CAMILLUS: A POEM Humbly Inscribed to the Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of
Peterborough and Monmouth. By AARON HILL, Gent.

Et thure and fidibus juvat
Placare, and vituli sanguine debito
Custodes Numidae Deos:
Qui Nunc Hesperia sospes ab ultima:
Charis multa Sodalibus,
-- dividit ocula.
Horat Ode 36. lib 1. LONDON, Printed for THO. BICKERTON at the Golden
Flower-de-Luce in St. Paul's Churchyard, and sold by B. Bragg in
Paternoster Row. 1707.

CAMILLUS: A POEM Humbly Inscribed to the Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of
Peterborough and Monmouth.
WHEN Injured Heroes suffer in their Fame,
Justice, unsummon'd, should their Wrongs proclaim;
Apollo's Sons should raise Resentment high'r,
And flame in Raptures of Poetic Fire;
Since where Injustice clouds a Noble Name,
The Poet suffers in the Patron's Shame.
Permit, Great Sir, my humble Muse to raise
A grateful Monument to Crown your Praise;
Unbend your mighty Soul, and stoop to Fame,
Whose Voice shall sound to Heaven your glorious Name.
Minds that are Great like Y^urs, disdain Applause,
Their inborn Virtue gives their Reason Laws,
Above the reach of Malice, blessed they live,
Proved to be enay'd, and like Heaven forgive.
Where shall my laboring Fancy Numbers find,
To sing the shining Glories of thy Mind?
Or through the lab'rynth of thy Wonders wind?
How dares my artless Pen attempt a Verse,
Worthy thy God-like Actions to rehearse?
How dares my Muse to Songs of Valor press,
Which all alike admire, but none can well express!
About my Breast tumult'ous Terrors roll,
And rising Passions shake my sickly Soul,
Reasons un-number'd through my Judgment shine,
Some urge, and some forbid the vast Design,
Here Justice summons, There my Youth denies,
Duty to This, to That my Will replys,
Resolved, at last, your safe Return to greet,
I throw my worthless Numbers at your Feet,
Assured, the generous Goodness of your Eye,
Will see my Will, and pass my Errors by.
But if my feeble Genius chance to fail,
Nor ardent Prayers can with the Nine prevail,
Think, Sir, how various your Great Acts appear,
There War and Glory, Wit and Honor Here;
One Glittering Moment spreads your wondrous Fame,
Battles and Bloodshed celebrate your Name;
Now the great Hero, in a Purple Flood,
Plunges through stormy Seas of hostile Blood;
Then Strides with skilful Courage from afar,
To stop the Gap of unsuccessful W A R:
Another Moment smoothly Guilds his Face
With Female Sweetness, and a Lovely Grace;
Calmly he Tunes his Mind to soster Sports,
And lives the Matchless Parragon of Courts,
No wonder then, if my presumptuous Eye,
Viewing thy Sun of Excellence too nigh,
Dazzled with Light, is forced to look awry.
Thus, when some Traveller who wants a Guide,
Over an extended Plain attempts to ride,
Where Numerous Paths of Equal breadth appear,
Till he no longer knows which Course to Steer,
If, choosing wrong at last, he goes astray,
What Man would blame him that he lost his way?
In Peace, the famed HISPANIA long had slept,
And full Possession of her Indies kept;
Burdened with Plenty, idle Bliss they knew,
Till with their Swords, their Natures rusty grew:
But now, against their Wills, they climb to Fate,
And hostile Heroes force 'em to be Great,
When their late Monarch had resigned his Breath,
And swift-wing'd Fame, proclaimed his mighty Death,
The Trumpets Clangors echoed from afar,
And Friendly Nations rose to sudden War;
The hardy Veterans their Arms prepare,
And waving Banners fan the Warlike Air;
The sprightly Steeds with lofty Bounds advance,
And curbed by skillful Riders, proudly prance;
A wild Confusion over the Globe is hurled,
And dreadful Earthquakes shake the Christian World;
The AUSTRIAN Prince, Heir by a just Descent,
To gain his Right, his strong Endeavors bent:
BOURBON opposed, and in the vacant Throne
Would place a Royal Offspring of his own;
The first had Right, but Power, which all obey,
Appeared, to justify the Second's Sway;
The Arms of France his false Pretense maintain,
And mount their ANJOU to the Crown of Spain.
With helpless sighs the Injured AUSTRIAN stands,
And lifts to gracious Heaven his Eyes and Hands;
He begs his Justice to a much-wrong'd Man,
And Heaven directs his Prayers to matchless ANNE.
Thither they fly whom powerful Wrongs oppress,
And find a certain Shelter from Distress:
By her the proud Usurper daily bleeds,
And Gazing Monarchs Wonder at her Deeds;
In deep Surprise and Silence, fixed they stand,
And see the Fate of Europe in her Hand.
Thither, with towering Hopes, and longing Eyes,
The Young Excluded Monarch swiftly flies,
Whispers in ANNA's Ears his weighty Grief,
And from her Pitty'ng Soul extracts Relief.
At her Command the ready Britains fly,
Exert their inborn Worth and proudly die;
Pleased with their Fate, they gladly sell their Breath,
And smile amidst the raging Pangs of Death.
A Chosen Band of Men, who all things dare,
For distant War their mighty Souls prepare;
Through every Ear their Glorious Cause they Ring,
To Curb proud France, and Right an injured King.
Over these a Earl of Peterborough.
Chief, by Art and Nature graced,
Renowned in War and Policy, was placed;
Beyond the rest his Judgment could discern,
And could with ease improve, what others could not learn.
He owed not Virtue to the fear of Shame,
Nor practiced Honesty in Hopes of Fame.
In him a spotless Honor firmly stood,
Bathed in the Generous Streams of Noble Blood.
Him the Great ANNA chose -- CAMILLUS go,
Revenge my Brother on his haughty Foe,
Guard him through Dangers, give the Prince his own,
And safely lift him to the Spanish Throne.
The Valiant Chief, without Ambition Brave,
Humbly Received the Weighty Charge She gave;
Destined in spite of Malice to be Great,
He Arms his daring Soul to Combat Fate.
And now the British Generals gladly meet,
And lead their Army to the waiting Fleet:
With swelling Hopes embark, and Joy to find
The brisk Assistance of a willing Wind.
In loud Salutes the deep-mouthed Cannons Roar,
Answered by zealous Wishes from the Shore,
Whence mingled Crowds their hearty Prayers repeat,
Till rising Waves Obscure the sailing Fleet.
On the extremest Limits of that Land,
Through which the Tagus, rich in Golden Sand,
His Rapid Course in depth of Waters bends,
And twice two hundred Miles his Stream extends,
Old BARCELONA, strong by Nature stands,
And Rules a vast Extent of fertile Lands.
With Rocky Mountains half environed round,
The other half, by Bogs and Marshy Ground;
Beneath her Walls surrounding Trenches lie,
Above their Banks rise Bulworks vastly high;
Walls within Walls the solid Place defend,
And watchful Sentinels their Charge attend:
^ngines of hollow Brass, with fiery Breath,
Vomit black sulfurous Messages of Death;
Charged with Destruction, speak with horrid Roar,
And scatter Terrors round the Neigh'bring Shore.
Hither with crowded Sails the Britains bent,
Big with the Message their Great Mistress sent;
Their Warlike Souls to Emulation rise,
And breath out pious Wishes to the Skies.
And now those Powers which brave Designs attend,
Had brought their Voyage to an happy End.
From Barcelona's Towers, with wild Affright,
The trembling Foe beholds the unwelcome Sight;
A mighty Fleet approaching by degrees,
In graceful Order Ploughs the smiling Seas;
Harmonious Music spreads the Joy they bring,
And Clamorous Shouts proclaim the coming King:
The sounding Trumpets his Intent declare,
And waving Streamers flourish in the Air.
Arrived at length, the Cannons loudly roar,
And shake with panick Fright the wondering Shore.
Mean while the Spaniards all their Force prepare,
And Arm confusedly for defensive War;
Blind with Amusement, and ignoble Fear,
They double all the BRITAINS that appear;
All think with Horror, England now had bent
Her utmost Force to form one Grand Descent.
But when they saw so small a Number Land --
And boldly tread the Surface of their Sand,
The paler Marks of Fear forsook their Face,
And Wonder, far more Great, supplies the Place.
An equal Force within their Walls they found,
Yet feared to meet their Foes on equal Ground;
They saw, with Wonder at an Act so vain,
The undaunted Britains win the Neighboring Plain,
Where soon their Squadrons formed a Camp, and then
They thought, or dreaded they were more than Men.
Thus had the great CAMILLUS forced his Way,
And void of Fear, in midst of Dangers lay.
Impatient of Delays the Austrian Youth,
Deep touched with Sorrow, listened to the Truth;
He saw the Weakness of his daring Few,
And with Concern his Foes Advantage knew.
The Brazen Tubes of Death were mounted high,
And Clouds of rolling Smoke obscured the Sky:
All this and more, from his small Camp was seen,
And Death, disguised with Horror, stalked between.
The Aged Chiefs, in cautious War grown old,
Would rather be too backward than too bold;
Therefore advised the Prince to haste away,
Since 'twas scarce possible to live and stay.
The Prince, with melancholy Thoughts oppressed,
Came to CAMILLUS and unlocked his Breast,
(...) the Pangs of Sorrow, Shame and Rage,
(...) shook the blooming Comforts of his Age:
Told him the Flames in which his Soul would burn,
Should he thus unsuccessfully Return.
With Grief the generous Britain heard him tell
The deep Misfortunes he but knew too well.
He rowls his Eyes, accuses Partial Fate,
And tells the Austrian, that he should be Great.
Resolved to act, the Council speak in vain,
And, by Debates, protract the Fall of Spain;
CAMILLUS had a Soul, whose Heavenly Fire
Could compass all Things, and to all aspire.
Himself alone could with himself Debate,
And moved obscurely, like the Hand of Fate.
Hard by the Towers of Barcelona stands,
High on the Rocks o'erlooking Neighboring Lands,
A strong-built Castle, whose extended Sway
Obliges even the City to Obey.
Five Hundred Men the solid Ramparts keep
On Rocks beyond Imagination steep;
Whence rolling Stones invading Foes can Chase,
When with an aching Eye they climb the dreadful Place.
This was the Source whence Victories must flow,
Hither the British Chief resolved to go;
Unused to Fear, and more unused to boast,
With temperate Words he cheered his wondering Host;
Strove not to hide the Hazard of the Task,
Nor cover Danger with a gilded Mask:
He tells each Soldier what he must perform,
And by Example wins 'em to the Storm.
The Rosy Morning ushered in the Sun,
Which was to see a bloody Business done;
His Beams shon bright to guide the Battle well,
And drank their Blood in Pity as it fell.
Eight Hundred Britains on this glorious Day,
Over Pathless Forests force their oblique Way:
In tedious March over high Assents they past,
And won the dangerous Precipice at last.
With strange Surprise the Foe begins to Arm,
And Bells rung backward in a loud alarm:
The summoned Soldiers hasten to their Post,
And pour whole Vollies on the climbing Host:
New Forms of Death huge falling Stones create,
And crush invading Numbers with their Weight.
Repeated Charges from the Cannons fly,
Like fiery Meteors blazing through the Sky.
The shattered Limbs of Men, who bravely dare,
Are born on Bullets through the flaming Air,
Adding new Motion to disjointed Parts;
The dismal Prospect shocks the bravest Hearts.
The brave CAMILLUS, with a fierce Delight,
Guides on the headlong Fury of the Fight;
Prompting his bleeding Troops to venture higher,
And scatter Death for Death, and Fire for Fire.
(...) when of old, the mighty Giants strove
(...) check the boundless Power of angry Jove;
With Force like this, but in a Cause less good,
The huge Briareus, bathed in Streams of Blood,
Stands on the Globe, attempts to conquer Fate,
And shakes the solid Center with his Weight;
Kicks at the Thunder which with Horror flies,
And while swift Lightning flashes in his Eyes,
Tears up a hundred Rocks, and throws 'em at the Skies.
But now aloft the mingled War grows high,
On heaps promiscuous Numbers fall and Die;
Rivers of Blood from the mixed Battle flows,
Till Death scarce sees to Guide her destined Blows.
The Walls are won, the Spaniards lose the Day,
And Valiant Britains win the Covered Way:
Soldiers below, by mutual Help ascend,
While those above the Conquered Pass Defend.
No more the driven Foes their Fortune try,
But quit their bloody Battlements and fly:
Despair and Horror fill the Dismal Place,
And Terror sits Enthroned on every Face;
Destructive Fate grows Cruel to Excess,
And rages blindly in her blackest Dress.
Matrons and Virgins Weep with bitter Cries,
And Noisy Sorrows pierce the distant Skies.
But cease, mistaken Wretches, cease your Moan,
And on your bended Knees your Follies own;
Though haughty Gauls will still Tyrannick be,
CAMILLUS Conquers but to set you Free.
His Generous Soul no base Intention knows,
But Pitties even the Blackest of his Foes.
This swift Success confounds the wondering King,
And all the Host their Gen'ral's Praises sing.
But he with wonted Care proceeds to End
The vast Design, such early Joys attend;
With rich Rewards he chears his Men again,
And leads them down with Courage to the Plain,
There plants divided Troops on distant Ground,
To force a City they not half surround.
Thus moves he brightly like some wandering Star,
And scorns the heavy Arts of Common War;
His Actions by their Merits brightly blaze,
He needs no Council, and he seeks no Praise.
While other Generals tedious Projects Form,
He Thinks, and Acts, and VVins Applause by Storm;
With furious Courage stands and Tempts his Fate,
But Heaven still spares the MAN to Bless the STATE.
With Threatening Look each ready Britain stands,
And sharp-edg'd Weapons grace their VVar-like Hands,
Obsequious Silence waits the Gen'ral's Nod,
As Ancient Grecians watched the Delphian God.
Mean while each trembling Tower with horrid Dread,
Loosened its Walls, and shook its battered Head,
The lofty Works, which should the Town defend,
The shocks of hostile Thunder widely rend;
Amidst these Crowds of Terrors and Despair,
The Britains for a sharp Assault prepare;
The Spaniards see and shun their lowering Fates,
And widely open their submissive Gates.
And now the mighty Deed is greatly done,
A King relieved and Kingdoms bravely won;
The Warlike Chief, with Glory fired his Breast,
Forgot his Pleasures, and forsook his Rest;
The Austrian fixed he boldly onward bent,
And Conquered Rebel Countries as he went.
The stubborn Catalans, unused to bow,
Gladly submit to firm Subjection now;
With joyful Shouts their happy Monarch greet,
And leave their Mountains for the Regal Seat;
That strong-built Fort, whose State the rest excelled,
And thrice Ten Thousand Gallick Foes repelled,
Afraid to strive, her Iron Gates unlocked,
And calmly opened when CAMILLUS knocked:
To his Successful Arms whole Nations yield,
And freely give him up an untried Field;
At his blessed Feet the Rich Tortosa lay,
And Matchless Conduct gained him Lerida;
Valencia's Kingdom Gloriously he won,
And triumphed over the prostrate Arragon.
But hold, unwary Muse, no higher soar,
He that did this, alas! must do no more:
Oh! that thy Numbers could but reach my Aim,
How would I celebrate his Glorious Name!
How would I Paint the Battles he has won,
And all the Noble Actions he has done!
How would I Paint him spilling Generous Blood,
And tempting Death for his dear Country's good!
How would I draw his two illustrious Sons,
Proud of their mangled Flesh and shattered Bones!
How would I tune my elevated Song,
To Shame those Men who do CAMILLUS wrong!
But since his Works through Clouds are forced to Shine,
How can I hope Success for such as mine!
Let Virtue be Rewarded if it can,
When Gratitude forgets so Great a MAN.
FINIS.

