HYPOCHONDRIASIS.

A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON THE NATURE AND CURE OF THAT DISORDER; Commonly called
the HYP and HYPO.

By Sir JOHN HILL.

THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for T. TRUEMAN, in the STRAND.

M.DCC.LXXV.

[Price ONE SHILLING.]

HYPOCHONDRIASIS.
SECT. I. The NATURE of the DISORDER.
TO call the Hypochondriasis a fanciful complaint, is ignorant and cruel. It is
a real, and a sad disease; an obstruction of the spleen by thickened and
distempered blood; extending itself often to the liver, and other parts; and
unhappily is in England very frequent. Physic has scarce known a Disorder more
fertile in ill; or more difficult of cure.

The blood is a mixture of many fluids; which, in a state of health, are so
combined, that the whole passes freely through its appointed vessels: but if by
the loss of the thinner parts, the rest becomes too gross to be thus carried
through, it will stop where the circulation has least power; and having thus
stopped, it will accumulate; heaping by degrees obstruction on obstruction.

Health, cheerfulness, and the quiet exercise of the mind, depend upon a
perfect circulation: is it a wonder then, when this becomes impeded, the body
loses of its health, and the temper of its sprightliness? to be otherwise would
be the wonder: and he inhumanly insults the afflicted, who calls this change a
voluntary frowardness. The slightest state of this obstruction brings with it
sickness, anguish, and oppression; and innumerable ills follow its advancing
steps; unless prevented by a timely care; till life itself grows burdensome.

The disease was common in ancient Greece; and her physicians understood it,
better than those perhaps of later times, in any other country; who, though
happy in many advantages, which these fathers of the science could not have,
yet want the great assistance of frequent watching the disease in all its
stages.

Those venerable writers have delivered its nature; and its cure: in the first,
every observation at this time shows they were right; and what they have said
as to the latter will be found equally just and true. All this, so far as
present experience has confirmed it, and no farther, will be here laid before
the afflicted in a few plain words.

SECT. II. PERSONS subject to it.
FATIGUE of mind, and great exertion of its powers often give birth to this
disease: and always tend to increase it. The finer spirits are wasted by the
labor of the brain: the Philosopher rises from his study more exhausted than
the Peasant leaves his drudgery; and this, without the benefit he has from
exercise. Greatness of mind, and steady virtue; determined resolution, and
manly firmness, when put in action, and intent upon their object, all lead to
this disease: perhaps whatever tends to the ennobling of the soul, has at least
an equal share in bringing on this weakness of the body.

Hence we may learn easily who are the persons most subject to it: the grave
and studious; those of a sedate temper and enlarged understanding; the learned
and wise; the virtuous and the valiant: those whom it would be the interest of
the world to wish were free from this and every other illness; and who perhaps,
except for this alloy, would have too large a share of human happiness.

Though these are most, it is not these alone, who are liable to the disorder.
There are countries where it is endemial; in other places many have the seeds
of it in their constitution; and in some it takes its rise from accidents. In
these last the complaint is the easiest of cure; and in the first most
difficult.

Beside the Greeks here named, the Jews of old were heavily afflicted with this
evil; and in their descendants to the present day it is often constitutional:
the Spaniards have it almost to a man; and so have the American Indians.
Perhaps the character of these several nations may be connected with it: the
steady honor, and firm valor of the Spaniard, very like that of the ancient
Doric nation, who followed the sober flute and not the sprightly trumpet to the
field; and met the enemy, not with shouts and fury, but with a determined
virtue; is perhaps allied to this constitution: it is the character of the
Hypochondriac to be sedate and temperate, but unmoveably resolved: the Jew has
shown this, mistakenly indeed; but astonishingly; and the poor Indian, untaught
as he is, faces all peril with composure; and sings his deathsong with
unaltered countenance.

Among particular persons the inquiring and contemplative are those who suffer
most by this disease; and of all degrees of men I think the clergy. I do not
mean the hunting, shooting, drinking clergy, who follow the tables of the
great; but the retired and conscientious; such as attend in midnight filence to
their duty; and seek in their own cool breasts, or wheresoever else they may be
found, new admonitions for an age plunged in new vices. To this disease we owe
the irreparable loss of Dr. YOUNG; and the present danger of many other men,
the best and most approved amongst us. -- May what is here to be proposed,
prevent a loss truly irreparable!

The Geometrician, or the learned enquirer, of whatever denomination, whose
course of study fixes his regard for ever on one object; his mind intensely and
continually employed upon one point, ought to be timely warned also that he is
in danger; or if he find himself already afflicted, he should be reminded that
the same course of life, which brought on the disorder, will, without care,
increase it to the most dreaded violence.

The middle period of life is that wherein there is most danger of an attack
from this disease: and the latter end of autumn, when the summer heats have a
little time been over, or early spring, when we first feel the sun, are the
seasons when, in our climate, its first assaults are most to be expected. The
same periods of the year always increase the disorder also in those who have
been before afflicted with it: and it is a truth which must however unwillingly
be confessed, that from its first attack the patient grows continually, though
slowly, worse; unless a watchful regimen prevent it.

The constitutions most liable to this obstruction are, the lean and dark
complexioned; the grave and sedentary. Let such be aware of the first symptoms;
and obviate, (as they may then with ease) that which it will be much more
difficult to remove.

It is happy that a disease, wherein the patient must do a great deal for
himself, falls, for the most part, upon those who have the powers of reason
strongest. Let them only be conscious of this; that the distemper naturally
disposes them to inactivity; and that the best reason will have no force unless
accompanied with resolution.

Though the physician can do something in the cure of this Disease, much more
depends upon the patient: and here his constancy of mind will be employed most
happily. None can be better qualified to judge, on a fair hearing, what course
it is the most fit that he should take; and having made that choice, he must
with patience wait its good effects. Diseases that come on slowly will take up
time in curing: an attention to the first appearances of this disorder will be
always happiest; because when least established it is most easily overthrown:
but when that happy period has been neglected, the Sick must wait the effects
of such a course as will dilute and melt the obstructing fluid gradually; for
till that be done it is not only vain, but sometimes dangerous, to attempt an
expulsion of it from the body.

The blood readily separates into grosser and thinner parts: we see this even
in bleeding; and from the toughness of the red cake from that operation, may
guess how difficult it will be to dissolve such a substance, though of less
firmness, in the vessels of the body. That the blood can thus become thickened
within the body, every Pleurisy shows us too evidently: in that disease it is
brought on suddenly, and with inflammation; in the other, slowly and without:
and in this last case, even before it forms the obstruction, can bring on many
mischiefs. Various causes may produce the same effect, but that in all cases
operates most durably, which begins most slowly. The watery part of the blood
is its milder part; in the remaining gross matter of it, are acrid salts and
burning oils; and these, when destitute of that happy dilution which nature
gives them in a healthy body, are capable of doing the greatest mischief to the
tender vessels in which they are kept stagnant.

SECT. III. The SYMPTOMS of the DISORDER.
THE first and lightest of the signs that show this illness are a lowness of
spirits, and inaptitude to motion, a disrelish of amusements, a love of
solitude and a habit of thinking, even on trifling subjects, with too much
steadiness. A very little help may combat these: but if that indolence, which
is indeed a part of the disorder, will continue to neglect them; worse must be
expected soon to follow.

Wild thoughts; a sense of fullness, weight, and oppression in the body; a want
of appetite, or, what is worse, an appetite without digestion; for these are
the varying conditions of different states of the disease: with these will come
on a fullness, and a difficulty of breathing after meals, a straitness of the
breast, pains and flatulencies in the bowels, and an unaptness to discharge
their contents.

The pulse then becomes low, weak, and unequal; and there are frequent
palpitations of the heart: a little dark-colored urine is voided at some
times; and a flood of colorless and insipid water at others; relieving for a
moment, but not affecting the distemper: there is in some cases also a
continual teazing cough, attended with a choking stoppage in the throat at
times; then heartburn, sickness, hardness of the belly; with a costive habit or
continual tormenting and vain irritation.

The lips will now turn pale; and the eyes lose their brightness; and by
degrees the whites will grow as it were greenish: the gums by this time want
their due firmness, with their proper color; and an unpleasing foulness grows
upon the teeth: the inside of the mouth is pale and furred, and the throat dry
and parched: the color of the skin is pale (though there are some periods when
the face looks florid) and as the obstruction gathers ground, and more affects
the liver, the whole body becomes yellow, tawny, greenish, and at length of
that deep and dusky hue, to which men of strong imagination have given the name
of blackness.

These symptoms do not all appear in any one period of the disease; or all in
any one case; but at one time or other the whole of them; as well as others,
which now follow: the flesh becomes cold to the touch, though the patient does
not himself perceive it; the limbs grow numbed and torpid, the breathing dull
and slow, and the voice hollow; and usually the appetite in this period is
reduced almost to nothing: night sweats come on, black swellings appear on the
veins, the flesh wastes, and the breast becomes flat and hollow: the mouth is
full of a thin spittle, the head is always dizzy and confused; and sometimes
there is an unconquerable numbness in the organs of speech.

I have known the temporary silence that follows upon this last symptom become
a jest to the common herd; and the unhappy patient, instead of compassion and
assistance, has received the reproof of sullenness; from those who should have
known and acted better.

About twenty years ago I met, on a visit at Catthorpe in Leicestershire, a
young gentleman of distinguished learning and abilities, who, as I was told, at
certain times was speechless. The vulgar thought it a pretense: and a jocose
lady, where he was at tea with company, putting him as she said to a trial,
poured out a dish very strong, and without sugar. He drank it; and returned the
cup with a bow of great reserve, and his eye bent on the ground: she then
filled the cup with sugar, and pouring weak tea on it, sent that also to him:
he drank it; looked at her steadily; and blushed for her. The lady declared the
man was dumb indeed; and the rest thought him perverse, and obstinate: but a
constant and steady perseverance in an easy course of medicines cured him.

All these are miseries which the disease, while it retains its natural form,
can bring upon the patient; and thus he will in time be worn out; and led
miserably, though slowly, to the grave. Let him not indulge his inactivity so
far as to give way to this, because death is represented as far off; for the
disease may suddenly and frightfully change its nature; and swifter evils
follow.

SECT IV. The DANGER.
SUCH are the effects of this mischievous obstruction, considered in its simple
state: but this, though often in itself unsurmountable by art; at least by any
method in common use; will be sometimes broken through at once by nature, or by
accidents; and bring on fatal evils. These are strictly speaking different
diseases; and are no otherway concerned here, than as the consequences of that
whereof we are treating.

The thick and glutinous blood, which has now so long stagnated in the spleen,
will have at length altered its nature; and acquired a very great degree of
acrimony. While it remains dormant, this does no other mischiefs, than those
named already; but when violent exercise; a fit of outrageous anger; or any
thing else that suddenly shocks and disturbs the frame, puts it in motion, it
melts at once into a kind of liquid putrefaction. Being now become thin, it
mixes readily with the mass of blood again; and brings on putrid fevers;
destroys the substance of the spleen itself; or being thrown on some other of
the viscera, corrodes them, and this way leads in a swift and miserable death.
If it fall upon the liver, that tender pulpy substance is soon destroyed;
jaundices, beyond the help of art, first follow; then dropsies; and all their
train of misery: if it fix upon the lungs, consumptions; if on the brain,
convulsions, epilepsy, palsy, and apoplexy; if on the surface, leprosy.

The true intention of cure in the Hypochondriasis, therefore, is to melt this
coagulation softly; not to break it violently: and when thus dissolved, to give
it a very gentle passage through the bowels. There is no safe way for it to
take but that; and even that, when hurried, may bring on fatal dysenteries.

Let no one wonder at the sudden devastation which sometimes rises from this
long stagnant matter, when liquified too hastily: we know how long, how many
years, the impacted matter will continue quiet in a schirrous tumor of the
breast; but being once put in motion, whether from accident, or in the course
of nature, who can describe; or what can stop its havoc!

Instances of the same nature, from this obstructing matter of the spleen, are
but too frequent. A nobleman the other day died paralytic; and dissection
showed a spleen consumed by an abscess, formed by the dissolved matter of such
an obstruction; and it is scarce longer since, that a learned gentleman, who had
been several years lost to his friends, by the extremes of a Hypochondriacal
disorder, seemed gradually without assistance to recover: but the lungs
suffered while the spleen was freed; and he died very soon of what is called a
galloping consumption.

Thus we see, when the obstruction is great and has been of long continuance,
if it be thus hastily moved, the consequence is, a sudden and a miserable
death; whether, like the matter of a cancer, it remains in its place, or, like
that of a confluent small pox, be thrown upon some other vital part.

Yet let not the patient be too much alarmed: this is laid down to caution, not
to terrify. It Is fit that he should know his danger, and attend to it; for the
prevention is easy: and the cure, even of the most advanced stages, when
undertaken by gradual and gentle means, is not at all impracticable. To assist
his physician, let him look into himself; and recollect the source of his
complaint: this he may judge of from the following notices.

SECT. V. The Causes of the HYPOCHONDRIASIS.
THE obstruction which forms this disease, may take its origin from different
accidents: a fever ill cured has often caused it; or the piles, which had been
used to discharge largely, ceasing; a marshy soil, poisoned with stagnant
water, has given it to some persons; and although indolence and inactivity are
oftenest at the root, yet it has sometimes arisen from too great exercise.

Real grief has often brought it on: and even love; for sometimes that is real.
Study and fixed attention of the mind have been accused before; and add to
these the stooping posture of the body, which most men use, though none should
use it, in writing and in reading: this has contributed too much to it: but of
all other things, night studies are the most destructive. The steady stillness,
and dusky habit of all nature in those hours, enforce, encourage, and support
that settled gloom, which rises from fixed thought; and sinks the body to the
grave; even while it carries up the mind to heaven. He who would have his lamp
At midnight hour
Be seen in some high lonely tower, Milton's Penseroso.



will waste the flame of this unheeded life: and while he labors to unsphere
the spirit of Plato Milton's Penseroso.
will let loose his own.

SECT. V. The Cure of the HYPOCHONDRIASIS.
LET him who would escape the mischiefs of an obstructed spleen, avoid the
things here named: and let him who suffers from the malady, endeavor to
remember to which of them it has been owing: for half the hope of relief
depends upon that knowledge.

Nature has sometimes made a cure herself, and we should watch her ways; for
art never is so right as when it imitates her: and sometimes the patient's own
resolution has set him free. This is always in his power; and at all times will
do wonders.

The bleeding of the piles, from nature's single efforts, has at once cured a
miserable man; where their cessation was the cause of the disorder. A leprosy
has appeared upon the skin, and all the symptoms of the fermer sickness
vanished. This last among the Jews happened often: both diseases we know were
common to them: and I have here seen something very like it. Water-Dock has
thrown out scorbutic eruptions, and all the former symptoms of an
Hypochondriacal disorder have disappeared: returning indeed when these were
unadvisedly struck in; but keeping off entirely when they were more wisely
treated. A natural purging unsuppressed has sometimes also done the same good
office: but this last is hazardous.

It is easy to be directed from such instances: only let us take the whole
along with us. Bleeding would have answered nature's purpose, if she could not
have opened of herself the haemorrhoidal vessels; but he who should give
medicines with that view, might destroy his patient by too great disturbance.
If a natural looseness may perform the cure, so may an artificial; when the
original source of the disorder points that way. But these are helps that take
place only in particular cases.

The general and universal method of cure must be by some mild and gently
resolving medicine; under the influence of which the obstructing matter may be
voided that, or some other way with safety. The best season to undertake this
is the spring, or autumn, but even here there should be caution.

In the first place, no strong evacuating remedy must be given; for that, by
carrying off the thinner parts of the juices, will tend to thicken the
remainder; and that way certainly increase the distemper. No acrid medicine
must be directed, for that may act too hastily, dissolve the impacted matter at
once, and let it loose, to the destruction of the sufferer; no antimonial, no
mercurial, no martial preparation must be taken; in short, no chemistry: nature
is the shop that heaven has set before us, and we must seek our medicine there.
The venerable ancients, who knew not this new art, will lead us in the search;
and (faithful relators as they are of truth) will tell us whence we may deduce
our hope; and what we are to fear.

But prior to the course of any medicine, and as an essential to any good hope
from it, the patient must prescribe himself a proper course of life, and a
well-chosen diet: let us assist him in his choice; and speak of this first, as
it comes first in order.

SECT VI. Rules of Life for HYPOCHONDRIAC PERSONS.
AIR and exercise, as they are the best preservers of health, are also greatest
assistants in the cure of all long-continued diseases, and they will have their
full effect in this: but there requires some caution in the choice, and
management of them. It is common to think the air of high grounds best; but
experience near home shows otherwise: the Hypochondriac patient is always worse
at Highgate, even than in London.

The air he breathes should be temperate; not exposed to the utmost violences
of heat or cold, and to the swift changes from one to the other; which are most
felt on those high grounds. The side of a hill is the best place for him: and
though wet grounds are hurtful; yet let there be the shade of trees, to tempt
him often to a walk; and soften by their exhalations the over dryness of the
air.

The exercise he takes should be frequent; but not violent. Motion preserves
the firmness of the parts, and elasticity of the vessels: and it prevents that
aggregation of thick humors which he is most to fear. A sedentary life always
produces weakness, and that mischief follows: weak eyes are gummy, weak lungs
are clogged with phlegm, and weak bowels waste themselves in vapid diarrhoeas.

Let him invite himself abroad, and let his friends invite him by every
innocent inducement. For me, I should advise above all other things the study
of Nature. Let him begin with plants: he will here find a continual pleasure,
and continual change; fertile of a thousand useful things: even of the utility
we are seeking here. This will induce him to walk; and every hedge and hillock,
every foot-path side, and thicket, will afford him some new object. He will be
tempted to be continually in the air; and continually to change the nature and
quality of the air, by visiting in succession the high lands and the low, the
lawn, the heath, and forest. He will never want inducement to be abroad; and
the unceasing variety in the subjects of his observation, will prevent his
walking hastily: he will pursue his studies in the air; and that contemplative
turn of mind, which in his closet threatened his destruction, will thus become
the great means of his recovery.

If the mind tire upon this, from the repeated use, another of nature's
kingdoms opens itself at once upon him; the plant he is weary of observing,
feeds some insect he may examine; nor is there a stone that lies before his
foot, but may afford instruction and amusement.

Even what the vulgar call the most abject things will show a wonderful
utility; and lead the mind, in pious contemplation higher than the stars. The
poorest moss that is trampled under foot, has its important uses: is it at the
bottom of a wood we find it? why there it shelters the fallen seeds; hides them
from birds; and covers them from frost; and thus becomes the foster-father of
another forest! creeps it along the surface of a rock? even there its good is
infinite! its small roots run into the stone; and the rains make their way
after them; the moss having lived its time, dies: it rots, and with the
mouldered fragments of the stone forms earth; wherein, after a few successions,
useful plants may grow, and feed more useful cattle! Biberg.


Is there a weed more humble in its aspect, more trampled on, or more despised
than knot-grass? no art can get the better of its growth; no labor can destroy
it! 'twere pity if they could: for the thing lives where nothing would of use
to us; and its large and most wonderfully abundant seeds, feed, in hard
winters, half the birds of Heaven.

What the weak moss performs upon the rock, the loathed toadstool brings about
in timber: is an oak dead where man's eye will not find it? this fungus roots
itself upon the bark; and rots the wood beneath it: hither the beetle creeps
for shelter, and for sustenance; him the woodpecker follows as his prey; and
while he tears the tree in search of him, he scatters it about the ground;
which it manures.

Nor is it the beetle alone that thus insinuates itself into the substance of
the vegetable tribe: the tender aphide Reaumur.
, whom a touch destroys, burrows between the two skins of a leaf, for shelter
from his winged enemies; tracing, with more than Dedalaean art, his various
meanders; and veining the green surface with these white lines more beautifully
than the best Egyptian marble.

'Twere endless to proceed; nor is it needful: one object will not fail to lead
on to another, and every where the goodness of his God will shine before him,
even in what are thought the vilest things; his greatness in the least of them.

Let him pursue these thoughts, and seek abroad the objects and the
instigations to them: but let him in these and all other excursions avoid
equally the dews of early morning, and of evening.

The more than usual exercise of this prescription will dispose him to more
than customary sleep, let him indulge it freely; so far from hurting, it will
help his cure.

Let him avoid all excesses: drink need scarce be named; for we are writing to
men of better and of nobler minds, than can be tempted to that humiliating
vice: Those who in this disorder have too great an appetite, must not indulge
it: much eaten was never well digested: but of all excesses, the most fatal in
this case is that of venery. It is the excess we speak of.

SECT. VII. The proper DIET.
IN the first place acids must be avoided carefully; and all things that are in
a state of fermentation; for they will breed acidity. Provisions hardened by
salting never should be tasted; much less those cured by smoking, and by
salting. Bacon is indigestible in an Hypochondriac stomach; and hams,
impregnated as is now the custom, with acid fumes from the wood fires over
which they are hung, have that additional mischief.

Milk ought to be a great article in the diet: and even in this there should be
choice. The milk of grass-fed cows has its true quality: and no other. There
are a multitude of ways in which this may be made a part both of our foods and
drinks, and they should all be used.

The great and general caution is, that the diet be at all times of a kind
loosening, and gently stimulating; light, but not acrid. Veal, lamb, fowls,
lobsters, crabs, craw-fish, fresh water fish, and mutton broth, with plenty of
boiled vegetables, are always right; and give enough variety.

Raw vegetables are all bad: sour wines, old cheese, and bottled beer, are
things never to be once tasted. Indeed much wine is wrong, be it of what kind
soever. It is the first of cordials; and as such only I would have it taken in
this disease; when it is wanted: plainly as a medicine, rather than a part of
diet. Malt-liquor carefully chosen, is certainly the best drink. This must be
neither new, nor tending to sourness; perfectly clear, and of a moderate
strength: it is the native liquor of our country; and the most healthful.

Too much tea weakens; and even sugar is in this disorder hurtful: but honey
may supply its place in most things; and this is not only harmless, but
medicinal; a very powerful dissolvent of impacted humors; and a great
deobstruent.

What wine is drank should be of some of the sweet kinds. Old Hock has been
found, upon enquiry, to yield more than ten times the acid of the sweet wines;
and in red Port, at least in what we are content to call so, there is an
astringent quality, that is most mischievous in these cases: it is said there
is often alum in it: how pregnant with evil that must be, to persons whose
bowels require to be kept open, is most evident. Summer fruits perfectly ripe
are not only harmless, but medicinal; but if eaten unripe, they will be
prejudicial. A light supper, which will leave an appetite for a milk breakfast,
is always right; and this will not let the stomach be ravenous for dinner; as
it is apt to be in those who make that their only meal.

One caution more must be given; and it may seem a strange one: it is, that the
patient attend regularly to his hours of eating. We have to do with men for the
most part, whose soul is the great object of their regard; but let them not
forget they have a body.

The late Dr. STUKELY has told me, that one day by appointment visiting Sir
ISAAC NEWTON, the servant told him, he was in his study. No one was permitted
to disturb him there; but as it was near his dinnertime, the visitor sat down
to wait for him. After a time, dinner was brought in; a boiled chicken under a
cover. An hour passed, and Sir ISAAC did not appear. The doctor then eat the
fowl; and covering up the empty dish, bad them dress their master another.
Before that was ready, the great man came down: he apologiz'd for his delay;
and added, "Give me but leave to take my short dinner, and I shall be at your
service; I am fatigued and faint." Saying this, he lifted up the cover; and
without any emotion, turned about to STUKELY with a smile; "See," says he,
"what we studious people are, I forgot I had dined."

SECT. VIII. Of MEDICINE.
IT IS the ill fate of this disease, more than of all others, to be
misunderstood at first; and thence neglected, till the physician shakes his
head at a few first questions. None steals so fatally upon the sufferer: its
advances are by very slow degrees; but every day it grows more difficult of
cure.

That an obstruction in the spleen is the true malady, the cases related by the
ancients, present observation, and the unerring testimonies of diffections,
leave no room to doubt. Being understood, the path is open where to seek a
remedy: and our best guides in this, as in the former instance, will be those
venerable Greeks; who saw a thousand of these cases, where we meet with one;
and with less than half our theory, cured twice as many patients.

One established doctrine holds place in all these writers; that whatever by a
hasty fermentation dissolves the impacted matter of the obstruction, and sends
it in that state into the blood, does incredible mischief; but that whatever
medicine softens it by slow degrees; and, as it melts, delivers it to the
bowels without disturbance; will cure with equal certainty, and safety.

For this good purpose, they knew and tried a multitude of herbs: but in the
end they fixed on one: and on their repeated trials of this, they banished all
the rest. This stood alone for the cure of the disease; and from its virtue
received the name of SPLEEN-WORT (...).
. O wise and happy Greeks! authors of knowledge and perpetuators of it! With
them the very name they gave a plant declared its virtues: but with us, a
writer calls an herb from some friend; that the good gardener who receives the
honor, may call another by his name who gave it. We now add the term smooth to
the name of this herb, to distinguish it from another, called by the same
general term, though not much resembling it.

The virtues of this smooth Spleen-wort have stood the test of ages; and the
plant has every where retained its name and credit. One of our good old
herbarists, who had seen a wonderful case of a swollen spleen, so big, and hard,
as to be felt with terror, brought back to a state of nature by it; and all the
miserable symptoms vanish with the swelling; thought Spleen-wort not enough
expressive of its excellence; but stamped on it the name of MILT-WASTE.

In the Greek Islands now, the use of it is known to every one: and even the
lazy monks who take it, are no longer splenetic. In the west of England, the
rocks are stripped of it with diligence; and every old woman tells you how
charming that leaf is for bookish men: in Russia they use a plant of this kind
in their malt liquor: it came into fashion there for the cure of this disease;
which, from its constant use, is scarce known any longer; and they now suppose
it is added to their liquor for a flavor.

The ancients held it in a kind of veneraration; and used what has been called
a superstition in the gathering it. It was to be taken up with a sharp knife,
without violence, and laid upon clean linen. No time but the still darkness of
the night was proper, and even the moon was not to shine upon it Silente Luna.
. I know they have been ridiculed for this; for nothing is so vain as learned
ignorance: but let me be permitted once to vindicate them.

The plant has leaves which can close at their sides; and their under part is
covered thick with a yellow powder; consisting of the seeds, and seed-vessels:
in these they knew the virtue most resided: this was the golden dust Pulvis
Aureus.
they held so valuable; and this they knew they could not be too cautious to
preserve. They were not ignorant of the sleep of plants; a matter lately spoken
of by some, as if a new discovery; and being sensible that light, a dry air, an
expanded leaf, and a tempestuous season, were the means of losing this fine
dust; and knowing also that darkness alone brought on that closing of the leaf
which thence has been called sleep; and which helped to defend and to secure
it; they therefore took such time, and used such means, as could best preserve
the plant entire; and even save what might be scattered from it. -- And now
where is their superstition?

From this plant thus collected they prepared a medicine, which, in a course of
forty days, scarce ever failed to make a perfect cure.

We have the plant wild with us; and till the fashion of rough chemical
preparations took off our attention from these gentler remedies, it was in
frequent use; and great repute. I trust it will be so again: and many thank me
for restoring it to notice.

Spleen-wort gives out its virtues freely in a tincture; and a small dose of
this, mixing readily with the blood and juices, gradually dissolves the
obstruction; and by a little at a time delivers its contents to be thrown off
without pain, from the bowels. Let this be done while the viscera are yet sound
and the cure is perfect. More than the forty days of the Greek method is scarce
ever required; much oftener two thirds of that time suffice: and every day,
from the first dose of it, the patient feels the happy change that is growing
in his constitution. His food no more turns putrid on his stomach; but yields
its healthful nourishment: the swelling after meals therefore vanishes; and
with that goes the lowness, and anxiety; the difficult breath, and the
distracting cholick: he can bear the approach of rainy weather without pain; he
finds himself more apt for motion, and (...) take that exercise which is to be
(...) in his cure: life seems no longer burthen-some: his bowels get into the
natural condition of health, and perform their office once at least a day;
better if a little more: the dull and dead color of his skin goes off, his
lips grow red again, and every sign of health returns.

Let him who takes the medicine, say whether any thing here be exaggerated. Let
him, if he pleases to give himself the trouble, talk over with me, or write to
me, this gradual decrease of his complaints, as he proceeds in his cure. My
uncertain state of health does not permit me to practice physic in the usual
way; but I am very desirous to do what good I can; and shall never refuse my
advice, such as it may be, to any person, rich or poor, in whatever manner he
may apply for it. I shall refer him to no apothecary, whose bills require he
should be drenched with potions; but tell him, in this as in all other cases,
where to find some simple herb; which he may if he please prepare himself; or
if he had rather spare that trouble, may have it so prepared from those whom I
instruct to do it.

(...) regard (...) using it is more effectual than simply taking it in powder;
the only advantage of a tincture, is, that a proper dose may be given, and the
stomach not loaded with too large a quantity: it is an easier and pleasanter
method; and nothing more. This Tincture may be had of Mr. Trueman, Bookseller,
at No 394, in the Strand.

If any person choose to take this herb in the other way, I should still wish
him once at least to apply to me; that he may be assured what he is about to
take is the right plant. Abuses in medicines are at this time very great, and
in no instance worse than what relates to herbs. The best of our physicians
have complained upon this head with warmth, but without redress: they know the
virtues and the value of many of our native plants; but dread to prescribe
them; lest some wrong thing should be administered in their place; perhaps
inefficacious, perhaps mischievous, nay it may be fatal. The few simple things
I direct are always before me; and it will at all times be a pleasure to me, in
this and any other instance, to see whether what any person is about to take be
right. I have great obligations to the public, and this is the best return that
I know how to make.


