AN EPISTLE TO Mrs. WALLUP, Now in the TRAIN of Her Royal Highness, The
Princess of WALES.

AN EPISTLE TO Mrs. WALLUP, Now in the TRAIN of Her Royal Highness, The
Princess of WALES. As it was sent to her to the HAGUE. Written by Mrs. SUSANNA
CENTLIVRE.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by R. Burleigh in Amen-Corner, and A. Boulter
without Temple Bar, 1715. (Price 6 d.)

AN EPISTLE, etc.
MADAM, What Muse can speak, what Pen display
Britannia's Pomp upon that happy Day,
When Royal George our City dain'd to Grace,
And from impending Slavery freed her Race?
His grateful Subjects round his Chariot hung,
Long live the King was heard from every Tongue:
Transporting Raptures all their Sense employ,
And Babes unborn, by Instinct leaped for Joy;
Even those whom Death stood ready to release,
Blessed the Deliverer, and died in Peace.
As Roman Sages charged their Sons to tell
That at their Deaths they left Augustus well:
So shall those Patriots who with Care and Toil,
Rescued the Charters of our British Isle,
At Fate's first Summons willingly obey,
And to their weeping Wives and Children say,
Cease, cease your Tears, no more of Grief be shown,
We leave you Free, and George upon the Throne.
This Madam, we may write, but who can tell
What mighty Transports in your Bosom dwell,
To see the Scepter by that Hero swayed,
To whom long since your ardent Vows were paid.
When your unwearied Zeal thrice crossed the Sea,
Nor feared what Dangers might obstruct your Way:
Not led by Interest, or Intrigues of State,
(Avarice and Pride! Faults of the meanly great:)
No private End by you was understood,
But all your Wishes were the Public Good.
Oh may the Princess you so often have praised,
And great Ideas of her Virtues raised,
Give you that Preference due to your Desert,
And place you foremost in her Royal Heart.
The Princess, said I? Oh that charming Name,
She comes! Who can the exulting Joy sustain?
The Heroes did such mighty Transports give,
We scarce can view the Heroine, and Live.
Oh Happy Britain! Oh propitious Day!
That shall this Lady to thy Isle convey:
From her may such a Race of Princes flow,
'Till Heralds barren of new Titles grow.
Come Royal Dame, and bless our longing Eyes,
Fulfill our Hopes, consummate all our Joys.
Your Glorious Offspring let Britannia see,
And make her happy, as you made her free.
Those Babes are for our Church's Safety given,
The Darling Hostages 'twixt her and Heaven.
Britannia's Court shall in full Luster shine,
As heretofore in Bright Maria's time:
Maria's Name still sounds in British Ears,
Like Music tuned from the Celestial Spheres.
With thousand Beauties was Maria graced,
A thousand Virtues in her Soul were placed;
Such was her Form, and such her mighty Mind,
That scarcely Angels could be more refined:
She wanted only Immortality,
To make the Angel with the Saint agree.
The Sun which set in fair Maria's Eyes,
In Carolina's does triumphant rise,
In her you will find Maria's Loss retrieved,
That Charming Queen for whom so much we grieved.
As when some happy Nuptial Knot's untied,
And Death uncourteous does the Pair divide,
The poor Wife, o'erpower'd by the Stroke of Fate,
Mourns like a Turtle her departed Mate,
Stretched on the Breathless Trunk her Tears she vents,
And utters to the Lifeless Clay Complaints:
To draw her thence all Arguments are tried,
Nothing can raise her from her Husband's Side,
Till some one Friend more lucky than the rest,
Lays the surviving Infant on her Breast:
She views each Feature, dwells on every Grace,
And in the Child surveys the Father's Face;
Then the dear Relick snatches to her Arms,
And all the Mother instantly returns.
So, when the beauteous, fair Maria died,
Sorrow overwhelmed us like a rising Tide,
Till Godlike WILLIAM studying our Repose,
Fixed the Succession, and relieved our Woes.
Whatever the Almighty gives to bless Mankind,
We, or in Spring, or in the Autumn find,
The Spring revives what Winter has decayed,
And in New Livery all the Earth's arrayed.
But though the Spring a Thousand Sweets disclose,
The Indian Jessamine, and Syrian Rose;
The various Product of each fertile Soil,
It Is the Rich Autumn Crowns the Peasant's Toil.
So, though we see a New-Created Spring,
And every Joy reviving in the KING;
YOU in the PRINCESS will our Harvest bring.
FINIS.

