THE Coffee-House Politician; OR, THE JUSTICE Caught in his own TRAP.

A COMEDY. As it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Lincoln's End Fields.

Written by Mr. FIELDING.

LONDON: Printed for J. WATTS, at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court near
Lincoln's End Fields. MDCCXXX.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. PAGET. IN ancient Greece, the Infant Muse's School,
Where Vice first felt the Pen of Ridicule,
With honest Freedom and impartial Blows
The Muse attacked each Vice as it arose:
No Grandeur could the Mighty Villain screen
From the just Satyr of the Comic Scene:
No Titles could the daring Poet cool,
Nor save the great Right Honorable Fool.
They spared not even the Aggressor's Name,
And Public Villainy felt Public Shame.
Long has this generous Method been disused,
For Vice has grown too great to be abused;
By Power, defended from the Piercing Dart,
It reigns, and triumphs in the Lordly Heart;
While Beaus, and Cits, and Squires, our Scenes afford,
Justice preserves the Rogues who weild the Sword;
All Satyr against her Tribunal's quashed,
Nor lash the Bards, for fear of being lashed.
But the Heroic Muse who sings Tonight,
Through these neglected Tracks attempts her Flight:
Vice, clothed with Power, she combats with her Pen,
And fearless, dares the Lion in his Den.
Then only Reverence to Power is due,
When Public Welfare is its only View:
But when the Champions, whom the Public arm
For their own Good with Power, attempt their Harm,
He sure must meet the general Applause,
Who against those Traitors fights the Public Cause.
And while these Scenes the conscious Knave displease,
Who feels within the Criminal he sees,
The Incorrupt and Good must smile, to find
No Mark for Satyr in his Generous Mind.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. MULLART. RAPE upon Rape! what Author ever chose
A Name so sure to make the Fair his Foes!
And, Ladies, I can read in all your Faces,
Our Author is not much in your good Graces;
But pray, confess, does all this Fury fall,
Because these Scenes Rape upon Rape we call?
Or is it -- that we have no Rape at all?
Our modern Beaus in Vigor are so hearty,
And modern Dames so very full of Vartue,
So scarce immodest Women, Men so urging,
A Rape's almost as common as a -- Virgin.
Oh! may our Youth whose Vigor is so parlous,
To Italy be wafted with Don Carlos;
There should one Victory but give them Scope,
They would not leave one Maidenhead for the Pope;
Or should some new Pope Joan the Chair possess,
They Would play the Devil with her -- Holiness.
Rape upon Rape should follow Blows on Blows,
And New Rome fall, by what the Old arose.
Lucretia surely, though her Fame has sounded,
With Ardour for her Country never abounded;
Who so abhorred, what had her Country founded.
Heathenish Wretch! the Pious Christian Wife,
Though ravished, still contents herself with Life:
So zealous from Self-murder we refrain,
We live, though sure of ravishing again.
What need has She of Penance or Repenting,
Who undergoes it all without consenting?
She sure, though with her Sword Lucretian swagger,
Requires a Cordial rather than a Dagger.
But may no fear of Ravishing affright
The beauteous kind Spectators of Tonight;
Safe to your Husbands Arms may you escape,
And never know that dreadful thing, a RAPE.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Worthy, Mr. Paget. Squeezum, Mr. Jones. Politic, Mr. Roscoe. Ramble, Mr.
Mullart. Constant, Mr. Stopler. Sotmore, Mr. J. Lacy. Dabble, Mr. Reynolds.
Quill, Mr. Wells. Staff, Mr. Dove. Porer, Mr. Hicks. Faithful, Mr. Wathan.
WOMEN.
Hilaret, Mrs. Mullart. Isabella, Mrs. Williamson. Mrs. Squeezum, Mrs.
Forrester. Mrs. Staff, Mrs. Lacy. Cloris, Mrs. Smith.
Evidences, Watch, etc.
SCENE LONDON. RAPE upon RAPE; OR, The JUSTICE caught in his own TRAP.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
SCENE A Parlour in Politick's House. A Table spread with Newspapers. Chairs.
Hilaret, Cloris. HILARET. WELL, Cloris, this is a mad Frolic. I am horridly
frighted at the Thoughts of throwing my self into the Power of a young Fellow.


Clo. It is natural to us to be frighted at first: I was in a little Terror my
self on my Wedding Day, but it went all off before the next Morning; a Husband,
like other Bugbears, loses all his Horror when we once know him thoroughly.


Hill. But if he should not prove a good Husband --


Clo. Then you must not prove a good Wife -- If he keeps a Mistress, do you
keep a Gallant; if he stay out with his Friends at a Tavern, do you be merry
with your Friends at home.


Hill. You give fine Advice indeed.


Clo. Upon my Word, Madam, it was such as I followed my self. I had a Rogue of
a Husband that robbed me of all I had, and kept a Mistress under my Nose: but I
was even with him: for it has been ever my Opinion that a Husband, like a
Courtier, who is above doing the Duties of his Office, should keep a Deputy.


Hill. But suppose you had been in Love with your Husband?


Clo. Why so I was, Madam, as long as he deserved it: but Love, like Fire,
naturally goes out when it has nothing to feed on.


Hill. Well, if it be possible to be assured of a Lover's Sincerity, I think I
may be assured of Constant: at least it is advisable to persuade my self of
his Truth whom I should Love, though he wanted it: -- Ah, Cloris! you may as
easily remove a Rock as a Woman's Passion --


Clo. And yet it is very often built on a sandy Foundation.


Hill. Love is the same, whatever be its Object: We as often like Men for
imaginary as real Perfections; we all look through a Prismatick Glass in Love,
and whatever Beauties we have once fancied, we never lose the Opinion of -- our
Amorous Faith is as implicit as our Religious.


Clo. If I have any Judgment in Mankind, and I am sure I have had some
Experince in them, your Passion could have been no where better fixed: Capt.
Constant has all the Qualities any Woman can desire. He has Youth, Beauty,
Vigor, Gallantry, Constancy, and as Mr. Cowley says, a long etc.


SCENE II.
Politic, Hilaret, Cloris. Pol. Ay there it goes, tick tack, tick tack, like
the Pendulum of a Clock. What Mischief are you hatching, hey? -- It is
impossible that two Women should be together without producing Mischief.


Clo. I always thought a Man and Woman the more likely to produce Mischief: and
yet I think them the properer Company.


Pol. I suppose you will tell my Daughter so too.


Hill. Indeed Papa she need not: for I was always of that Opinion.


Pol. You was! but I shall prevent your Wishes --


Hill. You may be mistaken.

[Aside.
Pol. I do not believe the Head of Cardinal Fleury can be more perplexed, than
mine is with this Girl. To govern your self, is greater than to govern a
Kingdom, said an old Philosopher; and to govern a Woman is greater than to
govern twenty Kingdoms.


Hill. I wish you would not perplex your self with Cardinals or Kingdoms, I wish
you would mind your own Business, instead of the Publick's; dear Papa, don't
give your self any more trouble about Don Carlos, unless you can get him for a
Son-in-Law.


Pol. Not if I were a King. I will make you a little sensible who Don Carlos
is. --


Hill. Nay, I do not understand one Word of your Politics.


Pol. I am sorry you do not -- A News-Paper would be a more profitable
Entertainment for you than a Romance. You would find more in one half Sheet,
than in the grand Cyrus.


Hill. More Lies very probably -- You know I do read the Home Paragraphs in the
Whitehail Evening Post: and that is the best of them.


Pol. If you would be informed in these Matters, you must read all that come
out: about forty every Day, and some Days fifty: and of a Saturday about
fourscore. Would you continue in such a Course but one Twelvemonth, I do not
question but you might know as much of Politics as -- any Man that comes to
our Coffee-house. And I had rather see you a Politician, than a Woman of
Quality.


Hill. If I may speak freely, it would have been better for me that you had been
less a Politician.


Pol. You are deceived, very much deceived: but some Fool has put this into
your Head. You may live to see me one of the greatest Men in England. Did I not
say at the Siege of Gibraltar, that within one three Years, we should see
whether we should have Peace or no. And yet I am an Ignoramus; I know nothing I
warrant you: I had better have continued a Merchant no doubt: but then what had
become of my Projects? where had been all those twenty different Schemes which
I have now ready to lay before the Parliament, greatly for my own Honor and
the Interest of my Country? Harkye, I have contrived a Method to pay off the
Debts of the Nation, without a Penny of Money.


Hill. And you will not get a Penny by it, I dare swear.


Pol. No, no, no certainly: though I would not take twenty thousand Pounds for
the Advantage which will arise to me from it. It has lain these three Years in
a Friend's Hands of mine of the House of Commons; who assured me not many Days
ago that it should be taken shortly into Consideration, though he believed it
could not be this Sessions.


Hill. Nor this Age, I am confident.

[Aside.
Pol. And how do you think it is to be compassed! why, by procuring a Machine
to carry Ships by Land about a hundred Miles: and so prosecute the East India
Trade, through the Mediterranean.


Hill. I wish you Success, Sir: but I must take my leave of you, for it grows
very late: so Goodnight, Papa.

[Exit.
SCENE III.
Politic Solus. I cannot rest for these Preparations of the Turks. what can be
their Design! -- It must be against the Emperor. -- Ay, ay, we shall have
another Campaign in Hungary. I wish we may feel no other effect from them --
should the Turkish Galleys once find a Passage through the Straights, who can
tell the Consequence. I hope I shall not live to see that Day


SCENE IV.
Politic, Dabble. Dab. We are all undone, Neighbor Politic! all blown up!
all ruined!


Pol. Protect us -- what is the Matter? No News of the Turks, I hope!


Dab. An Express is arrived with an Account of the Dauphin's Death.


Pol. Worse and worse -- this is a finishing Stroke indeed! Mr. Dabble, I take
this Visit exceeding kind -- pray be pleased to sit: we must confabulate on
this Important Accident. -- Pray light your Pipe -- I wish this may not retard
the Introduction of Don Carlos into Italy.


Dab. I wish it may.


Pol. How!


Dab. I wish Don Carlos do not prove a more formidable Power than is imagined.


Pol. Don Carlos a formidable Power, Mr. Dabble?


Dab. I wish we do not find him so.


Pol. Sir, I look on Don Carlos to be an errant Blank in the Affairs of Europe
-- and let me observe to you, the Turks give me much greater Uneasiness than
Don Carlos can: What the design of their Preparations can be, is difficult to
determine -- this I know, that I know nothing of the matter.


Dab. I think we have no need to travel so far for Apprehensions, when Danger
is so near us: the Prospect of Affairs in the West is so black, that I see no
Reason to regard the East: the monstrous Power which Don Carlos may be
possessed of by the Death of the Dauphin --


Pol. Rather, the monstrous Power which the Emperor may be possessed of.


Dab. The Emperor -- ah! --


Pol. Don Carlos truly.


Both shake their Heads at one another. Dab. I would fain ask one Question, Mr.
Politic. Prav how large do you take Tuscany to be? --


Pol. How large do I take Tuscany to be -- let me see -- Tuscany, ay; how large
do I take it to be -- hum -- Faithful! -- bring some more Tobacco. How large do
I take it to be -- why truly I take it to be about as large as the Kingdom of
France -- or something larger. --


Dab. As large as the Kingdom of France -- you might as well compare this
Tobacco-Pipe to a Canon. Why Tuscany, Sir, is only a Town, a Garrison to be
admitted into Tuscany; that is, into the Town of Tuscany --


Pol. Sir, I will convince you of your Error -- here, Faithful, bring a Map of
Europe hither


Dab. I did not think, Mr. Politic, you had been so ignorant in Geography.


Pol. Sir, I believe I know as much as you, or any one, of it.


SCENE V.
Politic, Dabble, Faithful. Faith Sir, Sir, your Daughter is gone out of the
House, no one knows whither.


Pol. And give me leave to tell you, Sir, I wish your own Ignorance in public
Affairs does not appear to our Cost.


Dab. Sir, I wish you would send for the Map.


Pol. Map me no Maps, Sir, my Head is a Map, a Map of the whole World. --


Faith. Sir, your Daughter --


Dab. If your Head be a Map, it is a very erroneous one.


Pol. Sir, I would not have called Tuscany a Town in a Coffee-House, to have
been Master of it.


Dab. Nor I have compared it to France, to have been King of both.


SCENE VI.
Politic, Dabble, Faithful, Porer. Por. Great News, Gentlemen, all is safe
again.


Pol. More Deaths?


Por. An Express is arrived with a certain Account of the Dauphin's being in
good Health.


Dab. This is good News indeed.


Pol. Is there a certain Confirmation?


Por. Very certain -- I came this moment from the Secretary's Office.


Pol. Dear Mr. Porer, you are the welcomest Man alive -- This News makes me the
happiest Creature living.


Faith. I wish, Sir, my News may not prevent it -- Your Daughter, Sir, Miss
Hilaret, is gone out of the House, and no one knows whither*


Pol My Daughter gone! that is some allay to my Happiness, I confess: but the
loss of twenty Daughters would not balance the Recovery of the Dauphin --
However, Gentlemen, you will excuse me, I must go enquire into this Affair.


Dab. Be not concerned at any thing, after what you have heard: let the Priva^e
give way to the Public ever.


[Exeunt. SCENE VII.
The Street. Sotmore, Ramble. Sotm. Why, thou will not leave us yet, and sneak
away to some nasty little Whore? A Pox confound them, they have spoiled so many
of my Companions, and forced me to Bed sober at three-a-Clock in the Morning so
often -- that if the whole Sex were going to the Devil, I would drink a Bumper
to their good Journey.


Ram. And I would go thither along with them. The dear charming Creatures!
Woman! It is the best Word that ever was invented. There Is Music, there is
Magic in it. Mark Anthony knew well to lay out his Money, and when he gave the
World for a Woman -- he bought a lumping Pennyworth.


Sot. If he had given it for a Hogshead of good Claret, I would have commended
the Purchase more.


Ramb. Wine is only the Prologue to Love: it only serves to raise our
Expectation. The Bottle is but a Passport to the Bed of Pleasure. Brutes drink
to quench their Appetites -- but Lovers to inflame them.


Sot. It Is Pity the generous Liquor should be used to no better a Purpose.


Ramb. It is the noblest use of the Grape, and the greatest Glory of Bacchus is
to be Page to Venus.


Sot. Before I go into a Tavern again with a Man who will sneak away after the
first Bottle, may I be cursed with the odious sight of a Pint as long as I
live: or become Member of a City-Club where Men drink out of Thimbles, that the
Fancy may be heightened by the Wine, about the same time that the Understanding
is improved by the Conversation: I Will sooner drink Coffee with a Politician,
Tea with a fine Lady, or 'Rack Punch with a fine Gentleman, than thus be made a
Whetstone of, to sharpen my Friends Inclinations, that some little Strumpet may
enjoy the Benefit of that good Humor which I have raised.


Ramb. Why, thou art as ill-natured and as angry as a Woman would be, who was
disappointed in the last Moment, when her Expectations were at the highest.


Sot. And have I not the same Cause?


Ramb. Truly, honest Nol, when a Man's Reason begins to stagger, I think him
the properest Company for the Women: One Bottle more, and I had been fit for no
Company at all.


Sot. Then thou had been carried off with Glory. -- An honest Fellow should
no more quit the Tavern while he can stand, than a Soldier should the Field;
but you fine Gentlemen are for preserving your selves safe from both, for the
Benefit of the Ladies. -- 'Sdeath! I Will use you with the same Scorn that a
Soldier would a Coward: So, Sir, when I meet you next, be not surprised if I
walk on the other side the way.


Ramb. Nay, pr'ythee, dear Silenus, be not so enraged; I Will but take one
refreshing turn, and come back to the Tavern to thee. Burgundy shall be the
Word, and I will fight under thy Command till I drop.


Sot. Now thou art an honest Fellow -- and thou shall Toast whomsoever thou
please. -- We'll bumper up her Health, till thou do enjoy her in
Imagination. To a warm Imagination there is no Bawd like a Bottle. It shall
throw into your Arms, the soberest Prude or wildest Coquet in Town; thou shall
rifle her Charms, in spite of her Art. Nay, thou shall increase her Charms
more than her Art: and when thou art surfeited with the luscious Pleasure, wake
cooly the next Morning, without any Wife by your side, or any fear of Children.


Ramb. What a luscious Picture have thou drawn!


Sot. And thou shall have it, Boy! thou shall triumph over her Virtue, if she
be a Woman of Quality -- or raise her Blushes, if she be a common Strumpet.
I Will go order a new Recruit upon the Table, and expect you with Impatience --
Fill every Glass.

[Sings. [Exit Sotmore.
SCENE VIII.
Ramble solus. Ramb. Sure, this Fellow's whole Sensation lies in his Throat:
for he is never pleased but when he is swallowing: And yet the Hogshead will be
as soon drunk with the Liquor it contains, as he. I wish it had no other Effect
upon me. Pox of my Paper Scull! I have no sooner buried the Wine in my Belly,
than its Spirit rises in my Head -- I am in a very proper Humor for a Frolic;
If my good Genius, and her evil one would but send some lovely Female in my way
-- Ha! the Devil has heard my Prayers.


SCENE IX.
Ramble, Hilaret. Hill. Was ever any thing so unfortunate! to lose this Wench in
the Scuffle, and not know a step of the Way -- What shall I do?


Ramb. By all my love of Glory, an Adventure.


Hill Ha! who is that? who are you, Sir?


Ramb A Cavalier, Madam, a Knight Er^ant rambling about the World in quest of
Adventures. To plunder Widows, and ravish Virgins; to lessen the Number of
Bullies, and increase that of Cuckolds, are the Obligations of my Profession.


Hill. I wish you all the Success so worthy an Adventurer deserves.

[Going.
Ramb. But hold, Madam, I am but just sallied, and you are the first Adventure
I have met with.

[Takes hold of her.
Hill. Let me go I beseech you, Sir, I will have nothing to say to any of your
Profession.


Ramb. That Is unkind, Madam: for as I take it, our Professions are pretty
nearly allied, and like Priest and Nun, we are proper Company for one another.


Hill. My Profession, Sir!


Ramb. Yes, Madam, I believe I am no Stranger to the honorable Rules of your
Order. Nay, it is probable I may know your Abbess too; for though I have not been
in Town a Week, I am acquainted with half a Dozen.


Hill. Nothing but your Drink, Sir, and Ignorance of my Quality, could excuse
this Rudeness.


Ramb. (Whu -- [whistles] Ignorance of your Quality! The Daughter of some
Person of Rank, I warrant her) [Aside] Look'e, my Dear, I shall not trouble my
self with your Quality: It is equal to me, whether your Father rode in a Coach
and Six, or drove it -- I have had as much Joy in the Arms of an honest
Boatswain's Wife, as with a Relation of the Great Mogul.


Hill. You look, Sir, so much like a Gentleman, that I am persuaded this Usage
proceeds only from your mistaking me. I own it looks a little odd for a Woman
of Virtue to be found alone in the Street, at this Hour --


Ramb. Yes it does look a little odd indeed.

[Aside.
Hill. But when you know my Story, I am confident you will assist me, rather
than otherwise. I have this very Night escaped with my Maid from my Father's
House; and as I was going to put my self into the Hands of my Lover, a Scuffle
happening in the Street, and both running away in a Fright to avoid it, we
unluckily separated from each other -- Now, Sir, I rely on the Generosity of
your Temper to assist an unhappy Woman, for which you shall not only have my
Thanks, but those of a very pretty Fellow into the Bargain.


Ramb. I am that very pretty Fellow's very humble Servant. But I find I am too
much in Love with you my self, to preserve you for another: Had you proved what
I at first took you for, I should have parted with you easily; but I read a
Coronet in your Eyes: (she shall be her Grace if she pleases, I had rather give
her a Title than Money)

[Aside.
Hill. Nay, now you mistake me as widely as you did at first.


Ramb. Nay, by this Frolic, Madam, you must be either a Woman of Quality, or a
Woman of the Town -- Your low mean People, who govern themselves by Rules, dare
not attempt these noble Flights of Pleasure. Flights only to be reached by
those who boldly soar above Reputation.


Hill. This is the maddest Fellow.

[Aside.
Ramb. So, my Dear, whether you be of Quality or no Quality, you and I will go
drink one Bottle together at the next Tavern.


Hill. I have but one Way to get rid of him.

[Aside.
Ramb. Come, my dear Angel. Oh! this dear soft Hand.


Hill. Could I but be assured that my Virtue would be safe.


Ramb. No where safer. I Will give thee any thing in Pawn for it -- (but my Watch)

[Aside.
Hill. And then my Reputation --


Ramb. The Night will take Care of that -- Virtue and Reputation! these Whores
have learnt a strange Cant since I left England.

[Aside.
Hill. But will you love me always?


Ramb. Oh! for ever and ever, to be sure.


Hill. But will you -- too.


Ramb. Yes, I will -- too.


Hill. Will you promise to be civil?


Ramb. Oh! yes, yes; (I was afraid she would have asked me for Money.)

[Aside.
Hill. Well, then I will venture -- Go you to that corner Tavern, I Will follow
you.


Ramb. Excuse me, Madam, I know my Duty better -- so if you please, I Will follow
you.


Hill. I insist on your going first.


Ramb. And so you will leave me in the Lurch: I see you are frighted at the
Roughness of my Dress; but foregad I am an honest Tar, and the Devil take me if
I bilk you.


Hill. I don't understand you.


Ramb. Why then, Madam, here is a Pound of as good Tea as ever came out of the
Indies; you understand that, I hope.


Hill. I shall take no Bribes, Sir.


Ramb. Refuse the Tea! I like you now indeed; for you cannot have been long
upon the Town, I Am sure. But I grow weary with Impatience. If you are a modest
Woman, and insist on the Ceremony of being carried, with all my Heart.


Hill. Nay, Sir, do not proceed to Rudeness.


Ramb. In short, my Passion will be dallied with no longer. Do you consider, I
am just come on Shore, that I have seen nothing but Men and the Clouds this
half Year, and a Woman is as ravishing a Sight to me as the returning Sun to
Greenland. I am none of your puisny Beaux, that can look on a fine Woman, like
a surfeited Man on an Entertainment. My Stomach's sharp, and you are an
Ortelan; and if I do not eat you up, may salt Beef be my Fare for ever.

[Takes her in his Arms.
Hill. I Will alarm the Watch.


Ramb. You Will be better natured than that. At least. to encounter Danger is my
Profession; so have at you, my little Venus -- If you don't consent, Ill ravish
you.


Hill. Help there! a Rape, a Rape!


Ramb. Hush, hush, you call too loud, People will think you are in earnest.


Hill. Help, a Rape! --


SCENE X.
Ramble, Hilaret, Staff, Watch. Staff. That Is he there, seize him.


Ramb. Stand off, ye Scoundrels!


Staff. Ay, Sir, you should have stood off -- Do you charge this Man with a
Rape, Madam?


Hill. I am frighted out of my Senses --


Staff. A plain Case! -- the Rape is sufficiently proved -- what, was the Devil
in you, to ravish a Woman in the Street thus?


Hill. Oh! dear Mr. Constable, all I desire is, that you would see me safe home.


Staff. Never fear, Madam, you shall not want Evidence.

[Aside to her.
Ramb. (Nay, if I must lodge with these Gentlemen, I am resolved to have your
Company, Madam.) Mr. Constable, I charge that Lady with threatening to swear a
Rape against me, and laying violent Hands upon my Person, whilst I was
inoffensively walking along the Street.


Hill. How! Villain!


Ramb. Ay, ay, Madam, you shall be made a severe Example of. The Laws are come
to a fine Pass truly, when a Sober Gentleman cannot walk the Streets for Women.


Hill. For Heaven's sake, Sir, don't believe him.


Staff. Nay, Madam, as we have but your bare Affirmation on both Sides, we
cannot tell which Way to incline our Belief; that will be determined in the
Morning by your Characters. -- I would not have you dejected, you shall not
want a Character.

[Aside to her.
Hill. This was the most unfortunate Accident sure, that ever befell a Woman of
Virtue.


Staff. If you are a Woman of Virtue, the Gentleman will be hanged for
attempting to rob you of it. If you are not a Woman of Virtue, why you will be
whipped for accusing a Gentleman of robbing you of what you had not to lose.


Hill. Oh! this unfortunate Fright! -- But, Mr. Constastable, I am very willing
that the Gentleman should have his Liberty, give me but mine.


Staff. That Request, Madam, is a very colloborating Circumstance against you.


Ramb. Guilt will ever discover it self.


Staff. Bring them along*


1Watch. She looks like a modest Woman, in my Opinion.


Ramb. Confound all your modest Women, I say -- a Man can have nothing to do
with a modest Woman, but he must be married, or hanged for it.


[Exeunt. ACT II.
SCENE I.
SCENE Justice Squeezum's; a Table, Pen Ink, Paper, etc. Squeezum, Quill.
Squeez. DID Mother Bilkum refuse to pay my Demands, say you?


Quill. Yes, Sir; she says she does not value your Worship's Protection of a
Farthing, for that she can bribe two Juries a Year to acquit her in Hicks's
-Hall, for half the Money which she has paid you within these three Months.


Squeez. Very fine! I shall show her that I understand something of Juries, as
well as her self. Quill, make a Memorandum against Mother Bilkum's Trial, that
we may remember to have the Panel No 3. they are a Set of good Men and true,
and hearken to no Evidence but mine.


Quill. Sir, Mr. Snap the Bailiff's Follower has set up a Shop, and is a
Freeholder. He hopes your Worship will put him into a Panel on the first
Vacancy.


Squeez. Minute him down for No 2. I think half of that Panel are Bailiffs
Followers. Thank Heaven, the Laws have not excluded those Butchers --


Quill. No, Sir, the Law forbids Butchers to be Jurymen, but does not forbid
Jurymen to be Butchers.


Squeez. Quill, do you hear! look out for some new Recruits for the Panel No 1.
We shall have a swinging Vacancy there the next Sessions. -- Truly, if we do
not take some care to regulate the Juries in the Old Bailey, we shall have no
Juries for Hicks's -Hall.


Quill. Very true, Sir. But that Panel has been more particularly
unfortunate. I believe I remember it hanged, at least twice over.


Squeez. Ay, poor Fellows! We must all take our Chance, Quill. The Man who
would live in this World, must not fear the next. The Chance of Peace is
d^ubtful as that of War; and they who will make their Fortunes at Home, should
entertain no more Dread of the Bench, than a Soldier should of the Field. We
are all militant here, and a Halter has been fatal to many a great Man, as
well as a Bullet.


SCENE II.
Squeezum, Quill, Staff. Quill. Sir, here is Mr. Staff, the Reforming Constable.


Staff. An't please your Worship, we have been at the Gaming-House in the
Alley, and have taken Six Prisoners, whereof we discharged two who had your
Worship's License.


Squeez. What are the others?


Staff. One is an Half-pay Officer; another an Attorney's Clerk; and the other
two are young Gentlemen of the Temple.


Squeez. Discharge the Officer and the Clerk, there is nothing to be got by the
Army or the Law; the one has no Money, and the other will part with none. But
be not too forward to quit the Templers.


Staff. Asking your Worship's Pardon, I don't care to run my Finger into the
Lion's Mouth. I would not willingly have to do with any Limb of the Law.


Squeez. Fear not; these bear no nearer Affinity to Lawyers, than a Militia
Regiment of Squires do to Soldiers; the one gets no more by his Gown, than the
other by his Sword. These are Men that bring Estates to the Temple, instead of
getting them there.


Staff. Nay, they are bedawb'd with Lace as fine as Lords.


Squeez. Never fear a Lawyer in Lace -- the Lawyer that sets out in Lace,
always ends in Rags.


Staff. I Will secure them. -- We went to the House where your Worship commanded
us, and heard the Dice into the Street, but there were two Coaches with
Coronets on them at the Door, so we thought it proper not to go in.


Squeez. You did right. The Laws are Turnpikes, only made to stop People who
walk on Foot, and not to interrupt those who drive through them in their
Coaches. -- The Laws are like a Game at Loo, where a Blaze of Court Cards is
always secure, and the Knaves are the safest Cards in the Pack.


Staff. We have taken up a Man for a Rape too.


Squeez. What is he?


Staff. I fancy he is some great Man; for he talks French, sings Italian, and
swears English.


Squeez. Is he rich?


Staff. I believe not, for we cannot get a Farthing out of him.


Squeez. A certain Sign that he is. Deep Pockets are like deep Streams; and
Money, like Water, never runs faster than in the Shallows.


Staff. Then there is another Misfortune too.


Squeez. What Is that?


Staff. The Woman will not swear any thing against him.


Squeez. Never fear that, I Will make her swear enough for my Purpose. What sort
of a Woman is she?


Staff. A common Whore, I believe.


Squeez. The properest Person in the World to swear a Rape. A modest Woman is
as shy of swearing a Rape, as a Gentleman is of swearing a Battery. -- We will
make her swear enough to frighten him into a Composition, a small Part of which
will satisfy the Woman. So go bring them before me. -- But hold! have you been
at home since I sent a Prisoner thither this Morning?


Staff. Yes, an't please your Worship.


Squeez. And what says he?


Staff. He threatens us confoundedly; and says you have committed him without
any Accusation. I Am afraid we shall get nothing out of him.


Squeez. We'll try him till Noon, however.


SCENE III.
Squeezum, Mrs. Squeezum. Mrs. Squeez. I desire, Mr. Squeezum, you would finish
all your dirty Work this Morning, for I am resolved to have the House to my
self in the Afternoon.


Squeez. You shall, my Dear; and I shall be obliged to you, if you can let me
have the Coach this Morning.


Mrs. Squeez. I shall use it my self.


Squeez. Then I must get Horses put into the Chariot.


Mrs. Squeez. I am not determined whether I shall use the Coach or Chariot, so
it is impossible you should have either. Besides, a Hack is the properest to do
Business in, and as I cannot spare you a Servant, will look better.


Squeez. Well, Child, well, it shall be so. -- Let me only beg the Favor of
Dining a little sooner than ordinary.


Mrs. Squeez. That is so far from being possible, that we cannot Dine 'till an
Hour later than usual, because I must attend at an Auction, or I shall lose a
little China Basin which is worth its Weight in Jewels, and it is probable I
may get it for its Weight in Gold, which will not be above One Hundred Guineas,
and those you must give me, Child.


Squeez. A Hundred Guineas for a China Basin! Oh the Devil take the East India
Trade! The Clay of the one Indies runs away with all the Gold of the other.


Mrs. Squeez. I may buy it for less; but it is good to have rather too much
Money about one, than too little.


Squeez. In short, I cannot support your Extravagance.


Mrs. Squeez. I do not desire you to support my Extravagance.


Squeez. I wish you would not.


Mrs. Squeez. Thus stands the Case: You say I am extravagant; I say, I am not;
sure, my Word will balance yours every where but at Hicks's -Hall. -- And
heark'e, my Dear, if whenever I ask for a Trifle, you object my Extravagance to
me, I Will be revenged, I Will blow you up, I Will discover all your midnight
Intrigues, your protecting Ill Houses, your bribing Juries, your snacking Fees,
your whole Train of Rogueries. If you do not allow me what I ask, I Will bid fair
to enter on my Jointure, Sir.


Squeez. Well, my Dear, this Time you shall be indulged. -- Trust a Thief or
Lawyer with your Purse* a Whore or Physician with your Constitution, bu^ never
trust a dangerous Secret with your Wife; for when once you have put it into her
Power to hang you, the sooner you are hanged, the better.

[Aside*
SCENE IV.
Squeezum, Quill, Mrs. Squeezum, Staff, Watch, Ramble, Hilaret. Staff. An't
please your Worship, here is a Gentleman has committed a Rape last Night on
this young Woman.


Squeez. How! a Rape! Has he committed a Rape on you, Child?


Mrs. Squeez. This may be worth hearing.

[Aside.
Hill. Sir, I have nothing to say against him. I desire you would give us both
our Liberty. He was a little frolicksome last Night, which made me call for
these People's Help, and when once they had taken hold of us, they would not
suffer us to go away.


Squeez. They did their Duty. -- The Power of Discharging lies in us, and not
in them.


Ramb. Sir --


Squeez. Sir, I beg we may not be interrupted. Heark'e, young Woman, if this
Gentleman has treated you in an ill manner, do not let your Modesty prevent
the Execution of Justice. Consider, you will be guilty your self of the next
Offense he commits; and upon my Word, by his Looks, it is probable he may
commit a Dozen Rapes within this Week.


Hill. Sir, I assure you he is innocent.


Squeez. Mr. Staff, what say you to this Affair?


Staff. May it please your Worship, I saw the Prisoner behave in a very
indecent manner, and heard the Woman say he had ravished away her Senses.


Squeez. Fie upon you, Child, will you not swear this?


Hill. No, Sir; but I shall swear something against you, unless you discharge us.


Squeez. That cannot be, Madam, the Fact is too plain. If you will not swear
now, the Prisoner must be kept in Custody 'till you will.


Staff. If she will not swear, we can swear enough to convict him.


Ramb. Very fine, faith! this Justice is worse than a Grand Inquisitor. Pray,
honest, formidable Sir, what private Pique have you against me, that you would
compel the Lady to deserve the Pillory, in order to promote me higher?


Squeez. My Dear, did you ever see such a ravishing Look as this Fellow has!
Sir, if I was a Judge I would hang you without any Evidence at all. They are
such Fellows as these who sow Dissension between Man and Wife, and keep up the
Names of Cuckold and Bastard in the Kingdom.


Ramb. Nay, if that be all you accuse me of, I will confess it freely, I have
employed my Time pretty well: Though as I do not remember ever to have done you
the Honor of Dubbing, Mr. Justice, I cannot see why you should be so incensed
against me; for I do not imagine you any otherwise an Enemy to these
Amusements, than a Popish Priest to Sin, or a Doctor to Disease.


Mrs. Squeez. You are very civil, Sir, to threaten to dub my Husband before my
Face.


Ramb. I ask Pardon, Madam; I did not know with whom I had the Honor to be in
Company; it was always against my Inclination to affront a Lady; but a Woman of
your particular Merit, must have claimed the most particular Respect.


Mrs. Squeez. I should have expected no Rudeness from a Gentleman of your
Appearance, and would much rather attribute any misbecoming Word to
Inadvertency, than Design.


Ramb. Madam, I know not how to thank so much Goodness; but do assure you, I
would buy an Introduction to your Acquaintance at a much greater Danger than
this Prosecution, which, I believe, you already see the Malice of. I hope,
Madam, I stand already acquitted in your Opinion.


Mrs. Squeez. I hope, Sir, it will only appear to have been a Frolic: I must
own I have been always a great Enemy to Force -- since there are so many
willing.


Ramb. So, I find there is no danger of a Rape here.

[Aside.
Mrs. Squeez. Well, Child, can you find any thing against this Gentleman?


Squeez. The Woman is difficult of confessing in public: but I fancy when I
examine her in private I may get it out of her -- So, Mr. Constable, withdraw
your Prisoner.


Mrs. Squeez. Nay he appears so much of a Gentleman, that till there be
stronger Evidence, I will take Charge of him -- Come, Sir, you shall go drink a
dish of Tea with me -- You may stay without.

[To the Constable, etc.
Ramb. This Kindness of yours, Madam, will be an Encouragement to Offenders.


SCENE V.
Squeezum, Hilaret. Squeez. Come, come, Child, you had better take the Oath,
though you are not altogether so sure. Justice should be rigorous. It is better
for the Public that ten Innocent People should suffer, than that one Guilty
should escape; and it becomes every good Person to sacrifice their Conscience
to the Benefit of the Public.


Hill. Would you persuade me to perjure my self?


Squeez. By no means. Not for the World. Perjury indeed! do you think I do not
know what Perjury is, better than you? He did attempt to Ravish you, you own;
very well. He that attempts to do you an Injury, has done it in his Heart.
Besides, a Woman may be Ravished, ay and many a Woman has been Ravished, ay
and Men been hanged for it -- when she has not certainly known she has been
Ravished.


Hill. You are a great Casuist in Conscience. But you may spare your self any
further Trouble: for I assure you it will be in vain.


Squeez. I see where your Hesitation hangs, you are afraid of spoiling your
Trade -- You think Severity to a Customer, will keep People from your House. --
Pray answer me one Question -- How long have you been upon the Town?


Hill. What do you mean?


Squeez. Come, come, I see you are but a Novice, and I like you the better: For
yours is the only Business, wherein People do not profit by Experience -- You
are very handsome -- It is Pity you should continue in this abandoned State --
Give me a Kiss -- Nay be not coy to me -- I protest you are as full of Beauty
as the Rose is of Sweetness, and I of Love as its Stalk is full Briars -- Oh!
that we were as closely joined together too.


Hill. Why you will commit a Rape your self, Mr. Justice.


Squeez. If I thought you would prove constant, I would take you into keeping:
for I have not liked a Woman so much these many Years.


Hill. I will humor this old Villain, I am resolved.

[Aside.
Squeez. What think you, could you be constant to a vigorous, healthy,
middle-aged Man, hey! -- could this buy thy Affections off from a set of idle
Rascals, who carry their Gold upon their Backs; and have Pockets as empty as
their Heads? Fellows who are greater Curses on a Woman than the Vapors; for as
those persuade her into imaginary Diseases, these present her with real. -- Let
thy Silence give Consent; here take this Purse as an Earnest of what I Will do
for you.


Hill. Well, and what shall I do for this?


Squeez. You shall do -- You shall do nothing, I will do: I will be a Verb
Active, and you shall be a Verb Passive.


Hill. I wish you be not of the Neuter Gender.


Squeez. Why you little arch Rogue, do you understand Latin, Hussy?


Hill. A little, Sir! my Father was a Country Parson, and gave all his Children
a good Education. He taught his Daughters to write and read himself.


Squeez. What, have you Sisters then?


Hill. Alack-a-day, Sir! sixteen of us, and all in the same way of Business.


Squeez. Ay, this it is to teach Daughters to write. I would as soon put a
Sword into the Hand of a Madman, as a Pen into those of a Woman; for a Pen in
the Hand of a Woman is as sure an Instrument of Propagation, as a Sword in that
of a Madman is of Destruction [Aside.] -- Sure, my Dear, the Spirit of Love
must run very strongly in the Blood of your whole Family.


Hill. Oh, Sir! it was a villainous Man of War that harbored near us -- My poor
Sisters were ruined by the Officers, and I fell a Martyr to the Chaplain.


Squeez. Ay, ay, the Sailors are as fatal to our Women as the Soldiers are. One
Venus rose from the Sea, and thousands have set in it -- But not Venus her self
could compare to thee, my little Honey-suckle.


Hill. Be not so hot, Sir.


Squeez. Bid the Touchwood be cold behind the Burning-glass. The Touchwood is
not more easily kindled by the Sun, than I by your dear Eyes.


Hill. The Touch wood is not drier, I dare swear.

[Aside.
Squeez. But hark, I hear my Wife returning -- leave word with my Clerk where I
shall send to you -- I will be the kindest of Keepers, very constant, and very
liberal. --


Hill. Two charming Qualities in a Lover!


Squeez. My pretty Nose-gay, you will find me vastly preferable to idle young
Rakehells. Besides, you are safe with me. You are as safe with a Justice in
England, as a Priest abroad; Gravity is the best Cloak for Sin, in all
Countries -- Be sure to be punctual to the Time I shall appoint you.


Hill. Be not afraid of me.


Squeez. Adieu, my pretty Charmer. I shall burn with Impatience.


SCENE VI.
Squeezum solus. Go thy ways for a charming Girl! Now if I can get her at this
wild Fellow's Expense, I shall have performed the part of a shrewd Justice; for
I would make others pay for my Sins, as well as their own. I fancy my Wife has
sufficiently frightened him by this, and that he will truckle to any Terms to be
acquitted; for I must own she will pump a Man much better than I -- Oh! here
they come; I must deal with my Gentleman now, in another Style.

SCENE VII.
Squeezum, Mrs. Squeezum, Ramble. Ramb. Well, Sir, is the Lady determined to
swear stoutly?


Squeez. Truly, it is hard to say what she determines; she is gone to ask the
Advice of a Divine and a Lawyer.


Ramb. Then the odds is against me: for the Lawyer will certainly advise her to
swear, and it is possible the Priest may not contradict her in it.


Squeez. It is indeed a ticklish Point, and it were advisable to make it up as
soon as possible. The first Loss is always the least. It is better to wet your
Coat than your Skin, and to run home when the Clouds begin to drop, than in the
middle of the Storm. In short, it were better to give a brace of hundred Pounds
to to make up the Matter now, than to venture the Consequence. I am heartily
concerned, to see a Gentleman in such a Misfortune. I am sorry the Age is so
corrupt. Really I expect to see some grievous and heavy Judgment fall on the
Nation. We are as bad as ever Sodom and Gomorrah were, and I wish we may not be
as miserable.


Ramb. Heark'e, Justice; I take a Sermon to be the first Punishment which a Man
undergoes after conviction. It is very hard I must be condemned to it
beforehand.


Mrs. Squeez. Nay, Sir, I am sure Mr. Squeezum speaks for your good. -- I shall
get a Necklace out of this Affair.

[Aside.
Squeez. Ay, that I am sure I do, my Interest sways not one way or the other --
I would, were I in that Gentleman's Circumstances, do what I advise him to.


Ramb. Faith, Sir, that I must doubt: for were you in my Circumstances, you
would not be worth the Money.


Squeez. Nay, Sir, now you jest with me; a Gentleman can never be at a loss for
such a Trifle.


Ramb. Faith! you mistake. I know a great many Gentlemen not worth three
Farthings: he that resolves to be honest cannot resolve not to be poor.


Squeez. A Gentleman, and poor! Sir, they are Contradictions. A Man may as well
be a Scholar without Learning, as a Gentleman without Riches. But I have no
time to dally with you. If you do not understand good Usage, while it is dealt
you, you may, when you feel the Reverse. The Affair may now be made up for a
Trifle; the time may come when your whole Fortune would be too little -- An
Hour's Delay in the making up an Offense is as dangerous as in the sewing up of
a Wound.


Ramb. Well, you have over-persuaded me, I Will take your Advice.


Squeez. I Will engage you will not repent it -- I don't question but you will
regard me as your Friend.


Ramb. That I do indeed. And to give you the most substantial Instance of it, I
will ask a Favor, which is expected only from the most intimate Friendship --
which is, that you would be so kind to lend me the Money.


Squeez. Alack-a-day, Sir, I have not such a Sum in my Command. Besides, how
must it look in me, who am an Officer of Justice, to lend a Culprit Money
wherewith to evade Justice! Alas, Sir, we must consider our Characters in Life,
we must act up to our Characters; and though I deviate a little from mine, in
giving you Advice, it would be entirely forsaking the Character of a Justice to
give you Money.


Mrs. Squeez. I wonder how you could ask it.


Ramb. Necessity obliges to any thing, Madam. Mr. Squeezum was so kind to show
me the Necessity of giving Money, and my Pockets were so cruel to show me the
Impossibility of it.


Squeez. Well Sir, if you cannot pay for your Transgressions like the Rich, you
must suffer for them like the Poor. -- Here, Constable.


SCENE VIII.
Squeezum, Mrs. Squeezum, Ramble, Staff, Constables. Squeez. Take away your
Prisoner, keep him in safe Custody till farther Orders. If you come to a wiser
Resolution within these two Hours, send me Word; after that it will be too late.


Ramb. Heark'e, Mr. Justice, you had better use me as you ought, and acquit me;
for if you do any thing which you cannot defend, hang me if I am not revenged
on you.


Squeez. Hang you! -- I wish there may not be more Meaning in those Words than
you imagine.


Ramb. 'Sdeath! you old Rascal, I can scarce forbear rattling those old dry
Bones of thine, till they crack thy withered Skin.


Squeez. Bear Evidence of this, I am threatened in the Execution of my Office.


Ramb. Come, honest Mr. Constable, Mr. nocturnal Justice, let me go any where
from this Fellow -- the Night has chosen a better Justice than the Day.


SCENE IX.
Squeezum, Mrs. Squeezum. Squeez. I am afraid I shall make nothing of this
Fellow at last. I have a Mind to discharge him.


Mrs. Squeez. Oh! by no means; for I am sure he has Money.


Squeez. Yes, and so am I. But suppose he will not part with it; it is
impossible to take it from him; for there is no Law yet in being to skreen a
Justice of Peace from a downright Robbery.


Mrs. Squeez. Try him a little longer, however.


Squeez. I will, 'till the Afternoon; but if he should not consent by that
Time, I must discharge him, for I have no Hopes in the Woman's Swearing. She is
discharged already.


Mrs. Squeez. I Will make him a Visit at the Constable's House, and try if I can
alarm him into a Composition. I may make him do more than you imagine.


Squeez. Do so, my Dear; -- I doubt not your Power -- Good Morrow, Honey.


Mrs. Squeez. But, my Dear, pray remember the Hundred Guineas.


Squeez. Yes, yes, I shall remember them; they are not likely to be soon
forgotten. -- Follow me to my Escritore.


SCENE X.
Mrs. Squeezum sola. Since you are sure of going to the Devil, honest Spouse,
I Will take Care to equip you with a Pair of Horns, that you may be as like one
another as possible. This dear wild Fellow must be mine, and shall be mine: I
like him so well, that if he had even ravished me, on my Conscience I should
have forgiven him.

SCENE XI.
Mr. Worthy's. Worthy, Politic. Worcester. Upon my Word, Mr. Politic, I am heartily
sorry for this Occasion of renewing our Acquaintance. I can imagine the
Tenderness of a Parent, though I never was one.


Pol. Indeed, Neighbor Worthy, you cannot imagine half the Troubles, without
having undergone them. Matrimony balks our Expectations every way, and our
Children as seldom prove Comforts to us as our Wives. I had but two -- whereof
one was hanged long ago -- and the other I suppose may be in a fair Way by this.


Worcester. In what manner did she escape from you?


Pol. She had taken Leave of me to retire to Rest, not half an Hour before I
heard of her Departure. I impute it all to the wicked Instructions of an Imp of
the Devil called a Chambermaid, who is the Companion of her Flight.


Worcester. But do you know of no Lover?


Pol. Let me see -- hey! -- There has been a Fellow in a Red Coat, with whom
she has conversed for some time, in spite of my Teeth.


Worcester. Depend on it, He is the Occasion of your Loss. I can grant you a Warrant
against him, if you know his Name, though I fear you are too late.


Pol. No, Sir, I am not too late; my Daughter is an Heiress, and you know the
Punishment for stealing an Heiress. If I could hang the Rascal, it would be
some Satisfaction.


Worcester. That will be impossible, without her Consent; and truly, if she be
married, I would advise you to follow the Example of that Emperor, who when he
discovered something worse than a Marriage, between one of his Subjects and his
Daughter, chose rather to let him enjoy her as his own, than punish him.


Pol. Pray where did that Emperor reign?


Worcester. I have almost forgotten, but I think it was one of the Greek Emperors, or
one of the Turks.


Pol. Bring me no Example from the Turks, good Mr. Worthy, I find no such
Affinity in our Interests. Sir, I dread and abhor the Turks. I wish we do not
feel them, before we are aware.


Worcester. But Sir --


Pol. But me no buts -- what can be the Reason of all this warlike Preparation,
which all our Newspapers have informed us of. Yes, and the same Newspapers a
hundred times in the same Words. Is the Design against Persia? Is the Design
against Germany? Is the Design against Italy -- Suppose we should see Turkish
Galleys in the Channel? We may feel them, yes, we may feel them in the midst of
our Security; Troy was taken in its Sleep, and so may we.


Worcester. Sure, Sir, you are asleep, or in a Dream --


Pol. Yes, yes, these things are called idle Dreams -- the justest
Apprehensions may be styled Dreams -- but let me tell you, Sir, Men betray
their own Ignorance often, in attacking that of other Men.


Worcester. But what is all this to your Daughter?


Pol. Never tell me of my Daughter, my Country is dearer to me than a thousand
Daughters; should the Turks come among us, what would become of our Daughters
then? and our Sons, and our Wives, and our Estates, and our Houses, and our
Religion, and our Liberty. -- When a Turkish Aga should command our Nobility,
and Janissaries make Grandfathers of Lords? Where should we look for Britain
then?


Worcester. Truly, where I may look for Mr. Politic now, in the Clouds.


Pol. Give me leave, Sir, only to let you a little into the present State of
Turkey.


Worcester. I must beg to be excused, Sir; if I can be of any Service to you, in
relation to your Daughter, you may command my Attention: I may probably defend
you from your own Countrymen, but truly from the Turks I cannot.


Pol. I am glad to hear you have some Apprehension of them, as well as my self.
-- That you are not so stupidly besotted, as I meet with some People at the
Coffee-house; but perhaps you are not enough apprized of the Danger. Give me
leave only to show you, how it is possible for the Grand Signior to find an
Ingress into Europe. -- Suppose, Sir, this Spot I stand on to be Turkey -- then
here is Hungary -- Very well -- here is France, and here is England -- granted
-- then we will suppose he had Possession of Hungary -- what then remains but
to conquer France, before we find him at our own Coast. -- But, Sir, this is
not all the Danger; now I will show you how he can come by Sea to us.


Worcester. Dear Sir, refer that to some other time; you have sufficiently satisfied
me, I assure you.


Pol. It is almost time to go to the Coffee-house -- so dear Mr. Worthy, I am
your most obedient Servant.


Worcester. Mr. Politic, your very humble Servant.


SCENE XII.
Worthy solus. I recollect the Dawnings of this political Humor to have
appeared when we were at the Bath together, but it has risen finely in these
ten Years. What an Enthusiasm must it have arrived to, when it could make him
forget the Loss of his only Daughter! The greatest Part of Mankind labor under
one Delirium or other: And Don Quixotte differed from the rest, not in Madness,
but the Species of it. The Covetous, the Prodigal, the Superstitious, the
Libertine, and the Coffee-house Politician, are all Quixottes in their several
Ways.

That Man alone from Madness free, we find,
Who, by no wild unruly Passion blind,
To Reason gives the Conduct of his Mind.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
SCENE The Street. Hilaret, Cloris, meeting. Hill. DEAR Cloris.


Clo. Dear Madam, is it you? you altogether?


Hill. Ay, ay, altogether, thank Heavens! I had like to have lost something, but
all is safe I assure you.


Clo. Ah! Madam, I wish it were.


Hill. What, don't you believe me?


Clo. I wish you could not me, or I my self. Poor Capt. Constant --


Hill. What of him?


Clo. Oh! Madam!


Hill. Speak quickly, or kill me, which you please --


Clo. -- Is taken up for a Rape.


Hill. How!


Clo. It is too true, his own Servant told me.


Hill. His Servant belied him, and so do you -- show me where he is, if he be in
a Dungeon, I Will find him out.


Clo. Very generous indeed, Madam! A King should sooner visit a Prisoner for
Treason, than I a Lover for a Rape.


Hill. It would be unpardonable in me to entertain so flagrant a Belief at the
first hearing, against a Man who has given me such substantial Proofs of his
Constancy: Besides, an Affair of my own makes me the more doubtful of the Truth
of this; but if there appear any Proof of such a Fact I will drive him for ever
from my Thoughts.


Clo. Yes, Madam, Justice Squeezum will take care to have him driven another
Way.


Hill. Justice Squeezum! let me hug you for that Information. Now, I can almost
swear he is Innocent: I have such an Adventure to surprise you with; but let me
not lose a Moment -- come, show me the way.


Clo. Poor Creature! She knows the way to her Destruction too well -- but it
would be Impertinence in a Servant to put her out of it.

[Aside.
SCENE II.
The Constable's House. Constant alone. I begin to be of that Philosopher's
Opinion, who said, that whoever will entirely consult his own Happiness, must
be little concerned about the Happiness of others. Goodnature is Quixotism,
and every Princess Micomicona will lead her Deliverer into a Cage. What had I
to do to interpose! What harm did the Misfortunes of an unknown Woman bring me,
that I should hazard my own Happiness and Reputation on her Account? -- But
sure, to swear a Rape against me for having rescued her from a Ravisher, is an
unparalelled Piece of Ingratitude.

SCENE III.
Constant, and Mrs. Staff. Mrs. Staff. Will your Honor please to drink a Dram,
or some 'Rack Punch?


Constable. Dear Madam, do not trouble me; I can drink nothing.


Mrs. Staff. Truly, Sir, but I can. Not trouble you! I had never such a
Customer here before. You a Captain charged with a Rape! -- I should sooner
take you for some poor Attorney, charged with Forgery and Perjury: o a
traveling Parson, with stealing a Gown and Cassock.


Constable. Drink what you will, and I Will pay what you please.


Mrs. Staff. Thank your Honor! Your Honor will not be offended, I hope -- we
stand at a great Rent: and truly, since this Gin Act, Trade has been so dull,
that I have often wished my Husband would live by the Highway himself, instead
of taking Highwaymen.


Constable You are not the only Wife who would give her Husband this Advice, I dare
swear. Nay, were Men all so uxorious to take it, Tyburn would have as much
Business as Doctors-Commons.


Mrs. Staff. I wish it had more; for we must stand and fall by one another; no
business there, no Business here; and truly Captain, it is with Sorrow I say it,
where we have one Felon now, we had ten, a Year or two ago -- I have not seen
one Prisoner brought in for a Rape this Fortnight, except your Honor. I hope
your Handsel will be lucky.


SCENE IV.
Constant, Staff, Mrs. Staff. Staff. Captain, your Servant, I suppose you will
be glad of Company -- here is a very civil Gentleman, I assure you.


Mrs. Staff. More Gentlemen! This is rare News indeed.


Constable. I had rather be alone.


Staff. I have but this one Prison-Room, Captain: besides, I assure you, this
is no common Fellow, but a very fine Gentleman, a Captain too -- and as merry a
one --


Constable. What is the Cause of his Misfortune?


Staff. A Rape, Captain, a Rape -- no dishonorable Offense -- I would not have
brought any Scoundrels into your Honor's Company: but Rape and Murder no
Gentleman need be ashamed of; and this is an honest Brother-Ravisher -- I have
ravished Women my self formerly: but a Wife blunts a Man's Edge. When once you
are married, you will leave off Ravishing, I warrant you -- to be bound in
Wedlock is as good a Security against Rapes, as to be bound over to the Peace
is against Murder.


Mrs. Staff. My Husband will have his Jest. I hope your Honor will pardon him.


Staff. But here is the Gentleman.


SCENE V.
Constant, Ramble, Staff, Mrs. Staff. Constable. Prodigious!


Ramb. Dear Constant!


Constable. What in the Name of Wonder has brought you to England?


Ramb. What in the Devil's Name has brought thee to the Constable's?


Constable. Only a Rape, Sir, no dishonorable Offense, as Mr. Constable has it.


Ramb. You jest.


Staff. No, Sir, upon my Word the Captain is in earnest.


Ramb. Why I should sooner have suspected Ermin or Lawn-Sleeves. But I see
Gravity and Hypocrisy are inseparable -- Well, give me thy Hand, Brother, for
our Fortunes agree exactly.


Staff. And will agree in the End, I don't question. This is not the first time
of their meeting together on this Account; a Couple of old Whore-masters, I
warrant 'em.

[Aside.
Mrs. Staff. Will your Honors please to drink any Punch, noble Captains, it
will keep up your Spirits.


Staff. Don't force the Gentlemen, Wife, to drink whether they will or no. -- I
wish you well off this Affair -- in the mean time, whatever my House affords is
at your Service -- and let me assure you, the more you drink the less you will
lament your Misfortune.


Ramb. Spoken like a true Philosopher.


SCENE VI.
Constant, Ramble. Ramb. But, dear Billy, I hope thou have not really
committed, hey?


Constable. What I heartily repent of, I assure you. I rescued a Woman in the
Street, for which she was so kind to swear a Rape against me; but it gives me
no Uneasiness equal to the Pleasure I enjoy in seeing you.


Ramb. Ever kind and good-natured!


Constable. Yet I wish our Meeting had been on another Occasion, for the Freedom of
your Life makes me suspect the Consequence of your Confinement may be heavier
than mine.


Ramb. I cannot tell what the Consequence may be, nor shall I trouble my self
about it: But I assure thee, no sucking Babe can be more innocent. If our Cases
differ in any thing, it is in this, that my Woman has not sworn.


Constable. This pleases me indeed! -- But pray, how came you to leave the Indies,
where I thought you had been settled for Life?


Ramb. Why on the same Account that I went thither, that I now am here, by
which I live, and for which I live, a Woman.


Constable. A Woman!


Ramb. Ay, a fine, young, rich Woman! a Widow with Fourscore Thousand Pounds in
her Pocket -- there is a North Star to steer by.


Constable. What is her Name?


Ramb. Her Name! -- her Name is Ramble.


Constable. What, Married!


Ramb. Ay, Sir; soon after you left the Indies, honest Mr. Ingot left the
World, and me the Heir to his Wife with all her Effects.


Constable. I wish you Joy, dear Jack; this thy good Fortune has so filled me with
Delight, that I have no Room for my own Sorrows.


Ramb. But I have not unfolded half yet.


Sot. [without.] Let two Quarts of Rum be made into Punch, let it be hot -- hot
as Hell.


Ramb. Do You hear, we are in a fine Condition 'faith!


SCENE VII.
Constant, Ramble, Sotmore, Staff. Sot. Here they are, here are a Brace of
desponding Whore-masters for you -- Ramble, what nothing to say in Praise of
the Women, Mark Anthony made a fine Bargain, hey, when he gave the World for a
Woman? 'Sdeath! if he had been alive now I Would have waged Six Gallons of Claret,
I had seen him hanged for a Rape -- as I shall very suddenly my two worthy
Friends.


Ramb. Hearkee, Sotmore, if you say any thing against the Women, we'll cut your
Throat, and toss Justice in a Murder into the Bargain.


Sot. Not speak against Women! you shall as soon compel me not to drink; you
shall sow up my Lips, if you do either -- Here, you, let the Punch be gotten
ready.


Staff. It shall, an't please your Honor. (This Gentleman is a rare Customer
to a House, I wish he would commit a Rape too.)

[Aside.
SCENE VIII.
Constant, Ramble, Sotmore. Constable. You must not rail against the Ladies,
Sotmore, before Ramble; for he is a married Man.


Ramb. And what is better, my Wife is at the bottom of the Sea.


Sot. And what is worse, all her Effects are at the bottom of the Sea with her.


Constable. How!


Ramb. Faith! Sotmore has spoken Truth for once. -- Notwithstanding my
Pleasantry, the Lady and her Fortune are both gone together; she went to the
other World Fourscore Thousand strong; and if there be any such thing there, I
don't question but she is married again by this Time.


Sot. You would not take my Advice. I have cautioned thee never to trust any
thing on the same Bottom with a Woman. I would not ensure a Ship that had a
Woman on Board, for double the Price. -- The Sins of one Woman are enough to
draw down a Judgment on a Fleet.


Ramb. Here Is a Fellow, who, like a Prude, makes Sin a Handle to his Abuse. --
Art thou not ashamed to mention Sin -- who art a Cargo of Iniquity? why will thou fill thy venomed Mouth with that of others, when thou have such Stores of
thy own?


Constable. What occasioned your separating?


Ramb. A Storm, and my ill Stars. I left the Ship wherein she was to dine with
the Captain of one of our Convoy, when a sudden violent Storm arising, I lost
sight of her Ship, and from that Day have never seen or heard of her.


Sot. Nor ever will -- I heartily hope. Though as for the Innocent Chests, those
I wish delivered out of the Deep. But the Sea knows its own good: It will be
sure to keep the Money, though possibly it may refund the Woman; for a Woman will
swim like a Cork, and they are both of the same Value, nay the latter is the
more valuable, as it preserves our Wine, which Women often spoil.


Constable. Why, Sotmore, Wine is the Touchstone of all Merit with thee, as Gold is
to a Stock-jobber, and thou would as soon sell thy Soul for a Bottle, as he
for a Guinea.


Sot. Wine, Sir, is as apt a Comparison to every thing that is good, as Woman
is to every thing that is bad.


Constable. Fie, Sotmore! this railing against the Ladies will make your Company as
scandalous to Gentlemen, as railing at Religion would to a Parson.


Ramb. Right, Constant! they are my Religion, I am the High Priest of the Sex.


Sot. Women and Religion! Women and the Devil: he leaves his Votaries in the
Lurch, and so do they.


Constable. I fancy, Ramble, this Friend of ours will turn Parson, one day or other
--


Ramb. If he was not such a Sot, I should think it possible:


Sot. Why faith! I am almost superstitious enough to fancy this a Judgment on
thee for breaking thy Word. -- Did I not tell thee, thou were stroling off to
some little dirty Whore? and you see the Truth of my Prophecy.


Ramb. Thou art in the right: It was not only a Whore, but the most Impudent of
all Whores -- a modest Whore.


Constable. A modest Whore! let her be married to an honest Attorney, by all means.


Ramb. And sent together to People His Majesty's Plantations.


Sot. Modesty nowadays as often covers Impudence, as it does Ugliness. It is
as uncertain a sign of Virtue as Quality is, or as fine Clothes are of Quality.


Ramb. Yet to do her Right: the Persuasions of the Justice could not prevail
with her to perjure herself.


Sot. Conscientious Strumpet! She hopes to pick your Pocket another time, which
it were Charity to thee to wish she might: for if thou escapest this, she
certainly will have an Opportunity.


Ramb. Pray, honest Nol, how did thou find us out? for a Boy would as soon
have sent for his Schoolmaster when he was caught in an Orchard, as I for thee
on this Occasion.


Sot. Find you out! why the Town rings of you -- there is not a Husband or
Guardian in it, but what is ready to get drunk for Joy. If the Woman be not
Gold-Proof, she will be bribed to swear against you. You are a Nuisance, Sir! I
don't believe he has been in Town Six Days, and he has had above sixteen
Women.


Ramb. And they are a nobler Pleasure than so many Gallons which thou have
swallowed in that time.


Sot. Sir, I pay my Vintner, and therefore do no Injury.


Ramb. And, Sir, I do no Injury: and therefore have no Reason to pay.


Sot. Hey-day! is taking away a Man's Wife or Daughter no Injury?


Ramb. Not when the Wife is weary of her Husband, and the Daughter longs for
one.


Constant. Art thou not ashamed, Sotmore, to throw a Man's Sins in his Face,
while he is suffering for them?


Sotm. That is the time, Sir; besides you see what an effect it has on him:
you might as well rail at a Knight of the Post in the Pillory.


Ramb. Let him alone, the Punch will be here immediately, and then he will have
no Leisure to rail.


Sot. Is it not enough to make a Man rail, to have parted with a Friend happy
in the Night, and to find him the next Morning in so fair a Way to -- Death and
Damnation! Show me the Whore, I Will be revenged on her and the whole Sex. If
thou art hanged for Ravishing her, I Will be hanged for Murdering her. Describe
the little Mischief to me. Is she tall, short, black, brown, fair? In what Form
has the Devil disguised himself?


Ramb. In a very Beautiful one, I assure you: she has the finest Shape that
ever was beheld, genteel to a Miracle, then the brightest Eyes that ever
glanced on a Lover, the prettiest little Mouth, and Lips as red as a Cherry:
And for her Breasts, not Snow, Marble, Lillies, Alabaster, Ivory can come up to
their Whiteness; but their little, pretty, firm, round Form, no Art can
imitate, no Thought conceive -- Oh! Sotmore, I could die ten thousand Millions
of Times upon them. --


Sot. You are only like to die once for them.


Constable. All these Raptures about a common Whore, Ramble?


Sot. Ay, every Woman he sees, they are all alike to him, modest, or immodest,
high or low, from the Garret to the Cellar, St. James's to the Stews; find him
but a Woman, and he will make an Angel of her. -- He has the same Taste for
Women, as a Child for Pictures, or a hungry Glutton for an Entertainment: every
Piece is a Venus, and every Dish an Ortelan.


Ramb. To say the Truth of her, Sotmore must have allowed her handsome, and I
must allow her to have been a damned, confounded, common --


SCENE IX.
Constant, Ramble, Sotmore, Hilaret. Ramb. Ha! Conjured up, by Jupiter! Well,
my little Enemy, do the Priest and the Lawyer consent -- and will you swear --
ha!


Hill. [Not regarding Ramble, runs to Constant.] My Constant!


Ramb. Hey-day! what, are we both in for Ravishing the same Woman? -- I see by
her Fondness, he has really Ravished her.


Constable. O, Hilaret! this Kindness of yours sinks me the deeper; can you bear to
think on one accused of such a Crime as I am?


Hill. Never to believe it can I bear.


Constable. How shall I repay this Goodness! Then by Heavens I am innocent.


[They talk apart. Ramb. Hey! the Devil! -- Is this Constant's Mistress? Here
will be fine Work, in faith!

[Aside.
Sotm. Is this the Lady that did you the Favor, Sir?

[To Ramb.
Ramb. This the Lady! No -- why this is a Woman of Virtue; though she has a
great Resemblance of the other, I must confess.


Sotm. Then I suppose this is she whom Constant has Toasted this half Year --
his Honorable Mistress, with a Pox. -- Rare Company for a Man who is in Prison
for a Rape!


Hill. And was you in that Scuffle which parted me and my Maid in
Leicester-Fields?


Constable. It was there this unfortunate Accident happened, while I was going to
the Place of our Appointment.


Hill. It had like to have occasioned another to me, which, that I escaped, I am
to thank this Gentleman.


Ram. Oh, Madam! your most obedient, humble Servant. Was it you, dear Madam?


Constable. Ha! is it possible my Friend can have so far indebted me! -- This is a
Favor I can never return.


Ramb. You over-rate it, upon my Soul you do; I am sufficiently repayed by this
Embrace.


Constable. I can never repay thee. -- Would thou have given me Worlds, it could
not have equaled the least Favor conferred on this Lady.


Ramb. I should have conferred some Favors on her indeed, if she would have
accepted them.

[Aside.
Hill. I am glad it is to Mr. Constant's Friend I am obliged.


Sotm. Yes, you are damnably obliged to him for his Character of you.

[Aside.
Constable. My dear Hilaret, shall I beg to hear it all? I can have no Pleasure
equal to finding new Obligations to this Gentleman.


Hill. Since you desire it --


Ramb. I fancy, Madam, your Fright at that time may have occasioned your
forgetting some Circumstance; therefore since Capt. Constant desires it, I will
tell him the Story. -- I had just parted from this Gentleman, when I heard a
young Lady's Voice crying out for help; (I think the Word Rape was mentioned,
but that I cannot perfectly remember;) upon this, making directly to the Place
whence the Noise proceeded, I found this Lady in the Arms of a very rude Fellow
--


Hill. The most impudent Fellow, sure, that ever was born!


Ramb. A very impudent Fellow, and yet a very cowardly one; for the Moment I
came up, he quitted his Hold, and was gone out of Sight in the Twinkling of an
Eye.


Constable. My dear Ramble, what have thou done for me!


Ramb. No Obligation, dear Constant! I would have done the same for any Man
breathing. But to proceed; the Watch came up, who would not be satisfied with
what she then said, but conveyed us both to the Round-House, whence we were
carried in the Morning before Justice Squeezum, and by him, notwithstanding
this Lady's Protestations, your humble Servant was committed to that Place
where he now finds himself with this good Company.


Constable. Oh, my Friend! -- May Heaven send me an Opportunity of serving thee in
the same Manner!


Ramb. May that be the only Prayer which it denies to Constant.


SCENE X.
Constant, Ramble, Sotmore, Hilaret, Staff. Staff. The Punch is ready,
Gentlemen, you may walk down; the Liberty of my House is at your Service.


Sotm. And that is Liberty enough, while thou have Punch here. If thy House
were a Sea of Punch, I would not prefer any House in Town to it.


Staff. Your Honor shall not want that.


Sotm. And I shall want nothing more.


Staff. Captain, a Word with you. [To Ramble.] There Is Madam Squeezum below
desires to speak with you alone.


Ramb. Bring her up. -- Sotmore, you must excuse me a few Moments, Constant and
this Lady will entertain you.


Sotm. Let the Moments be very few. I Will lay Five Gallons to One, this Fellow
has another Whore in his Eye.


SCENE XI.
Ramble, Mrs. Squeezum. Ramb. So; my Affair with my Friend's Mistress is
happily over. -- That I should not know a modest Woman! But there is so great
an Affectation of Modesty in some Women of the Town, and so great an
Affectation of Impudence in some Women of Fashion, that it is not impossible to
mistake. Now for Mrs. Justice, her Business with me is not exceeding difficult
to guess.


Mrs. Squeez. You will think I have a vast deal of Charity, Captain, who am not
only the Solicitress of your Liberty at home to my Husband, but can carry my
Goodnature so far as to visit you in your Confinement. I cannot say but I have
a generous Pity for any one whom I imagine to be accused wrongfully.


Ramb. I am obliged to you indeed, Madam, for that Supposal.


Mrs. Squeez. You are for the Cause of it. Wherefore do you imagine I ventured
my self alone with you this Morning?


Ramb. From your great Humanity, Madam.


Mr. Squeez. Alas, Sir! it was to try whether you were really the Man you were
reported to be; and I am certain I found you as inoffensive, quiet, civil,
well-bred a Gentleman as any virtuous Woman could have wished. Your Behavior
was so modest, that I can never imagine it possible you should have been guilty
of a Rape. No overgrown Alderman of Sixty, or taper Beau of Six and Twenty,
could have been more innocent Company.


Ramb. Whu! --

[Aside.
Mrs. Squeez. Your then Carriage has wrought so great an Effect upon me, that
I have ventured to trust my self here with you; nay, I could trust my self any
where with so modest a Gentleman.


Ramb. I Will take care, Madam, never to forfeit your good Opinion of me; you may
trust your self with me any where; I Will never behave in any other manner than
becomes the best-bred Man alive with the best-bred Lady. I swear by this soft
Hand, these Lips, and all the Millions of Charms that dwell in this dear Body.


Mrs. Squeez. What do you mean?


Ramb. I know not what I mean; Tongue cannot express, nor Thought conceive -- we
can only feel the exquisite Pleasures Love has in store.


Mrs. Squeez. Nay, I protest, and vow.


Ramb. Protestations are as vain as Struggling. This Closet has a Bed in it
that would not disgrace a Palace.


Sotm. [At the Door.] Why, Ramble! Jack Ramble! Art thou not ashamed to leave
thy Friends thus, for some little dirty Strumpet? If thou do not come
immediately, we'll break open the Door, and drown her in Punch.


Mrs. Squeez. [Softly.] I am undone! --


Ramb. Fear nothing -- Go to your Bowl, I Will come this Instant.


Sotm. I Will not wag without you.


Ramb. Then I Will come down, break your Bowl and spill all your Liquor.


Sot. Bring thy Whore along with thee; there is one there already, she will be
glad of her Company: If you don't come in an Instant I will be back again.


Mrs. Squeez. What shall I do?


Ramb. My Angel! Love shall instruct thee.


Mrs. Squeez. Let me go -- some other time -- I will not run any Venture here.


Ramb. I will not part with you.


Mrs. Squeez. You shall hear from me in half an Hour. You shall have your
Liberty, and I Will appoint you where to meet me.


Ramb. Shall I depend on you?


Mrs. Squeez. You may. -- Adieu. -- Don't follow me: I can slip out a back Way.


Ramb. Farewell, my Angel!


SCENE XII.
Ramble Solus. Confound this drunken Rascal! This is not the first Time he has
spoiled an Intrigue for me. But hold, as I am to have my Liberty beforehand, I
don't think this half Hour's Delay at all unlucky. That Consideration may
sufficiently compensate the staying of my Stomach. This Adventure of mine
begins to put on a tolerable Aspect. An Intrigue with a rich Justice's Wife, is
not to be slighted by a young Fellow of a desperate Fortune. I do not doubt but
in a very short Time, when I am taken up for the next Rape, to bribe the
Justice with his own Money. -- Lend a Man your Gold, he may forget the Debt;
venture your Life for him, he may forget the Obligation; but once engage his
Wife, and you secure his Friendship. There is no Friend in all Extremity so
sure as your Cuckold -- and the surest Hold you can take of a Man, as of a
Bull, is by his Horns.

SCENE XIII.
Ramble, Constant, Sotmore, Hilaret. Sotm. Ha! what is become of thy Wench? if
thou had none, thy Absence was the more inexcusable.


Constable. O Ramble! this our better Genius has invented the most notable Plot!
-- Such a Net is laid for the Justice! it will at once entangle him and
disentangle us. Mr. Hoggshead here is to play his Part too.


Ramb. I am sorry we cannot do without him; for should there be any Claret in
his way, he would disappoint the whole Affair for one Bottle.


Sotm. Not for the best Burgundy in France. This Lady has won my Heart by one
Bumper. -- By all the Pleasures of Drinking, Madam, I like you more than your
whole Sex put together. There is no Honesty in Man or Woman, that will not
drink. Honesty is tried in Wine, as Gold is in the Fire. Madam, you have made a
Conquest of me. I Will drink your Health as long as I can stand, and that is as
long as a reasonable Woman can require.


Hill. I am exceedingly proud of my Conquest over a Man of Mr. Sotmore's good
Sense.


Constable. Upon my Word you may, you are the first Woman I believe he ever was
civil to.


Sotm. It was because they none of them had your Merit; a Parcel of
Tea-drinking Sluts. -- If I had a Daughter that drank Tea, I would turn her out
of Doors. The Reason that Men are honester than Women is, their Liquors are
stronger. If the Sex were bred up to Brandy and Tobacco, if they all liked
Drinking as well as you seem to do, Madam, I should turn a Lover.


Ramb. Why, Constant, such another Compliment would make thee jealous.


Hill. Upon my Word, he has Reason already!


Sotm. Madam, I like you; and if a Bottle of Burgundy were on one side, and you
on the other, I do not know which I should choose.


Constable. Thou would choose the Bottle, I am sure.


Ramb. But I long to hear this Conspiracy.


Sotm. Then it must be below. I strictly forbid any Secrets to be told but at
the Council Table. The Rose is ever understood over the Drinking-Room, and a
Glass is the surest Turnkey to the Lips.


Constable. That Is contrary to the Opinion of Philosophers.


Sotm. Of the sober ones it may; but all your wise Philosophers were a Set of
the most drunken Dogs alive. I never knew a sober Fellow but was an Ass -- and
your Ass is the soberest of all Animals. Your sober Philosophers, and their
Works, have been buried long ago. I remember a Saying of that great Philosopher
and Poet, Horace, who wrote in Falernian instead of Ink: No Verses last -- can
long escape the Night,
Which the dull scribbling Water-drinkers write.



[Exeunt. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
SCENE Squeezum's. Squeezum, Quill. Squeez. YOU delivered my Letter?


Quill. Yes, an't please your Worship, I left it at the Coffee-House, where she
directed me.


Squeez. Very well. -- Quill!


Quill. Sir.


Squeez. I think I may trust thee with any Secret -- and what I am now going to
tell, will show thee what a Confidence I put in thee. -- In short, Quill, I
suspect my Wife --


Quill. Of what, Sir?


Squeez. I am afraid that I am not the only Person free with her, and that I am
free of the Corporation of Cuckolds.


Quill. Then your Worship is free of all the Corporations in England.


Squeez. Now thou know that there are very wholesome Laws against Cuckoldom;
the Advantage of a Man's Horns is, that he may shove his Wife out of Doors with
them.


Quill. And that is no inconsiderable Advantage.


Squeez. But there must be a Discovery first. It is not enough that a Man knows
himself to be a Cuckold, the World must know it too. He that will keep his
Horns in his Pocket, must keep his Wife in his Bosom. Therefore, Quill, as it
is in your Power to observe my Wife, I assure you a very handsome Reward on her
Conviction; for I begin to find, that if I do not discover her, she will
shortly discover me, or ruin me by bribing her to hold her Tongue. It is not a
little Gold will make a Gag for a Woman.


Quill. Sir, I shall be as diligent as possible.


Squeez. And I as liberal on your Success.

[Exit Squeezum.
SCENE II.
Quill solus. Indeed, Justice, that Bait will not do. I know you too well to
trust to your Liberality. Your Wife will reward Services better than you.
Besides, I have too much Honor to take Fees on both Sides. -- And since I am
her Pimp in ordinary, I Will go like an honest and dutiful Servant, and discover
this Conspiracy; for should she once be turned out of the Family, I should make
but a slender Market of this closefinger'd Justice, whose Covetousness would
suffer no Rogues to live but himself.

SCENE III.
The Constable's House. Ramble, Constant. Ramb. This little Mistress of yours
is the most dextrous Politician, if that drunken Puppy does not disappoint us.


Constable. Never fear him! he has Cunning enough, and there has been so long a
War in his Head between Wine and his Senses, that they seem now to have come to
an Agreement that he is never to be quite in them, nor ever quite out of them;
his Life is one continued Scene of being half Drunk.


Ramb. Well, as we can be of no farther Use in the Affair, but must stay here
and expect the Issue; pr'ythee tell me what has become of you these three long
long Years since you quitted the Service of the East India Company, and came
over to England with Sotmore?


Constable. Why, at my first Return to England, the Prospect of War was in every
one's Eye, and not only the Reports of the People, but the Augmentation of the
Troops assured us of its Approach; upon which, I resolved to embarque my small
Remains of Fortune in the Service of my Country, and obtained the same
Commission on that Occasion, which I had enjoyed in the Indies. My History is
not very full of Adventures; I continued therein 'till the Reduction, when I
shared the Fate of several unhappy brave Fellows, and was sent a begging with a
red Coat on my Back.


Ramb. It is the Faculty of the Cloth to be ragged. -- Red is as apt to be
ragged, as White to be soiled. It is commonly the Fate of our brave Soldiers to
bring home ragged Clothes, as well as Colors, and both are rewarded by
Westminster Hall -- the one is hung up in it, and the other is locked up safe
by an Order from it; for, Heaven be praised! the Goals are always open
Hospitals for us.


Constable. The only Happiness which has attended me since my Return, is my having
contracted an Intimacy with that young Lady whom you saw here; which has
proceeded so far, that last Night we had appointed to meet in order to our
Marriage; but as I was just arrived at the Place, a Woman well-dress'd was
attacked in the Street by a Russian; I immediately flying to her Assistance,
the Fellow quitted her, and left me alone in the Possession of the Watch, who
early this Morning carried me before Justice Squeezum, and by him I was
committed hither.


Ramb. What, did she appear against you?


Constable. No; they said she was ill of some Bruises she had received, but desired
I might be kept in Custody 'till the Afternoon, at which Time she would appear
against me. But by what Hilaret has told us, and by some Methods which have
been used to extort Money from me, I am inclined to fancy it all a contrived
Piece of Villainy of the Justice, and not of the Woman's, as I at first imagined.


Ramb. Be assured of it; -- if there be Roguery, the Justice has the chief
Part in it. But, comfort your self with the Expectation of Revenge, for I think
he cannot possibly escape the Net we have spread, unless the Devil have more
Gratitude than he is reported to have, and will assist his very good Friend at
a Crisis.


Constable. But, what do you intend in England, where you have no Friends?


Ramb. I know not yet whether I have or no. I left an old Father here, and a
rich one. He thought fit to turn me out of Doors for some Frolicks, which it is
probable, if he yet lives, he may have forgiven me by this. But what is become
of him I know not, for I have not heard one Word of him these Ten Years.


Constable. I think you have been vastly careless, in neglecting him so long.


Ramb. It Is as I have acted in all Affairs of Life; my Thoughts have ever
succeeded my Actions; the Consequence has caused me to reflect when it was too
late. I never reasoned on what I should do, but what I had done; as if my
Reason had her Eyes behind, and could only see backwards.


SCENE IV.
Ramble, Constant, Staff. Staff. Here is a Letter for your Honor.


Ramb. [Reads it.] Ay, this is a Letter indeed!


Constable. What is it?


Ramb. My Freedom, under a Sign manual from the Queen of these Regions.


Constable. Explain.


Ramb. Then, Sir, in plain English, without either Trope or Figure, it is a
Letter from the Justice's Wife, with an Order to the Constable for my Liberty.
[Reads.] SIR,
I Was no sooner recovered of the Fright which that unmannerly Friend of yours
occasioned, than I have performed my Promise; you will find me at Home; the
Constable has Orders by the Bearer to acquit you.


Here Is Goodnature for you! [Kisses the Letter.] Thou dear Wife of a damned
Rogue of a Justice, I fly to thy Arms.


Constable. Heark'e! suppose you brought her to be a Witness to our Design -- and
-- here, take this Letter of Assignation from the Justice to Hilaret; it will
give your Discovery Credit.


Ramb. An admirable Thought! I fly to execute it. Dear Constant, good morrow. I
hope when next we meet, we shall meet

In happier Climes, and on a safer Shore,
Where no vile Justice shall invade us more.

Constable. Success attend you.


[Exeunt. SCENE V.
A Tavern. Squeezum, Drawer. Squeez. No Woman been to enquire for Mr. Jones?


Draw. Sir, I know of none, but I Will ask at the Bar if you please.


Squeez. Do -- and leave Word if any such comes, to show her up hither. -- I
have no Reason to doubt her Company, but I am impatient for it. I protest this
Woman has revived the Vigor of Youth in me; sure, I must have over-reckoned
my Years! -- I cannot be above Forty-Nine at the most. -- I wish this dear Girl
was come. -- I am afraid I did wrong in giving her those Five Shillings, in a
Purse worth above Two Shillings more, which who knows but she may be spending
on some Bully, who will perhaps send another Present to me in return?


SCENE VI.
Squeezum, Hilaret. Squeez. Oh! are you come -- you little, pretty, dear, sweet
Rogue! -- I have been waiting for you these -- these four Hours at least.


Hill. Young Lovers are commonly earlier than their Appointment.


Squeez. Give me a Kiss for that. -- Thou shall find me a young Lover, a
vigorous young Lover too. -- Hit me a Slap in the Face, do. -- Bow-wow!
Bow-wow! I Will eat up your Clothes. -- Come, what will you drink? White or Red?
-- Women love White best. -- Boy, bring half a Pint of Mountain. -- Come, sit
down; do, sit down. -- Come, now let us hear the Story how you were first
debauched. -- Come -- that I may put it down in my History at Home. I have the
History of all the Women's Ruin that ever I lay with, and I call it, The
History of my own Times.


Hill. I Will warrant it is as big as a Church-Bible.


Squeez. It is really of a good reputable Size: I have done Execution in my
Time.


Hill. And may do Execution still.


Boy. [Without.] Half a Pint of Mountain in the Lion, score.


Squeez. Well -- But now let me have the History -- Where did your Amor begin
-- at Church, I warrant you: more Amors begin at Church than end there. -- Or
perhaps, you went to see the Man of War -- Going to see Sights has ruined many
a Woman. No wonder Children are Lovers of them, since so many owe their Being
to them.


Hill. [Aside.] I thank you for that remembrance, I had forgot my Lover. -- Ay,
Sir, it was there indeed I saw him first, that was the fatal Scene of our
Interview.


Squeez. Well, and was the Amor managed by Letter, or by word of Mouth?


Hill. By Letter, Sir. I believe he writ two Quires of Paper to me before I
would send him an Answer, I returned him several un-opened, and then several
others opened -- But at last -- he obtained an Answer.


Squeez. Well, and after your Answer, what followed then?


Hill. Oh! he thought himself sure of me, as soon as I had answered his Letter.


Squeez. Ay, I have always observed in my Amors, that when I received an
Answer, I never failed of the Woman; a Woman follows her Letter infallibly:
well, and what did he say in the second Letter?


Hill. Oh! he swore a thousand fond things, that his Love should last as long as
his Life. That his whole Happiness depended on me -- and a vast deal of that
Nature.


Squeez. Ay, ay, just as I have done my self. I find Whoring is as Methodical
as the Law.


Hill. And I fancy as tedious with you, old Gentle man.

[Aside
Squeez. Well, and how many Letters did you write to him, ey! -- before --?


Hill. Not many. He did not want much Encouragement.


Squeez. Then passing over the rest of the Suit, let us come to the last fatal
Meeting.


Hill. It was of a Sunday Morning. --


Squeez. Right. My old method: When other People are gone to Church.


Hill. In an exceeding hot Day. --


Squeez. May or June? -- Women and Cherries are commonly gathered in the same
Month.


Hill. I was fatigued with walking in the Garden, and retired to an Arbor to
repose my self: guess what was my Surprise, when I found the dear Perfidious
had conveyed himself thither before me.


Squeez. A sly Dog! My old way again. An Ambush is as useful in Love as War.


Hill. At my first Entrance, he pretended a Surprise at seeing me unexpectedly:
but on my questioning him how and with what Design he had conveyed himself
there, he immediately threw off the Cloak and confessed all: he flew to me,
caught me in his Arms with the most eager Raptures, and swore the most violent
Love and eternal Constancy. I in the greatest Agony of Rage repelled him with
my utmost Force; he redoubled his Attacks, I slackened my Resistance; he
entreated, I raved; he sighed, I cried; he pressed, I swooned; he --


Squeez. Oh! -- I can bear no longer, my Angel! my Paradise! my Honey-suckle!
my Dove! my Darling!


Hill. What do you mean, Sir?


Squeez. I mean to eat you up, to swallow you down, to squeeze you to Pieces.


Hill. Help there! a Rape, a Rape!


SCENE VII.
Squeezum, Hilaret, Sotmore. Sotm. Hey-day! what in the Devil's name is here?
-- Justice Squeezum ravishing a Woman!


Hill. Oh! for Heaven's sake, Sir, assist a poor forlorn, hapless Maid, whom
this wicked Man has treacherously seduced.


Squeez. Oh lud! -- Oh lud!


Sotm. Fie upon you, Mr. Squeezum! you who are a Magistrate, you who are the
Preserver and Executor of our Laws, thus to be the Breaker of them!


Squeez. Can thou accuse me?


Hill. You know too well how barbarously you have used me. For Pity's sake, Sir,
secure him; do not let him escape, 'till we send for a Constable. If there be
any Law for a Justice, I am resolved to hang him.


Squeez. Oh lud! what Shame have I brought my self to! that ever I should live
to see this Day!


Sotm. If thou had stood to thy Bottle like an honest Fellow this had never
happened, but you must go a Whoring with a Pox to you, at your Years too; with
these spindle Shanks, that weezle Face, that Crane's Neck of a Body. Who would
have imagined that such an old withered May Pole as thou art should attempt to
fall on a Woman? Why, thou will be the Diversion of the whole Town. --
Grubstreet will dine a Month on your Account. Thou will be ushered to Tyburn
with more Pomp then Alexander was ushered into Babylon. Justice never triumphs
so universally as at the Execution of one of her own Officers.


Squeez. Sir, if there be Truth on Earth, I am as innocent --


Sotm. All the Innocence on Earth will not save you -- A Man does not always
draw the Rope by the weight of his Sins. Your Innocence will not acquit you in
a Court of Justice, against her Oath; and when you come to the Gallows, it will
be vain to plead your Innocence. All Is Fish that comes to the Net there. The
Gallows so seldom gets its due, that it never parts with what it gets.


Hill. Can you pretend to Innocence? was not this Gentleman an Eyewitness to
your Rudeness, to the Injuries you offered me?


Sotm. Ay, ay, I can swear to the Rape with as safe a Conscience as I can drink
a Glass of Wine.


Squeez. I see I am betrayed, I am caught in my own Trap. There is but one way
to escape, which is the way I have opened to others. [Aside.] I see, Madam,
your Design is to extort Money from me. I am too well acquainted with the Laws
to contend: but I hope you will be reasonable, for I am poor, very poor, I
assure you: it is not for Men of my Honesty to be rich.


Hill. Sir, if you would give me Millions, it should not satisfy my Revenge;
you shall be hanged for an Example to others.


Squeez. Here Is a cruel Wretch! who prefers my Blood to my Gold, which is
almost my Blood.


Sotm. Hey-day! what Vehicle is this? a Vinegar Bottle? -- half a Pint, by
Jupiter! Why, thou sneaking Rascal, can thou pretend to Honesty, when this
Dram Glass has been found upon thee? Were I thy Judge, or thy Jury, this very
sneaking Vehicle should hang thee, without any other Evidence. But come, since
you are to be hanged, I Will drink one Bumper to your good Journey to the other
World -- You will find abundance of your Acquaintance, whom you have sent
before you -- And now, I Will go call the Drawer to fetch a Constable.


Squeez. Hold, hold, Sir; for Mercy sake do not expose me so -- Will nothing
content you, Madam?


Hill. Nothing but the Rigor of the Law. Sir, I beseech you lose no Time, but
send for the Constable immediately.


Squeez. I Will do any thing, I Will consent to any Terms.


Hill. The Constable! the Constable!


Squeez. Stay, dear Sir! I Will give you a hundred Guineas, I Will do any thing.


Hill. Remember your vile Commitment of two Gentlemen this Morning -- But I will
revenge the Injuries of my Friends -- Sir, I beseech you send for the Officers.


Squeez. One is already dismissed from his Confinement, and the other shall be
dismissed immediately.


Hill. It is too late.


Sotm. Hearkee, Sir, will you leave off Whoring, and take to Drinking for the
future?


Squeez. I Will leave them off both.


Sotm. Then you shall be hanged: but if you will commence honest Fellow, and
get drunk every Day of your Life, I Will intercede with this Lady, that on your
acquitting the Gentleman you shall be acquitted your self.


Squeez. I Will do any thing, I Will quit any thing.


Sotm. Madam, let me persuade you to be merciful this time to this unfortunate
and undutiful Servant of Justice.


Hill. Sir, I can deny you nothing.


Squeez. Get me a Pen and Ink, I Will send an Order to bring him hither, and
discharge him instantly.


Sotm. Drawer, bring Pen, Ink and Paper, and a Bottle of old Port.


Squeez. [to Hill.] And could you have had the Conscience to have sworn against
a poor old Man?


Sotm. Faith! 'twas a little cruel. Could you have had the Heart to see him
swinging like a gibbeted Skeleton? could you have served up such a dry Dish to
Justice -- The Body of one of her own Children too? -- But here is the Paper --
Come, Sir, write his Discharge and your own.


[ Squeezum writes, Sotmore and Hilaret advance. Sot. You have managed this
Matter so well, that I shall have an Opinion of your Sex's Understanding ever
after.


Hill. Let a Woman alone for a Plot, Mr. Sotmore.


Sot. Ay, Madam, a Woman that will drink a Bumper. Wine is the Fountain of
Thought, and

The more we drink,
The more we think.
It is a Question with me, whether Wine has done more Good, or Physic Harm in
the World; I would have every Apothecary's Shop in the Town turned into a
Tavern.


Hill. I am afraid the more you have of the one, the more you will require of
the other.


Sot. It is their Drugs that debauch our Wine: Wine in it self is as innocent
as Water, and Physic poisons both. It is not the Juice of the Grape, but of
the Drug, that is pernicious. Let me advise you, Madam, leave off your damned
adulterated Water, your Tea, and take to Wine. It will paint your Face better
than Vermilion, and put more Honesty in your Heart than all the Sermons you can
read. I Will introduce you to some Clubs of my Acquaintance, a set of honest
Fellows that live in the Clouds of Tobacco, and know no Home but a Tavern.


Squeez. This Letter, Sir, will produce the Gentleman immediately.


Sot. Here, Drawer -- let this Letter be sent whither it is directed. Come
honest Justice, our Acquaintance has an odd Beginning, but we may be very good
Companions soon: Let us sit down and expect our Friend in the Manner it
becomes us. Remember what you have bargained to do every Day of your Life, and
the Obligation shall be dated from this Hour. Come, sit thee down, honest
Publican, old Justice Merchant. [They sit] Here Is a Health to the Propagation
of Trade, thy Trade I mean, to the Increase of Whores, and false Dice -- Thou
art a Collector of the Customs of Sin, and he that would sin with Impunity,
must have thy Permit. Come, pledge me, old Boy; if thou leavest one Drop in the
Glass, thou shall go to Goal yet, by this Bottle.


Squeez. I protest, Sir, your Hand is too bountiful, you will overcome me with
Wine.


Sot. Well, and I love to see a Magistrate drunk; it is a comely Sight: When
Justice is drunk, she cannot take a Bribe.


Squeez. Do you not remember how the Athenians punished Drunkenness in a
Magistrate?


Sot. And do not I know that we have no such Athenian Law among us? We punish
Drunkenness as well as other Sins, only in the Lower Sort: Drink, like the
Game, was intended for Gentlemen -- and no one should get drunk, who cannot go
home in a Coach -- Come, Madam, it is your Glass now.


Hill. Dear Sir! I beg you would not compel me to it.


Sot. By this Bottle, but I will, I Will ravish thee to it before the Justice's
Face. Come, it will be better for you than Tea, you will not be obliged to
sculk away and take a Dram after this. Come drink the Justice's Health, as a
Token of Amity; the Justice is a good honest drunken Fellow. But let me give
you some wholesome Advice, [to the Justice] leave off fornicating, leave the
Girls to the Boys, and stand to thy Bottle: It is a Virtue becoming our Years;
and don't be too hard on a wild honest young Rake. Thou have committed a couple
of the pretiest Boys today, don't do so any more. -- Be as severe as you
please to Whores and Gamesters, that offer to act without your License; but if
ever you grant a Warrant for a Friend of mine again, you shall not only drink
the Wine, but eat the Bottle too. Come, here is your Health, in Hopes of your
Amendment; thou shall pledge thy own Health in a Bumper -- Here, Boy, bring up
a Gallon of Wine.


Squeez. Not a Drop more.


Sot. A Drop! confound the Name. Come, empty your Glass; the Lady is a-dry.


Squeez. This is worse than a Prison.


Sot. You will get out of this with paying less Fees. Drink, I say.


Squeez. Well -- since I must.


Sot. Come, we'll have a Song in praise of Drinking -- I Will sing the Stanza's,
and you shall bear the Chorus.

SONG.
Let a Set of sober Asses
Rail against the Joys of drinking,
While Water, Tea,
And Milk agree,
To set cold Brains a thinking:
Power and Wealth,
Beauty, Health,
Wit and Mirth in Wine are crowned;
Joys abound,
Pleasure's found,
Only where the Glass goes round.
II.
The Ancient Sects on Happiness
All differed in Opinion,
But wiser Rules,
Of Modern Schools,
In Wine fix her Dominion:
Power and Wealth, etc.
III.
Wine gives the Lover Vigor,
It makes glow the Cheeks of Beauty,
Makes Poets write,
And Soldiers fight,
And Friendship do its Duty:
Power and Wealth, etc.
IV.
Wine was the only Helicon,
Whence Poets are long-lived so;
'Twas no other Main,
Than brisk Champaigne,
Whence Venus was derived too:
Power and Wealth, etc.
V.
When Heaven in Pandora's Box
All kind of Ill had sent us,
In a merry Mood,
A Bottle of Good
Was cork'd up, to content us:
Power and Wealth, etc.
VI.
All Virtues Wine is Nurse to,
Of every Vice Destroyer;
Gives Dullards Wit,
Makes just the Cit,
Truth forces from the Lawyer:
Power and Wealth, etc.
VII.
Wine sets our Joys a flowing,
Our Care and Sorrow drowning.
Who rails at the Bowl,
Is a Turk in's Soul,
And a Christian never should own him:
Power and Wealth, etc.

SCENE VIII.
Squeezum, Hilaret, Sotmore Constant, Staff. Constable. My Hilaret! my Dear!


Hill. My Constant!


Sot. Give you Joy, dear Constant, of your Liberty.


Constable. Thank you, dear Sotmore, to you I am partly obliged for it: Ramble and
I will make you Amends* we'll give you six Nights for this.


Sot. Where is he?


Constable. Very safe; be not concerned about him.


Hill. Well, Sir, since our Affair is ended, there is the Purse you presented me
this Morning. As I have not performed your Expectations one Way, I Will give you
what I believe you did not expect -- your Money again. It is unopen'd, I assure
you.


Squeez. Thou art welcome however.


Sot. Come, Gentlemen, be pleased to take every Man his Chair and his Glass; we
will dedicate one Hour or two to drinking, I am resolved.


Squeez. First we will sacrifice to Justice. Mr. Constable, do your Duty.


Staff. Come in there.


SCENE IX.
Squeezum, Hilaret, Sotmore, Constant, Staff, Assistants. The Assistants seize
Constant, Hilaret, and Sotmore. Squeez. Seize those People in the King's Name
-- accuse that Woman and that Man of conspiring to wear a Rape against me.


Staff. It is in vain to contend, Gentlemen.


Hill. Oh the Villain!


Squeez. [to Sot.] The next Letter you extort, Sir, be sure to examine the
Contents.


Sot. Thou Rascal! will not even Wine make thee Honest.


Squeez Observe, Gentlemen, how abusive he is; but I Will make an Example of you
all: I Will prosecute you to the utmost Severity of the Law, -- Mr. Constable,
convey the Prisoners to your House, whence you shall have Orders to bring them
before a Justice.


Sot. And art thou really in Earnest?


Squeez. You shall find I am, Sir, to your Cost.


Sot. Then I have found one Man with whom I would not drink a Glass of Wine.


Staff. Come, Gentlemen, you know the Way to my House -- I am particularly glad
to see your Honor [to Sotmore] and will accommodate you in the best Manner I
can.


Constable. I am too well acquainted with Misfortune, to repine at any; but how
shall I bear yours, my Hilaret?


Hill. The less you seem to bear, the more you will lighten mine.


Sot. I must give the Justice one Wish. May Heaven rain Small-Beer upon thee,
and may it corrupt thy Body, till it is as putrified as thy Mind.


Hill. One Blessing only may Heaven leave thy Life,
May it take all things from thee -- but thy Wife.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
SCENE Politick's House. Politic solus. Pol. SURE, never Child inherited less
of a Father's Disposition than mine; her Mother certainly played me foul in the
begetting her: I, who have been my whole Life noted for Sobriety, could never
have given Being to so wild a Creature: I begin to recollect having seen a tall
Half-pay Officer at my House formerly: Nor do I think the Girl unlike him. I am
sure she has been ever wild enough, to have had any Officer in the Kingdom for
her Father. Nature has been kind to the Male of all Creatures but Man: The
Bull, the Horse, the Dog are not encumbered even with their own Offspring;
that Care falls only to the Females: But Man, when once a gabling Priest has
chattered a few mischievous Words over him, is bound to have and to hold from
that Day forward all the Brats his Wife is pleased to bestow on him. Yet I must
own the Girl has been ever dutiful to me, till she became acquainted with this
cursed Fellow in a Red Coat. Why should Red have such Charms in the Eyes of a
Woman? The Roman Senate kept their Armies abroad to prevent their sharing in
their Lands at home, we should do the same to prevent their sharing in our
Wives. A tall lusty Fellow shall make more work for a Midwife in one Winter at
home, than he can for a Surgeon in ten Summers abroad.


SCENE II.
Politic, Faithful. Pol. Well, any News of my Daughter yet?


Faith. No, Sir; but there is some News from the Secretaries Office, a Mail is
arrived from Holland, and you will have the Contents of it in one of the
Evening Papers.


Pol. Very well! I must be patient. I think we have three Mails together now: I
am not satisfied at all with the Affairs in the North: The Northern Winds have
not blown us any Good lately; the Clouds are a little darker in the East too
than I could wish them.


SCENE III.
Politic, Dabble. Pol. Mr. Dabble, good Morrow.


Dab. Are the Mails come in?


Pol. Just arrived.


Dab. I have not slept one wink for reflecting on what you told me last Night;
perhaps this Dutch Mail may give some Insight into those Affairs. But what says
the Lying-Post?


Pol. I have had no time to read it yet, I wish you would. I have only read,
The London Journal, the Country Journal, the Weekly Journal, Applebee 's
Journal, the British Journal, the British Gazeteer, the Morning Post, the
Coffee-House Morning Post, the Daily Post, the Daily Post-Boy, the Daily
Journal, the Daily Courant, the Gazette, the Evening Post, the Whitehall
Evening Post, the London Evening Post, and the St. James 's Evening Post. So,
if you please begin the Lying Post.


Dab. [reads.] Moscow, January the fifth. 'We learn from Constantinople, that
Affairs continue still in the same doubtful way, it is not yet known what
Course our Court will take. The Empress having been slightly indisposed the
other Day took the Air in her own Coach, and returned so well recovered, that
she eat a very hearty Supper.' --


Pol. Hum -- there is no mention of the Supper in any other Papers.


Dab. Berlin, January the 20th. 'We hear daily Murmurs here concerning certain
Measures taken by a certain Northern Potentate; but cannot certainly learn
either who that Potentate is, or what are the Measures which he has taken --
mean time we are well assured that Time will bring them all to light.'


Pol. Pray read that last over again.


Dab. 'Mean time, we are well assured that Time will bring them all to light.'


Pol. Hum! hum!


Dab. Marseilles, January the 18th. 'The Affairs in regard to Italy, continue
still in the same uncertain Condition.'


Pol. Hum.


Dab. 'The Talk of a large Embarkation still runs high.'


Pol. Hum.


Dab. 'The Spaniards continue still encamped near Barcelona.'


Pol. Hum! [Shakes his Head.]


Dab. 'And every thing seems tending to a Rupture -- mean time we expect the
Return of a Courier from Vienna, who it is generally expected will bring the
News of a general Pacification.'


Pol. All is well again!


Dab. I like this, and some other Papers, who disappoint you with good News.
Where the beginning of a Paragraph threatens you with War, and the latter part
of it ensures you Peace.


Pol. Please to read on --


Dab. 'However, notwithstanding these Assurances, it is doubted by most People,
whether the said Courier will not rather bring a Confirmation of the War; but
this is all guess-work, and till such time as we see an actual Hostility
committed, we must leave our Readers in the same uncertain State we found them.'


Pol. Hum! There is no Certainty to be come at, I find; it may be either Peace
or War.


Dab. Though were I to lay a Wager, I should choose War; for, if you observe, we
are twice assured of that, whereas we have only one Affirmation on the side of
Peace -- but stay, perhaps the next Paragraph which is dated from Fontain-bleau
may decide the Question. ' Fontain-bleau, January 23, Yesterday his Majesty
went a Hunting, today he hears an Opera, and tomorrow he hears Mass.'


Pol. I don't like that; hearing Mass is seldom the Forerunner of good News.


Dab. ' It is observable that Cardinal Fleury' --


Pol. Ay, now for it.


Dab. 'It is observable that Cardinal Fleury has for several Days last past
been in close Conference with the Minister of a certain State, which causes
various Speculations; but as we do not know what was the Matter in Debate, we
cannot say what may be the Consequence thereof. Mean time we cannot help
observing, that it has occasioned some People to put on very serene Looks, who
had worn cloudy ones for some time before: Some imagine on comparing this with
the News from Marseilles, that a War will be unavoidable -- others, who are
more peaceably inclined, are as strenuous Advocates on the other side -- We
must refer the whole to the Determination of Time, that great Judge in worldly
Affairs, who never fails with his two-edged Scithe to mow down the Weeds, which
shadow over the secret Counsels of State, and lay them open to the naked Eye of
the discerning Politician.'


Pol. Shall I beg to hear that over again?


SCENE IV.
Politic, Dabble, Faithful. Dab. [reads.] 'We must refer the whole to the
Determination,' etc.

[ Dab. continues reading.
Faith. Oh, Sir! Cloris has brought the strangest News of my young Mistress.


Pol. Don't interrupt us -- Blockhead.


Faith. If you lose a Moment she may be lost for ever.


Pol. Sirrah! Peace.


Faith. Sir, my young Mistress, Miss Hilaret, will be undone, ruined, hanged,
if you do not assist her; she is taken up for a Rape -- Oh! my poor young Lady!
the sweetest, best-temper'd Lady sure that ever was born. Oh! that ever I
should see the Day! And can you sit here, Sir, reading a parcel of damned
confounded lying Nonsense, and not go to your Daughter's Assistance?


Pol. Sure the Fellow is possessed.


Faith. Sir, your Daughter is possessed -- possessed by Constables -- she is
taken up for a Rape.


Pol. My Daughter taken up for a Rape!


Faith. Yes, Sir, for Ravishing a Justice of Peace.


Pol. Sure some Accident has touched the Fellow's Brain.


Faith. Ay, Sir, and it would touch yours too, if you had a Grain of Humanity
in you. -- Oh! that I should live to see my poor young Lady in such a
Misfortune.


Pol. A Woman taken up for a Rape -- it is impossible.


Faith. They may swear it though for all that -- I know her to be as modest a
good young Lady as any in the Kingdom; but what will not a set of Rogues swear.
Sir, I lived with Squeezum before I lived with you; and know him to be as great
a Villain as any in the Kingdom. Do, good Sir, come but with me to Justice
Worthy's, if you do not find your Daughter there, turn me away for a Vagabond.


Dab. I do remember, Neighbor Politic, to have seen in some News-Paper a
Story not very different from this.


Pol. Nay, if you have seen it in a News-Paper, it may probably have some Truth
in it; so Neighbor Dabble you will excuse me, I will meet you within an Hour
at the Coffee-house, and there we will confer farther.


SCENE V.
Worthy's House. Worthy, Isabella. Worcester. Sure Modesty is quite banished from the
Age we live in. There was a time when Virtue carried something of a divine Awe
with it, which no one durst attack; but now the Insolence of our Youth is such,
no Woman dare walk the Streets but those who do it for Bread.


Isa. And yet our Laws, Brother Worthy, are as rigorous as those of other
Countries, and as well executed.


Worcester. That I wish they were; but Golden Sands too often clog the Wheels of
Justice, and obstruct her Course: The very Riches which were the greatest
Evidence of his Villainy, have too often declared the Guilty innocent; and Gold
has been found to cut a Halter surer than the sharpest Steel.


Isa. Well, I am resolved to take care how I venture a step again after it is
dark: I find the Sun is the only Guard to us Women; for however chaste the Moon
may be in her self, she takes but very little care of ours.


Worcester. But could the Villain be very rude?


Isa. As rude as so short a time would permit. I would have given all I was
worth in the World, to have been here; but since I escaped, let us forget it.


Worcester. Forget! By Heaven it shocks me, that we who boast as wholesome Laws as any
Kingdom upon Earth, should by the Roguery of some of their Executors lose all
their Benefit. I long to see the time when here, as in Holland, the Traveller
may walk unmolested, and carry his Riches openly with him.


SCENE VI.
Worthy, Isabella, Squeezum. Squeez. Mr. Worthy, your humble Servant. I come to
wait on you on the strangest Piece of Business. We are brought to a fine Pass
indeed, when Magistrates shall not be safe; we are like to protect others, when
we cannot protect our selves.


Worcester. What is the occasion of all this Passion, Mr. Squeezum?


Squeez. Occasion! I have scarce Power to tell you. I have discovered one of
the most damnable Conspiracies, that has been invented since the
Gunpowder-Treason Plot.


Worcester. Nothing against the Government, I hope.


Squeez. Marry, but it is; for that which is against the Officers of the
Government, is against the Government. In short, Sir, it is a Conspiracy
against me, against my self. What do you think, Brother Worthy, but that moved
and seduced by the Instigation of the Devil, a vile Woman has conspired to
swear a Rape against me?


Worcester. A Rape against you! foolish Jade! Why your very Face would acquit you --
you have Innocence in your Looks, Brother Squeezum.


Squeez. I hope my Character will acquit me against such an Accusation.


Worcester. I think it ought; a Man whose Character would not, is very unfit for that
honorable Commission you bear.


Squeez. True! these Slurs reflect on us all. The accusing a Member, is
accusing the Body. We should consider it may be our own case. We should stand
by one another, as the Lawyers do. I hope, Brother, you will show me
extraordinary Justice; and I assure you, should any Affair of yours come before
me, my Partiality shall lean on your side.


Worcester. Partiality, Sir! I hope no Cause of mine will ever require it. I assure
you, I shall do you the strictest Justice; I believe you will not need more.


Squeez. Sir, my Case needs no more; but I think it incumbent on us all, to
discountenance any Prosecution of our selves on any Account whatsoever.


Worcester. To discountenance it by the Innocence of our Lives, is indeed laudable,
but no farther. It is a cursed Law, which exempts the Maker, or the Executor of
it, from its Penalty.


Squeez. Truly, Brother Worthy, I think the Makers of Laws, and the Executors
of them, should be free of them; as Authors and Actors are free of the
Playhouse.


Worcester. You are ludicrous, Mr. Squeezum. But let me tell you, he is the greatest
of Villains, who has the Impudence to hold the Sword of Justice, while he
deserves its Edge.


Squeez. And let me tell you, Brother Worthy, he is the greatest of Fools, who
holds the Sword of Justice, and hurts himself with it.


Isa. Brother, your Servant; my Presence will be very little necessary at this
Trial.


SCENE VII.
Worthy, Squeezum, Constant, Hilaret, Staff, Sotmore, Brazencourt, Fireball,
three Assistants. Squeez. But here come the Prisoners -- Brother Worthy, this
is the Woman whom I accuse of this detestable Fact; -- the Manner of it was
this. I received a Letter in an unknown Hand, appointing me to meet at a
Tavern, which out of pure Goodnature I complied with; and upon my Arrival
found that Woman there alone, who after a short Discourse laid hold of me and
bawled out, on which that Man there entered, and both threatened me, that
unless I immediately discharged that Man [points to Constable.] with another whom I
had committed for notorious Crimes, that the Woman should swear a Rape against
me -- This I am ready to swear. --


1. 2. 3. Ass. And we are ready to swear.


Worcester. What do you say, young Woman, to this? You do not look like one whom I
should suspect of such a Behavior.


Hill. That I did threaten him, as he says, indeed I confess.


Worcester. But did he attempt any such thing?


Hill. I cannot say he did, but --


Squeez. Do you hear this, Brother Worthy? I think you have nothing to do but
to make her Mittimus.


Worcester. And for what Reason did you offer this?


Hill. I offered it only to frighten him to the Discharge of two Gentlemen, whom
he had villanously committed to the Custody of that Constable.


Worcester. For what Crimes do they stand committed, Mr. Constable?


Staff. For two Rapes, an't please your Worship.


Hill. One of them on my Account -- though I never swore the least thing against
him.


Worcester. On your Account, -- I begin to be afraid he was unjustly committed indeed.


Squeez. Now Sir, we shall proceed to blacken a little the Character of this
Woman. Call Mr. Brazencourt; Mr. Brazencourt, what do you know of this fine
Lady?


Brazen. I know nothing more of her, than that I kept her half a Year.


Worcester. Kept her! -- in what Capacity did you keep her?


Brazen. In the Capacity of a Whore, till I was obliged to turn her off, for
stealing four of my Shirts, two pair of Stockings, and my Common Prayer Book.


Squeez. Call Captain Fireball.


Worcester. Captain Fireball, pray, do you know any Harm of that Person there?


Fire. Harm of her! ay, and so does my Surgeon too. She came to me from Major
Brazencourt. I kept her two Months.


Hill. Sir, I beseech you hear me.


Worcester. By and by. You must not interrupt them -- Go on. Did you lose any thing
by her too?


Fire. No, but I got something by her, which made my Surgeon get something by
me -- I love to express my self in modest Terms, but I believe you all know
what I mean.


Constant. Damnation!


Squeez. Call Mr. Drury. We shall blacken her farther presently.


Worcester. Indeed, you need not; let us hear no more; for her sake, I will never put
Confidence in an innocent Countenance again. -- Well, Woman, can you say any
thing for your self?


Hill. Oh! that I could hide my self for ever from the World, and never from
this Hour behold the Sun again.


Worcester. Indeed but you shall, Madam, and be beheld by others too.


Constable. Come to my Bosom, thou dearest, sweetest, loveliest, hide thy Sorrows
there -- Death only shall tear thee from my Arms again. Death, Hell it self
cannot have a Torment equal to seeing one Tear of thine.


Sot. Heark'e, Justice, I believe thou art honester than thy Brother; I am sure
thou can not be a greater Rogue: If thou will act the right Part, acquit us,
and send that Villain to Prison.


SCENE VIII.
Worthy, Squeezum, Constant, Hilaret, Sotmore, Staff, Constable, Assistants,
Politic, Faithful, Cloris. Faith. Now, Sir, will you believe your own Eyes? --
Is not that your own Daughter?


Pol. It is indeed. O my unfortunate Child --


Worcester. Mr. Politic, your humble Servant -- I will but commit this Woman to
Goal, and then I will be at your Command.


Pol. Sir, you shall not be my humble Servant, nor will I be yours; and if you
commit my Daughter to Prison, you are the worst of Turks.


Worcester. Your Daughter, Sir?


Pol. Yes, Sir, my Daughter, Sir.


Hill. Oh! my Father!


Pol. My poor Child! -- That ever I should live to see thee in such a
Misfortune!


Worcester. Is it possible, Mr. Politic, that this young Lady is your Daughter?


Pol. Yes, Sir, it is as possible, as that the Turks may come into our Part of
Europe; and I wish this may not be as sure as that.


SCENE IX.
Worthy, Squeezum, Constant, Hilaret, Staff, Constables, Assistants, Politic,
Faithful, Sotmore, Cloris, Ramble, Mrs. Squeezum, Quill. Mrs. Squeez. Where is
this Glory of the Bench, this Gallant Justice? this Terror and Example of Sin?
Do you know this Hand, Sir? Did you write this Assignation? You are a noble
Gentleman truly, to make an Appointment with a fine Lady, and then bring her
before a Magistrate.


Squeez. O my malignat Stars!


Worcester. Mrs. Squeezum, what is the matter?


Mrs. Squeez. You Mr. Worthy, I am sure will pity one who has the Misfortune
to be married to a Man, who is as much a Scandal to the Commission he bears, as
you are an Honor to it; my Conscience has been too long burdened with
conniving at his Rogueries. He, Sir, he alone is guilty, and every one whom he
has accused is innocent.


Worcester. I know not what to think.


Ramb. Sir, that Fellow there, that Butcher of Justice, is the greatest Villain
that ever was born -- Being a little frolicksome last Night with this Lady,
that Constable seized us. It Is to me she is indebted for all this Trouble; though
Mr. Constable may claim some Share, in not suffering us to depart at her Desire.


Mrs. Squeez. And Mr. Justice may claim a little, who committed you to the
Constable's House without any Evidence, or even Accusation.


Ramb. That he might extort two hundred Pounds, for which Sum he offered to
compromise the Matter.


Squeez. Heark'e, Madam, I shall be obliged to commit you to Bedlam.


Mrs. Squeez. No, Sir, I shall prevent you in that, as well as in your other
Designs; your Plot with Mr. Quill, which the whole World shall know; you shall
be divorced, Sir, though not the Way you desire.


Squeez. Sir, I beseech you to hear no more.


Worcester. That, Sir, I cannot grant.


Ramb. Sir, I desire that you would read that Letter, which he sent to this
young Lady whom he has accused.


Worcester. [Reads.] 'My little Honey-suckle, I will meet you within this half Hour
at the Eagle. I hope after what you have received from me today, you will not
disappoint yours till then and everafter.' --

Did you write this Letter, Mr. Squeezum?


Squeez. No, Sir, as I am ready to swear.


Mrs. Squeez. Sir, I will swear it to be his Hand --


Faith. And so will I -- I lived with him a Twelvemonth, and therefore should
know it.


Quill. And I carried it to the Lady.


Sot. Come, come, Justice, thou have Proof enough of her Innocence. I will give
you the Word of a Man of Honor, which is more than the Oaths of twenty such
Scoundrels as these, that she never intended more than to frighten him to the
Acquittal of Captain Constant here, whom he had unjustly committed.


Constable. And offered to acquit for a Sum of Money.


Worcester. Captain Constant! is your Name Constant, Sir?


Constable. At your Service.


Worcester. Desire my Sister to walk hither -- I am more obliged to you than you know


Squeez. Come, Sir, this is only losing Time -- I want the Mittimus.


SCENE X.
Worthy, Squeezum, Ramble, Constant, Sotmore, Hilaret, Politic, Mrs. Squeezum,
Quill, Staff, Faithful, etc. Isabella. Worcester. Sister, do you know this Gentleman?


Isa. Captain Constant! It is happy for me that I do -- I thank you, Sir, for
your generous Rescue last Night, which my Fright at that time prevented my
acknowledging.


Constable. And was it you, Madam? --


Ramb. My Isabella!


Isa. Ha! -- it is, it is my Ramble --


Ramb. My Touch deceives me not, it is my charming She, once more restored to
my despairing Hopes.


Isa. What lucky Stars can have contrived this Interview?


Ramb. Very lucky Stars they appear now; but they had a confounded ugly Aspect
some time ago.


Isa. Surprising! Brother, let that Fellow be secured. He was the Person from
whose Hands this Gentleman delivered me.

[To Fireball.
Quill. I hope your Worship will forgive me; but I hired these two Men, by my
Master's Command, to be Evidences for him.


Worcester. Surprising Villainy! -- secure them instantly. And particularly that
Justice, -- whom I shall no longer treat as a Gentleman, but as his Villainy
has merited -- Constable, I charge you with them all -- and let them be kept
below in the Parlour, whither I will come immediately and sign their Commitment.


Squeez. Sir, you shall wish you had dealt more favorably with me.


Worcester. Sir, your Threatenings will not terrify me.


Faith. Come, Gentlemen, we'll be your Safeguard.


Mrs. Squeez. I Will follow thee, like thy evil Genius, till I have brought thee
to that Justice thou deservest.


SCENE the Last.
Worthy, Ramble, Con^^ant, Sotmore, Hilaret, Isabella, Politic. Ramb. My dear
Isabella, I am so overjoyed at this unexpected Meeting, that I do not ask for
the Safety of our Treasure. Since the Sea has refunded Isabella, let it take
the Jewels.


Isa. The Sea has been even kinder than your Wish, it has returned you both.


Ramb. I should have soon forgotten that Loss, in having Isabella; yet for her
sake, the Teasure is welcome too.


Worcester. Mr. Politic, I am heartily concerned at this Misfortune which has
befallen your Daughter.


Ramb. Mr. Politic! -- By Heavens, his Features are the same. Had you not a
Son, Sir, once?


Pol. Yes, Sir, I had; but I turned him out of Doors, and believe he was hanged
long ago.


Ramb. Then I am his Ghost, just arrived from the Indies. When you turned me
out of Doors, I got admitted into the East India Company's Service; I changed
my Name in order to escape your Discovery -- and I hope you will now give us
both your Blessing.


Pol. And are you really that wild Follow my Son?


Ramb. I am that very identical wild Person, I assure you.


Pol. I don't know whether I Will give you my Blessing or no, till I see how you
are married.


Worcester. Mr. Politic, I rejoice in the Union of our Families; this Lady, your
Son's Wife, is my Sister -- and if fourscore thousand Pounds can make the Match
agreeable to you, it will be so.


Pol. Has the wild Rogue made his Fortune at last! Well, Son, I give you my
Blessing; and my dear Daughter I give you Joy, and I hope the Boy will give it
you, ay, and lasting constant Joy -- If he does not make you a good Husband,
I Will not own him; if he does not make you blessed, he shall have no Blessing of
mine.


Isa. Sir, I doubt him not.


Ramb. Well, Father, I have nothing more to ask of you, but in Favor of my
Friend Captain Constant, whose Love I am certain will complete the Happiness of
my Sister.


Worcester. I think I have never been witness to such a Complication of Villainy. Sir,
[to Constant] I assure you, and all of you, you shall have sufficient Reparaton
for the Injuries you have suffered. And Sir, by the Characters which I have had
from my Sister of that Gentleman, I do not think your Daughter can be better
disposed of, let the Difference of Fortune be what it please.


Ramb. Besides, though his Estate be not equal now, it may become so; for no Man
has a better Insight into Politics.


Pol. Nay, if his Studies bend that Way, no Man indeed can tell to what his
Estate may come -- Had I known this sooner, my Doors should never have been
shut against him. Sir, I shall be glad to confabulate with you at my House --
and if you should set your Heart on my Daughter, I do not believe I shall do
any thing to break it.


Ramb. Nay, Sir, there is no Hour like the Present: This Hour has proved lucky
to your Family -- Give me leave to present your Daughter to one whom if she
deserves, I shall be proud of calling her Sister.


Constable. Ramble, you have crowned my Obligations with a Gift, far dearer than
the Earth could prove.


Hill. I only wish you may always think so, Captain. And now, Pappa, I hope you
will pardon this Night's Sally, to both me and poor Cloris; we have been
already sufficiently punished; and since the Event is happpy, imitate in this
one thing the Turks, and consider it favorably, as it has been prosperous.


Pol. The Turks! I wish you were better acquainted with them than in Romances;
I hope that Gentleman will take care to instruct you in public Affairs. --
Well Jack [to Ramble] I long to have some Communication with you about the
Affairs of the Indies, and the Posture of our Trade there -- I hope you left
the Great Mogul in good Health --


Ramb. Very slightly indisposed of a Cold at my Departure.


Pol. I heartily forgive you all: So let me see you all embrace one another --
This is the Comfort of Age, Mr. Worthy.


Sot. Let me embrace you all together -- I have found this Day two good Women
-- and they have fallen to the Share of my Friends -- and I will get drunk this
Night, if the Spirit of Wine will do it -- I Will drink to your Happiness, while
you are enjoying it -- While you are tasting the Joys of Venus, I will swallow
down the Delights of Bacchus -- I despair of either of your Company this Month
yet -- but the Justice shall celebrate this Night with me -- Come, honest
Justice -- I have found one honest Justice too --


Worcester. Really, Sir, I think you have sufficiently celebrated already --


Sot. No, but I have not -- and you, Sir, will be drunk at your Children's
Wedding-Night.


Pol. I never drink any thing but Coffee, Sir.


Sot. Damn your Coffee --


Ramb. Sotmore, thou shall have Justice -- Mr. Worthy, I assure you,
notwithstanding this Humor, the World has not an honester Man.


Worcester. It is pity he should besot himself so. Your Character of him encourages
me to employ some Labor in advising him, to quit so beastly a Pleasure. --
Come Gentlemen, I desire you would celebrate this Day at my House tomorrow. I
will proceed to take all possible Measures to your receiving Satisfaction for
your Injuries, and making public Example of so great a Villain: for the Crimes
of a Magistrate give the greatest Sanction to Sin.

No Reverence that Church or State attends,
Whose Laws the Priest or Magistrate offends.

FINIS.

