THE Diet of POLAND, A SATYR. CONSIDERED Paragraph by Paragraph. To which is
added A Key to the whole, with the Names of the Author, and the Nobility and
Gentry, that are Scandalously Pointed at, in it.

Rode Caper vitem, tamen hinc cum stabis ad Aras,
In tua quod fundi Cornua possit, erit,
Ovid: LONDON, Printed: And Sold by Ben. Bragg, at the Blue-Ball in
Ave-Mary-Lane, in the Year, 1705.

THE PREFACE.
AS Poland lies almost in the same Latitude with England, so the Character the
Poet has here given of the Poles, seems so exactly to match what some
ill-natured People have said of some in Enland, that he easily foresees this
Censorious Age will be apt to mis-judge him, as if he had some Oblique Meaning,
and that this was a Satyr levelled at some People nearer Home ^han the Castle
of Warsaw.

To foresee an Accident and not endeavor to be prepared against it, is a Piece
of Policy peculiar to an Author that sets up To Reform the Errors of Petty
Statsmen three times a week to no Purpose; and it adds very much to a
Malefactor's Conviction to be guilty of a Willful Crime. Wherefore He had
better, either to have kept his Foresight to himself, or stifled his Poem
before he had sent it abroad, to the Great Abuse of himself, and the Patriots
he has taken the Freedom to Characte^. As for his Skill in Poetry, if it was no
better than his Knowledge in Geography, He might have spared the Trouble of a
Preface to the Reader, since there is so great a Difference between London and
Warsaw in their Latitude, that ^he first is Lon. 18. 36. Lat. 51. 32. the last
Lon. 42. 5. Lat. 52. 7.

But the Author humbly hopes all such Inuendo-Men will consider, that as they
can have no Reason to Think so, but Similitude of Characters, so no Conjectures
of theirs, ought to pre-judge his meaning, in which he demands to be left to
himself, and expects to be understood in the following Poem as he Speaks, not
as every prejudiced Man may imagine he meant.

How any Man can humbly hope, that has the Arrogance to say, He can be charged
with nothing but similitude of Characters, is beyoud the Reach of my
Understanding, and if he has not done by the Gentlemen whom he has Injuriously
treated, as well as those whose Reputation is blasted with his Commendation, as
if he had actually written down their Christian and Sir Names in Capital
Letters, then I have no claim to any such Thing as Common Apprehension.

If any are so Weak to tell us, That Smithfield and Cheapside, cannot be meant
of Poland, the Author presumes to ask such People, if ever they have been at
Warsaw; and, if they have, and don't know that there is both a Smithfield and a
Cheapside, as well as a May-Fair; and a Bear-Garden, he is sorry for their
Heads, and desires them to step thither again to Reform their Memories.

Poland may have Places put to the same uses as Smithfield and Cheapside, and
Fairs and Bear-gardens may be in Request there; but it is none of his business,
to bring English Transactions upon the Polish Theater. And any Man of
Compassion has very great Reason to be sorry for his Head, who thinks to
conceal what was Printed near Bartholomew-Close, under the sorry Artifice of an
Impression from Dantzick.

But suppose there are not places called directly by those Names, if there are
places applied to the same Uses, what has any Body to question the Allegories?
A poor Author must never Write at all, if he is not at Liberty to chose His
Metaphors, and all the rest of the necessary Figures of Speech to help out his
Expression.

He has forgot his Trial at the Old Bailey for writing The Shortest Way with the
Dissenters, or He would never insist upon an Author's Liberty to choose what
Metaphors He thinks fit; for, though He did not pay so dearly for his Beloved
Ironies as he deserved, yet the Sentence then passed on Him by the Bench might
have had such an Effect upon his Temper, as not to make him uneasy, but when
he was breaking through the Bonds, he was engaged in to the Government, in
being tied up to his Good Behavior.

If it is alleged that there is too great an Affinity in the Story. -- He
Answers, If that be True, he is sorry for it; but at the same time he Hopes
not, and the matter of Fact ought to be proved, before he stands Censured for
Calumny.

Though the Character of the Persons his Satyr points at are False and
Malicious, yet they bear so near a Resemblance to what is said of them by their
Enemies of the Dissenting Party, that the Scandal is fixed beyond an Excuse,
and ought to be Ammadverted upon with the utmost severity, unless the Gentlemen
in Power close with the Libeller, and fling off all Deference and Respect for
the Memories of their Predecessors.

It Is very hard that a Man cannot Write of the Follies of other Nations, but
People will be always comparing them with their own. One would have Thought the
Author had Traveled far enough to find out Histories and odd Passages to
divert us; but if neither China, Poland, nor the Inhabitants of the Moon will
protect Folks from being Hanged, as the Frenchmen said, for Tinking, go on,
Gentlemen, and if the Cap fits any Body let 'em wear it. You are Welcome to say
these Polish Grandees represent Englishmen, but look to it, ye Sons of Censure,
that can Swear to a Man's Meaning, and know his Inside without the help of his
Outside: For if the People your Profoundity pretends to describe, are
Affronted, the Action of Slander lies against You, and not the Anthor. In the
Writing it is a Poem, you, in the Reading, turn it into a Libel, and you merit
the Punishment for the Metamorphosis.

An ingennous Confession of the Author, who would be thought to take the Pains
of Concealing himself. If neither China, Poland, nor the Inhabitants of the
Moon will protect Folks from being Hanged, etc. Your Humble Servant Mr. Daniel
Foe! you might as well have given us your Name at Large, for every one knows
who wrote the Consolidator; and as to your Meaning, they must be Men of
profound Stupidity indeed, that cannot find it out by your Gaping, you are so
Intelligible your self, amongst your want of understanding. So that the Scandal
will be laid at your Door who made it a Libel, not at your Readers, who finds
it as such.

Perhaps there is a sort of Affinity among the Vicious part of Mankind in all
Countries and Climates; and the Author Doubts not he should have run the same
Risque of Misconstruction, had he Wrote this at Paris as at London, that he
should have been summoned before the Court of Honor for Libelling the Princes
of the Blood, the Sorbonne, or the Counselors of Parliament: it is very hard it
should (...) there, and here too.

Had such a Piece of Scurrility dared to show its Face at Paris, the Author of
it would scarce have had his Heels at (...) during Life, and if some People
whom it concerns (...) of this nature, would but perform those Duties (...) to
the Well being of the Government, He may chance to meet with none of the
Civilest Treatment in London for his Impudence; since no Term can be too
opprobri^ (...) thinks no Appellation Bitter enough against (...) Direct^rs of
the Publ^k Affairs, who act contrary to the Methods (...) prescribe to them.

Since then this is the Fate of Authors, and he must expect it, he Submits, but
desires however, that these Unchristian Censurers will take this along with
them, and so make a Virtue of their want of Charity. That wherever the
Similitude of Character pinches them too close, they would prevent the Severity
of the Application, by Reforming the Likeness; the Satyr would then have the
desired Effect, viz. By drawing the Imaginary Picture of Outlandish Devels,
really Transform our own.

The Fate of an Author that casts such a Reproach on the Church and Government
Established, ought not to terminate in a Scotch Casement; but He, that has
offered up a Hymn to the Pillory, and made it clap its wooden Wings for Joy, at
the Reception of its new Tenant, would not be much lamented if the Three Legged
Tree, a Mile and a half out of Town, should pay Him the same Compliment: Since
it is not his Reader's want of Charity, but his own, that renders him Criminal.

Nor do I apprehend the World will be less Solicitous about who is the Author
of this: Some perhaps will guess one, some another; and the Hawkers, they tell
me, will according to Custom, Cry it about the street in the famous Name of
Daniell de Foe. And though they might as well Guess it was Wrote by the Man in
the Moon, yet I am content, He, or any body else should go away with the Credit
of it. It Is enough that I am out of the Reach of the Polish Resentments, and
cannot be Prosecuted by the Cardinal Primate, most of the Persons here touched
at being his Friends, and all of them in his Interest; and as for the World
they may do their Worst.

I am their Vnconcerned Humble Servant, Anglipoloski, Of Luthuania.

When an Outrage is committed, it is but natural to be in Quest of the Person
that caused it; and it will not be difficult, without the assistance of the
Hawkers, who are more at his Service than his Handmaids the Nine Muses, to find
that this Label is not, without sufficient Grounds for so doing, charged with a
Name those Profane Throats are incessantly piercing our Ears with. Which may
prove his being out of the Reach of the Polish Resentments, to be a more
Chimara and false suggestion; for though the Ecclesiastical Authority may not
take him to Task, He may be grinded to Powder by the Secular Arm, which he must
own himself obnoxious to, notwithstanding his Borrowed Name of Anglipoloski.

THE Diet of Poland A SATYR, etc.
IN Northern Climes where furious Tempests blow,
And Men more furious raise worse Storms below,
At Nature's Elbow, distant and remote,
Happy for Europe had she been forgot,
The World's Proboscis, near the Globe's Extremes,
For barbarous Menrenown'd, and barbarous Names,
There Poland lies, too much her Maker's Care,
And shares the moderate Blessings of the Air,
Just as far off from Heaven as we are here.
Those must be Furious Men indeed that can out-Bluster Boreas, and how any
thing can be at Natures Elbow, and yet Distant and Remote at the same time,
requires the Nicest Determination. Natures Backside would have done as well
every Jot, but it is a Paw Word, as the Observator tells his Countryman Roger,
and must be flung aside for being Uncourtly. The World's Proboscis too is
altogether New, and just minted, why not Great Toe as well, for he that gave
the World a Nose, gave it likewise Feet to Stand upon, or it is Creation would
be imperfect?

Under the Artick Circle of the Sky,
Where Virtues Streams run Low, and Nature's High,
For Heat of Clime too far, of Blood too nigh:
Tempered for Plenty, plenteously supplied
With Men advanced in every Grace but Pride.
A mighty Nation throngs the groaning Land,
Rude as the Climate, numerous as the Sand:
Uncommon monstrous Virtues they possess,
Strange odd prepostrous Polish Qualities;
Mysterious Contraties they reconcile,
The Pleasing Frown and the Destroying Smile;
Precisely gay, and most absurdly grave,
Most humbly high, and barbarously brave;
Debauch'dly Civil, and Profanely Good,
And filled with Generous brave Ingratitude;
By Boun^y Disobliged, by Hatred won,
Bold in their Danger, Cowards when it is gone;
To their own Ruin they are the only Tools,
Wary of Knaves, and easily choused by Fools;
Profoundly empty, yet declar'dly wise,
And fond of blind Impossibilities;
Swess d with Conceit, they boast of all they do,
First praise themselves, than think that Praise their Due;
So fond of flattering Words, so vain in Pride,
The World Mock's them, and they the World Deride:
Value themselves upon their Nations Merit,
In Spite of all the Vices they inherit;
So wedded to the Country where they dwell,
They think that is Heaven, and all the World s a Hell.
Their frozen Vistula they would not forgo
For fruitful Danube, or the flowery Po.
Rapid Boristhenes delights them more
Than pearly Streams, or a Peruvian Shore:
And Russian Dwina dwells upon their Song,
Hurried by barbarous Steeps and Hills, and pusht along.
He must be well Read in Natural Philosophy, that makes Natures Streams run
higher Northwardly, and in the Coldest Climates, th^n in those that are many
Degrees nearer to the Sun, as the Western Parts, etc. And since He has given
Nature an Elbow, does very Poetically, as well as Modestly, in describing Her,
more Virginum, to make Water by the means of that Instrument; for it is not to
be imagined whence Her Streams Issue unless from thence. That Pride is a Grace
is likewise Wonderfully Novel, and how they can want that Grace when in the
same Paragraph they are Swelled with Conceit; and be va^ in Pride is a Riddle
requires an Oedipus to explain it. Neither are the two last Lines the most
sensible Mr. Foe has written in his Life, though they are very Musical to the
Ear; for it is a Manifest Contradiction to make the Dwina dwell upon their Song,
which is an Act of Stagnation, at the same Time, it is Hurried, i. e.
Precipitated and pushed along by Barbarous Steeps and Hills.

The Land too happy would the People bless,
Could they agree to know their Happiness;
Nature with very liberal Hand supplies
Her Situation-Insufficiencies:
The temperate Influence revolves of Course,
And Spite of Climate Nature works by Force.
The bounteous Spring the Winters Wast repairs,
And make the World grow young in spite of Years.
The fruitful Earth uncommon Freedom shows,
And foreign Wealth by foreign Commerce flows.
Now Dame Nature makes use of Her Hand as well as her Elbow, and gives amends
for Her Situation Insufficiencies. But how so? The Climate was Tempered for
Plenty, in the Second Paragraph, and now its so far from it, that Nature is
forced to Interpose, and Act as we do Unnaturaly, by Forcing the Growth of
Plants, etc. by Hot Beds. For my Part it never Entered into my Noddle how
Nature could work by Force, till this Author gave it me in the Affirmative.

But Peopled with a hardened Thankless Race,
Whose Crimes add Horror to the milder Place,
The Bounties by indulgent Heaven bestowed
Corrode the Mischief, and debauch the Blood.
That Native Fierceness which in Christian Lands
Makes Heroes, and their Poets Praise commands,
Here is a Vice, which rankles up to Fewd,
And nourishes the Gust of vile Ingratitude.
Pride, Plenty's Handmaid, deeply taints their Blood,
And Seeds of Faction mix the Crimson Flood.
Eternal Discords brood upon the Soil,
And universal Strifes the State embroil.
In every Family the Temper reigns,
In every Action Seed of Gall remains.
The very Laws of Peace create Dispute,
And makes them quarrel who shall execute.
Their valued Constitutions are so lame,
That Governing they Governments inflame.
Wild Aristocracy torments the State,
And People their own Miseries create.
To Corrode a Mischief, is in my Sense to lessen it, which is far from having
any Analogy to Debauching the Blood, that is to increase it; and then again to
say, that Native Fierceness which makes Heroes and Poets in Christian
Countries, here it is a Vice, and Rankles up to Few'd is false Grammar, with
Reverence to his Dictatorship, who sets up for the Difficult Resolver, and
impropriety Fi^der among the Class of Authors. Besides my Historians tell me,
though they are not of the Leyden Edition, and Printed cum Notis Variorum, That
Poland is a Christian Country which He seems not to allow here.

In vain has Heaven its choicer Gifts bestowed,
And strives in vain to do a Willful Nation Good:
Such is the Peoples Folly, such their Fate,
As all Decrees of Peace anticipate.
Immortal Jarrs in every Class appear,
Conceived in Strife, and Nursed to Civil War,
To make Heaven strive in Vain, looks also a little Impious, in an Author of
this Gentleman's Pretenses to Religion; and to let it be Anticipated in its
Decrees of Peace, can fall under no other Apellation than that of Blasphemy.

Such, Poland, is thy People, such thy Name,
Yet still thy Sons our Panegyricks claim,
Because their partial Genius is inclined
To think they merit more than all Mankind.
That is, such is thy People Poland, and such thy Name, i. e. Poland. And what
of all this, where is the harm of Poland's being called Poland? A Spade's a
Spade, and a Bandbox will be a Bandbox to the end of the Chapter, yet still
they Love Praise, and who does not? As the Vice Chancellor, who anfwer'd a
Master of Arts, that gave in for his Reasons of denying a certain Scholar his
Degree, that He Loved a Girl, by the known Response of Quis non? What Man is
without a Natural Affection to a Pretty Females.

Imaginary Happiness will do
For near as many Uses as the true:
And if the Poles in their own Plagues delight,
Wise Heaven's too just to let them thrive in Spite.
His Philosophy is none of the Best, whatever the Cadence of his Poetry is; for
that Imaginary Happiness can serve for near as many uses as True, neither
Aristotle or des Carts has yet laid down for an Axiom in Ethics.

Great Sobieski had their Crown obtained,
With steady Glory thirthen Years he Reigned,
And none, but who some Mischief meant, complained.
His Conquering Sword made all Men think it fit,
That he who saved the Land should Govern it.
The Field of Battle he had first possessed,
By Sixty Thousand slaughtered Turks confessed.
The fatten'd Frontiers felt the reeking Flood,
And died the Soil with Asiatick Blood.
The weeping Neister half the Host receives,
Hurries them down to darker Euxine Graves:
And Mahomet's insulting Banners lay
Beneath the Cross, his Valor's easy Prey.
Now he begins to fall into Particulars, and by Great Sobieski must be meant K.
W, who Reigned over us Thirteen Years, and who Conquered Ireland in Person and
by his Generals, after the Loss of Sixty Thousand French and Irish that sided
with the Unfortunate King James.

With mild and gentle, but with steady Hand,
He rather led than ruled the uneasy Land.
Filled with Important Cares, he saw their Fate,
And all the growing Mischiefs their own Feuds create;
Which made him less repine, and less deplore
To quit the Crown with such Concern he wore.
He rather Led than Ruled. Very pretty truly, and Emphaticaly! That is, He
seemed rather a Captain than a King. Dux suit non Rex: As if Leading an Army
was not to Rule it.

Tell us, ye Sons of Policy and Fraud,
Whose vast Intrigues your selves alone applaud;
Who always plot too deep, and soar too high,
And Damn the Nations Peace you know not why.
What ailed the Poles, with Peace and Plenty blessed,
To change for Years of Blood, their Days of Rest?
Describe the Men of Avarice and Pride,
With all Ambition's dark Disguise arrayed;
How, for the Nation's Liberty, they Cant,
Till those they say abuse it they supplant,
And then the mock pretended Sham lay by,
Pleased with the Profits of Authority.
He might have spared himself the Question of what ailed the Poles, etc. when
if he would but have looked into the Partition Treaty which was Signed and
brought about by a Minister of State He now professes so great a Regard for, he
had been satisfied without an Enquiry; and if he would fasten upon any one of
the Country Party, for taking of Places, after they had railed at Men in
Offices; we can give him two of the C -- side, etc. for one, without any more
to do by way of Exchange, If D -- and H -- are sufficient to balance Accounts
with him.

Statesmen are Gamesters, Sharp and Trick's the Play,
Kings are but Cullies, wheedl'd in to Pay;
The Courtiers Foot-balls, kicked from one to one,
Are always Cheated, oftentimes Undone;
Besieged with Flattery, false Report, and Lies,
And soothed with Schemes of vast Absurdities.
The jangling Statesmen clash in their Designs,
Fraud fights with Fraud, and Craft to Craft inclines;
Stiffly engage, quarrel, accuse and hate,
And strive for leave to help undo the Sat;
For all the strong Contention ends in this,
Who shall the Power of doing Ill possess:
Envy and Strife are only raised so high,
Because a Man's a greater Knave than I:
But if I can his Place and Wealth succeed,
He rails of Course, and I Am the Knave indeed.
Places and Pensions are the Polish Spoil
Will all sides please, and all sides reconcile.
It Is natural to all the Sons of Men,
To Rail and Plot when out, be Quiet in.
If all the Strife and Contention for Offices and Places of Trust, be for
obtaining the Power of doing Ill, then those in Authority must of Consequence
do Ill. Which is but an odd Compliment to the Present Administration, and takes
off very much from the Character he bestow's upon the L -- H -- T -- and Mr. S
-- t -- y -- H -- y under the Names of Casimir and the Dyets Marshall. And if
Kings are Cully's, Foot-Balls, and Wheedled into Pay he has done Augustus no
Manner of Service in giving him that Inglorious Title. And here I cannot agree
with some People who will have Augustus to be the Type of Q -- A -- for an
Author could not be so unmannerly as to Represent a Fortunate Princess, and
Immovable in Her Principles by the Name of one who has not only Changed his
Religion for a Crown, but has Ruined his Hereditary Dominions, being as it were
under a State of Exile at this Juncture. But Authors are Inscrutable in their
Reasons, and I leave him to explain himself on this Head, to such as he shall
think fit to Impart the Secret to.

Long had Divided Poland felt the Smart
Of vast Intrigues and Politicians Art:
As many Men of Character and Blood,
So many Thieves about the Scepter stood;
As many Gifts the Exhausted Prince could give,
So many Friends he only seemed to have:
The craving Wretches hung about the Throne,
He gave them all the Nation's Wealth, and all his own.
That There were Thieves about the Throne in the Late Reign we'll not dispute;
but he that has been so Free with the Names of such as have shared in the
Direction of Public Affairs in this, might have given us theirs, had they not
been his particular Friends and Favoureits. I never heard the Prince he
reflects upon, gave away all his Wealth to these Craving Wretches, if he had,
there had been no Dispute between the King of Prussia and Prince of Friez land,
about the Immense Riches he left behind Him.

Not all the Conquered Lands the Turk resigned,
Not all the World, had he the World obtained,
Would their insatiate Avarice suffice,
Supply their Hands, or satisfy their Eyes;
Who shall unhappy sinking Poland save,
What Gifts can close the Hands that always crave,
Unsatisfi'd as Death, and greedy as the Grave?
At every just Refusal Discontent,
And rave for want of Bribes at Government.
The Turk that is K. J. who Abdicated -- What a Respectful Title does he give
Her Majesty's Royal Father? and suffice their Avarice, is a Peculiarity of
Phrase I never heard of before. But this I have to say for him, when he turns
Plagiary, he makes bold with his own Works, as thinking nothing that belongs to
others worthy of being taken from them, but their Reputations; Witness
Unsatisfied as Death, and Greedy as the Grave, which are applied to the Saints
Favorite Sir R -- Cl -- ton in his Satyr called the Reformation.

The valiant Sobieski had bestowed
Moldavian Lands he conquered by his Sword.
He thought it just that Province to bestow
On those whose Valor helped to make it so;
But all the wiser Men, who had no Share,
Against the Justice of the Gift declare,
Oblige the yielding Hero to recant,
And re-bestow the hasty envied Grant.
By Moldavia is meant Ireland; and if the Members of Parliament, whom he owns
to be the Wiser, passed an Act for resuming the Grants of the forfeited Estates
in that Kingdom, then he must allow himself to be false in his Character, when
he speaks of them in another Style sometime after. And if the Grant was allowed
to be Hastily, they are not to be blamed who considerately pressed His Late
Majesty to Re-bestow it on the Public.

But tell us, now, ye Men of Polish Wit,
How the Moldavian feels the formal Cheat;
Let A -- leski reimburse the Bribes,
Ravished to wrong, instate the Polish Tribes.
Let all the sham Conveyances appear,
The Phantosme Sales, and Fancied Purchaser.
Let some true Satyr all the Grievance lash
Lands without Title, Buyers without Cash.
Under the weighty Fraud Moldavia bleeds,
And private Cheat the public Cheat succeeds,
Retrieving Laws by vast Designs Pushed on,
Cover Great Sobieski 's Errors by their own.
Here he takes Matters upon Trust, by giving Credit to a few Irish Petitions.
For the Parliament, if he means the Proceedings of the Trustees for the
Forfeited Estates, since A -- leski, i. e. Mr. Annesly was one in that
Commission, have passed a Vote in their Favor, which is a sufficient Argument,
that they (...) not Part with the Lands they were Empowered to sell to the
Buyer, without Cash.

With all these Frauds and Feuds and Millions more,
Which racked the injured Poles, and kept them poor,
Wife Sobieski, with strong Cares oppressed,
Dismissed the Throne and chose to be at Rest;
Embroiled he left them whom embroiled he found,
And great Augustus, with his Pow'r's Enthroned.
Dismissed the Throne, may be an elegancy with him, but cannot with a Judicious
Reader, who will Conclude Death Dismissed K. W. from the Throne; neither is it
a very great Compliment to a King's Memory, whom he would play the Panegyrist
upon, to affirm that he left us Embroiled; since the World is not without
People who make very Odd Reflections upon his Last Will and Testament.

In vain the new Crowned Monarch strives to please,
Or Cure the Hereditary vile Disease.
In vain Confed'rates, with the Nations Friends,
In vain their Laws and Freedom he defends.
The Parties join, in Grand Cabals they meet
The Monarch's healing Projects to defeat;
Grasp at his Gifts, and share the high Reward,
But not his Honor or Commands regard.
Not Sacred Oaths can their Allegiance bind,
Farther than by their Interest they are inclined,
Prompted by Avarice and deep Revenge,
With Fawning Face, and awkward Zeal they Cringe;
But all that can no Royal Bounty share,
Their factious Thoughts and strong Disgusts declare,
No Bounds their feigned Alleg'ance can secure,
To Day they will Swear, to Morrow they will Abjure.
Never did any Prince come to the Crown with a more general Satisfaction of the
Party, he points at, than Her Majesty: and the very Persons he is so Lavish of
his Invectives, against were those who rejoiced at the Turn of Affairs both in
Church and State. As to their Endeavors to defeat the Monarch's Healing
Project, they were such as advised it to be carried on; and for Swearing to Day
and Abjuring to Morrow, that Flies in the Face of the Pretenders to Moderation,
equaly with theirs who seem realy disposed for it.

The Monarch willing to dissolve the Feud,
That spread too fast in their infected Blood,
Summons the General Diet to appear,
The Nations and his own Demands to hear.
The Parliament was then sitting when Queen Anne Succeeded to the Throne; so
that she could not be said to call them together, having met before to consider
of the Arduous Affairs of the Kingdom.

Satyr look back, Survey the Glorious Roll,
The Life of Polish Power, the Nations Soul,
Poland's Collection, all the Peoples Breath,
The Monarch's Safety and the Tyrant's Death.
The Ancient Lords of the JAGELLAN Line,
Here in their representing Glory shine,
With Loyal Hearts, and strong Industrous Hands,
Ready to hear Augustus great Commands.
The ancient Polish Greatness to restore,
Assist with Council, and support with Power.
To say that the Ancient Lords of the Jagellan Line (whose Titles were
Hereditary doubtless) Shine in their Representing Glory, seems somewhat like an
Absurdity; for our Accounts hitherto tell us, the House of Peers Constitute two
Estates of Parliament, and the People of England, that is the Inferior Estate,
are Represented by the Commons. The Monarch's Safety, and the TYRANT'S DEATH,
Squints likewise at their Old Practice of Decollation, which the Party he is
Advocate for, has no small Veneration for the Memory of, at their Cruel
Festivals on the Anniversary of Her Majesty's Royal Grandfathers Martyrdom.

What though among the Illustrious Troop there is found,
Some less Polite than some, and some unsounds.
The Devil among the sacred Twelve appeared,
But Devils once known are no more to be feared;
The General Votes to Loyalty incline,
And Mischief sinks beneath her own Design.
Satyr, if there is a Pole among the Tribes,
Less true than Truth it self, it is him thy Verse describes.
The Devil under no Capacity is to be feared, but God whom the Scripture
Exhorts us to the Fear of; and if he was to describe all that were less True
than Truth it self, I question whether, if the whole Kingdom were to be
Numbered, notwithstanding his boasted Perspicuity, he could find one: For God
is Truth it self, and only the Divine Being worthy of that Attribute.

Here great Taguski first in Order came
Of bright unspotted, though suspected Fame.
Youth had supplied his Head with Parent Wit,
In Judgment solid, and in Sense complete;
The Muses him with early Garlands Crowned,
Sublime in Verse, and in his Phrase profound;
Polite in Language, in his Satyr strong,
Yet kills with all the Softness of a Song:
To steady Justice all his Thoughts incline,
Faithful in Council, Able in Design;
Raised by due Merit to the highest Trust,
The Captious Senate owned that Merit just.
What cannot high Exalted Virtue do?
He shows this strange unusual wonder true,
The Monarch s Favorite, and the Peoples too;
His Enemies to his just Praise submit,
Fly from his Satyr, and adore his Wit;
In vain they form Impolitick Designs,
Envy lies buried in her Deepest Mines.
For both Sides own this Character's his Due,
Always to Poland and Augustus true.
By the Character of Taguski, though it infinitely falls short of him, we may
perceive some Lineaments belonging to the L -- H -- x, whom he seems here to
endeavor to describe, and bears no more Proportion to his Gigantick Merit,
than a Mouse does to a Mountain. Parent Wit, is what also his L -- p owes his
no Thanks for, and suspected Fame is what he might have omitted, as well as
Phrase profound; for I look upon Profundity to be an Epithet for the Judgment
not the Word, which it is here applied to. Besides he might have considered
when he was delineating so Great a Judge in Poetry, not to call upon Satyr to
describe him while he was endeavoring a Panegyric upon his Undeniable
Accomplishments. What he means by calling his L -- p the Monarch's Favorite is
unknown to me, and he would do the In^^^tive Part of the World a Kindness if he
would explain himself upon that Head.

Their Ruski with his early Trophies stood
Won from the Swedes upon the Baltic Flood.
When Conti strove to snatch the Polish Crown,
And all the Generous Poles his Conduct own.
The Nation is very much Endebted to the Lord O -- d, then Admiral Russel, for
his Defeat of Torvill; and there is not one among the Party whom he hints at
for being Ungenerous, but pays him their Acknowledgment for that Days Service.

Rigatshi next, our just Applause Commands,
The Polish Peace on his wise Conduct stands;
High Chancellor in Sobieski's Reign;
And all (...) Poles would have him so again.
In Law upright, and prudent in the State,
In Council deep, in Execution great;
But by the Faction of the Swedes oppressed,
And to make way for Fools and Knaves, dismissed.
Rigatski by whom the Lord S -- is Personated; (King William) having inv^^ed
him with Large Demains at Rigate in Surrey, has the Character of a very Great
Man, though I cannot close with him in his ill Manners to the Present Possessor
of the great Seal, as to wish him to be Lord High Chancellor again; or say that
He made way for a Fool or a Knave since his immediate Successor, chosen by King
William, is deservedly Famous for being the very Reverse of that Inv^^ious
Apellation.

Amongst the Polish Prelates there appeared
Cujavia, loved for Piety, for Prudence scared;
Careless of Faction, or of Party hate,
He firmly fixed to Sobieski's Fate;
Followed his Fortune, and his Favor shared,
And had the Miter for his just Reward.
What though the Metropolitan declined,
And more for Conti's Monarchy designed;
Cujavia, all the Primates Place supplied;
And Poland, her intended Prince enjoyed;
Culm, and Posnania, Ecclesiastic Peers,
And Patcherouski, old in Zeal as Years;
With Thirteen Sacred Polish Miters who
Are Polish Lords, and Polish Prelates too,
Where all to Poland and Augustus true.
In Cujavia we may Read the B -- p of S -- Character who Preached the
Inuaguration Sermon at the Coronation of their Late Majesty's King William and
Queen Mary, and by Culm, Posnania, Patcherousky and Thirteen Mitres more, are
meant some very Good E -- l Peers, who were against the Bill to prevent
Occasional Conformity, and consequently ^rue to Poland and Augustus. Which
Consequence I shall no otherwise Animadvert upon, than that it is Injurious to
Augustus his Character, as if he was against the Bill, when he had given such
Assurances from the Throne in Favor of the Church Established.

These wore the Polish Laurels to the last,
And fixed the Polish Liberties so fast,
That Fate it self could not the Band destroy,
But what they once possessed, they still enjoy.
These were the Columns which so long sustained
The Load of State when Sobieski Reigned,
Who all the Lines of Government restored,
And held the Scepter while he drew the Sword.
When he encampt on the Moldavian Plains,
And freed the Poles from Mahomet's Servile Chains,
The Turkish Banuers to his Sword submit,
Abroad his Valor and at home their Wit;
They fought with Equal Enemies at home,
And Equal trophies to their Conduct come;
The Conquered Difficulties of the State
Make all Men own their Conduct to be Great;
And they that seek to blame their Management,
And charge on them what they could not prevent,
Should tell us in what Age it shall be known
No Faults attend the State, no Knaves the Crown.
That Bishops are Pillars of the Church, and Consequently Columns, no Man will
dispute with him; but that they held the Scepter while he drew the Sword, I
cannot agree with him, since it will very much derogate from the Honor of the
Lords Justices among whom the Temporal L -- ds preceding, for whom he expresses
such Regard, made a very great Figure.

Ungrateful Poland, never will be blessed
Till Sobieski's Management's confessed;
Till some of his forgotten Rules restored
Such Statesmen wield the Scepter, such the Sword,
Till some such Heads in Polish Council sit,
And some such Hero shall for Poland fight.
England has been blessed with more Victories since Her Majesty's Accession to
the Throne, than what fell to Her Share for a Century before, which is a long
Computation of Years Compared to Thirteen; and our Counselors Heads have done
enough at Home, as well as our Heroes Hands Abroad, to Eclypse the Glory of any
Hands or Heads whatsoever, King William's not excepted.

Finski, an upright Lithuanian Peer,
Sets up for sinking Poland's Prime Vizier;
For Application and Impertinence
No Man has half so much with half his Sense;
With Formal Step, and high Majestic Grin,
Is Polander without, and Swede within.
Envy and awkward Spleen sit on his Face,
In Speech precise, but always thinks apace;
In Earnest Nonsense does his Hours divide,
Always to little Purpose, much employed.
Strong in Opinion, in his Judgment Weak,
And thinks himself exceeding politic.
The Music of his Tongue is his Disease,
Conceives absurdly what he speaks with Ease.
The Discord of his Facu lties is plain,
He talks with Pleasure, what he thinks with Pain;
And there it is owned he shows some Policy
To make his fluent Tongue his Brain supply.
So Men are pleased with Shadows, so from hence
The World mistakes his jingling Tongue for Sense.
A busy trifling Statesman, Proud and Dull,
A thinking, plodding, wise substantial Fool;
In all vast Poland's far extended Round,
No Man was known so emptily profound.
Polite in Words, a stiff and formal Tongue,
And speaks to little purpose very long.
The Noble Peer that falls under his Censure here, is as much above his
Detraction, as the despicable Wretch that flings Dirt at him is beneath his
Notice. He never Employed his Momentous Hours about other Things than the
Advantage of the Prince whose Service he was in, and as for sinking any one, it
was never in his Thoughts, if a Person aimed at, Acted Contrary to the
Well-being of the Government. By Polands Prime Vizier, is meant the L -- H -- T
-- who owes him no Thanks for giving him an Infidels Title, which I never heard
belonged to Poland before. But as the Character of the Great Man, whom he
vilifies to the lowest Degree is False, so are the Terms he makes use of, to
bring his Designs about by.

To him Augustus gave the Polish Seal,
And made him Grieffier to the Commonweal.
They that could not his License first obtain,
Might not go out of Poland or come in;
The Public Safety was the just Pretense
To keep the Sweeds from true Intelligence;
But the more Genuine Reason was the Pence.
For in his time the Sweeds themselves obtained
His Blanks to pass their Spies to Polish Land.
Grieffier of Poland, is likewise a Title in no wise belonging to the Court he
applys it to; and the Public has been so well satisfied about the pretended
Proofs of the Wretch Fuller's Affidavity of his Lordships giving Passes to the
French Discontented Natives of England, that it looks Ridiculous in one that
lays any Claim to sense, to incline toward the very thought of it.

The slow unsteady Mannager appears
Too hot for Peace, too cold for Polish Wars;
While charmed with Foreign Margueretta's Song,
His sleeping Orders he delays too long
Whole Fleets attend the Minstrels softer Notes,
By her the Statesman steers, the Member votes.
Well might the Siren be Compared to him
That doz'd old Nature with his Touch Sublime.
The lofty Cedars danced his softer Airs,
And lofty Stupid Statesmen bow to hers.
Mr. Foe sure is acquainted with the Hermet in the Fable, that Blows Hot and
Cold with the same Breath, or else how could he make his Slow Manager (which By
the By is not to be Hot) too Hot for Peace, and too Cold for War. The Wi^est of
Men will have their Intervals of Diversion, and it looks as well in one
Statesman, nay better, since the Fabric of the Universe is Governed by
Harmony, to pass away his less Important Hours with Music, than for another to
spend whole Weeks with Horse Racing at New Market. Besides, let him consider
who was Secretary of State, when the Ships at Vigo were Taken and Destroy^, the
Town's in Flanders Surrendered, and the March to the Danube concerted, and he
must Condemn himself for Blami^ng his L -- p's dispatch of the Public Business.

Of all the Polish grave Nobility,
None acts so low that ever was born so high;
So fond of Liberty, he never endured
The Name of Slave, no not to his own Word.
This Paragraph, is the Product of a Complaint that this Incendiary vents in
all Companies, about his L -- p's not keeping his Word with him, when in
Newgate; At the same time, that he is Conscious to himself, he performed not
the Conditions for which the Promise was made of his coming to do no Damage.

Augustus saw, and soon mislik'd the Man,
And found him to the Swedish Cause incline;
With easiy Skill he read his well-known Fate,
A useless, unregarded Tool of State.
What though the Polish Diet was possessed,
And blindly in his Favor once Addressed;
The public Banter all the Kingdom knew,
It moved their Mirth and Indignation too:
The general fixed Dislike Augustus saw;
Laid by the haughty Thing, and left him to the Law.
The Quacking, Mountebanking Tool of State,
That neither could be little, or be great,
Retired to give us time to let him know,
No Knave's above being told that He is so.
If the Parliament of England Addressed the Throne in his Lordships Favor,
they did nothing but what was consistent with the Reputation of that August
Assembly, and which ought to be allowed for the pure effect of his Merit, as
well as Taguskis's, who had likewise the same Honor done him, though not for
the same Service. As for, no Knave is above being told HE IS SO, I agree with
him, but the Consequence may tell him before he is much Older, that an Honest
Man is, such as the Noblemen, whose Characters he makes so Free with.

Lawrensky next, of Prussia's Royal Breed,
To Ladislaus by Marriages allied;
Though Int'rested in Sobiesky's Line,
Yet to the Sweedes he always did incline:
He kept the Polish Cash in Days of yore,
When Kings grew Rich, and made the People Poor,
And fain would now our Polish Treasures teach
To make their Monarchs Poor, the People Rich.
Under Lawrensky, none that is acquainted with Names or Things, but may know
that Lawrence E -- of R -- ter is Couched. A Gentleman too near related to Her
Majesty, to be used after such a manner, and whose Conduct as L -- H -- T -- r
has not been Excelled by any Successor whatever, without any Reflection upon
the Present Management of the Ex -- quer.

If Stories known of Old, should be revived,
Of Leaves torn out, and horrid Facts connived;
Of Crimes too Black for Satyr to reveal,
Which Kings have Died, on purpose to Conceal:
Were but the black Record again Reviewed,
When the false Peer his Master's Fate persued,
His Picture would too low for Satyr lie,
And sink the Wretch beneath Authority;
Whether the French, the Sax, or Polish race,
He ever Fawned, and looked with Janus Face.
When Sobieski did the Throne obtain,
He Grudg^d the Crown, though his own Race should Reign:
But when in Viceroys Dignity went Halves,
He stoopt to Rule Moldavian Western Slaves.
The Tearing the Leaves is such a Forgery as has been more than once Exp^^^ed
and Confuted in the late Reign, when his Enemies, such as G^p'd after his Lord
Lieutenantship of Ireland, published their Sham Vindication, and for that Cause
requires no other Answer, than that those who think it Meritorious to revile a
N -- m, will not stick to Traduce a R -- r.

Now he Repines the Management supreme
Is not, as he contrived, resigned to him:
For this his Viceroy's Office he laid down,
Again to Govern, and Abuse the Crown;
But wiser Councils laid him gently by,
And left him to bewail his lost Authority.
His Character is of a much different Complexion, for he did not fling up his
Lieutenancy of Ireland for the sake of the Prime Ministry, but for his Ease,
since the Irish are an Inflexible People, and not to be Gove^n'd Easily but by
such as are the^ own Native. And he was so far from being dissatisfied with the
Measures taken by those near Her Majesty, that no other Motive but the
Satisfaction in the Administration, induced him to retire.

Now he Cabals, the Parties to Unite,
And strives to bring us all to Peace in Spite;
Courts every Side to his absurd Design,
And thinks to make the Swedes and Cossacks join;
My Soul, his sly, pretended Peace abhor,
The Brooding Vnion's Big with Civil War;
Rouse every Loyal Pole to Self-Defence,
Give them for Arms, their Eyes, for Swords their Sense,
For all Men see the empty sham Pretense.
Mr. Review has Preached up Peace and Union to some purpose, if at last he
turns Renegade from his own Principles, and makes it his Business to Ridicule
such as are for a Treaty between the two Contending Parties. Give 'em for Arms
their Eyes, says he, (...) Swords their Sense, as if Swords were not Arms; why
did he not insert for Guns their Eyes, since Arms and Swords are the very same
sort of Weapons.

Old Seymsky was of this intriguing Band,
A Polack born, on Neiper's Golden Strand;
Ancient in Crimes, bred up to Fraud and Feud,
His Interest at his Master's Cost persu'd;
A mighty Stock of ill-got Wealth enjoyed,
When Polish Troops our Polish Lands destroyed;
When his dear Countries Liberties lay low,
He Fisht in all the Troubles made then so:
When Poland's Kings the Polish Peers oppressed,
And Property was made the Monarch's Jest,
In those dear Days he kept the Royal Cash,
And forged those Cheats he since pretends to Lash.
Now he sets up to save the Nation's Pelf,
And would have no man Cheat us but himself;
Detects ill Practices with eager Vote,
And rails at Bribes with mertenary Throat:
That he should be Ungrateful and Unjust,
Despise the Grace, as he betrayed the Trust;
Be Proud, be Peevish, Insolent, and Base,
Nature has painted that upon his Face,
Envy sits rampant on his tottering Head,
And R -- e's wrote there so plain that every man may read.
In Seymsky, the Reader must agree with me, that he points at Sir Edward S --
r, but all to no purpose. Reverberat Ictus, the Shot rebounds upon himself, and
the Detracter falls a sacrifice to his own Calumny. At the Sitting of the
Parliament, it is ^en to one, but this Seymski makes Foeski Eat his Words, he
has shown many a Better Man a pleasanter Trick, and the Polish Scribe will not
be the First, whom he has brought upon his Knees for Breach of Privilege. For
he that Writes R -- upon a Wiseman's Forehead, ought to have Fool Written on
his own, besides the rest of the Catalogue of Hard Names which are usually
affixed to Pillories.

And now the conscious Criminal appears,
Affects to Cant of Poland's suffering Years,
Reproaches little Villains with their Crimes,
And rakes among the Evils of the Times.
Where Mismanagements are, there they should be taken notice of: for little
Evils as well as Great, though he is of too Intrepid a Temper to spare them,
ought to be animadverted upon.

That he should Poland's Liberties maintain,
Who can the wondrous Riddle now explain?
Or, who Believe the Fact, that Knows the Man?
Some think, indeed, it should be understood
A Penitence for Violence and Blood,
To Expiate his Share in former Reigns,
The S^^^k if not the Guilt of which remains.
If that be True, that he should make pretense,
To Censure others for a past Offense,
Savours of most prodigious Impudence;
While he that ought to Blush at former Times,
Boldly Condemns contemporary Crimes.
A General Charge without mentioning Particulars, can never Affect any
Gentleman's Reputation, especially one of his Figure and Family, and h s hints
of expiating for Violence and Blood, will never make any Impression upon any
one that has had the least Notice of what public Service he had done, and
continues to do, for the good of his Native Country, which he may be Styled the
Ornament as well as Defense of.

Immortal Brass sits on his testy Brows,
Hardened with Bribes, with Frauds, and broken Vows;
Infernal Feuds flame in his guilty Eyes;
He starts at Peace with Anger and Surprise:
Weakn'd in Wickedness; in Wishes strong,
A bribe-receiving Hand, and clamouring Tongue;
False to Himself, his Monarch, and his Friends,
But to the lowest Step of Pride descends;
Abject, and Mean, when Fortune's Storms appear,
Proud and Intolerable when it is Fair;
Noisy in Speech, in Manner Insolent,
And awkwardly submits to Government,
If Immortal Brass fits on his Brows, how comes he to be Abject and mean when
Storms appear? When a Man turns Abject, his Impudence commonly leaves him and
dies with his being dispirited or I am wrong informed from Experience in the
like Cases.

Often the Polish Monarchs have essayed,
So much they of his Mischiefs were afraid,
To win the Bully off with gentle Words,
And place him in the Class of Polish Lords;
But he that loved the Villainies of Life,
And chewed the Air he breathed to Sounds of Strife,
That lived upon those Particles of Fire
Which nourish Feud, and prompt the vile Desire,
Chose all the glittering Offers to despise,
Too vain to be made Great, too proud to Rise.
If Vanity consists in a Foolish Persuit after Titles and Applause, how can any
one be too vain to be made Great? And if Pride is the effect of an Ambitious
Temper, that aim's at an Increase of Prerogative and Power, can it be otherwise
than Impossible, that the Gentleman here designed can be too proud to Rise? I
have heard of Chewing of Tobacco indeed, but never heard of Chewing the Air to
sounds of Strife, which is a Note beyond Ela.

Augustus tried him with uncommon Grace,
Gave him his Household Staff, and Household Place;
His Robe of Peer attempted to put on,
But he put by that Feather to his Son;
Accepts the high Command without the Name,
Because he covets Mischief more than Fame.
The Party-Zealot never could resign
His dear Speech-making, old, contentious Sin,
Resolved the Head of Faction to supply,
And as he Lived unblest, uneasy Dye.
He was too proud to be made Great before, but here He accepts the High
Command. Ay but, says our Author without the Name of a P -- as if Greatness did
not consist more in Extensive Command than Length of Title. To Covet Mischief
more than Fame, is none of the most regular Expressions that have dropped from
Mr. Foe. since Mischief is Fame in one sense, and a Man may as well be Famous
that is Transmitted to Posterity for doing Ill things as Good.

Augustus saw the Sullen Wretch go on,
Neither by Art or Bounty to be won,
His Malice he despised, his Pride contenm'd,
And to his juster Fate the Wretch condemned;
Left him his empty Follies to pursue,
And his unvalued Favors with his Staff withdrew.
The White Staff was not taken from him, but he resigned it; and as Her Majesty
Taxed him with nothing disrespectful to Her August Character, the Poet would
have looked like a Man of more V^^^city had he done the same.

The unsteady Statesman's Temper yet untried,
Left him at once, in spite of all his Pride;
Not all his swelling Pride would give Relief,
But sunk his Spirit underneath his Grief:
The cowardly, self-condemned, abandoned Wretch,
Saw his ambitious Ends beyond his reach;
With strong Reluctance all his Honors quits,
And with his Places now resigns his Wits.
So Pride unbounded, with no Power sufficed,
Wants Courage but to see it self Despised.
How could he quit his Honors with Reluctance, when the very Gazette tells us
he voluntary resigned them? Or how could his Temper be said to be yet Untried,
on Account of his Places, when he had the Experiment made upon him more than
once in the surrender of more profitable Employs? But Contradiction sis what
the Party gain their Ends by, and so he is at Liberty to use them.

When Men are raised by Fate above their Sense,
Nature must sink them in her own defense,
Humane Society would else Decay,
And Mad men quite demolish Liberty:
For when the bloated Monster's once pulled down,
The Soul deserts, the Bubble's broke and gone;
Abjectly Wretched, and with Shame surprised,
He meanly begs what he before despised;
The high Extreme inverts in his Distress,
Dejected to a despicable, vile Excess.
So Bullies are but Cowards in disguise,
Whom few Men Value, all Men should Despise.
If he was not raised by Fate above his Sense, in being Speaker of the House of
Commons, Treasurer of the Navy, etc. Places of greater Importance by far, than
the Comp^'s of the Household 'twas a little out of the way to make him lose it
for what, was little Better than a Feather, to a Gentleman of his Years and
frequent Indispositions. And to make Nature do it in her own defense, requires
such Explanatory Notes from him, as he is not at leisure to give us, being so
taken up in Reading Horace, cum Notis Variorum.

Rokosky next fills up the spacious Rolls,
The mighty Captain Bassa of the Poles;
In foreign Expeditions he is employed,
And many Polish Millions has destroyed;
Abortive Projects flow in his loose Brain,
He loves to make a tedious Voyage in vain.
He will make the Polanders Infidels do what we can, notwithstanding he has
been told over and over, that Poland is a Christian Country. But its Sir George
R -- k whom he fallen's his Talons on now, and he that has done more Good than
all our Admirals at Sea for more than Twenty Years last past, must be a Captain
Bassa, and Marked out under an Odious Distinction.

Abandoned Poland, how art thou Betrayed!
Sold for that very Money thou have paid!
The greedy Monsters that receive thy Pay,
Trifle thy Blood, and Time, and Strengh away.
Rokosky Covetous, and Insolent,
On Poland's weightiest Errands has been sent;
Small Prophecy might those Events foretell,
Where he Commanded, that could Fight so well.
Was the Destroying the Ships at La Hogue, the Breaking the Boom at
Londonderry, the Deliverance of Two Hundred Ships Trading to Turkey, the
Levant, etc. the Glorious Succels at Vigo, the Taking of Gibraltar, which the
Spaniards have Spent so much Blood and Treasure about, in Endeavoring to
regain it, the Naval Victory over the whole Power of France and Spain, of so
little Force as to render him liable with being Taxed with Trifling our Blood
Time and Strength away? If so, what Apellation will our Future Miscarriages
fall under, when it shall be Visible how we suffer for wantof his Conduct, in
the Marine Affairs?

His Voyages never have been made in vain,
He took such care of coming Home again:
No Man could ever give him a Defeat,
And none can match him at a safe Retreat.
The carefull'st Officer the Poles could choose,
For when they bid him fly, he will never refuse:
A Neg'tive Soldier, always in the Right,
Was never Beaten, and would seldom Fight:
Poland will never her ancient Glory show
While Knaves and Cowards fight her Battles so.
To preserve a Fleet, sometimes is equal to a Victory, and Prince (...) got
more Honor in the last War, by making a Gloriou^ Retreat, than Luxemburgh did
by defeating the Confederate (...) at Landen. If he is a Negative Soldier that
has Fought the (...) of France and his Two Seconds with one Single Ship, with
at being worsted, what a Champion of a Man must he be (...) an Affirmative?

^^^osky now supports the Polish Crown,
And fights the Quarrels of his Masters Throne,
(...) by Proxy when he Fights his Own.
Mr (...) is not at all Obliged to you for reviving the Story of (...) Dispute
between Him and Sir George, which tends so (...) to his Disreputation, and
reminds People of the Merry (...) the Rehearsal mentions of that Friend and
Acquaintance (...) Fighting Duels. Should any Man serve me so, he should (...)
have the use of my Chambers at the Temple.

Poland, how past Retrieve must be thy Fate,
When Cowards Guide thy Arms, and Knaves thy State,
(...) the Braver Swedish Squadrons meet,
That stoop to Bully those they dare not Fight?
Co^^^^e and Crime can never dwell so near;
For where there is Guilt, there always will be Fear.
If P^ always where their's Guilt, then some Body is very Impr^ make a Champion
for a Party; and if telling a Man to (...) the Open Field of Election, as Sir G
-- did (...) he wrote what he Taxed him with, and would make it good, ie.
Bullying, I dare persuade my self an Assertor of such a Contradiction will not
be able to Define what Fighting is.

PART II.
IN Polish Diet now they all appear,
In Polish Diet all Men free from Fear,
May all their most malicious Thoughts declare.
Augustus calls them to the place Supreme,
There first they Swear to Poland, then to Him,
That they will both Support, and both Defend,
And All profess what very Few intend.
There from the Throne, He tells them of the State,
What things occur, and prompts their calm Debate;
Tells them his steady Thoughts due Peace to give,
And ancient Polish Honor to retrieve;
How he by Law came there, by Law would Reign,
And all their Polish Liberties maintain:
But lets them know, he finds to his surprise,
Some Poles are even for this, his Enemies.
Freedom of Speech is allowed in the English Parliaments, but un^er certain
Restrictions; for some Members have spoke so much ^here, as to be called to the
Bar, and afterward sent to the Tower for talking too freely. As for Swearing
first to Poland, then to Him, would Mr. Foe give himself the Trouble of
perusing the Oaths ^he Members of Parliament take, he would not have occasion
to be ^old he is in an Error on that Account, since they swear to be true to
their Queen and Country, not COUNTRY and QUEEN.

Informs them of a deep Livonian Plot,
And prompts them all to search it farther out.
Tells them the real Danger of the State,
And asks them to prevent their Monarch's Fate,
But presses them to Peace and Calm Debate.
By the Livonian Plot, is meant the Scotch Plot, which was so very deep indeed,
that I never heard of any one yet that found the ^ottom of it.

It Is all in vain, for Faction had possessed
Some Members, all the Diet to molest;
In vain the sullen Deputies Debate,
In vain they weakly prop the sinking State;
In vain to Oaths and Loyalty pretend,
They Sell that Prince whom faintly they Defend.
The Commons were as hearty in pursuit of such as were thought criminal (...)
that Juncture, as their Lordships, though they did not appoint a Committee to
meet at N -- d House, and were so very far from faintly defending her Majesty,
that never a heartier and more earnest Address came from a People to a Prince
on that Account. What remains, is to ask the Sense of the last Line, and how it
is a Consequence, that they must sell that Prince whom they defend faintly.

Satyr, with gentle Strokes the Mischiefs touch,
How little some Men said, how some too much:
How some, in hopes to pull the Cossacks down,
Slight the Livonian Plot, expose the Crown,
Cavil, Contrive, make Speeches, and Debate,
And Jest too much with Poland's dangerous State.
Prepost'rous Laws, absurd in their Design,
And, made on purpose to be broke, bring in;
Divide, in order to Consolidate,
And Tack Destructon to the wounded State.
Secure the Polish Freemen in a Goal,
For fear the Nation's Liberties should fail.
The Polish dear-bought Privilege destroy,
That Dyets Tyranny they might enjoy.
Support the Polish Dignity and Crown,
By pulling all her just Defenses down,
And save the tottering Kingdom from her Fate,
By decently embroiling Church and State,
He should have given us the Names of those Laws which he cal^ preposterous and
absurd, as his Reader might have known his Meaning. I have heard indeed of
bringing in a Bill, but never of a La^ that was brought; for nothing can be
called a Law till it has ha^ the Royal Assent. As for securing the Polish
Freemen in a Goa^ those Freemen, as he terms them, were guilty of an express
Breac^ of Privilege, in which the Honor of Parliament was so far concerned,
that they had lessened their Authority, but for their Commitment.

Mackreski first, the Dyet's Pamphleteer,
Stood up; -- all Poland waited on his Chair,
For all Men looked some wondrous thing to hear.
So once the Teeming Hill in Travail groaned,
The expecting World the mighty Wonder owned;
Young Mountains, Twins at least, they looked should come,
When One poor Mouse closed the vast laboring Wom.
By Mackreski, we are to understand Sir Humphry, who has written so very much
and well for the Honor of the House of Commons, and so learnedly vindicated
their Privileges, that were this Author Master of any Gratitude, he would
rather pay his Acknowledgments to so worthy a Representative, than make such
unmannerly Comments on what he himself, and all the Commons of England, are so
nearly concerned in.

The empty Orator in Florid Speech,
Told them, that he was just as Wise as Rich;
To's Printed Books for his Design referred,
Though that he ever Designed, no Mortal ever heard:
He talked indeed sometimes of Church and State,
Of Piety, and of the Lord knows what;
But no Man yet his vast Intentions found,
Deep as his Mines, and like his Brains unsound.
'Twas full a Polish Hour the Member spoke,
But all the Diet all he said mistook:
Some said he talked of this, and some of that;
Just so he jumbl'd Providence and Fate:
In both, the same Intention he pursued,
Neither to Understand, or to be Understood.
Thus he Harangu'd them Thirteen times and more,
And still he left them where they were before.
He talked of Crowns, of Property, and Law,
And means to make them keep themselves in Awe;
Of persecuting Peace, and quiet Jars,
Nations in Nubibus beyond the Stars.
Of moderate Feuds, and calm distempered States,
And moved to Bleed us, to avoid Debates.
Proposed by Poverty our Wants to cure,
Starving our Tradesmen to employ the Poor:
And backed his mighty Project with a Speech,
Would spoil the Nation's Trade to make them Rich;
In weighty Conference propt a tottering Cause
To set our Privilege above our Laws:
But as some Learned Speeches used to fail,
Because they would too much Head, and had no Tail;
So this was Hist about, because they said,
'Twas all made up of Tail, and had no Head.
Mackreski thus his Learned Breath bestowed,
And as it did no Harm, it did no Good;
And yet his Speech had this unlookt-for Charm,
That as it did no Good, it did no Harm.
If the Poet that Lampoons him, were but half so wise and rich, he would have
no Reason to expose himself in his Saturday's Review, July 7. by complaining of
sleeping Debates in Trade of seventeen Years standing being reciv'd; and the
very Management and Produce of those Mines he is so angry at the Depth of, is
such an Argument of his Designing, that he shows his own want of Brains, by
saying, No Man ever heard that he designed. If the Diet mistook what he said,
why did they close with his Projection, and pass his Bill for the Relief of the
Poor? But the Poet mistakes him, and therefore all must. As for the rest of the
Jargon of Scandal upon this Gentleman, it is all of a piece, and his Quibling
about his Speeches being made up of all Tail, and no Head, and his Convertible
Terms, (which he is so famous for in his Little Master Review) no Good and no
Harm, they are beneath Sir Humphry's Notice, and our Observation.

Pacski, a Polish Deputy, stood next,
And all the Polish Senators perplexed;
His Zeal was for the Church so fiery red,
His Breath at Distance struck the Cossacks Dead;
Plosko', the Polish Bishop, he o'erthrew,
And made Augustus forced Resentment show:
The Reverend Almoner at once displace,
And aged Virtue bowed to rampant Vice.
Hark how the Party-Hero Silence broke,
And mad with Zeal, and mad with Envy spoke.
By Pacski, we may read Sir J -- n P -- n, a Gentleman whose Hereditary Zeal
for the established Church and Government, is what renders him obnoxious to the
Censures of those that would share in the Revenues of the Church, while they
are Enemies to its Worship. If he did make Complaints to Parliament against his
Diocesan, every Gentleman has the Liberty so to do, when aggrieved; and it has
been more than once resolved in St Stephen's Chapel, That no Peer has any
thing to do with Elections for Members to serve in Parliament.

" Ye Poles, (says he) regard the tottering State,
" And think with me, of our Forefathers Fate;
" The Rebel Cossacks all their Force o'erthrew,
"I Would rather see the Swedes do so for you.
" But let us all the Cossacks first expel,
" And Tack their Ruin to the Tribute-Bill:
" The Poles may then in Peace and Union thrive,
" And Ecclesiastic Tyranny revive;
"Augustus may our Quiet recommend,
" But while these live, what Peace can he pretend;
" And if Augustus favors their Defense,
" To his Dethorning it is a just Pretense;
" I Hate a Cossack, though he were my Prince.
The Rebel Cossacks, viz. the Roundheads, in Oliver's Time, and what they did,
ought to be fresh in our Memory, that we may prevent the like Barbarities from
them again. But how Tacking the Occasional Bill as a Clause to the Land Tax,
could be Tacking their Ruin to the Tribute Bill, is beyond my Power to Divine,
since there was no Property invaded, but the Church only secured by an Act of
Parliament in her behalf.

He spoke, and Fury choked his rising Spleen,
And Passion kept more dangerous Language in.
For now he Mourns his just Designs are crossed,
Complains that Speech that Place he talked for, lost;
Declares he meant no Mischief to the Crown,
Aimed at no general Interest but his Own;
For that he spoke, and thought he should no doubt,
Talk himself in, and talk the Cossacks out:
But all his Province their Resentment show,
All his Consolidating Nonsense know,
Their future Trusts to Packski they refuse,
So perish all that Poland's Trusts abuse.
Sir John is of another Temper, than to talk for a Place, and of too large an
Estate to make his Conscience truckle to his Interest, as some that have gone
over from the Church-party have. Neither is it Fact that all his Province
disclaim his Proceedings; they show their just Resentment indeed for his
Affection to his Queen and Country for they have resented it so as to choose him
again for one of the Knights of the Shire, which is an Argument, that Mr. Foe
shot his Bolt too soon, when he said, Their future Trusts to Pacski they refuse.

When froward Toweroski took his place,
Zeal on his Tongue, and Fury in his Face.
" Ye reverend Poles, (says he) let Heaven forbid
" That Words should Poland 's Liberties decide;
" Our War's remote, but these are Foes indeed;
" I Would rather Beat the Cossacks, than the Swede.
"Augustus talks to Us, I hope in vain
" Of Peace, while Factious Cossacks shall remain,
" The Spawn of Rebels of Tartarian Race,
" Who ask no Favor, and deserve no Grace;
" If first Augustus will destroy the Breed,
" Then Peace at Home may probably succeed;
" But while this Vip'rous Brood the Poles betray,
" I Would not Augustus, though himself were here, Obey.
The Noble Gentleman that is personated here, Mr. B --, Brother to the E -- of
A --, is of another Disposition than what is froward; and his Sweetness of
Temper is as remarkable as his Loyalty to the present Government, which he
would not forfeit his Obedience to for any Cause whatsoever. Though he has but
too much Reason to think our Peace will never succeed at home, till such as are
averse to it, and say, Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace, (I mean the
Dissenters) are removed from having any share in the Administration.

He said, and more than half the Diet bowed,
And with consenting Silence 'twas allowed
A Law should pass the Cossacks to suppress,
The only way to Poland's Happiness.
Mean while the Assembly sep'rately repaired
To Church, and there the famous Burski heard,
Now Stanski, then Maroski, and a third
That always dealt in Tropes and Similies absurd;
These furious Priests the fatal Stroke excite,
Tell them of Kings that spared the Amalekite;
The Grave Divines, in Pulpit Rhet'rick known,
Talked of the Dyet's Wit to show their own,
Banter'd a Text or two, and talked some Greek,
And so went Home to Drink out all the Week.
Dooms the poor Cossacks from the sacred Text,
And raved in Zeal till he the Cause perplexed.
It was but reasonable that a Law should be brought in to prevent the Growth of
Hypocrisy, and Endeavors be used to save Reprobates against their Wills, if
they would not be instrumental to their own Salvation themselves; and if all
the Clergy in England had been so deservedly famous as Dr. Birch, some People
would have been nearer to that happy State, than they now are.

Priests, like the Female Sex, when they Engage,
There Is always something Bloody in their Rage.
He told the Diet they must Fight and Pray,
And pull the Cossacks down the Shortest Way;
And in his Zeal, so far his Text forgot,
He Perjured his Augustus on the Spot;
Unchurch'd the Nation, Cursed the Polish Tribes,
And for their Cure, the Cossacks Blood prescribes.
If Dr. Stanhope, in his Sermon upon the 30th of January at St. Margaret's
Church, applied the sparing the Amalekite to the Subject of that Day, it was
applicable enough; for the Remissness of King Charles the second in not taking
off all the Regicides, has been the chief Cause of our homebred civil
Dissentions ever since: And if he talked Greek, it is more than the Learned Mr.
Foe can do, the want of which Tongue, makes him exasperated against all that
use it.

Satyr, thy just Regret with Force restrain,
With Temper W^ite, although thou Think with Pain.
When once the Pulpit-Plague Infects the Land,
And Sermon-Readers get the upper-hand,
The Nation's ruined, all the Town's undone,
And Tongue-pad Evils, through the Vitals run;
Reason submits its captivated Head,
And raging Nonsense governs in its stead.
In vain our banished Liberties we seek,
Wisemen are bound to hear, when Coxcombs speak;
Reason pays Homage to Impertinence,
And Noise obtains the Victory from Sense;
The Clamouring Priest, Dogmatick, Proud and Dull,
Assumes Dictating Right, and calls his Master Fool.
How he could Unchurch the Nation by preaching in Defense of the National
Church, I cannot imagine; neither is it in my Power to know he could perjure
Augustus; for Persons guilty of a Breach of an Oath, in my humble Opinion, must
perjure themselves. As for his Reflection upon the Priesthood in general, he
acts contrary to their Precepts, and consequently is not to be expected to
speak well of them; and if he himself thinks with Pain, then some body does so
as well as my Lord of N -- m; a great Condescension truly for our Author to
accept of the Character he has bestowed upon that worthy P -- r. Well, but he
has Reason to think with Pain; the Church of England Clergy are Sermon-Readers,
they don't Preach and Pray extempore, like Dissenters, because they think
before they speak; which Premeditation of theirs makes Reason submit, and
raging Nonsense govern in its stead. Most exquisite Logic!

But if the Pulpit now began to Fire,
The Press, the Pulpits Echo, push it higher.
Bold Sachareski, in a Polish Rage,
Would all the Poles in Civil Blood engage;
Prints his exasperated fiery Zeal,
And Damns the Crown, for fear of the Common Weal.
By Sachareski, it will not be amiss to read Mr. Sacheverel, Fellow of Magdalen
College, a Gentleman whose Accomplishments and Zeal render him as well an
Honor to the Church and University, as an Otnament to the College he belongs
to; and as Loyal to the Queen, as he is faithful to his Country.

And two Extremes, one Mischief may prevent.
This Fury made the Polish Lords relent,
And Senators, their first Resolves repent.
How can Moderation be censured for an Extreme? for that is a Virtue that is
inseparable from the Church of England; and if some L -- s and Gentlemen were
not so hearty as was expected for the Church's Service, it must be attributed
to the Weakness of their own Resolves, not any thing that was defective in her
Worship.

The Diet reassumed, Cavenski broke
The Healing Party's Silence first, and spoke:
The h^sty Priest (says he) I understood,
The Gown too often dips the Sleeves in Blood:
The unheard of Insolence amazed my Soul,
And Horror seizes every Christian Pole;
I am a Northern Deputy it is known,
Where numerous Cossacks dwell in every Town;
The peaceful, and industrious People show
No Reason why they should be treated so;
What is it to us, what their Forefathers were,
The Polish Crown's too fast for us to fear;
Besides, Rebellions differ but in Name,
In future Ages Ours may be the same;
If ever the Old Fagellan Race should Reign,
And Damn our Revolutions; it is in vain
To talk of Titles, where the Swords devour;
They Are always Rebels, who have lost their Power.
With all Deference to my L -- d M -- ss of H -- n's excellent Qualities and
healing Discourse. Though his L -- p is to be commended for standing up for so
numerous a People as Yorkshire, who is so happy in the Choice of so excellent a
Champion, Mr. Foe has made him make but an indifferent Speech, which is
somewhat unmannerly for a Gentleman of his great Quality. For I cannot make
Sense of, The hasty Priest (says he) I understood,
The Gown too often dips the Sleeves in Blood.
Besides, he introduces his L -- p, speaking as if the Revolution was a
Rebellion, and insinuates by way of Comparison, as if it was equally criminal
with that in Forty one.

The Cossacks now incorporate, and tied
By Laws, by Interest, and by Blood allied,
Are native Poles, in Poland's Interest bound:
To tack them now, would Poland's Peace confound:
They Are rich and brave, and always have withstood
Th invading Tartars with their Wealth and Blood;
And have undoubted Title to pretend
To enjoy that Land, they helped us to defend:
Besides, by Laws, their Liberties remain,
Those Laws, Augustus promised to maintain;
This Priest would make those Promises in vain.
I think their Liberties their Due to enjoy,
That they may help us now, the Swedes destroy;
With him the old Nobility concurred,
And Damned the Bill at Cruel and Absurd.
Who doubts the Dissenters Right and Title to their Estate? Heaven's forbid
they should be wronged in the minutest Particle, either as to their Temporal or
Spiritual Concerns. The Church-party neither has, or ever had any Thoughts that
tended toward their no enjoying the Land since the late Revolution. Neither
did the Queen promise to establish them, only maintain them in the Benefits
that accrue to them from the Act of Toleration.

The zealous Deputies resist in vain,
And Envy prompts them to their strong Disdain;
With mighty Struggle, and avowed Regret,
They only seem to adjourn the warm Debate;
Resolved in future Dyets to pursue
The Cossacks Ruin, and the Nation's too.
If the Church of England can never be sufficiently secured till the Bill
passes, 'twould be impardonable for them wholly to drop the Debate; wherefore
it is but their Duty to adjourn it to a more convenient Opportunity.

Augustus, how unhappy is thy Fate?
How hardly do thou hold the tottering State?
In vain of Peace thou do the Poles persuade,
Deep as Infernal Darkness, their Designs are laid.
Never was Queen happier than her present Majesty, and never was Princess more
the Delight of the Church of England, who pays her the Hearts of her Sons, by
way of Acknowledgments of her Duty, while the Offerings of the Dissenters have
more of Appearance than real Sincerity.

Let them no more thy Sovereign Peace abuse,
Subjects can never the Prince's Grace refuse;
But it is a certain Signal to the Throne,
They aim at no less Purchase, than his Crown.
But still Augustus, his just Wrath forbears,
And Honors load the Wretches whom he fears;
Fain he would all their due Allegiance buy,
Does all his soft engaging Favors try;
To all the Charms of Kindness he is inclined,
With Grace would win a Turk's more constant Mind.
How can the Patriots that stand up in Defense of the Church, aim at her
Majesty's Crown? Have not they more to lose than the Dissenters? Are not they
possessed of the best Estates of the Land? And would not a French Power be more
destructive of their civil Rights and Immunities, than those of a Sect of Men
who have no Right to any Establishment, and who have more than once, witness
their Brethren in Scotland, closed in with Rome and France, in Opposition to a
Worship they are declared Enemies of.

Disposed to Pardon, all their Follies past,
And win them to their Country's Good at last.
Heaps undeserved his Favors on their Heads,
With gentle Hand to their own Duty leads:
Shows them the way to save the bleeding State,
And trust them with his Own, and Poland's Fate.
What is hinted here, exactly Tallies with her Majesty's Usage of the
Dissenters since her happy Accession to the Throne; but it has always been the
Practice of the Party, to throw Dirt first, and to fence off a Reproach, by
fixing it upon those from whence they expect it.

'Till Treason, blackened with Ingratitude,
Had all their Sense and Modesty subdued;
Ripened by Royal Mercy for Reproof,
The patient Prince had been provoked enough.
Whom the Aspersions in this Paragraph belong to, may be soon discovered, by
the Whigs insolent Usage of Her Majesty and Ministry, 'till the last Session of
Parliament, when a Change was made in the Administration and as for Treason
blackened with Ingratitude, they know best how to form New Conspiracies, that
have been so dext'ious in managing Old.

In vain he is of Livonian Plots afraid,
And Swedes preparing Poland to invade;
Intestine Feud the Polish Rakes pursue,
Their King instead of Cossacks to undo;
Neglect the public Danger to the last,
And make the Nation's real Fears, their Jest;
Willing to leave us open to Surprise,
Poland can have no greater Enemies.
As for the Plot here hinted at, we may expect Discoveries of the Authors of
it, from the Parliament of Scotland as soon as they shall fit; 'till then,
perhaps, it may be out of his Power to know when to fix it: For it is an
unquestionable Truth, That he that hides a thing, is the best able to find it
again.

Tococksi first, a forward Southern Pole,
A Pollish'd Carcass, and a Burnished Soul;
We cannot say he did the Silence break,
For he did always little else but speak.
How vain a thing's the empty Sound of Words
Abstracted from the Meaning it affords.
Long Speeches from his beated Spleen proceed,
And Nature makes him talk, to ease his Head;
The Hypocondriack Vapors upward fly,
And form some Words of State and Policy;
Bear with the Statesman, 'twas his Flux of Gall,
For all Men know he never meant at all.
By Tococksi, we are to understand Mr. T -- ke, a Gentleman desevedly the Envy
of all ill Men, because he is the Glory of the Go^ and who may truly be said to
be polished, and of shining Abiliti^ if any Gentleman in England deserves that
Character: So that wh^ is inserted of him, is the very Reverse of his
Demeanor; and (...) is so far from not thinking at all, that the Politeness,
and Effica^ of what he speaks, intimates as much as if he thought always.

He dooms the Cossacks to Tartarian Shades,
Their Civil and Religious Rights invades.
Demand no Reason, Satyr, that is supplied
With Passion, Parties, Prejudice, and Pride;
But if his wiser Arguments you would know,
He heard 'twas Just, old Seymski told him so;
That Learned Oracle supports the Cause,
And Noisy Zeal supplies the want of Laws.
Can a Dissenter be said to be doomed to Tartarian Shades, when it is
endeavored that he may be rescued from finking downwards, through the great
Weight of Hypocrisy? And is it not the highest Injustice to say, Mr. T -- ke
inclines this Way, or that Way. as Sir Ed. S -- r directs him, when Sir Ed --
himself would think it no Disparagement to advise with him?

The hot young Beau affects the Marshal's Chair,
And hopes in time to rule the Diet there;
Now he is the Party-Leader of the Day,
Resolved to teach the Cossacks how to pray,
Or from the Polish Church to drive 'em all away.
To teach any one to pray after the true Form of Worship, is to deserve the
Thanks of those that are instructed; and though he does not affect the Chair, I
question whether there is one among his Enemieshas an equal Title to it.

A Troop of Tackers at his Elbow stand,
Ready to move at his usurped Command;
Who all the Image of their Captain bear,
And in their Name may read their Character.
The Word in Polish, signifies a Fool,
A Man without a Meaning, called a Tool,
A weighty Block-head with an empty Scull.
When the Tackers in K. Charles the Second's Time, were for tacking away all
the Prerogatives of the Crown, the Name of them was not Fool then, but Knave:
'Twas their own dear Invention, and always put in Practice by the Commonwealth
Party. But for the Church to assume only the Liberty of trying the Experiment
once, and that for the Preservation of the Monarchy, there it must immediately
fall under the Name of Folly, because successless.

Nor let enquiring Heads decline the Name,
Tackers and Tookites always are the same;
The Emblematick Title's easily known,
Their Coat of Arms, stands up in Warsaw Town;
Rampant the Ass, enrob'd in Lions Skin,
To make the Bully keep the Block-head in;
Quartered at large it lies, Perte-Per-Pale,
The Asse's Ears against the Lyon's Tail.
He might have spared himself making the Tackers a Coat of Arms; for it is well
known they had them from their Predecessors, and have not been so good
Customers to the Herauld's Office, as the Whigs of late Years, who have had
none to put upon their Coaches 'till they paid for them.

The Family from Tartary descends,
And all the Furioso's are their Friends;
Before the Swedish Conquest they came in,
And some are lately run away again.
Their numerous Offspring fills our Polish Rolls,
So close allied to all our Native Poles,
"We hardly know from whence they came, or when,
"And yet they boast they are True-born Polish-men.
These are the Men would pull the Cossacks down,
And after them, Augustus and his Crown.
But Poland's Genius Laughed in hissing Air,
And Guilt made all the Rakes disclose their Fear.
The BILL's thrown out, but still they push their Cause,
In future Dyets hope for future Laws;
Rail at the Cossacks, false Constructions draw,
And Bully those they cannot Kill by Law.
If they hardly know from whence they came, or when, how comes he to lay it
down for granted, that they are descended from Tartary? But I forget he is
quoting himself, and the True-born Englishman must be brought in, though
introduced by the Head and Shoulders.

Bromski with Polish Air, but Swedish Skill,
Boasts that he was the Father of the Bill:
In Foreign Parts he Traveled much in vain,
Just made a Book, and so came Home again:
Tells us he saw a Bridge at Rochester,
And when he was at Chatham, HE WAS THERE;
So when progressively to France he is come,
He gravely says, he knew he wa'n't at Home.
Tells us he saw at Oyse a sad Distaster,
The Bridge broke down, because't could stand no faster.
And at Chantilly, the Prince of Conde's Town,
A Castle stood, before they pulled it down.
Montrevil's fortified, but is not strong;
Paris lies round, and yet is two Miles long;
And of the Buildings, this wise Truth he tells,
They Are gen'rally of Stone, OR SOMETHING ELSE.
Some Lands lie high, some lower still, and lower,
And where the People are not Rich, THEY ARE POOR.
The Learned Author then proceeds to tell
How near the Alps he clamber'd up a Hill
With many a weary Step, and many a Stride,
And so came down again, on the other side.
Tells us at Rome he saw a swinging Church,
And reads a Learned Lecture on the Porch:
Informed the World in Print where he had been,
But bought the Books himself, for fear they should be seen.
His traducing Mr. Br -- ly for his Book, is no Argument of the Goodness of his
own; besides, his contemptible Treatment of it will render that Gentleman more
valuable, because his Enemy is so illiterate, as not to be able to distinguish
between what is a Learned Lecture, or not: And it is enough for him not to have
blackened him as to other Concerns; for had he been guilty of any thing like a
Crime, he would have been sure of being told of it.

This worthy Author, warm with Polish Zeal,
Strives all the Cossacks Freedom to repeal;
Corrects the Bill, and to remove our Doubt,
The Persecution Preamble left out;
A Mark of Honesty, to let us know,
They scorned to hide what they resolved to do:
Sure of the Game, the Mark was so laid by,
And blinder Cossacks saw their Destiny.
The Preamble was not left out, because it favored of Persecution, but because
the Dissenters, and their Friends in Parliament, exclaimed against it as such.

Thus fired with Party Zeal, he read the Bill,
And asked the Diet how they liked his Style:
With many a Learned Speech, and formal Face,
For Italy had taught him the Grimace,
The exasperated Fop his Plot declares,
And to the Diet makes revengeful Prayers:
At Cossacks Ruin, makes the Grand Essay,
And tacks the Church's Fall the Shortest Way.
Formality of Face, is all the Sobriety the Generality of the adverse Party are
famous for; and if the Person that calumniates him had but any thing like his
Learning and Breeding, he would have made it his Choice to have paid him his
Acknowledgments for his Services to his Country, not a Return of base
Ingratitude forsuch inestimable Goodness.

Meerski, an ancient Mercenary Pole,
With vicious Body, and a hardened Soul,
Grown Old in Crimes, as he was Lame in Sense,
But not at all decayed in Impudence;
His long since baffled Conscience told his Fate,
He owns he is Damned, and there is an end of that:
But for the Cossacks Bill he raved so loud,
And so inflamed his old fermented Blood,
That some advised him to go home to Bed,
Open a Vein or two, and shave his Head,
Not knowing he had long ago been Mad.
By his Description, he should know Sir Thomas M -- rs no better than Mr. Br --
ly: But Madness is like the Yellow Jaundice; and those that are possessed with
it, think every one they see of the same Complexion; otherwise he would never
say, this worthy Knight was under that Predicament.

The Old Buffoon, Debauched in early time,
Boasts of his Vice, and Hugs himself in Crime:
Lewdness has Forty Years forsook the Beast,
And left his Vicious Body to its Age and Rest;
But though the Active part of Vice is Dead,
The Rampant Devil's Regnant in his Head,
Hurries the Lewd Distempered Wretch along,
With Vile Blasphemous Voice, and Baudy Tongue.
If Leudness has forsook his Breast forty Years, then how can the Rampant Devil
hurry the Lewd Distempered Wretch along still? for it is impossible for a Man
not to be Wicked, and Wicked at the same time.

Well might an Ancient Polish Bard Decree
Jowler the Hound, a Wiser Beast than he:
Meersky has always been the Dyets Jest,
Laughs loudest at himself, to Please the rest;
Betwixt the Extremes of Banter and of Rage,
He made himself the Fool, the House the Stage,
The Polish Merry Andrew, shifting Shapes
Till he is the very Block Head which he Apes.
I would not be thought to compare Mr. Dryden who is the Ancient Polish Bard
here meant to Mr. Foe, on Account of his Poetical Performance; but for
Ill Nature, the latter has such an Excess of it that he may be properly said to
lose by the Character; though Mr. Dryden had his share too, and fell foul upon
Sir Thomas on Account of a Personal Pique, which always carries more Malice
than Truth in it.

Wardsky, a Deputy of Northern Race,
Weak in his Head, but very strong in Face;
Assurance many Blessings may contain,
And often times supplys the want of Brain;
A Junior Tookite forward in the Cause,
To Damn the Cossacks by unheard of Laws;
A Scolding Clamouring Member, Vain and Loud,
Noisy in Words, and not a little Proud
His Polish fury ran before his Sense,
Mighty in Wit, vast in Impertinence;
The Hissing Diet Laughed, the Beau won on,
Muttered a Curse or Two, and so sat down.
How can Mr. W -- rd be mighty in Wit, and vast in Impertinence, at the same
time, unless Mr Foe takes Wit and Impertinence for convertible Terms, as he did
the Elements of Air and Water in one of his Reviews.

Satyr, make room for Men of Polish Wit,
Whose Zeal as well as Learning's too Polite;
A Polish Tookite of Collegiate Fame,
Hight Anneslesky, that is his Polish Name.
Satyr may make Room for Mr. Annesly Member of Parliament for the University of
Cambridge a^ long as it pleases for it, though I do not wonder a Person should
have no good opinion for Colleges, that has never been in any other than that
of Newgate.

He Learnt ill Tongues in Cambria's Famous Hall,
And very Apely represents them all:
Down with the Cossacks is his Darling Word,
The Bully Tongue supplies the Tamer Sword;
He Damns the Cossacks with Exalted Vote,
And Horrid Language fills his raveing Throat;
Nor does it Check the Man's degenerate Scorn,
To think that he himself's a Cossack Born;
Rather than not surpress the Growing Evil,
He freely Votes his Fathers to the Devil.
The Earl of Anglesea, Lord Privy Seal to King Charles II. whom this Paragraph
highly injures in calling him a Cossack, was advanced for his Loyalty and Zeal
for the Church Established; and being the Father of this Worthy Gentleman made
such Provision for his Son's Education, as is in no wise consonant to the
Dissenters Communion. For though they have their separate Universities at
Vtrecht, Leyden, etc. they are averse to the two Universities here, where
Religion and Loyalty are Taught and Practiced. Which is an Argument that he did
not Design to have his Son bred up otherwise than in those Principles which he
so gloriously adhere's to. And how a Man can Vote his Fathers to the Devil, by
coming up to his Father's Direction, I must profess my self Incapable of
Explaining.

Never did University pretend,
To Polish Diet such a Wretch to send;
It Is owned they did not Choose him for his Sense,
But he got in by Dint of Impudence;
A finished Coxcomb, with Assuming Wit,
In all but Sense and Manners he is Complete,
So furnished with the Language of the Town,
He made our Dunghill Rhetoric, all his own;
All his endeavors to support the State,
H' Expresses in the Style of Billingsgate;
Of Modesty and Manners very Shy,
And blessed with every Gift but Honesty,
If he has neither Sense nor Manners, how comes he to be Blessed with every
Gift but Honestys For as I take it, Sense and Manners are Gifts, and he cannot
have them, and not have them at the same time.

Gransky was newly made a Polish Lord,
Though most Men thought 'twas hasty and absurd,
His Honor thus, before his Wealth should rise,
But that his other Stock, that want supplies.
By Gransky, the Poet designs we shall read the L -- G -- ll, though he gives
us no Lineaments of him in his pretended Character. That he was made a Lord was
the Queen's Act and Deed, and to call his Creation Absurd, is to make her
Majesty Guilty of that Absurdity.

One farther Mischief his advancement brought,
Our Polish Mob have made the Grievance out;
May-Fair and Hockly, suffer such a Blow,
'Twill all the Bears and Back-Sword Men Undo;
All things give way to Fate's eternal Doom,
The shouting Crowd have lost their Captain Tom.
See how the Stage of Dirty Honor fails,
And Warsaw her Street Colonel Bewails;
No more the Gladiator now appears,
Patron to all the Whores, and all the Bears,
The Polish Smithfield Butchers storm and rage,
And sable Weeds adorn the drooping Stage;
Prize fighting Triumphs pass no more Cheap side,
Nor female Champions in their Armor ride,
The Sword and Dagger-Heroes are undone,
Gransky their darling Patron, Gransky's gone;
Augustus thus at one unhappy Word,
Lost the wild Gentry first to gain the Lord.
When once a Gentleman comes to be the Envy of a Party, and an overmatch for
them in Politics as well as Popularity and the People's Affection, they make
it their endeavor to render him Little, least his Merits should raise him too
high for their reach. This worthy Patriot's Services by Sea and Land attest for
him that his Thoughts are above Prize fighting and such Vulgar Exercises, and
though he may have Diverted himself as well as others, by seeing the Rarities
of Art and Nature, it is no more than the greatest Councellor in the Cabinet
descends to, sometimes.

Yet Gransky once the People's Humor Crossed,
He would be for the Bill, what'er it cost;
Though all the Poles their high Dislike expressed,
And so the Bill and Lord made up the Jest.
Gransky was always Zealous for the State,
But when the Swedes endangered Poland's Fate,
He gravely Vowed and Swore he would never Associate.
More Noblemen and Gentlemen than He who refused the Association at first have
taken it since, and to be singly in the Right, is more Honorable than to have
Thousands embark with him in a Cause that is wrong.

Not Vows nor Oaths, can Polish Members bind,
When latent Prospects preposess the Mind;
For when he had the Mareschal's Chair in View,
Through Forty Oaths that blessing he would Pursue.
Satyr, The Ambitious Wretch Commiserate,
Insult no more a Man of adverse Fate;
The Sullen Member's Chagrin and Perplexed,
With high extremes of Pride, and Envy Vexed,
Because from Speaking Office he must Fall,
For two long Years, he would hardly speak at all.
None that knows him will say, that he is not Master of Abilities to fill the
Speakers Chair, and had the Person that censures him for hardly speaking at all
these two long Years, managed his Pen as the Noble P -- r is said to manage his
Tongue, he would have no occasion next Session of Parliament to take the
Country Air, when the Winter draws other People to the City.

Augustus always, all Men's Good Intends,
To make the Man of Mischief some Amends,
He sent him down among his Western Friends.
The Tinners Petty Diet he Prepares,
Bear-Garden there, in Miniature Appears;
The Mobb-Assembly healed his Discontent,
For Rabble always was his Element.
A Sign that he knows the Constitution of the Stannaries, to say it is a
Bear-Garden, and Mob-Assembly, when most of the best Gentlemen of the West gave
their Appearance there. I hope he has changed his mind since his Lordship's
Removal from being Lord Warden, or it will be an Affront to Mr. Godolphin who
succeeds him.

In High Mock Majetty, and awkward State,
He Apes the Prince, and thinks himself as great:
The Black Assembly, in the Sulfurous Shades,
Where Mining Hand the Glittering Oar Invades,
" With all the Elder evils of the Mines,
" He calls in Convocations like Divines,
" Mobb'd them a Speech, within their Smoaky Den,
"Said much of Nothing, and came Home again.
The Speech which he calls a Mobb-Speech may be seen in the Gazette, and to say
much of nothing, is rather an Argument of his Dexterity in Discourse than
against it. As for his calling the Elder Devils of the Mines like Divines to
the Convocation-House, that carries such an odious Reflection upon the Church
of England Clergy in General, that i tought to be censured by the
Civil-Magistrate.

Bankski, a New Contemporary Lord,
An Orator at Poland's Chancery Board,
Furnished with Ciceronian Eloquence,
And mighty Flights of Language, none of Sense;
Speech making was his due Paternal Fame,
And made his Voice a Pun upon his Name;
A Tongue-Pad Family, of Wheedling Race,
And talks of nothing with a Wondrous Grace.
By Banksky we are to understand, the L -- d Gu -- sey who Married Sir John
Banks's Daughter, whom he owns to be furnished with Ciceronian Eloquence, at
the same time as he will allow him to have no Sense. An Instance of the
Satyrist's great Knowledge in Cicero, whose Oratory consisted not only in the
Cadence of his Words, but the Sense of them. As for his Voice being a Pun upon
his Name, (viz). that there is Music in it, and his Name is Finch, that is so
sorry a Conundrum that OWEN SWAN would kick his Vinegar drawer out of Doors for
it.

Augustus moved him, as 'twas understood,
That he might do no Harm who did no Good:
The Cossacks at his Honor much Rejoice,
For right or wrong, they always loss his Voice;
And Finky's glad of his assistance here,
To Check sometimes the too much talking Peer,
By Force, to stop the forward weak Effort,
Lest he should make the Diet too much Sport;
How often in Pity has he Pinned him down,
Whispered his Fathers Credit, and his own;
Told him his Grandsire's old, substantial Rule,
That silence never can describe a Fool.
The Queen moved him from the Commons to the Peers, from a true Sense of his
Worth, and the Nation is more indebted to his Assistance than his Brother who
needs it not, and is Second to no one Patriot whatsoever in every Acquisition
whether Natural or Artificial, that can make a Complete Statesman.

Unhappy ^inski, had he been but Wise,
And took his Younger Brother's grave Advice,
Whartski, Mobunski, and a Hundred more,
Had been as Sober as they were before;
The Dyet's Gravity had never been broke,
For no Man Laughed but just when ^inski spoke.
For a Man to be laughed at, and disrespectfully treated by some People,
redounds to his Credit since we are equaly to consider the Persons that Laugh
with those that are Laughed at, and the Character of the one is to be esteemed
or despised, according to the Character of the other.

Bucksky, a stalking, sharping, Polish Peer,
A Whoreing, Gameing, Swearing Chicaneer;
How just is Fate in his well-known Disease,
To make him Love the Whore he cannot Please;
Strange Power of Vice, whose Fury will prevail,
Possess the Head where it has left the Tail,
Nature grown Antic and Impertinent.
Let Us this be Lewd, and that be Impotent,
Had there been Money moving with the Bill,
Both sides knew how to purchase his good will;
His Vote's so sure, it never can be lost,
It Is always to be had by Who bids most?
Warsaw Remembers him of Old for that,
Though other Members suffered for the Cheat.
When City Brothers, Orphans Funds pursue,
And Lost their Bill and lost their Money too.
His lofty Palace now affronts the Park,
Light some the Tenement, the Incumbent Dark;
The Emblematic Sides Describe his Grace,
This Double Front, and that a Double Face.
Sibi Molestus, on the Coyns appear,
Though most Men think his Lordship need not fear,
No Man can envy him, his Heaven here,
Laetantur Lares Guilds the spacious Frize,
For Household Gods Dwell there of every Size;
'Twas never for these he Built the spacious Dome,
For all his Graces Gods would lie in far less Room.
The Motto's of Sibi Molestus and Laetantur Lares, so well describe the great
Man here hinted at, that there is no need of explaining it: Wherefore, I shall
only animadvert upon his Poetical Forehead, that could have the Impudence to
say so much, when there is so little reason of saying any thing of this Nature;
and point out a Person so plain, in affronting of whom, not only the whole
Nobility is concerned, but the Queen Her self, who is the Fountain of all
Honor, and is Interested in keeping its crystal Streams pure and undefiled
from such horrid Contaminations.

Guinsky, a Tartar of Circasshan Race,
What e're he wants in Head, makes up in Face;
In spite of Title, will be called a Pole,
A Russian Phys, and a Tartarian Soul;
In Prudence Light, and in his Follies Grave,
For Nature makes the Fool suppress the Knave,
A Cossack Bred, but grew a Coxcomb Young;
His Wits Decreasing, as his Pride grew strong;
The short Instruction had prepared his Mind,
But as his Vice Increased, his Sense Declined;
Ambition now, his ancient Thoughts Employs,
And all the little Grace he had Destroys
With empty Notions; Occupie's his Head,
In Seymski's Western Empire to succeed;
Affects the ancient Tyrant's vilest Part,
To fawn with Spleen, and to Insult with Art:
In Poland's Western Capital he Reigns,
Binters himself at most excessive Pains;
Seeks the Recorders Chair, and fain he would,
Dispense those Laws he never understood
A Hackney Deputy for every Town,
But soonest Chosen where he least was known:
Full Thirty Years he did the House Molest,
The Dyets Banter, and the Kingdoms Jest:
In strong assuming Nonsense still goes on,
Railing at Places, but forgets his own:
A Patent Broker Jobbs a great Employ,
That he may the Money, not the Post Enjoy;
For Bear-Skin Places, Chaffers with the State,
Secures the Cash, and leaves the rest to Fate;
Enricht with Fraud, in Trick, and Cheat grown Old,
And Places Bought on purpose to be Sold.
Yet to Complete himself the Nation's Jest,
He Damned the very Bribes that he Possessed:
By his own Vote, Disgorges ill got Fees,
And so by Law Corrects his own Diseate:
Thus he became the Dyets daily Sport,
A Knave in Council, and a Boor at Court:
Learned without Letters, Vain without Conceit,
Empty of Manners, Overgrown in Wit:
Of High Tyrannick Notions Prepossest,
The fitter to be Monarch of the West,
When Seymski's froward Spirit's gone to Rest.
Great Wits will be guilty of Mistakes sometimes, I perceive; for the Person
misrepresented here is one of his own Kidney; and he may sooner find Sir R -- G
-- n at Hannover, than affecting the Recorder's Chair at Exeter: And if he is
guilty of any thing here taxed with, he belongs to the Poet's own Party; and
muchgood may He do them, for Sir E -- S -- r has a greater Value for the
Monarchy, than to have a Republican for his Disciple, unless it be to Convert
him.

Powski, a noisy Polish advocate,
Grown Rich by Law, and buisy in the State;
Gravely he speaks in Polish Bombast Style,
And thinks the Dyets Pleased, because they Smile;
Tav' Finksi could have laid him down the Rule,
A Wise Man's Smile's, a Banter to a Fooi;
But Powski furnished with Opinion Wit,
None but uncommon Follies can Commit;
In thought Profound, and in Contrivance vast,
Speaks best to every Question when it is past.
Every one that has heard of Sir Thomas Po^is, has been acquainted with other
Qualities than what he is here censured for; an^ that he is so far from
speaking in Bombast Style, that the Happiness of his Periods terminates in the
most intelligible Expressions that can be made use of. As to his speaking
always to a Question when it is passed; the Author would do well to explain
himself, for I never heard of any that spoke to a Question before it was passed.

Some Rakish Poles, with these at once Concurred,
Who Peace and Cossacks both alike abhorred;
Buisy in Vice, but careless of the State,
Thoughtless of Party-Peace, or Poland's Fate;
Of these, mad Crakeroski was the first,
Of all the Polish Deputies the worst;
Mean to a Proverb, and below Lampoon,
Was Born too late, and may be H -- too soon,
The former Dyets thrust him out of Doors,
And let him loose to Laws, and Polish Whores;
Though 'twas Confessed, the bribe was not the Crime,
But 'twas the R -- e that Told on it ruined him.
This Gent. is the better to be spoken of, because set down for a Madman in his
ridiculous Meter; and if he is below Lampoon, why does the Poet take such pains
to expose Him? But perhaps Mr. Author does not think himself below Lampoon, and
therefore does it on purpose to Lampoon himself.

Cookski, A City Knight, got out of Jayl,
Stock-jobb'd the State, to make the Bill prevail:
The Dantzick Merchant's Mercenary Tool,
A Knave in Trade, and in the State a F -- l,
Once he to Warsaw's Castle did withdraw,
Secured against his Creditors by Law.
The Diet did his Crimes indeed pursue,
But fate Concurred the Jayl, that was his due,
Was Punishment, and was Protection too:
Vilely he Spent, what basely he had Won,
By Bribes Enricht, and by that Wealth Undone
As for Sir Thomas C -- k, every one knows what he was sent to the Tower for;
and the Character of Mercenary, so very ill becomes him, that no one has been
more famed for Generosity; witness his Sheriffalty, which fell very little
short of Sir ^^arles Duncomb's. How the Tower could be his Punishment ^d
Protection at the same time, is very difficult to be explain^; though had he
censured Sir Thomas, for being so mean spi^d as to refuse the Mayoralty of
London, because Sir John ^rsons had lop'd off the most considerable Branches of
its Re^ue, I would have agreed; for he is so far from being un^e, as the
Verse-insinuates, that he is very wealthy, and by at means the more inexcusable.

These are the Men, that Govern Poland's Fate,
^^d pull her down, to make her very great;
^ith a vast Crou'd that serve their Prince in Vain
^ith buisy Heads, but very Empty Brain,
^ith hasty Vote promote the Cosacks Fate
and to preserve the Church, undo the State,
^onsolidating Hero's who supply
Their want of Sense, with want of Honesty;
To pull a House down to rebuild it Nobler, is common ^ough in Architecture;
but that they endeavored to destroy ^e Government Established, to make it
Great and Flourish^g, is a Falsehood a Man of any Sincerity would not be in ^e
least guilty of. For what was done by the Church-Party ^as in pursuance of
former Acts of Parliament, in particular, ^at of Uniformity, to strengthen what
had been passed by ^ing, Lords and Commons; and render Her present Majesty's
^eign as Glorious, for the Preservation of the Church from ^er secret and
declared Enemies, as She has been for that of ^urope.

But still Augustus in the Center stands,
and Guides the dangerous Reins with steady Hands.
^upported by his People's Cheerful aid,
No more at false Livonians he is Dismayed,
Or of the feirce Invading Swedes afraid:
The Diet Rises, and the King intends,
To Purge his Household, and reform his Friends:
Dismisses from his presence and his Pay,
The Guilty Poles, who hardly durst their Sentence stay.
But fled before the High Command came down,
And left him still posess'd of his long envy Crowned.
The very cheerful Aid here spoken of was advanced and forwarded by the very
Patriots whom he treats after such a Rascally manner; and the time may come,
when Her Majesty may be more sensible than he would have Her, of the Removal of
such Gentlemen from Her Presence and Favor, who have made it their whole
Business to deserve Her Gracious Approbation. For it is impossible, that a Queen
descended from the Family of the Stuarts can discountenance Men of Probity,
Affection and Loyalty, to Her Person and Government.

So Seymski first dismissed th'awakned Court,
To Western Poles Conveys the swift report,
Tells them in what Disgust he came away,
Because he had been too great a R -- ke to stay;
That all his late Proclaimed Disgrace had been
Because he wanted Manners to his Qu -- n,
The Case was hard, since it was always known,
He scorned his Birth, and Vowed to die a Clown;
A Boor of Quality to whom it chanced,
That for his Anti-merit was Advanced.
If Sir E. S -- r was advanced for his Antimerit, what a sort of a L -- y must
somebody be that promoted him to that Dignity? For nothing can be plainer,
than that if I give a Man a Place because of his Opposition to Goodness, I must
be an ill Person my self. A scandalous Inuendo, which the Writer ought to be
called to an account for. But to answer this Paragraph in his own way, take
this noble Gentleman's Character, from a very worthy Gentleman, and yet a
Tacker, in his Poem, called, Moderation displayed; where the Fiend, speaking of
the late Change at Cort, says, after my Lord of I -- sy Removal had been spoken
of: Senato too who bravely does deride
Sempronia 's Little Arts, and Female Pride.
Whose Lofty look and whose Maiestick Mien
Confess the Tou'ring Godlike Soul within.
A Speaker of unparalleled Renown
Long in the Senate long in Conncil known,
Allied to E. of Rochester.
Celsus by the Noblest Claim,
By the same Principles of Worth the same.
Old as he is, still firm his Heart remains,
And dauntless his dec^^ning Frame Sustains.
So poised on its own Base, the Center bears.
The Nodding Fabric of the Universe.


Finski prevented the Approaching Fates,
And wisely his own Fall Anticipates:
The Courtier with the Statesman he resigned
Guilt taught him so much of his Prince's Mind.
The Earl of N -- m then is acknowledged to do one Wise Thing at last, sure the
Poet forgets himself, or He would never have been Guilty of such a
Condescension. But his Guilt taught him his Prince's Mind, he foresaw her
Majesty's Intentions, and upon that account was before hand with the Queen and
resigned the Seals before they were taken from him. Very well but how came Mr.
Foe to know the Queen's Mind, for I never heard he belonged to the Cabinet
before. But Railery apart, hear what the Devil himself says likewise of this
Noble Peer in the asoresaid Moderation displayed.

Villiaski followed, Conscious of his Crimes,
Loath to account for Sohieski's Times;
Augustus Sobieski's rule pursues.
This Cannot Employ the Wretch could that abuse;
Equal their Right, He that could that betray,
It cannot be fairly thought, should this obey.
What the E -- of I -- sy did in Relation to K -- W -- after his Death, was
Honorable and the Duty of his Post, and he was so very far from abusing or
betraying his Master, that he had been false to his Mistress had he not secured
that Prince's Closet. Take his Character likewise from the same Valuable Poem.
Then from this near attendance be Removed
(...) though by all admired, and L^v'd,
Though his Sweet Temper and obliging Port,
Become his Office, and adorn the Court.
He seems by Nature (...) Mankind (...) please,
So free, so unconstrained is his Address
Improved by every Virtue, every Grace.
Celsus disgraced Hortensio next appears,
Whose Vigilance still baffles all my Cares,
To whom by Right of Ancestry belong
A Loyal Heart and a Persuasive Tongue
Now Plots are formed and public Tempests roll,
He boast's a strange unshaken Strength of Soul:
Fearless against Her Foes the Church sustains
Alike their Friendship and their Hate disdains,
Disdains their Clamor and Seditious Noise,
Secure in the Applanding Senates Voice.
Of Noble Stem, in whose Collat'ral Lines
Virtue withequal Force and Luster Shines.


Too happy Poland, if thy Sons but knew,
How their own just Deliverance to pursue.
Let the Degenerate Palatines Combine,
Their Prince and Liberties to Undermine,
Call in the Swedes, Consult, Confederate,
With the Infatiate Enemies of the State:
It Is all in vain, Heaven points the Sacred Way,
To them that dare Augustus still obey.
Let them but in his juster Cause Unite,
It Is Justice and the Law make Cowards fight.
They that Advance to Liberty's Defense,
Find double Vigor in their Innocence.
Invading Swedes will never once prevail,
Till Poland's Peace at home begins to fail.
The way to make Poland unhappy, is to follow the Poets prescriptions, and
persuade all Men to be in Love with his Sham-Moderations; and to advance to
Liberty's Defense in his Scheme of Politics, is for us to turn Levellers, and
bring the Established Constitution to such a Pass that we may all equal in
Power, and share the Direction of Affairs alike, without any thing like a
Kingly Government, which this pretended Peace at Home may bring us to at last,
without the Interposition of such Patriots whom he calls Degenerate Palatines.

Long may Augustus wear the Polish Crown,
And Poland his Triumphant Glories own:
His Council steady, and his Statesmen Just,
When these are happy once, The Monarch must.
I join with him in the Prayer, though we are of two Minds concerning the
Justice of the Statesmen. For the World Just falls under a Different
Acceptance with Men of different Principles.

If there is a Statesman honest and upright,
Whom neither Knaves can bribe, nor Fools Invite;
Who with unbiased hands can hold the Reins,
And seeks to save his Countries lost Remains,
That loves the People and obeys the Crown,
And seeks the Nations safety, not his own:
Unhappy Poland! find the Hero out,
Court him, Let Great Augustus Court him to it.
Let no State Niceties prevent his Choice,
All Poland calls him with united Voice.
Heaven send Her Majesty such Persons about Her Royal Person. Amen, says the
Church of England from the bottom of her Heart, who looks upon the Queen as Her
Nursing Mother, as well as Daughter; while the Dissenters speak after this way
for form sake only, and from the Teeth outward, since Knavery and Dishonesty
is the support of their Cause.

It Is done, the Polish Genius has prevailed,
And Heaven has this new Blessing just entailed.
Not all the Swede's Invading Troops shall awe,
The Loyal Poles their Duty to withdraw;
Confederate Lords with their disloyal Train;
Shall always make the vile Attempt in vain.
While Heaven directs Augustus to apply,
To Men of Council, Men of Honesty,
'T's a Certain Sign there is Deliverance nigh.
We pretend not to so much as to insinuate, that her Majesty having suspected
Persons about her, such as take Bribes, etc. contrary to Her Declaration at her
Accession to the Throne, but that notwithstanding we are very happy in the
Present Ministry, we might likewise have been so if those that are removed from
it had continued in it.

How happy is Augustus in his Choice,
That makes the Swedes repine, the Poles rejoice:
See how the secret black Cabals abate,
And quit their Councils to avoid their Fate.
The Malcontents Discern their vile Mistake,
And old degenerate Principles forsake.
See how for early Pardon now they sue,
And their Allegiance openly renew.
What has Satyr to do in Viewing the Man that deserves your Panegyric: Prithee
Daniel leave off this way of Writing, or you will bring in Satyr so often, that
your Writings will be a Satyr upon your self at last.

The Happy Monarch sees the Cloud disperse,
And distant Peace shall gild the Universe;
The Poles their Loyalty begin to show,
But Satyr, view the Men that made it so.
If the Gentlemen pointed at in this paragraph held any secret Caballs, they
were for the good of Church and State and they are so far from forsaking their
own Principles that taught them the Continuance of their Duty without any such
thing as the Renewing their Allegiance, that they are inseparable from them as
Heat is from fire, or sensation from the Soul.

A Prince's Choice of Ministry and State,
Determines both his Wisdom and his Fate.
Wise Councils may a weaker Prince Restore,
But none has these, but what were wise before.
We agree with him, that the Fate of Prince and People depends upon the Choice
of a Ministry, and that Wise Councils may support a Weak Prince, but must deny
the Consequence, that none but a wise Prince can have a Wise Ministry, since he
has owned in this very Paragraph, that a weak one may be restored by one that
is Wise.

Grave Casimir revolving and sedate,
The Dyet's Marshal placed in Finsky's Seat,
This Guides the Treasure, That directs the State.
By Casamir he seems to hint at the L -- H -- T -- who he says placed Mr. S --
H -- y in the E -- of N -- m's Place, when we cannot but know those Offices of
Trust, such as a Sec -- of S -- are wholly and solely in the Gift of the Crown.

Augustus has found out the happy Two,
That his abstracted Interest can pursue;
Employ their abler heads t'assist his Crown,
Regard His Interest and neglect their own:
With Equal Zeal, in Poland's Safety join,
May all that love Augustus thus Combine.
That they are a Happy Two must be taken for granted since they are not only in
the Prince's Favor and Peoples too, but we are not to inter from, but to say
they neglect their own Interest out of Regard to the Queen's is an impardonable
Absurdity, because the Interest of Queen and People are Inseparable.

No Secret crime their Personal virtue stains,
No Swedish Poisoned Blood Infects their Veins:
Strangers to Avarice, they are well described
With Hearts untainted, and with Hands unbrib'd.
This is a Compliment they themselves will not allow of, for Sin is a Crime;
and there is no Man, not the Arch-B -- p himself, without it; which is enough
to infer from thence, that all Mankind in general are guilty of some secret
Crime or other.

The Polish Greatness is their true design,
How long has Poland Mourned for two such Men!
That count the Nation's Happiness their own,
Retrieve our Credit, and support out Throne,
Our Bankrupt Funds, and mortgaged Cash restore,
And make us Rich by That which made us Poor.
The Nation's Joy in their Advancement's seen,
And growing Triumphs Crown the peaceful Reign!
The want of Money makes all Men Poor; and if they can make us Rich by that
Want which made us Poor, then all Contradictions whatsoever my be resolved by
this Arcanum.

Long may Augustus their just Cares enjoy,
Till their true Measures all his ^ears destroy,
Till all Livonian Plots in Embrio's lie,
Abortive Treasons in Conception dye;
Traitors surrender to unerring Low,
And Swedish Troops from Polish Lands withdraw.
A Universal Satisfaction shines,
And coming Peace appears in their Designs.
A flowing Cash will due Success secure;
It Is this alone must end the Swedish War,
For things are altered, Fighting's grown absurd,
It Is now the Purse that Conquers, not the Sword.
And he that can the Polish Wealth Advance,
Strikes at the Root of Swedeland, and of France.
There is no Happiness, that the Church of England wishes Her Majesty not
Mistress of, who makes it Her continual Prayers, that not so much as the Talk
of a Plot, Scotch or English, may be heard in Her Auspicious Reign; and that
Money is the Nerves of War has been a received Truth, since Fighting is become
Mercenary, no Man of any rational Faculties will so much as question.

This Casimir has done, and This alone,
Has changed so much of late the smiling Sense;
These are the Agents of the Polish Peace,
To these we freely own our Happiness;
Firmly the willing Poles to these adhere,
Love 'em with Joy, and Trust 'em without Fear.
Fixtly the general Interest they pursue,
With faithful Vigor public Business do,
For This Beloved by Pole and Cossack too.
We grant him, that the Noble P -- rs represented by the borrowed Name of
Casimir, has done more than could be expected in a Treasury, that had been
exhausted by Depreations in the late Reign: and while either of two worthy
Patriots continue in their Posts, without giving us any Cause of Fear and
Distrust, that they ought to be beloved by Poles and Cossacks too.

The Conclusion.
OF all the needful Helps to Sovereign Rule,
The Usefull'st Thing in Poland is a Fool;
Among the Utensils of Government,
No Tool, like Him, supplies the grand Intent:
When he is in close Cabal, and Council set,
To turn the monstr'ous Windmill of the State,
The huge, unweildy, tottering Fabric stands:
Too Solid for his Head, too Heavy for his Hands:
The Force Reverts, and with the swift Recoil,
Assuming Statesmen perish in the Broil.
So, Mischief like, the high returning Tide,
Brings sure Destruction on it is Author's Head;
As Engineers, that ill support their Mind;
Sink in the Ruin of their own Design.
If the usefullest Thing in Poland is a Fool, then a wise Man is a Fool, for
wise Persons at the Helm of Government are the usefullest Things we can hope
for.

Poland, how strangely has thy Land been Blessed,
By Fools Redeemed, when ever by Knaves Oppress:
The Graver Blockheads of thy tottering State,
Protect thy Fame, and help to make thee Great.
For when they might thy Government o'erthrow,
The harmless Things themselves alone undo.
The untrain'd Politicians court their Fate,
If Knaves were never Fools, they would soon blow up the State.
That Is very strange indeed, to be redeemed by Fools, and almost as much as to
say, when we were at the brink of Ruin, by a parcel of Knaves who shared the
Administration in King James's Reign, the Fools interposed in our Behalf, and
brought about the late R -- vol -- n.

Here Men the Dignity of Folly gain,
And never live without their Wits in vain;
The empty Head, and noisy Tongue appear,
A Step to Fame, and Dubs a Polish Peer.
Coxcombs of hug uncommon Size we find,
And Fools beyond the Rate of Human Kind.
No Nation can such happy Blackheads show,
Ecols of Design, and Fools of Learning too;
With necessary Dullness so supplied,
Their want of Brains has all their Vice destroyed:
So Gravely silly, so Refin'dly dull,
So Clear the Head, and yet so Thick the Skull;
So damned to Forms, and so Tied up to Rules,
Poland shall vye with all the World for Fools.
In Council Hasty, in Performance Slow,
No Nation such a Breed of Fools can show:
Purse-proud and Fanciful they boast of Sense;
A certain Sign it is but a vain pretense,
Loss of Discretion's their chief Happiness,
No Men that want their Brains, can want them less.
So that Folly's a Dignity, and Dubs a Polish Peer, which is a sort of
Petty-Treason, because it is the Queen alone who Dubs a Commoner a Peer, and
insinuates as if Her Sacred Majesty was Guilty of Short-sightedness in the
Distribution of Her Royal Favors, and could not distinguish a Wise Man from a
Fool. Retrabas aut Vapules mi Poetula.

These are the Manufactures of the Land,
The Props on which our Polish Freedoms Stand;
That many a Polish Province represent,
And joined with Knaves make up a Polish Parliament,
That help to puzzle Causes in the House,
And Hunt a Question, as a Fox a Goose!
Strange Miracles they often times perform,
And Calm the Diet, when it is in a Storm.
Meersky and Grand Exper'ment often made,
Has made them Laugh and Rage, be Pleased and Mad.
Nature made Fools a Dernier high Resort,
To temper men of Sense, and make them Sport:
Like David's Harp they can the Nation Doze,
And drive the Devil from the Crazy House.
To compare a Fool to David's Harp is a little Profane, as it is to liken Sir
Tho. M -- r to David, who was a Man after God's own Heart, and huntiug a
Qnestion like a Fox a Goose, is such an Attribute of a Fool, as I never heard
of Before, since a Fox is looked upon to be the most Cunning Creature among the
whole Four Legged Race.

Satyr, forbear to Search the Wound too far,
Lest Poland's latent Errors should appear.
'Its Enough, the Nation knows the Cursed Design,
Has broke the Project, and has Marked the Men.
Augustus sees, Heaven has his Soul informed,
The Fools are all laid by, the Knaves disarmed;
Wisdom and Temper settles Poland's Fate,
And Moderation Guides the Helm of State,
It Is this makes Poland Safe, this makes Augustus Great.
Now He has made His Satyr say all the Malicious Things He could Invent of Her
Majestys best Subjects, He very Mercifully calls upon Satyr to Forbear, just
like a Certain Great General at the Boyne who sent orders to give Quarter,
after all his Enemies had been put to the Sword. If it be true that all the
Fools and Knaves are laid by and disarmed, then the Tackers are neither Fools
nor Knaves as He has Intimated, since there are above 90 chosen for Parliament
Men out of the 134. And England Thou ar't the Happiest spot in the whole
Universe, and so God Bless the Queen's most Excellent Majesty. Oh may thy Angel
guard Her Royal Mind,
That Favorites not educe, nor Trimmers blind;
For it is on Her thy Church and State depend,
With Her will flourish, and with Her will end.


FINIS.

