THE GENERAL.

[Price Half a Crown.]

Speedily will be published, The SECOND VOLUME of A TRIP to the MOON.

THE GENERAL. A POEM.

Respectfully inscribed to the Right Honorable the Marquis of GRANBY.

By the AUTHOR of A TRIP to the MOON.

-- nequeo monstrare, et sentio tantum. JUV.
It Is what I feel, yet strive in vain to show.
LONDON: Printed for W. NICOLL, and W. BRISTOW, in St. Paul's Churchyard; and
C. ETHERINGTON, in York. MDCCLXIV.

THE GENERAL.
IMMORTAL Shade! of each immortal Name!
That shines recorded in the Lists of Fame;
Not those who from hereditary Light,
With the false Glare of borrowed Beams are bright;
But such as Merit with rich Blood combine,
Reflecting Honor on a Noble Line;
That like the Phoenix, with peculiar Grace,
Unstained preserve the Beauties of their Race.
If the frail Bustle of this transient State
With immaterial Spirits can have Weight,
From those Aetherial Mansions where you rest,
Star-crown'd, in Pomp of virtuous Glory blessed,
Propitious come -- an honest Muse inspire --
Nerve her weak Wing -- lend your heroic Fire --
With your undaunted Ardour lead her on,
And teach her, Eagle-like, to view the Sun:
None but the Bird of JOVE should tempt a Flight,
That rushes on a Blaze of cloudless Light.
First, JUSTICE come with thy impartial Scale,
Lest Prejudice or Interest should prevail;
Take from Reflection every Power of Thought,
Ere that a single Compliment be bought;
Shield Reason's Eye with thy protecting Hand,
From the dread Influence of PACTOLIAN Sand;
Which, scattered by Corruption as she flies,
Pretending Patriots choaks -- or dims their Eyes;
Corruption, who, as MIDAS could of old,
With magic Touch turns any Thing to Gold,
Locks up the Senses, or inverts their Power,
Melting the hardest Heart with DANAE'S Shower.
Nor yet let poisonous Rage her Venom spit,
Satire run mad is the Buffoon of Wit;
From whose foul Mouth no Character's secure,
That lays the Bastard Vice at any Door;
That prays or curses, wheedles or knocks down,
Urged by that powerful Motive -- Half a Crown.
Wither such Bays -- if any Bays can rise
Beneath the Influence of such churlish Skies;
Where no mild Gleams of Summer cheer the Plain,
But Storms and everlasting Winter reign;
Bays which, like Nightshade, scatter Poison round,
Infect the circling Air -- profane the Ground;
Call forth Destruction from her dark Abodes,
And with fell Venom swell ten thousand Toads.
Honest may CHURCHILL be, for ought I know,
Some Lines depict him, and I wish him so:
Let him enjoy his Profit and his Praise,
In these so politic and generous Days;
Let him successfully pursue his Plan,
And prey upon the tenderest Part of Man;
Blushless, remorseless, and without Control,
Plunder the immediate Jewel of the Soul:
Let him, Humanity thrown quite aside,
Indulge his Spleen, his Interest, or his Pride;
Let him in Scandal wade through Thick and Thin,
To praise each Out -- and censure every In:
Let him, to please a Crowd of Knaves and Fools,
Paint MONARCHS, or their MINISTERS, as Tools:
Let him, still more to prostitute the MUSE,
A neighboring Nation by the Lump abuse:
Let him, in boundless Rage, pronounce the Lot
Of blackest Infamy to every SCOT:
Let him, like Humankind's imperial Caligula.
Foe,
Wish to behead them at a single Blow:
Let him, if not content to rail at home,
Over the submissive World's wide Limits roam;
Fit to engage a single Foe or Host,
Ready to fight a NABOB or a Ghost:
From Clime to Clime Malevolence transfer,
Distinguished -- Nature's Executioner.
All this, as gracious Heaven in Mercy sends
Plagues to perplex us for peculiar Ends,
With Patience will we bear -- but let him pause --
Nor longer dare, in raging Party's Cause,
(Party, of whom it may be justly said,
Behold a Monster! without Heart or Head,
By Madness, Avarice, Pride, and Jealousy,
Ingender'd on the Snake-lock'd Sisters three,
While Tyrant Satire waves her bloody Rod)
So often to trifle with an awful GOD.
That GOD whose Service to become a Wit,
The Reverend BARD most piously has quit;
And why? Because -- Oh Reason most divine --
His narrow Income could not purchase Wine.
That GOD, who, were he cruel to this Earth,
As Men to Men for Profit are or Mirth,
With sportive Thunder would confound the whole,
Nor spare even mighty CHURCHILL'S Patriot Soul.
Think not, mistaken Bard, I am thy Foe,
I neither know thee, nor can wish to know:
Reflected in thy Works thy Mind I view,
And grieve to find it of a Sable Hue:
Strong Beams of Genius gild the STYGIAN Gloom,
And fancy Webs there in her finest Loom;
Expression well arrays her verbal Band,
And Judgment leads them with a Master Hand;
While JANUS-fronted Interest slily waves
A flaming Banner to all Party Slaves;
Whose gaudy Hieroglyphics catch the Eye,
A poor fantastic Shade of Liberty.
This Patch-work Medley, blending Right and Wrong,
An impious, moral, soothing, sneering Song,
That shows the tortured Muse in various State,
Now bred at Court, now fresh from Billingsgate,
May cheat the Sensible, or charm the Rude,
May steal or thunder through the Multitude.
For my poor Part, by various Passions wrought,
I praise the Numbers while I damn the Thought;
I weep to see such Flights of Golden Darts,
With deadly Poison tipp'd, to rankle Hearts;
And, while the lovely Snake-like Verse I scan,
Praise crowns the Bard -- while Censure marks the Man.
What has provoked this unknown Scribe, you will say,
This feeble, nameless Mushroom of a Day;
This unfledged Rhimer to attempt a Flight,
When such a Falcon Muse appears in Sight?
What could induce the unimpassion'd Elf,
Who wishes me unfeeling as himself;
What Motives have arous'd the slumbering Drone,
Thus to assault me on Satiric Throne?
ME! ME! a Monosyllable of Weight,
To give a thousand groveling Reptiles Fate;
Can such a lifeless and insipid Thing
Ever hope to pierce me with his feeble Sting?
As well a Be, that hunts the flowery Field,
Might strive to wound through AJAX' sevenfold Shield:
Mankind must ridicule so dull an ASS,
Who breaks his Hoof against a Front of Brass.
Some Water-drinking Sprite -- for generous Wine
Would make a native Blockhead brighter shine:
Wine which he sneers at in his tart Reproof,
As turning poor Divinity aloof:
With my own Weapons dares my ponderous Rage,
A DAVID to GOLIATH on the Stage.
Well have thou pictured my unequal Force,
But think that DAVID checked the GIANT'S Course;
I own thee Proof against all Attacks of Shame,
Plunged over Head and Ears in SHANNON'S A River in Ireland, whose Water is
said to bless those dipped in it with invincible Assurance.
Stream;
But have thou too with great ACHILLES tried
The mighty Power of STYX'S awful Tide?
Is there no Spot wherein to make thee feel?
Yes, CONSCIENCE will convert thee all to Heel.
To please no Patron, nor to grasp at Pelf,
Slave to no Party -- I oppose myself:
Free by my Birth, still freer by my Heart,
Of injured Humankind I take the Part;
Boldly I stand against Passion's dangerous Sway,
And with cool Wisdom take the Middle Way;
Yet not so cold, but, for my Country's Good,
In Danger's Onset I could spill my Blood;
Give freely my poor All to aid her Cause,
To guard her KING, and, guarding him, her LAWS.
With Generosity and Friendship fired,
Why may not bounteous TEMPLE be admired?
TEMPLE! whose Principles reflected show
The Richness, Taste, and Elegance of STOWE.
Though differing Statesmen may explode his Aim,
Why may not DEVONSHIRE true Glory claim?
Whose steady Temper, and whose honest Heart,
Are nobly formed to act a Patriot Part.
May we not safely honor and commend
In ROCKINGHAM a BRUNSWICK'S faithful Friend?
WENTWORTH! whose Virtues act without Control,
Not more a Lord in Title than in Soul:
WENTWORTH! whose Noble Deeds his Mind approve;
WENTWORTH! whom Men and Liberty must Love.
Of silver-hair'd NEWCASTLE kindly sing,
A well-designing Servant of his KING,
Though now, perhaps, o'erpow'r'd with numerous Years,
Unfit to bear a Nation's cumb'rous Cares.
Hating, like SWIFT, a BISHOP for his Place,
Can we no Beauties in a DRUMMOND trace?
Shall modest Truth restrain her honest Tongue,
And leave him in the undistinguished Throng?
A Prelate by his Virtues dignified,
Just without Rigor, awful without Pride;
Pious without enthusiastic Flame,
All that sheds Luster on a sacred Name,
Shines Reverend YORK -- complete in every Sense,
Religion's Pride, and Boast of Eloquence.
Why should we fear to speak a SAVILE'S Sir GEORGE.
Praise,
Whose Merits would adorn the richest Lays?
SAVILE! whom Wisdom views with doting Eye,
Patron of calm and decent Liberty:
SAVILE! to Public Good alone inclined,
The Friend of Britain, and of Humankind.
Would it seem Treason, or a Lack of Wit,
To hail an able Minister in PIT?
To say his Counsels gave a Nation Weight,
The Thunderbolt of Eloquence and State?
Reason cries no, Intention is the Base
On which the Pile of Praise or Shame we place.
Should we reverse the Medal, and portray
Those who prevail in Ministerial Sway,
Fit to supply with Grace their arduous Parts,
Possessed of shining Talents, upright Hearts,
Would REASON and BRITANNIA cry out Shame,
Branding our Numbers with a venal Name?
Let us hope not -- the Number is but small
That Councils guide, and cannot take in all:
This we may say beyond the Reach of Doubt,
Some Honest and some Able must be out;
Thence can we not infer, devoid of Sin,
None Honest or none Able that are in.
As does Religion, Politics afford
More than one Way to serve the Sovereign Lord;
Poor is that Soul, in its own Notions blessed,
That, choosing one strait Path, damns all the rest;
As by unerring Wisdom we are taught
That the most Perfect are not without Fault:
A noble Emulation may divide,
And Honesty be found on every Side.
Shame to black Scandal, or foul-fac'd Reproach,
Cast at a Man on Foot, or in a Coach;
The spatt'ring Bard, whatever his Pretense,
Is but a filthy Scavenger of Sense:
Great Minds with Pleasure Emulation feel,
But meagre Envy trips at Virtue's Heel.
Let us correct, but not with Whips of Steel,
Feathers more winningly instruct to feel;
One Tickling leads to each defective Part,
The other, sluicing Blood, benumbs the Heart.
Oh may the Muse, debauched, never prove so loose
To stain herself with general Abuse;
Impartial, may she be in Honor bold,
Nor praise, nor censure, at the Chink of Gold.
Here, for myself, I boldly must declare
Against Ill Nature everlasting War:
Whether in Busy Bodies' whispering Tales
The carping, mean, illiberal Fiend prevails;
Whether in Friendship's fair Pretenses dressed,
She deeply wounds the unsuspecting Breast,
Locks up from Poverty a fruitless Store
Of Triumphs in a ruthless Creditor;
Whether, a venal Weathercock of Time,
She spits her Venom or in Prose or Rhyme,
From me the Serpent never shall escape,
Though, PROTEUS-like, she hourly change her Shape.
If to immortal FAME she points the Way,
And she alone may mine with Speed decay,
May it go with me to the peaceful Grave,
My Tomb declaring to each Fool and Knave,
That Views of Profit, Pomp, or Praise of Men,
Could never warp my Heart, nor gall my Pen.
Yet wherefore should I fondly speak of FAME,
Can Lays so humble hope a lasting Name?
To Pastry-Cooks and Trunk-Makers a Prey,
My Works will feel precipitate Decay;
While mighty CHURCHILL'S stand erect on high,
FAME'S dreadful Gibbet to Futurity.
Is there no honest Path to lengthen Life?
Must a sequestered Muse engage in Strife?
Must she cast off the Coyness of a Maid,
Or faster than a Nine-days Wonder fade?
Methinks I hear the Voice of FAME reply,
Hold, I Have a darling Object in my Eye;
Let winged Imagination deck her Plumes,
And Virtue sacrifice her best Perfumes,
Let Honor, Conquest, Freedom, all combine
To nerve each Thought, and animate each Line;
A noble Theme shall dignify thy Lays,
And the World gladly hang on GRANBY's Praise.
Thus, Wren-like, couched beneath the Eagle's Wing,
Tower thou may aloft, and safely sing;
While far more tuneful Songsters in their Flight,
Wanting such Aid, shall sink in endless Night.
Proud of the Task, unequal to its Weight,
With glad Submission I attend my Fate.
Dread War! enthroned upon thy sanguine Shrine,
No Touch of soft Humanity is thine:
On a rude Rock, amidst a dreary Waste,
Is thy unhospitable Temple placed;
Sprung from the impious Bones of murderous CAIN,
Gorged with the Carcasses of Millions slain,
Thy Temple, Desolation's Magazine,
An awful! savage! and terrific Scene!
Behold Ambition stretching blood-stained Hands,
Impatient at the rav'ning Portal stands;
In vain the Widow's Cries, the Orphan's Tears,
Or Nature's Groans, assault thy callous Ears.
Deaf as the Raging of a boundless Wind,
That only prostrate Ruin leaves behind;
Parent of Horrors! which still mark thy Way,
Hateful and sickening to the Eye of Day:
Fit only, like fell Monsters of the Wood,
To haunt in Deserts, and there proul for Blood:
Lion of Kings! let loose at their Command,
To stalk tremendous over each ravaged Land.
Death, grimly frowning in nocturnal State,
Lowrs on thy Brow, Prime Minister of Fate:
Whether thou bidst him rush in liquid Streams,
(Dire Emblems of the Light'ning's sulfurous Gleams)
Or wing'st him in the Steel's Eye-piercing Flash,
When trusty Blades in hardy Combat clash;
Whether he points the bearded Jav'lin's Blow,
Or issues from the Poison-teeming Bow;
Whether, in artificial Earthquakes borne,
While Rocks lament their flinty Entrails torn,
He bursts embattled Multitudes on high,
Piercing, with horrid Roar, the trembling Sky:
Whether, through mean Blockade and Famine's Sting,
The Brave are conquered by this fleshless King,
The insatiate Monster still obeys thy Call,
And, sweeping off Distinction, levels all:
Teaching this Lesson to o'er-swelling Pride,
That Dust and Humankind are near allied.
What! says the Miser, gloting on his Pelf,
The shining Idol! more than second Self,
Will Not all my Store, my countless Thousands, save
From the cold Comforts of the icy Grave?
Shall pennyless Companions share the Ground
Where I am laid, with equal Honor crowned?
How! cries the Hypocrite, with Saint-like Show,
Cannot my Devotion check this mortal Foe?
Cannot all the Splendour of my sparkling Eyes
Disarm his Cruelty, the Belle replies?
The Skeleton retorts, with hollow Tone,
Gold, Power, and Beauty bend before my Throne:
One only Method can subdue my State,
Be truly good, and I Am no longer great.
Second in Power Captivity appears,
Circled with galling Chains and chilling Fears;
More dreadful and more tort'rous to the Brave,
Than all the solemn Terrors of the Grave.
Sable Affliction's most affecting Goad!
Painful Existence, Misery's Abode!
Bane to each social Feeling of the Heart,
PROMETHEAN VULTURE to each vital Part!
Whether we view thee in the sunless Caves,
Where fell Inquisitors immure their Slaves;
Wolves of Religion, crowned with hellish Flames,
Whom bleeding Pity, filled with Horror, names:
Whether we find thee at the laboring Oar,
(Sad Monuments of arbitrary Power)
Or trace thee to SIBERIA'S dreary Plains,
Where painful Solitude with Exile reigns;
Exhaustless Fountain of corroding Care,
Thee next in Power we find to Death and War.
Friends to the dreadful, the united Three,
Foes to calm Peace and smiling Liberty,
Behold aspiring GAULS, in dark Debate,
Framing DAEDALIAN Labyrinths of State:
Fabrics most fair, and grateful to the View,
Enter not, Honesty, without a Clue.
There vainly Oaths and Treaties plead their Cause,
The Faith of Nations, and their mutual Laws:
Gewgaws of Conscience, Rattles of the Brain,
Mere Speculation, delicate and vain.
Far other Motives GALLIC Bosoms move,
Than the Aetherial Sparks of Patriot Love;
A lawless Thirst of Universal Power,
Still makes them wish, and ready to devour;
Nor heed the Means, how bloody or how dark,
So Laurels spring to deck their Grand Monarque.
Their Principles and Manners brought to View,
Behold a skipping, fawning, faithless Crew;
A Masquerade, where Characters are shown
In every outside Likeness but their own:
A Tribe of Mimes, with Feathers trimmed, and Lace*
Made up of Dancing, Chatter, and Grimace;
As Parrots talkative, as Peacocks vain,
Deceit and Folly's motley-colour'd Train:
Such shines the sad Majority of FRANCE,
Where Virtue's all comprised in -- Complaisance.
Can it be strange that such a Contrast should
Still thirst for BRITISH Wealth and BRITISH Blood?
That, Slaves themselves, they, with malignant Eye,
Behold and languish for our Liberty?
That, like the arch Fiend, to work their subtle Ends,
They wish to stab us in the Shape of Friends;
Since well they know, when open Force prevails,
Their Levity must kick up in the Scales.
Reason might well expect all this, and more,
As the sure Product of their Serpent Shore:
But for the Imperial Eagle, brave and rude,
To stain her Glory with Ingratitude,
To aim Annoyance at the friendly KING,
Who had so lately plumed her drooping Wing,
Staggers Credulity, bids Honor haste,
And hide his Blushes in some dreary Waste;
Since, in the Face of wondering Heaven and Men,
THERESA GEORGE forgot, and DETTINGEN.
When lawless Depredations spread Alarms,
Which BRITAIN forced unwillingly to Arms:
When Forts were raised in unsuspecting Climes,
And harmless Villagers, in peaceful Times,
Like Sheep were scattered over a barren Plain,
Or by the Tribe of scalping Butchers slain:
While Wives (dead Husbands welt'ring in their View)
First served the Lust of the rapacious Crew;
Then gladly sacrificed their final Breath,
So to escape such Ministers of Death;
Who, practiced in the savage, slaught'ring Trade,
In Cruelties refined their Art displayed.
When leagued with Savages, more virtuous far
Than those who plunged them in the Gulf of War,
FRANCE ranged in Blood whole Provinces along,
Horrid to tell -- as merciless as strong;
Taught Ruin through our Colonies to roam,
She treated us with Blandishments at home;
So Steel-ribb'd Dames, This Distich alludes to the Mode of Punishment in some
Countries, where an Iron Machine is dressed up in the Form of a beautiful Woman
with stretched out Arms, within whose Reach the Criminal being placed, he is
immediately crushed to Death.
with most alluring Grace,
Smile Men to Death, and kill with an Embrace.
While her back Settlements defenseless lay,
To uncheck'd Conquerors an easy Prey,
AMERICA, neglected, wept in Blood,
None the Most Christian Massacre withstood.
Strange to be told, yet not more strange than right,
Maternal ENGLAND, though she mourned the Sight,
Lay totally unnerv'd, and slumber'd on,
Till Danger proudly dared her native Throne:
Till flushed Monsieurs with Thousands lined each Coast,
Invasion, with resistless Power, their Boast;
And, may it not be told an After-Age,
May such a Blot never stain historic Page,
So much alarmed the Guardians of our State,
That Foreign Aid was called to baffle Fate.
Oh dark Remembrance! future Glory's Foil --
Brighter to show our Ocean-bounded Isle.
The Sons of HESSE and HANOVER, though brave,
Could never BRITAIN'S tottering Freedom save;
On our own Heroes must our State rely,
Who live to guard it, or to fail and die.
Some Armaments indeed, of gallant Show,
Were ordered forth, to stop the aspiring Foe;
Some North, some South, some East, some West were sailed,
To what Effect? -- each Expedition failed:
Ill planned, or spiritless, each warlike Scheme
Melted like Vapor, vanished like a Dream;
Which racks, to no Effect, the tortured Mind,
And, like the Mountain laboring, leaves a Mouse behind.
At length the Lion, roaring from his Den,
Breathed his rough Roar, so horrible to Men;
Raised his huge Mane, emblaz'd his glaring Eye,
Waved his fell Tail, and foamed for Liberty:
With Fangs and Claws in terrible Array,
Over trembling Nations took his lordly Way,
To scourge, with Sovereign Rage, each Subject Beast of Prey.
To show at large, and regularly trace,
The Flight of Fire-ey'd War from Place to Place,
Light by the Beams of his all-flaming Robe,
To traverse the four Quarters of the Globe;
To paint each Action, or to praise the Brave,
That conquering fought on every Plain or Wave;
Through each Campaign successively to run,
Would want the Force and Fire of ADDISON:
Let me, content with more contracted View,
A single COMET'S lucid Path pursue;
To show each Article in Order set,
Would make this Piece a versify'd Gazette:
Rough GERMAN Names would jar in every Line,
Wound each nice Ear, and clog my whole Design;
I aim not therefore at minuter Rays,
But strive to give the whole collected Blaze;
Whence my dull clay-form'd Image to inspire,
PROMETHEUS-like, I Will steal celestial Fire.
Come MINDEN! made immortal by the Day,
When pride-swell'd GALLIA'S numerous Host gave Way:
Thou glorious blood-stained Theater of FAME,
Which future Ages shall with Transport name,
With thee the Era of our Glory fix,
And wondering hail the conquering Number SIX:
Battalions SIX! which, firm as ATLAS, stood
Against the thundering Rage of War's tremendous Flood,
Which durst the fiercest Shock of Fate abide,
Breast cumb'rous Waves, repel the rapid Tide,
And smile to see its Foam burst vain on every Side.
Eager to make the glorious Work complete,
Burning to catch the favoring Smiles of Fate,
Leading our Squadrons with impatient Fire,
With all the Spirit Glory could inspire,
With all the Zeal which Patriot Bosoms know,
Who see, and wish to rush upon the Foe,
Brave GRANBY charged -- despising languid Rules,
War's Pedantry -- that genuine Ardor cools:
By slow Precision into Practice brought,
That knows not when Occasion should be caught.
Trembling lest Merit should assume her Place,
And leave her lingering in the martial Chase,
Fortune, with Darts of poisonous Envy stung,
Labored to blast his Laurels as they sprung;
Tried what she could to stop his conquering Way,
And dim the Luster of that glorious Day;
In Frenzy's Rage thus Victory upbraids,
Hence, British Slave, while I protect CONTADES;
Your haughty Masters mock my courted Power,
To LOUIS I devote me from this Hour.
In Part she triumphed, but each future Field,
Taught the reluctant Sorceress to yield.
So in translucent Regions of the Sky,
When spotless Beams would strike the ravished Eye,
A momentary Cloud may intervene,
And fleeting Vapor dull the lucid Scene;
Which, cleaving to the Bosom of the Gale,
Leaves pure unsullied Ether to prevail,
Celestial Gems again attract the Sight,
And sparkling shine with double Luster bright.
Wide is our Field for Fancy's vigorous Wing,
Fresh Images in rich Abundance spring;
Description, teeming with the crowded View,
Pants in the Chase, and labors to pursue;
While pining Flattery, filled with envious Spleen,
And wondering Grief beholds the copious Scene,
Where matchless Tints in genuine Beauty blend,
That justly scorn so varnishing a Friend:
A Prospect she, reluctantly, must own
By simple Truth to most Advantage shown.
What are Elogiums on the Good and Wise?
Faint Tapers laboring to illume the Skies:
Reversed, what are they to the vicious Great?
Lights to display the Rottenness of State.
We need not straining Panegyric use,
A licensed Freedom of the Magic MUSE,
To conjure ALEXANDER from his Grave,
And mortify his Pride with one more brave:
We need not bid the mighty JULIUS come,
To see a Race of fresher Laurels bloom:
We need not, fawning, give our Theme to Sight,
More stained with Blood than SCANDERBEG in Fight;
Whose single Arm, in one romantic Day,
So Story says, two thousand swept away.
Is it impossible to grace Command
Without a lightning Eye or thundering Hand?
True Merit needs no Foppington Display,
In Peacock Plumes of vain Hyperbole;
But, like the Gems which light INDOSTAN'S Mines,
With native Worth and matchless Radiance shines.
To warm the Passions, and to wound the Heart,
Why should we play the Scenery of Art?
Bring to astonished Optics from afar,
The glittering, dreadful Pageantry of War?
Why wound the harrow'd Ear with harsh Alarms,
Hoarse Drums, shrill Trumpets, and the Clink of Arms?
Why wake each tender Feeling of the Mind,
To weep the self-wrought Woes of Humankind;
To swell the sullen Streams of widowed Eyes,
To echo childless Parents' bursting Sighs?
Why show the dread Effects of ravenous Power?
Why flame the City, or subvert the Tower?
Why should we give a melting Reader Pain,
With Streams of Blood and Mountains of the Slain?
Why picture, what the Brave must weep to see,
Those dauntless Agents of Necessity?
Who, while each Breast with patriot Ardor glows,
For Justice fight -- yet weep over dying Foes.
Glory! -- bright Spark of an Aetherial Flame,
Humanity and thou art still the same:
Megrim'd Ambition vainly strives to ape
The Beauties of thy soul-enchanting Shape;
Yet, like the painted Prostitute, can gain
Some mad Admirers to adorn her Train;
Like her too, with the Lures of gay Deceit,
The Cormorants of Policy can cheat,
Lead to Destruction's Brink -- then headlong throw
The towering Fools to dreadful Depths below.
Not so thou treat'st thy votive gallant Swains,
Who court, with rough Embrace, in martial Plains;
Who on the Wings of Emulation tower,
Free from the paltry Views of Gain or Power;
Who only shed their own or foreign Blood,
To work, by noble Means, some general Good;
Who bravely stand against oppressive Ill,
And but from Principles of saving -- kill.
Faithful as chaste PENELOPE to these,
Undaunted by the War of Land or Seas,
Thy radiant Beams adorn each Hero's Head,
A GRANBY living, and a WOLF when dead.
A WOLF! -- methinks I see the pearly Tear
Stand swelling, trembling on its crystal Sphere;
Not so it gushed, but in a rapid Tide,
That Day when our EPAMINONDAS died;
Like Flowers o'ercharg'd with Dew, you feebly bow,
And a deep Sigh remembers gallant HOW.
More sweet than ARABY'S Perfumes must rise,
To smiling Heaven such lovely Sacrifice;
The laurell'd Shades receive it in its Flight,
While circling Cherubs share their fond Delight.
But wherefore droop? return to BRITAIN'S Isle,
And teach thy momentary Grief to smile;
Amidst surviving Sons, securely rest
In SAUNDERS, MONCKTON, HAWKE, and GRANBY blessed.
Nor these alone -- but should we speak of All
Who bravely followed at thy arduous Call;
Should we at Length recite each several Name,
We must monopolize the List of FAME:
A List from whence, exposed to GALLIC Eyes,
Dismay in trembling, lifeless Form must rise,
Chill their proud Monarch on his tottering Throne,
And, like MEDUSA'S Head, convert to Stone.
Often have we heard of Heroes in the Field,
Whose Courage forced the conquered Foe to yield;
Generals and Men adorned in every Sense,
Save with the virtuous Beam Benevolence:
That Beam divine! without whose cheering Ray
The darkened Soul admits no Gleam of Day.
Where is the Merit, with rapacious Hand,
To conquer, but to desolate a Land?
To feed his Appetite without Control,
Behold the Beast of Prey rapacious proul;
Still Instinct justifies his hostile Life,
Instinct with Reason here at mortal Strife.
Shall MAN, though justly roused to Self-Defence,
(A rational, yet often a false Pretense)
Without a Spark of Mercy in his Heart,
Ruthless perform a more than Savage Part?
Become to Humankind a lasting Curse,
To feed his Avarice and cram his Purse?
Not moved by Thirst of Glory, but of Gain,
Such Martial Usurers their Rank profane;
Yet such have been, and some -- Oh Pain to speak --
Who more, if possible, through Honor break --
Who farther yet the shining Pelf pursue,
And rob the honest Soldiers of their Due.
Down, Indignation -- keep thy Place below,
Nor let the Tide of just Resentment flow;
Leave with one Wish such Reptiles to their Fate,
Despised by Honesty, however great,
That of the sordid Crew it may be told,
Like CRASSUS, they, when dead, were gorged with Gold.
From this offensive Prospect let us fly,
And haste to one that may delight the Eye;
Behold a Portrait of uncommon Charms,
To animate and grace the BRITISH Arms;
Behold him giving Spirit full Career,
Alike untouched by Cruelty or Fear;
Behold his Breast with virtuous Ardor glow,
Behold him conquer and regret the Foe;
Behold him, from the sanguine Field retired,
With GLORY in a milder Shape inspired;
No proud luxurious Bashaw in Command,
Behold him cherish with a fost'ring Hand;
Behold his honest Heart and liberal Purse expand.
Behold him hospitable Aid afford,
By timely Largess and obliging Word;
Behold him, with a Parent's tender Eye,
View, and each practicable Want supply;
Behold him, Idol of each grateful Heart,
Unite the Gen'ral's and Protector's Part!
While Armies know not whether to commend,
And love the Chief, the Father, or the Friend.
Nor stops his Bounty here -- behold around,
Through all Degrees its kind Effects are found;
Towering above imperfect Flesh and Blood,
It lights on all -- an universal Good.
So sev'n-mouth'd NILUS, Source of Plenty, reigns
A well-tim'd Providence to thirsty Plains,
So swell his fertile Streams over Mother Earth,
So give they Plenty, Peace, and Gladness Birth.
This Portrait, though imperfect, it were Shame,
Like an ill Painter, to expose and name;
Yet should there one so ignorant appear,
So much sequestered from the shining Sphere,
As not to know the Likeness we advance,
Of ALBION'S Glory, and the Dread of FRANCE,
To him in Words the HERO we unfold,
Such GRANBY is, and POMPEY was of old.
Thrice happy BRITAIN! Empress of the Main,
May Ages bless thee with a BRUNSWIC'S Reign;
A BRUNSWIC worthy his illustrious Race,
Of virtuous Royalty the Pride and Grace;
KING of his People's Hearts! -- to Vice a Rod,
The undissembling Servant of his GOD;
Not more with Fame and public Virtue fired,
Than with domestic Harmony inspired.
Mark! Grandeur, mark! and imitate the Plan,
That dignifies the Monarch by the Man.
A BRUNSWIC formed, as Envy's Self must own,
To fix and dignify his native Throne;
A BRUNSWIC on whose Glory-beaming Brows,
The Crown imperial double Radiance shows:
Not such destructive Beams as Flames inspire,
And wildly set the groaning World on Fire;
But such mild Influence as, in temperate Skies,
The Sun celestial sheds on human Eyes:
A BRUNSWIC steady in his Country's Cause,
Firm Basis of our Liberty and Laws.
Well for the World does Providence provide
Such Instruments to check Ambition's Pride,
As wait the Signal of his Royal Hand,
Ready to guard, or to revenge his Land;
And wisely Power is lodged in such a Heart
As cannot even think a Tyrant's Part;
A Heart that owns no Merit in Success,
But as it gives extended Power to bless;
That all the Pomp of Victory disdains,
Unless when breaking proud Ambition's Chains:
Then Royalty indeed may justly tower
Stemming the Tide of Arbitrary Power.
Thus mighty GEORGE supports indulgent Sway,
While BRITONS gratefully with Pride obey.
Hear! Nations hear! nor envy while we sing,
Heaven's choicest Blessings in a PATRIOT KING!
To all who hold BRITANNIA worth their Care,
(May those who do not never her Freedom share)
This fervent Prayer I faithfully propose,
May all the Comforts human Nature knows,
May all the Smiles of most indulgent Fate
Smooth to our KING the Anxieties of State;
In the still Calm of a contented Soul
May silv'ring Years in long Succession roll;
And when -- but why anticipate what Time
Must bring to pass in each Degree and Clime?
May all his Actions Love and Honor win,
Without all Glory, and all Peace within.
Religion's Ministers, may they be all
Attendant only upon Virtue's Call;
By Doctrine and Example mend their Flocks,
Nor trade for Livings as the Jews for Stocks:
May moral Merit make successful Way,
And with internal gain external Pay;
That, from an easy and sufficient Store,
Blessed in themselves, they may assist the Poor;
Untouched with furious Zeal -- (a hateful Name,
That takes Religion's Shape, and proves her Shame;
Breaks rudely through all hospitable Bounds,
And Christian Harmony at once confounds)
With Charity unbounded may they reach
The saving Hand to All; and Mercy preach:
Correct with Tenderness, instruct with Smiles,
While Reformation crowns their pious Toils;
Each Pastor in his own contented Sphere,
To Virtue, as a mitred DRUMMOND, dear.
May Senators, unstained with Interest, feel
Their Country's Wounds, and prove the Means to heal;
Discharge their several Trusts with Honor fit,
As bold, as quick, as incorrupt as PIT.
Where tortured Law exalts her wrangling Voice,
May godlike Justice be the general Choice;
Smile where she can, yet wear becoming Frowns,
Nor bend her Power to supplicating Crowns:
May Right, at least, associate with the Fee,
And freeborn Juries stand for Liberty;
May Eloquence and Equity unite,
As now in PRATT, to shield us and delight.
To guard imperfect Nature from Decay,
May all thy Sons, HIPPOCRATES, display
Knowledge Medicinal -- and only give
The Means to make declining Patients live:
Not drain the Purse with multiplying Ills,
With fruitless Boluses and needless Pills;
But try, with learned Honesty, to save,
And cheat, like DEALTRY, the expecting Grave.
May Commerce ever sail through favoring Skies,
Free from the Encumbrance of Monopolies;
Never may her Sons, insatiate after Gold,
War's Crimson Banner hastily unfold;
Yet if again (as, Oh, too sure, I fear,
While faithless and insidious Foes are near)
Her hostile Blast should hurricane our Isle,
And all our present golden Hopes beguile;
If fire-breath'd Ate should successful prove,
And hungry Vultures chase the peaceful Dove,
May Resolution BRITISH Councils wait,
May Probity and Wisdom guide the State
Where Ministers preside -- nor factious Spleen,
Incumb'ring clog the complicate Machine.
Yet wish we not, with HERMES' slumb'rous Wand,
To close such ARGUS Eyes as watch the Land;
No, may they ever, for BRITANNIA'S Sake,
Keep clearly independently awake.
When to War's flinty Couch, from Beds of Down,
Our Heroes haste for Honor's deathless Crown,
May Zeal unshaken brace each martial Heart,
Well to perform the executive Part;
Still may a HAWKE be found to sweep the Main,
A GRANBY to adorn the embattled Plain.
FINIS.

