THE FASHIONABLE LOVER: Price 1 s. 6 d.

THE FASHIONABLE LOVER; A COMEDY: As it is acted at the THEATER ROYAL IN
DRURY LANE.

LONDON: Printed for W. GRIFFIN, at GARRICK's HEAD, in Catharine-Street,
Strand. MDCCLXXII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I COMMIT this Comedy to the press with all possible gratitude to the Public
for the reception it has met: I cannot flatter myself that the same applause
will follow it to the closet; for as it owed much to an excellent
representation, I have neither on this, nor any preceding occasion, considered
myself otherwise than as a sharer only with the Managers and Performers, who
have distinguished themselves in the exhibition of my trifling productions. But
it is not on the score of spectacle only that I am obliged to Mr. Garrick; I am
both in the instance of this Comedy, and in that of the West Indian, materially
indebted to his judgment, and owe the good effect of many incidents in both to
his suggestion and advice: the correction of a real critic is as different from
that of a pretender, as the operation of a surgeon from the stab of an assassin.

The Comedy, now submitted to the reader, is designed as an attempt upon his
heart, and as such proceeds with little deviation from mine; if it should be
thought therefore, that I have meant well, the charge of having executed
indifferently I shall patiently submit to: I have on this occasion, (as on the
two preceding ones) wholly rested my performance upon such poor abilities, as I
am master of; I am not conscious of having drawn any particular assistance,
either in respect of character or design, from the productions of others;
although I am far from presuming to say or think, that I have ever exhibited any
character purely original: The level manners of a polished country, like this,
do not supply much matter for the comic muse, which delights in variety and
extravagance; wherever therefore I have made any attempts at novelty, I have
found myself obliged either to dive into the lower class of men, or betake
myself to the out-skirts of the empire; the center is too equal and refined for
such purposes.

Whether the reception of this Comedy may be such, as shall encourage me to
future efforts, is of small consequence to the public; but if it should chance
to obtain some little credit with the candid part of mankind, and it is author
for once escape without those personal and unworthy aspersions, which writers,
who hide their own names, fling on them who publish their's, my success it may
be hoped will draw forth others to the undertaking with far superior
requisites; and that there are numbers under this description, whose
sensibility keeps 'em silent, I am well persuaded when I consider how general
it is for men of the finest parts, to be subject to the finest feelings; and I
would submit whether this unhandsome practice of abuse, is not calculated to
create in the minds of men of genius, not only a disinclination to engage in
dramatic compositions, but a languid and unanimated manner of executing them:
It will drive men from a necessary confidence in their own powers, and it will
be thought convenient to get out of the torrent's way, by mooring under the lee
of some great name, either French or Italian, and sitting down contented with
the humble, but less exposed, task of translation. Should this take place, a
cold elaborate style will prevail in our drama, clearly opposite to the
national character, and not at all at unison with the taste of our writers
themselves. Correctness will become the chief object in view, by which, though
much may be avoided, little will be obtained: nothing great can be accomplished
on a plain; turn to Shakespeare, and you find the Alps not more irregular than
his genius; had the critics of his days marked his inaccuracies with that
illiberal spirit which seems reserved for our time, the bold and daring sallies
of the sublimest Muse would probably have been suppressed, and neither the
great Actor who has brought his scenes to life, nor the elegant Essayist Essay
on the Genius and Writings of Shakespeare.
who has defended them, would have made such display of their own genius in the
celebration and protection of his.

RICHD. CUMBERLAND.

PROLOGUE.
SPOKEN BY MR. WESTON, In the Character of a Printer's Devil.
I AM a devil, so please you -- and must hoof
Up to the poet yonder with this proof:
I Would read it to you, but, in faith, it is odds
For one poor Devil to face so many Gods.
A ready imp I am, who kindly greets
Young authors with their first exploits in sheets;
While the Press groans, in place of dry-nurse stands,
And takes the bantling from the midwife's hands.
If any author of prolific brains,
In this good company, feels labour-pains;
If any gentle poet, big with rhyme,
Has run his reckoning out and gone his time;
If any critic, pregnant with ill nature,
Cries out to be delivered of his satire;
Know such that at our Hospital of Muses
He may lie in, in private, if he chooses;
We Have single lodgings there for secret sinners,
With good encouragement for young beginners.
Here Is one now that is free enough in reason;
This bard breeds regularly once a season;
Three of a sort, of homely form and feature,
The plain coarse progeny of humble nature;
Homebred and born; no strangers he displays,
Nor tortures freeborn limbs in stiff French stays:
Two you have reared; but between you and me,
This youngest is the favorite of the three.
Nine tedious months he bore this babe about,
Let it in charity live nine nights out;
Stay but his month up; give some little law;
It Is cowardly to attack him in the straw.
Dear Gentlemen Correctors, be more civil;
Kind courteous Sirs, take counsel of the Devil;
Stop your abuse, for while your readers see
Such malice, they impute your works to me;
Thus, while you gather no one sprig of fame,
Your poor unhappy friend is put to shame:
Faith, Sirs, you should have some consideration,
When even the Devil pleads against Damnation.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. BARRY.
LADIES, your country's ornament and pride,
Ye, whom the nuptial deity has tied
In silken setters, will ye not impart
For pity's sake some portion of your art
To a mere novice, and prescribe some plan
How you would have me live with my good man?
Tell me, if I should give each passing hour
To love of pleasure or to love of power;
If with the fatal thirst of desperate play
I should turn day to night and night to day;
Had I the faculty to make a prize
Of each pert animal that meets my eyes,
Say are these objects worth my serious aim;
Do they give happiness or health or fame?
Are hecatombs of lovers hearts of force
To deprecate the demons of divorce?
Speak, my advisers, shall I gain the plan
Of that bold club, which gives the law to man,
At their own weapons that proud sex defies
And sets up a new female paradise?
Lights for the ladies! Hark, the bar-bells sound!
Show to the club-room -- See the glass goes round --
Hail, happy meeting of the good and fair,
Soft relaxation from domestic care,
Where virgin minds are early trained to loo,
And all Newmarket opens to the view.
In these gay scenes shall I affect to move,
Or pass my hours in dull domestic love?
Shall I to rural solitudes descend
With Tyrrel my protector, guardian, friend,
Or to the rich Pantheon's round repair,
And blaze the brightest heathen-goddess there?
Where shall I six? Determine ye who know,
Shall I renounce my husband, or Soho?
With eyes half-open'd and an aching head
And even the artificial roses dead,
When to my toilette's morning task resigned,
What visitations then may seize my mind!
Save me, just Heaven, from such a painful life,
And make me an unfashionable wife!
PERSONS.
Lord Abberville, Mr. Dodd. Mortimer, Mr. King. Aubrey, Mr. Barry. Tyrrel, Mr.
Reddish. Bridgemore, Mr. Bransby. Doctor Druid, Mr. Baddely. Jarvis, Mr.
Griffiths. Napthali Mr. Waldron. La Jeunesse, Mr. J. Burton. Colin Macleod, Mr.
Moody.
Augusta Aubrey, Mrs. Barry. Mrs. Bridgemore, Mrs. Hopkins. Lucinda Bridgemore,
Mrs. Egerton. Mrs. Macintosh, Mrs. Love. Maid Servant, Miss Plat.
Servants, etc.
SCENE, LONDON.

THE FASHIONABLE LOVER.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A hall in LORD ABBERVILLE's house, with a staircase seen through an arch.
Several domestics waiting in rich liveries. Flourish of French horns. COLIN
enters hastily. Colin. HOOT! fellows, haud your honds: pack up your damned
clarinets, and gang your gait, for a pair of lubberly minstrels, as you are. An
you could hondle the bagpipe instead, I would na' say you nay: ah! it is an
ancient instrument of great melody, and has whastled many a braw lad to his
grave; but your holidays horns there are fit only to play to a drunken
city-barge on a swan-hopping party up the Thames.


LA JEUNESSE enters. La Jeu. Fedon, Monsieur Colin, for why you have send away
the horns? It is very much the ton in this country for the fine gentlemen's to
have the horns: upon my vord, my Lord this day give grand entertainment to very
grand company; tous les maccaroni below stairs, et toute la coterie above.
Hark, who vait dear? My Lord ring his bell. -- Voi la, Monsieur Colin, dear is
all the company going to the tea-room.


Colin. (looking out.) Now the de'el burst the weams of you all together, say
I, for a pack of locusts; a cow in a clover field has more moderation than the
best among you: had my lord Abberville the wealth of Glasgow, you would swallow it
all down before you gee'd over. -- Crom, crom.


La Jeu. Vat is dat crom, crom? We do not know in France vat is dat crom, crom.
But vat you say to the dinner? Upon my vord Monsieur the cook, make as fine
dispositions for the table, as the Grand Conde did for the battle: ma foi, he
merit to have his statue raised en crocan, in the center of his own performance.


Colin. Raised on a gibbet in the center of Hounslow Heath; that is what he
merits.


La Jeu. Ah, barbare! Here come my Lord.

[Exit.
LORD ABBERVILLE to COLIN. L. Abb. Colin, see that covers are laid for
four-and-twenty, and supper served at twelve in the great eating-parlour.


Colin. Ecod, my Lord, had you ken'd the mess of cakes and sweeties that was
honded up amongst 'em just now, you would na' think there could be muckle need
of supper this night.


L. Abb. What, fellow, would you have me starve my guests?


Colin. Troth, an you don't, they will go nigh to starve you.


L. Abb. Let me hear no more of this, Colin Macleod; I took you for my servant,
not for my adviser.


Colin. Right, my Lord, you did; but if by advising I can serve you, where is
the breach of duty in that?

[Exit.
L. Abb. What a Highland savage it is. -- My father indeed made use of him to
pay the servants wages, and post the tradesmen's accounts; as I never do
either, I wish somebody else had him that does.


MORTIMER enters, repeating to himself Mort. "Is this a dinner, this a genial
room?
"This is a temple and a hecatomb."

L. Abb. What quoting, Mortimer? and satire too? -- I thought you need not go
abroad for that.


Mort. True; therefore, I Am returning home. -- Good night to you.


L. Abb. What, on the wing so soon! With so much company can my philosopher
want food to feast his spleen upon?


Mort. Food! I revolt against the name; no Bramin could abominate your fleshly
meal more than I do, why Hirtius and Apicius would have blushed for it: Marc
Antony, who roasted eight whole boars for supper, never massacred more at a
meal than you have done.


L. Abb. A truce, good cynick: pr'ythee now get thee up stairs, and take my
place; the ladies will be glad of you at cards.


Mort. Me at cards! me at a quadrille-table; pent in with fuzzing dowagers,
gossiping old maids and yellow admirals; 'sdeath, my Lord Abberville, you must
excuse me


L. Abb. Out on thee, unconformable being, thou art a traitor to society.


Mort. Do you call that society?


L. Abb Yes, but not my society; none such as you describe will be found here;
my circle, Mr. Mortimer, is formed by people of the first fashion and spirit in
this country.


Mort. Fashion and spirit! Yes, their country's like to suffer by their fashion
more than 'twill ever profit by their spirit.


L. Abb. Come, come, your temper is too sour.


Mort. And yours too sweet: a mawkish lump of manna; sugar in the mouth, but
physic to the bowels.


L. Abb. Mr. Mortimer, you was my father's executor; I did not know your office
extended any further.


Mort. No; when I gave a clear estate into your hands, I cleared myself of an
unwelcome office: I was, indeed, your father's executor; the gentlemen of
fashion and spirit will be your lordship's.


L. Abb. Pooh! you have been black-ball'd at some paltry port-drinking club; and
set up for a man of wit and ridicule.


Mort. Not I, believe me: your companions are too dull to laugh at, and too
vicious to expose. -- There stands a sample of your choice.


L. Abb. Who, Doctor Druid? Where Is the harm in him?


Mort. Where is the merit? -- What one quality does that old piece of pedantry
possess to fit him for the liberal office of traveling preceptor to a man of
rank? You know, my Lord, I recommended you a friend as fit to form your manners
as your morals; but he was a restraint; and, in his stead, you took that
Welchman, that buffoon, that antiquarian forsooth, who looks as if you had
raked him out of the cinders of Mount Vesuvius.


L. Abb. And so I did: but pr'ythee, Mortimer, don't run away; I long to have
you meet.


Mort. You must excuse me.


L. Abb. Nay, I must have you better friends. -- Come hither, Doctor, hark'e --


Mort. Another time, at present, I am in no humor to stay the discussion of a
cockle-shell, or the dissection of a butterfly^s wing.

[Exit.
DOCTOR DRUID enters. Dr. Druid. Putterflies! putterflies in your teeth, Mr.
Mortimer. What is the surly-poots prabbling about? Cot give her coot luck; will
the man never leave off his flings, and his fleers, and his fegaries;
packpiting his petters? -- Coot, my Lord, let me call him back, and have a
little tisputes and tisputations with him, do you see.


L. Abb. Hang him, tedious rogue, let him go.


Dr. Druid. Tedious! ay, in coot truth is he, as tedious as a Lapland winter,
and as melancholy too; his crochets, and his humors damp all mirth and
merriment, as a wet blanket does a fire: he is the very nightmare of society.


L. Abb. Nay, he talks well sometimes.


D. Druid. Ay, it is pig sound, and little wit; like a loud pell, to a pad
dinner.


L. Abb. Patience, good Doctor, patience! another time you shall have your
revenge, at present you must lay down your wrath, and take up your attention.


Dr. Druid. Iv'e done, my Lord, Iv'e done: laugh at my putterflies indeed! if
he was as pig and as pold as King Gryffyn, Doctor Druid would make free to
whisper an oord or two in his ear.


L. Abb. Peace, choleric King of the mountains, peace.


Dr. Druid. Iv'e done, my Lord, I say Iv'e done.


L. Abb. If you have done, let me begin. You must know then, I expect my city
madam from Fish-street Hill.


Dr. Druid. Ay, ay, the rich pig-pellied fellow's daughter, young Madam
Pridgemore, my Lady Apperville, that is to be, pless her, and save her, and
make her a coot wife, say I.


L. Abb. Pr'ythee, good Doctor, don't put a man in mind of his misfortunes: I
tell you, she is coming here by appointment, with old Bridgemore and her
mother; it is an execrable groupe, and as I mean to make all things as easy to
me as I can, I Am going out to avoid being troubled with their impertinence.


Dr. Druid. Going out, my Lord, with your house full of company?


L. Abb. Oh! that is no objection, none in the least, fashion reconciles all
those scruples: to consult your own ease in all things is the very first
article in the recipe for good breeding; when every man looks after himself, no
one can complain of neglect; but as these maxims may not be orthodox on the
eastern side of Temple Bar, you must stand Gentleman Usher in this spot; put
your best face upon the matter, and marshal my citizens into the assembly room,
with as much ceremony, as if they came up with an address from the whole
company of Cordwainers.


Dr. Druid. Out on it, youv'e some tevilish oomans in the wind, for when the
tice are rattling above, there is nothing but teath, or the tevil, could keep
you below.


L. Abb. Youv'e guest it; such a divine, delicious little devil, lurks in my
heart; Glendower himself could not exorcise her: I am possessed, and from the
hour I saw her by surprise, I have been plotting methods how to meet her; a
lucky opening offers, the mine is laid, and Bridgemore's visit is the signal
for springing it.


Dr. Druid. Pridgemore's! how so?


L. Abb. Why, it is with him she lives; what else could make it difficult, and
what but difficulty, could make me pursue it? They prudently enough would have
concealed her from me, for who can think of any other, when Miss Aubrey is in
sight? -- But hark! they are come; I must escape -- Now, love and fortune, stand
my friends!

[Exit.
Dr. Druid. Pless us, what hastes and hurries he is in, and all for some young
hussy -- Ah! he will never have a proper relish for the venerable antique: I
never shall bring down his mercury, to touch the proper freezing point, which
that of a true virtuoso ought to stand at: sometimes indeed he will contemplate
a beautiful statue, as if it was a ooman; I never could persuade him to look
upon a beautiful ooman, as if she was a statue.


BRIDGEMORE, Mrs. BRIDGEMORE, and LUCINDA. Bridge. Doctor, I kiss your hands; I
kiss your hands, good Doctor. -- How these nobles live! Zooks, what a swinging
chamber!


Mrs. Bridge. Why, Mr. Bridgemore, sure you think yourself in Leatherseller's
hall.


Luc. Pray recollect yourself, Pappa; indeed this is not Fish street Hill.


Bridge. I wish it was: I Would soon unhouse this trumpery: I Would soon furnish it
with better goods: why this profusion, child, will turn your brain.


Mrs. Bridge. Law, how you stand and stare at things; stopping in the hall to
count the servants, gaping at the luster there, as if you would swallow it. -- I
suppose our daughter, when she is a woman of quality, will behave as other women
of quality do. -- Lucinda, this is Doctor Druid, Lord Abberville's traveling
tutor, a gentleman of a very ancient family in North Wales.


Luc. So it should seem, if he is the representative of it.


Dr. Druid. Without flattery, Mrs. Bridgemore, Miss has very much the
behaviors of an ooman of quality already.


Mrs. Bridge. Come Sir, we'll join the company, Lord Abberville will think us
late.


Dr. Druid Yes truly, he is impatient for your coming, but you shall find him
not at home.


Mrs. Bridge. How; not at home?


Luc. A mighty proof of his impatience, truly.


Dr. Druid. Why, 'twas some plaguey business took him out, but we'll dispatch it
out of hand, and wait upon you quickly.


Bridge. Well, business, business must be done.


Mrs. Bridge. I thought my Lord had been a man of fashion, not of business.


Luc. And so he is; a man of the first fashion; you cannot have a fresher
sample: the worst gallant in nature is your maccaroni; with the airs of a
coquette you meet the manners of a clown: fear keeps him in some awe before the
men, but not one spark of passion has he at heart, to remind him of the ladies.


Mrs. Bridge. Well, we must make our curtsies above stairs -- our card was from
Lady Caroline; I suppose she is not from home, as well as her brother.


Dr. Druid, Who waits there? show the ladies up.


Bridge. Ay, ay, go up, and show your clothes, I Will chat with Dr. Druid here
below.

[Exeunt Ladies. I love to talk with men that know the world; they tell me,
Sir, you have traveled it all over.


Dr. Druid. Into a pretty many parts of it.


Bridge. Well, and what say you, Sir? you're glad to be at home; nothing I
warrant like old England. Ah I what is France, and Spain, and Burgundy, and
Flanders? no, old England for my money; it is worth all the world besides.


Dr. Druid. Your pelly says as much; 'twill fill the pot, but starve the prain;
it is full of corn, and sheep, and villages, and people: England, to the rest of
the oorld, is like a flower-garden to a forest.


Bridge. Well, but the people, Sir, what say you to the people?


Dr. Druid. Nothing: I never meddle with the human species; man, living man, is
no object of my curiosity, nor ooman neither; at least, Mr. Pridgemore, till
she shall be made a mummies of.


Bridge. I understand you; you speak in the way of trade: money's your object.


Dr. Druid. Money and trade! I scorn 'em both; the beaten track of commerce I
disdain to follow: I Have traced the Oxus, and the Ton; traversed the Riphaean
Mountains, and pierced into the inmost Tesarts of Kalmuc Tartary -- follow
trade indeed! no; Iv'e followed the ravages of Kouli Chan with rapturous
delight: there is the land of wonders; finely depopulated; gloriously laid
waste; fields without a hoof to tread 'em, fruits without a hand to gather 'em;
with such a catalogue of pats, peetles, serpents, scorpions, caterpillars,
toads -- oh! it is a recreating contemplation, to a philosophic mind!


Bridge. Out on 'em, filthy vermin, I hope you left 'em where you found 'em.


Dr. Druid. No, to my honor be it spoken, I have imported above fifty
different sorts of mortal poisons into my native country.


Bridge. Lackaday, there is people enough at home can poison their native
country. (Mrs. BRIDGEMORE and LUCINDA enter) So, Ladies, have you finished your
visit already?


Mrs. Bridge. We Have have made our curtsies and come away.


Dr. Druid. Marry, the fates and the fortunes forbid that you should go, till
my Lord comes back.


Luc. Why not? if my Lord treats me already with the freedom of a husband,
shoudn't I begin to practice the indifference of a Wife?

[Exeunt.
Dr. Druid. Well, but the supper, Mr. Pridgemore; you a citizen, and leave the
supper?


Bridge. Your fifty mortal poisons have given me my supper: scorpions, and
bats, and toads -- come let us be gone.

[Exeunt.
Dr. Druid. Would, they were in your pelly!

[Exit.
An apartment in BRIDGEMORE's house. MISS AUBREY and TYRREL, and a maidservant
with lights. Aug. How I am watched in this house you well know, Mr. Tyrrel;
therefore you must not stay: what you have done and suffered for my sake I
never can forget; and it is with joy I see you now, at last, surmount your
difficulties by the recovery of Lord Courtland: may your life never be again
exposed on my account!


Tyr. I glory in protecting you; when he, or any other rake, repeats the like
offense, I shall repeat the like correction. I am now going to my uncle
Mortimer, who does not know that I am in town. Life is not life without thee;
never will I quit his feet, till I Have obtained his voice for our alliance.


Aug. Alas! What hope of that from Mr. Mortimer, whose rugged nature knows no
happiness itself, nor feels complacency in that of others?


Tyr. When you know Mr. Mortimer you will find how totally the world mistakes
him. Farewell, my dear Augusta; backed with thy virtuous wishes, how can I fail
to prosper?

(He goes out, and she enters an inner apartment. The maidservant immediately
introduces LORD ABBERVILLE.
Serve. All Is safe; follow me, my Lord; she is in her bedchamber.


L. Abb. Where; where?


Serve. There; where you see the light through the glass-door. If I thought you
had any wicked designs in your head, I would not have brought you here for the
world; I should be murdered if the family were to know it: for pity's sake, my
Lord, never betray me.


L. Abb. Go, get you gone; never talk of treason, my thoughts are full of love.
(The maidservant goes out.) First I Will secure the door: 'twill not be amiss to
bar this retreat. (Locks the door, and advances to the glass-door.) Ay, there
she is! -- How pensive is that posture! -- Musing on her condition; which, in
truth, is melancholy enough; an humble cousin to a vulgar tyrant. -- 'Sdeath,
she cannot choose but jump at my proposals. -- See, she weeps. -- I Am glad on it
-- Grief disposes to compliance -- It Is the very moment to assail her.

(She comes to the door, with the candle in her hand; seeing LORD ABBERVILLE,
starts.)
Aug. Who Is there; who is at the door? Ah! --


L. Abb. Hush, hush; your screams will rouse the house. -- It Is I, Miss Aubrey
-- it is Lord Abberville. -- Give me your hand. -- Nay, be composed. -- Let me
set down the candle: you are safe.


Aug. Safe, my Lord! Yes, I Am safe; but you are mistaken; Miss Bridgemore's not
at home; or, if she was, this is no place to meet her in.


L. Abb. I Am glad of that; blessed in Miss Aubrey's company, I wish no
interruption from Miss Bridgemore.


Aug. I should be loath to think so; an avowal of baseness to one woman, should
never be taken as flattery by another: in short, my Lord, I must entreat you to
let the servants show you to some fitter apartment. I am here in a very
particular situation, and have the strongest reasons for what I request.


L. Abb. I guess your reasons, but cannot admit them. I love you, Madam; let
that declaration be my excuse.


Aug. Nay, now your frolic has the air of insult, and I insist upon your
leaving me. (A rapping is heard at the door.)


Luc. (from without) Who Is within there?


Aug. Hark, hark, Miss Bridgemore, as I live. -- Come in.


Luc. Come in! why you have locked the door.


Aug. Locked! is it locked? -- for shame, for shame! thus am I sacrificed to
your ungenerous designs: -- she must come in.


L. Abb. Stay, stay; she must not find me here; there is one retreat; your
chamber; lock me in there: I may still escape.


Luc. (from without) What are you about, Miss Aubrey? Let me in.


Aug. Where shall I turn myself? You Have ruined all: if you're discovered, I
shall never gain belief.


L. Abb. Be advised then: we have only this chance left (goes to the bed-room
door.)


Luc. Miss Aubrey, if you don't let me in immediately, I shall call up my
mamma; so pray unlock the door.


Aug. I scarce know what I do (after locking Lord Abberville in, opens the
outward door.) There, Madam, you're obeyed.


Luc. Why, surely, you affect extraordinary privacy. It seems you have had your
Tyrrel in our absence.


Aug. Yes, Mr. Tyrrel has been here.


Luc. Humph! you're in mighty spirits.


Aug. No, Madam; my poor spirits suit my poor condition: you, I hope, are rich
in every sense.


Luc. She Is happy I can see, though she attempts to hide it: I cannot bear her.
-- Pray, Miss Aubrey, what are your designs -- to ruin this young man?


Aug. Madam! --


Luc. Can you now in your heart suppose that Mortimer will let his nephew marry
you? Depend upon it (I tell you as your friend) as soon as that old cynic hears
of it (which I have taken care he shall) your hopes are crushed at once.


Aug. When were they otherwise?


Luc. I don't know what to make of her -- she seems confused -- her eyes wander
strangely: watching the bedroom door -- what is it she looks at?


Aug. Where are you going?


Luc. Going! Nay, no where -- she is alarmed -- Miss Aubrey, I have a foolish
notion in my head, that Mr. Tyrrel's in this house.


Aug. No, on my word -- shall I light you to your room?


Luc. So ready! -- No; your own will serve: I can adjust my head-dress at your
glass -- Hey-dey; all is fast -- you have locked the door --


Aug Have I, indeed?


Luc. Yes, have you, Madam; and, if my suspicion's true, your lover's in it --
open it.


Aug. I beg to be excused.


Luc. Oh! are you caught at last? Admit me.


Aug. You cannot sure be serious -- think I Have the sanction of a guest.


Luc. Ridiculous! I Will raise the house -- let me come to the bell.


Aug. Hold! hold! you don't know what you do: for your own sake desist: to save
your own confusion, more than mine, desist, and seek no farther.


Luc. No, Madam; if I spare you, may the shame that waits for you fall on my
head.


Aug. At your own peril be it then! Look there (opens and discovers Lord
Abberville.)


Luc. Astonishing! Lord Abberville! This is indeed extraordinary; this, of all
frolicks modern wit and gallantry have given birth to, is in the newest and the
boldest style.


L. Abb. Upon my life, Miss Bridgemore, my visit has been entirely innocent.


Luc. Oh, yes! I give you perfect credit for your innocence; the hour, the
place, your Lordship's character, the Lady's composure, all are innocence
itself. Cannot you affect a little surprise, Ma'am, at finding a Gentleman in
your bed-room, though you placed him there yourself? So excellent an actress
might pretend a fit on the occasion: Oh, you have not half your part.


L. Abb. Indeed, Miss Bridgemore, you look upon this in too serious a light.


Luc. No, be assured: I Am charmed with your address; you are a perfect
fashionable lover: so agreeable to invite us to your house, so well bred to be
from home, and so considerate to visit poor Miss Aubrey in our absence:
altogether, I am puzzled which to prefer, your wit, politeness, or your honor.


Aug. Miss Bridgemore, it is in vain to urge my innocence to you; Heaven and my
own heart acquit me; I must endure the censure of the world.


Luc. O Madam, with Lord Abberville's protection you may set that at naught: to
him I recommend you: your company in this house will not be very welcome.

[Exit.
L. Abb. (to her as she goes out) Then, Madam, she shall come to mine; my
house, my arms are open to receive her. Fear nothing, set her at defiance;
resign yourself to my protection; you shall face your tyrant, outface her,
shine above her, put her down in splendour as in beauty; be no more the servile
thing her cruelty has made you; but be the life, the leader of each public
pleasure, the envy of all womankind, the mistress of my happiness --


Aug. And murderer of my own. No, no, my Lord, I Will perish first: the last
surviving orphan of a noble house, I Will not disgrace it: from these mean,
unfeeling people, who to the bounty of my ancestors owe all they have, I shall
expect no mercy; but you, whom even pride might teach some virtue, you to tempt
me, you with unmanly cunning to seduce distress yourself created, sinks you
deeper in contempt than Heaven sinks me in poverty and shame.

[Exit.
L. Abb. A very unpromising campaign truly: one lady lost, and the other in no
way of being gained. Well, I Will return to my company; there is this merit
however in gaming, that it makes all losses appear trivial but its own.


END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
A Library in MORTIMER's House. MORTIMER alone. SO! so! another day; another
twelve hours round of folly and extravagance: 'pshaw! I Am sick on it. What is it
our men of genius are about? Jarring and jangling with each other, while a vast
army of vices over-runs the whole country at discretion (Jarvis enters.) Now,
Jarvis, what is your news?


Jar. My morning budget, Sir; a breakfast of good deeds; the offerings of a
full heart and the return of an empty purse. There, Sir, I Have done your errand;
and wish hereafter you could find another agent for your charities.


Mort. Why so, Charles?


Jar. Because the task grows heavy; besides, I Am old and foolish, and the sight
is too affecting.


Mor. Why does not do like me then? Sheath a soft heart in a rough case, 'twill
wear the longer; fineer thyself, good Jarvis, as thy master does, and keep a
marble outside to the world. Who dreams that I am the lewd fool of pity, and
thou my pandar, Jarvis, my provider? You sound out the poor fellow then, the
half-pay officer I met last Sunday --


Jar. With difficulty; for he obtruded not his sorrows on the world, but in
despair had crept into a corner, and, with his wretched family about him, was
patiently expiring.


Mort. Pr'ythee no more on it: you saved him; you relieved him; no matter how;
you made a fellow creature happy, that is enough.


Jar. I did, Sir; but his story's so affecting --


Mort. Keep it to thyself, old man, then; why must my heart be wrung? I too am
one of Nature's spoilt children, and havn't yet left off the tricks of the
nursery.


SERVANT enters. Serve. Sir, Mr. Tyrrel's come to town, and begs to see you.


Mort. Let him come in (Tyrrel enters.) So, nephew, what bring's you to town? I
thought you was a prisoner in the country.


Tyr. I was; but now Lord Courtland has obtained his liberty, no reason holds
why I should not recover mine.


Mort. Well, Sir, how have you filled up your time? In practicing fresh
thrusts, or repenting of that which is past? You Have drawn your sword to satisfy
one man, now think of satisfying the rest of mankind.


Tyr. You know my story, Sir; I drew my sword in the defense of innocence: to
punish and repel the libertine attempts of an ennobled ruffian; every man of
honor would have done the same.


Mort. Yes, honor: you young men are subtle arguers; the cloak of honor
covers all your faults, as that of passion all your follies.


Tyr. Honor is what mankind have made it: and as we hold our lives upon these
terms, with our lives it behooves us to defend them.


Mort. You have made it reason then it seems, make it religion too, and put it
out of fashion with the world at once: of this be sure, I had sooner cast my
guineas in the sea, than give 'em to a duellist. But come, Frank, you are one
from prejudice, not principle; therefore we'll talk no more on it. Where are you
lodged?


Tyr. At the hotel hard by.


Mort. Then move your baggage hither, and keep house with me; you and I,
nephew, have such opposite pursuits that we can never justle; besides, they
tell me you're in love; 'twill make a good companion of you; you shall rail at
one sex, while I Am employed with t other, and thus we may both gratify our
spleen at once.


Tyr. O, Sir, unless you can consent to hear the praises of my lovely girl,
from hour to hour, in endless repetition, never suffer me within your doors.


Mort. Thy girl, Frank, is every thing but rich, and that is a main blank in the
catalogue of a Lady's perfections.


Tyr. Fill it up then, dear Uncle; a word of yours will do it.


Mort. True, boy, a word will do it; but it is a long word, it is a lasting one;
it should be, therefore, a deliberate one: but let me see your girl; I Am a sour
fellow; so the world thinks of me; but it is against the proud, the rich I war:
poverty may be a misfortune to Miss Aubrey; it would be hard to make it an
objection.


Tyr. How generous is that sentiment! -- Let me have your consent for my
endeavors at obtaining here is, and I shall be most happy.


Mort. About it then; my part is soon made ready; yours is the task: you are
to find out happiness in marriage; I Am only to provide you with a fortune.
(Exit Tyr.) Well, Frank, I suspected thou had more courage than wit, when I
heard of thy engaging in a duel; now thou art for encount'ring a wife, I am
convinced of it. A wife! 'sdeath, sure some planetary madness reigns amongst
our wives; the dogs-star never sets, and the moon's horns are fallen on our
heads.


COLIN MACLEOD enters. Colin. The good time o'day to you, good Master Mortimer.


Mort. Well, Colin, what is the news at your house?


Colin. Nay, no great spell of news, good faith; aw things with us gang on
after the auld sort. I Am weary of my life amongst 'em; the murrain take 'em
all, sike a family of free-booters, Master Mortimer; an I speak a word to 'em,
or preach up a little needful economy, hoot! the whole clan is up in arms. I
may speak it in your ear, an' the de'el himsell was to turn housekeeper, he
could na' pitch upon a fitter set; fellows of all trades, countries and
occupations; a ragamuffin crew; the very refuse of the mob, that canna' count
past two generations without a gibbet in their scutcheon.


Mort. Ay, Colin, things are miserably changed since your old master died.


Colin. Ah, Master Mortimer, it makes my heart drop blude to think how much
good counsel I have cast away upon my Lord; in faith I hanna' stinted him o'that;
I gee'd him rules and maxims of good husbandry in plenty; but aw in vain; the
dice have deafen'd him.


Mor. Yes, and destroyed; his head, heart, happiness, are gone to ruin; the
least a gamester loses, is his money.


Colin. Ecod and that is no trifle in his case: last night's performances made
no small hole in that.


Mort. Whence learn you that?


Colin. From little Napthali of St. Mary Axe: when a man borrows money of a
Jew, it is a presumption no Christian can be found to lend him any.


Mort. Is your Lord driven to such wretched shifts?


Colin. Hoot! know you not that every losing gamester has his Jew? He is your
only doctor in a desperate case; when the regulars have brought you to Death's
door, the quack is invited to usher you in.


Mort. Your Jew, Colin, in the present case, savours more of the lawyer than
the doctor; for I take if he makes you sign and seal as long as you have
effects.


Colin. You Have hit the nail of the head; my Lord will sign to any thing;
there is bonds, and blanks, and bargains, and promisary notes, and a damned
sight of rogueries, depend on it. Ecod he had a bundle for his breakfast, as big
as little Napthali could carry; I would it had braken his bock; and yet he is
na' half the knave of yon fat fellow upon Fish-street Hill.


Mort. Bridgemore, you mean.


Colin. Ay, ay, he is at the bottom of the plot; this little Hebrew's only his
jackall.


Mort. I comprehend you; Bridgemore, under cover of this Jew, has been playing
the usurer with Lord Abberville, and means to pay his daughter's portion in
parchment; this must be prevented.


Colin. You may spare your pains for that; the match is off.


Mort. Hey-day, friend Colin, what has put off that?


Colin. Troth, Master Mortimer I canna' satisfy you on that head; but
yesternight the job was done; methought the business never had a kindly aspect
from the first.


Mort. Well, as my Lord has got rid of Miss, I think he may very well spare her
fortune.


Colin. Odzooks, but that is no reason he should lose his own.


Mort. That, Colin, may be past my power to hinder; yet even that shall be
attempted: find out the Jew that Bridgemore has employed, and bring him hither,
if you can.


Colin. Let me alone for that; there never was a Jew since Samson's time that
Colin could na' deal with; an' he hangs bock, and will na' follow kindly,
troth, I Will lug him to you by the ears; ay, will I, and his Master the fat
fellow into the bargain.


Mort. No, no, leave me to deal with Bridgemore; I Will scare away that
cormorant; if the son of my noble friend will be undone, it never shall be said
he fell without an effort on my part to save him.

[Exit.
Colin. By Heaven you speak that like a noble Gentleman. Ah, Master Mortimer,
in England, he that wants money, wants every thing; in Scotland now, few have
it, but every one can do without it.

[Exit Colin.
An Apartment in BRIDGEMORE's House. BRIDGEMORE and DR. DRUID. Bridge. But what
is all this to me, Doctor? while I have a good house over my head, what care I
if the Pyramids of Egypt were sunk into the earth? London, thank Heaven, will
serve my turn.


Dr. Druid. Ay, ay, look ye, I never said it was'nt coot enough for them that
live in it.


Bridge. Good enough! why what is like it? where can you live so well?


Dr. Druid. No where, coot truth, it is all cooks shops and putchers shambles;
your very streets have savoury names; your Poultry, your Pye-corner, and
Pudding-lane, your Bacon-alley, and Fish-street Hill here; of my oord, the Map
of London, would furnish out an admirable pill of fare for a Lord-Mayor's
dinner.


Bridge. Well, Doctor, I Am contented with Fish-street Hill; you may go seek for
lodgings yonder in the ruins Of Palmyra.


Dr. Druid. Ruins indeed! what are all your new buildings, up and down yonder,
but ruins? Improve your town a little further, and you will drive every man of
sense out of it; pless us, and save us, bye and bye not a monument of antiquity
will be left standing from London-stone to Westminster Hall.


Bridge. And if the Commissioners of paving would mend the streets with one,
and present the other as a nuisance, bone setters and lawyers would be the only
people to complain.


Dr. Druid. Down with 'em then at once, down with every thing noble and
venerable and ancient amongst you; turn the Tower of London into a Pantheon,
make a new Adelphi of the Savoy, and bid adieu to all ages but your own; you
will then be no more in the way of deriving dignity from your progenitors, than
you are of transmitting it to your posterity.


Bridge. Well, Doctor, well, leave me my opinion and keep your own; you have a
veneration for rust and cobwebs, I am for brushing them off wherever I meet
them; we are for furnishing our shops and warehouses with good profitable
commodities; you are for storing 'em with all the monsters of the creation: I
much doubt if we could serve you with a dried rattlesnake, or a stuffed
alligator, in all the purlieus of Fish-street Hill.


Dr. Druid. A stuffed alligator! a stuffed alderman would be sooner had.


Bridge. May be so, and let me tell you an antiquarian is as much to seek in
the city of London, as an alderman would be in the ruins of Herculaneum: every
man after his own way, that is my maxim: you are for the paltry ore; I am for
the pure gold; I dare be sworn now, you are as much at home amongst the snakes
and serpents at Don Saltero's as I am with the Jews and jobbers at Jonathan's.


Dr. Druid. Coot truth, Mr. Pridgemore, it is hard to say which collection is
the most harmless of the two.


MRS. BRIDGEMORE enters. I Am out of patience with you, Mr. Bridgemore, to see
you stir no brisker in this business; with such a storm about your ears, you
stand as idle as a Dutch sailor in a trade wind.


Bridge. Truly, love, till you come in, I heard nothing of the storm.


Mrs. Bridge. Recollect the misadventure of last night, the wickedness of that
strumpet you have harbored in your house; that viper, which would never have
had strength to sting, had not you warmed it in your bosom.


Dr. Druid. Faith and truth now, I hav'nt heard better reasoning from an ooman
this many a day; you shall know Mr. Pridgemore, the viperous species love
warmth; their sting, look ye, is then more venomous; but draw their teeth, and
they are harmless reptiles; the conjurors in Persia play a thousand fancies and
fagaries with 'em.


Bridge. But I Am no Persian, Doctor.


Mrs. Bridge. No, nor conjuror neither; you would not else have been the dupe
thus of a paltry girl.


Dr. Druid. A girl, indeed! why all the European world are made the dupes of
girls; the Asiatics are more wise; saving your presence now, I Have seen a
Turkish Pacha or a Tartar Chan rule threescore, ay, three hundred wives, with
infinite more ease and quiet, than you can manage one.


Mrs. Bridge. Manage your butterflies, your bats and beetles, and leave the
government of wives to those who have 'em: we stand on British ground as well
as our husbands; Magna Charta is big enough for us both; our bill of divorce is
a full match for their bill of rights at any time: we have our Commons, Doctor,
as well as the men, and I believe our privileges are as well managed here at
St. Paul's, as their's are yonder at St. Stephen's.


Dr. Druid. Your privileges, Mrs. Pridgemore, are not to be disputed by any in
this company; and if Miss is as well instructed in here is, I wish my Lord
Abberville joy of his release; that is all.

[exit.
LUCINDA enters. What did the fellow say? who sent that old mummy hither?


Bridge. He came upon a qualifying message from Lord Abberville, as I believe;
but it is such an extravagant old blade, he got amongst the pyramids of Egypt,
before he could well bring it out.


Mrs. Bridge. I would he was there, and his pupil with him: don't you see what
a condition our poor girl is thrown into?


Luc. I into a condition! No; they shall never have to say they threw me into a
condition: I may be angry, but I scorn to own I Am disappointed.


Bridge. That Is right, child, sure there are more men in the world, besides
Lord Abberville.


Luc. Law, papa! your ideas are so gross, as if I cared for any of the sex, if
he had not singled her out from all women kind; but it was ever thus; she is born
to be my evil genius; sure the men are mad -- Tyrrel, Lord Abberville -- one
touched my heart, the other wounds my pride.


Bridge. Why, ay, there is a fine estate, a noble title, great connections,
powerful interest.


Luc. Revenge is worth them all; drive her but out of doors, and marry me to a
convent.


Bridge. But let us keep some show of justice; this may be all a frolic of Lord
Abberville's; the girl, perhaps, is innocent.


Luc. How can that be, when I am miserable?


Mrs. Bridge. Come, she is been suffered in your house too long; had I been
mistress, she should have quitted it last night upon the instant: would she had
never entered it.


Bridge. There you make a bad wish, Mrs. Bridgemore; she has proved the best
feather in my wing; but call her down; go, daughter, call her down.


Luc. I Will send her to you; nothing shall prevail with me to speak to her, or
look upon the odious creature more.

[Exit.
Mrs. Bridge. What is it you are always hinting at about this girl? she is the
best feather in your wing. Explain yourself.


Bridge. I cannot; you must excuse me; it is better you should never know it.


Mrs. Bridge. Why, where is the fear; what can you have to dread from a
destitute girl, without father, and without friend?


Bridge. But is she really without father? was I once well assured of that --
But hush! my daughter's here -- Well, where is Miss Aubrey?


LUCINDA enters followed by a MAID SERVANT. Luc. The bird is flown.


Bridge. Hey-day, gone off!


Mrs. Bridge. That Is flat conviction.


Bridge. What have you there? a letter?


Luc. She found it on her table.


Bridge. Read it, Lucy.


Luc. I beg to be excused, Sir; I don't choose to touch her nasty scrawl.


Bridge. Well then, let us see; I Will read it myself.

Reads. Sir, Since neither Lord Abberville's testimony, nor my most solemn
protestations can prevail with you to believe me innocent, I prevent Miss
Bridgemore's threatened dismission by withdrawing myself for ever from your
family: how the world will receive a destitute defenseless orphan I am now to
prove; I enter on my trial without any armor but my innocence; which, though
insufficient to secure to me the continuance of your confidence, will, by the
favor of Providence, serve, I hope, to support me under the loss of it.

Augusta Aubrey.


So! she is elop'd. --


Mrs. Bridge. Ay, this is lucky; there is an end of her: this makes it her own
act and deed; give me the letter, go, you need not wait. (to the servant.)


Serve. Madam!


Luc. Don't you hear? leave the room.


Serve. Pray don't be angry; I beg to speak a word to you.


Luc. Go, go, another time; I Am busy.


Serve. I Have done a wicked thing, and if I don't discharge my heart, 'twill
break, it is so full.


Mrs. Bridge. What have you done? speak out.


Serve. Why I have been the means of ruining an innocent person, for such Miss
Aubrey is.


Bridge. How so? go on.


Serve. 'Twas I that brought Lord Abberville last night into her chamber,
unknown to her; I thought it was a little frolic to surprise her; but when I
heard her scream, I was alarmed and ran and listened at the door.


Luc. Well, and what then?


Serve. Why then I heard her chide him, and desire him to be gone; yes, and but
just before you came up stairs, I heard the poor young Lady reproach him
bitterly for his baseness in making love to her, when he was engaged to you,
Madam: indeed, she is as innocent as the babe unborn.


Luc. Go your way for a simpleton, and say no more about the matter.


Serve. To be sure I was a simpleton to do as I did; but I should never survive
it, if any mischief was to follow.

[Ex.
Bridge. What Is to be done now?


Mrs. Bridge. What Is to be done? why let her take her course; guilty or not,
what matters it, if every man who offers for your daughter, is to turn aside
and follow after her?


Luc. True, where is the woman who can pardon that? indeed, had she been really
criminal, I could have endured her better, for then I had had one
qualification, which she had wanted; now she piques me every way.


A SERVANT enters and speaks. Lord Abberville, Madam, desires to be admitted to
say a word to you.


Luc. Who? Lord Abberville?


Mrs. Bridge. Oh, by all means admit him; now, Lucy, show yourself a woman of
spirit; receive him, meet his insulting visit with becoming contempt: Come, Mr.
Bridgemore, let us leave them to themselves.

[Exeunt Mr. and Mrs. BRIDGEMORE.
Luc. Ahem, now, pride, support me!


LORD ABBERVILLE enters to her. L. Abb. Miss Bridgemore, your most obedient; I
come, Madam, on a penitential errand, to apologize to you and Miss Aubrey for
the ridiculous situtation in which I was surprised last night.


Luc. Cool, easy villain! (aside)


L. Abb. I dare say you laughed most heartily after I was gone.


Luc. Most incontinently-incomparable assurance! (aside.


L. Abb. Well, I forgive you; 'twas ridiculous enough; a foolish frolic, but
absolutely harmless be assured: I Am glad to find you no longer serious about it
-- But where is Miss Aubrey, pray?


Luc. You Will find her probably at your own door, she is gone from hence.


SERVANT enters and speaks. Mr. Tyrrel, Madam.


Luc. Show him in, pray -- My Lord, you have no objection.


L. Abb. None in life; I know him intimately; but if you please, I Will take my
leave; you may have business -- Curse on it, he is the Lady's lover. (aside.


Luc. Nay, I insist upon your staying -- Now malice stand my friend! -- Good
morning to you, Sir, you're welcome to town.


TYRREL enters. Tyr. I thank you -- I am wrong I believe; your servant should
not have shown me in here: it is with Miss Aubrey I request to speak.


Luc. Lord Abberville, you can direct Mr. Tyrrel to Miss Aubrey: she has left
this family, Sir.


Tyr. Madam -- My Lord -- I beg to know -- I don't understand --


L. Abb. Nor I, upon my soul: was ever any thing so malicious? (aside.


Luc. My Lord, why don't you speak? Mr. Tyrrel may have particular business
with Miss Aubrey.


L. Abb. Why do you refer to me? How should I know any thing of Miss Aubrey?


Luc. Nay, I ask pardon; perhaps Mr. Tyrrel's was a mere visit of compliment.


Tyr. Excuse me, Madam; I confess it was an errand of the most serious sort.


Luc. Then it is cruel not to tell him where you have placed her.


Tyr. Placed her!


L. Abb. Ay, placed her indeed? For Heaven's sake, what are you about?


Luc. Nay, I have done, my Lord; but after last night's fatal discovery, I
conceived you would no longer affect any privacy as to your situation with Miss
Aubrey.


Tyr. What did you discover last night, Madam, tell me; I have an interest in
the question.


Luc. I Am sorry for it, for then you will not be pleased to hear that she admits
Lord Abberville, by night, into her bedroom; locks him up in it, and on
detection the next morning, openly avows her guilt, by eloping to her galant.


Tyr. What do I hear? My Lord, my Lord, if this is true --


L. Abb. What then? what if it is? must I account to you? who makes you my
inquisitor?


Tyr. Justice, humanity, and that control which virtue gives me over it is
opposers: if more you would, with anguish I confess my heart unhappily was
placed on her whom you have ruined; now you will not dispute my right.


L. Abb. This is no place to urge your right; I shall be found at home.


Tyr. I Will wait upon you there.

[Exit Tyrrel.
L. Abb. Do so -- your servant -- Miss Bridgemore, I am infinitely your debtor
for this agreeable visit; I leave you to the enjoyment of your many amiable
virtues, and the pleasing contemplation of what may probably ensue from the
interview you have provided for me with Mr. Tyrrel.

[Exit.
Luc. Ha, ha, ha! I must be less or more than woman, if I did not relish this
retaliation.


END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
The Street, with a distant View of a Square. COLIN alone. AH, Colin, you are a
prodigal; a thriftless loon thou'st been, that could na' keep a little pelf to
thysall when thou had got it; now thou may gang in this poor geer to thy
live's end, and worse too for aught I can tell; 'faith, mon, 'twas a smeart
little bysack of money thou had scraped together, an the best part of it had
na' been laft amongst thy kinsfolk, in the Isles of Skey and Mull; muckle good
may it do the weams of them that have it! There was Jamie Mac Gregor and Sawney
Mac Nab, and the two braw lads of Kinruddin, with old Charley Mac Dougall, my
mother's first husband's second cousin: by my sol I could na' see such near
relations, and gentlemen of fich ancient families gang upon bare feet, while I
rode a horseback: I had been na true Scot, an I could na' ge'en a countryman a
good laft upon occasion (as he is going out, Miss Aubrey enters.)


Aug. That house is Mr. Mortimer's; and yet I cannot resolve to go to it: to
appeal to Tyrrel is a dangerous step; it plunges him again in my unprosperous
concerns, and puts his life a second time in danger; still, still I know not
how to let him think me guilty: wretched, unfriended creature that I am, what
shall I do? (as she is going out, Colin advances.)


Colin. Haud a bit, lassie, you that are bewailing; what is your malady?


Aug. Sir! Did you speak to me?


Colin. Troth, did I; I were loath to let affliction pass beside me and not ask
it what it ailed.


Aug. Do you know me then?


Colin. What need have I to know you? An you can put me in the way to help you,
is not that enough?


Aug. I thank you: if I have your pity, that is all my case admits of.


Colin. Wha' can tell that? I may be better than I seem: as sorry a figure as I
cut, I have as good blude in my veins, and as free of it too, as any Breton in
the land; troth, an you be of my country, Madam, you may have heard as much.


Aug. I do not question it; but I am not of Scotland.


Colin. Well, well, an' if you had the de'il a bit the worse should I ha liked
you for it; but it was not your lot; we did na' make oursalls; Paradise itsal
would na' hald all mankind, nor Scotland neither; and let me tell you there is
na braver or more ancient people underneath Heaven's canopy; no, nor a nation
of the terrestrial globe wha have more love and charity for one another.


Aug. Well, Sir, you seem to wish to do me service: I Have a letter here; I
cannot well deliver it myself; if you are of this neighborhood, perhaps you
know the house of Mr. Mortimer.


Colin. Hoot! hoot! I ken him well; I came fra' thence but now.


Aug. Will you take charge of this, and give it as directed? The Gentleman will
be found at Mr. Mortimer's.


Colin. To Francis Tyrrel, Esquire -- Ah! an it is thereabouts you point,
gadzooks, your labor's lost; you may even wear the willow as they say, for by
my troth he will play the loon wi' you.


Aug. Is that his character?


Colin. No; but he canna' well be true to two at the same time.


Aug. His heart's engaged it seems: what is the Lady's name?


Colin. Woe worth her name! I canna' recollect it now; an it had been a
Scottish name, I should na let it slip so; but I Have no mighty memory for your
English callings; they do na dwell upon my tongue: out on it! it is with a great
fat lubber yonder in the city that she dwells; a fellow with a paunch below his
gullet, like the poke of a pelican; and now I call to mind, it is Aubrey is her
name; ay, ay, it is Aubrey; she is the happy woman.


Aug. Is she the happy woman? Well, Sir, if you will deliver that letter into Mr.
Tyrrel's hands; there is no treason in it against Miss Aubrey; she herself is
privy to the contents.


Colin. You need na' doubt but I shall hand it to him; I were a sorry child an
I could grudge you that: where shall I bring his answer?


Aug. It requires none.


Colin. But an he craves to know your house, where mun I say you dwell?


Aug. I have no house, no home, no father, friend, or refuge, in this world;
nor do I at this moment, fainting as I am with affliction and fatigue, know
where to find a hospitable door.


Colin. Come with me then, and I will show you one; ah! woe is me, we hanna'
all cold hearts, that occupy cold climates: I were a graceless loon indeed,
when Providence have done so much for me, an' I could not pay bock a little to a
fellow creature.


Aug. Who you may be I know not, but that sentiment persuades me I may trust
you; know, in this wretched person you behold her whom you think the envied,
the beloved Miss Aubrey.


Colin. Miss Aubrey! you Miss Aubrey! His presence be about us! And has that
great fat fellow in the city turned his bock upon you? Out on him, ugly hound,
his stomach be his grave! I could find in my heart to stick my dirk into his
weam.


Aug. Have patience; it is not he, Lord Abberville's the source of my
misfortunes.


Colin. Ah, woe the while the more's his shame, I Would rather hear that he were
dead.


Aug. Do not mistake affliction for disgrace; I Am innocent.


Colin. I see it in your face: would I could say as much of him.


Aug. You know him then.


Colin. Ay, and his father before him: Colin Macleod's my name.


Aug. Colin Macleod!


Colin. What do you start at? Troth, there is no shame upon it; it is naught a bit
the worse for my wear; honesty was aw my patrimony, and by my sol I hanna spent
it: I serve Lord Abberville, but not his vices.


Aug. I readily believe you; and to convince you of it, put me, I beseech you,
into some present shelter, till the labor of my hands can keep me, and hold me
up but for a breathing sp^ce, till I can rally my exhausted spirits and learn
to struggle with the world.


Colin. Ay, will I by my sol, so Heaven gives life, and woe betide the child
that does you wrong! I be na smuthly spoken, but you shall find me true. -- And
look, the first door that I cast my ey'n upon, I ken the name of Macintosh;
troth, it is a gudely omen and prognostic: the Macintoshes and Macleods are aw
of the same blood fra' long antiquity: had we searched aw the town we could na'
find a better. (Knocks at the door.) Odzooks, fear nothing, damsel, an she be a
true Macintosh, you need na' doubt a welcome. (MRS. MACINTOSH comes to the
door.) Good day to you, Madam, is your name Macintosh pray you?


Mrs. Mac. It is; what are your commands?


Colin. Nay, hau'd a bit, good child, we command naught; but being, do you see, a
Scottish kinsman of yours, Colin Macleod by name, I crave a lodgment in your
house for this poor lassie. -- Good troth you need na squant at her so closely;
there is naught to be suspected; and though she may na' boast so long a pedigree
as you and I do, yet for an English family, she is of no despicable house; and
as for reputation, good faith the lamb is not more innocent: respecting mine
own fall I will na' vaunt, but an' you have any doubts, you need na' gang a
mighty length to satisfy 'em; I Am no impostor.


Mrs. Mac. I see enough to satisfy me; she is a perfect beauty: -- pray, young
Lady, walk in; pray walk up stairs, you are heartily welcome; lackaday, you
seem piteously fatigued.


Aug. Indeed I want repose.


Colin. Rest you awhile; I Will deliver your letter and call on you anon.


Aug. I thank you.

[Enters the house.
Mrs. Mac. Heavens, what a lovely girl!


Colin. Haud you a bit, you have done this kindly, cousin Macintosh, but were na'
come a bagging, do you see; here, take this money in your hand and let her want
for naught.


Mrs. Mac. You may depend upon my care.


Colin. Ay, ay, I ken'd you for a Macintosh at once; I am na' apt to be
mistaken in any of your clan; and it is a comely presence that you have; troth
it is the case with aw of you; the Macintoshes are a very personable people.

[Exit.
Mrs. Mac. Another of my Scottish cousins -- Oh, this new name of mine is a
most thriving invention; a rare device to hook in customers; when I was plain
Nan Rawlins of St. Martin's parish, scarce a yard of ferret could I fell to
club a prentice's hair on a Sunday morning; now there is not a Knight of the
Thistle that does not wear my green paduasoy across his shoulder, nor a Mac
passes my shop who does not buy snuff and black ribband of his kinswoman; of
such consequence is it to have a good name in this world.

[Exit.
A room in LORD ABBERVILLE's house. LORD ABBERVILLE enters, followed by several
servants. L. Abb. You are a most unreasonable set of gentry truly; I have but
one Scotchman in my family, and you are every one of you, cook, valet, butler,
up in arms to drive him out of it.


La Jeu. And with reason, my Lord; Monsieur Colin is a grand financier; but he
has a little of what we call la malady du pays; he is too oeconomique; it is
not for the credit of mi Lord Anglois to be too oeconomique.


L. Abb. I think, La Jeunesse, I have been at some pains to put that out of
dispute; but get you gone all together, and send the fellow to me; I begin to
be as tired of him as you are. -- (Exeunt servants.) -- His honesty is my
reproach; these rascals flatter while they rob me: it angers me that one, who
has no stake, no interest in my fortune, should husband it more frugally than I
who am the owner and the sufferer: in short, he is the glass in which I see
myself, and the reflection tortures me; my vices have deformed me; gaming has
made a monster of me.


LA JEUNESSE reenters. L. Abb. Well, is the savage coming?


La Jeu. He is only turning his cravat, my Lord, and will be here immediately.


L. Abb. Leave me. (Exit LE JEUNE. COLIN enters.) Come hither, Colin; what is
this I hear of you?


Colin. Saving your presence I should guess a pratty many lies; 'twill mostly
be the case when companions in office give characters one of another.


L. Abb. But what is he, whom nobody speaks well of? You are given up on all
hands.


Colin. And so must truth itsall, when the de'el turns historian.


L. Abb. You Have been applauded for your bluntness; it is no recommendation to
me, Macleod; nor shall I part from all my family to accommodate your spleen:
from the stable-boy to my own valet, there is not a domestic in this house gives
you a good word.


Colin. Nor ever will, till I prefer their interest to yours; hungry curs will
bark; but an' your Lordship would have us regale our friends below stairs,
while you are feasting yours above, gadzooks, I have a pratty many countrymen
in town, with batter appetites than purses, will applaud the regulation.


L. Abb. It Is for such purses and such appetites you would be a fit provider;
it is for the latitude of the Highlands, not for the meridian of London, your
narrow scale of economy is laid down.


Colin. Economy is no disgrace; it is batter living on a little, than outliving
a grate deal.


L. Abb. Well, Sir, you may be honest, but you are troublesome; my family are
one and all in arms against you; and you must know, Colin Macleod, I Have great
objection to a rebellion either in a family or state, whatever you and your
countrymen may think of the matter.


Colin. My Lord, my Lord; when you have shad the blude of the offenders, it is
na' generous to revive the offense: as for mine awn particular, Heaven be my
judge, the realm of England does na' haud a heart more loyal than the one I
strike my hand upon.


DOCTOR DRUID enters to them. L. Abb. So, Doctor, what is the news with you? --
Well, Colin, let me hear no more of these complaints; don't be so considerate
of me -- and hark'e, if you was not quite so parsimonious to yourself, your
appearance would be all the better.


Colin. Troth, I Would be better habited, but I canna' afford it.


L. Abb. Afford it, sirrah? don't I know you have money enough, if you had but
spirit to make use of it?


Colin. True; but I fain would keep a little together, do you see, lest you
should not.

[Exit.
Dr. Druid. Plessing upon us, how the man prates and prattles! 'Twas but this
morning he was differing and disputing truly about pedigrees and antiquities,
though I can count forty and four generations from the grandmother of Saint
Winifred, as regularly as a Monk can tell his beads.


L. Abb. Leave your generations to the worms, Doctor, and tell me if you
carried my message to Bridgemore -- But why do I ask that? when I myself am
come from putting the finishing hand to that treaty: and really if young women
will keep companions, who are handsomer than themselves, they mustn't wonder if
their lovers go astray.


Dr. Druid. Ah my Lord Apperville, my Lord Apperville, you have something there
to answer for.


L. Abb. Preach not, good sixty-five, thy cold continence to twenty-three; the
stars are in my debt one lucky throw at least; let them bestow Miss Aubrey, and
I Will cancel all that is past. (A Servant delivers a letter) what have we here?
-- from Tyrrel I suppose -- no, it is from a more peaceable quarter; my
commodious Mrs. Macintosh. (Reads) -- "Chance has thrown in my way a girl, that
quite eclipses your Miss Summers: come to me without loss of time, lest the bird
should be on the wing." -- What shall I do? I have but little stomach to the
business. Aubrey is my goddess, and it is downright heresy to follow any other.
(Another Servant enters.)


Serve. My Lord, a person without says he comes with a recommendation from Sir
Harry Gamble.


L. Abb. What sort of a person?


Serve. A little ugly fellow; I believe he is a Jew.


L. Abb. That Is right, I had forgot: my Jew is fairly jaded; Sir Harry's
probably is better trained; so let me see him: who is in the antichamber?


Serve. There are several persons waiting to speak with your Lordship; they have
called a great many times.


L. Abb. Ay, ay, they come for money, he alone comes with it; therefore conduct
that little ugly fellow as you call him to my closet, and bid those other
people call again. [Exit Servant.] Doctor, if any of my particulars are
importunate to see me, don't let 'em interrupt me here; tell 'em I Am gone to
Mrs. Mackintosh's; they will know the place, and my business in it.

[Exit.
Dr. Druid. They may guess that without the gift of divination truly: Ah! this
passion is the prejudice of education! he may thank France and Italy for this:
I would have carried him through Ingria, Esthonia, and Livonia; through
Moldavia, Bessarabia, Bulgaria, Thrace; from the Gulf of Finland to the
Streights of the Dardanelles. It Is a chance if he had seen a human creature in
the whole course of his travels.


TYRREL enters to him. Tyr. Doctor, forgive me this intrusion; where is Lord
Abberville? his servants deny him to me, and I Have business with him of a
pressing sort.


Dr. Druid. Business indeed!


Tyr. Yes, business, Sir: I beg you to inform me where to find him.


Dr. Druid. I take it, Mr. Tyrrel, you are one of his particulars, therefore I
tell you he is gone to Mrs. Macintosh's; a commodious sort of a pody, who
follows one trade in her shop, and another in her parlour.


Tyr. Yes, yes, I know her well, and know his business there.


Dr. Druid. Pleasure is all his business; I take for granted he finds some
gratification in his visits there.


Tyr. Yes, the gratification of a devil, the pleasure of defacing beauty and
despoiling innocence, of planting everlasting misery in the human heart for one
licentious transitory joy: it is there he holds his riots, thither he is gone to
repeat his triumphs over my unhappy Aubrey, and confirm her in her shame.


Dr. Druid. Ay, I suppose Miss Aubrey is the reigning passion now.


Tyr. Cursed be his passions, withered be his powers! Oh, Sir, she was an angel
once: such was the graceful modesty of her deportment, it seemed as if the
chastity, which now so many of her sex throw from them, centered all with her.


Dr. Druid. I Have told too much; this lad's as mad as he -- well, Mr. Tyrrel, I
can say but little in the case; women and politics I never deal in; in other
words I abhor cuckoldom, and have no passion for the pillory.

[Exit.
COLIN enters. Colin. Gang your gait for an old smoak-dried piece of
goat's-flesh (shuts the door.) Now we are alone, young Gentleman, there is
something for your private reading. (Delivers a letter.)


Tyr. What do I see? Miss Aubrey's hand! Why does she write to me? Distraction,
how this racks my heart!


Colin. Ay, and mine too -- ecod, it gave it sike a pull, I canna for the sol
of me, get it bock into it is place again: good truth, you will find it but a
melancholy tale.


Tyr. (reads) "I am the martyr of an accident, which never will find credit;
under this stroke I cannot conceal a wish that Mr. Tyrrel would not give me up;
but as his single opposition to the world's reproach might be as dangerous to
him, as it must be Ineffectual to me, I earnestly advise him to forget the
unfortunate Augusta." -- What am I to conclude? The paper looks like innocence,
the words as soft as modesty could utter. -- The martyr of an accident! She
calls it accident; why that is no crime. Alas! it might be accident, which threw
temptation in her way, but voluntary guilt, which yielded to the tempter: of
him she makes no mention. Pray, Sir, inform me; you have seen this Lady --


Colin. I have.


Tyr. Discoursed with her --


Colin. I have.


Tyr. In that discourse do you recollect if she named Lord Abberville?


Colin. I recollect she said he was the source of her misfortunes.


Tyr. Ay, did she say so much? That Is guilty beyond doubt.


Colin. You're right; it carries a damned guilty look: I would na take his
fortune to father his faults.


Tyr. Why you then give him up. Oh! it is too palpable! But, pray, did she
herself give you this letter for me?


Colin. With her own hondes; good faith, the heart within you would ha malted
to have seen the manner of it.


Tyr. That aggravates my torture! Where was it you left her? In what wretched
habitation?


Colin. Hoot! no disparagement upon her habitation; there is naught of
wretchedness about it: odzooks! she is with a Lady of as good a family! -- But
you mun be as close as wax, do you see, you munna mang the secret to my Lord.


Tyr. Well, well, the place --


Colin. Nay, it is hard by; a cousin's of mine own; a comely courteous woman as
you would wish to commune with; one Mrs. Macintosh.


Tyr. 'Sdeath! that confirms it! There, Sir, bring me no more letters: whether
you're dupe or pandar in this business, I desire never to be troubled more.

[Exit.
Colin. Hoot! what the fiend possesses you? What time of the moon is this? The
lad's an errant bedlamite. There Is mischief in the wind; and this same Lord of
mine is at the bottom of it: gadzooks, there goes Master Mortimer; I Will tell
him aw the case, and take his counsel on the whole.

[Exit.
Scene changes to Mrs. MACINTOSH's House. Mrs. MACINTOSH and TYRREL. Mrs. Mac.
Well, Mr. Tyrrel, if you must and will be heard, you must; but pray be short,
my time is precious.


Tyr. So is my peace of mind: you have got a Lady in your house has taken that
from me I never shall recover.


Mrs. Mac. What is it you mean? What Lady have I in my house?


Tyr. Miss Aubrey.


Mrs. Mac. Miss Aubrey! You mistake; I never heard the name.


Tyr. Come, you and I have long been friends: answer me truly, does not Lord
Abberville visit a Lady here?


Mrs. Mac. Well, if he does, what then?


Tyr. Why then that Lady has undone me; she has broke my heart.


Mrs. Mac. Yes; but her name's not Aubrey; my Lord calls her Summers.


Tyr. Let my Lord call her what he will, coin what new name he pleases to elude
my search, still I must see her.


Mrs. Mac. Why you're mad sure to think of such a thing; I thought you knew me
better: violate a trust? No, no, young man, that is not my principle; you see no
Lady here. Why, sure, I Have not maintained an honorable character in the world
till now, to make away with it at last.


Tyr. If you suspect me, stay and be present at our conference.


Mrs. Mac. Yes, and so have my Lord come in and catch us, and a tilting bout
ensue betwixt you; no, Mr. Tyrrel, mine is a sober well conducted family: I Will
have no coroner's inquest come within my doors -- Hush, as I live, here comes
my Lord: dear Tyrrel, be advised, come along with me, and betake yourself out
of his way.


Tyr. No; I Will not seek a quarrel with Lord Abberville, but I cannot fly from
him: go, go, and leave us to each other.

[Exit Mrs. Macintosh.
Lord ABBERVILLE enters. L. Abb. Tyrrel! -- What brings you here? This is no
place of meeting; if you have any explanation to require upon Miss Aubrey's
account, come to my house: I answer nothing here.


Tyr. My Lord, when I Am assured Miss Aubrey is in this house, and see you her
visitor, I can interpret for myself.


L. Abb. Miss Aubrey in this house! You rave.


Tyr. Come, it is in vain; your Scotchman told me so; your Mrs. Macintosh
herself confessed it.


L. Abb. Humph! after all, 'twou'd be a lucky hit, should this be true: it may
be so (aside.)


Tyr. If you require more witnesses to what I say, here comes an indisputable
one, Miss Aubrey herself.


Miss AUBREY enters. Aug. Oh, Mr. Tyrrel, this is generous indeed! Lord
Abberville here too; -- it is what I dreaded. You have mischief in your minds;
but, I beseech you, leave me to my misfortunes, nor cast away one thought upon
a wretch like me.


Tyr. Give me your answer first to these demands. Have you been wronged? Have
you an accusation to prefer against this Lord, or do you acquit him, and submit
with patience to your situation?


Aug. I accuse no one; I submit with patience; I am content to be the only
sufferer in this business, and earnestly entreat you to desist from any
altercation with Lord Abberville on my account.


Tyr. I Am satisfied; and shall religiously obey you: Lord Abberville, I ask
your pardon for this interruption; I never shall repeat it more.


Aug. But are you going?


Tyr. For ever. Dangerous to behold you are; therefore, before my fond my
foolish heart relapses into love, I Will seize the resolution of the moment, and
bid farewell to you for ever.

[Exit.
Aug. Astonishing!


L. Abb. There, Madam, you perceive the love, the honor of that Gentleman.


Aug. Could I have thought this of him? Now I Am truly wretched.


L. Abb. No, Madam, if my purse, my person, my assiduous ardent love can fill
the vacancy his falsehood makes, you have had no loss: dry up your tears, you have
yet a friend; smile only on my wishes.


Aug. No, my Lord, no; you have made me wretched, guilty you shall never make me.


L. Abb. Inexorable girl, will nothing move? Then I Have no longer any terms to
keep: call to mind where you are; in a house where I am master; surrounded by
creatures whom I command; your champion gives you up; resistance is in vain; if
you refuse my favors, Madam, you shall feel my force. (Attempts her.)


Aug. What is it you mean, my Lord? -- Stand off!


MORTIMER enters. Mort. Ay, what is it you mean, my Lord?


L. Abb. Mortimer! 'sdeath, what evil genius conducted you hither?


Mort. (goes to the door.) Nay, my good friend, come in. (COLIN enters.) This
honest man was my conductor: while you, Lord Abberville, in a distinguished
rank are openly assaulting innocence, he, in his humble post is secretly
supporting it. -- If you come under that description, Madam, I am your
defender; if not, I have no further business here.


Aug. Why should I urge my innocence? I am unfortunate, I Am poor: your nephew,
Sir, will tell you that is cause sufficient for abandoning me.


L. Abb. This grows too serious; I scorn to steal that from you half my fortune
could not purchase. I believe you are as innocent as Heaven first formed you;
and to convince the world in what esteem I hold your virtues, here, before
Mortimer, I offer you my hand, and lay my title, rank and fortune, at your feet.


Aug. No, there may be a legal prostitute as well as a licentious one; had you
a world to give, after your base experiment, you cannot offer any thing that I
shall take. You may find others less exceptious; but in a noble family, though
stripped of fortune, there will still be pride.


L. Abb. I see my fate; I see a prepossession in your heart too strong for me
to shake: I plainly perceive that Mr. Tyrrel can offend with more impunity than
I can; however, Mortimer, you are a man of honor; I resign Miss Aubrey into
your hands for the present, and shall expect you will avail yourself of no
unfair advantages over me. -- Macleod, I find Miss Aubrey is to thank you for
this seasonable visit of Mr. Mortimer's.

[Exit.
Mort. Come, Madam, you are now my ward; Bridgemore must struggle hard to get
you back again.


Aug. Sir! -- Mr. Mortimer! You Will pardon me, but must I think you serious? If
what you now propose is meant in kindness to me, I must say the world has not
done justice to your character: I have been taught to look upon you as no
friend to our sex in particular.


Mort. Nor am I; your sex have broke treaty with us, passed the bounds betwixt
us, forced into our very taverns, and from being once the glory of my country
are become it is shame.


Aug. But all have not done this --


Mort. Nor am I then at enmity with all; a virtuous individual is of no sex, no
country.


Colin. No country? Hoot! A true North Briton will give up his virtue before his
country at any time.


Aug. Yes and I think it was a partiality to your country rather than to
virtue, which determined you to put me into this house.


Colin. De'il take me now and all may kindred with me, if I knew ought about
the house, more than the name of Macintosh upon the door.


Mort. Time will clear all things up: a general misconception is gone forth; my
nephew I perceive has fallen under it. As for poor Colin, his design in
bringing you hither was more than innocent, depend upon it, it was noble; I
have heard his story and at my request he brings me here: commit yourself
therefore to my protection and rely upon my justice.


Aug. How shall I answer you? Your generosity o'erwhelms me.


Mort. I generous! No, I am a mere voluptuary; I study luxury by principle, and
am as sensual on the side of virtue, as Abberville, or any other fashionable
rake, on that of vice. -- Colin, you will settle matters with your countrywoman
and come to us at my house.

[Exeunt.
Colin. My countrywoman! The fiend a bit! I never will believe she has a drop
of Scottish blude in aw her composition; as I shall answer I never blushed
before for any of the name: there must be something spurious in her genealogy:
I Will have a little serious talk with her on that; I Have got the pedigree of the
Macintoshes at my fingers ends, and if there is ever a flaw in her descent
'twixt this and Noah, gadzooks, I Will wager a hundred pounds I prove her an
impostor.


END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
Fish-street Hill. AUBREY alone. IF Bridgemore has'nt shifted his abode, that
is the house; 'twas there that eighteen years ago I lost a wife, and left an
infant daughter. All-disposing Providence, who have ordained me to this hour,
and through innumerable toils and dangers led me back to this affecting spot, can
it be wondered at, if I approach it with an anxious aching heart, uncertain as
I am if I have still a child or not? What shall I do? If my Augusta's lost,
'twere better I should never enter those ill-omen'd doors; if she survives, how
shall I disclose myself, and tell her she has still a father? Oh, that unknown
and unperceived, I could but catch a sight of her, gaze till I Would gratified my
longing, and till this throbbing might abate! I Will watch the door till somebody
comes out, that I may speak to. (Steps aside.)


COLIN MACLEOD, enters. Colin. The murrain light upon this Fish-street Hill,
wherever it may be: I would it had na got it is name for naught, that I might
fairly small it out, for I am clear bewalder'd. Johnny Grout's house would as
soon be found, as this same Bradgemore's. One cries turn of this hand, one of
that, and the other stares and grins forsooth because I hanna got the modern
gabble on my tongue, but speak the language in it is ancient purity. Hoot! this
mon seems of a batter sort, and peradventure would concede an answer. Speed
you, Gentleman, I pray you whuch way leads to Fish-street Hill?


Aub. You are there already; this is Fish-street Hill.


Colin. Gadzooks! and that is the reason I could find it na' where alse. Ken you
one Bradgemore's may I ask?


Aub. He had used to live in yonder house with the great gates; but it is many
years since I have been in England.


Colin. In Faith, you need na' tell me that; I apprehend as much from your
civility.


Aub. Give me leave now in my turn to ask you a few questions.


Colin. With aw my heart; you have good right; you may interrogate me freely.


Aub. You are acquainted with this Bridgemore. --


Colin. I am.


Aub. And with his family --


Colin. I am.


Aub. And what does it consist of?


Colin. Troth, of a spouse and daughter.


Aub. Are they all?


Colin. Ay, and enough in aw good reason; the de'il, Sir, in his vengeance need
na' add a third.


Aub. But to be serious, tell me I beseech you, do you know of no one else in
Mr. Bridgemore's family?


Colin. Of none.


Aub. What do I hear? Pray recollect yourself: you don't seem to know his
house; perhaps you are not well acquainted with his family.


Colin. Aw that he owns I know; what base begotten brats he may have sculking
up and down in holes and corners, troth, I cannot pretend to say. -- These city
cattle sometimes will break pasture.


Aub. You misconceive me, honest friend; has no young Lady of the name of
Aubrey come within your knowledge?


Colin. Ay, ay, poor lassie, she once lived with Bradgemore; the worse luck
here is, but that is over; she has got her liberty; she is now released.


Aub. I understand you -- She is dead. --


Colin. Dead! Heaven forefend! An you would give me time I would ha told you
she is released from yon fat fellow's tyranny; na more: out on him, filthy
porpoise, aw the bowels in his belly, though he has got good store, dunna contain
one grain of pity; troth, with his good will she might have starved and perished
in the streets.


Aub. What is it you tell me? In the same breath you bring my hopes to life and
murder them again. -- Starved in the streets? I thought she had an affluent
fortune.


Colin. In virtue, Sir, naught else, and that will not pass current for a
dinner. Zooks, an I mysall, by Heaven's good providence, had na' stapt in upon
the very nick of time, my life upon it she had been lost.


Aub. Come to my arms then, whosoe'er thou art, and wonder not, for thou have
saved my daughter.


Colin. Daughter! Gadzooks, you make my heart jump to my laps for joy. Are you
Miss Aubrey's father?


Aub. I am her father.


Colin. An if I Would found mine awn I could na' been more happy. Wall, wall, I
hope you will merit your good fortune; by my sol you have got an angel of a child
-- But where have you been buried aw the while? for we believed you dead.


Aub. You shall hear all my story, but this is no fit place to tell it in:
satisfy me first if my poor child is safe.


Colin. Fear naught, she is safe with Master Mortimer; I last her but this
moment.


Aub. Who is Mr. Mortimer?


Colin. Why, Master Mortimer is one who does a thousand noble acts without the
credit of one; his tongue wounds and his heart makes whole; he must be known
and not described: an' you will bait awhile in yonder tavern till I come from
Bradgemore's, I Will accompany you to where your daughter is.


Aub. Agreed! I fear I Have been mistaken in this Bridgemore; three years ago I
consigned to him a cargo of great value from Scanderoon; if he has robbed me --
but till I Have seen my daughter, I Will suspend enquiry. Step with me into yonder
tavern, there we'll concert the means of bringing Bridgemore to an interview at
Mr. Mortimer's. Come, my good benefactor, how fortunate was this meeting! I
long to know to whom I owe this happiness.

[Exeunt.
A Compting-House belonging to BRIDGEMORE. BRIDGEMORE and NAPTHALI. Bridge. And
so, friend Napthali, Lord Abberville has had another tumble.


Napth. A damn one.


Bridge. I Am glad on it; this will wring his fine high hampered carcass to the
quick.


Napth. I'fait, he flings and winces so, I tremble to come near; he look as
dark as India-stock upon a settling day.


Bridge. Ay, ay, the dice are little weapons, but they make deep wounds: what
between those that win and us that lend, he bleeds at both arms. These are the
bonds.


Napth. Take 'em: this is a memorandum of the premium on five tousand, and this
the private contract for extraordinary interest. (Gives several papers.)


Bridge. Good, good, friend Napthali! The bonds give legal interest, and this
doubles it. There, there, lie by and breed (puts them by;) but hark'e-me! Have
brought the abstract of the sale of the Neptune's cargo?


Napth. Aubrey's consignment you mean.


Bridge. The same; but mum! That Is between you and me: close, close, my little
Napthali.


Napth. A broker and betray his principal! That Is not my vay; there is no
senses in that. Here I have make out your account; it is var coot bargain I have
make considering diamond is a drug.


Bridge. Why this tells well; it mounts; the raw silk was old gold; the
carpetting and cottons not amiss; and whuh! the rhubarb!


Napth. Ah, Sir, but vat is that? -- Look at the coffee!


Bridge. Politics account for that; while newspapers bear price, coffee will
hold its own. This rupture with the Russians was in our favor here.


Napth. Ay, ay, a charming stroke: war is a var coot thing; and then the
plague; a blessed circumstance, tank Heaven; a blessed circumstance, coot 7 per
cent.


Bridge. Let me see; altogether it is a thumping sum: It netted forty thousand:
where is the conscience, Napthali, that woudn't strain a point for forty
thousand pounds?


Napth. Oh, it is all fair in the vay of trade; you could not strike a jury out
of Jonathan's that woudn't acquit you. Well, Mr. Bridgemore, any thing more in
my vay?


Bridge. Nothing at present. Did you call at Lloyd's?


Napth. Odso! well recollected! The Seahorse is arrived from Scanderoon, she
that had such high insurances upon her.


Bridge. What do you hear? What passengers come in her? Is she at Stangate Creek?


Napth. No, in the pool; she brought clean bills of health from Leghorn.


Bridge. Go, go; you have given me an ague-fit; the name of Scanderoon sets all
my teeth a chattering. (Exit Napth.) Well, would it had been possible to have
kept my secret from that fellow -- The Seahorse come at last! -- Why be it so.
-- What ails me; what possesses me? If she brings news of Aubrey's death, I Am a
whole man; ay, and a warm one too. -- How now; who is there?


COLIN MACLEOD enters. Colin. Cawdie Macleod, a ragged Highlander, so please
you, a wratched gaelly under savor of your raverence, na better.


Bridge. I recollect you now for one of my Lord Abberville's retinue -- Well,
you have some enquiries to make about Miss Aubrey.


Colin. Ecod, you are close upon the mark.


Bridge. I guest as much; but she is gone from hence, and you may follow.


Colin. Out on thee, ragamuffin; an I were not bound to secrecy, I Would gee thee
sic a pill should lead that weam of thine the de'il a dance (aside)


Bridge. No, Master Colin, your Scotch policy will stand you in no stead this
turn.


Colin. Then I Will forswear my country -- Well, you wull na' have my message
then, I mun gang bock to Master Mortimer, and tell the Turkish trader you will
na' see him.


Bridge. Hold, hold, what trader do you speak of?


Colin. Of one that is com'd a passanger from Scanderoon, aboard the what do you
call the vessel -- the Seahorse I take it.


Bridge. What, who? It is not Aubrey.


Colin. Good faith, I would it was -- the mon is dead.


Bridge. Which man is dead; the passenger or Aubrey?


Colin. Hoot! cannot you think it is Aubrey? -- By your leave, truth, awhile; you
will na' take it much to heart, an I make use of falsehood, to detect itsall
(aside.)


Bridge. I Will go to Mr. Mortimer's; I Will go with all my heart. Give me your
hand; I ask your pardon heartily, my honest friend -- and so he is dead you say
-- you're sure he is dead -- pray, what distemper did he die of?


Colin When a mon's in his grave, what matters whuch distemper laid him there?


Bridge. That Is true, that is true enough. Pray you sit down; I Will just run up
and tell my wife and daughter -- Zooks! suppose I brought them with me; will
they meet a welcome think you?


Colin. Ay, sic a one as you don't look for, take my word.


Bridge. I Am a new man; I walk upon the air.

[Exit hastily.
Colin. Ecod, the project takes; I drew for the cock bird, and have taken the
whole covey.


NAPTHALI enters hastily. Napth. Odds my life, Mr. Bridgemore, I forgot --
Who Is there? -- that devil Scotchman.


Colin. Hold, hold, friend Napthali; you and I munna part. you must keep pace
wi' me to Master Mortimer's.


Napth. To Mr. Mortimer's? Impossible: why I must be at Bank, Sir, I must be at
Jonathan's: I Have forty bargains to settle. I shall have half the Coffee-House
on my back. Would you make me a lame duck?


Colin. Duck, or no duck, ecod, Sir, you must travel.

[Drags him out.
LUCINDA enters. Heyday! I never saw the like before; I cannot think what
ossesses my father; he is intoxicated; quite beside himself with this
confirmation of Mr. Aubrey's death; for my part, I derive no particular
gratification from it; so that Augusta had but one lover less, I care not if
she had forty fathers living: Tyrrel's the man of her heart, and in truth he is
an object worthy any woman's preference; if I could draw him from her 'twou'd
be full retaliation for Lord Abberville -- I Will go to Mortimer's; it is an
untoward visit; but I Will go there.


BRIDGEMORE enters to her. Bridge. Come, bustle, daughter, bustle; get your
cloak on, the coach will be here immediately: but where is my Scotchman? I
forgot to ask the stranger's name.

[Exit hastily.
Mrs. BRIDGEMORE enters. Mrs. Bridge. Where have you hid yourself, my dear?
Come, are you ready? Your father's frantic with impatience.


Luc. I follow you -- Now, Aubrey, it is my turn.

[Exeunt.
Changes to MORTIMER's Library. MORTIMER and TYRREL. Mort. Never tell me,
you have acted like a giddy hot young man; put a few hearsay circumstances
together, shook 'em in an empty noddle, and so produced a compound of nonsense
and suspicion.


Tyr. I plainly see I Have judged too hastily.


Mort. Judged! pooh, I would not give a rush for such a judge: a magpye in a
cage, that chatters out whore to every woman that goes by, will be as often
right as you, and judge as wisely: never talk to me of judging others, till
you have condemned yourself.


Tyr. I do condemn myself; and if Miss Aubrey does not sign my pardon, I am
disposed not only to condemn, but execute.


Mort. Away then, and throw yourself upon the mercy of the court; it is the
fate of bunglers to be asking pardon.

[Exit Tyrrel.
COLIN enters. Colin. Bless you, good Master Mortimer, I hanna slept in your
commission: yon fat fellow upon Fish-Street Hill is on his march with bag and
baggage.


Mort. What mean you? Does he bring his wife with him?


Colin. Troth does he, and his daughter too; the plot is thick'ning you mun
know apace, and yon same buzzard canna spy it out.


Mort. What plot is thick'ning?


Colin. Zooks, mon, you shall behold as pretty a discovery, come the time, as
ever your eyes looked upon; but aw things in their course; I mun gang home the
whilst, but I Will be quickly bock again, do you see.


Mort. Do so, my friend; and hark'e, tell your Lord I beg half an hour's
conversation with him, when and where he pleases.


Colin. I shall do that; but you mun know, while I was on my way, I crossed
upon a Gentleman of no vulgar presence, and considering he has sojourned for a
pretty many years with none but such as we denominate barbarians, as courteous
in his manners as your heart could wish.


Mort. Why that accounts for it. Well, what of him?


Colin. With your leave, Master Mortimer, he will tell you his own errand:
troth, he wull'd me introduce him to you: he is without.


Mort. Admit him.


Colin. Good faith, he has done that for himsall; he is not habituated to our
ceremonies. Master Mortimer, I pray Heaven take you to its holy keeping till I
see you again.

[Exit.
AUBREY enters to MORTIMER. Aub. Sir, your most humble servant. Can you forgive
the intrusion of a stranger?


Mort. A stranger, Sir, is welcome: I cannot always say as much to an
acquaintance.


Aub. I plainly see your experience of mankind by the value you put upon them.


Mort. True, Sir; I Have visited the world from arctic to ecliptic, as a surgeon
does a hospital, and find all men sick of some distemper: the impertinent part
of mankind are so busy, the busy so impertinent, and both so incurably addicted
to lying, cheating and betraying, that their case is desperate: no corrosive
can eat deep enough to bottom the corruption.


Aub. Well, Sir, with such good store of mental provision about you, you may
stand out a siege against society; your books are companions you never can be
tired of.


Mort. Why truly their company is more tolerable, than that of their authors
would be; I can bear them on my shelves, though I should be sorry to see the
impertinent puppies, who wrote them: however, Sir, I can quarrel with my books
too, when they offend my virtue or my reason. -- But I Am taking up your time;
the honest Scotchman, who announc'd you, told me you had something of
importance to communicate to me.


Aub. I have: I Am told I am your debtor, and I came with a design to pay you
down such thanks as your benevolence well merits; but I perceive already you
are one, whom great professions would annoy, whose principle is virtue, and
whose retribution rises from within.


Mort. Pray, Sir, no more of this; if you have any thing to request, propose
it: I Would rather much be told what I may do for you, than reminded of what I may
have done.


Aub. I readily believe you, and according to your humor will address you: I
own you may confer a benefit upon me; it is in your power, Mr. Mortimer, to make
me happiest of all mankind.


Mort. Give me your hand; why now you speak good sense; I like this well: let
us do good, Sir, and not talk about it: show me but how I may give happiness to
you, with innocence to myself, and I shall be the person under obligation.


Aub. This then it is; you have a young person under your protection, a Lady of
the name of Aubrey --


Mort. I have.


Aub. Resign her to my care.


Mort. Sir!


Aub. Put her into my hands: I am rich, Sir, I can support her.


Mort. You're insolent, or grossly ignorant, to think I would betray a trust, a
sacred trust: she is a ward of virtue; it is from want, it is from oppression I
protect Miss Aubrey -- who are you, that think to make a traitor of me?


Aub. Your zeal does honor to you; yet if you persist in it, and spite of my
protest hold out, your constancy will be no virtue; it must take another name.


Mort. What other name, and why? Throw off your mystery, and tell me why.


Aub. Because --


Mort. Ay, let us hear your cause.


Aub. Because I am her father.


Mort. Do I live?


Aub. Yes, in my heart, while I have life or memory; that dear injured girl,
whom you so honorably protect, is my daughter. The overflowings of a father's
heart bless and reward you! You whom I know not, and that poor Highlander, out
of his small pittance, have under Providence prerserv'd my child; whilst
Bridgemore, whom I raised from penury, and trusted with the earnings of my
travel, has abandoned and defrauded her.


Mort. O mother Nature, thou wilt compel me to forswear thee.


Aub. Ah, Sir, you feel the villainy of man in every vein; I am more practiced,
and behold it only with a sigh: Colin and I have laid a little plot to draw
this Bridgemore hither; he believes me dead, and thinks he is to meet a person
at your house, who can relate particulars of my death, in which case it is
clear he means to sink a capital consignment I sent him about three years
since, and turn my daughter on the world.


Mort. Well, let him come; next to the satisfaction I receive in the prosperity
of an honest man, I am best pleased with the confusion of a rascal.


TYRREL enters hastily. Tyr. Dear uncle, on my knees -- what am I doing?


Mort. You thought I was alone.


Tyr. I did.


Mort. And what had you to tell me in such haste?


Tyr. I had a petition to prefer, on which my happiness in life depends.


Aub. I beg I may retire: I interrupt you.


Mort. By no means: I desire you will not stir; let him make his request; if it
is not fit for you to hear, it is not fit for me to grant. Speak out: nay,
never hesitate.


Tyr. What can I ask of you but to confirm my hopes, and make Miss Aubrey mine?


Mort. Was ever the like heard? Pray whence do you derive pretensions to Miss
Aubrey? Tell me in presence of this Gentleman.


Tyr. Not from my own deservings I confess; yet if an ardent, firm,
disinterested passion, sanctified withal by her consent, can recommend me, I am
not without some title.


Mort. Look you there now: this fellow you shall know, Sir, is my nephew; my
sister's son; a child of fortune. -- Hark'e, with what face do you talk of
love, who are not worth a groat?


Tyr. You have allowed me, Sir, to talk of love; openly, beneath your eye I
have solicited Miss Aubrey's consent and gained it; as for my poverty, in that
I glory, for therein I resemble her whom I adore; and I should hope, though
fortune has not favored us, we have not lost our title to the rights of nature.


Mort. Pooh! the rights of nature! While you enjoy it is rights, how will you
both provide against its wants?


Tyr. Your bounty hitherto has let me feel no wants; and should it be your
pleasure to withdraw it, thanks to Providence, the world is not so scantily
provided but it can give to honest industry a daily dinner.


Mort. Fine words! But I Will appeal to this good Gentleman; let him decide
betwixt us.


Aub. In truth, young gentleman, your uncle has good reason on his side; and
was I he, I never would consent to your alliance ^ith Miss Aubrey, till she
brought a fortune large enough to keep you both.


Tyr. These are your maxims I Have no doubt; they only prove to me that you love
money more than beauty, generosity or honor.


Aub. But is your Lady in possession of all these? Let me be made acquainted
with her, and perhaps I may come over to your sentiments.


Mort. Ay, Frank, go, fetch your girl, and let my friend here see her; I Am in
earnest. Upon my honor, nephew, till you have gained this Gentleman's consent,
you never can have mine; so go your ways and let us see if you have interest
enough to bring her hither.


Tyr. Oh! if my fate depends upon her looks, they must be iron hearts that can
withstand 'em.

[Exit.
Aub. The manly and disinterested passion of this youth, while it possesses me
strongly in his favor, gives an assurance of a virtuous conduct in my child;
indeed, Sir, I am greatly taken with your nephew.


Mort. Thank Heaven, the boy as yet has never made me blush; and if he holds
his course, he may take one half of my fortune now, and the other at my death --
But, see, Sir, here your daughter comes.


TYRREL introduces MISS AUBREY. Tyr. You are obeyed: you see the Lady, and
you have nothing now to wonder at, but my presumption.


Aub. To wonder at! I do behold a wonder! It Is her mother's image! Gracious
Providence, this is too much!


Mort. You will alarm her; your disorder is too visible.


Aub. I cannot speak to her; I pray you let me hear her voice.


Aug. Why am I sent for? is your uncle angry? how have I offended? --


Aub. Hush, hush, she speaks; it is she herself, it is my long-lost wife
restored and raised again.


Mort. Pooh! what had I to do to meddle with these matters?


Aug. Why does that Gentleman regard me so attentively? His eyes oppress me;
ask him if he knows me?


Tyr. Sir, if you know this Lady, if you have any tidings to communicate that
touch her happiness, oh! that I could inspire you with my feelings!


Aub. I knew your father, and am a witness to the hard necessity, which tore
him from an infant child, and held him eighteen tedious years in exile from his
native land.


Aug. What do I hear? You was my father's friend? -- The prayer and
intercession of an orphan draw Heaven's righteous benediction down upon you!


Aub. Prepare yourself, be constant. I have news to tell you of your father.


Mort. I cannot stand this; I wish I was any where else.


Tyr. Courage, my dear Augusta; my life upon it, there is happiness in store
for thee.


Aug. Go on, go on.


Aub. You are in an error, you are not an orphan; you have a father, whom,
through toil and peril, through sickness and through sorrow, Heaven has graciously
preserved and blessed at length his unremitting labors with abundance.


Tyr. Did I not tell you this? Bear up.


Aub. Yes, virtuous Augusta, all your sufferings terminate this moment; you may
now give way to love and happiness; you have a father living who approves your
passion, who will crown it with a liberal fortune, who now looks upon you,
speaks to you, embraces you.

[Embraces her.
Mort. There, there; I Am glad it is over. Joy befall you both!


Tyr. See how her color flies -- She Will faint.


Aub. What have I done? Dear innocent, look up.


Aug. Oh, yes, to Heaven with gratitude for these divine vouchsafements -- I
have a father then at last -- Pardon my tears; I Am little used to happiness,
and have not learned to bear it.


Tyr. May all your days to come be nothing else! But look, she changes again --
Help me to lead her into the air.

[Tyrrel and Aubrey lead her out.
Mort. I believe a little air will not be much amiss for any of us. Look at
that girl; it is thus mortality encounters happiness; it is thus the inhabitant
of earth meets that of heaven, with tears, with faintings, with surprise: let
others call this the weakness of our nature; to me it proves the unworthiness;
for had we merits to entitle us to happiness, the means would not be wanting to
enjoy it.


END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
The Hall in LORD ABBERVILLE's House. LORD ABBERVILLE followed by COLLIN. LORD
ABBERVILLE. 'SDEATH, Sir, am I or you the master of this house? who made you
judge what company is fit for me to keep? the gentlemen you excluded came by my
special invitation and appointment.


Col. Gentlemen!


L. Abb. Ay, gentlemen. Were they not such?


Col. Under favor, I took 'em to be sharpers; I know your Lordship always
loses, and I Have notic'd that they always win.


L. Abb. Impertinence! I had debts of honor to adjust with every one of them.


Col. Hang 'em, base vermin, pay them debts; pay your poor tradesmen; those are
debts of honor. (half aside.)


L. Abb. What is it you mutter? It was you too, I suppose, that drove away my
Jew, that came with money to discharge those debts.


Col. That Is true enough, good faith, I promised him a beating, and I kept my
word.


L. Abb. Rascal, you are born to be my plague.


Col. Rascal! Your father never used that word.


L. Abb. On your life, name not him: my heart is torn with vultures, and you
feed them: shall I keep a servant in my house to drive away my guests, to curb
my pleasures, my pursuits, and be a spy upon my very thoughts; to set that
cynic Mortimer upon me, and expose me in the moments of my weakness to that
snarling humourist? I want no monitors to reproach me, my own thoughts can do
that.

[Exit.
Col. Well, well! it is vary well! A rascal! Let it pass -- Zooks, I Am the first
Macleod that ever heard that word and kept my dirk within my girdle -- Let it
pass -- I Have seen the world, served a spendthrift, heard myself called rascal,
and I Will now jog bock again across the Tweed, and lay my bones amongst my
kindred in the Isle of Skey; they are all that will be left of me by then I
reach the place.


LA JEUNESSE enters. La Jeun. Ah! dear he stand, le pauvre Colin in disgrace!
Ha! ha! ha! quelle spectacle! Ma foi, I must have one little vord wid him at
parting -- Monsieur le Financier, courage; I am inform my Lord have sign your
lettre de cachet: vat of dat? The air of Scotland will be for your healt;
England is not a country for les beaux esprits; de pure air of de Highlands
will give you de grande appetit for de bonny-clabber.


Colin. Take your jest, Master Frenchman, at my countrymen an' welcome; the
de'il a jest they made of you last war.

[Exit.
La Jeu. Yes, you are all adroit enough at war, but none of you know how to be
at peace.

[Exit.
An Apartment in MORTIMER's House. MORTIMER, AUBREY, and NAPTHALI. Mort. And
these are all the money dealings you have had with Lord Abberville?


Napth. That is the amount of his debt; the bonds and contracts are in
Bridgemore's hands.


Mort. You see your money has not slept in Bridgemore's keeping; your
consignment, Mr. Aubrey, is put to pretty good interest (Mortimer looks over
his papers.)


Napth. Aubrey! Is your name Aubrey may I ask?


Aub. It is.


Napth. Have you had any dealings with Mr. Bridgemore?


Aub. To my cost.


Napth. Did you consign him merchandise from Scanderoon?


Aub. I am the person who was guilty of that folly.


Napth. Bridgemore I believe thought you was dead.


Aub. I take for granted he would gladly have me so -- But do you know any
thing of that consignment?


Napth. Heh! Do I know of it? I had better make a friend of him; it is up with
Bridgemore fait; there is no senses in serving him any longer (aside.) Why you
shall know, Sir, I was Bridgemore's broker for your merchandise: here is the
abstract of the net proceeds (gives a paper to Aubrey, who peruses it some
time.)


Mort. That Is lucky as I live; I see an honest man never can want weapons to
defeat a knave -- And pray, Sir, what might be your profit on this sale; double
commission for a breach of trust, that is the rule of the trade I think.


Napth. I work as others; I do nothing below market-price.


Mort. You're right, Sir; 'twou'd be starving many an honest family, if you
made roguery too cheap -- But get you gone together to my library; I observe a
person coming who will interrupt you. -- Hark'e, Mr. Aubrey, have an eye to our
Jew.


Aub. Trust him to me: I Am pretty well accustomed to their dealings.

[Exit with Napth.
DOCTOR DRUID enters. Dr. Druid. Save you Sir, save you; is it true I pray you
that a learned Gentleman, a traveller but just arrived, is now with you?


Mort. There is a person under that description in my house.


Dr. Druid. May he be seen, good now? may he be talked with? what has he
brought home? is he well stored with oriental curiosities?


Mort. Faith, Sir, indifferent well; he has brought a considerable parcel of
sun-dried bricks from the ruins of ancient Babylon; a heavy collection of ores
from the mines of Siberia, and a pretty large cargo of common salt from the
banks of the Caspian.


Dr. Druid. Inestimable!


Mort. Oh, Sir, mere ballast.


Dr. Druid. Ballast indeed, and what discoveries does he draw from all these?


Mort. Why he has discovered that the bricks are not fit for building; the
mines not worth the working, and the salt not good for preserving: in short,
Doctor, he has no taste for these trifles; he has made the human heart his
study; he loves his own species, and does not care if the whole race of
butterflies was extinct.


Dr. Druid. Yes, putterflies -- it is in my mind, do you see, what you have said
about my putterflies: it is upon my memory; but no matter -- your studies Mr.
Mortimer, and mine, are wide asunder. -- But go on -- reform the world, you will
find it a tough task; I am content to take it as I find it.


Mort. While the sun shines, you will carry a candle; how will that light them,
who travel in the night? Away with such philosophers, here comes an honest man,
and that is a character worth ten on it. -- (COLIN enters.) So, Colin, what is the
news with you? If I Am to augur from your countenance, something goes wrong at
your house.


Colin. Troth, Sir, no mighty matter; only Lord Abberville has turned away a
troublesome fellow, who bore your honor great good will.


Mort. What is it you tell me? is my Lord determined upon ruin, that he puts
away the only honest man belonging to him?


Dr. Druid. By this coot light, and that is well remembered; look'e, I Have got
your wages: come, hold out your hand.


Colin. Axcuse me, I Will have none on it.


Dr. Druid. No wages? why it is all coot money; it is in full. What, man, think
better on it; you will want it when you get to Scotland, ten to one else.


Colin. Like enough, but by my sol I Will touch na filler; he has geen a title to
me, which I hanna merited, Heaven knows, nor ever shall.


Mort. What title has he given you?


Colin. Saving your presence it have pleased my Lord to say, I am a rascal;
but I Will na wear a rascall's wages in a scottish pouch: de'il of my soul, I Would
sooner eat my stroud for famine.


Mort. I think thou would, but wait a while with patience; this rash young
man's affairs press to a crisis; I have yet one effort more to make, which if
it fails I sha^ take leave of him as well as you.


JARVIS enters. Jar. Lord Abberville, Sir, desires to speak with you.


Mort. That Is well. Colin, go you with honest Jarvis. Doctor, for once let us
unite our studies in this cause, come you with me; if my advice can rescue your
unhappy pupil from a course of guilty occupations, your philosophy may furnish
harmless ones to fill their place: make haste; make haste, here come the
Bridgemores.

[Exeunt.
Servant enters, introducing BRIDGEMORE, his Wife and Daughter. Serve. Please to
walk in here; my master will wait upon you immediately.


Bridge. Nobody here! -- Hark'e, friend, I expected to meet a stranger; a
gentleman just landed from Scanderoon. Know you of such a one?


Serve. He is now in the house.


Luc. And Mr. Tyrrel, Sir, is he at home?


Serve. He is; they both will wait upon you presently.

[Exit.
Bridge. That Is well, that is well; as for old furly-boots we could well spare
his company; it is a strange dogged fellow, and execrated by all mankind.


Mrs Bridge. Thank Heaven, he is a man one seldom meets; I little thought of
ever setting foot in his house: I hope the savage will not grow ceremonious and
return the visit.


Luc. Unless he brings his nephew in his hand.


MORTIMER enters. Mort. Ladies, you do me honor. Mr. Bridgemore, you come here
upon a mechancholy errand --


Bridge. True, Sir, but death you know is common to all men; I looked to meet a
gentleman here -- this is all lost time.


Mort. True: therefore before he comes, let us fill it up with something more
material: I have a business to propose to you, which I consider as my own. You
must know, Sir, I Have a nephew. --


Bridge. Mr. Tyrrel I suppose?


Mort. The same.


Mrs. Bridge. Mind that, Lucy, he is opening his commission.


Luc. Law, Ma'am, you put me into such a flutter.


Mort. There is a certain Lady, Mr. Bridgemore, whom, on this occasion, you
must father.


Bridge. How tedious he is! Coudn't he as well have named my daughter? -- Well,
Sir, what are your expectations from that Lady?


Mort. Nay, nothing but what you can readily supply: I know no good thing she
stands in want of, but a fortune.


Bridge. Well, and who doubts but on a proper occasion I shall give her one?
Ay, and a tolerable fortune too, Mr. Mortimer, as times go.


Mort. The fortune you was to have given my ward, Lord Abberville, will just
suffice: I think the sum was forty thousand pounds.


Bridge. Why you speak out at once.


Mort. 'That ever been my custom; I abominate long sleepy processes; life don't
allow of 'em.


Bridge. But I hear nothing on your part; Mr. Tyrrel, as I take it, is wholly
dependant on your bounty -- besides, affairs, as I conceive, are yet scarce
ripe.


Luc. Indeed, pappa, you're very much mistaken.


Mrs. Bridge. Why really, Mr. Mortimer, the parties should at least be suffered
to consult each other's inclinations.


Mort. By all means; let 'em speak for themselves: it is their own cause, and
they will plead it best: hark'e, come in, Sir, these are the parties.


TYRRELL and MISS AUBREY enter. Luc. Ah!


Mort. What ails you; have you trod upon a thorn?


Mrs. Bridge. Astonishing assurance! Augusta here?


Mort. Yes: Francis Tyrrel and Augusta Aubrey. Do the names offend you? Look at
the parties, are they not well matched? Examine them, they will tell you they are
agreed. Who shall forbid their union?


Luc. Who cares about it? If Mr. Tyrrel and the Lady are agreed, that is enough:
I suppose it is not necessary for us to be present at the ceremony.


Bridge. Ay, Sir, I pray you, where is the occasion for us to be called in,
because your nephew chooses to take up with an unworthy girl, that I once
harbored upon charity?


Tyr. Hold your audacious tongue: let conscience keep you silent.


Aug. Hush, hush! you frighten me; pray be composed; and let me own that no
injustice, no severity can wholly cancel what I owe to Mr. Bridgemore for his
past protection, and that share of education he allowed me; but when he puts
this to the account of charity, he takes a virtue foreign to his heart, and
only aggravates the shame that is falling on him.


Mrs. Bridge. Is the man thunderstruck; why don't you answer?


Mort. Charity keeps him silent.


Luc. Come, let us begone: her words have daggers in 'em, and her looks are
poison.


Aug. Before you go, Miss Bridgemore, suffer me to ask, when you related Lord
Abberville's adventure to Mr. Tyrrel, why you suppressed the evidence of your
own maid, who conducted him into my chamber?


Luc. Miss Aubrey, if it ever is your fate to have a rival, you will find an
answer to that question.

[Exit. with Mrs. Bridgemore.
Mort. Hold, you and I, Sir, must not part. (To Bridgemore as he is going.)


Bridge. Well, Sir, your pleasure?


Aug. I suffer for him; this is a scene I wish not to be present at.

[Exit.
Tyr. Well, Mr. Bridgemore, you that harbored my Augusta upon charity, I shall
leave my uncle to discharge my obligations to you on that score, together with
his own.

[Exit.
Mort. Well, Sir, we are now alone; and if it needs must be that one of us shall
come to shame, it is well we are so. It is thought I am a hard unfeeling man;
let it be so: you shall have justice notwithstanding: innocence requires no
more. You are accused; defend yourself.


Bridge. Accused of what; and who is my accuser?


Mort. A man; and you shall face him like a man. Who waits? (A Servant enters.)
Desire the stranger to come hither (exit Servant.) Fear nothing; we are enough
to try this question; where the human heart is present, and the appeal is made
to Heaven, no jury need be summoned. Here is a stranger has the confidence to
say that your pretensions to charity are false; nay, he arraigns your honesty;
a charge injurious to any man, but mortal to a trader, and levelled at the
vital root of his profession.


Bridge. Ay, it is the Turkey merchant I suppose; let him come in; I know upon
what ground I stand, and am afraid of no man living.


Mort. (aside.) We shall try that. Do you know this Gentleman?


AUBREY enters. Bridge. (starting) Aubrey!


Aub. Thou wretch!


Bridge. He lives!


Aub. To thy confusion -- Raised by the bounty of my family, is this your
gratitude? When in the bitterness of my distress I put an infant daughter in
your hands, the last weak scyon of a noble stock, was it to rob me you received
her? To plunder and defraud an helpless orphan, as you thought her, and rise
upon the ruins of your benefactor's fortune?


Bridge. Oh! I am trepanned! How shall I look my wife and daughter in the face
(aside.)


Aub. Where have you lodged the money I deposited with you at parting? I find
my daughter destitute: what have you done with the remittances I sent from time
to time? But above all, where is the produce of the Neptune's cargo? Villain,
look here, I have the proofs; this is the abstract of the sale; if you dispute
it, I am here provided with a witness, your Jew broker, ready at hand to attest
it to your face.


Bridge. Expose me not; I will refund to the last farthing: I dispute nothing;
call him not in.


Mort. There Is no occasion for witnesses when a man pleads guilty.


MISS AUBREY enters and throws herself on her knees to her Father. Aug. Dear
Sir, upon my knees I do beseech you mitigate your severity; it is my first
petition; he is detected, let his conscience add the rest.


Aub. Rise, my beloved child, it shall be so. There, Sir, your pardon be your
punishment; it was my money only you attempted, my choicest treasure you have
left untouched: now go and profit by this meeting: I will not expose you: learn
of your fraternity a more honorable practice; and let integrity for ever
remain the inseparable characteristic of an English merchant.


Mort. Stay; I Have another point to settle with you; you're a creditor of Lord
Abberville's: I find you have put Miss Aubrey's money to extraordinary interest:
Jarvis, show this Gentleman into my library, you will find a lawyer there will
settle your accounts.


Bridge. I think you have pretty well done that already -- A fine visit truly I
have made on it; and a fine reception I shall meet at home.

[Exit.
Aub. So! This uneasy business past, let us now turn to happiness: where is
your Nephew?


Mort. Conferring with Lord Abberville.


Aug. Lord Abberville? You frighten me.


Mort. Fear nothing; you will find him a new man; a deep incision has let out
the disorder; and I hope a healthy regimen in time will heal the wound; in
short I cannot be idle; and now Frank is off my hands, I Have once more undertaken
to set this ricketty babe of quality upon his legs -- Oh, here he comes; why
this is as it should be; now you look like friends.


Lord ABBERVILLE and Mr. TYRREL. L. Abb. May we be ever so! O, Mortimer, I
blush to look upon that Lady; your reproofs I bore with some composure; but
methinks was she to chide me, I should sink with shame.


Aug. You Have nothing, my Lord Abberville, to apprehend from me: I should be
loath to give an interruption to your happiness in the height of my own.


Aub. Give me thy hand, Augusta -- In the hope that I was laboring for thy
sake, and in thy person that I should restore the prostrate fortunes of an
ancient house, I have toiled on through eighteen years of wearisome adventure:
crowned with success, I now at length return, and find my daughter all my
fondest hope could represent; but past experience makes me provident; I would
secure my treasure; I would bestow it now in faithful hands -- What say you,
Sir, will you accept the charge? (To Tyrrel.)


Tyr. Yes, and will bear it ever in my sight, watch over it with unremitting
love, and guard it with my life.


Aub. What says my child, my dear Augusta? But I read her looks -- Blessed be you
both!


Mort. Amen, say I. Live an example to the age; and when I read the list of
marriages, as I do that of burials, with a sigh, let me have this to say, that
there was one example of felicity.


L. Abb. O, Frank, it is hard to speak the word, but you deserve her; yours is
the road to happiness; I have been lost in error, but I shall trace your steps
and press to overtake you.


Mort. Why that is well said; there spoke your father from within you: now
begone; fly to the altars of your country lares; visit that nurse of
contemplation, solitude; and while you range your groves, that shook at every
rattle of the dice, ask of your reason, why you was a gamester.


L. Abb. I Have been a madman; I have lost an humble faithful friend, whose
services would be invaluable.


Mort. Why ay, your Highlander, your poor Macleod; our plan must stop without
his help; I Am but a projector, he must execute -- but there likewise I can
serve you.


L. Abb. O Mortimer, how much have I mistaken thee!


Mort. Come, come, I have my faults; I Am an untoward fellow, and stand as much
in need of a reform as any of you all.


DOCTOR DRUID enters hastily, followed by COLIN. Dr. Druid. Tutor me truly --
talk to me! Pray, Gentlemen's, bear witness: is Master Colins here a proper
teacher of the dialects, do you see, and pronunciations of the English tongue?


Colin. Why not? Is there not Duncan Ross of Aberdeen that lactures twice a
week in oratory at the Seven Dials? and does not Sawney Ferguson, a cousin of
mine awn, administer the English language in it is utmost elegance at Amsterdam?


Dr. Druid. Bear witness, that is all I say, bear witness.


Mort. We do; there is not one amongst us, Doctor, but can witness to some
noble act of Colin's; and we would not wound his harmless vanity, for any bribe
that you can offer.


L. Abb. Colin, I Have done you wrong; but I was not myself; be you no worse a
servant than you have been, and you shall find henceforward I will be a better
master.


Colin. I Am satisfied; an you will neglect yoursall na more than I shall do,
things will gang well enough.


Tyr. I must apologize to Colin too; like my Lord Abberville, I was not myself
when I rebuff'd you on the business of Miss Aubrey's letter.


Colin. Say no more, Master Tyrrel; it is not for a mon to resent the pertness
of a child, or the petulance of a lover.


Aug. But what shall I say to him? where shall I find words to thank him as I
ought?


Aub. I father all your obligations; 'twas not you but me his bounty saved.


L. Abb. Hold, Sir, in point of obligation I stand first. By how much there is
more disgrace in doing than in suffering a violence, by so much I am more his
debtor than you all.


Colin. Ecod and that is true enough; Heaven sends misfortune, but the De'il
sends mischief.


Dr. Druid. Well, Master Colins, all is past and over; you have got your place
again, and all is well. Coot now, let me admonish you for the future to be
quiet and hear reason; moderate your choler and your passions and your
partialities: it is not for a clown like you to prattle and dispute with me; in
fait you should know better.


Mort. Come, come, it is you that should know better; in this poor Higlander the
force of prejudice has some plea, because he is a clown; but you, a citizen
that should be of the world, whose heart philosophy and travel might have
opened, should know better than to join the cry with those, whose charity, like
the limitation of a brief, stops short at Berwick, and never circulates beyond
the Tweed. By Heaven, I Would rather weed out one such unmanly prejudice from the
hearts of my countrymen, than add another Indies to their empire.


END OF THE PLAY.

