CLUMP and CUDDEN; OR, THE REVIEW: A COMIC MUSICAL PIECE, IN ONE ACT, As it is
PERFORMED at the ROYAL CIRCUS. WRITTEN AND COMPOSED BY Mr. DIBDIN.

Printed in the Year MDCCLXXXV.

CHARACTERS.
CLUMP, MR. JOHANOT, CUDDEN, MR. CONNELL, PLATOON, MR. MATHEWS, LATITAT, MR.
COPELAND, RAZOR, MR. LEACH, BIRCH, MR. HENLEY, STUD, MR. JOHANOT, Jun, PLUNDER,
MR. GASCOIGN, JUDE, MRS. HENLY, JENNY, MISS ROMANZIN^, FANNY, MISS JAMESON.


CLUMP and CUDDEN.
SCENE I.
The Door of a Public House -- A Table, Bowls, Glasses, Pipes, Tobacco, etc. --
At the Table are sitting CUDDEN, PLATOON, LATITAT, RAZOR, BIRCH, STUD, PLUNDER,
RIFLEMAN, etc. AIR.
CHORUS. WOULD you live, lads, a life of jollity,
Take a touch here of our quality;
To us soldiers come,
Here Bacchus of Mars beats the drum,
While Venus attending
Our joy is befriending;
Your zeal then to show to the field and the fair,
Quickly here to the standard of pleasure repair.
Does the loud trumpet call to glory,
Or flute to tell some amorous story,
Alike alert in every duty,
Now war his passion, and now beauty;
He fights the foe, or courts the fair,
Can kindly love, or bravely dare,
And honor seek 'midst clashing arms,
Well to deserve his mistress' charms.
Would you live, lads, etc.


PLATOON. Fine-sounding words! -- honor and fame! --
I says they are nothing but a name:
Courage and merit are neglected --
We gemmen soldiers an't respected --
We Are only thought by monkey beaux,
With paper skulls and powdered clothes,
And silks and sattins, bags and fine tails,
Fit only for the cat of nine tails.

CUDDEN. 'Cod, well zed, corp'ral -- folks may boast,
But zummet's wrong -- here goes a toast --
Here Is may they long be zick in their beds
Who first made -- jumping over heads --



ALL. Bravo! my boy.

CUDDEN. Lawyer, what zayst?

LATITAT. I says of the great, that bad's the best:
And harkee!
[Whispers.]
CUDDEN. No!

LATITAT. True.

CUDDEN. Indeed!

LATITAT. Fact.
Sponge --

CUDDEN. Good Lord!

LATITAT. General bankrupt act.

CUDDEN. That Is gwain to ruin thicker and faster:
What Is thy opinion, friend schoolmaster?

BIRCH. Why, if they would take the advice of a fool,
Your great ones should be sent to school.

STUD. I says, that, while upon my grounds
They Will let me hunt my pack of hounds,
It matters nothing what their ways are:
What do you say to this, friend Razor?

RAZOR. I says, take matters in the gross,
As how I thinks we are shaved too close.

PLATOON. You think! old Strap and Suds -- you! -- you! --
Did I command what would I do!
I Would raise each soldier's pay diurnal,
And every corp'ral make a col'nel.

CLUMP. Cod, well said, corporal, again.

PLATOON. Plunder!

PLUNDER. Here.

PLATOON. Muster all the men.
See their accoutrements are new,
This ev'ning's fixed for the review,
When Phoebus shall, in all his charms
Glittering, adorn the soldier's arms.

AIR.
This, this, my lad, is a soldier's life --
He marches to the sprightly fife,
And in each town to some new wife
Swears he will be ever true:
He Is here, he is there, where is he not?
Variety's his envied lot,
He eats, drinks, sleeps, and pays no shot,
And follows the loud tattoo.
II.
Called out to face his country's foes,
The tears of fond domestic woes
He kisses off, and boldly goes
To earn of fame his due.
Religion, liberty, and laws,
Both his are and his country's cause;
For these through dangers, without pause,
He follows the loud tattoo.
III.
And if at last in honor's wars
He earns his share of danger's scars,
Still he feels bold, and thanks his stars
He Is no worse fate to rue.
At Chelsea, free from toil and pain,
He weilds his crutch -- points out the slain --
And in fond fancy once again
Follows the loud tattoo.


SCENE II.
All go off except CUDDEN and PLATOON. CUDDEN. Here, jog a tiny bit this way.

PLATOON. What say, my hearty?

CUDDEN. What do I zay?
Can keep a secret? be one's friend?

PLATOON. Upon my sword.

CUDDEN. Nay, there is no end
When soldiers their fine oaths begin.
Hark thee to me -- Thou know our Jin;
She loves this mazzard here -- devilish fetch me --
And yet I do not think she will catch me.

PLATOON. Why not? -- she is young.

CUDDEN. She is, and fairish:
But lookee, I knows all the parish,
And, spite of their simp'ring smiles and frippery,
There never was an eel so slippery;
Besides, in your ear, I Have had my will of her,
And so I am more doubtful still of her.
Now this is what I wants to do,
To try our Jin -- so say but you
I Am with the other honest hearts
Listed, and gwain to voreign parts;
I soon shall by her wimp'ring see
If, as she ought, our Jin loves me.

PLATOON. Enough said, lad -- here take this crown
As part of the listing money down.

CUDDEN. Nay, that is as easy done as spoke.
'Twon't list me though?

PLATOON. Pho! that is a joke.

CUDDEN. I understand -- you will say, do you hear,
That I am listed.

PLATOON. Never fear.
Nay, zounds! I Will swear it, if that is all.
March -- turn your toes out -- at roll call
Fail not tomorrow, sir.

CUDDEN. Ods curse it!
How very natural he does it.
AIR.
Good Lord! it is a wondersome sight to behold
The soldiers bedaub'd all with silver and gold,
And to hear for miles off the loud drum and fife,
How they thump 'em and blow 'em away for dear life;
While the girls slyly watch to choose him for a lover
Who readiest and best
Can turn on his heel,
Can march and can rest,
And shoulder to boot,
And face to the right, and to the left wheel,
And present and make ready, and fire and shoot,
And come to a handsome recover.
II.
The moment a village the red coats come in,
The wenches, good Lord! how they titter and grin;
And 'teant only the young ones that crowd on the green,
But all ages, from seventy down to sixteen.
While the girls, etc.

SCENE III.
The Village; a poor House is seen; CLUMP is working in a Stall underneath the
Window; JUDE is within-side ironing, and JENNY fits on a Bench at the Door
knitting. TRIO.
Neighbor, neighbor,
Work away,
What like labor
Makes us gay?
The world is sad,
It knows not why.
Your poets in rhimes
May rail at the times,
But since they are so bad,
And no cure's to be had,
It Is better to laugh than to cry.
But look behind,
And you shall find
For one poor pleasure -- plagues a score;
Nor is, I fear,
One whit more clear
The prospect, should you look before.
Then, far beyond blind Fortune's power,
Live and enjoy the present hour.
RECITATIVE.
JUDE. In Faith I must not loiter so;
Give me my basket.

CLUMP. Ere you go,
I would thou'd'st speak a good word for me.

JUDE. Whence is it, girl, thy looks are stormy
TO our old friend Clump -- when of the sudden
They still clear up for that rogue Cudden?

JENNY. Why, mother, if you will be told,
I like not Clump because he is old;
Besides, my Cudden's smart and gay,
And drinks and rakes all niggledy jay.
O Cudden! Cudden! thou has won me;
And then he is rich too.

JUDE. Mercy on me!
How she does rattle! -- Jenny, Jenny,
Don't be a foolish headstrong ninny.
If thou say nay because Clump's poor,
Thou ought not to be blessed for sure;
For as there is no state ever so high
But has at times it is misery,
So those in station ever so low
Some sweet contented moments know.



AIR.
The world's a strange world, child, it must be confessed,
We all of distress have our share;
But since I must struggle to live with the rest,
By my troth it is no great matter where.
We all must put up with what fortune has sent,
Be therefore one's lot poor or rich,
So there is but a portion of ease and content,
By my troth it is no great matter which.
II.
A living's a living, and so there is an end,
If one honestly gets just enough,
And something to spare for the wants of a friend,
By my troth it is no great matter how.
In this world about nothing we busied appear,
And I Have said it again and again,
Since quit it one must, if one's conscience is clear,
By my troth it is no great matter when.
SCENE IV.
CLUMP. JENNY. CLUMP. Oh dear! our Jin!

JENNY. What!

CLUMP. Nan!

JENNY. The brute!

CLUMP. Pray, let me get the length of your foot.

JENNY. How! what! win my affections you!

CLUMP. Yes, I -- now prithee buckle too.

JENNY. Oh! no.

CLUMP. And you're determined?

JENNY. Yes.

CLUMP. And why?

JENNY. For reasons you cannot guess.

CLUMP. Nay, where the shoe pinches, you may swear it,
None know so well as them that wear it.

JENNY. You're not my choice.

CLUMP. Why, aye, that is true;
But then, you know, often a shoe
That Is ready made will fit some folk
As well as if 't had been bespoke.

JENNY. And then such difference between
Our ages -- I am scarce sixteen,
And you how much?

CLUMP. But sixty-three.

JENNY. And prithee how would that agree?

CLUMP. Why just as if I put together
An old sole to a new upper leather.

JENNY. Ho! ho! it takes away the breath of me.

CLUMP. Od rot thee, Jin -- thou wilt be the death of me.
AIR.
Whenever I Am mending a shoe,
Every thing in my stall that I view
To my doting remembrance brings you,
While my heart in my bosom goes thump:
The best callimanco's your hair,
Your skin is the lining so fair,
My awl to your eyes I compare,
That wounded the heart of poor Clump.
II.
Your teeth, which like ivory show,
Are the pegs in a white even row
Which I drive, while at every blow
My heart in my bosom goes thump.
Each object of you bears a part,
Your wit, that is so piercing and smart,
Is my knife -- but my lapstone your heart,
Which will never let you pity poor Clump.

SCENE V.
JENNY. FANNY. JENNY. Thus I Am obliged to act the part
Of pleasure with an aching heart;
For though I scoff at this poor elf,
I Am not much better off myself;
Ah! Cousin Fanny! tricked out too.

FANNY. I Am going, child, to the review,
To see my soldier in the field
His bayonet draw, his musket wield;
To see him to the rank repair,
More willingly because I Am there.
AIR.
When in order drawn up, and adorned in his best,
If my soldier appears with more grace than the rest,
If his gaiters are jet, his accoutrements fine,
If his hair's tied up tight, and his arms brightly shine,
Let him turn, wheel, or face, march, kneel, stoop, and stand,
Anxious still to obey every word of command;
Erect like an arrow, or bending his knee,
It Is not for the general, it is all to please me.
II.
If with smoke and with dust covered over by turns,
To gain a sham height, or false bastion he burns;
If of danger in spite, and regardless of fear,
He rushes to fight when there is nobody near:
In short, let him turn, wheel, march, etc. etc.

SCENE VI.
PLATOON, JENNY, FANNY. RECITATIVE.
FANNY. And see! I scarcely sound love's drums,
But at my call my soldier comes.

PLATOON. My Fanny -- What! and Jenny here,
I Have news that shall thy spirits cheer;
For which thou wilt give me ample thanks,
Cudden shall pay thee for his pranks.

JENNY. What pranks?

FANNY. Nay, coy it not to us,
The best will be too amorous
Sometimes, spite of the nicest care,
When at our feet men sigh and swear.

JENNY. I plainly see he has told all:
Women should think before they fall,
Lest they that hour survive and weep:
Prudence by love was lulled to sleep.



AIR.
A novice in love, and a stranger to art,
As pure as my wishes my unpracticed heart;
When I rose with the lark, and out-warbled the thrush,
Free from falsehood or guile, for I knew not to blush:
Those past days I deplore.
When innocence guarded my unfully'd fame,
When to think, and to act, and commend were the same;
When on my face,
With artless grace,
Danced frolic, sport, and pleasure -- now no more.
II.
Ere I listened and loved, ere man smiled and betrayed,
Ere by horror appalled, and of conscience afraid;
Lost to each fond delight that ever woman adorned,
By a hard-judging world looked at, pitied, and scorned:
Those past joys I deplore.
Those joys, ere by man's artful treach'ry forsook,
Which, guiltless and pleased, with the world I partook;
When on my face,
With artless grace,
Danced frolic, sport, and pleasure -- now no more.
PLATOON. Well, cheer thy spirits -- he is --

JENNY. Well what of him?

PLATOON. Nothing, but you will get all shut of him.
He Is listed --

JENNY. Listed!

PLATOON. With a view,
As he believes, just to try you;
But if you will give into my whim,
The scheme shall pretty well try him.

FANNY. What is it, Platoon?

PLATOON. What are those drums?
As sure as murder here he comes.

SCENE VII.
JENNY, FANNY, CLUMP -- aukwardly dressed as a Drummer. Why! what the devil
have we here?

CLUMP. -- I spose I looks a little queer;
Altered all over dress and phiz,
Come, you shall hear how the thing is:
The cruelty of that there creature,
Thinks I -- as how no human nature
Cannot never support, and so I goes,
Quite whelmed, as one may say, with woes,
To drown myself -- where was I? -- stay!
Oh! meeting neighbor Mudge in the way;
Says neighbor Mudge -- were me I Would liver,
Than like blind puppies drown in the river,
For a captain list -- grow great in story,
Go to the wars, and die with glory;
And so, d' ye see, without more mystery,
That I may make a noise in history,
I Am come, it is true, for I Am no hummer,
To you to list me for a drummer.

PLATOON. A charming thought -- Jenny, my heart,
Speak, girl; can act a sprightly part?

JENNY. I could once, ere, to reason blind,
I loved, and lost my peace of mind.

PLATOON. And shall again, girl -- Clump, this way;
Do thou love Jenny here, I say?
Like a soldier speak -- do dote upon her?

CLUMP. Damme -- and zounds -- and 'pon my honor.

PLATOON. Have thou a heart? -- speak out, you ninny.

CLUMP. I had before I gave 't to Jenny.

PLATOON. Well, thou wilt have here is, with interest lumping,
If thou wilt give Cudden a good thumping.

CLUMP. A what?

PLATOON. A basting.

CLUMP. Well, I Will see.

PLATOON. And then, like my dear Fan, shall she,
To pay attention to her lover,
Follow thee, Clump, the whole world over.

AIR.
Say, Fanny, will thou go with me?
Perils to face by land and sea
That tongue can never tell ye?
And will thou all these dangers scorn,
Whilst in these arms
I hold thy charms,
Enraptured every opening morn,
When the drum beats reveillez.

FANNY. II.
Yes, yes, Platoon -- I Will go with thee,
In danger whatsoever it be --
Believe it is truth I tell you;
My constant mind shall peril scorn,
Brave all alarms,
So in my arms
I hold thee every opening morn,
When the drum beats reveillez.

PLATOON. III.
Still, Fanny, will thou go with me?
Suppose the cruel fates decree --
Alas! how shall I tell you?
The news should come -- thy soldier fell,
And thou shall hear,
Appalled with fear,
Next morn his fatal passing bell,
When the drum beats reveillez.

FANNY. IV.
Still, fearless, will I go with thee,
Resigned to cruel fate's decree,
And bravely this I tell you:
When on the spot my soldier fell
I Would shed a tear,
The world should hear,
Mingling with his, my passing bell,
While the drum beat reveillez.

BOTH. V.
To the world's end I Would go with thee,
Where thou art -- danger never can be;
My joy no tongue can tell you:
And sure such love may perils scorn,
Brave all alarms,
While in my arms
I hold thee every opening morn,
When the drums beat reveillez.



CLUMP. I Will do it, my boy -- I Am ready for'n.

PLATOON. He Is coming! sure as you are born.

SCENE VIII.
PLATOON, CLUMP, CUDDEN, FANNY, JENNY. Make up to Jenny. CUDDEN. Well! how goes
it
About our scheme -- I spose she knows it.

PLATOON. Our scheme -- a likely way to hobble her;
Why zounds! she is married to the cobbler.

CUDDEN. To Clump -- fine work! and so he will find it.

PLATOON. Come! come with me! and never mind it.

CUDDEN. I Will speak a little to um first,
Sarvent, good volk -- Dam't I shall burst;
Now dounty think as I Am uneasy,
Why, zounds and fire! art thee run crazy,
Our Jin!

CLUMP. Nay make not such a clatter,
Good friend!

JENNY. Pray, fellow, what is the matter?

CUDDEN. Nay nothing, fellow!

CLUMP. Come don't bluster;
I'cod he is in a charming fluster.

CUDDEN. But, Jin!

CLUMP. Nay, take away thy paws!

CUDDEN. Do naw thee'st get a lick in the jaws?

CLUMP. Hey! what?

CUDDEN. Nay dam't, then there it is for thee!

PLATOON. Come, now is your time.

CUDDEN. What! cannot that stir thee?
Then take another.

CLUMP. Save me -- murder!
I Will carry on the farce no further;
I Am too much of the dunghill cock
For the wars to take off this fool's frock:
And, Master Cudden, as for thee,
Thy Jenny is no wife for me.

CUDDEN. Not married! thou'st a good escape,
Clump -- Harkee! look before do leap,
For fear, do you see, thy wife should cheat thee:
Curse it, I Am sorry that I beat thee.
AIR.
'Twere better I took your advice, my good neighbor,
Henceforward my conduct I Will mend;
With joy and content to my last will I labor,
Still striving to make a good end.
And then as to love I Will never think of a woman,
No, never! I Will swear it by goles;
But, like methodist preachers on Kennington Common,
I Will live by the mending of soles.
II.
Many battles I Will fight -- over a pot of good porter
Whole armies I Will kill -- in my stall
To no soul -- of a shoe -- will I ever give quarter,
And what hides will I pierce -- with my awl.
And then as to love, etc.

SCENE IX.
PLATOON, CUDDEN, JENNY, FANNY. PLATOON. Well! was not it a pleasant jest?

CUDDEN. What, about I? -- Nay, you know best;
It might, but I cannot say I saw't.

FANNY. 'Twas every bit the corp'ral's fault.

JENNY. He made us to it.

CUDDEN. Ah! -- mayhap so,
But I Am not to be caught in the trap so.

AIR.
CUDDEN. A man that is benighted or drunk may mistake,
And headlong fall into a snare,
But sober, at noon, all his senses awake,
He Will sure take a little more care;
So whimper or snivel, I say 't to your face,
Toy as much as you will, but no priest shall say grace*

JENNY. A woman, no longer her reason in view,
May headlong fall into a snare,
While the brute her betrayer still leaves her to rue,
That she took not a little more care;
So, though I Have been faulty, I say 't to your face,
No toying henceforth till the priest shall say grace.

CUDDEN. Away to the wars then, a soldier, I Will go,
To find in each quarter a wife;
I Will roar and I Will rant, wench a little, or so,
But no one shall snap me for life;
For, in spite of their fanzies, I Will say to their face,
Toy as much as you like, but no priest shall say grace.

JENNY. Adieu! and for ever then, since thou will go,
May thou find in each quarter a wife;
'Twill never vex me -- mind, it is I tell thee so,
A more kind one will take me for life;
For, whatever thou think, I declare to thy face,
I never will toy -- till the priest shall say grace.



CUDDEN. Here, take thy money, friend.

PLATOON. What money?

CUDDEN. Why, that I took to list --

PLATOON. No, honey;
That trick will not pass -- you're listed fairly;
Aye, and shall serve too --

FANNY. It works rarely.

CUDDEN. Thou shall get hanged first.

PLATOON. That we'll see;
Come, come, sir, march along with me.

CUDDEN. You're not in earnest? -- Jenny! -- Fanny! --
You cannot have the heart now -- canny?

PLATOON. Come, master Cudden, here is the truth:
All who betray imprudent youth,
Who lie, that women may believe,
And leave them afterward to grieve,
And their malignant stars to curse,
Deserve thy fate, and ten times worse.
Come, march; never let thy spirits faulter;
Thou made for thy own neck the halter.

JENNY. Bye, Cudden.

FANNY. He Is in a rare flurry!

PLATOON. Come!

CUDDEN. You're in such a woundy hurry:
Will nothing move thee, corp'ral?

PLATOON. No.

CUDDEN. What money wou'd'st take to let me go?
Speak; I can give thee zummet handsome:
How much woot hay?

PLATOON. Not the king's ransom:
And yet there is a price.

CUDDEN. Wounds! say it.

PLATOON. But shall I have't -- if thou can pay it?

CUDDEN. Aye, that thou shall, if 'twere a guinea.

PLATOON. Give us thy hand then -- Marry Jenny.

CUDDEN. I sposes she will not ha me now:
Woot? -- Jenny, speak --

JENNY. I know not how --
If you are sincere.

PLATOON. I Will make short work:
Tomorrow morn we'll all to kirk,
And soon as ever the priest shall tie
Cudden and you, and Fan and I,
There, before all our friends at large,
He shall receive his full discharge.
[Drum beats.] But hark! I must retire from beauty,
For the drum calls me to my duty.

CUDDEN. Jin, gi'us a kiss; I Am thine for ever,

JENNY. And shall we never part?

CUDDEN. No, never.

SCENE draws, and discovers an open hilly Country, where all the Maneuvers are
performed of a Review and Sham-Fight: after which the Characters come forward.
CHORUS. Thus soldiers should in time of peace,
That martial spirit never may cease,
Their nation's glory to increase,
Appear in this trim array;
While each, of emulation vain,
Shall follow in the noble train,
While the drums beat
To the battle's heat,
And the spectators, one and all,
With joy obey the public call --
While fifes shall sweetly sweetly play --
In chorus joining, cry -- Huzza!

The END.

