AN ESSAY ON THE BITE OF A MAD DOG, IN WHICH THE CLAIM TO INFALLIBILITY OF THE
PRINCIPAL PRESERVATIVE REMEDIES AGAINST THE HYDROPHOBIA IS EXAMINED.

By JOHN BERKENHOUT, M. D.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR R. BALDWIN, PATERNOSTER ROW.

MDCCLXXXIII.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

TO SIR GEORGE BAKER, Bart. F.R.S. PHYSICIAN IN ORDINARY TO THE QUEEN, THIS
ESSAY IS INSCRIBED, BY HIS MOST OBEDIENT SERVANT,

Winton, July 21, 1783. THE AUTHOR.

AN ESSAY ON THE Bite of a Mad Dog, etc.
1. I Know not of any human attempt which bears a better resemblance to the
knight of La Mancha's attack of a windmill, than that of combating vulgar
errors; of reasoning against received opinions. The most powerful and pointed
arguments generally fall to the ground, when opposed by the impenetrable shield
of common prejudice. Nevertheless, in the present age, when science is hourly
making such rapid advances toward the discovery of truth; when knowledge is so
much more universally diffused than in former times, it seems not unreasonable
to hope, that mankind may be persuaded to bestow a few moments unbiassed
attention on a subject confessedly of the highest medical importance.

2. This subject has indeed been amply and learnedly treated by ancient and
modern physicians, in various countries and languages; in this kingdom
particularly, by the celebrated Dr. Mead, and the no less famous Dr. James; the
latter of whom published, in the year 1760, an entire volume on Canine Madness.
Ancient authors were less diffuse, and were generally satisfied with
transcribing from each other. Most of these writers I have considered with
attention, and acknowledge myself much obliged to them for many important
facts: I cannot, however, avoid observing, that their labors have a manifest
tendency to confirm the fatal prejudice which I most devoutly wish to
eradicate; I therefore think myself justified in adding a small pamphlet to the
voluminous tracts already written on the disease commonly, but improperly,
called the hydrophobia, or dread of water. I say improperly, because this
aversion to water, or to drink of every kind, is only one symptom of the
disease in question, and that not constantly nor exclusively; for there are
many examples on record, sufficiently authenticated, of this symptom, this
hydrophobia, in patients not bitten by a dog, or by any other animal.

3. I am even inclined to assert, that the hydrophobia is not generally a
symptom of the disease produced by the bite of a mad dog. It rarely happens
that the patient has any aversion to water or other liquid; until by experience
he finds an insuperable difficulty in swallowing. He then dreads the approach
of water, having already found that the attempt to swallow any liquid produces
a violent and painful convulsion; so that the symptom in question is rather a
real difficulty of swallowing liquids, than a dread of water. As far as my own
experience reaches, I can, with great truth, aver, that I have never yet met
with a single patient, who expressed any aversion to the sight, sound, or
mention of water, until he had found, by experience, that drinking gave him
pain.

4. Some years ago, I was sent for to a young gentleman, who, about six weeks
before, had been bit in the arm by one of his father's hounds. A few hours
before his death, he stepped into a tub of warm water without fear, sat down, and
continued in it half an hour. I shall, in its proper place, relate his case
circumstantially: I mention it at present only to prove, that the hydrophobia
is improperly considered as a diagnostic symptom of this disease.

5. I am equally inclined to dispute the propriety of the denomination rabies
canina, canine madness; for though persons thus unhappily afflicted are often
violently agitated during a short time previous to their death, yet they
generally retain their reason to the last moment: this disease, therefore, is
improperly considered as a species of madness, if by madness we understand, a
distraction, suspension, or perversion of the reasoning faculties.

6. Writers, fond of searching into antiquity for what is not worth finding,
have taken great pains to discover the most ancient authors that have written
on canine madness. Hippocrates, most certainly, has not said a single word on
the subject, whatever some of his wise commentators may have imagined. A
learned list of ancient authors, who have written on the hydrophobia, may be
collected from various modern writers; but we search in vain for useful
information on this subject among the remains of high antiquity.

7. But if the disease we are about to investigate be neither a species of
rabies, nor hydrophobia, what shall we call it! -- It were idle to dispute
about a mere name; but when a misnomer conveys a false idea, it is no longer a
matter of indifference. The fatal disorder communicated to the human species by
the bite of a mad dog is doubtless a spasm of the organs of deglutition and
respiration; a species of angina convulsiva, vel suffocativa. The generic term
Angina, is thus defined by the learned Boerhaave, in his 783d aphorism --
Impedita valde, dolens admodum, vel et impedita et dolens simul, deglutitio
atque respiratio, quae contingit a causa morbosa agente in parts binis his
functionibus inservientes, supra pulmones et supra stomachum positas, Angina
vocatur; and in aphorism 818, he says, -- Si convulsionum causa quaecunque
musculos pharingis laryngesve occupaverit, oritur subita suffocativa angina.

8. As I am here writing particularly to medical readers, it is unnecessary to
translate the above quotation. Such readers, after comparing these definitions
with the symptoms of the hydrophobia, as it is called, will, I believe,
acknowledge their surprise, that Boerhaave should not rather have classed it as
a species of angina than of mania. Later nosologists seem equally unfortunate
in point of arrangement. In the system of the celebrated Sauvages, we find
Hydrophobia in the class Vesaniae, and order Morositates. His definition of the
class is, error in imaginatione, appetitu, vel juditio; of the order,
cupiditates aut aversiones depravatae. Now, I appeal, not to systematic
writers, but to those who have attended patients suffering under this dreadful
distemper; and I request them to recollect, whether erroneous imagination,
appetite, or judgment, or depraved desires or aversions, were among the
symptoms they observed? As to the patient's refusing to drink, it proceeds not
from an imaginary aversion to water, but from a real, a painful convulsion in
the organs of deglutition, excited by every effort to swallow liquids.

9. Linneus divides the disease in question into two distinct genera, viz.
Rabies, and Hydrophobia: the first he defines in these words, Desiderium
mordendi lacerandique innocuos; the second, thus, Aversatio potulentorum cum
rigore et sardiasi, adding, soepius praecedenti maritata. He places them in the
class Mentales, and order Pathetici, where, from what I have said above, they
must appear to have no business.

10. In Vogel's arrangement, under the class of Febres, and order continuae, we
find the Hydrophobia thus characterized, Febris cum aversatione liquidorum,
singultu, convulsione, et delirio. The absurdity of making the hydrophobia a
continued fever is so obvious, that it requires no comment.

11. Dr. Cullen denominates his second class of diseases, neuroses, which he
defines -- Sensus et motus laesi, sine pyrexia et sine morbo locali. Spasmi
constitute the third order of this class, and of this order, the last genus is
hydrophobia, thus defined -- Potionis cujuslibet, ut convulsionem pharyngis
dolentem cientis, fastidium et horror; plerumque e morsu animalis rabidi. Of
this genus he admits two species, viz. vulgaris, and spontanea, the first of
which is the immediate object of our present consideration.

12. Dr. Cullen, with his usual sagacity, saw the error of former medical
writers, who mistook this spasm in the organs of deglutition, for a species of
madness.

13. But by what name soever we distinguish this dreadful disease, previous to
our enquiry concerning its symptoms in the human species, let us endeavor to
ascertain those by which it may be known in the brute, where it originates.

Authors have amused themselves with learned disquisitions concerning the cause
of this rabies in dogs, wolves, foxes, etc. Some accuse worms within the
cranium, or under the tongue. Dr. Cheyne ascribed it to a superabundance of
animal salts, and Dr. James was of opinion that extreme heat, want of water,
Treat. on canine madness, p. 20
and putrid animal food, are generally the cause of this madness in dogs, which
he calls a fever.

14. The usual symptoms which indicate approaching madness in a dog, are,
first, an evident diminution of his natural keen appetite for food. He eats,
indeed, and laps his milk or water, but with obvious indifference. His eyes
have lost their usual luster; he drops his ears and tail, shows no sign of
hilarity at the approach of his master, and his whole aspect exhibits a picture
of melancholy, perfectly intelligible to those who are accustomed to observe
this animal with attention. In a day or two more, he refuses both meat and
drink, shuns the society of other dogs, and is equally, after a short
reconnoitre, avoided by them. He now quits his habitation, runs forward,
evidently without having any thing in pursuit, snaps at every animal that comes
in his way, and within forty-eight hours dies convulsed.

15. Such are the symptoms of this distemper in the brute creation; and these
symptoms are so constant and unequivocal, that all danger might easily be
prevented, by the smallest degree of attention. In the first stage of the
disorder, the dog has no propensity to bite, so that he may be seized and tied
up without fear.

16. Boerhaave has collected from Fracastorius and other writers, a catalogue
of symptoms more numerous, and somewhat different from those above enumerated;
but as it was not the result of his own observation, his description of this,
as of many other diseases, should be read, cum grano salis.

17. Pliny, Hist. not. Lib. 29, c. 5.
in his chapter de medicina animalium, tells us, that there is a worm under the
tongues of dogs, which if extracted when they are whelps prevents their running
mad. This doubtless was a vulgar error of the times in which he wrote, and thus
the universal prevalence of this absurd opinion down to the present age is
accounted for. Dr. James very justly ridicules this idea of a worm under the
tongue. On can. mad. p. 203.
-- "I take it (says the Doctor) to be a nerve; and this contracting when
recently taken away, the idiots fancy it stirs, and believe it a worm, towhich
it bears no manner of resemblance." -- He is certainly right in believing it
not to be a worm; but he is mistaken in supposing it a nerve, for a reason
which himself has adduced, namely, its contraction; nerves are not elastic. He
is also wrong in saying, it bears no resemblance to a worm. De sed. and cause.
morb. lib. 1. ess. viii. art. 35.
Morgagni probably was nearer the truth, in calling it a tendinous ligament. Be
it what it may, it is certainly of use to the dog and its extirpation answers
no salutary purpose.

18. Let us now trace the progress of this fatal disease in those of the human
species who have the misfortune to be bit by a mad dog or cat. The wound, on
immediate inspection, discovers no signs of malignity. If it be so superficial
as scarcely to have drawn blood it generally heals without the least
inflammation, and in that case there is little or no danger: on the second day
it seems a mere scratch, and on the third it is hardly visible. But if, on the
second morning, we observe an inflamed circle spreading from the wound,
resembling that which surrounds the puncture when inoculation for the smallpox
has taken effect, there is reason to believe that part of the poisonous saliva
of the enraged animal is absorbed, and the consequent symptoms may be
rationally expected.

19. Meanwhile the patient takes the Ormskirk, or some other equally infallible
medicine, is hurried away to the sea, in which he is two or three times dipped
and half drowned; the wound heals, and all his apprehensions vanish. Unhappily,
this delusion also vanishes in the space of five or six weeks, about which
period he feels a This symptom is said to have been first mentioned by Salius.
pain in the part where he was bit, gradually extending over the whole limb. He
now recollects his misfortune. The horrible stories he has heard rush upon his
mind, and the hourly expectation of madness and death fill his whole soul.
Under such apprehensions it is no wonder that he should discover symptoms of
impatience, anxiety, and even of delirium. But these symptoms proceed from, and
are always in proportion to, his apprehensions. His reasoning faculties
continue unimpaired; his pulse becomes irregular and quick; but there is no
preternatural heat, foul tongue, nor any other febrile symptom. He complains of
a fullness and prickling in his throat, and swallows his spittle with
difficulty. So far from expressing any aversion to water, he calls for drink;
but in the attempt to swallow it he is convulsed, and, after two or three
painful efforts, the approach, or even the sight of any liquid produces horror.
He continues some time longer to swallow solid food without much pain or
difficulty. At last even that is impossible. He now becomes sensible of an
irresistible inclination to struggle, and wishes to be held; he breathes quick
and with great difficulty, and in a few hours after dies convulsed, as if he
were strangled with a cord.

20. Such, and such only, are the proper diagnostic symptoms of this fatal
disorder: they are amply sufficient to distinguish it from any other, and are
therefore all that are necessary to be generally known; but as a disease so
frequently mortal cannot be too well understood, I shall proceed to mention the
symptoms above omitted, as I find them enumerated by the principal authors that
have written on this subject.

21. Coelius Aurelianus, who collected his history of the hydrophobia from
Eudemus, Soranus, and other writers with whom we are little acquainted, tells
us that the hydrophobia is immediately preceded by extreme irritability,
unusual motions of the body, disturbed sleep or absolute wakefulness,
indigestion, stretchings, yawning, nausea, imaginary notions of bad weather,
and no appetite for drink. To these symptoms, according to the same author,
succeed, when the hydrophobia begins, a desire to drink Appetentia bibendi,
which Dr. James translates, a violent and insatiable thirst. -- Treat. On Can,
Madn. p. 55.
, with terror at the sight, sound, or name of water. The patient is afraid even
of fomentations with oil; his pulse is dense (densus) small and irregular:
sometimes a small degree of fever, convulsive motions of the stomach, spasms in
the precordia, numbness of the joints, and torpor of the intestinal canal;
frequent inclination to make water; trembling and catchings of the limbs; voice
hoarse, resembling the barking of a dog; spiral posture of the body, like that
of a dog lying on the ground; anxiety when any person enters the room, as if
apprehensive that he should bring water; redness of the face and eyes; body
emaciated, the superior parts pale and sweating; veretri frequens tensio cum
seminis involuntario jactu, etc.

22. To the symptoms above mentioned Boerhaave adds the following -- Lassitude,
Aphor. 1138.
weight, and indolence in every muscle of the body; disturbed sleep, frequent
startings, frightful dreams, convulsions; constant inquietude, depression,
sighing, and love of solitude. If the patient be bled, the blood exhibits no
morbid appearance. He now complains of a squeezing about his heart. He is
terrified not only at the sight of any fluid, but even of any pellucid or
reflecting body. He vomits viscid bilious phlegm or poraceous bile; grows hot
and feverish. To a gradual exacerbation of these symptoms are now accumulated a
dry projected tongue, open foaming mouth, extreme thirst, an irresistible
inclination to spit at, and bite those that are near him; cold sweats, complete
rabies, and on the fourth day the patient dies.

23. Dr. Mead copies Boerhaave without any material alteration, except in
saying that death relieves the patient in two days after the first symptom of
hydrophobia.

Sauvages, in his Nosologia, adds no other symptom to those above related; but
from Dr. James we learn the following very curious and material proof of the
salutary instinct of dogs, namely, that they fly from persons actually infected
by the bite of a mad animal.

24. Such readers as are not acquainted with medical authors, and particularly
with the writings of the celebrated Leyden professor, will wonder why he should
have exhibited so numerous a catalogue of symptoms, if it be true, that so few
of them really occur in patients afflicted with this malady. But his wonder
will cease, when he is told that Boerhaave, when he began the study of physic,
found the science a mere chaos. He immediately conceived the idea of reducing
it to method, and, after much reading, condensed and arranged his materials in
the form of aphorisms, constituting a new system of physic, which aphorisms he
used as the text of his academical lectures. All his symptoms very seldom occur
in the same patient: they were collected from a variety of authors, and are to
be remembered by physicians, rather as possible phenomena than as absolute
diagnostics.

25. Having thus attended our unfortunate patient to the final period of his
life, let us proceed to examine the morbid appearances in his body upon
dissection.

26. Cappivacci, an Italian, was, I believe, the first anatomist who published
an account of any dissection of this kind. His observations, together with
those of Zwingerus, Brechtfeld, and other writers, were republished in the
Sepulchretum, and thence collected by Boerhaave, and condensed into a single
aphorism, which, for the sake of the English reader, I will translate. Aph.
1140.
-- "The morbid phenomena discoverable in the body by dissection are generally
the organs of deglutition somewhat inflamed, bilious gluten in the stomach, the
gallbladder full of black bile, the pericardium dry, the lungs incredibly
distended with blood, the heart full of blood almost dry, the arteries full,
the veins empty, blood in the arteries extremely liquid, and scarce coagulating
in the air, all the muscles, viscera, brain, and spinal marrow, dryer than
usual."

27. Zwingerus, Epb. N.C. dec. 3. a 2. obs. 104.
in a body which he dissected, found the membraneous interstices between the
cartilaginous circles of the aspera arteria intensely red, and the stomach and
intestines sprinkled with red spots.

28. Brechtfeld found the entire tract of the oesophagus narrow, Sepulc. Anat.
and in a state of constriction.

29. M. Tauvry, a French anatomist, Hist. R. Acad. an. 1699.
found the gula and aspera arteria in a state of inflammation.

30. Morgagni tells us of an hydrophobic patient whose body, De. Sed. et Cause.
Morb. ep. viii. art. 23.
though dissected sixteen hours after death, in a cold season, was intolerably
putrid. Black bile was found in the gallbladder; the lungs were also black,
and very offensive. The right auricle of the heart was much dilated, the left
very narrow. The blood vessels of the brain were all full; the brain was rather
dry.

31. The same author relates another history of a man who died about a month
after being bit by a mad dog, Ib. art. 25.
and whose body, which was dissected about twenty-four hours after death, in
the hottest season of the year, was much less offensive than the former. His
neck had a livid appearance; the blood vessels of the stomach were as full as
if they had been injected; the stomach was distended with air, and contained
besides a yellow and greenish water; part of the liver was livid, and the
gallbladder was full of brown bile; the diaphragm was a little inflamed; the
lungs on the posterior part were tumid with blood, and black; the upper part of
the oesophagus, aspera arteria, pharynx, and larynx seemed nearly gangrenous;
in the head, the vessels of the meninges were distended with blood, and the
internal substance of the brain was dotted with red points; the internal
ventricles contained a reddish serum.

32. In a third dissection the stomach was found to contain a viscid
cineritious fluid, Ib. art. 27.
and the gallbladder a small quantity of yellow bile; the illiac veins were
violently distended with blood, and their corresponding arteries quite empty;
lungs stuffed full with crassamentum, and in part almost in a gangrenous state;
the heart contained a small quantity of blood resembling melted pitch; the
organs of deglutition showed no other signs of inflammation than a slight
redness at the top of the pharynx; but the membrane which invests the
epiglottis was crisp and shrivelled; all the vessels of the meninges were
immoderably full of black blood; neither the cerebrum, cerebellum, spinal
marrow, viscera of the thorax and abdomen, nor any of the muscles were more dry
than they generally are; in the ventricles of the brain were about three ounces
of yellowish serum.

33. Morgagni, Ib. art. 32.
after comparing these observations with those of Mead, Plancus, Fabbri,
Brogiani, etc. concludes, that the bodies after death differ more from each
other than when living: "For (says he) whilst alive, they all drink with great
difficulty, and most of them not without horror; but, upon dissection, we find
no one phenomenon common to every subject. As to that dryness of the parts, so
generally observed, it is by no means universal; nor does it seem to deserve
much consideration, because the violent agitations of the patient, and the
consequent evacuations, sensible and insensible; the frequent exhibition of
alexipharmics, and long abstinence from liquids, are sufficient to account for
it."

34. On the authority, therefore, of Morgagni, who was a man of most extensive
anatomical reading and experience, we must conclude, that dissections have not
hitherto discovered the part, or parts, of the human body particularly
affected, or injured, and consequently no curative indication can thence be
deduced. He is of opinion, nevertheless, that the seat of the disorder is in
the nerves and brain. Democritus and Gajus, Coel. Aurel. Lib. iii. c. 14.
two of the most ancient writers on this subject, were of the same opinion; as
were also the disciples of Asclepiades. Some of the ancients accused the
diaphragm, some the stomach and intestines, and some the heart.

35. Boerhaave, Aph. 1142.
from the history and comparison of the hydrophobia with other diseases, was
induced to believe, that it is first an affection of the nerves; that
convulsions of the viscera are thence produced; that the blood and humors
thence become vitiated; but that the primary seat of the disorder is in the
region of the stomach. In this last part of his theory, he followed the opinion
of Arthemidorus, Coel. Aurel. Lib. iii. c. 14.
Artorius, and the disciples of Asclepiades.

36. Dr. Mead was persuaded, Mechan. Acc. of Poisons. Essay, 3.
that the seat of the disease is in the nervous fluid, contaminated by the
saliva of the dog acting as a ferment, and gradually assimilating the whole to
its own degree of morbid acrimony.

37. Dr. James ridicules these opinions, and roundly declares, P. 37.
that "he does not believe one syllable of the modern doctrine of nervous
juices and nervous distempers." Previous to the display of his own theory, in
order to render it intelligible to readers unacquainted with anatomy, he
translates, from Boerhaave's preface to his collection of authors on the
venereal disease, a minute description of the cellular membrane; to which he
adds two pages more, on the same subject, from Cheselden. The first of these
begins thus -- "This membrane is of a vascular contexture," etc. This is
certainly not true. If Dr. James had ever read so common a book as Haller's
Primae Lineae, he would not have quoted Boerhaave and Cheselden on this
occasion. His theory, however, is briefly this -- The poison contained in the
saliva of the mad dog is communicated through the wound made by his teeth to
the fat contained in the cellular membrane, which fat, by fermentation with the
saliva, is assimilated into a poison; now this fat being mixed with the blood,
and conveyed to the liver, by the vena portarum, the bile is contaminated, and
necessarily produces all the symptoms observable in canine madness.

38. To render this theory more intelligible, the Doctor informs the ignorant
reader, P. 77.
"that there is a perpetual intercourse betwixt the blood vessels and the
cellular membrane, and consequently between the contents of both, the blood and
fat." -- It is somewhat singular, that this poisoned fat should, in its passage
to the liver, mix with the blood without injuring that fluid, which throughout
the entire progress of the disease is found to differ in nothing from that of a
person in health. This obstacle was too obvious to escape the Doctor; but he
tumbles over it very clumsily: he supposes, notwithstanding appearances, that
the blood must be ultimately vitiated by the bile; so that the blood first
vitiates the bile, and the bile returns the compliment to the blood.

39. Thus, then, according to Dr. James, the liver is the primary seat and
fountain of the hydrophobia, which viscus, he tells us, P. 82.
"supplies the rest of the body with bile in immense quantities." In what
physiological school the Doctor learnt that the rest of the body is supplied
with bile in immense quantities is difficult to imagine. I know of no part of
the body which is supplied with bile except the duodenum, where, mixing with
the digested aliment issuing from the stomach, part of it is converted into
chyle, and thereby bereft of all its bilious qualities, and the remainder
carried through the intestinal canal, and finally ejected: so that no bile,
quasi bile, is absorbed, and consequently no part of the body except the
intestinal canal is supplied with this fluid.

40. But, if it be true that the liver is the part of the body chiefly affected
in the human species, we may, I think, fairly conclude, that this viscus is
also the primary seat of the disorder in dogs. Now, it is very certain, that
the liver of a mad dog, supposed to be an infallible remedy against canine
madness, has been frequently eaten without any bad effect.

41. There is yet another objection to Dr. James's hypothesis, which the
anatomical reader will probably think of some weight. -- Page 78 of his
treatise, he tells us, that "the poisonous saliva adhering to the tooth of a
dog is immediately communicated to the fat residing in one or more of the cells
of the cellular membrane;" that "a scratch is sufficient, if it only raise the
cuticle, without drawing a drop of blood;" for (continues the Doctor) this
subtle poison, as well as the venereal venom, is capable of entering the
cellular membrane when applied to any part not covered by the cuticula."

42. Is it possible that Dr. James, the author of a medical dictionary in three
folio volumes, should not have known, that there is no external part of the
human body which is not covered by the cuticle. That he was really ignorant of
this fact is still more evident from the following passage in his 16th page --
After relating a case from Van Swieten, who quotes it from Palmarius, of
several children having caught the hydrophobia by kissing their father, who had
been bit by a mad dog, he says -- "In this case it is very possible that some
of the frothy saliva might be conveyed to the lips or the mouth of the
children, which, not being defended by the cuticle, might communicate the
contagion, as it happens with respect to the venereal poison." -- Now, it is
not only certain that the glans penis, the lips, and mouth, are covered by the
cuticle, but that it is continued through the fauces, oesophagus and intestinal
canal.

43. But the Doctor assures us that, for the saliva of the dog to poison the
fat, "a scratch is sufficient, if it only raises the cuticle." Surely, the
Doctor had forgot, that the cellular membrane, with which he took so much pains
to make his readers acquainted, and in which the fat resides, adheres to the
internal surface of the cutis vera, which therefore must necessarily be
perforated before the saliva can be brought into contact with the fat.

44. If Dr. James had been at all acquainted with the absorbent lymphatic
vessels, whose extremities perforate the cuticle in every part of the surface
of the body, he would not have deemed those parts only which he supposed
destitute of this external shield susceptible of the canine poison. Though the
medical world be much indebted to the minute enquiries of Doctors Monro and
Hunter for a more perfect intelligence of the lymphatic system, yet the
absorption of fluids through the pores of the skin has been generally known,
even prior to the days of Galen, who, as a proof of this fact, Gal. de usu
pulls. c. 5.
says -- Si sitiens balneum ineat, illi sitis sedabitur. Innumerable
experiments have been made by later writers in order to establish this
doctrine, particularly by Boil, Bellini, and many others. Phil. Tr. No. II.
In the Philosophical Transactions we read of men working in quicksilver mines,
whose bodies had imbibed so much of that metal, that they changed the color of
brass by rubbing it with their hands, or even by breathing upon it. We know
that by handling turpentine the urine acquires a violet smell; that tobacco
will vomit, and aloes purge, when externally applied; but the fact most
universally known is the constant effect of mercurial unction.

45. Hence it is evident that the cuticula, or epidermis, as it was called by
the Greeks, is no defense against the canine, or any other poison, if the
application be continued sufficiently to give time for its absorption: it is
therefore necessary, when the saliva of a mad dog touches any part of the skin,
to wipe it off immediately, and wash the spot. The examples, indeed, of persons
thus infected without a wound are not numerous, because those on whose hand or
face the saliva rests naturally wipe it off before it can be absorbed.

46. But, in defense of Dr. James it may be urged, that, whether the cuticle be
pervious or not, or in whatsoever manner the canine poison pass the cutis, it
proves nothing against that part of his hypothesis which establishes the fat as
the immediate receptacle of the poison, and its future vehicle to the liver.

47. In reply to this defense, it will be sufficient to observe, that the
bibulous lymphatics, by which fluids on the surface of the body are absorbed,
do not discharge their contents into the cellular texture, but, creeping along
its membranes, communicate with larger veins which terminate in the
receptaculum chyli, the thoracic duct, or jugular vein; so that the canine
poison, or any other fluid, absorbed from the surface of the body, cannot
remain in a state of extravasation with the fat in the cellular web, but must
necessarily be thrown into the general mass of circulating fluids "I shall
avail myself (says Dr. James) of but one more argument to illustrate the
probability of the canine venom being received and fostered in the membrane
which contains the fat, or rather in the fat itself. And this I draw from the
method of cure; for that very medicine which cures the venereal disease, whose
residence is in the fat, is also found effectual in preventing and even curing
canine madness." -- Unfortunately for this argument the venereal disease does
not reside in the fat.
.

48. Dr. James's theory, therefore, being contradicted by anatomical
demonstration, necessarily falls to the ground. The hypothesis of Boerhaave,
Mead, and others, who supposed the seat of the disease to be in the nervous
fluid, is equally insupportable, because no such fluid circulates in the
nerves, which are not tubes but solid fibers, whose extremities therefore are
incapable of absorption.

49. If these theories be false, those who read for information will ask, where
lies the truth? If such readers have sufficiently attended to the 47th
paragraph they will easily conceive that the poisonous saliva of the dog is
absorbed by the capillary lymphatic veins, whose ramifications expand to every
part of the surface of the human body; those veins which imbibe the matter
communicated by inoculation, the venereal virus, water, and infectious miasmata
from the air.

50. But, if this be true, why is it necessary, in order to communicate the
small pox by inoculation, that the cuticle should be raised? -- I answer: It is
not necessary; but that by this operation the communication of the disease is
rendered more certain, because the matter being lodged under the cuticle, by
retaining its moisture, continues longer in a fit state for absorption.

51. If it should be further asked, why the canine poison, thus introduced,
continues circulating in the body five or six weeks before it produces that
disease, of a single paroxism, called the hydrophobia? -- I answer, that in
this it differs from other inoculated diseases only in point of time, In all
inoculations there is an intervention of some days between the cause and
effect; but why that of canine madness requires a longer time for assimilation
and maturity must remain a mystery, until we are better acquainted with
nature's modus operandi. Probably there are other contagious diseases whose
malignant miasmata may be equally slow in their progress from admission to
efficiency.

52. Some attempts have been made to discover the nature of this canine poison
by the help of microscopes and chemical experiments; but to no purpose. Dr.
Mead supposed it to consist of fiery saline particles. Dissert. Med. de rab.
can. Edinb. 1771.
Dr. Heysham believes it to be an acid; but this is mere conjecture. All we
know of the matter is, that it is a poison sui generis, which, being absorbed
by the lymphatic veins, produces certain effects in the human body; no
mechanical nor chemical theory, therefore, can assist us in the invention of a
remedy against the bite of a mad dog. Analogy may possibly be of some use.
Chance, the great inventor of medicines, has not, I think, been successful in
the present case. Let us, however, proceed to the most important, the
therapeutic division of our essay.

53. Mithridates, king of Pontus, about two thousand years ago, is said to have
invented that farrago of more than forty ingredients called by his name.
Historians tell us that, believing it to be an universal antidote, he took a
dose of it every morning. In justice however to his Pontic majesty, I must not
suppress what Samonicus writes on this subject. "When Pompy (says he) took the
baggage of Mithridates, he found, among his papers, the prescript for
compounding the famous antidote against all poisons, invented by that king: he
was much surprised to find that it consisted only of twenty leaves of rue, two
walnuts, two figs, and a little salt." To whose inventive genius we are
indebted for the forty ingredients which were afterward added I know not,
unless to that of Damocrates, under whose name this celebrated antidote shines
conspicuous even in the last edition of the London Pharmacopoeia.

54. Andromachus, a native of Crete, cotemporary with Galen, not satisfied with
an antidote of forty-five ingredients, composed one of more than sixty, which
he called (...) (serenitas) from its sedative or anodyne effect. This
impertinent jumble of stuff was afterward called Theriaca, from the Greek word
(...), fera, a wild beast, being an antidote against the invenomed bite of mad
or poisonous animals. This notable hodge-podge is also to be found even in the
last edition of the London Dispensatory; and, what is more extraordinary, there
are, I am told, some physicians who continue to use these theriacas in their
prescriptions: with what intention is best known to themselves.

55. If the inventors of theriacas had any ideas at all, they probably thought
that, in so great a number of ingredients, it was possible some one of them
might hit the mark they aimed at, for the same reason that sportsmen prefer a
number of small shot to a single bullet; but I am rather inclined to think them
the invention of some arch apothecary's apprentice, who had a mind to try what
sort of a medicine he could produce by jumbling together every drug in the
shop. Be their origin however what it might, they are certainly the oldest
antidotes upon record, and, from the proportion of opium they contain, might
possibly alleviate the spasmodic symptoms incidental to the bite of a viper, or
of a mad dog.

56. Dioscorides wrote a treatise on the Theriaca, in the second chapter of
which he recommends, as a medicine that might be depended on for the bite of a
mad dog, two spoonfuls of the ashes of the river crab, with half the quantity
of gentian, to be taken in a large glass of wine. De simpl. med. facul.
Galen prescribes the same medicine, with the addition of a small quantity of
frankincense: the crabs he burnt alive in a copper dish, after the rising of
the star Sirius, when the sun was in the constellation Leo, and on the
eighteenth day of the moon. This invaluable secret he learnt from old Aeserion
the emperic, who, being Galen's master, must have lived cotemporary with
Dioscorides, and might probably be the inventor of this infallible medicine,
for so it was esteemed by these physicians.

57. Dr. Mead is of opinion that this remedy is recommended by the ancients
upon rational grounds, because it is a diuretic; "For (says he) "the surest
remedies in all ages against this venom have been such as provoke a great
discharge by urine." Reflecting on this circumstance, this Esculapius of his
times, conceived the great idea of recommending to the world his infallible
Pulvis Antylissus, which, at the doctor's request, was honored with a place in
the London Pharmacopoeia.

58. Whence did Dr. Mead conclude that this powder of calcined river crabs, or
crawfish (for such he supposes them to have been) would promote a great
discharge of urine? He certainly thought that this calcination, like the
incineration of vegetables, would produce an alkaline salt. If he had possessed
the least degree of chemical knowledge, he would have known that the animal
itself would burn to a mere earth, totally inert, and that its shell would be
converted into quick lime, of which consequently, with a very small proportion
of earth, this specific must consist.

59. Dr. James's chemical knowledge appears to have been not much inferior to
that of Dr. Mead, whom he thinks totally wrong in translating the (...) of
Dioscorides, and Galen, River Crawfish. He is clearly of opinion, and takes
some pains to prove, that these authors meant a species of river crab, and not
crawfish. Dr. James prudently observes, that we ought to be very accurate in
our quotations from ancient authors, "lest the medicine recommended be mistaken
for something that may not possess the same virtues." This is doubtless a wise
observation; but any chemist's boy would have told him, that the virtues,
whatever they may be, of a calcined crawfish, crab, or oister, are exactly the
same; that all shells are calcarious earth, and consequently burn to quick
lime, in no respect different from that produced by the calcination of chalk,
limestone, or marble. But, that Dr. James, as well as Dr. Mead, supposed that
this calcination of river crabs produced an alkaline salt is evident from the
following passage. Speaking of this powder, he says -- "I believe it may have
some efficacy in preventing the canine madness, P. 215.
though none that can be depended upon. This opinion is founded on its being an
highly alkaline substance; and all or most of the pretended specifics for this
distemper are alkaline, and destroyers of acids; as the celebrated pancake made
of oister-shells, mentioned by Dessault, Armenian Bole, Tin, and many other."
These last words put the doctor's skill in chemistry quite out of doubt.

60. But, as we can hardly suppose that Dioscorides and Galen ventured to give
their patients two spoonfuls of quick lime, it is probable that they did not
calcine these crabs, or crawfish, sufficiently to convert the shells into lime,
though long enough to dissipate the volatile parts of the animal. On this
supposition this specific powder becomes a mere absorbent earth, a pulvis e
chelis cancrorum, possessed of no diuretic virtue; yet Galen pronounces it
infallible. De simpl. med facul. L. 3. c. 34.


61. The next diuretic antidote of the ancients, "recommended (as Dr. Mead
thinks) upon rational grounds," is the Spongia Cynorrhodi, sponge of the
dogrose, "Which (says the Doctor) is so celebrated an antidote, that P.
Boccone, who has written a whole discourse upon its virtues, tells us it is
called in Sicily Sanatodos, or All-heal." We also in this country have a common
plant dignified with the same name, and equally insignificant in its medical
capacity. These panaceas are generally good for nothing. But Dr. Mead ranks
this gall of the briar among his animal diuretics, because Mr. Ray found it to
be the nidus of a fly. -- "Now (says the Doctor) all insects abound with a
diuretic salt." -- If the lie direct were admissible in polite conversation, I
would say, this is not true. But I marvel exceedingly that he did not observe
that this Sanatodos of the Sicilians is called in England a Dog-rose, because
it produces a medicine for a mad- dog: also, that he forgot to inform his
readers, that this celebrated antidote originated in the dream of an old woman,
as he must have read in Pliny.

62. Dr. Mead, after specifying, from the ancients, other diuretics, which
certainly are not diuretics, proceeds to the recommendation of his infallible
Pulvis Antilyssus, which he declared never failed of success, though he had
used it a thousand times. "I have often wished (adds the Doctor) that I knew so
certain a remedy in any other disease." -- Surely such testimony, from so great
a physician, must be more than sufficient to establish the infallibility of any
medicine beyond all suspicion: and yet two greater men, Boerhaave and Van
Swieten, Aph. 1147.
are of opinion that it is good for nothing; and Dr. James assures us, that "it
has been given, Pa. 227.
without success, to a great number of people and animals in many parts of the
kingdom."

63. This infallible Pulvis Antilyssus is prescribed by Dr. Mead in the
following words -- "Take of the herb called, in Latin, Lichen cinereus
terrestris, in English, Ash-colored ground-liverwort, cleaned, dried, and
powdered, half an ounce; of black pepper powdered, two drachms. Mix these
together, and divide the powder into four doses, one of which must be taken
every morning fasting for four mornings successively in a pint of cows milk."
-- I have now before me a London Dispensatory with manuscript notes by my
worthy friend Dr. Longfield, a physician deservedly distinguished for his sound
judgment, and extensive medical knowledge. On the blank leaf opposite to the
Pulvis Antilyssus, he wrote -- "This is Dr. Mead's famous powder: it is most
certain that it never cured one person bit by a m^d dog."

64. A moderate share of experience in the medical powers of plants is
sufficient to determine a priori the virtue of this Lichen, which, together
with the rest of its tribe, discovers no other sensible quality than a slight
degree of astringency, and therefore can have no other effect than what may be
expected from any other medicine, astringent in the same degree; unless we
admit the doctrine of specifies, to which Dr. Mead would doubtless have
objected, being himself a sectator of the mechanical Belini. Pb. botan. Frag.
meth. ^at. Mat. Mid. p. 161.
-- Insipidae et inodorae vim medicam vix exercent, is an aphorism of Linnaeus.
"This rule (says Dr. Cullen) seems to be without exception; and it is on this
account, and not on any proper experience, that many plants are expunged from
the Materia Medica, as having no taste or odor which should point out in them
any active qualities." -- After such evidence, we may, I think, justly proceed
to the condemnation of the infallible Pulvis Antilyssus.

65. But Dr. Mead, in order to convince the world that he had not adopted this
medicine without proper scientific investigation, informs his readers, that he
examined the Lichen cinereus terrestris by distillation, and that the result of
his analysis was, some acid water, some oil, and some coal that contained fixed
salt. A bunch of docks, of nettles, of thistles, or of any other common weed,
would have yielded the same. This sort of analysis can be of no use in
discovering the medical virtues of plants. The receipt to make this celebrated
Pulvis Antilyssus was first brought to England by Captain Dampier, who called
the plant Jew's Ear ( Tremella auricula of Linnaeus) a kind of ash-colored
fungus, which is frequently found on the trunks of old trees. But it seems Sir
Hans Sloane was of opinion that the Captain was mistaken; that he certainly
meant the ash-colored Liverwort, which, on the authority of so great a
naturalist, was accordingly adopted. Is it not probable from this history,
that, in rejecting the original Jew's Ear, Dr. Mead seized the ear of the wrong
sow?

66. The next infallible medicine I shall examine is that which, about thirty
years ago, was brought from Tonquin by Sir George Cobb, when he returned from
the East Indies. It consists of native and factitious Cinnabar each twenty-four
grains, with sixteen grains of Musk, powdered and mixed well together. This dose
is to be taken in a glass of Arrack once only, and repeated after an interval
of thirty days The absurdity of making any distinction between native and
factitious Cinnabar, which are precisely the same thing, is too obvious to need
a commentary: it proves, however, the ignorance of the Chinese old woman who
probably invented the medicine, and of all those who in prescribing this powder
have continued to observe the same ridiculous distinction. But, in the
composition of this specific, there is another absurdity of more importance.
All the cinnabars, whether native, factitious, or of cinnabar of antimony, are
mere powder of post; absolutely inert.

67. "Factitious cinnabar (says Dr. James) is made of three parts of mercury to
one of sulphur; and, Pa. 155.
as I remember, a pound of good native cinnabar yields near fourteen ounces of
fluid mercury; and therefore it seems that the good effects of this medicine
ought to be principally, if not entirely, ascribed to mercury." -- Dr. James,
having resolved to sport a preparation of mercury as the only specific for
canine madness, was quite satisfied with this sort of reasoning: but we must
come nearer to the point.

68. Native cinnabar is the ore of mercury; that is, mercury mineralized by
sulphur, in the proportion of about six, seven, or eight parts of the former to
one of the latter. -- Sulphur possesses the singular property, in combination
with mercury or antimony, of rendering both these violent metallic substances
inactive. It is particularly well known of antimony that it is more or less
mild in proportion as the regulus is combined with more or less sulphur. This
chemical fact Dr. James must have known, if he had understood the process for
making his own fever-powder. But mercury, before it can exert its stimulant
power, must not only be completely extricated from the sulphur with which it
formed cinnabar, but must afterward be divided by trituration, or dissolved in
a mineral acid. Now, the only means of decomposing cinnabar is by fire, in,
what is called by chemists, the dry way. In the human body, therefore, it is
impossible; but if we could suppose the mercury actually separated from the
sulphur, not being dissolved by a mineral acid, or otherwise divided, it would
still remain in a state of total inactivity: a priori, therefore, cinnabar may
be pronounced inert.

69. But, lest the advocates for this Tonquin medicine should deem this sort of
philosophical argument inconclusive, let us take the opinions of a few eminent
chemists on the subject. Pa. 451.
-- Dr. Cullen, in his Lectures on Materia Medica, speaking of mercurial
preparations, says -- "Crude mercury, and the combination in cinnabar and
Aethiops mineralis, to which may be added Aethiops antimonialis, in so far as
it contains mercury, can only by accident, or indirectly, prove medicines." --
"Triturated with sulphur, Pa. 444.
mercury becomes an inert substance. This I could determine a priori, whether
it was in the form of Aethiops mineral, or native or factitious cinnabar." --
Dr. Lewis in his Dispensatory tells us, that "cinnabar, like Aethiops, Pa. 331.
is inactive." -- Cartheuser, having given a large quantity to a dog, says,
that it produced no sensible effect, but that part of it passed through the
intestines unaltered, and that the remainder was found in the stomach and
bowels. -- Dr. Longfield, whom I have before mentioned, wrote the following
note on the article cinnabaris factitia in the Pharm. Col. Reg. Med.
Londinensis -- "It is a shame that the cinnabars are not totally exploded: they
have not the least title to the character of nervous medicines; they are both
inert." -- But it were unfair to conceal from the reader, that a famous German
chemist of the last century was of a different opinion. He considered cinnabar
as an efficacious medicine, and ascribed its virtue to its beautiful color,
with which Archeus is so charmed as to neglect the disease which he was
employed in exiting; for it seems this Archeus, this creature of Van Helmont's
distempered brain, is wonderfully delighted with the color red.

70. In answer to all this reasoning a priori, I shall be told, that experience
is the only test, and that the instances upon record, of the hydrophobia being
cured or prevented by the Tonquin powder are innumerable. In reply to this
answer -- First, there are examples upon record of persons having died of the
hydrophobia after taking it, particularly in two cases related in the London
Medical Observation: Page 195, and apendix, p. 3.
Secondly, many other medicines, equally infallible and equally extolled, have
deservedly sunk into contempt: Thirdly, no attestation of facts will convince a
rational being that an effect was produced without a sufficient cause: now, a
substance which is demonstrably inert can produce no effect in an animal body,
and therefore can cure no disease.

71. Cinnabar being thus, I think, fairly dispatched, if there be any antidotal
power in the Tonquin medicine, it must be attributed to to the antispasmodic
virtue of the musk: Dr. James ascribes it to its alkaline quality -- "Musk (he
tells us) is an animal substance, and consequently of an alkaline nature; and
as alkalies have in all ages been recommended in this case, it seems at least
to be not prejudicial." -- This is damning musk with faint praise. But what did
the Doctor mean by ascribing to it an alkaline quality because it is an animal
substance? Had he forgot that animal matter wants the assistance of fire to
produce alkali? If every species of animal matter be an alkaline medicine, the
parings of his own nails would have done as well. Musk, however, is doubtless a
powerful antispasmodic, and for that reason may be of service in the
hydrophobia.

72. This Tonquin powder is ordered to be taken in a glass of Arrack, doubtless
with no other intention than to cover the taste of the musk. This vehicle,
however, suggests an idea, which, though I may think it extravagant, I will
communicate. Suppose, when the symptoms of the fatal disease in question first
appear, previous to the difficulty of swallowing liquids, the patient were to
drink to intoxication of any strong liquor he may choose. Who, without trying
it, will pretend to circumscribe the antispasmodic effect of this remedy? It is
certainly not contra-indicated by any febrile or maniacal symptoms. In a
forlorn hope no attempt can be too extravagant. It will at least answer one
good purpose: I mean that of relieving the patient from several hours of the
most horrid anxiety that can possibly be conceived.

73. I now beg leave to call the reader's attention to the mercurial
preparation so strenuously recommended by Dr. James in his Treatise on Canine
Madness. It is called Turpith mineral; it is a precipitate of mercury from its
solution in the Vitriolic acid, by which it was not only dissolved but
calcined. Whether it be a pure calx of mercury, without any adhesion of
vitriolic salt, is a matter of dispute among chemists of the first reputation.
Monsieur Baume declares positively, vol. ii. p. 403.
que, ce precipite est absolument prive de toute acide, lorsqu'il a ete lave a
plusieurs reprises dans de l'eau bouillante -- Nevertheless, from the effect of
the medicine, I presume he is mistaken. It is a very rough mercurial, fit only
for dogs, to which animals Dr. James seems to have given it with success. As to
its effect on the human species, he produces no more than one single case of a
patient bit by a mad dog, and cured under his own immediate care by Turpith
mineral, He relates, indeed, three or four other cases in support of his
specific, on the authority of persons of his acquaintance; but hearsay
evidence in this case, as in courts of justice, is inadmissable. -- Dr.
Raymond, Med. Obs. append. p. 3.
physician at Marseilles gave seven boluses, containing each four grains of
Turpith mineral, to a patient bit by a mad dog: the patient died.

74. The Ormskirk medicine, which in many parts of this kingdom, particularly
in the North, is deemed infallible, appears, from the report of Dr. Black and
Dr. Heysham, to consist of, Med. Com. Vol. v. p. 50.
Powder of chalk, half an ounce; Armenian bole, three drachms; Alum, ten
grains; Powder of elecampane root, one dram; Oil of anise, six drops. -- Now,
though the chemical enquiries of these gentlemen may not be admitted as proof
positive, yet when the result of experiments made by two able chemists, at
different times, is precisely the same; when a medicine composed of the
supposed ingredients has the same color, taste, and smell, we have the
strongest presumptive evidence that our conjectures are well founded;
especially, when there is no discoverable difference between the effect of the
real and supposed composition.

75. As to the medical virtues of the ingredients abovementioned, they are
sufficiently known. -- Chalk is a mere absorbent earth, without any other power
than that of destroying the acid it may meet with in the primae viae, and,
during the effervescence, of producing a little calcarious gas, commonly called
fixed air. -- Armenian bole, such as is generally sold by the druggists, is
nothing more than a lump of pipe-clay, colored with a little red ochre or rust
of iron. This English or Dutch Armenian bole is, in no respect, inferior to the
true Oriental, or to any other bole, for medical purposes.
-- Alum is an astringent, and nothing more. -- Elecampane-root has been
generally ranked among the Alexipharmics; it is said to assist expectoration,
and, in large doses, to act as a diuretic and cathartic: it is, however, in no
estimation, and in so small a dose, mixed with the other ingredients, can
produce no effect. -- As to the six drops of oil of aniseed, I presume their
efficacy, in the present case, will hardly be insisted on.

76. Possibly I may be told, that, though these several ingredients, separately
taken, may possess no extraordinary medical powers, yet, like other compounds
they may, when united, form a medicine of considerable virtue. -- I acknowledge
that a powerful medicine may be formed by a judicious combination of simple
ingredients, prescribed on chemical principles; but I am very certain, that an
ignorant jumble of chalk, clay, alum, and elecampane, will form nothing but an
heterogenerous mass of dirt, that may do harm, but cannot possibly do good in
any disease whatsoever.

77. But, say the advocates for the Ormskirk powder, what signifies reasoning
against facts? Are there not a thousand examples of the hydrophobia prevented
by taking this medicine? Would the sagacious inhabitants of the northern
counties have such faith in a mere ignis fatuus? -- Far be it from me, to doubt
the sagacity of the northern counties: they are by no means singular in
mistaking shaddows for realities. All quack-medicines, and more than half the
medicines used in regular practice, are ignes fatui. What are all the vaunted
panaceas, theriacas, antidotes, and specifics, but ignes fatui, deceptions,
chimeras?

78. The several specifics above considered have all successively had their day
of infallibility, and have all been equally supported by experience, the true
test of medical virtue: that is, a number of people bitten, or supposed to be
bitten, by dogs supposed to be mad, have taken the Ormskirk, or any other
infallible powder, and have escaped the hydrophobia. But in the London Medical
Observations, Vol. v. p. 195.
etc. we have, on the authority of Dr. Fothergill, an incontestable proof that
the Ormskirk medicine is not infallible: Mrs. Bellamy, who was bit by a mad
cat, took it, and "conformed to the directions given by the vender in every
respect," yet died of the hydrophobia about four months after, as, I make no
doubt, would all the patients that ever took the Ormskirk medicine, if they had
been really infected by the canine poison.

79. This censure I do not confine to the Ormskirk, nor yet to any of the
medicines abovementioned: it comprehends every prophylactic remedy taken
internally. Can any thing be more absurd than to imagine, that a disease
received into the body by inoculation; a poison absorbed by the lymphatic
veins, and mixed with the general mass of circulating fluids, can be destroyed
by a medicine taken into the stomach? Is there any analogy in the history of
physic to authorize such expectations? Will any powder, pill, or bolus, stop
the progress of the smallpox by inoculation, or prevent it from taking effect?
Was there ever a physician weak enough to attempt to prevent any other
infectious disorder, after the poisonous liquid or miasmata were actually
absorbed?

80. Having thus, I hope not unfairly, considered the pretensions to
infallibility of the specifics introduced and recommended by particular men, we
are come at last to that sovereign remedy extolled by every writer on canine
madness, ancient and modern, and used in all countries, in every age, from the
days of Celsus to the present moment -- I mean bathing in cold water. To this
part of our subject I beg the reader's particular attention, because I am very
certain that many lives have been lost by a foolish dependence on this broken
reed. I have said that all writers on canine madness, ancient and modern, have
recommended cold-bathing; but I must except Dr. Falck, the author of The
Seaman's Medical Instructor, and Dr. Fothergill, who wrote a paper in the
London Medical Observations, Vol. v. p. 290.
purposely to prove the inefficacy of bathing in the sea.

81. The physician last mentioned was of opinion, that the practice of bathing
in salt water, as a preservative, originated in a mistake. Celsus directs the
patient, Cells. lib. v. c. 27.
actually laboring under the hydrophobia, to be thrown unexpectedly into a
fishpond: if he cannot swim, he is to be suffered to flounce and drink, raising
him a little now and then, so as to keep him from drowning; but, if he can
swim, he is to be frequently ducked, that in spite of himself he may be
satiated with water: "Thus (says Celsus) his thirst and dread of water will be
cured at the same time."

82. Celsus was mistaken in supposing that he could force the patient to drink
by holding him under water, or that, after being half drowned, he would look on
water with less horror, or swallow liquids with greater ease. The latter part
of this discipline is daily practiced, by the old women at the watering places,
on the wretched creatures that are sent by old women, male and female, from the
inland country. This practice of drowning the patient in order to cure him of
an aversion to water, absurd as it is, was probably taken from Celsus, who,
though a sensible man, possibly without experience or much reflection,
prescribed it on the authority of some Greek writer; but why the sea was
substituted for a fish pond, and how it came to pass that what Celsus ordered
as a cure for the hydrophobia actually present, should be applied as a
prophylactic, a preservative remedy, is difficult to conceive.

83. Who was the inventor of this immersion in salt water I cannot determine. I
am inclined to think that it originated in Holland or Flanders, in the days of
panaceas, charms, witches, and hobgoblins. That it was a common practice in the
Netherlands in the sixteenth century appears from the following passage from
Van Helmont; which, as his books are not in every library, and, I believe, were
never done into English, I shall endeavor to translate literally. -- "There is
a fortress on the seacoast, about four leagues from Ghent, called Sluice. There
I saw a ship passing by, and in it an old man, naked, bound, and weights
fastened to his feet. Under his arms they had tied a rope, the other end of
which was fixed to the yard-arm of the vessel. I asked the meaning of this
spectacle, and was answered by one of the sailors, that the old man had got the
hydrophobia, having, some time ago, been bit by a mad dog. Why, I asked, is he
brought to the sea? Whether they meant to drown him? 'No, no, (said the sailor)
he will soon be cured; such is the blessing of God upon the sea, that it will
instantly cure this kind of madness.' At my request they took me on board. We
had scarce sailed a mile, when the sailors, by pulling out a plug in the bottom
of the ship, let in the water, till she sunk almost to the edge of the gunwale.
This seawater they collected for the purpose of making salt. The plug being
now re-adapted, two men hauled down the opposite end of the yard, and thus
hoisted the old man into the air. They then let him drop into the sea, and he
remained under water ad spatium Miserere. They repeated this operation twice
more, keeping him each time under water ad spatium Salutationis Angelicae."

84. Some profane readers may possibly be inclined to comment ludicrously on
this spatium Salutationis Angelicae; but, choosing rather to treat the matter
seriously, I requested a friend to read over the Miserere, Psalm LI.
and found by my stop-watch, that he performed it in one minute and thirty-five
seconds; and the Salutatio Angelica in ten seconds. Van Helmont is not
sufficiently explicit in this important part of his narrative. Whether this was
only a method of computing time, or whether these psalms were actually repeated
during the immersion, does not appear. I am inclined to think they were: if so,
this capital omission in our old women on the sea coast sufficiently accounts
for their fallibility. But to proceed with Van Helmont's story.

85. "They then laid him on his back across a barrel, and covered him with a
watch-coat. I concluded he was dead; but the sailors ridiculed my
apprehensions. Being now released from his bonds, he discharged all the water
which he had inspired, and presently revived. He was a cooper from Ghent, and
being cured of his hydrophobia, continued perfectly well."

86. If the poor cooper remained long in that position, supino dorso super vas
teres, I marvel that he ever recovered. That the Dutch sailors should believe
that his lungs were full of water is no great wonder: Van Helmont should have
known better. There are, indeed, writers of some reputation, who tell us that
they have found water in the lungs and stomach of drowned subjects; but, waving
the improbability of the fact, later experiments prove incontestably that
drowning animals rarely imbibe any water; certainly no quantity to do them any
injury. Morgagni drowned guinea-pigs, hedge-hogs, Ep. xix. art. 41.
dormice, and other animals, and found on dissection little or no water in the
lungs or stomach of any of them. The opinion that drowned persons are full of
water, erroneous as it certainly is, prevails so universally among the
ignorant, that I am persuaded many have been prevented from recovering by
holding them up by the heels, or laying them on the side of a hill, with the
head downwards.

87. These Dutch skippers told Van Helmont, that a salt herring applied
immediately to the wound was an infallible cure for the bite of a mad dog, and
that half drowning in salt water was only necessary when this remedy had been
neglected; so that we have neither the authority of Celsus, nor the practice of
the Netherlands, to plead in favor of sea-bathing as a preservative. The case
of this cooper, if we believe that he was really so mad as to require being
fettered, affords a singular example of the hydrophobia actually cured by
immersion in salt water: it is indeed so singular, that I can produce but one
more on any tolerable authority. The instances in which it has failed, as a
prophylactic remedy and cure for the hydrophobia, are innumerable.

88. Morgagni, Epistle viii. Art. 23. tells us, that an hydrophobiac patient
was thrown into a cold bath, and held some time under water: he died the night
after. -- In Art. 25, we read of another who died soon after he was taken out
of the bath. -- Art. 26. After mentioning Van Helmont's cooper, and the case of
a girl recorded in the history of the Academy of Sciences at Paris, Ann. 1699.
Morgagni writes thus: "Immersion in cold water must have succeeded very
differently with others; since, beside Baccius, and him whom Parry pointed out,
not only Salius has written that he, after several times experience, had found
no advantage from this remedy, but also Caelius Aurelianus expressly
discommended it, as injurious. But Palmarius has admonished us, that it was
certain, from the experience of many, that this method of treatment had been
very unsuccessful."

89. Boerhaave's directions for bathing the patient in the sea, or in a river,
Aph. 1143.
are very singular. -- "Immediately after infection, with great preparation,
exciting fear, and after frequent threatenings, at last throw him into the
water." -- He then repeats the orders given by Celsus for half-drowning the
patient: "for (he adds) the cure is effected by the perturbation of the mind
(spiritum turbando) agitation of the animal spirits, and not by the salt water,
as we learn from the deplorable exit of the man who, after being bitten by a
mad dog, was ship-wrecked and swam a long time in the sea, frequently covered
by the waves, yet died of the hydrophobia." -- This being the case, threatening
to hang the patient would answer the same purpose. Here, I think, sea-bathing
seems to be fairly given up.

90. Dr. Mead, speaking of sea-bathing as a preservative, says, "I have known
many to have died raving mad who had undergone this treatment." -- "I will not
(says Dr. James) pretend to determine how much more effectual bathing in the
sea may be than in cold fresh water. Page 235.
It is certain that many that have been almost drowned in the sea have soon
after died of the hydrophobia; and I knew a gentleman who took thirty couple of
fox-hounds to the sea, and had them dipped with all manner of caution;
notwithstanding which, he lost several hounds every day he took out the pack."
-- In the Edinburgh Medical Essays, we read of a boy, bit by a mad dog, who was
ten times dipped in the sea, yet died of the hydrophobia some months after. --
Dr. Fothergill, in his Additional Remarks on the treatment of persons bit by
mad animals, addressed to the editors of the Medical Observations, etc. says:
"I have heard of diverse instances, P. 290.
and I have no doubt but you are as well satisfied as myself; and perhaps from
your own observation, that this process (sea-bathing) is by no means a
preservative from the fatal consequences of the bite of mad animals." --
Desault, a physician at Bourdeaux, in his treatise sur la Rage gives his
opinion on this subject in the following words: "When I am applied to by a
person bit by a mad animal, I order him to bathe in the sea, though I have no
dependence on this remedy, since the many proofs we have had of its inefficacy
in the course of the present year." -- Choisel, a Jesuit residing at
Pondicherry, in a pamphlet published at Paris in 1756, in which he relates many
examples of canine madness cured by mercurial friction, says: "Bathing in the
sea has hitherto been considered as an infallible preservative from this
disorder. My own experience proves the futility of that opinion. Not one of
those who depended solely on this remedy survived the bite more than
thirty-three days."

91. I presume the reader is, by this time, satisfied as to the efficacy of
bathing. The reason why it continues, in the present age, to be used as a
prophylactic remedy for the bite of a mad dog, is the same which may be
assigned for a thousand other foolish customs -- our fathers did so before us;
and their reason was, that their fathers did so before them: but from what
theory the inventor of this remedy deduced his prescription is not easily
imagined. All medicines must have originated either in reasoning a priori, or
from some fortuitous event. The first, I think, is, in this case, out of the
question: I conclude, therefore, that some person bit by a dog, supposed to be
mad, accidentally fell into a horse-pond. He continued well; ergo, the
hydrophobia was prevented by a ducking. The reputation of some other medicines
in constant use for other diseases is not a whit better supported.

92. Aurelianus, in his chapter enti^led Quomodo curandi sunt hydrophobi, Cap.
16.
exhibits the various prescriptions of all the authors he had read upon this
subject. Most of them deserve no notice. I shall select a few however which,
doubtless, the reader will think too important to be neglected: -- "Let the
patient's chamber be tolerably warm and lightsome. -- Let the part that was
bitten be covered with a piece of clean warm flannel. -- If it be necessary to
bleed him, let the blood be received in the hand of the assistant, lest the
noise of its falling into the basin should affect the patient. -- Talk to him
about washing and drinking, and, if he hears this patiently, you may then give
him something to drink; if not, you may let him suck through the spout of a
tea-pot, covering his eyes or darkening the room. -- Let his nurses be discrete
and not Aurelianus did not mean female nurses.
loquacious. -- Let his head be shaved. -- Let him be exercised in a hammock or
a sedan. -- If he refuses to take any liquid in at his mouth, force it into the
other end of him; but, take care that you do not administer too great a
quantity, lest it squirt in your face. This perilous operation being happily
accomplished, you are then to squeese his, or her, belly, so as to force the
contents upwards, and thereby quench the patient's thirst. Tullius Bassus (says
our author) besides clysters gave his patients a pinch or two of snuff; whose
friend Dr. Black gave white hellebore, of which some physicians order a
cataplasm to the patient's backside."

93. "Paracelsus (says Van Helmont) affirmed, Demen's idea, p. 287.
that the hydrophobia might be cured by acrid purgatives. His promises,
however, are not justified by the event. Our good Catholics, therefore,
despairing of relief from the faculty, repair to St. Hubert, at whose shrine,
by virtue of certain ceremonies, they are cured; but, it is worthy of remark,
that if these ceremonies are not strictly observed, the latent rabies
immediately breaks out, and they become irrecoverably hydrophobic. There is a
vestment of St. Hubert's, which is preserved in a chest, secured by six locks,
the keys of which are kept by six different Vergers. For these fourscore years
past they have been continually cutting off pieces from this holy vestment;
nevertheless it remains, to this day, perfectly entire. Now, it is impossible
there should be any imposture in the case; for they have never been able to
discover whether this miraculous robe be of linen, woollen, or of silk,
consequently it cannot be annually renewed. They cut off a piece of the robe,
and incarnate a thread between the skin of the patient's forehead. Hence
another miracle; for a person thus cured becomes possessed of a power to
postpone the hydrophobia during forty days in any of his acquaintance, who,
after being bitten, may not have leisure immediately to visit St. Hubert: on
this condition, however, that if they exceed the forty days ever so little,
without applying for a prorogation of the term, they go mad irrecoverably."

94. Those who are conversant with books on this subject, will ask, why I have
taken no notice of the celebrated powder invented by Palmerius? -- I have two
reasons: first, because it deserves no notice; secondly, because it is never
prescribed in this kingdom, and therefore can do no mischief. I have omitted
several other infallible medicines for the same reason. An idle display of
medical erudition on so trite a subject were ridiculous. I sat down solely with
a design to convince the less informed part of the community, that their
opinions concerning the prevention of canine madness, or hydrophobia, are
fatally erroneous, inasmuch as that dependence precludes the application of
more rational means. I determined to employ a few leisure hours on this
subject, because Boerhaave, Mead, and other physicians of high reputation, have
authorized such irrational dependence.

95. But this is not the sole mischief of which the erroneous opinions of
eminent men are productive. Dr. Mead, fully persuaded of the all sufficiency of
his Pulvis Antilyssus, endeavors most irrationally, to divert his readers from
an attention to the wound. These are his words -- "The ancient physicians, P.
88.
who are followed in this by the moderns, advise, where the place will admit of
it, to enlarge the wound by incision; to apply a cupping-glass; to burn it with
a hot iron, and to keep a discharge from the ulcer for many days. I cannot but
say, that I think all this severity useless." -- "It happens in most cases that
the wound, being small, P. 89.
is healed up before the patient seeks for help. For this reason, and because
it is of no great consequence whether it be cured or not, in the paper which I
printed and dispersed some years since, entitled, A certain cure for the bite
of a mad dog, I took no notice of any outward application." -- I will, without
hesitation, venture to pronounce this the most pernicious doctrine that ever
was taught by any physician ancient or modern. It affords one of the most
flagrant examples in the annals of medicine, of a sensible man and a scholar
sacrificing his reason, his common sense, to a preconceived hypothesis. He
imagined that the poison contained in the saliva of the enraged animal
contaminated a nervous fluid -- which has no existence; and that this poison
might be carried off by a diuretic medicine -- which is certainly neither
diuretic nor any thing else. He advised cold bathing, because, on mechanical
principles, he supposed that the external pressure of the water, by
constringing the vascular system, would determine the segregated poison to the
kidneys, and so assist the operation of his Pulvis Antilyssus.

96. Before I prescribe that which I conceive to be the only rational means of
preventing the fatal effect of the bite of a mad dog, it is necessary that I
should answer a very natural question. -- If (says the reader) the several
specifics above condemned are really good for nothing, how comes it that so
many persons bit by mad dogs are daily cured by the Ormskirk medicine, bathing
in the sea, etc.? -- If this were not what is called begging the question, I
should be distressed for an answer; but the truth is, that all those who
believe themselves cured by these futile preservative remedies were never
infected; and consequently no harm would have happened, whether they had used
them or not. Fortunately for mankind, not one in fifty of the dogs supposed to
be mad are really mad; and of those few that are so, their teeth are often
wiped clean by the clothing of the person bit, and consequently no inoculation
takes place. It happens also, as in all other infectious diseases, that the
body is frequently not disposed to receive the infection. These, and these
only, are the causes of all the transitory reputation which the various
infallible medicines have from time to time acquired.

97. Nevertheless, as the case is always doubtful -- as possibly the dog may be
actually mad, and the poison really imbibed, nothing can be more imprudent than
to depend on the chance of its being otherwise: we are, therefore, to act as if
we were certain that dog was a mad dog. The person bit must immediately apply
his mouth to the wound, and continue to suck it during ten minutes or a quarter
of an hour, frequently spitting out, and washing his mouth after each time with
water, warm or cold, no matter which. If the wound be in a part of his body
which he cannot reach with his mouth, possibly he may prevail on some rational
friend to do him this kind office; especially when I assure him, positively
assure him, that it may be done without the least danger. My own son, then
about eight years old, in returning from school, was bit by a dog in the thigh.
My eldest daughter, being informed of the accident, without the least
hesitation immediately sucked the wound. She had heard me say it might be done
with safety. The dog was certainly not mad; but I relate the story in justice
to her affectionate intrepidity, which, in a young girl, was somewhat
extraordinary.

98. Neither ancient nor modern writers, if I remember right, have advised
sucking the wound received by the bite of a mad dog: Lib. III. c. 2.
yet Galen, in his book de Temperaments, says, that the saliva of this animal
is not equally dangerous when admitted into the stomach; therefore, it is
probable that, in some part of his voluminous writings, he may have mentioned
this experiment. But, in the bite of a venomous serpent, Lib. V. c. 27. P. 37.
Celsus, and after him Dr. Mead, lays great stress on this preservative
application. It is very extraordinary, that in one case the Doctor should deem
it of so much, and in the other, of so little importance. The first of these
authors assures us, that the Psylli, a people who pretended to an hereditary
and exclusive power of curing the bite of serpents by suction, owed their
success solely to their resolution; for, says he, Venenum non gustu, sed in
vulnere nocet; adding, "whoever, therefore, sucks the wound after the example
of these Psylli, will save his friend, and do himself no injury."

99. Dr. Mead was informed by a surgeon who lived in Virginia, Mead, P. 40.
that the Indians there cure the bite of the rattlesnake by first sucking the
wound This is also a common practice in the Highlands of Scotland. See
Pennant's Tour. append. p. 275.
, and then swallowing a large quantity of a decoction of the rattle-snake root,
so as to vomit plentifully. Now, that the decoction contributes nothing toward
the cure, I presume will be readily admitted; sucking the wound, therefore, is
the sole remedy, which was certainly dictated by the natural sagacity of this
people. That this cure is effectual is confirmed by the case of a man in
London, who, being bit by a rattle-snake brought from Virginia, sucked the
wound, and recovered. "As the poison (says Dr. Mead) of this snake is more
quick and deadly than any other that we know, Mead, p. 38.
a remedy for this will most certainly prove effectual against that of smaller
vipers, and all other creatures of this kind" -- and why not of every other
kind? Was not the analogy sufficiently obvious? If the poison of a serpent may
be sucked from a wound, is there any reason to imagine that the virus in the
saliva of a dog may not? But then the infallible Pulvis Antilyssus would have
been of no use. Seriously, I believe, that if this simple operation were
immediately and resolutely performed, no other remedy would be required. The
best medicines are often the most simple, and those which are nearest at hand.
We are too apt superciliously to overlook the simple dictates of nature and
common sense, to the discredit of our profession, and the loss of our patients.
Art, chemistry, compounds, and systems, are the hobby-horses of young
physicians; and it is not till they have grown old in the profession, that they
return to Nature and Hippocrates.

100. But, though I have great dependence on this simple preservative remedy,
we cannot be provided with too many weapons; offensive and defensive, against
so formidable an enemy. Those who want resolution to attack the foe personally,
will be glad of a substitute. That substitute is a cupping glass, or any other
vessel that will answer the same purpose. If no surgeon be present take a
pretty large piece of paper; twist it gently, so that it may easily be thrust
into a narrow-mouthed jug; light the paper well, and, having put it into the
vessel, fix it tight over the wound, and let it remain in that position till it
may be easily taken off. Repeat this operation three or four times.

101. Ancient and modern writers on this subject have generally advised searing
the wound with a hot iron; partly with a design to destroy the poison, but
particularly with an intention to produce an ulcer. This, I think not only an
unnecessary, but a pernicious act of cruelty. Let us suppose that a particle of
the poison, sufficient to communicate the disease, is absorbed by a lymphatic
vein, what will be the effect of the application of a red hot iron to the
extremity of that vein, after such absorption? Will it not immediately shrink
and shrivel? and will not the reduction of the poisonous fomes, by any external
application, be thus effectually prevented?

102. The wound being now wiped dry with lint or tow, let two drachms of
mercurial ointment be rubbed into it, and let the part be then covered by a
blistering plaster somewhat longer than the wound. As soon as a bladder is
perceived to have risen under the plaster, raise the edge of it, and let out
the lymph; and, in order to keep it running, let it be daily dressed, during
fourteen days or longer, with an ointment composed of equal parts of Emplastrum
vesicatorium, and Unguentum coerubeum fortius, P. L. melted together in a very
gentle heat. Let a dram of mercurial ointment be rubbed into the fore part of
the legs of the patient every other night, and on the nights intervening let
him take a bolus, composed of three or four grains of Calomel, six grains of
Camphore, and a dram of Conserve of Roses. If any signs of salivation should
appear, it must be checked by a day or two's suspension, and a dose of
Glauber's Salt.

103. It may possibly be asked, on what foundation I have differed from so many
eminent writers in not advising immediate scarification? -- I answer, because
they advised scarification on a groundless supposition. They imagined that the
canine virus was communicated to the blood; therefore they wisely ordered the
blood thus contaminated to be drawn away; but I conceive the poisonous fomes to
be absorbed by the lymphatic vessels, and, therefore, I prefer blistering the
part.

104. Every person who, from the bite of a dog really mad, has received the
fatal poison, whose constitution is at that time disposed for such infection,
and who has ignorantly depended on sea-bathing, or on any specific taken
internally, will, most certainly, in the space of a few weeks, perceive
symptoms of the approaching catastrophy, called hydrophobia. In this stage of
the disease I fear there is very little probability of recovery. I have, in
paragraph 72, perhaps rather wantonly, advised intoxication; I am still of
opinion that it is an experiment worth trying. It can certainly do no harm. I
remember somewhere to have read of opium, in large doses, being successfully
administered; but I do not find this practice confirmed by experience. Powerful
anti-spasmodics are certainly indicated.

105. In the 4th paragraph of this essay, I mentioned the case of a young
gentleman, whom I attended in the last stage of this horrible disorder. He had
been bitten by one of his father's hounds, six or seven weeks before. A day or
two before I saw him he complained of a pain in the arm which had been bitten,
gradually extending toward his shoulder. He had taken many doses of the
expressed juice of Ribwort, which in that country was universally deemed a
specific, and had bathed every day in the river. I saw him about ten in the
morning. He complained of nothing but a pain in his arm, and some little
difficulty in swallowing. I ordered a warm bath to be prepared, in which he sat
half an hour with great composure. I rubbed a considerable quantity of
mercurial ointment into each arm, and gave him a grain of crude opium every
hour, till nine or ten o'clock at night, without the least effect. About eleven
he became extremely restless, and died at twelve, retaining his senses to the
last moment, without any symptoms of madness, or propensity to bite his
attendants.

106. This pamphlet, inconsiderable as it may appear to some readers, was not
written stans pede in uno; it was nearly finished before the publication of Dr.
Cullen's third volume of First Lines of the Practice of Physic. I saw, in that
volume, with infinite satisfaction, my own opinion, concerning the cure of the
disease in question, confirmed by that of my venerable preceptor, who concludes
his chapter on canine madness with these words. -- "Whilst the state of our
experience, with respect to several remedies now in use, is uncertain, I cannot
venture to assert that any of these is absolutely ineffectual; but I can give
it as my opinion, that the efficacy of mercury given very largely, and
persisted in for a long time, both as a means of preventing the disease, and of
curing it when it has actually come on, is better vouched by experience than
that of any other remedy now proposed, or commonly employed."

107. This Essay may possibly be read by persons who live in the country, at
some distance from an apothecary, and consequently, in case of an accident, it
may be many hours before any mercurial ointment can be procured. Such readers
will necessarily ask, what then is to be done? -- Whilst the person bit is
sucking the wound, let a spoonful of lard, or tallow, or fat of any kind, be
melted, and immediately, with the hand, rubbed into the part, continuing the
operation until the fat be entirely absorbed. Let him then take his horse and
ride leisurely to the nearest apothecary, who will proceed as above directed.

108. On the testimony of Dessault, and the Jesuit Choisel, particularly the
latter, mercury appears to be a certain antidote for the poison of a mad dog.
The first used mercury only in the ointment: Choisel, besides using the
ointment, gave also a mercurial bolus. They both succeeded. From Dessault's
practice we learn, that mercury externally applied is sufficient; but evidence
is wanting to prove that mercury taken internally, without the external
application of the ointment, will prevent the hydrophobia. May we not,
therefore, hazard a conjecture, that the lard or fat of which the mercurial
ointment is made is the real preservative? Is not this conjecture powerfully
supported by the analogy between the canine poison and that of a viper, which
is effectually destroyed by viper's fat, or oil of any kind, applied to the
part? I mention this merely as a conjecture, future experiments may possibly
discover it to be a fact: meanwhile, when mercurial ointment can be had,
doubtless it ought to be preferred.

THE END.

