Daniel Defoe (...)



ADVICE TO ALL PARTIES.

By the Author of The True-born Englishman.

LONDON, Printed: And are to be Sold by Benj Bragg, at the Blue-Ball in
Ave-Mary-Lane. MDCCV.

THE PREFACE.
THese Sheets having, with their unhappy Author, fallen into the Barbarous and
Unjust Hands of the late Ministry, had never seen the Light, had not Providence
seemed to reserve them for two Ends:

1. As a standing Monument of the dext'rous Management of a certain most
Exquisite Statesman, whose strictest Scrutiny all these Papers past, and yet
came home as Things relating to the Author's private Concerns, and with them
several other Manuscripts, which no body but such an over-vigilant Minister
would have parted with.

2. As a Subject for which there was yet a more proper Juncture coming, when it
would be more than ordinary useful.

(...) ^^bition of all his Actions: He is sure it cannot be (...) ^rinciple is
the Good of (...) Country; they that want Advice, it may do good to; they that
want it not, (...) can do no harm to.

The Tendency of this, as of all he writes, is the general Peace of Parties, a
Subject never to be sufficiently pursued and embraced by all honest Men in this
Nation, as that without which we are undone at Home, ruined Abroad, and must,
at last, fall a Prey to the Invading Power of Popery and Foreigners.

Advice to all Parties,
HE that gives his Advice before it is asked, expects no Fee for his Counsel;
and so the Author of these Sheets stands clear from the Scandal of Bribery.

If the Gifts of the Spirit qualify a Man for Teaching his Neighbors; by the
same Rule, if any Man knows more than another, he may tell him his Mind, and
then every one is free to do what he pleases.

The Author, though he is no professed Statesman, may pass for a gifted Brother
that way: If he says nothing to the purpose, yet hear him; and if he says any
thing that is to the purpose, hear him, and no more.

Whatever the World may say of him, they cannot imagine him to be such a Fool,
as to think he shall please every Body. What suits the Wise Man, will not please
the Fool: If the Honest-man is contented, the Knaves will murmur: Peace will not
please the Soldier, nor Plenty the Farmer: Truth will please the Wiseman; and
he that cannot discern it, is a Fool worth no Body's Notice.

The World is made up of a Conjunction of Contraries, and the Harmony is the
more Admirable: So the Times dilcover a Conjunction of opposite Parties, which
if they can be brought to keep the Peace, the Union would be something
wonderful.

Before we come to talk with the Gentlemen concerned, 'will be needful to
separate the Parties Sheep and Goats, Birds of a Feather; set every Sort by
themselves, with their Characters and Descriptions, that all People may look
out and know them, and look in and know which sort they belong to.

We are at present the most divided Nation in Europe, the Jest of all the
World. The Polanders are Fools to us: We have among us, as some have observed,
three or four and thirty sorts of Religions, and twelve or thirteen Severals in
Politics. In Religion, here are Christians and Jews, Papists and Protestants,
Heathens, Pagans, Idolaters, and Atheists, worse than any of them, Deists,
Anti-Deists, Socinians, Arminians, Pelagians, Gnostics, Donatists, Adamites,
Sweet-singers, Enthusiasts, Families of Love, Arians, Antinomians,
Free-willers, Seventh-day Men, Universal Redemptioners, Asgelites, Quietists,
Lutherans, Calvinists, Hugonots, Church of England Men of several Sorts,
Puritans, Presbyterians, Independants, Anabaptists, Quakers,
Fifth-Monarchy-Men, and the D^ and all (...). If but one Sort of these are in
the right, God knows which Sort that is, and the Lord have Mercy on all the
rest. If all Sorts may be in the right, than it is no Matter what Sort a Man's
of, and there is no need of any Strife about the Matter.

In Matters of Politics, the numerous Kinds have obtained the Sir-names of
Court-party and Country-party, Tories, Whigs, Trimmers, Loyalist, Royalist,
Commonwealths-men, Williamites, Jacobites, High Church, Low Church, and No
Church, Non-Jurants or Church-Dissenters, Church Whigs, and abundance of other
Sorts, which the Custom of the Times have been pleased to give Titles to.

But when all these Names are made use of, with many more, by way of Contempt
upon one another, to show our Want of Goodnature, as well as Want of Manners;
the real unhappy Differences of this Nation seem to lie among the Parties at
Court that lately had the Ministry, and those that have it now; between the
Furioso's in the Church, who are for carrying all before them, and the Moderate
Men in the Church, who are for Peace joined with the Dissenters, who are for
the Liberty they enjoy being preserved.

To these Gentlemen the following Advice is directed: If they think it is good,
they will accept the Hint, or come under the Class of Solomon's Fools, that hate
Instruction: If they contemn it, they ought to show a Reason for it, or else
they are in Solomon's Reach again; He that judges of a Matter before he hears
it, it is Folly and Shame unto him.

Temerity in Politics, is certainly the most impolitick thing in the World.
Too much Haste may do Harm, but seldom does Good; and and one would think, the
late Reign of King James might be a Memento mori to all the Sons of Jehu either
in Church or State.

He is certainly the Friend of such men, who advises them to check their Career
before they go too far; because such Tempers always run on to their own
Confusion as well as other People's.

But, to tell who I mean without going far about, There Is a sort of People
among us, who, after their Tears of Joy for the Death of King William were
dried up, began to be comforted very early with the Halcyon Days of Queen Ann;
and, as if they had made their Conditions with her before Hand, they gave a
Loose to their Passions, and discover their Satisfaction, in the Country
Coffee-Houses, in Terms like these: -- Well Boys! Now we shall have brave Times
again. Brave Times! says his honest Neighbor, who was melancholy still for
the Nation's Lois; Why what is the Matter? Matter! why, we have got a Church of
England Queen, and all these damned Phanaticks will go down again. We'll have
them all turned out now. We'll have no more Canting within the Noise of our
Church Bells, no Tub-Preaching, no Barn-meeting, no Whiggish Justices now, that
a poor Man cannot get a Cup of Beer in his Crown of a Sunday after Sermon, but
his Neighbor shall be plaguing him with the Stocks: And if he happen to swear
an Oath, or so, to be teased with Informers, that a Man cannot take a Glass of
Wine after Sermon, but he shall be Fined and Exposed for it; here has been such
a ^plutter with your Reformation of Manners and your Dutch Government: We have
an English Queen, and a true Church of England Queen, and down you go: We'll
have your Meeting Houses about your Ears quickly.

That this is Matter of Fact, that this was the Discourse not in the Mouths of
here and there a Fool, but of a whole Party, I Will at any time set my Name to
the Charge; And I suppose no Body need put me upon the Proof.

Nor was Her Majesty's Declaration to her Council, or Speeches to the
Parliament, or Her Answers to the Dissenters Addresses, of any Weight with
these sort of People; though Her Majesty took exceeding Care, on all Occasions,
to make all Her Subjects easy, by giving them Assurances, First, That She would
be a Religious Observer of Her Royal Word; And then giving Her Royal Word, that
She would Maintain the Toleration, and give Her Protection to the Dissenters.

Let me tell those Gentlemen, that they are guilty of two Crimes; First, great
Indiscretion, in showing their Teeth, before the Muzzle which the Laws have put
upon them is taken off, and that they have no Power to bite. Secondly, So much
want of Manners and Respect, that should the Author write half so much Satyr
upon the Queen in this Book, it is to be thought he would write himself into
Newgate, and very well he would deserve it.

What can the English of such Language be other than this; That the Queen made
such Promises of Protection to the Dissenters, and continuing the Toleration,
only to quiet their Minds at Her first Accession, and 'till She is Settled in
the Throne, or perhaps 'till the War abroad is over; but She does not design to
keep her Promise with them, but they shall all be suppressed as soon as
Opportunity offers? And truly Gentlemen, Her Majesty is very much beholden to
you.

The short Advice the Author thinks fit to give such People, is, to hold their
Tongues, and have more Manners than affront the Queen at so Impudent a Rate;
and since they have shown their good Will, let them be quiet till their (...)
comes, (...) Her Majesty being informed of their rudeness, should think fit to
give the Nation a further Assurance of Her Justness to Her Promises, by
punishing them for their raising a Scandal upon her Veracity.

A second sort of People, which the Author pretends to give Advice to, are
such, as upon the Queen's Dissolving Her first Parliament, and Calling a New
one, pretended to tell us what brave things that approaching Parliament would
do for them.

We have now gotten a Church-Parliament, a Loyal Church-of -England Parliament,
say they, and now we will do your Business, and this Parliament shall (...) us
all to Rights again. Now, we'll dismount the Two Bulwarks of Whiggish Hopes;
for this Parliament shall repeal the (...) of Toleration, and the Settlement of
the Crown: They shall leave the English Throne to be, as it always was,
Hereditary, and let Right Line and Descent take place; that English Loyalty may
flourish, and the Prerogatives of Princes be no more invaded, nor the Nation be
governed by Dutchmen and Foreigners.

I believe no Body will dispute with me the Truth of Fact, that this was the
Talk, not of a Single Person, or of a few, but of a Party, their Common, their
Table, their Coffee-House Discourse.

How to comment upon such Insolence, I hardly know: This is an Iniquity to be
punished by the Judge. -- And if the House of Commons did not take Cognizance
of such People, it was, because they restrained their Resentment of such
Affronts more than any House of Commons ever did before them.

As to the last Parliament, the Author has no Business to say any thing of
their Religion: But, I think, all our Parliaments have been Church-Parliaments;
nor is there any Doubt but they always will be so. But what sort of Doings is
this with Parliaments, if they are to be anticipated, led by a Party, and told
beforehand what they shall do.

If this sort of People conferred with the Members, and concerted with them
beforehand, what should, or should not, be done; if so, we had then such a
Parliament as never was before.

But if these Gentlemen did this only to inflame Parties, only to let us see
what they would have done, what Design they were driving at, it is time for the
Nation to open their Eyes, and Examine who they are.

The Act of Settlement is the Foundation on which the Nation stands: It Is the
Sacred Pillar of the present Government, and on it may be very well placed the
Scotch Motto, Nemo me Impune Lacessit: It Is the Sanctum Sanctorum, near which
no Man may approach, without a Blast from the Breath of the whole Community:
This is the Ark of our Israel, before which the Dagon of the Jure Divino Men is
fallen, with his Head and his Hands knocked off: It Is the Pedestal of the
English Throne; which if it be removed, the whole Column of the Government
sinks, and the Capital, which is the present Queen, must fall with it: Her
present Majesty can have no Right to the Crown, if King James left a Son, but
by the Act of Settlement.

Now, it is worthy of Remark, that the Gentlemen who talk of repealing the Act
of Settlement, don't do it barely because the Crown is not thereby limited to
their liking: But they are for repealing it as a thing not legal in its own
Nature; they would have the Parliament disown the Right of Limiting the Crown,
and acknowledge a Right of Succession Jure Divino, That Kings of all Religions
or Principles, must be submitted to, if they come of the Race; That the Right
Line must succeed, and it is not in the Power of the People of England, either
Collectively or Representatively, to question their Princes, or to oppose their
Oppressive unjust Proceedings. -- The latent Consequences of this will come in
at the last; viz. That the late Revolution was an Act of Rebellion against God
and the King; That it was a Violence offered to God's Vicegerent, against
Justice and Allegiance; That King William was an Invader of another Man's
Right, an Usurper, and a Tyrant; and so we are all a-comming, Gentlemen, to the
old Point against Passive Obedience, Non-Resistance, Dispensing Power, and all
the Absurdities and ridiculous Contradictions of the late Reigns come into Play
again, and we have spent thirteen Years War, a Mass of English Money, and a Sea
of English Blood to a fine purpose.

This is one Design, in striking at the Act of Settlement; another is to
supplant the House of Hanover, because, forsooth, they don't like them. They
are ashamed to own what they would have; but the Case is so plain, that it
needs no Comment. A late Author has published the Life of King James; and,
taking no Notice of this Act, says, "King James died, and left one Son, and two
Daughters. Now, what is the Language of this Party? If we must submit to the
Queen's reigning before her Brother, because she is Crowned, and has
Possession, we cannot help it; but we are next Oars, and there is no reason to
expel the rest of his Family; Here is a Son and a Daughter; we may have them
home, make Protestants of them, and never run up into Germany for an old Woman,
and her Dutch Progeny to Reign over us.

Here is the plain English of the Design, a Design, which aims at the Root and
Fundamental Part of our Constitution; And though there is no great Danger of the
thing, yet it is plain they push at it with all their Might.

As to this Act of Settlement: First, The Queen who Reigns by Virtue of such a
Settlement, has not once, but several times given Her Royal Promise to maintain
it: So that if ever such an unhappy Time should come, that a Parliament should
offer to disannul it, we have Her Majesty's Honor, which we trust will never
forsake her, to have recourse to as a Check to the fatal Mischief: And if both
Queen and Parliament should be so mistaken, and so much Blindness from above
should in Judgment to them be their Portion; the Native Original Right of the
People of England, as the Fountain of Power and Government, will come up, and
give a Negative to the Execution. What will any new Settlements of the Crown,
that may be made, amount to, if the People of England, who have an undoubted
Right to the Government themselves, should contradict them at the Time they
would Enter upon the Possession, with this general Negative, We will not have
this Man to Reign over us.

The Safety of the English Nation, rests in, and depends upon themselves. The
People of England are a Security to the People of England, for a Preservation
of all their own Essential Right; and among the rest, this is the chief, to be
governed by Princes of their own Nomination, and Laws of their own making. No
Prince can Reign here, but by the Consent of the People; and by no Laws, but
such as become Laws by the Consent of the People: It has been in vain attempted
to bug-bare the Nation into Villenage and Vassalage; but the Liberties of
England has always been like the Stone in the Gospel, whosoever has fallen
against them, has been broken to pieces; and on whomsoever they have fallen,
has been groun'd to Powder.

The English Nation has not many more Liberties than they had before; but they
know them better than they did.

We know now, that our Princes are circumscribed by the Laws and Constitutions
of the Nation, are obliged to Govern justly, and perform the Stipulation of
Government declared in two Acts of Parliament: We know, that if they Issue out
illegal Commands, it is no Treason to disobey. If a Prince should Levy Money by
Arbitrary Authority, any Freeholder may refuse to Pay it, and be guilty of no
Crime: If it is Levied by Force, he may oppose it with Force, and yet be no
Rebel.

We know the very Parliament themselves cannot dispense with the Law, but in a
Parliamentary Way: No Law can cease to be a Law, till repealed by the same
Power that made it; and nothing can have the Force of a Law in England, but
what has the People's Consent in Parliament.

The Power of Parliament, and how far the Members are accountable to their
Principals, is not for me to determine; but this I venture to say, that without
Doubt a Member of Parliament is to have some Regard, in Honor, to the
Inclination of the People he serves, at least, not to act what he knows is
contrary to their Desire.

It Is plain, that the Act of Settlement is the most Valuable thing in the
Government, as the Security we have against future Slavery: It Is the Account we
are to give to our Children of our Care for their Safety: It Is the Bulwark of
the Nation against Popery and Tyrany; and none but the Enemies of our Liberties
can wish to see it Repealed. It Is our double Security; First as it is an
Acknowledgment of the People's Power to limit the Crown; and Secondly, as it
has effectually declared the Right of the Subject, their Liberties, and just
Priviledes, under such as shall Reign hereafter.

Some have thought, that the Party in a certain House, who made it their
business to limit, thwart, and affront the late King William, particularly as
to the Matter of the Army, and afterward the Grants of Lands in Ireland, while
they carried on their private Pique at the King, involuntarily and unwarily set
their Hands to the Peoples Liberties, and made such Declarations of the Rights
of the Subject, as they would be glad to have now undone if they could; if they
were led into this by another Party, they were tricked with a Vengeance: But a
Learned Gentleman, who was formerly a great Jure Divino Man, was pleased to say
of it with an Oath, We are going to make our selves all Kings, only to cross
one King.

But let the Design have been what it will, the People's Liberties were
Recognized by some Gentlemen; who, if it should have been told them formerly,
that they should have done so and so, would have answered with the Assyrian
Captain; Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do these things?

To these, and all the Gentlemen of that Party, who aim at altering the Act of
Settlement, our Advice is short, Have a Care, Gentlemen, what you do: Methinks
you should not have the Face to expect, or the Impudence to desire the Queen to
break her Word, the Parliament Men to Act contrary to the Interest and
Inclination of the People that chose them, a Papist set upon the Throne, a
rupudiated Impostor Acknowledged, an Abjured Race received. It Is true, all Acts
of Parliament may, as Acts, be repealed by Parliament; but some things are in
their own Nature to be continued; this cannot be repealed; if the Queen should
break her Word, which it is base to suppose, even if the Parliament should
consent: Who shall absolve us of an Abjuration Oath? Who shall reconcile the
Nation to a French and Popish Prince? The meaning is only Confusion and
Distraction, and the End will certainly be the destruction of all that shall
ever attempt it; and therefore I think it as kind a piece of Counsel as can be
given; Gentlemen, have a Care; for you will certainly miscarry in the Attempt.
Popery and Slavery will never go down with this Nation: Popery is so formidable
a thing, that the very Name of it would set the whole Nation in an Uproar:
Those that do not understand it, hate it by Tradition; and I believe there is a
hundred thousand plain Country-Fellows in England, would spend their Blood
against Popery, that do not know whether it be a Man or a Horse.

Let such People therefore have a Care, the People of England provoked, are not
easily appeased: Let them remember the Consternation they were in 16 Years ago,
when the Resentment of the People of England hung over the Heads of a whole
Party: And let them rest assured,

The Act of Settlement, and Limitation of the Crown, with the Recognition of
the Peoples Rights, are the very things the War, the Revolution, and the
Dismission of King James were made for: These were the Port the whole Nation
steered for, and this Nation will never part with them. Now, they are safe,
they can never have any Tyrant, but by their own Consent, and if they are
Slaves again, they must do it themselves, and no body will pity them.

The next sort of People, to whom these Sheets are directed, by way of Caution
or Advice, are, First, The late Ministry.

To you, Gentlemen, the Author directs himself without any thing of Satyr;
which, considering how you treated him, you might reasonably expect; but
stating your Case as it really is, refers you to your selves, to reflect upon
the profound Policy of your Ways.

Her Majesty taking you for wise Men, as well as honest Men, comcommitted to
your Conduct the guiding of her Affairs: War abroad, Peace at home, Her
Majesty's Glory, the Nation's Happiness, were all in your Power: You had what
Solomon calls a Price put into your Hands, and Solomon, not I, shall tell you
what you ought to be thought, for not making such Improvement of it, as God and
the Nation expected from you.

That you were the honest Men the Queen expected you to be, let the Answers you
gave to the Proposals for relieving the Camisars, the Expedition to Cadiz, the
Management of the Victualing-Office, the Army and Navy, in too many Particulars
to be innumerated here, speak for you, if they can; the Forfeiture of your
Honor and Word on sundry Occasions, the Connived Correspondencies with the
Enemy, and the like, let them answer for the Matter: That your Consummate
Wisdom deceived her Majesty, whose Goodness had Entertained better Thoughts of
you, than your Merit gave Reason for, will too plainly appear in the weak
Attempts made to cover the farther Dishonesty of your Designs in pushing this
Nation into all manner of Feuds, Heats, Animosities, and Strife of Parties, to
the no small Confusion of the Public Affairs, and hazarding the Public Peace.

How you would have extricated her Majesty and this Nation out of the Labyrints
of Error, and the Impolicies you were driving the Public Affairs into, we
thank her Majesty's Prudence that she did not think fit to expect, not thinking
it safe to run the risque of calling you Fools at the Price of some Mischiefs
too gross to be born with, and too late to be remedied.

It is sufficient, that her Majesty, finding both the Dishonesty and Folly of
your Management, and foreseeing the precipiece on which you had brought the
Public Affairs, had both the Wisdom and the Courage to take the Reins out of
your Hands before you had quite over-turn'd the Chariot of the State, and
before you had hurried both us and your selves into Gulfs of irretrievable
Confusions.

The humble Advice of the Author of these Sheets to you, is, To sit down and be
quiet, thank God on your Knees, Night and Day, that you had a mild, a merciful,
and a gentle Mistress, that let you fall softly, and did not tie the Weight of
the Law to your Heels, which would have sunk you to the Bottom of that Gulf, in
which false Favorites have generally fallen in all Ages of the World.

Thank God and the Queen, That Her Majesty did not give you time to ruia your
selves, but took the Knife out of your Hand, before you did that Mischief with
it that must at last have fallen with a double Weight on your own Heads.

Madmen and Fools are always taken care of by their Friends, mischievous
Weapons taken from them; and if they are not peaceably disposed, are frequently
locked up from any Capacity of injuring themselves or others.

Her Majesty could never have answered it to her own known Prudence and
Judgment, to have committed the Power of your own Ruin, and the Nation's
Disturbance, any longer to you: For when once the State-Frenzy appeared, and
all the fatal Plague-Tokens of Lunacy and National Distraction broke out in
your Behavior, the Queen as a true Nursing Mother to you, gave you a Recess
from Public Employment, that you might have time to shave your Understandings,
discipline your Tempers, and put your politic Capacities under a Course of
State Physic, might recover your Senses a little, and, if possible, with Time
and Reflections, come to your selves again.

How kind has her Majesty been to you Gentlemen! that when you had absolutely
hanged your selves in the State-Noose, had actually tied the Rope of Causes and
Consequences about your Necks, and had you gone on but a few moments more, must
have been hampered irretrievably, and been quite strangled with the Extension
of your own Politics; at once the kind hand of your Sovereign cut you down
before your breath was quite gone, brought you to Life again, and delivered you
from those dangerous Wildernesses and Mazes of State Affairs; the Conduct of
which you never understood, and has now given you the Happiness of a calm
Recess, and fair Warning not to meddle any more with Things out of your Sphere.

Keep the Anniversary of your Deliverance, Gentlemen, and let it never be
forgotten: Remember it with Thankfulness to the Queen, to the Glory of her
Majesty's Lenity and Tenderness, and think sometimes how impossible it had been
but that the Mischiefs and Distractions you were pushing this Nation upon, must
have ended in Committing you the Instruments of it to the Hands of that Justice
which some of you, by the unexpected Happiness of Revolution-Clemency, had the
good Fortune to escape from once before.

My third Advice is to the Church of England.

Possibly the Clergy may disdain to be advised, at least by me, as Persons
whose Province it is, to give, not receive Admonition: But none ought to refuse
Advice, but he that has never been mistaken; and I hope, Gentlemen, you will
not pretend to be the Men. You have now your Day, as Ashton said lately, every
Body has. The Queen has declared her self of your Side, and that though others
shall have her Protection, you shall have her Favor.

The humble Advice to you, Gentlemen, is, First, To Deserve it. Secondly, Be
contented with it.

Deserve it by being Faithful to her, and to your Native Country; for it is a
most certain Truth, no Man can be a Faithful Subject to the Queen, who is not
entirely in the Interest of his Native Country.

By this I mean (for I desire to be understood) No Man can be a Faithful
Subject to the present Queen, and deserve her Favor, who designs or desires to
overthrow the Peace of the Nation she Governs, to overthrow the Foundation on
which it stands, that would endeavor to bring in a Popish Race to Reign over
us, and consequently involve the Nation in Blood and Confusion. It Is not enough
to say they design no Alteration during the Queen's Life, but to keep out
Foreigners: There is nothing so Foreign to this Nation as Popery. The Church of
England were the Men which threw it out; and how it can be, that the Church of
England Men should run a Venture of its returning, is past my Understanding.

It Is true, every thing that is done by the Members of the Church of England,
is not done by the Church; a lame Shift lately made use of by a certain
Gentleman, to throw off the Scandal of Passive-Obedience.

But, with submission to that Gentleman, he might have answered the Author of
the New Test of the Church's Loyalty better than so, or he had as good have
said nothing: For, I think, in Arguing, we may take the Principles of a Church
from the Writings of her Doctors, who are the Explainers of them, as well as
from her Confession of Faith: Now he owns that the Doctors of the Church have
Preached such a Doctrine; if it be a Doctrine not agreeable to the Canon, then
they ought to have been reproved by the Diocesan, and Punished by Suspension,
or otherwise. But however, it is sufficient to the Argument and therefore the
Distinction was needless, that whether it is an Article of the Church's Faith
or no, it is a Doctrine was Preached by the Learned Doctors of the Church,
universally received by the Members of the Church, defended openly, professed
and acknowledged by those Gentlemen that have been, and are still esteemed
Fathers and Pillars of the Church, and this is sufficient to the Point.

Now, in this respect, what is done by the Members of the Church of England,
and none else, is in the Sense of the Argument done by the Church, though it be
not a public Act of Convocation, or an Act of Delegates from the Church.

In this Sense the Church of England Deposed K. James, and yet they never made
an Act of Convocation for it, but 'twas the Church of England part of the
Nation did it; and thus I am to be understood here, without putting any one to
the Trouble of Exercising his Logic upon the Point.

In this Sense too I desire to be understood of the Church of England in all I
shall say of 'em, or to 'em: I am not Discussing their Articles of Faith, I
like them very well, and wish they would stick close to them themselves; nor am
I singling out their Clergy to Reproach them with their Immoralities, of which,
perhaps, there may be cause enough, aye, and in other Clergy too; but I Am
directing my discourse to the whole Body of this Nation, who call themselves of
the Church of England, and it is to them I say, that whoever goes about to
Introduce a Popish Succession to the Crown of this Protestant Nation, whosoever
designs to restore the Abdicated Line of the late King, cannot deserve the
Favor which her Majesty has promised them, and which, I cannot but suppose, she
promised them with a Sub-Intelligitur of their Faithfulness to her and the
Nation.

The Protestant Succession is the Foundation on which her Majesty and the
Nation now stands, and without which they cannon stand; of which may be said,
without Profaneness, as is said of the Gospel, other Foundation can no Man lay
than that which is laid.

2. As I would advise the Church of England to deserve this Favor of their
Prince, so I advise them to be contented with it.

It seems a Manifest Affront to the Queen's Declaration that when she has
promised them her Favor, and the Dissenters her Protection, they should not be
contented with the First, without depriving the other of the Last. What shall we
say? that while the Queen declares she will protect her Dissenting Subjects in
their Liberty of Worship, it shall be hindered from the Pulpit, and afterward
from the Collegiate Press at Oxford, that it is the Duty of all true Chur. of
England Men to Erect a Flag of Defiance against the Dissenters, or Phanaticks,
till they are Rooted from off the Face of the Land: Why, what is the matter
Gentlemen? will not you let the Queen keep her Word with them? she has promised
upon her Royal Word to preserve the Toleration, and you declare she shall not.
This is very scoundrel usage of her Majesty, and a sorry return for the Favor
she has promised you. I question not but you will come in with the Shift just
now mentioned, That this is not an Act of the Church of England; but Gentlemen
as you ought to be ashamed of it, let us see you Correct it, or else we suppose
your tacit acknowledgments is an Assent.

Here are in England, by a modest Estimation, above two Millions of Dissenters;
I would fain ask the hottest headed Church of England Man in Town, what he
would have done with them?

Hanged, all Hanged, says furioso, Ay, Sir, if you could fight as well as talk,
it may be you might do it; But they will not be Hanged, and how will you make
them? 'twas tried once, and nothing was got by it but Blows, and that Two for
One.

Suppose you would Banish them, and Suppose they would go, 'twou'd Ruin you all
to part with them. See what a Condition Spain brought it self to, by sending
170000 Families of Marescoes away.

They Are not only Numerous but Wealthy, your Trade would remove with 'em,
they would carry with 'em so much of your Cash and Wealth, you would be in a worse Case
than the Israelites left the Egyptian Ladies in, without their Jewels.

I cannot see the Policy of the Church of England Men in suppressing the
Dissenters; it is certainly more for the Nations Good to Unite all Parties;
there can be but one thing in it; Convert them they cannot; I never read of any
Conversion brought about by Persecution but in France, and what are New
Converts turned to? only to submit for Fear.

Now without pretending to Prophesy, I may say, the Dissenters in England are
not to be brought to that, the only thing that remains, is, they would have the
restraint of the Law taken off, that they may be loose upon them to harrass and
plunder them, this is what is aimed at.

Well Gentlemen, when you have this Liberty you dare not put it in Practice
further than the Law will give you leave; if you do, the Law gives them leave
to resist you, and in either, there is half your own Party will be against you;
Nay, those who are properly the Chapter of England will be against it, all the Men
of Honor, Conscience, Charity and Mercy will be against harrassing and
dragging their Neighbors about for Points of Conscience: Nay, the Mob of your
own Party will stone your Informers; and who are you that are left, if the
other should stand Neuter? can you Force the Queen to break her Word? are ye
able to fright her into it? and if you could, when you have driven all the
Nation into Confusion, can you defend your selves against the Laws and the
Party.

To what purpose than is all this Huffing, is it not only that you want to be
Plundring your Neighbors? Why, if you are for Plunder, take Arms a God's Name,
and go and Plunder the French. -- But I ask Pardon, I forgot your Principles,
you are for Plunder without Fighting.

The farther Confirmation of this Advice, is drawn from the plain Conviction,
which the powerful Arguments of Peace, Temper and Moderation have forced on the
Minds of Men.

You now see Gentlemen, the Queen, the Head of your own Church, the Bishops, a
numerous part of your own Body, the Men of the Gown, they are all convinced.

It Is impossible for Wise Men to resist Demonstration, the consequence of
things has brought, I had almost said, all the Wise Men of the Church, and I
would to God it were true, to see the absolute necessity of Peace, to see that
a Union of Parties is the only step to this Nations Settlement, that a Recess
from Party Rage, and healing the Wounds of the State, is the only Method to
prevent the Nations falling into Convulsions, Fevers, Calenturs, and Death.

And why, Gentlemen, will you stand out? it were to be wished you would a
little consider how is it possible you can Erect your own Judgments against a
whole Nation, the Queen, the Nobility, Thousands of your best Parishoners,
born, bred in, and ever true to the Church, are convinced, and will you not be
moved to Examine the Case.

What prospect of Injury or Mischief can you see in Peace? what damage can
accrue to the Church or State, to put but a Negative upon your Zeal, and not
suffer it to outrun the Law, or Fight with your knowledge.

As you Love the Church, your Prince, and your Country, listen to Peace, listen
to the Voice of the Nation, and of the Queen, and the Voice of Reason, and the
Nature of the things, all concur to call upon you to Unite with your Brethren,
and no more let small things divide us, no more let our Enemies beat us with
our own Hands, and destroy us by our own Assistance.

If you will not give Ear to this Cordial Advice, give the Author leave to
determine two Things, which without any pretense to the Spirit of Prophesy, he
thinks he may presume to assure you of.

1. This Nation, whose Eyes are now open to their own Safety and Deliverance,
will do the Work without you, the People of England, aided by the Laws,
encouraged by the Nobility, the principal Gentry, a great Body of the Clergy,
and backed by the Queen, joining in this mighty work, this glorious attempt to
establish a Party Peace, will do the work without you.

2. You will fix this Eternal Brand of Infamy on the English Clergy, that they
were the principal Opposers of the Nation's Peace; that in Contempt of the
Blessed healing and heavenly Spirit of Peace, in spite of the Royal
Exhortations and Invitations of their Sovereign in Defiance of the noble
Example of their Brethren, they, even they only, are at this Day the wideners
of our Breaches, the Encouragers of Divisions, and the daily prompters of the
Ignorant People to abhor their Brethren, to hate their Neighbors, and to keep
up the unnatural Divisions of this Nation.

A blessed Memorandum this will be to the Honor and Glory of our Inferior
Clergy, to remain to Posterity, when our Children shall say, We had been a
happy Nation, if the Clergy of the Church had not hindered the general Peace in
1705, when the Queen, the Nobility, the Gentry, nay, and the very Bishops
offered to join in a happy Union, when they all invited them to it; when all
Circumstances concurred to make them easy, and when the want of it let in
Slavery and Bondage upon our Fathers, and entailed it upon us their Postery.

To the moderate Gentlemen of the Church, the Author of this sees but little
Occasion to speak; the whole need not the Physicians; he that is in the right
Way needs no Guide. Peace has brought some Scandal upon you, but it is from such
Mouths whose Breath is all Scandal, and whose Throaths is an open Sepulcher.

Pursue, Gentlemen, with the same Courage and Candor, the same happy
Resolutions, and successful Measures you have begun; how easy is the Work of
Peace in England, when by wise Hands, back with the Encouragement of Power, it
is once set on foot.

Go on, Gentlemen, with Success; Peace is always the first Act of wise
Counsels: What Confusions have our State Mountebanks runs us into? Our N^ms,
our S^mours, H^s, B^ms, Gra^ls, Ro^rs, and the Rabble of Jehu's Politicians?
whither were they hurrying this Nation by Civil Confusions, while, at the same
time, we were involved in a cruel, a formidable, and threatening War abroad?

You have rescued the Nation; God Almighty, by infusing Principles of Peace,
Moderation, Union, and Temper into the Heads and Hearts of the Queen and you,
has saved us from the Ruin contrived for us by the Devil, and unwarily
propogated to treat them with Charity, by our own Impolitick and thoughless
Managers.

The Dissenters are another Branch of those who this Author, with submission to
their politics, thinks may accept of some Advice, though perhaps they may be of
another Opinion.

However, whether they will hear or forbear, he takes the Freedom to speak to
them, though in general, only referring a further Explication of his Meaning to
another place.

You have always, and above all Parties, pretended to peace: Now show the
reality of your Design.

You are divided in some Steps which you think needful from the Church; let the
Spirit of Charity remain, and divide no farther than you really know to be
needful.

In Matters of Religion, enjoying your Liberty, be content with it, and study
to let there be no more Difference between you and the Church, than there
really is.

We are all Christians, all Protestants, all Englishmen, let us be all
Brethren, and act like such on all Occasions.

The Church of England and the Dissenters have but one Interest, one
Foundation, and but one End: The Moderate Churchmen, and the charitable
Dissenter, are the same Denomination of Christians, and all the Difference
which now looked at near the Eye shows large, if viewed at the distance of
Heaven shows not it self; neither will Catholic Christianity, in that Realm of
Light, appear in any Party-colored Garment.

In Civil Affairs, it is your Interest, your Safety, and your Glory, that the
Government should be in the Church of England, and even this is a Security to
the Dissenters against all that Clamor raised at them, of their pulling down
the Church. The Dissenters cannot wish the Downfall of the Church of England
Governments, without proving themselves Lunatic, and all the Sense of their
own Interest must forsake them.

In all Occasions therefore, with all possible cheerfulness, join with the Men
of Peace of the Church; carefully choose them to represent you; boldly rescue
them from the Scandals and Calumnies of their own Clamouring high Party, and
heartily assist them upon all Occasions in their honest and just Endeavors for
the Nation's Security.

What if every body you suspect or dislike is not turned out, or every body you
like put in? What if Her Majesty is willing to try some Men longer than others,
and give Knaves an Opportunity to turn honest? what if the Revolution of
England from Madmen and Fools in the Ministry, to honest and wise Men, be
acted like the Moderation we recommend, with Temper, sedately, gradually, and
with due Consideration to Circumstances: Being once fully satisfied with the
sincere Resolution of the Queen and Ministry, to pursue the Nation's Peace,
acquiesce in Her Majesty's Methods: Her Designs being so just, fear not but the
Methods will be as judicious. Our Savior's Redemption was all complete, though
he did not Answer the hasty Expectation of the Disciples, who thought he must
needs just then restore the Kingdom of Israel.

The Queen has sufficiently declared Her glorious Resolution for Peace; pray
let us leave Her Majesty to Her own Methods: It is not two Year ago since we we
should have thought our selves happy with what we now see; let us look on our
present Liberty and Peace with Satisfaction, and wait with Joy and Pleasure for
the Remainder, which in its Time and Season we have great Reason to hope will
be perfected, to the Settlement of that lasting Calm in these Nations, which
Good Men have so long prayed for:

FINIS.

