AN ESSAY ON THE Force of Imagination IN PREGNANT WOMEN.

ADDRESSED TO THE LADIES.

LONDON, Printed for R. BALDWIN, No. 47, Paternoster Row.

M DCC LXXII.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

TO THE LADIES.
LADIES,
BEING convinced from deliberate reflections, that the imagination of pregnant
women, can make no impression on the form of the foetus: and, being witness to
much unhappiness from adopting the contrary opinion, I was led to collect my
thoughts on the subject, and throw them on paper.

As it is a subject, under some circumstances, of very great importance to the
fair sex, I am induced to address myself to them in particular; in hopes such
address may engage an attentive perusal; from whence, I flatter myself, I shall
be the means of alleviating those anxious fears raised by prejudice, and but
too generally attendant on the pregnant state.

Sensible that physical, and anatomical disquisitions cannot be pleasing to the
fair sex, I have intentionally avoided them as much, as the explanation of my
subject would admit, nor do I think my cause has in the least suffered from
such conduct, as, exclusive of their assistance, my design is answered, without
fatiguing the ladies with perhaps at best but groundless conjecture.

In what I have advanced, I have taken reason for my guide; and have attempted
to deliver its dictates with clearness, and precision. How far my endeavors
have succeeded, I submit, ladies, to your decision.

And am, With all due deference and respect, THE AUTHOR.

AN ESSAY ON THE Force of Imagination, etc.
THAT the imagination of pregnant women is capable to mutilate or deform the
foetus, is an opinion of a very ancient date, and has been supported by the
sentiments of the young, and old, wise, and unwise for several centuries past.
The ill effects of adopting this erroneous doctrine, I shall forbear to enlarge
on. If I prove it to be built on irrational superstitious notions, the intent
of the following pages will be sufficiently answered.

Preparatory to this intention, I beg leave to observe, "by imagination I
understand (as Pope and Gay express it) that power which forms ideal or mental
pictures;" this I apprehend is taking the word in its utmost latitude; and,
under this acceptance, we are to consider its effects, as they may tend to
external objects; or, as they may influence the animal machine.

It will require very little force of argument to show how ineffectual is the
power of imagination, unassisted, to influence, or obtain any change on
external objects.

The utmost exertion of its force can neither deprive the loadstone of its
attraction, prevent the vegetation of plants, or stop the descent of rain. For,
in spite of our most ardent wishes, nature's laws will be predominant; the
loadstone will attract, plants will vegetate, and rain descend.

Could imagination screen us from want, whose wants would be unsupplied? the
miser would no longer have an object for his avarice, the ambitious would
possess the extent of his ambition; and every man arrive to the summit of his
wishes.

The impotency of ideal conceptions being so glaringly obvious, it would be an
insult to our understanding to suppose any change, either designed, or
unintended, could take place on external objects; respecting their form, bulk,
substance, or position, without some intervening power. Hence then to form an
object concording with our ideas, requires an assistance found only in art. By
the intervention of this, we are enabled to assist or prevent the effects of
nature, though to pervert the system, baffles all human invention.

Being convinced of the inability of ideal conceptions to produce any change on
external objects, it naturally occurs to consider what influence the
imagination has over the human machine.

To attempt the discussion of this consideration in its full extent would lead
me into a labyrinth of philosophic theories, doubts, and disputations. The
passions of the mind are an inexhaustible fund for philosophical inquiries.
Every day some instances are to be observed where anger, grief, joy, and
surprise have produced astonishing changes in the human constitution:
nevertheless, these effects remain inexplicable by the narrow limits of our
physiological knowledge. Hence then I shall limit this consideration to the
point in question, viz. the influence of the imagination on the foetus.

To judge of the propriety of what is hereafter to be advanced on this subject,
it is necessary some idea should be formed of the connections consisting
between the mother and embryo.

The foetus, or embryo during its stay in the womb, is envelloped in a peculiar
set of membranes (of a vascular, spongy texture) aggregately termed the burden:
from the attachment the burden forms to the womb subsists a constant
circulation of blood between the mother and child.

This attachment is formed by an adhesion of the spongy cells of the burden, to
the veins and arteries of the womb; one series of the vessels contained in the
burden, being filled by means of its attachment to the womb with blood from
that organ, after a variety of convolutions, empty their contents into the
veins, forming a part of the umbilical cord, or navel-string. This cord,
passing from a certain place in the burden, enters the body of the foetus at
the navel; from whence, by wonderful mechanism, the blood is transported to
every very part of the foetus, and vessels destined for that purpose. To
preserve a constant and free circulation, without which the foetus must suffer,
the blood is returned from the child to the arteries of the navel-string, from
whence it is dispersed into the burden; and, passing into the spongy cells
connected to the womb, enters the circulation of the mother; and hence between
her and the child the intimate connection subsists. The ill consequences
attending a detachment of the spongy cells of the burden from the womb, are too
obvious to need mentioning: to prevent them, comes not only under the province
of the physician, but the prudent care of every one.

The physician will tell you that a distention of the blood vessels from a
preternatural fullness, or a relaxation from emptiness; an undue velocity in the
circulation, or too great languor, are all capable of separating the burden
from the womb; consequently, are all capable of producing abortion and
miscarriage.

Your own good sense, ladies, will inform you that fear, grief, anxiety, joy,
or surprise, will retard or accelerate the circulating fluids, according to the
actuating motive; hence, from these passions, miscarriages frequently ensue:
and give me leave to add, this is the greatest effect the foetus can experience
from the power of imagination.

On a review of the connection subsisting between the mother and child,
together with a reflection on the natural properties and use of the blood in
adults, it is very apparent nature intended this circulation, solely for the
nutrition and perfection of the foetus. From the similitude of its office, I
think it may very aptly be compared to water, poured on a plant or seed,
without which, neither the plant would thrive or the seed vegetate. The seed of
a plant put into water, will by the assistance of a due degree of warmth and
moisture, vegetate and produce a plant bearing the same characteristic marks,
as that from which the seed was gathered. The good or ill quality of the earth,
the abundance or deficiency of water, the proper or improper temperature of the
air, will affect the seed in no other way, than either totally suppressing its
vegetation, or causing it to shoot forth in a more or less healthy state, as
its nutritive essentials, earth, air, and water, were better, or worse adapted
for vegetation in the species of plant.

The characteristic marks of the plant all spring from that small atom, the
seed; this particle is from the positive laws of nature decreed to shoot forth
into such marks, colors, and fibers, as the plant from which it was gathered
is distinguished. The proper nourishment, as I said before, that is necessary
to vegetation, consists of a due mixture and temperature of the earth, air, and
water. Notwithstanding any defect that may occur in these nutritive principles,
the seed, when it vegetates, will produce the characteristic marks of the
plant, though in an unhealthy aspect. To an impregnated woman, it is ordained,
by the same dispensing power, to produce an offspring bearing the
characteristic marks of the human race. It is the office of the circulation,
passing between the mother and child, to afford nourishment to the embryo; as
it is the office of the elements to produce vegetation in the vegetable kingdom.

Should sickness, anxiety, or any cause whatsoever, debilitate the constitution
of the woman, the circulating fluids being thoroughly rendered incapable of
affording proper nourishment; abortion, or the birth of a weakly, puny child,
will be the consequence. But the defects in the mother's constitution, from
whatever cause they may arise, can no more alter the original form the foetus
was endued with, than earth, air, and water, assisted with all the art of man,
is capable to produce the flower of a rose from the seed of a thistle. The
inference I draw from this similitude, serves only to corroborate this
indisputable fact, viz. the organization of the embryo from the hour of
impregnation; a fact every one tacitly acknowledges, who adopts the opinion,
that impressions are made on the foetus by the force of imagination. Such
impressions are said to be produced instantaneously, and not confined to any
term of pregnancy.

The defects of a leg, toe, arm, or finger, have been ascribed to a sudden
surprise on seeing objects in that lamentable state. The very supposition
tacitly implies the foetus was once perfectly formed, or rather that the parts
were, previous to the surprise, in a natural state. If then the loss of a
member is thus suddenly accomplished, I should wish to know how the
haemorrhage, which must necessarily ensue from the division of such parts, was
restrained, and what became of the separated parts. For among all the tales I
have heard relative to this subject, I do not recollect one that mentions the
appearance either of an haemorrhage, or of the separated part.

The impossibility, satisfactorily to answer these inquiries, would, I should
think, sufficiently evince the absurdity of the supposition. But as these
inquiries are unanswerable, to explain them is never attempted, because such an
attempt, if impartially pursued, must raise a train of ideas that would
inevitably destroy an opinion that, as it has been strongly inculcated by the
prejudice of education, requires more trouble to divest ourselves of, than
mankind in general choose to take. But to return more immediately to the
subject.

We have seen that ideal conceptions can make no impressions on external
objects; but as such we cannot consider the foetus (from it is being so
intimately connected with the mother). Let us view it then in its proper light,
viz. organized matter, placed in the womb, there to be nourished, and brought
to a certain degree of perfection, and then to be expelled.

We have observed, that the nutrition necessary to the perfection of the
foetus, is obtained by the circulating fluids passing between it and the
mother. Exclusive of these fluids, we know of no intercourse, consequently of
no power, passing from the mother to the child, that can possibly be
subservient to the mother's imagination. Hence then, if to mutilate or deform
the foetus is the effect of the mother's imagination, the blood alone must be
the immediate acting principle. Whether this principle has powers equal to the
effects ascribed, let plain common sense decide; and when it reflects that
blood is a smooth, oily fluid, will immediately acknowledge such consistence
sufficiently demonstrates the blood's incapacity to mutilate the foetus, or
impress any form imagination can devise. Were the form of the foetus in the
power of imagination, our offspring would be as subject to the capriciousness
of mankind as our clothes.

The form of the child's mouth, nose, eye, eye-brow, or any of its features,
would as much depend on the reigning fashion, as the cut of a cap, coat, or any
part of our dress.

No fortunes would then be forfeited for deficiency of male heirs; nor
uneasiness at the birth of a son, when the mother ardently longed for a
daughter.

If the imagination could take off, or place on, the foetus, a leg, toe, or
arm, it could certainly remove all kind of blemishes. With such powerful
assistance, who would bear the deformity of wens, carbuncles, warts, etc. these
being excrescences nourished by the circulating fluids, and connected to the
patient by bloodvessels, as the foetus is nourished and connected to the
mother? If these fluids are so powerful in some cases, we may, from parity of
reasoning, expect the same in other.

It is evident the imagination, unassisted, can have no manner of effect on
external objects: that as the foetus, from its situation, and intimate
connection with the mother, is to be considered as part of her fabric; yet, as
to mark, or mutilate, requires a due degree of force; and the only power
capable of conveying such force to the foetus, in consequence of the
imagination, is the blood; I think it is a very obvious inference, that the
imagination is as incapable of effecting any impression on the foetus, as on
any external body whatsoever.

From what has been advanced, I hope I have satisfactorily proved, the
imagination can make no impression on the foetus. I shall now proceed to show,
that the marks attributed to the force of imagination are effects proceeding
from other causes.

The exact manner these marks are formed, is beyond the reach of my
comprehension to explain. To convince you they are not the effects of the cause
ascribed, let us convey our ideas to the vegetable and brute creation. In the
former of these, we seldom see a collection of apples, pears, plumbs, nuts,
etc. but we discern some protuberance or deficiency in their respective form,
something altogether out of the general course of nature. In the brute
creation, it is by no means a very unfrequent occurrence to meet cats, dogs,
sheep, etc. etc. dismembered, and impressed with the greatest variety of marks.
Can we attribute these appearances to the force of imagination? We know of no
such existence in the vegetable kingdom; and in the brute creation, under the
form of instinct only. It is universally acknowledged, there is no satisfactory
way to account for these appearances; we call them deficiences or luxuriances
of nature. If, then, nature proves deficient in the productions of the animal
and vegetable kingdom, by what system of logic are we to expect she will be
infallible to the offspring of man?

Man claims a superiority over all other created beings, from his peculiar
endowment, reason. This blessing constitutes his dominion. Nevertheless, the
same omnipotent wisdom is observed in the mechanical structure of a fly, as in
the formation of man. Hence we may conclude, that no peculiar providence is
established for the perfection of mankind, beyond those laws of nature framed
by the omnipotent Being for the perfection of every created object. When
infants come into the world with narrow breasts, one shoulder higher than
another, or with inverted feet, we do not always attribute them to the force of
imagination, but sometimes to inexplicable causes in nature. If thus we
acknowledge nature protrudes some parts, and contracts others, I think it would
be a greater proof of our reason to attribute all impressions and marks to the
same source, than to believe the idle tales of ignorance and superstition. It
has never been supposed the imagination could change the sex of the child; that
has ever been deemed impossible: but the same chain of arguments that will
convince us of the impracticability of such metamorphosis, must also convince
us, that to mutilate or deform the foetus by the same power is equally
impracticable.

I shall next offer to your consideration a few thoughts on the longings, and
strange ideas some pregnant women are possessed with. Strange as these ideas
are, they are not, as is generally supposed, peculiar to pregnancy, but are to
be observed in men and maidens. Whatever may be the cause, I think they are
evidently the symptoms of a depraved taste or appetite.

Those conversant in the practice of physic, find it no very unusual thing for
a patient (either in a fever, in an insane state of mind, or in the
green sickness, which is the most familiar) to crave after what, in an healthy
state, they had conceived a great aversion to. Can we account for these
cravings in any other way, than saying they are the symptoms of a vitiated
taste, brought on by a disease in the circulating fluids? To believe this a
fact, (and that it is so, to me appears incontestable) we must immediately
infer, that, as taste is a sense liable to be vitiated by an alteration in the
circulating fluids, and as the disposition of the circulating fluids evidently
becomes altered from impregnation, the desires and longings of pregnant women
are to be considered, like those of men, the mere effects of a depraved or
vitiated taste.

From what has been advanced, I hope, ladies, you are now sensible, no power of
imagination can effect any mark or impression on the foetus. Nevertheless, I
apprehend, though your reason may in this coincide with my opinion, yet the
prejudice of education is so very predominant, that you cannot totally divest
yourselves of the contrary opinion.

The many tales you have heard in its favor, has, as it were, fortified your
mind against the convicting power of reason. To remove that barrier is a very
difficult task, as it is not always in our power immediately to divest
ourselves of those prejudices that have been adopted by our friends, and by
them inculcated with our education.

To say that all the tales which have formed these prejudices, and told us by
our ancestors with all the confidence of truth, believed by our prejudiced
friends, who, to corroborate their father's, or grandfather's report, will
attest similar occurrences to have happened within their own knowledge: I say
for me to declare all these tales are false and erroneous, would be deemed to
their author's veracity the grossest insult, and in me such a step would appear
the highest pitch of arrogance. To avoid the first, and wave the imputation of
the latter, I shall only say as my private opinion; that our friends reason
has been misled; and either the histories have been misrepresented, or the
events recorded in them, ignorantly accounted for. In defense of this opinion,
I beg leave to produce some instances, wherein will appear the ignorant
credulity of two of the greatest philosophers, as ever adorned the English
nation.

The great Sir Francis Bacon attributes the cure of some warts he was afflicted
with, to rubbing them with some lard, to which adhered the skin, which was
afterward exposed to a south wind.

The Hon. Mr. Boil records as facts, among many other, the following histories.

A great lady (far from being credulous) confessed to me, as also did some of
her servants, that with the common remedy of ash-ashes, formed by warm urine,
into seven or nine cakes, and buried some days in a dunghill, she was cured of
the yellow jaundice, after having passed through a tedious course of physic.

A physician afflicted with a marasmus, (a species of consumption) boiled an
egg till it was hard, in his own urine; and with a bodkin perforated the shell
in many places, and buried it in an ant's hill; where, as the emmets devoured
it, he found his strength return, and his disease decrease.

Riverius tells us, that the daughter of a great officer was excessively
tormented with a whitloe, for which he ordered her finger to be put into the
cat's ear, and within two hours after she was freed from pain.

These few instances I have selected, are such, that to believe them in the
light these great men have shown them in, no one in this age, who boasts common
sense, unentrammeled with superstition, will pretend to. Nevertheless, they are
told with a confidence of their veracity, and told by men of incontested
learning, and abilities. From such authorities why do we discredit them?

Because, that spirit of free enquiry, and general improvement, which
distinguishes the present era, has convinced us, (though the facts may be deemed
indisputable) that neither exposing the lard's skin to a south wind; burying
the seven, or nine cakes of ash-ashes under a dunghill; the destruction of the
egg by the ants; or placing the finger in the cat's ear, effected the cure
respectively ascribed to each.

The melancholy effects said to arise from the sting or bite of the tarantula,
cured only by the charms of music, are almost universally believed, and too
well-known to need a repetition; yet these effects are now rejected by people
of sense and discernment, as tales propagated by knavery and imposition. The
existence of the tarantula is not doubted; but its bite, from experience, has
been found attended with no other inconvenience, than would have ensued from
the sting of a large gnat, or wasp.

The stories first told of the strange symptoms attending the bite of this
spider, were undoubtedly raised to answer some sinister view. The credulous,
superstitious multitude swallowed the bait; and thus have enabled the cheat to
be carried on to this very day, by cunning vagabonds, who, taking advantage of
the superstitious folly of the country, act, in confederacy with the fiddler,
(to excite charity) the wild extravagant gestures, said to be the symptoms
produced by the venomous bite of the tarantula.

This contradiction to the received opinion is now well attested; but I believe
the united testimonies of all the learned in England, will never eradicate the
contrary notions from the vulgar and illiterate.

In every age and clime, the crafty knave has found a multitude to receive his
impositions. The powers of amulets and charms; the bottle conjuror; rabbit
woman; Cock-lane ghost; witchcraft and fortune-telling, are perpetual
testimonies of English credulity.

If we pass to our neighbors under the papal jurisdiction, we shall there find
credulity in (if possible) a more glaring, absurd light. When we reflect on
this prevailing folly of mankind; and that physic was once in the hands of
priests, subjected to all the impositions paganism, ignorance and superstition
could devise; we cannot wonder there should remain some tints of its former
subordination.

Those who are wanting either of leisure or abilities to think for themselves
in matters of science, are apt to place too great a faith in all that is told
them: hence a continuance of error. And I think it is pretty obvious, while
this oral tradition continues, there ever will be some, who will rely on the
influence of the moon and stars; the powers of amulets and charms; and all such
idle, unphilosophical notions.

The same chain of ideas, that shows the impropriety of believing the cure of a
toothache by a charm; the destruction of warts, by turning thief, and stealing
raw meat; the cure of the cramp, by wearing rosemary, or placing the soals of
our shoes uppermost when we go to bed: I say, the same chain of ideas that
shows the impropriety of believing these absurdities, will, when applied with a
real desire to be informed, whether the imagination in pregnant women possesses
the powers ascribed, convince the enquirer, that the tales told of the mother's
imagination exerted on the foetus, are a collection of falsities formed by
superstition and ignorance, and continued by prejudice and credulity.

I have now, ladies, finished my intended plan. Am sensible how difficult a
task it is to remove deeprooted prejudice: but, however unsuccessful my attempt
may be to that purpose, my intentions, I flatter myself, are irreproachable:
and if the arguments I have used, have not sufficient weight to induce my fair
reader to adopt my opinion, they are such as will not incur her censure.

FINIS.

