A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON THE GONORRHOEA, RECOMMENDING THE USE OF INJECTION As
the most speedy and efficacious METHOD of CURE WITH A brief ACCOUNT of the
REMEDIES which have been used in the LUES VENEREA, From its first Appearance in
EUROPE; AND A CRITICAL ENQUIRY INTO The present MODES of administering MERCURY.

By PETER CLARE, SURGEON.

Non mihi, sed rationi. A NEW EDITION WITH ADDITIONS.

LONDON: Printed for T. CADELL, in the STRAND. MDCCLXXXIII.

PREFACE.
THERE are two very different methods of curing the Gonorrhoea, the one wholly
by internal medicines, the other principally by injection. The former is
generally a very uncertain and disagreeable process, the latter is both
expeditious and safe, but dreaded by many persons on account of a false idea
which has long prevailed. This ill founded notion it is my business at present
to confute by several arguments supported by quotations from Authors of
distinguished credit.

Mr. Pott recommends the advice given by Lord Bacon to a student, "to consider
one disease at a time, and to become thoroughly acquainted with that, before he
undertakes another." He further observes, "that the only means by which true
and useful knowledge is to be obtained in every part of surgery, are a
competent knowledge of the anatomical structure of the human frame, a close
attention to the symptoms of diseases in the living, and a minute examination
of the appearances in the dead: these are the great fountains of all medical
knowledge." Mr. Pott has here pointed out, in a very judicious manner, the path
which every chirurgical practitioner and writer should pursue, who undertakes
to explain the true nature, seat, and cure of any bodily disorder.

Chancery Lane, January 1, 1783.
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
TREATISE on the Gonorrhoea. Page 1 On the Cure by internal Medicines. Page 10
Particular Observations on Nitre. Page 12 Injections strongly recommended. Page
17 Objections to them answered. Page 18 On the Difference between Pus and
Muens. Page 20 Brief Account of the Remedies used for the Cure of the Lues.
Page 25 A Critical Enquiry into the different Methods of administering Mercury.
Page 29 Objections to Mercurial Pills, etc. Page 37 Objections to Mercurial
Ointment. Page 41 A Recapitulation of the Argument, with additional
Observations. Page 45
A TREATISE ON THE GONORRHOEA.
THE part principally affected by the Gonorrhoea is the penis, which consists
of three parts; two of which are called corpora cavernosa, and lie on each
side, and a third, which is situated underneath, named corpus spongiosum
urethrae, consisting of the bulb and membranous part, continued on to the
bladder, and terminating at the other extremity in the corona, or glans penis.
The urethra has three glands, which were discovered by Cowper, and called
mucous glands, from the tenacity of the liquor which they separate. There are
also two, (or rather one,) about the size of a nutmeg, they lie at the neck of
the bladder, between the vesiculae seminales and penis, under the ossa pubis,
almost within the pelvis of the abdomen; they separate a limpid glutinous
humor, which is carried into the urethra by several ducts, which enter near
those of the prostatae The two first of Cowper's glands are about the bigness
of a French bean, of a depressed oval figure, and a yellowish color like the
prostatae, being on each side the bulb of the urethra, a little above it. Their
excretory ducts arise from the internal surface next the inner membrane of the
urethra, into which they open a little lower by two distinct orifices, just
below the curvature of the ossa pubis in perinaeo, where they discharge a
transparent viscous liquor. The third mucous gland is a small conglobate
yellowish gland, like the former, but somewhat less, situated above the angle
of the flexure of the urethra, under the ossa pubis, in the perinaeum, near the
anus: it has two excretory ducts, which enter the urethra obliquely, a quarter
of an inch below the two former, and discharges a liquor like them both in
color and consistence.

The seat of the Gonorrhoea in women is the vagina, which is affected with a
discharge charge like that of the urethra in men. It lies between the bladder
and intestinum rectum, and has rugae, under which are small glands, whose
excretory ducts are called lacunae. These glands separate a mucilaginous slimy
liquor to lubricate the vagina, and are the seat of the Gonorrhoea in this sex,
as the glands in the urethra are in the male. The meatus urinarius being a very
short passage, the heat and scalding is consequently much less than in the men.

"A Gonorrhoea from the urethra in a man, begins with an uneasiness about the
parts of generation, together with an appearance of a little whitish matter,
about the orifice of the urethra, a little swelling and sometimes redness
there, and a slight pungency upon the evacuation of urine. The whitish matter
soon increases in quantity, the inflammation about the end of the urethra
becomes more evident, and for the most part there is now a tension and hardness
through the whole of it, a swelling of the lacunae, and a sensation of
stricture in the penis, particularly on erection. The matter still increases,
flows out, and grows thinner, loses all its adhesiveness, and is of a yellow,
or greenish color. There is now always a redness about the end of the canal;
often a pain from the distention of the urethra, during the evacuation of
urine, and a much severer toward the orifice, from its stimulus, with an
increase of the redness just after it is evacuated. The inflammation prevents
the extension of the urethra in erection, so that the penis is at that time
curved downwards with great pain, which is increased if it be raised toward
the belly, and the stimulus occasions it often to be erected, especially when
warm in bed Dr. Fordyce's Elements of Physic.
."

I believe it would generally be esteemed good practice on this occasion to
give nitre in considerable quantity, a purging electuary, pill, or salts, and
to take blood freely from the patient; also to direct large quantities of
diluting liquors, and further to recommend a strict regimen and abstinence from
particular meats, vegetables, and strong liquors. The question is, are such
medicines and restriction necessary? In my humble opinion they are not, and
they appear, upon the whole, to do more harm than good, as I shall endeavor to
demonstrate from the experience of those who are well qualified to give an
opinion in a matter of this kind, and also from my own observation and practice.

Dr. Cullen remarks, "that purgatives not only inflame the rectum, but also
extend their irritation to the urethra." May not chordee and priapism then
often be attributed to this cause?

Dr. Fordyce recommends "increasing the secretion a little, by such gentle
purgatives as procure only two or three evacuations a day." -- But who can
ensure his patient two or three stools only in a day? The intestines being once
put into motion, will not accommodate themselves exactly to our wish or
convenience. Happily for the patient, it is certain that even gentle purging
may be dispensed with on these occasions.

He adds, "that severe purging often augments the inflammatory symptoms, brings
on strangury and exulcerations, gives occasion to inflammation of the
testicles, and other neighboring parts, or it stops the running before the
infection is washed off, and the Gonorrhoea either returns in a few days, or
exulcerations take place."

The Doctor further observes, "that long continued purging is apt to weaken the
stomach and intestines, to hurt the digestion, to produce obstinate gleets, and
leave hypochondriacal symptoms, particularly in irritable or melancholic
habits."

Many more authorities might be adduced in proof of the bad effects of a course
of purgatives in these cases, which are generally of considerable duration,
when treated in this manner. Neither are antiphlogistic remedies to be depended
upon, as they sometimes produce the very contrary effect to what was expected
from them: amongst the first of these is nitre, in inflammatory disorders. Dr.
Lewis, a late writer of no small credit, reckons, that nitre often gives relief
in stranguries, and heat of urine, proceeding either from a simple or a
venereal taint; and indeed the greatest part of practitioners have always given
it, and still continue to give it in the venereal ardor urinae.

"This practice, however, says Dr. Hope in his lectures on the Materia medica,
I am apt to believe has taken its rise from the name of ardor having always
been given to the pain in evacuating the urine, during the time of a venereal
inflammation of the urethra, and the name and virtues of a cooler, having
always been attributed to this salt. But it is certain that the urine passed
during the time of a venereal inflammation is no warmer than at other times,
and therefore to prescribe a cooler to allay the heat of it, is absurd: and I
am persuaded, that on a free and candid examination of this matter, it will be
found, that nitre has not the smallest power of alleviating the pain which is
then felt; for I have given it in all the different stages of this disease, in
small and in large doses; but from the sole use of it in a great number of
trials, have never been able to observe that it afforded the least relief. Nor,
when we consider the cause of that pain, and the effects of nitre, have we any
reason to expect it; for the pain certainly proceeds from the acrid salts in
the urine, stimulating the inflamed or excoriated urethra; and a solution of
nitre applied to any excoriated part always gives considerable pain.
Experiments assure us, that on taking nitre into the stomach, the urine becomes
impregnated with it. The larger therefore the doses are, the stronger will this
impregnation be, and the greater stimulus added to the urine; so that we may
sensibly conclude, that this salt will rather augment than diminish the pain in
evacuating it. The Doctor further remarks, that there are many weak and
delicate stomachs which cannot bear the cold it produces, and others in whom it
always creates sickness and nausea."

Besides the disagreeable circumstance of taking great quantities of nauseous
medicines, we find there is the greatest uncertainty as to their real effects
on the diseases they are intended to remove. A powder or medicine of any kind,
applied to blood in a basin, may visibly affect that fluid, and render it thin
or thick; yet being taken into the stomach, and possibly from thence into the
circulation, it may have a very different effect on the circulating fluids, or
perhaps none, having undergone a material alteration in its course.

A late celebrated Lecturer on the Materia Medica, discoursing with his pupils
on the powerful operations of mucilaginous medicines in the alleviation of the
pain arising from the stone in the bladder, remarked that such medicines were
extremely useful where the stone was of the mulberry kind, and apt to vellicate
the coats of the bladder. He told them the ropy mucilage would envelope the
stone, and make a uniformly smooth surface, entirely depriving it of its
asperities, and consequently of its power of hurting the bladder.

It is difficult for one conversant with the mechanism of the human body, and
the operation of medicine, to conceive, that a mucilage given by the mouth will
arrive at the bladder in that state. We are certain that particular remedies
will stimulate particular parts: balsam of capivi, for instance, being
absorbed, is known to affect the kidneys and bladder, by the strong odor it
imparts to the urine; but we do not find this, or any other medicine, except
quicksilver, will pass off in the same form in which it is administered by the
mouth. This balsam is very much esteemed for its great virtues, particularly in
certain stages of the Gonorrhoea, but it is so very disagreeable, on account of
its oily and bitter quality, as well as its smell, that some patients are soon
disgusted with it, and others will not be prevailed upon to take it at all; we
cannot therefore think it strange, that many gentlemen should often prefer
injections to all other means, which do not appear to produce effects in any
degree equal to the trouble which attends them. It must be acknowledged that
patients often suffer more from the remedy than the disorder; they are often
more emaciated, weak, and pallid in their countenance, (circumstances which
frequently lead to disagreeable discoveries,) from the operations of purgatives
in the space of one week, than they would have been in a month, if there had
been no attempt made to check the progress of this disorder.

There are many people who have not leisure to pursue the several directions
and prescriptions given by practitioners; and if they could find time, they
would have but little inclination to undergo so much fatigue and trouble. Such
tedious processes are very ill contrived for the multitude, who must be, and
are daily cured by means much more easy, expeditious, and quite as effectual;
and if one class of men are cured in this manner, why should not all enjoy the
same benefit?

I have asserted, that a regimen, or particular diet, is not necessary in the
cure of the Gonorrhoea, when treated in the manner here recommended. Some have
asked, if the disorder is not inflammatory, and if living low is not
indispensibly necessary in every complaint of this kind? It may be said in
reply, that this is a local inflammation, which yields at once to a cooling
detergent liquid applied to the part; whilst internal medicines are commonly
slow and uncertain in removing it. -- When mercury does not pass into the
stomach, there is no occasion to enjoin restrictions with respect to diet,
since no disagreement can then happen; patients may live in the same manner as
at other times, only avoiding excess.

Dr. Hugh Smith, who is an advocate for vitriolic injections, asserts, "That a
Gonorrhoea, if taken in the beginning, may generally be cured in a fortnight,
without any injuty to the constitution, or any ill effects whatsoever Dr.
Smith's Formulae Medicamentorum.
."

I have met with the greatest success in the cure of this complaint from the
same sort of injections, and find they answer much better than mercurial ones,
which deposit a considerable sediment, and being conveyed into the urethra,
cause irritation and pain in that tender passage.

The injection should be applied cold, rather than warm, (as cold braces and
warmth relaxes,) which I find often completes the cure in much less than a
fortnight, the time mentioned by the Doctor.

If the injection causes any more than a slight sensation of smart or pain in
the passage, it is evidently too much impregnated with vitriol, and the
solution must be made weaker, as the irritation of the liquor would increase
the symptoms instead of diminishing them.

The great objection to this sort of practice is raised on the supposition that
Injections are apt to produce stricture in the urinary passage, This idea, I
apprehend, is not well founded; having enquired of many different people who
have been troubled with strictures, if they had used injections for the cure,
and was generally answered in the negative. -- I am much inclined to think with
Doctor Fordyce, "That when a gonorrhoea continues long, it sometimes produces a
stricture in the part." Inflammation is naturally disposed to produce
contraction and stricture in the different sacculi and passages of the body, as
well as in the urethra: therefore we may conclude, that evils are often
attributed to Injections, which in fact owe their origin to other causes If the
long duration of this distemper produces strictures and obstructions, then what
removes the disorder quickly, must undoubtedly prevent the above evils, instead
of causing them.
. The same gentleman justly observes, that omitting the injection once or twice
will often make it fail of curing, when it would have otherwise produced that
effect If the Injection should not produce the desired effect, it will be right
to enquire if the urine passes freely, and whether it divides into two streams,
or more; or whether it comes out twisted, like a cork-screw. In these cases, it
is not likely the Injection should effect its purpose, being unable to pass:
recourse must therefore be had to the Bougie to restore the passage to its
natural state.
. He likewise remarks, that patients treated in this manner, are less liable to
inflammation of the testicles, or of the glands in the groin (on to chancres)
or strictures. These observations are certainly founded on fact. It is the
general opinion, that small doses of mercury ought to accompany the Injection.
See Fordyce, Saunders, Smith, and others. -- Conformably to this idea, I give a
grain of mercurial powder, and apply it to the cuticular surfaces of the lips,
or the tongue, and at the same time make use of the vitriolic, in preference to
every other Injection. Though I have made repeated trials of several, I know of
no other which would remove the disorder in twice the time which this does; but
there are some that would not succeed at all, and rather aggravate the symptoms.

It is now proved by a repetition of ingenious experiments, and generally
admitted, that the discharge in a Gonorrhoea proceeding from the wethra, is not
pus, but mucus. Pus is the matter which proceeds from wounds and ulcers, but
mucus comes from surfaces not ulcerated, though sometimes inflamed. Dr. Hunter
says, he has often dissected the urethra of persons who have died, having the
Gonorrhoea at that time, and he adds, that he never discovered any ulcer in the
passage. Mucus is, in itself, an innocent, mild fluid, but capable of acquiring
virulence and acrimony from contagious infection.

The Gonorrhoea is an increased and virulent discharge from the mucous glands
Described in Pages 1 and 2.
of the urinary passage. Mucus, when untainted, is transparent like the white
of an egg, appears as a drop sometimes at the orifice of the urethra next the
glands, is of a mucilaginous viscidity, and its use is to sheathe and defend
the passage from the irritating salts conveyed in the urine. It resembles the
fluid in the eye, which is secreted in small quantity, but when the lachrymal
gland is stimulated by grief, dust, or other offending substance, the discharge
becomes copious and sometimes acrid.

Darwin observes, in his experiments on pus and mucus, "That whenever the
secretion of any fluid is increased, there is at the same time an increased
heat in the part." The same gentleman observes, that "the catarrhal humor from
the nostrils of some who ride in frosty weather, and the tears which run down
the cheeks of those who have an obstruction of the puncta lachrymalia, are
easily distinguished from others, by their abounding in ammoniacal or muriatic
salts, whence they inflame the circumjacent skin: thus in the catarrh, the
upper lip becomes red and swelled from the acrimony of the mucus, and patients
complain of the saltness of its taste. The eyes and cheeks are red with the
corrosive tears, and the ichor of some herpetic eruptions erodes far and wide
the contiguous parts, and is pungently salt to the taste, as some patients have
informed him."

When the mucous membrane of the nose is stimulated by a violent cold, or other
cause, we often see an extraordinary quantity of discharge from that organ; yet
no one suspects the existence of any ulcers there, and I have often observed,
that the discolored mucus of that part bears so strong a resemblance to the
virulent discharge in the gonorrhoea, that it would frequently perplex persons
conversant in these matters to distinguish two handkerchiefs, the one from the
other, when stained with the respective mucus. Either of these fluids having
acquired acrimony will inflame, and sometimes slightly excoriate irritable
nervous membranes. These excoriations generally heal of themselves, and when
they do not, no one hesitates to apply repellent and healing medicines to the
part, without even the smallest suspicion of any bad consequence. With ulcers
the case is very different, there being the greatest reason to apprehend danger
from the absorption of matter into the circulation. Writers of good credit
assert, that a drop of acrid pus, absorbed into the blood, affects all the
fluids, stimulates the vessels, and is capable of producing violent disorders,
such as putrid fevers, etc. Impressed with such a belief, no thinking man, in
this or any age, would adopt a practice at once so irrational and dangerous:
but as the discharge is merely mucus, and has no concern with the system or
animal economy, it may be safely washed away, like any other sordes, or filth
from the surfaces of the body, by injections, which are not only far more
expeditious in producing their effects, but also appear, on a due comparison of
the merits of each, to possess another advantage, that of being a more cleanly,
safe, and agreeable method of cure, than any other whatsoever. I have only to
add in this place, that I am confirmed more and more in the use of injections,
which entirely answer the above description and commendation.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE REMEDIES in USE for the CURE OF THE LUES VENEREA, FROM
ITS First Appearance in EUROPE.
THE cure of this disorder, which has now prevailed all over Europe near three
centuries, has not been so much improved by the profession as might have been
expected during so long a period. It raged for several years uncontrouled,
before an effectual remedy for it was discovered. After the antidote for this
poison was found to exist in mercury, yet still so very unfortunate was the
applicat on of it, that many lives were lost by salivations, shocking to
relate, in consequence of the want of sufficient knowledge of the nature and
qualities of this mineral, in the practitioners of those times.

"The first attempts of the cure of venereal maladies, by this remedy, were
learned from the Arabians, who having recommended mercurial ointments in the
Leprosy or scabies, gave a handle to the Italian physicians, to try their
efficacy in removing the foulness of the skin from a new and terrible
contagion: neither were they sparing of their liniments, which they continued
to rub in for twelve, fifteen, nay, sometimes for above thirty days together
Mead on Poisons.
," a very dangerous practice, which prevails too much even in the present age.
Sarsaparilla, sassafras, guaicum, have all at different periods been in more or
less estimation for their antivenereal virtues; but mercury is the only
antidote for this poison, on which any age has reposed an entire confidence.

In 1685, Dr. Sydenham wrote on this amongst other subjects. His account shows,
that although the use of the remedy was better understood, yet the cure of the
disorder was but little improved.

In 1731, Dr. Turner, a member of the College of Physicians in London, who had
made the Venereal Disease his particular study, thought proper to communicate
his observations and practice to the world. His drastic purges, and mercurial
prescriptions, were such as might destroy the most robust constitution; what
then must have become of those of a weak and delicate frame?

Dr. Boerhaave has advanced a system of his own, apparently less detrimental
than former ones, and which has been very much adopted of late years. The
Doctor's theory of the disease is, that it is seated in the fat; therefore
evacuations which destroyed it, must, in his opinion, contribute greatly to the
cure of this disorder; for which reason the Doctor recommended the most
powerful sudorifics and purgatives, the former of which though hurtful, are
less prejudicial to the constitution than the latter.

Dr. Astruc, a celebrated writer, has given a very sensible and accurate
description of the Lues Venerea in all its stages, with directions for its
cure; but the remedies are as violent as those recommended by preceding
writers, and ought therefore to be exploded.

Baron Van Swieten recommends The Corrosive Sublimate to be given internally.
It had hitherto only been used externally to fungus in wounds, on account of
the violence of its nature. Even when administered in rum or brandy, to correct
it, the stomach can seldom retain it, for which reason it has grown into
disrepute, although it has a most astonishing and rapid effect in removing
venereal symptoms.

Mr. Professor Plenk advises the giving Quicksilver with gum arabic, to prevent
it from exciting a salivation. This is the least prejudicial of all the modes
of administering mercury internally.

Fumigation, which is lately revived, I have often seen applied to sores with
hardly any perceptible advantage, and sometimes it gave great pain, and did a
manifest injury.

Two circumstances have conduced greatly to the better treatment of this
complaint, within these twenty or thirty years; I mean, the extraordinary
improvements in anatomy and chemistry: by the former we have acquired a better
knowledge of the seat of this disorder, and by the latter, of the medicines
employed to effect it is cure.

A CRITICAL ENQUIRY INTO THE OPERATION OF MERCURY, AND THE DIFFERENT Modes of
administering it considered.
DIFFERENCE of opinion prevails with regard to the mode of administering
mercurial preparations; the advocates for each, giving their reasons for that
which they adopt in preference to any other. The alterative method is much in
esteem and practice, and with some deviation and caution may be rendered very
beneficial.

This appellation of alterant or alterative is given to all such medicines as
correct the bad qualities of the blood, and other animal fluids, without
occasioning any sensible evacuation. According to Dr. Woodward, all that is
commonly alleged concerning the change of principles or ferments of diseases
by alterant remedies, is merely chimerical and imaginary; he remarks, that
there is no change made to the advantage of the human body without a successive
renovation and discharge of what is hurtful, and a supply of its place by
something innocent.

The Doctor gives the preference to evacuants, as being the only medicines
capable of freeing the machine from whatever incommodes it. Some take a
contrary course, and ascribe even the salutary effects of evacuants to their
alterative nature, which has been alleged of mercury in the cure of the
venereal disease. Among alterant medicines there are several which change the
scene of the symptoms, and others which suspend the action of the morbific
matter for a time; but these remedies which hold the morbific principles
captive pro tempo^e, are only palliatives, and even on some accounts dangerous,
since they may as well captivate other principles necessary to lise.

Dr. Fordyce says, "Whatever preparation we employ, we should give it in such a
manner, and in such a dose as to produce hardness, fullness, and moderate
frequency of the pulse, with as little sensible evacuation as possible; for
that the mercury cures sooner and with greater certainty, when the strength is
but little, than when it is much reduced by it."

Mr. Plenck is of opinion, "that mercury, together with the venereal virus, may
be more conveniently and more easily evacuated by the ordinary excretions of
sweat, stool, and urine."

It seems to me much more safe to permit the gradual evacuation of mercury
(after it has circulated some time, and subdued the virus) than to confine it
within the body by opiates, or other means, so as to occasion hardness,
fullness, and acceleration of the pulse. The saturation or surcharge of the
system with mercury is very hazardous, as it sometimes terminates in a fatal
diarrhaea. Surely it is most prudent to permit a little of the mercury to
depart, and throw into the circulation such a proportion only, as may be
altogether safe and yet sufficient to keep up a gentle mercurial stimulus in
the habit.

Mercury and wine operate somewhat alike upon the body. With a certain quantity
of wine, hardness, fullness, and acceleration of the pulse will supervene, till
at length in common an evacuation takes place; when it does not, and the wine
is retained there, (like mercury exhibited as an alterative), it excites
feverish heat, and does the constitution much more injury than when it passes
off gradually by any of the ordinary evacuations.

Dr. Fordyce observes, "it is never necessary to salivate a patient, unless he
be so irritable, that the smallest dose of mercury immediately affects his
mouth, or unless the disease be proceeding so fast that it would be hazardous
to wait till it was checked by the remedy given in such a manner as to avoid
salivation; or excepting when we cannot trust to his using it regularly. On the
contrary, salivation renders the effects of the medicine uncertain." The same
author says, "If, notwithstanding these precautions, a salivation should come
on, we know of no remedy which will remove it with any degree of certainty,
although sulphur, camphire, and purgatives have been recommended for this
purpose. If therefore the case be urgent, the best way is to let it go on,
using the mercurial ointment as above described." Dr. Saunders says he has
known patients who have had violent fevers excited by mercury in the form of
unction. The same author remarks, that a gentleman who had recourse to
mercurial unction, being seized with a fever, sent for him, and communicated to
him his venercal complaints. His pulse was quick and hard, he complained of
pain in his back, headache, thirst, and other such symptoms as he had frequently
seen arise from a mercurial course, conducted on the plan here prescribed."

Dr. Cullen observes, -- that purging is never excited by any means, without
spasms of the intestines, which, when the operation is continued, are apt to
end in durable spasm and inflammation. These are attended with very dangerous
consequences. Neither does the method of purging by unction answer much better
(although perhaps more effectual), because it is attended with very great pain.
-- Lectures on Materia medica.




I have ever found those patients more easily cured, who were most susceptible
of the mercurial stimulus. Let there be an affection of the mouth and cheeks,
and an amendment of the complaint takes place at least nine times in ten; the
mercury will run off in general very soon if the process is discontinued, which
it must not be, but the tenderness of the mouth is to be kept up to a certain
degree, according to the urgency of the disorder, and to prevent a relapse,
especially in chancres with hardness, and in other inveterate cases. It is not
the mere quantity of mercury, but the method of directing its operation, which
in my opinion is the chief circumstance to be relied on in the cure. I would
certainly run the risk, if there was any, of not immediately curing, rather
than expose my patient to the hazard of a large quantity of accumulated mercury
ready at an hour's notice, or less, to emancipate itself from the body by
stimulating the intestines, and thus exhausting li^e.

We may be amused with the theory of mercury circulating in the system in
perfect equilibrium, not inclining more to one secretion than to another; but
it is certain, this is a powerful medicine that ought not to be trifled with;
we cannot say to it -- So far shall thou go, and no further. The most skilful
pilot will find it difficult so to trim his vessel that it shall not sink or
overturn when too heavily laden with mercury.

The ingenious Plenck, (to whom the world is so much indebted for the great
improvements he has made by his experiments on mercury, and in the cure of this
disease) says, that a salivation is a dangerous practice; for the famous
Astruc, says he, asserts that there frequently supervene, violent fevers,
diarrhaea, dysentery, haemoptoe, an immobility of the jaws, and likewise a
suffocation, and that too, when a salivation has been most properly conducted;
and after him the most skilful Locher tells us the same. --

Several years since a practitioner had the misfortune to lose (within a short
time of each other) two patients with chancres, for the cure of which he had
raised very high salivations by mercurial ointment. Just as their complaints
were healed, and salivation began to decline, one of the gentlemen was seized
with a dysenteric flux, and expired within a few hours: his death was
attributed to a piece of butter which the nurse had inadvertently put into his
gruel. The other died also of a flux, arising from the sudden descent of the
mercury overturning the equilibrium, and rushing through the patient's bowels
with irresistible impetuosity. --

To form a just idea of a salivation, we should perambulate the public
hospitals, where there are wretches miserable indeed! miserable in having a sad
disease, but much more so in having a cure to encounter which makes the unhappy
objects call on death for a deliverance from their pains. Their head, face, and
tongue so swelled, as to forbid their uttering a syllable. Their cheeks often
torn to pieces, a salivary flux of two or three quarts a day, with breath
extremely offensive, teeth loose, tongue and gums ulcerated and inflamed,
attended with a severe unremitting headache; and this process is the same in
all cases and seasons: it may truly be said, such remedies are worse than the
diseases they are intended to remove. But this is not all the patient has to
undergo; add to this, frequent severe cholicky pains, accompanied with
diarrhaea and dysentery, which continuing, so often prove fatal. The patient
can swallow no solid food during this severe operation, and indeed scarcely
liquids, and is almost dead with hunger, having often an appetite without the
possibility of indulging it. Thus are persons confined for several weeks, and
when the process is finished, they are so reduced in flesh, as to be quite a
spectacle, and frequently go into a deep decline. -- If these evils may be
prevented, and that they may, we have daily experience added to the strongest
testimonies, are we not all called upon by every motive of conscience,
religion, and humanity, to preserve the unhappy from ruin, by rejecting so
cruel a practice?

"Graviora morbis patimur remedia;
"Nec Vita tanti est, vivere ut possis, mori."
If the surgeons who superintend the hospitals would make a trial of my method,
I am convinced from experience, they would be able, without annoying the
stomach, to convey any quantity of any mercurial preparation into the system in
few hours, instead of weeks. This may be done by rubbing mercury on the back
and middle of the tongue, and repeating the process at the shortest intervals.
There is no occasion to wait for its operation as in the case of pills, but we
may safely stimulate these surfaces as much and as often as we choose, till we
have actually produced the desired effect on the system. Let the mouth be well
cleared of the saliva, and I know of no other impediment to the success of this
process. Dr. Home, professor of physic at Edinburgh, has honored me by making
a variety of public experiments in the Edingburgh Infirmary, which will soon
appear in the Doctor's intended publication. By these experiments it is proved,
that mercury is more quickly introduced, with greater certainty, and with less
prejudice to the constitution in this way, than by any of the other modes of
administering it internally or externally.

Objections to Mercury in the Form of Pills, Bolus, etc.
WITH respect to Pills, it is certain that many patients find a difficulty in
taking them. First, it is hardly possible so to distribute the mercury
throughout the mass, that there shall not be some difference and uncertainty in
the dose when divided into pills; and secondly, they sometimes pass through the
body undissolved. When they dissolve, they irritate, perhaps corrode, the
stomach, an organ most essential to health. This circumstance has excited
universal complaint and dread of mercury, which however being administered in
my method, is so very mild, that it does not in the least impair the
constitution, as the surface on which the mercury is laid, will bear a
considerable degree of irritation without any sort of prejudice. A grain of
mercury applied to the internal surfaces of the mouth is thence absorbed with
the greatest facility, and operates kindly and with effect on the habit in
general. Dr. Cullen justly observes Lecture on Mercury.
, "that when we purge, we think we are operating on the common sewer of the
system: but little advantage is to be found from the mercury employed in this
way, as its virtues depend chiefly on its operation on the body in general."


"The saline chrystals of mercury vellicate and twitch the sensible membranes
of the stomach to that degree, as excites them to an excretion of their
contents and glandular juices upwards or downwards, according as the force of
irritation is greater or less." -- Mead on Poisons,

"Of all the various modes of administering mercury, that which you recommend
seems to me the most safe, and I have no doubt but it will likewise be found
the most efficacious. A false opinion has long prevailed, that every medicine
ought to be taken into the stomach: this has done much mischief. Many people
have such an aversion to medicines of all kinds, that they will suffer any
thing rather than swallow a single dose. Others have such a debility of the
Viscera, that though they can swallow mercury, yet it tears their stomach and
bowels to pieces. Of this every medical practitioner must have seen many
instances. There are few persons who have been so unfortunate as to take large
quantities of this mineral in the usual way, who do not exhibit melancholy
proofs of its baneful effects on the stomach and bowels. By your mode of
administering mercury, these effects are obviated, while it is much more
cleanly and agreeable than the common method of applying it to the skin." --
Extract from Dr. BUCHAN'S Letter.

Dr. Hunter observes, "that this process is preferable to pills or boluses, as
the calomel stimulates the primae viae much less, and therefore he adds, people
with very tender bowels may bear it much better in this form than any other."
Therefore it is best for all constitutions, as every person has most
undoubtedly tender bowels.

Dr. Krohn, in his letter to me mentions the case of a gentleman, "who had a
virulent chancre on the froenum, of which he was cured in a fortnight by this
process, without the smallest inconvenience; on the contrary, he found his
bowels perfectly free from any attack on them, the usual attendants on former
methods of treatment, which he had frequently experienced previous to this
trial."

"How many originally, vigorous, deduce their present weak bowels, and crazy
constitutions, from the mischiefs occasioned by the action of the Mercury on
the primae viae." -- Mr. Cruikshank's Letter.

After ample trial of all the different mercurial preparations in common use, I
find that any of them may be safely and expeditiously conveyed into the system
from the surfaces of the mouth, and that those of the most subtle and active
kind are equal to the cure of the most confirmed disease. Their stimulating
quality supplies the place of friction, which is only necessary when any of the
milder preparations are employed.

Objections to Mercurial Ointment.
"The friction of Mercurial Ointment is to many people one of the most
disagreeable things in the world. It Is leaden color, contrasted with the skin,
makes it look dirty. It has a particularly offensive smell, independent of that
of the turpentine, or balsam of sulphur, which may have been employed in
extinguishing the quicksilver. From the circumstance that half an hour's
friction, or even that of a whole hour, if ever so well performed, will not
commonly effect a total absorption of the ointment, the skin is generally left
a little smeared with it: after the process is over, as it is oily it does not
evaporate, or dry readily, and will easily stick to whatever it touches.
Patients are obliged to sleep in flannel drawers to prevent the ointment from
getting through and daubing the bed clothes. They must be frequently changing
these drawers, constantly washing the skin; or, as washing off the ointment
would retard rather than forward the cure, they must remain dirty for six
weeks, or perhaps three months together; and if by accident any part of the
ointment gets upon their linen, from it is color it is very apt to give the
alarm in families, and lead to disagreeable discoveries."

Mr. Cruikshank's Letter.


Dr. Manning, in his Practice of Physic, on the subject of my mercurial process
observes as follows; "By this method we not only avoid the inconveniences of
unction, but the purgative effects that are often produced by mercury when
taken into the stomach."

With respect to a regimen in the treatment of the Lues, abstinence and low
living certainly retard the cure. Persons afflicted with this distemper, are
much subject to despondency, and living more freely now than at other times,
raises the spirits of the patient, and contributes to his cure by cooperating
with the medicine; therefore I shall continue to recommend that practice, at
the same time should object as strongly as any other practitioner, to every
indulgence that might be prejudicial. It has been said, that people under a
course of mercury cannot be kept too warm, which is true only when the mercury
affects the stomach or bowels, or greatly opens the pores of the skin; but from
the very mild operation of mercury on the system in my method, patients are
exposed to all weathers, without injury to the constitution.

Dr. Krohn on this subject says, "this mode agrees better with people who are
debauchees, having had essential proof of this assertion in a patient who drank
all kinds of strong liquors, was scarcely ever in bed for a week together, till
break of day, and was much exposed to cold damp air."

A Recapitulation of Objections to the common Methods of administering MERCURY,
accompanied with some new Observations, and conveying a short and pointed View
of the Whole.
A Lues is a venereal infection in the mass of blood; and is to be cured by
throwing a sufficient quantity of mercury into the system to expel it.

There are many ways of conveying mercury into the circulation of the blood.

The usual methods are by pills, boluses, and draughts, and also by outward
application of mercurial ointment.

The first three are conveyed by the mouth into the stomach, where the
mercurial particles are in part absorbed by the lymphatic vessels of that
organ, and conveyed into the blood; also by the same vessels in the intestines,
and frequently the greatest portion of the mercury escapes out of the body by
this outlet, having first irritated the animal economy throughout the whole of
the canal.

Mercury may be prevented from passing downwards by joining opium with it,
which takes off its stimulus, and generally prevents its purgative effects; but
this often creates sickness and reaching, and shakes the whole nervous system.

Two grains of mercury taken up into the blood by the mouth, will produce as
powerful an effect on the system, as twenty grains thrown into the stomach, on
the presumption that eighteen of the twenty make their exit downwards: we
reckon only what gets into the system, for what passes through, is lost, and
certainly better had never been given. The stomach resembles a sink with a
grate in it, and is not constructed to retain mercury.

Mercurial ointment cures by being taken up into the blood by the absorbents of
the external skin, and when introduced there, by operating on the whole
vascular system, and expelling the venereal poison by the different secretions
and excretions of the body.

The objections to this mode of practice are, First, that it is dirty and
disagreeable; that it is commonly slow and tedious: that it requires too much
labor for persons in a weak state, and if the friction is performed by other
hands than their own, that one half of the ointment, or more, must infallibly
be lost to the patient, and may prove very injurious to the party who applies
it.

Mercurial ointment affects the stomach or bowels, and brings on purging;
insomuch that it is not uncommon for patients, both in public and private
practice, to die under a course of unction, of violent cholies, accompanied by
sanguinary and other fluxes, and this happens by the quantity of mercury
absorbed proving an overbalance for the constitution.

Practitioners do not accurately know what quantity of mercury may be given,
and what quantity of it will take effect, as different constitutions require
different doses. Five grains of mercurial ointment will take more effect on one
subject, than fifty on another; after using it ten or fifteen days
successively, no visible effect may be produced on the constitution; yet, on
the eighteenth or twentieth, a salivary flux may commence, and continue for a
fortnight or three weeks, and the patient's strength become exhausted. At this
juncture should a diarrhaea unfortunately take place, it carries off the
patient in a few hours, notwithstanding all the endeavors of the most skilful
of the faculty.

I have made use of such arguments as have occurred to me in behalf of this new
method, and have advanced nothing but what my repeated experience does fully
warrant. If the ideas of other practitioners do not coincide with mine, I shall
be happy to see their avowed and printed sentiments on this important subject,
divested of prejudice and delivered with candor.

Should it be asserted that this method sometimes fails, let not that
declaration prevent the trying it, as this may be urged against all medical
practice, and often, no doubt, with the greatest injustice.

It is said that this process, by shortening the cure and lessening the
medicines, will diminish the fee. The profession need not object to it on that
account, as they are paid, not for their medicine, this being no object, but
for their skill and judgment. Patients of liberal dispositions will always be
pleased with dispatch and make a handsome return: and others will find their
interest also in behaving in the same equitable manner.

FINIS.
Published by the same Author, in two Pocket Volumes, in boards. Price 5s.
A New and easy Method of Curing the LUES VENEREA: with an Essay on ABSCESSES,
and other observations in Surgery. The 3d edition; to which is added a Letter
to Dr. Buchan, on the Modern Practice of INOCULATION: also Miscellaneous
Remarks by several Gentlemen of the Faculty in favor of the NEW MODE of
administering Mercury: with anatomical Plates of the Villi, or Packets of
Absorbent Vessels.


