The Invasion: A POEM TO THE QUEEN.

By Mr. HILL.

Nil actum est, inquit, nisi, Gallo milite, Portas
Frangimus, and Regno vexillum pono Britanno,
Quantulus at rediit?
Juv. Sat. 10. LONDON: Printed for THO. BICKERTON at the Golden Flower-de-Luce
in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1708.

The Invasion: A POEM.
PRIDE of the World, permit an humble Muse
To snatch the Theme her Duty bids her choose,
That so the boundless Zeal which now inspires,
And warms my glowing Breast with Loyal Fires,
May teach my towering Fancy to rehearse
Your Godlike Actions in a lofty Verse:
So shall Your spreading Laurels never die,
Nor Your bright Deeds in dark Oblivion lie,
But Ages yet unborn shall learn to bless
The Author of those Joys their Children must possess.
Oh! could You see with how sincere a Flame
My Soul expands in Raptures at Your Name!
How pure my Praise! how innocent my Song!
My Prayers how ardent! and my Zeal how strong!
You would not, could not think Your Virtuous Rays
Produced so base a Plant as mercenary Praise.
No hopes of Gain can stain my honest Pen,
Nor can I stoop to write like flattering Men;
For though, Obscure, amongst vulgar Crowds I lie,
Skreen'd from the SUN of Your enlivening Eye,
I bear a Loyal Soul, and dare to do
Beyond the Power of Man, to serve a QUEEN like YOU.
But it is a needless Art I practice now,
Too low to HEAVEN and YOU we cannot bow;
For Majesty like Yours, and Power Divine,
Whose dazzling Rays with spotless Luster shine,
By innate Force draw Praise from every Land,
Nor can we give You more than You command;
Envy herself can spy no doubtful Act,
Nor Malice from your witnessed Worth detract;
Faction, disarmed, submits to what You do,
Nor can the brightest Praise reach Power to flatter YOU.
Long had BRITANNIA mourned a cloudy Fate,
Depressed with Fears for her divided State;
Long had each willing Sister wished in vain,
For Dreams alternate of the Crown and Chain
Invite 'em often, often bear 'em wide again:
Till Heaven, indulgent to the doubtful Isle,
Looked down with Pity, and vouchsafed a Smile;
What common Kings had found too hard to do,
Some Power Celestial must attempt anew;
Thence Jove shot down from Heaven his brightest Ray,
To animate the purest part of Clay,
From which Great UNION Godlike ANNA came,
ANNA, the darling Favorite of Fame!
By Her the wondrous Task was bravely done,
And the Coy Nymphs to kind Embraces won;
At Her Desire Heavens mighty Mandates fly,
And firm a Gordian Knot that Hell can never unty.
In a rough part of Gallia's Warlike Land,
A craggy Ridge of Rocky Mountains stand,
Whose steep Ascents, and vast unmeasured Height
With pleasing Wonder strike the distant sight;
Their solid sides vast Tracts of Land surround,
And skreen bright Prospects of Enchanted Ground.
Here, on a gaudy Throne of glittering State,
As Fortune changeable, but fixed as Fate,
With Eagles Wings, and Virgins lovely Face,
Of Form inviting, and unequalled Grace,
The Fiend Ambition sits, and shines around the place;
Imperial Crowns of Gold adorn her Head,
From whence, in wanton Curls, her Tresses spread;
Her Hands are elevated as her Look,
One holds a Bloody Sword, and one a Golden Book.
On her Right Hand appears her Sister Pride,
And crawling Envy guards the other side;
Of either Sex un-numbred Swarms appear,
And throng in Crowds to pay their Homage here;
On all alike the crafty Fury smiles,
With equal Art their various Thoughts beguiles,
First draws them on to Fate, then glories in their Spoils.
For round large Hills, overspread with shining Light,
With Gold refulgent, and with Diamonds bright,
Ten thousand Deaths in strange Disguises stand,
And crush the rash Invaders of that LAND.
Hither the News of ANNA's Honors came,
The ponderous Message burst the Trump of Fame,
And every Fiend grew pale, and trembled at Her Name.
An awful Silence swiftly followed this,
And Envy's Snakes, with fright, forgot to hiss,
Till from her Throne the shocked Ambition starts,
And in these Words her fixed Resolves imparts:
Ha! shall I lose, at last, my boasted Power?
Long have the Books of Fate foretold this Hour;
Either my Empire falls, or ANNA bleeds;
But I waste time in Words, behold my Deeds,
She said, -- and on the Ground her Ensigns threw,
Extended wide her Wings, and upward flew,
And left her Train amazed and wondering at the View.
Near the famed Borders of the River Seine,
Whose gentle Streams in large Maeanders twine,
Whose swelling Floods by fertile Showers advance,
And kindly wash the fairest Plains of France,
Versailles, a small, but stately City, lies,
And rears her lofty Turrets to the Skies;
Proudly she boasts the Source whence Honors spring,
From the fixed Residence of Gallia's King;
For there that Mighty Monarch's Palace stands,
Guarded by brawny Slaves in chosen Bands.
Here, on a Bed of State, the Tyrant lies,
Pregnant with Hopes to make the World his Prize;
Here different Passions round his Bosom roll,
And various Tortures rack his anxious Soul;
Here conscious Guilt invades his wished Repose,
And magnifies the Number of his Foes;
Now he has mounted the Triumphant Car,
Now sinks beneath the Weight of adverse War;
Here Hopes and Fears alternate Changes bring,
And here AMBITION finds her Favorite King.
An unexpected Sleep had closed his Eyes,
And seized his Senses with a soft Surprise,
When to the place the angry Fury came,
Her Breast all boiling, and her Eyes shot Flame.
Son, says the Fiend, bright Darling of my Care,
Pride of my Hopes, and Subject of my Prayer,
Rouse from the Damps in which your Senses steep,
It Is not, oh! it is not Now a time to sleep.
Have I, for this, your lost Advantage sought?
For this your Power with Blood of Nations bought?
Have I for this your daring Breast inspired,
And with hot Flames of War your Bosom fired?
Have your great Stratagems bound Europe fast?
And must a Woman break the Chain at last?
Ah Prince! betimes exert a vigorous Care,
Betimes for Death or Victory prepare;
For oh! I fear, nay, more than fear, I know,
From' ANNA's Arm you must expect a Blow,
And who opposes Her has Heaven to be his Foe.
In vain abroad your dreadful Cannons roar,
In vain your Fleets at home defend your Shore;
In vain your Armies Foreign Vict'ries gain,
In vain Almanza gave you conquered Spain;
And, oh! in vain your baffled Soldiers fight,
While the two Barriers of your Power Unite:
BRITAIN, Great Prince, by Heaven and ANNA led,
Has joined Two Bodies to One Sovereign Head;
And if divided She could shake your Throne,
She may o'erturn it Now, since into UNION grown.
Rouse then, and swiftly form some vast Design,
Impending Dangers should Dispatch incline;
Speed gives Success, by Time it is lost or won,
It Is not 'twas bravely Thought, but bravely Done.
I know your Courage great, I know you Wise,
And therefore but remind you, not advise.
You have a British Prince attends your Court,
At least a Prince by His and Our Report;
Contested Titles we dispute in vain,
Kings should not mind the Justice, but the Gain.
Strike now; a Wound just closed you will soon renew;
But, if neglected long, you will find it hard to do.
She said, -- and vanished swiftly from his sight,
Lost in the sable Clouds of dusky Night.
The frighted King in furious haste arose,
Forgot the softer thoughts of his Repose;
The Fury's Sting had touched his Vital Flood,
And raging Fevers heats enflamed his Blood.
Revolving Thoughts consumed the tedious Night,
And Eastern Skies displayed the Morning Light,
When the fierce King a hasty Summons sends,
And each commanded Officer attends;
The wondering Council in Confusion met,
By the King's side the young Pretender sat;
Fires in his Soul a flaming Wrath provoke,
While thus, with sparkling Eyes, the Gallick Tyrant spoke:
Lords of this Land, where I so long have reigned,
Whose Loyalty your Courage has maintained,
I called you hither now, to let you know
I aim my Arrows at a British Foe;
Their sudden UNION has my Hopes betrayed,
We must dissolve the Tie that Knot has made,
Not meanly guard our own, but Hostile Shoars invade.
And You, young Prince, whose too unhappy Fate
Has cast you roughly from your Father's State,
Shall have my Help to lift you to a Throne
That justly is, or ought to be, your own:
It then remains, You should the Dangers weigh
That may a while defer the happy Day;
Which if You dare but meet, the Task be Mine
To guide you safely through the vast Design;
The Gallick Fleet shall shake the British Shore
With Force they never felt nor feared before;
My best Commanders shall attend your Fate,
And chosen Troops support your Kingly State.
This is my Will, your Answer I expect,
I have proposed the Task, and will the Deed effect.
A rising Murmur from the buzzing Crowd
Proclaimed their Wonder and their Pleasure loud,
While the Pretender spoke, and as he spoke he bowed.
Illustrious Prince, from whom my Fortune springs,
Great Dread of Nations, and great Chief of Kings,
Words want the Power to speak my rising Joy,
Nor can my Tongue vain Eloquence employ;
Give me my Crown, and its Command shall show
How much to Your great Soul I and my Subjects owe.
Green in the Field, unused to Wars Alarms,
Soldier in bloom, and yet unskilled in Arms,
I Will bravely lead your conquering Squadrons on,
And wade through Seas of Blood to reach my Throne;
Nor fear I Dangers, nor can doubt Success,
Hell cannot curse the Man whom You vouchsafe to bless.
He spoke, -- The smiling King the Speech commends,
And sudden Orders over his Kingdom sends,
Surprised, the Council rose, and the great Congress ends.
Now from all parts the Din of War grows high,
And Trumpets sound their Summons to the Sky;
Tonitruous Drums in rougher Notes proclaim
The Soldiers Business, and their Leaders Aim:
Arms long neglected, now begin to shine,
And neighing Horses snort a Great Design;
The Warlike Ensigns that the Chiefs prepare,
In pendant Curlings fan the wanton Air;
Love's softer Arts no more amuse the Swains,
And Nymphs are left abandoned in the Plains;
To War's great Call Troops of bold Youths advance,
The Pride of Valor, and the Bloom of France;
With sprightly Joy they hear the loud Alarms,
Forget their softer Dress, and shine in glittering Arms:
To Dunkirk's Port with hasty Zeal they fly,
Where ready Ships of War in graceful Order lie.
And now the fatal Morn' began to peep,
When the strong Fleet must plough the Stormy Deep;
In the gay Town the chosen Army lay,
And with loud Shouts salute the welcome Day.
The tuneful Trumpets echo from afar,
With all the noisie Instruments of War;
The summoned Chiefs to their fixed places flew,
And into Order all their Forces drew;
The tops of Houses Crowds of Gazers heap,
And from the Windows Wives and Mothers weep;
With wringing hands a last Farewell they take,
And wish the War Success, each for her Husband's sake.
In the broad Front, with an unequalled Pride,
They saw the rash Pretender boldly ride,
Graced by the Warlike Chiefs who rode on either side.
Twice Fifty gallant Troops march slowly on,
Whose Swords in frequent Wars had Vict'ries won;
With graceful Pride their tall Commanders tread,
And feathered Plumes adorn each elevated Head;
Their sloping Spears shine through the City-gate,
And others bear for Arms the fiery Tubes of Fate.
Thus march the haughty Train in pompous State,
To gain the Strand, where ready Vessels wait;
A tempting Gale invites 'em soon aboard,
And from the Port their hasty Ships unmoor'd;
Saluting Cannons from the Bulwarks roar,
And the Fleets Thunder shakes the Friendly Shore.
And now the formidable Ships of France
From their strong Port to the wide Seas advance;
Their tallow'd Keels divide the rolling Waves,
And their smooth sides the rising Ocean laves;
The skilful Mariners unfurl their Sails,
Whose fluttering Canvass courts the swelling Gales;
The managed Rudders break the Billows power,
And make 'em guide what they would else devour:
To dreadful breadth the bulky Squadrons spread,
Afrighted Neptune hides his hoary Head,
And the Sea Monsters fly, struck with a pannnick Dread.
To Caledonian Land their Course they bend,
And on her Coast their threatening Powers descend:
The craggy Rocks, that guard the Northern Shore,
Trembled and shook at their loud Thunders roar,
And loos'n'd from their Roots, that never moved before.
But hold, my Muse; -- Forget thy Foes a while,
And turn a pleasing look to BRITAIN's Isle,
On whose blessed Fortunes Heaven and ANNA smile.
Soon had the watchful Eyes of PROVIDENCE,
That ever wake and move for Her Defense,
Perceived the black Design, their Forces seen,
And told their Numbers to the happy QUEEN:
The Loyal Senate flame with generous Fire,
And their Examples every Breast inspire;
At the first Summons Crowds unnumber'd meet,
And throw their Lives and Fortunes at Her Feet.
Two British Fleets then plough'd the distant Main,
One bore her Natives to the Coast of Spain,
Others in Midland Seas Vict'ries on Vict'ries gain.
Mean while Domestic Shoars unguarded lie,
No equal Force to meet the Foe was nigh;
But ANNA needs not that, for Heaven is Her ALLIE.
Yet at Her Call tall Ships in Numbers meet,
And form, with wondrous haste, a Mighty Fleet;
Over the rough Seas commanded Squadrons fly,
In their swift way no dangerous Barriers lie,
From Her they claim their Force, their Fortune from the Sky.
Now the brave Britons, whom the Seas obey,
Over moving Mountains force their watery Way,
Their crowded Sails leave loit'ring Birds behind,
And their stretched Breadth monopolize the Wind.
Eager to fight, their Ships for War prepare,
Fly through the Seas, and sail upon the Air;
Each laboring Hull the wondering Waves divides,
And shakes the frighted Billows from her sides;
Their bending Masts yield to the powerful Gales,
And groaning Beams below proclaim the ponderous Sails.
When from their Watch the Fleets each other spy,
With equal Joy contiguous Sails they ply,
And look like two black Clouds gathering from either Sky.
Each to just length contract their spreading Line,
And glittering Weapons from their Rigging shine;
Death, here invited, leaves the peaceful Shore,
And lies concealed in every Cannon's Bore,
Tempting their fiery Rage, and courting them to roar.
Britannia's Sons with cheerful Shouts come nigh,
And their loud Triumphs pierce the vaulted Sky;
On the high Decks the graceful Chiefs appear,
Invite the Battle, and disdain to fear;
Their sprightly Trumpets loud Defiance sound,
And wondering Fishes dance in Shoals around;
With gentle force the Southern Breezes blow,
And bear their dreadful Thunder on the Foe.
But when the bold Pretender saw their Power,
And felt their Anger in a Sulfurous Shower,
His gifted Sword forsook his trembling Hand,
And his rolled Eyes surveyed the distant Land,
His fault'ring Tongue forgot a while to speak,
And knocking Knees with sudden shocks grow weak;
Strangely surpised his anxious Thoughts appear,
And drowns his Senses in the Gulf of Fear.
Thus, when the Noble Lion sleeping lies,
Nor dreads the Danger of a base Surprise,
Some envious Fox, who fears an open Strife,
With treacherous Guile attempts his Royal Life;
But when He Is seized, and in vindictive Claws,
Quakes with a guilty Fear, beneath the grasping Paws.
Now the rash Gallick Chiefs amazed looked round,
No Hopes of Safety but by Flight they found,
With heedless haste they clap their Helms a-lee,
And raise a short-lived Storm, by breaking up the Sea;
No more the Ships in their first Order join,
Confusion now divides the scattered Line,
Over the wide Ocean spread, they lose their State,
And fly disordered from pursuing Fate;
They crowd more Sail than Rigging can supply,
Grasp all the Winds that whizz along the Sky,
And court the Tempests they were used to fly:
O'erloaden Vessels crack beneath their weight,
And every Plank gapes wide, and opens Death a Gate:
Close to the Waves they lay their prostrate sides,
The chalky Keel high over the Surges rides,
And their swift Prows raise Foam upon the murmuring Tides.
The wondering Britons view their sudden Flight,
And bless with shouts the unexpected sight;
With equal haste, by different Causes led,
To equal breadth their Conquering Squadrons spread;
Well-manag'd Sails their stately Line extend,
And their stiff Masts to the strong Canvass bend;
Swiftly they scud along the watery Plain,
And by degrees a short Advantage gain,
Then tempt their Rivals to dispute the Day,
And with loud Cannons summon them to stay:
From their tall sides a generous Thunder roars,
Echoing Defiance to the distant Shoars,
While from the Gallick Sterns base Bullets fly,
And Clouds of shameful Smoke invade the blushing Sky.
In vain th'intrepid Britains tempt the Fight,
In vain they strive to stop their eager Flight,
In vain to animate their Foes they try,
Beckon the Dangers Nature bids 'em fly,
And court the bloody Blows which Heaven and France deny.
Long had their Ships, divided, urged their way,
And graced the Seas that did their Power obey,
When a brave Few, more happy than the rest,
With greater Speed, but equal Courage blessed,
Overtake the hindmost of the Hostile Fleet,
And with unwelcome Shouts their powerful Rivals greet.
From each side now successive Thunder flies,
On the rough Waves contending Vessels rise,
Alternate Showers of Death blue Sulphur rain,
Oceans of Blood the watery Surface stain,
And spread their purple Horror over the Main.
Britannia's Sons with brave Resentment flame,
Gallia must now support her sinking Fame,
One side for Honor fights, and one for Shame.
Hot Wombs of Brass new Births of Fire prepare,
Thunder on Thunder shakes the smoaky Air,
Sulphurous Clouds in curling Volumes rise,
And Nitrous Gloom obscures the ambient Skies,
Till dreadful Lightning flashing through the Night,
Discloses horrid Scenes with momentary Light.
Promiscuously the Ships in Battle join,
Observe no Order, keep no formal Line,
But strive by different Arts, to compass one Design;
With deadly Force Here adverse Bullets meet,
And with rough Shocks, and breaking Fury greet,
Here rising Waves the meeting Vessels dash,
And join their bulky Sides with hideous Crash;
Now grapling Sailors Hand to Hand contend,
Some desp'rately assail what some defend;
Here Sword from Sword with fearful Noise rebounds,
Here weighty Fauchions fix their dreadful Wounds,
Here by destructive Muskets Crowds expire,
And adverse Parties fight in Storms of Fire;
Three Elements in strange Disorder join,
In vain the struggling Flames attempt to shine,
Through rising Surges red-hot Bullets fly,
And dash the hissing Waters to the Sky;
With unresisted Force they onward roar,
Disjoin the Ships that closely fought before,
And shake the troubled Seas, and drive 'em to the Shore.
Now was the Time BRITANNIA should advance
Her deathless Glories on the Fall of France,
Sing, Loyal Muse, by what strange turn of Fate
The faithless Foe preserved his sinking State;
Say by what means Jove's Favor was obtained,
And how, by him secured, they Dunkirk's Port regained.
Shocked at the growing Thunder of the Fight,
And eager to behold the bloody Sight,
Imperial Jove descends, enthroned on Clouds,
And Heaven's bright Host attends in shining Crowds;
At his Command the strengthened Air supports
The numerous Rulers of Celestial Courts,
Who, stretched at wanton Ease, observant lie,
And frame a glorious Heaven below the Sky.
Not far from hence, amidst th'unfathom'd Sea,
There stands a Rock, strong in a vast degree,
Its towering sides the roughest Storms out-brave,
And mock the Fury of the fiercest Wave,
High on its craggy Top old Neptune stood,
Lord of the Regions of the briny Flood;
Around his Head a whistling Tempest blew,
And his long Hair high from his Temples flew,
His raised Right Hand his powerful Trident shook,
And the loud Ocean trembled at his Look.
Soon as he saw the thundering God descend,
And feared the Consequence that might attend,
He raised his dreadful Voice, and thus began,
While the hushed Seas in awful silence ran.
Brother, whose happier Fate has placed you high,
And fixed you Ruler of the starry Sky,
Welcome, oh welcome, for you come in time,
To see me punish an unequaled Crime:
ANNA the Great, the Just, of matchless Worth,
Whom Fate decrees the Empress of the Earth,
Urged by the pious Flames of mutual Love,
And such as almost equals yours above,
Gives the Command of the subjected Main
To her blessed Consort GEORGE the Royal DANE;
Long has that happy PRINCE successful been,
And Ruled the Navies of his Darling QUEEN,
Till over the wondering World He spread Her Fame,
And distant Nations trembled at her Name;
My self with Pleasure all my Power resigned,
Gave Him a full Command over Seas and Wind,
For I submitted still to all that She designed.
Yet Now, O daring Insolence! this Foe,
Whose wide Ambition injured Nations know,
At her loved Breast has aimed a treacherous Blow;
But see the conquering British Fleet advance,
Whose dreadful Cannons bear the Fate of France.
He said, -- and as he would have spoken more,
Jove cast his Eyes upon the Gallick Shore,
Henceforth, he cried, Rash Prince, more humble grow,
Nor tempt the Anger of your British Foe:
Fate now protects you, if again you dare
Invade that Land, a bloody Fall beware.
This said, -- a dusky Cloud he downwards threw,
And Scenes of Darkness 'twixt the Navies drew,
Then smiled in Neptune's Face, and upwards flew.
The furious God with Wonder viewed the Deed,
And cursed the Safety Jove to France decreed;
He bent his stormy Brow against the Skies,
Amazing Fires flashed swiftly from his Eyes,
And mad with raging Passion, loudly cries,
Hah! dares he thus invade a Brother's Right?
Though I can never repel his New-fram'd Night,
I Will curse with equal Plagues their shameful Flight.
He said, -- and made his willing Tritons meet,
To guard from gathering Storms the British Fleet,
Then with his Trident struck the hollow Rock,
That three times trembled with the mighty shock,
Thence issued Boreas with impetuous roar,
And shook the boyst'rous Seas from Shore to Shore,
Successive Waves in watery Hills rise steep,
Disclosing all the Horrors of the Deep,
Commissioned Billows over each other roll,
And frightful Prospects shock the bravest Soul.
The Gallick Fleet the Tempest soon o'ertakes,
And on their Ships with dreadful Horror breaks;
Now with strange Force the swelling Surges rise,
And lift the mounting Vessels to the Skies,
Then from their Keels the faithless Waters fall,
And to the muddy Bottom drop 'em all.
The trembling Sailors ply their Ropes in vain,
And gaping Planks admit the roaring Main,
Their shattered Sails in numerous pieces fly,
And Tempests blow their Streamers to the Sky,
Disjointed Rudders float upon the Waves,
And groaning Numbers sink in watery Graves,
Disabled Vessels meet with sudden Shocks,
And some are dashed with force upon the Rocks,
Some shrieking Mariners midst Waves Expire,
Some dye by strange Diseases, some by Fire,
Death in all Shapes, and horrid Pomp appears,
And growing Dangers swell beyond their Fears,
Plague, Wind and Sea against perjured France combine,
And in her Ruin firm Confed'rates join,
Till long-deserv'd Fatigues and Hazards over,
A scattered Remnant gain their native Shore.
Such Fate may ANNA's Foes for ever find,
May HEAVEN on Her still smile, nor Hell disturb Her Mind.
FINIS.

