INOCULATION MADE EASY.

CONTAINING A Full and True DISCOVERY of the METHOD practiced in the County of
ESSEX.

In which County alone, upwards of Nine Thousand People have been INOCULATED
within these Two last Years, without the Loss of One Single Patient, or the
least dangerous Circumstances.

BEING INTENDED FOR THE BENEFIT Of Masters and Mistresses of FAMILIES, and the
Public in General.

The Whole Art being laid down in so Clear and Easy a Method, as to render any
one capable of INOCULATING themselves and others, with the greatest EASE and
SAFETY.

WITH A TRUE RECEIPT to make the PREPARATIVE POWDERS, REPELLENT PILLS, and the
PUNCH used in INOCULATION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR; And Sold by R. WITHY, at the Royal Exchange;
T. VERNOR and J. CHATER, on Ludgate Hill; and L. HASSALL, at CHELMSFORD. 1766.

[Price Two Shillings and Six Pence.]

N. B. A sufficient Quantity of Medicines to prepare and cure one Person, is
given (Gratis) with this Treatise. The Use of the Medicine will in a great
Measure stop the Contagion in those who do not choose to be inoculated; or, if
they should cate^ it, will cause the Effects to be much more favorable.

TO THE PUBLIC.
THE terrible Havoc the Small Pox has of late made amongst Mankind in several
Parts of the World, together with the fearful Apprehensions so many Thousands
now lie under, dreading the Effect of this fatal and sore Disorder, induces me
to offer the following Pages to the Public. For I cannot appear justifiable to
myself, that a Secret which has never failed to procure this Distemper in the
most safe, easy, and mild Manner, should be any longer kept from the Public.
But, in the Prosecution of this (perhaps) a few Individuals, whose principal
Motive is Self-Interest, may be offended at my publishing a Subject to the
World which they think should be confined to the Faculty only. Salus Populi, I
think, will hold good in the Matter, and to answer this Purpose more
effectually I shall omit all set Phrases and technical Terms; as the Intention
of this is not meant to display the Grammarian or Orator, Humanity being the
leading Principle, for Advantages I want none. Humane it must evidently be, to
point out a certain, plain, and infallible Method of relieving the Distresses
of our Fellow Creatures; few Disorders having produced more public Calamity
than that loathsome Distemper, and from Time to Time, the most eminent
Physicians have on those Occasions found themselves at their ne plus ultra.

Therefore a Method which is here offered, not only regarding the Preparation
of the Patient, but likewise the Treatment during the whole Cure; the Efficacy
of which being hereby laid open to the Public, the surprising salutary Service
resulting will speak more for the Author than any pompous Apology.

Discoveries of any Kind, however rational or beneficial, are generally
received with some Degree of Dubiety: It must not therefore seem strange if
this of mine should be objected to by some, who, for want of other Arguments,
will quarrel with it on a religious Account: But to those good People I shall
state this Case of Conscience by observing. That the Almighty God in his great
Mercy to Mankind has taught us a Remedy to be used to prevent the fatal
Effects of the Small Pox, upon the Use of which, the Patient will be unattended
with those direful and dreadful Apprehensions, so long the Companions of this
Distemper; and in consequence of the Means here offered, neither Health nor
Life in Danger. To these People I appeal, whether a Christian may not employ
this Remedy, and be very thankful to a Supreme Being for his Good Providence in
causing Mankind to be able to make a Discovery, so beneficial and valuable in
its Nature; and the peculiar Blessing attending the Success thereof, evidently
to be produced by the Thousands which have happily and safely recovered without
Pain, or even Confinement to their Beds.

But possibly there may be those, whom no Arguments can prevail upon. I shall
therefore spend no more Time in the Attempt to convince them of the Lawfulness
and Goodness in the Practice of Inoculation, but refer them to Experience,
which will certainly open the Eyes of those few Opposers to this safe and
salutary Method. The whole of which I have endeavored to lay down in a plain
and easy (though not elegant) Dress; for my Endeavor is to be understood by
every Body, and the Reader may depend that no Medicine is here offered but what
is founded upon, and is the Result of, long Observation and Experience.

I shall conclude with observing, that those who make use of the Means here
offered them will be sufficiently convinced of the Humanity and Integrity of
the Author.

INOCULATION MADE EASY, etc.
THE fatal Consequences which in general attend that loathsome and very
dangerous Distemper, the SMALL POX, the dreadful Havoc it has made, from Time
to Time, amongst Mankind has induced several humane, learned, and able Men, to
use their utmost Endeavors to find out a Method to render this alarming
Disorder more mild and favorable. INOCULATION was then thought on. The Greeks
are said to be the first Nation that practiced this Method; the Turks are
supposed to have borrowed it from them, and practiced it with the greatest
Success, not only for the Small Pox, but even for the Plague itself. The
frequent Accounts we had of their great Success in almost putting a total Stop
to the Fatality of this sore Distemper, induced us to follow their Example;
but, however this may be, it was practiced by us at first with no very
considerable Success, yet it proved much more favorable in its Effects than
the natural Kind. This occasioned several others to attempt a still farther
Improvement, and has from Time to Time, been brought to a still greater Degree
of Perfection, so that out of an Hundred Patients, perhaps only Two or Three
have lost their Lives; though a great Part of them have had the Distemper in a
very sore and terrible Manner. But by the Assistance of an Almighty Providence
we have now brought it to the very utmost and greatest Degree of Perfection
imaginable; so that in fact it now ceases to be any longer a Distemper; for
what can be a greater Proof, what can ascertain the Excellency of this new
Method more than the plain and convincing Demonstrations we have now before our
Eyes, and the Thousands of living Witnesses to prove it? for Nine Thousand
People or more, who have been inoculated, (within Thirty Miles round the Town
of Chelmsford in Essex, and within the Space of these two last Years) not a
Single Patient has lost his Life; and what is still more extraordinary, they
have had this Distemper in so mild and favorable a Manner, that the greater
Part of them have been capable of carrying on their Trades and Business during
the whole Time, not being confined by it one Hour to their Bed or Room; except
out of a Complement to those who have not had it, and would be fearful of
catching it from them, may have induced some to keep up a few Days, but not
from the Effect of the Distemper. This Method has also these several Advantages
with it; viz. That it has been tried and answers with all Ages and Complexions,
on every Constitution; the robust and infirm, the black and the fair, the
corpulent and the lean; and in each extreme Season of the Year, the Summer and
the Winter. Nor has it failed in any one Instance; the Patient being subject to
very slight Symptoms, sensible of very little Sickness; nor do what few
Eruptions they have, ever leave any Scars or Pits behind them.

I think it unnecessary to say any thing farther in Behalf of this excellent
Method of recovering the Distemper. Therefore shall immediately proceed to lay
before my Readers the Manner and Medicines, which will answer all those
extraordinary Virtues above mentioned.

First, As to the Manner of preparing the Body to receive the Infection. -- But
as the Preparation is material, and of some Importance, I hope no one, who
intends to be inoculated, will be so far an Enemy to themselves, as not to be
strictly careful and attentive to the Rules here laid down; which are meant to
lower the Blood and Humors, and render the Body sufficiently prepared to
receive the Infection in the most favorable Manner.

You must abstain from all Salt Provisions whatever, nor must you eat any Kind
of Meat or Butter; nor drink Beer or Spirituous Liquors, not even Wine; Cheese
and spiced Foods are likewise prejudicial. -- But to make it more clear, I have
set down a Regimen, or Method of preparing, which must be continued and
persevered in for Nine Days at least, and is as follows:

Directions for preparing for Inoculation.
The DIET for BREAKFAST.
Tea, Coffee, or Chocolate, with dry Toast, or ordinary Cake; Rice-Milk:
Milk-Gruel: Skimmed Milk, Honey and Bread, etc.

For DINNER.
Plumb or Plain Pudding with Vinegar Sauce, which is made by adding Sugar and
Vinegar to a proper Quantity of boiled Flour and Water: Rice-Pudding:
Apple-Pudding: Apple-Pye: Rice-Milk: Frumenty: And the Productions of the
Kitchen-Garden, with the Use of Salt.

For SUPPER.
Any of the above Spoon Meats: Roasted Potatoes: Turnips, etc. But, if it can
be complied with, going to Bed Supperless, and to eat sparingly even at other
Meals, will be most proper; and, as observed above, abstain from all Flesh,
Butter, Cheese, and Spiced Food. Most Kind of Fruits may be eaten at pleasure,
except on the Physical Days.

DRINK.
In common it may be Toast and Water, Milk and Water, Lemon and Water, or
Imperial Water; abstaining from all spirituous, vinous, and malt Liquors.
Moderate Exercise withal is necessary.

Directions for taking the Preparative Powders.
After having strictly observed the foregoing Rules for Nine Days, you must
take one of the Papers of Powders at Bedtime, in the Pulp of a roasted Apple,
or any Jelly, and next Morning a Paper of the Salts, dissolved in a little
boiling Water, drinking plentifully of Water Gruel, Cheese-Whey, or Small Tea,
as they work. The Patient should be very careful of Cold, during the Operation
of the Physic; and if it does not operate Six or Eight Times in about Six
Hours, it will be necessary to take half another Paper of the Salts, (more or
less as Occasion requires). Or if they be vomited up shortly after being taken,
as soon as the Sickness is entirely off, one of the other Papers of Salts must
be given. The other Powders and Salts are to be taken as above, omitting Three
Days between each Dose. The Deficiency of Salts may be had at an Apothecary's:
It will be requisite for the Patient to have a Stool on each of the
intermediate Days during the Preparation, in order to which Stewed Prunes,
Roasted Apples, or Tamarinds, should be eaten occasionally.

I shall now inform my Reader how to make every Medicine to be used throughout
the Disorder, and first the PREPARATIVE POWDERS are as follows.

Take ten Grains of Calomel and one Grain of factitious Cinnabar, and mix them
well together for one Dose.

A Child of six Years old may take a fourth part of a Paper; from eight Years
old to twelve half a Paper, and from twelve Years old to fifty a whole Paper;
from sixty Years old to an hundred half a Paper; be careful not to omit taken
the Salts in the Morning as before ordered; the Salts are Glauber's Salts. A
grown Person may take from half an Ounce to an Ounce, Children half an Ounce
only: These POWDERS greatly cleanse the Blood, are not only very effectual to
prepare the Body for the Smallpox; but may also be depended upon as a never
failing Remedy for Worms, as it scours away those roped viscid Humors which
are apt to breed them in the Bowels; they may be taken with the greatest Safety
by Men, Women and Children, observing the above Rules: they are good likewise
in Cutaneous Disorders, such as Foulness of the Skin, or Sores or Ulcers, and
teterous Eruptions, the Itch and Leprosy; and those who are unwilling to be
Inoculated, yet fearful of catching the Smallpox, in the natural Way, may in a
great Measure, be secured from it by taking the above POWDERS, for it Purifies
the Blood in such a Manner as to render it less liable to the receive the
Infection. Or if the Distemper should be caught after taking the POWDERS, the
Patient may depend upon having it in a more favorable Manner. These POWDERS
are also very valuable as a Common Purge in the Spring of the Year, but Salts
must in all Cases be taken after them. Observe, that when Children from two to
five Years old are to be Inoculated, it will not be proper to give them the
POWDER, but instead of which you must give them a Dram of Manna dissolved in
warm Milk or Water, repeat it each Day, and continue it for a Week or ten Days,
at the End of which time you may Inoculate them.

After the Patient has sufficiently prepared himself by strictly following the
Directions for the Regimen; that is, having Dieted himself one Week, and the
next Week dieting as before, and taken his POWDERS, he is now fit for
Inoculation, which is very easily performed as follows: You must get some
Matter out of a Ripe Pock upon the Point of a Needle, sharp-top Penknife, or
Launcet, and with any of these Instruments (having the fresh Matter on its
point) you must make a small Incision or Prick on the Arm, between the Elbow
and the Shoulder; you need only make the smallest Drop of Blood appear, and
wiping the mattery Part of the Instrument on the Place, it is done. In about
four or five Days the Inoculated Part will grow a little red; in a few Days
more it will rise to a Kind of Pustule having Matter in it; after which it
decreases and goes away of itself. Several of my Patients have only had this
Eruption, and no other Appearance of the Smallpox upon them; but it is as
effectual as having a large Number of Pustules. In about six or seven Days
after the Inoculation, the Patient sometimes feels a Kind of a slight Pain in
the Inoculated Arm, in his Back and Head, but all those Symptoms soon go off.
About five Days after the Inoculation, the Patient (if of a robust gross Habit
of Body) must at Night, going to Bed, take one of the Repellent Pills; if it
operates but little, take another in the Morning; if that should have no
considerable Effect, take two more Pills again at Night; on the contrary take
only one, the remainder to be taken the next Morning. The Intention of these
Pills are to carry off the Matter which would occasion Eruptions. The Pills are
made as follows The Patient must observe to continue strictly to the Regiment
till all the Symptoms of the Small Pox have left him: which from the
Preparation to the Recovery is generally about three Weeks.


The REPELLENT PILL.
Take ten Grains of Kermes Mineral For the Virtues of Kermes Mineral, See Dr.
James's Dispensatory.
, twenty Grains of the best Succotrine Aloes, and ten Grains of Camphor, add a
sufficient quantity of Spirits of Wine to make them into a Mass for Pills,
which is done by beating them together in a Mortar; of this Composition make
four Pills.

N. B. You must first pound the Camphor with a few drops of Spirits of Wine,
then mix the other Ingredients.

Some few have a slight Fever at the time of breeding the Pock, those are
desired to drink plentifully of the following Decoction, or Punch, as it is
termed in Essex.

The Patient may have it made, or make it himself, the Effects of which is to
carry off the Fever. The Receipt is as follows.

Take unground Oats a Handful, and boil them for some time in a Quart of
Spring Water, then strain it, with which mix half an Ounce of Stibiated Nitre,
half an Ounce of Citron, or Lemon-Juice, and an Ounce and half of the Sirup of
Violets. About six or seven Days after Inoculation this Liquor should be drank
very plentifully, as it tends from its cooling Quality to carry off every
Symptom of the Fever. -- [The Ingredients may be had at any Apothecary's; nor
must the Patient be without it.]

But to make this useful Liquor more cheap and easy to the Poor, I have set
down another Method of making of it, which in a great Measure will answer all
the Intentions of the first, and is as follows.

Boil a Handful of Oats in a Quart of Spring Water, add to it after it is
strained, half an Ounce of Saltpeter; sharpen this Liquor with a little Lemon
Juice or Vinegar, and sweeten it to the Palate with brown Sugar or Honey.

This will not be so pleasant as the first Method of making it, though almost as
effectual; by drinking plentifully of this the Fever will be almost immediately
lowered: The first taking of it should be to drink half a Pint, or more at
going to Bed at Night.

I have now gone through the whole Progress of the Cure, and if all the Rules
here laid down are strictly attended to, the Patient may depend upon having the
Distemper in the most favorable manner.

The great Success which in general attends this Method of Inoculation is no
ways surprising; nor need we wonder at so many dying with it that have it in
the Natural Way; for when we come to consider, that while the contagious Matter
is exerting its Malignity upon the Humors, (which is generally seven or eight
Days) Quietness, Moderation in Diet, together with cleansing Medicines, and
every thing else is strictly observed in Inoculation; whereas many incur the
Natural Distemper on a sudden, when the Blood is heated with Wine and Exercise,
by which means all the Symptoms must necessarily prove more severe and
dangerous.

I would also observe, that I do not pretend to persuade the Public, that all
the Inoculators in Essex make use of these Medicines exactly as here set down,
or that all of them make use of the same Compositions: I only say that the
greatest Success may be depended upon from a proper use of these Medicines,
they having all that Virtue comprehended in them, which is necessary to render
the Disorder mild and favorable, as I have happily experienced by the Number
of Patients, who have recovered from this Distemper without being confined to
their Bed or scarce sensible of any Pain.

I shall conclude this Treatise with some few Cautions to those who take the
Medicines. Those of a very weak and delicate Constitution, may prepare with
taking only half a Paper of the POWDERS at a time with the Salts, and go on
till all the Papers are taken. In case the POWDERS should cause the Mouth to
water, or an Inclination to Spitting, (which I never knew happen in the Course
of my Practice) upon such an occasion, the Patient must take larger Doses of
Salts, and about an Hour after take near half an Ounce of Flour of Brimstone,
which will prove an effectual Remedy. Be careful of the Subject which you
Inoculate from, that it be a mild and favorable Sort, and that the Person is
free from any other Distemper. The Patient, as I have before observed, must the
first Week prepare by Diet, etc. the next Week prepare to take the POWDERS,
(living as by Direction above) then Inoculate, and upon breeding the Pock,
drink plentifully of the Punch before mentioned, and the Patient will find this
Method answer his most sanguine Wishes.

N. B. In about a Week after the Smallpox is quite over, it would be necessary
for the Patient to lose a little Blood, and take a Dose of Salts.

THE END.

