THE MAGIC OF OROSMANES; OR, Harlequin Slave and Sultan: A PANTOMIME, DRAWN
FROM THE ARABIAN LEGENDS.

Printed in the Year MDCCLXXXV.

CHARACTERS.
OROSMANES. OCTAR. OSMYN. HARLEQUIN. CLOWN. CHIEF EUNUCH. TWO JANISSARIES. A
DERVISE. ENGLISH SAILOR. ENGLISH CAPTAIN. MOB. GENII, etc. etc. ZULMA. Female
Slaves and Attendants.
THE MAGIC OF OROSMANES.
SCENE I. A Market for Slaves -- a Number of both Sexes are seen in Chains.
CHORUS.
THOUGH in indignant chains confined,
And lost to liberty,
Yet, spite of these, the noble mind
In slavery dares be free.
Dares suffer dungeons bonds -- than death
Less cruel and severe,
Nor against fortune utter breath,
Or shed affliction's tear.
After the chorus the chief Eunuch comes on, and singles out Harlequin and
Clown, whom he purchases as mutes for the seraglio; several purchasers also pay
for their slaves, and take them away. SCENE II. The Gardens of the Seraglio.
The Eunuch conducts Harlequin and Clown, and after having described their
separate employments, orders them to their work, and leaves them -- Harlequin,
after deploring his situation, determines to kill himself, and telling the
Clown his intention, advises him to do the same -- the Clown begs to be
excused, but tells Harlequin he will leave the coast clear rather than be witness
to the death of his friend -- this he does, after taking leave in a very comic
manner. Harlequin, being now alone, considers how he had best dispatch himself
-- a pistol, a halter, and a phial of poison, appear to him by the hands of
three statues, which rise on traps -- Harlequin makes an obedience to them, and
first resolves to take the pistol, but upon considering it will make his head
ach, he rejects it -- in like manner he refuses the poison, for fear of a pain
in the stomach; and upon putting his hands round his throat to try the effects
of strangling, he will have nothing to do with the halter -- upon second
thought, however, he plucks up resolution, and takes the pistol, when --

Orosmanes appears, attended by two Genii. RECITATIVE.

OROSMANES. Banish thy fears -- all is not lost that falls.
List -- it is thy father, Orosmanes, calls;
Thou art a prince, and rightfully should wed
The Sultan's daughter, Zulma -- but instead,
Octar, of virtue and our race the foe,
In the cradle -- sorc'rer -- forced thee to forego
Thy human form, and shrunk thee to an ape;
Nor could my power procure thy pristine shape
More than thou now art -- but his race is run;
Today he fondly hopes his hideous son
Shall wed fair Zulma; -- but I Will raise a storm
That his bright sun of joy shall soon deform;
Root up his hopes, his hot ambition freeze:
Genii, come forward -- Harlequin, take these.
AIR.
This magic belt shall fiends disarm;
This sword shall every thing transform;
These drops on Osmyn's head diffuse,
And thou shall see their wondrous use;
Despair not of the imperial throne,
Go on, and victory's thy own.

SCENE III. A Kind of Courtyard leading to the Women's Apartment, with a
Balcony, at which appears Zulma with four Female Slaves, who play on lutes to
amuse her; she seems melancholy.
Harlequin comes on, is struck with her charms, and does every thing in his
power to induce her to notice him; she at last sees him, falls in love with
him, and they are contriving how to get at each other, when the chief Eunuch
comes behind Zulma on the balcony, and forces her away. Harlequin in fear of
being seen slips off -- The Clown comes on, describing he has searched every
where for his friend to no purpose, and concludes he has hanged himself -- The
chief Eunuch comes on, and, finding the Clown lamenting, a comical explanation
takes place; after which the Eunuch gives the Clown a letter to carry to the
Sultan, appointing him to come immediately and celebrate the marriage.

SCENE IV. A Grove.
Harlequin comes, and considers what he shall do to get at Zulma; he touches
the stump of a tree, which turns into a writing desk; he writes a letter, and
shuts it up again -- His next idea is how to send it; this he effects by
turning a cypress into a pigeon-house, calling down one of the pigeons, and
tying the letter about his neck -- He describes that he has appointed Zulma to
meet him at a mosque, sends the pigeon away, and goes off himself rejoicing at
his project.

SCENE V. A Gallery in the Seraglio.
The Clown comes on, still lamenting the loss of Hariequin, and yet intent upon
the letter, which he holds in his hand -- As he spells out the address, he
hears a noise over his head, and upon looking up sees the pigeon within his
reach with Harlequin's letter about his neck -- He takes hold of him, and
laughs at the idea of the pigeon's being a letter-carrier, as well as himself
-- upon reflection he thinks he may as well make the pigeon carry both letters,
and for that purpose ties the other round his neck; but after considering that
the pigeon may not know the direction of the letter he ought himself to carry,
he is determined to take it back again -- Here a new difficulty occurs, upon a
recollection that he cannot read; he however, upon comparing the two letters,
seems pretty well satisfied, though it is apparent he has changed the letters
-- He now wishes the pigeon a good journey, who immediately flies away, and the
Clown goes off.

SCENE VI. A Garden.
Harlequin comes on in anxious expectation of seeing Zulma. After waiting with
impatience, Octar and Osmyn drag on the Clown, demanding of him with threats
where he got Harlequin's letter, which Osmyn holds in his hand: the Clown
comically describes his getting it from the pigeon; and Harlequin coming to see
what is the matter, discovers his old friend in jeopardy -- The Clown spying
Harlequin, tells Osmyn that he is the cause of all the mischief, but at the
same time cannot refrain from catching him round the neck at seeing him alive.
Harlequin disengages himself from the Clown just at the time they are about to
seize him, and by a jump through a vase escapes -- They all go off to find him,
and Harlequin coming on, and finding himself alone, immediately changes the
scene to

SCENE VII. Zulma's Dressing Room.
Zulma is sitting on a sopha -- Harlequin apprizes her that their enemies are
at hand, and if she would save herself she must fly with him -- They go off;
soon after which come on Octar, Osmyn, the Clown, and Slaves, but first the
Dwarf, who sees Harlequin and Zulma make their escape -- They are determined to
go in pursuit of them, but first Octar orders the Clown to be strangled: two
mutes bring on a sort of stake, to which they fasten the Clown, and put the
cord of the bow-string about his neck, but cannot pull it tight enough to
strangle him -- The Clown makes a hideous noise; and finding the mutes do no
good, declares he will strangle him himself: at this moment Harlequin comes on,
and, touching the Clown, he sinks under the stage, and Octar appears playing
upon a double-bass, the bow-string serving for the bow, and the stake for the
finger board; the remaining part having slipped up behind Pierrot when he was
surrounded by the mutes -- Octar finds his mistake, vows vengeance against
Harlequin, and goes off, followed by the rest, being first apprized by the
Dwarf which way the fugitives were gone.

SCENE VIII. An open View and a Caravansera.
Harlequin, Zulma, and Clown come on: the Clown is full of extravagant
gratitude to Harlequin for having saved his life -- they consider by what
expedient they can escape from their pursures -- An English Sailor comes on;
Harlequin accosts him, and asks whither he is bound -- he answers to England,
and that his Captain is within the caravansera. They all go in -- Two Turks
come on with great precaution, each carrying a jug of wine; upon seeing two
Jannissaries they sneak into a corner; the Janissaries, however, see them,
severely threaten them, and take away the wine, sending them off, after they
have begged their lives upon their knees -- As the Janissaries hold each of
them a jug, and are hugging themselves at their expedient to get at the wine,
Harlequin, Zulma, the Clown, and the English Captain come on, describing that
they could get no wine at the caravansera. Harlequin remedies this, by taking
two vases, which are ornaments to one of the houses, and drawing off into them
all the wine from the jugs held by the two Janissaries. After this Harlequin,
Zulma, the Captain, and Clown go off. -- The Janissaries, who had been eating
while the above trick was playing them, now begin to think of drinking; but
before they can get the jugs to their mouths, a Dervise comes on, and stops
their hands -- he represents to them the wickedness of drinking wine; they,
however, not only coax him to forgive them, but to drink with them, and at last
he consents -- They drink his health, and hastily take the jugs from their
mouths, when, finding they have tasted nothing but water, they enquire what is
the matter, and, in order to convince him, they pour water from one jug to the
other; he visibly expresses surprise for a moment, but recollecting himself, he
tells them he performed the miracle to convince them of their impiety. At last
they go off in astonishment, while he laughs at their credulity, and goes off,
drinking wine out of a bottle which had been concealed under his cloak.

SCENE IX. The Seacoast -- a Ship in the Offing.
Harlequin, Captain, Zulma, and Clown come on -- Harlequin presses him to set
sail, but the Captain tells him the wind is not fair -- Harlequin appears hurt
at this delay, and fearful lest he should be pursued by his enemies -- the
Clown tells him they are at hand, and immediately the Dwarf comes on, and goes
off to tell his master. Harlequin, finding he has no time to lose, changes the
scene to

SCENE X. Covent Garden.
Several fruit women go across the stage with baskets, the Clown watching his
opportunity steals some of the fruit; the women set down their baskets and want
to make him pay, this he refuses: some chimney-sweepers come on, and also steal
fruit out of those baskets which are on the stage; the fruit women first attack
the Clown, then the chimney-sweepers, and a battle royal is begun, when Octar,
Osmyn, and the Dwarf come on, who attack Harlequin and his party; Harlequin
summon some chairmen to his assistance, and obtains the victory over Octar's
party.

SCENE XI. A Landscape.
Harlequin, the Clown, and Zulma come on; the clown describes the bustle --
they then see Octar, etc. coming, and go off. Octar and his party make their
appearance, very much disfigured by having been hustled among the mob. Octar
has lost his turban, and picked up an old round hat in its stead; the Dwarf, in
place of his robe, has a chimney-sweeper's foot-bag; they at first separately
bewail their misfortunes, but upon seeing each other burst out a laughing --
they then look at themselves and groan, then at each other and laugh, and so go
off the stage, alternately groaning and laughing.

SCENE XII. A Street.
Harlequin, Zulma, and the Clown come on; they appear perfectly satisfied at
having tricked their enemies. -- Bill-Stickers come on, and the Clown reads in
one of the bills -- "The Gigantic Magician;" begs Harlequin will treat him to
see his performances. They all go in; after which Octar, Osmyn, etc. come on;
the Dwarf, excited by the curiosity, also entreats his master to treat him to
see the Gigantic Magician; they however go off, and the Dwarf follows
reluctantly.

SCENE XIII. The Magician's Apartment.
The Magician shows his different deceptions, at which the spectators testify
surprise; at last Harlequin, to convince him of his superior power, the Dwarf
having first discovered Harlequin, etc. changes the scene to

SCENE XIV. The Haymarket.
The Magician is turned into an old woman, people come about them, and among
the rest a puppet is brought on, which converts to a sort of awning, under
which is discovered a pig; the pig comes forward, and Harlequin scatters a
number of letters on the stage, and asks the name of the Conjuror; he spells
the word FOOL. The Dwarf discovers Harlequin, etc. and afterward Octar and
Osmyn come on, who in the scuffle seize Zulma and the Clown; Harlequin follows
slowly in despair.

SCENE XV. A Desert.
Harlequin comes on in the greatest wretchedness at having lost Zulma; he runs
about on all sides to watch which way they are gone with her; but on despairing
of finding them, he then bethinks himself of the phial, and, taking it out,
recollects the injunction of Orosmanes. At this time he sees at a distance
Octar, the Dwarf, and Osmyn, conducting Zulma and the Clown; he watches his
opportunity as they pass, and pours the contents of the phial on Osmyn's head,
when a Dragon comes on; and while Octar and the Dwarf are expressing their
astonishment at this monster, Harlequin, Zulma, and Clown make their escape,
and are followed by Octar, the Dwarf, and Osmyn.

SCENE the last. A magnificent Palace with an Archway, under which are seated
on a Throne Harlequin, Zulma, and Orosmanes.
They come forward. OROSMANES. Welcome, my son; thy toil and danger's over;
Octar's subdued, and Amurath's no more;
No longer Harlequin, that mimic elf,
The chains of magic loosed, thy noble self
Thou now appear'st. -- Thus may all treach'ry fail:
Shout, friends! -- exult! -- the Sultan Achmet hail!
CHORUS.
Let the tinkling lyre and lute,
The minstrel, and the dulcet flute,
With music fill the air around,
Alternate with the trumpet's sound.
The softer strains shall pleasure sing,
Till loyal acclamations ring,
And, while to heaven our voices raise,
Drown private mirth -- in public praise.

The END.

