MEDICAL ADVICE TO THE CONSUMPTIVE and ASTHMATIC PEOPLE OF ENGLAND.

[Price One Shilling.]

MEDICAL ADVICE TO THE CONSUMPTIVE and ASTHMATIC PEOPLE OF ENGLAND; WHEREIN THE
PRESENT METHOD OF TREATING DISORDERS of the LUNGS IS SHOWN TO BE Futile and
fundamentally Wrong. AND A NEW and EASY METHOD of CURE, PROPOSED BY PHILIP
STERN, M. D.

LONDON: Printed for J. ALMON, opposite Burlington House, in Piccadilly.

MDCCLXVII.



MEDICAL ADVICE To the CONSUMPTIVE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND.
IF it should be asked, why I address myself to the Patient, rather than to the
Physician, I answer, that, having offended the Doctor in my title page, I
presume he will give but little attention to my reasoning; for we listen very
unfavourably to the advice of a man who begins by asserting, that we are
fundamentally wrong. But with the Patient, the case is different: recollecting
that consumptions, in the present mode of practice, are very rarely cured, he
almost assents to the truth of my assertion, even before he has heard the
arguments upon which it is founded. I speak, therefore, not immediately to the
Physician, because I do not like that a man should turn his back on me when I
am talking to him. If the Doctor chooses, whilst I am conversing with my
Patient, to look another way, yet squint an ear to my babbling, he is very
welcome; provide he will not condemn my practice, till he has proved its
futility by experience.

Now though I write not directly to Medical Gentlemen, I esteem it nevertheless
necessary to proceed methodically, and accordingly shall premise as much of the
anatomical and physiological description of the lungs, as will be sufficient to
enable those, who have not had a medical education, to comprehend my arguments.
I shall then enquire into the predisposing and immediate causes of
Consumptions; shall indicate the symptoms by which the patient may be certain
of his disorder, and shall lastly proceed to consider the cure, upon rational
principles.

The trunk of the human body is divided, by a membrane called the diaphragm,
into two distinct cavities, the lower of which is called the abdomen, or belly,
and the upper, the thorax, or chest. The latter of these cavities contains the
heart and the lungs. The lungs are divided into two principal lobes, which are
enclosed in two distinct bags, formed by a membrane called the pleura; so that
the right and left lobe of the lungs have not the least communication. The
adhesion of these bags near the middle of the chest, forms a perpendicular
membrane called the mediastinum; but receding from each other as they go lower
down, they form a third bag, called the pericardium, which contains the heart:
so that the chest is divided into three separate cavities.

The lungs are composed of blood vessels, air vessels, lymphatic or water
vessels, nerves and cellular membrane.

The blood vessels are arteries and veins; but these are of two distinct kinds:
the first receive and return the whole mass of blood, which circulates through
the lungs, before it is thrown into the other parts of the body, and the second
were intended only for the support and nourishment of the lungs themselves.

The air vessels are infinitely small branches continued from the windpipe,
with which, in a sound state, they have a free communication, so as at every
inspiration to be filled with air.

The lymphatic vessels are distributed on the surface of the lungs, and convey
the lymph, which they imbibe, to a certain duct, whence it is returned to the
mass of blood.

The nerves are exceeding small branches, which proceed chiefly from what is
called the eighth pair.

The cellular membrane, which fills the intermediate parts between the vessels,
is composed of fibers or lamina, which are neither vascular, nor endowed with
sensibility.

The aspera-arteria, or windpipe, is that tube which conveys the air passing
through the mouth, or nose, to and from the lungs. It is composed of alternate
cartilaginous and fleshy rings, behind which are an infinite number of small
glands, which supply the windpipe with a thin pellucid mucus lining its
internal surface, which consists of a membrane of exquisite sensibility.

Thus much being premised, we shall now proceed to the office and utility of
the lungs, which are necessary to be understood, before we speak of its
diseases.

The organs of respiration are so indispensably necessary to our existence, it
is no wonder that physiologists should have taken uncommon pains to discover
the real design of nature in their formation. Various have been the conjectures
of authors on this subject. Some have supposed, that the blood in passing through
the lungs acquires its red color; others have been of opinion, that the
intention of respiration is to receive a certain quantity of air, which they
imagined necessary to be mixed with the vital fluid; with many other
suppositions equally without foundation. That nature, by first circulating the
blood through the lungs, after the reception of fresh chyle, intend some
necessary preparation may be concluded without farther examination; and that
this preparation is effected by throwing off a certain quantity of noxious
matter, imbibed by the air which is received by the lungs, seems evident from
the experiments which prove, that air once saturated with this noxious matter,
is unfit for respiration. The notion that animals, when confined to breathe the
same air, die because the elasticity of the air is destroyed, is entirely
without foundation; it being very easy to prove, that the elasticity of the air
is not in the least diminished. The use therefore of respiration, is to relieve
the body from a certain matter, perspirable only from the lungs, which, if
entirely retained, is incompatible with existance, and, when retained in part,
is productive of disease. It is separated from the blood by means of small
ducts passing from the pulmonary arteries to the air vessels, where it is
dissolved and carried off by the air. The existence of these ducts is easily
demonstrated, by injecting almost any liquor into the pulmonary artery, which
liquor may, without much difficulty, be made thus to fill the branches of the
windpipe.

Supposing that we are now pretty well acquainted with the fabric and office of
the lungs, we may, I think, with safety, proceed to the more immediately object
of our attempt.

The general predisposing causes of a consumption of the lungs are to be sought
for in the original formation of the body, the acrimony of the juices, or the
age of the patient. As to the first of these causes, without reasoning about
the matter, it is sufficient for our purpose to observe, that people of a
slender and delicate frame, whose skin appears remarkably transparent, whose
chest is flat and narrow, and shoulders high, are in general more subject to
this disease than people of a contrary make; because, say the learned, the
vessels of the lungs are, in such bodies, too fine and too weak, to resist the
impetus of the blood, flowing with great rapidity through the organ of
respiration; a rupture of the vessels, a spitting of blood, etc. are the
consequence. The same effects may be produced by an extraordinary acrimony in
the fluids, which may corrode the vessels; and as to the third cause, it is
attributed to the fervor of the blood, which is supposed to be greatest at the
age when people are most liable to consumptions. To a sagacious reader, part of
this reasoning will appear plausible, and part otherwise. But these are remote
causes which are equally applicable to all countries, and which do not in the
least assist us in accounting for the peculiar consumptive propensity in the
inhabitants of this island.

This propensity must be accounted for, not by any predisposition in the make
of our bodies, but by what is called a procatarctic or occasional cause,
namely, the instability of our climate, or rather its immediate effect, a Cold,
to which, I am convinced, the frequency of Consumptions, in this kingdom, is
chiefly to be attributed.

What is a Cold, and what are its effects?

The questions are of importance; let us not, therefore, be too precipitate.
Experience, our best instructor, has taught us, that nothing is so detrimental
to the human body, as sudden transitions from one extreme to another; but it is
particularly true in regard to heat and cold. The natural effect of warm air is
to relax the skin, consequently to open our pores, and consequently to increase
our perspiration; an effect which may reasonably be supposed to take place
equally in the lungs, as on the surface of the body. When the body, in this
state, is suddenly exposed to a cold air, the consequence is an immediate spasm
over its whole surface. The pores are obstinately closed, and the perspirable
matter is gradually returned into the mass of blood.

That this perspirable matter is of an exceeding acrid nature, is evident from
its effects. By irritating the vessels, it increases their oscillations, which,
increasing the circulation, produces fever. Its acrimony appears even in the
very first symptom of a Cold. The pores of the head have scarce been closed a
moment, before the perspirable matter, falling upon the membrane which lines
the nose, causes, by its irritation, that convulsive motion which we call
Sneezing. It returns upon the glands about the windpipe, and issuing thence
excites another convulsive motion, called a Cough; which are different efforts
of nature to rid herself of the offending cause. In oozing down the windpipe,
it destroys the mucus, therefore we are hoarse; and by inflaming the membrane
which lines the trachia, occasions that sensation of soreness in the breast,
which we feel in a few hours after taking cold. Thus continually descending, it
enters the branches of air vessels, and diffusing itself to every part of the
lungs, occasions the cough, which we so easily distinguish from that which
proceeds from an irritation in the upper part of the windpipe, and which we
call a tickling cough.

We are not however to imagine, that this acrid lymph, which falls from above,
is the sole cause of irritation in the lungs. On the contrary, it is more
probable, that they are principally offended by the acrimony of that which
issues from their own peculiar glands; for in severe colds, that is, when the
obstruction of perspiration is almost universal, for it is never entirely so;
in such cases, I say, every humor in the body is contaminated; and that very
mucus which, in health, prevents irritation in the air vessels of the lungs, is
now the principal cause.

Inflammation is the natural consequence of this continued irritation, which as
naturally produces a superabundant secretion of mucus, and which, if not
constantly spit up, suffocates the patient. When these symptoms are violent,
the disease is called a peripneumony. But if this inflammation continues beyond
a certain time, the vessels are destroyed, and become dissolved in a kind of
matter-called pus.

Thus we are arrived at the immediate, or proximate, cause of a Consumption of
the substance of the lungs. But here it may naturally be asked, how it happens,
when a part of an organ, so indispensibly necessary to life, is destroyed, that
the patient does not immediately die? I answer, that Nature, in this instance,
has been particularly kind to us; for the two lobes of the lungs having no
communication, are not immediately affected by each other's diseases; besides,
every minute branch of the same lobe is so contrived, as to perform its office
independent of the rest; therefore every single vessel continues to receive and
return its portion of air, till it be actually destroyed. Hence it is, that in
dissecting of bodies which have died consumptive, we frequently find a
considerable part of the lungs entirely destroyed. Indeed the appearance of the
lungs in those who have died of this disease, is so various, that though it may
be but of one genus, the number of species are extremely numerous, if we may
conclude from the diversity of phenomena upon dissection. Sometimes we find the
texture of a part of the lungs entirely destroyed, and nothing but a collection
of purulent matter in its place, communicating with the windpipe, so as to
fill it on laying the head downward. At other times, we discover a quantity of
matter enclosed in a kind of bag. Sometimes this matter is contained in a
number of small follicles, and at others, it may be squeezed from every part,
and the texture of the lungs but little injured. In some cases, we find a
number of small hard lumps; in others, large indurations, and sometimes tumors
that are absolutely cancerous. In short, as I have before observed, the variety
of appearances is infinite, especially if we include color.

However, notwithstanding this great diversity, the proximate cause of that
species of Consumption which is so frequent, and so fatal, in this kingdom, is
an ulcer in the lungs, in consequence of inflammation, occasioned by a cold,
or, in other words, by a greater flux of acrid perspirable matter to the lungs,
than can be absorbed and carried off by the air. It is also possible, that a
part of this matter may be confined near the extremities of the air vessels, by
a spasmodic constriction in the upper part, occasioned by the sudden admission
of cold air. When this is the case, an enclosed ulcer, or vomica, is the
consequence.

Having proceeded thus far in the consideration of our subject, and, I think,
without straining our text, we are now naturally led from the cause, to the
cure of our disease. And first it may not be amiss to enquire a little into the
foundation of the general practice.

The first thought, which naturally occurs, is, that this general practice is
generally unsuccessful; and we thence as naturally conclude, that it must be
fundamentally wrong.

If the inflammation be violent, comparing it with inflammations in other parts
of the body, and reasoning from analogy, the first thing we do is to bleed, and
so far we are right, as by lessening the quantity of blood, we lessen the
impetus of the remaining part, and thereby retard the progress of the disease
for a time; but alas! the time is very short. The pulse soon recovers its
velocity and strength. Well; but then we administer a quantity of saccharine,
oily and mucilaginous medicines, in the form of an emulsion, or otherwise,
intending, no doubt, thereby to sheathe and obtund the acrimony which causes
the irritation in the lungs. The intention is certainly laudable; but it
happens unfortunately that these balsamics go down, not into the lungs, but
into the stomach, where they immediately undergo such a change, as to carry but
little of their balsamic qualities even into the intestines, where they are
still farther mixed and adulterated, particularly by the addition of a certain
quantity of bile, immediately on quitting the stomach.

But to proceed. Let us suppose these demulcents already in the intestines.
What becomes of them? They must either be received by the lacteal vessels, or
pass off per anum; the latter of which is the way chosen by the greatest part
of them, contrary to the intention of the physician. Happily for mankind, these
lacteal vessels are endowed with a kind of mechanical sagacity, which enables
them to select from that heterogeneous mass of food and medicines, constantly
presented to them by the stomach, such matter only, under the denomination of
chyle, as is fit to be assimulated with the blood.

Here I shall be interrupted with an objection, that the lacteals are capable
of admitting poisonous matter, and conveying it to the heart, to the immediate
destruction of the body. To this objection (having first hinted, that most
poisons are destructive from their immediate action on the nerves in the
stomach) I answer, that Nature acts, not by partial, but by general laws. Those
who are incapable of applying this argument, deserve no other reply.

Let us now suppose, that a small portion of our balsamics has gained
admittance through the mouths of the lacteals. Thence it is conveyed into the
glands of the mesentery, and having been secerned through several of these, it
rises into a certain receptacle, whence it is conducted into a vein under the
left arm, and thus mixes with the blood. It now soon reaches the heart, and
from thence, thus mingled with blood, it passes through the lungs. I say through
the lungs; because it is immediately returned to the heart, thence to be
distributed through the rest of the body.

Now it must be remembered, that the seat of the disorder which, by these
healing medicines, we are endeavoring to cure, is not in the blood vessels,
but in the air vessels of the lungs; and that these air vessels have no
communication with the arteries, except by means of tubes or pores so extremely
small, as not to admit the red globules of the blood; consequently the
constituent particles of our medicine must be smaller than these, otherwise no
part of it can possibly be thus applied to the part injured. But we have said,
that a liquor may, by injection through the pulmonary artery, be forced into
the bronchia: true; but this liquor passes colorless, always depositing in its
passage the matter with which it was tinged.

These things being properly considered, let me now ask the reader, whether he
thinks it probable, that even the least benefit can rationally be expected from
saccharine, oily, mucilaginous, or balsamic medicines, thus applied?

What then is to be done? Has Nature been so unkind, particularly to the
inhabitants of this island, as to afflict us with a disease for which there is
no remedy? I verily believe she has not been so unkind. The fault is not in
Nature, but in ourselves; or, perhaps, rather in the difficulty of the task:
for we cannot suppose, in the present improved state of chemistry and anatomy,
that all thinking men are not perfectly sensible of the improbability, I had
almost said impossibility, of applying demulcents to the lungs through the
alimentary canal: nor is it more reasonable to suppose them forgetful, that the
only possible way of applying medicines directly to the lungs, is through the
windpipe. But, as I have before observed, they have been prevented from
attempting this obvious method, by the difficulties which occurred in the
execution.

To convey any palpable solid or liquid substance through the windpipe into
the lungs, we know to be impossible; for that if the least crumb of bread, or
drop of any liquor, happens by accident to enter the glottis, a violent cough
is immediately excited, till the offending matter be rejected. But we also
know, that impalpable volatile matter is incessantly carried to and from the
lungs, along with the air; every substance therefore that can be volatilized,
may be conveyed directly to the lungs. Aqueous liquors may be easily converted
into vapor, and vapor may be impregnated with great variety of medicinal
substances.

On these considerations, it should now seem, that the whole mystery is at once
discovered, and that we have nothing more to do, than to convert our proper
medicines into vapor, and so convey them directly to the diseased part. Alas!
there are many considerable obstacles yet to surmount, as will appear from a
chemical view of the medicines in question.

Let us suppose, that our patient, having caught a severe cold, labors under
an inflammation of that membrane or skin which is continued from the mouth,
down the windpipe, into the bronchia, and that this inflammation is chiefly in
the lungs. Or let us suppose, that the irritating matter is not sufficiently
acrid to produce much inflammation; but only, a superabundant secretion of
acrid mucus. Or, let us farther suppose, that the lungs are actually ulcerated.
In these several stages, or degrees of the disorder, what are the indications?

Our endeavors to restore the obstructed perspiration, is undoubtedly
rational; but our medicines, given with this intention, commonly fail. They
excite indeed a copious sweat; but the fluid thus determined to the surface of
the body, is totally different from that volatile matter which, in a sound
state, exhales particularly from the lungs, and to the diminution of which
exhalation, the disease in question is solely to be attributed. But what is the
present danger? It is, that the inflammation may end in suppuration; or that
the acrid matter may be obstructed by mucus, or spasm, and so corrode,
indurate, or destroy the substance of the lungs. The immediate indication
therefore is, if possible, to prevent these consequences; which I presume can
only be effected, by the application of antiseptic (that is medicines which
resist putrefaction) antispasmodic, attenuating, and balsamic medicines,
directly to the part affected.

With regard to the first, viz. antiseptics, there is no difficulty, the most
powerful of them (I speak from experience) being in their nature volatile.
Antispasmodies and attenuants are equally easy of conveyance; so that the sole
difficulty lies in our balsamic medicines, which are very refractory, but of
great importance.

Gums, mucilages, and expressed oils, are, by no means, volatile: nor would I, in
the present case, give one farthing to find them otherwise; as they would, at
any rate, be totally unfit for our present purpose. Our whole attention
therefore is fixed on the resinous native balsams; but not indiscriminately.
Those who have bestowed so much attention on them as myself, will find them
extremely different in their chemical properties and effects on the human body.
Besides, they are rarely to be met with genuine; and a thorough knowledge of
them is only to be acquired by long experience and frequent examination.

The chief of the liquid balsams are, Balsam of Gilead, of Copaiba, of Peru, of
Tolu, of Canada; and the dry balsams are Benjoine, Storax, Labdanum, Myrrh and
Mastich, and the Terpentines. But though these several substances are much
alike in their chemical properties, yet they differ essentially in their
medical virtues, which is easily accounted for, from the difference in quantity
and quality of the etherial oil which they contain.

The chemical properties, as far as they are commonly known, of these fragrant
resins or balsams are, that they are inflammable, dissoluble in rectified
spirits, but not in water. Now, this being the case, supposing, even after a
thousand experiments, that we have fixed upon those whose oils are least acrid,
and which, in every respect, are best fitted for our purpose, how shall we
possibly contrive to convey them to the lungs in a proper vehicle? They will
not dissolve in water, and the vapor of spirit of wine is much too ardent and
inflammatory.

If indeed we had remained satisfied with these general properties, without
farther enquiry, we should still have believed, with our neighbors, that the
attempt was impracticable; that it was impossible to apply an efficacious
remedy directly to the lungs, and consequently that consumptions were incurable.

Ever since I was capable of enquiry, it has been a constant maxim with me, to
take nothing for granted, upon any authority whatsoever. Upon this principal, I
began my experimental disquisitions relative to the subject in question, being
fully persuaded, for reasons which will hereafter appear, that if I could find
means to convey the best of these native fragrant balsams to the lungs, in a
mild and truly balsamic state, the consumptive people of this island might
expect considerable benefit from my success.

Were I to relate the many fruitless experiments I have made, since I first
engaged in this enquiry, the reader would be surprised at my patience and
perseverance; but it would answer no other purpose. Let it suffice therefore to
tell him, that I, at last, hit upon a certain chemical liquor, which, to my
great astonishment, dissolved at least double the quantity, of the balsamic
resins which I had selected, to any menstruum which I had ever tried or heard
of. The pleasure I felt upon this discovery, can only be conceived by those who
have had the happiness to extend, in any degree, the path of knowledge. It
immediately occurred to me, that the discovery of so powerful a menstruum,
would not only be a considerable step in my present pursuit, but might probably
prove of singular advantage to medicine in general. But what added greatly to
my expectations was, that this liquor happens to be of exceeding volatility,
not at all inflammatory, and remarkably antiseptic, and antispasmodic.

Thus far, I had obtained every thing that I could wish. My solution, however,
was too strong for the purpose I intended. I therefore, by way of experiment,
dropped a few drops of it into boiling water, and found, beyond all possibility
of a doubt, that the steam was richly impregnated, both with the antispasmodic
and antiseptic qualities of the menstruum, and also with the balsamic and
salubrious principles of the fragrant resins. This vapor I drew in with my
breath, for a considerable time, and found it not in the least irritating; but,
on the contrary, extremely mild and agreeable. Being now desirous to ascertain
the quantity of the dissolved resins, which thus rose with the vapor, I poured
half an ounce of my solution into a quantity of hot water, and after
evaporating the whole, I found remaining in the vessel a very small proportion
of the weight of balsam which had been dissolved in that quantity, and
consequently by much the greatest part had risen with the vapor.

Let me now ask the reader, whether he is not of opinion, that the happiest
effects may rationally be expected, from such a medicine thus applied, by means
of the steam of hot water, directly to the injured lungs? Whether he does not
think it probable, that the acrimony of the irritating fluid will be thus
obtunded, either in a recent cold, or more advanced state of the disease?
Whether the spasmodic constriction of the vessels will not thus be relaxed, and
the consequence of obstructions prevented? Whether the progress of putrefaction
may not thus be stopped, and whether, in that case, even in the advanced stage
of a consumption, we may not hope for a cure?

When a considerable part of the substance of both lobes of the lungs is
destroyed, the disease is doubtless incurable; but we know from diffection,
that commonly one lobe only is principally affected. If therefore we can thus
stop the progress of putrefaction in the diseased lobe, the other may continue
to perform its office, and the patient suffer but little inconveniency.

THERE remains yet another argument in favor of this new method of
application, which, I think, will appear to be a powerful one. We know that
many people who have been far gone in a consumption, have recovered by removing
to happier climates. We cannot rationally attribute their recovery to any other
cause, than a difference in the air they breathe, which difference must arise
from its being impregnated with certain salubrious, antiseptic, or balsamic
effluvia. Since therefore this natural application of salutiferous air to the
part affected, will produce that which medicines taken into the stomach had
attempted in vain, are we not thereby naturally led to conclude, that the best
way of administering to the lungs, is by means of the air? It were ridiculous
to attribute the recovery of consumptive people on their migration to a milder
climate, merely to increase of heat, which might be increased to any degree in
the patients chamber at home. On the contray, we know that heat remarkably
accelerates putrefaction; so that in a putrid state of the lungs, if it were
not for some powerful counteracting cause, the disease, by traveling
southward, must necessarily be increased.

With regard to the manner of applying this medicine it is extremely easy. I
usually drop 20 drops into about half a pint of boiling water, immediately
after it is taken from the fire, ordering the patient to hold his mouth over
the vessel so as to draw in with his breath, as much as possible of the vapor,
continuing the operation as long as the steam will rise. I then order him to
drink the water as soon as it is cold enough for that purpose: for though I
depend entirely on the vapor for the cure of the lungs, yet as all the juices
in the body may be in some degree affected, by the matter absorbed from the
lungs, this balsamic water received into the stomach, will be of some advantage.

This simple method of application will be abundantly sufficient in common
colds, hoarseness, etc. but when there is reason to (...) and from its
antiseptic power, that it will prevent putrefaction, or stop its progress when
begun, and thus preserve the sound part of the lungs, and give an opportunity
to nature to regenerate the parts that were already destroyed.

What! says the sagacious reader, do you imagine, if a part of the lungs be
actually destroyed, that it can ever be restored! -- Sir, it is a maxim with
me, never to affirm any thing which I cannot prove; but I know no reason why
nature should not as easily restore a part of the lungs, as a part of an
external muscle, or a part of the external skin, which is continued into the
lungs, and which is as vascular as the lungs themselves.

I shall now beg leave to add a few words concerning the diet, etc. of
consumptive people; for, though our opinion of a medicine be ever so great, it
were certainly imprudent to neglect such other means as may contribute to its
success; and indeed, if the disease be far advanced, little is to be expected
from any medicine whatsoever, unless the patient will adhere implicitly to the
rules prescribed by his physician, relative to his diet and manner of living.

First, with regard to exercise. Our immortal Sydenham was so strongly
prepossessed in favor of riding on horseback, that he constantly recommended
that exercise in every stage of a consumption. It is, however, with this, as
with most efficacious medicines; if it does no good, it certainly does harm.
The patient himself will be able to determine whether its effects be salutary
or otherwise, by observing the following directions. First, unless the weather
be hot, let his clothing be somewhat warmer than usual, as he will otherwise
grow chilly. Let him ride not more than an hour at a time, and that very
gently. If it be in spring or autumn, he must ride from eleven to twelve, or
from twelve to one. If in the hotter months, let it be from nine to ten in the
morning. But in moist or cold weather let him not ride at all. If after this
gentle exercise, he finds himself in better spirits, his appetite increased,
his breathing easy, and his skin cool and soft, he may certainly conclude that
riding is of service to him, and ought therefore to be continued as often as
the weather will permit. If on the contrary, he finds himself fatigued, his
breathing more frequent and more difficult, his skin parched and dry, the palms
of his hands hot, his cheeks flushed, his tongue dry, and in himself an
inclination to drink rather than eat, he may then conclude that riding is
improper in the present state of his disorder, and that taking the air in a
carriage will have better effects. If nevertheless, he finds no alteration for
the better, I advise him, by all means, to have recourse to a sea voyage, from
which, with the continuance of the medicine here recommended, I venture to
promise him every thing that human art can possibly supply. It may not be
improper to observe, that though I have above, in speaking of riding, limited
the patient to an hour at a time, I mean that, in proportion to his increase of
strength, and benefit received, the time should be prolonged, and the degree of
exercise augmented.

We come now to aliment, which is of infinite importance. The first general
rule which I give to my consumptive patients is, that, regardless of all stated
hours, he is to eat as often as he has an appetite, but never much at a time.
If, when he rises in a morning, he finds no appetite for his breakfast, let him
walk a little into the air, and wait an hour or two before he takes any food.
As to tea, I absolutely forbid it, because it is an enemy to weak nerves, but
more especially on account of the warm water, which greatly relaxes the
stomach. A sea biscuit with a pint of cold almond milk, made with barley water
or whey, is a good breakfast for a consumptive person; or a few almonds
blanched and ground in a mortar with a little cold water, and then mixed, by
little at a time, with two thirds of milk from the cow, is still better, where
more nourishment is required. This admixture of almonds renders the curd, which
separates in the stomach, much less tenacious, and easier of digestion. I
mention cows milk, because it is most easily obtained; otherwise, asses milk is
certainly preferable, because it contains much less of curd, which is both
difficult of digestion, and putrescent. Goat's milk contains even a greater
proportion of curd than cows milk, and therefore highly improper, though
frequently prescribed.

Eggs are by no means to be allowed, on account of their putrifactive tendency.
In short, animal food is in general to be avoided; though, if the patient be
weak, I allow a little boiled white meat once or twice a week, and now and then
a little veal or chicken broth with a small quantity of lemon juice squeezed
into it. Potatoes, turnips, carrots, parsneps, beans, spinach, broccoli,
sallets, bread and rice, constitute our general bill of fare.

As to drink, if the patient has much hectic fever, I confine him entirely to
almond milk, barley water, or milk and water; otherwise, besides these, he is
permitted to drink one or two glasses of mountain wine every day; or in case
that cannot be afforded, now and then a draught of ale, porter, or table beer.

If the patient complains of a nausia, weight, or uneasiness at his stomach, I
order him ten grains of Ipecacoanha, with chamomile tea, to be repeated once in
ten days, or a fortnight, if the symptoms return.

With regard to bleeding, as I expect nothing more from it than a little
present relief, I never order it, unless when the fever runs too high, and then
I seldom exceed five ounces.

If the patient be costive, I order him a solution of manna, with a little
soluble tartar; if the contrary, I give him occasionally a few drops of the
Thebaic tincture in a little simple cinnamon water.

If he sweats toward morning, which is often the case, I order him to go to
bed in good time, to rise very early, and to repose a little after dinner. If
his sweat still continue, I give him 20 or 30 drops of the acid elixir of
vitriol in a glass of cold water twice a day. As to the Peruvian bark on this
occasion, I believe it to be an excellent medicine; but I dislike it in
substance for many reasons, and am no less dissatisfied with all the known
preparations of it. I have lately begun a course of tedious experiments, with
an intention to discover the parts in which its virtues actually reside, and to
divest it of those which are inert. If I am not much mistaken in my
conjectures, it is possible to condence its active principles into a very small
compass, and thereby to render it a much more agreeable and efficacious
medicine. If I succeed, possibly the public may in some future time expect to
be made acquainted with the result of my enquiries.

There remains yet one piece of advice, to which the patient, if he regards his
own safety, will be particularly attentive. It concerns the position of his
body. Consumptive people, from an indolence peculiar to their disorder, are
very apt, whether sitting, walking, or riding, to suffer the body to bend
forward, for want of a proper exertion of those muscles by which it should be
kept erect. In this drooping position the chest is never sufficiently enlarged,
nor the lungs fully expanded. I, therefore, constantly advise my patients to
keep themselves upright, and, especially when in the open air, to endeavor to
bring their breast as forward as possible. In this, my intention is, to expand
the small ramifications of the bronchus to their extremities, and to open a
free passage for the blood from and to the heart; both which will assist our
endeavors to remove obstructions, and prevent those adhesions of the lungs to
the pleura, which are generally found on dissection of consumptive bodies See
Morgagni, de Sedib. and Causis Morborum.
.

My asthmatic patients, no doubt, begin to think me tedious, or rather imagine
that I have quite forgot them. That, however, is not the case. By an asthma we
mean that disorder, the chief symptom of which is a difficulty of breathing. It
is either continued or by fits. Now, though the cause of this disease is
frequently in the lungs, yet it is sometimes owing to a morbid affection of
some of the other organs of respiration, as the diaphragm, the intercostal
muscles, or the windpipe, or some of the neighboring viscera. How it happens
that the balsmic medicines, which are recommended as a cure for consumptions,
are at the same time recommended in asthmatic complaints, is amazing, and must
proceed either from consummate ignorance, or unpardonable dishonesty. If, as we
have seen above, these balsamics, taken into the stomach, can do nothing
toward the cure of a consumption, how much less likely are they to relieve an
asthmatic patient? For if they could even be applied immediately to the part
affected, they possess no one virtue that might authorize such expectation.

Hold! cries the reader, if that be the case, how comes it that you recommend
your balsamic vapor for the cure of an asthma? I answer, that unless the
asthma be a symptom of a consumption, I expect no advantage from the balsamic
quality of this vapor. But when the cause of the asthma is a spasmodic
contraction of the lungs, or windpipe, which is very frequently the case,
especially when the disease returns by fits, I then expect considerable
advantage from the antispasmodic power of this vapor; and when in a continued
difficulty of breathing, the cause of the disorder is an infarction of the
lungs from viscid mucus, my hopes are then built on the attenuating power of
the vapor exhibited in the manner I recommend. Let those who are capable of
reasoning judge, whether my expectations are well founded.

I have said, that the peculiar consumptive disposition observable in the
people of this kingdom, is to be attributed to the instability of our climate,
which renders us so frequently liable to take cold. Now as it is always better
to prevent a disorder, than to cure it, and as colds do no injury to the lungs,
except in their remote effects, I thought it rational to suppose, if
immediately after taking cold. I could dilute or obtund the acrimony of the
humor which irritates and inflames the lungs, I should probably prevent the
bad consequences of obstructed perspiration, at least as far as it concerned
the lungs. Having, myself lately taken a violent cold, I immediately began to
use the balsamic vapor, by holding my head over a common pint vessel, keeping
my mouth generally shut, that the steam might pass through my nose, and repeating
the operation several times a day, for two or three days. The consequence of
this was, that I very soon got rid of my cold, without the least cough or
difficulty of breathing, which was really a remarkable circumstance, because my
lungs are naturally so irritable, that I hardly remember ever to have had the
least degree of cold which did not end in a cough. This, however, is but a
single experiment. But I have another of greater weight.

Having founded my expectations, in the cure of consumptions, which are far
advanced, chiefly on the antiseptic quality of this Ether, in order to try its
power, I suspended from two nails, at the distance of about four foot from each
other, two pieces of fresh beef. Under one of these, I held a vessel of hot
water, into which fifteen drops of the medicine were dropped, repeating the
operation three or four times every day, and continuing it about five minutes
each time. To the other piece nothing was applied. I carefully examined each
piece every day, and was greatly surprised to find, at the expiration of a
month, that neither of them was, in the least, tainted or discolored. That the
piece, to which the vapor was applied, continued sweet, did not at all
surprise me; but I own, I did not expect, that the antiseptic power of this
vapor was so great, as to prevent putrefaction in the other piece of beef, by
only mixing with the air in the room. Indeed the room was small. This
unexpected event, however, gave me great pleasure, as it immediately suggested
to me the evident advantage that might be expected, in all putrid disorders,
from impregnating the air in the chamber with this vapor. For this purpose, it
is my constant practice to order 30 or 40 drops to be dropped into a quart of
boiling water, and the vessel to be placed near the bed of the patient, to be
repeated three or four times a day; or the water to be kept boiling over a
lamp, in any part of the room, till it is entirely evaporated, if the disorder
be of a very putrid nature, and especially in the small pox. It were certainly
needless to mention the use of this vapor in sore throats, whether
inflammatory or putrid.

The medicine is entitled, Dr. Stern's Balsamic Ether, and may be had, for six
shillings the bottle, of Mr. ALMON, in Piccadilly, Mr. Cook, near the Royal
Exchange, Mr. Bladon, in Paternoster Row, Messrs. Curtis, in Fleet Street, Mr.
Woodfall, Charing Cross, and Mr. White, Lincoln's Inn Fields, Booksellers.

I shall now, by way of conclusion, beg leave to give a few general rules to
the reader, which may enable him to judge properly of medicines which are
exposed to sale. These rules seem the more necessary, in an age when almost
every week produces a new medicine.

The first general rule is, never to pay the least regard to the canting of
those who pretend, that the good of mankind is their sole motive for offering
their medicine to sale.

Secondly, disregard all assertions concerning the excellency of a medicine,
which are mere assertions, without any foundation in reason and experiment.

Thirdly, conclude the advertizer to be either a knave or a fool, in physic,
who pretends, that his medicine will cure several disorders which have not the
least analogy to e^^^ other.

Fouthly, give no credit to the recital of Cases, as they are generally
invented by the doctor.

And lastly, when the doctor writes a pamphlet, with an intention to recommend
his medicine, if it betray a manifest ignorance of his subject, of style, and
grammar; in short, when his language is evidently that of a porter, conclude
him to be some illiterate, ignorant person, whose medicine and opinions deserve
no attention.

Concerning myself, and the medicine I recommend, I do not expect, that the
reader should have any dependence on what I may have asserted in the preceding
pages; because, if he has any knowledge of mankind, he has reason to suppose,
that I have sacrificed truth to interest and a favorite hypothesis. My
assertions however are very few, except what relates to the experiment to prove
the antiseptic quality of this vapor; but as it is in every ones power to
repeat the experiment, it will be an easy matter to convict me of falsehood, or
confirm the truth. All I expect of the reader is, that he will impartially
consider the reasons, upon which I have founded my expectations of curing
disorders of the lungs by means of this balsamic vapor. If he is of opinion,
that I have reasoned justly, he will certainly think it advisable for those
whose lungs are injure to try the experiment, especially as it cannot possibly
be attended with any danger; and as to the expense, it will certainly be
thought most inconsiderable, when compared with the fees of a physician, and
the bills of an apothecary.

FINIS.

