AN ESSAY ON Pope 's ODYSSEY: IN WHICH Some particular Beauties and Blemishes
of that Work are considered.

-- Each finding, like a friend,
Something to blame, and something to commend.
Pope's Miscel. Vol. I. Le choix des grans mots done aux chooses une espece
d'ame and de vie; les beaux mots sont la lumiere propre et naturelle de nos
pensees: mais un discourse tout simple exprimera quelquefois mieux la chose, que
toute la pomp and tout l'ornement. Boileau. Printed for James and J. Knapton,
R. Knaplock, W. and J. Innys, J. Wyatt, D. Midwinter, Booksellers in St. Paul's
Churchyard, LONDON: And S. Wilmot, Bookseller in OXFORD. 1726.

THE PREFACE.
THERE is no Person more Odious than the Man who makes himself greatly Eminent.
It is a sort of tacit Reproach on the rest of the Species: and every one feels
his own meanness the more sensibly, when he looks toward those exalted
Genius's, who have gained a Superiority over the rest of mankind. This may make
it obvious to imagine, that the following Dialogues are partly designed as
Invectives; and produced chiefly from that Blind-side in Selflove, which makes
Men willing to d^rogate from every one, who has merit enough, to provoke; and
fame enough, to make others think themselves lessened by the overgrowth of his
Character.

Though this reasoning be exceedingly true in general, it ought to be considered
at the same time, that any dislike to the Eminence of others naturally arises,
only among such persons, as are got into the same paths of Fame. The Gentlemen
of the Sword cannot bear to have others rise over their head; the Men of Genius
look maliciously on a prevailing Poet: But Pope, I presume, never envied
Marlborough the Battle of Blenheim, any more than that Hero envied him his
Translation of ^he Iliad.

It Is for this Reason I might almost sa^, that I cannot envy Mr. Pope. So ^ar
at least I am unbiased; I can hear ^he Applauses, which are given that Great
Man; I can admire the Passages, which contribute to the deserving them; but I
cannot be uneasy at those, or detract from these, out of any prejudices arising
from this Passion. Give me leave to say farther, that in reading that Work of
his, which occasioned this Essay, no one could be more delighted, than I was,
in several parts of it. Many Beauties I saw in it; and I imagined I saw some
Faults: In some particular Conversations on this Head, I have found my self
indifferent in the Case: and now I have here flung the Thoughts on both
together, I hope, with some degree of Impartiality. But if some things should
be blamed without sufficient Reason, or others commended too highly, and in a
manner disproportioned to what they deserve, I submit each to the many better
judges, who may happen to meet with these sheets. I ask pardon for any Errors
in them: I beg to be set right.

Prefaces, I think, are the only places in which a Man may be allowed to talk
freely of that worst of subjects, Himself: I hope no body will deny one the use
of so awkward a Privilege; and shall therefore go on without any farther
Apologies.

To many it may perhaps seem arrogant to find fault at all with so
distinguished and so noble a Poet as Mr. Pope. Indeed here are some things
proposed as faulty from his Translation; but they are only proposed: the World
is to judge of them. Where I have been mistaken in any of these Points, it is
not for want of a due deference to the merits of this Writer; but from the
shortness of my own sight. On the contrary, if any such Criticisms happen
sometimes to be right, the Eminence of the Poet will be so far from being a
reason against them, that it makes any true Cautions the more proper, and in
some sense perfectly necessary.

Besides: The learned World, as I take it, have ever allowed a Liberty of
thinking and of speaking one's sentiments. That serene Republic knows none of
the distance and distinctions which custom has introduced into all others.
There is a decent familiarity to be admitted between the Greatest and the
Meanest Person in it. This has often raised a Thought in me, which has
something wild and agreeable in it^ when indulged to any degree: It Is in
Relation to the peculiar happiness of Men of Letters; in that they can sit down
in their closets and converse with the greatest Writers of every Age, or of any
Nation; and that in as much freedom and intimacy, as their nearest Friends
could ever use toward any of them, when living. What an illustrious Assembly is
there on those Shelves? The Courts of Augustus, Lewis the Fourteenth, or
Charles the Second, never beheld such a frequency of great Genius's, as stand
round a Man in his own private Study. How large an Happiness is it for a Person
to have it in his Power to say at any time, That he is going to spend the
Afternoon with the most agreeable and most improving Company, he will choose out
of all Ages? If he is in a gay Humor, perhaps with Horace and Anacreon, and Ld
Dorset; or if more solid, either with Plato, Mr. Lock, or Sir Isaac Newton.

It Is this ease of access, it is the liberty arising from it, which constitutes
and preserves the felicity of the Republic of Letters. The meaner sort, which
compose it, are all Freevoters; and may speak their real Opinion without
reserve: at the same time the Characters too, even of the greatest and first
Men in it, must be formed and established on this openness of Judging, and that
freedom of Observation.

But waving whatever has been said of this Liberty in the Learned World, most
people will be apt to help one to an Excuse of another kind: for most, I think,
are very ready to agree, that Mr. Pope is only the Master-hand in this
Translation; and that he has been obliged with the assistance of some other
Gentlemen in several parts of it. Though, I believe, I am acquainted with this
affair more than many who speak of it with a great deal of Confidence and
Assurance, any mention of it in the Piece is purposely avoided. Mr. Pope has
recommended the whole with his Name; He gives the finishing stroke to every
thing: and the Dialogues speak of him, as if he were really the Author of the
whole. It would have been a confused thing, and often not practicable, to have
spoken at every turn to the right Person. This has occasioned several applauses
of the Poet, which may seem too high for a stranger: But as I have since had
the greatest reason to be persuaded, that Mr. Pope is not the sole Translator;
I have at the same time equal reason to think, that the other Gentlemen engaged
are persons of established Characters in the Poe^ick World. -- After this,
perhaps, those Compliments may still be allowed to stand, as they are: I hope
they are never wrought too high for Mr. Pope himself; and I believe they may
generally be spoken very justly of his Seconds in the Work.

One word more, and I have done. As to the manner of these Dialogues; It Is the
old Platonic way, which Cicero brought from Greece, and used so happily in the
Latin Tongue. It has had its Successes too among the Moderns: Fontenelle will
always be read with the greatest Pleasure, where he has followed it; That
Writer is peculiarly happy in all his Dialogues, of whatever sort; and, in
general, may be said to talk as well with Pen and Ink, as any Man in the World.
Mr. Dryden and Mr. Addison have recommended it among us by their Example.
Indeed the method it self is more capable of variety, and (which makes it
particularly proper for the present Case) it has something of Action and
Reality in it. Besides that the common way among us of merely keeping up a
Discourse between two blind Names, is perhaps not very Commendable: the Persons
of the Dialogue in such Cases are generally like those Actors, who have no
Character in the Play; and who only come in to talk upon the Stage. They have
no more distinction, no other marks by which you may know one from another,
than the two Capital Letters, which usually stand for them. It is much
otherwise, and and much better, among the Persons introduced by the Writers in
the other method: their Great Names I use only to authorize this manner of
Dialogue, as that is all which I can pretend to imitate in them.

As I ought to beg pardon of the Reader, for troubling him with so long a
Preface; I shall at the same time take the opportunity of begging Pardon of
Antiphaus and Philypsus, (the two Gentlemen who are disguised under the Persons
of these Dialogues) for giving to the World, what was chiefly their Thoughts,
in a manner so much inferior to what either of them might have done
themselves. I wish I might have leave to mention their real Names in this
place: That would add a weight to every thing they say. Though indeed the
Sentiments of those Gentlemen, were they fully represented, would not want the
luster of any Authorities to set them off; except that of the the
Reasonableness with which they both think and speak; and for both which they
have made themselves so remarkable in the World.

An ESSAY etc.
EVENING the FIRST.
ANTIPHAUS managed his Affairs so as to get this Winter sooner than usual to
the Country-seat of his Friend Philypsus. It is there that he passes his time,
when ever he can clear himself from the hurry of Business, in a retirement
every way agreeable; and in a full enjoyment of those Pleasures, which attend
on a particular Friendship, in an open and improving Conversation. The
Conversation there does not run in the present polite way of saying and saying
nothing; when alone, they usually fall into some Points of Learning; and as
both of them are particularly fond of Poetry, their Disputes turn more
frequently on that Subject, than any other. Indeed their differing in Sentiment
can scarce be called Disputes; for whenever their Thoughts do not meet, each of
them shows a diffidence in his own Opinion, and a willingness to submit to the
Judgment of his Friend.

It is by this means that they fall into each others Sentiments, more than
could well be expected from Men of so different a Turn. The enlarged Genius of
Philypsus always led him to dwell upon the most beautified Parts of a Poem with
the greatest Pleasure; while Antiphaus, who has a very clear Head, and has
given much into a strict way of thinking, is taken most with just Descriptions,
and plain natural Ideas: The one was so possessed with the Pleasure which he felt
from fine Thoughts and warm Expressions, that He did not take a full
Satisfaction in low Beauty, and simple Representations of Nature; the other, on
the contrary, had such an aversion to glitterings and elevation, that he was
distasted at any the least appearance of either. If the latter was prejudiced
for the Ancients, from the Purity and Justness, which we find in most of their
Works; Philypsus had his foible too, and was sometimes caught by the Flourish
and Coloring of the Moderns. In a word, if Philypsus would sometimes contemn a
Point as low and mean, though in reality proper enough, and naturally expressed;
Antiphaus, in his turn, might happen now and then to blame a Passage which
required a good degree of Ornament, as being too glaring and artificial.

Among several other Topics, one Evening, they happened to fall into a
discourse on Mr. Pope's new Translation of the Odyssey. As they both found
Beauties in that Piece agreeable to their particular Tastes, they had read it
over with a great deal of Pleasure: however Philypsus was the Person who
admired it the most. "There are some Lines, says he to Antiphaus (pointing to
the Odyssey which lay before them) there are some Favorites of mine in that
Poem, which you must not look upon with your usual severity: Prithee Antiphaus,
be more sensible to the Flame and Spirit of a Writer, who is evidently Our
present Laureate in Genius, and the most enlivened Translator of the Age. "I
will very readily allow what you say of that Great Man, returned Antiphaus; and
shall always pay a deference to your more lively taste of the Fine and Sublime
in Poetry; but you must give me leave to dissent from you in some Particulars:
if I do not agree with your Sentiments, in relation to several Lines and
Passages of that Translation, it is perhaps because I fall so much short of you,
in your inward sense of the high and elevated Beauties of Language. As I cannot
imagine that to be the reason, says Philypsus, I beg to hear those Particulars
you talked of; I am persuaded, several of the Passages, which I have observed
you to be less taken with in reading the Translation, will upon a closer view
appear to be really Beauties; to tell you the truth, I long to make a Convert
of you; and beg you would be full and large in communicating whatever Remarks
you have made on this Performance. The Evenings are long; we have sufficient
time upon our Hands; and I know not how we can pass it away more agreeably.

Antiphaus paused for some time, and seemed to be taken up in recollecting his
Thoughts on this Point: at last taking a Tablet out of his Pocket, Since you
desire it (says he) I will show you what Observations I made as I went over the
Work; they are the Thoughts which struck me en passant, and many of them will
perhaps appear little and trifling.

You will allow me, I believe, in the first place, That Lines very good in
themselves, may be bad when considered as a Translation. The aim of a
Translator is to give us the Spirit of the Original; and where the Original is
just, the very manner is to be observed. By the Manner, I would not intend the
express words, or the mere turn of a Period; but that the Imitation ought to be
easy, simple, and unadorned, wherever the first Writer uses either of those
Styles with Judgment. You are well acquainted with that plain humble manner of
Homer, which is more particularly kept up by him in the Odyssey: And as much as
I admire several parts in this Translation, I cannot but think there are places
in it, which differ from the Manner of Homer, without sufficient reason for a
Change. The Poet, in several parts of that Work, seems to me to have let fall
some Lines that are forced; some of too much flourish, and ornament; and a few,
even swelling, and unnatural; where the Original is with good reason plain, and
natural, and unadorned.

Where we admire the Simplicity of Homer with Justice, we cannot avoid blaming
the want of it in his Translator. Mr. Pope intimates in one of his B. 14. 1.
Notes, That no Reproach has ever fallen upon Homer, in relation to his sinking
too Low, or being too Familiar; That as to these Particulars he preserves an
Universal Justness: and that there is not any one place in his Poem, which can
be justly censured upon this account. If so, a Translator of Homer has no
occasion for raising any thing, beyond what it is in the Original; If he
follows his Master it is sufficient: All additional Flourish and Glitterings,
where we should meet with the plain and the familiar, are at best so many
beautiful Excrescencies.

There is one Case, which seems more particularly to lead Mr. Pope into a
glaring Style: it is almost ever to be found in his Descriptions of Day, of
Light, and of the Morning. It Is true, these are subjects which in themselves
may require some brightness in the language; but there is a great difference
between giving one Light, and dazzling ones Eyes. Beside the conformity to the
Original, there is another certain and easy way of judging, whether the
Brightning in these or any other Points, be proper or not: that Light, we may
be sure, falls in a wrong manner, or an undue proportion, which does not make
the thing more visible.

There are of these Descriptions, Philypsus, which seem both to refine too much
upon the Original, and to err according to this Rule. Did you ever observe
those lines on one of the most agreeable Images in the World, The break of Day?
they are in the beginning of the third Book: If you will give me leave, I will
read them to you.

The sacred Sun^ above the Waters raised,
Through Heaven's eternal, brazen Portals blazed;
And wide over Earth diffused his ch^aring Ray,
To Gods and Men, to give the golden Day.
Several of these Expressions seemed to me at first sight to take from the
Nature and Simplicity of the Description; and when I turned to the Greek, I
found those very Expressions to have no Foundation there. It Is the same Case in
the following Lines:

Translat. Book 4, V. 411. Orig. d' 306.
Soon as the Morn, in o^ient Purple dressed,
Unbarr'd the Portal of the roseate East etc.
B. 13, 112. (...) 93.
-- When the Morning Star with early Ray
Flamed in the front of Heaven, etc. --
You will find these short Sketches in Homer to be much more simple and
natural: I leave it to your Judgment, whether they appear better with these
Colorings, or not. To add one Instance more of the same thing. Is it more
proper for Circe to tell Ulysses, That he should stay that Night with her, and
set sail the next Morning? or to hear her giving him leave, to

B. 12, 35. m' 24. -- (...) --
Spread his broad Sails, and plough the liquid way,
Soon as the Morn unveils her Saffron Ray.
I must own, says Philypsus, this would have been more fit for the Description
of a Voyage, than for a Speech: in a Place too, where we only find Orders given
for setting Sail at such a time.

To me, proceeded Antiphaus, Mr. Pope seems to Beautify too much in several
other Points, beside those Topics we have been talking of: as where he calls
the Nobles of Phoeacia, B. 6, 306. z' 257.
A radiant Band of Noblemen; and where he introduces Helen with B. 4, 158. d'
121.
a Gale of rich Perfume breathing before her. If Homer mentions Cups of solid
Gold; in Mr. Pope,

B. 1, 188. a' 142.
The Gold gives luster to the purple Draught:
B. 3, 601. g' 472.
And in the dazzling Goblet laughs the Wine.
You cannot but observe, by the way, that the Original here is designed to
signify the real intrinsic Value; while only the outside and more glittering
Circumstances are what the English dwells upon entirely: but to go on. -- The
Horns of a Bullock are in this new Language, B. 3, 493. g' 384.
Budding Honors; and those of a Ram (if I am not much mistaken) B. 4, 107. d
85.
translucent Crescents. Pallas is well known to have had Blue Eyes given her by
the Ancients; now it is

B. 1, 408. d' 314.
Celestial Azure brightning in her Eyes.

This heightning of things, by a severe Critic might be thought blameable; and
indeed whenever it interferes, where the Passions ought to be touched, it
certainly is so in an higher degree. The Reader is delighted when, after a
melancholy Scene, he sees Penelope revived by a Message from the Gods; and B.
4, 1096. a' 840.
secretly enjoying the Satisfaction of her Soul: but what Passion, what Idea
has he, when instead of this he is told of her B. 4, 1096. a' 840.
Hearts dilating and glowing with florid Joy? -- Paint to him that unhappy
Princess in her Distress, retiring silently, and crying herself toS leep; only
show the Circumstances, and the Reader must be moved: Does her Behavior and
her Sufferings strike him so forcibly, when he finds it embellished into

B. 1, 462. a' 363.
-- Echoing Grief, and Silver-streaming Eyes?
But however these Passages may seem to be weakened by the finery and
luxuriance of the Language, this certainly is not so much the fault of Pope, as
of the Age: We give much into an airy way: If a Verse runs off smooth, it is no
matter for depth or clearness; and as the Ancients valued Thoughts more than
Sound, we seem to be taken with Sounds more than Thought. To speak out, we are
got into an idle manner of Versifying; and if Mr. Pope sometimes falls into it,
we are not so much to blame him for those Particulars, as to wonder, that he
does not do it more frequently, in so general a debauch of Taste among us.

Hold (interrupted Philypsus) if You go on at this rate, You will seem only to
be got into the old Cant of running down our own Times: I do not believe, but
that I could name some Poet among us, to answer any of those who flourished in
the Augustan Age. As to the present Point, we rarely hear of any such thing as
Translation among them: In Satyr, we have the great Names of Rochester, Dryden,
and Oldham: (not to mention the new kind of Satyr, introduced among us by
Butler.) In Critical Poems, there are (You know) two or three very good, beside
that incomparable Piece by Mr. Pope, all to weigh against poor Horace. As for
miscellaneous Subjects; think of Cowley, Pope, Waller and Pryor, to mention no
more of them. In the Epick, Milton may dispute the Laurel with either Virgil,
or Homer; and in Dramatick Pieces, of either kind, we have Writers that
indisputably exceed any of the Ancients.

Antiphaus was not inclined to enter into a dispute of this nature. "I was only
speaking, says he, of our present Taste in Poe^ry, and the prevailing manner of
those writers who are now upon the Stage. As to this, Philypsus, give me leave
to say, that the language of our Writers, and the practice of the World, is
much infected with the Finesse. I think it is Mr. Lock observes, that the
humors of a People, may be learnt from their usage of words. This symptom of
the disease is very strong in the pre^ent Case: thus to say that a verse is
bien turn is the highest commendation among the French Critics: in general,
the Beau Monde is the only name now, for what was called by a very different
one formerly; as a fine Scholar, polite Literature, and the Belles Lettres are
the leading expressions, when we would speak of Learning in the best sense. And
I appeal to you, who are so well acquainted with all our Poets, whether their
practice, in particular, does not fall more and more into the Finesses, we have
been complaining of. We may partly judge of this from some Lines in the Best of
them, the Writer whose Works lie before us: I was just going to give you a few
more instances of it, from the Odyssey.

Is there any Figure so much abused by the Moderns, as what they call the
Antithesis? they run it into a down right playing upon Words. Cowley's Poetry
could not live without it: Dryden uses it almost perpetually, in his
Translation o^ Virgil; and was ridiculed, You know, o^ that head by the late
Duke of Buckingham. I have observed with pleasure, that Mr. Pope, in his
Translation, very much avoids this little beauty, which the other affected so
excessively; yet I have a place before me, where one of this kind ha^ slipped
from his Pen: It runs thus. (He is speaking of a Stranger's Arrival at the
Court of Penelope, disordered so much by the riot of the Suitors.)

-- When, to taste her hospitable board,
Some Guest arrives, with rumors of her Lord;
B. 14, 416. x', 376.
And these indulge their want, and those their woe;
And here the t^ars, and there the goblets flow.
Pardon me, says Philypsus, there you do not seem to do the Translator Justice;
the Figure is countenanced by Homer himself: You see here is an Antithesis in
the Original. "That (answered Antiphaus) seems rather to be a Contrast, to set
the riot of the Suitors in a stronger light: But call it what you please, it is
only single there, whereas you see it multiplied, and worn to Rags in the
Translation. This over-doing a Point is observable in many other Cases, as much
as in the former; and in some, is carried on to a degree which borders upon the
Forced, and Unnatural.

Telemachus, bursting into Tears at the Name of his Father, end^avours to hide
his Sorrow from Menelaus, who was then talking with him. Homer says only, that
B. 4, 154. d', 116. --. (...).
Menelaus observed him; which words Mr. Pope draws out into this Couplet: The
Conscious Monarch pierced the coy disguise,
And viewed his filial love with vast surprise.


For an humble natural Description o^ a Tripod (or Caldron) set upon the Fire,
I would recommend you to the following lines: The Flames climb round it with a
fierce embrac^^
B. 8, 474. the, 437. (...).
The fuming Waters bubble over the Blaze.


But above all, in my Opinion, are these on a Person tired and quite spent^

-- Lost in lassitude lay all the Man,
B. 5. 585. e', 456.
Deprived of Voice, of Motion, and of Breath;
The Soul scarce waking, in the Arms of Death.
Or these: B 6, 162. z', 220. -- (...)
Ye Gods! since this worn frame refection knew,
What scenes have I surveyed of dreadful view?


Would you Imagine, that all which countenances this in the Original, is a
Passage in Ulysses's Speech after his Shipwreck, in which he intimates, That he
had not bathed for a considerable time?

I find it so, (says Philypsus) and own the Lines to be somewhat forced and
unnatural; indeed those you have repeated seem generally to draw too near to
that Character. But I cannot conceive by what means they sound so harsh to me
at present: when I read the Piece, there was scarce a Line of them which gave
me any offense. -- Yes; it must be by your tearing them from the Body of the
work, that they now seem not so agreeable. Really, Antiphaus, this is not sair
usage of an Author; You rob them of their Order and Connection; and it is thenc^
that they perfectly lose the Beauty, which they had in the Whole. Very true,
r^ply'd Antiphaus; the warmth of Reading, the thread of the Story, and a
general tunableness in the Verse, will carry^ a Man on strangely; and may
sometimes cheat him into a ^alse Pleasure. But then it is for this very reason,
that I should think, the justest method of forming a judgment on Particulars
is, to consider them apart. However, let us try it for once in a more entire
Passage, than any of the former. Let me see; The place I have dipped upon, is
where Minerva tells Ulysses that she will transform him into the figure of an
Old Man; that he may view the posture of his Affairs unsuspected and unknown:
The Lines in Homer may be thus read into English:

(...) 397, to 403. I will make you (says that Goddess to the Hero) entirely
unknown to all Men; the beauty and smoothness of your Skin shall be taken away,
your Limbs bent, and the Hair of your Head turned gray. I will then fling a
Garb over you that shall make you frightful and odious to those that see you.
All that flame and life in your Eyes shall be lost; I will so far deform them
that you shall look contemptible to all the Suitors, to your own Penelope, and
to your Son, whom You left yet an Infant in your Palace. You know that Mr.
Pope, in comparing some Passages in the Prophesies of Isaiah with the famous
Eclogue of Virgil, turns the latter into Prose; If we follow that Example in
the present case, his Translation of these Lines runs thus:

Od. 13. V. 453, to 464. It fits thee at present, to wear a dar^ disguise, and
walk secret, unknown to the Eyes of Mortals: For this my Hand sha^ wither every
Beauty, and every eleganc^ of Form and Face, Spread a bark of Wrinkles over thy
smooth Skin, turn the auburn honors of thy Head hoar, disfigure with coarse
attire every Limb, and extinguish all the Fire in thy Eyes; add all the decays
of Life, and all the wants of it, ^strange thee from thy Own, thy Son and thy
Wife; every sight shall turn from the loathed object, and the blind suitors
scorn their destruction. Give me leave to go out of my way a little, to try the
same Experiment on a single Passage from the Iliad, which is flourished, and
set off in an extraordinary manner. It is in the Nineteenth Book, where we have
a poetical account of a fine Breed of Horses; The Original runs thus:

(...) 221. 225. Three Thousand Mares grazed these Meads, with their young
Foals running by them; Boreas was enam^ur'd of them as they ^ed there, and
turning himself into the shape of a fine black Horse, accomplished his desires:
Of this breed, were twelve of the Colts. Mr. Pope's Translation, (only allowing
equivalent Expressions to blind the Rhimes) runs thus:

Iliad, B. 20. V. 262. 270. His spacious Pastures bred three Thousand Mare^,
and three Thousand Foals ^ed beside their Mothers: Boreas enamored of the
sprightly train, concealed his Godhead in the Locks of Hair that flowed over
his Shoulders; he neigh'd to his Loves with dissembled Voice, and cours'd the
dapple Beauties over the Meadow: Twelve others of unrivaled sort sprung hence,
swift as their Mother Mares and Father Wind. This, if over-wrought, is the more
blameable, because the matter is carried very far even in the Original, and so
is the less capable of being stretched any farther. Mr. Pope, in his note upon
the Place observes, That Homer has the happiness of making the least
Circumstance considerable; and that the plainest matter shines in his dress of
Poetry. It is true, it shines sufficiently in that. Some brightning is
necessary in Poetry: but an excess of it, Philypsus, may dazzle, or may blind
our Eyes; it can never assist, or delight them.

By comparing these Passages, You will see that which I intend; the difference
of Manner in the Ancient and Modern Poetry: In the latter we find Expressions
added, which seem to be added for beauties, and which in reality perhaps only
turn the Plainness and Strength of the Original, into the Fine and the
Artificial.

Upon^ Philypsus's acknowledging that he thought the Point too much labored,
and the Translation unequal; Yes, says Antiphaus, the Translator himself seems
to be sensible of it in the present Case; for soon after, when the former
Passage is repeated in the (...), 430.
Original, he gives an entirely new B. 13, 497.
Turn to it; And I believe, upon hearing the Lines, you will be of opinion that
(excepting a word or two) it is rendered with a better grace and with more
Justice, than we find inthe former.

She spoke, then touched him with her powerful Wand:
The Skin shrunk up, and withered at her Hand:
A swift Old Age over all his Members spread,
A sudden Frost was sprinkled on his Head.
Nor longer in the heavy Eye-ball shined
The glance Divine, forth beaming from the Mind;
His Robe with Spots indelible besmear,
In Rags dishonest flutters with the Air.
Mr. Pope without question is happy in a great share of Judgment, as well as
Vivacity and Spirit in Writing: but it is next to impossible, in so long a
Translation, especially as it is in Rhyme, not to give sometimes into Sound and
Ornament; when to crown all, the Vogue of the World goes so strong for both. Do
not ask, whether I should desire to see both of them banished out of Poetry; far
from it: Expressive Sounds are of use in the most natural, and Variety in the
management of them, is necessary to keep up Attention in the Reader: That, and
Ornament, is what sets Poetry above Prose. All I would say is this, that Sound
is not sufficient where we might expect Sense; and that in humble Passages, in
natural Descriptions, or in moving most of the Passions, additional ornaments
are so many blemishes. Dressing up the expressiveness of Homer, in such
fineries, is much the same as if one should throw a very gay modern dress over
the Hercules of Farnese, or any of the most Nervous Statues of the Ancients.

But You will allow Ornament, where the subject will bear it, and where the
Original leads the Way? -- In a translation (answered Antiphaus) it is proper
perhaps, only in the latter Case; but allowing it in both, it should never be
over-wrought in either. Too much Finery is always Affectation: and I wish our
Writers at present were not so generally given to elevate and surprise, and all
that, as Mr. Bays calls it.

The running into this excess so much, is what has unsinew'd our Poetry. It Is
with Poetry, as it is in Buildings; the being vastly Studious of Ornament does
not only take away from the Strength of the Work, but is a sure token of a
vitiated taste in the Designer.

You are always blaming the Modern Refinements, says Philypsus; but will you
not allow that this taste of the Age is a sufficient justification at least of
Mr. Pope, in those cases where he complies with it? -- We must write so as to
please the World, and speak so as to be most easily understood: Custom will
often wear away the propriety of things of this Nature; and as for the
propriety of language, that depends upon it entirely. I allow, to u^e your own
thought, that a profusion of Lace and Embroidery would be a disguise upon an
Old Hero; but they are so far from being improper, that they are becoming on
the Heroes of our Age. --

They may become the Heroes of our Age (replied Antiphaus smiling) perhaps on a
far different account: there is another Character now wove into and blended
with that of a Soldier, to which these things are very agreeable: How many are
there of these Heroes, as you call them, whose Courage reaches no farther than
their Sword-knot, and whose Conduct is taken up wholly in their Dress? But
consider a Man barely as a Soldier; think of him in the midst of some warm
Action, and these little Ideas of him will disappear: Then it is that posture,
that pressing on the foe, that grasping of his Sword, that fierceness in his
Eyes, that serenity and that eagerness on his countenance, which strike us
wholly, and take up all our attention. Yes, Philypsus, if you view a real
modern Hero in a true light, those fineries do not set well upon him: and I
think, I never saw any thing more truly ridiculous, than the Piece we were
laughing at the other Day, in your Picture-Gallery. -- Good Heaven! The Duke of
Marlbrough in the heat of an Engagement, with a full-bottom'd Wigg, very
carefully spread over his Shoulders!

But to return to the present taste in Poetry. -- If this Corruption of the Age
could excuse a Writer for what he composes now, must it be carried down as far
as Homer's Days? must his Heroes love, and talk, and fight a-la-mode? must his
strong, sententious lines, be set to the new polite airs of Handel and
Bononcini? Yet, were what you would allege of any force, it would carry the
matter thus far; and the whole Iliad and Od^ss^y ought to be enervated down to
the present taste. No, whatever may be allowed to any of the proper genuine
productions of this Age, it ought not to make an inrode upon all others: let
Homer's energy and pathos be violated as little as is possible; Nature ought to
rule in his Works, and those of the Ancients: as ornament, and surprise, and
elevation, have in their turn the Empire of the Modern World.

You see I beg into show the old heat, that this subject (I think) always
betrays me into. -- I beg pardon, Philypsus; and will attend more to what I am
about for the future. -- I should have given you some instances of this
Elevation from the translation before us. A-propos, What a glaring description
of a Sword have we in the Eighth Odyssey?

-- Whose blade of Brass displays
A r^ddy gleam; whose hilt a Silver blaze;
B. 8, 437. the 403.
Whose ivory sheath inwrought with curious pride^
Adds graceful terror to the wearer's side.
Homer says, that Hermione was as beautiful as Venus: this is low and humble in
comparison of Mr. Pope's Hermione, B. 4, 19. d' 14.
On whom a radiant Pomp of Graces wair,
Resembling Venus in attractive state.


Where a prodigy is sent to the Ithacensians in Council, Homer says that they
were struck at the sight of it, and revolved in their Minds what it might
presage to them this Mr. Pope renders after the following manner, B. 2, 18^.
b' 156.
The wondering rivals gaze with cares oppres^
And chilling horrors freeze in every Breast.


How mean is it, and how much lik^ prose, to tell us, that Penelope heard t^^
mirth of the Suitors? to elevate this sufficiently, You must say B. 1, 425.
(...) 3^
The shrilling Airs the valuted Roof rebounds,
R^flecting to the Queen the Silver Sounds.


This false way of animating Poetry, a^ no doubt many will be pleased to call
i^ grows particularly prejudicial and absur^ in any case, where the Passions
are to b^ raised in the Reader, or described in the Persons of the Poem. Where
we wou'^ move Pity, in particular, nothing is (^ m^^e odious than a show of
Eloquence. Nature has provided a Sympathy in o^^ Souls; She has put a biass
into our Temper, that inclines us forcibly to Compassion; Odi reum cui esse
diserto vace^. Quin^ Lib. 11. c. 1.
and we should Quicquid meris adjicietur affectibus, omnes eorum diluet vires,
and miserationem secu^^tate laxabit. Quintil. Instit. L. 11. c, 1.
leave her to her own work in such points, without any of the impertinent
assistances of Art.

The lines You have just repeated, interrupted Philypsus, are such as I cannot
admire: but I think you carry the point too far against Art in general. Is
there not the greatest Art required in moving the passions? why then have
Cicero, and all the Critics of old, given us so numerous rules in this Case?
Yes, replied Antiphaus, great Art, or rather a great Genius, is very necessary
toward any excellence this way. But what I have said was intended not so much
against the Use of Art, as the Appearances of it. It Is the greatest of Arts, to
conceal the Art you use; and to have it very evident, is the greatest of
Blemishes. The Critics, and Cicero in particular, speak with the greatest
plainness against any thing of that kind. Where the passions are to be touched,
apparent art is apparent fraud; so that here particular care should be taken,
that nothing be over-wrought.

It Is on this account, that when You compare the following lines to the
Original, You will not, I dare say, be over ^ond of them:

The Soul of Friendship to my hope is lost,
B 4, 248. d', 182.
Fated to wander from his natal coast.
He said: chill horrors shook my shivering Soul,
B 4, 726. d', 539
Racked with Convulsive pangs in d^st ^ roll.
And that entire passage of Penelope.

Rolling Convulsive on the Floor, is seen
The piteous object of a prostrate Queen.
Words to her dumb Complaint a pause supplies,
And breath, to waste in unavailing Cries:
Around their Sovereign wept the menial Fair,
B. 4, 957. d' 721.
To whom she thus addr^ss'd her deep despai^ etc.
I wish this false elevation and profusion of Ornament does not carry Mr. Pope,
in some few Cases, into down right Fustian. See p. 14.
A Man's being lost in Lassitude, and a Soul scarce waking, in the Arms of
Death, looked very much that way. Do You remember where he talks of B. 11, 151.
Princes on Princes rolled, and Obs. 27 on B. 11, Ver. 38^
Gods being heaped on Gods? Or how in another place we are told, that B. 4, 480.
-- The Pharian Isle
Fronts the deep Roar of d^s^mboguing N^le?


You know the Character of some o^ Sir John Falstaff's Attendants, in the Merr^
Wives of Windsor; a sort of Men, who are industrious in talking hard Words; and
whose Humor, is to be unintelligible. One would almost Imagine, the humble
Account of shutting a Door, in the end of the First Odyssey, to be copied from
those illustrious Originals.

-- The Door reclos'd;
The Bolt, ob^dient to the si^ken Cord,
B. 1, 555. a', 441. -- (...), --
To the strong Staple's inmost depth restored,
S^c^r^d the Valves. --
I own (says Philypsus) I cannot but give up those lines to you, and several of
the other You mentioned before. The first lines, when You repeated them, I took
tobe the very worst, You could pick out of the Od^ssey: But I know not how i^
comes about, You rise gradually in your demands upon me; and are got insensibly
from lines in that piece, which were forced and too much beautified, to things
unnatural, and shocking. When I thought of making a Convert of You to an entire
admiration of Mr. Pope, I fancy, I was much mistaken; at this rate, you will
turn the Tables upon me: and to tell You the truth, I cannot but confess, that
the Poet has, in some Cases, fallen into each of the faults You mention.

In some Cases doubtless (replied Antiphaus) that Gentleman is not to be
commended: I take his Translation to be as good, as any Translation of Homer,
into English, and in Rhyme, could be expected to be; In all probability, we
might safely add, that no other Writers of the Age could, in the whole, have
performed such a task so well. But a perfect Piece of this kind cannot be
expected: If Homer himself is allowed to Sleep a little, his Translator
certainly may Nod sometimes. --

One thing I observed (interrupted Philypsus) in the lines you have repeated
that the faultiness of several of them was owing to an Excess in one of the
greatest Beauties of Poetry, I mean, the Metaphors too frequent in them. I
observ'^ the same (says Antiphaus) as I was collec^ing these little Remarks: it
occasion'^ my using a particular Paper for that single point: If it did not
grow so late, ^ would show it to You; but -- No, le^ us have it now, cried
Philypsus: I never knew any thing of yours too long, and (...) it be that Paper
in your Hand, I shou^^ think it much too short; were it not for my concern for
the Poet, and the desi^^ I have of finding as few Faults in his Writings as
possible.

Metaphor, says Philypsus, is certainly the most universal enlivener of Poetry.
At the same time that it adds to the dignity of Verse, it gives it an agreeable
variety; together with a power of Painting out all its Images, in the boldest
and strongest manner in the World. It Is this which animates those objects,
which must otherwise be still and unaffecting: it ^lings every thing into
Motion, Life, and Action: By this the Arrow is eager and on the Wing, by this
the Sword thirsts for Blood, and the Spear rages in the Hands of the Warrior.
Metaphor raises each subject out of the heavy narrative way: it creates new
Beings; it represents the passions of Men, and even mere Names, as animated and
imbodied; and shows them in the posture and attitudes of Agents. Thus when the
Battles are going to join, You see Rage stalk amidst the Combatants; pointing
with one Hand to the Enemy, and in the other, shaking the Torch of War. By
this, the Valleys and Mountains rejoice, when Peace once more spreads her downy
Wings, and Plenty descends from Heaven upon the happy climate. It Is Metaphor
which makes the Woods and Caves answer to the voice of the Poet, and the
murmuring Stream compassionate his complaints: It Is this which makes the Nile
know Caesar; and the Sea, its present Monarch.

If Mr. Pope manages this powerful Figure frequently to the best advantage,
sometimes he happens not to be so happy in the use of it. The force of Metap^or
is to make things strong, clear, and sensible: any confusion destroys the very
end of it; and yet a little inaccuracy may occasion gross errors this way.
Sometimes what is just with the Figurative^ may disagree with the Proper:
sometimes again, an idea which might stand with the proper expression, will be
inconsistent with the figurative. A misapplication either way is very obvious,
and yet it gives a jar to the Ideas, and makes the sense of a line to be
perplexed and in confusion.

It sounds but oddly to talk of a Person, and of his Picture, without any
manner of distinction: To say, that the piece, drawn by Sir Godfrey Kneller for
Mr. Pope^ is an excellent Poet and Writes with the greatest Command imaginable;
Or, that Mr. Pope is a very good piece, and his fac^ very well colored, though
he is but just recover'^ from a fit of Sickness; either of them w^u'd carry a
mixed incoherent sense with them: This I take to be partly the Case in the
following Lines,

B 4, 962. d', 727. (...) --
Now from my fond embrace by Tempests torn,
Our other Column of the State is born;
Nor took a kind adieu. --
B. 9, 210 in, 180. (...).
They sweep Neptunes smooth Face.
B 2, 437. b', 388. (...).
Declining, with his s^^ping Wh^els
Down sunk the Sun. --
To say the Go^ of Light was driving his Car, down the Steep of Heaven (as Mr.
Pope somewhere expresses it) is metaphorical; To say the Sun is setting, is
proper: but should one say, The Sun is setting with s^oping Wheels, This would
be neither Metaphorical, nor Proper; nor could it raise any thing in the Mind,
but a confusion of Ideas.

Again: B. 9, 224. in, 192. -- (...)
As some lone Mountain's monstrous grow^h he stood^
Crowned with rough thickets and a noddingwoo^^


Again: B. 9, 618. in, 528. (...) --
Hear me, Oh Neptune! thou whose Arms are h^rl'd
From Shore to Shore, and gird the sol^d World.


I think, Neptune has the luck of it; for it is the same Deity, that in another
place makes just such a Figure, as I have seen him in some Mortlock-Hangings:
B. 5, 365^ e', 285.
The raging Monarch shook his ^zure Head,
And thus in secret to his Soul he said^ etc.
B. 5, 480. e, 380.
This said, his Seagreen Steeds divide the Foam.


Such confusions of the Metaphor and the Proper have a great resemblance to
that absurdity (of mixing Fable and Reality together) which appears so grossly
in Mr. Dryden's Hind and Panther; and which was the very thing, that provoked
Lord Halifax to ridicule that Piece, with such infinite humor and good sense.
The Noble Author's Words on that subject, may give a Side-light to what I mean
in the present Case. Speaking of the Ancient Fabulists, They wrote (says he
Preface to the Hind and Panther Transvers'd^
in Signs, and spoke in Parables: all their Fables carry a double meaning: The
Story is one and entire; The Characters the same throughout; not broken, or
changed, and always conformable to the nature of the Creatures they introduce.
They never tell you that the Dog, which snapt at a shadow, lost his Troop of
Horse; that would be unintelligible. -- This is his (Dryden'^) new way of
telling a Story, and confounding the Moral and the Fable together. After
instancing from the Hind and Panther, he goes on thus. What relation has the
Hind to our Savior? or what notion have we of a Panther's Bible? if you say,
he means the Church, how does the Church feed on Lawns, or range in the Forest?
Let it be always a Church, or always the Cloven-footed Beast, for we cannot
bear his shifting the Scene every Line.

I had almost forgot to tell You, that upon consulting the Original there was
no Metaphor at all to be found, for either of the Lines, I last repeated from
the Odyssey. We have now Metaphors perpetually; the Translator is vastly fond
of them. I need not say that an Excess this way is very blameable; You know the
Critics speak against it in a high strain, and one of them goes so far as to
say, that this F^equens (M^taphorae usus) and obscurat^ and ^aedio complet^
continuus vero in allegoriam and aenigma exit. Quintil. Instit L. 8. c 6.
Figure, when frequent, obscure^ the Piece, and fatigues the Reader; when
continual, it is no longer a Poem, it is all Allegory and Enigma.

As a ^alse Mixture of the proper and the figurative confuses the sense; The
joining Metaphors together, which do no^ agree, makes it still more dark and
perplexed. These are like (what they call^ Medley-Pieces; a huddled kind of
Pictures^ which show a Variety of Objects, flun^ together without any order or
design^ As that in the beginning of Horace's A^ of Poetry, they join the Limbs
of on^ Creature to the Body of another; an^ confuse all the properties and
circumstances of an Action.

If the Poet be not very careful he man by these means tie not only things
improper, but even contrarieties, together^ Do not the following Lines border
o^ this? to me the Metaphors in them see^ to be improperly united.

From Elateus's strong Arm the Discus flies,
And Sings with unmatched Force along the Skies:
And Laodame whirls High, with dreadful sway,
B. 8, 140. the, 130. (...) --
The Gloves of Death. --
At the same Time, nothing can b^ more Proper and Narrative than the Original
in that place. Again: B. 11, 486. l', 390. -- (...).
From his Eyes poured down the tender Dew.


B. 4, 388. d', 286.
But Anticlus unable to control,
Spoke loud the languish of his yearning Soul.
In these the Action is described in words, that import a violence; while the
Act to be expressed, is plainly something still and gentle.

Nothing is more known in relation to the Metaphor, than that rule of Cicero
's; Verecunda d^bet esse Transl^^io, ut deducta esse in alienum locum, non
irruisse; atque ut precario, non vi venisse videa^ur. -- Est hoc magnum
ornamentum orationis, in quo obscuritas fu^d (...) st. Cicero de Oratore. Lib.
3.
That it should be so modest, as to seem to have been handed into the place of
the proper Word, not to have forced its Way thither: it should fall into it in
a free, voluntary manner. Otherwise it will make the sense dark and intricate;
and that absolutely destroys all the use of it: for as Metaphor should be the
Verecunda d^bet esse Transl^^io, ut deducta esse in alienum locum, non
irruisse; atque ut precario, non vi venisse videa^ur. -- Est hoc magnum
ornamentum orationis, in quo obscuritas fu^d (...) st. Cicero de Oratore. Lib.
3.
greatest Light and Ornament of Language, Obscurity is the most absurd thing,
and the most to be avoided in Metaphor.

If so, I would ask whether it be very natural to talk of B. 2, 439.
the Womb of a Vessel? What congruity is there? What Idea have You of the
Forehead of Night, of a Star, or of the Heavens? yet in the Translation we meet
with Metaphors of thi^ kind: and though it may be tolerable to talk of the B 13,
113.
Front of Heaven; the other two, B^ 5, 352.
The blazing Forehead of a Sta^, and B. 1, (...)
the Matron Brow of Night, ar^ scarce to be born with. For my part, I should
not have expected these Expressions from Mr. Pope: They rather pu^ me in mind
of another Gentleman, wh^ in a Poem of his speaking of the Church of England,
says that Tate's Mausolaeum.
Divinely bright her Frontlet-Stars appeared,
While up toward Heaven her ravished Eyes she rear'^


I desire you would give me your Sentiments on another passage: what do yo^
think of the Images in the followin^ Line? They cuff, they tear, their Che^ks,
and Necks (...)


Do You remember whom it is spoke of? Really, says Philypsus, I cannot we^
determine, whether it is spoken of Me^ or of a couple of Beasts fighting. -- (^
neither, answered Antiphaus: it is used (...) Eagles in the B. 2, (...)
Odyssey; and in the (^ Iliad, of a couple of Vultures.

(f) Iliad 16, 524.
There is an Observation arising from this, which ought to be considered, in
transferring Metaphors: it may be said, that the word Cheeks in this Verse, is
justified by the Original. Custom, Philypsus, is the great Rule of Words: and
what is easy in one Language, will not bear in another; because usage may have
softened in one, what in the other is yet harsh and unwarrantable. This is
evident from the very Word in debate. Thus we use ^Cheeks in English of some
Creatures beside Men; the Term is so far familiarized, and sounds very well:
Yet to talk of the Cheeks of a Pheasant, or the Cheeks of a Vulture, will by no
means sound the softer for it is prevailing in those other particulars.

However, this is agreed on all hands; that a Metaphor is not to be used,
unless it gives a greater light, and makes the thing more sensible to us. Are
the Borrowed terms, in this Case, more expressive than the Native? Nay, do they
give you as clear Ideas, as the Native would? Do they give you as clear, where
the Poet talks of B. 6, 298.
asswaging Thirst with a generous ^intage, or of Polypheme's doing the same
thing with a B. 9, 353.
Milky deluge? What do you think of an B^ 14, 533.
Ozier-fringed Bank, of a Voice (just heard) B. 5, 515.
wounding the Ear, or of the Seas being called the B. 4, 748.
howling desert of the Main? Mr. Pope B. 14, 510, Notes.
questions whether the nodding of a Mountain be a natural Image; should not You
be apt to think too, that a Mountain B. 13, 400.
shaking the Forests on his sides, is fitter for an Earthquake, than a
Metaphor? What sort of Idea have You of a B. 5, 395.
well-fought Wall, or a B. 5, 159.
thrice-ear'd Field? in a Word, have You any Idea at all, when he tells us of
Jove's B. 5, 391.
rearing a Tempest, or of the B. 3, 213.
whistling Winds waking the Sky?

Philypsus consulted his own Mind all along as these points were offered; and
endeavored very fairly to discover, whether the Images were as clear and
evident, as they ought to be: He knew that the great use and Modus nullus est
florentior; nec qui plus luminis afferat Orationi. Cicero de Oratore. Lib. 3.
beauty of Metaphor, was to give Light and Perspicuity to a description; to
cloth Words (as he used to say) with Substance; and to make Language visible:
But as, upon this View, he could not answer fully what had been produced, he
was willing to evade it as much as he could. These Instances, says he (turning
to Antiphaus) though few for so large a Piece, when laid together, are apt to
incline ones judgment to the prejudice of the Translator: it will not be ^air
to look only on the worst side of him; We owe it to Justice, and to the
Excellencies of that great Man, to give one Evening to his Beauties, as well as
this to his Defects. -- Be so good then (interrupted Antiphaus) as to undertake
that part for the next: You know me so well I need not assure you, that I shall
be as much pleased with hearing the Beauties, as I am uneasy in repeating the
Faults of this Writer.

After some other discourse, Antiphaus, going for his own apartment, and
reflecting upon what had passed between him and his friend, took occasion to
observe; How impossible almost it is for thegreatest Genius not to fail
sometimes, in an undertaking of this Nature: and how unavoidable it will be ^or
the Reader, (in a Poem generally well wrote) not to be led away from observing
those faults, by the vast Power of Ornament, the easy Fluency of the Verse, and
his Engagements to the Beauties of a favorite Piece. The best qualified (added
he) will thus err, when ever they write for Fame; and the most judicious will
be thus deceived, when they read for Pleasure.

An ESSAY etc.
EVENING the SECOND.
BETWEEN company and business, it was some time before Philypsus and Antiphaus
could get an Evening to themselves; the latter had waited for it with some
impatience; and did not fail, pretty early in it, to remind Philypsus of his
promise. I long, says he, to see your Remarks: such a method of viewing a Poem,
is something like the way of our favorite Vertot in writing History: we have
the material Parts of it, without passing through the dead Lines, which go toward
the Narrative; or the less significant Passages, which are to fill up the Chain
of Events. You must not expect any great Matters, answered Philypsus: Though I
have had longer time than we talked of at first, it has been sufficient only
for collecting some of the scattered Beauties of this excellent Translation.

Some of the Lines which you repeated the former Evening, showed that the
Greatness of his Genius, had led Mr. Pope sometimes into an Excess: if things
can be too much beautified, that fault does certainly belong to him. In a few
lines, I confess, he discovers a greater love of Ornament, than is becoming.
This is the fountain of all the several Peccadillo's which you observed from
his writings; whatever there is to be found in them either too glaring, or
forced, or figurative, or too much elevated, may fairly be accounted for this
way. You, Sir, produced some Passages, as I remember, under each of these
Characters: But how pardonable is it, for so exalted a Genius, to run sometimes
into an excess of Ornament? And how admirable for such, to excel often in the
just, handsome, natural Manner? As Mr. Pope, in the former, may possibly want
some favorable Allowances; He must certainly command the highest Esteem in the
latter.

Is not almost the entire B. 4, 493. to Verse, 776.
Episode of Menelaus and Proteus particularly just, and beautiful? What can
have a greater share of Nature, without any excesses, than the Adventure with
B. 6.
Nausicaa? How justly are the Passions preserved in B. 11.
The Descent into Hell; and before, in all the Speeches Books 5, and 10.
of Circe and Calypso?

Though these Passages are generally of too great a length to bear repeating in a
single Evening, you will indulge me with the reading some of the most finished
Parts of them.

The whole Episode is particularly well wrote; but the things chiefly to be
admired in it are, the Metamorphosis of Proteus; -- His Speech on the unhappy
Curiosity of Men; -- the account immediately after, of the Deaths of Ajax and
Agamemnon; and, above all that enlivened Conclusion, in Relation to Elysium,
and, the future Happiness of Menelaus. You remember the various Transformations
of Proteus; and, I believe, will allow them to be exceedingly well expressed:

A Lion now, he curls a surgy mane;
Sudden, our bands a spotted Pard restrain;
Then armed with tusks, and lightning in his eyes,
A Boar's obscener shape the God belies:
On spi^y volumes there a Dragon rides;
Here, from our strict embrace a Stream he glides:
And last, sublime his stately growth he rears
B. 4, 615. to 622.
A Tree, and well-dissembled foliage wears.
The Lines are extremely good, says Antyphaus; but I had a Thought came into my
Head, that possessed me, all the time, you were reading them: I could not
forbear thinking, what an happy Contrivance it would be in the Managers of the
Old House, to bring this Deity upon the Stage, in the same manner, that he
appears in these Verses. Such a Performance would set their Character in the
most eminent Light: They would infallibly get the start of their ingenious
Rivals; and poor Doctor Faustus, and his Dragon, would no longer be the highest
Entertainment of the Beaux Esprits of this Age.

I am got into another Part of the Poem (says Philypsus) which might serve, in
some measure, to arm their Rivals of Lincolns-Inn-Fields, against so formidable
an Undertaking. There are Passages in the Descent into Hell, capable of
furnishing out a great deal of the Wonderful, and Surprising, in this way. But
to return: can any thing be more Pathetick, than this whole Book? especially,
the latter part, when the Heroes come to make their Appearance. Though I am
always lost in the Variety of Beauties, which we find in it; I must single out
the Speech of Agamemnon, and read (at least) the Conclusion of it to you:

When War has thundered with its loud est Storms,
Death thou have seen in all her ghastly forms;
In duel met her, on the listed Ground,
When hand to hand they wound return for wound:
But never have thy Eyes astonished viewed
So vile a deed, so dire a Scene of Blood.
Even in the flow of joy, when now the bowl
Glows in our Veins, and opens every Soul,
We groan, we faint; with Blood the dome is died,
And over the pavement floats the dreadful tide --
Her breast all gore, with lamentable cries,
The bleeding innocent Cassandra dies!
Then, though pale death froze cold in every vein,
B. 11, 528. l', 423.
My Sword I strive to wield, -- but strive invain.
Surely nothing in Nature can be conceived of greater Strength and Emotion,
than this Circumstance. We see the Hero weltring on the Floor, all covered with
Blood, and in the last agonies of Death. It was then, that he heard the Cries
and Shrieks of the Daughter of Priam, pursued by the Traitors, and stabbed to
the Heart by the barbarous Clytemnestra: expiring as he was, he endeavors to
raise up his Arm, and at last gets his Hand upon the hilt of his Sword; which
he had strength only to grasp, with a look full of Rage, Compassion, and
Revenge. Methinks, Antiphaus, I see him now expired, and dropped upon the Floor:
but though expired, there is still that Rage and Passion in his Countenance; he
still grasps his Sword, and seems to threaten the Traitors and the Adulteress
with his looks.

I know nothing finer (says Antiphaus) than these last Efforts of dying Heroes.
They affect the Soul wonderfully: And the weakness of their Body, which will
not permit their acting at such times, in my Opinion sets off their Courage,
and their Desire of Action, in the strongest Light imaginable. There is nothing
unnatural in this; though indeed it follows Nature to its last Pitch: The best
Historians, as well as the first Poets, make use of such Circumstances very
finely; and I remember Instances of it Etiam quos vires sanguisque desereret,
u^ intra vallum hostium c^derent, nitebantur. Live. vol. 3. p. 145. per H^arne.
in Livy and Catilina vero long a suis inter hostium cadavera repertus est,
paullulum etiam spirans, ferociamque animi quam habuerat vivus, in vul^u
retinens. Sall. Bell. Cat. juxta finem.
Sallust, that carry this Matter as far as G. 4, 526. Aen. 9, 444.
Virgil or Homer. But some Moderns, as usual, stretch it so immoderately, that
they go beyond nature; and the Moment it is so, it must be ridiculous. How
often have we laughed at those Rants of Tasso, and Ariosto? It would be very
well if their Heroes only threatened in Death, but they must die Minacciava
morendo, e non languia. Tas.
away, without being at all the Weaker: some of them (in the heat of Battle,
you may be sure) forget that they are Il pover' huomo, che non sen' era accorto
Andava combattendo, ed era morto. Ariost.
killed, and so keep on fighting: like Strada's Soldiers, who after they are
cut in Two, Dimidiato corpore pugnabant sibi superstites, ac peremptae partis
ultores. Strad. Dec. 2. Lib 2.
survive themselves; and fight on with that half of their Bodies, that is left
them; to revenge the other, which was knocked on the Head, an hour or two
before.

Such things as those (answered Philypsus) are not Blemishes in a piece; they
are downright falsities; mere outrages against Truth, as well as common sense.
Nothing can be invented more ridiculous: they are like the incomprehensible
Lies of Sir John Falstaff; and put one in mind of his fighting with Blount, an
hour by Shrewsbury Clock, after that Gentleman had been killed before very
heartily by Princ^ Henry.

On the contrary; Homer is as great a friend to Truth and Nature, as he is to
Poetry: He knows how to raise, every thing, as far as it will bear; he ha^
always a Command of whatever is prope^ to be said; and, which is yet greater^
always understands when he has sai^ enough.

But we forget our selves, Antiphau^ this Digression has carried us so far,
th^^ if we do not soon go on with this Spee^ of Agamemnon's which occasioned
it, w^ shall not know where it left off: Aft^ that pathetick account of his
Death an^ the barbarity of his Queen, he proceed^

Nor did my traitress Wife these Eyelids ck^
Or decently in Death my Limbs compose.
O Woman, Woman! when to ill thy Mind
Is bent, all Hell contains no fouler Fiend.
And such was mine! who basely plunged her sw^
Through the fond Bosom, where she reigned ado^^
Alas! I hoped, the toils of War overcome,
To meet soft quiet and repose at home;
D^lusive hope! -- O Wife, thy deeds disgra^^
The pe^jur^d Sex, and blacken all the race;
And should posterity one virtuous find,
B. 11, 540. l', 433.
Name Clytemnestra, they will curse the ki^^
The turn of Expression in this, is much more lively and passionate, than the
language of Homer himself. As you cannot value any delays, where we meet with
such Improvements; I am sure you will give me leave to read you the Speech of
Ulysses just after: That I mean, in which he gives Achilles an account of his
Son Pyrrhus's behavior in the War.

-- Hear with pleased Attention the renown,
The wars and wisdom of thy gallant Son:
With me from Scyros to the Field of Fame,
R^diant in Arms the blooming Hero came.
When Gr^^ce assembled all her Hundred States,
To ripen Counsels, and decide Debates,
Heavens! how he charmed us with a flow of sense,
And won the heart with manly Eloquence!
He first was seen of all the Peers to rise,
B. 11, 626. l', 511.
The third in wisdom, where they all were wise. --
Give me leave (says Antiphaus, interrupting him) -- that very Verse I have
formerly taken notice of; the Translator seems to me to have used an
unnecessary Caution in it: He is tender of making Ulysses commend himself by
Name, where Homer does it with the greatest bluntness. --

I know it, says Philypsus; but that I should have put to the account of his
Improvements on this Speech. Could any thing have been more gross, than to have
imitated that line in its own coarse, rustic Dialect? Is it not better on all
Hands for such a Sentiment to be implied than to be expressed?

Custom and Prejudice (answered Antiphaus) have now rendered it unpolite, and
even shocking, for a Man almost in any Case to commend himself: But it was not
thus anciently. It is certain, that it was not thus in the times of those
Heroes, whom Homer describes; and Home^ therefore acts with Propriety, in
making Ulysses say, that Nestor and Himself were the wisest of all the
Grecians. Now, is the Translator in this Case to follow his Author, or not? Is
he to preserve the Manners of the Ancients in the characters or his Heroes? or
is he to modernize them and to make Ulysses and Achilles appear the most
accomplished, finest Gentlemen in the World?

That will be carrying the Matter to^ far, replied Philypsus; I speak it only
as to this particular; and I own I am yet to be convinced, that this Humor o^
commending themselves, was really s^ prevalent among the Ancients. Perhap^ this
is one of the Places where Home^ nods: it might be a slip of haste or
inattention. --

No, interrupted Antiphaus, nothing can be more certain, than the freedom and
honesty of Speech used among the Ancients, in this particular; not only before
Homer, but very long after his time. -- If Homer's Ulysses here calls himself
the wisest of the Grecians, his Achilles does not stick at calling himself the
Best and most Valiant of them; and that too, in a Council of all the Princes:
Virgil has given us his Approbation of both the one and the other, in making
Aeneas talk frequently of his own piety and valor. I could tire you with
Quotations of this kind: Socrates, in Plato, is always brought in to his
advantage; and yet there he does just the same thing with Ulysses in the
present case: he himself quotes the Oracle, which pronounced him to be the
Wisest of Men. Xenophon represents Cyrus, upon his Deathbed, as taking notice
of the greatest Beauty of his own Character, his Humanity; in a Piece which,
every one knows, was designed for the Character of a perfect Prince. In a word,
whole Treatises ^ave been wrote of this very thing, and ^n this very strain.
Ca^sar, and the great ^ewish writer of his own Life, frequently ^ommend
themselves: the greatest Cri^ick, as well as the greatest Orator, among the
Romans, who so often recko^s Modesty among the things which are most necessary
toward rendering a Man great in his Profession; how open and frequent is he in
praising himself, and in setting his own Merit in a true Light? But what puts
this beyond dispute (and shows at the same time, that a just Commendation of
one self, may by very consistent with the greatest Modesty) is to be found in
the sacred Writings, in which Moses says of himself, that he was the Meekest
Man upon Earth.

Thus free were the Ancients in commending themselves; and not to consider
here, whether we, or they were in the right; (whether their Behavior may not
be thought to have had more of Veracity in it; and our Method to have been
grounded, in a great degree, on a false Estimate of things: however that be) I
think enough has been said, to show that Homer was not drowsy, when he wrote
this line; and that Ulysses might use it, without any thing of a vicious
Arrogance.

To confess the Truth (says Philypsus) I was really ignorant in this point of
the Usage of the Ancients, and had modelled their Manners too much by our own.
I now see my error; and think the Translator might have spared the excuse,
which he Note on Ver. 626, B. 11^
makes for this Indecency in Ulysses behavior: it is plain, it would not have
been so improper, before a People, less noted for Vainglory, than the
Phaeacians. I thank you, Antiphaus, for this new Light; and shall go on with
the Hero's Character of Pyrrhus, without thinking him so assuming, as he
formerly appeared to have been. After placing the Son of Achil^es next to
Nestor and Himself in Wisdom, he proceeds to give an account of his Courage;
and in that, sets him above all the Grecians, without Exception.

But when to try the fortune of the day
Host moved towered host in terrible array,
Before the van, impatient for the ^ight,
With martial port he strode, and stern delight. --
When Ilion in the horse received her doom,
And unseen armies ambush'd in its womb;
Gr^^ce gave her latent warriors to my care,
'Twas mine on Troy to pour the imprisoned war:
Then, when the boldest bosom beat with fear,
When the stern eyes of Heroes dropped a tear;
Fierce in his look his ardent valor glowed,
Flushed in his Cheek, or sallied in his Blood;
Indignant in the dark recess he stands,
Pants for the battle, and the war demands;
His voice breathed death; and with a martial air
B. 11, 650. l', 531.
He grasped his Sword and shook his glittering Spear.
How well is the earnest Spirit of a young Hero described throughout this
whole Passage? How does the impetuousness of his Soul appear, in these previous
Actions of the warrior? Had one the poetical Liberty of making comparisons, I
should not stick at saying, that this has a great resemblance to that admirable
description of a War-horse, in the most finished Poem in the World.

-- Virgils Georgicks. 3, 83^
T^m, siqua sonum procul arma dedere;
Stare loco nescit, micat auribus, and tremit ^rtus^
C^ll^ctumque prem^^s volvit sub naribus ignem.
I am apt to believe, that Mr. Pope had this behavior of Pyrrhus in his Eye,
when he gave those lively Strokes in the entrance of his Ode for Music. We see
the Heroes there in the same Postures when animated by the martial strains o^
Orpheus.

Stanza. 3.
Each chief his sevenfold shield displayed,
And half unsheathed the shining blade;
And Seas, and Rocks, and Skies re^ound
To arms, to arms, to arms!
By the sudden flow of their Spirits^ and the rapidity of their Imagination^
they prevent the War^ They show a noble forgetfulness of the Place and
Circumstances of things about them, and think themselves already engaging with
the absent Enemy.

There is one Speech more of those I mentioned at first, which I cannot forbear
repeating to you; though I am sensible, that I have been too long upon this Head
already. It is that of Circe to Ulysses, in the tenth Odyssey:

Then waved the wand, and then the word was given^
Hence to thy fellows! (dreadful she began)
Go, be a Beast! -- I heard and yet was Man.
Then sudden whirling like a waving Flame
My beamy faulchion, I assault the Dame:
Struck with unusual fear, she trembling cries,
She faints, she falls; she lifts her weeping eyes.
What art thou? say! from whence, from whom you came?
O more than human! tell thy race, thy name.
Amazing strength these poisons to sustain!
Not mortal thou, nor mortal is thy Brain.
Or art thou he? the Man to come (foretold
By Hermes powerful with the Wand of Gold)
The Man from Troy, who wandered Ocean round,
The Man, for Wisdom's various Arts renowned:
B. 10, 395. ch', 330.
Ulysses? -- Oh! thy threatening fury cease. --
What starts? what terror, and a^azement? What passionate breaks are ^here in
these lines? How solemn is the beginning? how emphatical the account of the
action? and how lively the surprise and con^usion of the Inchantress, upon
finding the inefficacy of her Charms? Nature here appears in every Word that
she says; if the Disappointment is great and shocking, the lines too are all
impetuous and abrupt: if the passions strong and various, the Expressions in
the Translation are instant and pressing, and the style often changed: How
great and swift is the Alteration, from an imperious cruel Tyrant, to a poor
weak helpless Woman? And how is it equaled by that judicious shifting of the
scene in this piece? There the change is as sudden and immediate; and nothing
can be greater than the fall from the haughtiness of Go, be a Beast! --
to the meanness of the line, just after, She faints, she falls; she lifts her
weeping Eyes.


You cannot but observe farther, my Antiphaus, that the lines in this
description, are every where improved with those Figures, which the Ancient
Critics have always looked upon as the most proper to express an hurry of
Passion. The Transposition, the Omission of Words, the pressing use of
Exclaiming and Interrogation, and the general Inconnection which runs through
it, are all applied in the most natural and poetical Manner. There is a Note of
the Translator on a Passage not long before this, which gives us in one view
several excellent Observations of this kind, and which no doubt he had in his
Eye here; for the rules of it are exactly followed in the present case. This
Poet is the best Commentator on himself; give me leave therefore just to look
back for his No^e on B. 10, Ver. 295.
Note on the Speech of Eurylocus; that you may see how exactly those
Observations tally with his performance here, in every particular Article.

We have here (says he) a very lively picture of a Person in a great fright: --
the very manner of speaking, represents the disorder of the speaker; he is in
too great an Emotion to introduce his Speech by any Preface, he breaks at once
into it, without preparation, as if he could not soon enough deliver his
thoughts. -- Again:

There is nothing, which gives more life to a Discourse, than the taking away
from Longinus ^e Subl. c, 17.
the Connections and Conjunctions; when the discourse is not bound together and
embarass'd, it walks and slides along of it self. Periods thus cut off, and yet
pronounced with Precipitation, are signs of a lively Sorrow; which at the same
time hinders, yet forces him to speak. -- Again (in a like case)

He speaks short, and in broken and interrupted Periods, which excellently
represent the agony of his thoughts. -- Afterward we see he breaks out into
Interrogations, which, as De Subl. c, 17.
Longinus observes, give great motion, strength, and action to Discourse. If
the Poet had proceeded simply, the Expression had not been equal to the
occasion; but by these short Questions, he gives strength to it, and shows the
disorder of the speaker, by the sudden starts and vehemence of the Periods.

All these animated Figures, all those Arts of expressing the Passions, are
beautifully wo^e into this single piece of Poetry: But there is one peculiar
Excellence in it yet behind, which I admire beyond all the rest. It is a power
almost unknown even to Poetry before, and the Critics have not as yet found
out any Name for it. The extraordinary Beauty I mean, is that Insight which the
Poet gives his Readers into Circe's Mind: We look into her Soul, and see the
Ideas pass there in Train. At first she is ignorant, then dubious, and at last
discovers gradually in her Thoughts the Character, and very Name of the Hero.
Circe, skilled as she was in all the arts of Magic, is limited in her
Knowledge and Discovery of things: and in the present Discovery of the Person
of Ulysses, her Mind acts with Tumult and Rapidity, but at the same time with a
series and gradual Collection of Truths, at first unknown. Every one may
perceive the Tumult, and the successive Enlightnings of her Mind. We are led
into a full View of the shifting of her thoughts; and behold the various
openings of them in her Soul.

What art thou? say! from whence, from whom you came.
Or art thou He? the Man to come foretold --
The Man, from Troy? --
The Man, for wisdom's various arts renowned,
Ul^sses? --
I never read any thing which sets the actings of another's Mind so distinctly
to the view. Circe's very Thoughts are made visible to us; they are set full in
our Eyes; and we see the different degrees as it were of Light, breaking in
upon her Soul. -- It Is a most charming piece of Poetry! and upon turning it
every way, and considering all its several perfections, I believe one might
venture to pronounce it, the most finished Piece, the most complete Beauty in
the whole Translation.

These are the productions of a Sublime Genius, and speak an uncommon Spirit,
together with a firm extensive Judgment, and an exact Sense of things. But you
Antiphaus chiefly complain of this Writer for his Refinements and Elevation:
there is too much of the Enflure (as the French call it) in his Works; and you
cannot bear with such a profusion of Glitter and Embroidery in the Language. I
do not deny, that the Passages you repeated, are generally blameable on these
accounts; but beg leave to produce some instances, which may show the
Translator, to be a master in the just and proper style; as the former convince
us of his Excellence in the polished, and enlivened, and pathetick.

How humble are the lines in particular, B. 13.
where Ulysses meets with Minerva in Ithaca, and how rural the (^) (b) B. 14.
B. 14.
Scene between him and Eumaeus in that Island? So far, that for my own Part I
must confess, I should be more apt to imagine, that Mr. Pope on these Occasions
sinks now and then into Lownesses, beneath the dignity of the Epick; than that
he soars too high, or uses any false Elevation.

As for the just and chaste Manner of expressing things, it is very frequent in
these Passages: There is a place just come into my Head, in which this very way
of speaking is described; the lines are close and expressive; and, according to
Mr. Pope's Method in his incomparable Essay, are themselves the best example of
the thing they treat of; they are Verse, 185. the 170.
in the Eighth Book:

With partial hands, the Gods their gifts dispense;
Some greatly think, some speak with manly sense.
Here Heaven an elegance of form denies,
But Wisdom the defect of form supplies:
This Man with energy of thought controuls,
And steals with modest violence our Souls;
He speaks res^rv'dly, but he speaks with force,
Nor can one word be changed but for a worse.
The Conclusion of Tiresias's Speech to Ul^sses (proceeded Philypsus) I dare
answer for it, you will think excellent in this way:

-- Peaceful shall thou end thy blissful days,
And steal thy self from life^ by slow decays:
Unknown to pain, in age resign thy breath,
When late stern Neptune points the shaft with death;
To the dark grave retiring as to Rest,
B^ 4, 776. d', 564 to 569.
Thy people blessing, by thy people blessed.
By this we see, how Mr. Pope can enliven any thing of this kind with the
greatest Justice and Beauty: Such (to mention but one more) is that single
Passage, as I take it, in all Homer's Works, which describes the Regions of the
Blessed. The Lines are very beautiful in the Original; and the Translation has
expressed all the beauties of it, in a lively proper fluency of Verse:

Elysium shall be thine; the blissful plains
Of utmost Earth, where Rhadamanthus reigns:
Joys ever-young, unmixed with pain or fear,
Fill the wide circle of the Eternal Year.
Stern Winter smiles on that auspicious clime;
The Fields are florid with unfading prime:
From the bleak pole no Winds inclement blow,
Mould the round Hail, or flake the fleecy Snow:
But from the breezy deep, the blessed inhale
The fragrant murmurs of the Western gale.
This grace peculiar will the Gods afford
B^ 4, 776. d', 564 to 569.
To thee, the Son of Jove, and beauteous Hel^n's Lord.
What can be more Just and Beautiful? The Thought proper and adequate; the
Words glowing; and the Language alive: To me, the Verses themselves seem to run
on with joy, and pleasure. The delightful Softness of those lines in Homer
(...) is diffused through the whole Description by Mr. Pope; and the latter has
the advantage of the Original, in concluding with a full elastick line, that
carries a Spring with it, instead of the heaviness of -- (...).

I entirely agree with you (says Antiphaus) as to the turn of the Lines; It Is
very fine and vigorous: but methinks even in these, what answers the two
particular Greek Verses you have repeated, are too much flourished, and more
remarkable for their Sound, than for any other Idea they may give the Mind. The
Sense seems to be almost overlaid by the Finesse of them.

I shall not stand with you for that Couplet, answered Philypsus: what I
chiefly admire is the general ^low of the lines in the whole Passage.

This manner of writing, Antiphaus, is very assistant in expressing the nature
of the Subject: and indeed, though Mr. Pope does sometimes go too far in the
Florid and Artificial, we may say in general, that he is a very natural Writer.
His Imagination is lively, his Colors strong, and his Hand masterly in most of
his strokes. We should lose our selves in endeavoring to observe all that
variety of Beauties of this kind, which are to be found in his Translation: one
Point I have particularly admired in it; The Poet's peculiar Air, and Happiness
in drawing Landscapes; especially hanging Woods, Slopes, and Precipices: Thus,
-- High Ithaca o'er-looks the Floods,
B. 3, 96. g' 81.
Brown with o'er-arching Shades, and pendent Woods.


What Reader will be so unconcerned, and so little taken with this Prospect, as
Ulysses is represented to be in another Part of the Poem? For it is the same
place, that we have a description of afterward, when we are told, That he

-- Deep-musing, over the Mountains strayed,
Through mazy thickets of the woodland shade,
And cavern'd ways, the shaggy coast along,
B. 14, 4.
With cliffs, and nodding forests over-hung.
In Ulysses's first adventures on Phaeacia, we are led on successively, through
several very beautiful Descriptions. First we have a B. 5, 520, 521. e', 402.
rocky Coast, excellently pictured in two lines only: thence we are carried
into a B. 5, 613, to 622. e', 480.
thick dark Wood, for that Night. The next Morning, we have a B. 6, 310, to
320. z', 262, 269.
View of the City; The first things which offer to the Eye are the Castle, and
the Senate House, rising above the other Buildings; at a distance, across the
great Road, appears the Port with the Ships at Anchor, and their Sails
fluttering in the Air: on the Shore, just by the Temple of Neptune, you see the
Phaeacians busied in the Dock, all in their several Employments. After this
View, you pass through a B. 6, 350. z', 291.
delicious Range of Groves, and Meadow-ground, up to the Walls; while on this
side, B. 6, 355. z', 293.
appear the Gardens all in bloom; and the Vineyards of Alcinous close the Scene
on the other.

There can be nothing better imag'd, and more natural, than these Descriptions
are in Mr. Pope's Translation: they exceed even the Original it self.

I beg leave to repeat another Description to you, which lies not so diffused
as the former; it is one single View of Calypso's Grotto; and what an exact and
beautiful Draught of it does it give us?

-- A various Sylvan scene
Appears around, and groves of living green;
Poplars and Alders ever quivering played,
And nodding Cypress formed a fragrant shade;
On whose high branches, waving with the storm,
The Birds of broadest wing their mansion form,
(The Chough, the Sea-mew, the loquacious Crow)
And scream aloft, and skim the deeps below.
Depending Vines the shelving Cavern screen,
With purple clusters blushing through the green^
Four limpid fountains from the Cliff distill,
And every fountain pours a several rill,
B. 5, 92. e', 71.
In mazy windings wandering down the Hill.
Nothing can be more beautiful to the Eye, than these Landscapes are in the
Poem: they make every thing present to us; and agreeably deceive us into an
Imagination, that we (...). Longin. (...).
actually See, what we only Hear: As the Poet may improve all his Circumstances
at pleasure, what the Critics have observed in this Case, is not so
extravagant, as one would imagine; we really see things more fully and with
greater delight in the Poem, than we should in the reality; The Picture
improves upon Nature: and we might look on the Prospect it self with (...).
Dionysius Hal. (...).
less pleasure, than we hear it described.

Whoever is shocked at this, may be pleased to consider the Cave of the Nymphs,
in the Thirteenth Book: That alone may serve to show, how largely Circumstances
may be added, in describing the works of Nature; or in drawing poetical
Prospects.

Mr. Pope shows an excellent Hand in several other Places; as in the first View
of Circe's Palace at a distance, and constantly in the appearance of Land off
at Sea.

Ulysses gives us an account of the former at his landing upon the Island of
that Goddess.

B^ 10, 173. ch', 150.
From the high Point I marked in distant view
A stream of curling Smoke ascending blue,
And spiry tops, the tufted Trees above,
Of Circe's Palace bosomed in the Grove.
The other is very frequent: take a Description or two of it, that come into my
Mind at present.

B. 13, 115, n', 95.
Like distant Clouds the Mariner descries,
Fair Ithaca's emerging Hills arise.
Again;

B. 5, 356, e', 279.
The distant Land appeared --
Then swelled to sight Phaeacia's dusky coast,
And woody Mountains half in vapors lost;
That lay before him, indistinct and vast.
Like a broad Shield amid the watery waste.
Nothing has furnished Homer (as well as Virgil) with such a variety of
natural Images, as this Element; and in nothing has Mr. Pope more finely copied
his Original. But all these Beautiful Pictures, are only Pictures of still
Life; this Gentleman's Excellency reaches farther; he is as masterly in all his
Motions, and Actions; he can teach his Pencil to express Ideas yet in the Mind;
and to paint out the Passions of the Soul.

Sometimes we have all the Imagery in Motion: If a Ship is to set sail, the
Canvas swells to the Eye, the Streamers float in the Air, and the Sailors are
all full of Noise and Business: B. 2, 459. b', 419.
We see the Vessel move on, and here the rushing sound of the Water.

-- The attending train
Load the tall bark, and launch into the main.
The Prince and Goddess to the stern ascend;
(c) To the strong stroke at once the rowers bend
Full from the West she bids fresh breezes blow;
The sable billows foam and roar below. --
With speed the Mast they rear, with speed unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the Wind.
High over the roaring Waves the spreading Sails
Bow the tall Mast, and swell before the gales;
The crooked keel the parting surge divides,
And to the stern retreating roll the tides.
At another time, you behold the Rowers, drawing B. 12, 183. m', 147.
the Oar to their broad Breasts; and the different attitudes of them, as they
B. 12. 216.
bend, or B. 12. ^65.
stretch to the stroke.

B. 13, 94, n', 78.
At once they bend and strike their equal oars,
And leave the sinking hills and lessening shores.
This Idea of the Land seeming to sink and recede, is very beautifully added,
in another Place, where we have the Description of a Person driving, very
swiftly, in a Chariot: I believe you will hear the entire Passage with
Pleasure, as it is all very Just and Natural:

With hasty hand the ruling reins he drew:
He lashed the coursers, and the coursers flew.
Beneath the bounding yoke alike they held
Their equal pace, and smoked along the field^
The Towers of Pylos sink, its views decay,
Fields after fields fly back, till close of Day;
B. 3, 618. g', 435.
Then sunk the Sun, and darkened all the way.
Along the waving fields their way they hold,
B. 3^ 628. g', 495.
The fields receding as the Chariot rolled.


Give me leave (interposed Antiphaus) to observe one thing, by the way. Mr.
Pope (possibly, to make this the more sensible to us at present) deviates a
little from the Truth; and chooses rather to show the Poet, than the Antiquary.
As I take it, the Horses in the Chariots of the Ancients were not beneath the
Yoke. Do not their Medals, and all the Pictures of them represent it otherwise?
And does not the Verse, here in the Original, show its Position in respect of
the Horses, very particularly and distinctly?

However, this is a slip of a small Nature: and had the thing been expressed in
exact Conformity to the Grecian fashion in this particular, it might not have
struck the Reader so strongly, as it does now, by its Agreement with the
present Idea of the same thing.

I am not concerned, says Philypsus, either in defending, or giving up that
particular: I only instance this Passage, in general, for its expressiveness of
such an Action; and of the Ideas, arising in the Mind upon it: As to that End,
I believe it will hold very well. The Description and Sentiment is very
Natural, (replied Antiphaus) I beg you to go on without observing any little
breaks for the future, which may be occasioned by such Circumstances, as do not
affect the chief Aim and Design of a Quotation.

If the Poet, proceeded Philypsus, can paint out the Ideas in the Mind with so
much Justice, as he appears to do by this instance; and more particularly by
another mentioned before (of the successive openings and unfolding of an
unknown Truth, in the Mind of Circe) we shall find him to have been equally
Happy in expressing the Passions of the Soul. Something of this has been
mentioned already, and almost an infinite variety of Beauties of the same kind
might be added. They ^bound every where in the Translation, and are generally
well touched. But there is the Description of one Passion in particular, which
is perserv'd throughout the whole Piece: It is Ulysses his Love for his
Country. Give me leave to repeat some of the first, and last Passages, in which
it is expressed. How strongly does Minerva represent this, even in the ^ery
entrance of the Poem? She says the Hero is detained from Ithaca, by a Goddess
(nothing human could have forced him into so tedious an absence: by a Goddess)

Who sooths to dear delight his anxious mind --
Successless all her soft caresses prove,
To banish from his breast his Country's love;
To see the Smoke from his loved palace ^ise,
While the dear Isle in distant prospect lies,
B. 1, 77. a', 59.
With what contentment would he close his eyes?
The first Appearance of the Hero is most excellently imagined. Calypso has
just received orders to detain Ulysses no longer from his Country; she finds
him sitting alone upon the Rocks, the Tears trickling down his Cheeks, and his
Eyes fixed upon the Sea. It was thus that he passed his Hours, in the Island of
that Goddess: He constantly,

In slumber wore the heavy Night away;
On Rocks and Shores consumed the ^edious Day:
There sat all desolate, and sighed alone,
With echoing sorrows made the mountains gro^n^
And rolled his eyes over all the restless main,
B. 5, 204. e', 154.
Till dimmed with rising grief, they streamed again
Pardon me, says Antiphaus; even her^ (though the Passion be strongly set out
yet) the Language of the two Passages which you repeated last, is not entirel^
free from the old Fault: the Enflure is still discernible. That soothing an
anxious Mind to dear delight, falls short of the plainness, and energy of the
Original: -- To make the Mountains groan with echoing Sorrow, is yet more
over-wrought. -- And the streaming again of his Eyes, is not exactly right in
the Translation, which does not mention, his weeping before; at the same time,
that it varies from the Original, which says that he never ceased from weeping.

We meet with another Image of this (replied Philypsus) in the Evening before
Ulysses sets sail for Ithaca; which, I believe, you will allow to be better
expressed. He was then in so delightful a Place, as the Court of Alcino^s. They
had a multitude of Diversions there: the Phaea^ians were the happiest People in
the World; Races and Entertainments, Mirth, Wine, and Music were the chief
Business of their Lives. Ulysses appears among them with a quite different
^^ce: he looks like a Creature of an higher Make, of an Order above them; and
his Mind is taken up with farther Views, and other Desires.

All, but Ulysses, heard with fixed delight:
He ^ate, and eyed the Sun, and wished the Night;
Slow seemed the Sun to move, the hours to roll,
B. 13, 38. n', 30.
His native Home deep-imag'd in his Soul.
We are continually put in mind of this fondness of the Hero for his Country:
and in the last Case, it is particularly fixed upon the Reader by a very
expressive See Mr. Pope's Note on the Place.
Simile. We may imagine the ardency of Ulysses's Love for his Ithaca, his own
proper Country, when we consider his Affection for his Countrymen, the
Grecians in general. Upon an occasional revival in his Thoughts of the
Destructions and Misery they underwent before Troy, the Hero's Dissimulation
(great as it was) is overcome; his Passion breaks through every restraint: we
immediately see him all in Tears. This tenderness of his, is painted in another
Simile, the most pathetick that can be conceived, and the most expressive of
his Affection for his Countrymen.

-- Ulysses's griefs renew;
Tears bath his cheeks, and tears the ground ^edew:
As some fond Matron views in mortal fight
Her Husband falling in his Country's right;
Frantic through clashing Swords she runs, she flies,
As ghastly pale he groans, and faints, and dies;
Close to his Breast she grovels on the ground,
And bathes with floods of ^ears the gaping wound;
She cries, she shrieks: the fierce insulting foe
Relentless mocks her violence of woe,
To chains condemned as wildly she deplores,
B. 8, 580. th, 530.
A widow, and a slave on foreign shores.
It would be endless to repeat every thing of this Nature; There are a Thousand
sketches of it in the Odyssey. It Is sufficient at present to observe, that Mr.
Pope generally gives them to us in very lively Colors; and excells almost
every where in the Pathetick. It Is certain (says Antiphaus) that he has an
excellent Hand; his Images, which you have set before me, are as strong as any
of the Works of the Pencil. They are so, answered Philypsus; and, on that
account, you will Pardon me for borrowing so many Metaphors from Painting in
this Case; It Is unavoidable. The designs of Painting and Poetry are so united,
that to me the Poet and the Painter seem scarcely to differ in any thing,
except the Mean they make use of, to arrive at one and the same end. Both are
to express Nature: but the Materials of the one are Words, and Sound; of the
other, Figure and Colors. Poetry can paint more particularly, more largely,
and with greater coherence^ Painting is the more concise, and emphatical. If
This may excel in showing one View distinctly, That can show several in
succession, without any manner of Confusion. Any figure in Painting is confined
to one Attitude; but Poetry can give as great a variety of Motion and Postures,
as the reality it self. What seems a Paradox of Art in either, is their Power
of expressing two opposite Passions in the same face. Of this sort (among a
Multitude of like instances) is the Mother of Lewis the Thirteenth, in the
Gallery of Luxembourg; and every Piece in that fine Episode, which conc^udes
the sixth Iliad. In that Picture, the Queens Face strongly expresses the Pain
and Anguish of her Condition, mixed with a regard toward her Son, full of the
greatest Pleasure and Complacence. In the Poem we have the greater variety, and
each piece is perfectly just and finished. Hector shows a sierceness for the
War, and a tenderness that inclines him to stay for a last interview; little
Astyanax has a Fondness and a Terror in his Eyes, a^ the sight of his Father;
while Andromache's Face is all softened into a tende^ Smile; and at the same
time, wet with the Tears, that fall for her Hector.

I remember (says Antiphaus) it was to you that I was obliged for the first
Observation, I ever met with, on these Double Passions. I have since read
several things, (in the Aeneid, as well as in the Works of Homer) with a
pleasure perfectly new, on account of the light, you then gave me, into this
particular: And out of a Thousand Places, that I have observed it in since, I
know none so beautiful as that of Achaemenides in Virgil; which you mentioned
to me, the first time we ever talked of this Subject.

That you know (replied Philypsus) to have been always my Favorite: I have
read it over in Dryden so frequently, that I believe I can now repeat you his
Translation of it:

-- From the Woods there bolts, before our sight,
Somewhat betwixt a Mortal and a Spright;
So thin, so ghastly meager, and so wan,
So bare of Flesh, he scarce resembled Man:
This thing, all tattered, seemed from far t'implor^
Our pious Aid and pointed to the Shore;
We look behind; then view his shaggy Beard:
His clothes were tagg'd with thorns, and ^ilth his limbs be^mear'd:
The rest in mein, in habit, and in face^
Appeared a Greek; and such indeed he was:
He cast on us from far a frightful view,
Whom soon for Trojans and for foes he knew;
S^ood still, and paus'd^ then, all at once, began
To stretch his Limbs, and trembled as he ran;
Soon as approached, upon his knees he falls,
And thus with tears and sighs for pity calls:
"Now by the Powers above, and what we share
"From Natures common gift, this vital Air,
" Dryd. Transl. Aen. 3, 788.
O Trojans, take me hence. --
It Is but too evident (continued Philypsus) that Mr. Dryden falls as much ^hort
of Aen. 3, 592^ -- Subito e sylvis macie confecta suprema,
Ignoti nova forma vi^i, miserandaque cultu
Pr^ced^t, supplexque manus ad litora tendit --
-- U^i D^rdanio^ habitus and Troia vidit
Arma p^ocul; paullum aspectu conterritus haesi^,
Continuitque gradum: mox sese ad litora praec^p^
Cum fletu precibusque tulit. --

Virgil in the chief turn, that relates to our present purpose; as Virgil has
exceeded that Il', ch', 358.
Passage in the Iliad, which seems to have given him the hint for drawing this
admirable Image.

This Distraction of Achaemenides between several Passions at once, puts me in
mind of the dubiousness and shifting of thoughts, which is illustrated by Homer
by a very apt and expressive Simile; than which (says Mr. Pope) There Note on
I^. 14, 21.
is scarce any thing, in the whole compass of Nature, that can more exactly
represent the State of an irresolute mind, wavering between two different
Designs; sometimes inclining to the one, sometimes to the other, and then
moving to that Point to which its Resolution is at last determined:

As when old Ocean's silent surface Sleeps,
The Waves just heaving on the purple Deeps;
While yet the expected Tempest hangs on high,
Weighs down the cloud, and blackens in the sky,
The mass of waters will no wind obey:
Jove sends one gust, and bids them roll away.
While wavering counsels thus his mind engage,
Fluctuates in doubtful thought the Pylian sage;
To join the host, or to the General haste
Iliad 14, 30.
Debating long, he fixes on the last.
There is something of this Melange of Passions, (and those too, the most
beautiful in this Case, I mean of opposite Passions) in that line of Milton,
where he says that Death Grin'd horrible a ghastly smile --


One would almost be persuaded, that Homer is the dernier Ressort of all the
finest Thoughts in Poetry; for this likewise is copied from him, though it fails
very much (as to the Point in hand) both of the Original, and of Mr. Pope's
Translation of it. -- Juno makes a very mutinous Speech in an assembly of the
Deities: The Infection took, as much as she could desire: and that success,
provoked and inflamed as she was, forced her to be somewhat pleased, in spite
of her self: Upon this she shows a sort of Il. (...), 103.
uneasy satisfaction, and such a Smile, as Ovid Risus abest; nisi quem visi
movere dolores B. 2, 778.
gives to his Envy in the Metamorphosis.

To see the gathering grudge in every breast,
Smiles on her lips a spleenful joy expressed;
While on her wrinkled front, and eye-brow bent,
Pope's Iliad, B. 15, 113.
Sat steadfast care and lowering discontent.
This struggle of Passions has been imitated by some Moderns: The first of the
French Writers in Tragedy has a fine Occasion for it in the Wife of one of the
Horatij; she was Sister at the same time to the Curiatij; so that you may
imagine, how she must be distracted between the Interest of the two Cities, and
that eminent contest which so particularly involved the two Families: She is
introduced upon that Occasion, speaking to this purpose Albeou ^'ay commence de
respirer le jour,
Albe, mon cher pais, and mon premier amor,
Lors qu' entre-nous and toy je voi la guerre ouverte,
Je crains nostre victoire au^ant que nostre perte.
[Corneille.

:

Alba! my dearest Country! Why could fate
Mark ou^ no other foe for Rome, but Alba?
From our Defeat what Terror must I feel?
And yet -- I dread our Victory. --
There are many things in Virgil's fourth Aeneid, which might be produced on
this Occasion: but it is more to our present Subject to consider that part of
the Odyssey, from which some of its finest strokes are borrowed. Calypso, when
she acquaints our Hero with the design of his departure from her Island; upon
his doubting her sincerity, swears very solemnly, that her Resolutions are
real: the next moment, she falls into a Speech full of Insinuations and
Arguments to detain him: both these speeches may rather be said to be enlivened
and improved, than to be well translated by Mr. Pope; this only would be too
narrow a Commendation of them: -- The first runs thus:

How prone to doubt, how cautious are the wise?
But hear, Oh Earth, and hear, Ye sacred Skies!
And thou, Oh Styx! whose formidable floods
Glide through the shades, and bind the attesting Gods;
No formed design, no meditated end
Lurks in the counsel of thy faithful friend;
Kind the persuasion, and sincere my aim;
The same my practice, were my fate the same.
Heaven has not cursed me with a heart of steel,
B. 5, 246. e', 191.
But given the sense to pity and to feel
One would think now that the Goddess was to do nothing but to advise about his
Voyage, and the Conveniences for it: but her Passions immediately veer about;
and the very next Page, the very next time she speaks, is all in a strain
entirely opposite to what she has been saying in this:

Ulyss^s! (with a sigh she thus began)
O sprung from Gods! in wisdom more than Man!
I^ then thy home the passion of thy heart?
Thus will thou leave me? are we thus to part?
Farewell! and ever joyful may thou be;
Nor break the transport with one thought of me.
But ah Ulysses! were thou given to know
What fate yet dooms thee, yet, to undergo,
B. 5, 265. e', 208.
Thy heart might settle in this scene of ease etc.
I must not forget here, that the fines^ of the modern Italian Poets has
expressed this Melange, on an occasion which is attended with such a
Circumstance, as exceeds any of the other: The particular in which he shows it,
shows at the same time the swiftness of the intervening passion; and expresses
the strongest of any how immediately one flow of Spirits succeeds upon a former
and quite contrar^ emotion. Armida, deserted by her Rinaldo, breaths nothing
but fury and revenge; she pursues him in the heat of the battle; forgetful of
her former passion, she aims an arrow at his heart: but see, while it is yet in
its flight, how the passions vary on her face! her rage and fury soften into
tenderness and apprehensions of his danger! in an instant her Love is too
strong for her Resentment: in an instant, she dreads least her Design should be
effectual, and longs to be disappointed in her aim:

(a) Swift flies the shaft: as swiftly flies her prayer,
That all its vehemence be spent in air.
How finely are the Passions blended in this piece? the Transition from the
extremity of fury to an excess of love, is managed in such a manner, as to be
wholly ^nsensible: as when two Colors are lost ^n the Shades of each other,
the Eye is ^greeably deceived; and we are delight^d with the delicacy of their
Union, ^^o' unable to discover where one com^ences, or the other ends.

In this particular there is not any ^ing that can equal Poetry, or bear to
(...) compared with it, except its sister-^^t of Painting; that might copy
every Lo stral volo; ma con lo strale un voto bito usci, che vada il colpo a
voto. Tasso.
instance, I have mentioned here: And certainly what makes so beautiful a
Figure in the finest Poets, might deserve the imitation of the best Painters.
Was not the Dolon and Calypso of Homer worthy the hand of a Zeuxis or
Parrhasius, a Protogenes or Apelles? Would not the Aruns or Achaemenides of
Virgil have been a fine design even for Raphael and Angelo to have worked upon?
If our Shakespeare can give us the struggle of Passions in the Breast of
Coriolanus, Thornhill might trace the same, and speak them as well with his
Pencil: And if Corneille expresses the contrary desires of the sister of the
Curiatij, his Countryman Le Brun might have had a much finer Subject in the
various Passions of the Sabines, rushing in amidst the two contending Armies;
to prevent those fatal Consequences, in which the Victory of either party must
necessarily involve them.

But what I have often thought of as the finest Subject of this kind, either
for Poetry or Painting, is the first Bru^us on the Judicial seat; just before
the act of giving Sentence on his own Sons^ for their treachery to the
Common-wealth^ What a noble strife was there betwee^ natural Affection, and the
Love of one'^ Country? between Duty, and Desire between common Humanity, and
the Spirit (perhaps the Pride) of a Roman? What a fine Groupe of Figures would
the Suppliants for the Criminals compose in such a Piece? On one side of the
Tribunal, the Wife of the Judge and Mother of the Offenders; and all the
Relations divided in the same manner, between a desire of moving Pity, and an
abhorrence of the very Crime, for the Pardon of which they would intercede: The
People of Rome, on the other side, with looks full of mixed Passions; some
struck with Pity amidst all their severity, some almost condemning and yet
approving at the same time, the rigid justice of the Father; while others
commiserate the Youth of the Sons, and seem incensed at the unnatural
impartiality of the Judge.

It Is a Misfortune, that Virgil's Hand was withheld from launching farther, Aen
6^ 821.
where he has touched upon this Subject: but it would be well made up to us, if
any eminent Person, in the other Art, would undertake it: It might certainly
make a finished Piece: and Painting in this particular would have the advantage
of Poetry; as it could express this Melange of passions directly, and would
strike the mind with them in their proper Union, all at once: whereas, when
taken from the Poetical Picture, the combination is not so easy; and we scarce
ever conceive it, so closely as we ought.

Were you to give me full scope, I should carry the r^semblance between these
Arts much farther than it has ever yet been carried: There is scarce a Figure
or Manner in Poetry which I should not imagine to have its tally in the Schools
of the Painters: I could find it even in the very next point, which comes in my
way, in the Emphatical. Natural Descriptions, as they are Pictures which take
in the various Circumstances of a place or action, give us generally several
Groupes of finished Figures: This, on the contrary, is a way of expressing
Nature in Poetry, not unlike Out-lines and Sketches in Painting: and as the
lines in Sketches are fewer, but the more distinct; this must be always
concise, and very expressive.

There are several masterly strokes of the Emphatical kind in the Odyssey: Such
is that Speech of Telemachus, where he says Prepared I stand. He was but born
to try
B. 3, 119. g', 96, 95.
The lot of Man: To suffer, and to die.


Such is Circe's whole speech B. 10, 387, to 392.
which I repeated to you before, on account of its Pathos. Such, in an high
degree, is the first rencounter of the Hero with that Goddess,

Hence to thy Fellows (Dreadful she began)
B. 10, 382. ch', 321.
Go, be a Beast. -- I heard; and yet was Man.
This Manner is necessary in all Sententious passages, and moral reflections;
it is often strong in expressing the passions: and peculiarly useful in the
Sublime. Take an instance of each, from Mr. Pope.

B. 14, 110. x', 88.
-- Pirates and conquerors, of hardened mind,
The foes of peace, and scourges of mankind,
To whom offending Men are made a prey
When Jove in vengeance gives a land away;
E^'n these, when of their ill-got spoils possessed,
Find sure tormentors in the guilty breast:
Some voice of God close whispering from within,
"Wretch! this is Villainy, and this is Sin."
The reflection upon seeing Agamemnon in Ades, is of this kind.

B. 11, 490. l', 392.
Now all Atrides is an empty shade!
Just after Atrides speaks thus passionately in the account of his own Death,
by the treachery of Aegisthus: B. 11, 512. l', 412.
But not with me the direful Murder ends;
These, These expired! -- Their crime, they were my friends.


In the Sublime, nothing can be higher than the language of his Gods, Neptun^
and Jupiter: B. 13, 177. n', 154.
If such thy Will -- We will it, Jove replies,


This latter is that short full way of Expression, so frequent in Naviget. Aen.
4, 237.
Virgil and (...). (...) 146.
Homer, copied perhaps by both from the admired Example of it in The great Fiat.
Moses, and grown since into an (...). Them. Phal. (...).
Axiom among the Critics. It is the more to be commended in Mr. Pope, because
the turn, ^e gives the Line, is perfectly his own: Indeed in every one of these
instances, as I take it, the Chief of their strength and emphasis, is owing to
the Improvements in the Translation.

Antiphaus could scarce imagine, that these were all clear improvements upon
Homer: He immediately consulted the passages in the Original; and was surpised
to find, how far they fell short of the Translation; especially, in the line^
that answer Circe's threat, and the complaint of Agamemnon. I am pleased (says
he) beyond measure, in consulting these parts of the Poem, to see how much
strength and force there is added to them; have you not observed more instances
of this kind? impart them to me, good Philypsus: It Is no matter for method or
regularity; Give them to me immediately. -- Had I time (answered Philypsus) I
could find out several other places which have all their proper improvements;
at present, I shall refer you to the beginning of Menelaus his speech to
Telemachus in the Fourth Odyssey, Nestor's V. 125, g', 103.
in the Third; and in the Tenth, the speeches between Ulysses and Circe. -- I
was going to point out some passages in the Book 11.
Descent into Hell: but it is difficult to single out particular beauties from
that book; The whole of it is so excellently Translated, and (I believe I may
say) so generally improved.

The mentioning Circe just now, puts me in mind of another passage: It Is where
Homer describes the Metamorphosis of the companions of Ulysses. They had (says
he) the Shape and the Voice of Beasts, (...), 240 (...)
but their Mind remained firm and unaltered: this Mr. Pope improves into the
following lines.

B. 10, 281.
Still cursed with sense, their mind remains alone,
And their own voice affrights them when they groan.
The addition here is very Natural, and full of Beauty; in such changes,
particularities of this kind strike us very much: Virgil touches them on this
Occasion -- Qu^mvis collo timuisset aratrum, E^ s^^pe in laevi quaesisset
cornua front. E^l. 6, 51.
with his usual happiness; and -- Conata queri, mugitus edidit ore,
Pertimui^que sonos, propriaque ex^^rrita voce est. M^t. (...), 638.
Ovid, who has shown a particular talent for such subjects, has left us the
very same thought with this of Mr. Pope.

I remember that Mr. Pope appeared to me, upon my first reading his
Translation, to have improved much upon the Original in his Poetical
Repetitions of the same word, the Figure in which he is most frequent. Thus is
it used in the following lines:

A Scene, where if a God should cast his sight.
B. 5, 96. e', 73.
A God might gaze, and wander with delight.
B. 2, 320. b', 282.
Never, Never wicked man was wise.
B. 2, 356. b', 316.
Here, or in Pyle. -- In Pyle or here, your foe.
And in these other very Pathetical, B. 2, 415. b', 370.
Then stay, my Child! -- Storms beat, and rolls the Main,
Oh beat those Storms, and roll the Seas in vain!


It Is yet more beautiful, when the Repetition holds farther; as in this Passage:

B. 8, 90. the, 92.
Transported with the song, the listening train
Again with loud applause demand the strain:
Again Ulysses veiled his pensive head,
Again unmanned, a shower of Sorrow shed.
This sometimes gives an additional solemnity, and rises stronger and stronger
each Line:

Celestial as thou art, yet stand denied:
O^ swear that oath, by which the Gods are tied,
Swear, in thy soul no latent frauds remain,
B. 10, 410. ch', 343. (...).
Swear, by the vow which never can be vain.
This is sometimes carried yet farther; and in Virgil particularly there is a
fine Instance of this sort of Repetition Saevus amor docuit natorum sanguine
matrem
Commaculare manus; Crudelis tu quoque, matter:
Crudelis matter magis, an puer improbus ille?
Improbus ille puer; crudelis tu quoque, matter.
^^. 8. v. 50.

being doubled.

But in nothing is this figure more beautiful, than in the B. 12. 220. m', 184.
Siren's Song: That Piece of ancient Music, is greatly enlivened in the
Translation; the whole flows on in a peculiar Harmony, and the Chorus is very
happily added in the Conclusion of it: Celestial music warbles from their
tongue,
And thus the sweet deluders tune the song.
O stay, oh Pride of Greece! Ulysses, stay!
O cease thy course, and listen to our lay!
Blessed is the Man ordained our voice to hear,
The song instructs the soul, and charms the ear.
Approach! thy soul shall into raptures rise!
Approach! and learn new wisdom from the wise.
We know whatever the Kings of mighty name
Achieved at Ilion in the field of fame;
Whatever beneath the sun's bright journey lies.
O stay, and learn new wisdom from the wise!


The peculiar justice and propriety of this, is the manner in which these
Goddesses apply to Ulysses; B. 12. 220. m', 184.
by offering him knowledge; a thing the most opposite to their own Complexion;
and a motive, the most likely to obtain upon that Hero. Mr. Pope has shown his
taste, and his judgment, very much in improving so finely upon this
Circumstance: but what runs through the whole, is that musical enlivened turn
of the Verses. This is (b) See Pope's Note on the Place.
the happiness, which of all things I admire in this writer: either in prose,
or verse, he has the finest flow that can be imagined. I have often heard a
very good Critic say, That whenever he is reading any Prose of Mr. Pope 's, he
cannot help thinking that he should never have wrote any thing else: and
whenever he reads his Verses, he is angry with him, for losing any time from
them, for Prose. How often has the same Gentleman applied to this writer those
Lines in Milton, in which he speaks of the first Poet, as well as the first of
Men?

-- Paradise lost. B. 5, 152.
Such prompt Eloquence
Flows from his lips: In Prose or numerous Verse
More tuneable, than needed Lu^e or Harp
To add more sweetness. --
Among so many excellencies, the repeating those Lines, which make the Chorus
of this Song of the Sirens is not the least beautiful Circumstance: there are a
Multitude of other passages, which deserve to be mentioned on account of the
fine Repetitions in them: these are what fell into my thoughts at present; and
you have them in the same scattered manner, that they appear there: But one
method of Improvement in this Translation, I took particular notice of, and in
that, I can be a little more full and distinct.

Mr. Pope has a very great happiness in Transferring Beauties. He often guides
his Translation of Homer by some fine thought, or good expression in any other
eminent writer; and this has been the occasion of several improvements in that
work.

Have you never observed how he introduces the Elegance of Virgil, into the
Majesty of Homer? There are two B. 10, 385.
speeches of Circe, which have much of the air of that of Proteus, in the
fourth Georgick^ and that of the Sybill's in the sixth Aeneid. The speech of B.
11, 130. Aen. 6, 87 etc.
Tiresias is improved, from another of the Sybill; so also is the Prophetical
speech, in the V. 203.
second Odyssey.

There are several Imitations (in a shorter compass) of natural Images, and the
like, introduced into Homer from the same treasury: Thus the following Lines

B. 14, 572.
Down-sunk the Heavy beast.
B. 10, 93. Aen. 3, 206.
Laestrigonia's gates arise distinct in air.
B. 12, 201.
-- The shores like mists arise.
B. 12, 474. Aen. 3, 193.
And all above is Sky and Ocean all around. etc.
Although the Translator adds these fine strokes from other Hands, they are
brought in so naturally, that they seem to spring out of Homer's sentiment: And
if an Instance or two should be found among them which may vary a little from
the Original, it is only to add some apposite Thought, that is not only finer,
but at the same time perfectly agreeable to the Subject. In such cases a
Translator may demand the greater liberty of enlarging: as a Flattering
Resemblance is always allowed to Painters. I like that ^ery ingenious Friend of
yours, who calls ^he French Translation of Tacitus, La ^^lle Infidelle: That
piece, you know, ^ho' not very precise and constant to its ^uthor, is the more
beautiful, and the ^ore engaging.

However it is seldom that Mr. Pope va^es much in these additional Beauties; ^s
Translation is generally faithful, even ^here it improves upon Homer: And he
^eps the chief mark steadily in his Eye, ^o' at the same Time it admits the
side ^ances of Light, from other objects. ^hus you will scarce ever find him
de^ting from his Author in such cases: ^o' this manner of improving him by
^itation from others is vastly frequent; ^d often so plain, that one may trace
it through whole scenes together: In particular, I could almost be positive that
Mr. Pope read over the Eclogues of Virgil, before he set about that Part of the
Story, which lies between Ul^sses and Eumaeus; and indeed I should be apt to
conjecture that he usually read those Pastorals, before he sat down to any
rural Scene in this Piece: If I am mistaken in this, it is the From Virgil B.
14, 76. B. 5, 96. See also B 2, 26. Aen. 3, 627. B. 2, 55. B. 3, 126. B 4^ 509.
B. 6, 197, B. 10, 569. B. 11, 433, 434 etc^
resemblance of their beauties, which has deceived me.

Sometimes we find the Diction beautified by such Resemblances, or the
Sentiment improved from other hands. From the Scripture. B. 1, 483. B. 3, 424
451. B. 4. 145^ 438. B. 5, 288. B 6, 235. B. 10, 591. B. 11^ 239. B. 14, 109.
And frequently in other pl^ces^
Sacred Writings frequently; from parallel places in Iliad. B. 11, 415. (...),
41. etc. Ovid B. 4, 808. B. 10, 282. B. 13, 193. B. 14, 224^ S^neca^ B 5, 573.
Horace. B. 10, ^56, 557. B. 14, 519.
Homer himself: From Ovid, Seneca, Horace, etc. among the Ancients; And from
Dryden. B. ^, 80. B. 11, 531^ etc. Addison. B. 4, 371. B. 11^ 684.
Dryden, Addison, Milton, and several others of the most celebrated Moderns. In
his Speeches, we meet with improvements from the Examples and Rules of the
Orators of old; and many, from our own Dramatick pieces. It would not be
difficult, for a Man of a good Taste, to discern the Air sometimes of Dryden,
sometimes of Shakespeare. B. 9^ 420. B. 10, 410. etc.
Shakespeare, and at others of Otway, among the speeches in the Odyssey. I shall
only point out to you those of Agamemnon, which are so very pathetick, in the Sea Book 11. V. 531. And 537. to 54^.
Eleventh Book: You will easily see that they have a new manner, which
exceedingly resembles the hand of the most moving of all our Tragic Writers,
since Shakespeare.

Antiphaus, upon consulting the passages, immediately perceived the spirit of
O^way in them; He then desired Philypsus to direct him to the other imitations
he had mentioned: at first he did not think they deserved so much commendation;
but when he came to Compare the original Lines from the Odyssey, with those of
Mr. Pope, he was convinced of their (...) B. ^^, 725 And frequently in other
places.
beauty: It delighted him to see, what Foundation the Original gave for such a
turn, and yet how new that turn was in the Translation; he found almost in
every one of them some addition for the better, and scarce in any a deviation
from the sense of Homer: It was Homer's sense, but the Expression of it was
improved. I thank you, (says he turning to Philypsus) I thank you for this
clearer view you have given me of the beauties of this Translation: beside
these last, how many things have you repeated to me that are extremely just,
pure, close, and emphatical? how many perfectly true, and natural? how many
handsomely beautified, and enlivened? what Pictures of Things? what Descriptions
of Actions? and what beautiful Expressions, both of the thoughts, and of the
passions of the soul? in a word, what improvements, in some strokes, upon the
greatest Genius of the World? -- Yes, added Philypsus, upon the greatest Genius
of the World, assisted by the native use of the most Noble, and most Poetical
of all Languages. Then were we to consider the inconveniences on the other
side; the general difficulties of Translation^ and the difficulty o^ this in
particular: How hard is it for ^ Poet to keep up his spirit and flame in
another's Work? and how natural to ^lag in representing Thoughts not our own?
To maintain the vigor of Language and the poetic warmth thorough so long a
work, and to express the Soul of Homer, what a Genius does it require? what
Spirit would not sink under so large an undertaking? Yet does Mr. Pope hitherto
sustain his Character in an handsome equal manner: and we may safely promise
ourselves the same of the remaining part of this work: As he entered upon this
stage with the greatest expectations of all Men, I doubt not but he will leave
it with an Universal Plaudite.

But however great and handsome his performance is in the whole, I own with you
that it has its faults, the common marks of Humanity: Yes, my Antiphaus, you
convinced me the former Evening, that it is unavoidable for the greatest Genius
not to fail sometimes. For my ^art (says Antiphaus,) I shall make no Apologies
for the freedoms with which I then used this excellent writer: Any thing of
that kind might look odd to you from one, whose constant Sentiment you ^now to
be this; that the kindest way of ^^mmending a writer, is to find fault with ^im
now and then, at proper intervals. ^oes not this evince an Impartiality in your
views, and add an air of Sincerity and Justice to those Commendations, which
you give him? Your Critics, who extol a Man Universally, and will not be
satisfied with any thing under a ^er^ect Character, without any the least
defect, are a kind of Romantic Critics; they are rather making an Hero, than
describing a Man: They give you a Picture of something, which exists no where
but in their own Minds: and a complete Poet, according to their representations
of such, will after all be only (what the Earl of Mulgrave calls it;) A
^aultl^ss Monster which the world never saw.


Very true, says Philypsus; that sort of Critics ^ail as much on one hand, as
^u^ more Modern Critics have excee^ed usually on the other: Indeed the former
err on the good-natured side; yet both of them are very much to blame: For as
it shows a mischievous sort of Frenz^ to start errors, where there are really
none^ so an Obstinacy not to see ^aults, where they are very evident, requires
either a good degree of Ignorance, or a most inveterate Fondness.

I am entirely of your opinion, says Antiphaus, and since I find you in such a
temper for it, I could almost of^er to show you some farther remarks on that
side of the Question, -- Have you any other then? (says Philypsus.) A Few,
answered Antiphaus; but I beg one Evening more on this Topic. At present I
shall only add my wishes, that we may constantly use thisfair method, in
reading all the celebrated Pieces, which come out among us: Let us keep up the
true balance; and not suffer ourselves to be prejudiced either by too great
fondness, or too violent dislike. This is the great Rule of Ancient Criticism:
Always to keep our Hearts open to the beauties of a Poem; and never to shut our
Eyes against the defects of it.

An ESSAY etc.
EVENING the THIRD.
ALMOST all the next day Philypsus was taken up in reflecting on what had been
said at the close of their last meeting: he began to be not so uneasy, as
usual, in thinking that the faults of a favorite Poet were to be looked into
that Evening; he did not value Mr. Pope less than formerly, but he was
thoroughly convinced that there was not so much of severity in this Method, as
he had once imagined. "No: (says h^ to himself) Let us view impartially, that
we may rationally admire: Where before I was immediately in love with his
^eauties and fond of the Work, I now feel an equal Pleasure and an equal
Esteem; but it is in a different manner: I now seem to see the causes that move
me to be pleased with those fine Passages, and feel a more just and manly
Satisfaction in them: It Is true, the Soul is not hurried away with that
vehemence of delight, as formerly; but the agreeable Sense I now have from
them, is both more refined, and more lasting. How much is this rational way of
admiring to be preferred to the common, vulgar passionate one? This is as a
flash of Lightning; but the other is like the Light of the Day: It Is a serene,
dif^us'd, steady light, which at the same time that it discovers all Objects to
us, is it self the most beautiful of any.

But then (continued he) how blind was I to the defects of this Poet. Has not
Antiphaus shown me several, which before I had no sense of, and which now
appear evidently to be such? Indeed that oversight was more excusable in
reading the Works of this celebrated Writer, than it would have been in any
other: Reason may well lose something of her Liberty, when she is taken up with
an Object every way so agreeable and engaging: However, for the future, I
resolve to keep my self obstinately from being over-pleas'd with any thing; and
to read his, as all other the best Pieces, in spite of all their Beauty, by
that Rule which Antiphaus has laid down.

With these Thoughts he opened the Translation which lay on his desk; and was
very busy in considering it, when Company came in, and interrupted him for that
Night: The next Day he employed himself in the same manner; This sort of view
was new to him, and of course the more agreeable: Sometimes he met with a line
or two, that disgusted him a little; but much more frequently was he struck
with the Beauties of the Poem; and those he enjoyed with a full Delight, as he
found that Delight to be rational and just. This search drew him on strangely;
he did not know how to leave off: And though Antiphaus stayed for the Evening
before he would disturb him, he found him still closely employed at it: "My
Philypsus, (says he) I Am glad to see you engaged thus in the Odyssey: What new
light shall we have into the excellencies of this writer? Have not you been
collecting other Beauties out of the Translation? -- I have met with several
other, replied Philypsus: So many indeed, that it would be almost endless to
collect them. But to tell you the Truth, my business was quite contrary to what
you imagine: I was upon a more difficult task; I was endeavoring to try what
Faults I could discover in it. That is by much the more difficult, says
Antiphaus: The few Faults of that Piece are scarce discernible among such a
superior number of Beauties: How seldom do we perceive the disagreeableness of
a single feature, in a Face that is very taking in the whole? Well; but have
you been able to overcome this Difficulty? can you discover any thing farther
of this kind in the Odyssey? Very little, answered Philypsus: There is but one
point yet, that has afforded me any number of Instances; And that is a Fault,
directly opposite to what you particularly insisted upon, in our first
Conversation on this Subject.

It was then, you know, that we considered several Points in which Mr. Pope
appears to Elevate and Flourish too much: Have you never observed, on the
contrary, that there are a few Lownesses in his Writings; and that he sometimes
sinks into a Diction, which borders on the Mean and Vulgar? I have, replied
Antiphaus, in some few lines: but if you have made any remarks of that kind, I
beg rather to see those of your observation.

The two Friends were always ready to comply with the desires of each other^
Philypsus, as usual, without prefacing or debating the matter, immediately
showed him the following Lines.

B. 10, 259. ch', 225.
A Gallant leader and -- a man I loved.
B^ 3, 523. g', 40^^
The old man early rose, walked forth, and sat
On polished stone before his palace gate.
B. 11, 258. l', 212.
Or has Hell's Queen an empty image sent,
That wretched I might even my joys lament.
B. 10, 588 ch', 496.
Struck at the word my very heart was dead.
B. 2, 393. b', 345.
Euryclea, who great Ops thy lineage shared,
And watched all Night, all Day: a faithful guard.
B. 14, 392. x', 359.
They led me to a good Man and a wi^e.
B. 3, 25. g', 20.
And sure he will, for wisdom never lies.
In the note upon this line (says Philypsus) we have a couplet repeated from
the Iliad, which I fear is of the same stamp.

Iliad 9. 412. in 313.
Who dares think one thing and another ^ell,
My soul detests him as the gates of Hell.
I must confess, says Antiphaus, that the Lines you have repeated, carry a mean
ai^ with them; but possibly what looks like a fault, may really be a beauty in
some of them.

Some subjects require a simplicity of style: Beside Mr. Pope is to follow
Homer; and should Homer use an humble style in these places, even to appearance
improperly, yet one should be apt to look upon it, as a sufficient
justification of his translator.

For my part (replied Philypsus) I have always thought, that there is a wide
difference between an humble and a mean style; but (not to urge any thing of
that kind) in the greater part of the instances just repeated, I am certain,
there is not a sufficient likeness between the manner of the Original and the
Translation.

I shall only except the two last, which ^re indeed plain and proverbial in the
^reek. There is a simplicity, as Mr. P^pe tells us in his notes, a noble
simpli^ity in the diction; and which, in my ^pinion, is not Equally kept up in
the English: but those I shall not insist upon.

As for the rest, that mean close of the ^^rst of these Lines, is in Homer an
-- (...).
Handsome sentiment, delivered in a sounding verse: and the meanest Expression
in the second, -- (...), 405.
is poetical in the Original. The same will hold, in some degree, of the other
Lines. As it happens Mr. Pope in his B^ 14. Observation XVIII.
Note upon one of them, They led me to a good Man and a wi^e;
has given us this prose translation of the same words; The Gods guided me to
the habitation of a person of wisdom:


Now it might be thought a rude question, to ask whether is the more poetical,
his prose or verse Translation of this Line?

Indeed where Homer leads the way, the case is very different: I cannot say how
far it might be justifiable, to blame a Translator for following his Author:
and it was for that very reason, that I should not have taken any notice of the
delightful History of the Coat and Cloak, which is given us in one of the
longest speeches in the Fourteenth Odyssey.

But we have several instances of additional Lownesses: I observed particularly
that they were pretty frequent, when the Scene is in Ithaca: Thus; His task it
was the wheaten loaves to lay,
B. 14, 507 x', 455.
And from the banquet take the bowls away.


Again; But if, to honor lost, it is still decreed
B. 1, 482. a', 378.
For you my bowl shall flow, my flocks shall bleed.


Again; B 2, 347. b', 310.
Is this, returns the Prince, for mirth a time?
When lawless gluttons riot, mirth's a crime. etc.


The meanness here (interposed Antiphaus) is occasioned by a just design; that
of writing in a style, agreeable to the simplicity of the subject: In several
other places, it has a less excusable rise; I mean, the labor and difficulty
of Rhyme. The Poet's being in haste to get this drudgery off his Hands,
sometimes draws him into the use of Expressions, which are flat and
contemptible. Thus I believe, we may account for the Lownesses in these
Couplets:

While with my single ship adventurous ^,
B. 9, 202. in, 174.
Go forth the manners of yon Men to try.
Meanwhile the Gods the dome of Vulcan throng;
B. 8, 362. the, 322.
Apollo comes, and Neptune comes along.
-- When great Alcides rose^
B. 8, 256. the, 225. (...)^
And Euritus, who bad the Gods be fo^^^
You need only read over one single passage, to guess how frequently the sense
may be lessened and broke by this means; and how often we are put off with low,
wretched words, merely for want of a more generous Rhyme.

You remember the Speech of Ulysses, when ship-wrack'd in his voyage from
Calypso's Island; it is transferred, you know, by Virgil into his storm; and both
are very strong, and animated. This is the passage which I beg lea^e to read to
you from Mr. Pope:

Happy! thrice happy! who in battle slain
Pressed in Atrides' cause the Trojan plain:
Oh! had I died before that w^ll-fought wall,
Had some distinguished day renowned my fall;
(Such as was that, when showers of j^v'lins -- fl^d
From conquering Troy around Achill^s -- d^ad)
All Greece had paid my solemn fun'rals -- th^n,
And spread my glory with the sons of men.
A shameful fate now hides my h^pl^ss head,
Un-wept, un-noted, and -- for ever dead.
A mighty wave, rushed over him as he spoke,
The raft it covered, and the mast it broke;
Sw^pt from the deck^ and from the rudder torn,
Far on the swelling surge the chief was born:
While by the howling tempest rent in twain,
Flew sail and sail-yards rattling over the main.
Long pressed he heaved beneath the weighty wav^,
Clogged by the cumbrous vest Cal^pso gave;
A^ length emerging, from his nostrils wide
And gushing mouth, effus'd the briny tide. etc.
The meanness of this passage, in comparison either of the original Greek, or
of Virgil's imitation of it (which the English Translator, I doubt not, had in
his eye) appears to be in a great measure owing to a poverty of Rhyme. It has
given a low turn to the whole passage; and that lowness is still most evident
in the terminating of the Lines.

There are a Thousand other things (resumed Philypsus) which contribute to the
meanness of style; even a desire to avoid it, will occasion it: It Is not
uncommonly seen that the straining to elevate a point, will make it really the
more mean and ridiculous: as nothing shows the littleness of a dwarf, more than
strut^^ng.

One would be apt to suspect this to be the case in the following verses: B.
11, 727. l', 588
There fi^s Sky-dy'd, a pu^ple hue disclose --
There d^^gling pears exalted scents unfold^
And y^llow apples ripen into gold.


And in these other: B. 1, 190. a', 144. (...). --
Lured with the vapor of the fragrant feast
(...) rushed the suitors with vor^cious h^ste


Sometimes one single word will lessen the sentiment, and break in upon the
dignity of verse. Thus where the Greek call's Memnon, The glorious Son of
Aurora, we find it in the Translation only B 4, 256. (...), 188.
Swarthy Memnon. This, by sinking below the Original: it may be as faulty, to
stick too close to it. B 14, Note 1.
Hogherd and Cow^eeper, (says Mr. Pope in one of his Notes) are not to be used
in our Poetry, though there are no finer words, than those which answer them, in
the Greek language: for the same reason I should think that the use of the word
B. 10, 277. 338. 459 etc.
S^y, which occurs so often in the Tenth Book, might be varied; and in the
Sixth,

B. 6, 370. z', 306.
^

In general, what do you think B. 3, 221. g', 180.
of Scudding before the gales to Pylos? of a B. 3, 252.
sore Soul? and of B. 3^ 17. g', 12.
Sacrificing throngs? are not these Expressions to, low for verse? and is it
not too low and rustic even for prose, to talk of the B. 5, 296.
swelling loins of a Goddess, or of a Nymph's Ibid. 192.
pacing along the Sand?

Your Instances, replied Antiphaus, sufficiently show, that (beside the
inconvenience of Rhyme) Mr. Pope does sometimes, without that wrong Biass,
deviate into a meanness of Expression: They are directly contrary to his usual
Spirit. There is a case (says Philypsus) just come into my Head, which ought
not to be forgot; we may see by it, on the other hand, how much this Gentleman
can improve upon expressions in the Original, beyond the other translators of
Homer. That venerable old Poet uses a phrase which, though I do not believe it to
have been mean in his times, does most certainly sound so in the present: In
speaking of a Person entirely lost in melancholy, he says that he was
continually (...). Il. (...), 202.
eating up his own Mind: So great a Man, as Cicero, has endeavored to give
this in Ipse suum cor edens. T^sc. Quaest. lib. 3.
Latin; but with that usual unhappiness, which attended him in all his Poetry.
In another part of Homer, we have the same manner of Expression; and it is as
meanly translated by several Hands. The Passage is a part of Ju^iter's Speech
to Juno; in which, to set out the violence of her hatred to Priam and his
family, the God says, that she would (...) Il. d', 35.
eat them, or swallow them up quick. Actius Labeo, a wretched though a Court
writer, translated several Books of the Iliad into Latin; and if we may guess
at the rest, by the only Verse left us of that Work (which, as it happens,
answers this very Line) we have no great Reason to lament the loss of it: This
an old Scholiast has preserved, for a taste of the Performance:

Crudum manduces Priamum, Priamique pisinnos.
Labeo, as Mr. Pope observes in his Note upon the Il. B. 4, 56.
place, is equaled by Ogilby;

Both King and People thou woudst eat alive:
As is Ogilby by Hobbs;

And eat up Priam and his people all.
Such a general meanness in giving us this Expression of the Greek Poet, must
make us look upon Mr. Pope with the greater regard, if he can keep it from
sinking in English: This he has not only done, but gives it to us in an
handsome poetical turn:

Let Priam bleed! if yet thou thirst for more,
Il. B. 4, 56.
Bleed all his sons, and Ilion float with gore!
This expresses the full sentiment; and that, with an air of greatness, and
majesty in it: It Is now Language not unfit to be put into the mouth of Jupiter.

Antiphaus was extremely pleased to see so great a change in Philypsus; and
that (sudden as it was) it had not affected him in the usual manner. As Men
generally run from one extreme to the other, he was afraid, that the making him
sensible of the Faults of the Translator, might give him some distaste to his
beauties: but as he found he was fallen into the Indifferent just manner of
Reading, he thought he might now safely go on with him farther in the same way.
"The defect (says he) which you have proved in some particulars on Mr. Pope, is
sufficiently recompensed by his Flame and Spirit, and the general beauty of his
diction: It Is from this Quarter that I am still the most apprehensive of
Faults, in that Gentleman's compositions. Surely, says Philypsus, you have
nothing more to produce on that head? Yes (replied Antiphaus) I have a word or
two to add, to what we observed upon it, the other Night. There are a sort of
Verses, very frequent in our modern writers, which run very smoothly off the
Tongue; the stream is easy, but there is neither depth nor clearness in it: The
truth of it is, they are undisturbed with Meaning; And their calmness is as the
calmness of the Night, which is dark withal. If I might have leave, I should
call such verses as these, Un-ideal Verses; and I fear there are some few of
them to be met with in the Odyssey.

Pray observe what an unthinking harmony there is in this couplet, which comes
first into my Head; B. 6, 284. z', 236.
Soft he reclines along the murmuring Seas,
Inhaling freshness from the fanning breeze.


And what a Panegyric in this? -- Every Eye
B. 8, 18. (...), 17.
Gazed as before some brother of the sky.


I will read you but a few more: B. 2, 378. b, 336.
The Royal Palace to the Queen convey.


And B. 13, 442. n', 386.
-- Plan with all thy arts the scene of fate^


B. 4, 708.
Of deathful arts expert, his Lord employs
The ministers of blood in dark surprise.
But among all of them, upon comparing the Original and the Translation, this
seems to be the non-pareil: B. 4, 104 d', 85. (...).
Then warp my voyage on the Southern gales
Over the warm Lybian wave to spread my sails.


Mr. Pope has had a Critique on some Lines of his Iliad, which is chiefly taken
up in discovering, or making False English of them: If this can neither darken
the Line, nor affect the Sense considerably, it seems to me not to be of any
concern in Comparison of the former finesses. The ancient Critics were much
kinder on this head: and it is hence that we owe many of our Figures in
Rhetoric, to Peccadillo's against Grammar. I am the most unfit in the World to
determine in this Case, because I have always found my self (...) aver^e to the
Grammatical ^ort of Criticism, as I am fond of the Poetical: but I am apt to
think, that there are not many faults of this kind justly chargeable on the
Odyssey. Of the few which I have by chance observed, the chief are to be met
with in the close of his verses; Thus it occurrs, if I remember right, twice or
thrice in that short passage, which I re^eated to you the other Evening, on the
Transformation of Ulysses. This Rhyme Philypsus, is a terrible Thing: it has
^poil'd more Lines -- Good Antiphaus (cried Philypsus hastily) be not so
inveterate against Rhyme: does not it soften and beautify verse? and turn
poetry into a sort of music, to a good Ear? -- I am not Universally an Enemy
to Rhyme, you know; (returned Antiphaus) It does very well in Odes and Sonnets
to Armida: But for any thing very solid or pathetick, surely it is an Ornament
too comtemptible, as well as too much abused. The first Piece of Latin Rhyme I
know of, that famous Stanza of Adrian, does well enough; 'twas spoke out of
pure Gaiety and good Humor: but to introduce it gravely into poetry, as it was
the effect of a miserable de^rav'd taste^ so will the productions of those Ages
show how happily it succeeded. The Runick Lays (answered Philypsus) I do not
pretend to admire: but surely you will allow it to have succeeded better in our
Language, than it did in the hands of that monkish Cla^ of Poets. It Is true
(says Antiphaus smiling) we have not improved it yet into middle Rhimes, and
some other of their excellencies. Perhaps it would have bee^ happy too for our
Poetry, if we had confined this Music, as you call it, to it^ proper subjects.
How wretchedly doe^ it sound in some of our Tragedies? i^ such, all the Actors
to me seem rathe^ to be playing at Crambo with one another, than endeavoring
in the least to affect the Audience. With all the violence that Mr. Dryden
wrote in this cause, you ^ee he was forced to recant at last; The ^only true
reason of his persisting in it at ^ll is, I believe, very obvious, though the
^as^ he would have given us: It was then ^he Humor of the Age; Dryden, every
^ne knows, wrote for Money; and his ^usiness was to please his Customers.

And now I have mentioned Mr. Dryden, (...) may be worth the enquiry, to
consider (...) little more particularly, what that ^riter has said on this
subject; as he must (...) allowed, on all hands, to have been ^e of the nicest
Judges of Harmony, one (...) the greatest Masters of Versification, ^d one of
the best Poetical Critics in ^neral, that our Nation has ever pro^ced.

In reading what he has given us, in ^fferent places, on this head, it is easy
(...) ^ee, that he very much observes a ^^erence between Rhyme, in the genuine
^^e of the word, by which he always ^ends the true Harmony of Verse; (...)
Rhyme, in the lowest sense; or that ^gle, and playing with sounds, in which
(...) Moderns have exceeded all the other (...) of the World; and which indeed,
since the last revival of Letters, has bad fair for the Universal Monarchy in
Poetry.

Though Dryden understood Rhyme in the first sense, as well as most Writers, and
yet generally stooped to the use of it in the other: Nevertheless I am inclined
to believe, that he always saw thorough the Defects and Inconveniences, not to
say the Barbarity and Childishness, of it. Indeed one might be justified in
saying even this; for Dryden himself follows Vossius in calling it expressly,
Preface to V^rgil's Pastorals, p. 95.
A Childish sort of verse; and says that some Rhiming Hexameters, which may be
discovered in Homer, were probably the remains of a Barbarous Age: Virgil (add^
that writer) had them in such abhorrence, that he would rather make ^ false
Syntax, that what we call a Rhyme -- The nicer Ears in Augustus his Cour^ could
not pardon him for a Line, i^ which he had only dropped something like it: so
that the principal Ornament of Modern Poetry, was accounted deformity, by the
Latins, and Gree^

After observing that the Greek tongu^ falls naturally into Iambicks, and the
Latin into Heroic verse, he calls all o^ little arts of Rhiming, Barbarities:
An^ adds, that As Age brings Men back i^to the state and infirmities of
Childhood; upon the fall of their Empire, the Romans doted into Rhyme.

What you have now read to me (interposed Philypsus) shows sufficiently, that
Mr. Dryden could give up an old Friend, and abuse him heartily behind his back;
That writer could speak the severest things of Rhyme, when he was got into a
vein of Prose-writing: But the present ill treatment he gives to it, may
perhaps be on some particular Occasion; and in some Cases, I cannot deny that
Rhyme may be a very improper Ornament.

No (returned Antiphaus) he is here speaking of Rhyme in general, and on a
general occasion: If you would know his sentiments of Rhyme, more particularly
in relation to the present purpose, and its use in translating an Heroic Po^m;
as it happens, there is a remarkable ^assage, wrote by him on this very
occasion: it was in his more advanced Judgment; and particularly, as he himself
informs us, when he was in his great Climaterick. He is speaking of Han^^al
Caro's Translation of the Aeneid: The performance, Dedication to his Aeneid. p.
417.
says he, is very mean, though that Poet took the advantage of writing in
Blank-verse, and freed himself from the shackles of Modern Rhyme. I will not
make a digression here (proceeds that Writer) though I am strangely tempted to
it; but will only say, that he who can write well in Rhyme, may write better in
Blank-verse. Rhyme is certainly a constraint even to the best Poets, and those
who make it with most ease: -- What it adds to Sweetness, it takes away from
sense; and he who loses the least by it, may be called a Gainer. It often makes
us swerve from an Author's meaning: as if a mark be set up for an Archer at a
great distance, let him aim as exactly as he can, the least Wind will take his
Arrow, and divert it from the White.

Thus far Mr. Dryden. And his opinion weighs the more with me in this case;
because, if any thing, we might expect that he should be prejudiced in favor
of Rhyme, but the reason of the thing, You see, prevailed over all other
considerations: He goes sofar as to condemn his own manner of Writing, rather
than suffer such a corruption to pass without a severe Censure; and to that
end, very generously gives up his Practice, to his Judgment.

Indeed I know of but one argument (and that the meerest Circle in the World)
to support the present practice of writing in rhyme; we must use it, because
it is all the fashion. We who were never so far infected, can laugh heartily at
some of the French, for rhiming thoroughout their Comedies; yet Rhyme in
Tragedy was very becoming among us, in an Age, not the least knowing and
polite. Disuse has made us see the flatness and inconvenience of that Ornament;
and nothing reads more insipid, than the best Pieces left us in that way. Tell
me Philypsus; why do we so much dislike those Beauties of their kind in our Age?

I believe, says Philypsus, it is as you observe. Now the taste is altered, and
the sashion worn off; we can look back, and perceive with ease the prejudice of
that beauty; where the End is to stir up the Soul, by true representations of
Nature: To raise La Tragedy roulat sur deux passions: ^cavoir la terreur que
doivent donner les suites ^^nestes du vice; and la compassion, qu' inspire la
^ertu persecutee and patiente Arch^ev. de Cam^ay. Sur l'Eloquence. Dial. 1.
Terror or Compas^^n, is the business of the tragic Poet; and ^o endeavor to
raise either with Rhyme and all its Harmony, seems to me more proper for an
Italian Opera, than an English Tragedy.

Very true, says Antiphaus; and do ^ou not judge it as absurd, where any other
Passions are to be moved, as well as Terror and Compassion? -- Undoubtedly,
replied Philypsus. -- And is it not the business of the Epick, to awake the
S^ul? to raise in it an esteem for Vir^ue, and an hatred to Vice? in a Word, to
move the Passions, particularly those very Passions you have mentioned? Why
then is Rhyme, which you disallow in Trag^dy, to be thought useful and
com^^^dable in the Epick? -- As for mo^^ng the Passions (says Philypsus) Rhyme,
I ^llow y^u, is of no use in either; bu^ it is a fine Ornament, which may b^
more proper in the one, than in the other: In Dramatick Pieces the Persons
should be supposed to speak extempore but there can be no such thing conceived
in an Epick Poem -- I beg your Pardon (says Antiphaus) Though not so strongly^
yet this is often supposed in an Epick^ as well as in Tragedy: Do you thin^
that Homer is telling you a story, o^ Ul^sses, when we are got into Phaaci^ In
the 2 d Aeneid, have you not sever^ intermediate Ideas, which agree not wit^ a
Reader, but a Spectator? -- Yes, Sir; in all active Poems, as well as Tragedy,
The Author is to disappear, as much as possible: the greatest Art of them is to
deceive us into an imagination, that we hear the very Persons speaking, and see
them acting before us. In ipsis Omnia ^unt oculis. Every Poem the nearer it
comes to this, the more perfect it is. Consider too, how much of any good Epick
piece is purely Dramatick: it is ^carce to be imagined, for Instance, how ^mall
a number of Lines in the Aeneid are properly Virgil's: they almost all belong
to the Persons engaged in the Poem; and where the Lines are spoke, we see the
attitudes and behavior of the particular Persons, and receive the words from
their Mouth.

Much of what you urge is true; (answered Philypsus:) but yet you must allow,
that Rhyme sounds unnatural in Tragedy, and agreeable in pieces of the other
kind. That is, as we were just ^aying, (replied Antiphaus) because in these
it is at present all the Mode: let the fashion alter, and this beauty will ^ook
as false in one, as it has already in ^he other. This Italian Taste of your
Tasso's and Ariosto's led away the first Poet of our Nation, who attempted any
thing toward an Epick; and probably we should to this Day have thought it the
only proper for our Language, had it not happily been disdained by the great
Genius of Milton, who chose rather to follow the true old Roman manner. It was
Milton who flung off our Fetters; and we may venture to say in the prophetical
manner of a very good Poet now living, that Mr. Watts's Horae Lyr. Pref. p. 31.
He shall for ever be honored as our deliverer from that bondage. What a pity
it is, he did not suffer us still to continue in it, since we are so fond of
our Chains? How happy would it have been, to have given up the Nervousness and
Majesty of his Poem, for Pryor's Ease, or the Sweetness of Waller? I know not
what they world may say to it; but, for my part, when I read in the Bishop of
Sarum's History That Paradise Lost is a noble Piece Bishop Burnet's History of
his own Times. p. 163^ (b) See the Spect^tor. V. 1. Numb. 60.
tho the Author affected to write it in blank verse it always puts me in mind
of the Gentleman, in the monkish Ages of Poetry who said of Virgil's Aeneid,
that it wa^ really a very good Poem; and wanted nothing, but the (c) Sweets of
Rhyme, to mak^ it, the most perfect Work in its kind.

Well, (says Philypsus) I own, there is the greater majesty in Blank verse; but
you will own too, that the other is the more beautiful. Yes, (replied
Antiphaus) but for that very reason is Blank-verse undoubtedly the more proper
for the Epick; as that is the most majestic kind of Poetry imaginable. And
even as to the Sound, Those musical returns (if allowed to be true Beauties)
are more than balanced by the Dead Manner, introduced with them into Poetry;
What I mean, is that perpetual likeness in the cadence, and turn of the
Periods: How frequently do they fall in several repeated Couplets, without any
variety, or relief to the Ear? You will sometimes meet with a Rhime-Poem, all
the Lines of which run off entirely with the same pauses; the stream always
equal, and so level that you can scarce perceive it to move: What do you think
of each Couplet, chiming on in the same stops and measure, with the most
tedious uniformity of sound imaginable? -- That is the fault of the Poet, not
of the use of Rhyme, says Philypsus: I could name you ^ Poem of this kind,
which has almost ^s great a variety in the Periods, as any Piece in
Blank-verse. Possibly you mean a piece with Mr. Oldisworth's Name to it, (says
Antiphaus) which I have heard you commend particularly on that score. It Is true
our Poets of late have endeavored to diversify the sound, as much as possible:
We see great improvements of this kind, in the excellent Translator of Vida's
Poeticks; and several in the most nervous and vigorous of all our Translators,
both in his Manilius and Lucretius: Mr. Pope seems to have thought of this much
more frequently in his Odyssey, than in the former Translation of the Iliad;
and gives us an admirable Od. B. 14; Observe. 2.
Observation upon it, toward the conclusion of his last work. But after all,
let our Poets manage the cadence and structure in Rhime-verse never so
artfully, it will fall vastly short of Blank in these particulars; Indeed Rhyme
is a natural Enemy to them: it breaks and disturbs both the structure, and the
cadence. The very sound of any periods the best contrived will convince one o^
this: when a person of a good Ear is reading them, you may observe, that he
endeavors to drop the Rhyme, and lose the gingle of it, as much as possible:
and when the sound of it is not sufficiently kept under; you will find, that it
spoils the continuance, and occasions too great a break in the period.

You may see by what I have been saying, that this charge is not designed
against single Couplets; The corruption in this respect evidently ceases, where
there are no periods to be varied. To determine precisely where it will grow
prejudicial, would be difficult, and is not very material: Though I know not but
what it might be uneasy to a very nice Ear, to have only four Lines together
with regular Rhyme: and possibly on this very account, the Stanza but of two
Couplets has generally unequal Rhimes, (the Second Line answering the Fourth)
and that of Three, varies in the last Couplet. However forced or delicate this
observation may be thought, one thing I could assert with some degree of
Confidence: I dare say, any one of a good Ear, who reads only ten Lines of the
best Rhime-Versification, and an equal number of Milton's true harmonious
Verses, upon this view; will find a nobler sound, and that variety (which is
necessary to the beauty of periods, and to the pleasure of a Reader) much
stronger and much ^uller in the latter.

What has been said of Couplets, may in a great Measure be said of Odes, which
consist of proper Stanzas: As these come next to Couplets for shortness, they
have scarce room, singly, for the tedious Uniformity, we have been complaining
of: and unless the Ode be long, they do not produce it by their Number. There
may be a variety too of singular use in this sort of Poetry, where a person can
run these Stanzas artfully into one another; if the interweaving of them be not
so frequen^ and equal, as to bring in that very Satiety we would avoid. Thus
qualified Rhyme is, at least, very tolerable in Odes: And even in Pindaricks,
the most extensive and lofty of any, the prejudice of it is not so pressing;
There is so great a Liberty (I mean, in our modern Pindaricks) of varying the
Numbers, and of fixing or deferring the Rhyme at pleasure. But above all, in
single Couplets, Rhyme is most allowable; and in them indeed, I should think,
it deserves the preference to Blank-verse: it may please the Ear more, and
cannot do that mischief, for which it is chiefly to be avoided in all large
Pieces, and all compositions of a nobler sort. In this respect, i^ is with
Poetry, as it is in Building: A Pile composed of Stones, cut just alike all
equal and uniform; and disposed alike, without any thing either great or
beautiful in the whole; will yield to one of a good design, formed of materials
various and unequal, and perhaps ruder, or less exactly polished: At the same
^ime, the particulars of which it is made taken singly, will evidently exceed
the others. Thus we find, in a walk of Trees, that the two Opposites, when cut
to ^nswer each other, look better, than if ^hey were in disagreeing Figures;
but a Wood, or a Garden full of Trees, all ^ one Figure, would be rather
displea^ng to the Eye than otherwise: In the ^^o similar Figures, we should
have a ^easing Uniformity; but in this large ^peated view of the same thing, we
^ou'd lose that Variety, which a late ^ry ingenious Writer has shown to be
^eparable from the Idea of Beauty; and which the mind seems to require the ^re,
as the number of Objects is en^eas'd.

It is a known Rule in versification, ^t the Second Rhyme ought not to re^ble
the sound of those in a preceding ^uplet. When it is carried to the far^st, it
will not bear beyond the Third ^e; and even that is run generally in^an
Alexandrine, that in some degree the turn of the Period and the Numbers may be
varied. Now why should it not be as disagreeable to have a perpetual uniformity
of Periods, as a continued likeness of Rhyme? The latter no Man in the World
will allow to be proper: nay, it could not be born with, only for three
Couplets together.

But supposing Rhyme a real beauty in Poems of an higher kind, which I am
persuaded it is not; (to speak nothing of its uniform returns, and the havoc
which it makes in the Periods; nor even of the diversion it gives the thoughts
of the Reader, and its general disservice to pieces that should be solid and
pathetick: to omit all this) the single reason which introduced this question
is, as I take it, sufficient to determine it. If Rhyme is exceedingly apt to
mislead a Writer, often to cramp, and sometimes to spoil his sentiments; its
benefits, as being only benefits of Sound, will be far from ballancing those
inconveniences of so much superior a nature. This at least is the Case with
Rhyme: it gives either an impertinent pleasure, or an unnecessary trouble to a
writer; and at the same time, that it distracts his attention^ it increases his
difficulties: in a word^ it is a false bent put upon the thoughts of the Poet;
and, in the best, proves frequently a counter-biass too strong for their good
Sense.

I own, it is with a strange readiness, that people fall generally into this
taste; it has almost universal consent on its side: and the few Asserters of
the Liberty of Verse meet with little Praise, or even Countenance, from the
World. How many Persons would fly into unreasonable Heats upon hearing half
that I have said to you? I should beg the favor of any such Person, who would
please to be disobliged in it, to ask himself what argument there is for this
practice, which has so generally obtained in the modern World: If he can find
none, it is easy to bring the matter more home, and to ask farther, whether he
thinks Rhyme would be proper in the Odyssey or Aeneid; and then, what single
reason can be assigned, why it should be improper in a Latin or Greek, and not
so in an English Epick. -- Yes, Philypsus, I am persuaded it is nothing but
use, which makes it supportable at present; and whenever the world recovers it
self from this agreeable Stupor, it will then appear as ridiculous to the
Reader, as it has been inconvenient to the Poet. This I really imagine, that in
fu^ure, and perhaps far distant Ages, the Critics, when they look back on any
the best Poem of this sort, (which may be delivered down to them from their
Ancestors) will be at a loss to give any account of their Manner of Writing.
When they read Mr. Pope's Iliad or Odyssey, they will often applaud the
greatness of his thoughts; and often admire the happiness of his diction, as
far as the present Language shall be preserved to them. They will honor his
remains, and when they look toward his Ashes with veneration, There (will they
say) lies the Great Man, who in ancient Days, is said to have shown the noblest
Genius to Poetry in the World: what beauties do we discover in him, through all
this rust of time, and so much obsolete language? He is every way to be
commended as far as any of our ancient Poets are; Only he fell into the common
fault of those Ages; and always shows that trifling labor of making the last
syllable of every alternate line, sound like the close of the foregoing: Bating
this insignifican^ tas^e of those times, how much is he to be praised, and how
much to be admired?

It would have been much better, and much more for their honor, for Mr. Dryden
in his time, or Mr. Pope in ours, to have broke thorough this tedious Slavery;
and to have ^reed the World from a taste so irrational, and barbarous. -- I own
it to you; I have something of an Impatience in me to see this great
Reformation in Poetry set on foot: I wish it could be brought about in our
Time: and if not, almost envy those, who in future Ages shall be so happy, as
to see Men awake from this Lethargy of Verse: when all the Poets shall conspire
to restore strength to their Sentiments, and nerves and variety to their
Numbers: when the Writers shall throw aside all those idle Arts and Tricks,
which we now play with Sounds; and true Harmony shall flourish, without
incroaching upon true Sense.

Conclusion of the Earl of Roscommon's Essay (...) Translated Ve^se.
O might I live to hail the glorious day,
And sing loud Pae^^s through the crowded way,
When in triumphant state the B^itish Muse,
True to herself, shall barbarous aid refuse;
And in the Roman Majesty appear,
Which none know better, and none come so near!
Philypsus began to be moved by what his friend had urged on this head: I
confess (says he) You are a powerful adversary to Rhyme; but you must allow one
some time to get a thorough dislike of a thing, which has once been so
agreeable. There are some allowances too to be made in the present case; I
believe, no man is less embarass'd by the use of Rhyme, than Mr. Pope; and his
command in Writing will take off much of your objection at present: though I own
your reasoning against this Fashion in general, to be very strong and forcible.
However, this Writer has a peculia^ happiness in it, and his Language flows
with the greatest ease in the World: I believe you can scarce instance a verse
in the whole Work, which does not ru^ off smooth and handsomely. It Is tru^
(says Antiphaus) there are very few in i^ that are harsh, or any way faulty,
either in Sound, or Composition: two or thre^ which I remember of that kind are
scar^ worth repeating -- Yes (interrupted P^lypsus) if you have observed any
such, l^ us have them. What do you think ^ this? says Antiphaus: B. 6, 138.
And to the deaf Woods wailing breaths ^^ woe


Or of these; B. 4, 406.
Rich Tapestry, stiff with in woven gold.
B. 3, 311.
By what strange fraud Egysthus wrought, relate,
(By force he could not) such an hero's fate.


No bird of air, no dove of swiftest wing
Shuns the dire rocks: in vain she cuts the skies,
B. 12, 78.
The dire rocks meet, and crush her as she flies;
B. 10, 172.
I climbed a cliff --
To learn if ought of mortal works appear,
Or cheerful voice of mortal strike the ear.
B. 1, 86.
Deem not un justly by my doom oppressed, etc.
These Lines are somewhat faulty in the sound, or posture of the words: but I
only mention them; it would be frivolous to make particular remarks on them:
You may see, Philypsus, that my stock is quite out when I sink so low: my task
this Evening was difficult enough to me; and indeed it is not easy for any one
to find many faults in a Piece, which comes from such excellent hands. Have you
nothing farther to observe on it? (says Philypsus) I think I have heard you
speak formerly of some Contradictions -- That particular I had forgot, lays
Antiphaus; there are indeed some seeming Contrarieties in this work: these are
of two sorts; one, in which the Translator is contrary to his Original: and the
other, when the Translation seems to have some little Circumstances in it
contradictory to one another.

Since you mention the thing, I believe I can recollect a passage or two, in
which the sense is pressed so far, or so much altered from what it was, that
they seem directly opposite to the Original. When the Grecian Commanders were
drawn into Troy, in the famous Wooden Horse; the Enemy upon suspicion of the
design, used an artifice to make them cry out by surprise, if there were really
any persons concealed in it. Homer tells us, that all of them sat very silent:
only Anticlus, one of the Officers, was just ready to answer; when Ulysse^, who
sat by him, stopped his mouth by force^ prevented his making any noise, and s^
preserved all their Lives. Instead o^ which the Translation says, that thi^
Anticlus, B. 4, 388. d', 287.
-- Unable to control,
Spoke loud the languish of his yerning soul.


In another place, where in Homer w hear of an Hero, falling in the defense o
his Country, under the Walls of his native City; Mr. Pope, in drawing out the
Circumstances of it, speaks as if it was B. 8, 580. the, 524. -- (...) --
on a foreign shore. In the Second Book, we meet with three or four particulars
of this kind. -- There Telemachus desires the suitors (as it is in Homer) to
leave him, and be quiet; as in Mr. Pope, to B 2, 77. b', 70. (...). --
rise in his aid. -- There the same Prince is said to draw his hand gently out
of that of Antinous; instead of which the Translation, I think, tells us that
he frowned; caught away his hand B. 2, 362. b', 321. -- (...), --
sternly; and strode away in a passion. It Is the same Case with Mentor in the
Council: he rose to make a speech to them, with (as the Greek signifies) a wise
or friendly air; but in the English, B. 2, 259. b', 228.
Stern as he rose he cast his Eyes around
That flashed with rage; and as he spoke, he frowned.


These look like contrarieties between Homer, and his Translator; there seem to
be a few others, between passages in the Translation it self.

There is a part of Mercury's speech in the Fifth Odyssey, and another point in
the description of Lachaea, an uninhabited Island, which (I remember) I
mentioned to you formerly, as Examples of this Inconsistency. Such indeed they
appeared to me, even after a second and third Reading: but upon consulting the
Original, I at last found them to be capable of a consistent Meaning. However
it is to be wished, that the Translator had set them in a clearer light: for in
one, the reader will be apt to imagine, that the Poet speaks of Book 9. Compare
Verse 143, with 147.
Inhabitants in a desert Country; and in the other, that Mercury is said to
have been Book 5. Compare Verse 98, with 124.
vastly delighted with the sight of Calypso's Island, and not t^ have been
delighted at all with the sight of it.

In another place (I take it to be in the very first Book of the Odyssey)
Telemachus says, that his Father is B. 1, 299, and 309.
Dead, and that he is wandering from Country to Country, at the same article of
time: Thus too we hear the Sea, called the B. 5. 65.
foaming Flood, in one Line; and in the very next, it is the Level surface of
the deep.

As for mere Mistakes (where a Verse carries something of Blunder in the sound
of it) I have taken but little notice of them; and shall only mention two or
three, just to show, that the greatest Writers are capable of falling into such
Errors, as will be discernible to the meanest Readers.

B. 10, 451.
I answered, Goddess! human is thy breast --
-- is a Line of this kind: and the Expressions in it will appear to every one
that looks upon it, to be improperly put together, on the same account, as
those in the following Couplet: B. 5, 224.
Some other motive, Goddes^! sways thy mind,
Some close design, or turn of Womankind.


There is a Verse just come into my head, in which Mr. Pope may be thought to
talk of B. 6, 40. See, from their thrones thy kindred Monarchs sigh.
seeing a Sound; and in another we are told of a place so Nor the fleet arrow
from the twanging bow, Sent with full force could reach the depth below. B. 12,
102.
deep, that you could not shoot to the bottom of it.

I know not whether a severe Critic would not think that there is a jar
between the Expressions, where Ulysses is said, to be -- Doomed to mourn,
B. 1, 300.
Bitter Constraint, erroneous and forlorn.
And where Halitherses speaks of B 2, 201.
Deeds then undone. but these, and such like trifles, I shall leave to those,
who are fond of finding faults; and whom I can own without envy to have a
greater Niceness, and Curiosity in Verbal Criticism, than ever I desire to have.

These, though less considerable blemishes in a poetical Character, are much more
obvious to every Eye, than the greater defects of a Poem: and will be always
observed upon, with more scorn and contempt, than any other: they border on
Ridicule; and that is a thing, which will ever be agreeable to little Minds.
That Verse of Sir Richard Blackmore's, in which he describes A painted Vest
Prince Voltigern had on
Which from a Naked Pict his Gransire won.

the Vest of a naked Pict; and that in one of Mr. Dryden's Tragedies, which
speaks of What horrid silence does invade my Ear?
Silence invading the Ear, has probably been repeated many times more, than the
best Line he ever wrote. This is low enough of conscience, though it has been a
very fashionable way of Criticizing of late Years: it shows how ill-natured the
World is; but people will have their Laugh: and it is vastly easier to Ridicule,
than to Admire.

It is this sort of Men, Philypsus, and a clan of others, equally malicious and
more gloomy than the former, who have brought the name of Critic into such
contempt among us: While those have imagined, that Sneering and Malice are the
best titles to Wit; and these were of opinion, That to find fault is to
Criti^ise. How different from this was the ^ethod of the Ancient Critics of
Greece and Rome? Indeed Criticism, as first in^^tuted by Aristotle, was
designed for a ^^andard of judging well; to give an in^ght into the
Excellencies of Authors, and to discern their Faults. There was (...) time,
when it was a study highly ra^onal; far from borrowing its force from ^idicule
and False Wit, it should pro^ed upon known Rules and established ^easures. I do
not say but what the ^st Critics may have approved of par^ular Lines, without
being capable of ^^gning the Reasons why they pleased ^m so greatly. You often
see a Face ^ch is very taking, without any regularity of Features: such an one
as pleases every body, though no body can give the Reason of his being pleased
with it. Eloquence has its Je ne scai quoi's, as well as Beauty. However most
commonly we can specify the particular features, which are so agreeable; or
know that our pleasure is founded on the Symmetry of the whole.

But it is not enough that Criticism is rational; it should ever be Human and
Good-natured. Where the Design is great, the Disposition just, the Descriptions
lively, and the Language generally good and poetical, that work is in general
to be commended; though the Poet, in particular Points, may have fallen into many
faults; nay into some, which look very gross, when they are considered singly.
The greatest Critic among the Roman Poets lays it down for a Rule That where
there are more Beauties tha^ Faults in a Poem, that Piece is to be pronounced
good: And one of the greate^^ Critics among the Greek, carries it farther; He
shows at large, Longinus (...) etc.
That ther^ is often a negligence, that is becoming -- That a greatness of Soul
will carry Man above the observation of little Circumstances; -- And That a
Poet of a generous Spirit with faults, is greatly preferable to a low wary
Writer without them.

Agreeable to this was the behavior of these great Men in laying down rules,
or making observations: their intention was to distinguish the beauties of
Language or Sentiments, from the defects and vices of either. You find them to
have been in Love with the Charms of Eloquence, and the true Spirit of Poetry,
wherever they meet with them. They ^ake not that snarling Satisfaction in
finding faults, which many of their pretended Successors are so full of in
their writings. Indeed they very freely pointed out the mistakes and vices of
the greatest Writers: but their chief design in this was, that such of their
remarks might ^erve as Buoys to show where former ^entures had miscarried, and
to prevent others from running upon the same Shalows. This was the Spirit of
the Anti^nt Critics. Their Fate was according ^ their Merit: they still remain
among ^s, and are read with pleasure and ap^ause: whilst Zoilus, the only
Modern ^itick of the Ancients, has left nothing behind him, except the odious
memor^ of his Impotence and his Malice.

Our modern Zoilus's (interposed Philypsus) are very easily known. They ru^
down the performances of the best writers with heat and noise: every thing is a
fault with them. They will go regularly thorough a Poem, with a constant frown
upon them; and think themselves obliged to find mistakes or nonsens^ in every
Line of it: they condemn b^ Tale, and censure by the Sheet. Nothing is more
probable, than that from the Poem, they come to quarrel with the Person of the
Author. Blemishes in his moral Character, and even natural Imperfections, have
a share in their observations: and in a word, they labou^ hard to convince you,
that they are bad Christians as well as bad Critics. The best of it is, their
attacks are as weak^ as they are violent; they have but little of Courage, though
they make so great a Noise with it: and are like a sort o^ Currs that bark
most, and run the soonest. The Character that was given o^ the French, as
Warriors, is true of these People, as Writers: They behave themselves fiercer
than Men, in the onset^ and in the shock, are feebler than Women.

I think you cannot be too severe upon them, resumed Antiphaus: they are a
Contradiction to true Criticism; as they always show the greatest malice
against every thing, that deserves the most to be commended. Mr. Pope has had
the fate to be attacked by these Animals: and indeed I do not see how he could
avoid it. He has too many excellencies to let them sleep in quiet.

It Is certain that the faults of a Writer (and never was any Writer without
faults) ought to be observed; and the more excellent an Author is, the more
necessary is such a Work. But this is the Drudgery of Criticism: the Pleasure
and the Profit are on the other side.

We ought to show faults, but we ought ^ever to show malice. And beside the
^eneral good Nature which is owing to ^^^se Great Men, who have eminently
^blig'd the World by their Labors; ^here are particular allowances to be ^ade
in this last work of the greatest ^oet of our Age. Nothing in the World ^s more
laborious, than Translation; ^^d especially when the Piece is engaged ^^r, and
must go on. It Is extremely ^fficult to keep up the Spirit of Poetry ^another's
Compositions, though you catch all the Mollia tempora fandi.
aptest Moments; and never employ the Mind, but when there is a^ Impetus comes
upon it toward that particular business: and this Difficulty i^ greatly
increased, where a Man cannon well set down to it, only at such time as his
Muse is in a good Humor; bu may be obliged, in a manner, to Writ^ by the Hour,
and upon fixed returns. know not how ^ar this was the Case wit^ Mr. Pope, in
this performance: b^ wherever it was, the Poet will be litt^ more than a common
Man: He is, a such times, much the same as a Proph^ without his Afflatus.

Beside this, I must repeat, what I ha^ sa^d s^ often: The constant returns
(...) Rhim^ unavoidably unnerve a P^em The Age is in Love with this Weakne^ and
Mr. Pope, in indulging their humo^ has taken much from the strength of h
Genius: had he been less obliging to t^ taste of his Readers, his performan^
might have been more sinewy, and mo^ complete. This ought certainly to (...)
taken into the account: and wherev^ the Translation falls short of the for^ and
nervousness of Homer, we ought co^stant^ to ask our selves this question;
Whether Homer himself could have carried it farther, had he wrote (as Mr. Pope
does) in English, and in Rhyme?

It Is true, all this may be said of his Translation of the Iliad; but if that
Piece exceed this of the Odyssey, it is very natural upon other Accounts that
it should do so. Homer exceeds himself in that Poem. -- Great Actions strike
the Soul with rapidity; while all the things that relate to lower Life, are
less vigo^ous and affecting: -- The description of Warriors and moral Precepts
have a very different effect, on the writers themselves; those assist the
Poetical flame, while these ^ling the Mind into a more ^edentary Posture. It Is
natural almost ^or People to sleep at Sermons: But a ^attle rouzes and animates
the Specta^ors, as well as those who are engaged (...) it. Thus there must be
less spirit in ^he Writer, as well as less attentiveness ^n the Reader of the
Odyssey: and a Tran^ation of it, even from one and the same ^and, could not
fairly be expected to ^qual a Translation of the Iliad. The Rea^^r and the Poet
have both of them the dis^dvantage of a cooler and more unactive ^^bject: A
Poet (as Age always is) vastly ^^kative; A Fable laid infinitely lower; and a
Diction, almost perpetual in moral Sentences and Reflections, give a pattern
very different from Homer, in all his vigor, describing the Passion of
Achilles; and sounding out the Wars of the Greeks, with an air the most martial
and animated, that can be imagined.

Here Antiphaus rose up from his seat, and as Philypsus perceived that he had
finished; "I was unwilling to interrupt you (says he) otherwise I should have
observed on a verse or two, which you repeated, as rough, and of a bad turn.
What were those Lines of the Roc^s, which you mentioned just now? -- Of the
Rocks? (says Antiphaus) let me see -- Oh, I remember them; No Bird of air, no
Dove of swiftest wing
Shuns the dire rocks: in vain she cuts the skies,
The dire rocks meet and crush her as she ^lies.


The same says Philypsus: these and that other verse, Rich Tapestry, s^iff with
inwoven gold,
^ound indeed rough; but to me their roughness, is their beauty: the turn o^
them seems designed; and their manner to be expressive of their sense. If that
be the Case, I beg pardon, says Antiphaus Were I the greatest enemy in the
World to mere harmony, and the stated returns and gingle of syllables; I should
be one of the first among the admirers of Sound, whenever it is made
serviceable to nature and true sense. That is the Art (says Philypsus) and the
Mastery, for which I particularly admire Mr. Pope: It is he who took up that
great Rule of the Sounds being a comment on the Sense, and enfor^'d it beyond
any of the Critics who went before him. To this Writer we chiefly owe the
revival of the nobler art of Numbers; and the method of signifying motions, and
actions, and all that vast variety of our own passions by Sounds. In his
incomparable Essay on Criticism, this Writer has given us the best Advises, and
interwove the most beautiful Examples into them, in a manner that will always
be admired. The first Stanza, in his Ode on St. Caecilia's Day, is the fullest
Piece of this kind perhaps extant in any Language: it is it self a perfect
Consort. In the Translations of Homer we find him very frequent, and very just,
in the same manner of Expressing things: I call it so; and could almost be
persuaded to think it a better way of Expressing, than in the common way of
Words. These have a Sense affixt to them by Custom; while the other speaks by
the Ideas of things; That is a flowing, variable help; this is the Voice of
Nature, and a sort of Universal Poetical Language.

Mr. Pope affords us infinite Examples of this Beauty in his Translation of the
Odyssey; it would be endless to repeat them all, or to admire them as they
deserve. But amidst all this variety, there is a single Point, which I have
observed more than any of the rest: Whenever the Poet is speaking of the watery
Element, or any thing belonging to it, his management of Sounds is particularly
frequent and beautiful.

Though it might not be much observed at the first view, I know no place where a
greater variety of things are expressed this way, than in the Twelfth Odyssey;
It Is where Ulysses is giving an account of his setting sail from the Island of
Circe:

B. 12, 189.
-- We rushed into the Main;
Then bending to the stroke, their oars they drew
To their broad breasts, and swift the galley flew.
Up sprung a brisker breeze: with freshning gales
The friendly Goddess stretched the swelling ^ails;
We drop our oars: at ease the pilot guides;
The vessel light along the level glides.
Then rising sad and slow, with pensive look,
Thus to the melancholy train I spoke.
The objects shift perpetually in these Lines; and yet there is not a single
period or pause in them, the sound and turn of which does not agree perfectly
with the sentiment: I do not intend to enlarge much upon them; but had it been
wrote in the Days of Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, I doubt not but he would have
given us a Dissertation, on a passage which so variously expresses that Art, of
which he was particularly fond. That is the Critic, I think, says Antiphaus,
who first (...) p. 29. Ed. R. Steph.
observed this Beauty in the noted Description of Sisyphus his Stone? Yes,
answered Philypsus; and every one knows how perfectly well the excellence of
that Passage is preserved B. 11, 735. l', 593.
in Mr. Pope's Translation.

Words give us the bare Ideas of things; but words, thus managed, impress them
^ery strongly and sensibly upon the mind: Do you not perceive the Storm rising
B. 12, 379.
When the wild Winds whistle over the main? and are you not in the midst of it
when B. 5, 380.
East, West together roar, and South and North roll mountains to the Shore?
Then are we hurried over the Deep, and see all the rocks and dangers of it:

B^ 12, 280.
Dire S^ylla there a scene of Horror forms,
And here Charybdis fills the sea with storms;
When the tide rushes from her rumbling caves
The rough rock roars; tumultuous boil the waves;
They toss: they foam. --
The next moment if the Poet pleases (like the Demon he speaks of) He can make
all as gentle and serene, as it was before rough and boistrous.

B. 12, 202.
Sunk are at once the winds^ the air above
And waves below, at once forget to move:
Some Demon calmed the air, and smoothed the deep,
Hushed the loud winds, and charmed the waves to sleep.
Did you ever see a more perfect Calm? Yet smooth and hushed as these Lines
are, you may easily perceive a difference between the description of a still
Sea, and the easy beautiful current of a River.

B. 11, 286^
Smooth flows the gentle stream with wanton pride,
And in soft mazes rolls a silver tide.
How happy is the hand of the Poet, and what a Command has he of Nature, to
make the numbers of his verse speak his Sentiments; Thus to paint even sounds;
and to draw by Measures, what does not come under the power of the Pencil? In
this Writer, Sir John Denham's Wish is effected: His Lines always flow as his
Subjec^; Though deep, yet clear; though gentle, yet not dull^
Strong, without rage; without overflowing full.


I thank you (says Antiphaus bowing) I thank you, my dear Philypsus, for this
unexpected view of one of the greatest Beauties in Poetry. I could willingly
^^ay to hear you farther on this Head, and am perfectly angry with the Night
^or wearing away so fast. I hope we ^^all soon find an opportunity of resu^ing
the Subject (answered Philypsus) I ^eed not tell you how agreeable it is to ^e,
even to be convinced of my Errors (...) Antiphaus; and I Am satisfied that (...)
take a delight in any occasion of ^miring Mr. Pope. I beg you would (...) me
Antiphaus; do you not approve (...) him in some points, more than you ^^e
formerly? I do not know how it ^^ays Antiphaus) but I seem to be both ^re
pleased, and more displeased with (...) than I was before this enquiry: (...)
Excellencies, from the light in which (...) have set them, strike me more
agreeably than ever; but then this looking so closely into his Defects has made
those too the more gross and visible. However (concluded Philypsus) you will
still acknowledge with me, That his faults are the faults of a Man, bu^ his
beauties are the beauties of an Angel. -- You don't seem to like the word: it
may sound perhaps too high; but I mean only of a Great and Uncommon Genius.

FINIS.
AN ESSAY ON Pope 's ODYSSEY: IN WHICH Some particular Beauties and Blemishes
of that Work are considered. PART. II.

-- Each finding, like a friend,
Something to blame, and something to commend.
Pope's Miscel. Vol. I. Le choix des grans mots done aux chooses une espece
d'ame and de vie: les beaux mots sont la lumiere propre et naturelle de nos
pensees: mais un discourse tout simple exprimera quelquefois mieux la chose, que
toute la pomp and tout l' ornement. Boileau. Printed for S. Wilmot, Bookseller
in OXFORD; and Sold by J. and J. Knapton, R. Knaplock, J. Wyatt, D. Midwinter,
W. and J. Innys, and T. Astley, in St. Paul's Churchyard; W. Mears, without
Temple Bar; J. Crokat, in Fleet Street; and J. Roberts, in Warwick Lane,
LONDON. 1727.

Price One Shilling and Sixpence.

INDEX OF Figures, Passions, etc.
AF^ectation 1^ 23 Allegori^s 2, 78 Amazement 2, 189 Ambiguity 2, 25 Anger 2,
42 Anti-climax 2, 139 Anti thesis 1, 12 2, 116, 159 A^chaism 2, 13 A^^^milation
2, 185 A^^onishment 1, 55. 2, 47 ^^^v^lence 2, 102 ^^^bast 1, 23, 47 ^^^ism 2,
1^0 Ir^aks 2 42 Co^pounds 2, 9 (...) 2, 126 C^^^^rn 2. 44 C^^^is^ness 1, 88, 2,
113 (...) 2, 41 (...) 2. 65 (...) 1, 137. 2, 22 ^^^rast 2, 169 ^^^age 1, 53
(...) and Criticism, (...) 100, 143, etc. 2, 5, 36, 143, etc. Delay 2, 125, 203
Description 1, 6, 16, 6^ Descriptions of Elysium 1, 627. -- Tartarus, 2, 130.
Phaeacia, 1, 65. -- Ithaca. 1, 64. -- of the Royal Palace, 2, 167. -- ^f the
Country^ ib. -- of Laert^s his Gardens, ib. -- of the Cave of the Nymphs, 1,
67. -- of Calypso's Grot, 1, 66. -- of distant Prospect^, 1, 67 Shield of
Achilles, 2, 193^ Hercules Belt, 2, 194^ Ces^us of Venus, 2, 1935. -of a Ship
under Sail, 1, 68. -- of Rowing, 1^ 69. -- o^ driving a C^ariot, ib. -- of the
War^horse from Virgil, 1, 54. -- of Fish expiring ^n the Shore, 2, 169 Virgil's
Troilus, 2, 194. his Achaemenides, 1, 77 -- of Herces going to an Engagement,
1, 53 -- ^f dying Heroes, 1, 46 -- H^rce of the Odyssey, his first App^arance
in that P^em, 1^ 72. -- of a malicious Smile, 1, 80. -- an une^sy Smile, 2,
180.^ an horrid one, 1, 79 D^s^riptions from the Turn and Management of the
Numbers, Sailing 1, 153 -- a T^mpest, ib. a Calm at S^a, 1, 154. -- a
Smooth-stream, ib. See, Versification. Distraction between Hope and fear 1, 77.
Double-passions 1, 76, 84. 2, 181 Doubt 2^ 50 Elevation 1, 6. 2, 153 Emphasis
1, 86, 2. 20, 115. 120 Epithets their uses 2. 16 to 22. -- abuse, 2, 28 to 35.
-- in Allegories 2, 83 Exclamation 2, 40 Fable 1, 32 Fear 2, 187, to 1^0
Figures, whence and what 1, 117. 2, 38, 39, and 17^ Finesses 1, 11 Fustian 1^
2^ Grammar 1, 117, 2, 13 Hirmu^ 2, 12^ Hyperbaton 2, 11, and 9^ Hyperboles 2,
188 Hy^ernianism 1, 141 Idea's, or actings of the Mind'describ'd 1, 59, 6^, 83,
2, 189. -- Assimilation of Idea's 2, 185. -- (...) of Idea's 2, 21 Imitation 1,
94. 2, 8^. 2, 161 Indignation 2, ^^ Infinitude 2, 131 Insertion 2, ^^ Insulting
2, 63, 6^ Intimation 2, 11^ Joy, 2, 40. Excess of J^^^ 2, 50^ 51, 53 Love in
Calypso 2, 48. -- m Penelope 2, 51. -- of one's Country 1, ^4 Lownesses, from
excess o^ defect, 2, 135.-from the Characters of the Person 2, 137. -- from
(...) 2, 146. or nauseou^ Ideas 2, 147.- from br^tishness 2, 1^1. -- from
thoug^t^ being false a^ the bottom 2, 155- from improper Mixture o^ Ideas 2,
136. -- from (...) too great (...) 2, 138. -- from (...) 2, 153. -- from t^^
much Ornament 1, 111. 2, 154. -- from aimin^ (...) Simplicity 1, 10^, 109. --
from the use o^ ^^rds too vulgar, or debased 1, 112. 2, 142. -- or burlesque 2,
143. -- from a prosaick Diction 2, 14 -- from the Rhyme 1, 110-from
Monosyllables 1, 2, 141. from sporting upon Words 2, 157. from imitating a
lower Writer 2, 161 Lownesses in Homer 1, 106. 2, 145 M^lancholy 2, 40, 55
Metaphor 1, 29, to 38. 2. 60 and 61. -- the emphatical 2, 62. -- the animating
2, 66. -- the audacious 2, 63. -- confused with the ^ro^^r 1, 31. 2, 29 and 77
-- forced and ill chosen 1, 36. 2, 84. -- disagreei^g 1, 34. -- disproporti^^ed
to the Occasion 2, 75. -- too frequent 1, 33. -- continued too far 2, 77 --
dark or un-ideal 1, 38 ^^otony, general 1, 27. ^^rticular 1, 137 (...) Heroism
2, 106 (...) a poetical Trea^^^ of Morality 2, 164. (...) such preferable to
all (...) (human) Poems 2, 101 (...) English. one great ^^^ty of it 1, 136 --
^^ticular inconvenien^^ in translating it 1^ ^^ -- improves on the Original in
several Passages I. 49, 58, 63, 65, 88, 90, 95, 98. ^^, 19, 38, 41, 48, 53, 73,
90, 104, 149, 170 Opposition 2, 116 Orientali^m 2, 56 Passions 1, 56 -- the
most eminent in the Hero of the Odyssey 1, 71, to 75. -- contrary passions 1,
76. 2, 181 Poetry and Painting 1, 75 86. 2, 191 Precipitation 2, 51 Prevention
2, 54 Prophecy 2, 54 Prosopopeia 2, 72 Rage 1, 45 Rants 1, 47 Rhyme 1, 119, to
130. Repetition 1, 90. 2, 125, 203 Sanchoism 2, 111 Scene of the Odyssey 2, 167
Self-praise 1, 52 Sentences 2, 99 to 109 Silence 2, 45 to 49 Similie pathetick
1, 74. Exact 1, 78 -- short and expressive 2, 170 -- adapted to the Place,
Person, or Circumstances 2, 171, 172 -- unusual 173 -- agreeable and free 174
-- the continued 176 -- the multiplied 177, 175 -- the contrary 176. Similies
from calm life 2, 169. -- Elevating 2, 69 Sound, significant of the sense 1,
151 to 154. 2, 63 Faults from affecting this or carrying it too far, 2, 213
Speeches of Calypso, wavering and tender 1, 81. of Circe, confused 1, 55 -- of
Agamemnon violent and enraged 1, 45, 48 -- of Penelope, tender and amorous 2,
179 - of Ulysses Narrative 1, 49, 53. -- dit. neat and beautiful 1, 61. -- of
Tiresias 1, 62. -- of Theoclymenus 2, 56 -- other, prophetical 1, 94 Starts 1,
55. 2, 41 Style, the passionate 1, 57. the flowing 1, 62 -- the just and simple
1, 61 -- the fabulous 1, 32 -- the raised and ennobled 1, 114. -- the elevated
and over-wrought 1; 6, 23, 2^ 153. -- the Un-ideal style, 1, 116 Suspense 2, 43
Threats 2, 42 Transferring 1, 94^ 2, 87 Turns 2, 162 Versification musical 1,
92 -- too rough and embarassed 1, 137 -- similar 1, 63. adapted to large images
2, 124 -- how to roughen it 2, 198 -- how to smoothen it 2, 198 -- the rapid 2,
199 -- the heavy and embaras'd 2, 200 -- the horrid; and the delightful 2, 202
-- the joyous and the melancholy 2, 203 -- its great Excellence 1, 151 --
particular faults in it 2, 213 -- it is grand fault 1^ 12^ Words debased by the
Vulgar 2, 9 -- sporting upon them, mean 2, 157, 160^ appropriated to particular
uses 2, 27 -- technical, to be avoided 2, 26 -- new Supplies necessary 2, 9 --
old ones reviv^d 2, 13 -- borrowed from other Languages. 2, 14^
The Natural Order of the Passages quoted from the ODYSSEY.
Od. B. 1. V.75 Ess. II p 115 Od. B. 1. V. 77 p 72 Od. B. 1. V. 86 p 137 Od. B.
1. V. 188 p 8 Od. B. 1. V. 190 p 111 Od. B. 1. V. 214 Ess. II, p 213 Od. B. 1.
V. 219 Ess. II, p 27 Od. B. 1. V. 292 Ess. II, p 25 Od. B. 1. V. 300 p 14^ Od.
B. 1. V. 309 p 140 Od. B. 1. V. 389 Ess. II, p 20 Od. B. 1. V. 408 p 9 Od. B.
1. V. 425 p 24 Od. B. 1. V. 449 Ess. II, p 22 Od. B. 1. V. 462 p 10 Od. B. 1.
V. 482 p 109 Od. B. 1. V. 483 p 96 Od. B. 1. V. 534 p 36 Od. B. 1. V. 553 p 27
Book 2. V. 26 p 96 Book 2. V. 28 Ess. II, p 77 Book 2. V. 54 Ess. II, p 113
Book 2. V. 55 p 96 Book 2. V. 77 p 139 Book 2. V. 179 p 36 Book 2. V. 183 p 24
Book 2. V. 201 p 142 Book 2. V. 203 p 94 Book 2. V. 259 p 139 Book 2. V. 320 p
91 Book 2. V. 347 p 109 Book 2. V. 356 p 91 Book 2. V. 362 p 139 Book 2. V. 378
p 116 Book 2. V. 393 p 106 Book 2. V. 415 p 91 Book 2. V. 437 p 31 Book 2. V.
439 p 35 Book 2. V. 459 p 68
Book 3. V. 1 p 7 Book 3. V. 17 p 112 Book 3. V. 25 p 106 Book 3. V. 96 p 64
Book 3. V. 119 p 86 Book 3. V. 126 p 96 Book 3. V. 190 Ess. II, p 24 Book 3. V.
213 p 38 Book 3. V. 221 p 112 Book 3. V. 252 p 112 Book 3. V. 311 p 137 Book 3.
V. 424 p 96 Book 3. V. 435 Ess. II, p 136 Book 3. V. 451 p 96 Book 3. V. 493 p
9 Book 3. V. 523 p 106 Book 3. V. 601 p 8 Book 3. V. 618 p 69 Book 3. V. 628 p
70
Book 4. V. 19 p 23 Book 4. V. 47 Ess. II, p 27 Book 4. V. 104 p 117 Book 4. V.
107 p 9 Book 4. V. 116 Ess. II, p 62 Book 4. V. 145 p 96 Book 4. V. 154 p 14
Book 4. V. 158 p 8 Book 4. V. 199 Ess. II, p 27 Book 4. V. 227 Ess. II, p 143
Book 4. V. 248 p 26 Book 4. V. 256 p 112 Book 4. V. 320 Ess. II, p 21 Book 4.
V. 371 p 96 Book 4. V. 388 p 35, and 138 Book 4. V. 406 p 137 Book 4. V. 411 p
7 Book 4. V. 438 p 96 Book 4. V. 480 p 26 Book 4. V. 509 p 96 Book 4. V. 543
Ess. II, p 147 Book 4. V. 547 Ess. II, p 213 Book 4. V. 548 Ess. II, p 147 Book
4. V. 587 Ess. II, p 80 Book 4. V. 615 p 44 Book 4. V. 708 p 116 Book 4. V. 725
Ess. II, p 213 Book 4. V. 726 p 26 Book 4. V. 748 p 38 Book 4. V. 776 p 62 Book
4. V. 794 Ess. II, p 27 Book 4. V. 808 p 96 Book 4. V. 951 p 26 Book 4. V. 962
p 31 Book 4. V. 1096 p 9
Book 5. V. 65 p 140 Book 5. V. 80 p 96 Book 5. V. 85 Ess. II, p 18 Book 5. V.
92 p 66 Book 5. V. 96 p 90, and 96 Book 5. V. 124 p 140 Book 5. V. 159 p 38
Book 5. V. 192 p 112 Book 5. V. 204 p 72 Book 5. V. 213 Ess. II, p 84 Book 5.
V. 224 p 141 Book 5. V. 227 Ess. II, p 17 Book 5. V. 246 p 81 Book 5. V. 265 p
82 Book 5. V. 288 p 96 Book 5. V. 296 p 112 Book 5. V. 305 Ess. II, p 48 Book
5. V. 3^2 p 36 Book 5. V. 356 p 68 Book 5. V. 365 p 32 Book 5. V. 380 p 153
Book 5. V. 391 p 38 Book 5. V. 393 p 110 Book 5. V. 395 p 38 Book 5. V. 417
Ess. II, p 173 Book 5. V. 420 Ess. II, p 1^0 Book 5. V. 480 p 32 Book 5. V. 515
p 38 Book 5. V. 521 Ess. II, p 12^ Book 5. V. 529 Ess. II, p 126 Book 5. V. 573
p 96 Book 5. V. 585 p 14 Book 5. V. ^30 Ess. II, p 173
Book 6. V. 40 p 141 Book 6. V. 67 Ess. II, p 2^ Book 6. V. 138 p 13^ Book 6.
V. 197 p 96 Book 6. V. 204 Ess. II, p 71 Book 6. V. 235 p 96 Book 6. V. 245
Ess. II, p 102 Book 6. V. 247 Ess. II, p 112 Book 6. V. 262 p 14 Book 6. V. 284
p 116 Book 6. V. 298 p 37 Book 6. V. 306 p 8 Book 6. V. 370 p 112 Book 6. V.
374 Ess. II, p 71
Book 7. V. 42 Ess. II, p 172 Book 7. V. 54 Ess. II, p 25 Book 7. V. 117 Ess.
II, p 27 Book 7. V. 123 Ess. II, p 153 Book 7. V. 135 Ess. II, p 170 Book 7. V.
193 Ess. II, p 137 Book 7. V. 228 Ess. II, p 137 Book 7. V. 256 Ess. II, p 103
Book 7. V. 264 Ess. II, p 105 Book 7. V. 296 Ess. II, p 137 Book 7. V. 428 Ess.
II, p 27
Book 8. V. 18 p 116 Book 8. V. 68 Ess. II, p 141 Book 8. V. 78 Ess. II, p 142
Book 8. V. 90 p 91 Book 8. V. 140 p 34 Book 8. V. 185 p 61 and Ess. II 2^ Book
8. V. 256 p 10^ Book 8. V. 362 p 109 Book 8. V. 380 Ess. II, p 22 Book 8. V.
437 p 23 Book 8. V. 4^4 p 14 Book 8. V. 580, p 7^, and 139
Book 9. V. 67 Ess. II, p 19 Book 9. V. 147 p 140 Book 9. V. 202 p 109 Book 9.
V. 210 p 31 Book 9. V. 217 Ess. II, p 124 Book 9. V. 224 p 31 Book 9. V. 321
Ess. II, p 102 Book 9. V. 329 Ess. II, p 103 Book 9. V. 330 Ess. II, p 20 Book
9. V. 353 p 37 Book 9. V. 354 Ess. II, p 124 Book 9. V. 420 p 97 Book 9. V. 443
Ess. II, p 147 Book 9. V. 4^9 Ess. II, p 75 Book 9. V. 469 Ess. II, p 124 Book
9. V. 514 Ess. II, p 25 Book 9. V. 515 Ess. II, p 81 Book 9. V. 550 Ess. II, p
189 Book 9. V. 581 Ess. II, p 71 Book 9. V. 604 Ess. II, p 185 Book 9. V. 618 p
31
Book 10. V. 93 p 94 Book 10. V. 131 Ess. II, p 136 Book 10. V. 144 Ess. II, p
136 Book 10. V. 172 p 137 Book 10. V. 173 p 67 Book 10. V. 204 Ess. II, p 24
Book 10. V. 205 Ess. II, p 157 Book 10. V. 227 Ess. II, p 144 Book 10. V. 259 p
106 Book 10. V. 281 p 90 Book 10. V. 282 p 96 Book 10. V. 285 Ess. II, p 147
Book 10. V. 288 Ess. II, p 46 Book 10. V. 291 Ess. II, p 20 Book 10. V. 382 p
87 Book 10. V. 385 p ^4 Book 10. V. 387 p 86 Book 10. V. 395 p 5^ Book 10. V.
410 p 91, 97 Book 10. V. 451 p 141 Book 10. V. 556 p 96 Book 10. V. 569 p 96
Book 10. V. 588 p 96 Book 10. V. 591 p 106 Book 10. V. 593 Ess. II, p 153
Book 11. V. 109 Ess. II, p 126 Book 11. V. 130 p 94 Book 11. V. 151 p 26 Book
11. V. 169 p 62 Book 11. V. 239 p 96 Book 11. V. 258 p 106 Book 11. V. 286 p
154 Book 11. V. 373 Ess. II, p 126 Book 11. V. 388 Ess. II, p 201 Book 11. V.
408 Ess. II, p 43 Book 11. V. 415 p 96 Book 11. V. 433 p 96 Book 11. V. 486 p
34 Book 11. V. 487 Ess. II, p 161 Book 11. V. 490 p 87 Book 11. V. 512 p 88
Book 11. V. 528 p 45 Book 11. V. 531 p 96 Book 11. V. 537 p 97 Book 11. V. 540
p 48 Book 11. V. 626 p 49 Book 11. V. 650 p 53 Book 11. V. 665 Ess. II, p 47
Book 11. V. 684 p 96 Book 11. V. 725 p 97 Book 11. V. 727 p 111 Book 11. V. 735
p 153 Book 11. V. 736 Ess. II, p 200 Book 11. V. ^38 Ess. II, p 200 Book 11. V.
740 Ess. II, p 159 Book 11. V. 7^6 p 194 Book 11. V. ^82 Ess. II, p 213
Book. 12. V. 32 Ess. II, p 155 Book. 12. V. 35 p 8 Book. 12. V. 52 Ess. II, p
22 Book. 12. V. 78 p 137 Book. 12. V. 102 p 141 Book. 12. V. 183 p 69 Book. 12.
V. 189 p 152 Book. 12. V. 201 p 94 Book. 12. V. 202 p 154 Book. 12. V. 216 p 69
Book. 12. V. 220 p 92 Book. 12. V. 245 Ess. II, p 189 Book. 12. V. 265 p 69
Book. 12. V. 280 p 154 Book. 12. V. 300 Ess. II, p 169 Book. 12. V. 379 p 153
Book. 12. V. 474 p 94
Book. 13. V. 13 Ess. II, p 8^ Book. 13. V. 38 p 74 Book. 13. V. 94 p 69 Book.
13. V. 112 p (...) Book. 13. V. 113 p 36 Book. 13. V. 115 p 67 Book. 13. V. 156
Ess. II, p 138 Book. 13. V. 164 Ess. II, p 139 Book. 13. V. 167 Ess. II, p 24
Book. 13. V. 177 p 88 Book. 13. V. 193 p 96 Book. 13. V. 400 p 38 Book. 13. V.
442 p 116 Book. 13. V. 453 p 16 Book. 13. V. 497 p 19
Book. 14. V. 4 p 64 Book. 14. V. 76 p 96 Book. 14. V. 109 p 96 Book. 14. V.
110 p 8^ Book. 14. V. 224 p 96 Book. 14. V. 392 p 106 Book. 14. V. 416 p 13
Book. 14. V. 473 Ess. II, p 213 Book. 14. V. 499 Ess. II, p 75 Book. 14. V. 507
p 109 Book. 14. V. 519 p 96 Book. 14. V. 533 p 38 Book. 14. V. 572 p 94 Book.
14. V. 740 Ess. II, p 159
N. B. All the following References belong to the Second Volume of the ESSAY.

Book 15. V. 145 p 24 Book 15. V. 151 p 168 Book 15. V. 250 p 88 Book 15. V.
295 p 139 Book 15. V. 319 p 166 Book 15. V. 435 p 22 Book 15. V. 560 p 141
Book 16. V. 35 p 150 Book 16. V. 189 p 88 Book 16. V. 208 p 41 Book 16. V. 217
p 50 Book 16. V. 237 p 88 Book 16. V. 243 p 46 Book 16. V. 249 p 52 Book 16. V.
380 p 80 Book 16. V. 381 p 81 Book 16. V. 420 p 88
Book 17. V. 47 p 172 Book 17. V. 49 p 84,85 Book 17. V. 55 p 53 Book 17. V.
200 p 25 Book 17. V. 227 p 88 Book 17. V. 230 p 167 Book 17. V. 400 p 141 Book
17. V. 471 p 104 Book 17. V. 506 p 72 Book 17. V. 523 p 88, 107 Book 17. V. 549
p 135 Book 17. V. 550 p 143 Book 17. V. 613 p 88 Book 17. V. 621 p 33 Book 17.
V. 625 p 146
Book 18. V. 121 p 88 Book 18. V. 158 p 88 Book 18. V. 171 p 106 Book 18. V.
194 p 180 Book 18. V. 207 p 24 Book 18. V. 229 p 173 Book 18. V. 250 p 19 Book
18. V. 282 p 146, 11 p 212 Book 18. V. 284 p 22, 189 Book 18. V. 299 p 115 Book
18. V. 308 p 61 Book 18. V. 412 p 150 Book 18. V. 427 p 190 Book 18. V. 443 p
113
Book. 19. V. 22 p 85 Book. 19. V. 85 p 42 Book. 19. V. 99 p 88 Book. 19. V.
110 p 20, 151 Book. 19. V. 131 p 76 Book. 19. V. 143 p 85 Book. 19. V. 149 p 84
Book. 19. V. 155 p 29 Book. 19. V. 245 p 161 Book. 19. V. 247 p 181 Book. 19.
V. 268 p 193 Book. 19. V. 286 p 77 Book. 19. V. 461 p 91 Book. 19. V. 500 p 81
Book. 19. V. 547 p 91 Book. 19. V. 554 p 41 Book. 19. V. 565 p 76 Book. 19. V.
605 p 173 Book. 19. V. 694 p 88
Book 20. V. 19 p 77 Book 20. V. 256 p 63 Book 20. V. 335 p 72 Book 20. V. 358
p 27 Book 20. V. 370 p 88 Book 20. V. 439 p 188 Book 20. V. 430 p 56 Book 20.
V. 432 p 27
Book 21. V. 104 p 59 Book 21. V. 240 p 46 Book 21. V. 449 p 1^7 Book 21. V.
461 p 197
Book 22. V. 2 p 136 Book 22. V. 13 p 157 Book 22. V. 3^ p 157 Book 22. V. 3^ p
59 Book 22. V. 41 p 744 Book 22. V. 81 p 42 Book 22. V. 8^ p 135 Book 22. V.
13^ p 31 Book 22. V. 136 p 75 Book 22. V. 166 p 41 Book 22. V. 167 p 27 Book
22. V. 186 p (...) Book 22. V. 226 p 11^ Book 22. V. 292 p 198 Book 22. V. 417
p 190 Book 22. V. 430 p 169
Book 23. V. 47 p 15^ Book 23. V. 212 p 46 Book 23. V. 215 p 1^9 Book 23. V.
217 p 2^ Book 23. V. 240 p 5^ Book 23. V. 322 p 8^ Book 23. V. 337 p 1^^ Book
23. V. 369 p 12^ Book 23. V. 387 p 1^^
Book 24. V. 6 p 1^^ Book 24. V. 14 p 1^^ Book 24. V. 131 p (...) Book 24. V.
201 p 18^ Book 24. V. 237 p 16^ Book 24. V. 272 p 6^ Book 24. V. 309 p 8^ Book
24. V. 339 p 4^ Book 24. V. 376 p (...) Book 24. V. 404 p 4^ Book 24. V. 411 p
5^ Book 24. V. 498 p (...) Book 24. V. 499 p 1^^ Book 24. V. 504 p 1^^ Book 24.
V. 513 p (...) Book 24. V. 540 p (...) Book 24. V. 547 p 1^^ Book 24. V. 558 p
(...) Book 24. V. 561 p 1^^ Book 24. V. 610 p 1^^ Book 24. V. 612 p (...) Book
24. V. 618 p (...) Book 24. V. 622 p (...) Book 24. V. 632 p (...)
An ESSAY etc.
EVENING the FOURTH.
AFTER having engaged themselves so far, we may imagine that Antiphaus and
Philypsus waited with a good deal of Impatience for the remaining Part of ^^e
Odyssey. As it happened, they were ^oth in Town, before it appeared in Pub^ck;
and Philypsus, who was the warmer (...) the two, used to enquire almost every
^^y at Lintot's how the Press went on. ^e grew still the more eager, as the ^me
drew nearer: and the first moment (...) could procure it in Sheets, he set down
(...) them with all the Pleasure, and all the ^verity, that Antiphaus had
preached up to ^m in their former Enquiries.

In the time that was taken up by this agreeable Search, he called often upon
that Friend, with whom he shared his Studies, as well as his Affections. This
was rather a Dividing, than Leaving his Pursuits: for he scarce ever saw
Antiphaus, without mentioning something of the Odyssey, and hearing his
Sentiments in return. When he had gone entirely thorough the Poem, he went
immediately to desire a Meeting, in some place where they might talk more at
large upon that Head. By good luck Antiphaus was perfectly disengaged: It Is a
fine Evening, says he; and if you please we will take a turn together in the
Gardens of Horatio: since we cannot enjoy his Company, at least let us make use
of that Liberty he has left with us. There we shall be retired from the Noise,
and Bustle of the Town; and safe from every sort of Interruption. Philypsus was
extremely pleased to find him so ready: they stepped together into his Coach,
which drove immediately to Horatio's, and set them down at the Gates which lead
into the Great-Walk of the Garden.

After a turn or two there, they sat down by the side of a Fountain, full in
^ight of the Thames, which passes at the bottom of the Walk. The Walk itself
makes a fine Visto in its Descent to the River: at a distance, you see the
Fields and Hills; at first in an easy Ascent varied into Pasture and Arable,
and then rising unequally, and covered here and there with Woods, till they are
insensibly lost in a bluish Cast of the Clouds. The agreeableness of the Place
made Philypsus forget himself for a few Moments: he was taken up wholly in
wandering with his Eye, sometimes over those beautiful Gardens, and sometimes
over the irregular Prospect that lay before them. At last recollecting himself
and turning to An^i^^aus, There is a difference (says he) in the agreeable
Sense I ^eel at present from the delightful Views on all sides of us, which may
partly confirm what we were talking of just before we sat down. Does not this
Masterpiece of Art, with all its Symmetry and Justness of Proportions, strike
the Mind in a fee^ler manner, than that Landskape of Nature in its infinite
Irregularity? These measured Rises and Falls, in Slopes answering each other,
Those Groves terminating every way in an exactness of ^igure, These Walks
intercrossing without confusion, and uniting ^o happily, cannot fail of
pleasing the Eye very much: Yet that Wildness and Variety abroad, the River,
Lawn, Fields and Woods so beautifully interspersed, compose a Scene much finer
and more engaging. For my part, I should be apt to prefer that single Grot
yonder, and the hanging Precipice over it, to a whole Scenary of natural
Objects laid out in the most regular order imaginable. There is something of
this in the Pleasure which is given us by the greatest Writers. A Noble natural
Genius, however irregular and unconfined, delights us in a much higher degree,
than the most uniform and correct: And the Writer who enjoys this freedom of
Soul, amidst all his Starts and Errors, is greatly to be preferred to the
Justness of one, who is too severe to commit a Fault, and too cool and
phlegmatic to be a P^et.

Such a temper (replied Antiphaus) can never produce any thing truly Great. The
noblest Poet in the World has not the fewest Faults: and the same Spirit which
qualified Homer to be so, is what at the same time might hurry him away from a
nicer Observation of some little Particulars. The very Negligencies of Homer
show the Greatness of his Spirit: and where there may be any like Negligencies
in the Version of Homer, methinks, it would be but Justice to attribute them to
the same Cause: at least where the Spirit of that Poet is so discernible, as it
is in this late Translation.

I cannot but smile sometimes, when I hear a severer Reader very gravely
condemning a Poem for a few Faults, which may be evident in it here and there.
Nothing can be plainer than that our Judgments ought to be formed upon the
Whole, and not upon Particulars: the Superiority of Beauties or D^fects is the
only thing that can determine the Character of the Piece. It Is possible that
Mr. Hobbes may have expressed a word or two correctly, where the New
Translation has deviated into a Metaphorical or licentious Expression: but what
a strange method of Comparison would it be, to settle our opinion of the
Writers from hence? By such a way of proceeding we might prefer one, who loses
the Life and Vigor of Poetry throughout, to others who preserve it so strongly
in the general Turn of their Compositions.

As we go on, Philypsus, with our usual freedom of speaking our Sentiments on
each particular Passage; I dare say, that even all those, which may seem faulty
to us, will make but a small figure, when compared to the several Excellencies
of this Piece. As for my part, after a Research of some care through the whole
Translation, I find no reason at all to alter my Opinion, That the Beauties of
it are far more numerous, and far more considerable, than its Blemishes: even
taking all those things for real Blemishes, which we may only imagine to be
such.

If the fashionable Choice of Verse be justly blameable; it may as justly be
said that no one moves with more freedom in his Fetters. In particular Lines,
there may be some farther disagreeable Likenesses of Sound; but the Variety of
Numbers in general is great and handsome: What Smoothness and Harmony do we
find through the course of the Poem; and how seldom are they interrupted either
by the Littleness, or the Vastness of the Words? by the Openness of the Vowels,
the Clashing of Consonants, or any other Roughnesses whatever: Not to mention
against these, that Significance of Sound, which is more frequent, and more
happily practiced by Mr. Pope, in particular, than by any other of the Modern
Poets.

As to the Diction; not only the Poem but our Language itself is enriched by
it. Where it is once Mean, it is in many instances Great, Noble, and Solemn.
Where a Simplicity beyond our Taste is to be preserved, we may expect some
Flatnesses: And it may be to these perhaps we owe that Justness and Purity,
which in so many places makes us imagine, that we are conversing with Persons
of those First Ages of the World, in all their Plainness and Honesty of
Behavior. At other times the Narration is raised, and the Images strengthened
by a figurative way of speaking, though no doubt, in some cases, to excess: but
these Excesses may well be passed over, when we consider, that they proceed
from Liberties, which are highly useful in rendering the Style the more various
and poetical; so far, as frequently to improve upon Homer himself.

Above all, is that flame and spirit diffused through the whole Poem; and
oftentimes so well kept up, as to make us forget, that we are reading a
Translation. When we are engaged in the Piece, do not the great and generous
Sentiments we meet with perpetually, make a few Thoughts, which have something
cold or little in them, appear inconsiderable upon the first Comparison? What
Eclaircisements have we, and how little Obscurity? What a number of natural
Thoughts, Images, and Descriptions might be produced, to overbalance such
Lines in it, as may seem to be Affected, or too Artificial?

Thus which ever way we turn ourselves, whether we consider the Poetical
Spirit, the Language, or the Versification; in each of them the Beauties far
exceed the Defects. It is with this Notion we ought to proceed in our
Enquiries: we must carry this Thought all along with us. Let us remember
Philypsus, That all human Excellence stands merely on Comparison: that no one
is without Faults, and that very few arrive in any tolerable degree toward
Perfection: That Mr. Pope does not only appear among the Few, but that his
Superiority is every way visible: If we compare his Compositions in general
with those of our other Poets, the Disproportion is as great, as when we
compare the Blemishes of his own Poetry, with the Beauties which every where
abound in it.

Some of these we are now to consider; and we may enter on this View with the
greater Pleasure, as we have the advantage of Mr. Pope's own Observations in
several Points, both as to those things, in which he met with the greatest
difficulty; and the Methods he has taken of raising his Language, and improving
the Versification.

One of the greatest Sources of raising, as well as enlarging the Poetical
Language, is by inventing New Words, or importing old Ones from a foreign Soil.
Words, when they are used vulgarly, grow mean: Like other Fashions, when their
use is once got among the Populace, they soon begin to be rejected by the
politer Part of the World. This it is (as Art de bien Parler^ Part 1. Chap. 4.
Sect. 5.
the Gentlemen of Port Royal very justly observe) which necessitates the
introducing of New Words into every Language; it occasions a continual Decay,
and demands continual Supplies. Thus whoever has a Felicity this way, is a
Benefactor to the Public: he adds so much to the Bank; and gives his
Assistance in supporting the present Credit of Language among us.

It would be equally trifling and laborious, to give all the particular
Instances of this Version's enriching our Language. It is every where visible;
there is no reading a Book in the Odyssey, without observing it frequently. You
will almost constantly find his new Words to be apt, easy, and poetical.
Sometimes he introduces the Expressions, and even the Peculiarities of other
Languages into our own: These, when unforced, please us very particularly, by
the Variety, and Novelty, they bring along with them. We admire the Stranger in
our Habit; and are extremely taken to see him look as free and easy as if he
were a Native, and had been always truly English.

The Poet has the same Art and Delicacy in Connecting two Words into one, a
thing much more difficult than Inventing: The Union is proper and insensible;
there is no Knot, where they are ingrafted: in short, they Thus: Mellif^uous,
attemper'd; ever-shady, ill-perswading, serpent-mazes, and several others in
this Translation.
may be said rather to grow into one another, than to be brought together by
Art. I do not say, that this hits so naturally in all the Instances; there may
be Thus perhaps: Sea-girt, end-long, loved^ttied, woman-state, etc. in the same.
some Words less tractable, or less harmonious than others: But in general we
may affirm, that as his Translation is wrought off from a Language, which in
this Respect greatly exceeds all that ever were; So the Imitations of it, this
way, are unusually Beautiful and Harmonious.

To deviate from the strict Rules which Grammarians would impose on Words,
either single, or as they stand in their relations to one another, gives an
agreeable uncommon Air to Language; but in the very Notion of it carries
something of difficulty, and niceness along with it. Mr. Pope seems to have
thought it the safest way in such Cases to follow or resemble those Deviations,
which have been already Authorized by some Masterly hand: and where he strikes
more boldly into any new Freedom, he is generally careful of giving things such
an Openness, that they may neither perplex the Sense, nor embarrass the Period.

A thing more useful and agreeable than either of these, is to turn the stream
of Words out of their common Channel. -- There is a good deal of Stiffness,
which yet attends our Language, from the stated order of Words in such a
repeated Succession: and though we are much freer than our Neighbors the French
in this particular, I should be glad to see our Poets, at least, go yet farther
toward the Liberties of the old Greeks and Romans. Mr. Pope has some strokes
toward this: he is sometimes bold in varying the expected range of Words, to
give his Sentences a new and agreeable air: he transposes their order, often by
his own Judgment, and often in imitation of some of our best Poets, who have
succeeded in it before.

I would not have a certain Grammarian, or two, over-hear me commending these
Liberties so freely: it would certainly cost one a Dispute. You know the Men:
they are as strict in the Punctilio's of Words, as some formal People are in
the little Points of Behavior. I warrant you, your Neighbor, The Doctor,
would stand as strictly upon the Nominative Case's going before the Verb, as
Wicquefort would for the Precedence of an Ambassador: It Is certain he can
settle all the Rules of Place from undeniable Authorities; disposes of the
Upper-hand with perfect Economy; and, upon the whole, would make an Excellent
Master of the Ceremonies among Words and Syllables.

However, with this Gentleman's leave, there are several just Liberties which
may be allowed for varying the Poetical Plurimae sint locutiones apud Poetas
usita^ssimae, and in primis elegantes, quae scriptis Pro^^cis usurpatae etiam
Grammaticae leges violant. (...) Trapp's Prael. Poet. Page 49, etc. to Page 53.
Style: and many Aids, proper to enliven and elevate it in the more noble Parts
of a Poem.

Among the latter, Mr. Pope has made very good use of Antiquated Words; and no
less of Expressions borrowed from our Translation of the Sacred Writings. The
Language of Scripture, as it is received from the first with a certain
religious Awe, will still retain something venerable, and august: it may
therefore be of signal Service in giving to the Heroic Muse that Majesty,
which so well becomes the Sublime Air she ought to assume. It Is much the same
in the revival of old Words: Antiquity always carries a sort of Solemnity with
it, in its very Roughnesses and Decays: The Rustic strikes the Mind, as
strongly, as any thing in Architecture; and Ruins themselves have often
something awful and majestic in them.

I would not willingly interrupt you (says Philypsus) but the humor of heaping
superannuated Words in some late Poems, is too provoking to be passed by. How
have our Miltonick Writers, in particular, prostituted them on all occasions:
in what an undistinguishing manner do they labor to draw into their Works, any
word which their great Master has adopted into his Paradise Lost? -- Erst,
Nathless, Behests, Welkin, and a Thousand other Expressions of equal beauty and
agreeableness of Sound, are repeated ten times in every Sheet of theirs: in
short, these Gentlemen have made me quite sick of People's going two Hundred
Years backward for their Language; and furnishing out half their Poems from the
Vocabularies annexed to Spencer and Chaucer.

As for some of those Writers (replied Antiphaus calmly) You have reason to be
angry with them; but if we may reject any thing merely for the abuse of it,
there is nothing of the greatest use, that we may not fairly reject. Virgil
made particular use of this method in his Poems, and was Cum sint verba
Propria, sicta, translata; Prop^iis dignitatem dat Antiquitas: eo ornamento
Vi^g^l^u^ u^ice ^st usus. Quintil. Instit. Lib 8. Cap. 3. (...) Lib 9 C^p 3.
admired by his Countrymen on that account: What is your Opinion of our Milton?
Are you displeased with the antiquated Words in his Writings? No, Philypsus, I
know your Taste too well to imagine any thing of that nature. And even of
those, that have followed his Example, there is one or two who make good use of
them. This we see in Philips's pieces; not to mention the new WINTER: by Mr.
Thompson.
Poem we were reading the other Day: the Author of which, beside several other
Beauties, is by no means unhappy in his Management of this sort of Words. I
agree with you, the Abuse of them is frequent, and much to be condemned: If
perpetual, they run into a mere Barbarism; and indeed wherever they are
thrust in, without any other reason except their being Ancient, they give a
Roughness and Disorder, instead of the proper Solemnity: But when they are
placed here and there with Judgment, they support the greatness of our Ideas,
and reflect a venerableness on the subject. Were the Old Oaks, that are left
standing in the Gardens of Blenheim, more numerous, that Design might have too
much of the Forest in it: but as they ^re, they serve to communicate the nobler
^ir of Antiquity to the things about them; and appear in a Majesty of Years,
equal ^o the Grandeur of the Place.

I would desire you to commend the in^rtion of Solemn Words, only as they are
proper to the Places in which they are used. We see by Mr. Pope's Observations
on this Head, that he understands the Benefit of them perfectly well; as his
Works show that he practices up to his own Rules; and scarce ever inserts
either the Words of former Centuries, or the Language of Scripture, but where
the Subject demands a solemn and venerable Turn.

As these are the chief Methods of ennobling the Poetic Style; so the chief to
enliven it, is the free and various use of Epithets. No one thing is of greater
service to the Poets for distinguishing ^^eir Language from Prose. This has
occasioned that Eo (Epitheto) poetae and frequentius and liberius u^untur:
Namque illis satis est conveni^^ verbo, cui apponitur; and ita Dentes albi, and
Humi^^ Vina in his non reprehenduntur. Quintil. Insti^ Lib. 8. Cap. 6.
large and unrestrained use of them, so much beyond what we ^^nd in Oratory:
And though Homer is more bold and frequent in this, than any of the Poets who
have wrote since; I know not any of the Ancient Critics who have ever blamed
him on that account. It Is partly from his uncommon liberties this way, that Mr.
Pope looks upon his Epithets, as one of the Pref. to Il. p. 21.
Distinguishing Marks of that Poet. In Homer they have on several accounts a
peculiar air: and this Translation not only preserves their proper beauties,
but shows many Methods of improving upon them. Sometimes the Old are set in a
stronger light, and sometimes New ones added with a peculiar grace: Sometimes
several are applied to the same thing, without Huge, horrid, vast! Od. 5,
227^^175.
that strictness of connection, which would (...). Them. Phal. (...).
flatten the energy of them; and where the poverty of our Language will not
convey their full Sense in the Conciseness of the Original, they are enlarged
upon in the Translation, and laid more open to our view.

Epithets, Philypsus, like Pictures in Miniature, are often entire descriptions
in one Word. This may be either from their own significance, or by their
immediate connection with some known object. We see the thing, when the Poet
only mentions the Nodding Crest of an Hero; and form a larger Idea of Jove from
the single Epithet of Cloud-compelling, than we might find in a description
more diffuse. It was chiefly from See Mr. Pope's Note on Il. 1, 683.
two Poetical Epithets, that Phidias designed the countenance of his Olympian
Jupiter; as, in Reverse, we often see the Person in his Epithet, from our being
acquainted with some Statue, or Picture, to which it refers: Thus when Apollo
is called the Archer-God, it recalls to our memory the representations we have
so often seen of that Deity: the complete Figure is raised up in the Mind, by
touching upon that single circumstance.

It Is by the same means, that one single Epithet gives us the Idea of any
Object, which has been common and familiar to us. Meadows, Fields, Woods,
Rivers, and the Sea itself, are often imag'd by one well-chosen word. Thus in
that See (...) 5^ 85.
beautiful Description of Calypso's Bower, you see the Groves of living green;
the Alders ever quivering; the nodding Cypress, and its high Branches, waving
with the Storm: It Is by Epithets that the ancient Poets paint their Elysian
Gr^ves; and the Modern, their Windsor-Forests.

Where our Language will not admit of this conciseness, we find the Image
preserved by a Description more full and diffusive; thus, -- The Morning Sun
increasing bright
Od. 9, 67 -- 56.
Over Heavens pure Azure spreads the growing light.


I should think that the Opening of the Sense in a larger Compass may often be
approved, even where we are not driven to it by the poverty of our Language.
Homer himself, who has the advantage of single Words so much stronger and more
significant, often chooses to draw out his Sentiments, into several Lines: and
sometimes N(...) which is beautifully expressed by Horace in three words
(nimi^m lubricus aspici) is enlarged by Homer himself, on a fit occasion, into
three lines: Compare Il. l, 16, with n', 340.
the very same Sentiment, which upon other Occasions he has expressed in one
word only. May not the same Liberty be allowed to his Translators? Is it not a
fine Enlargement for Instance, where Homer is speaking of Penelope's Veil with
the Epithet of Pellucid only, to say that the Transparent Veil Od. 18, 250 --
209. (...).
Her beauty seems and only seems to shade.


Though these imaging and descriptive Epithets are the more Beautiful, those
which add Strength and Emphasis are by no means to be contemned. This way they
are of great Service in all Satire; and particularly in that Abusiveness, which
Homer is not over nice in bestowing upon his Gods: they appear well in the
Ridicule of the Suitors; and are strong and vehement in any Arrogant Character,
particularly in all Contemners of the Gods. I shall give you only one instance
of the latter; from Polypheme's Answer to Ulysses:

Fools that you are! (the monster made reply,
His inward fury blazing at his eye)
Or strangers distant far from our abodes,
To bid me reverence or regard the Gods.
Know, that we Cyclops are a race above
Od. 9, 330 -- 276.
Those air-br^d people, and their goat-nurs'd Jov^^
You must have observed (Philypsus) several other Methods of using Epithets
poetically. I need not mention the peculiar fitness and strength, which they
may acquire, from the Od. 23, 217. compared with verse 227.
occasions on which they are used, or the Light they are set in: That Od. 1,
389 -- 299.
Substantives are sometimes used as Epithets; and sometimes Od. 19, 110 -- 91.
Epithets as Substantives: Sometimes the Od. 10, 291.
Metaphor is conveyed this way with a good Grace; and at others, two Thwarting
Ideas are mixed together in a very agreeable manner. Mr. Addison is the first I
know of, that observed upon these, and gave them their Name, and of this kind
is the Od 4, 320 -- 230.
Vegetable Venom in the fourth Odyssey, which answers Addison's Misc. Vol. 1.
p. 245. 120.
his Instance of Aurum Frondens from Virgil.

I know not whether I perfectly apprehend you, or not (interposed Philypsus):
Do You not mean that particular sort of Metaphor, when some strange quality in
a thing, is turned into an Epithet, and directly applied to it? -- Either that;
or else some strange Circumstance applied in the same manner: in both it is the
Novelty and the Surprise, that please us. -- I take you, says Philypsus; and
believe I now see a farther Reason, why a very natural Passage (in another Poem
by Mr. Pope) has always been so agreeable to me. It Is where he speaks of the
odd Appearance of things from their inversion in a River: I think I can repeat
it:

Often in the Stream -- The musing Shepherd spies
The headlong Mountains and the downward Skies,
The wa^ry Landscape of the pendant Woods,
And absent trees that tremble in the floods;
In the clear azure Gleam the Flocks are seen,
Windsor-Forest, p. 59. folio.
And floating Forests paint the Waves with green.
These are of the kind I mean, says Antiphaus; they are bold, but they are
natural: Indeed with due caution, greater Contrarieties than these may be
joined, under some particular Circumstance, to justify so unexpected an Union.
Thus all Epithets, which contradict the general Sense of the Thing, but agree
with the particular Occasion; Thus is Grief called pleasing; there are
Kindnesses which are terrible As when the Cyclops, in the height of his good
nature, promis^s Ulysses, that he shall be the last he will devour. Od. 9.
: And in many cases Death and even Disgrace may be desirable. Instances of this
kind, are very frequent, especially among our modern Poets. There are Od. 1,
449 -- 353. 15, 435 -- 399. otherwise 12, 52. 18, 284 etc.
many in this Translation: in particular, it is this which gives a new Air to
that gay Verse 380 -- 342.
Speech of Mercury in the Eighth Book.

Though the Latins used this agreeable Clash of Ideas, the Greek Poets (as Mr.
Addison M^sc. Vol. 1. p. 245. 120.
observes on the former Head) wanted Art for it; They, at least the more
Ancient of them, never join things that seem to disagree, in so close an Union.
Unless where Nature her self has led the way in an Thus in the Twilight, when
we have really a sort of visible Darkness, Homer uses an Epithet of the same
contrariety: A(...), i.e. Darkness tinged every way with Light. (...), 433.
actual mixture of Contrarieties: in any point, except that single one, these
must be entirely Improvements on the Original.

The Misfortune is, that in all Human Excellencies there will be an Alloy:
Faults spring out of our Improvements themselves; and the very methods of
Beautifying lead often into Blemishes. The way to any Perfection is full of
Difficulties and Windings on each side; and every step out of the right Path
(though they cross each other every Moment) is a wandering from our Design. In a
word, Philypsus, it is much the same with Errors and Improvements, as it is with
Pleasure and Pain in the Philosopher's Fable: they are blended together in such
a manner, that it is impossible to come at the one, without touching upon the
other.

All the Methods which are used in Mr. Pope's Translation, and which are so
often of great Efficacy toward beautifying and improving the Diction, may
sometimes fall under a different Character.

Among the Words which are introduced from other Languages into our own, there
may be Dexter, circumfusile, variegated Od. 15, 145.
some, which still retain too much of the air of Foreigners: As antiquated
Words may Seneschal, viands, bev'rage, irefull 3, 179.
look too Grotesque, or have a rough disagreeable sound. The very Solemnity of
Scriptural Expressions may sometimes require that they should not be Jupiter is
styled, God (simply; Od. 3. 190 -- 158, (...)) Neptune, A God above the Gods.
Od. 13, 167.
alienated: at least it may make them look To thee a Son is given -- Od. 18,
207. And -- Food in the desert land, behold, is given. Od. 10, 204 -- 175.
too high for the Passages in which they are inserted.

Next to the importing of Words New to the Poetical Style, is the varying the
use of the Old. To deviate from the strictness of Grammar, is what gave a rise
to Rhetoric; and surely there are few who would not prefer all the beautiful
Forms and Figures of the latter (at least for Poetry and Oratory) to that bare
correctness, which alone is the Province of the former: Yet there may be
Innovations on this too harsh or daring; and Figures, that may look more like
Patchwork, than true Ornaments in the Dress of Poetry.

The greater danger is, when the Poet assumes Flown (with Insolence) Od. 1,
292. ^ilial ^or a Daughter) 6, 67.
any common Word in a new unusual Sense. The worst Fault of any Language is,
Ambiguity; that great cause of Darkness in Verse, and the continuer of every
Dispute that has been kept up for any time in Prose. The various Appearances of
words, Philypsus, should not be multiplied unnecessarily; the Reader is apt to
be distracted between so many Lights: and in such a Variety may follow the
false, as well as the true.

I have observed this particularly in Words derived from other Languages:
These, you know, often prevail among ^s very differently from their native
signification. The Latin sense perhaps is ^ne thing, and the English use
another: When this has obtained universally, we ^ught not to run back to the
Latin Partial Od. 8^ ^85. (...) 17, 200. Objected 7, 54. Impl^cite 9^ 514.
^ense of the word, in our use of it. If ^ou should, the Learned themselves may
^ot readily fall into your meaning, and ^he Unlearned will inevitably mistake
it.

It may be inquired too, how far this Translation, may make a wrong use of
Terms borrowed from any of the Arts and Sciences: As where we read of
Architraves, Colonnades, and the like. I would not produce these as undoubted
faults in the Poetical Style: though the banishing all Technical Words, be laid
down by some Critics as a Rule never to be transgressed; I should imagine they
might be admitted in some Cases; even where there is not that absolute
necessity, either of using them, or losing the Sense of the Original.

Will not the very thing, on which the Rule is founded, allow the departing
from it sometimes? "That the Poet writes to all Mankind in general; And "That
h^ should avoid all appearance of Labor, a^ well as Affectation, is very true;
and very good reasons they are for his not using Technical Words, while they
carry difficulty and an Air of Affectation about them: But if such words ever
happen to be perfectly Familiarized by the Writing of former Poets, or become
of common Use in the World, I should think the^ have the same Right to be
admitted into Poetry (and if not mean, the same propriety) as any other Words,
the most obvious and intelligible. Any one may distinguish their greater, or
less fitness, o^ this Account, in the description of Al^nous's Palace: in which
there are sever^ Instances, both of Terms familiariz'^ and of such as are less
allowable, under one and the same view:

The Front appeared with radiant splendors gay,
Bright as the lamp of Night, or orb of Day.
The walls were massy brass: the Cornice high
Blue metals crowned, in colors of the sky:
Rich plates of gold the folding-doors incase;
The pillars silver, on a brazen base;
Silver the Lintels deep-projecting over,
Od. 7, 117 -- 90.
And gold the ringlets that command the door.
Some of these Terms are certainly allowable; And you will think perhaps I
carry the matter too far in another Point, which may seem as allowable to the
full. You must know, I am apt to imagine, that not only the more difficult
Terms of Art, but even such Words as are Thus there is something which does not
^ound entirely right in these lines: Full shines the Father in the Filial
Frame, Od. 4, 199. He ceased: the Filial Virtue made reply. 22, 167. Mean time
Arcte for the hour of rest Ordains the fleecy couch -- 7, 428. The Peers
reproach the sure Divine of fate. 20, 432.

Within the Stricture of the palace wall 22, 186. Imposthumate with pride. --
20, 358. With Venial freedom let me now demand Thy name. -- 1, 219. There cling
implicit, and confide in Jove. 9, 514.

The Seneshal rebuked in haste withdrew, 4, 47. A Cenotaph I raise of deathless
fame. 4, 794.


^surp'd more particularly in any single Province, may become less fit to be
used in Common. If so, it may require caution in inserting some, that are
appropriated to particular Persons or Things; Many that are used much in the
Professions, especially in the Scholastic way of Distinctions: and all in
general that are perplexed, or not to be understood without Difficulty.

I Am afraid I have tired you, Philypsus, with such a string of dry
Observations; they must have their Turn in a view of this Nature; and to omit
what is Necessary, for fear of an imputation of Pedantry, is perhaps the worst
Pedantry one can be guilty of.

Give me leave to enlarge more upon the Abuse of Epithets, as I did before upon
the Use of them. It Is the same with these, Philypsus, as with all other
Ornaments of Speech; their being so very serviceable, may lead to a large^ Use
of them than is proper: but there is this Advantage too; the very thing which
makes them so strong and beautiful, will help to discover any Error in their
Application. They are each connected so immediately to their Subject, that
their Impropriety, as well as Agreement, is very easily discerned.

On (...). Aristot. Rhetor. Lib. 3. ^p. 2.
this Account, we should be the more cautious how we mix the Epithets of the
Proper, with any Metaphorical Expressions: These, for the Time change their
Nature, and may signify things very different from what they stood for before.
That Metaphor, which puts the Name of a Place or Country for its Inhabitants,
is reckoned a great and agreeable one; but wherever it is used, we must
remember it stands now for Men, and is not to be considered in its proper
^tate, as a Part of the Earth. If its old Epi^hets are still applied to it, the
Sense must ^e disagreeing and confused.

I fear we meet with something of this ^here Penelope complains of the Numbers
and Importunity of her Suitors: after ^his manner:

Zacynthus green with ever-shady groves,
and Ithaca, presumptuous boast their loves;
^^truding on my choice a second Lord
(...) They press the Hymenaean rite. --
(b) Od. 19, 155 -- 131.
Longinus, Cap. 24. Ed. Oxon. 1718.
somewhere in his Treatise on the sublime, gives us an instance of this sort of
Metaphor, from Herodotus, where that Historian is speaking of a very moving
Tragedy, at the Acting of which, the Theater burst into tears: This the Critic
judges to be so taking, from the surprise that Turn of Expression carries with
it. The Metaphor itself has certainly something great in it: But had Herodotus
joined some of its proper Epithets or Description with this Mataphor, and said,
that The Theater, raised all o^ Columns of the Corinthian Order, burst into
Tears at the deepness of the Tragedy Longinus might have thought the passage
more Surprising, but I dare say he would not have thought it so worthy of hi^
Commendation.

To mix these things in a Description is really as Absurd, as to paint a
River^God, not with his Urn, to signify wha^ he is; but gushing all over into
Streams^ like some of the odd Figures in Ovid'^ Metamorphosis: and by the way,
it man be a very good Spectator, N. 59^
Rule that is given, (...) try mixed Metaphors at any time; b^ forming in one's
Mind a Picture, from what is said; and considering how the Parts of it would
agree, were they delineated upon Canvass.

There is another disagreement in Epithets, when two Expressions, proper in
themselves, are yet joined together improperly. After a great Slaughter we may
very well have a Notion of Heaps, or (as it is in the Poetical language)
Mountains of the Slain; it is natural on the same Occasion to imagine to
ourselves their Wounds, and the blood ebbing out of them: these are very proper
separately; but to join them under the Notion of a Od. 22, 135 -- 118.
Bleeding Mountain does not look so reconcilable to the Mind.

An Error yet more frequent is, when we give a word that Epithet, which is
proper to it on some Occasions, indifferently at all times, and without any
Occasion.

This, in some Measure, has been always allowable in Verse: however such a
Liberty is not without its bounds, nor should it be used intemperately. Purple
(for instance) is an Epithet very frequent in the Ancient Poets for the Habit
of Princes: yet it is not to be given to that of all Great Men; nor of Princes
equally, whether (...). Arist. Rhet. l. 3. c. 2.
young or old; nor of the very same Prince, under several Circumstances: though a
Remark of this kind may seem insignificant, an Impropriety in this Case might
be very gross and shocking.

Again: What is proper in one Language, may not be so in another. Was any one
to Translate the purpureis Oloribus of Horace, Purple Swans, would not he be so
Literal, as to miss the Sense of his Author entirely?

There may be another Impropriety from the difference of time and
circumstances: It may do very well to give the Epithet of browzing, to a Goat;
or grazing, to the Ox: it helps to describe them in the Fields, or to
distinguish them from some other Creatures; and if neither of these, at least
it gives the Language a Poetical Air: Yet these Epithets have some restraints,
they belong to Life and Action; they do not suit with those very Creatures,
when Dead; and less so, when they are cut out in the Shambles, or served up at
a Feast: this is the Case in a Passage relating to Penelope's Suitors; they,

-- A Luxurious race, indulge their cheer;
Devour the grazing Ox and browzing Goat,
Od. 17, 621 -- 535.
And turn the generous Vintage down their throat.
As Epithets should be proper to the Things, or Person, they are spoken of; so
must we take Care that they are still proper to the Metaphors we add; and in
Allegory, not to confound the Epithets of the Real, with those of the
Fictitious Person.

In the Preface to the Iliad Page 22. 12 mo.
we have an Excellent Distinction to this Purpose, on a known (...).
Epithet of Apollo; Which (as we are there told) is capable of two
Explications; One Literal, in respect of the Darts and Bow, the Ensigns of that
God; the other Allegorical, with regard to the Rays of the Sun: therefore in
such Places, where Apollo is represented as a God in Person, I would use the
former Interpretation; and where the Effects of the Sun are described, I would
make Choice of the latter. You see the justness of the Observation: it may
serve to explain my Meaning better than I could express it my self.

It Is Evident, by the Way, that Mr. Pope formed this Observation upon his
Experience in the Progress of that Translation: This appears from the first
Part of that Work, in which we sometimes find the Properties and Effects of the
Sun, blended with the personal Act^ of Apollo: thus it is in the first
Appearance of that Deity in the Poem. I shall read the Passage to You, though
something long: it begins with that beautiful line^

Silent Chryses.
he wandered by the sounding Shore:
Till safe at distance to his God he prays,
That God, who da^ts around the World his rays.
O Smintheus sprung from fair Latona's line,
Thou guardian power of Cill^ the Divine,
Thou source of Light^ whom T^n^dos adores.
And whose bright presence gilds thy Chrysa's shore^
God of the Silver bow! thy Shafts employ,
Il. 1, 60 -- 42.
Avenge thy servant, and the Greeks destroy.
The Original here does not once Attribute any thing to the Deity but wha^ is
personal: it is certain the Sun and i^ Effects are hid under this Allegory but
then they must be hid; for so far a it appears, it will cease to be Allegor^
Homer never mixes shadows and reality and as Mr. Pope perceived this in his
goin^ on with the Poem, I presume he bui^ upon it that excellent Observation.

Any mixture of this Nature is more evident in Epithets, for that obvious
Reason I mentioned before. And thus, you see, there are Inconveniences attend
each Method of improving the Poetical Diction; and that the danger bears some
Proportion to the Excellence. Where the finest Colorings are most visible, the
^aulty strokes of the Pencil are the sooner perceived: and when we meet with
the greatest Improvements in a Piece, we must ^ot imagine it to be wholly
without de^ect. Of all Doctrines, I shall never hold that, which supposes any
Man to be In^allible: and of all Men, the Poet of a ^rue, free, glowing Spirit,
must naturally ^e incapable of that Character. No, ^hilypsus, the most correct
Writer is he, that has the fewest Faults: and he is the ^^blest Poet, that has
most distinct Excel^encies.

You need not repeat, says Philypsus, that you have thoroughly convinced me ^f
long since. Yes, it is the Whoever thinks a faultless Piece to see, ^hinks what
never was, nor is, nor ever shall be. Pope's Essay on Criticism.
Condi^on of every human Performance not to ^e absolutely perfect. I can allow
of see^g Faults in any the most favorite Piece: and find a fresh and greater
Pleasure every Day in reading an Author without that Biass, which used to make
me admire every thing I read. Yet I must own my Infirmity to you; I still find
it very Difficult to arrive to that Indifference, you would persuade, in any
Tolerable degree.

A perfect Indifference (answered Antiphaus) is no more attainable, than a
perfect Excellence, by a Creature made up of so many Passions, as is Man. We
must poise ourselves with all the Steadiness we ^re Masters of; and when those
Disturbers will be interfering, the best way is to turn their own Artillery
upon them: and to play one Passion against another. If the superior Merit of a
Writer, or his engaging Way, is apt to captivate us so far as to raise any
partial regards in us; we must stop, and Consider what we owe to Truth, the
most beautiful and commanding thing in the World: On the contrary, wherever
we begin to feel a malicious Pleasure in finding out the Faults of great Men,
we must break off that humor as soon as perceived, by turning immediately to
some of the finest Passages in their Works, and indulging that Delight and
Admiration they raise in us.

I do thus (replied Philypsus) and yet it is but too frequently that I find my
self more engaged than I ought to be, after all my Endeavors: How happy should
I be, could I have that command of my Temper, which Antiphaus shows upon all
Occasions.

If you have observed any thing in me of that Nature (says Antiphaus,
interrupting him) it is chiefly owing to the Observance of this Rule, When we
are thinking of any particular Passage, to forget the Character of the Author:
and when we are speaking of the Character of the Author, to forget the Turn of
any particular Passage. Our Notion of a Poem is not to be influenced ^y a few
Lines, taken here and there from it: the only thing by which it can ^e justly
determined is the Balance of the Account, after reckoning up all its Beau^^es
and all its Defects against one another. I mean, not only as to their Num^^,
but according to the real Value, or ^^^oy that is in them. But what am I ^oing,
Philypsus? to talk at this rate, ^hile I might be enjoying your Obser^^tions?
-- The things I have heard you ^eak of at Different Times, make me ^ng to see
them in one collected View. ^e are here safe from the Impertinence (...)
Business, or Visits: and may enjoy ^r selves at Large, without being inter^pted
by either.

I am sensible (answered Philypsus, after a short pause) that what you
particularly mean, is the Improvements in Mr. Pope's Translation, from the many
Figures and Variations added in that Work: but as I am not prepared for a
regular Account of them, You will give me leave to mention them just as they
come into my Thoughts. My happiness is, that I spea^ to so generous a Friend: I
know Antiphaus too well to make Apologies for the Weakness of my Observations,
o^ the loose manner in which I may lay my Thoughts before him.

From Aristotle's Lib. de Poet. Cap. 2^.
To be Clear and not to be Mea^ is the great Excellence of Languag^ A Style
that is made up wholly of proper Words, will be the clearest of any but at the
same Time it will necessaril^ be mean: On the Contrary, the i^prov'd figurative
Style is great, but (...) it be Crowded every where with F^gures and new Terms,
it must gro^ dark and barbarous. If this Rule be just, as it has ever be^
allowed to be (quite down from the Gre^ Father of Criticism at Athens, to tho
who Flourish now in the Academy (...) Paris) all Additional Figures in the
Translation, which neither darken nor perplex the Sense, are so many new
Beauties and Improvements upon the Original.

For my part I should not stick at carrying this Point farther. I should
imagine, That Figures are the Language of the Passions. The Body it self is
agitated, and our Features discomposed, when the Mind is struck violently with
any Object: and if we speak upon such Occasions, it is with rapidity and
disorder. We ^ourst out into Exclamations: our Senti^ents are quick and
violent; and our Language interrupted frequently with ^uddain Starts, and as
sudden Pauses. Things appear then more strong and ^argely to the Mind; and we
paint them (...) more expressive Colors, with a greater ^nergy of Words. It Is
this way of ^^eaking, that gave rise to what the Cri^cks afterward called
Figures. These ^re the beautiful Disorders of Language; ^^ey are in our Words
what sudden Agi^tions are in our Minds; and though we ^ay think them chiefly the
effect of Art, ^ey are really the most natural things (...) Poetry.

When we are struck suddenly with ^y or Sorrow, Hopes or Fears, we ^eak out in
a short quick manner of Expression. -- Ulysses, in the Habit of a stranger,
finds the good old Laertes ever sorrowing for his Absence, and bu^ying himself
in his Garden, to divert the melancholy of his Thoughts. The Hero does not
discover himself immediately; only just mentions to him, that he had seen
Ulysses in his Travels. That is the point Laertes fixes upon: This Island you
are landed upon (says he) is Ithaca;

But tell me Stranger, be the Truth confessed,
What years have circled since thou saw that guest?
That hapless guest, alas! for ever gone!
Wretch that ^e was! and that I am! my Son!
If ever Man to misery was born,
Od. 24, 339 -- 289.
'Twas his to suffer, and it is mine to mourn^
Ul^sses in his Answer informs him where he had met with his Son; and that when
the^ parted, he ^latter'd himself with ho^es of seeing him again; but now, he
found, he must despair of that happiness This was too much for Laertes to bear
(...) we see him overcome with Sorrow. It Is now Ulysses's turn to be agitated,
and t^ speak his Passions in the same impetuou^ manner:

He ran, he seized him with a strict embrace^
With thousand kisses wandered over his face^
"I, I am he; Oh Father rise! Behold,
" Od. 24, 376 -- ^20
Thy son! --
I can scarce leave the pleasure I take in repeating these Passages only to
tell you, that they are extremely improved by Mr. Pope. No one will imagine how
much, that has not compared them with the Original.

You see these Passions break out in short violent Flashes: sometimes they are
so strong as to permit no more than one word or two. When Euryclea by accident
discovers Ulysses, she can only cry out Od. 19, 554 -- 475.
My Son! -- My King! -- And where any go farther, they rather hint at things,
than mention them: Their Thoughts are ^ull of starts, and hurry; they speak
with vehemence; and often end abruptly. Thus Ulysses, when he discovers himself
^o Telemachus:

I am thy Father. O my Son! my Son!
That Father, for whose sake thy days have run
Od. 16, 208 -- 189. Od. 22, 166 -- 152.
One scene of woe. etc. --
And in another place, from a different Passion:

O cursed event! and Oh unlooked for aid!
^anthius, or the women have betrayed --
(...) Oh my Dear Son! --
These passionate Breaks are one of the finest things in Poetry. They are as
natural in Anger, as they are in Sorrow or Suprizes; and indeed in the former
are proper sooner, and upon less motives far, than in these. I know not how it
is, they have a particular aptness in all Threats; and either intimate very
strongly, or are very well filled up with some menacing Action: This choice is
left you to resist or die;
Od. 22, 81 -- 67.
And die I trust, Ye shall. --


Or, as in the Nineteenth Book, Vagrant be gone! before this blazing brand
Od. 19, 85 -- 69.
Shall urge -- and waved it hissing in her hand^


You have puzzled me, says Antiphaus Now for my Life cannot I tell which to
approve of most, the expressing, or the i^timating the Action in such Cases:
the requires the greatest strength in the Poe^ and the other has greater force
in h^ Performance. Oh, give me leave to mention one thing -- Have you not
observ^ a Larger sort of Break, which is us^ artificially in a Poem, to incite
the A^tention of the Reader? I mean, wh^ the Narration is dropped in the most
engaging parts of it, or just before some very material Incident: This adds a
double desire of hearing: the Audience generally make it their Request, that
the Speaker would go on, and inform them of the Sequel. Thus it is in the
Eleventh Odyssey. Ulysses in the midst of his Account of the Infernal Regions
Od. 11, 408 -- 328. -- (...), Verse 333^ And V. 369. Alcinous desires him to
proceed.
makes a feint of concluding: we are immediately told, that the Phaeacians were
eager to hear him on; and it is observable, that the very -- Donec Calchante
ministro -- Tum vero ardemusscitari. -- Aen. 2, ^00 and 105.
same Break, and the very same Sentiment after it, is imitated by Virgil. It Is
indeed improved in the latter: he has all the Use of Homer's suspense, without
the Tediousness of it.

I have often taken notice of this Arti^ice, says Philypsus. It Is very usual in
the Close of the particular Books, not only of this Poem, but equally of the
Iliad and Aeneid. -- Were it not a thing pretty obvious in itself, I should be
apt to imagine, that it was from this practice of Homer and Virgil, that those
prudent Authors, who write for Sale, had learnt what is so common among them:
Thus in our Books of Adventures and Romance, we seldom meet with a First Part,
which does not break off in such a point of the Story, as may be most apt to
engage the Expectation of the Reader; and to draw him in for that most tedious
thing in the World, vulgarly called, A Second Part.

There is yet another sort of Breaks, Antiphaus, which proceed not from the
Artifice of the Writer, but the Passion he feels upon some great or unexpected
Calamity. There might be Instances of this given from the Poem before us: but
we must go to another Piece of Mr. Pope's for the finest that ever I met with
in my Life. It Is in his Charming Ode on Music, where he is speaking of that
great Master of it, Orpheus:

Sta^za the 6th.
See wild as the winds over the mountains he ^lies,
Hark Haemus refounds with the Bacchinals cries!
-- Ah, see! he dies.
Those Passions, which break off our Language in this manner, and confine it to
short catches and starts; when they are wrought up to the highest pitch, or
crowd in many of them together upon the Mind, are best expressed by Silence. Such
Silences as these (pardon me a Paradox as old as (...) (the Disciples of
Pythagoras) (...). Philo^ratus de Vita Apol: Lib. 1^ Cap. 1.
Pythagoras his times) are the voice of Nature. It Is true in the common Method
of speaking, there are only a few particular Organs concerned: but in stronger
Emotions, in the violence of any Passion, the whole Body may be talkative.
Every Look, and Turn, and Motion is significant; and each Nerve can have its
share in making up (what our Shakespeare calls) A kind of Excellent Dumb
Discourse.

To be more plain: Our Passions are often too strong to be expressed
immediately by words; they often choke up the passage for them: and yet at the
same time they are most apparent. The more any one is a stranger to art and
disguises, the more is he moved on these Occasions: these Silences are the pure
effects of Nature; and the Descriptions of them are some of the most natural,
as well as most beautiful Passages in the whole Poem.

The Recovery of Ul^sses is the Incident of the greatest concern to all his
Friends, and must be attended with the strongest flow of Passion in them:
accordingly they are each too much moved with the discovery, to utter their
Sentiments on that Occasion. Telemachus is the first to whom Ulysses makes
himself known: He falls on his Father's Neck, and they continue embracing each
other, without speaking Od. 16, 243 -- 220.
for a considerable time. -- We have a like Scene, Od. 21, 240 -- 226^
when he discovers himself to two or three select Friends: Good old Laertes, on
the same Occasion is not only silent, but scarce Od. 24, 404 -- 346.
able to support himself, under such an excess of Passion, And the fond, tender
Penelope, is quite overcome with it: Od^ 23, 212 -- 205.
She sickens, trembles, falls, and faints away.


A Great Surprise, or Extraordinary Fright, has the same Effect: as in Homer's
Od. 10, 288 -- 246.
Eurylochus, and the Sir Trevisan of Spencer, which the Od. 10, 288 -- 246.
Notes mention as a Parallel to Eurylochus. Never was any Image set in a fuller
Light than this of Spencer's: it is presented to our View with all the strength
that Poetry is capable of. I must beg leave to read it to you.

He answered naught at all, but adding new
Fear to his first amazement, staring wide
With stony eyes, and heartless hollow hue,
Astonished stood, as one that had espied
Infernal furies with their chains untied:
Him yet again, and yet again bespake
The gentle Knight; who naught to him replied
But trembling every joint, did only quake.
Admirable Imagery! and admirable Silence! cried Antiphaus. But I hope you will
not be so possessed with the excellence of our Poet, as to forget Od. 11. 665
-- 537.
the Ajax of Homer; whom Ulysses bespeaks again, and yet again, without any
Answer at all? Or perhaps this has been observed upon so often, that you think
it needless to repeat its Beauties: I don't question but you admire it very
much. I do so (answered Philypsus) and agree entirely with the Observation.
Note ibid. and Longi^^^, th.
That Ajax has more the air of Grandeur when he says nothing, than when the
Poet makes him speak.

Mr. Pope does not only follow Homer very finely, wherever he has led the Way
^n these beautiful Figures; he sometimes heightens, and sometimes adds them
with a great deal of Propriety. Every one sees how unwilling Calypso is to part
with Ulysses: But the Command of Jove must be obeyed: and the same fondness
which makes her look on the departure of that Hero with extreme regret, engages
her, at the same time, to assist him in the conveniences for it. She is always
directing him, when employed; and when not, secretly dissuading him from his
Voyage. We see her busy, even to Officiousness, in bringing him the Instruments
for his Work: guiding him to the Forest, and showing what Trees are fittest for
his Purpose:

Od. 5, 305 -- 238.
On the lone Islands utmost verge there stood
Of poplars, pines, and firs, a lofty wood,
Whose leafless summits to the skies aspire,
Scorched by the sun, or seared by heavenly f^re.
Already dried. -- These pointing out to view,
The nymph just showed him, and with tears withdrew.
This is much better expressed than in the Original: indeed there we scarce
discern that it is a passionate Silence. Improvements of this kind, Antiphaus,
are the more to be valued, because there is not any one thing in Poetry of
greater Beauty and Energy. The Critics look upon it as the most (...).
Longinus, (...) and Cicero: Rarum est eloquenter loqui; ^^iu^, eloquenter
^acere. Ep. ad Atticum^ L. 13.
sublime, unusual part of Eloquence: and it is none of its least Advantages,
that it hits that excellent Rule they give us, Of See Them. Phal. (...).
Leaving some things for the Audience to perceive of themselves: Though it be not
told him, every Man very easily finds out the heightning of such a
Circumstance; and is sure to value it the more, because he finds it out
himself. In short, these are Masterly s^rokes, and few hands arrive to them in
their true Excellence. Though it requires the greatest Art and Judgment to
introduce it, the Writer when he has chose the proper Point, seems to be put to
no pains to rule our Affections: he governs all our Passions without the Labor
of Words; and looks as Archimedes would ^o one's fancy, moving the whole World,
while he sits still himself.

Suspense and Doubt have something of this Figure intermixed with them. A
Speaker hesitating and unresolved, is in ^ State of Half-silence: As we see the
former poetical Silence is observed in H^mer every time Ulysses discovers
himself to any of his nearer Friends; so is there a mixture of this
Doubtfulness also in each of those Interviews: Thus Telemachus, on that
Occasion;

Thou art not -- no, thou can not be my Sire;
Heaven such illusion only can impose
Od. 16, 217 -- 195.
By the false joy to aggravate my woes.
The Unravelling of the Doubt is what strikes us most, both in Laertes and
Penelope: in the latter Case, this is deferred for too long a time: However as
they are, they afford us some of the most pathetick Passages in the whole Poem.
In what an affecting Manner does Laertes appear to us just at the point of his
being convinced, that the Stranger he is conversing with, is his Son?

Smit with the signs which all his doubts explain,
His heart within him melts; his knees sustain
Their feeble weight no more^ his arms alone
Support him, round the loved Ulysses thrown^
He faints, he sinks with mighty joys oppressed:
Ulysses clasps him to his eager breast.
Soon as returning Life regains its seat,
And his breath lengthens, and his pulses beat;
Yes, I believe, he cries: Almighty Jove! --
Heaven rules us yet, and Gods there are above.
Od. 24, 411 -- 351.
It Is so. --
As to Penelope: Where a modern would have been overjoyed, and caught
immediately at an Occasion for so many raptures, the Greek Poet chooses rather
to show her Prudence, than her Passion. I believe every body will agree, that
this still Interval is not ill-chosen: the fault of it is, its being carried
through too many Lines. The Queen, no doubt, struggled hard all the while; She
had difficulty enough in restraining herself; And the moment she is convinced,
she is all Tenderness and Passion.

While yet he speaks, her powers of life decay,
She sickens, trembles, falls and faints away:
At length recovering to his arms she flew,
And strained him close, as to his breast she grew;
The tears poured down amain: And oh, she cries,
Let not against thy Spouse thine anger rise!
O versed in every turn of human art,
Forgive the weakness of a woman's heart --
O let me, let me not thine anger move,
That I forbore -- thus -- thus -- to speak my love;
Thus in fond kisses, while the transport warms,
Pour out my Soul, and die within thy arms! --
Od. 23, 240 -- 230.
I yield, I yield! my own Ulysses lives.
This unravelling of a Doubt is generally followed by what is the most contrary
to it of any thing in the World, Precipitation. To doubt of any happy
Circumstance, is to fear that it should not prove true. When we are agitated by
the Expectation of some Bliss, we long to indulge that Flow of Spirits which it
Occasions; only some particular Caution forces us to restrain them in the midst
of their Career: The moment our Doubt is cleared, and the Obstacle removed,
they rush on with the greater Violence and Impetuosity. Then are our Words
quick and vehement; We speak short, and fast; A Thousand things We want to say,
and are so eager we don't know which of them to say first. I know nothing in
Music that strikes me equally to those sudd^in Pauses, when the Consort stops
at ^nce; and after the still Interval breaks out unexpectedly into a full
Tumult of Harmony. This Pause, and the Impetuousness that succeeds upon it,
(...) the case (to carry on a Scene, which w^ have touched upon twice or thrice
already) when Telemachus recognizes his Father: Telemachus wants to know ever^
thing at once; and Ulysses wants to te^ him every thing as fast: All, All,
Ulysses instant made reply,
Od. 16, 249 -- 226.
I tell thee All, my Son! --


Such an Hurry of Spirits, the more violent it is, makes us speak in the more
broken and interrupted manner. You always see that a Crowd is the longest in
getting out of a place, where they are in the greatest Haste, and press most.
When the Passions are less disturbed, they go in Train, and follow one another
easily; but if they move all of them for a Passage at the same time, they
hinder one another: This sort of Precipitation, ^s very well expressed in
Penelope, upon ^eceiving Telemachus after his Voyage:

Few words she spoke, though much s^e had to say,
^^d scarce those few for tears could force their way.
^ight of my Eyes! He comes! -- Unhop'd-for Joy!
^^s Heaven from Pylos brought my lovely Boy?
^snatch'd from all our cares! Tell, have thou known
O^. 17, 55 -- 44.
Thy Fathers Fate, and tell me all thy Own.
You cannot imagine, Antiphaus, the ^ll heightning of this Passage, without
^omparing it with the Original: It Is ^e same case in most that I have menon'd;
They are some of the justest Im^ovements in the Poem; as well as In^nces of the
best sort of Figures, such (...) show the Passions of the Mind in a ^ong and
lively manner. There are other, which the Poet makes use of, sometimes to raise
and diversify his Language; sometimes to give stronger Colors to the things he
describes; And sometimes to engage or possess his Readers. I need not enter
into a long Enquiry concerning the more known Figures of either kind; but shall
touch upon one or two, which as yet have not been introduced by the Critics
into their Systems.

Poetical Prophecy, is when we acquain^ the Reader beforehand of some Events
which will happen in the Progress of the Poem: Prevention is when we speak o^
such things, yet to come, as if they we^ already present. Prevention gives an
u^ common Greatness and Energy to the Language: It places distant Actions fu^
before our Eyes; and carries a certa^ Boldness and Assurance with it, that very
becoming: The other is of gre^ Strength in possessing and captivating t^
Reader; We love to look on into Fut^rity: Thus it flatters the Powers a^
Capacity of our own Minds, at the sa^ time that it gives an Air of Super^
Knowledge and Authority to the Poe^

From the Invocation of the Muse the entrance to his Poem, the Poet h^ a Right
of Prophesying; and it mig^ be ^^rtly from this, that the Name Prophet and Poet
has in some Languages been used in common. But though he may, and does, prophecy
in Person, things of this Nature are usually introduced from others: as from
Superior Beings; from Priests and Augurs; from As Tiresias in the 11th Odyss^y;
or Anchises in the 6th Aeneid.
Persons in the other State, or just at the Sea Il. p', Ver. 844 and 852. Aen.
10, 739.
Point of Departing from this. This latter Method perhaps may carry the greater
Sanction with it; but the other is the more Poetical.

Some of the strongest Speeches in Homer and Virgil are delivered after this
manner, by Men of the Prophetic Character; It is to this Figure (if you will
give me leave to call it so) that the Sixth Book of the Aeneid, and the Fourth
of the Odyssey owe the greatest share of their Beauty. Even the frightful
Raptures of Theoclymenus, and the Harpye of Virgil, engage the Reader with a
sort of pleasing Terror. There is something horribly delightful in these Lines.

Floating in gore, portentous to survey!
In each discolored vase the Viands lay:
Then down each cheek the Tears spontaneous flow
And sudden Sighs precede approaching woe.
In vision rapt, the Th^oclymenus.
Hyper^sian Seer
Up-rose, and thus divined the Vengeance near.
O Race to Death devote! with Stygian shade
Each destined Peer impending Fates invade:
With tears your wan distorted cheeks are drowned,
With sanguine drops the walls are rubied round^
Thick swarms the spacious hall with howling Ghosts,
To people Orcus, and the burning Coasts^
Nor gives the Sun his golden O^b to roll,
Od. 20, 430 -- 357.
But universal Night usu^ps the Pole!
I beg pardon (says Antiphaus) but the Speech of Theoclymenus is a particular
Favorite of mine: and now you repeat it in English, I seem to want something
of that strong Pleasure it used to afford me, Where the Greek speaks -- (...).
Of the Su^ being perished out of Heaven, and of Darkness rushing over the
Earth; I cannot express the Fullness of the Words -- But you know the Original;
and I fear will never see a Translation equal it. This whole Prophetical Vision
of the Fall of the Suitors is the True Sublime: and, in particular, gives us an
higher Orientalism, than we meet with in any other part of Homer's Writings.
You will pardon me a new Word, where we have no old one to my Purpose: You know
what I mean; That Eastern way of expressing R^volutions in Government, by a
Confusion or Extinction of Light in the Heavens. It is this manner of Thinking
which works up that Speech the nearest of any to those noble Passages in holy
Scripture; Joel 2. 31.
I will show Wonders in the Heavens and in the Earth, Blood and Fire, and
Pillars of Smoke; the Sun shall be turned into Darkness, and the Moon into
Blood. -- Amos 8. 9.
I will cause the Sun to go down at Noon, and I will darken the Earth in the
clear Day. -- Ezekiel. 32 8.
All the bright Lights of Heaven will I make Dark over thee, and set Darkness
upon thy Land.

I have often wondered, Philypsus, at some particular Persons, who are ever
ravished with any thing of the Sublime in common Authors, and yet seem to have
no taste for the finest touches of this kind, those which are so frequent in
our sacred Writings. With what Greatness, and Sublimity, do they abound? Such,
as might persuade, that wear not only blessed with Instructions, but favored
too with a Language from Heaven. Those sacred Pages want only to be read with ^
common regard, that all Men might acknowledge them to contain the greatest
Masterpieces of Eloquence. Yes, Philypsus, it is there, that Eloquence sit^
beside the Throne of Truth, in all he^ noblest Attire, and with a Look, tha^
strikes us at once with Reverence and Delight. I long to expatiate on so
gloriou^ a Subject: but perhaps we may find (...) time of joining together in
some View o^ this Nature: There has been a very goo^ Blackwall's Sacred
Classicks^
Example set the World this last Summer; and if ever we should follow i^ and
enter thoroughly into this sort (...) Criticism, I dare say it will make an^
other kind look poor and insipid, when compared with it. -- But at present
(...) are in another Sphere; and I have alrea^ interrupted you too much. --

Philypsus, desirous as he was to laun^ immediately into those noble Depths
(...) Eloquence, complied for the present, a^ returned to the point in hand. My
l^ Instance from the Odyssey prevents wh^ I had designed for the next; You
(...) it speaks all along of future things, (...) if they were actually
present. Theo^menus has the whole fact passing successi^ly before his Eyes: The
Destruction (...) the Suitors is pictured in his Mind; (...) sees their blood
sprinkled upon the Wa^ their bodies floating in Gore, and their ^ouls sinking
to the Regions of the Dead.

Now I am upon this head of Prophecy and Prevention, I should be very
defective, ^ere I to omit the other Branch of it; which takes in all cases
where the Poet ^orewarns us of Events in his own proper ^erson. This is to be
found in the very ^ame point, the Fate of the Suitors; but (...) is not
delivered with the same Air of ^nthusiasm: The Poet is informed by the ^^u^e of
things to come, while the Pro^et is possessed by Vision: The know^dge of one,
is from Instruction; of the ^her, from a sort of Frantic Possession (...)
Mind. The Poet therefore antici^tes Events with less emotions of Lan^age; and
seldom rises into any fervor, love what we meet with in these Passa^s:

-- Incensed they spoke
^hile each to chance ascribed the wondrous stroke;
and as they were -- For death even now invades
His destined prey, and wraps them all in shades.
And before:

-- In his Soul fond joys arise,
(...) his proud hopes already win the prize.
^speed the f^ying shaft through every ring,
^etch! is not thine: the arrows of the King
Shall end those hopes^ and fate is on the wing.
^^) Od. 22, 38 -- 33.
(b) Od. 21, 104 -- 98.
You observe, Antiphaus, that this Event which is so often anticipated by the
Poet, is the great Point on which the Completion of his Fable turns: and I
believe you may have observed, that Virgil puts on the Prophetic air, See Aen.
10, 501.
exactly in the same Case. Virgil oftentimes improves upon his Master: the
Circumstance that introduces that Passage in the Aeneid, and the greater
distance of time, give it a much finer and a nobler Air, than we find in Homer
himself.

These Figures (for so I beg leave to call all unusual manners of Speech) are
of more difficult Observation, as they lie out of the common road: I am afraid
of wandering too far; and shall therefore return very readily to the more
beaten Path.

All Passions warm the Imagination, and make its Images more strong and
sensible. It is this, in my Opinion, tha^ might render Metaphors very proper in
the Pathetique: Though you and I, perhaps, should not agree entirely on tha^ Head.

At least this is certain, that the^ strengthen and enliven the narrative Part
of Poetry, beyond any other Metho^ whatever; when the Poet treats of the most
common things, he does not treat of them in the common manner:

Fame speaks the Trojans bold, they boast the skill,
To give the feathered arrow wings to kill;
To dart the spear, and guide the rushing car,
With dreadful inroad through the walks of war.
Od. 18, 308 -- 263.
Strip these Lines of the Metaphor, and they lose their greatest Force and
Beauty. To say barely (as it is in the Greek) That the Trojans are good
Warriors, that they lanch the Spear, and handle the Arro^ well; that they
manage their Horses de^trously, and in general, that they are ^e^y Strong and
Successful in Battle: This ^eclares the whole of the thing; but, with
Submission, it is more like a Prose, ^han a poetical Narration; at least, when
compared with the same Sentiments in those Lines I have just repeated.

There are many Innovations of this ^^nd, which make the English Homer ap^ear
with Advantage: A naked relation ^f Fact is enough for History; but Poe^y
requires something more than bare truth: It has a thousand ways of rai^g and
beautifying its Subject: Phoebu^, (...) the Luminary over which he presides,
does not only show, but sets a Luster too, on every thing he touches: The Poet
is not so much to declare Events, as to give its Colors and Life to every
Action: in doing this, nothing is so requisite as strong animated Figures; as
of all Figures the Metaphor affords the most sensible Strokes, and comes
nearest to the Pencil.

Even in common Cases they are not without their Beauty: thus in that Enterview
between Ulysses and Laertes:

Beneath a neighboring tree, the chief divine
Gazed over his Sire, retracing every line,
The ruins of himself! now worn away
Od. 24, 272 -- 232.
With age, yet still majestic in decay.
Thus Agamemnon (after all his dangers, murdered by the hands of Villains in
his own Kingdom) is not said barely to die^ but to end, Od. 4, 116 -- 91.
The sad Evening of a stormy life.


When this Figure expresses some strang^ Particularity, or includes any
magnifying Comparison, one single Word is ver^ powerful in raising the
Narration, an^ enlarging our Ideas up to the Occasion

With dreadful shouts Ulysses poured along^
Od. 24, 622 -- 537.
Swift as an Eagle, as an Eagle strong --
Now by the Sword, and now the Javelin fall
Od. 24, 612 -- 527.
The rebel Race, and Death had swallowed all etc.
I know no Case, in which Metaphors of a bold Sound are more proper, than in
arrogant Speeches; When Men defy the Gods, or quarrel with the Dispensations of
Providence. Philaetius in the Od^ssey is no arrogant Character: Yet in one
place (upon considering the Afflictions of his Prince, whose Piety and Virtue
he was so well assured of) he falls into a Rant against Providence; in which
the Language is as lively and vigorous, a^ the Sentiment is ill-grounded and
absurd:

O Jove! for ever deaf to human cries;
The tyrant, not the father of the skies!
Unpiteous of the race thy will began:
The fool of Fate, thy manufacture, Man,
With penury, contempt, repulse, and care:
Od. 20, 256 -- 204^
The gauling load of Life is doomed to bear.
These Metaphors (which are of that ^ind we may call The audacious) come ^ery
near the Spirit of Oldham and Dryden; ^ho undoubtedly, in their Satirical
^orks, flash out into the greatest Bold^esses this way of any of our Writers:
^deed, in both, there are some which may come too near to Profaneness: but we
must always take care not to attribute to the Poet, what he speaks under some
other Person. A Devil is no longer a Devil, unless he be haughty, impenitent
and blaspheming: and Dryden is no more to be condemned than Milton, for making
such impious Spirits speak according to their true Character.

What y^u assert, I take to be perfectly true, says Antiphaus: but were I blessed
with any Genius for Poetry, I own that a shocking Impiety should be one of the
last things I would choose to describe. And where it is ch^sen, there is room to
be m^derate, without i^juring the Character with t^o great a show ^f Go^dness:
We see that Milton is not so gross, as Dryden: Nor Virgil seldom descends to
particulars: h^ c^uses rather to say in g^n^^al, Atque D^^s, a^q^^ a^tra vocat
crud^l a m^^^r. ^v^n his (...) i^ ^ore reserved than Hom^r'^ Deisrs: He rather
^idicules than aff^^nts; As^ a^ me Divum p^ter a^q^ Hominum R^x Viderit --
Afterward he grow^ (...) little Wa^mer, and more Me^apho^ical;

D^xtra mihi Deus, and ^^lum quod missile libro, Nunc adsint --

Where he speaks plainest of all, Virgil touch^ upon his miserable fa^e in the
very next line:

N^c mort^m horremus^ nec Divum parcimus (...) D^sine. Jam venio moriturus. --
Aen. (...)


Virgil so blunt, as Homer.

Well, says Philypsus, there are other Points which you might choose, and which
serve as well for this sort of Metaphor: Thus all pious Fra uds, infamous
Priests, or any prevailing Superstition. Here the Figure retains much of the
audacious Air, without any thing of Impiety in it. Agamemnon indeed goes too
far in the Iliad, where he seems to neglect Apollo, as well as his Priest:

Hence, with thy laurel crown, and golden rod,
Nor trust too far those ensigns of thy God:
Il. 1, 39 -- 29
Mine is thy daughter, Priest --
Here is something of Irreverence to the God, and an evident Injustice to Man:
and the Poet very prudently condemns ^he Speech, before he delivers it in his
^oem. But there is no such Mark s^t ^n one of Hector's; nor does it at all
in^ringe that Hero's Character, which is ^emarkably Pious all through the Poem:
^e is speaking against a very popular ^uperstition, the Trade of Augury:

Ye Vagrants of the Sky! your wings extend
(...) where the Suns arise, or where descend;
^o right, to left, unheeded take your way,
^hile I the dictates of high Heaven obey.
without a sign his Sword the brave man draws,
Il. 12, 284 -- 243.
And asks no Omen but his Country's cause.
This has the audacious Air, because it speaks contemptuously of a Practice,
which was vulgarly looked upon as religious and sacred: and is just, because it
shows at the same time the greatest Reverence to the Gods: He obeys the
Dictates of Heaven, but he contemns the Artifices of the Priest.

Whatever restraints this kind of Metaphor may deserve, there is another sort
which has always been received with the greatest Liberty. The animating
Metaphor, though the Praecipue ex his oritur mira sublimitas, qu^ ^ud^ci^ proxima
periculo translationis attollitu^ (...) T^llun^ur quum rebus sensu carentibus
actu^ quendam and animos damus. Quintil. Lib 8. Cap. 6. Aristotle and Phala^eus
say exactly the same; s^e the la^^er (...).
most Sublime, and the most Daring of any, except what was last mentioned, is
very common; and that even in the chastest Poets, and in the foftest Pieces. It
is this by which we give Action and Spirit to things that are Still and
Insensible. This will raise the meanest Points in the World: it may treat mere
Names, as if they were Things and Things still and inanimate, as i^ they had
Thought and Action. Wha^ might seem the most surprising is, tha^ this method of
raising things above their Nature, has nothing of ridiculous in it. We easily
perceive this to be true: but I own, for my part, I should have been at a loss
for the reason of it, had not I met with a Od. Vol. 5^ Page 238.
fine Observation in Mr. Pope's Appendix to this Work. I wonder now why I could
not before perceive, That Ridicule is confined to moral Agents, and obtains
only where Choice and Freedom is directly concerned. That this is the Case is
the more plain; because, even among moral Agents, the very same thing, which if
brought on by our own Folly, is a certain subject for Ridicule; when it
proceeds from some inevitable Misfortune (or Necessity) is the farthest from
being Ridiculous.

I am pleased to see that this Figure stands on such good reason; for it is the
very Life and Soul of Description. And might it not be of a larger Use,
Antiphaus, than has commonly been observed? It is chiefly mentioned indeed of
enlivening things inanimate; Whereas possibly it may hold through the whole Chain
of Beings in the World, as they rise gradually ^bove one another. Thus when we
attribute any thing of absolute Perfection to the highest Orders of created
Beings, any thing which we think Angelical to Man, or any thing like Humanity
or Virtue to Beasts; it might as well be included in this Branch of Metaphor,
as when we give the Powers of Motion to things, Still; or Passions, to things
Inanimate.

Nay, it may even return from the Lower to the Higher; when the Species of a
lower Rank, upon the whole, has any As when we amplify the Swiftness of a^
Hero, by comparing it to the Flight of an Eagle (...) or
particular Excellence which the higher wants: Or partakes of any the Swiftness
of an Eagle, by comparing i^ to the Swiftness of the Winds.
Excellence, which is common to them both, in a greater and more excellent
Degree.

But it must be observed, that where this Figure, in its higher Notion, is
applied to Intelligents, it must not be done with the same Indifference; or
rather it requires the strictest Caution.

The Poet is at liberty to attribute Action and Passions to any part whatever
of the mute Creation: he may make the Woods, or any such Insensible, Sympathize
with his Grief, with the same freedom as any inferior Animals; we find it thus
used particularly in all the Pastorol Writers, whether Ancient or Modern. Every
Beast may have the Compassion of Man; but few Men can sustain the Properties of
an Angel: Nothing would make a common Mortal so mean and ridiculous, as such an
Elevation: the same holds in the higher Intelligents; The First of the Angelick
Order looks mons^rously ridiculous (as well as monstrously impious,) when he
would imagine an Equality, where there was an immutable Disproportion.

However, in some Cases, the Property of an Angel may be given to a Man. The
Heathen Poets compare their greater Her^'s to their Gods; And when the
Christian Poet extols any superior Ge^ius, any Character that has something ^n
it above the common race of Mortals, ^e may well draw some Expressions from ^he
Order of Beings next above the Hu^an. Had not Mr. Addison thought ^^is
Justif^able, we should have lost one ^f the finest Amplifications imaginable.

See Addison's Works, Vol. 1. Page 78. 120.
So when an Angel by Divine command
^i^h ^is^^g ^empest^ sh^ke^ a guilty land,
^uch ^s of late over pal^ B^itannia past,
^^m and serene he drives the furious blast;
^^d pleased the Almighty's o^ders to perform,
^ides in the whirlwind, and directs the storm.
But whither am I wandering, my Antiphaus? You will think such Flights as these
too Airy; surely, I am got into the Wilds of Criticism! -- I don't know what
the World might think of You at present, says Antiphaus: but if ever Mr.
Dryden's Scheme should take place, and the Poetical Characters of Angels be
generally established; what you may think the wildest of your Flights now,
might then be of good Service this way in Poetry. -- Be that as it will, says
Philypsus, I believe I had better draw in my thoughts a little for the present;
and keep to things, that are more obvious and secure. All agree, that the
giving Thought to things insensible, and human Passions to the brute part of
the Creation, is equally just and beautiful: and at the same time nothing is of
greater Efficacy in rendering our Sentiments Raised and Poetical. That The
Sufferings of our Fellow Creatures affec^ our Souls by a natural Sympathy, is a
very good moral Sentence: but the Poet is to Elevate this effect of Misery; he
invest^ her with a sort of new Being; and the^ gives her Address and Action. In
Poetry our Tears Od. 10, 291 -- 248.
speak; our Misfortunes ar^ Od. 6, 374 -- 311^
Eloquent; and Misery appears Od. 6, 204 -- 169. As Aen. 3. 672.
in Person to plead for the distressed.

When more uncommon things are transferred this way, the Metaphor may be safer,
if it has some grounds in the Fact; though it will bear very often without it.
It Is allowable to represent the Sea, as flying back, and astonished, at the
terrible (c) Voice of the Cyclops: but it is more close to attribute this Fear
and Flight to it, when its Waves are Od. 9, 581 -- 495. Aen. 8, 712.
drove asunder by the same Cyclops flinging a Rock into the midst of it.

Another thing, which made this Fi^ure the stronger among the Ancients, ^as
their Notion of Genii, or presiding ^eities. In particular, there was scarce
(...) River or Brook amongst them, but what ^ad its Genius; and in speaking of
these ^he Poets carry this Metaphor farther ^an in any other case whatever.
What (...) Appearance does Xanthus and Simois ^ake in the Battle of Rivers,
which ^kes up the 21 st Iliad? What a bold ^raught is that of the Nile, in the
Sea^ht at Actium, by (e) Virgil? And how ^uch more Sublime than either, is our
^ranslation of the Sacred Writings, where it makes the Deep Habakkuk 3, 10.
utter his voice, and lift up his hands on high?

You may perceive I am run into another Figure: but it is of a kind, so nearly
allied to the animating Metaphor, that one often finds some difficulty in
distinguishing the one from the other. Indeed when any of these Personages are
introduced distinctly in full State, then it is something beyond Metaphor; but
in short Sketches, it may pass very well under that Figure. There is nothing
but a stronger Name adapted to the thing, than its strictly proper Acceptance
affords. I think, for instance, that we need not seek for a new Figure in this
Passage: Awed by the Prince so haughty, brave and young^
Od. 20, 335 -- 268.
Rage gnawed the Lip, Amazement chained the Tongue:


Or for this: In every sorrowing soul I poured delight,
Od. 17, 506 -- 421.
And Poverty stood smiling in my sight.


In the close of this Poem, the Narration is elevated, by a successive Chain of
these Metaphors, or Fictions, call them which you will. When the Ithacen^ians
are ranged in Arms against their Prince, it is not said, that they shall Die,
but that Od. 24, 540 -- 470.
Death attends them in the Field: -- To express Ulysses's aptness to forgive
them: Od. 24, 558 -- 484.
Oblivion is ready to stretch her Wings over their Offenses: As when they are
shockt with their Crime, and fling down their Arms, there is this Voice from
Heaven to effect it: Forbear ye Nations! your mad hands forbear
Od, 24, 618 -- 534.
From mutual slaughter. Peace descends to spare.


These, Antiphaus, are the most remarkable things, I have taken notice of, as
to the Figures. I could have produced a greater number of excellent Lines from
this Translation, had not I ^ndeavour'd chiefly to give such Instances ^s
contained, at the same time, some peculiar Improvements in them: You would be
surprised to see how many Beauties ^hey have, that are wanting in the Ori^inal.

Surely they who are the most rigid ^or Close-translating, will allow such
beautiful Variations as these; which, without losing the Sentiments of the
Ori^inal, only set a finer Turn upon them. Let them call them, if they please,
glorious Offenses, or beautiful Wanderings from the Letter: these are such
Offenses as one would wish to see more frequent than they are; and of which the
best Translators are the most guilty.

For my part I am particularly pleased, when I see a Translator reflect new
Light upon his Original: wherever this is done justly, it does not alter the
Objects; it only makes them more bright and visible.

I believe, Antiphaus, you will not disapprove of some other Methods, used in
the English Odyssey for this Purpose, which I am just going to lay before you.
Sometimes the Language is raised and strengthened; sometimes the Order
transposed to Advantage; in several Cases w^ have Homer's Thoughts inspirited
b^ collateral Thoughts from other Authors some little things are omitted, and
some short strokes added, to correct the Sentiment, or to heighten the Colors
in the Original.

Before you enter upon those Point^ says Antiphaus, give me leave to mentio
some few things, which look like Bl^mishes, under the Subject you have ju^
concluded.

It is allowed, that Metaphors are the most useful of Figures to raise the
Poetical Style, to give their Color to our Descriptions, and a just Swelling
and Relief to our Images; It Is allowed, that a Translator may add these
Colors, where the Original is less Lively and Expressive, than the Subject may
very well bear. The Faults then must lie, either in the Excess, or Impropriety
of such Additions. Some things will not bear a strong Light; and others require
to be flung into Shades.

Where there is no Occasion for Figures, they are at best only so many
unnecessary Ornaments: I cannot see why a Quiver full of Arrows should be
called Od. 22, 136 -- 119.
A Store of flying Fates; why a Fire should be termed Od. 9, 449 -- 378.
A burning Bed: or a Libation, Od. 14, 499 -- 447.
The Sable Wave of offered Wine.

It Is not the Disproportion of the Me^aphor to the Thing, which might render
^hese Expressions blameable; If any thing, ^tis the want of Occasion. When the
^oet is to aggrandize small Subjects, we ^an bear with much bolder Metaphors
^^an these: though it may not be proper to call a stream of Wine, by the Title of
a Sable Wave, on common Occasions; Yet when the Work requires heightening, we
may go so much farther, as to call a As does Virgil, Georg 4, 29.
small River by the Name of the Ocean.

If we judge by the Occasion, there can be but few liberties for Metaphor in
common Conversation; I mean, the common Conversation of Poetry. Not that they
are to be banished thence entirely; rather it will require them frequently: but
it requires only such as are single, and not far removed from the Subject. When
a Person is speaking to Penelope, in Commendation of Ithaca, he might be
allowed to say, that Its Soil is rich; that it ab^unds in Corn; and that its
Trees ar^ laden with Fruit: Homer's Expression^ scarce carry this so far; and
yet I should think them preferable to these in the Translation: Od. 131 -- 112.
See V. 565 ib. 48^.
In wavy Gold thy summer vales are dressed
Thy autumns bend with copious fruits oppressed


Where the Original says, that Eur^^mus was among the Suitors of Penelope, do
not it seem better, as well as plain^ than this Translation? -- To climb with
haughty fires
Od. 2, 28 -- 21.
The royal bed, Eurynomus aspires.


A Metaphor may be continued too far, as well as carried too high: a long Chain
of them leads us away from the proper Sense; and flings that into Allegory,
which we intend for Reality strongly expressed. This is very common, especially
in our Pindarick Writers: indeed few of our Poets, but what have See Od. 19,
286 -- 251. (...) 20. Verse 19, to Verse 30 -- 13, to 23. (...) See Spectator,
Numb. 5.
fallen into it some time or other; but in those, you find the most gross and
insufferable Instances of it, that can be imagined.

In these strings of Metaphor, nothing in my Opinion is so faulty, as that
Point which has been so often touched upon: the shifting of Circumstances in
the same Description; and representing a Thing confusedly, sometimes in its
figurative, and sometimes in its proper Appearance. While an Actor is upon the
Stage, his ^wn private Character must be wholly said aside: he must be entirely
Booth, or ^ntirely Cato. Nay, even in the Scenary ^self, things must be of a
piece; and ^^r. Addison has the justest Occasion for ^s frequent Severities
upon this (c) contradictory Mixture's prevailing so monstrously in our Theater:
How would the Wits of King Charles's time have laughed to see Nicolini sailing
in an open Boat, upon a Sea of Past board? What a field of Raillery would they
have been let into had they been entertained with painted Dragons spitting
Wildfire, enchanted Chariots drawn by Flanders-Mares, and real Cascades in
artificial Landskips? the making things after this manner, partly real, and
partly imaginary, is to join Inconsistencies. Shadows ought never to be mixed
with Realities in the same Piece, whether in poetic Scenary, or that o^ the
Stage.

A Poet is never more apt to fall into this Confusion, than when he is speakin^
of Allegorical Persons; as, particularly the Deities of the Heathens. When
(...) speak of them personally, we are apt (...) mix something of their mystic
Characte^ this is certainly vicious in Writing; a^ it is more so, to confuse the
Properties (...) those things, over which any of the Deities were supposed to
preside, wi^ the Personal Acts of any particu^ Deity.

The Poets are allowed the privile^ of elevating every Subject they take i^
the^r management: if they please t^ may represent the Sun, as guided by an
Intelligence: and it is but one step farther with them, to give that guiding
Intelligence, a Name; they call him Phoebus; and obviously enough, feign to
themselves, that he drives round the World in a Chariot of Fire. By degrees the
Allegory is formed regularly, and enlarged with more Particulars: he has so
many Horses assigned to his Chariot: His own Appearance is well known:
Beardless and Young, A Glory round his Head, and a Quiver full of Arrows over
his Shoulder: Thetis is ready to receive him at the End of his Journey; and
when he is to set out again, Aurora rises from the Ocean to open the Gates of
Heaven, that are kept for him by the Hours.

How very regular can Fiction be upon Occasion? The establishment of this
Allegory under these Particulars, has prevented a world of Confusion: this we
may see by any Allegory, which is not yet settled on some Uniform Plan. To show
how far, I shall beg leave to enlarge a little on one of the same Nature, That
of Aurora, the Goddess of the Morning.

Phoebus is never represented on this Occasion, but in his Chariot I was
speaking of; As for Aurora, I know not whether she rides, sits, or walks:
Sometimes she is in Heaven, and sometimes upon Earth: In short, the Poets seem
to leave it undetermined how, when, or for what time she makes her Appearance.
I have laid together several Passages relating to this, but they leave the
Point as confused as it was before: Now did the rosy-finger'd Morn arise,
Od. 13, 22 -- 18.
And shed her sacred light along the skies:


There, she is plainly in Heaven.

-- When over the Eastern lawn
In saffion robes the daughter of the dawn
Od. 4, 587 -- 431.
Advanced her rosy steps --
And here, as plainly upon Earth. -- With her orient wheels
Od. 16, 380 -- 368.
Aurora flamed above the Eastern hills^


Here I cannot absolutely determine, whether she be in Heaven, or upon Earth;
but it is plain, she is got into her Chariot now, as she was pleased to Walk the
time before.

But when it is evident, that she is not upon Earth; it is still difficult to
know whether she is near it, or in the higher Heavens: whether she -- Ascends
the Court of Jove,
Il. 2, 60 -- 49.
Lifts up her light, and opens day above:


Or, only Il. 19, 1.
-- Heaves her orient head above the waves.


There is the same difference in the degrees of that Brightness, which is
attributed to her appearance: sometimes she only Il. 11, 1.
blushes with newborn Day, and sometimes she is encompassed with Il. 8, 83 --
66.
the full splendour of it: When I read one Description, I take it for granted,
that the Glory round her Head should be of a Od. 9, 515 -- 437.
glimmering Light; but when we come to another, it is of a strong Od. 16, 381 --
368.
Flame: You are at the same loss to know, whether her Robes are Od. 4. 587 --
431.
Rose-colour'd, Od. 4. 587 -- 431.
Saffron, or Od. 19. 500 -- 428.
Purple: In fine, It would puzzle the Critics to answer directly, whether she
has a Quiver on her Shoulders; and whether she is to appear in a Compare Od.
19, 500, with 6, 58.
martial, or in a gentle, peaceable Posture.

This unsettledness in the present Case, runs through almost all the Poets
since Homer. The most correct that ever wrote are not entirely free from it.
Virgil himse^f oftentimes Aen. 6, 536 etc.
continues her Course so far, that his Thus Donatus, Ruaeus, etc
Commentators, to salve the matter, say, we must understand Phoebus by Aurora.
In him the very Horses that draw her Chariot are Aen. 7, 26, and 6, 536.
Rose-colour'd; as in Theocritus they are -- (...). Idyl. 13.
White: sometimes she has the Aen. 5, 10^
Horses of Phoebus; sometimes Aen. 6, 536.
Four of her own; sometimes Aen. 7, 26.
Two; and sometimes she is forced to ride only, and that upon K (...). L^
cophron.
the Wings of Pegasus.

It may be left to the Poets themselves to determine, whether this Management
be just toward Persons of their own making: I shall only say, that the
greatest Critics have ever thought, that consistency is required in the most
unbounded Fictions: And, if I mistake not greatly, Homer is more regular in
this very Fiction before us. A Person better versed in his Writings, than I
have the Happiness to be, might, I believe, form from them a^ settled a Scheme
in relation to this Goddes^ as has been drawn up for any other of his Deities.
This is certain, that he has precisely fixed the time of her appearance; it is
that The Twilight is reckoned into the Night. (...) ^, 433. And the first
direct appearance of ^ays attributed to the Sun; ibid. 422.
Interval, which commences after the first Dawn of Light, and ends just before
the actual Rising of the Sun. She always ascends Il. to, 2.
from the Sea, to the Eastern extremity, or (as it is in the Language of
Poetry) the Sea Mr. Pope's Note on Il. 5, 928.
Gates of Heaven: there she sits in her Od. ps' ^44.
Golden Chariot, which has two Horses assigned to it, distinct See Note on Od.
23, 260.
from those of Phoebus, and there she waits to (...). Il. b', 49, etc.
prepare the way for the Chariot of that Deity.

The Dress, and the Epithets, which Homer gives to this Imaginary Being are, as
they ought to be in all such Allegories, at the same time evidently This
Eustathius shows (...) large in his first Note on the second Book of the
^dyssey: particularly, as to the Epithet (...).
drawn from the Nature of the Thing, and fairly applicable ^o the Fictitious
Person.

So much for Allegory: It Is a danger^us Topic, and we are apt to be lost in
the Clouds of it: Either the natural Description, or the Allegory, by it self,
may have a thousand Beauties; but when they are dashed together, every thing is
dark and confused. They put me in mind, Philypsus, of the two Liquors Sir Isaac
Newton speaks of, which from a fine Azure, and a beautiful Red, if you mix
them, produce no Color at all; The transparence and glow, which each had
separately, is immediately lost; and their Beauties vanish away into one thick
impenetrable Shade.

Before these confused Allegories and mixed Metaphors, I should have mentioned
some other Instances, in which single Metaphors are faulty, either as they are
Improper or Affected.

Is it proper to speak of Penelope's Wi^ and Beauty (or her Beauty alone) under
the Notion of O^. 19, 149 -- 128.
Drooping Verdure? is i^ proper to talk of Od. 17, 49 -- 39.
Raining Kisses? or of Od. 5, 21^, and 216 -- 167.
Storing a Vessel with prosperou^ Gales?

Is not the Metaphor and the Turn (...) Expression somewhat affected, or over^
wrought, in this Passage of the Nineteenth Odyssey:

These swarthy arms among the covert stores
Are seemlier hid; my thoughtless youth they blame
Od. 19, 22 -- 18.
Imbrown'd with vapor of the smouldring flame.
And a little farther, in the same:

My woes awaked will violate your Ear;
And to this gay censorious train, appear
Od. 19, 143 -- 122 ^, O^. 17, 49 -- 38.
A winy-vapour melting in a Tear.
Again; upon Telemachus's return:

All crowded round the family appears,
With wild entrancement, and exstatick tears.
Swift from above descends the Royal Fair;
Her beauteous cheeks the blush of V^nus wear,
(c) Chasten'd with coy Diana's pensive air.
In the following Lines she hangs over him, -- In his embraces dies;
(c) Rains kisses on his neck, his face, his eyes.


You have here (says Antiphaus) what ^as appeared to me as Blemishes in this
^oem, under these several Heads. I have ^ndeavour'd, Philypsus, to read it with
^everity: and when my Regards for the ^uthor, or the Influence which such
^riters will always have over ones Soul, began at any time to sway my Mind; I
have called up all the Ill Nature I am Master of to my Assistance; I Am fully
sensible how difficult it is to keep the balance steady: sometimes our
Admiration may warm us too much; and sometimes a little Malice will prevail. If
any thing I have been saying seems discolored with this Temper of Mind, point
out my Faults to me, dear Philypsus; Correct me like a Friend; and show that
openness I have deserved at your hands.

When I have time to consider the Notes, I see you have taken down (answered
Philypsus) and to compare some Passages with the Original, You shall know more
of my Mind: as yet I see no reason for your Request; but think you have dealt
with that Fairness which I so much admire in my Antiphaus.

In the mean time I have a word or two to add on those other Excellencies of
this Translation, which I mentioned to you before.

That Method of Improving the Original, by Tran^ferring Beauties from on^ fine
Writer to another, is carried on through this remaining part of the Poem, in the
same frequency, as it was used i^ the former Volumes.

These Foreign Infusions of Thought and Language (to use the Name which Mr.
Addison has given them) are very discernible to any one of a tolerable Taste:
it is true, they must have something of a new Air; but they still (...) a
distinct Resemblance of the Old, something like that of the Sister N^^eids in
Ovid; -- Facies non omnibus una,
^^c di^ersa t^m^n; qual^m d^c^t ^ss^ s^rorum.


In pointing out these Resemblances to some People, I should be apprehensive,
that they might think me taken up in an Imaginary Chase: but any one of much
less D^scernment, than Antiphaus, will perceive immediately, that this Liken^ss
is real, and designed by the Poet himself. There is an C^saubon.
eminent Critic, who has wrote a whole Treatise on this single Point, in
Praise of a Persius.
particular Favorite of his: In the present Case, Mr. Pope tells Preface to
his Works, Fol. and Pref. to the ^^storals. p. 10.
us, That he read the Ancients with this Design; that he serves himself of them
as much as he can; and that they have been his chief Inspirers in Poetry. I
believe the Gentlemen, who are concerned with him in this Translation, would
give me leave to say the same of them: It Is too evident to be denied: it
appears both in their See Note on Odyssey 11, 152 -- 18, ^07.
Observations, and in their excellent Works.

In these last Volumes, how finely are From Ss. Book 16, 237. ibid. 420. B. 18,
158. B. 19, 99 etc V^rgil. B. 15, 250. B. 16, 189. B. 17, 227. -- Ibid 523. B.
18, 121. B. 24, 131. etc. -- Homer. B. 17, 613. B. 24, 513. -- Milton. B. 19,
694. B 20^370. B. 24, 498. etc. -- Dryden. B. 23, 322. B. 24, 309. i^id. 632.
--
some Thoughts wove into this Translation from the sacred Pages? from the Iliad,
and Aeneid; from Dryden, and Milton among ourselves; and from several others,
both Ancient and Modern?

The Translator is sometimes as Artsul in adding, of himself, some short
Strokes to what Homer has said. We meet with several of these little
Insertions, which are very just and improving. I shall mention but one. As Mr.
Addison Sp^ctator, Numb. 369.
proposes a Correction of Paradise Lost, by cutting off the two last Lines; Mr.
Pope improves this Poem, by adding a Line in the Conclusion of it: This
Insertion possibly is better chose, than that Alteration so modestly proposed
by Mr. Addison. The Reader, indeed, would willingly go off with some Hopes and
Satisfaction, after the Melancholy Scene in Milton's last Book: but it may be
said that, considering the Moral and chief Design of that Poem, Terror is the
last Passion to be left upon the Mind of the Reader. On the contrary, the
Odyssey ought on all Accounts to terminate happily: and Mr. Pope's Addition, in
the close of it, is therefore an Improvement, because it forwards the Moral; it
gives us a So Pallas spoke: the mandate from above
The King obeyed. The Virgin-seed of Jove
In Mentor's form confirmed the full accord,
And willing Nations knew their lawful Lord.
Homer himself does not end in so full and compl^at a manner: His last Line
does not rest well: and Chapman seems resolved to show the infirmness of it, as
much as he could possibly in his Translation, which breaks off in these Lines.

-- Twixt both parts the seed of Jove,
Athenian Pallas, of all future love
A League composed; and for her form, took choice
Of Mentor's likeness; both in limb, and voice.

fuller View and Confirmation of the Happiness of Ulysses, and leaves it upon a
firmer Foundation.

In the beginning of the Evening, Antiphaus, You were speaking of the Poets
transposing Words to Advantage. I believe this may sometimes be of greater Use
in altering the Order of Sentences, o^ the Succession of some Incidents in the
Poem; though I own, this must be attempted but rarely, and with the greatest
Caution: Difficult as it is, You will find a good Instance of the Former in one
of the Suitors ridiculing Speeches; and of the Latter in Euryclea's Transports.

Euryclea, You know, discovers Ul^ss^^ by a Scar upon his Leg, while she is
Bathing him. The Moment she makes this discovery, she drops the Jarr of Water,
and is ready to faint away with Surprise and Joy. Though these, in the Nature of
the Case, must follow immediately upon one another, Homer has inserted a long
Story (how the Scar wa^ occasioned) just after the Discovery, a^^ before those
Passions, which are the i^mediate Effect of it. Thus is a suddai^ Event
declared ^ourscore Lines before (...) is described -- A Succession of time
tak^^ up in the Narration, contrary to t^^ time of the Fact -- An Impetuous
Pa^^^^^ kept in suspense; in a word, Two thin^ inseparable in their Nature, are
(...) in the Description. I know (...) whether I see this in a wrong Light; b^
^t present it puts me in Mind of (...) fli^ging his Basin down, travell^^ to
Heaven, seeing the Lord knows what there, and returning again before the Water
is run out.

If I mistake not, this Impropriety is avoided very Artfully. Euryclea is not
made to discover this Scar before that long Digression. Od. 19, 461. And 547 --
392, and 467.
It is rather said (in the Prophetic manner of the Poets) that she would soon
Discover it, than that she has actually Discovered it. It Is after the
Digression, that it is mentioned directly as Fact: so that in the Translation,
This Fact is not dis-jointed from those Emotions which it immediately raises in
Euryclea; We are not told fourscore Lines after the Jarr is flung down, that
the Water is running out of it.

If this be really the Case, says Antiphaus, I think the Alteration is much to
be commended. But why may not Homer himself be understood to speak in the
Prophetic manner too? for I suppose that single Point would salve all: You do
not blame the Digression itself?

No, says Philypsus, it is not the Digression which I blame, but the Point in
which it is introduced; just between a Fact, and what in Nature must be
immediately consequent upon that Fact. If, as you ask, Homer speaks at first,
only in the Prophetic manner, then it is all cleared up: But I fear his
Expressions confine it directly to a thing then done, and cannot be taken in
the Prophetical way.

Philypsus was so engaged to this Moment, that he had not once observed how the
Day wore away: He was surpised to find the Night was just coming on. Why did
you suffer me (says he to Antiphaus) to keep you here so long: I did not
imagine the Night had been so near us: You know I am an Eternal Talker --
However I see the Coach is at the Door; and we may reach our Lodgings, I
believe, before it is quite dark.

An ESSAY etc.
EVENING the FIFTH.
BEFORE they parted the last Evening the two Friends agreed, that their next
meeting should be in the same place; and as this was to be the last which they
intended to set apart for this Enquiry, they set out for Horatio's earlier than
usual. When they alighted, Philypsus ordered his Servant before them to the
Dome of Apollo, with a Book or two he had brought in the Coach; whilst He and
Antiphaus walked on gently to enjoy the Freshness of the Air, and the Beaut^es
of the Place. The Sun (which now began to be in its decline) as it shot through
the Trees, made a thousand wavering Mixtures of Light and Shade: The Birds, on
all sides were answering one another in their little natural Airs: every thing
looked Fresh about 'em; and every thing was Agreeable.

Delighted with so many calm undisturbed Pleasures, they wandered on from one
Walk to another; and chatted, as they went, of a Thousand indifferent Things.
Among the rest Philypsus fell into an Account of the Company he had to Dine
with him. You know Morfori^, says he? -- Perfectly well, answered A^tiphaus. --
He was there too; and made it his Business, as usual, to contradict every thing
that was offered against any of our celebrated Poets. -- I am very glad, says
Antiphaus, that I was not of the Company; his way of arguing is t^^ General to
be Answered, and too Positive (...) be B^rn with. -- Yes, says Philypsus, it
was his old way. If one Person blamed some particular Littleness in Milton, he
would immediately ask him how he could blaspheme such a Sublime Poet? and when
another mentioned a gross Line from Addison's Works; How absurd is that, say^
he, to charge such a thing on the chaste^^ and most correct Compositions in the
World? -- Right! and I suppose t^ very next thing he must ask was, How Yo^
could dislike such Glorious Men, as Addison and Milton -- You have him exactly.
It was in vain to tell him that you disliked only this Line, or that Thought:
He would have h^s way: and, I doubt not, but in his Opinion we are all a Set of
Heretics, or at least Free-thinkers in Poetry. What an egregious Fault is it,
Antiphaus, with some Men, only to have ones Eyes open? -- But there are times
(says Antiphaus, assuming as he spoke, the imperious air and manner of
Morforio) there are times sure, when they had better ^e shut -- And therefore I
should wink always -- Not so neither: Your Betters ^ay direct you what to look
upon, and what ^ot -- That Is a good Thought, truly: ^tis great Pity the
Legislator has not considered of it. I should be in Love with ^n Act of
Parliament about the Use of Eyes. -- Why where would be the great ^arm of the
Matter, if you were ordered to ^ink hard, or to turn away from every
disa^^eeable Object, that offered it self? -- How ^ay I behave, if the Object
be agreeable? -- Look as long as you please -- And How, if there be a Mixture
of disagree^ble in it? -- You suppose then, that ^here may be something
disagreeable, in that which is beautiful? -- Really, Sir, that ^s my Notion.
Nay, I am apt to think farther, that there is nothing so Beautiful, as to be
without Defect; without some Mixture of the Disagreeable. By your Rule then, we
must lose the sight of a Thousand fine Objects. How can I look on that Lady,
you were admiring so much the other Day in the Ring, without seeing that her
Hair is of a disagreeable Color? Or must I swear that her Eyebrows are Black,
because she has a fi^^ Shape? -- That Is over-straining the matter: but I think
you might pass by such a Trifle, if it were only in Complaisance. Where there
are such exact Features, (...) charming a Complexion, and a Make so delicate,
it is barbarous not to let such a sma^ Affair, as the Color of an Eyebrow,
esca^^ your Observation. -- Depend upon it, I^ would not be so blind as to
think the Lady was Disagreeable on that Accou^^ -- B^t I cannot allow any thing
disagr^^able about her -- Where are your Eye^ then? -- I would not believe them
-- That Is one way -- Or what would (...) say to the new I^vention -- What
Invention I beseech you -- Only of a ^ett (...) Glasses, which shall make each
favouri^^ Object appear exactly the same to every E^ -- And exactly beautiful?
-- T^^ too -- An hopeful project, truly! L^ but Morforio be the Designer, and
so^ things would appear all Glaring and Beautiful; while all the rest, I
suppose, only upon turning the Tube, might be nothing but Deformity.

In the midst of this roving sort of Talk, they were got to the Dome, before
they thought of it: Well, says Philypsus (as he entered) till I meet with the
Perspectives you were talking of, I shall not be ashamed to confess, that I
find my Eyes at present to be of a different Turn. I cannot help perceiving
some little Blemishes in our most delightful Poets; and yet I am far from an
Insensible to their Beauty: I view them with delight; I admire them
passionately: Nay, I believe, I have all of Morforio's Love, except the
Blindness of it. It Is there that you have opened my Eyes, Antiphaus: You have
taught me to Love not only with Passion, but with Reason -- Rather say (replied
^ntiphaus) that your own Mind asserted ^s true Prerogative; and rose up to
guide ^our Passions to none, but proper Ob^cts. -- However that be, says
Philypsus, ^am sensible of an Alteration for the bet^r; and can now indulge a
Passion for ^y Writer with the greater Appetite, (...) I am persuaded it gives
the Mind a ^fficient Pleasure, without making so great a Fool of it. Do I not
love thi^ Writer, added he, (taking up one of the Pieces that lay before him) I
read hi^ with the same Eagerness, and find ne^ Charms in him continually. Nay,
(...) think my Love of him more secure, tha^ ever: Since I can suffer my self
to se^ his Faults; and by that means, am satisfied that they can never be
sufficien^ in the least to cloud his Perfections.

I am entirely of your Opinion, (say^ Antiphaus) and doubt not, but in ou^
finishing this Enquiry, we shall have the greater Security in admiring Him.
(...) only speak of our selves. There may b^ many other Beauties, and other
Fault^ visible to Men of better Eyes: but w^ may safely fix our own Sentiments
o^ what we have been able to discover ou^ selves. I hope, we have endeavour'^
sincerely to hold the Balance steady and when we have done what we can we have
done what we ought.

I wish you would have left that Sentence for me, says Philypsus; It would have
served admirably to introduce wha^ I am to enter upon this Evening. -- I^ is at
your service (says Antiphaus) an^ therefore I beg you would proceed.

Though I might begin very well with the sententious manner in Writing; my
Subject, says Philypsus, is so various, that I ^o not well know what I ought to
choose ^rst: The Prospect widens rather too ^uch upon me; and indeed takes in
^ost of the Faults and Virtues of any ^oem. I own that, in general, the Great
and First Excellence of a Poet, is to be ^^tural: but it will be allowed me,
that (...) chief, and distinguishing Beauty of (...) Epick Poem, as such, is a
true A^r of ^reatness, and a Style that carries weight ^d emphasis with it: as
the Vice most ^pposite to it, is trifling, vulgarity, and ^^anness. I wish I
may manage these ^oints as fully, as I doubt not Antiphaus ^ill display the
natural strokes that are (...) frequent in the Odyssey.

Sentences carry much efficacy with ^em in a Poem; they are usually of the
^erceptive kind; though they seem rather (...) insinuate, than to command: As
they ^e general Truths and Maxims of Life, ^ell adapted to some particular
occasion (...) the Poem, they appear with Autho^ty; and contain the most useful
Instru^ions, without the Stiffness and Odium (...) personal Advice.

It Is a Mistake (to use a Maxim of lord Shaftsbury's) to think that no body
^^ws how to take Advice; the Fault is, (...) few know how to give it. To do
this agreeably, and at the same time with Weight, is the great Art of Sentences
in Poetry.

Poetry in its Birth was calculated for the Service of Religion. The design of
the Epick Muse was to paint the Successes of Virtue, or the Punishment o^ Vice.
Hence the Tragic, that follow'^ the very same Purposes; and afterwar^ the old
Comedy, whose business lay in encouraging lesser Domestic Virtues, an^
ridiculing the Foibles of Mankind. S^tire, the Offspring of both these,
pa^takes of either kind; she Smiles in H^race, looks Severe in Persius, and
Commanding in Juvenal: The Satirist man ^se different Methods, but whether
(...) Lash^s or Ridicules, it is still the vici^^ who are to suffer.

All the other Species of Poetry eit^^ ^all in with these, or follow the sa^
Ends: such, as forget this, deserve (...) the Name of Poets: they prostitute t^
Muse; and whatever they produce m^ be of a Bastard-Kind.

Among many other Excellencies, (...) ought particularly to be observed in
H^nour of the true genuine Poets of A^quity, that they seem to treat of
Mo^lity, even better than those who profes^ that Study. Were it not for the Wo^
of their Poets, we might very well imagine Benevolence, for Instance, That
which gives its Life and Spirit to the whole Family of Virtues, was suppressed
^o the last Degree among the Heathens. ^n reading their Philosophers, one is
^lmost persuaded, that they teach Re^enge; and make it their business to li^it
and restrain that Love, which Men ^ave naturally to one another. In short, ^e
that wants to find the true Philoso^hy must go to their Poets. They break ^ut
into warmer Notions, and more ex^lted Lessons of Humanity. Among them ^e Face
of Charity is less veiled, and ^ouded; and Goodness appears with a ^ountenance
more generous and erect.

The Odyssey, as a Moral Poem, exceeds ^l the Writings of the Ancients: it is
^rpetual in forming the Manners, and ^tructing the Mind: it sets off the Du^s
of Life more fully, as well as more ^reeably, than the Academy or Lyceum.
^race, who was so well acquainted ^th the Tenets of both, has given (a) ^mer's
Poems the Preference to e^^er.

Quid sit pulchrum, quid turpe, qu^d u^ile, quid non, ^nius ac melius Chrysippo
and Cran^o^e dicit^ (...) 1. Ep. 2.
Surely, Antiphaus, Men were more Virtuous in the days of Homer, than they were
in the time of Plato or Cicero; at least, they were more charitable, and tender
to Strangers. How else could the Poet speak in such a Spirit of Goodness,
whenever he touches upon this Duty? Nothing is inculcated by him, more
frequently; and nothing, with greater Strength and Emphasis.

Homer (in relation to Strangers) does not stint the Charity of his Countrymen
to the common Use of Fire and Water: he seems rather to proportion the bounty
to the want; It Is ours the Sons of sorrow to relieve,
Od. 6. 245 -- 207.
Cheer the sad heart, nor let affliction gri^ve.


He scarce looks upon this as bounty, he rather thinks it a debt owing to every
one of the same nature with us: It Is what the happy to the unhappy owe:
Od. 9, 321 -- 269.
It Is what the Gods require.


What is given to them (says he) is paid ^o, and will infallibly be rewarded
by, the Divine Power. By Jove the S^ranger and the Poor are sent;
Od 6, 24^ -- 208.
And what to those we give, to Jove is lent.


As the neglect of this will be avenged by the same, To Jove their cause, and
their revenge belongs,
Od. 9, 329 -- 271.
He wanders with them, and he feels their ^rongs.


I doubt not, but this Notion of the Gods wandering on Earth in a disguised
manner, was a very common motive to Charity in those times: it is mentioned
very strongly in the Original, in this place; and Od. 7, 265 -- 199.
afterward, when Ulysses appears as a Suppliant among the Phoeacians.

Such high exalted Thoughts of this Duty have carried the Poet so far as See
Od. 7, 256 -- 194.
to teach, "That we should not value any "labor of our own in assisting
others:" but as that is not delivered in the Sententious manner, I should go
out of my way to repeat it at present.

To us, who have always enjoyed so clear and steady a Light, in regard to every
branch of this Duty, these sentences may appear common and obvious: but I
imagine any one, who should compare these Passages, by the rules of Benevolence
in the Philosophical writings of the Ancients; would upon such a view allow
them to contain thoughts highly noble and extensive.

I shall mention but one more, which though it run through several lines, is but
one entire sentence: and which, by the way, if I forget not, contains a motive
to Charity, not to be found even in De Officiis^ p. 20. In beneficentia
delectus esset dignitatis etc.
Cicero's Catalogue.

Who calls, from distant nations to his own,
The poor, distinguished by their wants alone?
Round the whole world are sought those men divine,
Who public Structures raise, or who design;
Those to whose Eyes the Gods their ways reveal,
Or bless with salutary arts to heal:
These states invite, and mighty Kings admire,
Wide as the Sun displays his vital fire.
It is not so with Want! How few that feed
Od. 17, 471 -- 387.
A Wretch unhappy, merely for his need?
I ought not to dissemble one thing; That the Translation is not to be trusted
entirely in this Argument: we find these Passages improved in the Handling; and
those Lines, in which they resemble our sacred Writings, may be drawn more
strongly. However, the Original it self may give us a great deal of reason to
suppose, either that Homer had borrowed some lights from thence; or that he
could discern the Light of Nature more clearly, than any other of the Heathen
Writers.

Before I compared Passages, I must own to you, that I was in particular
expectation of Improvements from Mr. Pope under this Article. A virtuous
generous Soul is certainly as necessary to constitute a Great Poet, as a Great
Orator: and in Sentiments like these, we may discover that temper of Mind,
which I dare say has contributed much toward making that Gentleman so good a
Poet, as well as so good a Friend.

There is one particular more extremely frequent in Homer: it runs thorough all
his Works; and is scarce once omitted, where there is any occasion for it. I
believe your Thoughts outrun me, and might prevent my saying, that I mean His
Reflections on the Miseries of this Life. They are mostly very emphatical; and
lead to a very easy and useful inference.

-- To his native land our charge resign'd^
Heaven is his life to come, and all the woes behind.
Then must he suffer what the Fates ordain;
For Fate has wove the thread of life with pain,
Od. 7, 264 -- 198.
And Twins even from the birth are Misery and Man!
In another place we have the same Thought as strongly expressed, though branched
out into several other Particulars: Let us suppose Ullysses before us: A
Prince, Great for the Ages in which he lived, and greatly distressed: How much
does he speak like one, born to Wisdom, and long instructed by Adversity?

Of all that breaths, or groveling treads on earth,
Most vain is Man! Calami^ous by birth.
To day with power ela^e in strength he blooms;
The haughty creature on that power presumes:
Anon, from Heaven, a sad reverse he feels;
Untaught to bear, against Hea'vn the wretch rebels.
For Man is changeful, as his bliss or woe;
Too high, when prosperous; when distressed, too low.
There was a Day, when (with the scornful Great)
I swelled in pomp and arrogance of state;
Proud of the power, that to high bi^th be^ongs;
And used that power to justify my wrongs.
Then let not Man be proud; but, firm of mind,
Bear the best humbly, and the worst resigned:
Od. 18, 171 -- 141.
Be Dumb, when Heaven ^fflicts! --
Of all Sentences, there are none which strike the Mind more forcibly, than
those which carry a bold air, a certain nobleness of Thought with them. There
is a Moral Heroism, greatly to be preferred to that which generally usurps its
Name; a Generosity of Soul, that looks beyond the Vulgar, and speaks up to the
Truth of things: It is this Generosity, which animates those Lines in Virgil:
Est hic, est animus, lucis contemptor; and istum
Aen. 9, 206.
Qui vi^d been cred^t emi, quo tendis, ho^orem.


The same Spirit is in^us'd into this Line: Od. 17, 523 -- 441.
Death, ill-exchang'd for bondage and for pain!


The noblest Sentiments, are not such as make an Eclat, but those which are
solidly generous and good. We have frequent instances of both from two Persons
in the Iliad: Hector speaks things, that are great; Ajax often, what is
mavelous and surprising: Both speak loftily: but one is more solid, and the
other nearer to a Rant; both show Courage and Generosity in what they say; but
they seem to talk, as they act; Ajax fights merely for fighting sake; while
Hector engages always for the good of his Country.

I shall beg leave to close this Head with two Sentiments, as much celebrated
as any in the Iliad, and spoke by the two Heroes we have been talking of. The
one, in the mere Spirit of an Hero; If Greece must perish, we thy will obey,
See Note on Il. 17, 731 -- 647.
But let us perish in the face of day.


The other, in that of a Patriot too; Without a sign his sword the brave man
draws;
Il 12, 284 -- 243.
And asks no omen, but his country's cause.


I am sorry, says Antiphaus, you have quitted this Point so soon, methinks you
might afford a little more room for a thing of such considerable Use. Sentences
are fitted by their Nature to carry on that Chief design of Poetry, to mix the
Useful with the Agreeable. -- Together with a certain air of Authority, they
serve to establish the Poets Moral Character; which, according to a Origin of
our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue.
late Hypothesis, may render him at the same time more delightful, as well as
more instructive. -- Besides this, they often flatter the Vanity of the Reader;
And (as the Sea Arist Rhet. Lib. 2. Cap 21.
First of Critics tells us) take the more readily with this or that Person, as
they confirm in general, what he has before concluded from his own Observation
on particular Occurrences in Life.

I wonder at one thing, says Philypsus; That so many of the Critics should
blame Sentences, and look upon 'em as particularly unfit for Poems of the Epick
Kind: See Note on Od. 7, 379.
Rapin, I think, condemns them, as they seem to jut out of the Structure of the
Poem, and are apt to interrupt the Narration too much: Bossu, who is rather on
their side, yet observes there is a kind of Calm Wisdom in them, that is
contrary to the Passions. Even the Person, whom you just now called the First
of Critics, puts us in mind of your Rusticks, that are always Arist. Rhet.
^ib. 2. Cap. 21.
stringing of Proverbs together: and (...) very good Critic of our own says,
in ^o many words, that Addison's Misc. vol. 1. p. 237. 120.
they are generally ^ome of the heaviest pieces in a whole Poem.

Let them add, if they please, says An^iphaus, that they sound aukwardly from
^he mouth of a Young Person, and prepo^erously from an Atheist. I own the
^harge: the best Writers themselves seem ^o be sensible of it; and where they
do any thing of this kind, are the first to ^orrect themselves. Addison Port.
It Is not in mortals to command success; ^ut we'll do more, Sempronius; We'll
deserve it^ ^emp. Curse on the stripling how he apes his (...) ^mbitiously
sententious. -- Cato. Act ^. (...)
puts a ^entence into the Mouth of Portius; but ^e corrects him for it, in the
next Line, ^ho' the Son of a Cato; and when Virgil Aen. 10, 860.
makes his Atheist sententious, there is still a mixture of the Atheist to be
discovered in what he says.

But grant that Sentences are not proper from Persons that are Young, or
Vicious; Grant, that they are not proper in a Mezentius, or a Portius: What
then? may they not be proper in Cato himself, or in Aeneas?

It Is the same Case in every particular you have produced from the Critics:
they speak rather against the Abuse of this Ornament, than against the Ornament
itself. There can be no doubt of it; Sentences are certainly faulty, when they
appear too grossly, and stand off from the rest of the Work: But what is this
to Sentences, which are fitly applied, and wove in Artfully with the other
Parts? Homer and Virgil are very happy in this particular: they give them a
sufficient Fullness; but they never glare so, as to attract the Eye singly to
themselves^ You admire them as much from their Relation to the things about
them, as for their own particular Beauty: in short, they might be Beautiful by
themselves, but they are much more so in the Tout-ensemble of the Piece.

We may add to this, that their Sentences are so far from hindering the
Narration, that they are almost constantly a part of it, and help to carry it
forward: But though they are usually wrought into the Speeches of the Poem, we do
not receive them from Persons improper; or hurried by any violent Passion: and
where the Subject is still and gentle, that ^alm Wisdom, that has been objected
to them, cannot be very prejudicial. Indeed in any place, or on any Occasion, a
long thread of them is insupportable; these are worse than the Sanchoisms of
Cer^antes, because they are not so ridiculous: We can laugh at Sancho all the
time he is multiplying his Proverbs upon us; but in Poetry, such dry
Preachments are, of all other, the greatest Opiates, and have the quickest
effect on the Audience. L^can's Poem and Seneca's Tragedies, notwithstanding
all their Beauties, are In^ances of this to a great degree.

There is another way of murdering Sentences, for which we are wholly o^lig'd
to those ingenious Gentlemen, the ^ditors. It is that Art of cutting off
^entences from the Body of a Work, and ^rcing them to jut out from it, whether
^ey will or no, by Printing all such, ^here-ever they can catch them, in
Italick Characters. Mr. Addison, if I remember, is condemning this Practice in
that very place where he says, that Sentences are some of the heaviest Pieces
in a Poem: and I imagine nothing could make him speak so severely of them in
general, but this Practice that is so destructive of their Beauty.

In short, Sentences that are cold, affected, or ill-placed, such as are either
too distinct, or too much thronged, may be blamed with a great deal of Justice:
but such as are handsomely wove into the Narration, at proper Intervals, and
from none but proper Speakers, will not only be safe from the Censure of the
Critics; but are allowed by them in general, to be highly serviceable toward
g^ving its proper Weight and Emphas^^ to an Epick Poem.

I think you have defended this Beaut^ sufficiently, says Philypsus; and shall
g^ on to the next under this Head, Concise^ ness: There is no greater Symptom
(...) weakness in a Writer, than his being a^ to say a little in a great deal;
as nothi^ is more strong and emphatical, than (...) say a great deal in a
little.

Hence the Force and Emphasis of the Line of Mr. Pope.

Od. 22, 226 -- 208.
Oh every sacred Name in one, my Friend!
And of this, Od. 2, 54 -- 47. (...) Od. 18, 443 -- 397.
The Great, the Good; your Father and your King.


The want of a scrupulous Connection, draws things into a lesser Compass; and
adds the greater Spirit and Emotion: (c) He shrieks, he reels, he falls. --


The more Rays are thus collected into (...) Point, the more vigorous the
Flame: Hence there is yet greater Emphasis, ^hen the Rout of an Army is shown
in ^he same contracted manner; As that (...) the 24th of the V, 610.
Odyssey: which has ^me resemblance to Sallust's Description ^f the same thing
(agreeable to his usual ^onciseness) in these four Words only: ^^) Sequi,
fugere, occidi, capi.

There may be a contraction of many ^ircumstances to a Point, which turns ^ore
on the Sentiment, than the Diction: ^s when we place the Success of a Thou^nd
important Events on one Effort, or ^ne Moment of Time: Thus Antinous, (e) Bell.
Jug. ^^ 106. Ed. Mattaire^
the Chief of the Suitors, to his Companions, Od. 24, 499 -- 436.
Arise, (or you for ever fall) arise.


Which has such an Air of Milton's Lucifer: Awake, Arise, or be for ever fallen!


Those Lines, says Antiphaus, serve the purpose for which you repeat them very
well; but is there not something too much like a Turn upon the words in them? I
was sensible of that (answered Philypsus) but I follow your Example, Antiphaus,
in viewing a thing only in one Light at a time, to prevent the infinite
Confusion that would happen in turning each Line every way. This is brought as
Emphatical: You allow it to be so; if it answer the end for which it is
produced, that is all that I intend: and I beg once for all to be understood
under this view in every Instance that I have, or may use, on particular
Occasions.

This masculine nervous Conciseness, I am speaking of, is very usual from
Generals to their Soldiers: but among a multitude of Instances, I am
particularly pleased with that Speech of Henr^ the Great, before the Battle in
the Plains of Ivry, I am your King, You are Frenchmen, and there are the Enemy.

Sometimes we find an Emphasis and Vigor impressed on every particular word of
a Sentence: Od. 18, 299 -- 255.
Now, Grief, thou all art mine!


And in these Lines, which we have often admired for their peculiar Strength
and Efficacy; They speak of Ulysses's extreme Love of his native Country:

To see the smoke from his loved palace rise,
While the dear Isle in distant prospect lies,
Od. 1. 77 -- 59.
With what cont^ntment would he close his eyes?
This is not only of use in the Grand or Pathetick: there are excellent
Instances of it from Terence Haec verba mehercule un^ falsa lachrumula, Quam,
ocul^s t^rendo misere, vix vi expresserit, Restinguet. -- Eun. Act. 1. Sc. 1.
, in the Tender and Familiar, as there are others from Virgil in the Natural,
and even in the Satirical; and that so strongly in the latter, that Thus
Dryden: from his -- Non tu in triviis, indocte, solebas Stridenti mis^rum
stipula disperdere carmen. Ecl. 3, 27. As others from this Line: Qui Bavium non
odit, amet tua carmina, Maevi. ib 90.
some have been apt to imagine from them, that Virgil might, if he pleased,
have made the greatest Satirist that ever wrote.

Sometimes this very Emphasis is increased by a certain Opposition of the words
used in it: there is a Passage in the Iliad, which I have particularly admired
on this Account: Give me leave to repeat it from the Original; because the
Greek Tongue is particularly Emphatical, and has more Nerves than perhaps our
Language is capable of: (...), Il. ch, 48. The Opposition is carried on farther
in the next Lines, between (...), and (...).
(...). --

The Emphatical manner in writing flies all Dress and Ornament, all superfluous
and descriptive Epithets, all turns and elegancies of Thought. Hence that
Conciseness, which generally attends it. The most obvious fault in Conciseness
is Obscurity; what is obscure, can never be sufficiently emphatical: This makes
the concise way the most difficult of any. It Is easy to follow the Stream of
one's Imagination, and write on with an unthinking Rapidity; but to express
every thing fully, and to say nothing that is needless, requires a great
Judgment, and much force in our Expressions. The great Monsieur Pascal had a
particular happiness of comprizing much in a few Words: he had a very
Mathematical Turn of Thought; and of all things hated an idle Prolixity. You
will be pleased with an Excuse of his in a certain Case, where he had been
guilty of it: It Is in the close of one of his Letters, where he begs his Friend
to pardon the unusual length of it, by saying, that he really had not time to
make it shorter.

Some emphatical Passages are not only so concise, as to contain just as many
Ideas as Words; they have often force enough even to intimate several Ideas
more than they express.

Thus it is in all Intimations of Power. One of Homer's greatest Excellencies
lies in this. In setting off the Hero of his Iliad, he does not say in Words,
that he was vastly Terrible to the Enemy; he mentions the effects, and leaves
the Reader to collect what Terror must attend him. After the Death of
Patroclus, the whole Army of the Trojans is put into Confusion, only s', 224.
at hearing his Voice: They are all trembling, and dispirited: Il. s', 248.
they had seen Achilles. It Is not a sudden Panick; it continues upon them: When
they poured down in such Numbers from the City, it was because ib. p', 70.
they did not behold the Crest of that Hero; and now they are all consulting,
whether they should not quit the Field, because -- s', 262.
he had shown himself at a distance, and might possibly enter into the next
Engagement.

Homer has the same address in intimating the Power of his Deities; when he
introduces them as effecting their designs with a Il. n', 60, 75.
Touch, with a ib. x, 150.
Voice, with a ib. of, 242.
single Thought.

It is the same Sentiment that gives their Air of Grandeur to these Lines:

Od. 24, 547 -- 475.
Declare thy purpose; for thy Will is Fate.
Let a^l be Peace. -- He said; and gave the nod
Od. 24, 561 -- 485.
That binds the Fates, the Sanction of the God.
And this, of the same import, from our Shakespeare; -- What he bids be done,
Is finished with his bidding. --


On this turns the Greatness of that Thought in the Sacred History of the
Creation: God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light: Though I should
imagine this to exceed every Instance above; because it intimates, all that
they express, and intimates it as fully and strongly, as they express it.

Let the Greatness of this Sentence stand or fall by the Rules of Sublimity. We
need not mention, that Cap 9. Ed. Ox^n. 1718.
Longinus chose it for an Instance of the Sublime: whether that great Critic
ever saw it or not, is not material: but I wonder, that some later Writers, of
very great Name, cannot be persuaded to see any Force or Energy in it. I own, I
have never read what Monsieur Le Clerc offers against the Sublimity of this
Passage: Surely it would not be very difficult to answer it, if it be of a
Strain with what See Preface to B^ileau's Works.
Monsieur Huetius offered before him; Where he seems to argue, that See Huetij
Them. Ev. Prop. 4. Sect. 53.
This Passage cannot be Sublime, because the Language is Simple.

It is this Art of leaving more for the Reader to collect, than you express in
Words, which runs through several of Ulysses's Speeches; both at the Court of
Alcinous, and before the Suitors. Whether the Hero tells his own Story, or
feigns some other, he is equally careful in laying before them something of
the High Station he once enjoyed: and hence his Speeches have generally a great
Air of that celebrated Answer of Marius to a Message sent from the Roman
General: Plutarch's Life of Marius.
Go, and tell, Sextilius, that you saw Marius, ^itting among the Ruins of
Carthage.

Intimation is so strong and nervous, that the Sea Quintil. Instit. Lib. ^.
Cap. 3. and Lib. 9. Cap 2.
Ancient Critics confined the Name of Emphasis to this one Point; though (as we
use the word) the very contrary of this, may be of great Service in making a
Discourse emphatical. The Soul is sometimes possessed by the Number of great
Circumstances. Thus in that Passage of Homer, which Mr. Pope translates after
the following manner;

M^n, Steeds, and Chariots shake the trembling ground;
The T^n^ult thickens, and the Skies resound:
Victors and V^nquish'd join promiscuous cries,
Il. 8. 80 -- 65.
Triumphant shou^s, and dying groans arise.
We meet with the same tumultuary Figure in the Description of the Field after
the Battle: Il. 10, 356 -- 298.
Through Dust, through Blood, over Arms, and hills of Slain.


This Passage (we are told) is imitated by Xenophon; and I am sure the
Historian has not weakened it, by drawing it into a greater length, and
expressing the Circumstances more fully; Allow me the Satisfaction of reading
it to you. Note on Il. 10, 3^6.
When the Battle was over, one might behold through the whole extent of the
Field, the Ground died Red with Blood, the Bodies of Friends and Enemies
stretched over each other, the Shields pierced, the Spears broken, and the
drawn Swords, some scattered ^n the Earth, some plunged in the Bodies of the
Slain, and some yet grasped in the Hands of the Soldiers.

Now we have fallen upon an Historian, give me leave to observe one thing; That,
both with Poets and in History, Minus est totum dicere, quam omni^.
There may be some Fraud in saying only the bare Truth. In either, it is not
sufficient to tell us, that such a City, for Instance, was taken and r^vag'd
with a great deal of Inhumanity: There is a Poetical Falsity, if a strong Idea
of each particular be not imprinted on the Mind; and an Historical, if some
things are passed over only with a general mark of Infamy or Dislike. It was in
Instit. Lib. 8. Cap. 3.
Quintilian I first met with this Observation; and I wish our Historians, of
all Parties, did not give us so many Examples of it, as we find every where in
their Works.

It Is the same in Poetry: when all the Circumstances are laid out in their
proper Colors, and make a complete Piece; its Images strike us with greater
Energy, than when the Whole of the thing is only mentioned in general. Thus the
diffused Style has its Propriety under this Head; and makes a larger and more
continued Impression: as the force of its contrary Excellence, a just and
emphatical Conciseness, may be more collected, and pierce the deeper. I do not
mean when we mention a thing, but when we show it in a few words. There are
just Miniatures of Great Objects in Poetry, as well as in Statuary or Painting.
A Hercules, in little, may have all the Nerves of a Colossus: and even that
prodigi^us Design of To form Moun^ A^h^s into a Statue of Alexander the Great;
so desig^'d^ as to hold a City in one hand, and to have a River run thorough
the other.
Dinarchus might not have been more Gigantick, than Timanthes His Picture of
that Giant in Miniature.
his Polyphemus. Noble Images, whether in a large or smaller Compass, ^^rike
the Mind very strongly. Either must be according to the Occasion. Things
sometimes demand to be drawn at full Length, and the Soul requires to expatiate
over them: Sometimes they choose a more contracted Space; But though they lose
from their Size, they lose nothing of their Spirit. It fills us with a ^oble
and enlarged Pleasure, to consider ^he Heavenly Bodies, their Courses, and
their immense Distances: at the same ^me, we are struck with a very parti^lar
Admiration, when we view their ^tuation and Measures in the Orrery.

Any uncommon extensive Image causes (...) Enlargement of our Ideas, and
pos^ses the Mind more completely: In ^ch Cases it is observable, that even ^e
Turn of the Verse may assist these ^ages. I may seem too particular if I ^y,
that large Words and Lines which ^nsist chiefly of long Syllables, may be use
to extend our Thoughts in con^ving any Gigantick form: and yet ^haps both will
be found not unservice^e in Mr. Pope's Description of his Cyclops.

A Giant-shepherd here his flock maintains;
Far from the rest he solitary reigns,
In shelter thick of horrid shade reclined;
And gloomy mischiefs labor in his mind.
Od. 9^ 217.
A Form enormous! --
Or, where we see him (b) Ibid. 354.
Stretched forth in length, over half the cavern'd Rock.


Or, when He sends a dreadful groan; the rocks around,
Ibid^ 469.
Through all their inmost, winding caves resound.


Whether you think this length and heaviness of the Syllables necessary in the
present case, or not; I am sure, you will allow it to be so in Melancholy
Images.

Where heavenly-pensive Contemplation dwells,
And ever-musing Melancholy reigns --
And a Thousand more.

Homer too in describing a large Object, makes use of a word, which of itself
is Il. (...), 676.
above half a Verse: and Ovid, on a like Occasion, joins several together of an
unusual length. We behold his Aegeon bestriding his Whale, even in the Turn --
Balaenarumque prementem Egeona suis immania terga lacertis. Met. 2, 10.
of the Words which are to describe him.

Delay and Repetition are sometimes proper for the same Reasons; There is a
Delay almost in every Syllable, where Mr. Pope intimates the vast size of a
Stone, as well as the difficulty in heaving it up;

Then heaved the Goddess in her mighty hand
A stone, the limit of the neighboring land,
(b) There fixed from eldest times; black, craggy, vast.
Virgil adds a Repetition in his Imitation of this very Passage in Homer: Saxum
circumspicit ingens, saxum anti^^um, ingens -- And Mr. Pope commends the Beauty
of this Repetition, as See Note ibid.
it makes us dwell upon the Image, and gives ^s leisure to consider the
Vastness of it.

It may seem strange, that the Vastness, the mere Bulk of an Object, should
possess the Mind in the manner I have been ^peaking of: but though there is no
real Ex^ellence in Largeness, it is certain that ^e are apt to apprehend it as
excellent. This puts me in Mind of a Point, that ^lways strikes me very much in
Poetry; ^) Il. 21, 470 -- 404.
A sort of Comprehension, as I should choose to call it, for want of some better
Name. It Is when any Great View is completely contracted into a few Lines; but
to come up perfectly to my Notion, it should be such a View as is sufficient to
fill the whole Mind: We are, in a manner, surrounded with it on all sides; and
which ever way we turn our Eyes, we cannot look out of i^. This is the Case,
where Ulysses is represented in his Shipwreck on the Coast of Phoeacia; Above,
sharp Rocks forbid access; around,
Od. 5^ 529 -- 413.
Roar the wild Waves; beneath, is Sea profound!


If you can fancy yourself in the Place of Ulysses, at that Juncture; you will
apprehend what I mean the more fully. You can then see nothing, but what is
painted out in this Couplet.

I apprehend you, (says Antiphaus) and indeed have observed this Beauty often
in Reading. There is a Thought, (if I mistake not) repeated twice in the
Eleventh Odyssey, of this kind: Od. 11, 139 and 3^^.
Above, Below, on Earth, and in the Sky.


I know not whether the Image be Total, but it cannot want much of it, in that
Description of a shipwreckt Person, just before the Lines you repeated:

Amidst the rocks he hears a hollow roar
Of murmuring surges breaking on the shore;
Nor peaceful port was there, nor winding bay,
To shield the vessel from the rolling sea;
But cliffs, and shaggy shores, a dreadful sight,
Od. 5, 521.
All rough with rocks, with foamy billows white.
If this be not Total, at least it will engross Two of your Senses, whilst you
keep in the same Posture; but those, as you say, seem the most complete, which
take up the Eye what ever way you turn. -- As this (resumed Philypsus) to keep
to the same Element: Od. 12, 474.
And all above was sky, and ocean all around.


These Total Views are much more vigorous and affecting, when the Objects are
not inanimate: or at least, when, some more moving Considerations are annexed to
them. Thus in the Picture of a rough Sea, terminating in craggy Shores, and
Rocks, and a tempestuous Sky, every Object has an additional Terror from our
seeing Ulysses painted in the midst of these Dangers, and struggling to make so
difficult a Shore. -- I remember a Passage of this kind in a Writer of a very
strong Imagination, which is heightened by the same Method. We have it in a
Description of Mount Atlas, though I believe the Author took his Ideas from the
Alps: it is delivered in this bold Poetical kind of Prose: Characteristicks.
Vol. ^. Page 389.
See, with what trembling steps poor Mankind tread the narrow Brink of the deep
Precipices! from whence with giddy Horror they look down, mistrusting even the
Ground which bears them; whilst they hear the hollow sound of Torrents
underneath, and see the Ruin of the impending Rock, with falling Trees, which
hang with their Roots upwards, and seem to draw more Ruin after them. --

In these Cases, our Passions, as well as our Senses, are engaged: and I take
such Views to be then entirely complete, when all our Passions, as well as all
our Senses, may be engrossed by them. Were I to give an Instance of such a
View, I should prefer that Passage in Virgil, where he places you in the midst
of a City, covered with the dismal shades of Night, taken and fired in a
Thousand places by the Enemy, and every where filled with Ruin, Terror, and
Confusion: Aen. 2, 369.
-- Crudelis ubique
Luctus, ubique Pavor, and plurima mortis imag^.


I have dwelt the longer on these Comprehensive Views, as they fill and delight
the Mind very strongly. There is another Case, much of this Nature, and of
particular Energy: I do not mean, when we surround, but when we carry the Mind
out to a vast extent: As in this Sentiment; Od. 23, 369.
By Heaven above, by Hell beneath.


There is a Thought of this Nature, very justly reckoned among the Sublime,
which appears with a perfect Uniformity in Ingrediturque solo and caput inter
nubilacondit Ae 4, 177. (...). Lxx per Grabe. (...), 16.
Virgil, in Homer, and in the Book of Wisdom, formerly ascribed to Solomon: For
my part, I do not at all wonder at this exact Resemblance in them. It is such a
Thought, that when it is once set before one, it possesses the Mind so
strongly, that it will leave its Image behind it: And indeed it is obserable,
that a great Critic, where he would applaud it in Homer, T(...). De Subl. the.
Edit. Oxon.
repeats it himself in the very turn of his own Criticism. Longinus is the
Person I mean: who in a thousand Instances, as well as this, Essay on Criticism.
-- Is himself the great Sublime he draws.


One of the most common Topics for this among the Poets, is in speaking of the
distance of Tartarus. Homer makes it as far from Hell to Earth downwards, as it
is upwards from Earth to Heaven: It has been Note on Il. 8, 16.
observed, that Two of the best Poets since have enlarged it gradually, Virgil
to Twice, and Mil^on to Thrice that Depth: but, if I mistake not, Hesiod of old
has carried the Mind further than either of them: It would please you to see,
how exact he is in his Measures: (...). V, 722.
An Anvil (says he) will be Nine days complete in falling from Heaven to our
Earth; and as many in falling from our Earth to Tartarus. -- This is the
Distance from us to the Gates of Tartarus only: he afterward carries the Mind
much farther, in this Description:

There lie the Treasures of the stormy Deep,
Of Earth, and Water, and extended Darkness.
A dreadful Chasm! squalid, and uninform'd,
And hateful even to Gods. Whoever, within
The dreadful Opening of its Gates, should plunge
Prone through the great abyss; twelve times the course
Of the Pale Moon, should feel it^ Storm and Tempest
In dire Descent; still hurried on precipi^ate,
Amidst the various Tumult and Confusion
Of disagreeing Natures. Often the Powers
Immortal cast their Eyes upon these regions,
Hesiod's (...). 744.
And shudder at the Sight. --
This Imagination seems to be imitated in Milton, where Satan meets with that
violent shock, in Traveling through Chaos; but the Fall here strikes us more,
because it has no Bounds: It is still continuing lower and lower; and the Mind,
in endeavoring to conceive it, is lost in its desired Infinitude.

When our Bodies are all so straightened and confined, what must the Soul be made
of, Antiphaus? and what might be its Powers, if unrestrained? Since even in
such dull Company as the Body, with all these Weights and Incumber^ents about
it, it betrays on every the ^^allest Occasion such an Appetite to ^nfinity?

Mr. Addison, in one of his finest Works, ^he Essay on the Pleasures of the
Imagination, reckons Greatness as first among those things, which give that
Spectator, Numb^ 412.
Pleasure: Nothing (says he) Numb. 4^^
gratifies the Mind so much, as those large growing Ideas, which lead her on
almost to an Infinitude. Numb. 412.
Our Imagination loves to be filled with an Object, or to grasp at any thing
that is too big for its Capacity: We are flung into a pleasing Astonishment at
such unbounded Views, and feel a delightful Stillness and Amazement in the
Soul, at the Apprehensions of them.

Every one may know this Pleasure by Experience: It Is not a dry Maxim laid down
by the Philosophers: Whoever will consult his own Mind, when he looks only on a
Prospect, may say as much as Mr. Addison, or Mr. Lock have on this Occasion.
When I had the Pleasure of Conversing with the Gentleman, who designed these
Gardens, (as indeed the Finest in the Nation owe their Beauty to his
Directions) I was very much pleas'^ with a Maxim which he then mentioned That
as the greatest fault in a Prospe^ was Confinement; So the meanest thin^ too in
a Design, was to have the Bounds and Restraint of it immediately visible.

There may be several other Points to be considered under the Character of
Emphatical, whether from the Strength of the Language, the Nobleness of the
Sentiment, or the Greatness and Extent of the Object itself: but I am only
giving a few Sketches of the Kind: You will give me leave, in the same manner,
to take a short View of its Contrary, the Low or Mean Style.

It has been said, That Eadem fere est ratio minuendi: Nam ^otidem sunt
descendentibus, quot ascendentibus gradus. Quintil. Instit. Lib. 8. Cap. 4.
Lowness ^as just as many Causes, as Elevation; since whatever raises the
Sentiment or Diction has its Opposite, which is Mean. This has the Appearance
of Truth; but if one general Measure must be given, I should think that it is
an Excess either way, which causes Meanness. Things over-wrought, as well as
things under-wrought, will be Mean.

When the least Object is expressed in just and proper Terms, it will not of
itself come under the Character of Meanness: Nay, small things may be managed
so, as to change their Nature, and to compose the Grand Air. We meet with
Dissertations on the late Discoveries in the lesser World of Animals, which
have something Great and Sublime in them. Littleness itself may be assistant
too in Amplifying a Subject: Homer uses it thus in his Character of Tydeus; and
it is visible to any one, That bold Martial Atcheivments look greater in a
Nassa^, than they would in a Maximin.

Such Considerations as these have induced me to imagine, That all Meanness
arises from some Disproportion, or other. When a Person is represented in a
View beneath himself, or any Action of Force is expressed weakly, the
Expressions fall short of the Nature of the Thing: Again, that Meanness, which
arises from the Language, may have the same Measure^ The Close of a Sentence
may fall beneat^ the Expectance raised in the Beginnin^ of it, and then will
necessarily have a mean Air. Some sorts of Poetry are o^ a nobler kind; and
Descriptions of things that would not be Mean in a Sonnet o^ Satire, may become
so in Epick. In general, all vulgar Terms, and all ver^ disagreeable
Descriptions, are beneat^ the Heroic Style: as all Triflings, o^ any
Affectation of Ornament, argu^ something beneath the Care of a Poet who has
taken upon him to rule the nobler Passions, and to sing of Heroes and of Gods.

When any thing has an Epithet higher, than its own Nature and the Occasion
requires; or lower, than the proper Idea of the thing might very well demand;
it is much the same; in both there w^ll be a Disproportion, and a Meanness.
Thus, ^e mindful of yourselves draw forth your Swords,
Od. 22, 88 -- 75.
And to your Shafts obtend these (...) (...).


And this Line, Od. 17, 549 -- 4^1.
^is Shoulder blade received the (...) (...)


The same Critic, who observes on a certain Writer, for saying, That some
Persons who were Shipwreckt met with ^n Unpleasant Death; is equally severe ^n
those, who carry things too ^ar; he ^anks any vain (c) Elevations, and the
^uerile Style, under one and the same ^ead.

Indeed Both are frigid, and Both are ^ean. A little or pretty Thought dressed
^p in grand Words, is like the C^pid, in L^nginus, Cap. 3
one of Coypel's Pieces, who is crept into Mars's Armor, and looks as if he
was endeavoring to strut about in it: Whilst a great Thought in little Words,
puts one in Mind of that tall Gentleman we saw one Night at the Masquerade,
dressed like an Infant; and dangling its Hands, as if it were perfectly
helpless.

A Mixture of Mean Language with the Grand, makes the Meanness more visible; as
possibly in this Line, Od. 22, 2.
Stripped of his rags -- He blazed out like a God


Thus where a Libation to the Gods, i^ c^^l'd Od. 3^ 435 -- 3^9.
An Holy Beverage in the (...) and Mars Il. 21 471.
the Heavenly Homi^^^e in the Iliad.

There seems to me to be something ^oo mean for the Ide^ we form of a Giant, in
this Expression; Od. 10^ 131 -- 115.
Her Antiphates.
Husband scowr'd away --


And just after; The Men like fish, they stuck upon the flood,
Od. 10, 144 -- 124.
And crammed their ^ilthy throats with hum^^ food


In the same manner we hear of Ulysses's Companions, being Od. 23, 337 -- 313.
dashed like Dogs by the Cyclops.

I doubt not this was expressed thus, to give us the larger Idea of that
Monster: but might not it have been expressed so, as to serve that purpose,
without giving us at the same time too low an Idea of the Men?

The Dignity of the Person will make any mean Language appear yet meaner.
Whether we consider Ulysses as Od. 7, 228.
so great an Hero, or as the Od ^^ 19^.
Godlike Guest of Alcinous, this Couplet sounds beneath his Character: Od. 7,
296 -- 215.
-- Shrunk with pining fa^t,
My craving bowels still require repast.


Nothing can be more just than Horace's Observation, De Art P^et. ^ 95.
That a King in Exile, or Dist^ess, must lay aside that Air of Grandeur, and
those swelling Words which might ^^come him in his Power: Yet must he remember,
that he has been a King: ^here's a Greatne^s even in D^str^ss; and a due Medium
between Words of a ^oot-and-a-half Long, and Monosyllable^. Be that as it will,
there is certainly much Reason, that he should reassume his Style with his
Dignity: and (whatever may be said for that Speech of Ulysses in his
Wanderings) after he is reinstated, he ought certainly to speak like a Monarch.
I am afraid he fails in this respect, in the following Lines:

^e it my care, by loans, or martial toils,
To throng my emptied folds, with gifts or spoils:
But now I haste to bless L^ertes's eyes,
Od. 23, 387 -- 360.
With sight of his Ulysses e're he dies;
When the God of the Ocean sees Ulysses escaped from his Dominion, he is so
much provoked, that he flies immediately to the Throne of Jupiter, to lay his
Complaints before the Father of the Gods; Let us hear part of his Speech on
this grand Occasion:

Against yo^ destined head in vain I swore,
And menaced vengeance e're he reached the shore;
Od. 13, 156 -- 135.
Behold him landed -- careless and asleep.
When an Expectation is raised by the preceding Verses, and little or nothing
follows upon this Expectation; -- We need not quote De A^^e Po^^. V. 139.
Horace to prove that it will be Mean; every one will see it; and every one may
see, that it arises from the Disproportion.

I have often observed, how fatal this Particular is to that sort of People,
who are known by the Character of Story-tellers. The greatest baulks these
Gentlemen meet with, are occasioned by their bespeaking Attention too much; and
after all, ending in some inconsiderable Circumstance: There is a certain
Passage in the Odyssey, which puts me in Mind of this Disaster so common to
them: Pr^pare then said T^lemachus, to know
Od. 15, 295 -- 270.
A Tale, from falsehood free, not free from woe.


What follows upon this? No earthly thing, I'gad, as Mr. Bays has it; only that
he is the Son of Ulysses, and that he is searching after the King his F^ther.

There is another See Od. 13, 164 to 172 -- 140 to 147.
Instance of this Nature, in that important Dialogue, between Neptune and
Jupiter^ just mentioned.

Of this kind also is a certain Figure, which Mr. Addison Misc. Vol. 2, p. 300.
120.
calls an Anti-climax: A Downfall in the Close, where a Passage has been very
promising in the Beginning. I remember he quotes a All^z vous, luy dit-il, s^ns
bruit chez vos parens^ Ou vous avez laisse vo^re honneur and vos gans ib.
French Couplet upon that Occasion, which I suppose was designed for Ridicule;
but there are many Instances of it, from more serious Writers. Such is what a
Grave Doctor has said in his Character of your Miltonick Friend, Mr. Philips:
it is delivered in this grand air of Prophecy. Mr. Philips's Poems (says he)
will last, as long as Blenheim is remembered, Or D^s. on the Classicks^ p. 217.
Cider drunk in England.

I beg leave to mention one thing, says Antiphaus, -- What You have been
saying, may afford the reason, why that Species of Criticism, which goes upon
Ridicule (in the manner of the Hind and Panther) is not to be depended upon:
The best Lines that ever were wrote, may be rendered Ridiculous, only by
raising too great an Expectation in the Reader, just before they are introduced
in the Criticism.

There is another kind of Littleness (proceeded Philypsus) when the Language
does not become the Poetic Style; all Prosaick Poetry, or (as Dr. Garth used
to call it) a Diction loytering into Prose, carries something of meanness with
it; something below the Harmony, the Emotion, the Majesty, that is required
from the Epick Muse. -- Here are two or three Couplets which I think descend
too near to Prose;

And now Telemachus, the first of all,
Od. 17, 400 -- 328.
Observed Eum^eu^ entering in the Hall.
-- Let Eurymachus receive my g^est.
Od. 15, 560 -- 517.
Of nature courteous, and by far the best.
His food an herald bore; and now they fed,
Od. 8, 68 -- 69.
And now the rage of craving Hunger fl^d.
It might be thought too trifling to observe, that this Meanness is often owing
to an ill-judg'd use of Monosyllables. From Vossius de Carm^ Cantu. p. 45.
A Long Run of these little Pigmy Words, beside an unavoidable Air of Meanness,
often makes a Line rough, and hobling; and almost ever keeps it from being
firm, and compact.

It Is very rare, that you meet with a Latin Verse terminating in a single
Monosyllable; and sometimes, where we do meet with it, it is evidently As in
Horace's Art of Poetry, V. 139 and Virgil's ^ Geo^g. V. 181.
designed to assist in expressing the Littleness or Ridiculousness of the
Subject.

Unless it be thus designed, or be significant, a Verse (even an Hemistick) may
be rendered Mean, merely by consisting of these little Words. I know there are
entire Lines of them that are tolerable, nay, that run with some degree of
Vigor; as this in the Odyssey,

Od. 8, 78.
^^re yet he loosed the Rage of War on Troy.
And that Close in Shakespeare,
Cried Havoc; and let s^^p the D^gs of War.
The Sentiments here are so great, that they take us off from observing the
Littleness, which the Dictio^ might otherwise Occasion: Yet, to speak my Mind,
I believe that these very Thoughts would appear more Majestically in large
adequate Expressions.

Beside this Littleness from the Nature of words, there is oftentimes a
Meanness annexed in our Thoughts to such particular Words and Phrases. All mere
Vulgar ways of ^peaking are mean in Poetry. -- The Muse should reject any low
P^overbs, and the Language of the Crowd -- Even the Ideas of things, in which
they particularly ar^ employed, are ^ullied and debased -- I believe I may add,
that whatever has an Air of Burlesque, or has been marked for ridiculous on any
other Occasion, will be apt to retain something of the Mean, wherever it is
used.

His Shoulder blade received th'ungentle shock;
He stood and moved not, like a marble rock,
Od. 17, 550 -- 463.
But shook his thoughtful Head. --
I doubt not, I have formerly met with something in Burlesque, to which this
Passage has a distant Resemblance: though the thing itself be gone out of my
head, the distaste to such a particular Expression still remains with me. It Is
true, this would not justify a Criticism; and yet it leads one unavoidably to
dislike the Passage. -- This sort of Acquired Meanness may be sometimes more
general: as where Menelaus calls Telemachus, Od. 4, 227.
The Mirror of constant Faith; This Expression has been so often used in a
ridiculous ^ort of Writings, that it will sound mean to the generality of those
that ^ear it.

A Starlight Evening, and a Morning Fair. --
-- Is a Line in Dryden's Virgil, Essay on G^^rg^ 1. Pref. p. 3.
condemned by a very exact Critic, upon account of its being Low and Mean.
It Is of the acquired kind. Any one, who has been at all conversant with the
Poetry of a Belman, will certainly look upon it with something of Contempt: Yet
is there nothing Mean in it of itself; and a Critic in France might think it a
good handsome Line. But the best Expressions degenerate, when used by the
Populace, and applied to low things: the use, they make of them, infects them
with a low abject Air.

Thus Proverbial Speeches, and all other Expressions very common among us,
become unworthy of our Poetry. Foreign Proverbs are often great and emphatical
to us; as many of ours may sound great to Foreigners: yet at home, both, if
vulgar, will be apt to appear mean; or at least, unfit for Poetry. One
Instance, or two will be sufficient: in the Tenth Odyssey we have this Line; V.
227.
With broken hearts my sad companions stood.


And this in the 22 d, V. 41 -- 35.
-- Dogs, Ye have had your Day. --


I shall not presume to say, how far the Odyssey or Iliad might be blameable
for any of these Meannesses in the Days of Homer himself: it is the Privilege
of every dead Language, to be entirely free from them at present. We hear not
the Proverbs, nor know the current Ridicule of those Times. His Language is
safe enough from the Vulgar now; And as to any Words, that might be vulgar
enough then, to seem low, we are in an entire ignorance. This is a considerable
Advantage which the Ancients have over every Living Writer; and for which, by
the way, there should be a large allowance made in any Comparison between an
Ancient and a Modern.

Thus any Meanness that is acquired, may be lost again, or worn off by Time and
Accidents. It is not so with Meanness in the Things themselves. They have
something settled in them; and ar^ delivered down to us through the Stream of
Ages, unaltered and the same. Perhaps, if we would take off the Veil, which
Superstition has flung over the Worshippers of Homer, we might discern some
traces of this in the Conversation of the Suitors; in the Scene at Eum^^us's
Lodge; and in Sicily, when we are with the Cyclops. It Is true, the Odyssey is
built upon an humbler Plan: Homer suits himself to his Design: and it may be
very justly said (with Mr. Pope) Od. Vol. 5. p 237. 120.
"That where this Poem cannot support a Sublimity, it always preserves a
Dignity, or at least a Propriety. If these Points may fail in Dignity, they
have always some Propriet^ in the Poem; either from the Speaker or the
Audience, or the Occasion.

To return to the Translation. Every Idea that has something awkward in it, has
something mean, and ridiculous: The first Laugh in the Iliad i^ occasioned by
the awkward Behavior and odd Address of Vulcan; as the only Laugh in the
Aeneid is raised on the untoward figure, which Menaetes makes i^ that Poem.

There seems to me to be somethin^ Mean and Awkward in this Image: His loose
head tottering as with wine oppressed,
Od. ^ 282 -- 239.
Obliquely drops, and nodding knocks his brea^


Perhaps the Sneezing-piece in the 17^ Book, V. 625 -- 541.
borders too much on the sam^ Fault; or, if it be no Fault, on the sam^
Disagreeableness.

For the same Reason, all Descriptions that have any thing of the Nauseous in
them, might be avoided in Poetry, or at least be but slightly touched in it: I
cannot think it is any particular niceness or effeminacy in my Temper, which
inclines me to wish, that the Colors had not been laid on so strongly on some
See Od. 4, 543, and 548 -- 10, 285. etc Od. 9. 443 -- 373. Aen. 3^ 632.
Addis^n's (...) V. 1. Page 61. 120.
Occasions. The worst Image I know of this kind is in the description of the
Drunken Cyclops: and what is surprising ^o me, the very same Grossness, on the
^ame Occasion, is kept up in (b) several ^f the best Poets that ever wrote. --
Here ^ou will forgive me, if I am ready to ^nk under Authority, in a Point
where ^y very Senses almost contradict it. ^ut when such great Names, as Homer,
^irgil, Pope, and Add^son may be produ^ed to defend one and the same Descip^on,
what are we to think, Antiphaus? ^an we say a thing is not offensive, when ^e
feel the contrary? or must we al^w, that Nature ought to be justly and ^lly
expressed, even in the most nause^s of Subjects?

It cannot be denied (answered Anti^aus, after having turned the Question. for
some time in his Mind) every Description that is just, is poetically good; but
then I fancy, it is as true, that a Description poetically good, may be the more
improper to be inserted, on that very Account. This will be readily allowed in
all Cases of Obscenity: The b^^t Description in such Points is certainly the
most improper; and surely the same will hold in a great Measure of any Images
directly nauseous. We have, you say, the Examples of the greatest Poets that
ever wrote, against us: but i^ the reason of the thing be against them no
Authority whatever, nor any numbe^ of Examples, can be of the least rea^
W^^ght. I am delighted with the Corre^tness of a Virgil or an Addison; I ad^^re
Pope, and reverence Homer. Bu^ were there any one piece of Obscenity (...) the
Works of all these Great Men, wou'^ such a description alter its Nature, an^
become amiable? It Is the same in other Cases, as well as in Obscenities: A^
things, that have something in the^ nature Disagreeable, will still be (...)
agreeable, wherever we find 'em.

The Line you hint at in the Drun^^ Cyclops cannot but carry a very nauseo^
Idea with it: and had Mr. Pope deviat^ from the Original, and dropped it in (...)
English, I am persuaded most people would have looked upon it, as a commendable
Injury to his Author; I remember Il. 9, 612.
a Passage (of this Nature, though less gross than this) in the Iliad, which Mr.
Pope has improved by concealing the Grossness of it; and in the Note upon it,
he says, it is unworthy of Homer; he does not see any Color to soften ^he
Meanness of it; it must ever have been ^oo nauseous to be described.

What fine Critics should we make, ^ays Philypsus, since we can be both so
^eady to wish a Translator had erred more ^requently from his Copy? -- But
^hatever those severe Gentlemen may ^ink, we should certainly have a large
^arty on our side in the present Case. that would they say to another Prin^ple?
That it may be necessary to de^ate from the Words of the Original, to ^eserve
the Sense of it: And yet this ^ay happen; As, for Instance, where ^r Notions of
things are directly conary to what was thought of them in ^omer's Days.

Words are to be considered, not as ^nds, but as they are Significant: and
strict Translator should endeavor chiefly to give us the same Ideas which the
Writer he represents, gave to his Readers. It is on this Account I should take
O^. 16, 35 -- 3^.
The Monarch of the Swains, for Instance, to be a juster Translation of (...),
than the Chief Swine-herd would have been. In the present acceptance of
things, a literal Translation would have been a Travesty: it would have made
that ridiculous and mean, which was not mean or ridiculous in the Original.

Of old, Useful Employments were also Honorable. The chief Courtiers were
Masters of the Flocks and of the Herds: A Skill in Agriculture was reckoned a
very handsome part in the Character of a Monarch: Homer See Note on Od. 18, 412.
places it upon a ^evel with Military Science; and looks upon the Reputation it
deserves, as equal to the Glory acquired by Achievements in War.

To preserve something of these S^^ Od. 4, 974. 14, 122. and 18, 412.
Primitive Notions of things, at least not to sink into those very low Ideas,
which we in the present world entertain of such sorts of Arts and Employments,
a Trans^ator of Homer is obliged to vary the Expressions in common use for the
same things: Nothing would be more ridiculous now, than to call a First
Minister, by the Name of a Hog-herd; or to say of Kings, that they overlooked
the Dairy.

There are some other Points, relating to the Manners of Antiquity, which may
require some Alterations in the turn of expressing them. I have been too
tedious already; Let me only mention one Particular of this kind, and I have
done^ The Heroes of Old, in rating each other, are very free with the mutual
Terms of Dogs, Cowards, Villains etc. In the Odyssey we have a Queen calling
one of her Maids of Honor, an Impudent Bitch; and Jupiter, if I mistake not,
pays exactly the same Compliment to his Royal Consort in the Iliad. I think no
one can dispute which is the better Translation in the former Case, The New,
which makes Penelope call her Servant Od 19, 110 -- 91.
a Loquacious Insolent; or the Literal of Hobbes: Bold Bitch (said she) I know
what de^ds you have done^


This is equally a mis-representation of Fact, and shocking in its very sound;
It offends the Ear, and makes one s^artle at the Behavior of Penelope: A
Reader ought to think that Lady well bred: This he cannot do, at least he will
be prejudiced not to do so, by hearing such Language now, however decent it
might be thought in those Times.

I am obliged to you (says Antiphaus, perceiving that Philypsus stopped here) for
the fair account you have given of these Lownesses in an Epick Poem: I know not
whether your general rule of Meanness will hold in every Point, that might be
mentioned; but in those you have produced, it seems to square very well. I
imagine too, there is one Particular, of pretty large extent in this Question,
not yet touched upon. -- There may be several; but you have all that I have
observed, says Philypsus -- I doubt not (says Antiphaus) you have observed the
same thing, and put it under some other Head; You must know, I would rank all
Thoughts which border on Puerility, all cold Fancies, all forced Antitheses,
and any mere turns, and sporting upon words, under the Class of Meannesses in
an Epick Poem. -- As you have hinted such a Variety of Subjects, says
Philypsus, will you not complete the Favor, and afford some Instances too
under these Heads? -- What I can recollect (replied An^iphaus) is at your
Service.

Does not there seem to you to be something Affected and Cold in this Thought,
which I doubt not many will be apt to take for a pretty Clash in the Ideas.

Here ceased he; but indignant tears let fall;
Od. 24. 504 -- 437.
Spoke when he Ceased. --
Such is this Thought; Od. 10, 593 -- 499.
And my tossed limbs now wearied into rest.


Nothing is meaner than what is overwrought: I own it is in Poetry, as in
Statuary; Figures that are to be set up at such a height must be something
larger than the Life; but even then there are exact Rules of Propor^ion, and
nothing is to appear too Vast to the Eye.

In giving ones Opinion of an exquisite Statue we may say, it lives or speaks:
but when we go to refine on this, we grow affected and mean. Pardon me if I
take this to be the Case in the las^ Line of this Couplet: Alive each animated
Frame appears;
Od. 7, 123 -- 94.
And still to live, beyond the Power of Year (...)


I was formerly pleased with the In^cription under a Saint Bruno in Italy; but
give it up now as carried too far; it tells us, as you may remember, Egli e
vivo, e parlerebbe, se non osservasse la ragola del Silentio
That He is alive, and would speak, were it not for the Rules of Silence he had
established. A Man must understand the History of the Grand Chartreux to take
the meaning of this; and after all, it appears too forced and artificial.

A Fault of this kind is the more evident, when the Thoughts and Language look
noble about it: There terrible in arms Ulysses stood,
Od. 23, 47 -- 51.
And the dead Suitors almost swam in blood.


You know a late excellent Mr. Wollaston.
Philosopher has endeavored to prove that no Action, which disagrees with
truth, can be good; and I should not be new or singular in my Opinion, were I
to assert the same of any point in Poetry. Every one knows, the Dialogues of
one of the most Bouhours.
penetrating Critics in the last Age, are wrote chiefly in this View. He
asserts constantly, that no Thought can be good, which is not Poetically true;
and I imagine this that he asserts, may be defended as easily in the Fiction^
of Poetry, as in any of the plainest Passages. But such an Enquiry would take
up more time^ than Cr^ticism deserves; and I mention it at present only as a
Measure of such Thoughts as are mean from their being false, i. e. really
beneath what they pretend to be. -- This Rule, if just, would be of particular
service in this kind of Pursuits: I shall give you but one I^s^ance; When Circe
mentions Ulysses's descent to the Infernal Shades, she adjoins this Reflection.

O Sons of woe! decreed by adverse Fates,
Alive to pass through hells eternal Gates!
All soon or late, are doomed that path to tread;
Od. 12, 32 -- 22.
More wretched You, twice numbered with the Dead!
Do you not think this last Thought has something Weak and Little in it?
according to your general Rule, it fails in its Proportion; That Proportion, I
mean, which every Thought should bear to Truth.

If it fails in that, says Philypsus, I must allow it to be Mean by my own
Rule; but I do not perceive in what respect that Sentiment is false.

No! says Antiphaus; I beg you would consider the very Word on which the whole
of the Reflection turns: It has plainly too Significations widely different. If
their being n^mber'd with the Dead, be taken in its strongest Sense, it is
certain this did not happen twice to Ul^sses, and his Companions; if in its
weaker on this Occasion, Their Calamity is put on a Level with something much
more terrible and calamitous than it self.

Or thus: If this being twice numbered with the Dead be intended both in the
same Sense, the Sentence is directly false^ if in very different unequal
Senses, it is fallacious and false in its Consequence.

I beg pardon for putting on this grave face, and affecting such an air of
Demonstration: but you must know this Though^ is exactly the same in the
Original, o^ (if any thing) rather more fallacious ther^ than in the
Translation: in such a Cas^ all ones Gravity is scarce sufficient; an^ the
Superstitious perhaps would rathe^ disbelieve a real Demonstration, tha^ allow
of any Fault in Homer. I beg Pardon of them, for thus assuming the Chair of
Criticism (as the noblest of Lord Bacon. De A^gm. Scient. Lib 6. Cap.
human Writers calls it) and am very willing to descend, and act in an humbler
Sphere.

All sporting upon Words may seem unbecoming of the Epick Muse: I shall leave
you to determine how far there may be any suspicion of this in some particular
Lines.

Od. 22, 32 -- 27.
Thy last of Games unhappy has thou played --
-- To me has some resemblance to the rebellious Angels in Milton, where they
run on in such a vein of insulting and punning. I know not how far the Original
might help in leading a Translator into the former Turn; but here is another
Line which runs into it, without that wrong biass.

Od. 10, 205 -- 180.
They on the future banquet feast their eyes.
I should think this yet more improper on any grave or affecting Circumstance:
Do you remember the Death of Antinous in the Odyssey? It Is in the Instant of
his lifting a Goblet of Wine to his Mouth:

Wretch that he was, of unprophetick Soul!
High in his hand he reared the Golden Bowl;
Even then to drain it lengthened out his Breath,
Od. 22, 13 -- 10.
Changed to the deep, the bitter draught of Death.
I fear that some Points, which generally pass for Elegancies, are of this
kind. -- A Case, which touches all Readers of a little Taste very much, is,
Addison's M^sc. Vol. 1. p. 239. 120.
when two very different Ideas are joined to the same Verb: This is very
frequent in Cowley, and he has been often blamed for it; as in that Instance,
O^ 14, 454 -- 410.
Up rose the Sun and Saul.


I know not how it is, there is something agreeable in this management of
Words, but it is very apt to ^njure the Sense. A thinking Malbranche. Search
after Truth V. 2 p. 74.
French Author lays down a Rule, which is very useful toward discovering
Fallacies in Reasoning; It is this: To put the Definition instead of the Thing
defined. I have often tried something of this nature in Poetry; If we make the
Experiment in the pre^ent Case, and insert the enlarged Meaning instead of the
particular Words used by the Poet, we shall generally find a Fallacy in this
sort of Verse; or, at least, a Lameness in the Sense of it.

It will not be any great trouble to try this in one single Point. The Poet^
speaking of Telemachus's Voyage, uses this Turn of Expression: To distant Pylos
hapless is he gone,
Od. 14, 209 -- 180.
To seek his Father's fate, and find his own.


This sounds very well: but what is the meaning of the word Fate, which is of
such double Service upon this Occasion? Try it in your own Mind: To distant
Pylos hapless is he gone,
To seek (whether his Father be dead or not) and find -- What?


There Is no need of trying it, says Philypsus; I allow it to be d^ficient upon
the first hearing: But by the way, I wonder you let the Antithesis in it escape
so peaceably!

Indeed I am no great Friend to them (replied Antiphaus) especially when they
are multiplied upon us, as in this Line: Od. 11, 740 -- 599.
Dust mounts in clouds, and sweat d^s^^nds in dews.


I do not fear my Philyp^us should mistake me: it would be too s^rupulous to
discard every Antithesis out of Poetry, as it seems affected to run into them
very often. Some are of Force and Emphasis, and some agreeable and engaging:
Possibly, even the Double Use of the same Word is not absolutely to be
rejected. But however these Ornaments may obtain on some Occasions, they ^eem
generally too little and artificial for the more noble Parts of Poetry. They
are of the Ovidian kind, rather than of Homer: and are more apt to hit the
Taste of Schoolboys, than of Men.

And now I have mentioned Ovid's manner, give me leave to say that (in spite of
his several Beauties, and that peculiar Ease and Address with which he tells a
Story) I fear his Writings are one great Reason of the trifling Manner keeping
its gr^und so much in the present Age. Ovid is generally made use of to
initiate our Youths in Parnassus: We look upon him as soon as ever we open our
Eyes to Poetry: He is then, it is true, fit for our Taste; but the misfortune
is, he is too Agreeable: it is odds but this fondness grows up with us; and a
false taste of Wit, drawn from him, may inf^uence our Writings many Years after
we have flung him from our Bosom. The Boyisms of Ovid, (as Dr. Garth calls 'em)
are agreeable enough to infect us to old Age. Mr. Dryden, for Instance, was
thus infected by 'em. Ovid, and Cowley our English Ovid, were his favorites at
Ten Years old, and his Corrupters at Seventy.

As great Genius's, and more correct Writers, than Mr. Dryden may be touched
with the same Infection; I will give you an Instance or two of this, with which
a Person may be pleased, even while he condemns 'em.

Od. 19, 245 -- 209.
She to her present Lord laments him lost,
And views that object which she wants the most.
Again: His arms he stretched; his arms the touch deceive;
Od. 11, 487 -- 391.
Nor in the fond embrace, embraces give.


Any one, the least acquainted with the Manner of the Poets, will readily
perceive this to be of the Ovidian kind. It is pretty, and agreeable as Ovid:
but to be so, it loses something from the Air of Homer; it sinks beneath that
Simplicity and Nature, which is the distinguishing Character of his Writings.

Now you mention Mr. Dryden, and this sort of pretty Writing together, give me
leave (says Philypsus) to commend one sort of Turns, which that Critic
Dryden's Pref. to Juvenal, p. 84. 80.
judges not only pretty, but really good and substantial: I will not defend all
his Instances, but I would engage to do it were they all as good as that from
^gnoscenda quidem, scirent si ignoscere man^
Virgil. -- A very good Critic since has treated of this more distinctly. His
Notions as I remember are, That a dextrous Turn upon Words, is pretty; The Turn
upon the Thought, substantial; but the most complete of all, is when the Turn
of the Words and of the Thought concur: B^^ckwall's Introd. to the Classick^,
p. 214.
When both our Reason an^ our Ear are entertained with a noble Sentiment
expressed vigorously, and beautifull^ finished. I should be glad to know you^
Opinion, Antiphaus, how far a Person might admit these Turns, in Heroic^ Poetry?

As for the first (says Antiphaus) I believe one might venture to say, that i^
should be rejected universally: I am s^ little versed in these Particulars,
that cannot readily say any thing as to the second: the other (whether justly
or no^ takes one very much. I own, for m^ part, that I imagine them, not only
bea^tiful, but useful: I remember an Instan^ of G^org. 1^ 404.
one in Virgil, which fixes the Images very particularly on the Mind; and it is
this which helps to touch us in those Lines of Mr. Addison, which strike every
one who reads them:

The listening Soldier ^ixt in sorrow stands,
Loath to obey his Leaders just commands;
The Leader grieves, by generous pity swayed
Addiso^ Vol. 1. Page 76. 12^.
To see his just commands so well obeyed.
If you ask my opinion in this Point, rude and unsettled as it is; I should
think, that no Turns should obtain in an Epick, or any solemn Poem, except such
as have more Strength, than Beauty: That in lesser Pieces, those may be allowed
which have more Beauty, than Strength: but that they can be justified in no
Piece whatever; unless they have some share of Strength, as well as Beauty.

The great Art of them is to appear Unartful; as in these pretty Lines from Mr.
Philips's Pastorals;

Fair is my Flock, nor yet uncomely I
If liquid Fountains flatter not; and why
Should liquid Fountains flatter us^ yet show
The bordering flowers less beauteous than they grow?
As I take it; The Beauty of this Passage is in a greater degree, than its
Strength; and the natural Air of the Sentiments, is more exquisite than either:
The Turn of the Lines makes them observed by every Reader more than they would
otherwise be; and yet that very Turn does not seem to be designed, but rather
to be the natural result of the Shepherd's Thoughts as he speaks them.

If I have said too much, Philypsus, you must blame your self for it, who led
me from my chief Design. I was just entering on the several Natural P^eces in
the Poem before us.

Some fanciful Writers afford us nothing but Pictures and Descriptions: they
continue Image after Image; and put one in Mind of those Americans, who, when
first they were discovered, are said to have used Painting instead of Writing.

Homer's Judgment will not allow him, in any of his Works, to be thus Perpetual
in his Descriptions; and the design of the Odyssey will not allow near the
variety, which he has very justly employed in the Iliad. The Odyssey is a
Poetical Treatise of Morality: it does not admit of a profusion of Colors:
this is not to be looked upon as a Defect: we might with the same Reason blame
a Book of Maxims, or Plato's Moral Dialogues, for not having all the Flourishes
and Charms of Rhetoric.

And as the Plan of the Odyssey in general excludes that great variety of
Description, which abounds in some Poems; the chief Scene, in the remaining
Part of it, is so wholly Domestic, that it scarce allows room for any thing of
that Nature. The Action now is confined; it lies all between either the
Country House of Eumaeus, and the Palace; or this latter, and the Gardens of
Laertes. What a narrow Scene is this for Description? and yet these are the
only places capable of any, if you except a two days Journey, and a short
Voyage ^n the 15 th, neither of which could be enlarged upon without injuring
the main Design. Homer was unacquainted with the modern Affluence of Painting,
wherever there may be any fine Object in the way: As these Opportunities offer
only in an Episode, he passes them with the utmost dispatch: we see his haste
in the very Lines, and indeed in every one of them distinctly:

With speed the mast they rear, with speed unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the wind:
Minerva calls; the ready gales obey
With rapid speed to whirl them over the sea;
Crunus they passed; next Chalcis rolled away, --
The silver Phaea's glittering rills they lo^t^
Od. 15, 319 -- 296.
And skim'd along by Eli's sacred coast.
It might be the indigence of his Subject this way, which induced Homer to
repeat the view of Hell in the 24 th Book; and the wanderings of Ulysses in the
23 d. But nothing could make him run into Descriptions on that Occasion. We
have the Names of Places repeated in Order; and though Penelope has the ful^
Relation, the Reader is only tantaliz'^ with hearing in general, that, Od. 23,
336.
H^ images the rills, and flowery vales.


These things, however they had been laid out, would have been only Sideviews.
For in the main Scene, as i^ now lies in Ithaca, I think there are bu^ four
Places capable of Description. If (...) am not mistaken in this, it will give
u^ great Reason to admire the Managemen^ of Homer; who, as he was too pruden^
to run out into any impertinent Descriptions; at that same time, has not
omitted any one of those places, that might very well allow of a Description
without wandering. We have distinct draughts of Laertes's Gardens, Od. 14, V. 8
to 26.
Eumaeus's Lodge, of Od. 17, 316 and 415.
the Royal Palace, and the Road between these and the Palace. These complete
the present Scene of the Poem; and any one by laying them together, may form an
exact Picture of it in his Mind.

Some of these have been mentioned already on other Occasions; and the way from
Eumaeus's House to the Metropolis deserves very well to be mentioned ^ere: I
dare say you will think part of ^t, the most delightful Road you ever ^ravell'd
in your Life:

Now passed the rugged Road, they journey down
The cavern'd way descending to the Town,
Where, from the rock with liquid lapse distills
A limpid fount; that spread in parting rills,
^^s current thence to serve the city brings
An useful work; adorned by ancient Kings.
^^^itus, Ithacus, Polyctor there
^n sculptured Stone immortalized their care;
^n marble urns received it from above,
And shaded with a green surrounding grove;
Where silver Alders in high arches twined,
Drink the cool stream, and tremble to the wind.
^eneath, sequestered to the Nymphs, is seen
A mossy Altar, deep embower'd in green;
Where constant Vows by travelers are made,
Od. 17, V. 230 to 245.
And holy horrors solemnize the shade.
There is a sort of melancholy Pleasure hangs upon the Mind, wherever we
have a View of Laertes in his Retirement. The good Old Prince Od. 15, 151.
Labors thorough Life; he Od. 11, 226.
longs to lay down the Burden: And when he is not so overcome with his
Distress, as to Od. 16, 15^
neglect his Employment in his Gardens, he seems busy rather to Od. 24, 285.
avoid Pain, than to enjoy Pleasure. Thus is he engaged, with something of
Diversion, and much of Melancholy, when the Scene changes to his Gardens.

We have not a set Description o^ these altogether; but it begins at thi^
Point, and is carried on Od. 24, V. 237, 256, 26^ and 395.
successively, till we may easily form an Idea o^ the whole.

Though Homer has not wandered into any Descriptions of Places that lay ou^ of
this Scene of the Poem, he has here and all along in the former part of it
brought in short Draughts and Side views of things by such Arts, as a^ some of
them necessary, and all very allowable in Poetry.

Such are all descriptive Similies: Where in some Picture out of the Subject is
borrowed to illustrate any Point that belongs to it. This affords us several
occasional Pieces, and some of them very natural: I have just dipped upon one of
this sort. It Is just after the Slaughter of the Suitors; They are yet gasping,
and Ulysses is surveying their Bodies, to see whether the Number be complete:

So when by hollow shores the fisher train
^weep with their arching nets the hoary main,
and scarce the meshy toils the copious draught contain:
^ll naked of their Element and bare,
^he fishes pant, and gasp in thinner air;
Od. 22, 430 -- 387.
Wide over the sands are spread the stiffening prey.
It Is a known Remark, that all Allu^ons of this kind, drawn from calm Life ^s
Fishing, Hunting, and rural Affairs) ^ave a peculiar Beauty: and it is as well
^own, that they acquire an additional ^nergy, when they are introduced amidst
^y Confusion, or to illustrate Images of ^error. Virgil Compare Aen. 2^ 303.
d', 455.
has imitated this ^rt of Contrast from a Similie in the ^ad; which affords
frequent Instances the same kind; nor are they wanting the Sea Od. 12, 300. and
the Note ^re.
Poem before us.

The more concise and natural any Image, the stronger the Illustration. How do
you approve of this, on a number of Females employed at the Loom? -- Their busy
fingers move
Od. 7, 135 -- 106.
Like Poplar-leaves, when Zephyr fans the grove^


When these occasional Images hit i^ several Points, they are the more
descriptive of the things, which they ar^ brought to Illustrate. Homer gives u^
an Idea of the Spirits in Ades, of their still Posture, their Motion, their
Confusion, and the odd Noises they utte^ all in one single Picture of this kind:

Trembling the Specter glide, and plaintive ve^
Thin, hollow Screams, along the deep descent.
As in the cavern of some rifted Den,
Where flock nocturnal Bats and Birds obscene;
Clustered they hang, till at some sudden shock^
They move, and murmurs run through all the rock
So cow'ring fled the sable heaps of ghosts,
Od. 24, 14^
And such a Scream filled all the dismal coasts^
It seems not improper to point o^ these distinct Likenesses; as the
Translation has done in the present Cas^ more plainly than the Original; the
same may be said of S^e Od. 5, 420 -- 330.
some other^ This is done sometimes by insisting much on one Circumstance, and
As in Mr. Pope's Iliad 22, V. 257 to 262. Book, 21.
repeating it over and over.

Borrowed Images appear with a particular Propriety and Grace, when they have
some near Relation to the Scene, on which the Poem turns at the very Instant of
applying 'em. Thus in the Battle of Rivers, in the (b) Iliad, every Similie is
^quatick, and adapted to the Place. Thus if the Swiftness of a Deity passing
^'er the Land is to be illustrated in this ^anner, Homer images it by the
Swift^ess of an Eagle: but when Mercury is ^ying over the Sea, by that of some
Od 5, 64.
^ater-fowl.

The Image of an Angler is used in ^e Iliad, of a person in the Field of Bat^e;
in the Od. 12, 300.
Odyssey, of persons at Sea; ^oth on Occasions which make that ^age proper. But
it seems more pro^er in the latter, from the Agreement (...) Place. In this,
and all like Cases, ^rt of the Picture is nearer to us, and ^ill be conceived
the more readily and early.

There may also be some propriety ^om any previous Relation between the Person,
and the Thing to which he is compared. Any faithless wavering Creature may be
compared to the Sea; but it strikes one more, when Venus is said to be as
Guarini's Pastor Fido. At. 4. Sc. 7.
Inconstant, as the Waves from whence she sprung. Any rough Man may be compared
to the Element, in another view; but there is a peculiar fitness in these
Lines: A r^ce of rugged Mariners are these
O^ ^. 42.
Unpolished Men, and boisterous as their Seas.


I remember, I used formerly to be mightily taken with a Similie in the -- Cui
saepe suis in montibus hirc^ Prolixam invidit barbam -- De Cambro-Bri^ Thus
Virgil's Abietibus juvenes patriis and montibus aequos.
M^scipula; and I believe now, it was ^n this very Account. Ideas, which ^ave
been alreaded joined on any other Occasion, will agree the more easily on a new
one.

The Picture is less broken also, when the borrowed Image is adapted to the
present Circumstances: Where Penelop^ is represented as chaste and beautiful,
it is said she looked Od. 17, 47 -- 37.
like Diana with all the Charms of Venus; when her Beauty is the chief
Circumstance to be insisted on, she is compared to Od. 18, 229 -- 192.
Venus, without any mention of Diana.

We may observe, by the way, that the Heathen Poets, in comparing a Person to
any of their Deities, had a sure Method of giving their Readers a Picture of
that Person. The Statues of their Deities were known by every one; and the
Faces of each as well ascertained, as the Faces of the Roman Emperors (for
instance) can be, by frequently conversing with their Medals; This I take to be
one Reason, why this sort of Comparison is so very frequent in the Ancients:
The Case is very different in any modern Composition; though we seem to be
equally fond of the same Comparisons.

If it does not add to the Strength, at least it makes the Piece more
agreeable, when these Images are unusual. Thus Ulysses in his Bed of Leaves, to
a Od. 5, 630 -- 488.
Coal of Fire preserved in the Embers; and before in his raft at Sea, to an
Ibid 417.
heap of Thorns, driven by the Wind.

There may be a Prettiness, as well as a Likeness in these Images; I always
used to be pleased with that Passage, where Penelope is compared to a Od. 19,
605 -- 518.
Nightingale; though I am more pleased with the same Image in Georg. 4, 511.
Virgil; which, beside its agreeableness, is perhaps the most complete
Instance, that can be given, of such Similitudes as hit exactly in every Point.
Virgil certainly excells Homer in these, as we may say that Homer excells him
in the Vague Similitude; for both have their distinct Beauties.

It Is the proper air of Poetry to be unconfined and free: The Muse loves a
flowing Dress: Her motions are ever Easy, and her very ornaments must be
Natural. Such is the Muse of Homer. And hence the Poet, in this sort of^
Pictures, does not in the least Scruple^ to take in several Circumstances, that
do^ not affect the main Resemblance. When^ a Painter is copying a Piece, he
must preserve the Likeness; but he may var^ in the Drapery, the Posture, the
Under^ figures, and the Scene around 'em.

Thus in Homer's Philomel, the main Likeness is very well taken: When the Poet
has secured this, he touches upon the History of Itylus; and launches out into
Particulars, which are Od. to, 523. ^
so far^ from squaring with the Case of Penelope, that they have no manner of
Relation to it^

Homer is almost singular in another sort of Similie, the Reverse of the
former: when the Principal Figures have in themselves no Likeness, but agree in
some one Circumstance of Action. These are very frequent in the Iliad and
Odyssey: and I cannot say, whether it be from a true Judgment, or a scrupulous
Niceness, that later Writers endeavor to imitate them but very rarely.

Perhaps this is blameable; and so may be that stringing of several Similies
together, which we sometimes meet with in Homer. I do not mean when several
things are chosen to illustrate the Sea Il. x, 394.
same Point more fully: but when Similies on different things follow too close
on the Neck of one another. In the 2 d Iliad, -- (...), 453 to 483.
we have one of these strings which takes up thirty Lines; And though they are
all excellently well chosen, and have one common Point of Union between (...)
they may seem something faulty, as they are too numerous for the ^lace in which
they stand, and too much crowded on one another.

Now I have digress'd so far on two or three Vices in ancient Similies; I shall
just mention one or two of a later Date. Such is the continued Similie, which
is very liable to the great Fault of mixed Metaphors, when a Writer, to lengthen
a comparison, carries it beyond the Likeness. I remember one of Mr. Dryden's in
a Before his Translation of the Georgicks.
Dedication, that begins very well. The Greatness of Birth shows a Nobleman
with advantage; but if he degenerates, the least Spot is visible on Ermine. --
This does not seem to be continued so happily, as it is begun. To preserve this
Whiteness in its Original Purity, You (my Lord) have, like that Ermine,
forsaken that common tract of Business, which is not always clean.

The Art of extracting Similies out of a thing directly contrary to your
purpose, is I think wholly Modern. Every one knows an Instance of this in that
famous Doctor, who to illustrate the Danger of the Church, compares it to one
of the Prophets, who was encompassed with ^^^^emen and Chariots of Fire -- for
his ^^fence.

Nothing is so opposite to the Design of this Beauty in Poetry, as to labor
after a vast Number of Likenesses in any the minutest Points; and to multiply
them, rather to show how far the Poets Wit can carry the Resemblance, than to
strengthen the Image of the things described. This descends even to playing
upon Words; nay sometime to particularize several Points in which they are
unlike, as well as those in which they agree. This is the Cowlean Similitude:
and I could produce See a Pindarick Ode on Cowley, in Dryden's Misc. (Vol. 4)
particularly the whole third Stanza.
monstrous Instances of it from a very fine Writer, where he endeavors only to
imitate Cowley at a Distance. It Is the same Person who has introduced Similies
into his Prose, in a manner unknown to the Ancients: but he who would blame any
of his Writings of this kind, must blame them, as Mr. Lock does Eloquence,
with the Tenderness of a Lover.

It is not difficult to judge of any Similie, Ancient or Modern. Their Ad
inferendam rebus lucem repertae sunt Similitudines. -- Praecipue custodiendum,
ne id quod Similitudinis gratia adscivimus, aut obscurum sit ^ut igno^um.
Quintil. Instit. Lib. 8. Cap. 3.
chief Design is to make things clear: Obscurity and Confusion is their great
Fault: Poetry may go much farther in them than Prose; but, even in Poetry, none
can be good, which do not give us either more distinct, larger Notions of the
thing, or at least of some Circumstance of the things to be described.

I long to add several things on this Head; but I have wandered too far already
from our chief Design: it is time now to consider a higher Class of
Descriptions and Images (which we touched upon when we were talking over the
former Books of the Odyssey) that Poetical power of expressing the Passions,
and even Ideas yet in the Minds of Men.

I am not angry with You, Philypsus, for preventing much of what might have
been offered here, when you were considering the Starts and Turns, which our
Passions occasion in the various manners of Speaking. I know not how such a
Notion would appear to the World; but you have thoroughly persuaded me, that
all the Figures of Speech, of the Figures either belong to the Diction, or the
S^ntiment: the latter is what is here intended.
Nobler Order, are viewed in a truer Light, when we look upon them, as
naturally Expressive of what we feel within us; than when we consider them,
only as the Arts and Machineries of Writing.

It was on this Occasion you went thorough the most passionate Scenes in the
Odyssey; for such are the several Enterviews in which Ulysses makes himself
known to his Book, 21.
Friends, his B. 16.
Son, his B. 24.
Father, and his B. 23.
Consort. Penelope's Od. 23, 215.
Speech at that juncture is excellent; and indeed all her Speeches in general
are of the Pathetick kind, and (under this view) afford us the most beautiful
Passages in the whole Poem.

To the many things that have been said on the Double Passions (as you were
pleased to let me call them) give me leave to add one particular Case more:
what I mean, is Dissimulation. We have frequent Descriptions of this in the
Odyssey: Every Instance of it (if passionate at all) will fall under this
Consideration; and that in the highest Degree, as the Passion assumed, and the
real, are direct Opposites. Every one, who only pretends to Courage, is
certainly affected with Fear; and when we put on a false Gayety, the Heart is
as dull and oppressed, as the Countenance is enlivened.

Could we look into the Breast of one who affects a Liveliness, when his
Thoughts are really Gloomy; we should see his Spirits in such contrary
Emotions, as are described in the Suitors, under those unaccountable mixed fits
of Mirth and Heaviness. --

Od. 20, 419.
Pallas clouds with intellectual gloom
The Suitors Souls, insensate of their doom;
A Mir^hful phrenzy seized the fated crowd,
The Roofs resound with caus^less laughter loud...
Then down each cheek the tears spontaneous flow.
Such is that Od. 18, 194 -- 162.
Smile of Penelope, which has something very uneasy in it: She seems all the
while to struggle with her Tears. It Is like a transient Gleam of Light, when
the Heavens are overcast: all around is Gloomy; and the Light itself is Dim and
Waterish.

This perhaps is an Instance not of the affected, but the natural Kind. It Is
true, one Passion sometimes usurps the Effect of another: Without tumbling over
Descartes for a Solution of the matter, we know, that an Excess of Joy often
breaks out into Tears; and that Rage may vent itself in a Smile: These indeed
are contrary Appearances; but it is very different in all Points of
Dissimulation. The Mixture then has something peculiar in it. Contrary to the
natural Blending of such Emotions, this has always an Air forced and
artificial. The Soul was not made to be a Counterfeit: every time we would
teach her these new Arts, we fling her off her Biass, and give her an unnatural
Motion. There will ever be something awkward in the Passions of the most
profound Dissemblers.

Only view Ulysses, when he is struck to the Soul with the Affection and Tears
of his Penelope, and at the same time resolved to conceal those his Emotions
from her, as much as possible:

Od. 19, 247.
Withering at heart to see the weeping fair
His eyes look stern, and cast a gloomy stare;
Of horn the stiff relentless balls appear,
Or globes of iron fixed in either Sphere;
Firm wisdom interdicts the softening tear.
Even Ulysses, that Ulysses who is so See Note, ibid.
Celebrated among the Ancients for his Command over his Passions, does not
appear without something forced and unnatural in his Looks, amidst all his
Dissimulation. He can command his Tears; he can command his Tongue; but still
his very Features would betray him.

I know not what to say to one thing: That Homer makes Dissimulation one of the
greatest Excellencies of his Hero. The Heathen system of Morality was
incomplete enough to bear with this proceeding: and even Christians of the
greatest Name have bordered much on the same Notions. One of our Ancient
Writers, who was as capable as any of them to do it, has See Chrysostom. Tom.
6. page 5. Ed. Savil. (...) etc.
launched out into a long defense of useful Frauds; and Father Paul, to mention
one not inferior among the Moderns, reckons Dissimulation Where the Historian
says that Pope died Con allegrezza non mediocre della cor^e: ^a quale ben
ammirava le virtue di quello, che erano una gravita natural, et essemplare
parsimonia, and dissimulation^; odiava pero maggio^mente l' avaria^ia, durezza,
and crudelta. Hist. del Concilio Trid^ p. 68.
expressly among the Virtues of Pope Clement the Seventh. I do not mention this
as any Argument for the thing; but to extenuate the Proceeding of Homer: It Is
no wonder that he should mistake a counterfeit Virtue in the Dark, which such
great Men could not distinguish in the Light.

But whatever Color Dissimulation may bear in the Schemes of Morality, it is
certainly a great Excellence to paint Dissimulation well in Poetry. The
pretended Passion must appear most strongly, and yet the real Passion must
appear under it. It must be like the Drapery in Pictures, which shows the turn
of the Limbs, at the same time that it hides them; and in particular, puts one
in Mind of that Veil in Homer, which seems and only seems to shade the Face of
Penelope.

There is nothing more difficult in Poetry, than to express justly Ideas in the
Minds of Persons whom we describe. But though this be the least obvious, it is
perhaps the most agreeable of all Studies. The Poet must search carefully into
the Nature of Man, and the Working of his Thoughts in general; He must know
what Emotions are natural on each Accident of Life; and on every single
Occasion is to consider, not only the Circumstances of Actions, but also the
Temper, the Education, and the very make of the Person concerned in them. These
will alter Men's Views of the very same Point; When Nestor talks of
Achievements in War, he will dwell chiefly upon the Prudence and Experience of
a General; Hector will mention the great effects of Strength and Courage;
T^deus must place the whole on a bold daring Spirit, without taking the Body
into the Account; while Polypheme, on the contrary, must speak of nothing but
the Advantage of a vast Size and superior Strength.

A Man's Notions of Excellence are formed generally from some advanced Powers
of his own. Each Man is apt to make himself the Measure of all the Species; and
his Species the Standard of all Perfection. All Beings above him must be
exactly like the superior Moiety of his own Being, and all below him must be
purely of the Inferior. The Vulgar of Mankind form their Heaven hereafter out
of those things which have pleased them most in Life; and the very Notions of
the Deity in most Men take a Turn from their own Complexions. The God of proud
tyrannical Minds is a Being, that delights only in the Glory of being Terrible;
as with the soft and pitiful, The Deity is all Mercy: the Gods of Epicurus were
mere pleasurable Intelligences; and the Deities of the Irroquois are Mighty
Hunters. Commend me to that Philosopher who said, that were his Horse to give
us his Notion in this Case; A Broad Chest and a Flowing Mane would certainly be
the Principal things in it.

One cannot easily apprehend how general an effect this has in the Actings of
our Minds. I know not that it is yet designedly managed in any System of
Philosophy, (for Mr. Locke's Association of Ideas seems to be something very
distinct from it) and as it wants a Name, give me leave to call it for the
present, The Assimilation of Ideas.

If you would save me from a Fit of Philosophizing, be so good as to reach that
Volume of the Odyssey just by you, That I may read you a Passage which took
with me particularly, on this Account. It Is where Ulysses has acquainted the
Cyclops with his real Name and Character: this is part of the Monster's Answer;

Oh Heavens! oh Faith of ancient Prophecies!
This, Telemus Eurymides foretold: --
Long since he menaced such was Heavens command,
And named Ulysses as the destined hand.
I deemed some Godlike Giant to be hold,
O^ lofty Hero, haughty brave and bold;
Not this weak Pigmy wretch, of mean Design,
Od. 9, 604 -- 516.
Who not by Strength subdued me, but by Wine.
Even the Excellence of those things, with which we converse chiefly, is apt to
influence our Thoughts in the same manner. Hence the Eastern Writers Image the
Height and Stateliness of any illustrious Person, by Cedars: Homer, by the Od.
z', 16^ -- 6, 193.
Delian-Palm-tree; and Virgil, by what a British Reader will think the most
Noble, a Aen. 9, 682 and 1^, 700.
large Lofty Oak.

There Is a Passage which, I remember, I was mightily pleased with formerly, in
reading Cervantes, without seeing any Reason for it at that Time; though I now
imagine, that which took me in it comes under this View. Speaking of Don
Quixot, the first time that Adventurer came in sight of the Ocean, he expresses
his Sentiments on this Occasion in the following manner, He saw the Sea, which
he had never seen before; and thought it much bigger than the River at
Salamanca.

This Turn of Thought is not so commonly observed perhaps as it might easily be
in Life. There are other occasional Traces in the Mind, which are known and
obvious: Things that are common in some Degree to all Men; and such are all
those Apprehensions which follow from any Master-Passion. One might expat^ate
here very Agreeably on each of them; but I am ever apt to be too Tedious; and
will therefore confine my self to one single Passion, that of Fear.

We may see in the Descriptions of the Poets, how this Passion acts on the Soul
through all its different Degrees, from a Wavering and Irresolution of Mind, to
the Excess of Confusion and Despair.

When a Coward (as most Cowards are Vainglorious) undertakes any Enterprise of
Difficulty, the Moment he is engaged in it, his Mind turns all upon the Danger
of the Undertaking. He immediately wishes himself fairly out of it; His Body
begins to tremble, and his Thoughts are all confused and irresolute. Thus it is
with Dolon. That Wretch engages under the Covert of the Night, to steal to the
Camp of the Greeks, and discover their Motions. Before he is got half way, The
first tread of Men that he hears, He hoped in his Mind (says Il. ch', 355.
Homer) that 'twas a Messenger from Hector to recall him.

The whole Book, where we have this Image, is nothing but one Picture of Fear
in different Postures; The apprehensions of distant Danger are very naturally
expressed in the Grecian Guard;

-- Cautious of surprise,
Each Voice, each Motion draw their ears and eyes;
Il. 10, 22^ -- 189.
Each Step of passing feet increased th'affright.
This Description seems to have been improved beyond the Original from --
Vastos a rupe Cyclopas Prospicio, sonitumque pedum, vocemque tremisco. Aen. 3,
648.
Virgil's Achemaenides.

Any near Danger has more visible Effects; The Motions of a Person, thus
affected, are -- Ex oculis se turbidus abstulit. Ae. 11, 814.
-- Tum pectore sensus
Vertuntur varii. Rutulos aspectat and urbem,
Cunctaturque met^, telumque instare tremiscit. 12, 916.

broken and disordered; his Color comes and goes: His Eyes are Tum primum
nostri Cacum videre timentem Turbatumque oculis. -- 8, 223.
disturbed; he cannot bear to look -- (...). -- (...), 169.
full on the Face of his Enemy: he approaches faintly, and winks even when he
strikes.

Fear has another strange Property of Magnifying our Ideas of the Danger. When
we are possessed with it, we are apt, like Sosia in the Play, to take every
Shadow for a Man, and every Man for a Giant. If the Danger be present, we think
it greater than it is; and to its real Terrors, add a Thousand that are only
imaginary. Thus the Suitors view Ulysses, when he is ready to revenge himself
upon them: their Fears Od. 24, 201 to 208.
aggravate every Fierceness of his Actions; they look upon him as more than
human, as an incensed destructive Deity.

If I mistake not, there is a certain great Writer who calls Fear, A natural
Inebriation of the Mind: it shows every thing Double: I know not what the
Mythologists may teach; But this, in my Opinion, might account for the
Multiplicity of Cerberus's Heads, and all the Hands of Briareus.

There is something very Expressive in a Thought of Virgil's, if we might take
it under this View: -- Se Turni media inter millia vidit,
Aen. 9, 550.
Hinc ^cies, atque, hin^ acies astare Latinas.


This spreading of any Danger in our Ideas may widen so far as to possess the
whole Mind. Then it is, that it takes away all Od. 12, 245.
Power of Action, even Od. 18^ 284.
of Flight; it fixes -- Subitus tremor occupat artus;
Diriguere oc^^i: tot Erinnys sibilat hydris,
Tantaque se facies aperit. -- Aen. 7, 448.

the Eye entirely in one horrid Stare: and even (...) etc. -- Il. the, 98. See
Note on Odyssey 10, 295.
shuts up all the Senses, to any other Object, but that of its Terror and
Amazement; It is this Excess of Fear which, in any eminent Danger, makes a
Person This sort of Idea is strongly expressed in the Odyssey^ Gods! should the
stern Ulysses rise in might, Those gates would seem too narrow for thy Flight.
18, 427 -- 6, 385.


think it impossible that he should Escape; and it remains so Strong and
Lively, that after he is got perfectly out of Danger, he can scarce persuade
himself, but that he is still in the midst of it --

-- With timorous Awe,
From the dire Scene the exempted two withdraw,
Scarce sure of life, look round, and trembling move
Od. 22, 417 -- 284.
To the bright altars of Protector Jove.
All these are Points which lie in common between Painting and Poetry; I would
willingly touch upon one thing more under the same View: I mean, those pieces
in Poetry which answer Copying in Painting; and each of which is really the
Picture of a Picture.

You will give me leave by Picture here to understand any Artificial Images of
things; from Embroidery, Embossing, or any other Method of expressing Nature by
Likenesses of Art: And indeed it is of this kind, that all the Pictures spoken
of in Homer are; and, I believe, all in Virgil. At least, what we call Painting
now, was not the Painting of the Homerick Ages.

It is to the Honor of the Art (in this general Sense) that the Poets, when
they are copying from Painting, generally exceed themselves. I believe there is
not a more masterly Piece in all Virgil's Works, than his Copy of Troilus; Thus
the same Hand in the Images of Aeneas's Shield: As in that of Achilles, Homer
has all the Life and Expression that Poetry is capable of.

In both of these, the Poets use a way of speaking in relation to Picture,
which is very Strong and Emphatical; and which may show the high Notions they
entertained of this Art: They do not say, that the Images seem to perform such
Actions; but talk of 'em as real Life: They say directly, that they Move, and
Act, and Speak. The Critics, who have blamed some Boldnesses of this kind,
show only their own See pope and Dacier on the Shield of Achilles. ^^. Book 18.
Coldness, and want of Taste. It Is a Figure as just as it is daring: it
animates the Description; and where the Poet is Thus where Europa is said --
Terras spectare relictas
Et comites clamare suas, tactumque vereri
Assilientis aquae, timidasque reducere plantas:
One should forget it was only in Picture, did not the Poet take so much pains
to inform us of it; Ipsa videbatur terras etc --
Verum taurum, freta vera pataras.
Met 6, 107.
more cautious, he is less lively on that very Account.

My want of Skill, in this Noble Art, is the same disadvantage in viewing these
Poetical Pictures, as want of a proper Light would be to the Real; but with all
this Disadvantage, they seem extremely Beautiful: And I cannot resist the
Temptation of setting one or two of 'em before you.

The Design on the Shields affords such a variety of Images exquisitely well
wrought, and disposed so justly, that it would be perfectly Gothic and
Barbarous to take them to Pieces. Ignorant as I am; The Sea Aen. 8, 634.
young Romulus, and Remus, and Ibid. 711.
the Genius of the Nile, strike me particularly in the one; and in the other,
The Sea Pope's Il. 18, 595 to 626.
Ambuscade and Engagement, the Ibid. 677.
still rural Prospect; and Il. 18, 683
the Dance, considered as a Poetitical Piece of Painting.

To what Perfection must Embroidery have arrived in Homer's Days, if its Works
could equal his Descriptions of them? How full of Life is Od. 19. 268 -- 23^.
that Figure in Ulysses's Robes? And, I suppose, the Cestus of Venus was of the
same Nature, in which was --

-- Every ar^, and every charm,
To win the wisest, and the coldest warm:
^ond Love, the gentle vow, the gay desire,
The kind deceit, the still-reviving fire,
Persuasive speech, and more persuasive sighs,
Il. 14, 252 -- 127.
Silence that spoke, and eloquence of eyes.
Hercules's Belt, and the Description of it in the Odyssey, is the Reverse of
this. The Belt it self perhaps was of a different Make, answerable to the
Shield of Achilles; which, by the way, may ^ntimate something of an Art, that
is ^ow lost, which (if you will allow me in (...) mere Conjecture of my own)
seems to ^ave been a sort of Mosaick-work of diffe^ent Metals; See Il. s', 475
Brass, Stannum, Silver etc, intermixed with Gold; Ibid 480.
all varied, and Ibid. 549
shaded, so as to express the different Properties and Actions of the things
described: But whatever the materials were, the Workmanship certainly excelled
them greatly. Any one, to be convinced of this, need only turn his Eyes on the
Hercules in Ades, where

Gloomy as night he stands, in act to throw
The aerial arrow from the twanging Bow.
Around his breast a wondrous Zone is rolled,
Where woodland Monsters grin in fretted Gold;
There sullen Lions sternly seem to roar,
The Bear to growl, to foam the tusky Boar:
There War and Havoc and Destruction stood;
Od. 11, 756 -- 608.
And vengeful Murder, red with human blood.
These are all Copies: And I have done, if you will give me leave only to set
Virgil's Troilus before you; which is certainly as fine a Piece as any drawn by
that great Hand:

-- Amissis Troilus armis
Infelix Puer, atque impar congressus Achilli,
Fertur ^quis, curruque haeret resupinus inani,
Lora tenens tamen: huic cervixque comaeque tr^huntu^
Aen. 1, 482.
Per terram, and versa pulvis inscribitur hasta.
How beautiful does this look in the Poem and in the Picture? Yes, the Painter
and the Poet have one and the same Art; or rather one and the same Power of
Creating.

Aut utramque credes esse pictam:
Aut utramque credes esse veram.
I am extremely obliged to you (says Philypsus) for so various a View of these
Beauties. Believe me, I have scarce known for some time, whether I was not got
into some strange Picture-Gallery, where one meets every Moment with new
Subjects of Admiration and Delight. The Misfortune is, You have only led me
thorough by the hand; and given me a transient View of them: when I could have
dwelt Hours upon admiring each by itself. It Is just like some Traveling
Enjoyment of this kind; when we have been forced to run over whole Apartments
furnished with Pieces by the greatest Masters, too numerous to be observed
^articularly; You have delighted me in ^aste; and I know not how it is, I find
^y self pleased and dissatisfied at the ^ame time.

I am sure, says Antiphaus, I have dealt ^ith you, like the Connoisseurs, which
a Traveller often meets with in places, ^here there are the best Collections:
Were you left to your self, you would ^njoy a thousand Beauties in them; but
must be plaguing you all the while with ^^inting out the most particular; though,
after all I know only where they stand, who they were drawn by, and what they
represent.

But we forget, Philypsus, that we are at present half Travelers in earnest:
We are from home; and you see the Sun is just setting -- No, -- interrupted
Philypsus, We have half an Hour good, at least; And if you have any thing
farther on this head, I beg you would favor me with it: -- As you please, says
Antiphaus. -- You know, ^e have hitherto been viewing those Points in which
P^etry and Painting ^^^ee; there is one Method behind, ^^ich P^etry has of
impressing its Images, ^ecu^^ar to itself. -- The Poet ^an imitate the Colors
of the Painter; but the Painter can never imitate the Sounds of Poetry: You may
see the Hero ^all in Picture; but in the Poem you see him fail, and hear the
Clang of his Arms.

Yes, Philypsus, there is a natural fitness in Sounds. Every Passion has its
distinct Voice; each Action its proper Turn; and every Motion a particular
Sound that may correspond to it.

Only observe the difference in the Sound of these Lines; it is as sensible a^
that of the real Sounds, which they describe: Compare this Couplet, of Mr.
Pope, Od. 24, 6.
Trembling the specter glide, and plaintive vent
Thin hollow Screams along the deep descent.


With this of the same hand, -- The string let fly,
Od. 21, 449 -- 411.
Twang'd short and sharp, like the shrill Swallow's cry.


Thus we might Fluviorum rex Eridanus. Georg. 1, 482.
S^xosumque sonans Hypanis. Georg. 4, 370.
Or these -- Fluvio Tiberinus amaeno
Vorticibus rapidis, and multa flavus arena
In mare prorumpit. Aen. 7, 32 -- Fragosus
D^t sonitum saxis and torto vortice torrens AE. 7. 567.

compare in reading Virgil several Descriptions of Rivers: There we have the
full course of the Po, and the windings of the Tiber, the Georg. 2, 160.
largeness of Benacus, the Georg. 3, 14.
slowness of the Mincio, the Georg. 1, 109.
murmuring of a Brook, and the broken Aen. 1, 103.
course of a River encumbered with Men and Arms; in a word, every variety of
streams that can be conceived, all imag'd in the various Numbers and Cadence of
his Verse.

In Poetry, the Bow twangs; the Arrow Od. 21, 461.
whizzes through the Air; and Il. 1, 64.
the Quiver rattles on the Shoulder of the Warrior; Even the particular
difference of the same sort of Actions, is to be distinguished in the sound of
the Verse; and the Javelin, that Od. ^2. 2^2.
flies impetuous from Ulysses, languishes in the hand of the Suitors. This very
Circumstance, as I take it, is beautifully described by the Translator of Vida,
among several other See Pitt's Vida^ p. 108. and^
excellent Images of the same Kind.

We do not only meet with a great Variety of these significant Numbers in the
Odyssey; but are instructed too in the Methods of rendering our Numbers proper
and significant. Here we are taught how the Poet roughens his Verse to imitate
the Subject he is to express. Thus the Note tells us that his Description of
the Sea abounds (...) ^2 2^^^
with the harshest Letter our Language affords. It is clogged with
Monosyllables, that the Concourse of the rough Syllable^, might be more quick
and close in the pronunciation, and the most open and ^ounding Vowel occur in
every word.

On the contrary, a gentle flowing Stream runs as easy and smoothly in the
Description: We then hear See Note on Od. 14, 1.
nothing of those rough Consonants; Instead of them we meet with several
Liquids, and those Liquids are softened with a multitude of Vowels.

What a violent and strong Motion does Homer give to Sisiphus's Stone in its
fall? Od. l', 597.
(...).


Whence this Rapidity and Violence in the Numbers? See Note on Od. 11, 736.
If we observe it we find that There is not one Monosyllable in the Line, and
but two Dissyllables; Ten of the Syllables are short, and not one Spondee in
it, except one that could not be avoided in the close (which perhaps too may be
of Service toward imaging the stopping of its Course at last) There is no
Hiatus or Gap between word and word, no Vowels left open to retard the Celerity
of it: and yet, though the Motion be carried on with such a vehemence, one seems
to see the bounding of the Stone, as well as the Impetuosity of its Descent.

I should think (though the Notes do not mention any thing of it) that the
Translator expresses this double Image in the English; when he makes the Stone
Od. 11, 738.
-- Resulting with a bound,
Thunder impetuous down, and smoke along the ground.


At least, In both we may say of the Versification, as of the Stone it
describes; Ipsa suis viribus ruit.


The opposites to these express a Slowness and Difficulty of Motion; When a
Hero strains -- Some rock's huge weight to throw,
Mr. Pope's Art of Criticism^
The line too labors, and the words move slow^


Thus is Sisyphus described in the former Picture; With many a weary step, and
many a groan,
Od^ 11, 736 -- 594.
Up the high hill he heaves a huge round stone.


Never was a Translator more just to his Original; The Observation which has
been made on the Greek, these Lines answer, will hit equally with the Sea Note
on Od. 11, 736.
English The Verses are clogged with long Syllables, and with Vowels open upon
one another; the very Words are heavy, and as it were make re^istance in the
pronunciation.

In the same manner Virgil and Homer describe the Labor of the Giants, when
they endeavor to scale Heaven. Ter sunt conati imponere Pelio Ossam
Scilicet, atque Ossae frondosum involvere Olympum.
Georg. 1, 282 Sec. Ed. Ruaei. -- (...), 315. Heaved on Olympus tottering Ossa
stood;
On Ossa, Pelion nods.
-- Od. 11, 388.
Virgil, chiefly by the openness of his Vowels: Homer, by the resistance of his
Syllables, and the pauses of his Lines; and his Translator, by slow Syllables,
burdened with several Elisions, close upon one another.

The Numbers are thus minutely adapted to the Motions described by these great
Masters; And we need not wonder if they observe like Rules in Points of greater
concern; Such are all Occasions where they speak the Language of the Passions:
or endeavor to touch the Soul of the Reader either with Pleasure or Pain.

When Homer describes any terrible Object, See Note on Od. 6, 193^
He rejects the more flowing and harmonious Vowels, and makes Choice of such
Mutes, and Consonants as load the Syllables: Then long weighty Sounds, and
Words of many Syllables are proper; and often a designed harshness, unusual
pauses, and a broken structure in the verse.

But the Lyre must be new tuned, when the Subject is agreeable or delightful.
The Poet then softens every Line See Note on Od. 6, 193^
with Vowels, and the most flowing Semi-vowels: he rejects harsh Sounds, and
the Coll^sion of rough Words: The Tone of the Verse must be neither serious,
nor majestic; but rather qualified by as great a Frequency of short Syllables,
as can well be admitted, without rendering the Lines Weak and Effeminate: The
Cadence is soft and gene his Words descend like a kind re^r shing Shower; or
like the Snow that melts in falling.

The joyous Ver^ification admits of more sprightly Notes, and a greater Mixture
Exulting in Triumph now rise the bold Notes. Mr. Pope's Ode on Musick^
of Energy and Vigor: sometimes she rises even to breaks, and pauses: (a) See
Note on Od. 6, 153.
but they must be always, like those in Music, pauses of Delight: and the
Verse muse spring on again, when it recovers itself, without losing any thing
of its Exultation and Vivacity. -- Unless some As Virgil from the glories of
Rome, to the death of Marcellus. Aen. 6.
afflicting Theme breaks in, and turns our Thoughts away, to dismal Scenes,
where sighs and melancholy Reign: The Muse, compassionate, speaks all in
Tears, and moves with the same Quantos ille virum magnam Mavortis ad urbem
Campus aget gemitus! vel quae, Tiberine, videbis
Funera, cum tumulum praeterlabere recentem.
Aen. 6, 874.
This Delay also fixes the melancholy on ones
Mind: and for the same reason Repetition seems
to be particularly useful on these subjects:
-- Ut vultum vidit morientis and ora,
Ora modis, Anchisiades, pallentia miris;
Ingemuit miserans graviter. -- Aen. 10, 823.

slow Melancholy Air.

It is scarce to be imagined, Philypsus, how great the Powers of Sounds are,
when adapted to the Subject and the Passion. For my part, I should think that
our very Bodies are disposed to receive them; that this Frame of ours is like
an Instrument ready tuned; and when the proper Key is touched, our Nerves
tremble and answer it with a Kind of Musical Sympathy. How far this may reach
in others, I know not; but as for my particular Make, it is strangely
susceptible of such Impressions. After a Period set to Melancholy, I have been
surpised to find my Eyes full of Tears: There are some exquisite Lines which I
can never read without a certain Shivering thorough my Blood, that I cannot
express to you: I have felt my Spirits Burn within me, upon hearing a Point of
War, well wrote; and have been almost ready to start from my Seat at the
Poetical Sound of a Trumpet.

This Energy of Sounds, and the great and various Emotions they are capable of
raising in our Breasts, may serve partly to excuse those Critics, who are very
particular in laying down Rules, as to this part of Versification; The
Ancients, as well as Moderns, have left us whole Treatises upon it: and those
who have wrote in a more general way, are very diffusive, when they come to
this Part of their Subject. They speak to every the least Circumstance; and
Readers, who have never thought over this Point, would be surpised to find the
great Cicero very industriously ^ettling Quantities, and measuring Words fit
for such and such a Period. They would wonder, whence he is so peremptory for
^ambicks on this Occasion; and on another, so great a Partizan for Tribrachs,
and Dactils.

Why, seriously, says Philypsus, I have often thought him quite tedious on
these particulars: The Orator, even the Critic, seemed to be lost sometimes,
and nothing but a mere Pedant appear in their room. I admire the force of
Numbers (continued he) as much as any one; but when I have been reading the
Rules at large in the Critics, I could not help thinking them too minute and
trifling. If a Man must be taken up thus in weighing Syllables and ranging of
Vowels, what Elegance of Language can we expect, or what Life in his
Compositions?

What you say (answered Antiphaus) is what, I believe, most Men think on this
Occasion: and were a Poet always to be studying his Rules, such an Objection
would be very powerful: But it is with this, which is only the Mechanism of
Verse, as it is in the Mechanism of Writing. We must learn to draw the Figure
of the Letters, and study how to form the particular Turn of each^ before a Man
can write down a wh^le Sentence; By use this knowledge gr^ws familiar; We then
write by a See Quintil. Instit^ Lib. 10. Cap. 7, Est igitur usus quidam
irrationalis etc. Or Mr^ Lock's Essay. Lib. 2. Cap, 9. Sect. 9, and 10.
sort of Instinct; and our Pen runs over each Letter, without our considering,
distinctly at each which way we shall direct it. It Is much the same in these
Arts of Versification. When we have learned the force of Letters, and the
Powers of Sound; when we know what Syllables are proper to express such a
Motion, and what run of Verse hits such particular Images, Use makes the Mind
ready in applying what is proper; and the Thought is as nimble in suggesting
Words of a suitable Sound, as the Hand is in Motions proper to set down those
words on our Paper.

But it will be hal^ a life, perhaps, before the Poet can come to this
Readine^s -- I do not say it is to be acquired immediately, answered Antiphaus,
but acquired in some Measure it must be, by any one who desires to be a true
Poet: In the mean time, a Man may indulge his Vigor, he may compose his Lines
with full Spirit, and set them to Music afterward; Le^ a Man write with
Flame, if he will but correct at Leisure.

Besides: this is not so difficult to be attained, as one would imagine. The
fitness of Sounds to things is natural: Invention itself will go some way in
the Work; and where there is naturally (What we call) a Good Ear, Nature will
do the Business almost without the help of Art. I do not speak this in a
declamatory way, Good Philyps^s; I imagine Fact and Experience will go a great
way in proving what I say. A Man, who thinks vehemently, will speak swiftly;
and when we are on a grave Point, our Words will of themselves be in a great
Measure slow and weighty. This is yet plainer from the Invention of Languages;
How many single Words are there in every Tongue, that have been originally cast
in a proper Mould, and on the first Heat carried off the Images of things
impressed upon them? I was saying too, that the posture of the Mind at the time
of Composing, will assist the turn of the Composition; And is this more absurd
in particular Cases, than that the Temper of a People in general should affect
their Language in the same manner? Yet has it been often observed that the
Dispositions of a People are perceivable in that Turn of Words they chiefly
delight in. Thus the French Tongue is brisk and voluble: The Germans talk in
vast Syllables and perpetual Consonants: English is neither too soft, nor too
rough: though our Northerly Situation inclines us rather to the latter: And, as
the Spaniard is the most haughty of all Nations, their Language is the most
Grand; it prides itself in firm Syllables, in a frequency of the fullest Vowel,
and the most sonorous Terminations of its Words.

Nature certainly forms us within for fit Sounds: We see every Day that even
Brutes can express their Passions by the Tone of their Voice; and is not an
Intelligent Being as well qualified by Nature to adapt Sounds to his Senti^ent^?

Indeed they are thus adapted already in a Multitude of Instances; Our Language
abounds with such words; and ^n many Cases we need only utter our Sentiments in
the most common Expressions, to speak with this Significance. What was it that
led the first Inventors into this frequency of such words? Was in Art, or the
Natural Resemblance, and their Obviousness upon that Account? It Is in this
Light we must understand our Master Critic, where he calls Nature Dion. Hal.
(...).
The great Original and Mistress of propriety in the present Point: It is she
that leads us to imitate things by Sound; and to express what we conceive, by
Words that are turned according to those strong Likenesses, which we form in
our Minds.

It Is plain the Use of Words is arbitrary: we might if we had a fancy for it,
call any thing by any Name: Yet there is something from within, that has
influenced all Nations so ^ar, as to lead them to descriptive Sounds, in their
giving Names to things; and that more frequently than one would readily
imagine. What Nature has done in single Words the Poet carries on in
Composition; Almost all the particular Names of Sounds themselves, for
instance, are naturally significant in most Languages; as with us, the Roaring
of Waves, the Whistling of Winds etc. Of such Words, assisted by a proper
structure of Quantities, and a significant Cadence of Verse, the Poet makes an
Hurricane by Land, or a Storm at Sea. Nature first presided in establishing
those proper sounds, and still directs in the Assemblage of them.

Hence it is that this Point takes such a Compass in the Doctrine of the
Critics. Some of them, no doubt, carry the Matter too far, when they would
require this Natural Significance of Sounds, to be kept up in every thing we
write. Such was Vossius. It would make you smile to hear some of his Fancies:
He talks as if every Language, like that of hi^ Favorites the Chinese, should
be nothing but Music: He would have our very Actions all Tuned: A Soldier
cannot run the Gauntlet, but he must be The Ancients (says he) used Music in
every thing; Adeo quod ipsae quoque plagae ad (...) harm^nic^s sontibus
i^gerebantur. De Viribus Ry^hmi. p. 47.
slashed in Time; and his very Non semel recordor me in ejusmodi incidisse
manus, qui quorumvis etiam can^icorum mo^^s suis imitarentu^ pectinibus; it^ ut
nonnunquam Iambos v^l Trochaeos, alias Dactylos vel Anapaestos, nonn^nquam
Amphib^aches aut Paeonas quam sci^issime exprimerent und^ haud m^dic^ ^ri^b^tur
del^ctatio. ib. p^ 6^.
Barber must Shave him in a just proportion of Dactils and Spondees.

Hermogenes is perhaps more trifling, though in a graver manner: He questions
whether this sort of Sounds be not preferable to the Sentiments in a Poem. This
is to oppose two Things, that are in the strictest Amity and Concord. These
Sounds do not, like the Modern, pretend to rival the Sense; their whole
Business is to make the Sentiments more strongly perceived, and more effective
on the Mind.

I have heard it frequently objected to those Gentlemen, the Critics, that
they find out several Beauties of this Kind in the Works of Homer, which he,
never so much as dreamed of in composing 'em. In many Cases this may be true;
and in many the Lines may be justly commended, and really significant, though
that particular Beauty might not be designed in composing them: But those, who
can persuade themselves, that Homer never designed any such thing in his
Writings, I should think, might soon bring themselves to believe (what has been
so frequently produced as an instance of Absurdity) that his Poems might be
made by chance.

The Notes of Music in a good Composition are fitted to the Subject: And a
good Copy of Verses wrote for Music will be fitted for Notes. I cannot once
doubt, that the first Stanza in Mr. Pope's Ode for St. Caecilia's Day has a
designed Harmony all thorough it. It Is just the same Case with Homer's Poems:
They were all made for Music; and have been all sang to the Lyre.

As for my part, says Philypsus, I find Music enough in them, even now,
without the Lyrist. Neither have I any quarrel with the Critics for giving
mepleasure, and pointing out Beauties of this kind, whether designed by Homer
or not. But I wonder at one thing: while they speak of the Defect in this point
perpetually, I never yet heard them speak of any Excess in it: It Is certain,
that the greater Number of Poets err in neglecting the significant Turn of
their Verses: but is there no erring too by an Affectation of it?

I thank you, (answered Antiphaus) for putting me in mind of this particular.
Undoubtedly there may be faults on both sides: Even in the Poem before us I
imagine, this is sometimes carried too far, and sometimes used improperly: The
Infirmness of a Couplet, mentioned on another Occasion, agrees with the thing
described, and may perhaps be blameable on that very Account.

Od. 18, 282 -- 239.
His loose head tottering as with wine opprest^
Obliquely drops, and nodding knocks his breast^
Terrible Images have something engaging; and the Mind takes a secret Pleasure
even in Melancholy: Disagreeable Longinus condemns a Passage in Hesiod on this
very Account: de Subl. Cap. 9.
objects alone are the worse for being well described: A Poet is to reject, as
well as to choose; It Is want of Art to set every thing in a strong Light^ and
there are many Objects, which if they must have a place at all, require at
least to be flung into Shades.

If this be true, there are some few Images of this sort, which I think are
drawn too strongly, or too lavishly:

Od. 14, 473 -- 425.
Down dropped he groaning --
Od. 4, 725 -- 538.
He said: chill horrors shook my shivering Soul.
Od^ 1, 214 -- 165.
They curse their cumbrous pride's unweildy weight.
Od. 4, 547 -- 405.
There wallowing warm etc.
To me the Screaming of the Ghosts, as described at the end of the Eleventh
Odyssey, is rather disagreeable than dreadful:

Swarms of Specter rose from deepest Hell^
With bloodless visag^ and with hideous Yell,
They scream, they shriek; sad groans and dismal sounds
Od. 11, 782 -- 632.
Stun my scared Ears, and pierce hells utmost bounds
I leave this to your judgment; for it is very difficult, in these Cases, to
discern the True from the Faulty: A harshness of Sounds is often proper and
significant; but when and how far, is a knot that I will not pretend to untye.

I beg leave to repeat a Passage from the Iliad, in which some of the Lines may
be strained too much, under this notion of rendering them significant:

First march the heavy Mules, securely slow,
Over hills, over dales, over crag^, over rocks they go:
Jumping, high over the shrubs, of the rough ground,
Rattle the clatt'ring cars, and the shockt axles bound.
But when arrived at Ida's spreading woods
(Fair Ida, watered with descending floods)
Loud sounds the Axe, redoubling strokes on strokes;
On all sides r^und the Forest hu^ls her Oaks
Headlong^ Deep-echoing groan the thickets brown;
Il. 23, 147 -- 120.
Then rustling, crackling, crushing, thunder down.
This last Verse in particular may be an Instance of employing descriptive
Sounds too thick upon one another; but this, if it be a fault, is such an one
as in the present state of Poetry, requires an unusual Eminence in the Writer,
to be capable of committing it.

It Is much more frequent among our Poets to neglect the Sentiments in their
Versification; to give up the significant Structure of Words, for mere harmony
and softness of Verse; and even to make u^e of Numbers contrary to the Image or
Passion they are describing; though to describe Actions of Rapidity, for
instance, in slow solemn Measures, is as absurd, as for an Actor to scold, or
rant, with the tone and steadiness of a Philosopher.

We have not time, Philypsus, otherwise I should have ventured on some farther
Faults of our Versification: but I must not now run out into Complaints on the
frequent Consonants and frequent Elisions, multiplied so much in our Verses,
though both ought to be particularly guarded against, in a Language naturally
overladen with them: -- On the neglect of Measure, and taking all Syllables
whether long or short to be of Equal Time: and the Lameness and Inequality from
hence in Verses of the same kind: -- The discord of the Emphasis or Accent, and
of the Pauses: -- the repeated Cadence, and continued Likeness of Sound. I need
only mention some other Identities of Sound, as all middle and double Rhimes,
and all that are alike for two Couplets together. And methinks, Philypsus, as
all these likenesses of Sound would be given up at the first word, unless there
be some particular Reason for retaining that fashionable jingle at the close of
our Verses, we may even reckon that as bad as the rest. I should have said
something on this: but it is no great matter; since it stands condemned over and
over by the greatest Critics among the Modern. For my part, I Will talk no more
of it, that we may go in Humor to our Claret. -- I begin to wish my self in
your Parlour. The Evening shuts in apace. Come, good Philypsus, let us be
going, I beseech You.

FINIS.

