THE LIFE OF THE Lady JANE GRAY. WITH SOME REMARKS ON THE PLAY. In a LETTER to
a FRIEND. By William Rufus Chetwood.

DUBLIN: Printed for G. Risk, Bookseller, at the London in Dames-street,
over against the Horse-Guard; where New Plays and Novels are to be Sold. And
the Tragedy of Jane Gray, 1715.

THE LIFE OF THE Lady JANE GRAY, etc.
SIR,
YOU desired me to send you the Life of the Lady Jane Gray. I do assure you, my
Friend, (and hope to be believed) that I spent a whole Day in the search, and
to as little purpose, as he that carried a lighted Torch at Noonday, to look
for an honest Man. But however, you shall not altogether lose your Longing: For
you may, if you please, read this following Account, Collected out of the best,
and most exactest, Historians.

THis Incomparable Lady was Eldest Daughter to Henry Lord Gray, Duke of
Suffolk. She was born in the Year 1534. She was Endowed with all the Graces
both of Mind and Body. She gave in her earliest Infancy, many Proofs of her
growing Piety, and her Veneration for Holy Writ. For once being diverting
herself with her Companions, one had an occasion to have something that was
above her reach, and taking a large Bible to tread on to get it; the young Lady
seeing her, would not suffer her, and expressed her Resentment: She was so taken
with it, that she broke off their sport, and retired to her Closet, more than
ordinary Melancholy.

She was a Lady indeed that seemed cut out by Heaven for Greatness. As She was
a Beautiful and a Graceful Person, so she was Endowed with all those Virtues
that are esteemed by Heaven, and all good Men, as is expressed in the Tragedy
of her, by the Poet.

Candor with Goodness, Fortitude with Sweetness,
Strict Piety, and love of Truth, with Learning,
More than the Schools of Athens ever knew,
Or her own Plato taught --
When she came to years of more solid Understanding, Dr. Elmer (afterward
Bishop of London) was her Tutor: And from him she learned Latin and Greek, to a
Perfection, and would Discourse in those Language upon any Subject, and would
give her Sentiments to Admiration. Nay, she delighted in such Conferences: For
when others of her Sex and Age were taking their Diversion abroad, she employed
her time in Reading. The Lady Elizabeth's Tutor (Roger Ascham) coming once to
wait on her at her Father's House in the Country; was surpised to find her
alone reading of Plato's Works in Greek, while the rest of the Family were
diverting themselves with Hunting, (in her Father's Park) and other Rural
Diversions. He asked her how she could lose the share of such Diversion: She
answered, Those were but faint Shadows of what she enjoyed in Contemplation
there -- [pointing to Plato's Phoedon that lay before her] And added she, I
esteem it one of the greatest Blessings of my Life, that I have had severe
Parents, and a Milder Master, which have made me delight with those Companions,
which were not like Mankind; for when I find my self weary, I can lay by their
Company without commiting a Soliecism against good Manners.

The young King was ever fond of her Company, and as their Ages were much the
same, so was their Fancies and Desires. As the Poet has it.

From their first early Days of Infant Life,
A gentle Band of Friendship grew betwixt 'em;
As Brother, and as Sister, bred together,
Beneath one Common Parents Care they lived.
In every Innocent Delight they shared,
They Sung, and Danced, and Sat, and Walked together:
She left the shining Courts to share his Toil,
To turn with him the Grave Historian's Page,
And taste the Rapture of the Poets Song.
She was well read in Sacred, as well as Profane History, and had attained to
a large Knowledge in Divinity: And at the Age when others were but tasting the
Notions of Philosophy, she had Capacity enough to make a full Feast. And with
all these Advantages of Birth and Parts, she was so Humble, so Meek, and Pious,
that all People both Admired and Loved her. She had a Mind wonderfully raised
above the World, and the Pleasures of it she called Vanities.

Lord Guilford, Son to the Aspiring Duke of Northumberland, by his Father's
Politic means, was Married to her on the Third of June 1553, and as well as I
can make out in the Twentieth Year of her Age. She expressed all the sorrow
imaginable at the King's Death, and in his Sickness gave him most constant
Attendance, which is finely expressed in the Poets Lines by Northumberland on the
occasion.

All desolate, and drowned in flowing Tears,
By Edward's Bed, the Pious Princes sits;
Fast from her lifted Eyes, the pearly Drops
Fall trickling over her Cheek, while strong Devotion,
And fervent Zeal pour forth her laboring Soul,
And every sigh is winged with Prayers so potent,
As strive with Heaven to save her dying Lord.
When her Father, the Duke of Northumberland, with the rest of the Privy
Council, came to attend, and hail her Queen, she expressed a great deal of
Reluctance, and was rather forced to take it, out of an Obedience to her
Parents, than any desire of her own. She said the Crown, by Right of
Inheritance, was to descend to the Sisters of the late King, and that she was
unwilling to burden her Conscience to enrich herself with the spoils of others.
At last, for the Safety of the People, and the Maintaining and Preserving the
Reformation, she was won upon to accept the Crown. The Author of the Tragedy of
Lady Jane, has expressed her unwillingness in this manner.

Take me, Crown me;
Invest me with this Royal Wretchedness:
Let me not know one happy Minute more,
Let all my sleepless Nights be spent in Care,
My Days be vexed with Tumults and Alarms,
If only I can save you; if my Fate
Has marked me out to be the Public Victim,
I take the Lot with Joy. -- Yes, I will Die
For that Eternal Truth my Faith is fixed on,
And that dear Native Land which gave me Birth.
All that I ask, is, though my Fortune frown,
And bury me beneath this Fatal Crown;
Let this one good be added to my Doom,
To save this Land from Tyranny and Rome.
She was neither lifted up when she wore the Crown, nor cast down, when her
Palace became her Prison, but carried herself in an even Temper of Mind in
those great inequalities of Fortune, that so suddenly exalted, and depressed
her. All the Passion she expressed was, that her Father, Mother, and Husband were
involved in her ill Fortune. When she had notice that her Sentence of Death was
past, she did not express the least concern, but bore it with a Constancy of
Mind beyond thought. The Queen sent Dr. Fecknam Three Days before to prepare
her for Death: He had a long Conversation with her, and answered to all his
Questions, with that calmness of Mind, and clearness of Reason, that it was a
Wonder to hear, how so Young a Person of her Sex, could look on Death so nigh
her with so little concern. She sent a Letter to her Father, to mitigate his
Sorrow for her Unhappy End. She rejoiced at aproaching Death, and thought the
nigher it appeared it looked less dreadful. She expressed a great deal of
tenderness, when she saw her Husband led out first to Execution: He had desired
to take leave of her before he died, but she declined it, since (she said) it
would rather be an Addition to her Grief: And she hoped to meet shortly, and be
united in a much happier State. She saw her Husband's Headless Trunk carried by
her without any outward concern, or Woman's Wailings, and consol'd herself in
knowing she should soon follow him. When she was brought to the Scaffold (which
for fear of the People was built within the Tower) she confessed she had Sinned in
taking the Crown when it was proffered her, but she took it to a good end. She
declared she die d a true Christian in the reformed Faith, but hoped to be saved
only, through the Merits and Sufferings of her Blessed Lord and and Savior Jesus
Christ. Then having desired the Peoples Prayers, she repeated the 51st Psam,
when after some private Devotion, she undressed herself, put her Hankerchief
herself upon her Eyes, then laying her Head upon the fatal Block, she resigned
her Breath to him who gave it her.

Thus fell this Great, this Good, and Pious Lady, which seemed by Virtue to be
formed for Greatness, which may be as an Example to the World of the Mutability
of Fortune: And I think our Poet has been very exact in his Characters in
following the truth of History. Nothing can Describe the Haughty Ambitious
Northumberland better than himself, in the following Lines, where he seems to
have laid the Scheme of his designs even before the King's Death.

She must be here, and lodged in Guilford's Arms
E're Edward Dies, or all we have done is Marred,
Ha! Pembroke! that is a Bar that thwarts my way;
His fiery Temper brooks not opposition,
And must be met with soft and subtle Arts,
With crouching Courtesy and Hony'd Words,
Such as Assuage the fierce and bend the Strong.
See Baker's Chronicle, in giving an account of Northumberland, Marching with
his Troops out of London. The 14th of July he Marched through Shoreditch with
2000 Horse and 6000 Foot, and though there were many Spectators in the Streets as
he passed, none wished him Success. Now judge how high the Poet comes, where he
makes Pembroke a Spectator.

I saw him Marching at his Army's Head,
I marked him Issuing through the City Gates;
And (for he wore his Beaver up) could read
Upon his Visage Horror and Dismay.
No Voice of friendly Salutation cheered him,
None wished his Arms might thrive, or bad Heaven speed him:
But through a Staring ghastly looking Crowd,
Unhail'd, Unblest, with heavy Heart he went.
The Duke of Northumberland went back to Cambridge to wait for more Succors
from London; but hearing how Matters were carried, he dismissed his Troops, and
went to the Marketplace, only Accompanied with the Mayor, and himself, for
want of a Herald, flung up his Cap (for Joy) and cried, God Save Queen Mary.
But the Earl of Arundel came with orders from the Queen to apprehend him, as
one guilty of Treason, and brought him from Cambridge to the Tower on the 25th
of July, and on the 22d of August 1553 was Beheaded. This passage is described
by the Duke of Suffolk to his Daughter the Lady Jane.

With some sew Followers he arrived at Cambridge,
But there, even they forsook him, and himself,
Was forced with heavy Heart, and watery Eye,
To cast his Cap up with dissembled Cheer,
And cry, God save Queen Mary: But alas!
Little availed the Semblance of that Loyalty;
For soon thereafter by the Earl of Arundel,
With Treason was he charged, and there Arrested:
And now they bring him Prisoner up to London.
I must confess in my Judgment there is a great many fine thoughts in this
Play, but I leave 'em to yours; only I must beg leave to point you out one, and
so conclude, for I reckon by this time you're as tired with Reading, as I with
Writing.

It is in the Conclusion of the 4th Act, where Guilford is bewailing the Loss
of each other in Death: But she endeavors to comfort him, by telling him they
shall meet again.

Behold the Universal Works of Nature,
Where Life still Springs from Death. To us the Sun
Dies every Night, and every Morn revives.
The Flowers, which Winter's Icy Head destroyed,
Lift their fair Heads, and live again in Spring.
Mark with what Hopes upon the furrowed Plain,
The Careful Ploughman casts the pregnant Grain*
There hid as in a Grave, a while it lies,
Till the revolving Season bids it rise,
Till Natures Genial Powers Command a Birth,
And potent call it from the teeming Earth;
Then large increase the buried Treasures yield,
And with full Harvest Crown the plenteous Field.
I shall trouble you no farther, and I shall think my Pains amply required if
this Succinct (but true) Account can give any satisfaction to the entire Friend
of*

Sir Your Humble Servant, W. R. C.

FINIS.

