AN ESSAY ON PHYSIC.

OR, An ATTEMPT to Revive the PRACTICE of the ANCIENTS.

WITH SOME GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON ANIMAL MECHANISM, AND THE MATERIA MEDICA.

By ANDREW HOOK, M.D.

LONDON: Printed for J. ROBERTS, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane; and sold
by the Booksellers in London and Wesminster; and at the Author's House in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields. MDCCXXXIV.

(Price 1 s. 6 d.)

AN ESSAY ON PHYSIC.
I SHALL not trouble the Reader with the Occasion of the following Essay, or
make any Apology for publishing it; the Subject of it is too Important to need
the latter, and the former is a matter of no Consequence to the Public: and as
I am not in humor, at present, to compliment either my Self or Others, and
have neither leisure nor inclination to be Impertinent, I shall directly fall
on my Subject, without farther Preface or Dedication.

IT IS a matter of Fact beyond dispute in the History of Physic, as far as we
have any remaining Records of it, from its first Rise to this Day, that the
Materia Medica has still grown more and more Bulky in every Age. From what
Causes this arose, and what Effects it has produced, will be farther seen in
the Course of this Essay.

THE most ancient Physicians, as far as we can find, made use of but very few
Remedies, and those few were entirely directed to the natural Evacuations;
either to promote such as were Obstructed and Defective, or to check and
restrain such as were Excessive and Redundant. And herein they exactly followed
the Direction and Indications of Nature, by observing what Augmentation or
Diminution of these Evacuations, brought on such and such morbid Symptoms, and
by what ways and means they were removed and carried off, when the whole
Process was left to Nature only, without any assistance or interposition of
Art. And as this was the only proper foundation to erect a laudable Praxis
upon; so in fact we find that the Medical Processes of the Ancients, were
always more or less successful, as they had a nearer or more remote relation,
in their intention of Cure, to the Operations of unassisted Nature, and were
directed, governed and conducted by this Principle.

WHILE Men thus contented themselves with knowing only what they could discover
in Fact, confined their Reasonings to such Phenomenon as occurred by
Observation and Experience, and were not ashamed to confess their Ignorance
where they had no true Knowledge; they studied Nature more successfully, and
applied their Knowledge to much better purpose: and Physic, as well as other
Arts and Sciences, was considerably advanced and improved. But such was the
Vanity of the Philosophers in pretending to search into the real Essences,
intrinsic Constitutions and formal Causes of things, that, in this whimsical
pursuit, they had not only set aside the true method of improving Knowledge by
careful observation and just experiments, but introduced into its room a
chimerical Succedaneum, which had no foundation in Reason and Nature, but was
merely Fictitious, Imaginary and Hypothetical. And thus while they thought to
ransack the Bowels, and penetrate to the very Center of Nature, they lost sight
of the Surface, and could not perceive or judge of what was before their Eyes.

IF these dark and profound Inquisitors had confined their Enquirys and
Lucubrations to matters of Speculation and Entertainment, and had not attempted
to intrude their Whimsys and Reveries into common Life, and the useful Arts and
Sciences; though no good had come of it, yet, on the other hand, no great harm
would have been done: but the mischief lay here, that in every Age the
Philosophy most in vogue, like a Torrent carried all before it, broke in upon
Soul and Body at once, and settled not only the Faith of Christians, but the
Practice of Physicians too: and hence we meet with in their turns Platonists,
Aristotelians, Cartesians, Corpuscularians, Specificians, and Rosicrucians in
Physic, as well as in Divinity. These all claimed the same implicit Faith and
Obedience to their respective Creeds, Canons and Constitutions, equally denied
the Right of private Judgment to all their Disciples, and, as far as lay in
their power, discouraged and opposed all rational Freedom of Inquiry
whatsoever. Thus a Physical as well as Theological Orthodoxy was ever insisted
on, and a Man, in either case, was always reputed to die a Heretic, if he did
not die in Form.

THE State of Physic thus stood for many Ages, on the authority of the Schools
and whimsies of the Theorists. The study of Nature was almost wholly laid
aside, and the good old way to Knowledge by Observations and Experiments, was
superseded by Canons and Aphorisms founded on a mere verbal and unintelligible
Philosophy; which from authority, only, obtained the name of first Principles,
and of consequence were not to be disputed. And hence we find that the Practice
of Physic in every succeeding Age became more and more uncertain and
precarious, till it ran quite out of Character, and fell into the hands of
Visionaries and Chemical Enthusiasts, who being for the most part Men of strong
Imaginations and weak Judgments, employed all their thoughts, and spent all
their time, in search after the Alkahest or Universal Medicine; and so eager
were they in the pursuit of this Chimaera, that they not only neglected, but
almost quite lost, the little knowledge they had of particular Remedies.

AND that a proper Theory might not be wanting exactly suited to this whimsical
and ridiculous Enterprise; and finding it impracticable to adapt any one then
in being, or to contrive a new one in the way of Reason and Nature; they wisely
took it into their heads to introduce Machinery into Medicine, and to bring in
Demons and supernatural Agents to their assistance. Thus the Archaeus came into
play and was constituted Superintendant over the whole Animal Economy. This
Major-Domo, as long as he was in good humor, executed his Commission very
faithfully, and guarded the Health and Safety of the whole Body; so that all
Danger was prevented, and every thing went on well. But no sooner was he
displeased and disobliged, but he neglected his guard, Disease broke in upon
the Constitution, and all was out of order; and nothing in Nature could restore
it again to its former Health and Rectitude, till the Archaeus was pacifyed and
appeased with the grand Secret or universal Medicine. Now this grand Secret,
you must know, was a certain Chemical Preparation so exactly suited to his
Taste, that it never failed, when timely administered by the Physician, to
answer this intention: but when this peevish testy Phantom happened to be
neglected too long, he then fell into a passion, became implacable, and in his
rage and fury always destroyed the Patient.

THIS Scheme, as whimsical and visionary as it appears to be, has had for its
Patrons and Defenders Gentlemen of the greatest name; and I make no doubt but
long ever this time, some happy Genius or other in the Enthusiastic way would
have carried this matter, if possible, into farther Fanaticism, had not
Mathematical and Mechanical Learning, which began to be in fashion in the last
Age, put People on a better method of enquiry and a juster way of reasoning.

And yet notwithstanding, such is the prodigious and almost insuperable force
of Prejudice and Education, that a great part of this Scheme is still retained,
by Gentlemen who would think themselves ill used if their Mathematical or
Mechanical Knowledge should be called in question, under the Animal Spirits,
notion of to whom they have assigned much the same Province and Powers, as was
done to the Archaeus before; with this additional absurdity, that these Animal
Spirits have been treated as mechanical and intelligent Agents at the same
time: of which any one may be convinced, who shall think it worth his while to
look into and examine the several Hypotheses on this Subject.

AND though it must be owned, that great advances and improvements have been
since made, by the Moderns, in natural Knowledge, yet it is much to be wished
that a better method had been taken in the application of this to the Animal
Economy, the Practice of Physic, and the Cure of Diseases. But such has been
the hard fate of this Profession, that amidst all other advances Physic has
been so very little improved, that we have but one Book in the World, as far as
I know, wherein any general Attempt has been made to apply the true Philosophy
of Nature to the Animal Economy and the Materia Medica; and this in my opinion
has been executed with such success by the Ingenious Author of the
Philosophical Principles of Medicine, that the Intelligent unprejudiced Reader
may promise himself to meet, therein, with almost every thing that is valuable
in the Theory and Practice of Physic; erected into one consistent System,
founded on indisputable Principles, and judiciously drawn out into all its
useful Corollaries and Consequences. Nay, it is a Truth but too plain in fact,
that in general we are much declined from the more simple and natural methods
of cure made use of by the Ancients; and as this has been chiefly owing to our
neglecting the true rational Indications and Intentions of Cure, so instead of
applying to this as Nature would direct us, we have been, and still are,
continually amused with an infinite jumble of Medicines under the notion of
Specific Alteratives; as if, by a most unaccountable and unintelligible
Transmutation, the morbid Matter could be converted into good Blood and
Humors, and retained in the Body without injury to the Constitution; and there
were no need at all of throwing it off by any of the natural Evacuations. Which
idle Conceit is without doubt the Bane of all rational Practice, and the common
Cheat by which Quacks, Empyricks and Ignorant Pretenders, chowse and dupe
People out of their Money and Lives.

Now in order to show the Folly and Absurdity of this Notion, and to contribute
what lies in my power toward reviving the more natural and rational Practice
of the Ancients, I shall in this Essay, under distinct Sections, consider the
principal Operations of Medicines, and the manner in which they Act; end herein
I shall confine my self to such Simples as are most useful and necessary in
Practice, with due allowance for some choice of things, in the same general
Intention, for the better accommodation of them to the Stomach and particular
liking of the Patient: avoiding as much as possible all such philosophical
Speculations, as have the least tendency to lead me beside my Design, or to
draw me into any Considerations or Enquiries, concerning them, beyond their
obvious sensible Qualities and Effects; which, in my opinion, is the true
Boundary of all medicinal Knowledge, and the Ne plus ultra of the Physicians
Empire.

SECT. I. Of Animal Mechanism.
IT would be impossible to give any rational Account of Diseases and their
Cure, without a general knowledge of the Animal Economy and the Method of
Nature in preparing, digesting and secreting the several Liquors of the Glands,
and the principal ends and uses for which they are intended. And as this can
only be known by a careful observation of Facts and the method of Nature either
in preserving Health, or in the Formation and Cure of Diseases, where there has
been no Interposition of Art, and no Reasonings a priori or antecedent to the
Facts themselves: so it is no wonder that the Theorists in all Ages, who
deviated from this good old way of the Ancients, and set out with other Views
and on other Principles, bewildered themselves and their Followers, and never
arrived at any one point of real and useful Knowledge, or made the least
Advance or Improvement in the Art of Healing.

THE most ancient Physicians, who were always the best Philosophers of their
time, grounded their Curative Intentions, upon the most obvious and sensible
Effects of Medicines, as they either promoted or restrained this or the other
natural Evacuation, and thereby corrected any such Error either in Excess or
Defect. And this most obvious and sensible Effect, visible to all Bystanders
or Observers, they called the Virtue, Power or Property of the Medicine; and
herein they never expected or promised any sensible Effect in the Cure of
Diseases, from insensible or unknown Causes; or, which is the same thing, they
were not let into the Mystery of our Modern Specific or Corpusculariau
Philosophy; they did not understand the Magic of Curing Diseases, by Occult
Qualities in Medicines, or of producing sensible Effects without sensible
Causes.

BUT our Modern Writers upon Physic and the Cure of Diseases, have for the
most part inverted this Order of Nature, by a most ungeometrical and
immechanical Application of Geometry and Mechanism, to the Animal Structure and
Economy: And not a few of the great Masters and Leaders of the Faculty, have
either made their own Data, assumed false Principles without Proofs, or
reasoned Illogically, by drawing false Consequences from real Facts and just
Principles. Of this I shall give some very pregnant and convincing Instances,
that I may not be thought to talk at random, or to lay in a Charge against our
Modern Medico-Philosophers without Ground or Reason: for though I love Truth, yet
I hate any thing that looks like Malice and Defamation, and had much rather be
convicted of Ignorance than Dishonesty.

1. THEN the Ancients had observed, that the small parts of some sorts of
matter, would attract and intimately unite or Incorporate with each other;
while the Particles of other sort of matter, would naturally separate and
disunite, and could not easily be Incorporated at all. Thus they observed that
the Particles of Salts would readily dissolve in, and intimately mix and
incorporate with Water, though they are Specifically heavier; and that Oils and
Sulphurs would not do so, but, on the contrary, disunite, separate and repel
each other, whatever their different Specific Gravities might be.

THEY observed likewise in the Animal Body, that the several parts to be
supplied and nourished, would attract, imbibe and retain their proper Nutritive
Matter, and repel or drive on any other sort of Matter, not fit for such a
purpose; and these different Powers or Properties, in the several sorts of
Matter which they observed to be so obvious and visible to the Senses, they
called Sympathy and Antipathy, without knowing the Causes of it, or so much as
pretending to reason from it a priori. And here therefore they could mean no
more by it, than we do by Centripetal and Centrifugal Forces, or the mutual
Attraction and Repulsion of the several parts of Matter. The most ancient
Philosophers and Physicians therefore had as clear and distinct Ideas of their
Sympathy and Antipathy, and understood what they meant by it, as well as we do
the Gravity and Vis Inertiae of Bodies in general, the Elasticity of the Air,
or the Pressure of Fluids, and the different degrees of Attraction in Bodies.
And, it is more than probable, were these Gentlemen now living, and asked to
explain themselves on this Subject, that they might tell us they would assign
the Causes of what they called Sympathy and Antipathy, as soon as we had
explained and assigned the Causes of any of the other Facts and sensible
Appearances before mentioned; and that till we could do this, we should in
reality be no wiser than they.

IT must be owned that this Doctrine was afterward very much corrupted and
abused, and applied to a thousand Cases, where it could have no place, as the
Peripatetick Philosophy grew into Vogue, and came to be more and more
celebrated in the Schools. For in this Philosophy, Words were never intended to
signify any real Facts, Appearances or Phenomenon in Nature, but only the
unknown Causes, or internal Constitutions of Things. This indeed was a short
way of talking, about every thing known or unknown, but a round-about way to
Knowledge, as it never produced any. But as this cannot affect the more ancient
Physicians and Philosophers, or those who lived after Aristotle's time who
still built their Knowledge of Nature upon Observation, Experiment and Fact, as
much as if no such Philosopher had ever been born; so it is certain that no
other real Improvement of natural Knowledge has ever been made, or ever can be
made, on any other Plan whatsoever.

WHEN the Ancients were mistaken, it was generally owing to want of clearer
Facts or Data to reason upon; but the Moderns, by wrong Reasoning upon Facts,
and drawing false Consequences from Things given, have run into more and
grosser Errors, than had ever been known before. In short, the most Ancient
Physicians were very good Modern Philosophers, in every thing relating to their
Profession, whatever they might be as to other parts of Nature; while the
Generality of the Moderns, though very good Philosophers in other Respects, are
yet, with regard to the Medical Art, in spite of all the Newtonian Principles
and Discoveries, downright Atomists or Aristotelians.

THE Ancients knew nothing of the Circulation of the Blood, from the Heart
through the Arteries and back again by the returning Veins; nor of the particular
Ducts through which part of the Chyle is conveyed from the Stomach to the
Subclavian Veins. But the Moderns having made these Discoveries, let us
consider some of the Fruits of it, and the Consequences they have drawn from it.

FROM the Circulation of the Blood, as a Fact given, it has been commonly
concluded, that the Action of the Heart, in its alternate Systole and Diastole,
is the whole Force and adequate Power, by which the Blood is moved in the
course of its Circulation. Knowing therefore that the Blood Circulates, and
presuming that the Heart is the moving Force or Power, this Power has been
exactly computed, at a great expense of Geometry and Mechanism. And herein the
Gentlemen, who have applied themselves to this, have succeeded so well and come
so near together, that they have differed only about the Force of the Heart, in
the proportion of 500000 to I; for this, upon a just Computation, will be found
to be nearly the Difference, between Dr. James Keil, and the famous Borelli in
his Book de Motu Animalium. But in the mean while, might it not be as well to
be quite ignorant of the Circulation of the Blood, as not to be able to apply
it to better Purpose? Did not the Ancients Bleed, when occasion required,
before they knew any thing at all of the Circulation of the Blood? Nay, did
they not use Phlebotomy with more Judgment and Success, by opening a Vein as
near as possible to the Part affected; while the Moderns have absurdly run into
the contrary Practice, against Fact and Experience, as well as the Reason and
Nature of Things; by falsely concluding that 'twould be indifferent from what
part of the Body Blood should be drawn, since, in consequence of the
Circulation, the Aequilibrium of the Vital Fluid would necessarily be soon
restored again. Or has the Knowledge of the Circulation, by any Use or
Application whatever that has yet been made of it, at all improved the Art of
Healing?

BUT farther, from the Discovery of the Chyliferous Ducts, which terminate
chiefly in the left Subclavian Vein, though they are often found in the Right
too, it has been concluded that the whole quantity of Chyle, and every thing
that can be conveyed from the Stomach through the Lacteals, must pass this way
into the Blood Vessels; and that this Matter must afterward be derived again
from the Blood in the Arteries, by the Glandular Secretory Ducts, before there
can be any such thing as Animal Nutrition or Evacuation. But as this is
contrary to all the Phenomenon of Animal Nature, and demonstratively false in
Fact, it could not possibly have ever entered into the Heads of Men, who had
not had the vast advantage of Modern Discoverys in Physic.

ANY Man, I think, who has made the least reflection upon this Matter, if not
too strongly prejudiced, or accustomed to another way of thinking, must be
convinced that the Natural Evacuations, in their increased or diminished
Quantities, do not at all follow the Laws and Conditions of the Sanguineous
Circulation, or the increased or diminished Velocity and Momentum of the Blood;
but that one may be increased while the other is diminished, and produce their
Effects reciprocally. In Inflammatory and Effluent Fevers, where the Velocity
and Impetus of the Blood is greatest, the natural Secretions and Evacuations
are generally greatly diminished. And, on the contrary, in the Paroxisms of
Diabetical, Hypochondriacal and Hysteric Disorders, we often find a very great
and extraordinary Profluvium of Urine, where the Circulation of the Blood is
very low and languid, or almost quite suspended; which could not possibly
happen, I think, if these Evacuations were made from the Arterial Blood, and
depended on the Velocity and Impetus of that Fluid.

IN Atrophys we frequently see People, running off all their Flesh, till they
are reduced to mere Skin and Bones, and yet the Blood Vessels remain still full
and turgid, and the Blood, upon opening a Vein, comes off with sufficient Force
and Freedom, and there are no Symptoms, or Indications at all, of any
Diminution or Defect of that Fluid.

IN a Dropsy every thing that is drank, or taken in of a fluid Nature, fills up
and distends the Ventricles of the Glands, the Lymphatick Ducts, and Membranous
Cells throughout the Body still more and more; while the quantity of Blood,
upon the whole, is not at all increased, but rather much lessened and
diminished: And Bleeding, in this Case, is so far from lessening or abating any
such Glandular, Lymphatick or Membranous Plethora, that, on the contrary, it
rather increases, strengthens and confirms it: And farther, in this Case such a
Plethora, or Redundancy of Water, may be all drawn off, and discharged by
Urine, Stools, Sweating, etc. without affecting or altering the State of the
Blood, so far as can be discovered, either as to its Quantity or Quality.

THESE Facts; and Observations, to mention no more, are I think sufficient to
demonstrate, that there is no such Intercourse and Communication between the
Glands and Membranous Cells and the Blood, as is commonly Imagined; and that a
Defect, or Redundancy, may happen in either independent of each other, and
consequently that those Lacteals, which convey a certain portion of the Chyle
from the Stomach, to be emptyed into the Blood Vessels, may receive either more
or less than their share, as well as those which are to carry off and convey
the same to the Breasts, Kidneys, Cutaneous Ducts, etc. and this independent on
each other, as the Recipients, leading to one part or the Other, may either be
too Lax and Open, or too much Constringed and Obstructed. And from hence it is,
that we find some Persons and Constitutions very much inclined and disposed to
collect and accumulate Blood, while they are still Thin and Lean in Flesh; and
others to grow Fat and Fleshy, with a Scarcity and Defect of Blood at the same
time. Which yet, as plain and evident as it is in Fact, I think, could not
possibly happen upon the Modern Hypothesis of Secretion, or if the whole
quantity of Chyle or Nutriment from the Stomach, were to be conveyed and thrown
into the Blood, before any other part could be supplied with the Same.

ANOTHER modern Discovery in Physic, as a Consequence of the former, is this,
That there is no such thing as different Fermentations, Digestions, and
Separations of Liquors in the Ventricles of the Glands, from different Degrees
of Heat and Motion; but that all the variety of the different Secretions, is
effected by a simple Colature from the Arterial Blood, through small Pipes of
different Diameters, and which will admit of Fluid Particles of one Size, but
not of another, without any Glandular Concoction whatsoever. Now if any body
had a mind to look like a Mechanician and Chemist, without being one the
Bellinian Doctrine, would soon furnish him with Words that might sound very
well; and a Man who is well versed in that Hypothesis, may possibly be thought
a considerable Philosopher, while he is talking the greatest and most egregious
Nonsense in the World. For though we see every Day, and in the whole Economy and
Process of Nature, very great Changes and Transmutations made upon Fluids by
Fermentation and Digestion, under different Degrees of Heat, Rarefaction and
Intestine Motion, yet no Man could ever observe any such Thing effected by any
sort of Colature or Straining whatsoever. And when these Gentlemen will be
pleased to give us any Instances of turning Must into Wine, Wort into Beer, or
Chyle into Milk, Urine, Bile, etc. by Straining, it will then be time enough to
consider this Matter farther; but, in the mean while, if they will not be
convinced to the contrary themselves, I hope they will give me and some others
leave to laugh at such an Hypothesis, at least, till they are better able to
support it.

THE Ancients, though they had not the use of Microscopes, the Method of
Injecting the Vessels, and several other Helps with which Providence has
favored us, yet they were very careful and diligent Observers of all the
obvious sensible Appearances, or Phenomenon of Nature, in the Animal Structure
and Economy. And from hence they formed Judgments and Conclusions more certain
and successful, concerning the Formation and Cure of Diseases, than ever the
Moderns have done from a great number of most precarious and false Hypotheses,
under the pretense of a better Application of Geometry, Mechanism and
Philosophy, to Physic and the Animal Economy. The pretended Fermentations of
Acids and Alkalys in the Blood; the various Combinations of the Chemical
Principles of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, in the Body, and the Effects from
thence arising; the motive Power of the Animal Spirits, together with their
several Suffocations and Explosions, Concentrations and Dissipations; the
Specific Transmutations of morbid Matter, and the Miraculous Power of
Medicinal Corpuscles upon the Blood; the mysterious Effects of Straining, or
the Preparation of all the different Liquors of the Glands, by a Simple
Colature from the Blood in the Arteries, These are some of the most prevailing
Hypotheses which the Moderns have assumed and argued upon, as Facts, without
the least Ground or Reason from any of the reast Appearances or Phenomenon of
Nature: And, to which I shall here only add one more, as the Crown and Glory of
all the rest, namely, that the Blood, in its Circulation, moves it self by
means of the Animal Spirits, which are, at the same time, moved by the Blood.
For, in this Hypothesis, the Blood cannot move till the Heart contracts, by the
Influx of the Animal Spirits from the Nerves; and, on the other hand, the
Animal Spirits cannot flow through the Nerves into the Heart, till they have been
separated in the Brain, by the prior Motion or Circulation of the Blood. So
that herein it is evident, that they are both supposed as the Antecedent Causes
and Consequent Effects of each other; and the Blood, in this way of accounting
for its Circulation, can have no Motion but what it communicates to, and
returns upon it Self; and this against a constant Resistance, without any prior
independent Moving Force at all. Which is just as good Sense as if any one
should assign the Weight, Spring, or Moving Force, applied to the Wheels, or
Pullies, as the Cause of the Motion of a Clock, Watch, Crane, or other Machine,
and at the same time suppose the Motion of the Engine, to be the Cause of the
Weight, Spring, or Moving Force. But this, notwithstanding all the expense of
Geometry and Mechanism that has been laid out upon it, by its great Patrons and
Defenders, and its being so generally received on their Authority, as a first
Principle in Physic, is an evident Impossibility.

THE first and best Philosophers and Physicians, who applied themselves to the
Study of the Animal Economy, by observing the great Alteration made upon our
common Food, by Fermentation and Digestion in the Stomach, whereby a Liquor was
prepared to be afterward farther conveyed to the several Parts of the Body,
while the Excrementitious Indigestible Parts of the Aliment were separated,
forced forward, and thrown out of the Body, carried this Reasoning, by Analogy
of Nature, to the other Glands and Ventricles of the Body, where they supposed
a farther Concoction might, in like manner, be made and different Liquors
prepared and separated, under different Degrees of Digestive Heat and Motion,
so as to answer the several Ends and Purposes of the Animal Constitution. And
herein they argued right, and grounded their Principles upon the true Method
and Economy of Nature in all other like Cases. But how far the Moderns have
mended this Theory, or any other practical Principle of the Ancients, by any of
the foregoing Hypotheses, or by their clearer Knowledge of Anatomy, I may leave
any one to judge.

BUT, besides the Virtues, Properties or sensible Effects of Medicines, as they
visibly promoted or restrained this or the other natural Evacuation, the first
and most successful Students of this part of Nature, had another Class of
Powers and Properties in things given, as they visibly and sensibly affected
the Animal Constitution, with regard to the Primary or Elementary Qualities, as
they chose to call them, of Heat Cold, Moisture and Dryness. Or which is the
same thing, as Things given, whether a Medicine or Diet, were found to Heat or
Cool, Moisten or Dry the Solids in general. And upon this they founded their
Notion of the four Principal Primary or Elementary Constitutions of Hot and
Dry, Hot and Moist, Cold and Dry, and Cold and Moist. Where these primary
Elementary Qualities were found to be so equally mixed and contemperated, as
that any one of them did not abound or prevail against the rest, this was
called the Natural Temperature or State of Health; For while these Elementary
Qualities were duly tempered and equally blended together, the Body remained
Sound and Well, and performed all its Functions regularly and in good Order;
and no Disease or Distemperature could ever be observed, but upon the
Prevalency of some one, or more, of these Qualities above the others: And from
hence in every Disease the prevailing Humors were distinguished into Blood,
Phlegm, Choler or Bile, and Melancholy or Black Bile: and the general
Constitutions were from thence denominated, either Sanguine, Phlegmatic,
Cholorick, or Melancholy, as this or that Humor prevailed or had the
Ascendency in particular Persons.

Now this, I think, is plain Sense and talking very Intelligibly; and the
Moderns, who have found out other Hypotheses, better Methods of Reasoning in
Physic, and nearer Ways to Health, as the Event has plainly proved, cannot
pretend to be Ignorant of what the Ancients meant by Blood, Phlegm, Choler or
Bile, though they have been mightily puzzled to know what was understood and
intended by their Melancholic Humor or Black Bile. And yet he who does not
understand this, must either never have practiced Physic, or else never have
made any Observations and Reflections on what he has seen and met with in
Practice. For, in my Opinion, it is extremely clear that the ancient Physicians
neither did, nor could, understand any thing else, by their Melancholia or
Bilis Atra, but the Bile corrupted, vitiated, and degenerated from its natural
State and Use; in which case it always turns Black, and becomes a peccant
distempered Humor. It is true, indeed, that all the Humors by Stagnation,
Corruption and Fermentation, may change their Original Colors and Qualities,
as well as the Bile, which was as well known to the Ancients as to the Moderns,
and taken notice of by them accordingly; but yet this Corrupt Bile, when it
prevails, is so very extensive in its Consequences, and productive of so many
and great Diseases, even where no Jaundice ensues, that it was justly taken
notice of and distinguished, by them, as one of the Principal General Morbid
Constitutions: And especially, as this Distemperature of the Bile naturally,
and almost constantly, attends a Cold and Dry State and Habit of Body, or a
prevalency of Cold and Dryness, above Heat and Moisture, in the General
Constitution.

I am aware some trifling Objections may be made to what I have advanced here;
but as they would all terminate in this, that the Ancients could not always
express themselves accurately enough to be understood by the Moderns; so in
answer to them, without mentioning the particular Objections, it may be only
said in general, that the Moderns, in this Case, have been equally culpable, in
that they have not been always able to express themselves, with sufficient
Clearness, to be understood by one another. But for any one gross Absurdity, or
Falsehood in Fact, which any Man shall produce from the Ancients, about the
Cause, Formation and Cure of Diseases; I will undertake, in defense of the
Moderns upon this Article, to give him five.

THE Ancients had, indeed, a particular Notion that the Blood is made in the
Liver, to which Viscus they ascribed the Act of Sanguification. This Opinion
has been perhaps justly rejected by the Moderns, though they have not been able
yet to settle any thing in the room of it; and therefore have had no ground for
the Laugh. The Ancients, it seems, fell into this Mistake for want of a clearer
Knowledge of Anatomy. Well, be it so; but how have the Moderns rectified this
Error, by their farther Discoveries, and better Acquaintance with the Animal
Structure and Economy; or to what particular Organ do they ascribe this Act of
Sanguification? Perhaps it may be answered, with some Triumph here, that the
Case is now very plain, and that since the Discovery of the Elasticity of the
Air, it is evident enough that the Lungs are the only proper Sanguifying Organs;
where, by the Intromission of a fine Elastick Aura, these Globules are formed
and blown up. But this is a very strange Account of the Matter, indeed, since
it is certain, in Fact, that these Globules are specifically heavier, instead of
being lighter than the Serum. And consequently, that they cannot be Vesicles or
Bubbles filled and blown up with Air. And had one therefore a mind to maintain
the Argument, for the sake of the Jest, it would be no great difficulty, in my
Opinion, to defend the Liver against the Lungs, in spite of all such Reasonings
as this.

BUT he who would follow the Guidance of Nature, and build his Opinion herein
on plain Facts and Observations, may perhaps see Reason to conclude, that the
Act of Sanguification is not appropriated to any particular Viscus or Bowel,
that the Lungs contribute only their share in the Operation, and that the Blood
receives its peculiar Type and Form in the Arteries, where it undergoes the
highest Degrees of Heat, Impetus and Motion.

FOR we may observe, in Old People, where the natural Heat, and Elastick Tone
of the Solids are much impaired, that the Blood grows paler, fainter, and runs
more into Water, and that the Globular Part or Cremor sensibly lessens in
proportion to the Serum. And this likewise is remarkably the Case in a
Chlorosis, or, indeed, any Obstruction of the Menstrual Secretion attended with
Chilliness, Lowness, Pallor and Languor: In which Cases we often see the
Globules almost lost, and the Blood is little else but Serum. But, by restoring
the natural Heat, and strengthening the Elastick Tone of the Arteries, these
Globules soon rise again, and the Crassamentum or Cremor is reduced to its
natural and due State, whether this be done by any Internal Means or External
only.

THUS it may likewise be observed, that People of Hot, Biliose, and Sanguine
Constitutions, whose Fibers are more firm and tense, and where consequently the
muscular Force and Action of the Solids is stronger and more vigorous, than in
other Temperaments, have proportionally more Cremor in the Blood than others;
and, in some high Inflammatory Fevers, where the Elastick Force of the Solids
is still greater and more exalted, the Blood becomes almost all Cremor, and
affords but very little Serum after it has stood many Hours in a cold Place.
Now, from these Observations, to mention no more at present, it may perhaps be
justly concluded, that the Blood receives this Form from the Heat and
Elaboration it undergoes in the Arteries.

BUT to resume and consider a little farther the natural Constitutions, as
depending on the Primary or Elementary Qualities above mentioned, it may be
proper to take notice, that the true alterative Method of the Ancients,
consisted in regulating and moderating these natural Constitutions and primary
Qualities. And this they did not pretend to do by Specific Alteratives, in the
Modern Quack Sense, or by any Occult Qualities, or Magical Effect, of Medicines
on the Blood, where People were not to know what they took, or after what
manner they were to expect Relief, but by a skilful Direction and Regimen in
the Use of those Things, which have, I know not for what Reason, been commonly
called the Non-Naturals, such as Diet, Air, Exercise, etc. But I should rather
choose to call these the Universals or Constitutionals, because the Original
Natural Constitutions and Primary Qualities do almost entirely, absolutely and
universally depend upon them, so far as Moderating and Tempering them can fall
under the Consideration of a Physician.

A Flesh and Ale Diet increases the Crassament of the Blood, and accumulates
Fat more than any thing else; it oilifies and enriches the Blood, and promotes
the Heat and Humidity of the Constitution, which is the Characteristick of that
Temperament which by the Ancients was called Sanguine. But when this
Constitution becomes Intemperate and Morbid, it is the Foundation of all those
Diseases which are owing to an overgrowth of Fat, and a too thick and rich
Blood.

A Milk and Vegetable Diet, joined with Water-Drinking, increases the Serum of
the Blood more than the Crassament. It cools, refrigerates and moistens the
Habit or Constitution, moderately contracts the Solids, and promotes the Alvine
and Urinary Discharges. But it has not the same Effect on the Cutaneous
Evacuations by Sweat and Perspiration, which it rather lessens and restrains.
And yet, by joining this Regimen in Diet to a moderate use of warm Liquors, or
such as contain a Vinous Spirit, any immoderate Check or Restraint of
Perspiration may easily be prevented: As, on the other hand, Vegetables and
Water-drinking are, in a good measure, Preventatives of the ill Consequences,
which might otherwise follow, from the too free Use of a Flesh and Ale Diet.

THE Choice of Air is undoubtedly of the utmost Consequence to moderate and
reduce a Constitution, when it grows into any Intemperature; and here the
Constitution of the Air, with regard to the Primary Qualities above mentioned,
compared with the Constitution of the Patient, will afford any Man a sure and
unerring Rule in the choice of Air. For it is certain that any Error of
Constitution ought to be rectifyed and reduced by the contrary Temper and
Quality of the Air, and no body would choose a Hot Air for a too Hot
Constitution, or a Cold Air for a Cold One, and so of the Rest.

IN a Phthisis, or natural Weakness of the Lungs, the softest and warmest Air
is to be chosen, provided it be not too Thick, Moist and Boggy. But in an
Asthma, Jaundice, Weakness and Relaxation of the Nerves, and almost in all thin
declining Habits where the Lungs are sound, a thin, cool, dry and Elastick Air,
is always best and most eligible. But Gross, Fat and Corpulent People can never
be much mended by any Air, without a cooling attenuating Vegetable Diet and
proper Exercise.

OF all Exercises for Health, as well as Pleasure, nothing can stand in
Competition with Riding and Swimming; which wonderfully brace the Nerves and
Solids in general, restore their Elastick Tone, open Obstructions, and promote
the several natural Secretions and Evacuations, beyond any other Gymnastick
Regimen whatsoever.

MODERATE Sleep is the great Solamen and Restorative of Nature, by which the
Organs are warmed, moistened and lubricated, and the several Springs of Motion
wound up, and prepared for farther Action in the waking Hours. But in this Case
excessive Indulgence of Sleep, or Overwatching and Want of Sleep, are equally
injurious to, and produce different and contrary Effects upon, the
Constitution. For Excessive Sleeping checks and restrains all the natural
Secretions and Evacuations, weakens and relaxes the whole Animal Frame,
destroys the Tone of the Muscles, and induces such a weak, cold, humid and
flabby State of the Nerves, as threatens a Palsy, and frequently terminates in
one; which I have more than once known to be the Consequence of it.

ON the other hand, Overwatching and the Want of natural Sleep, wears and
wastes the whole Animal Constitution, heats the Blood, drys and contracts the
Nerves, and, in fine, either kills with a Fever attended with a Phrensy, or
induces a Mania, Lunacy, or Distraction of some sort or other, as is but too
commonly seen and experienced.

THE Passions have so great a share in the Constitutions and Diseases of the
Body, that, in my Opinion, this ought to be reckoned one of the principal
Provinces of Physic; and indeed, with a Saving to the Divines, I think
Physicians are the fittest Persons to apply a proper Relief, under those great
Emotions and Perturbations of Mind; which either arise from the Body at first,
or are soon materializ'd by a communication with it. For these Passions are all
either pleasing or painful Images, and have just the same Effect upon the
Constitution, whether they arise from things without us, or have their Original
from the Mind within.

IT IS evident that the pleasurable and painful Passions, have very different
and even quite contrary Effects upon the Blood, Humors, and respective Organs
of the Body, of which a Mechanical Account and Explanation, may be seen in the
Ingenious Dr. Morgan's Philosophical Principles of Medicine; a Book that can
never be too much studied by the young Physician, who intends to make a Figure
in his Profession, and would build his Practice on plain Facts and indisputable
Principles. To that Treatise, therefore, I shall refer the curious Reader;
where, I can assure him, he will find this Subject: touched with uncommon
Delicacy, and see the Origin, and different Modifications, of the Passions
beautifully described, and their Effects on the Animal Organism, in a strong
and masterly manner, Anatomically delineated and Mechanically accounted for:
Which makes it the less necessary for me to enter farther into the Theory of
the Matter here.

IT IS evident in Fact that Hope and Joy warm the Blood, diffuse the natural
Heat, raise the Pulse, and take off any Irritation or painful Stimulus upon the
Organs; and that Fear and Grief produce the quite contrary Effects to all
these. But it is observable, that Grief is the most sinking, wasting,
disanimating Passion of all; for Fear very often inspires the Person Affected,
with a Resolution and Courage proportional to the apparent or apprehended
Danger, and thereby arms him, with suitable Strength and Firmness, to encounter
with the Difficulties before him.

Hope and Joy affect the Blood and Humors much after the same manner with
Vinous Spirits, Opiates, and other such Exhilerating Volatiles; but Grief and
Fear when they are strong and overbearing, with Acids and Salts upon the
Stomach; i. e. they affect the Organs with Pain, lower the Pulse, repel the
natural Heat, and disarm a Man of Spirit, Strength and Resolution, or, perhaps,
keep him constantly awake and attentive to the painful disagreeable Scene, till
he has quite lost his Senses. From this short Account of the Mechanical and
most obvious Effects of the Passions, the Methods of relieving them when they
grow Exorbitant, may be easily drawn; and there is no need that I should
farther insist on it here. I had some thought indeed of being larger on the
consideration of these Constitutionals, which we so improperly call
Non-Naturals; but the Bounds to which I must confine my Self, in this Essay,
will not permit of a longer Detail at present; and I must, therefore, refer a
more particular and distinct Account of these Matters, to some fitter
Opportunity.

SECT. II. Of the Materia Medica in general.
NOTWITHSTANDING the vastness of this Subject, I have no design to write a
Volume upon it, nor do I think it necessary. But considering the Bulk to which
the Materia Medica is grown, it is certainly, I think, high time to come to some
proper Limitations and Restrictions concerning it, before it is quite run out
into Infinity. For, to such an excessive Degree is this Matter grown already,
that a Man had almost as good read over all the Acts of Parliament and Laws of
England, as the Books of Physic, and the infinite Jumble and Confusion of
Remedys of one sort or another. I am sensible, indeed, that the best and ablest
Physicians among us, have very much reduced the Materia Medica, and brought it
into a narrow Compass with respect to their own Practice; but this is no
advantage to those who have not bought their Experience at so dear a rate, or
who have not had opportunitys of making trials themselves, but must still go
on, in their Practice, upon the Judgments of such as have pretended to vast
Experience before them, and who have, hereupon, cried up a prodigious number of
Simple and Compound Remedies as infallible, and filled large Volumes with them,
when, perhaps, few or none of them, upon trial, will be found to answer their
Character. So that, amidst this huge Lumber, a young Practitioner must still be
continually sifting out a Medicine, for his purpose, in most Cases, like a
Pearl in the common Rubbish, or a Needle in a Heap of Sand.

THIS Uncertainty and Confusion in Physic, have not arisen from any of the
obvious Sensible Properties or Effects of Medicines, as they affect the Natural
Evacuations or the Primary Constitutional Qualities; for here the Practice
stands upon a pretty good certainty: but only from the vain and fruitless
search after Specificks, in the modern absurd Sense, or rather Nonsense, of the
Word. This, as the Matter appears to me, has been the true Cause of all such
Darkness and Obscurity, as we find the Materia Medica under to this very Day. I
shall therefore, under this Section, lay down some Principles, well established
in Fact, which may serve as so many certain Rules of Judgment, whereby the
young Physician may govern himself in the choice Medicines, so as to render his
Practice less precarious and uncertain, than it otherwise might be, upon his
first setting out in the World. And herein, I shall proceed in this plain and
natural Method, by considering how far the several Parts of the Materia Medica,
as it now stands, are Digestible or Indigestible; in what Cases and under what
Circumstances, they are capable of passing the Lacteals and mixing with the
Blood; and what Effects may be expected from them, when they get there, which
will take in all I intend to say on this Subject.

1. THEN it is certain, that nothing can pass the Lacteals, but what has been
previously liquified, and reduced to an Effluvium, or an exceeding fine, thin
and rarefyed Vapor. Not only the Fibrous Solid Parts of our common Food, but
likewise the more fixed Oils and Salts, with which it abounds, are incapable of
being dissolved, liquifyed and volatiliz'd, by the Digestive Heat and Action of
the Stomach, and the Attractive Power of the Lacteals; and therefore the
Residue of the Aliment, which cannot be resolved, attenuated and fluxilized, by
such a degree of Heat and Motion during the time of Concoction, are by Nature
precipitated, thrust forward and ejected out of the Body, through the common
Alvine Excretory Ducts and Passages. Now, if so considerable a Part of our
common Aliment, which has no stronger or closer Texture than that of the
Vegetable and Animal Solids, cannot be so far dissolved and attenuated in the
Stomach, as to be strained off through the Lacteals; what shall we say to those
vastly more solid and compact Substances which are often given as Specific
Alteratives? or by what Chemistry, or Mechanism, can our Specificians pretend
to convey such Substances as these into the Blood, without first rendering
them, by some previous Operation, Soluble and Fluxilizable in Water?

Sulphur, Aethiops, Cinnabar, Antimony, Mineral Bezoar, and universally all
Mineral Glebes and Metalline Calces, communicate nothing to Boiling Water, but
their Parts remain fixed, inseparable and unalterable, against all the Power of
such a degree of Heat and Motion; which is yet vastly greater than can be
produced, by the natural digestive Heat and Action of the Stomach, during the
time of Concoction. Nay, if the Parts of any such solid cohering Substances be
first of all broken and divided, as far as possible, by any Grinding or
Trituration whatever, yet still, when they are afterward committed to boiling
Water, such a degree of Heat and Motion makes no Alteration, and cannot break
or divide them farther: but, after all, their smallest Parts, when examined by
a Microscope, will appear to be many thousand times larger than any of the
Orifices of the Lacteals, of which any Person may easily be convinced upon
trial. And consequently, he who expects to pass such Particles through the
Lacteals into the Blood, even after their utmost Trituration, and consequent
Maceration, in any Liquor which the Stomach can bear, will find himself
deceived, and may as well attempt to thread a Needle with a Cable, or, to speak
according to our English Translation, It is as impossible as for a Camel to go
through the Eye of a Needle.

2. SUCH Metalline Substances, as above mentioned, may indeed be converted into
the form of a Salt, by the Power of strong Acids, such as Oil of Vitriol,
Spirit of Nitre, etc. as is well known to the Chemists; and in this Case they
become Soluble in Water, and may be volatiliz'd in it, to any assignable degree
of Tenuity. But then they are converted into Poisons, and cannot be thought fit
Alteratives, unless the intended Alteration be Death.

I know that some of these Metalline Acid Salts, may be given in some Cases, as
Emeticks and Catharticks: bu tthen, as they are not intended to pass into the
Blood, but to be presently thrown out of the Body together with such other
morbid Matter as they derive from the remote Parts; so, in no case whatever,
should they be exhibited as Alteratives in a long continued Course of Medicine,
nor indeed used for any other purpose, but with the greatest Caution, and upon
the utmost Necessity. They are edged Tools, and never to be meddled with
without some Danger.

IT is true indeed, that some Physicians have recommended even the alterative
Power of Poisons, when the first Passages are guarded against them, and they
are safely conveyed into the Blood and remote Recesses of the Body; but, upon
what Principles this Practice is founded, I own, is beyond my Comprehension.
Would any but a Madman, trust an Enemy in his House, or Closet, that he knows
would murder him in the open Street? or is it conceivable that, the much
thinner, finer and tenderer Coats and Membranes of the remote Glands and
smallest Vessels, under such Recluses, should be able to bear the Power of so
vast a Stimulus, better than the Stomach it self where there is so free and
open a Discharge?

It is well known that Poisoning has been made an Art of, and reckoned a
principal Part of Magic; and it has been reported of the Indians and some
Italians, that they can give Poisons to operate in a certain assignable time,
either longer or shorter, without producing any present ill Consequences when
first exhibited. This method of Poisoning indeed, might, perhaps, receive vast
Improvement from such a Notion of Alteratives; but, as this does not belong to
Physic, I shall leave the consideration of it to others. And, since no Method
has yet been discovered, of governing and directing the Venenous Particles,
when got into the Habit, to the morbid Matter only, or of preventing their
baneful Impression, and deleterious Effects, on every part of the Animal Frame
and Constitution; I shall not only absolutely reject the internal Use of any
such sort of Medicines, but draw one practical Conclusion from the whole which
I take to be of great Importance; sc. That any Medicine, endued with a strong
Emetick or Cathartick Stimulus, should never be suffered to lie long in the
Body, or to pass the Lacteals where it is capable of it, but ought to be thrown
off, as soon as possible, by the nearest Outlets and properest Excretorys;
together with such other Matter as it has derived and prepared for Evacuation.

BUT, besides those things that are absolutely Indissoluble, and cannot be
conveyed into the Blood at all, and such as, by reason of their violent
Stimulus and Corrosive Qualities, ought not to be trusted there, there is
another sort of Medicines which might justly be expelled the Province of
Physic, under this notion of Specific Alteratives, though they are not
absolutely Indigestible, nor endued with any hurtful Stimulus: What I here aim
at, is the Testacea, Resins, Boles, and Earths, which will not impart a
Tincture so as to be liquifyed and volatiliz'd with Water, or any other common
potable Liquor.

ANY of these, when retained in the Body, must necessarily clog and obstruct
the primary concoctive Organs, and do more Mischief, in a little time, than all
the Advantages that can be expected from them. For, as they cannot be
sufficiently resolved, liquifyed and sublimated, by the natural digestive Heat
of the Stomach, so as to pass the Lacteals, they must needs foul and obstruct
the first Passages, impair the Appetite, suppress the natural Heat, weaken the
Force of the Muscles and Elastick Fibers in general, and, by continuance,
induce an Atrophy of the worst sort, which arises from an Obstruction of the
Lacteals, and a consequent depravation of Digestion and loss of Appetite.

BUT while I am exploding, and setting aside these things as Alteratives, or
with regard to any good Effects they can have upon the remote Glands and
Membranous Vesicles, I would not be thought to maintain, or suppose, that they
may not, at least some of them, be of use, in particular Cases, by their
present Effects on the first Passages; provided they are extruded and thrown
out of the Body, by Emeticks or Catharticks, as soon as they have answered
their proper Intention. But this will be farther explained in some of the
following Sections.

ANOTHER principal thing, to be regarded in the Practice of Physic, is the
Doses of Medicines, and the Manner of Exhibiting them. For it is certain, that
where a Medicine is never so good and efficacious, and capable of answering the
Intention of the Physician of it self; yet still this Effect may be eluded, and
Nature deprived of the expected and intended Relief, by a wrong method of
Exhibition, or by an Error committed, either in the Quantitys or Forms of such
Simple or Simples, on which the whole Intention of Cure depends.

AND nothing, in my Opinion, has proved more prejudicial in the Practice of
Physic, than the Stated Canonical Doses of Medicines, whether Simple or
Compound. When once a Man imagines himself to be pinned down, in the giving of
Medicines, to any stated Authorized Doses, he must not go beyond it, though he
should miss of his Intention and lose his Patient. And from hence one may
venture to say, that more hurt has been done by trifling with Efficacious
Medicines, and thereby losing Time, than by mistaking the Case, and directing
things contrary to the Intention of Cure.

BUT this Error is oftnest committed in the Case of Compounds, which are
commonly looked upon and regarded as so many Canons in Physic; and
consequently entitled to an absolute and implicit Obedience and Conformity.
But, as this is certainly the prudential Orthodox Method of Trifling, and of
doing a great deal of Mischief by doing no Good, so I dare be bold to say, that
he who shall govern himself by these Rules, without using his own Judgment in
varying the Doses and Forms, as occasion requires, will not only oftentimes
lose his Patient, but his Reputation into the Bargain.

It is certain that the Art of Composition in Medicine, upon which all our
common Dispensatorys are founded, arose with the Specific or Corpuscularian
Philosophy, and with that it must sink again; for, while the Practice stood
upon this Chimaerical Foundation, the Physician, for want of being acquainted
with the Obvious Sensible Qualities and Effects of Medicines, and the Method
that unassisted Nature took to relieve her self, under any particular Disorder,
could have no other Intention in his Medical Processes, than to cure by Magic
or Occult Qualities; and consequently must conclude that his chance of Success,
always rose in proportion to the number of Ingredients in the Compound Remedy.
But an Extemporaneous Practice is, certainly, the only true and rational Method
of practicing Physic; as this may, by the Physician who knows what he is
about, be always accommodated to the great Variety and Complication of Symptoms
in particular Cases: and nothing surely can be more Absurd and Irrational, than
Extemporaneous General Prescriptions, or Stated Canonical Compound Remedys.

WHOEVER considers the most common prevailing Compounds; will find them to be a
general confused Jumble of Simples of very different Virtues and Properties;
and, consequently, not containing, upon the whole, the real Power or Efficacy
of any one Ingredient in the whole Composition. And if any such General
Artificial Composition should happen to answer the Intention, in some
particular Cases, it is more by chance than any thing else. And, in these
Canonical Compounds, it may be pretty generally observed, that the Simple that
gives it the Name, or from which the Denomination is taken, has the least share
in the Composition, and might do much better alone, or with any easy
extemporaneous Management.

BUT besides this Art of Composition, or confounding all Virtues and Properties
together, there is another artificial Method of spoiling, or rendering Useless
and Insignificant, the best and most Efficacious Simples, by pretending to
preserve and secure their original native Effects and Virtues, in their
Distilled Waters, Syrups, Confections and Conserves.

Simple and Compound Waters drawn from Vegetables, are, for the most part,
simply ineffectual as to any Intention for which they are given; and he, who
makes use of them for any other purpose than as Vehicles, for Medicines of
greater Efficacy, will always find himself disappointed; and, even for this
purpose, the Simple or low Distilled Waters, not having Strength enough
generally to keep from Mothering and Spoiling upon hand, are not half so good
as Common Water or fresh Small Beer. But the Compound Waters, which are raised
to a proof Spirit, may, some of them at least, do very well and be thought
pleasant enough as a Dram, though, I think, most of 'em are fitter to be sold at
Inns and Coffee-houses than the Apothecarys Shops.

THE Medicated Syrups are, if possible, still more Insignificant; for,
excepting a few of them which are intended as Purgatives, there is not one of
them capable of answering any other Intention in Physic: and since they are
chiefly used in Juleps, as Specific Sweetners by the Physician, and as Sugar
it self would do much better and render the Medicine more agreeable and less
nauseous, I think they may be very well left, to the Apothecary, for the
purpose of particular Forms and to make up dry Substances into Boles, Pills and
Electuaries.

Confections and Conserves may likewise answer some such use as to give an
agreeable Relish, or to bring Electuaries to a due Consistence; but otherwise,
their Medicinal Virtues may very well be spared.

BUT, by Decoctions, Infusions and Tinctures, the Native Essential Oils and
Salts of Simples may be extracted, so far as the natural Heat of the Stomach is
capable of doing it. And, since all the proper Medicinal Virtues and Powers of
the Simples themselves consists and resides in these Salts and Oils, by such a
Preparation and Management, they may certainly be given to vastly greater
Advantage than in their common Gross Substances. For by this all the Efficacy
of the Simples may be obtained fresh and pure, and to any given degree as the
Case requires, so as to come up fully to the Intention. And hereby also the
Stomach may be saved the Difficulty and Inconvenience of Solution, Digestion
and Separation of the Parts; which is done beforehand in this way of
Preparation, to the great assistance of Nature. For it cannot certainly be a
rational Method, or good Contrivance, to commit Gross, Solid and
Strongly-Cohering Substances, to a sick, weak and distempered Stomach, which
cannot perhaps retain and digest any ordinary solid Food.

AND, from the same Mechanism and Chemistry of Nature, it must likewise follow,
that all nauseous, sickening and loathsome Medicines, ought as much as possible
to be avoided; that is, they ought absolutely to be avoided and never given or
urged at all. For it is a hard Case, indeed, when a weak languid Patient must be
forced, with Things which he could never have taken, in his best Health,
without loathing Reluctance and sensible Disorder.

THE Notion of Specificks, and the vain pretense of curing Diseases by the
Occult Operation of Medicines upon the Blood, has been the true ground of all
such Violence offered to Nature. For, if the Disease is to be cured by Things
which are to affect the Blood, after a secret and inexplicable Manner, the
Patient must believe and suffer for the sake of Health, against all sensible
Appearances to the contrary: for, no doubt, the Specific Remedys will do their
Work, and faithfully execute their Commission, when they get into the Blood and
arrive at the Seat of the Disorder, whatever Mischief or Injury they may
occasion, to the Constitution, before they get there.

I have made these Observations, which appear to me plainly necessary, with
regard to the general Use and Application of the Materia Medica, for the sake
of such Gentlemen, only, as shall think it worth their while to form their
Conduct upon the Reason and Nature of Things, and build their Practice on Facts
and Experiments. And, if such Regulations should happen to throw out a great
part of its many Particulars, I hope, however, it may serve to improve the Art
of Healing, which is all I aim at.

SECT. III. Of Stimulating and Quieting Medicines.
THE Doctrine of Stimulation and Pacification, or the Effects of Pain and
Pleasure, is of so vast an extent in Physic, and so essentail to all Animal
Mechanism; that I thought it a matter of the utmost Importance, to consider
this part of the Materia Medica, in a distinct Section by it self.

Pain, or Uneasiness, is the universal Stimulus, or Principle of Motion in all
Animal Mechanism. When it arises from the Body it has a material Cause, and
though when it arises from the Mind, and has no other Cause, but the various
Modifications of Good and Evil as they appear to the Judgment or Understanding;
yet still it may be observed, that this mere Mental Pain, when impressed on the
Animal Organism, will have just the same Effect on it, as if it had originally
arisen from some material Stimulus. And, in this Case, altering the Judgment
and thereby exciting Pleasure, affects the Animal Constitution, much after the
same manner, as a Vinous Spirit, Volatile Salt, Opium, or any other material
Pacifyer. And this Consideration is of such consequence, that, without it,
there can be no such Thing as either the Knowledge, or Application of Animal
Mechanism to the purpose of my present Subject. But having observed this once
for all, I shall confine my self, in what remains, to the Consideration of
Material Stimulation and Pacification; where the Pain, or Pleasure,
Stimulation, or Pacification, arise from without and may be ascribed to some
material Cause.

It Is well know that the active Principles of Bodies are their Salts and Oils;
and that these variously affect the Animal Solids and Fluids, as they are
Pungent and Vellicating, or Softening and Lubricating, Fixed or Volatile,
Heating and Rarefying, or Cooling and Condensing. Nor are there any Operations
of stimulating and quieting Medicines, but what may be understood and
explained, by these their obvious sensible Properties or Mechanical Effects.

IT may be observed farther, that an Organ may be stimulated, vellicated, or
put to pain, either by an immoderate Distention or Compression: For, in either
of these Cases, the original Structure and Conformation of the Organ or Vessel
must be altered and broken, the natural Indication or Notification of which, in
the Animal Constitution, is Pain. A Stimulus, therefore, may be either Hot or
Cold; i. e. the stimulating Substance may either be a strong, rigid,
condensative Salt, or a heating, rarifying or pungent Oil.

IN a cold condensative Stimulus, the Afflux and Weight of the Fluids, toward
the Organs or Vessels stimulated, and the Evacuations depending thereon, will
be increased. And when any such Stimulus is too strong and powerful, the Afflux
of the Fluids to the stimulated Parts, will overbear the contractile
Restitutive Force of the Solids, in which Case the Parts must Swell, Mortify
and Gangrene, or the Stimulus will act as a Poison, and the Person thus
affected dies, under all the Pain and Torture of such an Erosion, in the full
force and vigor of his Senses, without any Stupor or Lethargick Symptoms.

BUT in a hot rarefactive Stimulus, the Symptoms will be very different, which
I shall here briefly consider and explain. For, though the swelling of the
stimulated Part will always be, caeteris paribus, in proportion to the quantity
of the Fluid flowing to the Part, yet in this Case of a hot rarefactive
Stimulus, the Organ or Vessel will be considerably more inflated and distended,
by the Action of the heated rarefied Air included in the Fluid, and the
circumjacent Vessels necessarily Compressed and Constringed to a greater
degree, and consequently the influx of their Fluids will be interrupted or
lessened in proportion. Now the Effects of this Inflation or Distention, will
be most remarkable and sensible, when it happens in the Stomach, which is the
principal and original Seat of the Action of Medicines. And here the heating
rarefying Oil, acting upon this Organ, and inflating or distending it more or
less, may in its Effects prove either Sedative, Pacifying and Composing;
Sickening, Surfeiting and Stimulating; or Stupifying, Lethargick and Mortal;
according to the different degree of such Inflation, and the different power of
the Cause or Counterforce which it acts against.

LET us suppose then the Pulse lowered, the natural Heat repelled, the
Perspiration checked, the Tide of the vital Fluid sunk and depressed, and
consequently the Membranes of the Stomach, Intestines and Viscera, tumifyed and
relaxed from a Redundancy and Surcharge of Fluids, occasioned and brought on by
Fasting. Watching, hard Labor, immoderate Purging and Vomiting, and the like
Cause. And it is well know that, in such Cases, a moderate quantity of Wine, or
any generous heating and rarifying Liquor abounding with a Vinous Spirit or
Volatile Oil, will give a very great and sudden Relief, by diffusing the
natural Heat, raising the Pulse, and restoring the Perspiration. If this warm
Effluvium, and consequent Inflation of the Stomach, be carried somewhat
farther, all the foregoing Effects of it will be increased; the Pulse will rise
higher, the external Heat will be greater, and the augmented Perspiration will
break out into Sweats; which Sweats in such a Case are vastly beneficial, as
they deterge and purge the cutaneous Glands and excretory Ducts, which were
before obstructed by the Induration and Concretion of their contained Matter.

BUT, if this Distention of the Stomach shall be still increased, so as more
strongly to compress the descending Aorta and Viscera contained in the Abdomen,
and to throw a greater quantity of Blood upwards through the more patent Canals;
this Increase, by compressing the Nerves in their Origin, will fix them, and
induce Sleep, which will be more or less sound, and of longer or shorter
continuance, according to the different Power and Efficacy of the Cause. But
when this Cause is raised to its highest Degree, and acts with an overbearing
Strength and Violence, it produces a Lethargy, Apoplexy and mortal Stupor,
under which, the Person thus affected dies Senseless and Convulsed, especially
in the lower Parts which derive their Blood from the descending Trunk of the
Aorta; while the superior Muscles, which are overcharged with Blood, remain
fixed and in a manner motionless. But the direct contrary to all this happens,
when a Person dies under the Power of any stimulating, acid or saline Poison.
And from hence it may appear, that Alkaline and Acid Poisons are a sort of
Antidotes, or Counter-Poysons to each other: for as Vinous Spirits and Volatile
Oils and Salts, especially Opium, mitigate the Violence of corrosive Salts and
Acids, so do these restrain and moderate the other. And from hence it is
evident, that Life or Death, Killing or Curing depend on the different Use of
the same things; and what is a necessary Antidote in one Case or method of
Exhibition, will under different Circumstances act as a deadly Poison.

Emeticks and Catharticks differ only in the degree of their Vellication or
Stimulus. If their stimulating Power be such, as to act immediately on the
Stomach, before they can pass farther, they prove Emetick and are thrown off by
Vomiting. But, where the rigid stimulating Salts or Acids, are intimately
united with a soft lubricating Oil, in the essential Texture and Constitution
of the Medicine it self, this qualifying Oil is not presently separated from
the more ponderous fixed Oil and pungent Salts; and consequently, the
Stimulation of the Medicine may not be sensible in the Stomach, nor its Action
perceived till it comes into the Intestines where it operates as a Purge.

As Emeticks and Catharticks differ from each other, in the degree of their
Stimulus, so they differ very considerably, among themselves, according to
their different Strength or stimulating Power; or as their stimulating Salts
and ponderous Oils, are more or less tempered and qualifyed with a soft Lymph
and lubricating Nutritious Oil. But, of all Catharticks, the strong purgative
Resins artificially drawn upon Spirit of Wine, are the most detrimental and
attended with the worst Consequences; as the repeated Use of them most sensibly
impairs the Appetite, obstructs the Lacteals, and fouls, clogs and weakens, the
concoctive Organs and Viscera in general. And this, I think, one may lay down
as a certain Rule, that where Nature has prepared a Medicine, it can never be
much mended by Art.

Jalap in its natural state, is, perhaps, one of the best general Purgatives in
the World. For though it possesses a sufficient stimulating Power, to answer the
end of a Purge, even where strong and quick Purging is requisite; yet it
abounds, at the same time, with Phlegm and Oil enough to correct and moderate
its Operation, so as to render it safe as well as effectual: which good
Properties the artificial Resin is deprived of; nor can any Art afterward
restore them again. If this Cathartick can be at all improved, it is by mixing
and grinding the powdered Root with about a third part of Calomel, which makes
it more attenuating, dissolvent and detersive, and, at the same time, lessens
its Stimulus and the adhesive Quality of its Resin.

Gutta Gamba makes a quick, safe and excellent Purge in Dropsies, or wherever
strong Purging is required, when corrected with Mercury: and though, in its
natural State, it be too violent and stimulating in its Operation, to be given
to any but grown Persons and those of strong and robust Constitutions; yet,
under this management, I can affirm, from a constant course of Experience for
many Years, that it may be exhibited, with great safety, to the tenderest
Habits and most delicate Constitutions. And this indeed, in general, is the
only method of correcting every thing possessed with a powerful Stimulus, or at
least, as far as I have yet found.

Rhubarb is a very moderate Purgative, but a great Astringent and strengthner
of the Stomach and Bowels, when they are too lax and flaccid, and when given
with about a third part of English Saffron, is an excellent and noble
Diuretic, in all great Relaxations of the Renal Glands and Urinary Passages.
But when it is made up into Pills with Quicksilver, first minutely divided and
incorporated with any proper Subject of the Turpentine kind, its purgative
Quality is greatly strengthened and improved. For, where the first Passages are
foul, and stuffed with a load of Matter which wants to be evacuated, Rhubarb
thus given, will work as much as Jalap given alone, or in its natural State;
and this without any Pain or Sickness, or uneasy Stimulus whatsoever. And this,
as I said before, is the true Art of correcting, not only Emeticks and
Catharticks, but all other Medicines which would, otherwise, act by a too
powerful and overbearing Stimulus on the Stomach and Intestines. For hereby the
attenuating, dissolving and deobstruent Powers of the Medicine are increased
and strengthened, and, at the same time, the Stimulus and Vellication on the
great Organs lessened in the same proportion. And, indeed, a Physician ought
never to suffer a Medicine to act by any powerful or too violent a Stimulus, so
as to occasion excessive Pain; because, in this Case, it comes near to a
Poison, and threatens a Mortification or Gangrene of the Part thus stimulated.
And whenever this happens, accidentally and beside the Intention, the only
effectual way to prevent farther Mischief, and to quiet and pacify the Tumult
raised in the Constitution, is immediately to give a sufficient quantity of
some powerful Volatile, especially Opium, to take off the Pain and, thereby, to
prevent the fatal Effects of such a Stimulation.

Sudorificks act counter to Emeticks and Catharticks, and the Operations of
these are, caeteris paribus, reciprocally proportional. Almost every body must
have observed, that a Sweat raised stops a Diarrhoea; and that the checking of
Sweat and Perspiration, occasions a Diarrhoea if the Intestines are not
obstructed too at the same time. The Reason and Mechanism of this is very
evident; for, as all Muscular, Mechanical or Necessary, Motion is propagated
from the Heart Undiquaque in the Direction of the Arterial Blood, it is plain
that when the Fluids move in a surplus Quantity from the Heart inwards toward
the Stomach and Intestines, and their Evacuation that way is increased by any
Cause whatsoever, the Discharges, in the contrary direction, toward the
external Surface or cutaneous Emunctories, must be diminished in the same
proportion, and so vice versa reciprocally. And hereupon is grounded the true
rational Method of curing a Diarrhoea.

Sudorificks, Diuretics and Catharticks, and indeed all other Medicines
universally, will operate differently according to the different Constitution
in general, or the present occasional State of the Animal Economy, with regard
to the primary Elementary Qualities before mentioned. And here the different
Powers of Heat and Cold, or of Rarefaction and Condensation, compared with the
different state of the Solids and Fluids, or with the nature of the Disease as
Effluent or Influent, must be the Physician's Guide. Every one knows that
heating and cooling, rarefying and condensing Medicines, will either promote or
restrain Perspiration and Sweat, in their place and turns, or under different
Circumstances. No Man therefore, who knows what he is about, would attempt to
promote Sweat and Perspiration by heating rarefying Volatiles, where the
cutaneous Discharges had been obstructed and retained by a too great Efflux and
diffusion of Heat before; or endeavor to promote this Evacuation, by cooling
refrigerating Salts and Acids, in a low, languid, and depressed State of the
Blood and Animal Fluids. And yet, as wrong and irrational as this evidently
appears to be, any Person, who is but moderately acquainted with the Modern
Practical Physical Writers, especially those in the Specific Way, must have
observed, that very little regard has been had in Practice, especially in
Fevers, to this plain, obvious, and indisputable Principle. Sudorificks and
Diaphoreticks, therefore, ought to be of one Sort or the other, or the Simples
of each kind variously compounded, in extemporaneous Practice, from a careful
and judicious Observation of the difference in the simple, or complicated,
Symptoms. And this farther shows the vanity and absurdity of Stated Canonical
Compounds, or General Recipes, under the infinite diversity and various
complications of Diseases and their Symptoms. But yet I must needs say,
notwithstanding the general Doctrine here laid down, that there is one
Preparation of Nature, so nicely tempered and adjusted with respect to Heating
and Cooling, that, in this intention o^ promoting Perspiration and Sweat, and
thereby carrying off the foulnesses and impurities of the Glands, by the
cutaneous Emunctories, is almost universally Beneficial: What I mean here is
Opium, which, at all Times, and almost in all Cases, greatly promotes the
Sudorifick and Diaphoretick Indications, whether the general Intention, and the
Medicines with which it is joined, be otherwise Heating or Cooling, Rarefying
or Condensing.

BUT, where Perspiration and Sweating are necessary, and the Intention cannot
otherwise be obtained, which often happens in Fevers, nothing can come into
competition with Blistering, which is not only a safe, but a sure, Refuge on
such occasions. And this is so effectual to the purpose here mentioned, that
it is great pity it should ever be made the last Resort, after other Methods
have been tried in vain, and when, perhaps this may come too late; especially
since, in the modern Method of directing and governing it, the most dreaded and
usual mischievous Consequences of this Operation are so easily prevented.

To close this Section, I shall only make one Observation more, as a Matter of
great importance; and that is, that the Metalline Salts, or such as are
prepared by impregnating and incorporating Metals, especially Iron and Copper,
with their proper dissolving Menstruums whether Acid or Alkaline, are in many
great Cases the most effectual Remedies of all; as they may be directed to any
of the natural Emunctories, by a skilful and judicious management, and become,
then, the most certain and efficacious Dissolvents, Deobstruents and Detergents
of any thing yet known. But a full Discussion of this cannot fall within the
Bounds of a short Essay, though something farther will be observed upon it in the
following Sections.

SECT. IV. Of Absorbents.
IT IS certain that some sorts of Substances, which are in themselves
indigestible, and which can by no means pass the Lacteals, or mix with the
Blood, do yet most powerfully attract, imbibe, and retain the morbid Salts,
Acids, and Sulphurs or Inflammatory Oil which is often thrown on the first
Passages, in Fevers and other Diseases of the putrefactive kind. And, on this
account, such sort of Medicines may be of great use in Physic, provided that
sufficient care be taken to extrude them out of the Body, as soon as they have
done their work, and saturated themselves with the morbid Matter. By this means
the peccant Humor is discharged and cast out, together with the Medicine that
had attracted and imbibed it. But nothing surely can be more irrational and
absurd, than the giving such Medicines under the notion of their Digestibility
and alterative Effects in the Blood; as if the Stomach could work Miracles and,
by its natural Heat and Motion, dissolve that which no Art can do by degrees of
Heat and Motion vastly greater. And besides, if such Substances were supposed
capable of being dissolved and liquifyed in the Stomach, so as to be strained
off through the Lacteals and Lymphatick Recipients, yet still, as in this Case
they must necessarily carry the morbid Fomes along with them, which they had
before imbibed and retained, and thereby corrupt and poison the whole Mass; so
consequently the Practice, in this view, would be rather more absurd and
irrational than before.

IT may be here observed, that such sort of Substances are the best Absorbents
as are good for nothing else, and have no other remarkable Property whatsoever.
Such as Chalk, dry Earths, powdered Shells, burnt Hartshorn, and the Mineral
Glebes which have been first deprived of their Salts, Sulphurs and Mercury, or
stripped of their active Qualities, by proper chemical Processes, such as
Diaphoretick Antimony, Mineral Bezoar, etc. I cannot therefore wholly condemn
these things, as of no use at all in Physic, especially the Minerals before
mentioned, as some very considerable Physicians have done, particularly that
Prince of the Faculty the Great and Learned Boerhaave, because they could find
them possessed of no active Qualities, and could easily prove them to be
absolutely indigestible, and indissoluble in the Stomach, by the clearest and
most convincing Experiments. For notwithstanding their Passiveness in other
Respects, yet, it is certain, they still retain the common Power of Attraction.
And as they attract, absorb, and retain Salts, Acids and Sulphurs, with the
greater force and efficacy, for having been deprived and divested of them
before; so, in this way of preparation of them, they may, I think, be
deservedly reckoned some of the most efficacious Absorbents in the Materia
Medica. But then, when the Use of such indigestible Substances is too long
continued, which it always must be when they are directed under the Notion of
Alteratives; or, where they are too long retained in the Body, and due care is
not taken to get rid of them, as soon as they have answered their Intention;
they must neccssarily produce Effects very mischievous to the Constitution, and
such as may, in some Cases, be absolutely Irretrievable. And herein Dr.
Boerhaave's Observations and Reasonings, upon this Subject, are certainly right.

SECT. V. Of Deobstruents.
DEOBSTRUENTS act by attenuating, liquifying, and deterging or carrying off the
viscid Concretions of Matter, lodged in the Ventricles of the Glands and
Membranous Cells, throughout the whole Body, but especially those of the
Mesentery, and Viscera of the Abdomen, which are most liable to be thus
obstructed, and where the Obstructions are commonly the most obstinate and
invincible.

IN all Cases of Obstructions, great regard is to be had to the Nature and
Quality of the obstructing and retained Matter; as whether it be a cold,
sluggish, indurated Phlegm, or a heating, acrid, concreted Oil and Salt. And as
this is nothing, but observing the Primary Elementary Qualities, in the
Constitution of every Disease; so it is only to be known, by carefully
regarding the general Temperament of the Patient, the antecedent Causes by
which the Obstruction may have been brought on, and the particular Symptoms and
Appearances of the present morbid Constitution. And this Distinction is of such
Consequence, that all true Practice depends upon it.

IN all Obstructions occasioned by a cold, unactive, indurated Lymph or Phlegm,
where the Complexion is pale, the Pulse low, the natural digestive Heat
impaired, and the Serum of the Blood very much abounding, in proportion to the
Crassament; in such Cases, I say, Steel, joined with the warm Bitters and
Aromaticks, is a great and noble Deobstruent. It raises the Pulse, strengthens
the Digestion, diffuses the natural Heat, restores the elastick Tone of the
Arteries, and, in a little time recovers the Crassament of the Blood to a
wonder, after it had been almost quite lost and run into Water.

BUT, on the other hand, when the Obstructions are occasioned by a hot, acrid,
concreted Oil and Salt, tending to Erosion and Ulceration, or where the natural
Heat is excessive, and the Crassament of the Blood is very predominant in
proportion to the Serum. Steel, in this Case, can hardly be born at all, and
will be sure to do more Hurt than Good. For as Steel is indisputably one of the
warmest Deobstruents in the Materia Medica, so, it is from thence evident, it
can have no place as a Medicine here, and can only, then, be proper, when the
Obstruction proceeds from a contrary Cause, or, a cold, acid, Condensative
Coagulation; and, in this Case, it is instar omnium and has not its equal.

BUT the great universal Deobstruent, which may be accommodated to all Cases
and suited to all Constitutions, is Mercury or Quicksilver, which is deservedly
styled by Belloste a Miracle of Nature, and the greatest Gift of Providence in
the whole Materia Medica. This noble and divine Medicament, being first well
cleansed and purifyed from its original Arsenical Sulphur, and all other
Artificial Heterogeneous Mixtures and Impurities, may be given, with the
greatest safety, to the youngest, tenderest and most delicate Subjects: And,
when under a skilful Management, may be directed to any of the natural
Emunctories, so as to prove Sudorifick, Cathartick, Diuretic, Expectorating or
Salivatory, in any degree, according to the Nature, Constitution and
Appearances of Diseases, and their various Indications and Intentions of Cure:
And this I can confidently affirm, from my own Experience, in repeated Trials
of it upon my Self and others, for a Course of many Years together. I confess
indeed, that I have never yet observed any great or sensible Effects from it,
beyond the first Passages, when taken by Ounces at a time, in the Vulgar Method
and Quack way of Prescription: And notwithstanding the Facts published, in the
Controversy on this Subject, which seem to prove the contrary; yet, I am still
of Opinion that the Relief obtained, in those Cases, was purely accidental, and
owing rather to the casual Separation and Division of some part of the
Quicksilver into its Minutissima, in its Passage through the Stomach and
Intestines, from the long continued repetition of the Doses, than to any
natural or necessary Comminution of it, by the digestive Heat and muscular
Action of those Organs. But, however it be, thus much, I think, is certain,
that it does not so quickly, easily and surely pass the Lacteals, in that way
of exhabiting it, as when it is antecedently divided by Art, and intimately
combined and incorporated with other Bodies: And, in this way of Management, I
may venture to affirm, it will seldom or never disappoint the judicious
Physician's Intention, even in Diseases of the most obstinate Chronick kind,
where any Relief is reasonably to be hoped for or expected. But a particular
Consideration of this Matter, would open one into too large a Field for a short
Essay, such as I only intend this to be. And besides, as I can give the World
some Assurance of seeing this Subject more thoroughly handled by an abler Pen,
I shall choose to refer to that Treatise which, I believe, will be soon
published, and in which, I am confident, the Reader will find his Account.

I shall therefore conclude this Section with one Remark more, by way of
Caution to the Quicksilver Devourers, especially such of them as take vast
quantities of it out of mere Whim and Wantonness, which is this; That though
Quicksilver be in it self, perhaps, the most innocent thing in Nature, and
absolutely incapable of hurting the most delicate Constitution, if taken pure
and in moderate Quantities; yet, since it will intimately mix and incorporate
with other Metals, especially Lead with which it is but too commonly
adulterated, and which it will so strongly attract and retain, as not to be
separated from it again by any sort of Straining, or other manual Operation: I
say, since this is the Case, it may be worth such Persons while to consider,
whether Quicksilver thus sophisticated, with a Metal endued with such noxious
Qualities, may not, in a long Course of taking it, become a Slow Poison, and do
more future Mischief to the Constitution, than can be balanced by any present
sensible Relief or Advantage whatsoever.

FOR my own part, I freely acknowledge, I dare not give it, even in small
Quantities, for a long Time together, without being well assured of its Purity.
And though a Person of Judgment may pretty well discover, upon view, from the
degree of its Luster, Polish and Fluidity, whether it be greatly adulterated or
not; yet, I am very sure, from a great number of Experiments, that a sufficient
quantity of noxious Particles may be so intimately blended with, and retained
by it, as not only to deceive the nicest Eye, and elude all other Methods of
Trial, short of the Fiery One, but to do a great deal of Mischief, in a long
Course of taking it in surplus Quantities according to the common Way: for
which Reason, I never prescribe Quicksilver, but as Revived from Cinnabar, or
Redistilled, according to Art, after it is got into the Apothecary's Hands.

I had here some Thoughts of considering the Materia Medica more particularly,
in another Section, and of ranging and disposing the most approved and
efficacious Simples, in their most natural and proper Order. But I must
postpone this, to another Opportunity, for the Reasons already given; and the
rather because I intend, one Day or other, if I have Time and Leisure to make
the necessary Experiments, to trouble the World with a new Pharmacopoeia upon
this Plan, in which I propose, accurately, to re-examine the whole Materia
Medica, both Chemically and Mechanically, and to dispose the most efficacious
Simples in every Intention, in distinct Classes, according to their most
Obvious Sensible Powers and Properties, with regard to the Primary Elementary
Qualities and Natural Evacuations: And to place them in such a natural Order,
according to their different Degrees of Power and Force in each Intention, that
none but Empyricks, or such as have little or no acquaintance with Philosophy,
and the Animal Structure and Economy, shall be easily capable of erring in the
Use and Application of them.

IN this Examen, the Reader, I believe, foresees that the Materia Medica,
which, in its present State is enormously Bulky, will be greatly reduced and
brought into a very narrow Compass. But, however, because I would give no
Offense to any Gentlemen of the Faculty, especially the Specificians, who may
possibly think themselves Neglected, if not Injured, by this Method of treating
the Subject; I farther intend, for their Use, and the Entertainment of others,
though it will cost me no small Pains, to take due notice of the remaining
Simples, which, for want of proper Criteria, cannot be entitled to a Place in
the rational Part of this Pharmacopoeia; and which have no claim to any Regard
or Esteem at all, but on the Foot of Magic and Specificism. These I shall
place in opposite Columns, and in distinct Classes likewise, according to their
Traditional Occult Virtues and Qualities from the best Authorities. By this way
of proceeding, the true State of the Controversy between the Mechanical and
Specific Gentlemen will at once be exhibited to View; and, if I am not much
mistaken, will appear in so strong a Light, that a Man of no great Abilities
may easily determine on which Side the Weight of the Argument lies: And whether
the Newtonian Philosopher, who confines his Reasonings to plain Facts and just
Experiments, or the Corpuscularian and Rosicrucian, who is led by his
Imagination into all the Lengths of Whimsy and Enthusiasm, is like to prove the
better and more useful Physician.

UNDER this Article likewise, it will clearly appear, from the manifest
Contradiction of the Authorities produced in the course of the Evidence, that
for one true Fact, upon Record, in the History of Specificism, you have ten
Falsities; that the Argument, therefore, from Authority only, has as little
Weight in Physic as in Divinity; and consequently, that the Free-Thinker, in
the one Profession as well as in the other, has ten times a better chance of
being in the Right, in all Cases whatsoever, than the Free-Believer or
Enthusiast.

FINIS.

