THE FAMILY PHYSICIAN: BEING A COLLECTION OF USEFUL FAMILY REMEDIES.

TOGETHER WITH PLAIN and FULL DIRECTIONS for Administering them, and properly
Nursing the Sick, where the Advice of a PHYSICIAN is difficult to be procured.

To which is added, A SHORT ACCOUNT of those CASES in which BLEEDING and
BLISTERS are really serviceable.

BY HUGH SMITH, Apothecary, At the CHEMICAL WAREHOUSE, the upper End of
Cheapside, leading into Newgate-Street, LONDON: WHERE The MEDICINES herein
recommended, are faithfully prepared in Boxes, convenient for FAMILIES to take
into the Country, and for those who use the SEA to take on Shipboard.

The THIRD EDITION, with ADDITIONS.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCCLXI.

[Price One Shilling.]

PREFACE.
THE intention of the following sheets is to direct a right use of those
medicines which are necessary to be kept in families, whose distance from a
good practitioner, or any other circumstance, renders an immediate application
in sudden illnesses almost impossible, and occasions those delays in trifling
complaints, which oftentimes prove of very bad consequence. It has been found
by experience, for want of proper hints and directions in respect to the doses
of medicines, several fatal errors have been committed, either from the
ignorance of persons themselves, or from being obliged to have recourse, for
want of better, to the advice of nurses, and such good women, whose greatest
skill extends to the making a posset for a sweat, or a plaster for a sore shin.

THOSE captains of ships whose vessels are too small to allow of carrying a
surgeon, and gentlemen whose business may call them to take a long voyage in
such small vessels, or to travel by land through unfrequented or poor places,
or those who are going to settle in any of his Majesty's plantations, will find
a great advantage from being thus enabled to become their own physicians in
cases of necessity; and we often see that Nature, with a little assistance,
will free the constitution from disorders which are not too deeply rooted, or
very malignant in the first attack. I would by no means be understood to
pretend that the medicines I here recommend, are infallible in the respective
disorders they are prescribed for, being for the most part such only as are to
be found in the dispensatory of the college of physicians; where I have been
under a necessity of compounding, I have attended to the practice of the
principal physicians in town, and assume no further merit to myself than to
care of selecting such medicines whose operations are the least dangerous. Thus
far however I will venture to assert, that, by following these directions,
which are plain and easy, and wrote in a style fitted to the meanest capacity,
perspicuity being always preferable to elegance in this kind of writing, the
patient may, by applying what is necessary in time, prevent those ills that
follow from neglect, which good nursing and a few innocent things might at
first remove.

THOSE who have a knowledge in physic, and do not stand in need of my
assistance, will in the boxes find many useful medicines to be kept at hand,
and may extend their practice, by giving me a catalogue of such others as they
would choose to have added.

LADIES and gentlemen, who reside in the country, will hereby be enabled to
assist their poor neighbors; which many of them I doubt not would take a
pleasure in doing, did they but know what to apply.

WITH each box of medicines may be had a box of scales and weights; each weight
marked distinctly, that any person may at once adjust the proper quantity for a
dose.

As many people may choose to keep by them what is proper for their own
particular complaints, whom it may not suit to have the box complete, I think
it necessary to mention, that any of the medicines here recommended may be had
separate, or as many of them as agreeable, packed up in lesser boxes for the
convenience of carriage.

N. B. LADIES closets are also fitted up with the choicest drugs, medicines and
cordials, by

Their obedient, very humble servant, HUGH SMITH.

WEIGHTS used in PRESCRIPTION.
A pound containing Twelve ounces. An ounce containing Eight drams. A dram
containing Three scruples. A scruple containing Twenty grains.
THE FAMILY PHYSICIAN.
ASTHMATIC TINCTURE.
THIS tincture is of use in a difficulty of breathing, tightness across the
breast, and short coughs, particularly if brought on by cold north-easterly
winds, which frequently affect the breast, sides, and lungs: it allays the
cough, opens the chest, and loosens the phlegm, so that it easily comes away;
and frees the pores of the skin which have been shut up by the winds.

It may be taken as often as occasion requires, from thirty to sixty or eighty
drops, in a little See Page 15.
pectoral drink or barley water, with which you should dilute plentifully,
drinking it of the same heat as you would a dish of tea.

ASTRINGENT ELECTARY.
NEVER be too hasty in the use of this electary; it is often found that a
purging is the means made use of by Nature to carry off other complaints, or to
free the body from bad humors, which might in time beget disorders; now, by
stopping this wholesome drain too soon, these bad humors may be thrown back
into the blood, and produce the worst consequences: therefore you will seldom
or never err, by suffering the purging, if not over violent, to continue two or
three days, at the end of that time, should you find the patient weakened by
it, or that it is really a disorder itself, and not a cure for other disorders,
then you may give a dose or two of rhubarb, and afterward proceed to the use
of the electary: by these means you will cleanse the stomach and bowels, and
get rid of the complaint without any farther trouble.

Fluxes, which seafaring people are subject to, are to be treated much in the
same manner, but be very careful to cleanse the bowels first.

Some of my friends who have been many years accustomed to the sea, recommend
the Sea p. 17.
purging apozem before the use of astringents: they say it cools the body, and
carries off every thing which is disagreeable to the bowels, better than
rhubarb, or any other purge. After having cleansed the stomach and bowels of
the filth which occasioned the disorder, by the one or other of these means,
you will find ipecacuanha given with the astringent electary in very small
quantities, viz. from half a grain to one or two grains, of infinite service;
but this should be practiced only by those who have some little knowledge in
physic, and they will have the satisfaction to find the method here recommended
will seldom, if ever, fail of success.

ITS DOSE.
Above 14 years -- from 2 scruples to 1 dram. Between 7 and 14 -- from 1
scruple to 2 scruples. Between 3 and 7 -- from 10 grains to 20 grains.
Under three years old decrease the quantity in proportion.

This may be given once in six or eight hours, or night and morning, as the
case requires; either swallowed whole, or dissolved in a little hartshorn drink.

Remember beer should be forbid; and See hartshorn and gum, p. 10.
hartshorn drink supply the place of other small liquors. Rice gruel is a
proper food.

Should this or any other of the electaries grow dry, they may be softened with
a little syrup, or a spoonful of white wine.

BALSAMIC ELECTARY
Is good in all tickling coughs, soreness at the breast, inward bruises, and
such like complaints.

The quantity of a nutmeg may be taken night and morning, and once or twice in
the day besides, with a large draught of pectoral drink made hot after it.

If costive, take a little of the opening electary, or a few spoonfuls of the
purging apozem, as you judge most proper,

BARK.
THE febrifuge quality of this bark, and its peculiar efficacy in curing
intermittent fevers, is now universally known, yet a two hasty use of it
oftentimes proves prejudicial, a A remittent fever is when at certain periods
the fever is more violent than at others, but the patient never entirely free
from it.
remittent or continual fever being the consequence. You will seldom or never
err, by giving a vomit first, and if the sick be of a full habit of body, you
may also purge with safety; you will act more prudently by waiting till they
have had four or five ague fits before you throw in the bark, giving a salt of
wormwood See p. 19.
draught once in six or eight hours, which will make the fits more regular, and
prepare the blood for the bark. You should begin when the fever is gone
entirely off, and give at least one ounce before you expect it to return In low
fenny countries, where the atmosphere is moist and foggy, it is sometimes
necessary to give one ounce and a half of bark between the fits, but in general
an ounce is sufficient.
; half a dram, two scruples, or a dram may be given for a dose, as the stomach
will bear it, the less you administer at a time the more frequent it must be
repeated; for, unless you get the whole quantity down within the time you do
nothing.

The fit being put by, a second ounce should be taken in the like small doses
within the three following days, at the distance of about six or eight hours;
the patient may now rest six days, unless signs of the ague's return require
the bark to be repeated sooner, when a third ounce is to be taken in like
manner, a dose every six or eight hours; another week being elapsed, a fourth
ounce is also to be administered, when you may take your leave of them, and be
pretty well assured they will not be subject to a return.

The common mixture to give it in may be made of three quarters of a pint of
spring water, and a quarter of a pint of good French brandy, sweetened with a
bit of sugar, a teacupful of which should be taken with each dose; mix the
powder in a little of it, and drink the remainder after it.

If it purges, which is oftentimes the case, it should be given in a little
cinnamon tea; should that not answer, two, three, or four drops of laudanum
must be added to each dose.

If, on the contrary, the bark should bind, a few grains of rhubarb may be
given with each dose as long as you see necessary.

Above the age of fourteen it will require this quantity to cure the ague,
under these years your judgment must direct you to decrease it; the manner of
giving it must be exactly the same We frequently, and with success, for
children, and those of dellcate constitutions, boil the bark a long while in
water, and give the strained liquor instead of the powder in substance; the
proportion is, an ounce in two or three pints of water, till you can pour off
one.
: sometimes, when the season is unfavourable, you may meet with cases which do
not entirely give way to this treatment, if so, let them continue the following
a fortnight or three weeks afterward.

BARK WINE.
TAKE of bark, grossly powdered, two ounces, the yellow peel of two Seville
oranges, and one nutmeg grated; pour three pints of old rough red port upon
these ingredients; let them stand by a gentle fire, in a large bottle, for
three or four days, shaking it frequently; then pour off a wine-glassful of the
clear liquor at the time you take it, which should be morning, noon, and night;
when you have taken one half, another pint of wine may be added, and kept upon
the ingredients till the whole is taken, at least for ten days or a fortnight.
A few drops of elixir of vitriol two or three times a day with the wine, or
mixed in a glass of water, may be also serviceable.

BARLEY WATER.
TAKE two table-spoonfuls of pearl barley, wash it, and boil it in half a pint
of water for two or three minutes; pour away this water which will be colored,
and add about three pints of boiling water; let it simmer till one pint is
consumed. This is a common and good drink in fevers and every other complaint
when a soft diluting liquor is advisable.

COLIC MIXTURE.
THIS mixture is warm and comfortable to the stomach and bowels, somewhat
opening, proper in colic complaints, and for the wind, particularly if after
meals; it is likewise serviceable for pains in the stomach.

Two or three table-spoonfuls may be taken at a time.

But if the pain is very violent, and stools are much wanting, give of the
purging apozem freely, or the opening electary.

If there are too many stools, first give a little rhubarb, then use the
astringent electary, which see.

DIACHYLON PLASTER.
THE use of this plaster is well known in slight cuts, or other little
accidents; it should be spread with a warm knife upon a piece of fine rag or an
old glove.

DIURETIC MIXTURE.
THIS mixture is good in all gravelly complaints, and for the dropsy, heat of
urine, pains in the loins, and stoppage of water. One large spoonful, or two
upon an emergency, may be given for a dose, every six or eight hours, or night
and morning as the case requires, mixed in half a pint of marshmallow drink, if
you can procure it, if not, barley water. But observe, if the pain is violent,
you will do right first to give the purging apozem to promote stools, and let
them drink plentifully of thin water gruel, which will cleanse the bowels and
urinary passages, and greatly assist the intention of this mixture. Remember
the body should always be kept open; and those who are subject to these
complaints, should accustom themselves to drink very plentifully of small
liquors at all times By small liquors, I would be understood to mean any liquor
between water and twelve shilling table beer.
, which will often of themselves perform a perfect cure.

ELIXIR OF VITRIOL.
THIS is esteemed good to strengthen the stomach and bowels, to create an
appetite and brace up the solids.

ITS DOSE.
Above 14 years -- from 20 to 30 drops. Between 7 and 14 -- from 10 to 20.
Under that age -- from 5 to 7 or 8.
It may be given in a little water, or wine and water; but where the patient
can be brought to take it, a cup of chamomile tea is preferable to any other
liquid whatever.

The proper times for taking it are in a morning fasting, an hour before
dinner, and two hours after dinner.

When joined with the tincture of bark, it will be found to add considerably to
the efficacy of that noble medicine.

FEVER POWDER.
WHEN the skin is hot and parched, the tongue white, and other common signs of
a fever, which every one is acquainted with, such as thirst, weariness, etc.
put them to bed, and give a dose of the fever powder every six or eight hours;
let them drink freely of pectoral drink, barley water, or the like small
liquors, to dilute the blood, and encourage a breathing sweat; if you find them
mend under this management, and the fever to disappear in a day or two, before
you quit them, give the purging apozem, which will secure their health and add
to your reputation. When they are young and very full of blood, and the pulse
throbbing with great violence, it is a strong indication to bleed, to satisfy
you more particularly in this point refer to the article Bleeding.

It will be frequently necessary under the above symptoms, particularly if
costive, to give the purging apozem before the powder, thereby you cleanse the
bowels and cool the body, but here your observation can alone direct you.

ITS DOSE.
Above 14 years -- from 12 to 30 grains. Between 7 and 14 -- from 8 to 20.
Between 1 and 7 -- from 4 to 12.
Within the months as your judgment directs.

On the contrary, should the disorder not give way, unless you have some
knowledge in physic, it will be most prudent, if you can have advice, to commit
them to the care of some gentleman of the faculty, as you may conclude it is
that kind of fever which will not yield to this simple method.

Should I attempt to describe the various kinds of fevers, it would only puzzle
the unskilful, therefore the above directions are sufficient for those who
stand in need of any assistance, to enable them frequently to render service,
and prevent their ever doing any injury.

FIT DROPS FOR CHILDREN.
THESE drops are very good against fits in general, for grown persons as well
as children; but they are particularly serviceable to the latter, more
especially in those fits which attend the cutting their teeth.

From three to ten drops may be given for a dose to children under twelve
months old, above that age increase the number as you think fit; grown people
may take a large tea-spoonful for a dose.

They may be given in black cherry water, or any other liquor, and repeated as
often as necessity requires.

FRYAR'S BALSAM
IS applied to fresh wounds, and is esteemed good to stop bleeding; be careful
not to use it to old sores, as it frequently proves prejudicial.

It is given internally, from ten to sixty drops, in a little powdered sugar or
a glass of water, in inward decays, bleedings or bruises, also in coughs and
hoarseness.

GASCOIGN'S POWDER.
THE reputation of this powder, so long established, renders it almost
unnecessary to say any thing about its efficacy; its use among children is very
common, to correct gripings, prevent acidities, and remove little feverish
heats; it is frequently, and with great propriety, joined with a few grains of
rhubarb.

A child within the month may take from 1 to 4 grains.

Between 1 and 12 months -- from 4 to 8. Between 1 and 5 years -- from 8 to 12.
Those who are more advanced in life from 10 to 30.

It may be taken every six or eight hours, us you see necessary.

GARGLE FOR SORE THROATS.
TAKE half a pint of pectoral drink, two spoonfuls of virgin honey, and a like
quantity of the best white wine vinegar; let the throat be gargled frequently
with this, as hot as you can bear it. If the glands are much swelled, so as to
render it difficult to swallow, and the patient is very hot and feverish, with
a full quick pulse, refer to the article Bleeding, and give the purging apozem
to open the body three or four times, then let him take the fever powder, and
dilute very plentifully with pectoral drink, or the like.

If, on the contrary, there is a small fluttering pulse (sometimes rather
quick) with specks in the throat, and it looks discolored, give wine and
cordial things.

GLAUBER'S SALTS.
THIS salt is seldom taken alone, except by common people who cannot afford to
join manna with it, which not only makes it more palatable, but prevents the
roughness of its operation.

From ten years old its dose is from half an ounce to one ounce, with an equal
quantity of manna (some people add a double quantity of manna) dissolved in a
little water, water gruel, or sena tea, but the best form is the purging
apozem, which see.

HARTSHORN DROPS
ARE given in faintings, and esteemed good to thin the blood, its known use
renders a more minute detail unnecessary.

The dose is from ten to sixty drops, in any liquid you please.

HARTSHORN AND GUM.
POUR three pints of water on each paper of hartshorn and gum, let it boil till
you can strain off a quart, which should be poured through piece of a fine rag,
or a lawn sieve, just before you take it from the fire, you may add a crust of
bread and a bit of cinnamon, if agreeable; it may be sweetened to your palate.
This is the proper drink to be used in common for purgings, after a little
rhubarb or something of that kind has been given.

HEART-BURN LOZENGES.
ONE of them may be kept in the mouth as often as agreeable; if costive a few
grains of rhubarb should be taken, or a little magnesia alba.

HIERA PICRA
IS a warm physic, good for disorders in the stomach, and particularly in
female complaints.

Its dose from one table spoonful to four, at bed time or in a morning.

HYSTERIC MIXTURE.
THIS mixture may be taken from a tea-spoonful to a table-spoonful, which is
the proper dose for a grown person, in any hysterical complaint; it should be
mixed with a little water, or with a cup of hysteric and pennyroyal water,
being too strong to take alone.

JAUNDICE ELECTARY.
WHERE it has not been preceded by the colic, nor is attended with a fever or
bleedings, it is most likely to proceed from a sluggish, viscid bile; in which
case the cure is easy, and may be effected in the following manner: the
symptoms every one knows are a yellowness of the skin and upon the whites of
the eyes, high-colored urine and white stools, an inactivity, weariness,
oppression of the spirits, and loss of appetite.

First give a gentle vomit of ipecacuanha, the following morning let them be
purged four or five times with the purging apozem, which should be repeated
every fourth or fifth day; on the intermediate days of purging give them the
quantity of a nutmeg of this electary, night and morning, with a salt of
wormwood draught after it; let them dilute plentifully with lemonade, and live
upon light food. This method will quickly restore their color, strength and
spirits.

IPECACUANHA
IS a gentle vomit, and may, where there is occasion, be safely given to
children. I am afraid it is in general rather over-dosed, whereby the patient
is sometimes injured by straining more violently than their stomach and
constitution will bear. I am convinced from experience, that a few grains will
operate on many people far better than large doses. The best way of
administering it to children, and indeed to every body, is to give three, four,
five, or six grains, mixed in a little water or chamomile tea; and, if it does
not take effect in ten minutes or a quarter of an hour, repeat the same
quantity. This method will certainly prevent the bad consequences sometimes
attending violent vomits, and make the operation more easy and pleasant.

Let them drink thin water gruel, chamomile tea, or the like, to work it off.

FOR THE ITCH.
AN ointment made of one third part of flowers of sulphur, and two thirds
hog's-lard rubbed in night and morning where it appears, is a safe and certain
cure, though perhaps not so expeditious as mercurial preparations, but they
have no place here I have not put up any thing for the itch, and some other
complaints that need no immediate assistance, or require more experience than
the generality of my readers are acquainted with, such as the small pox,
measles, etc. in which the constitution and symptoms must vary the practice.
Particular medicines in these complaints, setting the almost impossibility of
giving clear directions aside, would swell the box too large and answer little
or no end; my greatest care through the whole being to prevent mischief in
improperly administering medicines, and I should be fearful in these cases the
bold unskilful practitioner might oftentimes be puzzled, to the detriment of
his patient; and those who are capable of rendering service, will find
medicines in the box to answer their intention in most disorders.


LAUDANUM.
I HAVE directed the use of this with the bark; a few drops may also be joined
with the astringent electary, if the purging is obstinate, and does not readily
give way: it is likewise proper in many other cases; but I would not have the
unexperienced be too free with it, therefore shall say no more.

MAGNESIA ALBA
IS a medicine strongly recommended by many writers, particularly for young
children.

It corrects acidities in the stomach more powerfully than chalk,
oyster-shells, pearls, coral, crabs eyes, or the like testaceous powders; and,
joined to this, it has a gentle purgative property, and is the only one of an
alkaline nature at present made use of; it is also serviceable in the
heart-burn.

It may be given to children from twenty grains to a dram, or even two drams in
a day, a little at a time, mixed in their food; grown people may take it more
freely.

MANNA
IS a gentle purge, which affects only the stomach and bowels; it is in much
esteem for children, and given from one or two drams to one ounce; grown people
may take one ounce and a half or two ounces, without stirring them, for which
reason it is quickened with Glauber's salts, which see.

MARSHMALLOW DRINK.
TAKE a quarter of a pound of marshmallow roots washed very clean, and boil
them in three quarts of water until one is consumed, remove it from the fire,
and, when cold, decant off the liquor; if you do not think the thickness
disagreeable, it will be more efficacious by pressing the roots; it may be
sweetened with virgin honey. This may be drank at pleasure, and is recommended
in all cases where a soft lubricating regimen is proper; it is much esteemed
for the gravel and heat of urine.

NERVOUS TINCTURE.
NERVOUS complaints are too common in England to need a particular description,
in all kinds of them this tincture is very serviceable; it is likewise proper
in lowness of spirits, faintings, and hysterical cases, giving strength and
cheerfulness, and raising the depressed spirits. The dose is from one to two
tea-spoonfuls, two or three times a day, in a glass of wine and water, or
valerian tea.

OIL OF ROSES.
THIS is an excellent outward remedy for all parts in a state of inflammation,
especially when attended with great pain; in which case it is also proper to
refer to Bleeding, and the purging apozem.

The method of applying it is by rubbing it in with a warm hand.

OILY EMULSION.
TAKE four large spoonfuls of oil of almonds, half a pint of cold barley water,
two drams of fine sugar, in powder, and sixty drops of spirit of hartshorn;
shake them well together, and the whole immediately becomes a white emulsion;
two spoonfuls of cinnamon water being added, will make it very palatable.

It is good in stitches and pleuritic pains in the side and breast, hoarseness,
coughs, etc.

A tea-cupful may be taken frequently.

OPENING ELECTARY.
THIS electary gently relaxes the belly, without causing sickness or gripings,
which quick purges are apt to do.

When intended only to open the body, for a grown person, the dose is the
quantity of a nutmeg at bedtime; if designed to purge more brisk, repeat the
dose in the morning.

It may be given to children in a proportionably less degree and proves a good
physic, particularly where they are troubled with phlegm.

If more agreeable in a liquid form, you may dissolve it in a small quantity of
any weak drink.

OPODELDOC
IS very serviceable in bruises or strains; it should be rubbed in with the
warm hand three or four times a day.

PALSY DROPS.
IN all cases where a heaviness hangs upon the spirits, with a drowsiness,
dizziness, or swimming of the head, these drops are equally serviceable as in
the palsy; all these complaints proceeding from the same bad disposition of the
blood.

The dose is from one to two tea spoonfuls, two or three times a day, in a
glass of wine and water, or valerian tea.

PARALYTIC OR PALSY-LINIMENT.
THIS liniment is good in all paralytic complaints, likewise where a stiffness
and numbness remain after the rheumatism; it will remove those acute rheumatic
pains which seize the limbs on taking cold, and oftentimes proves a cure for
the sciatica or hip gout: its warm stimulating quality puts the part rubbed
with it into a glow, frees the pores of the skin, and, by quickening the
circulation, removes those obstructions which were the cause of pain.

It should be applied, night and morning, with a warm hand, if before the fire
the better, and the part afterward covered with a piece of warm flannel; where
the disorder does not give way, let the palsy drops be taken also.

PECTORAL DRINK.
TAKE two table-spoonfuls of pearl barley, boil it two or three minutes in half
a pint of water, pour away that water, and add a quart and half a pint of fresh
water to the barley, let it boil ten minutes; then add twenty stoned raisins,
and one fig cut into slices, also a bit of stick liquorice as long as your
finger; let these boil together a few minutes, and strain off a quart of the
pectoral drink.

This is an agreeable soft liquor, good in any case where the intention is to
dilute; but more especially in coughs, colds, oppressions of the breast, and
such like complaints.

PILE ELECTARY.
TAKE the quantity of a nutmeg of this electary night and morning, so as to
keep the body gently open; avoid pepper and all heating things, little or no
wine should be drank, and your food must be of the lighter and vegitable kind.

PILE LINIMENT.
IF the piles are external, apply a little of this liniment upon a piece of
fine rag very frequently, which will cool the part, and procure ease. Setting
over the steam of warm water is frequently serviceable, especially if an
handful or two of marshmallow leaves and a little bran be added.

POWDER FOR SWEATS.
INEED not point out the particular circumstances in which this is necessary,
every one being sensible how much it is of service in colds, achs, and pains in
the bones, and the like complaints.

ITS DOSE.
Above the age of 14 -- from 20 to 30 grains. Between 7 and 14 years -- from 10
to 20

Under seven years old decrease the quantity as your judgment directs; let it
be taken at bedtime, with a large draught of white wine whey, or something of
that kind, and, if very hard to sweat, twenty or thirty drops of spirits of
hartshorn or sal volatile in it; but observe, if there is any fever, the fever
powder is most proper.

PURGING APOZEM.
POUR a pint of boiling water upon one ounce of Glauber's salts, one ounce of
manna, and one dram of bruised caraway seeds; stir them a little to dissolve
the manna and salts, cover the vessel, and let it stand to cool; you may, if
you please, add a little slice of Seville orange peel to the above.

This is the best method I know of disguising the salts, and making them sit
easy upon the stomach.

Of the strained liquor a draught may be taken in the morning, and repeated
once in half an hour or an hour, as the stomach will bear it, till it purges
sufficiently. The age of the person must be considered; and, as you know the
strength of the apozem, it will be easy to adjust the dose.

If intended only to relax the body, a few spoonfuls taken at bedtime, or in
the morning, will have the desired effect.

A less quantity may at any time be prepared as you find occasion for it.

QUICK PURGING POWDER.
IN many cases, such as dropsical and gross habits of body, foulness of stomach
(when a vomit is sometimes previously to be taken) and for people of strong
constitutions, who live much upon a flesh diet and salt provisions, where you
think manna and salts are not powerful enough; and even to younger persons whom
you want to purge very briskly, this purging powder is recommended, and may be
given in a little of any liquor.

ITS DOSE.
Above the age of 14 -- from 25 grains to 2 scruples. Between 7 and 14 -- from
15 grains to half a dram. Between 3 and 7 -- from 6 grains to 1 scruple.

RHEUMATIC POWDER.
THIS powder may be given night and morning, from one to two scruples, with
twenty or thirty drops of sal volatile, in white wine whey, sage tea, I must
not omit noticing an egregious and common error in making these herb teas for a
sick person, that is, the putting such a large quantity of leaves and stalks
into a pot and letting water stand upon it three or four hours, which is the
general method used by nurses and attendants; it not only makes the drink
nauseous, but, in many inflammatory cases, it proves very prejudicial, for
instead of being the cooling draught which is advisable, it is become so hot
by the pungency of the herbs, that it absolutely adds fuel to the fire. Put
from 10 to 20 leaves, according to the strength of different herbs into a pot,
and pour upon them a quart of boiling water, after standing three or four
minutes (just as you manage your green tea) pour it out into a basin to cool,
by this means you have the fine flavor of the plant, and, I am convinced, many
people will find herbs which our own climate produces, such as sage, mint,
balm, ground ivy, etc. thus properly managed, produce a more grateful liquor
than that tea so commonly used in England, and for which we pay so extravagant
a price.
or any small liquor.

The dose should be increased or diminished, so as to keep the body open; if
the pains are very violent, and the pores of the skin shut up by preceding
colds, let the paralytic liniment be used.

RHUBARB POWDER.
ALL physicians agree in the excellency of this root; it is a good purge in
many complaints, and strengthens the stomach and bowels; it is particularly
recommended for children, more especially for the worms, as it purges off those
crudities in which they breed.

ITS DOSE.
Above 14 years -- from 15 to 30 grains. Between 7 and 14 -- from 10 to 20
grains. Between 1 and 7 -- from 5 to 15 grains. Within the months -- from 1 to
5 grains.

SALOP
Is of late years brought into much esteem in England; it is of a restorative
and strengthening quality Salop, like most other things for which there is a
large demand, to enable the trader to sell cheap, is very frequently much
adulterated. I am afraid the greatest part of what is commonly sold for powder
of salop, will be found to have in it a considerable quantity of starch and gum
arabic, which ought to put people upon their guard where they purchase it; for,
although the virtues of the true are undeniable, the adulterated must fall
short of its excellency, and the false in appearance, if artfully managed, will
deceive very good judges.
; many ladies, whom I have had the honor to recommend it to, of tender
constitutions, where tea has been found to prey overmuch upon a week stomach
and where more nourishment has been necessary than they received from their
ordinary food, eat it in a morning for breakfast; and I must confess it would
much please me to see it more universally received, particularly by those who
are subject to nervous complaints, being in its own nature very strengthening,
easy of digestion, and, in the manner here recommended, affords a great deal of
nourishment in an impoverished state of blood; therefore the properest food
that can be received after a severe fit of sickness, whereby the patint is much
weakened.

The common way of preparing it is with water, and a glass of wine added to it,
but the method I think far preferable is this:

Boil half a pint of milk with as much water, while it is in a boiling state,
let two tea-spoonfuls of the powder of salop, first mixed in a basin with a
spoonful or two of cold water, be thrown into it; after it has simmered a
minute or two, stirring it the while, you will find the whole of a smooth
creamy consistence; a bit of sugar, and a little nutmeg may be added to make it
palatable. Those whom milk is apt to render costive, should mix the salop with
the water alone as above directed, and add the milk to it after it is taken
from the fire.

We all know how serviceable a milk diet is in many cases; by this method it
will agree with them, upon whose stomach it other-ways turns sour and curdles.

SALT OF WORMWOOD DRAUGHT.
TAKE a scruple of salt of wormwood, pour upon it by little and little fresh
lemon juice, till it has done fermenting and tastes quite insipid, about one
large spoonful is sufficient; then add a little fine sugar to make it
palatable, about a wine-glass of spring or barley water, and a pap-spoonful of
cinnamon water, makes a most pleasant draught.

Above the age of fourteen, it may be given once in six or eight hours, in any
little feverish complaints, sickness at stomach, watchings, parched dryness of
the mouth, and suchlike ills, and is often preferable to the fever powder.
From seven to fourteen years, half a draught is sufficient; under that age
still decrease the quantity.

SAL VOLATILE.
THE use of these drops is so common and well known for raising the spirits,
that I need only take notice of its dose, which is from ten to sixty drops, in
a glass of water, or what you please.

SCORBUTIC ELIXIR.
THIS preparation is in an especial manner devoted to the relief of scorbutic
disorders. It is of a scouring nature, breaks and divides all obstructions of
the glands proceeding from a more than ordinary thickness of the blood, and, by
restoring the mass to a due state of fluidity, prevents those feverish
dispositions which naturally arise from any hindrance in the necessary
secretions, such as urine, stool, etc. It is a great promoter of urine, and a
great quickener of the motions of the fluids; it may be likewise serviceable in
an unwieldy habit from sluggish humors, and help to throw off a dropsy. From
fifteen drops to two tea-spoonfuls may betaken to or three times a day, in a
draught of sage tea or any other liquor, and continued for some time.

SENA TEA.
THE usual method of preparing this, is, by putting as much of the sena leaves
as your thumb and two fingers will contain into a teapot, and pouring upon it a
gill of boiling water; when cold, pour out the liquor, which will be strong
enough to give a grown person a stool or two.

A little manna and salts may be dissolved in this sena tea, which makes it
operate brisker.

SNUFF FOR THE HEADACHE.
THIS snuff may be safely used in all complaints of the head. It is prepared
from herbs which have a particular efficacy in those cases, as is manifest from
the infinite service received from it, in old and settled pains of the head.

It may be taken as freely as you please.

SPERMA CETI BOLUS.
Take of sperma ceti one scruple, of fever powder ten grains, make these into a
bolus with a sufficient quantity of syrup, to be taken once in six or eight
hours, with a little pennyroyal and hysteric water, in lying in cases and
miscarriages, in either of which where the pains are violent you may add three,
four, or five drops of Laudanum to each bolus; remember also to prevent
costiveness either by gentle clysters, a little sena tea, or some other mild
purgative.

SPERMA CETI EMULSION.
TAKE two drams of the powder of sperma ceti, rub it in a marble mortar, with a
quarter part of the yolk of one egg, till it is a smooth pulp; then add two
drams of fine sugar in powder, mix them well together, and by little and little
pour on half a pint of cold barley water; strain it through a fine hair or
coarse lawn sieve, which will keep back the undissolved part of the sperma
ceti, and render the emulsion smooth and even; to the whole you may add two
spoonfuls of cinnamon water.

A wine-glass may be taken as often as agreeable, in coughs, hoarseness, when
troubled with phlegm, or any of the like complaints; also in the hooping cough,
when, if they are feverish, you should join a little fever powder with it, and
purge them with rhubarb or the quick purging powder once in four or five days;
you may likewise give the stomach tincture between breakfast and dinner and
between dinner and supper: gentle vomits are oftentimes also serviceable.

SPERMA CETI AND SUGAR CANDY.
THIS may be taken at pleasure, when troubled with a cough or hoarseness,
difficulty of breathing, or with phlegm; it is often of some service, and so
innocent, it can do no harm even to young children.

SPIRIT OF LAVENDER
IS used in lowness of spirits as a cordial; it is also given in faintings and
pains in the head; and may be taken frequently, from ten to sixty drops, on a
lump of sugar, in wine and water, or any other liquor.

STEEL ELECTARY.
IN female obstructions this electary may be given, from half a dram to one
dram, night and morning, in the form of a bolus, or made into pills, as is most
agreeable, drinking a cup of cold chamomile flower tea, or a little pennyroyal
and hysteric water; if you have reason to think physic is proper, give a dose
of hiera picra; at bedtime, let the feet be bathed in warm water for ten
minutes, then wipe them very dry, and, if the weather is cold, wrap them up in
a piece of flannel.

STOMACH TINCTURE.
THIS tincture is highly proper in a weakness of the stomach, loss of appetite,
or bad digestion; as a bitter, it frequently contributes to the destroying of
worms; and not only excites the sense of hunger, but, by its warm aromatic
property, at the same time that it gives a grateful sensation, strengthens the
coats of the stomach, which by any cause may have been weakened, and renders it
more able to break and digest the food taken in for the nourishment of the body.

The dose for a grown person is from one to two tea-spoonfuls, an hour before
dinner, and three hours after dinner, in a glass of water; those who are
accustomed to drink wine, may add an equal quantity to the water.

When given to children for the worms, it should be taken the first thing in
the morning, and last at bedtime, in a little water or chamomile flower tea.

A child of seven years old may take a tea-spoonful for a dose; under that age
decrease the quantity as your judgment directs.

If you have reason to imagine the stomach is foul, let a gentle puke of
ipecacuanha be taken before the use of this tincture.

If inclined to be costive, now and then at bedtime take a dose of the opening
electary, or a few grains of rhubarb.

STRENGTHENING PLASTER.
A PIECE of this plaster may be applied in any wrench or strain, weakness of
the loins, or other parts.

TO MAKE A SYRUP.
DISSOLVE a pound of sugar in half a pint of water, over a gentle fire, in an
earthen pipkin; let it simmer one minute or two, take off the scum, and
preserve the syrup, which is proper to soften the electaries when they grow
dry, to make up pills or bolusses, and to give children their powders in.

TINCTURE OF BARK.
THIS is serviceable in many complaints, in weak and relaxed habits of body,
flushings and hectic heats; it checks profuse sweats, and braces up the solids;
it is highly proper in all kinds of bleedings, but more efficacious when joined
with a fourth part of elixir of vitriol.

It may be given on any emergency; when taken for a constancy, the proper hours
are the same as for elixir of vitriol, which see.

The dose is from one to two tea-spoonfuls in any liquor.

TOOTH POWDER FOR THE SCURVY IN THE GUMS.
THIS powder eleanses and preserves the teeth and gums, takes off scales and
all kind of filth without injuring the enamel, which gritty powders are apt to
do.

It should be used with a piece of sponge, every thing which is hard or rough
being prejudicial, as they destroy the enamel, when the teeth must necessarily
decay.

TURNER'S CERATE
IS commonly used for burns, cuts, scalds, bruises, chilblains, and other
little complaints where the skin is worn off, and is so well known I need not
be more particular.

VALERIAN ROOT
IS of late years come into great esteem in all nervous disorders; of the
bruised root they make a tea in the same manner as sena tea, and drink it three
or four times a day, which is a proper thing to take the nervous tincture in,
being of itself I am afraid not effectual, as the quantity of the root given in
this manner, or in the tincture prepared from it, is too trifling to have any
great dependence upon.

VALERIAN ROOT IN POWDER.
IF you intend to reap benefit from it, you must take it in pretty large
quantities. It is usually given from half a dram to one dram, in a little
liquor of any kind, and should be repeated once in six or eight hours.

YELLOW BASILICON
IS made use of in cases which require more discharge than the Turner's cerate
will promote, but in a great measure applied for the same intention.

WORM POWDER.
THIS powder should be taken the very first thing early in the morning, and the
last at bedtime, at least one hour after supper, mixed in a little honey,
current jelly, or somewhat of the like nature, and where it is not a spoiled
child, let a cupful of cold camomile tea, or water with a tea-spoonful of the
stomach tincture, be drank after it. This will keep them open; nevertheless, in
most cases you should purge once in four or five days; for very young children
rhubarb is proper; should that not prove strong enough, the quick purging
powder may be given; but where they are older and will take it, cleanse their
bowels with the purging apozem.

ITS DOSE.
Above 14 years -- from 25 grains to 2 scruples. Between 7 and 14 -- from 1
scruple to half a dram. Between 3 and 7 -- from 12 grains to 1 scruple. Between
1 and 3 -- from 6 to 12 grains.
ON BLEEDING.
IRATHER choose to mention the complaints in which bleeding is advisable under
this general head, than with the medicines for the respective disorders,
because it may naturally be supposed they cannot always procure the assistance;
for which reason, directing to bleed before the use of the medicines, in cases
where it might prove serviceable, may be a means of preventing their
administering those remedies, which, taken in time, will frequently alone
remove the complaints. Besides, I would not wish the unskilful to be too free
with the lancet, as an injudicious evacuation of blood may be succeeded with
very bad consequences; and my intention through the whole, as I observed in the
preface, being no other than to supply families with a few useful remedies for
slight indispositions, by which they may frequently prevent tedious illnesses,
but not to put the unexperienced upon trifling with themselves when they are
really ill, and can have proper advice.

Blood should be taken away in the beginning of fevers, when there is a strong,
quick pulse, the eyes red and fiery, with great heat and thirst; but never when
they are in the decline, as, from being inflammatory, they are often at this
period degenerated into the nevous kind, when the chief of the affair is to be
managed by the frequent application of blisters.

In asthmatical complaints, if the patient be of a full habit of body.

In coughs, if the pulse is quick and full, with an oppression at the breast,
or difficulty in breathing.

In colics, where the pain is violent, the bowels inflamed, and no stools.

In fits, if the spirits are hurried and overpowered, and the patient full of
blood.

In swimmings, dizziness, and pains of the head.

In stitches, and pleuritic disorders of the side and breast, particularly if
it gives pain to take a deep breath.

In sore throats, where there is a strong, quick pulse, and the throat greatly
swelled and inflamed.

For the piles it is sometimes serviceable; as likewise in female obstructions,
and frequently in rheumatic complaints; in apoplectic disorders, a dysentery or
bloody flux, and irksome heat of the bowels; for the hooping cough,
particularly if of a full habit of body, and the phlegm which is brought up
appears streaked with blood; in all of which cases, the quantity taken away
must be proportioned to the age of the patient, and the violence of the
complaint.

Bleeding again ought to be directed in large abscesses or swellings, where the
heat and pain is immoderate; for in these cases, by drawing blood, the matter
is more easily and speedily brought to ripen, and by that means the body more
effectually freed from its distempers.

In a word, wherever prevail sore eyes, sciatica or hip gout, a dry husky
cough, an headache, pains of the womb or of the bladder, dry gripes, strangury,
gravel, pain from the stone, violent bleedings of the nose, ears, or other
parts, an inveterate scorbutical itch, and the like, opening a vein is of
peculiar service; but in dropsies, a jaundice, the gout, and all illnesses
occasioned by a relaxed state of body, an impoverished blood, or too great
weakness of the vessels, you must seek relief from the medicines recommended in
this little manual, and not, by an abrupt and preposterous use of bleeding,
increase the disorder, and ruin the health of the patient and your own
reputation.

ON THE APPLICATION OF BLISTERS.
TO the cautions here laid down with respect to bleeding, I shall add a word or
two concerning the application of blisters.

The most excellent remedy may be prostituted by an inconsiderate, rash, and
foolish practice; which, it is plain, oftentimes happens with regard to
blisters, by ordering them indiscriminately in all severs, and without
distinction in any time of the distemper, which can only be the effect of
ignorance.

Therefore, before we resolve on an expedient of this nature, it would be
convenient to consider whether the fever be of the inflammatory or nervous
kind; if of the former, instead of blistering the lancet ought to be used, and
a mild cooling regimen set on soot, as already directed; this will moderate the
heat of the blood, and by degrees restore it to its due temper. On the other
hand, in fevers of the nervous class, where the symptoms are quite different,
the pulse being low and weak, the spirits almost spent, and the eyes, instead
of appearing sparkling, red and fiery, grown quite dim, we ought by all means
to make use of blisters, and that freely.

They are oftentimes proper in paralytic and nervous complaints, as likewise in
rheumatic pains and pleurisies, in which cases a blister applied immediately
upon the part affected frequently affords great relief; and, and in a variety
of other cases they are of infinite service; but then regard must be paid to
the state of the patient's blood, for if a full, quick pulse, great heat,
thirst, and the other symptoms of an inflammatory fever attend upon the
disorders, the fever must first be conquered, and afterward, if necessity
requires it, let blisters be applied. Should they cause a strangury, which will
sometimes be the case, give the patient plentifully of marshmallow drink, or
barley water with a little gum arabic dissolved in it; or if there is a
purging, which you would wish to be stopped, of the hartshorn drink, and this
inconvenience will soon be remedied.

In regard to the management of them, the plaster should be spread upon a piece
of an old glove, and bound on to the part intended; after twenty-four hours,
the strength of the flies being pretty well spent, you may remove the blister,
and, if you cannot procure the proper dressings, a little Turner's cerate
spread upon a piece of fine rag may supply its place.

Should any blisters appear unbroke, snip them with a pair of scissars; if they
give violent pain, this may be done when the plaster has been applied only
twelve hours; when, by discharging the water, and laying it smooth on again,
you ease the patient, and give the blister an opportunity of acting more.

INDEX.
A. AGUE -- See Bark page 3, bark wine 5 Acidities at the stomach See
Gascoigne's powder 9, magnesia alba 13 Asthma See Asthmatic tincture 1
Appetite, to create See Elixir of vitriol 6, stomach tincture 24, tincture of
bark 25

B. Bleeding, outward See Fryar's balsam 9 Bleeding, inward See Elixir of
vitriol 6, Fryar's balsam 9, tincture of bark 25 Blood, to thin See Hartshorn
drops 10 Bones, aches and pains in See Powder for sweats 17 Breast, tightness
and pain across See Asthmatic tincture 1, oily emulsion 15 Breast, Soreness at
See Balsamic electary 3 Breathing, difficulty in See Sperma ceti and sugar
candy 23 Bruises See Opodeldoc 15, Turner's cerate 26 Bruises, inward See
Balsamic electary 3, Fryar's balsam 9 Burns See Turner's cerate 26, yellow
basilicon 26

C. Chilblains See Diachylon plaster 16, Turner's cerate 26, yellow basilicon
26 Colic See Colic mixture 5 Colic, with stools See Astringent electary 1,
colic mixture 5 Cough See Asthmatic tincture 1, balsamic electary 3, pectoral
drink 16. sperma ceti emulsion 23, sperma ceti and sugar candy 23 Cough,
hooping See Sperma ceti emulsion 23 Cuts See Diachylon plaster 6, Turner's
cerate 26, yellow basilicon 26

D. Digestion, bad See Stomach tincture, page 24 Dilute, liquors proper See
Barley water 5, pectoral drink 16 Dizziness See Palsy drops 16 Dropsy See
Diuretic mixture 6, quick purging powder 18, scorbutic elixir 21 Drowsiness See
Palsy drop 16

F. Faintings See Hartshorn drops 10, nervous tincture 14, sal volatile 21,
spirit of lavender 23 Fever See Fever powder 7, Gascoign's powder 9, salt of
wormwood draught 21 Fever, intermittent See Bark 3, bark wine 5 Fever, upon the
spirits See As above in faintings Fits See Fit drops for children 8 Food easy
of digestion See Salop 20 Flux See Astringent electary 1

G. Gravel See Diuretic mixture 6, marshmallow drink 14 Gripings See Colic
mixture 5, Gascoign's powder 9

H. Headache See Nervous tincture 14, palsy drops 16, snuff for the headache 22
Heart-burn See Heart-burn-lozenges 11, magnesia alba 13 Hoarseness See
Asthmatic tincture 1, Fryar's balsam 9, oily emulsion 15, sperma ceti emulsion
23 Hysterics See Hysteric mixture 11, fit drops for children 8

I. Jaundice See Jaundice electary, page 11 Itch See Page 12 Inflamed parts See
Oil of roses 14

L. Loins, pain in See Diuretic mixture 6, strengthening plaster 25 Lyings in
See Sperma ceti bolus 22

N. Nervous complaints See Nervous tincture 14, valerian root 26 Nourishment
proper for weak stomachs See Salop 20

O. Obstructions, female See Steel electary 24

P. Palsy See Palsy drops 16, and liniment 16 Phlegm See Asthmatic tincture 1,
sperma ceti emulsion 23, sperma ceti and sugar candy 23 Piles See Pile electary
17, and liniment 17 Pleurisy See Oily emulsion 15 Purges, various kinds of See
Glauber's salts 10, magnesia alba 13, manna 13, opening electary 15, purging
apozem 18, quick purging powder 18, rhubarb 19, sena tea 22 Purgings, to stop
See Astringent electary 1, laudanum 13

R. Rheumatism See Palsy liniment 16, rheumatic powder 19

S. Scalds See Turner's cerate 26, yellow basilicon 26 Scurvy See Scorbutic
elixir 21, tooth powder 25 Side, stitches in See Oily emulsion, page 15 Solids,
to brace up See Elixir of vitriol 6, tincture of bark 25 Spirits, lowness of
see Nervous tincture 14, sal volatile 21, spirit of lavender 23 Stomach-ach See
Colic mixture 5 Stomach-ach, foulness of See Ipecacuanha 12, quick purging
powder 18 Stomach-ach, sickness at See Salt of wormwood draught 21 Stomach-ach
strengtheners See Elixir of vitriol 6, rhubarb 19, stomach tincture 24,
tincture of bark 25 Stomach-ach, weakness of See Stomach tincture 24 Strains
See Opodeldoc 15, strengthening plaster 25 Sweats, to promote See Powder for
sweats 17 Sweats, to prevent See Elixir of vitriol 6, tincture of bark 25
Swellings See Oil of roses 14

T. Throat, sore See Gargle for a sore throat 9

U. Urine, heat of See Diuretic mixture 6, marshmallow drink 14 Vomits See
Ipecacuanha 12

W. Water, stoppage of See Diuretic mixture 6 Wind, to expel See Colic mixture
5 Worms See Rhubarb 19 stomach tincture 24, Worm powder 26 Wounds, fresh See
Diachylon plaster 6, Fryar's balsam 9 Wounds, old See Turner's cerate 26,
yellow basilicon 26 Wrench See Opodeldoc 15, strengthening plaster 25

FINIS.

