EXPERIMENTS AND OBSERVATIONS ON THE BLOOD WHEN MIXED WITH URINE.

BY EVERARD HOME, ESQUIRE. F. R. S.

EXPERIMENTS, etc.
Read before the ROYAL SOCIETY, June 16, 1796.
THE greater number of cases in physic and surgery are only important and
interesting to those engaged in the study of medicine; they are not connected
with general science, and therefore do not properly come under the
consideration of this learned Society.

Practitioners, however, in these professions have, upon many occasions,
brought to light facts of importance in the animal economy, which could only
be discovered while the human body was laboring under disease; and those have
been distinguished with a place in the Philosophical Transactions.

As every change the blood undergoes must appear an object of importance to
those who study the economy of animals, I am induced to believe the present
observations on the change produced on it by being mixed with the urine, will
not be considered as wholly undeserving of notice.

I was led to pay attention to this subject from considering the following
case, which came under my care.

A gentleman, seventy-one years of age, in the spring 1795, found that in
making water, the urine had the appearance of blood, and congealed into a solid
mass as soon as received into the vessel. This complaint appeared to have
arisen from the rupture of a vessel in one of the kidneys, for he had a pain in
his loins, but none in the region of the bladder. He seemed to void no water,
for the whole quantity which was expelled at any one time, amounting to about 4
ounces, formed itself into a coagulum; next day he voided bloody water, which
did not coagulate. This continued for three or four days, and then went
entirely off.

In the spring, 1796, he had a return of the same complaint. It came on in the
evening of the 3d of April; on the 4th it was very violent; and in the
afternoon there was a total suppression. A catheter was passed six or seven
times; but the oval holes near the end of the instrument were always filled
with coagulated blood, and no urine could be drawn off. On the 5th, a larger
catheter was passed, with small round holes, less likely to have the coagulum
entangled in them, but no urine came away. In the evening it was introduced
again, having its cavity completely lined with a flexible gum catheter, which
was withdrawn as soon as the instrument was carried to the fundus of the
bladder; and in this way 4 ounces of a bloody fluid were drawn off, which on
exposure coagulated.

On the morning of the 6th, a pint of bloody urine was drawn off; this
operation was repeated three times in the twenty-four hours, and the same
quantity was brought away each time.

On the 7th, the urine drawn off was less tinged with blood; and when it was
allowed to stand, the upper part became tolerably clear. There was little
change in the circumstances for six days; but on the 13th the urine drawn off
was of a darker red color, and in smaller quantity. On the 16th, the color
was more of a light brown, and after standing some time, a whitish powder was
deposited; the urine drawn off in the morning upon getting up, was nearly of
the natural appearance, but that brought away in the course of the day, had a
deeper tinge, and more of the white sediment. It is also to be remarked, that
the sediment evidently passed off only with the last part of the urine. On the
19th, the urine was tolerably clear, and the white sediment more completely
separated, and in greater quantity. In the course of the might, while lying in
bed, the patient voided naturally in many different attempts, 4 ounces of
water, but could not make any when up. The urine now continued clear from any
tinge, but no more passed without the catheter being introduced, till the 28th,
when he again made some water naturally, but could not completely empty the
bladder; on the 29th, the quantity which required being drawn off was less; and
by the 5th of May he made water as usual, at which time the sediment began to
diminish, and gradually disappeared.

From the symptoms which have been stated, it appears that part of the blood
which passed into the bladder from the kidney had remained there, and formed a
coagulum, which coagulum gave a bloody tinge to the urine, and caused an
inability to void it without assistance, till the coagulum was dissolved.

With a view to ascertain how far this had been the case, and discover what
changes the blood undergoes when placed in such circumstances, I instituted the
following experiments. They were performed by Mr. CHARLES GROVER, a very
ingenious surgeon, at present house surgeon in St. George's hospital.

Experiment I. Four ounces of blood were drawn from the arm into a phial
containing 4 ounces of fresh urine, and the phial was kept in the temperature
of the human body; in fifteen minutes the whole mixture formed an uniform firm
coagulum, and appeared wholly composed of blood.

This experiment was made to ascertain the probable time the blood would take
to coagulate in the bladder.

Experiment II. Six ounces of blood were drawn from the arm into 6 ounces of
fresh urine; in fifteen minutes the whole mass became one solid coagulum. In
seven hours, 6 drams of clear fluid were separated from it; this was poured
off, and the same quantity of fresh urine was added; after standing nine hours
it was poured off; some red globules were mixed with it, but sunk to the bottom
undissolved. The coagulum had fresh urine added to it three times a day, the
former urine being previously poured off, and allowed to stand some hours for
examination.

For the first five days the coagulum appeared to undergo little change, except
becoming smaller in size, and the urine poured off from it was tolerably clear,
but on standing deposited a dark cloudy sediment.

On the sixth day, the urine, when poured off from the coagulum, was of a dark
red color, and deposited a greater quantity of a dark colored sediment, but
on standing became tolerably clear.

On the ninth day, the coagulum was reduced to the size of the original
quantity of blood drawn from the arm.

On the 13th day, the size of the coagulum was a good deal reduced; the urine
poured off from it was still more tinged with the red globules; but when
allowed to stand, the upper part became clear, and free from the red tinge, and
the sediment had the appearance of a whitish powder. From this time the
quantity of white sediment increased, and the size of the coagulum diminished.
In its decrease from this period the loss was from its external surface, and
nearly equally all round; what remained appearing like the nucleus of the
original coagulum. On the twenty-fifth day, it was of the size of a large
cherry, and on the twenty-ninth it entirely disappeared. Some red globules were
very distinctly seen in the sediment along with the white powder.

To see how far the changes the blood had undergone in this experiment depended
on the peculiar properties of the urine, the following experiment was made,
with blood and common water.

Experiment III. Six ounces of blood were drawn from the arm into 6 ounces of
water. In a quarter of an hour, the whole became one solid coagulum. In twelve
hours, 6 ounces of a clear water, of a bright red color, were separated, nor
did it on standing deposite any sediment.

This coagulum had fresh water added to it twice a day, and what was poured off
was allowed to stand for examination.

The coagulum on the second day began to break; on the fifth had a putrid
smell; and in eighteen days was almost entirely dissolved.

The water which was poured off was of a bright red color from the beginning
to the end of the experiment, in consequence of the red globules being
dissolved; it had a very offensive smell, but never deposited any white
sediment; the coagulating lymph dissolving from putrefaction.

As it is evident, from the result of the last experiment, that the coagulum
remaining so long undissolved in the second experiment depended upon its being
mixed with the urine, I was desirous of knowing whether it was the urine
incorporated with the coagulum, or that which surrounded it, which produced
this effect. To determine this point I instituted the following experiment.

Experiment IV. Four ounces of blood were drawn from the arm into a cup, and
allowed to coagulate. 4 ounces more were drawn into a separate cup. From each
of these equal portions of coagulum, at the end of three hours, 1 ounce of
serum was separated, and poured off. To one of them fresh urine was added; to
the other common water. The urine and water were changed night and morning.

The water was tinged of a bright red color throughout the whole experiment,
and deposited no sediment. On the eighth day the coagulum was rather looser in
its texture. On the thirteenth day it began to break, and by the twentieth day
it was nearly dissolved. The progress corresponding with that of the coagulum
in Experiment III.

The urine the second day of the experiment was clear, but the bottom of the
basin was covered with red globules, undissolved.

On the fifth day, the urine poured off was tinged of a bright red color,
similar to the water taken from the other coagulum; and after standing some
hours a white sediment was deposited.

On the thirteenth day it was looser in texture, and more dissolved than the
coagulum in the water. It continued to tinge the urine of a bright red color,
and what was poured off deposited a white sediment in greater quantity. On the
eighteenth, the coagulum was nearly dissolved; so that the coagulum immersed in
the urine dissolved two days sooner than that in the water.

From this experiment we find, that it was the urine incorporated with the
coagulum in Experiment II. that prevented the red globules from dissolving, and
preserved the coagulum for so long a time, since these effects were not
produced by urine while simply surrounding the coagulum.

If we compare Experiment II. with the result of the case, they agree so
entirely, that it leaves no doubt of the process carried on in the bladder
being similar to that which took place out of the body. The patient was unable
to make water for twenty-four days, although the passages readily admitted,
during the whole of that time, an uncommonly large instrument, which could not
have been the case had there been any obstruction in them; for six days more he
voided it with difficulty, but afterward made water very well.

The coagulum out of the body was reduced in twenty-five days to the size of a
cherry, and in four days more it was completely dissolved.

The patient's urine became darker, from the red globules mixing with it, in
nine days. In the experiment this took place in five days.

The white sediment was first observed, in both instances, about the twelfth
day; it continued to be deposited till the patient got well, and to the end of
the experiment.

That the blood is capable of uniting with a quantity of urine equal to itself,
so as to form a firm coagulum; that the red globules do not dissolve in a
coagulum so formed; that an admixture of urine prevents the blood from becoming
putrid; and that the coagulating lymph breaks down into parts almost resembling
a soft powder, are facts which I believe to be new; -- they may, however, have
been before ascertained, although I have not been acquainted with them.

They are certainly not generally known, and one object of the present paper is
to communicate them to others.

These facts, considered abstractedly, may not appear of much importance; but
when compared with what takes place in the living body, and found to agree with
the process the blood undergoes in the urinary bladder, they become of no small
value, since they enable us to account for the symptoms that occur in that
disease, and lead to the most simple and effectual mode of relieving them.


