THE FAST, A POEM, TRANSLATED FROM THE PROPHET ISAIAH.

By the Rev. JAMES MURRAY.

Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not. Isaiah lviii. 3. [Price 8 d.]

THE FAST.
ISAIAH LVIII. 1 1 Cry aloud, spare not; lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and
show my people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins.

2 Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did
righteousness, and forsook not the ordinances of their God: They ask of me the
ordinances of justice; they take delight in approaching to God.

3 Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not? Wherefore have we
afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your
fast you find pleasure, and exact all your labors.

4 Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness: Ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard
on high.

5 Is it such a fast that I have chosen; a day for a man to afflict his soul?
Is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes
under him? Will thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord?

6 Is not this the fast that I have chosen; to loose the bands of wickedness,
to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break
every yoke?

7 Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor,
that are cast out, to thy house; when thou see the naked, that thou cover
him, and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?


.
IN lofty accents let thy voice be heard,
And show the tribes the mandates of the Lord.
Through all the land proclaim what crimes abound,
Let every word loud like a trumpet sound;
Spare neither age nor sex, nor low nor high,
Let all the house of Jacob hear thy cry:
For from the lowest cottage to the throne,
All ranks of men in paths of vice have gone.
They much profess, but yet their meaning's naught,
For not one word's an emblem of their thought.
In show fictitious they draw nigh to me,
And act as if Jehovah did not see.
With pomp and splendour, void of soul and grace,
They pay devotion in my holy place.
A pleasure counterfeit smiles on each brow,
And songs melodious from their lips do flow,
That such as see them in this apish mode,
Would almost swear they did delight in God;
Yet all is fiction; -- if you mark their course,
They still proceed from evil deeds to worse.
Their state devotion's all an action feigned,
For when they worship God, cursed self's their end.
Their slumbering priests like hirelings serve for pay,
And idly sleep and saunter out the day.
Like drowsy idle shepherds, who at noon,
Stretch out their lazy limbs upon the down,
And sleep securely in the heat of day,
While all their flocks do wander far astray:
And when the rav'ning wolves the sheep devour,
The shepherd lies supine, and sleeps secure.
At last the sluggard wakes, and as a proof
He loves the flock, he cries and scolds the wolf.
So thus the shepherds of the sacred fold,
They cannot watch, but loudly can they scold.
Even God himself, (they are so void of grace),
They even dare to scold him to his face.
'How vain is it for us to fast and pray,
'To waste our labor and lament a day,
'To vex our souls for sin, for though that we
'Do fast and pray, Jehovah will not see;
'Or if he sees us, pays us no regard,
'Nor thinks our labor worthy of reward.
'Our schemes are baffled, and our troops defeat,
'And all our wisest projects are too late.
'The chiefs of Bozrah, who obeyed our laws,
'Have now rebelled, and Libnah's joined their cause;
'Now both are rebels, and defy our hosts,
'Defeat our armies, and invade our coasts:
'Yet we have fasted many a weary day,
'But now we find it vain to fast and pray.'
[THE WORDS OF THE ALMIGHTY.]
Can such profane dissemblers think that I
Will either hear their voice or mind their cry?
For when ye seem to fast in outward show,
You seek not things above, but things below;
Your souls are lofty, and your hearts are proud,
This all your actions do proclaim aloud;
For when ye fast, and feign to afflict your souls,
You swing in pleasure, and ye swill in bowls;
And when ye come to bow before my throne,
Ye make your servants drudge like slaves at home.
You never fast but when ye mean to smite,
And never pray unless for power to fight.
No more ye mean when ye your sins confess,
Than to bribe heaven for freedom to oppress.
Think ye that God, all gracious, ever will
Regard their litanies, who pray to kill?
To kill! and whom? your very flesh and blood;
Should I regard you, how could I be good?
Cease thus profanely to invoke my aid,
Or think I Will help to kill the souls I Have made.
Ye tyrants, dread my thunder, fear your God,
And tremble at the lifting of my rod.
Is it a solemn fast to please the Lord,
To bow the head, and next transgress my word?
Can sackcloth sanctified, conceal your sin,
Or hide from me your ugliness within?
All space I view, and all the orbs that roll,
Mine eyes behold, and penetrate the whole.
Your inmost thoughts, their secret springs I see,
Proceed from selfish vile hypocrisy.
To me's a fast an acceptable day,
When none but hypocrites do fast and pray;
When bended necks and stubborn hearts draw nigh,
To offer vain requests to the Most High?
Cry loud and long, yet for no other ends,
Except to kill their foes, enslave their friends. --
Who never bend their knees before my bar,
Till sin and guilt have plunged them deep in war;
And then they think that I am so unjust,
To slaughter righteous men to feed their lust. --
Their lust of power; and when they steal my word,
Maintain they have dominion from the Lord.
Their legislature, though reverse to mine,
They yet eclept a government divine.
Such is their power and impudence of face,
They Would swear that Satan's power proceeds from grace:
Even Saul, Manasseh, Ahab, all these three,
Pretended each they had their power from me.
Yet they from me had power no other way,
Than wandering slaves have power to go astray;
For power to live and move implies no more,
Than to preserve what I have made before.
Abuse of power depends upon men's will,
And all must blame themselves when they do ill.
All just dominion has its base in right,
And shines self-evident like beams of light:
Man's lusts apart, all mankind must agree,
That only righteous power proceeds from me.
None need dispute who has a right to rule,
The God of wisdom never appoints a fool.
When fools wear crowns, and tyrants sceptres sway,
Then subjects sin not though they disobey:
When legislative power's opposed to right,
Men are not ruled by justice, but by might;
Force is no law, and violence no rule,
Who practice either must be knave or fool.
The scheme of government which I approve,
Is that which rules the heart of man by love.
What Is Aaron's race or David's line to me,
When priests are proud, and kings love tyranny?
The poor man's interest, and his soul's as dear
In my esteem, as those of prince or peer.
Kings were appointed, legislatures made,
Men's interests to preserve, not to invade.
How great their power, how far their might should go,
Are things quite plain, not difficult to show.
The end of power is universal good,
A thing conspicuous, easy understood.
First do no ill, than all the good you can,
This is the end of government to man.
INFERENCES.
Kings often do, and princes oftimes pray,
For power to rule with universal sway;
For royal proclamations seldom come
Abroad, unless to bring dominion home.
When kings proclaim a fast, the blind may spy,
They have at least a vineyard in their eye.
Ahab, than whom a baser prince never swayed
A scepter over a nation, whin'd and prayed;
Proclaimed a fast at Jezebel's command,
And issued humiliation through the land:
But underneath this mask dark vengeance lay,
And Naboth suffered when the court did pray;
The royal monarch gained his point at last,
And consecrated murder by a fast.
The venal minister's of Ahab's court,
Meant more by tasting than a simple sport;
Like cunning politicians, who conceal
Their dark designs against the commonweal;
Who, lest some prying folk should chance to know,
Strike up some novel masquerade or show,
Some Cock-lane Ghost, or if these fail, at last
Amuse the people with a public fast.
State humiliations are but state engines,
Intended chiefly to mask over black crimes I. Kings xxi. 1. to 13.
.
Fasts seldom from the royal power proceed,
Unless the prince is sadly pinched indeed.
Give monarch's troops, and but the treas'ry fill,
They Will leave the tribes of men to fast who will.
A poor exchequer and the reg'ments thin,
To monarch's always is the greatest sin.
When loads of wealth are squandered on their lust,
And all the ponderous sums they hold in trust,
Are scattered far abroad to gather power,
They call it treason to refuse them more.
The subjects must not judge, although they pay,
How much the king and courtiers throw away.
Implicit faith to courts is reckoned due,
And none have right to judge except a few; --
Whose interest always blinds their judgments so,
They never err, be it ill or good they do.
Thus faith politic, like men's creed at Rome,
Is free to be explored by only -- some.
The ignoble vulgar must remain content,
Though monarchs should mortgage the continent.
Thus speak the proud, but hear the Eternal say
What men should ponder when they fast and pray.
[THE WORD OF THE LORD.]
'He who proclaims a fast ought first to free
'His subjects from all yokes of tyranny:
'Loose all unrighteous bands both more and less,
'And cease even helpless beggars to oppress.
'Set prisons open, and the hungry feed,
'Bring water to the thirsty when they need;
'Give wholesome covering to the naked poor,
'To all in want set open wide the door.
'When to your home your helpless friends repair,
'Let them have always ready welcome there.
'Nor suffer sycophants for to deny
'Your presence, when a needy friend stands by.
'Then shall thy glory like the morning ray,
'Burst forth in splendour, and increase like day;
'Health like a bubbling fountain shall spring forth,
'And pleasures flow from east, south, west, and north.
'The trump of Fame before thy face shall bear
'Thy high renown, and glory close the rear;
'And when thy orisons shall ascend on high,
'Thy God, propitious, shall attend thy cry;
'Grant all thy suits, and thy requests receive,
'And even ere you ask shall answer give.
'Throw every yoke but legal bands away,
'Nor meanly rule with arbitrary sway;
'For threatening proclamations never can
'Insure obedience, or regard from man.
'How vain is it to think when kings command,
'That men should run if they but wag their hand.'
Thus spoke Jehovah to the Jews of old,
And this the Prophets to the Fathers told Isaiah lviii. 8, 9.
.
PART II.
EVER since the time that monarchies began,
And monarchs claimed dominion over man,
Princes who aimed at arbitrary sway,
And meant to make their villains all obey;
Have bribed an hireling priesthood first to blind
The human conscience, and debase the mind:
For every tyrant, if he loose his purse.
Will find some Balaam ready with a curse; --
Cheerful to listen to his Lord's command,
To scatter heaven's vengeance through the land;
False prophets, Hannaniah like, to tell
When every thing is wrong, that all is well. --
Whose power of face, and vilest impudence,
Exceed the utmost bounds of all pretense.
They think no shame to tell the grossest lies,
And publish fictions for true prophecies.
Even when an host advances in array,
Will gravely swear they saw them run away:
Make ign'rant fools believe (for there are fools
At all times ready to be great men's tools)
That if they bow their heads or bend the knee,
In formal, feigned, vile hypocrisy,
With bashful looks conceal the worst intents,
That then they keep divine commandments.
When Zedekiah erst over Judah reigned,
And God's own people all his laws profaned;
False prophets then* as well as prophets since,
Told lies and flattery to that weak prince:
They augur'd all things as the courtiers willed,
But never found their prophecies fulfilled.
Even those who trusted to their prophecies,
In sad experience found them all prove lies.
When Salem's stately towers and walls around,
In ruins lay quite level with the ground;
The temple sacked, and its foundation tilled,
Then were their godly prophecies fulfilled.
Their haughty monarch, whose perverted mind,
To truth and all true discipline was blind;
Who to his flattering sycophants gave ear,
For his credulity he soon paid dear:
He saw his kingdom lost, his city taken,
His dearest offspring in his presence slain;
What now he saw was all foretold before,
He saw it true; alas, he saw no more!
The cruel Chaldean then put out his eyes,
And in his blindness proved the prophecies.
Helkiah's son, of Aaron's sacred line,
Of Anathoth, by augury divine,
In strongest emblems showed his dismal fate;
At last hew saw the truth; but ah! too late.
When Babel's warlike sons approached near,
And filled the tribes of Judah all with fear;
The wise foresaw the land's approaching doom,
And trembled for their miseries to come.
But Azur's faithless son, an augur base,
Who yet at court passed for a child of grace,
Bribed by the ministry to publish lies,
Came forth with asses loads of prophecies.
Preached final conquest over every foe,
His lying pasquils over the country go,
Industrious spread by ministerial tools,
To gull the unwary and to flatter fools.
Full fifty thousand in a month were sold,
From Salem to Beersheba I am told:
And when the faithless people would not buy,
The courtiers gave them out of courtesy.
So sanguine they to blind the people's eyes,
They turned pedlars of false prophecies.
And Shephatiah, D -- h I would say,
As Balaam preached and published, he did pay;
The old false prophet in his chariot flew,
And every lie he caught he dressed it new;
Cursed as he went, and as his curses flowed,
Held up his hands, and turned his eyes to God.
His sanctimonious phiz and sly grimace
Passed among partisans for signs of grace;
So reverend like he vamped all his lies,
That grossest falsehoods passed for prophecies.
Thus courtiers praised him, and the venal tribes,
Who judge a cause by interest, truth by bribes; --
Who rights divine or human will not see,
Unless unlocked by int'rest's golden key.
Hardened in sin, and vainly puffed with praise,
He showed some marks which were not signs of grace;
For which the Almighty gave him in his ire,
Nor son nor daughter to succeed their sire Jer. xxix. 32.
.
While things turned worse, and worse, and every day
Brought still new tidings of some fresh dismay,
The king alarmed, and roused through fear, at last,
Turned first devote, and then proclaimed a fast.
He called the priests and prophets to prepare
A scheme of fasting, and a form of prayer,
To try if heaven would grant him power to kill,
All those that were not subject to his will.
Court, priests, and prophets, when that sov'reign's cry
Run at their call, and at their nod draw nigh;
For royal mandates have a powerful zest,
And like a mighty loadstone draw a priest.
Even bishops feel their sympathetic force,
And all who have their feelings in their purse.
From Jearim to Beersheba all obeyed,
Even judges fasted and attorneys prayed;
One would have thought all Judah were sincere,
For naught was heard but mighty peals of prayer;
Like Ahab's priests they would not be said nay,
Though God refused to hear, yet still they pray.
Than Hananiah none showed more zeal,
In fervent fasting for the commonweal;
With labored suits he prayed, and while he cried,
The very God of battles he defied.
Of Jewish valor vauntingly he spoke,
And with a symbol brake the Chaldean yoke Jer. xxviii. 10.
;
Made all the tribes believe their foes would run
Like bats and owls before the approaching sun.
He proved still more, that on that fatal day,
When Nergal Nergal, a Chaldean officer.
conquered, that he ran away.
Him fools believed, and lived in hope to see
The Jews victorious and the Chaldeans flee:
So strong their faith, they boast how every Jew
Had conquered squadrons, told they legions slew;
At their approach their foes still run away,
And yet the conquering tribes still lost the day.
When heaven's ang'ry frowns their hopes beguiled,
Then Hananiah swore Jehovah smiled;
Told how their foes were blasted since that day,
The guilty Jews began to fast and pray.
Yet every post brought tidings worse and worse,
Often times the foot were slain, sometimes the horse:
All this was proved a victory complete,
And those who vanquished were aye defeat.
Such power has fasting in the hands of kings,
It changes nature, and the cause of things.
Even sins are sanctified when princes pray,
And light turns darkness, darkness shines like day.
All this a venal priesthood will declare,
And consecrate plain murder lawful war.
Even so it was in Ahab's pious reign,
Baal's prophets prayed till Naboth he was slain.
Whatever the prince desired, with one accord,
The priests insur'd him always from the Lord.
Four hundred prophets in a lusty ring,
As they obsequiously stood round the king,
With rosy gills in cringing accents bless,
And swore that Ramoth Gilead sure was his.
But shall I prosper, the vain prince replied,
They all said prosper; but the prophets ly'd.
With hieroglyphic horns (vain symbols those)
To show how wicked men would push their foes,
These lying prophets, with a solemn farce,
Made foolish Ahab think himself was Mars;
But when the awful day of battle came,
He found their words and deeds were not the same.
It Is vain to fast and pray while men remain
Resolved to hold, and all their sins retain.
They cannot be humble who resolve to sin,
Nor are they pure who lodge vile thoughts within.
It Is no hard matter for to fast till four,
Then feast on turtle when the fast is over.
Where envy rules, or proud ambition reigns,
Religion's self is fettered fast in chains.
However abstemious envious mortals are,
With God and man they wage eternal war.
Whole chapels crowded full of envious men,
Are but an image of that dreary den,
Envy's dark cave, which erst the virgin found
In a dark vale, and deep below the ground.
Where Envy, seated in her dark abode,
Defiled with ropy gore and clots of blood;
Shut from the wind and from the wholesome skies,
In a deep vale the dreary dungeon lies;
Dismal and cold, where not a ray of light
Invades the winter, or disturbs the night.
A poisonous morsel in her teeth she chewed,
And gorged the flesh of vipers for her food.
Minerva, loathing, turned away her eye,
The hideous monster, rising heavily,
Came stalking forward, with a sullen pace,
And left her mangled offals on the place.
Soon as she saw the goddess gay and bright,
She fetched a groan at such a cheerful sight.
Livid and meagre were her looks, her eye
In foul distorted glances turned awry;
A hord of gall her inward parts possessed,
And spread a greenness over her cancer'd breast;
Her teeth were brown with rust, and from her tongue
In dangling drops the stringy poison hung.
She never smiles but when the wretched weep,
Nor lulls her malice with a moment's sleep;
Restless in spite, while watchful to destroy,
She pines and sickens at another's joy;
Foe to herself, distressing and distressed,
She bears her own tormentor in her breast.
She takes her staff hung round with wreaths of thorn,
And sails along, in howling tempests born,
Over fields and flowery meadows; where she steers
Her baneful course, a mighty blast appears,
Mildews and blights; the meadows are defaced,
The fields and flowers and the whole year laid waste.
On mortals next, and peopled towns she falls,
And breathes a burning plague among their walls.
Though men may fast, and with much fervor pray,
Malice and envy soon will guilt betray.
He who commits a crime will quickly find
The pressing guilt lie heavy on his mind,
Though bribes or favor should assert his cause,
Pronounce him guiltless, and elude the laws.
None quits himself; his own impartial thought
Will damn, and conscience will record the fault.
Each as his hands in guilt have been embru'd,
By hellish horror ever is pursued,
A virtuous heart, and unstained innocence
Is man's best second guard, and sure defense.
But hear with patience a famed heathen's word,
It may do good even to a fasting lord,
Who fasts for power, and when he fasts will pray
For might to make reluctant lands obey;
And flimsy patriots, if they will, may hear
Some wholesome lessons for a patriot's ear.
That man's a Sisyphus whom noise and strife
Seduce from all the soft retreats of life;
To vex the government, disturb the laws,
Drunk with the fumes of popular applause,
He courts the giddy crowd to make him great,
And sweats and toils to mount the sovereign seat.
For still to aim at power and still to fail,
Ever to strive and never to prevail;
What is it? but, in reason's true account
To heave the stone against the rising mount:
Which urged with labor, and forced up with pain,
Recoils, and rolls impetuous down the plain.
But mark him down a slave, who, humbly proud,
With presents begs preferment from the crowd;
That early suppliant, who salutes the tribes,
And sets the mob to scramble for his bribes.
That some old dottard, sitting in the sun,
On holidays may tell what fates were done.
But ye proud chiefs, that thirst for sovereign sway,
Hear what an ancient Heathen bard does say.
'Some ask for envied power, which public hate
'Pursues and hurries headlong to their fate;
'Down go their titles, and their statues crowned
'Are by base hands in the next river drowned;
'The guiltless horses, and the chariot wheel,
'The same effects of vulgar fury feel.
'The smith prepares his hammer for the stroke,
'While belching bellows hissing fire provoke.
'Sejanus Prime minister of Tiberius Caesar: He had many triumphal chariots and
statues erected to him; but falling into disgrace, they were all broken down,
and the Senate and people insulted over him as meanly as they had formerly
flattered him.
, almost first of Roman names,
'The great Sejanus crackles in the flames.
'Form'd in the forge, the pliant brass is laid
'On anvils, and of head and limbs are made
'Pans, cans, and piss-pots, and such kitchen stuff;
'Nor did their mean revenge think this enough:
'They drag the image through the streets, and loud
'Sound welcome to the gazing gathering crowd.
"Adorn your doors with laurels, and a bull
"Milk white and large, lead to the capitol;
"Sejanus with a rope is dragged along,
"The sport and laughter of the giddy throng.'
'Good Lord, they cry, what blackmoor lips he has,
'How foul a smock, and what a hanging face!
'By Heaven, I never could endure his sight;
'But say, How came his monstrous crimes to light?
'What is the charge, and who the evidence?
'There must be striking proofs of his offense.
'Nothing at all of this; but Caesar sent
'A threatening letter to the Parliament:
'Nay, Sirs, if Caesar writ, I ask no more;
'He's guilty -- and the question's out of door.'
Now, with Sejanus would thou change thy fate,
To be like him, first minister of state?
To have thy levees crowded with resort
Of a depending, gaping, servile court;
Dispose all honors of the sword and gown,
Raise with a nod, and ruin with a frown;
To hold thy prince in pupilage and sway
The monarch whom the conquered world obey:
Yes, I believe thou would be great as he;
For every man's a fool to that degree.
All wish the dire prerogative to kill,
Even they would have the power that want the will.
But would thou have thy wishes understood,
To take the bad together with the good?
Would thou not rather choose the small renown,
To be the mayor of some poor paltry town?
Bigly to look and barbarously to speak,
To pound false weights, and scanty measures break;
Than be Sejanus, so advanced in place,
Then tumbled headlong to such mean disgrace.
Great Hannibal within the balance lay
And tell how many pounds his ashes weigh;
Him Afric was not able to contain,
Whose length runs level with the Atlantic main,
And weakens fruitful Nilus to convey
His sun-beat waters by so long a way.
Spain first he won, the Pyrenaeans past,
And frozen Alps, the mounds that nature cast;
And with corroding juices, as he went,
A passage through the living rocks he rent.
Though Italy was conquered and o'er-run,
Uneasy still, he cried, there is nothing done;
Till level with the ground their gates are laid,
And punic flags on Roman towers displayed.
But what is his end, O charming glory! say
What rare fifth act to crown this huffing play?
In one deciding battle overcome,
He flies, is banished from his native home.
These heathen hints, in an auspicious hour,
May warning give to such as pray for power.
To see the wan-complexion'd, gambling crew,
In church sit cloistered, fasting in a pew,
Yawning and panting till the hour's are past,
And longing more to break than keep their fast,
To hear the long robbed gentry squeaking say,
Ah guilty! Miserere Domine,
Is such a farce, would almost spoil the grace,
And pinch the skill of Aristophanes,
To give their characters a striking hue,
As they sit feign'dly fasting in the pew.
By play men's tempers are unguarded made,
And when the head's intent the heart's betrayed;
Then base desires of gain, then rage appears,
Next blows and brawls arise, and anxious fears;
Then clamor and revellings reach the sky,
While losing gamesters heaven and earth defy;
Then horrid oaths are uttered every cast,
They grieve, and curse, and swear, nay, weep at last,
And in a pet will even feign to fast.
When lawyers fast, and when that gamblers pray,
Or when that bishops cast the tithes away,
When haughty churchmen are not fond of power,
Or when the strong do not the weak devour;
Then shall dissemblers find it on record,
That when they fast for strife, they please the Lord.
But why do pious nations, in distress,
Flee to the Lord, and all their sins confess?
Sins, which they mean not ever to give over,
While sin brings gain, and vice increases power.
Can such believe the great Almighty's blind,
And does not see the errors of the mind?
Or that hypocrisy and vile grimace,
Is a fit offering to obtain his grace?
While secret vice lies lurking in the mind,
And guilty culprits to their faults are blind:
Though they may bow, and cringe, and fast a day,
In God's pure eye they neither fast nor pray.
A pampered prelate, finely decked in lawn,
To fast and pray, (by six fine horses drawn
In a gilt coach), and to confess the crimes
Of lords and scavengers, in these bad times,
Is so polite a mark of penitence,
That drunken peers can scarcely take offense.
But why not join in praise as well as fast,
And thank the Lord for many favors past?
For smiling springs dressed in a verdant green,
And gladsome summers which our eyes have seen;
With richest autumns in effulgence gay,
All nodding with a cornu copiae.
For twenty seasons past, and some few more,
The last was better than the year before;
And now the present still excels the past,
Yet peevish Britons will not praise but fast.
Like children, who, for some conceived affront,
Will fast in spite, if bid them eat they wont;
Take penance on themselves, 'cause Heaven will not give
What their own pride unjustly would receive.
Who are not grateful for all favors past,
But mock Jehovah when they feign to fast.
FINIS.

