NEW MARKET, A SATIRE.

POYLYPONOS IPPEIA.
OS EOLES AIAN
TADE GA.
Sophok. El. 508. LONDON, Printed for J. NEWBERY, at the Bible and Sun in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCCLI.

NEW MARKET, A SATIRE.
HIS Country's hope, when now the blooming Heir
Has left the parent's, or the guardian's care;
Fond to possess, yet eager to destroy,
Of each vain youth, say, what is the darling joy?
Of each fond frolic what the source and end,
His sole and first ambition what? -- to spend.
Some 'Squires, to Gallia's cooks most dainty dupes,
Melt manors in ragouts, or drown in soups.
This coxcomb doats on fiddlers, till he sees
His mortgaged mountains destitute of trees;
Convinced too late, that modern strains can move,
With mightier force than those of Greece, the grove.
In headless statues rich, and useless urns,
MARMOREO from the classic tour returns;
So poor the wretch of current coin, you would laugh --
He cares not -- if his Antique Medals.
CAESAR'S be but safe.
Some tread the slippery paths of love's delights,
These deal the cards, or shake the box at WHITE's.
To different pleasures different tastes incline,
Nor the same sea receives the rushing swine.
Though drunk alike with CIRCE's poisonous bowl,
In separate sties the mimic monsters roll.
But would ye learn, ye leisure-loving 'Squires
How best ye may disgrace your prudent sires;
How soonest soar to fashionable shame,
Be damned at once to ruin -- and to fame;
By hands of Grooms ambitious to be crowned,
O greatly dare to tread Olympic ground!
Where famed NEW MARKET spreads her tempting plain,
There let the chosen steed victorious strain;
Where not Alluding to those well-known lines of Sir JOHN DENHAM (in Cooper's
Hill) on London.

" -- -- Through several ways they run,
"Some to undo, and some to be undone."

(as erst was sung in manly lays)
Men fly to different ends through different ways;
Through the same path, to the same goal ye run,
And are at once, undoing and undone.
Forfeit, forget friends, honor, and estate,
Lose all at once -- for what? -- to win the plate:
All are betrayed, and all alike betray,
To your own beasts, ACTAEON-like, a prey.
What dreams of conquest flushed HILARIO's breast,
When the good Knight at last retired to rest!
Behold the youth with new-felt rapture mark
Each pleasing prospect of the spacious Park:
That Park, where beauties undisguis'd engage,
Those beauties less the work of art than age;
In simple state, where genuine Nature wears
Her venerable dress of ancient years;
Where all the charms of chance with order meet,
The rude the gay, the graceful and the great.
Here aged oaks uprear their branches hoar,
And form dark groves, which Druids might adore;
Pride and support of Britain's conquering cross,
Which distant ancestors saw crowned with moss:
With meeting boughs, and deepening to the view,
Here shoots the broad umbrageous avenue:
Here various trees compose a checkered scene,
Glowing in gay diversities of Green:
There the full stream through intermingling glades
Shines a broad lake, or falls in deep cascades.
Nor wants there hazle copse, or beechen lawn,
To cheer with sun or shade the bounding fawn.
And see the good old seat, whose Gothic towers
Awful emerge from yonder tufted bowers;
Whose rafter'd hall the crowding tenants fed,
And dealt to Age and Want their daily bread.
Where garter'd knights with peerless beauties joined,
At high and solemn festivals have dined;
Presenting often fair virtue's shining task,
In mystic pageantries, and moral It was a fashionable Practice among our
ancient nobility and gentry, of both sexes, to perform personally in
entertainments of this kind. Nothing could be a more delightful or rational
method of spending an evening than this. MILTON's Comus was thus exhibited at
Ludlow-Castle, in the Year 1631. See BEN JOHNSON's Masks.

Poetry, painting, and music, were here united in their highest perfection. It
were to be wished that our modern people of distinction would revive this
excellent practice, and substitute it in the place of routes and masquerades.
But in the present age, the idea of the true decorum seems to be utterly
extinct; and even the dignity of human nature seems to be quite overrun with
the false refinements of affected elegance, and all the inconsistent fopperies
of studied folly.


Masque.
But vain all ancient praise, or boast of birth,
Vain all the palms of old heroic worth!
At once a bankrupt, and a prosperous Heir
HILARIO bets -- Park, House dissolve in air.
With antique armor hung, his trophied rooms
Descend to Gamesters, Prostitutes, and Grooms.
He sees his steel-clad Sires, and Mothers mild,
Who bravely shook the lance, or sweetly smiled,
All the fair series of the whisker'd race,
Whose pictured forms the stately gallery grace;
Debased, abused, the price of ill-got gold,
To deck some tavern vile, at auctions sold.
The parish wonders at the unopening door,
The chimnies blaze, the tables groan no more.
Thick weeds around the untrodden courts arise,
And all the social scene in silence lies.
Himself, the loss politely to repair,
Turns Atheist, Fiddler, Highwayman, or Play'r.
At length, the scorn, the shame of Man and God,
Is doomed to rub the steeds that once he rode.
Ye rival Youths, your golden hopes how vain,
Your dreams of thousands on the listed plain!
Not more fantastic Clavileno. See Don Quixote. B. ii. Chap. 41.
SANCHO's airy course,
When madly mounted on the magic horse,
He pierced heaven's opening spheres with dazzled eyes,
And seemed to soar in visionary skies.
Nor less, I ween, precarious is the meed,
Of young advent'rers, on the Muse's steed;
For Poets have, like you, their destined round,
And Ours is but a race on classic ground.
Long time, soft son of patrimonial ease,
HIPPOLITUS had ate sirloins in peace:
Had quaff'd secure, unvex'd by toils or wife,
The mild October of a rural life:
Long lived with calm domestic conquests crowned,
And killed his game on safe paternal ground.
As bland he puffed the pipe over weekly news
His bosom kindles with sublimer views.
Lo there, thy triumphs T -- thy palms P --
Tempt him to rein the steed, and stake his store.
Like a new bruiser on BROUGHTONIC sand,
Amid the lists our hero takes his stand;
Sucked by the Sharper, to the Peer a prey,
He rolls his eyes that witness huge dismay;
When lo! the chance of one unlucky heat,
Strips him of game, strong beer, and sweet retreat.
How awkward now he bears disgrace and dirt,
Nor knows the Poor's last refuge, to be pert. --
The shiftless beggar bears of ills the worst,
At once with dullness, and with hunger cursed.
And feels the tasteless breast equestrian fires,
And dwells such mighty rage in graver 'squires?
In all attempts, but for their country, bold,
Britain, thy CONSCRIPT COUNSELORS behold;
(For some perhaps, by fortune favored yet,
May gain a borough, by a lucky bet,)
Smit with the love of the laconic boot,
The cap and wig succinct, the silken suit,
Mere modern PHAETON's, usurp the reins,
And scour in rival race NEW-MARKET's plains.
See side by side, the Jockey and Sir JOHN,
Discuss the important point -- of six to one.
For oh, my Muse, the deep-felt bliss how dear,
How great the pride, to gain a Jockey's ear!
See, like a routed host, with headlong pace,
Thy Members pour amid the mingling race!
All ask, what crowds the tumult could produce --
"Is Bedlam or the C -- ns all broke loose?"
Such noise and nonsense, betting, damning, sinking,
Such emphasis of oaths, and claret-drinking!
Like schoolboys freed, they run as chance directs,
Proud from a well-bred thing to risque their necks.
The warrior's scar not half so graceful seems,
As, at NEW MARKET, dislocated limbs.
Thy sages hear, amid the admiring crowd
Adjudge the stakes, most eloquently loud:
With critic skill, over dubious bets preside,
The low dispute or kindle, or decide:
All empty wisdom, and judicious prate,
Of distanc'd horses gravely fix the fate.
Guide the nice conduct of a daring match,
And over the equestrian rights, with care paternal, watch.
Meantime, no more the mimic patriots rise,
To guard Britannia's honor, warm and wise:
No more in Senates dare assert her laws,
Nor pour the bold debate in freedom's cause:
Neglect the counsels of a sinking land,
And know no Rostrum, but New-Market's A kind of scaffold, where is held a
consistory, made up of several very eminent gentlemen, for determining doubtful
cases in the race, etc. This place might not improperly be called, a
Pandaemonium.
Stand.
Are these the sage directive powers designed,
With the nice search of a sagacious mind;
In judgment's scales, the fate of realms to weigh,
Britannia's interest, trade, and laws survey?
O say, when least their sapient schemes are crossed,
Or when a nation, or a match is lost?
Who dams and sires with more exactness trace,
Than of their country's Kings the sacred race:
Think London journies are the worst of ills,
And set their hands to articles for bills:
Strangers to all historians sage relate,
Their's are the memoirs of the equestrian state:
Unskilled in Albion's past and present views,
Who The accurate and annual author of an historical list of the runninghorses,
etc.
CHENY's records for RAPIN peruse.
Go on, brave Youths, till in some future age,
Whips shall become the senatorial badge;
Till England see her thronging senators
Meet all at Westminster, in boots and spurs;
See the whole House, with mutual frenzy mad,
Her Patriots all in leathern breeches clad:
Of bets, for taxes, learnedly debate,
And guide with equal reins a Steed and State.
How would a virtuous Vid. GULLIVER's travels, voyage to the Houhnhyms.
Houhnhym neigh disdain,
To see his brethren brook the imperious rein;
Bear slavery's wanton whip, or galling goad,
Smoke through the glebe, or trace the destined road,
And robbed of manhood by the murderous knife,
Sustain each sordid toil of servile life.
Yet oh, what rage would touch his generous mind,
To see his sons of more than mortal kind;
A kind, with each ingenuous virtue blessed,
That fills the prudent head, or valorous breast,
Afford diversion to that monster base,
That meanest spawn of man's half-monkey race;
In whom pride, avarice, ignorance conspire,
That hated animal, a Yahoo-Squire.
How are the advent'rers of the British race,
Changed from the chosen chiefs of ancient days;
Who warmed with genuine glory's honest thirst,
Divinely labored in the Pythian dust.
Their's was the wreath that lifted from the throng,
Their's was the Theban bard's recording song.
Meantime, to manly emulation blind,
Slaves to each vulgar vice that stains the mind,
Our British THERON's issue to the race,
Of their own generous coursers the disgrace.
What though the grooms of Greece never took the odds,
They won no bets -- but then they soared to gods;
And more an HIERO's Palm, a PINDAR's Ode,
Than all the united plates of G -- E bestowed.
Greece! how I kindle at thy magic name,
Feel all thy warmth, and catch the kindred flame.
Thy solemn scenes, and awful visions rise,
In ancient grace before my musing eyes.
Here Sparta's sons in mute attention hang,
While sage LYCURGUS pours the mild harangue;
There XERXES' hosts all pale with deadly fear,
Shrink at her LEONIDAS.
fated Hero's flashing spear.
Here hung with many a lyre of silver string,
The laureat walks of sweet ILISSUS spring:
And lo where, rapt in beauty's heavenly dream
Hoar PLATO walks his oliv'd Academe. --
Yet ah! no more the seat of art and arms,
Delights with wisdom, or with virtue warms,
Lo! the stern Turk, with more than Gothic rage,
Has blasted all the bays of ancient age;
No more her groves by sacred feet are trod
Each Attic Grace has left the loved abode.
Fallen is fair GREECE! by luxury's pleasing bane
Seduced, she drags a barbarous foreign chain.
BRITANNIA watch! O trim thy withering bays,
Remember thou have rivaled GRAECIA's praise,
Great Nurse of works divine! yet oh! beware
Lest thou the fate of GREECE, my Country share.
Recall thy wonted worth with conscious pride,
Thou too have seen a SOLON in a HYDE;
Have bade thine EDWARDS and thine HENRY's rear
With Spartan fortitude the British spear;
Alike have seen thy sons deserve the meed,
Or of the moral, or the martial Deed.
FINIS.

