A DISSERTATION ON Hermaphrodites.

BY GEORGE ARNAUD,

Ancient Master of Arts and Surgery, Member of the ACADEMY, and Demonstrator of
the School of St. Come at Paris, Herniary Surgeon to all the Hospitals of the
same Town, and Military Hospitals of France; now Surgeon of London.

-- neque indecorum nobis in utilitatem audientium nominare dicata conceptui
organa, quae and ipsum Deum creare non puduit.

Clem. Alexand. Paedag. 11. LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, opposite to
Catherine-Street, in the Strand. MDCCL.

[Price 1 s. 6 d.]

Advertisement.
AS early as the year 1733, I read the following dissertation on
Hermaphrodites, at a public meeting of the Academy of Surgery. Though it
seemed equally to take with the people of the art, and the learned of all
denominations who honored the assembly with their presence, I thought proper
however to defer the publication: at that time being too young, and but just
beginning to enter upon the practice of hernia's, which requiring a great deal
of circumspection, and a delicacy of manners, a work of this sort could not
fail of exposing my character to the censure and malice of my enemies. It was
necessary therefore to suppress it; it now has lain by me for eighteen years,
and would have lain still longer, had it not been for some circumstances which
prevail with me to publish it.

There appeared in London, ten years ago, a girl of bad structure as to the
parts of generation, who passed for an Hermaphrodite; she in that respect
imposed upon the curious. Dr. Parsons published in English a book entitled, A
mechanical and critical inquiry into the nature of Hermaphrodites. This work
undeceived the world as to the false notion it had entertained in regard to
this creature. Another sort of person of the male kind, and lately arrived
here, gives room to disputes about his state; some affirming, others denying,
it to be hermaphrodital. People go still farther, and ask themselves, Whether
really there be genuine Hermaphrodites or no? Some pretend there may be, others
would prove there are none. Those build on the opinions of authors, who have
proved their existence; these employ the arguments, which other authors have
opposed to the former. From all these reasonings there appear to result but
vague and confused ideas, which still leave the problem unresolved.

My design is not to decide this controversy, my only view is to expose the
facts on each side, which have given room to the disputes that have subsisted
for upwards of two thousand years, upon this subject. I have confined myself,
as much as possible, within the strictest limits; I thought that it was better
to instruct by amusing, than to tire out by instructing. In giving a summary
relation of the opinions of authors, I afford satisfaction enough to the
learned; the curious will ask for no more. To support the opinion of the
ancients, I shall relate the most authentic observations of our days, made by
modern practitioners who are still living: I have added the history of an
anomolous person, whom I have myself observed. And here I shall obviate an
objection, which the critics will be sure to start upon this observation; they
will say, it is too long; a fault which some persons have upbraided me with, in
regard to my dissertation on hernia's. To this I answer, that observations can
never be too circumstantial; and that it is a defect, common both to the
ancients and moderns, to be too little circumstantial in relating of facts: and
this accounts for our deriving so little benefit from the numerous volumes of
observations left us by the ancients. Why then do not the moderns, who expect
to be read, correct the faults they find in those who have gone before them?

To avoid the reproaches that might be made me in regard to the passages which
I have been obliged to quote from the Latin poets, I have softened, in the
translation, the freedom of the original, without altering any thing in the
genuine sense of the authors.

As to the plates, which might convey along with them, to the minds of some, a
character of obscenity, they are taken from the authors; and if there is any
difference, it is only in the delicacy of the execution; a mark of the
generosity of the bookseller, who has been at that expense.

As my design is to enlarge this subject with the greatest number of
observations I can possibly collect, I take this occasion to invite persons of
the art acquainted with similar cases, to communicate them, in order to their
being put together into a new edition of this work, which their generosity
would encourage. The authors will be no losers, the public great gainers;
especially if the observations are accompanied with cuts.

Those who are possessed of particular facts in relation to hernia's, are also
entreated to communicate them, to be put in their proper places in the new
edition of The complete treatise of Hernia's, which I propose to publish in
quarto next year.

LONDON, Martlet-Court, Bow-Street, Covent Garden, May 1750.
A DISSERTATION ON HERMAPHRODITES.
The Introduction.
WHATEVER degree of accuracy and wisdom nature employs in the composition and
frame of the human body, we have oftener than once seen her swerve from these,
and, as it were, forget herself; oftener than once, instead of regarding that
construction, that order, those proportions of the organs, whence results that
perfect harmony, which forms the object of our admiration, she has exhibited
irregular, vicious, and unseemly conformations of parts. It should seem, to
speak the language of a certain author, that this common parent, tired out and
spent with producing every day the same things, over and over, in the same
order, did now and then quit that uniformity, and throw into her productions a
variety but little conformable to her laws. Sometimes she withholds from a
body the parts the most necessary; in another subject, she is pleased to
multiply them, often allots them situations, connections, and dimensions, the
most extraordinary and fantastical; she separates what, according to her own
laws, should be joined, and joins what ought to remain separate: hence arise
those deformities in the strokes or features, those members ill-articulated,
those disproportions, those imperfections of organical parts, and those
combinations, so monstrous and out of the common road, that it is with
difficulty we discover nature even in nature herself. Among the lusus naturae,
which are exhibited to us under different forms, some are of a peculiar
species, which cannot fail of exciting our curiosity or compassion, and which
art can never pretend to correct. There are others, on the contrary, which call
for all the attention of the surgeon, and in which his understanding and
dexterity become of extraordinary use; who leaving to the bare speculative
physician, the painful but honorable province of finding out the mysterious
causes, his principal concern is to lend a helping-hand to those who are thus
disfigured by nature; he omits nothing in his power to redress and set her
to-rights again, by prudent and skilful operations; and sometimes he is happy
enough to succeed, either by retrenching useless and superfluous parts, or by
joining those which are separated, or separating those which are joined against
the order of nature, or by laying those open and bare, which are concealed and
covered. Daily practice furnishes examples enough, to prove that I advance
nothing at random: but that I may confine myself within the limits prescribed,
I shall rest satisfied with giving proof thereof, by reciting an observation
concerning an hermaphrodite, after having given a general idea of the different
sorts of people of faulty structure of the parts of generation, who have been
considered by certain authors as hermaphrodites, of which others formally deny
the existence.

Etymology of the term hermaphrodite.
By the term hermaphrodite, we understand him or her, in whom the parts, which
form the essential difference between the two sexes, are found together, either
perfectly or imperfectly. It is derived rived from the greek, (...), signifying
to be made up, or consist of Mercury and Venus. In Ovid we find the fabulous
history which has given rise to that signification; Hermaphrodite; its origin.
he makes Hermaphroditus to be the son of Mercury and Venus; who, says he, was
of so perfect a beauty, that the nymph Salmacis fell desperately in love with
him one day, as he happened to be washing in a fountain where she presided;
enraged for being unable to make him sensible of her passion, she prayed the
gods to join them together in such a manner, that their two bodies should make
but one, in which, however, the two sexes should remain accurately
distinguished; this favor was granted:

Nec duo junt, sed forma duplex, nec foemina dici
Nec puer ut possint: neutrumque and utrumque videntur.
"They are not two, yet the form is twofold; we cannot say, that it is the body
of a boy or of a girl; they are neither, though they appear to be both."

The ancient poets, fruitful in fictions, underneath that veil concealed
truths, which happy geniuses have skilfully unveiled, by interpretations either
moral or political. But the sequel of this discourse will possibly serve to
justify those who imagine, that the veil which covers the truth in this fable,
may be seen through. For may we not from this fiction infer (as M. Mertru
Mercure de Franc. du Mois de Fevr. 1750. Edit. Land.
, who in this agrees with the Abbe de Bellegarde Auteur des Explic. sur les
Metamorph d'Ovide. Edit. de la Hay. 1735.
, says) that

"the ancients had a knowledge of the union of the two sexes in one and the
same person; and that this fantasticalness of nature, is the origin of the
fiction related by Ovid in his metamorphoses."

"Ovid has feigned," says the Abbe de Bellegarde, "that Hermaphroditus was the
son of Mercury and Venus, upon the observations of some naturalists, who have
remarked, that the children, who are born during the conjunction of these two
planets, are sometimes hermaphrodites, and partake of both sexes."

The Greeks have, moreover, called these fort of creatures androgynes, a term
which seems to be more significant, in that it is derived from the two words
(...), which denotes a man, and (...), a woman. We however will use that of
hermaphrodite, as being more common or popular.

S^^e aff^^m that A^am was an hermaphrodite.
I will not engage in the disputes of some rabbis, who have given out that Adam
was an hermaphrodite, prior to his fall, and that he was created with a view to
continue in that state. On this head may be read Gaspar Bauhin.

Aristotle's opinion on hermaphrodites.
Hermaphrodites have been allowed of by so great a number of authors, that some
people have no manner of doubt of their existence. Aristotle would seem to
prove their evidence by the recital he makes of them: he relates such
peculiarities of them, as are admired by some, and laughed at by others. I here
pretend not to fix the judgment of the reader, every one is at liberty to
settle his ideas according to the extent of his understanding; my aim only is
to relate the authorities of those who merit our attention: I shall neither
contest nor prove that Aristotle has talked idly, or with reason affirmed, that
some hermaphrodites had the right breast like that of a man, and the left like
that of a woman, and that they changed nature alternately; that may or may not
be, it is what I will not determine; nature shows every day singularities too
surprising to attempt engaging in that dispute with Aristotle.

Ambrose Pareus's opinion on hermaphrodites.
Ambrose Pareus, who had studied nature like a true surgeon, gives much more
clear and precise ideas of them than Aristotle, by the division he has made,
which at once gives us a true notion: he has given us several figures, among
which is that of two hermaphrodites, twins, which came into the world joined by
the back; fig. 1. plate II.

The best authors who have treated this matter since Pareus, have followed his
division; as Gaspar Bauhin, who has writ a particular treatise, which is very
ample, and so learned, that there are few works in any kind of natural history,
so full of erudition. Duval, physician at Rouen, follows also Pareus's
division. The author of the Tableau de l'amour considere dans l'etat du
marriage, has also allotted for them a peculiar chapter, considerable and ample
enough, following also Pareus's plan, bating a few things: he however engages
in explanations which are very abstracted and vague. Martinus Schurigius, in
his Spermatologia historico-medica, gives very singular instances of them, and
follows also the division of Pareus.

These authors, and others who have gone before them, as Hippocrates, Galen,
Realdus Columbus, Paulus AEgineta, Fortunius Licetus, and others, have
undertaken to explain what they imagined might have given occasion to the
generation of hermaphrodites (those they took for such) but what they have left
us on this head, contains nothing interesting enough to claim our attention:
and as all I could myself advance, could not give half the satisfaction that
the demonstration of facts affords, as nature lays them before our eyes, I pass
on therefore to the division of the different species of hermaphrodites.

Division of hermaphrodites.
They are divided into four species, namely, the male hermaphrodite, plate I.
fig. 2; the female hermaphrodite, plate I. fig. 1; the perfect hermaphrodite,
plate II. fig. 1, 2, 3; the imperpect hermaphrodite, plate III.

Besides these four species of hermaphrodites, there is a particular sort of
persons of bad formation of the parts of generation, to which we cannot ascribe
any character of hermaphrodite; of which plate IV. may serve to give a general
idea: I shall give instances thereof.

Male hermaphrodite.
The male hermaphrodite is he in whom the parts of generation of the man are
perfect, both in dimensions, figure, and actions; and in whom the parts of the
woman err through some peculiarities, as when the vagina is not open enough to
admit the penis; and that there is only an imperceptible outlet for the
discharge of the menstrual blood.

Female hermaphrodite.
The female hermaphrodite is she who has all the parts of the woman fit for
generation, and in whom the appearances of virility are imperfect. This species
is characterised by those women in whom the clitoris is disengaged or free (for
in the natural state, though it is, indeed, considerably swelled in the venereal
act, yet it never quits its place to become erected; see plate IV. fig. 1.) and
which having the same figure with the penis of the man, yet without being
perforated like it, makes them almost resemble eunuchs, who can enjoy coition
without the perfect consummation of the venereal act. The Greeks called these
women (...), whence comes, I imagine, Ribaude, what.
the old French word ribaude, which signifies a lewd woman; such was the famous
Sappho. Martial writ the following epigram on occasion of a certain young woman
of this species, who passed for virtuous for some time, because she had never
ventured her chastity with the men:

Esse videbaris, fateor, Lucretia nobis,
At tu, pro facinus! Bassa fututor eras.
Inter se geminos audes committere cunnos,
Mentiturque virum prodigiosa Venus.
Commenia es dignum Thebano aenigmate monstrum,
Hic, ubi vir non est, ut sit adulterium!
"I own, Bassa, I had all along taken you for a virtuous person; but, O
infamous! you played the whore-master, and had the impudence to act the part of
a man with your own sex, and make yourself pass for one; a prodigy worthy the
Theban riddle, that adultery may be committed without the intervention of a
man!"

Some years ago a girl of this sort was confined at Paris, because she went
about in men's clothes, and was discharged out of prison, on condition of going
dressed like a woman, which she did with much regret. These sort of women are
pretty rare in Europe, but were formerly very common in Egypt; and when they
were to be married, care was taken to cut the clitoris, to prevent its being
troublesome to the husband. Aetius and Paulus AEgineta give the method of
performing this operation.

The perfect hermaphrodite.
The perfect hermaphrodite, according to the relation of certain authors, is
where we find the parts of generation of both sexes, with both the active and
passive power. Albertus says that there are hermaphrodites who are both incubi
and succubi in coition, and yet incapable of generating or conceiving:
wherefore nice and scrupulous authors consider these as imperfect
hermaphrodites.

The true character of the perfect hermaphrodite.
They would have the parts of both sexes, each in particular, to have the
genuine character which constitutes their essence: for if there are some which
are faulty, through a vice of action or proportion, they accordingly class the
subject with the male or female hermaphrodites.

The disposition of the exterior parts seems to be of no importance to their
faculties, and changes nothing in the species. It has been observed, that in
some the parts are placed contiguous to each other; see plate II. fig. 1 and 3.
Others there are, in which they are placed one above the other; sometimes those
of the man have the first place; sometimes, those of the woman predominate; see
plate II. fig. 2. The most natural order.
But the most perfect disposition, in my opinion, is that which makes no
alteration in the natural situation of the parts; as when the penis occupies
the place of the clitoris, and the two testicles are enclosed in the lips of
the vulva, as they would be in the scrotum, if divided into two equal parts, as
may be remarked in plate I. fig. 2.

The opinions divided as to the existence of genuine hermaphrodites.
The opinions have at all times been divided in regard to the existence of this
species of hermaphrodites. Hippocrates, Galen, Licubantius, Paulus Zacchias,
Fabricius ab Aquapendente, and some other authors, knew of no such species; and
from thence it is they disavowed them, in like manner as some philosophers did:
yet Aristotle, several historians, and some physical authors, relate instances
of them, which seem guarded with all the characters of truth; and there is,
even in the Talmud, a law for them, comprising several articles, and from which
lawyers have taken their authorities to restrain these people. See Gaspar
Bauhin.

Is It authority, tending to prove the existence of perfect hermaphodires.
Every body knows the horror wherewith superstition had inspired the Romans
against these sort of persons, who, by the laws of the Aruspices, were
condemned to be drowned some years after their birth, because they were
considered as monsters by the decree of Romulus; but in the time of Pliny they
laid aside that unjust prejudice, as he proves by these words: Gignuntur
utriusque sexus quos hermaphroditas vocamus, olim androgynos vocatos, and in
prodigiis habitos, nunc vero in deliciis. "There are persons born with both
sexes, "whom we call hermaphrodites, formerly "called androgyni, and deemed
prodigies, "but now had in great favor.

These same Romans, convinced at length of their error, made a law, by which
those who united in themselves both sexes, had the liberty of choosing their
sex; but if after having made this choice, they came to be convicted of having
made use of the other sex, they were punished with great rigor and severity.

IId authority which seems to prove the existence of perfect hermaphrodites.
Another authority, which some people urge, to prove that the Romans allowed of
true hermaphrodites is, that there was at Rome the famous hermaphrodite, which
Polycles, a sculptor of great reputation, had made. There have been others
found in marble, which are kept and considered as perfect masterpieces, and of
inestimable value; whence they would infer, that these rare pieces were made
after the life. But the figures of centaurs, satyrs, fauns, tritons, sirens,
etc. which antiquity supplies us with, greatly weaken that proof.

IIId authority, tending to prove the existence of perfect hermaphrodites.
We read in history of the cruelties which were formerly exercised in some parts
of the India's upon hermaphrodites, who, from being very numerous, were
employed in works, to which in Europe we put our horses.

IVth authority, tending to prove the existence of perfect hermaphrodites.
M. de Rennefort says, that at Surat there are still many people of that
species, who with the dress of a woman are obliged to wear the turban, to
publish to the world that they have the advantages of both sexes.

Pliny, after Calliphanes, affirms, that among the Nasamonians and Machlyans,
people of Africa, there was a great number of hermaphrodites, who had mutually
carnal knowledge of each other.

Gaspar Bauhin, Johannes Schenkius, Realdus Columbus, Martinus Schurigius, and
some other physical authors, confirm their existence by the enumeration they
make of them.

Divines admit the existence of hermaphrodites.
In fine, Tertullian, St. Augustine, Kugler, and other divines of our day, have
treated these matters, so far as they have a relation to good order, and the
regularity of manners.

It is of importance to physicians and surgeons to be instructed in what
constitutes the character of hermaphrodites.
But whatever be in this, as it is possibly on the relation of physicians and
surgeons, that divines and lawyers determine on the species of the sex to which
those should keep, to whom nature has given faculties so opposite, either for
administering to them the sacraments, or doing them justice in civil and
criminal affairs: it is in these cases that surgeons ought to be perfectly
informed in the structure and relation of these parts which constitute
hermaphrodites; and that they ought to give a good deal of attention to the
nature of the secretions peculiar to these organs, without which they would be
guilty of very great mistakes, by forbidding those parts, which possibly might
be the fittest for generation, in order to allow the action or use of others,
which might have the least degree of force, and the least faculty for that
purpose.

VIth authority, tending to confirm the preceding ones, in regard to perfect
hermaphrodites.
This examen, and the judgment we should pass upon it, are of so much the
greater consequence, as the civil and canon laws are very strict against those
who fail in the oath they have been forced to take, of using only the sex they
have reserved, and to which they have been forced to confine themselves; for by
the violation thereof, they are condemned as guilty of the unnatural sin of the
flesh: which is proved by an arret of the parliament of Paris of 1603, which
condemned a young hermaphrodite to be burnt, for having made use of the sex he
was expressly forbid.

VIIth authority, which supports the preceding ones on the subject of perfect
hermaPhrodites.
It was for not having observed with fidelity the law imposed on the people of
that species, says Nicolas Venette, that the Scottish servant maid, who had
chosen the quality of a woman, and who afterward got a citizen's daughter with
child, was buried alive by sentence of judge. Doctor Venette seems to
contradict himself in citing this example, as he pretends there are no genuine
hermaphrodites; for how could this creature have been punished like the
hermaphrodites, who abuse both sexes, if she had not been perfectly provided
with both? Or, dare we presume to say, that in a country, where the wisdom of
the laws only govern, judges would have been wicked enough to pass a decision
without the authority of proofs; a thing quite incredible.

But if divines are at a loss to decide under what kind they should rank the
capacity of a subject, in whom they find the two sexes, how much more must they
be so, when chance joins together in marriage two perfect hermaphrodites! This
case is, indeed, rare, yet it happened toward the middle of the last century
in the kingdom of Valentia: VIIIth authority, which seems to confirm in a
manner more convincing than any other, the existence of perfect hermaphrodites.
two young persons were married, and very soon after they were both in the
state of pregnant women; they were prosecuted as guilty of the most abominable
crime; but Laurence Matthieu, a physician as prudent as knowing, who was
consulted on their score, at the moment they were carrying to the place of
execution, in order to be burnt alive, decided in their favor, the church
having given them the Power to be joined together, and to make but one body and
one flesh. Here follow his words:

Tenendum firmiter credo, delictum punibile in iis hermaphroditis non reperiri;
and quoad forum internum, opinor quod licite utroque sexu uti poterant, virtute
potestatis corporum acquisitae per matrimonium, cum facti fuissent duo in carne
una ad finem naturalis prolis, vel ad finem remedii incontinentiae.

"My opinion is, that there is no crime punishable by law in these
hermaphrodites; and as to the court of conscience, I hold they may lawfully
make use of either sex, in virtue of the power acquired over each other's body
by the rights of marriage, being become, but one flesh, for the purposes of
generation, and for remedying the vice of incontinence."

Ixth authority, which confirms the preceding.
A single instance of this sort would seem to border a little too much on the
mavelous, if nature, which can repeat at one time what she has produced at
another did not multiply her proofs. We find in Ambrose Pareus the figure of
two twins, see plate II. fig. 1. joined together by the back, and who both had
the natural parts of both sexes exact and perfect in all their. shapes and
dimensions.

Isidorus, on occasion of the perfect hermaphrodites, says, Vicissim coeundo
gignunt and pariunt. "By mutual embraces they generate and bring forth."

But let us remove our thoughts from a commerce which appears so contrary to
the purity of manners; let us allow that the rigor of the laws cannot too
severely punish those who, after a solemn oath, should bring openly such a
scandal to the view of the public, which could not fail of being thereby
justly irritated and incensed.

I wave a great many other instances to be met with in authors, by which they
seem to prove the existence of perfect hermaphrodites: my design, as I hinted,
was not to make a complete treatise on this subject, nor to fix or determine
the judgment of the reader; I content myself only to recite some authorities
which seem to establish their possibility; a larger work would possibly not be
in the taste of the public; and the learned would not receive the same degree
of pleasure from it, as from reading the original authors themselves.

Imperfect hermaphrodites; what constitutes their true character.
The imperfect hermaphrodites are those in whom the natural parts of both sexes
have defects, which either entirely suspend, or diminish their action. This
last fort is the less rare, but also is that which varies the most. There have
been of them, in whom there was not to be found even any the least appearance
of a double sex, which however have passed for hermaphrodites; such was a
sodomite, who, A sodomite conceives and brings forth.
by the relation of Trallian, had conceived and brought forth. The same author
says, that a soldier brought forth at the time that Conon commanded at Athens;
because the fundament served as a conduit to the womb, just as the vagina does
in a natural state.

I will not insist on the number of instances nearly of this kind, which are to
be met with in authors, as the one or the oother are not sufficiently
conclusive to establish the proposition. The following observation, clothed
with all the necessary characters, is a proof, if not sufficiently convincing,
at least sufficiently probable, of the existence of imperfect hermaphrodites.

Is It observation made by the author of the dissertation.
In the year 1725, a species of hermaphrodite, in woman's dress, applied to me
on account of a hernia she said she had in the left groin. I found without the
ring a small swelling, which appeared to me quite a different thing from the
disease she complained of. She told me, she had always been sensible thereof,
that sometimes it fell down lower; and that while it was reascending, which was
the case from time to time, she underwent a great deal of pain. I caused the
patient to be laid upon a bed, in order more particularly to examine her case.
I at first sight perceived a sort of penis, which made me suspect the swelling
of the groin might prove a testicle. I compared the ailing side with the right,
where I found a like swelling, but which fell down lower; I distinctly
discovered, by the touch, that these two swellings were two testicles; I was
not deceived as to the form of these organs, nor on that of the epididymis, and
the spermatick vessels. I was obliged, in order accurately to examine the left
testicle, to pull it a little downwards, because cause it was, as it were,
stuck on the ring, which never failed to happen, when nature was preparing for
the expulsion of the menstrual blood. This testicle was one half smaller than
that of the right side.

The covering of the testicles.
These two testicles were included each in a sort of purse or scrotum; these two
purses represented well enough the two great lips of the natural parts of a
woman: the inside of these lips was ruddy, strewed with sebaceous glands
sufficiently distinct, and moistened with an humidity, like to that which
generally drenches these parts. See plate III. letters E F. The penis issued
from the superior part of these two lips; upon removing which, the whole extent
of that part was discovered: it was extremely well formed, was about three
inches long, and four in circumference. I could not learn whether this penis
was capable of any ordinary sensation, either because it was susceptible of no
motion, or that modesty taught the patient too much discretion: she only told
me, that at the time of the menses it became larger than at other times, but
without erection; yet I understood, notwithstanding these reasons, that it was
very capable of erection, because the patient would absolutely have me cut it
away; by reason, said she, of the trouble it gave her: this trouble, in my
opinion, could be no other than an involuntary, spontaneous erection, much more
uneasy and embarrassing, than pleasurable and satisfactory. The figure of the
penis; its structure.
This penis had the figure of that of a man, and appeared consisting of two
cavernous bodies, an urethra, and a glans; it was covered with a skin of the
same color with that which covered the other parts of the body; that skin was
plaited on the corona of the glans, stretched and extended itself in order to
re-cover it according to its disposition: the portion of the skin, which
covered the under part of the penis, was ruddy, extremely smooth, and
interspersed with sebaceous glands, which made it moist.

The glans and its preputium.
The glans was well formed and proportioned to the rest of the penis; it was not
perforated at its extremity, but there we observed a small depression, which
extended along the length of the under part of the penis to its root, and
terminated at the superior edge of the canal of the urine: this depression,
which had the figure of the indenture of a probe, appeared incontestably to be
the urethra of the penis sunk or depressed; for, when the patient made water,
the depression became filled up and swelled; which gave reason to believe, that
the urine had free access into this canal, which, being unperforated, obliged
the fluid to return by the canal which nature had formed for it.

This canal was terminated by a hole entirely like to the urinary meatus in
women; Urinary meatus.
it was situated in the same part it is in the sex, and had the figure thereof;
see letter C of plate III. There was no appearance of nymphae.

On both sides of this depression, of which I have spoken, were very distinctly
felt the cavernous bodies; Cavernous bodies.
they seemed to terminate at the superior middle part of the ossa pubis.

The inferior reunion of the two lips.
Immediately under the inferior border of the canal of the urine, was formed
reunion of the two separated portions of the purses or scrota, which formed
the lips: this reunion, or commissure, resembled, imperfectly enough, what
French authors call the fourchette Fourchette is the inferior commissure of the
lips of the vulva; it seems we have no term in English for it.
. From this commissure to the anus, there were about three inches distance,
which distance was occupied by a portion of lax and softish skin, which sunk
under the finger, and seemed to enter into a kind of cavity; none of that seam,
which is called the raphe, was remarked therein, but on it was observed much
hair, as indeed on all the rest of the part, and none about the anus.

The cavity, into which the skin sunk, Appearance of the vagina
when pressed with the finger, seemed to indicate that of the vagina; which
having no orifice, suffered not the menstrual blood to run off freely: it was
obliged to pass every month through the anus, by taking the rout of an aperture
or canal of communication, which probably reached from the vagina to the rectum.

A tumor in the perinaeum at the time of the menses.
Some days before the issuing of the menstrual blood, by the way nature had
paved for it, there was a tumor formed in the perineum, which increased
gradually, and in three or four days became of the bigness of a hen's egg: at
the end of that time, the blood began to flow by the anus, Evacuation of the
menses by the fundament.
without observing there any swelling either internally or externally; which
gave room to think that this blood was amassed by overflowing into the cavity
where it was retained, till there had been a large enough quantity thereof, to
be able to gain the height of the orifice of communication, which from that
receptacle went into the rectum; when once it had begun to flow, it continued
discharging for three or four days. It was further observed, that the skin
which closed up the vagina, and which formed a bunch or swelling, when the
blood was there amassed, changed not color.

Such was the state of the parts, when I saw the patient for the first time;
Mess. Malaval and Puzos examined her at the same time with me. These gentlemen
suspended their judgment, and would not determine under what species to rank
her, without having previously made a particular examen of the kind of
periodical flux, which she called her courses. I know not whether, these
gentlemen have since been able to inform themselves more exactly.

Age, corpulence, and character of the patient, and the proportion of the parts.
This creature was then thirty-five years old, was five foot five inches high,
had the corpulence of a thin effeminate man, had little beard; her complexion
was tanned or swarthy, the skin of her body dingy or brown, her voice hoarse
and mannish, her breast flat, her arms dry and musculous, the hands large, the
fingers long and strong, the belly flat, the haunches large, the pubis raised
much, the buttocks, the thighs and legs round, the feet small; so that she
might be taken for a man from the head to the waist downwards; but for a woman
too, from the waist down to the feet, bating the parts of generation. She
employed herself in women's work.

The symptoms caused to this hermaphrodite by her bad conformation.
As this hermaphrodite was extremely valetudinary, and complained much more of
her bad state of health during the time that the menstrual flux was in a
disposition to appear, and then was subject to considerable tensions of the
belly, to violent cholicks in the lumbary regions, to yawnings, to continual
vertigo's, and frequent syncope's; I imagined that all these symptoms, to which
she was subject from the age of puberty, and which had brought her in danger of
sinking under them, proceeded from the menstrual blood not having liberty
enough to evacuate; and that necessarily a more easy way must be paved for it,
by opening the skin which closed up the vagina, and by maintaining in that part
a suitable aperture. Many of the most celebrated surgeons were of my opinion;
but as we agreed to perform that operation at a time the tumor of the perineum
should appear, the patient went away home some miles from Paris, and was five
or six months gone. She told me, on her return, that being almost brought to
the point of death at the times she had had her courses upon her; and as the
time of having them drew near, she thought herself obliged to come, previous to
her suffering what she then apprehended; yet I thought it proper to make my
remarks before undertaking the operation. On the morrow after her arrival, she
complained of colic pains, fell into swooning fits and faintings, could not
eat for all that day; her pulse was raised, frequent, and unequal. I several
times touched the perineum the first day, without observing therein any thing
more than ordinary; the second day I began to perceive a small swelling, but
the third it became of the bigness of a hen's egg, without changing the color
of the skin; the tumor diminished considerably when the patient was a-bed. M.
de la Brunnerie, and my father, made the very same observations. At length, on
the close of the fourth day, we saw the blood issuing out at the fundament in a
very small quantity, Discharge of the menses.
of a color rather serous than sanguine; it continued flowing, but in a larger
quantity for five days, of the ordinary color. On the sixth day the evacuation
diminished, and was quite dried up on the seventh. During all the time of the
courses, we informed ourselves of the state of the fundament, where we found
not the least appearance of haemorrhoids. The most favorable time for
performing the operation, had been a month after, when the tumor was to
re-appear; but the patient could only stay fifteen or twenty days at Paris: I
was then obliged to avail myself of that time of necessity. I called together
Messs. de la Brunnerie, Carere, Guerin the elder, Morand, de Garengeot,
Foubert, Grammont, Galin, and my father; all were of opinion (after having
heard my exposal, and examined the parts) that I should proceed to the
operation.

Operation; in what manner performed.
I caused the patient to lie on the side of a bed, her legs being supported on
the knees of two of the consultants, who held her thighs asunder. I pinched the
skin, which covered the vagina, transversely, with the thumb and forefinger of
my left hand; Mr. Guerin laid hold also with his fingers on the same fold, on
the side opposite to that which I held; I afterward cut that skin with a
strait bistory, by describing a line perpendicular to the anus; at one stroke I
came to a sort of cellular texture, which I took hold on with a hook, and which
I afterward cut with a pair of scissars. I conveyed my finger into the
aperture, which procured me the division of the cellular texture; it entered
without any resistance into a void or empty space, which was considered by
those of the consultants, who put their finger into it, as the cavity of the
vagina. This cavity seemed to us to have two or three inches in depth, and
about two in circumference. I filled it with several t^ps of lint, tied with
thread. On the following day I substituted, for the taps of lint, a tent of 3
inches long, and one in diameter. On the sixth day of the operation, Mr.
Verdier and I felt, at the end of the finger, an eminence at the bottom of the
vagina, The matrix distinguished by the touch.
which appeared to us to be the orifice of the part of the matrix which enters
into the vagina. From the sixth day after the operation, the patient was not
dressed for twenty-five days that she stayed at Paris, but with a very large
tent made of prepared sponge, which was never charged with purulent matter but
at the parts, which answered to the aperture of the skin, whose edges
suppurated a very long time. I gave pieces of prepared sponge to the patient to
use herself. Some days after getting home, the blood of the courses came out at
the aperture which I had made for it, without a single drop passing by the
fundament; she had also none of the symptoms, to which she had been formerly
subject, only for five or six hours before the flux, she had colic pains like
those she had always had upon her. The evacuation lasted only three days;
during which time the patient discontinued the use of the sponge, as I had
directed her, and continued it afterward. Five weeks after, the blood
re-appeared still by the same part, and flowed for three or four days. The
patient imagined then she might be without the sponge. The fistulous orifice,
that is to say, the aperture which I had made, appeared to be closed up; yet it
opened on the third month to give passage to the blood, when it was about to
re-appear. This happened still for two months longer; but on the sixth month
the blood resumed its course by the fundament, and all the symptoms, to which
the patient had been subject before the operation, recurred upon her afresh.
She thus suffered silently, without acquainting me for eight or ten months; at
the end of which time she consulted me: I had no other means to propose to her
than the same operation; but particular reasons hindered the submitting to it.

We see by this observation, of what consequence the resources of surgery are,
and that if nature departs from her usual course, and forgets herself, she may,
by the aids of this art, be redressed, and new ways, capable of putting her in
the state of perfection she ought to have, be paved out for her, provided the
patients have discretion enough to assist themselves, and second the surgeon's
care.

The death of the patient: the opening of the body.
The patient died in 1740; I was apprized of the day of her death; I
communicated it to the academy of surgery. The academy named M. Verdier and
Foubert to make their report. M. Verdier, on whom I deferred the honor of
opening the body, carried home with him all the parts, in order to make a
particular dissection of them in presence of M. Foubert, myself, and some other
curious persons, who went along with us to the defunct's. M. Verdier made
several appointments, but kept none of them, through an affectation but little
decent. What were his reasons to behave in this manner, and to have made no
report to the academy, are things quite unknown to me.

Subjects ill conformed, to which we cannot give the quality of hermaphrodites.
It now remains to make a general examen of a species of subjects, to which it
is not possible to give any character of hermaphrodite, and even sometimes
pretty difficult to determine their sex.

There are some, in whom we cannot easily distinguish whether what appears
prominent or sticking out, be the penis or the clitoris, the part which appears
to represent either, being the most fantastical and various that can be, more
or less long or large, of an irregular, round, square, flat, spiral, unequal,
or uneven figure, susceptible of any voluptuous or pleasurable sensation, of
inflation, erection, or quite insensible of all. There are of them who have a
sort of glands, which we would be apt to take for testicles, did we not more
narrowly attend to them: others have genuine testicles, but placed differently
than in the natural state; as the subject of which Reald. Columbus speaks, who
had them in the perineum: and there has been seen in London, not long ago, a
man who had them in the same place.

IId observation. The vagina unapparent, is only discovered by chance.
In some subjects we distinguish not whether there be any vagina or no, unless
chance make the discovery for us. Martinus Schurigius relates the history of a
young woman, who arrived to a very advanced age, without every knowing whether
she had any vagina or no. She had occasion to take a glyster, but as no one
could administer it, her surgeon undertook the task: he was surprised to find
the decoction come out in proportion as the syringe voided it; he drew back the
pipe, and introduced his finger into the fundament; and then he perceived that
the canal, by which the excrements were discharged, was larger than commonly
the fundament is, went also to the matrix, whose orifice he touched with his
finger.

IIId observation. The excrements and urine sometimes come out at the vagina.
This observation seems to confirm what Palfyn relates after Zaborella,
professor of phyfick, who had a servant-maid, whose urine and excrements came
out by the vagina. This fact is related as a natural accident, having nothing
in common with the same accidents which happen to certain women, the neck of
whose bladder, and the rectum, are tore in hard labor.

The urine sometimes discharged byways quite extraordinary.
There are also people ill-conformed, who though they have canals which seem
proper for conveying the urine out of the bladder, yet they discharge it by
other peculiar passages; such was that hermaphrodite of Columbus, who
discharged the urine above the os pubis.

IVth observation. The menses are sometimes discharged by peculiar outlets.
Nature, in some subjects, forms to herself peculiar routs for the evacuation of
the courses, as was remarked in the person of a monk, who died at the
Hotel-Dieu of Paris in 1726. M. Boudou, head-surgeon of that hospital, opened
the body of this religious. The exterior parts consisted in a chink of no great
depth, ruddy within, like the part of a woman; the two edges of that chink
represented, imperfectly enough, the two lips of the vulva. In one of these two
lips there was a testicle, in the other none: from the space between these two
lips issued forth, toward the superior part, a sort of penis ill-formed,
unperforated. The urine had been always determined through an orifice situated
under the penis, at its root, in the part where is the meatus urinarius of
women. These was no appearance of a vagina externally. After this examen, he
opened the belly; he found that the spermatick vessels observed nearly the same
direction as in the natural state; such of these vessels, as were of the side
of the testicle, went to empty themselves into that organ; instead of the
bladder of that side, in the ordinary situation, there was a seminal vesicle;
the spermatick vessels of the opposite side proceeded to lose themselves
between the bladder and rectum in a small body, which, as far as Mr. Boudou
imagined, was a matrix, which, for want of use, was become collapsed.

This religious had an ulcer in one of his legs, from whence periodically
flowed, every month, a sanious serosity, which made Mr. Boudou conjecture, that
the discharge, which was made by that ulcer, supplied the place of the menses.

There are in this observation some other peculiarities, in which I am not
enough instructed; they would come much better from the hands of Mr. Boudou
himself.

Vth observation. A monk hermaphrodite delivered of a child.
It is not only in our days, that such sort of people are to be met with in
cloisters: Gaspar Bauhin relates, that in the year 1478, in the reign of Louis
XI. there was a monk hermaphrodite at Issoire in Auvergne, who had the
advantage of both sexes; he came to be in the condition of a pregnant woman,
and was delivered of a child at the usual term.

Mas, mulier, monachus, mundi mirabile monstrum. An accurate description of the
parts would have given us more satisfaction than all the fine gingle of words
in this verse. The place also we assign to this history, screens us from the
reproach that might be thrown out upon us, did we put it to the rank of perfect
hermaphrodites.

These sorts of subjects, ill-constructed, do often impose on the people of the
art, the most skilled in the structure of the parts; and thus it is nowise
surprising, to find midwives embarrassed, who have often taken males for
females, and females for males; because that in these the clitoris is sometimes
longer than in the natural state; and in those, the penis is extremely short,
and the scrotum, folded up in two, appears as if divided by a slit: of this we
find instances in Riolanus, and De Graaf; my practice has furnished me with
one, as follows.

VIth observation. A girl taken for a boy till the age of six years.
M. Perrat, man-midwife to the queen, was consulted for a child of six years
old, who passed for a girl, on a hernia he was supposed to have; he devolved on
me the decision and the care: I found that the pretended hernia was a testicle,
which gave me the curiosity particularly to examine the scrotum and penis: the
scrotum was exactly divided by a slit, like to that of the vulva; this slit was
ruddy within, and very moist; the penis was extremely short, and scarce came
out of the slit; the testicle, which was taken for a hernia, had begun to come
out of the belly but lately, and that of the other side had not yet appeared. I
acquainted the parents with their mistake of the sex, which gave them a double
satisfaction.

VIIth observation. A female African, who passed for an hermaphrodite.
We sometimes meet with conformations still more vitiated, which are made to
pass current with persons prepared by prejudices. Dr. Douglass disabused the
public, by the description he gave of the natural parts of a female African,
who ten years ago passed in Londom for an hermaphrodite: he caused to engrave
the plate, which Mr. Cheselden has published in his anatomy, and Dr. Parsons in
his critical inquiry into hermaphrodites. This African had all the proportions
of body, the tone of voice, and the ways of a woman. Two peculiarities only in
her parts of generation, were sufficient to impose on the simple, namely, the
clitoris and the lips of the vulva. The clitoris, as may be seen plate IV.
which I caused to engrave after the original, is indeed larger and longer than
in the natural state, but has nothing to characterise the penis; the right lip,
excessively large, compared with the other, is, with probability, supposed by
Dr. Douglass to include a hernia of the ovaries (it might also be an
epiplocele) which imposed on those who considered it as a testicle. The marking
down the urethra, which I suppose to be between the nymphae, has escaped the
accuracy of Dr. Douglass. Dr. Parsons's work contains several instances of this
sort, which he has drawn from authors; they all tend to his design, namely, the
proving the opinion he is in, that there is no hermaphrodite among men; that no
hermaphrodital nature can exist in human bodies.

Nothing is more common, than to hear mention made of these sorts of persons as
hermaphrodites; and the public would for ever be under the illusion, if
persons of wisdom did not endeavor to disabuse it.

VIIIth observation A child ill-conformed, who passed for an hermaphrodite.
M. Faudacque, surgeon at Namur, says, in an observation which he has
communicated to the academy of surgery at Paris, that he has seen, at three
leagues distance from Givet, a child of eight months old, who passed for an
hermaphrodite. The Penis was unperforated both at the glans and preputium; he
made water by an orifice greatly dilated, like a sort of vulva, situated
immediately under the scrotum. As to the rest, the penis was, says M.
Faudacque, disfigured and monstrous, resembled a small snail, was so curled and
bent, that the extremity of the glans, covered with the preputium, touched the
posterior part of the root of the penis. All the part, which answered to the
place where naturally is the canal of the urethra, appeared to be ligamentous,
and so short, as to bridle in and bend the penis in the manner I have
described. When Mr. Faudacque saw the child for the first time, the testicles
were not yet come down into the scrotum, but since he has observed them there.

Mr. Mertru, surgeon at Paris, IXth observation another boy, taken for an
hermaphrodite.
has published in the Mercure de France for the month of February of this year
1750, the description of the parts of the body of one named Michel-Anne
Drouart, aged about sixteen, born at Paris, in the Fauxbourg St. Marceau. The
state of this young man, to whom M. Mertru ascribes the character of
hermaphrodite, leaves no doubt of the species of his sex, since he is in
London, where he arrived four or five months ago. The difficulty of finding the
cause of the sudden change of his state, will justify my silence. His
countenance, his voice, his corpulence, the proportion of his limbs, denote
very distinctly the male kind. He is a lad, who, for his age, is well built,
but ill-formed in the parts of generation of a man, which are the only ones he
has. Nature, indeed, seems to have forgot herself in the conformation of the
penis; for though of the natural bulk, size, and figure, yet it is unperforated
and bent downwards, being forced to take that turn by a fold of the skin, which
extends from its root to the frenum: but as nature rarely loses on one hand,
but she gains on the other, she has formed for herself a way at the root of the
penis for the discharge of the urine and other excretions. We may compare this
aperture to the meatus urinarius in women: if there is any difference, it is
only in the exterior figure of this orifice, in that it forms a sort of
excrescence, composed of a simple fold of the skin, which is of a semilunar
figure; this fold forms a cavity about three lines in depth, and admits the
extremity of the little finger to lodge in it; it terminates almost at all the
circumference of the meatus urinarius, and has the figure of a funnel. On
removing the two sides of this excrescence, we observe in the inferior part a
very delicate folding, but in which we found nothing to characterize the
fourchette; this part forms, in young women especially, who have had no
children, a perfect crescent, and raised much, which does not appear in this
subject. At the bottom of the sort of funnel I mentioned, I find a small nipple
(as Mr. Mertru remarks) but to us it appeared to be another vice of
conformation: it is placed over against the urethra, and makes the jet of urine
forked. The absence of the testicles, in the two divided portions of the
scrotum, holds still to this day; but their existence is for that not the less
certain, since the subject has evacuations of seminal matter, of the same
consistence and color with that of a man of his age, in consequence of the
erections, which, by his own confession, procure him the enjoyment of the sex.
The want of testicles in the scrotum, is a defect common to a good many men,
which hinders not their having a great deal of vigor; on the contrary, they
are much more able for generation, on account of the heat in which these organs
are kept This manner of speaking, though improper, ceases not to be understood.
. I have on this subject a memoir both useful and interesting, which I purpose
to publish soon. As to the menses, they have not hitherto appeared, and nothing
can make me believe they ever can.

We reckon then by this report, that the subject in question, is a lad
ill-formed in his genital parts, and incapable of generation. Xth observation.
A subject in which the menses come out by the penis.
The memoirs of the academy of sciences of Paris, make mention of a sort of
creature much more singular, and whose sex appears to me difficult to determine.

In figure and body, in gross, it resembled a girl: it was baptized by the name
Margaret. The construction of the natural parts was such, that no vagina
appeared; there were, however, two lips, which characterised only the part of
the woman. From between these lips there issued forth a pretty long penis,
about eight inches in length, when in a state of erection; it was well formed,
but without any preputium. There was, besides, no appearance of testicles; the
urine and semen issued out as in a man, through the canal of the urethra but
what was more extraordinary, the menses passed regularly every month through the
same canal.

XIth observation. An hermaphrodite of a very peculiar sort.
I conclude with the following observation; it must be considered here as out of
its place: its singularity might entitle it to be ranked under the species of
perfect hermaphrodites: but as the person, who is the subject thereof, never
had any children, and as there is no proof it ever begot any, this might be
made a handle of to charge us with being inclined to decide too lightly. The
readers therefore will be left at liberty to give to this subject what
character they shall judge to suit best to it.

The observation is owing to M. Gallay, surgeon of Gargenville near Mantes in
Normandy, who has submitted it to the judgment of the academy of surgery of
Paris.

On the 27th of March 1740, being, says he, at the village of Issou near
Mantes, I learned they were to bury, that very day, a woman who had passed for
an hermaphrodite; I arrived at the moment they were about to convey the body
into the earth. I begged of the husband to allow me to examine her, which he
granted, on condition I should not open her. The natural parts appeared to me
to consist of the lips, the nymphae, etc. At the superior angle of the great
chink, where the clitoris should be, there was a well-conditioned penis, the
glans was proportional, and covered in part with its preputium, was as
perfectly crowned as that of a man; at the extremity of this glans, there was
an orifice, into which I introduced a probe, which entered quite into the
bladder, from which issued out the little urine it contained. This penis was
three inches six lines in length, and three inches four lines in circumference.
The urine had no other outlet than by this canal. I discovered no testicles,
the great lips were the parts which should naturally contain them; the vagina
was placed, as usual, at the inferior part of the vulva; thither I introduced
my fingers; with their extremities I felt the orifice of the matrix, whose
edges were hard, and, as it were, cartilaginous. The husband withdrew for a
moment; I improved this time of absence in opening the belly, in hopes of
finding there the testicles; my expectation proved vain, I found nothing that
had any relation to these parts; the ovaries, the tubae fallopianae, the womb,
were scirrhous. The return of the husband prevented the carrying any farther my
curiosity. There is room to believe, that the penis consisted of all the parts
necessary to its actions, since the husband assured me, that it was often in a
state of erection. I could not learn, whether in that state it had ever
discharged any sort of seminal matter. As to the rest, this woman had had her
courses in her youth, never had had any children; her face was thick set with a
beard, the tone of her voice was mannish.

I here give, XIIth observation. Two hermaphrodites in carnal commerce together.
by way of supplement to these observations, the history of two hermaphrodites,
which are said to be of the perfect kind. The one was a young lady of
condition, the other a Religious of the order of St. Francis, who had the
direction of the young lady's conscience. Lust and the devil put it into the
heart of the monk, to join with his penance a commerce very different from that
which his profession allowed of; but he paid dearly for his incontinence, for
after a proper period he brought forth a girl, which cost him his life, through
the hard labor he underwent.

The girl, who was born of this copulation in a town of Italy, where the scene
of the action lay, is now actually living at Paris. She has given the history
of her father and mother; and the manuscript, which she purposes to publish
forthwith, is in the hands of a person of my acquaintance. The public will
then judge what place in our differtation this history should occupy.

Corrigenda. In Page 26, Line 17, for Physician read Lawyer; in p. 37, l. 1.
after Syncope's, for. put;

FINIS.
At the Publisher's of this, may be had the Author's Dissertation on HERNIA'S
or RUPTURES; in which he points out the Remedies proper for these Disorders,
and his Rules for the Use of the Bandages invented by him much more sure and
lighter, as also more commodious, than any hitherto invented.

Those who have Occasion to consult the Author in any chirurgical Cases, may
address themselves to him, an his House in Martlet-Court, Bow-Street,
Covent Garden.

BOOKS printed for A. MILLAR, opposite to Catherine-Street, in the Strand.
1. A Dissertation on Hernia's, or Ruptures. In Two Parts. I. Familiar and easy
Instructions for Persons afflicted with those Diseases; by which they may learn
to distinguish their own Cases, palliate the Symptoms, and promote the Cure.
II. Two Memoirs for the Use of Surgeons; one concerning a Strangulation of the
Intestines by the Hernial Sac; the other concerning the Adhesion of the
Intestine in Hernia's. To which a Preface, concerning the Improvements made by
modern Surgery in the Cure of Hernia's, is prefixed; and a Dictionary of Terms
of Art, used in the Dissertation, is subjoined. By George Arnaud, Master of
Arts and Surgery, Member of the Royal Academy of Surgery at Paris, Demonstrator
in the School of St. Come, Surgeon for Ruptures, of the Hospitals of
Hotel-Dieu, the Invalids, and Incurables, of the City of Paris, and of all the
Military Hospitals in France. Translated from the original MSS. under the
Inspection of the Author.

2. A Synopsis of the History and Cure of Venereal Diseases. From the famous
Venetian Collection of fifty-nine Writers upon this Subject, published in Latin
by the celebrated Dr. Boerhaave, with his Preface and Praxis. The whole fully
and compendiously translated and methodized by J. Armstrong, M. D. Wherein the
Substance of all these Writers is preserved in whatever is material, only by
contracting Things of little moment, and avoiding useless Repetitions. In this
Work are particularly shown, 1. The Original and Progression of such Distempers
in the several Shapes and Stages wherein they have appeared. 2. Proper
Observations and Remarks; comparing, connecting, and reconciling, as much as
possible, the ancient Practice with the modern. 3. A faithful Compendium of Dr.
Astruc's New Treatise on the Venereal Disease, whose Method is excellent, and
generally regular. Made English from the Latin Original published at Paris 1736.

3. Essays Medical and Philosophical. Containing, 1. The Periods and Crises of
Diseases. 2. The Specific Operations of Cathartick Medicines. 3. The
Construction and Graduation of Thermometers. 4. The Comparison of Thermometers.
5. The Heating and Cooling of Bodies. 6. The various Degrees of Heat in Bodies.
7. The Ways of computing the different Degrees of Heat. 8. Of the Heat of the
Air. 9. The comparative Heats of the Sun, Earth, Planets, and Comets. 10. The
Degrees of Heat in Animals. 11. The preternatural Heats of Animals. 12. The
Heats of Waters, Oils, and Salts, according to their Fluidity and Consistency.
13. The melting and shining Heats of Metals and Minerals. 14. The boiling Heats
of liquid and melted Bodies. By George Martin, M. D. Honorary Fellow of the
College of Physicians at Edinburgh, and chief Physician to the Forces in the
Expedition under Lord Cathcart.

4. Georgii Martinii, M. D. de Similibus Animalibus, and Animalium Calore,
Libri duo.

5. De Re Medica Dissertationes Quatuor. Auctore Thoma Simson, M. D.

6. A Discourse on the Plague; by Richard Mead, Fellow of the College of
Physicians, and of the Royal Society, and Physician to his Majesty. The Ninth
Edition corrected and enlarged.


