AN ESSAY ON THE NATURE AND CURE OF THE (SO CALLED) WORM-FEVER.

By SAMUEL MUSGRAVE, M. D. Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY,

And Corresponding Member of the Academy of BELLES LETTRES at Paris.

LONDON, Printed; And Sold by T. PAIN, B. WHITE, J. ROBSON, and P. ELMSLY.

M.DCC.LXXVI.

OF THE WORM-FEVER.
THE Worm-Fever, as it is called, being a disorder to which Children are pretty
generally liable, and frequently eluding the skill of the physician; it will
not, I presume, be unacceptable to the Public, if I lay before them a method of
treating that disorder, which, in several instances of my own practice, has
been attended with success, and which, from the immediate relief it gives the
patients, I conclude to be specifically adapted to the cure of it, and not
successful by accident only.

The difficulty of curing what is called a Worm-Fever, arises in my opinion
from its being frequently attributed to Worms, when the cause of the disorder
is of a quite different nature. I do not mean to deny that Worms do sometimes
abound in the human body, nor that the irritation caused by them does sometimes
produce a Fever; but I apprehend these cases to be much more uncommon than it
is generally imagined, and that great mischief is done by treating some of the
disorders of children as Worm-cases, which really are not so.

That Practitioners are frequently deceived in this respect, is sufficiently
ascertained by the testimony of Dr. Hunter, who assures me that he has
dissected great numbers of children, who have been supposed to die of
Worm-Fevers, and whose complaints were of course treated as proceeding from
Worms, in whom, however, there appeared upon dissection to be not only no
Worms, but evident proofs of the disorder having been of a very different
nature. A single case of this kind was published long ago in the Edinburgh
Medical Essays by Professor Sinclair, who, after informing us, that upon
opening the body, no Worms were found, goes on to observe, that "A
disappointment of this kind is no new thing; for all experienced Physicians
know, that every symptom commonly produced by Worms, (except voiding them)
sometimes arises from other causes." If this be the case, if it be no new thing
for Physicians to prescribe medicines against Worms to patients who have none,
I am afraid it is no new thing also, under this misapprehension, to do a great
deal of mischief.

The cause of these mistakes is plainly this, that people not only conclude too
hastily from the existence of a single Worm, that there are many more behind;
but they often (as Dr. Sinclair also intimates) infer the existence of Worms
from signs that are very equivocal and uncertain; such as the stools containing
sometimes a curdly matter, like the curd of milk, and sometimes a dark green
substance, apparently full of filaments, like the conferva upon standing
waters, the urine, at the same time, having a mixture of something creamy. With
evacuations of this kind, if the patient is flushed in the face, starts
frequently from his sleep, and is much disposed to rub his nose, it is
concluded, that though there be no Worms completely formed, there is yet a
considerable quantity of the minera verminosa, or seminium verminosum, which
must be carried off by repeated purges.

It is observed, however, by Practitioners, that the disorder is much less
obstinate and dangerous when the Worms appear to be completely formed, even
though their number should be considerable, than when there is no evacuation of
complete Worms, but only a large quantity of what is called the seminium
verminosum: and yet in this last state, the animal being by supposition as yet
in embryo, and quite invisible, cannot give so much irritation to the bowels,
nor absorb so much of the chyle, as when it is perfectly formed and active; and
therefore ought not, upon this principle, to give so much disturbance to the
body that it inhabits.

But further, it is remarked, that the supposed Worm-Cases do every now and
then cause a soreness, prominency and inflammation of the navel, which, if it
comes to suppurate, the disorder speedily gives way; whereas, if there is no
such tendency to inflammation, it frequently proves fatal, and is at best very
tedious and difficult of cure. Now, what connection can there be between a
suppuration of the navel, discharging nothing but pus, and a real Worm-Case?
How comes it to pass that all the bad symptoms shall vanish, as I have seen
them do, upon the coming on of the suppuration, if they had been produced by
Worms lodged in the intestine, and still continuing to lodge there?

Wherever this has been the case, it seems clear that the disorder must have
been only an irritation or morbid affection of the bowel, from the use of some
improper food, which the strength of the constitution after a time throws out
upon the external surface of the body, producing at the same time a
proportionable relief of the internal and vital part. Now if this be the nature
of the disorder in some few cases, it may not improbably have been so in many
more, in which the efforts of Nature have been checked; or, to speak less
metaphorically, in which the power of Nature has been too much weakened by
injudicious and repeated purges.

That purges are often found ineffectual to dislodge the Worms in children, is
a fact acknowledged by those who most frequently use them in the supposed
Worm-Cases. Indeed the difficulty of those cases evidently shows it, the
general method of cure being by repeated purges. If this, however, was the only
inconvenience, if all that purges did was to produce a little unnecessary
nausea and griping, the practice might be borne with; but unfortunately, what
upon the common supposition is only useless, upon the contrary and more
probable supposition is pernicious and destructive. Where the irritation of the
bowels is disposed to affect the brain, the proper indication, after carrying
off the original offending matter, is to comfort and strengthen the bowels,
instead of weakening them by frequent purges, which effectually prevent the
irritating cause from discharging itself upon the surface. In children,
particularly, whose nerves are tender, and in whom all irritations are readily
transmitted from the intestines and other remote parts of the body to the
brain, the effects of too frequently repeating them are greatly to be dreaded.
I have myself seen more than one instance, where the evacuations intended to
carry off Worms from the bowels, though not immoderate in quantity, have been
soon after followed by slight convulsions, and other very threatening nervous
symptoms.

For this reason, unless we could be certain a priori, that the child we
prescribe for has Worms, and Worms too in a considerable number, I must think
it highly imprudent and unsafe to teaze and weaken him by purging, which, if
there be really no Worms, must certainly do considerable harm. To those
Worm-medicines that are not purgative, there is not the same objection, though
still there is little or no benefit to be expected from them in the spurious
Worm-Fever, which, as I observed before, is much the most common of the two.

The spurious Worm-Fever, of which I come now to give an account, has, in all
the instances I have seen, arisen evidently from the children having been
indulged with too great quantities of fruit; though a poor cold diet of any
kind may, for aught I know, occasionally give birth to it. Every sort of fruit
eaten in excess, will probably produce it; and of course, that which is to be
had in the greatest plenty, will, from its plenty, be the occasion of most
mischief. I am convinced, however, as well from my own experience, as by the
observations of my medical friends, that a great proportion of these disorders
is produced by the immoderate use of cherries, which may in part be owing to a
prevailing opinion of their innocence; so that children are suffered even by
their parents to eat freely of them, without any suspicion or apprehension of
danger, which they are very seldom suffered to do of pears, plumbs, or apples.

There is no part of Nature so open to doubt and skepticism as medical
subjects; and therefore it is not to be wondered that many people should
entertain a notion of the innocence of fruit to children. Fruit, like most
other substances that we know, has a variety of effects upon the human body: To
some it is salutary and medicinal, to others innocent, and to a third sort
prejudicial. Where it is even prejudicial, the harm it does depends in a great
measure upon the quantity; and the precise quantity that will be prejudicial,
it is, from the great varieties of constitution, impossible to define. People
not aware of this intricacy, can hardly be said to reason ill, when they infer,
that what a great number eat with impunity is innocent to all. Yet further
reflection would suggest to them, that things the most confessedly noxious do
not in every constitution produce the same effects. The effluvia of the
smallpox, for instance, will affect one man, while another, equally exposed to
them, shall escape. It would, therefore, be a very commendable piece of
discretion, to pay a little more regard, upon this occasion, to the judgment of
our forefathers, who are known to have been particularly cautious in the
article of fruit, and attributed many of the disorders of children to a too
frequent or excessive use of it. And that this apprehension was not wholly
unreasonable, will appear, I think, from the following reflection. We have all
frequent opportunities of observing, and most of us have experienced, that
fruit in no very large quantity will produce the colic; which it could not do,
without being occasionally offensive and hostile to the body. Now, whatever is
offensive and capable of creating pain, will, by change of circumstances, be
capable of creating a disorder of a different kind; that is, a fever, a
diarrhoea, or a stupor, and oppression of the brain.

The approach of this disorder has a different appearance, according as it
arises from a habit of eating fruit in rather too large quantities, or from an
excessive quantity eaten at one time. In the former case, the patient gradually
grows weak and languid; his color becomes pale and livid; his belly swells and
grows hard; his appetite and digestion are destroyed; his nights grow restless,
or at least his sleep is much disturbed with startings, and then the fever soon
follows: in the progress of which the patient grows comatose, and at times
convulsed; in which state, when the event is fatal, he dies. The pulse at the
wrist, though quick, is never strong or hard, as indeed it very seldom is in
any of the disorders of children. The carotids, however, beat with great
violence, and elevate the skin, so as to be distinctly seen at a distance. The
heat is at times considerable, especially in the trunk; though at other times,
when the brain is much oppressed, it is little more than natural. It is
sometimes accompanied by a violent pain of the epigastric region, though more
commonly the pain is slight, and terminates in a coma; some degree of pain,
however, seems to be inseparable from it, so as clearly to distinguish this
disorder from other comatose affections.

Where a large quantity of fruit has been eaten at once, the attack of the
disorder is instantaneous, and its progress rapid; the patient often passing,
in the space of a few hours, from apparently perfect health, to a stupid,
comatose, and almost dying state. The symptoms of the fever, when formed, are
in both cases nearly the same, except that in this latter sort I have now and
then seen a little purulent matter discharged by vomit and stool from the very
first day. The stools in both sorts are such as I have already described; that
is, they exhibit sometimes a kind of curd, resembling curdled milk, and at
other times a floating substance, of the color and appearance of conferva,
sometimes a number of little threads and pellicles, and now and then a single
Worm.

If the patient, under these circumstances, is too frequently or too strongly
purged, the complaints, after a short interval of relief, return with great
violence; the coma increases, or, instead of it, convulsions come on. Where the
disorder is not so severe, frequent purgings will bring on flatulent shifting
pains of the sides and breast, and twitchings of the lips and face. As soon as
any thing of this kind appears, it is necessary to desist immediately from
purging. And as to bleeding, it is not to be thought of in any stage of the
disease.

At the beginning of the illness, as the indigested matter and mucus that lies
in the stomach and bowels has a tendency to keep up the morbid symptoms, it may
be of great use to give one vomit and one purge; the vomit for a child of three
or four years old, to consist of a few grains of Ipecacuanha, or, which is
rather better, three or four tea spoonfuls of Ipecacuanha wine, with ten drops
of the essence of Antimony. The purge for the same age may be; a powder of
Jalap and Rhubarb, of each four grains, powder of Sena leaves and fine sugar,
of each six grains. When this has operated properly, there will very seldom be
any occasion for repeating it; and it will be sufficient, if the body is
costive, to throw up every second or third day, the following clyster: Infus
Flor. Chamaemel. unc. v. Aloes Caballin. dram. ss. Fiat Solutio pro Enemate.

But the principal part of the cure depends upon external applications to the
bowels and stomach, which are the residence of the morbid cause, and from
whence the mischief spreads as from a center to the parts above and below. I
have already delivered my sentiments with regard to external applications, that
they have a real distinguished efficacy, and that their action is not by
absorption and circulation, but directly upon the nerves. As the cause of this
disorder is of a cold nature, the applications must be warm, cordial, and
invigorating; and their action must be promoted by constant actual heat. The
following is a prescription I have used with success: Folior. Absinth. and
Rutae a^a^ p. aeq. Aq. Pur. Q. S. Fiat decoctum saturatissimum, quo calide
foveatur regio ventriculi and abdomen quarta vel quinta quaque hora per horae
quadrantem.

Magma ex herbis coctis post fotus usum iisdem partibus perpetuo appositum
teneatur, and quoties refrixerit, aliud calidum apponatur. For internal use,
the following is all I have found necessary: Aq. Cinnam. spir.
-- Cinnamom. ten a^a^. unc. ss.
Ol. Amygdal. dulc. unc. iss.
Sir. Balsam. dram. iij.
Misce, and tempore usus fortiter concutiantur in phiala. Capiat pro ratione
aetatis dram. ij. ad dram. vj. tertia quaque hora.

If any nervous symptoms should come on or remain after the disorder is abated,
they will soon be removed by giving a pill of four grains of Asa foetida once
or twice a day. The benefit the children find from this, makes them, instead of
loathing, soon grow fond of it, so as to call for it of their own accord, if it
is not brought them, and sometimes prefer it to an orange or a sweetmeat.

It was before observed, that the diagnostics of Worms are very uncertain,
which implies not only that they are sometimes suspected where they have no
existence; but on the contrary also, that they sometimes exist where they are
not suspected. Hence it becomes a very natural question, whether, if a real
Worm-Case should be treated in the manner here described, there would be any
risque of its being increased by such treatment? or of its gaining ground by
loss of time? My opinion upon both these questions is clearly, No; and that in
cases, where we will suppose the bowels to be really full of Worms, this
method, with some slight alterations, is greatly preferable to those which are
commonly used. As Worms either find the constitution weakly, or very soon make
it so, the frequent repetition of purges, particularly mercurials, cannot but
have a pernicious effect upon children. Bearsfoot is still more exceptionable,
being in truth to be ranked rather among poisons than medicines. Worm-seed, and
all kinds of bitters are too offensive to the palate and stomach to be long
persisted in. The powder of Coralline creates disgust by its quantity; and the
infusion of pinkroot is well known to occasion now and then vertiginous
complaints and fits: and though some people assert, that these fits are owing
to the contorsion of the Worms in the bowels, when the infusion is not
sufficiently strong to kill or stupefy them; others, and particularly Dr.
Lining, are of a contrary opinion, and impute the bad effects of it to an
over-dose. In this diversity of opinions, who will positively undertake to say,
that the accident shall not happen? It is commonly, therefore, with some
reluctance that parents suffer it to be administered to their children, who
have on their parts, on account of its sickly and earthy taste, an equal
aversion to taking it. But fomenting the belly night and morning with a strong
decoction of Rue and Wormwood, is a remedy very easy to be administered,
attended with no danger, and, instead of weakening the bowels, has an evident
tendency to corroborate them; which circumstance alone contributes, perhaps,
more than any thing else to the destruction of Worms, the vigor of the
contained or parasitical animal being overcome by the digestive powers of the
Viscera in which it is lodged. After the fomentation, it may be of use to
anoint the belly with a liniment composed of one part essential oil of Rue,
with two parts of a decoction of Rue in sweet oil. Forestus, in his
Observations, Lib. xxi. 33. mentions a remarkable cure effected by an ointment
in which the gall of a bull [the text has it, fell Auri] was a principal
ingredient. Where the decoction or essential oil of Rue are not readily to be
procured, an ointment strongly impregnated with this or ox's gall, would, I
suppose, be very efficacious. Of internal medicines, the best is Asa foetida,
with an aloetic pill or two at proper intervals.

The diet of children disposed to Worms should be warm and nourishing,
consisting in part at least of animal food, which is not the worse for being a
little seasoned. Their drink may be any kind of beer that is well hopped, with
now and then a small draught of porter or negus. A total abstinence from butter
is perhaps not so necessary, as the generality of the world imagine. Hungry
poor cheese must by all means be avoided; but rich pungent cheese, in a
moderate quantity, is particularly serviceable. In the spurious Worm-Fever, the
patient should be supported occasionally by small quantities of broth; and at
the close of it, when the appetite returns, the first food given should be of
the kinds above recommended, though in a very small quantity. As the patient
grows stronger, the quantity may be increased, taking care, if possible, to
avoid indigestion; or, if it arises, correcting it with the following powder:
Rhubarb. pulv. Magnes. alb. a^a^ gr. v. Spec. Aromat. gr. ij. Misce.

The diet here directed will, perhaps, be thought extraordinary, as the general
idea is at present, that, in the management of children, nothing is so much to
be avoided as repletion and rich food. It is, no doubt, an error to feed
children too well, or to indulge them with wine and rich sauces; but it is
equally an error to confine them to too strict or too poor a diet, which
weakens their digestion, and renders them much more subject to disorders of
every kind; but particularly to disorders of the bowels. In regard to the
spurious Worm-Fever, if it be true that acid fruits too plentifully eaten, are
the general cause of it, it follows as a consequence, that a warm nutritious
diet, moderately used, will most effectually counteract the mischief, and
soonest restore the natural powers of the stomach. Besides, if the disorder
does not readily yield to the methods here directed, as there are many
examples, and some within my own experience, of its terminating by an
inflammation and suppuration of the navel, it is highly advisable to keep this
probability in view, and by a moderate allowance of animal food, to support
those powers of Nature, from which only such a happy crisis is to be expected.

FINIS.

