AN ESSAY, TOWARD A DEFINITION OF ANIMAL VITALITY; READ AT THE THEATER, GUY's
HOSPITAL, January 26, 1793;

IN WHICH SEVERAL OF THE OPINIONS OF THE CELEBRATED JOHN HUNTER ARE EXAMINED
AND CONTROVERTED.

By JOHN THELWALL, MEMBER OF THE PHYSICAL SOCIETY, etc.

FELIX, QUI POTUIT RERUM COGNOSCERE CAUSAS.
VIRGIL. LONDON: PRINTED BY T. RICKABY; AND SOLD BY G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSONS,
PATERNOSTER-ROW; DEBRETT, PICCADILLY; AND COX, ST. THOMAS'S STREET, BOROUGH.

1793.

[Entered at Stationers' Hall.]

TO HENRY CLINE, ESQUIRE. Lecturer on Anatomy and Surgery, and Surgeon to St.
Thomas's Hospital.
SIR,
IT is with no small degree, of diffidence that I presume to dedicate this
first effort at Scientific Investigation to you; nor could I ever so far have
prevailed upon myself, had not my desire to testify the gratitude I feel for
the many obligations I owe to yourself and family, been considerably stronger
than my hopes, that any thing contained in this Essay could be worthy of your
attention. -- I do not, Sir, approach you with the venal breath of panegyric;
nor can I have the presumption to hope, that any laurels can be added to your
reputation by one who has yet all his own to gather; but as I am now hastening,
in a new character, to the bar of the public, I am actuated by a feeling
natural enough to mankind -- the desire of appealing first to that decision
which is likely to have the strongest bias toward lenity and indulgence. You,
Sir, need not be told the disadvantages under which I have attempted to form an
opinion upon an abstruse Physiological Question, which has always, even to the
most learned professors, appeared to be involved in so much obscurity and
doubt; and you will, perhaps, be kind enough (if my Definition should ever
engage so much attention, as to be the object of conversation in those
respectable medical circles you frequent) to apologize for the imperfections of
a young Theorist, whose information upon the subject has almost entirely been
derived (in the few hours he could steal from other studies and other pursuits)
from the Lectures to which yourself, Mr. Haighton, and Mr. Ashley Cooper, have
been so kind as to invite me It is an act of justice due to the celebrated
Lecturer on Comparative Anatomy, to confess, that I never was personally at his
Lectures; and that, except in the instance where I have mentioned the authority
of the Encyc. Brit. my quotations are taken from the manuscript copy belonging
to a very ingenious pupil, who, a few years ago, was a constant and diligent
attendant.
. I am aware, Sir, that to this the ill-natured critic might reply: but why,
then, intrude his puerile speculations on the world? To this I must reply, for
myself, that the reception of this little Essay in the Society, The Essay was
disenssed for six successive nights to a theater particularly thronged; and the
following Letter of Thanks was officially addressed to the Author: Theater,
Guy's-Hospital, March 2, 1793.

SIR,
I AM desired, by the Members of the PHYSICAL SOCIETY, to return you their most
sincere Thanks for your excellent and very valuable Essay, toward a Definition
of Animal Vitality, the Abilities you displayed during the discussion, and the
instruction which this institution has received from your Assistance in the
debates.

I am, SIR, With the greatest Respect. Your most obedient humble servant,
George Johnson, Secretary. J. Haighton, Praeses.
Mr. THELWALL, Westen Street, Borough.


where it had the honor to be read, was by far too flattering for a young man
like myself to be insensible to; and the solicitations of some of the most
respected and intelligent members appeared a sufficient justification, in the
eye of prudence, for hazarding its publication. I have, therefore, committed it
to the Press, in the assurance, that, if these gentlemen have leaned too far on
the side of partiality. I shall not fail to be set right again by the kind
severity of some, who will incline, with sufficient force, the other way. Among
these, however, will not, I am sure, be enumerated the Gentleman, whose,

With the utmost gratitude and esteem, I have the honor to remain, JOHN
THELWALL, Maze Pond, Southwark.

AN ESSAY, etc. READ TO THE PHYSICAL SOCIETY.
INTRODUCTION.
MR. PRESIDENT,
AS my sole motive for becoming a member of this society was the pleasure I
always derived from the enlightended conversation of gentlemen of the Medical
Profession, and as I have hitherto attended to the science only as a matter of
entertaining curiosity, and not as a pursuit to which I have any present
intention of devoting myself, I might, perhaps, without encountering the
censure of the candid and considerate, have endeavored to excuse myself from
the execution of a talk to which the nature of my pursuits must necessarily
render me so inadequate. But, as I am no friend to privileges, and would have
every member of society endure his proportion of the public burdens; and as,
above all, I would wish to exclude the idle drone from the hive of science, I
felt myself called upon to perform the part allotted by our institutions, and
to give every gentleman that opportunity of canvassing and controverting my
opinions, which, with respect to theirs, I have occasionally exercised myself.

I have discarded, therefore, as far as possible, the timidity naturally
attendant upon the many disadvantages under which I labor, and launching into
a new and untried region, have brought my little tribute of physical knowledge,
or rather speculation, to the general fund; confident only in the hope, that
the smallness of its value will in some degree be compensated by the
cheerfulness with which it is contributed.

My Theory will no doubt be found, in many respects, defective, from the want
of more general information in the sciences of Anatomy and Physiology; and may,
perhaps, be erroneous in others, from the misapprehension of scattered facts,
imperfectly collected, without the concatenation of circumstances by which they
might be elucidated and explained. But such as it is, I am sure the society
would pardon its imperfections, if they knew the numerous avocations among
which it has been digested, and the small proportion of time I have been
enabled to devote to its composition.

I make these observations, not to abate the ardour of controversy, or restrain
the keenness of investigation. It is from that ardour, from that keenness, and
not from any vague conjectures in this essay, that edification is to be
expected by the society; and so far am I from wishing to shelter my hypothesis
behind the screen of any personal consideration, that I should neither be
displeased at being convinced that I am wrong, nor backward in acknowledging my
conviction. Reputation is not to be expected from so transient an attention as
I have been enabled to pay to this subject; nor can there be any disgrace in
the failure of an attempt, which is the result rather of necessity than of
choice.

In short, candor of judgment, and not indulgence in investigation, is what I
solicit from the society; and for that I shall not solicit in vain.

It is necessary, however, before I proceed to my subject, to premise one
remark. I do not here profess to delineate a perfect system. I have entitled my
paper an Essay, and as such only I wish it to be considered. I shall not
therefore be expected to demonstrate every proposition, or to draw out every
part of my theory with amplitude and perspicuity.

This, I believe, is what has never yet been done; nor, from the limits of our
present knowledge, can it rationally be expected of any hypothesis upon this
subject. The Anatomical Physiologist himself is frequently left to wander in
the regions of conjecture. The functions of almost every organ may be traced
farther than the existence of such organs can be detected by the minutest
enquiry: Analogy, therefore, is often called upon to supply the place of
Demonstration; or the more easy expedient is appealed to, of passing over in
silence what cannot be readily accounted for. Many of the conjectures, it is
true, which the imperfection of the senses, or the deficiency of observation,
has rendered necessary to professors, have gathered confidence from the great
authorities by which they have been sanctioned: yet let it not be forgotten,
that it is not in the nature of authorities to change conjectures into proofs.
Let us remember also, that reason is the greatest authority of all; and that
when systems clash, and demonstrations are not to be had, we ought not to
consider who is the author of this, or who of that opinion, but which it is
that involves the fewest absurdities, or is best supported by analogy, and the
correspondence of the general laws of Nature.

AN ESSAY, TOWARD A DEFINITION OF ANIMAL VITALITY.
IT is an apparent paradox, but it is not therefore the less true, that those
ideas, or phenomena, that are most familiar to us, should frequently be the
most difficult to explain. This is particularly the case with the subject of
the present Essay.

Life is a term so constantly recurring, and, indeed, as one would at first
suppose, an image so perpetually presenting itself to our senses -- and the
difference is so striking, between the pale insensate corpse, and a living
being, with all the expressions, actions, and attributes with which, in the
higher scale of animals, he generally offers himself to our eyes, or our
imaginations, that a vulgar observer would sneer at the philosopher who should
suggest the difficulty of ascertaining in what vitality consists: yet where is
the student, who, upon serious examination, has found himself satisfied with
any thing that has been said upon the subject?

Does not the greatest anatomical philosopher, even of the present enlightened
age, tacitly confess the confusion of his ideas in this respect, when he
declares that, "From an examination and survey of animal matter when dead, only
we gain an idea of living animal matter;" and that "as from life only we gain
an idea of death, so from death only we gain an idea of life?"

Before we can possibly derive any sort of information from this antithesis, it
is necessary that we should be instructed how life and death may be accurately
discriminated; for how are we to make comparisons between objects which we are
unable to separate from each other? But even this has never successfully been
attempted; for though there are certain signs (as putrefaction, etc.) by which
the death of the animal may be demonstrated; yet, as it is not even pretended
that putrefaction is the act of vital dissolution, -- or, in other words, that
the body which is not putrid is necessarily alive -- death must have taken
place, independently of any such change; and we are, therefore, just as much in
the dark as ever with respect to the ultimate test by which the presence of
life may be ascertained.

Treatise after treatise has been written on the Vital Principle; theory has
pulled down theory without end; and the gross contradictions which have marked
the opinions of the greatest characters upon the subject, might induce one to
think that, even with respect to the general idea, we are still entirely at a
loss; that we are seeking for an imaginary something -- a phantom of the brain,
which, perhaps, has no real existence: and, indeed, if the term is to be
literally understood -- if this Vital Principle is to be considered as a
distinct or independent essence, separable from the effects and actions by
which the state of vitality is to be ascertained, I am not sure that this
conclusion will be found to involve as much absurdity as is included in the
contrary opinion.

I am well aware that there are some, who, from the first blush of this
observation, may be inclined to smile, and consider it as the ne plus ultra of
skepticism: but the philosopher will do well to keep the distinction between a
vital principle, and the state of vitality, constantly in his mind: the former
properly meaning a living CAUSE -- the latter simply a modification or effect,
to which the name of life is given, and which may be the result of a
cooperation of other causes, neither of which need, in themselves, of
necessity be alive. -- In other words, to contend for the existence of a Vital
Principle, is to contend that there is superadded to organized matter a
distinct something, in itself alive, by which the vital functions are carried
on; while, on the other hand, the State of Vitality need not of necessity be
construed, as meaning any thing more than the condition of the animal body
during the continuance of those functions.

Now -- that there is a state of animal existence, that may properly be called
the State of Life, and be put in direct contradistinction to that of Death, and
that upon the previous induction of this state depend all the higher functions
of the sensitive being, are certainly among the most self-evident of all simple
propositions. Nor is it less certain, that there must be an exact and precise
moment (nay, fraction, or, if I may so express myself, mathematical point of a
moment), in which this state of life ceases, and that of death begins; though
whether that moment can ever be ascertained by any sensible and positive mark
of discrimination, is matter of considerable doubt: but if this Vitality is to
be considered, ab origin, as a Principle, (by which, physically or
philosophically speaking, I conceive is always to be understood, a simple,
elementary, and first natural cause), and not, as itself, an effect of the
cooperation of other principles, or natural and pre-existing causes, I own,
for my own part, I must be rather slow in yielding my assent; and, while I bow
with respect to superior judgments, must claim the prerogative of exercising my
own.

Egypt, Greece and Rome are, it is true, against me: -- the ancients and the
moderns -- Aristotle and Plato, Plutarch, Moses, and John Hunter; and yet
against this host of Giants I presume to lift my pigmy lance, and brave the
unequal combat.

The most ancient of the opinions transmitted to us upon this subject, I
believe, is that of the Egyptians, which considers the Soul (or living
Principle) as a kind of shadow, or aerial substance, diffused through every
part of the body, animating every limb, and partaking of all its proportions.

Man, according to them, consists of three parts -- a gross perishable body --
an intellectual principle, or intelligent mind, by which he is elevated above
the brute creation -- and an image, or soul, exactly resembling the body in
shape, in magnitude and feature, upon which animation, and all the functions of
the animal frame depend; and in which, also, they conceive the intellectual
principle to be enshrined.

That these were considered, in the proper meaning of the word, as distinct
principles, is evident, since they are treated as being capable of independent
existence -- the soul, or vital principle, continuing many of its functions
after its separation from the body; and the mind, or intellectual power, after
the final separation, being sometimes consigned to a different residence from
the soul.

This opinion (which still, with some slight variations, continues to be
popular among Divines and Moralists, and has been mangled and metamorphosed
even by our philosophers themselves) was adopted by the Greeks, was infused
into the subtle and intricate philosophy of Aristotle, dilated upon by the
divine genius of Plato, beautified by the sublime invention of that most
ancient of their poets and philosophers, the immortal Homer; and, at length,
was taught by Plutarch to the Roman World, in the following manner:

"Man," says he, "is a compound subject, but not of two parts, as is commonly
believed, because the understanding is generally accounted a part of the soul;
whereas it as far exceeds the soul, as the soul is diviner than the body. Now
the soul, when compounded with the understanding, makes REASON, and, when
compounded with the body, makes PASSION; whereof one is the source or principle
of pleasure or pain -- the other of vice or virtue. Man, therefore, properly
dies two deaths; the first makes him two of three, and the second makes him one
of two."

This hypothesis has certainly beauty and ingenuity to recommend it to our
imaginations; and is also, to my conceptions at least, somewhat more
comprehensible than those systems which refer the operations of gross matter to
immaterial agency. It is, however, like all the speculations of the ancients
upon these subjects, unfounded in experimental enquiry, and unsupported by
facts or observation: yet St. Paul, (who derived much of his inspiration from
the ancient poets and philosophers) has given it the sanction of his authority,
by dividing, in distinct terms, the triune man into Body, Soul, and Spirit.

This being the case, it is not at all surprising that modern philosophy should
have been more anxious to frame such systems as were reconcilable with this
tripartite division, than such as might be consistent with known facts, or
maintainable on the grounds of reason; and that we should accordingly find this
theory so stoutly defended to the present hour, with the slight alteration only
of transposing the soul into the place of mind or spirit, and substituting
Vital Principle in the place of soul. Some philosophers, however, by
considering the immaterial essence as the animating principle, and others, by
considering the animating principle as the only medium of intelligence, have
reduced human existence to a twofold nature: I, for my part, shall simplify
the subject still farther -- and, regarding man as differing from other animals
rather in the extent than in the nature of his powers, shall consider him,
together with the inferior tenants of creation, in an individual point of view
only; as consisting of a simple organized frame, from the susceptibility and
presence, or the non-susceptibility, or absence of stimuli in which arises the
whole distinction between the living body and the dead. Wherever there is a
perfect organization of the animal substance, there, I conceive, we have the
susceptibility (or, as it may, perhaps not improperly, be called, the
PRE-DISPOSING CAUSE) of Life: whatever may be that specific stimulus, by which
such susceptibility may be disposed to be excited, that, I conceive, must be
admitted to be the REMOTE CAUSE, or agent by which Life is to be produced: from
the intimate combination of these results, that meliorated or altered state of
the organized frame, which may be considered as the PROXIMATE CAUSE; and the
Vital Action, as it may properly be called, or the power by which the vital
functions are performed, being the ultimate effect of these cooperating
causes, is, in reality, as I humbly presume, to be considered as that Life, or
Animal Vitality, for which, under so many denominations and imaginary forms,
the Philosopher and the Medical Professor have so long been seeking.

Such is the general idea, which, upon the simple principles of materialism, I
have formed of life; and so to define this idea as to account for the
phenomena, without appealing to the fanciful creations of the visionary brain,
or abstruse and unmeaning terms of pretended science, is the task I have
undertaken.

But before I enter more particularly into the subject, it will be necessary to
bestow some consideration on another theory that has lately very much amused,
and, according to my judgment, misled the scientific world -- The theory, I
mean, of the Vital Principle being resident in the blood.

This doctrine, in all probability, had its origin in the remotest antiquity;
since the fatal consequences that result to the animal frame, from the spilling
of this important fluid, must have been frequently observed, especially in the
ages of barbarism and violence, long before the faculties of man were
sufficiently improved for refined speculations, or philosophical researches
into nature: but the prejudices of ignorance have sometimes been ascertained,
and more frequently adopted, by the luminaries of science and the world; and
this hasty opinion (for such to me at least it appears) has not wanted
supporters among those who will long continue to claim the applause and
admiration of mankind.

And first, I must particularize, that this doctrine has received the direct
sanction of the great Jewish Lawgiver (or whoever was the author of the Five
Books of Sacred History generally ascribed to him) in the following, among a
variety of texts of a similar nature -- "For it is the life of all flesh; the
blood of it is the life thereof: therefore I said unto the children of Israel,
Ye shall eat of the blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh is
the blood thereof; whosoever eats it shall be cut off."

I am very well aware, that the sublime language of Revelation is not always to
be interpreted with philosophical precision -- the enthusiasm of divine
inspiration frequently elevating the style of the holy penman to a degree of
poetical hyperbole, which would be perfectly unintelligible to the cold
perceptions of reason and enquiry, if it were not for the friendly appeals of
the commentator to mystical allegory, and metaphorical elucidation: but as the
doctrine here quoted is merely illustrative of the simple mandate, that the
Jews should not eat of the blood of animals slain for their sustenance, there
can be no doubt of its being intended to be literally understood as the opinion
of Moses, that the blood is absolutely the Vital Principle.

For this opinion, I am very much inclined to suspect, that no better
foundation will be discovered than the acknowledged fact, that when the blood,
or any very considerable portion of it, is drawn away, the vital functions of
the animal will cease: but, unfortunately for this theory, these functions will
also cease, without the proportion of this fluid being at all diminished: and
as there are also several other parts entering into the composition of the
animal, which, if subtracted, even in part, resign the body to inevitable
destruction, we might as well say, that the stomach thereof, or the kidneys, or
the liver thereof, is the life thereof, as that the blood is to be so
considered. Nay, from what we are now acquainted with concerning the nervous
system, there would be much better reason to suppose, with some later
philosophers, that the life of the animal is in the brain, rather than in the
blood, since so much of the latter may be lost without essential injury, while
the former cannot receive the slightest wound without bringing on immediate
dissolution; and though, upon serious reflection, there is every reason to
believe, that the fatal catastrophe is produced as much, at least, by the
consequent extravasation of the blood, as by any immediate susceptibility of
injury in the substance of the brain; yet this does not weaken the argument,
since it is evident, that it is not the loss of blood from the vessels which is
the real cause of the mischief (for much larger quantities may be drawn from
the same part by mere external wounds, without any alarming consequences); but
that the injury produced by the extravasation results from the consequent
oppression on the organ, by which its active energy is restrained and benumbed,
and, of course, its vital functions will be stopped.

From this, and a variety of other considerations, it is evident that the brain
is, at least, more vital than the blood, since the compression of the former is
more dangerous than even a very considerable deduction of the latter.

But it might, perhaps, be objected to the whole of this reasoning, that many
animals have life, which have neither brain, nor kidneys, nor liver, nor,
strictly speaking, even stomachs; for I know not how the simple cavities of the
leech or polipus can, in strict propriety, be considered as stomachs.

This objection being founded in truth, it is necessary that we should give it
its utmost force, and admit it as a demonstration, that animal life neither
consists in, nor is absolutely dependant upon any one of these particular
organs: but as it will be admitted, that though they have not these, they have
some other organs, which, as far as is necessary for the performance of their
functions, supply the place of these, the cases will still be found to be in
some degree parallel -- for, strictly speaking, many of the most imperfect
animals have no blood (at least, according to the general idea which is given
of it in the descriptions of anatomists), there being, perhaps, as much
difference between the ichor, which supplies its place in several classes of
insects and reptiles, and the compound fluid, which, in the more perfect
animals, we call by the name of blood, as between this ichor and the sap of
vegetables, and a variety of other simple juices of animal or vegetable
substances. If, therefore, the Vital Principle is to be sought in the
circulating fluids, we ought rather to say, that the SERUM thereof is the life
thereof, than the BLOOD.

But as I am informed, that the immortal Harvey upheld a doctrine similar to
that I am combating; and as so great an authority as John Hunter has thought
proper, in some degree, to sanction the opinion, it is necessary to treat it
more at large, and to abandon the cursory observation of the Jewish Lawgiver,
for the more elaborate and practical researches of the British Anatomical
Philosopher.

I have said, that John Hunter's Theory sanctions, in some degree, the opinion
of Moses; for I think it very doubtful, whether he means to carry it to the
full extent, and to assert, that the Vital Principle is peculiarly, or
originally, in the blood. The Editors of the Encyc. Brit. it is true, ( title
BLOOD, vol. iii. p. 313), evidently understood him in this manner, as will
appear from the following quotation: "The uses of this fluid are so various,
and of such an important nature, that some have not scrupled to affirm the
blood to be actually possessed of a living principle, and that the LIFE of the
whole body is derived from IT. This opinion was first broached by the
celebrated Harvey," ( this I have already shown to be a mistake Vide p. 13. of
this Essay, where it is shown to have been the opinion of Moses, etc.
), "the discoverer of the circulation: but in this he was never much followed;
and the hypothesis itself, indeed, has been pretty much laid aside and
neglected, till of late that it was revived by Mr. J. Hunter." After which are
quoted the six arguments, (which I shall presently endeavor to examine) as
advanced by that great professor, to support this broad and unqualified
opinion: but, in the manuscript copy of his Lectures, which I have principally
made use of, he begins the subject with the simple assertion only, that the
blood "is endowed with a principle of life, in itself, equally with the solid
parts."

Now, whether all or any, either of the particular fluid or solid parts, I
treat the word parts here, not as alluding to limbs or proportions, but as
referring to the separate and different species of substance of which the body
is constituted -- as bone in contradistinction to muscle, muscle in
contradistinction to nerve, nerve to membrane, and the like.
possess in themselves (that is to say, either separately, or absolutely) a
principle of life, I do not at present enquire, because it seems to involve the
general question, (which must be referred to its proper place in my Essay);
namely -- Whether life itself is to be considered as a distinct and positive
essence, or, simply, as the result of a particular harmony and correspondence
of the whole, or aggregate combination, preserved and acted upon by a
particular stimulus? On this subject, indeed, it is sufficiently evident that I
have the misfortune to differ from the illustrious authority before me; but as
I am now examining the doctrine only of the Vitality of the Blood, it is but
necessary for me just to observe, that as nothing more is directly asserted in
the proposition, than that the blood of the living body is equally alive with
the bones and ligaments, and muscular fibers, etc. of which such living body is
composed, it does not seem to lie considerably in the way of my theory;
because, if in other respects I can but substantiate my opinion, the difference
will not be very great, whether we admit the blood as participating in the
Vitality, produced as I shall endeavor to show, or consider it as nothing more
than a specific fluid, giving nourishment to the various substances, and
conveying to the different organized parts the necessary stimuli, by which Life
or the Vital Action is to be produced or sustained. Nay, when he afterward
proceeds to assert, that "Blood is not only alive itself, but also, by
circulation through every part of the body, becomes the means of, and carries
Life to, the other parts;" I do not yet perceive the absolute necessity of
entering the lists upon this part of the subject, because he does not palpably
assert, that the Life to be conveyed is, sui generis, or originally in the
blood; but only that this fluid is the agent by which the Vitality is
communicated to the respective parts; and it is my intention to admit that the
blood, in the more perfect, and the serous fluid, substituted in its place, in
the less perfect animals, is the appropriate medium, by which alone the stimuli
necessary for the production and sustainment of Life can be absorbed and
properly diffused through the organized frame: and, indeed, several passages
might be produced to countenance the suspicion, that this justly admired
Lecturer so far agrees with the Theory I mean to enforce, as to admit that the
Vital Principle is, at least, sustained and re-invigorated (if not absolutely
generated), not independently by the blood itself, but from something imbibed
in its passage through the lungs; for he acknowledges, that "Before blood is
capable of giving life," (in other words, according to his own theory, before
it is alive), "it must have circulated through the lungs, where it undergoes
some essential change. Perhaps," continues he, "it is then in its second state,
or vivification."

It is obvious to remark, that if the blood is not "in its state of
vivification" till it has passed through the lungs, Vitality cannot be the
property of the blood itself, but only a consequence of some action, or
superaddition, acquired in its passage through that organ; and, consequently,
that the Vital Principle (to use the language of those philosophers who
consider Life as a separate essence) is to be sought, not in the blood, but in
that subtle element, or whatever it is, which is imbibed by means of the
respitory system.

But (if it is not presumption for me to say so) there seems to be some degree
of obscurity -- perhaps, if I were speaking of any man but John Hunter, I
should venture to say contradiction, in the doctrines of the Lecturer, upon
this subject; for he immediately afterward denies that the blood derives its
Vitality from its passage through the lungs, in the following words: "Perhaps
it might be thought that Life is given to the Blood in the Lungs in consequence
of the heat applied there, as heat is supposed to act upon the Egg; but it must
be remembered, that Life is not given to the Egg by heat, only action produced
by it." By which it should seem that he means to be understood as considering
the Vital Principle to be a property of the blood itself (so long as it
continues in its perfect state) independent of respiration; and that this
action of the Lungs is only necessary for the purposes of circulation, and the
production of action in the other parts of the frame, by the distribution of
this principle.

And yet, if the Egg be alive (which, let it be remembered, I do not positively
admit), how can this be? since (previous to the alteration taking place, from
the application of heat, during the period of incubation), it contains no blood
whatever; and, consequently, if the Vital Principle be in the blood, must be
alive without the principle of life -- a paradox, which, perhaps, it would be a
little entertaining to hear the advocates of this doctrine explain.

Not, however, to dwell upon so ambiguous a passage, there are, in the Lectures
of this truly great man, sufficient foundations for the opinion apparently
entertained by the Editors of the work above quoted, as well as by several of
his pupils and admirers -- namely, That he means to represent Vitality, or,
according to his own expression, the Vital Principle, as residing originally,
and in an emphatic sense, in the blood, and derived from it to the other parts
of the system. He even, in the clearest manner, affirms its superior
vivification over the nerves in particular: for while these, according to one
of his aphorisms on the Vitality of the Blood, are not concerned in "conveying
life to parts, but only direct the motions of the parts," the blood is
explicitly affirmed not only to "convey life to the other parts," but to be
absolutely "the living support of the nerves themselves:" by which it is
evident, that we must understand not only that the nourishment of these
sensitive organs, but even their Vitality, is derived, not from their
organization and the stimuli (of which they are, perhaps, the important
repositories, or reservoirs), but from the Vital Principle peculiarly resident
in the blood, and deposited there for the purpose of being communicated and
diffused to other parts.

These other parts then being dependant (according to this theory) upon the
blood, not only for their support and enlargement, but, also, in an immediate
view, for their Vitality, it is clear that if the system of the Lecturer does
not go the whole length with Moses, of saying that the blood of the animal is
the life thereof, at least that he supposes Life, of itself, and independent of
any particular action or stimulus to belong to, or be a property of, the blood;
while to the rest of the animal substance, it only belongs in a secondary
signification, as being imparted by the blood. And this, perhaps, we are the
more bound to consider as his real meaning, as he maintains the doctrine of its
vitality even after coagulation; and even delivers it as his opinion that this
phenomenon "is owing to an action of self-preservation in the blood, or to an
effort for its continuance." So that, according to this position, and the
arguments that follow upon the circumstance of coagula becoming vascular under
particular circumstances, we are not to consider the vitality of the blood as
the consequence of its state, condition, and harmony, with the other parts Vide
Note, page 19.
of the body, but to look upon it as a principle inherent in it, and equally a
property of it, whether in one state and situation, or another -- whether in
its vessels, or in a state of extravasation -- whether in a fluid or a solid
form -- a circumstance attributed to no other of the component parts of the
animal frame: these being considered as having no other principle of life, but
what they immediately derive either from the blood, or from their harmony with
the system in general; whose resources must cease before any material change in
their nature and substance can take place. And yet, if this argument is
properly sifted, I question whether it will make much for the Vitality of the
blood, in any point of view whatever. For as no similar change in any other
fluid was ever brought forward as an evidence of a Vital Principle in such
fluid, I cannot see that any phenomenon, that would not be considered as a
proof of Vitality, or of an effort of self-preservation, in any other instance,
should have such stress laid upon it, for such purposes in the case before us.

With respect to the generality, probably to all, of the fluids capable of
congelation, it might, perhaps, be objected, that they afford no parallel
example of permanent change of structure; as they are capable of resolution to
their original form, which blood is not. But petrified substances, in which the
change is permanent and entire, might at least be said, in this respect, to
have as good a claim to the attributes of a vital principle and action of
self-preservation, as the blood, which is here said to metamorphose itself into
something else, in order to continue its existence. Besides, if the coagulation
of the blood be an action of its Vitality, and an effort of its Vital Principle
for its preservation, how comes it that it will coagulate after having been
frozen; for John Hunter admits, that what he calls the Vital Principle of the
Egg, is destroyed by freezing; and, indeed, nothing is more injurious to
vitality of every kind, than the frigorific process: and yet Mr. Hewson informs
us, that blood may be completely frozen, and preserved in that condition (as
other dead animal substances may) for a considerable time; and yet, after it is
again reduced, by an increase of temperature, to its fluid form, it will
coagulate just as usual.

Having thus examined the general state of the question, I shall preceed to
review the six arguments brought forward upon the authority of the lecturer, in
the Encyclopedia, in support of the opinion previously quoted -- ( vide page 18
of this Essay.) For the more ample statement of these, however, (not to swell
my Essay to an unnecessary length, by quotations from a book, which is in the
hands of every body) I shall refer to the work itself.

With respect to the first of these, derived from "the power which the blood
possesses, of uniting living parts," it is to be remembered, that this is only
the case in those instances where blood is immediately supplied by the parts to
be united, and where, consequently, from its temperature, its assimilitude to
the parts with which it is to enter into combination, its glutinous texture,
and a variety of obvious reasons, it may naturally be supposed to form the best
cementing medium; and the healing of wounds, by other applications, which have
evidently no Vital Principle, appears to me sufficient to show, that this is no
proof of Vitality. All that is requisite, in either instance, being to keep the
living parts in contact, and exclude the air, and other injurious, extraneous
particles, till Nature has a sufficient opportunity of exerting her restoring
powers.

The blood, yet warm, and fluid from the wound, may naturally enough be
expected to enter intimately into the different portions of the severed parts;
and all further injuries being thus prevented, it is neither singular nor
strange, that the separated vessels should again unite, from the attraction of
similar particles so frequently observed, when circumstances are favorable to
the experiment; and that the stream of blood, driving toward its usual course,
should at last find its way again through the coagulum formed by the blood thus
bound up with the injured parts, and complete their restoration. -- 2 and 6.
Exactly upon the same principle I account for the phenomenon from which the
second argument is drawn; namely -- That "coagula of extravasated blood will
become vascular:" for this, I believe, is never the case, except when the
coagula come in contact, or nearly in contact, with arteries previously formed.
This, therefore, seems to prove nothing more than that coagulated blood, when
preserving a proper degree of temperature, from its situation, is the proper
medium, or soil, into which the arteries may strike and ramify -- all living
parts, perhaps, having a tendency to grow and enlarge, so long as sufficient
stimuli are supplied, and the proper medium is presented. For my own part, I
cannot but observe, that all the preparations I have seen, intended to support
this argument, have only suggested a process similar to that observable in
vegetation, where the moist earth, in contact with the roots of plants or
trees, supplies the proper medium into which the fibers are stimulated to
extend their growth. And hence it is, that I find no difficulty in accounting
for the junction of the testicle of the cock, to the liver of the hen, into
whose abdomen it had been introduced, as mentioned in illustration of the first
argument; or, for the vascular appearance of the coagulum, found between the
separated parts of the fractured os humeri, upon which the sixth, or rather the
reiteration of the second argument, is founded. -- 3. As for the third
argument, drawn from the power of the blood, to preserve an equal degree of
temperature in the living body, during the prevalence of different temperatures
of the atmosphere -- I shall at present make no other answer to this, than by
observing, that if the Theory I am about to suggest is well founded, that will
be sufficient to account for this phenomenon, without appeal to any other
hypothesis: for if the air may be admitted to be sufficiently impregnated with
the same specific stimuli in the coldest, as well as in the hottest day, there
can be no reason why the blood should be expected to have a lower degree of
temperature on the former than on the latter -- whether it be admitted to be
possessed of a Vital Principle independent of such stimuli, or not. -- 4. As
for the "Blood being capable of being acted upon by a stimulus," -- this is
saying no more than may be proved of a variety of things that have confessedly
no pretensions to life whatever: and as the only particular effect which is
instanced as produced by the stimulating influence on the blood, (namely
coagulation), would never be admitted as a proof of life in any other fluid
whatever, it cannot, as far as I am able to discover, be made any use of in
illustration of the point in question. 5. The fifth argument, that "the blood
preserves life in different parts of the body," is equally applicacable to the
Theory of the Lecturer, and to my own; for, whether it be considered as
retaining in itself the Vital Principle, or being the sole medium through which
Vitality can be produced, we must equally admit its importance, not only in
preserving, but in diffusing life: I shall therefore only observe, that the
collateral part of the argument, which asserts, that "when the nerves, going to
a part, are tied, the part becomes paralytic," is, I believe, overthrown by
later experiments; and that sensation only, and not the power of acting the
muscles, is interrupted by the ligature of nerves. Upon this, however, (as I
certainly do not mean to rob the blood of its vital honors, to bestow them on
the Brain and Nerves), I shall not at present enlarge; but shall conclude what
I have to say upon this subject, by observing that, perhaps, the whole doctrine
of the Vitality of the Blood (in whatever point of view it may be taken)
originated in the mind of the Lecturer, from observing the important offices it
performs in the fustainment and reproduction of parts confessedly and palpably
alive. Now, that the nerves (for example), as well as every other part of the
animal body, are nourished by the blood, is sufficiently evident, and that, but
for such nourishment, these parts must, by exhaustion, lose their Vitality, is
equally obvious; but that the fluid, nourishing and sustaining a living part,
must of necessity be itself alive, is what I cannot readily admit, because it
seems to contradict the known laws and phenomena of nature. Air and water are
the proper and necessary nourishment of plants, without which vegetation must
quickly be exhausted and expire; but no one will, therefore, contend, that air
and water are alive: nor will the difficulty be removed, by objecting, that air
and water are only the food of plants, and that the nourishment of the
vegetable is immediately derived from the circulating sap, as that of the
animal from the blood; for as no digestive process can be assigned to the
plant, air and water must be the immediate nourishers of the sap; and,
consequently, the conclusion must either be, that the living sap is nourished
by air and water, which are not alive, or that the sap, which is not alive,
nourishes the living plant; which, with respect to the argument before us, is
just the same: in short, it might as well be maintained, that whatever supports
a sensitive part must itself be sensitive; or that nothing but nerve should
nourish a nerve, or muscle but muscle, etc. which would drive us back to the
obsolete opinion of those philosophers, who maintained, that all things contain
the component parts of all things; and, in short, would even compel us to
appeal to the doctrine of an ancient sect of Atheists, who, to get rid of the
necessity of a Deity, insisted upon the original and eternal Vitality of
matter, and accounted for the growth and nourishment of living things, by
arguing, that the particles that nourished them were themselves possessed of a
living principle. If, however, we abide by the mode of reasoning suggested by
the known phenomena of nature, a much more simple theory will present itself,
in the evident tendency of small accumulations of matter (when placed under
favorable circumstances) to assimilate, and even identify themselves with the
larger masses to which they adhere, or with which they enter into combination;
which will sufficiently account for the nourishment and growth of the living
body, without attributing Vitality to the blood, by which it is sustained.

Having thus taken as brief a survey as the nature of the subject would permit,
of some of the principal opinions, that have, at different times, commanded the
attention of the scientific world, I shall proceed to the professed object of
my Essay; namely -- to consider of the Definition. Of this undertaking the
difficulty must be readily admitted; or, should pride or petulance be inclined
to deny it, the subterfuges to which the most ingenious ornaments of medical
science have been driven, would furnish a sufficient reply. Some have given it
up entirely, and satisfied themselves with a negative test, instead of a
positive definition; asserting, that the only criterion of its absence is
putrefaction: but these cautious maxims, though they may be adopted, for
security, by the practitioner employed in the benevolent labor of snatching
from premature dissolution the pale victims of accident or despair, will not
satisfy the spirit of the philosophical enquirer: he, indeed, may frequently be
compelled to wander in the gloom of doubt and negation; but his active mind
will scorn such sullen darkness, and pant for the glorious prospects of truth
and certitude; to which, however, I have not the arrogance to profess that I
shall conduct him.

By some it has been contended, that life consists in action, or excited
irritability; by others, simply in organization: but both of these would admit
a variety of instances, that can lay no claim to any sort of Vitality, much
less to that sort of Vitality which is the subject of the present paper: with
respect to the former, I need only instance, that parchmen, leather, thread,
etc. may be excited to considerable action by either heat or moisture, as may
also a variety of light bodies, by the application of electricity: and, as for
organization, this I consider to be no other than that arrangement of
dissimilar parts, by which a harmony and communication of the whole is
produced, so as to enable it to preserve itself in a given state, and resist
its own dissolution. This, therefore, is very inadequate to our idea of life;
for matter will continue to be organized when LIFE has ceased; as it also, I
conceive, must be organized before LIFE begins; in illustration of which, I
should rather be inclined to quote the instance of the Egg, which (with all the
deference due to the high authority of John Hunter) appears to me to be
organized, though not alive, previous to incubation: I conceive also, that many
bodies may be considered as organized, that were never intended to live at all.
To those, however, who wish to consider life as entirely dependant on
Organization, I submit the following Definition: That perfect harmony of
organized parts, by which the animal frame is rendered so far susceptible of
the proper stimuli, as to have its functions, or any of them, induced upon such
stimuli being applied: and this the Society will be kind enough to keep in
their minds, as what I mean, when I come hereafter to speak of Specific
Organization. -- Others have considered Animal Life as consisting in the
performance of the Animal functions: but this definition would exclude, from
all pretensions to Vitality, many beings, which common sense must admit to be
alive; for an animal may certainly live, when it neither does, nor can perform,
all its functions; and, as for ascertaining which may be dispensed with, and
which may not, this, I believe, has never been successfully attempted.

The definition of John Hunter appears to me particularly vague and
unsatisfactory. "Life," says he, "does not consist in any modification of
matter: it either is something superadded to matter, or else it consists in a
peculiar arrangement of certain fine particles of matter, which, being thus
disposed, acquire the properties of Life." The Disciples of this justly
celebrated man must pardon me, if I am inclined to smile at this definition, or
rather indefinite description of Life, and to declare, that I never in my life
met with any thing more completely incomprehensible. "Life does not consist in
any modification of matter;" and yet, perhaps, "it consists in a peculiar
arrangement of certain fine particles of matter, which, being thus disposed,
acquire the properties of Life!" What is the fineness of these particles of
matter, but a modification of matter? -- What is the peculiar arrangement --
what the disposition of these particles, but a modification of matter? In
short, is not this telling us, in other words, that Life positively is not a
modification of matter, but that yet, perhaps, it is a modification of matter?
As for the other position, that Life consists in something superadded to
matter, I had once occasion to controvert this incomprehensible axiom at the
Lyceum, when, all of a sudden, a sneer went round the Theater, and a hundred
mouths were filled with fury against me, as though I had stood up, in the
presence of the Pope and his Cardinals, to deny the doctrine of the Trinity. I
shall venture, however, once more to assert, that the spiritual allusions of
this sentence are too fine for the gross conceptions of my material organs.
According to my dull comprehensions, matter and vacuum stand precisely in the
same degrees of contradistinction as something and nothing; and, in the former
case, as in the latter, it is impossible for me to admit the negation of the
one, without, at the same time, acknowledging the affirmation of the other. --
Where there is not matter, there there is vacuum; -- where vacuum is not, there
there must be matter. Those effects, which are not produced by the operations
of some modification of matter, or, in other words, of something, must of
course be produced by some modification of vacuum, or, in other words, of
nothing; and how vacuum, or nothing, can be so modified as to produce Life, I
leave to the consideration of the Metaphysicians. It is evident, however, that
this is not what the Lecturer means; because, though he denies the modification
of matter, he admits the superaddition of something. -- But what is this
something that is not matter? -- Is it Spirit? I certainly do not think it the
part of a philosopher absolutely to deny the existence of every thing that he
cannot demonstrate; but, as contradictions are not to be admitted, I must, for
my own part, maintain, that if there is any such thing entering into the animal
composition (though our senses have never yet been capable of taking cognizance
of it) as Spirit, having an existence separate and distinct from organization,
and that gross perishable kind of substance we call body, that such Spirit,
however subtle, however refined, must still be material: and then, indeed, the
absurdity vanishes -- because that more subtle matter can act upon that which
is more gross and inert, we have sufficient evidence in the action of air, and
of the electric fluid. And that this (a fine and subtle, or aeriform essence)
is the real and genuine meaning of the term Spirit, about which divines and
philosophers have so long been contending, is, I conceive, sufficiently
demonstrable, not only from its etymology, but also from the common application
of the word in the other senses in which it is still retained: as, for example,
-- by the spirit of any distilled or fermented fluid, we always mean to express
that more subtle and volatile principle (the alkohol of the chemists) mixed
with, and diffused through such fluid, and whose materiality (notwithstanding
its superior subtility) is no more to be questioned than that of the grosser
parts of the fluid with which it enters into combination. In short, it will
perhaps be found, that all Nouns, immediately or arbitrarily derived from
Verbs, The natural mode of derivation seems to be of the Verb from the Noun;
this being evidently likely to precede in the first rude attempts at language:
but there are many words now in use, which must have come to us in the contrary
direction -- as Heaven, for example, which still retains, simply and
absolutely, the meaning (that which is heaved or lifted up), which it brought
from the parent verb, to beave.
whether of the same, or any other language, still retain, in a considerable
degree, their paternal signification; and spirit must, perhaps, be admitted to
bear no other meaning than the Latin spiro (to breathe), from which it is
confessedly taken: or, if we must needs make a distinct living existence of it,
then can it possibly mean no other than a vital aeriform substance, diffused
though the frame, and giving animation to the respective parts. So that, at any
rate, this something superadded to matter, can only be a more refined species
of matter added to that which is more gross; and, of course, it constitutes
that very modification which the Lecturer denies. -- It has been stated, in
defense of this passage, that by some thing superadded, no more is meant than
some quality; but this would by no means mend the matter, since nothing can be
added but what has a previous and separate existence. Two things brought
together may, it is true, occasion the existence of a third, different from
both; but this third is not added, but produced. Now qualities have no separate
existence, nor can they even be conceived in the imagination, otherwise than as
connected with the things of which they describe the shades or attributes: they
are, in fact, solely and purely, modifications of matter, and, consequently,
this interpretation involves all the absurdity and contradiction of which I
have before complained.

But it is much more easy to find fault with the definitions of others, than to
frame such as are not faulty: I shall proceed, therefore, to my task with
caution; and, beginning with a general, proceed to a particular definition. --
Life then, in the animal, we will say, is that state of action, by which the
functions, or any of the functions of the animal, are carried on. This
definition, it is true, neither points out how the action is supposed to be
induced, nor the state of the animal previous to the induction: I proceed,
therefore, to add, that, previous to the existence of life, the body must have
attained a SPECIFIC ORGANIZATION; and that Life, or, in other terms, the Vital
Action, is induced by the application of proper stimuli: thus, then, life in
the animal is that state of action (induced by specific stimuli upon matter
specifically organized), by which the animal functions, or any of them, are
carried on. To the whole of this, I know, may be objected, the assertion of
that great man, whom, with such repeated arrogance, I have ventured to oppose:
namely -- That Life may exist without matter, being in "a state of action, and
the property of self-preservation may alone be present, Life being at the same
time present in its full force." To the solitary instance, however, brought in
support of this assertion, I must reply, that the life of the Egg is by no
means obvious to my understanding; for, although the Egg be so far organized as
to be endowed with the principle of self-preservation; so, also, are various
fruits, etc. whose Vitality, I suppose, after they are plucked, will not be
contended for Some, perhaps, will contend for the life of the kernels, seeds,
etc. I, however, should content myself with contending for their specific
organization; by which, upon the application of proper stimuli, they are
rendered susceptible of Life.
. In short, it does not appear to have any one property or attribute, which, in
any other substance, would be deemed a sufficient test of Vitality, till the
stimulus of heat, being properly applied, so meliorates the arrangement of
particles, as to induce the specific organization essential to the
susceptibility and production of Vital Action. -- By this, then, it will
appear, that I consider the preliminary principles of life to be a specific
organization and a specific stimulus; the perfect contact of these to be the
immediate cause, and life itself to be the state of action produced by this
union.

It will now only be expected, that I should give an opinion upon the nature of
the stimulus required. But, in order to do this, I must first premise, that I
consider the Blood, independent of its nutritive power, as the specific medium
by which the stimuli must be conveyed to the different parts of the organized
frame, so as to produce the Vital Action. This Blood, then, in its passage
through the Lungs, collects a something, which generates a specific heat (for
it is evident, that heat, unless thus generated, will not answer the purpose),
which it diffuses through the whole vascular system, and then (exhausted of its
vivifying power) returns again to the lungs, to exhale whatever noxious
particles it may have collected, and to inhale a fresh portion of the same
vivifying principle. But what is this something -- this vivifying principle? --
Is it atmospheric air itself? -- Certainly not. The coats of the arteries, and
the membranous linings of the cells of the lungs, forbid the access of such an
element; besides, it has been proved by experiment, that in the arteries of the
living body there is no air. Something, however, it must be, that is contained
in the atmosphere, and something of a powerful and exquisitely subtle nature.

If, then, we look upon the component parts of our atmosphere, what can we
discover so competent to the task -- so subtle, so powerful, so nearly
approaching to that idea of an ethereal medium, which some philosophers have
supposed necessary to complete the chain of connection between the divine
immortal essence, and the dull inertion of created matter, as the electrical
fluid? -- that principle, whose presence, under such a variety of forms, is
constantly presenting itself to the researches of the philosopher! -- whose
agency, in so many of the phenomena of Nature, we are daily detecting! and
which, perhaps, will one time be discovered to be the real principle by which
all heat and action are originally generated and maintained!

FINIS.
BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

In the Press, and the First Volume now ready for Delivery, THE PERIPATETIC;
Or, SKETCHES of the HEART, of NATURE, and of SOCIETY; In a SERIES of JOURNALS,
in VERSE and PROSE, of the ECCENTRIC EXCURSIONS of SYLVANUS THEOPHRASTUS, 3
Vols. Price 9s. in boards.

SCBSCRIPTIONS received by the Author, by the Publishers of this Pamphlet, and
HOOKHAM and CARPENTER, Bond-Street.


