A NECESSARY SUPPLEMENT To the former ESSAYS on the MEDICINAL VIRTUES OF
HEMLOCK.

By Dr. ANTONY STORCK, AULIC COUNSELOR, and a CHIEF PHYSICIAN, to Her most
sacred Majesty, the EMPRESS QUEEN; and Physician to the Pazmarian Hospital of
the City of Vienna.

With several COROLLARIES and ADMONITIONS, AND A Figure of the PLANT, used at
Vienna, Drawn from the Life.

Translated from the original LATIN, Printed at VIENNA, 1761, By a PHYSICIAN.

LONDON, Printed for T. BECKET and P. A. DE HONDT, in the Strand, M,DCC,LXII.

PREFACE.
IF we read with attention the histories of grand remedies, we see, their
efficacy was ever warmly disputed, at all times, and in all places.

There were physicians, who immediately condemned them, and proscribed them as
hurtful.

But others, upon different experiments, praised and commended them, as most
salutary.

By these learned disputes the thing was at last rightly determined, and
applied to common use.

I plainly foresee, the same will happen to HEMLOCK.

But in the mean time I am very sorry, to see some medical people, of great
rank, give a premature and harsh sentence against hemlock; and to condemn it,
and to dissuade others from it, as a poisonous and useless plant.

This savours of too great a desire of contradiction; and is repugnant to all
reason in medicine.

But the most cruel thing that has happened to me, is, to find those to be my
enemies, whom I always treated with the greatest respect; to whom I have done
all manner of good offices; and whose duty it rather was, to take my part, than
to hurt me.

But I am neither concerned at that, nor thirst after revenge. And that these
my adversaries may acknowledge, I am no ways disaffected to them on that
account, although I may differ in opinion; I write these observations for their
honor; offer and dedicate them, with all due respect, to them.

Bur I do not by any means desire, that they should show me any favor. Let
them only love the truth; act like just judges; and ingenuously own, whatever
is for the good of the sick.

As for the idle clamours of some, I am indifferent about them, and despise
them.

Whoever dreads the rattling of leaves, let him avoid a wood.

A NECESSARY SUPPLEMENT UPON HEMLOCK.
I Have already shown, and confirmed, in two former volumes, the virtue and
efficacy there is in hemlock.

For that reason there was no occasion, that I should write any thing more on
that subject.

But as there are still many, who do not rightly conceive my notions about
hemlock; and doubt its species, and character; it was necessary to give a
figure of the plant.

And that this might be rightly done, and made clear and plain to every one,
without any danger of error, I entreated Dr. Crantz, the famous and
indefatigable Professor of the Institutions of Medicine, and of the materia
medica, to bring this plant into his botanical garden, and to take care to have
it well delineated.

This he did willingly, and gave me this table, drawn and engraved by the
learned Mr. Cipps, a candidate in physic.

From this any one, the least versed in botany, may know the plant at first
sight, and distinguish it from all others.

But as for the extract of it, it is not every where prepared to my mind. For
they take a large quantity of the expressed juice, which they boil in a copper
vessel, on a fierce fire; whence arises a strong fetid steam, which is the best
part of the medicine, that flies off: and besides, they do not take proper care
to purify the juice and extract.

By these means is prepared a black mass, that is tough, and with little of the
genuine fetid flavor.

But when it is prepared in my way, it ought to be a thick extract, of a dark
greenish color, with a most ungrateful fetid flavor, much like the smell of
mice.

Some have mixed other herbs with hemlock, and some leave the herb fresh
gathered in a heap for several days, by which it grows flaccid; part of it
corrupts; and the juice grows roapy and slimy.

Others do not boil the juice as soon as it is expressed, but wait for a day or
two, till they have leisure; by which the juice changes, and loses its virtue.

On this occasion I thought it would not be improper, to give an account of
some cures, that I have made with hemlock alone, since my second treatise on
that subject was published.

In doing this I shall be short, that I may not interrupt the leisure, or
consume the time, that is so precious to physicians, by tedious narrations.

When I say I gave hemlock, I mean its extract; which I take notice of, that
there may be no dispute about words.

Nor have I always added the dose of the medicine; because I have almost always
begun with a small quantity, and gradually increased it, till a good effect
ensued: then I stopped, and never increased the dose afterward.

CASE I.
A Man of about thirty years of age, complained, for several months, of a
violent pain, and continual heat, in his belly: he had no appetite; the urine
flowed as in a strangury; his stools were frequent, small, hot, joined with a
tenesmus; the complexion pale, and the whole body emaciated.

Remedies of every kind were tried, but did no service: sleep was rather
disturbed, and his strength began to fail.

HEMLOCK alone gave him relief in the space of three months: his appetite
returned; the stools became natural; his urine was made freely; he gained
strength, and a perfect state of health.

CASE II.
A Youth of fifteen had a tumor for three months, of the size of a walnut, on
his left cheek.

A fistula, weeping an ichor, penetrated into this tumor.

The physicians and surgeons had here tried their art for a long time to no
purpose.

But upon giving hemlock, the tumor disappeared; the fistula closed; and all
his pains ceased.

CASE III.
A Woman, forty-odd years old, had a very bad spreading tetter or ringworm
(serpiginem) on her hand, above a twelvemonth, so that the skin was cracked to
the flesh in several places.

Neither external remedies, nor internal purges, and sweetners of the blood,
gave any relief.

HEMLOCK cured her within two months.

CASE IV.
A Woman, past thirty, perceived a scirrhus of a large size in her
right-breast, for several months.

A plaster was applied, by which both the hardness and size of the breast were
increased, and the swelling spread under the arm-pit.

The tumor became of a purple color, with here and there livid streaks, and
the pain so excessive, that she could neither sleep day nor night.

At length several knots or tubercles rose on the tumor, which threatened a
very bad exulceration.

I being called in, desired that she would lay aside all kind of plasters, and
cover the breast only with a soft linen cloth.

Internally I gave only the extract of hemlock.

In the space of eight days the pain almost entirely ceased; the color of the
tumor changed; and the tubercles subsided.

In nine weeks the breast came to its natural state.

The greatest dose was half a dram a day.

CASE V.
A Woman, of twenty-seven years of age, throwed up every thing she swallowed
for three and twenty weeks, and was almost consumed by it.

Physicians, surgeons, quacks, and old women, had tried all their skill,
without any amendment of the disorder.

I ordered twenty grains of the extract of hemlock, in a mixture of four
ounces; of which she took a spoonful every two hours; and in a short time the
vomiting ceased; she recovered her appetite, and her strength.

And it is now three months, since any signs of the vomiting have returned.

CASE VI.
A Man of seventy had an ulcer in his arm for five years: a sharp humor that
weeped out of it continually fretted the parts adjacent, and excited burning
pustules.

The remedies that were applied anon relieved the disorder, but the itching
soon returned, with a fretting of the cuticle; and the ulcer began to weep a
most sharp humor.

The patient then took, by my advice, six grains of the extract of hemlock,
every morning, and as many every evening, for five weeks: outwardly was applied
the plaster of diapompholyx: and now in six months the ulcer is quite healed,
and the old man enjoys perfect health.

CASE VII.
A Noble old lady had both her breasts large and scirrhous.

A plaster irritated the disorder, and brought on great pain.

The nipple of the right-breast was twice as large as usual, ulcerated, and
continually weeped a sharp, corrosive ichor. The tumor had spread under the
armpits.

The good old lady could hardly speak, much less laugh, or breathe freely,
through pain.

The taking of hemlock immediately amended the disorder; the nipple was reduced
to its natural size in four weeks; and in four months both breasts were cured.

There was no occasion to increase the dose above eighteen grains a day.

CASE VIII.
A Man, about thirty, had a tumor larger than a man's fist, for a long time, on
the right side of his neck.

He was, besides, cachectic; and complained of violent pains, all over his
body, and in all his limbs; which tormented him night and day.

These complaints lessened his appetite; he wasted away; and looked ill, of a
dark yellow complexion.

Whatever remedies he took were of no service.

But as soon as he consulted me, I gave him, hemlock; by which in a few days he
grew better, and in two months was quite well.

CASE IX.
A Woman, of thirty six years of age, labored under malignant ulcers, for two
years; which had eat into the tip of the nose, the nostrils, and the whole
upper lip; so as to render the whole visage a most frightful sight.

All these parts were livid, hard, swelled; and violent pain deprived the
miserable object of rest.

A sharp thin humor, continually weeping, corroded the adjacent parts.

Purges, antiscorbutics, mercurials, sweetners of the blood, made no
alteration; if it were not, that the disorder seemed to grow much worse.

Upon the taking of hemlock, a copious ichor, but much milder, was discharged;
and immediately the swelling of all the parts fell; the pain ceased; and the
livid color was changed to a natural one.

In three weeks time a great change was observed for the better; and the
patient grew much stronger, and plump.

She then abstained for some time from hemlock; but matters soon grew worse;
and the pains increased.

But as soon as she began to use hemlock again, all the bad symptoms went off:
and by a continued use of it for six weeks the ulcers were cicatrised; and the
swelling disappeared.

CASE X.
A Woman of thirty-two, had a pain in her right groin for six years, with a a
hard tumor; and an acrid purulent humor dropped from the womb.

She imputed the cause of this disorder to her last lying-in, which was a
troublesome one; in which the midwife extracted the afterbirth with great
force.

Neither baths, nor medicines, which she had taken for six years, had any
effect on her disorder.

But by the use of hemlock the tumor disappeared in six weeks; the pain ceased;
and the sharp flux stopped.

CASE XI.
A Man of twenty-nine, was troubled with various venereal maladies for many
years, but was never perfectly cured.

The glands of the neck, groins, about the ears, under the armpits, etc. at
last swelled; and created great pain night and day.

Antivenereal remedies, that are otherwise the best in these cases, increased
the disorder; so that a consumption was feared.

On that account he refrained from all medicines, by the advice of his
physicians.

From that he grew neither better nor worse; if it were not, that his pains
were often most severe.

At last he was forsaken by his physician in ordinary; who said, he would leave
the case to nature.

But this patient had seen the good effect of hemlock in some others; from
which he had conceived such hopes, that he came to me, and asked, if this
medicine might not be proper for his case.

I immediately advised it, and he was cured in two months; the scirrhous tumors
quite disappearing.

CASE XII.
A Virgin, of seventeen, had a spina ventosa in her right-arm for three years;
with very ugly ulcers.

Innumerable medicines, both external and internal, had no effect.

The belly grew hard, and big; an excruciating pain seized the limbs; and a
cachexy came on, with a loss of strength, and emaciated habit.

Hemlock alone reduced the belly to its natural size; cured the pains, cachexy,
and emaciated habit; and healed the ulcers, and spina ventosa.

CASE XIII.
A Boy, seven years old, had all the glands of his neck, and about the ears,
scirrhous, big, and painful.

His belly was moreover hard, and swelled.

Six grains of the extract of hemlock were given in the morning, and as many in
the evening; the effects of which were so speedy, that all the swellings
subsided within ten weeks.

CASE XIV.
A Woman, of twenty-five, had a violent cough for four years, and a very
disagreeable itching over her whole body.

White, pellucid, burning and corroding pustules frequently broke out all over
the skin.

By a long use medicines she at last began to grow consumptive.

In this condition I gave her twice a day four grains of the extract of
hemlock; upon which she immediately spit a very tough glutinous matter in
quantities; the itching went off; her strength returned; with a perfect state
of health, and good habit of body.

This dose of the medicine was not to be increased; because it did as much as
could be desired.

CASE XV.
A Man about sixty, after an intermittent fever, had his belly swelled; the
right hypochondre tight and hard; a yellow complexion, without any appetite;
and excruciating pains in the nightime in his limbs, which were emaciated.

Hemlock entirely restored him.

CASE XVI.
A Man of seventy, had labored under a most violent vomiting, now for the
third month; which could not be stopped by any remedy.

Hemlock, dissolved in a mixture, soon stopped and removed it.

CASE XVII.
A Rickety child, three years old, could neither stand on its legs, nor breathe
freely.

Hemlock carried off the whole disorder; so that the child breathed easily; ran
about briskly; and enjoyed better health than the rest of his brethren. I have
many like cases.

In some, four or six grains a day are sufficient: but in others the dose
should be increased to ten, twelve, and twenty grains.

CASE XVIII.
A Virgin, of six and twenty, was subject to most violent hemorrhages from the
womb for some years: and when the flux of blood stopped, a thick, yellow, acrid
matter was discharged from the womb, which corroded every thing.

Other eminent physicians, and myself, tried innumerable remedies for a long
time: but the patient found no relief from them; she rather grew cachectic, and
swelled.

In such a stubborn case, I was willing to try, what hemlock alone would do;
and for that purpose I gave her every day three pills, each weighing three
grains.

After a few days I perceived, the color of the body was changed to a natural
one; she gathered strength, with a good appetite; and made urine plentifully,
with much glutinous matter.

In a month's time, the whole disorder put on a very different appearance.

For respiration, which was before suffocated with the least motion, became
free; the anxious palpitation of the heart ceased; and rest was easy and quiet.

But what was most remarkable, the hemorrhagies of the womb stopped; and the
menstrual flux appeared in due time, in due quantity, and quality.

The matter, that flowed from the womb, was no longer thick, nor acrid.

In two months she appeared to all to be in perfect health; and only a little
mild serum weeped from the womb.

CAXE XIX.
A Man, about sixty, had a tumor under his chin, as big as a goose's egg, and
as hard as a stone, and painful; which remained immovable, without any
alteration; notwithstanding the application of remedies, both external and
internal, for a long time.

But hemlock loosened and discussed it, in the space of two months.

CASE XX.
A Cachectic, melancholic woman, of forty, began to decay by degrees.

No manifest fault could be discovered in the whole body, to which this disease
could be attributed.

The face was of the color of the earth; the eyes sunk; voice weak; a frequent
palpitation of the heart; respiration was short and uneasy, on a little hard
exercise; and the appetite quite lost.

The usual remedies in like cases afforded no relief.

But three ounces of hemlock, taken by degrees, restored the appetite, vigor of
body, and cheerfulness of mind; mended the cachexy; and now this woman enjoys
perfect health, to the admiration of all.

A cachexy, with an emaciated habit, if it does not proceed from an internal
latent vomica, or some corrupted bowel, is generally cured by hemlock.

CASE XXI.
A Boy of ten years of age, miserably torn with ulcers from a spina ventosa A
spina ventosa per totum corpus misere exulceratus.
, all over his body, and upon every joint, as well as in the face, and about
the eyes, emaciated, and totally cachectic, took various things for several
years from the best physicians, but to no purpose; the disease always grew
worse.

Upon giving hemlock all the ulcers healed, and the scars are not ugly. Large
pieces of the bones came off. He has now good strength, a natural complexion,
and sound habit of body.

He has now taken every day, for several weeks, a whole dram of the extract
of hemlock, the dose having been gradually increased.

CASE XXII.
A Woman above forty, has now for two years labored under an open cancer, most
miserably ulcerated.

By the internal and external use of hemlock, the whole ulcer is now almost
healed.

She was before totally emaciated; with night sweats; and loss of appetite.

But now she has gathered strength; the complexion is good; sleep quiet; the
pain is gone; the sweats have ceased; and the emaciated habit is no more to be
discerned.

A dram and a half of the extract of hemlock is still given every day.

In another woman thirty-odd years old, I reduced a large open cancer to a
small size by the sole use of hemlock, in six weeks; and a cicatrix now begins
to be formed.

These cases occurred to me in my practice in the city. But as for those things
that I have seen in the hospital, which are certainly wonderful, and deserve
the attention of the learned world, I could not relate them here; because Mr.
Collin, my excellent colleague, is faithfully describing them, and will soon
commit them to the press.

We daily see so good and so manifest effects of hemlock in the hospital, that
not only the students of physic, but other ignorant people, who are about the
sick, are astonished, and wonder at them.

Nevertheless there are some cases, in which there is no success.

For if the disease is got to too great a height; or the whole habit is
destroyed, who is there that will cure? or from what method of practice can we
promise health?

We neither perform, nor desire, miracles from our medicines; but we wait to
see how far we can go by art.

If we meet with any obstacle, we consider, whether that is to be overcome by
art: when we cannot do that, we acknowledge, that we are but men, and are yet
ignorant of many things.

We do not imagine, that we are superior in art to others; but daily desire to
be taught by the meanest.

But we likewise desire others, that they will be of the same mind toward us,
if we err, or have erred; and that they will show our error in friendship and
decency; then we shall neither blush to be taught better things, nor prove
obstinate.

COROLLARIES.
I.
THE extract of hemlock is a very innocent medicine.

It may, by gradually increasing the dose, be given to the quantity of two,
three, or four drachms a day.

And the use of so great a dose may be safely continued for several weeks.

Hemlock neither hurts infants, children, the middle-aged, the old, decrepit,
women big with child, the embryo's in the womb, noble nor plebeian.

II.
HEMLOCK neither excites a greater motion, nor other disturbance, in the
circulation of the blood.

It neither cools, nor heats.

III.
The extract of hemlock is a most efficacious medicine.

But it sometimes, although rarely, moves the belly; and much more rarely
excites vomiting; sometimes it increases perspiration; but it very often
discharges a plentiful glutinous urine.

But in many patients it does not sensibly increase any evacuation.

IV.
The extract of hemlock has the greatest resolving quality; and often
penetrates, and reaches to parts, which the most powerful remedies hitherto
known could not touch.

It opens obstructions; and by that means restores a free circulation of the
blood, when it is disturbed, and obstructed.

Hence it removes a languor, numbness, and pain in the limbs, proceeding from
that cause.

It renders the mind serene, and the body strong and active.

It increases the secretions; whence it often makes the ears, nose, mouth, and
jaws moist, when dry; and makes them perspire.

Men who have no children, from an immeability or obstruction of the vessels,
it renders fruitful.

It removes a hardness or mucosity in the wombs of women; opens a passage for
the menstrual flux, obstructed from that cause; and prepares a fit place for
conception.

It cures children of the rickets.

It often removes a numbness, coldness, insensibility, and decay of the limbs;
and makes the natural heat return, with vigorous and brawny muscles, and the
necessary sensations.

For the same reason it frees the vessels of the eyes; restores weak sight; and
sometimes cures blindness (gutta serena.)

This remedy often cures the deaf; restores the lost sense of smelling, and an
impediment in speech is often removed by the use of it.

A rheumatism, or inveterate and obstinate aches of the joints, are cured by
its resolving quality.

V.
HEMLOCK often resolves tumors arising from obstructions; and carries off even
old scirrhuses, that resist all other the most efficacious remedies.

Nor does it signify, in what part of the body such tumors lurk; it acts with
equal energy on all parts: thus it removes obstructions in the sublingual and
subaxillary glands, about the ears, in the neck, under the armpits, in the
breast, belly, groins, anus, vagina, uterus, penis, scrotum, testicles, etc.

It often cures a dropsy, by resolving the hard swellings (scirrhos) of the
belly.

It softens the hard and stuffed bellies of children, and brings them to a
natural state.

Hence it often mends a cachexy; and cures a consumption itself, or hectic
fever.

It dissolves tubercles (scirrhos) of the lungs; and promotes a glutinous
spitting: hence it removes a difficulty of breathing, night sweats, and a decay.

It dissipates tumors of the joints; and restores a due flexibility and motion
of the parts.

VI.
HEMLOCK sometimes dissolves cataracts, or obstructs their growth.

And, by that means, preserves sight; sharpens it; or restores it when lost.

VII.
It corrects the acrimony of the blood, and removes diseases proceeding from it.

It cures sharp defluxions; saltish humors; itching; tetters and ringworms; the
worst scald head; and an inveterate scab or itch that resists every thing else.

It cures the most malign ulcers, fistula's, and sinuses.

VIII.
It removes a caries, and takes off a rottenness (corruptionem) of the bones;
and promotes a separation of the scales.

Hence it is a remedy in a spina ventosa.

IX.
It cures a cancer, or mends its virulence; brings on a laudable suppuration,
and eases the pains.

X.
It is a remedy in a malign fluor albus; and in an inveterate and obstinate
gonorrhoea.

XI.
It stops vomiting, and the most obstinate heart-burns.

XII.
It carries off the relicts of a venereal distemper, that yield to no other
remedy.

XIII.
HEMLOCK cures the diseases, that ensue after a malignant smallpox.

To confirm this, Dr. Lebmacker, an eminent physician of this city, wrote me
the two following histories.

The first is the history of his own son, which was thus:

'My son, an infant five months old, otherwise in perfect health, was seized
with the smallpox on the 26th of February, 1760; which, although distinct, was
not of so good a kind.

On the ninth day of the disease a sudden diarrhoea came on, whence all the
pustules on the left-side from head to foot sunk in, while those on the
right-side remained full.

On this the left-arm, knee, and foot swelled to an enormous size, with great
pain and inability; which the poor infant made us sensible of by its shrieks,
if it was touched.

No aperture could be made in these tumors, either by nature or art; but they
were cured in four months time by the skill of an expert surgeon, Mr. Leber,
without any impediment in the action of the parts.

But as the cross child could not be prevailed upon to take any medicine,
either in the time of the smallpox, or thereafter; and his mother's milk, with
a milk diet, were not sufficient to assuage the virulence of the variolous
matter, his whole body was in time covered with innumerable ugly ichorous
ulcers, from the crown of the head to the soles of the feet; so that he had
nothing but a swelled belly, and ulcerated skin, to cover the bones.

The child being thus left in this deplorable condition, till it was one and
twenty months old, that is, till June 1761, all hopes of its recovery were
over, as it grew worse and worse every day. I was willing, however, to try,
what the extract of hemlock, given as we could, might do in such a case.

From the beginning of June, then, I gave him daily two grains, one in the
morning, in a weak decoction of coffee and toasted barley, with milk; and
another in the evening, in chocolate, that he might not discern it.

I so increased the dose by degrees, that he took daily six grains, without any
regard to his diet.

By these means the ulcers began to afford a good pus, to be cleansed, to heal
up, and to disappear over the whole body; only a scab or two remaining among
the hair of his head.

By the middle of July he had got so much strength, that he could run up and
down very briskly, both within doors and without, with his head upright, and
his eyes clear and open; neither fearing the rays of the sun, nor a candle,
which he could not bear for two months before, on account of his inflamed eyes,
which made him hang his head, and put his hands to his eyes, whenever any light
came before them.

Thus by degrees the child, that was before intolerably cross, now runs about
all day with cheerfulness at his play.'

He took six drachms of the extract of hemlock, but no other medicine.

Now, my good readers! if we had only this single case to vouch it, would not
hemlock deserve the greatest praise?

HEMLOCK was given to an infant quite extenuated, covered with ulcers, and in
the worst cachectic habit of body, of which he was cured.

HEMLOCK then is an innocent remedy, and it is an efficacious one.

There are, indeed, some terrible calculators in medicine, who will, perhaps,
attribute this cure, to the decoction of toasted barley, infusion of coffee,
chocolate, or to the force of nature.

But they must know, that this child took those drinks before he used the
hemlock, but grew worse upon it: so that we can neither attribute his recovery
to the force of nature, nor to this drink. But as soon as the extract of
hemlock was given, the infant began to grow better.

Whence, O hemlock! the praise is due to thee.

The second history is the following one, communicated to me by the same
learned gentleman.

'About the end of June, 1761, I met by chance a certain noble lady of three
and twenty, who had been afflicted with the confluent smallpox eighteen years
before, the sad remains of which she still bewails; for besides the loss of her
right eye, she had an ulcer, with a hard swelling, on her right cheek

Various remedies, as she said, both internal and external, had been tried to
heal this sore; but they were all, even to a salivation itself, given in vain.

Remembering the success of the extract of hemlock in a like disease, I advised
the same to her.

Although she was now tired of medicines, yet she consented to it.

She began then, on the first of July, to take every day eight grains of the
extract of hemlock.

Taking off the plaster, of what kind I know not, I took care to have the ulcer
fomented with a linen-cloth, dipped in a decoction of hemlock.

In eight days the tumors appeared to be both less, and softer; and there
seemed to be some slight tokens of a cicatrix forming on the lips of the ulcer.

In the mean time, proud flesh sprung up here and there in the middle of the
ulcer; which was taken off by sprinkling the powder of hemlock upon it.

The crust occasioned by this, I took off with honey of roses, mixed with the
same powder: which were repeated, as often as the proud flesh sprang up again.

In the mean time I increased the pills, so that for three weeks past she has
taken every day thirty two grains.

This dose I have hitherto continued, intermitting now and then a day or two.

About this time, the tumors, and hardness, almost entirely went off; the ulcer
began to be cleansed, to be dried up, and to be covered with a thin skin; and
thus it has remained closed now for six weeks.

She will go on with the same dose of hemlock, till the cicatrix is sound.

She has now taken, from the beginning of June to the end of September, four
ounces of the extract of hemlock.

She received no benefit from any other medicine for eighteen years.

But now, by the use of hemlock, she finds her appetite to be increased; she
grows plump; is free from rheumatic pains, which she was before troubled with;
and has no other complaint.'

Is there any man in his senses who doubts of the efficacy of hemlock?

Since hemlock operates on the virulent remains of the Smallpox, a question
arises upon it; whether it may not be allowable to give it, in a malignant
variolous distemper itself, in a spare dose, by a prudent hand, with judicious
and provident care? it is agreeable to nature, and appears from an infinite
course of experience, that vegetables of whatever kind may be digested in our
stomachs, and converted into the inquiline juices of the body; but minerals
cannot.

VEGETABLES, then, are more easily borne by our nature, and are by far more
safe and agreeable to it.

Therefore if it was allowable to others to use mercury, and antimony, in a
virulent state of the Smallpox, why may not we be allowed, without any
remorse, to try hemlock, since the best remedies yet known do nothing; these
two cases of the learned Lebmacher were very necessary here, to make this
proposition appear worthy of approbation.

I have likewise, from other physicians both of this and foreign countries,
some excellent cases relating to hemlock, in which it proved successful: and I
have others, in which it did not succeed so well; but I have thought proper to
reserve all these for another time.

ADMONITIONS.
THESE Corollaries are deduced from, and confirmed by, repeated experience.

But I beseech all, and every physicians, not to persuade themselves, that I am
of such an opinion as to believe, that these rules are general, and that
hemlock ought always to cure.

I say and openly own, that I have likewise had patients of all kinds, to whom
hemlock was of no service; although it was indicated from a similitude of the
disease.

But I do not believe, there are any, who will doubt of the truth of the cases
I have related.

But if any one makes a scruple about the truth of the matter, and suspects my
probity, let him go to the illustrious Van Swieten; who has the names of the
patients, and an account of their place of abode.

Happy me! who have an opportunity to practice physic under the auspices of so
great a man.

I have seen patients laboring under the worst cancer of the breast, whom
hemlock soon relieved: but there were several others, to whom hemlock only
afforded some relief, but did not cure them: others found no alteration from
the use of hemlock: one or two could not bear hemlock.

I would have the same to be understood of other diseases, for which I have
commended hemlock.

For I only contend, that hemlock is sometimes of service, and does wonders,
where other the most famous and extolled medicines do nothing.

If other physicians still find other remedies, we may be able, in time, to
cure the most difficult diseases.

Truly! I congratulate myself, when I hear, there are several physicians, who
follow my example about diverse vegetables.

How many thousands of plants are there, whose virtues we are ignorant of? But
to discover these, there are required industry, labor, provident care, and a
mind free from all sects.

Neither should you swear by the dictates of a master.

Moreover, it is always to be remembered, that there are limits both to art
and medicines.

Now when hemlock is sometimes of service, but at other times does nothing in
the same disease; it is certain there must be some latent difference, the
diagnostic signs of which are yet unknown to us; nor am I alone sufficient to
determine those things; and for that reason I have not hitherto been able, to
give any certain rules.

But they who might and ought to have assisted me, desired to be excused. Yea
they have even, by sharp censures, and repeated harangues to the sons of art,
condemned and proscribed my works, and would have them destroyed by fire and
sword.

Ah me! miserable fate of man.

In my two treatises on hemlock, I have related both the cases that were
successful, and those that proved unsuccessful: and moreover I always
admonished, that hemlock would not prove of equal service to all: I said
farther, in my second book, it was enough to me, if I shall preserve and cure
one patient in a hundred by the use of hemlock, who could not be restored by
other medicines.

If every one of the other ninety-nine physicians will do as much as I have
done, then all the hundred patients will be cured.

Could any man write with more sincerity and honesty? It is allowable to
propose our experiments faithfully and cautiously to the world: but after that
every physician is at liberty, to use such a remedy, or to let it alone.

I neither desire honor, glory, immortal fame, nor profit: I would only desire
to be useful to mankind, afflicted with so many miserable distempers; and would
be willing to relieve such calamities. This is the duty of every physician; I
beg, then, that others would give me no disturbance.

I have given to the sick some hundred pounds of the extract of hemlock, and
can affirm, with a safe conscience, that I never hurt any one. For when I saw
things to be in a right way, I went on boldly, continued, and increased the
dose: but as soon as I observed (which very rarely happens) that the sick did
not do well from it, I forbore, and laid aside hemlock. This is the rule of art.

Since then this medicine prudently given cannot hurt, our art requires, that
it should be farther recommended to all; in order to make numbers of trials,
which may be collated together, and compared according to their signs,
symptoms, and events. Then let the reasons and causes be inquired into, why
hemlock is sometimes of service, and makes a radical cure; and why it sometimes
does nothing in the same disease.

Upon seeing the difference, and finding out the cause, it will appear, how far
the efficacy of hemlock may extend. And then a reason may be given, why hemlock
does not act equally upon all. It may then likewise be determined, with what
cases it evidently agrees; and in what it performs nothing.

These observations being rightly digested, we may be able to apply some other
remedy, in cases where hemlock is inactive.

By such means the bounds of our art will be extended, to the great benefit of
the community.

In some cases, where hemlock had not the effects I expected from it, I have
tried other remedies; and not without success.

If that was not sufficient, I have another ready.

Thus I shall ascend by degrees; and I hope in God, that he will prosper my
endeavors, which are only intended for the welfare of my neighbors.

I here faithfully promise my adversaries, I shall employ the more pains upon
those things, the more they endeavor to interrupt and hinder me.

While I do what is right, I fear no body.

Although hemlock is a most innocent remedy, yet I could wish, that every
physician would always begin with a small dose, and gradually increase it.

For we know, how strange and diverse the peculiar temperaments of men are;
whence there may be some, who may not bear this remedy.

By a small dose then, no one will commit a fault: because a good physician
will discontinue a medicine, where he observes any sinister event.

But it is always to be well observed, whether that event may be owing to the
medicine; or to the symptoms that accompany the disease; or to an error in the
non-naturals.

There are some, who are tormented, vomit, are seized with a fever, and faint
away, only from taking crabs eyes, which are certainly a most innocent
medicine: and why should there not be others, who, from some latent cause, may
be ill affected with hemlock?

But is hemlock therefore no medicine? Ought hemlock to be condemned on that
account? No prudent physician will think so.

If the use of hemlock proves prejudicial to any, it is not to be attributed to
the medicine, but to the fault of the prescriber; if we take the thing in a
strict, and true medical sense.

Symptoms of a different nature from the disease are often complicated with it:
and then it is requisite, that other remedies should be applied, besides
hemlock.

If spasms or convulsions prove troublesome, antihysteric nervine remedies are
wanted.

If pains are violent, paregorics and opiates become necessary. A high fever,
and full pulse, require cooling nitrous remedies.

In a putrid state of the juices, or if an intermittent fever comes upon the
use of hemlock, the bark is added to it.

Sometimes purging is needful, sometimes bleeding.

Too great a flow of sharp humors on a part requires an issue, or seton.

Neither ought a fomentation or cataplasm of hemlock always to be applied
outwardly; but they are to be changed, according to the judgment and experience
of a good physician, or surgeon.

If ulcers are dressed with lint, great care should be used in taking it off;
lest the threads adhering to the naked vessels should be torn off with force,
which might hurt every thing: a haemorrhage might ensue, from which proud
flesh, springs up.

They should all be first moistened with the weakest infusion of hemlock, or
other proper liquid.

The more urging symptoms often demand, that the use of hemlock, both external
and internal, should be left off for some time; till these are either cured, or
at least mitigated.

We should endeavor to palliate disorders in those persons, who do not bear
hemlock; so long as we are unacquainted with any other remedy.

The bones, tumors, scirrhuses, are often attended with great pain in their
innermost recesses: I have often observed in such cases, there was an erosion,
or corruption, in that place: but a corrupted part should be separated from the
sound, which cannot be done without an external aperture, made by a caustic
application, or chirurgical instrument; but by the use of hemlock it is often
made spontaneously.

Then corrupted matter issues forth, and there is a sinuous ulcer.

The less intelligent imagine, that this corruption proceeds from the use of
hemlock: although upon the continued use of it in the same case, whether
internal or external, perfect health often ensues.

I have sometimes seen certain scirrhuses in the glands dissolved by the use of
hemlock, but new ones appeared in other parts.

That seemed strange: but the sick always found themselves well in other
respects; so that I continued the same remedy, and cured the patients.

Such things never frighten the skilful: and therefore we ought not immediately
to change the medicine.

In diet, farinaceous unfermented substances are to be avoided; and likewise
too acrid spices.

Acids are allowed for a condiment; but when they are too predominant, they are
not so proper.

Good wine does not hurt those, who are used to it.

Friction, or great motion, in the part affected, generally increase the
disease.

It is very conducive to a cure, for the sick to live in a free and open air,
and to preserve a cheerful and right disposition of mind.

Sadness, melancholy, disturbances of the mind, retard and hinder the cure;
occasion new disorders; and often turn a scirrhus to a cancer.

The time in which hemlock may cure, and resolve tumors, cannot be determined.

For sometimes that is soon done, sometimes very slowly.

Nor is the nature of ulcers, tumors, or cancers, always the same.

I gave a woman hemlock in a large dose for tumors of the neck, more than two
years, without any alteration in the tumors: but as her menses flowed more
plentifully, her strength was greater, mind more cheerful, and the whole habit
of body much better, she desired herself, that I would not deny her those pills.

At length, after two years and a half, the tumors were dissolved, and
everything reduced to a natural state.

Nor did the long use of it do any harm.

I have another woman, who took only two grains of hemlock in the morning, for
a cancer of the breast; and although she was a woman of seventy, there ensued
so good and sudden a change, and diminution of the tumor, that both the
bystanders and myself were astonished.

This woman made urine most plentifully, with much glutinous sediment. But when
she abstained one day from hemlock, the urine was in a small quantity, and
without the sediment.

In diseases about the kidneys, bladder, and urinary passages, hemlock
sometimes has most excellent effects.

It sometimes cures a retention of urine, and strangury; and often eases pains
in making urine, sooner than opium.

Nor is the extract of hemlock to be despised, in disorders arising from a
stone.

From what has been said, it appears, that hemlock is highly worthy of being
tried.

In the mean time I do not affirm, it has any specific virtue; but I expect the
mutual aid of good physicians, to establish rules about it.

FINIS.
Colchicum Autumnale Eng. Meadow-Saffron.
depiction of meadow saffron (apparently confused with hemlock) Augustine: Cipps
Medic: Stud: delin. Viennae 1763.



