THE OPINION OF A Known Dissenter On the BILL for Preventing Occasional
Conformity.
WHAT is the public Possession of Places, or Offices of Trust in a Government,
to the Case of Religion? They who separate from the Communion of a Church,
cannot in reason expect to be entertained in the Service of that very Church:
And they that separate from the Church, ought to consider Places and Offices
beforehand, and to examine whether they can forego them for their Consciences
or not, and if they did so, they would not be so frequently foregoing their
Consciences to possess them a Gain.

And I cannot but wonder at, and condemn the Injustice of such Dissenters, who
would have those People, to whose Communion they cannot or will not join,
receive them into equal Advantages of Honor and Profit, of Trust and
Management, in the Politic Concern.

I cannot approve the equity of it, nor I would not have the Dissenters covet
it; nor had they the Government in their hands, would they admit it themselves.

This coveting Offices of Trust, Honor and Profit, in the Government, has been
the cause of that Occasional Compliance, which to the Dishonor and Shame of
the Dissenters, has Branded them with too much Levity in Religion.

For whoever dissents from an Established Church on any account, but from a
real Principle of Conscience, is a Politic, not a Religious Dissenter.

Nothing can be Lawful and Unlawful at the same time. If it be not Lawful for
me to Dissent, I ought to Conform, but if it be Unlawful for me to Conform I
must Dissent; and he that cannot Die, or at least desire to do so, rather than
Conform, ought to Conform.

If I shall Dissent, and yet at the same time Conform, by Conforming I deny my
Dissent being Lawful; or by my Dissenting, I damn my Conforming as sinful.

An Act of Parliament is of every Man's own doing, and therefore it is just every
Man should comply with the Terms or suffer the Penalty; but here is no Penalty,
if no Crime, and if no Preferments are sought, no Honors accepted, there is no
Crime; if Self-denial was as practicable as Self-advancement, here is no need
of Occasional Conformity, for all such do seek the Crime, that is the first
Sin, then Mortgage their Consciences to avoid the Penalty, and so add one Sin
to another.

No Man can be said to separate from, and join to a thing at the same time, if
your Conscience is satisfied in joining; it cannot be satisfied in separating,
unless you can suppose your Conscience to be satisfied and dissatisfied both
together.

A Man passively Religious, that can Communicate any where, may from the same
Principle, and with far less guilt, Communicate no where, for he has
prostituted the little Religion he had, if ever he had any, to his Interest.

No Occasional Conformist can be received into Communion in any Dissenting
Assembly, upon any other Terms than as a Penitent; for this Practice is
prepostrous, excentrick and destructive of the very Foundation of the
Dissenters Principles.

Methinks Men should seem what they are, if a Man dissent from the Church let
him do so, and his Principle being well-grounded for such Dissent, let him hold
it; if not well-grounded, let him leave it, if he cannot suffer one way, let
him suffer another, and why should we not be as honest to God as our Country?

It Is an intolerable Affront to the Church of England, reflecting upon its
Doctrine as well as Practice, to make use of the Church for a Cover to fence
them against the Laws, at the same time continuing to Disown its Communion as a
thing not fit to be continued in.

Conformity and Nonconformity at the same time, in one and the same Person, for
a Secular End, to save a penalty, and privately; and then, as being ashamed of
it, to go back and sit down as not having done it at all, are Contradictions I
must insist upon, and rather wish, than expect to see rectified.

He who dissents from the Established Church, except from true Principles of
Conscience, is guilty of a great Sin.

He who Conforms to the Established Church against his Conscience, is guilty of
a great Sin.

He who both Dissents and Conforms at the same time, and in the same point of
Religion, must be guilty of one of these great Sins.

And he who has committed either of these Sins, ought not to be received again
on either side, on any other Terms than a Penitent.

As to Partial Conformity, Dissent in some things, and Conforming in others,
does not seem to concern this Case, no Man among the Dissenters pretended to
dissent in every thing, but we are speaking of conforming in those very Points
in which we dissent, and that no less than the Article of Communion.

If Gentlemen who have such a Latitude in their Opinions, would not have it
thought they are moved to it by their Interests, let them practice it openly,
and not Time it so, to the every Eve of an Election, as to have it speak of it
self, and, as it were, force Men to believe it done on purpose; nay, let them
not put such a Reproach in the Mouths of their Enemies, as to have it spoken in
contempt, with circumstances that stop the Mouths of Argument, and are as
Convincing as Demonstration.

It Is not a light thing to shift and change Communion with an Established, and
with a Separate Church, as often as convenience, or Reason of State or Interest
invite.

As to the Excuse that is made, That this is no Conformity in Point of
Religion, but done as a Civil Action, in Obedience to the Laws of the Land, as
a Qualification for admittance into Public Employments, which they think it
their Duty to accept, in order to Serve their Country; are not Sacraments
Religious Acts? Are they not the same thing, though differently Administered in
the Established, and in the Dissenting Church? And how can you take it as a
Civil Action in one place, and a Religious Act in another? This is playing Bo
peep with God Almighty, and no Man can tell when they are about a Civil Action,
and when about a Religious. And if the Service of their Country be so dear to
them, pray why should they not undergo the Penalties, and choose to expose their
Bodies and Estates for that Service, rather than their Souls? These are
Patriots indeed! that will damn their Souls to save their Country! For, as has
been observed, Conformity is a Sinful Act in a Dissenter, or else his
dissenting before and after must be a Sinful Act; and he has no Excuse, unless
it be that he was convinced and re-convinc'd, and then convinced again.

After description of true Protestant Dissenters, who cannot conform, he
proceeds in this manner: If there are crept into their Company
State-Dissenters, or Politick-Dissenters, they are not of them, and we wish
they would go out from them. I see no Act of Parliament a making to the
prejudice of this Dissenter. -- This is the Dissenter to which Her Majesty has
promised her Protection. The Act against Occasional Conformity does not concern
us, I dare undertake not one Dissenter offered to present a Petition to the
Honorable House against its passing; they who can conform for one Reason, may
conform without two, and ought to conform. And we are therefore content to be
distinguished who cannot conform at all; if we have any Knaves amongst us, take
them; if we have any Hypocrites, any who can conform and do not, we are free to
part with them, that the remainder may be all such as agree with the true
Character of a Conscientious Dissenter.

It Is plain, that Occasional Communion is contrary to the very Nature and Being
of a Dissenter, who, if he can conform, ought to conform; and if he can for a
Place of Preferment, ought to do it without the Preferment.

It is an Act destructive of all possible pretense for dissenting, and never
was, nor never can be defended by any Dissenter, without overthrowing all the
Reasons they could ever give for dissenting; How then can this Bill be aimed at
the Dissenters? We hold it to be a Novelty, an Abuse crept in amongst us, and
we are glad to have it condemned by Authority. We are so content with the
suppressing the grievance of this scandalous Ambidexter Conformity, that we
think the Hardships put upon us with it not worth the naming.

All the Parliaments that ever were, or will be, can never suppress any thing
amongst us so scandalous to our Reputation, and to that Candor with which we
desire to guide our Actions, nor so contrary to, and destructive of the very
Nature of our separating from the Church of England, and the Constitution of
all our Collected Congregations; and therefore, if these Occasional Conformists
would accept of the Friendly Advice of their Brethren, it should be, That they
would for the future conform to the Church of England.

As for his Authority to write thus in the Name of the Dissenters, he alleges
that he has the General Concurrence of all the Dissenters he ever conversed
with, that Publication is an Appeal to the World, and if he has affirmed any
thing in the Name of the Dissenters which is not their Opinion, he is liable to
an easy Confutation: Truth (says he) is a General Commission, and any Man may
write it.

He modestly conceals his Name, that his Reasons might not come clogged with
the dead weight of the Meanness and Imperfections of the Author: The Occasional
Conformity of Dissenters (says he) is not Condemned or Defended by the Names of
Authors on either side, but by Truth, Scripture and Reason; and so far as that
is on his side, he thinks it ought not to be despised for being ushered in by
an Unworthy Instrument.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by J. Nutt near Stationers Hall. 1703.


