A Political Romance, Addressed To (...) (...), Esquire OF YORK. To which is
subjoined a KEY.

Ridiculum acri
Fortius et melius magnas plerumque secat Res.
YORK: Printed in the Year MDCCLIX. [Price ONE SHILLING.]

A POLITICAL ROMANCE, etc.
SIR,
IN my last, for want of something better to write about, I told you what a
World of Fending and Proving we have had of late, in this little Village of
ours, about an old-cast-Pair-of-black-Plush-Breeches, which John, our
Parish-Clerk, about ten Years ago, it seems, had made a Promise of to one Trim,
who is our Sexton and Dog-Whipper. -- To this you write me Word, that you have
had more than either one or two Occasions to know a good deal of the shifty
Behavior of this said Master Trim, -- and that you are astonished, nor can you
for your Soul conceive, how so worthless a Fellow, and so worthless a Thing
into the Bargain, could become the Occasion of such a Racket as I have
represented.

Now, though you do not say expressly, you could wish to hear any more about
it, yet I see plain enough that I have raised your Curiosity; and therefore,
from the same Motive, that I slightly mentioned it at all in my last Letter, I
will, in this, give you a full and very circumstantial Account of the whole
Affair.

But, before I begin, I must first set you right in one very material Point, in
which I have missled you, as to the true Cause of all this Uproar amongst us;
-- which does not take its Rise, as I then told you, from the Affair of the
Breeches; -- but, on the contrary, the whole Affair of the Breeches has taken
its Rise from it: -- To understand which, you must know, that the first
Beginning of the Squabble was not between John the Parish-Clerk and Trim the
Sexton, but betwixt the Parson of the Parish and the said Master Trim, about an
old Watch-Coat, which had many Years hung up in the Church, which Trim had set
his Heart upon; and nothing would serve Trim but he must take it home, in order
to have it converted into a warm Under-Petticoat for his Wife, and a Jerkin for
himself, against Winter; which, in a plaintive Tone, he most humbly begged his
Reverence would consent to.

I need not tell you, Sir, who have so often felt it, that a Principle of
strong Compassion transports a generous Mind sometimes beyond what is strictly
right, -- the Parson was within an Ace of being an honorable Example of this
very Crime; -- for no sooner did the distinct Words -- Petticoat -- poor Wife
-- warm -- Winter strike upon his Ear, -- but his Heart warmed, -- and, before
Trim had well got to the End of his Petition, (being a Gentleman of a frank and
open Temper) he told him he was welcome to it, with all his Heart and Soul.
But, Trim, says he, as you see I am but just got down to my Living, and am an
utter Stranger to all Parish-Matters, know nothing about this old Watch-Coat
you beg of me, having never seen it in my Life, and therefore cannot be a Judge
whether it is fit for such a Purpose; or, if it is, in Truth, know not whether
it is mine to bestow upon you or not; -- you must have a Week or ten Days
Patience, till I can make some Inquiries about it; -- and, if I find it is in
my Power, I tell you again, Man, your Wife is heartily welcome to an
Under-Petticoat out of it, and you to a Jerkin, was the Thing as good again as
you represent it.

It is necessary to inform you, Sir, in this Place, That the Parson was
earnestly bent to serve Trim in this Affair, not only from the Motive of
Generosity, which I have justly ascribed to him, but likewise from another
Motive; and that was by way of making some Sort of Recompense for a Multitude
of small Services which Trim had occasionally done, and indeed was continually
doing, (as he was much about the House) when his own Man was out of the Way.
For all these Reasons together, I say, the Parson of the Parish intended to
serve Trim in this Matter to the utmost of his Power: All that was wanting was
previously to inquire, if any one had a Claim to it; -- or whether, as it had,
Time immemorial, hung up in the Church, the taking it down might not raise a
Clamor in the Parish. These Inquiries were the very Thing that Trim dreaded in
his Heart. -- He knew very well that if the Parson should but say one Word to
the Churchwardens about it, there would be an End of the whole Affair. For
this, and some other Reasons not necessary to be told you, at present, Trim was
for allowing no Time in this Matter; -- but, on the contrary, doubled his
Diligence and Importunity at the Vicarage-House; -- plagued the whole Family to
Death; -- pressed his Suit Morning, Noon, and Night; and, to shorten my Story,
teazed the poor Gentleman, who was but in an ill State of Health, almost out of
his Life about it.

You will not wonder, when I tell you, that all this Hurry and Precipitation,
on the Side of Master Trim, produced its natural Effect on the Side of the
Parson, and that was, a Suspicion that all was not right at the Bottom.

He was one Evening sitting alone in his Study, weighing and turning this Doubt
every Way in his Mind; and, after an Hour and a half's serious Deliberation
upon the Affair, and running over Trim's Behavior throughout, -- he was just
saying to himself, It must be so; -- when a sudden Rap at the Door put an End
to his Soliloquy, -- and, in a few Minutes, to his Doubts too; for a Labourer
in the Town, who deemed himself past his fifty-second Year, had been returned
by the Constable in the Militia-List, -- and he had come, with a Groat in his
Hand, to search the Parish Register for his Age. -- The Parson bid the poor
Fellow put the Groat into his Pocket, and go into the Kitchen: -- Then shutting
the Study Door, and taking down the Parish Register, -- Who knows, says he, but
I may find something here about this selfsame Watch-Coat? -- He had scarce
unclasped the Book, in saying this, when he popp'd upon the very Thing he
wanted, fairly wrote on the first Page, pasted to the Inside of one of the
Covers, whereon was a Memorandum about the very Thing in Question, in these
express Words:

MEMORANDUM.

The great Watch-Coat was purchased and given above two hundred Years ago, by
the Lord of the Manor, to this Parish Church, to the sole Use and Behoof of the
poor Sextons thereof, and their Successors, for ever, to be worn up them
respectively in winterly cold Nights, in ringing Complines, Passing-Bells, etc.
which the said Lord of the Manor had done, in Piety, to keep the poor Wretches
warm, and for the Good of his own Soul, for which they were directed to pray,
etc. etc. etc. etc. Just Heaven! said the Parson to himself, looking upwards,
What an Escape have I had I Give this for an Under-Petticoat to Trim 's Wife! I
would not have consented to such a Desecration to be Primate of all England;
nay, I would not have disturbed a single Button of it for half my Tithes!



Scarce were the Words out of his Mouth, when in pops Trim with the whole
Subject of the Exclamation under both his Arms. -- I say, under both his Arms;
-- for he had actually got it ripp'd and cut out ready, his own Jerkin under
one Arm, and the Petticoat under the other, in order to be carried to the
Tailor to be made up, -- and had just stepped in, in high Spirits, to show the
Parson how cleverly it had held out.

There are many good Similies now subsisting in the World, but which I have
neither Time to recollect or look for, which would give you a strong Conception
of the Astonishment and honest Indignation which this unexpected Stroke of
Trim's Impudence impressed upon the Parson's Looks. -- Let it suffice to say,
That it exceeded all fair Description, -- as well as all Power of proper
Resentment, -- except this, that Trim was ordered, in a stern Voice, to lay the
Bundles down upon the Table, -- to go about his Business, and wait upon him, at
his Peril, the next Morning at Eleven precisely: -- Against this Hour, like a
wise Man, the Parson had sent to desire John the Parish-Clerk, who bore an
exceeding good Character as a Man of Truth, and who having, moreover, a pretty
Freehold of about eighteen Pounds a Year in the Township, was a leading Man in
it; and, upon the whole, was such a one of whom it might be said, -- That he
rather did Honor to his Office, -- than that his Office did Honor to him. --
Him he sends for, with the Churchwardens, and one of the Sides-Men, a grave,
knowing, old Man, to be present: -- For as Trim had withheld the whole Truth
from the Parson, touching the Watch-Coat, he thought it probable he would as
certainly do the same Thing to others; though this, I said, was wise, the
Trouble of the Precaution might have been spared, -- because the Parson's
Character was unblemished, -- and he had ever been held by the World in the
Estimation of a Man of Honor and Integrity. -- Trim's Character, on the
contrary, was as well known, if not in the World, yet, at least, in all the
Parish, to be that of a little, dirty, pimping, pettifogging, ambidextrous
Fellow, -- who neither cared what he did or said of any, provided he could get
a Penny by it. -- This might, I say, have made any Precaution needless; -- but
you must know, as the Parson had in a Manner but just got down to his Living,
he dreaded the Consequences of the least ill Impression on his first Entrance
amongst his Parishioners, which would have disabled him from doing them the
Good he wished; -- so that, out of Regard to his Flock, more than the necessary
Care due to himself, -- he was resolved not to lie at the Mercy of what
Resentment might vent, or Malice lend an Ear to. -- Accordingly the whole
Matter was rehearsed from first to last by the Parson, in the Manner I Have told
you, in the Hearing of John the Parish-Clerk, and in the Presence of Trim.

Trim had little to say for himself, except "That the Parson had absolutely
promised to be friend him and his Wife in the Affair, to the utmost of his
Power: That the Watch-Coat was certainly in his Power, and that he might still
give it him if he pleased."

To this, the Parson's Reply was short, but strong, "That nothing was in his
Power to do, but what he could do honestly: -- That in giving the Coat to him
and his Wife, he should do a manifest Wrong to the next Sexton; the great
Watch-Coat being the most comfortable Part of the Place: -- That he should,
moreover, injure the Right of his own Successor, who would be just so much a
worse Patron, as the Worth of the Coat amounted to; -- and, in a Word, he
declared, that his whole Intent in promising that Coat, was Charity to Trim;
but Wrong to no Man; that was a Reserve, he said, made in all Cases of this
Kind: -- and he declared solemnly, in Verbo Sacerdotis, That this was his
Meaning, and was so understood by Trim himself."

With the Weight of this Truth, and the great good Sense and strong Reason
which accompanied all the Parson said upon the Subject, -- poor Trim was driven
to his last Shift, -- and begged he might be suffered to plead his Right and
Title to the Watch-Coat, if not by Promise, at least by Services. -- It was
well known how much he was entitled to it upon these Scores: That he had
black'd the Parson's Shoes without Count, and greased his Boots above fifty
Times: -- That he had run for Eggs into the Town upon all Occasions; -- whetted
the Knives at all Hours; -- catched his Horse and rubbed him down: -- That for
his Wife she had been ready upon all Occasions to charr for them; -- and
neither he nor she, to the best of his Remembrance, ever took a Farthing, or
any thing beyond a Mug of Ale. -- To this Account of his Services he begged
Leave to add those of his Wishes, which, he said, had been equally great. -- He
affirmed, and was ready, he said, to make it appear, by Numbers of Witnesses,
"He had drank his Reverence's Health a thousand Times, (by the bye, he did not
add out of the Parson's own Ale): That he not only drank his Health, but wished
it; and never came to the House, but asked his Man kindly how he did; that in
particular, about half a Year ago, when his Reverence cut his Finger in paring
an Apple, he went half a Mile to ask a cunning Woman, what was good to stanch
Blood, and actually returned with a Cobweb in his Breeches Pocket: -- Nay, says
Trim, it was not a Fortnight ago, when your Reverence took that violent Purge,
that I went to the far End of the whole Town to borrow you a Close-stool, --
and came back, as my Neighbors, who flouted me, will all bear witness, with
the Pan upon my Head, and never thought it too much."

Trim concluded his pathetick Remonstrance with saying, "He hoped his
Reverence's Heart would not suffer him to requite so many faithful Services by
so unkind a Return: -- That if it was so, as he was the first, so he hoped he
should be the last, Example of a Man of his Condition so treated." -- This Plan
of Trim's Defense, which Trim had put himself upon, -- could admit of no other
Reply but a general Smile.

Upon the whole, let me inform you, That all that could be said, pro and con,
on both Sides, being fairly heard, it was plain, That Trim, in every Part of
this Affair, had behaved very ill; -- and one Thing, which was never expected
to be known of him, happening in the Course of this Debate to come out against
him; -- namely, That he had gone and told the Parson, before he had ever set
Foot in his Parish, That John his Parish-Clerk, -- his Churchwardens, and some
of the Heads of the Parish, were a Parcel of Scoundrels. -- Upon the Upshot,
Trim was kicked out of Doors; and told, at his Peril, never to come there again.

At first Trim huff'd and bounced most terribly; -- swore he would get a
Warrant; -- then nothing would serve him but he would call a Bye-Law, and tell
the whole Parish how the Parson had misused him; -- but cooling of that, as
fearing the Parson might possibly bind him over to his good Behavior, and, for
aught he knew, might send him to the House of Correction, -- he let the Parson
alone; and, to revenge himself, falls foul upon his Clerk, who had no more to
do in the Quarrel than you or I; -- rips up the Promise of the
oldcast-Pair-of-black-Plush-Breeches, and raises an Uproar in the Town about
it, notwithstanding it had slept ten Years. -- But all this, you must know, is
looked upon in no other Light, but as an artful Stroke of Generalship in Trim,
to raise a Dust, and cover himself under the disgraceful Chastisement he has
undergone.

If your Curiosity is not yet satisfied, -- I will now proceed to relate the
Battle of the Breeches, in the same exact Manner I have done that of the
Watch-Coat.

Be it known then, that, about ten Years ago, when John was appointed
Parish-Clerk of this Church, this said Master Trim took no small Pains to get
into John's good Graces; in order, as it afterward appeared, to coax a Promise
out of him of a Pair of Breeches, which John had then by him, of black Plush,
not much the worse for wearing; -- Trim only begging for God's Sake to have
them bestowed upon him when John should think fit to cast them.

Trim was one of those kind of Men who loved a Bit of Finery in his Heart, and
would rather have a tattered Rag of a Better Body's, than the best plain whole
Thing his Wife could spin him.

John, who was naturally unsuspicious, made no more Difficulty of promising the
Breeches, than the Parson had done in promising the Great Coat; and, indeed,
with something less Reserve, -- because the Breeches were John's own, and he
could give them, without Wrong, to whom he thought fit.

It happened, I was going to say unluckily, but, I should rather say, most
luckily, for Trim, for he was the only Gainer by it, -- that a Quarrel, about
some six or eight Weeks after this, broke out between the late Parson of the
Parish and John the Clerk. Somebody (and it was thought to be Nobody but Trim)
had put it into the Parson's Head, "That John's Desk in the Church was, at the
least, four Inches higher than it should be: -- That the Thing gave Offense,
and was indecorous, inasmuch as it approached too near upon a Level with the
Parson's Desk itself. This Hardship the Parson complained of loudly, -- and
told John one Day after Prayers, -- "He could bear it no longer: -- And would
have it altered and brought down as it should be." John made no other Reply,
but, "That the Desk was not of his raising: -- That 'twas not one Hair Breadth
higher than he found it; -- and that as he found it, so would he leave it: --
In short, he would neither make an Encroachment, nor would he suffer one."

The late Parson might have his Virtues, but the leading Part of his Character
was not Humility; so that John's Stiffness in this Point was not likely to
reconcile Matters. -- This was Trim's Harvest.

After a friendly Hint to John to stand his Ground, -- away hies Trim to make
his Market at the Vicarage: -- What passed there, I will not say, intending not
to be uncharitable; so shall content myself with only guessing at it, from the
sudden Change that appeared in Trim's Dress for the better; -- for he had left
his old ragged Coat, Hat and Wig, in the Stable, and was come forth strutting
across the Churchyard, y'clad in a good creditable cast Coat, large Hat and
Wig, which the Parson had just given him. -- Ho! Ho! Hollo! John! cries Trim,
in an insolent Bravo, as loud as ever he could bawl -- See here, my Lad! how
fine I am. -- The more Shame for you, answered John, seriously. -- Do you
think, Trim, says he, such Finery, gained by such Services, becomes you, or can
wear well? -- Fie upon it, Trim; -- I could not have expected this from you,
considering what Friendship you pretended, and how kind I have ever been to
you: -- How many Shillings and Sixpences I have generously lent you in your
Distresses? -- Nay, it was but the other Day that I promised you these black
Plush Breeches I have on. -- Rot your Breeches, quoth Trim; for Trim's Brain
was half turned with his new Finery: -- Rot your Breeches, says he, -- I would
not take them up, were they laid at my Door; -- give 'em, and be d^d to you, to
whom you like; -- I would have you to know I can have a better Pair at the
Parson's any Day in the Week: -- John told him plainly, as his Word had once
passed him, he had a Spirit above taking Advantage of his Insolence, in giving
them away to another: -- But, to tell him his Mind freely, he thought he had
got so many Favors of that Kind, and was so likely to get many more for the
same Services, of the Parson, that he had better give up the Breeches, with
good Nature, to some one who would be more thankful for them.

Here John mentioned Mark Slender, (who, it seems, the Day before, had asked
John for 'em) not knowing they were under Promise to Trim. -- "Come, Trim, says
he, let poor Mark have 'em, -- You know he has not a Pair to his A^: Besides,
you see he is just of my Size, and they will fit him to a T; whereas, if I give
'em to you, -- look ye, they are not worth much; and besides, you could not get
your Backside into them, if you had them, without tearing them all to Pieces."

Every Tittle of this was most undoubtedly true; for Trim, you must know, by
soul Feeding, and playing the good Fellow at the Parson's, was grown somewhat
gross about the lower Parts, if not higher: So that, as all John said upon the
Occasion was fact, Trim, with much ado, and after a hundred Hum's and Hah's, at
last, out of mere Compassion to Mark, signs, seals, and delivers up all Right,
Interest, and Pretensions whatsoever, in and to the said Breeches; thereby
binding his Heirs, Erecutors, Administrators, and Assigns, never mere to call
the said Claim in Question.

All this Renunciation was set forth in an ample Manner, to be in pure Pity to
Mark's Nakedness; -- but the Secret was, Trim had an Eye to, and firmly
expected in his own Mind, the great Green Pulpit-Cloth and old Velvet Cushion,
which were that very Year to be taken down; -- which, by the Bye, could he have
wheedled John a second Time out of 'em, as he hoped, he had made up the Loss of
his Breeches Sevenfold.

Now, you must know, this Pulpit-Cloth and Cushion were not in John's Gift, but
in the Churchwardens, etc. -- However, as I said above, that John was a
leading Man in the Parish, Trim knew he could help him to them if he would: --
But John had got a Surfeit of him; -- so, when the Pulpit-Cloth, etc. were
taken down, they were immediately given ( John having a great Say in it) to
William Do, who understood very well what Use to make of them.

As for the old Breeches, poor Mark Slender lived to wear them but a short
Time, and they got into the Possession of Lorry Slim, an unlucky Wight, by whom
they are still worn; -- in Truth, as you will guess; they are very thin by this
Time: -- But Lorry has a light Heart; and what recommends them to him, is this,
that, as thin as they are, he knows that Trim, let him say what he will to the
contrary, still envies the Possessor of them, -- and, with all his Pride, would
be very glad to wear them after him.

Upon this Footing have these Affairs slept quietly for near ten Years, -- and
would have slept for ever, but for the unlucky Kicking-Bout; which, as I said,
has ripp'd this Squabble up afresh: So that it was no longer ago than last
Week, that Trim met and insulted John in the public Town - Way, before a
hundred People; -- taxed him with the Promise of the
old-cast-Pair-of-black-Breeches, notwithstanding Trim's solemn Renunciation;
twitted him with the Pulpit-Cloth and Velvet Cushion, -- as good as told him,
he was ignorant of the common Duties of his Clerkship; adding, very infolently,
That he knew not so much as to give out a common Psalm in Tune. --

John contented himself with giving a plain Answer to every Article that Trim
had laid to his Charge, and appealed to his Neighbors who remembered the whole
Affair; -- and as he knew there was never any Thing to be got in wrestling with
a Chimney-Sweeper, -- he was going to take Leave of Trim for ever. -- But,
hold, -- the Mob by this Time had got round them, and their High Mightinesses
insisted upon having Trim tried upon the Spot. -- Trim was accordingly tried;
and, after a full Hearing, was convicted a second Time, and handled more
roughly by one or more of them, than even at the Parson's.

Trim, says one, are you not ashamed of yourself, to make all this Rout and
Disturbance in the Town, and set Neighbors together by the Ears, about an
oldworn-out-Pair-of-cast-Breeches, not worth Half a Crown? -- Is there a
cast-Coat, or a Place in the whole Town, that will bring you in a Shilling, but
what you have snapp'd up, like a greedy Hound as you are?

In the first Place, are you not Sexton and Dog-Whipper, worth Three Pounds a
Year? -- Then you begged the Churchwardens to let your Wife have the Washing
and Darning of the Surplice and Church-Linen, which brings you in Thirteen
Shillings and Four Pence. -- Then you have Six Shillings and Eight Pence for
oiling and winding up the Clock, both paid you at Easter. -- The Pinder's
Place, which is worth Forty Shillings a Year, -- you have got that too.-You are
the Bailiff, which the late Parson got you, which brings you in Forty Shillings
more. -- Besides all this, you have Six Pounds a Year, paid you Quarterly for
being Mole-Catcher to the Parish. -- Aye, says the luckless Wight
abovementioned, (who was standing close to him with his Plush Breeches on)
"You are not only Mole-Catcher, Trim, but you catch STRAY CONIES too in the
Dark; and you pretend a License for it, which, I trow, will be looked into at
the next Quarter Sessions." I maintain it, I have a License, says Trim,
blushing as red as Scarlet: -- I have a License, -- and as I farm a Warren in
the next Parish, I will catch Conies every Hour of the Night. -- You catch
Conies! cries a toothless old Woman, who was just passing by. --

This set the Mob a laughing, and sent every Man home in perfect good Humor,
except Trim, who waddled very slowly off with that Kind of inflexible Gravity
only to be equalled by one Animal in the whole Creation, -- and surpassed by
none. I am,

SIR, Yours, etc. etc.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Have broke open my Letter to inform you, that I missed the Opportunity of
sending it by the Messenger, who I expected would have called upon me in his
Return through this Village to York, so it has laid a Week or ten Days by me.

-- I am not sorry for the Disappointment, because something has since
happened, in Continuation of this Affair, which I am thereby enabled to
transmit to you, all under one Trouble.

When I finished the above Account, I thought (as did every Soul in the Parish)
Trim had met with so thorough a Rebuff from John the Parish - Clerk and the
Town's Folks, who all took against him, that Trim would be glad to be quiet,
and let the Matter rest.

But, it seems, it is not half an Hour ago since Trim sallied forth again; and,
having borrowed a Sow-Gelder's Horn, with hard Blowing he got the whole Town
round him, and endeavored to raise a Disturbance, and fight the whole Battle
over again: -- That he had been used in the last Fray worse than a Dog; -- not
by John the Parish-Clerk, -- for I should not, quoth Trim, have valued him a
Rush single Hands: -- But all the Town sided with him, and twelve Men in
Buckram set upon me all at once, and kept me in Play at Sword's Point for three
Hours together. -- Besides, quoth Trim, there were two misbegotten Knaves in
Kendal Green, who lay all the while in Ambush in John's own House, and they all
sixteen came upon my Back, and let drive at me together. -- A Plague, says
Trim, of all Cowards! -- Trim repeated this Story above a Dozen Times; -- which
made some of the Neighbors pity him, thinking the poor Fellow crack-brain'd,
and that he actually believed what he said. After this Trim dropped the Affair
of the Breeches, and begun a fresh Dispute about the Reading-Desk, which I told
you had occasioned some small Dispute between the late Parson and John, some
Years ago.

This Reading-Desk, as you will observe, was but an Episode wove into the main
Story by the Bye; -- for the main Affair was the Battle of the Breeches and
Great Watch-Coat. -- However, Trim being at last driven out of these two
Citadels, -- he has seized hold, in his Retreat, of this Reading-Desk, with a
View, as it seems, to take Shelter behind it.

I cannot say but the Man has fought it out obstinately enough; -- and, had his
Cause been good, I should have really pitied him. For when he was driven out of
the Great Watch-Coat, -- you see, he did not run away; -- no, -- he retreated
behind the Breeches; -- and, when he could make nothing of it behind the
Breeches, -- he got behind the Reading-Desk. -- To what other Hold Trim will
next retreat, the Politicians of this Village are not agreed. -- Some think his
next Move will be toward the Rear of the Parson's Boot; -- but, as it is
thought he cannot make a long Stand there, -- others are of Opinion, That Trim
will once more in his Life get hold of the Parson's Horse, and charge upon him,
or perhaps behind him. -- But as the Horse is not easy to be caught, the more
general Opinion is, That, when he is driven out of the Reading-Desk, he will
make his last Retreat in such a Manner as, if possible, to gain the
Close-Stool, and defend himself behind it to the very last Drop. If Trim should
make this Movement, by my Advice he should be left besides his Citadel, in full
Possession of the Field of Battle; -- where, it is certain, he will keep every
Body a League off, and may pop by himself till he is weary: Besides, as Trim
seems bent upon purging himself, and may have Abundance of foul Humors to work
off, I think he cannot be better placed.

But this is all Matter of Speculation. -- Let me carry you back to Matter of
Fact, and tell you what Kind of a Stand Trim has actually made behind the said
Desk.

"Neighbors and Townsmen all, I will be sworn before my Lord Mayor, That John
and his nineteen Men in Buckram, have abused me worse than a Dog; for they told
you that I played fast and go-loose with the late Parson and him, in that old
Dispute of theirs about the Reading-Desk; and that I made Matters worse between
them, and not better."

Of this Charge, Trim declared he was as innocent as the Child that was unborn:
That he would be Book-sworn he had no Hand in it. He produced a strong Witness;
-- and, moreover, insinuated, that John himself, instead of being angry for
what he had done in it, had actually thanked him. Aye, Trim, says the Wight in
the Plush Breeches, but that was, Trim, the Day before John found thee out. --
Besides, Trim, there is nothing in that: -- For, the very Year that thou wast
made Town's Pinder, thou know well, that I both thanked thee myself; and,
moreover, gave thee a good warm Supper for turning John Lund's Cows and Horses
out of my Hard-Corn Close; which if thou had not done, (as thou told'st me)
I should have lost my whole Crop: Whereas, John Lund and Thomas Patt, who are
both here to testify, and will take their Oaths on it, That thou thyself wast
the very Man who set the Gate open; and, after all, -- it was not thee, Trim,
-- 'twas the Blacksmith's poor Lad who turned them out: So that a Man may be
thanked and rewarded too for a good Turn which he never did, nor ever did
intend.

Trim could not sustain this unexpected Stroke; -- so Trim marched off the
Field, without Colors flying, or his Horn sounding, or any other Ensigns of
Honor whatever.

Whether after this Trim intends to rally a second Time, -- or whether Trim may
not take it into his Head to claim the Victory, -- no one but Trim himself can
inform you: -- However, the general Opinion, upon the whole, is this, -- That,
in three several pitched Battles, Trim has been so trimmed, as never disastrous
Hero was trimmed before him.

THE KEY.
THIS Romance was, by some Mischance or other, dropped in the Minster-Yard,
York, and picked up by a Member of a small Political Club in that City; where
it was carried, and publicly read to the Members the last Club Night.

It was instantly agreed to, by a great Majority, That it was a Political
Romance; but concerning what State or Potentate, could not so easily be settled
amongst them.

The President of the Night, who is thought to be as clear and quick-sighted as
any one of the whole Club in Things of this Nature, discovered plainly, That
the Disturbances therein set forth, related to those on the Continent: -- That
Trim could be Nobody but the King of France, by whose shifting and intriguing
Behavior, all Europe was set together by the Ears: -- 'That Trim's Wife was
certainly the Empress, who are as kind together, says he, as any Man and Wife
can be for their Lives. -- The more Shame for 'em, says an Alderman, low to
himself. -- Agreeable to this Key, continues the President, -- The Parson, who
I think is a most excellent Character, -- is His Most Excellent Majesty King
Gearge; -- John, the Parish-Clerk, is the King of Prussia; who, by the Manner
of his first entering Saxony, showed the World most evidently, -- That he did
know how to lead out the Psalm, and in Tune and Time too, notwithstanding
Trim's vile Insult upon him in that Particular. -- But who do you think, says a
Surgeon and Man-Midwife, who sat next him, (whose Coat-Button the President, in
the Earnestness of this Explanation, had got fast hold of, and had thereby
partly drawn him over to his Opinion) Who do you think, Mr. President, says he,
are meant by the Churchwardens, Sides-Men, Mark Slender, Lorry Slim, etc. --
Who do I think? says he, Why, -- Why, Sir, as I take the Thing, -- the
Churchwardens and Sides-Men, are the Electors and the other Princes who form
the Germanick Body. -- And as for the other subordinate Characters of Mark
Slim, -- the unlucky Wight in the Plush Breeches, -- the Parson's Man who was
so often out of the Way, etc. etc. -- these, to be sure, are the several
Marshals and Generals, who fought, or should have fought, under them the last
Campaign. -- The Men in Buckram, continued the President, are the Gross of the
King of Prussia's Army, who are as stiff a Body of Men as are in the World: --
And Trim's saying they were twelve, and then nineteen, is a Wipe for the
Brussels Gazetteer, who, to my Knowledge, was never two Weeks in the same
Story, about that or any thing else.

As for the rest of the Romance, continued the President, it sufficiently
explains itself, -- The Old-cast-Pair-of-Black-Plush-Breeches must be Saxony,
which the Elector, you see, has left off wearing: -- And as for the Great
Watch-Coat, which, you know, covers all, it signifies all Europe;
comprehending, at least, so many of its different States and Dominions, as we
have any Concern with in the present War.

I protest, says a Gentleman who sat next but one to the President, and who, it
seems, was the Parson of the Parish, a Member not only of the Political, but
also of a Musical Club in the next Street; -- I protest, says he, if this
Explanation is right, which I think it is, -- That the whole makes a very fine
Symbol. -- You have always some Musical Instrument or other in your Head, I
think, says the Alderman. -- Musical Instrument! replies the Parson, in
Astonishment, -- Mr. Alderman, I mean an Allegory; and I think the greedy
Disposition of Trim and his Wife, in ripping the Great Watch-Coat to Pieces, in
order to convert it into a Petticoat for the one, and a Jerkin for the other,
is one of the most beautiful of the Kind I ever met with; and will show all the
World what have been the true Views and Intentions of the Houses of Bourbon and
Austria in this abominable Coalition, -- I might have called it Whoredom: --
Nay, says the Alderman, it is downright Adulterydom, or nothing.

This Hypothesis of the President's explained every Thing in the Romance
extremely well; and, withal, was delivered with so much Readiness and Air of
Certainty, as begot an Opinion in two Thirds of the Club, that Mr. President
was actually the Author of the Romance himself: But a Gentleman who sat on the
opposite Side of the Table, who had come pipinghot from reading the History of
King William's and Queen Anne's Wars, and who was thought, at the Bottom, to
envy the President the Honor both of the Romance and Explanation too, gave an
entire new Turn to it all. He acquainted the Club, That Mr. President was
altogether wrong in every Supposition he had made, except that one, where the
Great Watch-Coat was said by him to represent Europe, or at least a great Part
of it: -- So far he acknowledged he was pretty right; but that he had not gone
far enough backwards into our History to come at the Truth. He then acquainted
them, that the dividing the Great Watch-Coat did, and could, allude to nothing
else in the World but the Partition-Treaty; which, by the Bye, he told them,
was the most unhappy and scandalous Transaction in all King William's Life: It
was that false Step, and that only, says he, rising from his Chair, and
striking his Hand upon the Table with great Violence; it was that false Step,
says he, knitting his Brows and throwing his Pipe down upon the Ground, that
has laid the Foundation of all the Disturbances and Sorrows we feel and lament
at this very Hour; and as for Trim's giving up the Breeches, look ye, it is
almost Word for Word copied from the French King and Dauphin's Renunciation of
Spain and the West Indies, which all the World knew (as was the very Case of
the Breeches) were renounced by them on purpose to be reclaimed when Time
should serve.

This Explanation had too much Ingenuity in it to be altogether slighted; and,
in Truth, the worst Fault it had, seemed to be the prodigious Heat of it; which
(as an Apothecary, who sat next the Fire, observed, in a very low Whisper to
his next Neighbor) was so much incorporated into every Particle of it, that it
was impossible, under such Fermentation, it should work its desired Effect.

This, however, no way intimidated a little valiant Gentleman, though he sat
the very next Man, from giving an Opinion as diametrically opposite as East is
from West.

This Gentleman, who was by much the best Geographer in the whole Club, and,
moreover, second Cousin to an Engineer, was positive the Breeches meant
Gibraltar; for, if you remember, Gentlemen, says he, though possibly you don't,
the Ichnography and Plan of that Town and Fortress, it exactly resembles a Pair
of Trunk-Hose, the two Promontories forming the two Slops, etc. etc. -- Now we
all know, continued he, that King George the First made a Promise of that
important Pass to the King of Spain: -- So that the whole Drift of the Romance,
according to my Sense of Things, is merely to vindicate the King and the
Parliament in that Transaction, which made so much Noise in the World.

A Wholesale Tailor, who from the Beginning had resolved not to speak at all in
the Debate, -- was at last drawn into it, by something very unexpected in the
last Person's Argument.

He told the Company, frankly, he did not understand what Ichnography meant: --
But as for the Shape of a Pair of Breeches, as he had had the Advantage of
cutting out so many hundred Pairs in his Lifetime, he hoped he might be
allowed to know as much of the Matter as another Man.

Now, to my Mind, says he, there is nothing in all the Terraqueous Globe (a Map
of which, it seems, hung up in his Work-Shop) so like a Pair of Breeches unmade
up, as the Island of Sicily: -- Nor is there any thing, if you go to that,
quoth an honest Shoemaker, who had the Honor to be a Member of the Club, so
much like a Jack-Boot, to my Fancy, as the Kingdom of Italy. -- What the Duce
has either Italy or Sicily to do in the Affair? cries the President, who, by
this Time, began to tremble for his Hypothesis, -- What have they to do? --
Why, answered the Partition-Treaty Gentleman, with great Spirit and Joy
sparkling in his Eyes, -- They have just so much, Sir, to do in the Debate as
to overthrow your Suppositions, and to establish the Certainty of mine beyond
the Possibility of a Doubt: For, says he, (with an Air of Sovereign Triumph
over the President's Politics) -- By the Partition-Treaty, Sir, both Naples
and Sicily were the very Kingdoms made to devolve upon the Dauphin; -- and
Trim's greasing the Parson's Boots, is a Devilish Satirical Stroke; -- for it
exposes the Corruption and Bribery made Use of at that Juncture, in bringing
over the several States and Princes of Italy to use their Interests at Rome, to
stop the Pope from giving the Investitures of those Kingdoms to any Body else.
-- The Pope has not the Investiture of Sicily, cries another Gentleman. -- I
care not, says he, for that.

Almost every one apprehended the Debate to be now ended, and that no one
Member would venture any new Conjecture upon the Romance, after so many clear
and decisive Interpretations had been given. But, hold, -- Close to the Fire,
and opposite to where the Apothecary sat, there sat also a Gentleman of the
Law, who, from the Beginning to the End of the Hearing of this Cause, seemed no
way satisfied in his Conscience with any one Proceeding in it. This Gentleman
had not yet opened his Mouth, but had waited patiently till they had all gone
through their several Evidences on the other Side; -- reserving himself, like an
expert Practitioner, for the last Word in the Debate. When the
Partition-Treaty-Gentleman had finished what he had to say, -- He got up, --
and, advancing toward the Table, told them, That the Error they had all gone
upon thus far, in making out the several Facts in the Romance, -- was in
looking too high; which, with great Candor, he said, was a very natural Thing,
and very excusable withal, in such a Political Club as theirs: For Instance,
continues he, you have been searching the Registers, and looking into the Deeds
of Kings and Emperors, -- as if Nobody had any Deeds to show or compare the
Romance to but themselves. -- This, continued the Attorney, is just as much out
of the Way of good Practice, as if I should carry a Thing slap-dash into the
House of Lords, which was under forty Shillings, and might be decided in the
next County Court for six Shillings and Eightpence. -- He then took the Romance
in his Left Hand, and pointing with the Forefinger of his Right toward the
second Page, he humbly begged Leave to observe, (and, to do him Justice, he did
it in somewhat of a forensic Air) That the Parson, John, and Sexton, showed
incontestably the Thing to be Tripartite; now, if you will take Notice,
Gentlemen, says he, these several Persons, who are Parties to this Instrument,
are merely Ecclesiastical; that the Reading-Desk, Pulpit-Cloth, and Velvet
Cushion, are tripartite too; and are, by Intendment of Law, Goods and Chattles
merely of an Ecclesiastic Nature, belonging and appertaining 'only unto them,'
and to them only. -- So that it appears very plain to me, That the Romance,
neither directly nor indirectly, goes upon Temporal, but altogether upon
Church Matters. -- And do not you think, says he, softening his Voice a little,
and addressing himself to the Parson with a forced Smile, -- Do not you think
Doctor, says he, That the Dispute in the Romance, between the Parson of the
Parish and John, about the Height of John's Desk, is a very fine Panegyric
upon the Humility of Churchmen? -- I think, says the Parson, it is much of the
same Fineness with that which your Profession is complimented with, in the
pimping, dirty, pettyfogging Character of Trim, -- which, in my Opinion, Sir,
is just such another Panegyric upon the Honesty of Attorneys.

Nothing whets the Spirits like an Insult: -- Therefore the Parson went on with
a visible Superiority and an uncommon Acuteness. -- As you are so happy, Sir,
continues he, in making Applications, -- pray turn over a Page or two to the
black Law-Letters in the Romance. -- What do you think of them, Sir? -- Nay, --
pray read the Grant of the Great Watch-Coat -- and Trim's Renunciation of the
Breeches. -- Why, there is downright Lease and Release for you, -- it is the
very Thing, Man; -- only with this small Difference, -- and in which consists
the whole Strength of the Panegyric, -- That the Author of the Romance has
conveyed and re-convey'd, in about ten Lines, -- what you, with the glorious
Prolixity of the Law, could not have crowded into as many Skins of Parchment.

The Apothecary, who had paid the Attorney, the same Afternoon, a Demand of
Three Pounds Six Shillings and Eight-Pence, for much such another Jobb, -- was
so highly tickled with the Parson's Repartee in that particular Point, -- that
he rubbed his Hands together most fervently, -- and laughed most triumphantly
thereupon.

This could not escape the Attorney's Notice, any more than the Cause of it did
escape his Penetration.

I think, Sir, says he, (dropping his Voice a Third) you might well have spared
this immoderate Mirth, since you and your Profession have the least Reason to
triumph here of any of us. -- I beg, quoth he, that you would reflect a Moment
upon the Cob-Web which Trim went so far for, and brought back with an Air of so
much Importance, in his Breeches Pocket, to lay upon the Parson's cut Finger.
-- This said Cob-Web, Sir, is a fine-spun Satyr, upon the flimsy Nature of one
Half of the Shop-Medicines, with which you make a Property of the Sick, the
Ignorant, and the Unsuspecting. -- And as for the Moral of the Close-Stool-Pan,
Sir, it is too plain, -- Does not nine Parts in ten of the whole Practice, and
of all you vend under its Colors, pass into and concenter in that one nasty
Utensil? -- And let me tell you, Sir, says he, raising his Voice, -- had not
your unseasonable Mirth blinded you, you might have seen that Trim's carrying
the Close-Stool-Pan upon his Head the whole Length of the Town, without
blushing, is a pointed Raillery, -- and one of the sharpest Sarcasms, Sir, that
ever was thrown out upon you; -- for it unveils the solemn Impudence of the
whole Profession, who, I see, are ashamed of nothing which brings in Money.

There were two Apothecaries in the Club, besides the Surgeon mentioned before,
with a Chemist and an Undertaker, who all felt themselves equally hurt and
aggrieved by this discourteous Retort: -- And they were all five rising up
together from their Chairs, with full Intent of Heart, as it was thought, to
return the Reproof Valiant thereupon. -- But the President, fearing it would
end in a general Engagement, he instantly called out, To Order; -- and gave
Notice, That if there was any Member in the Club, who had not yet spoke, and
yet did desire to speak upon the main Subject of the Debate, -- that he should
immediately be heard.

This was a happy Invitation for a stammering Member, who, it seems, had but a
weak Voice at the best; and having often attempted to speak in the Debate, but
to no Purpose, had sat down in utter Despair of an Opportunity.

This Member, you must know, had got a sad Crush upon his Hip, in the late
Election, which gave him intolerable Anguish; -- so that, in short, he could
think of nothing else: -- For which Cause, and others, he was strongly of
Opinion, That the whole Romance was a just Gird at the late York Election; and
I think, says he, that the Promise of the Breeches broke, may well and truly
signify Somebody's else Promise, which was broke, and occasioned so much
Disturbance amongst us.

-- Thus every Man turned the Story to what was swimming uppermost in his own
Brain; -- so that, before all was over, there were full as many Satyrs spun
out of it, -- and as great a Variety of Personages, Opinions, Transactions, and
Truths, found to lay hid under the dark Veil of its Allegory, as ever were
discovered in the thrice-renowned History of the Acts of Gargantua and
Pantagruel.

At the Close of all, and just before the Club was going to break up, -- Mr.
President rose from his Chair, and begged Leave to make the two following
Motions, which were instantly agreed to, without any Division.

First, Gentlemen, says he, as Trim's Character in the Romance, of a shuffling
intriguing Fellow, -- whoever it was drawn for, is, in Truth, as like the
French King as it can stare, -- I move, That the Romance be forthwith printed:
-- For, continues he, if we can but once turn the Laugh against him, and make
him ashamed of what he has done, it may be a great Means, with the Blessing of
God upon our Fleets and Armies, to save the Liberties of Europe.

In the second Place, I move, That Mr. Attorney, our worthy Member, be desired
to take Minutes, upon the Spot, of every Conjecture which has been made upon
the Romance, by the several Members who have spoke; which, I think, says he,
will answer two good Ends:

1st, It will establish the Political Knowledge of our Club for ever, and place
it in a respectable Light to all the World.

In the next Place, it will furnish what will be wanted; that is, a Key to the
Romance. -- In troth you might have said a whole Bunch of Keys, quoth a
Whitesmith, who was the only Member in the Club who had not said something in
the Debate: But let me tell you, Mr. President, says he, That the Right Key, if
it could but be found, would be worth the whole Bunch put together.


