POEMS UPON Various Occasions.

Written for the Entertainment OF THE AUTHOR, And Printed for the Amusement Of
a few FRIENDS, Prejudiced in his Favor.

BY WILLIAM SHENSTONE, Gent.

-- Spes and Fortuna, valete! OXFORD: Printed by Leon Lichfield near Eastgate.
1737.

PREFATORY DEDICATION, TO Mrs (...)
DEdications, Madam, ought in Policy to be addressed to the most powerful, and in
Justice to the most deserving. These I think I have united by applying to You
in this Manner, who have gained the former of these Advantages by means of the
latter. Accomplishments like Yours give the most absolute Authority of any: I
mean that over the Judgments, as well as Hearts of Mankind.

I intended here, Madam, after the Manner of other well-meaning Dedicators, to
have given some Sketches of Your Character. Not so much from the Ostentation of
my Art in describing, as of the peculiar Diligence I have used in observing it.
An indifferent Painter may trace some Features of his Sov'reign's Face, whose
Loyalty has rendered him accurate in studying the Original -- Besides, 'Twere
hard a Lady of Your Perfections should be the only one exempted from the
Pleasure of being acquainted with 'em. It Is true, You have a quick Eye, and
penetrating Judgment in distinguishing both natural, and moral Beauties: But
You must inevitably remain a Stranger to the greatest, were it not for the
Assistance of those important Utensils, a Poet and a LookingGlass.

'Twere dangerous indeed You might suffer by any Representation I am capable
of. But 'twas not Incapacity alone discouraged me. There is something in Your
Character vastly disadvantageous to any that attempts it. To proclaim You
possessed of every imaginable good Quality, would be saying it was Day, when
the Sun shines in its Meridian. As for Your Faults, (if You have any,) they
indeed are far enough from being liable to the former Exception: but the
extreme Difficulty I should have found in selecting a few minute ones, (And
some I must have selected, if possible, as the Shades of my Piece;) together
with the small Share of Credit I should have gained in the World, dis-hearten'd
me. Such indeed were my only Objections. Unless I may adjoin this, that to
Strangers your real and genuine Character must have passed for Flattery. I say
to Strangers, for, where you are known, You must be acknowledged incapable of
it: As the Sun's Brightness can be set off by no Allusion. Hence, in short, I
laid aside all thoughts of a Portraiture. Those, that would love You as You
deserve, must know You; as necessarily, as those, who know You, must
consequently love You.

As to the Poetry, I beg Leave to declare, that it is the Product of a young
Genius, little exercised in Versification. And the Muses, you know, Madam, are
not like a great many of their Sex, that have the most Esteem for those, who
neglect them; though they have had sometimes, in Appearance. Horace, and Swift
(whom to you I would choose to mention) have attended them whole Mornings at
their Toilette, that they might conduct them into the World, in a more
agreeable Undress. But my Negligences, Madam, are of such a Nature, that I must
beg you would impute them to Disuse and Inexperience. However, by this Confession,
I may probably put you in Mind of a Lady, who, having thrum'd over a Spinnet
for a considerable Space, without the least show of Harmony, took much pains to
prove she had never played before. It Is with an Author much the same as with a
Sportsman; Hippolitus may excuse his Ill-success to himself, and, perhaps
justly allege several alleviating Circumstances; But in vain may he attempt
his vindication to the World. That has been so frequently deluded by these
Apologies, that it has made it a Rule to fix the Fault upon the Marksman.

I indeed ever despaired of affording much entertainment this way to a Lady of
your refined Taste: And I Am positive, that Indolence, has with me proved, and
always will do, more than a Balance to any other Ambition. This is my only
Encouragement, that, as one almost insensibly conforms to a taste one very much
admires, I cannot but think these Trifles will not prove absolutely disagreeable to
Yours.

You Will perhaps find other Names in these Pages, than that, which includes all
that is agreeable, and is indeed the most comprehensive word that is; I mean
your own. But as there is some thing mean in an aversion to the Praises of
another, or a continual Apprehension of being rivaled, which I take to be it is
original; I Am secure of giving You no uneasiness. Especially, since a Lady of
Your Merit may give all others infinitely more than their due, without the
least Shadow of Danger.

I ask Pardon for the Pedantry of Latin Mottoes and Quotations: But You may
easily dispense with the loss of them, whether You consider them, merely as a
Compliance with custom, or as certain scraps of Antiquity, to indemnify the
Poet with those Critic's, who approve only what is ancient. As there are some,
who fix a tutelary Piece of Iron on their Thresholds, to elude the Fury of
Ill-designing Spirits.

Next to the happiness of being possessed of Merit, is to show one's
Approbation of those who are; And this is really no small addition to a Man's
Character. So that, should these Papers appear ever so ridiculous, I shall
value them on one Account; And should their Fame prove equal to Mr. Pope's, I
should value them on none so much as that; which is, that they enable me to
declare openly how much I am,

MADAM, Your most Obedient Humble Servant,
Pembroke College, OXFORD, April 29th, 1737.
POEMS Upon Various OCCASIONS.
The Speeches of SLOTH and VIRTUE: Upon the Plan of Xenophon's Judgment of
Hercules.
SLOTH. HITHER, dear Boy, direct thy wandering Eyes,
It Is here the lovely Vale of Pleasure lies.
Debate no more -- to me thy self resign;
Her mossy Caves, her Groves, and all are mine.
For me the Goddess opes her various Power,
Springs in a Tree, or blossoms in a Flower:
To please my Ear she breaths celestial Strains:
To please my Eye, with Lillies strews the Plains:
To form my Couch in mossy Beds she grows:
To gratify my Smell she blooms a Rose.
Often in some Nymph the Deity I find,
Where in one Form the various Sweets are joined.
Yield but to me, -- a Choir of Nymphs shall rise,
And with the blooming Sight regale thy Eyes:
Their beauteous Cheeks a fairer Rose shall wear,
A brighter Lilly in their Necks appear:
Thou on their Breasts thy wearied Head recline,
Nor at the Swan's less pleasing Nest repine:
Whilst Philomel in each soft Voice complains,
And gently lulls thee with her dying Strains:
Whilst spicy Gums round each fair Bosom glow;
And in each Accent myrrhy Odours flow.
For thee with softest Art the Dome shall rise,
And spiring Turrets glitter through the Skies.
For thee the Robe shall glow with purple Rays;
The Side-board sparkle, and gilt Chariot blaze,
In brilliant Mines, be other Hands employed.
So the gay Product be by thine enjoyed.
For thee the Poplar shall her Amber drain:
For thee in clouded Beauty spring the Cane.
To please thy Taste shall Gallia prune the Vine:
To swell thy Treasures India sink the Mine.
For thee each Nations nicer Stores shall grow,
And every Wind some lovely Tribute blow.
Learning shall never molest thy tranquil Reign,
Nor Science puzzle thy inactive Brain:
Sometimes perhaps thy Fancy take her Wing
To grace a Fan, or celebrate a Ring:
Fix various Dies to suit each varying Mien:
Prescribe where Patches should in Crowds be seen;
Or sigh soft Strains along the vocal Grove,
And tell the Charms, the sweet Effects of Love!
Or if more specious Ease thy Care should claim,
And thy Breast glow with faint Desire of Fame,
Some trivial Science shall thy Thoughts amuse;
And Learning's Name a solemn Sound diffuse.
To Thee all Nature's shelly Store I Will bring,
To thee the Sparklings on the Insect's Wing.
Pleasure in infant Forms shall thou descry;
View, in an Ant, or hear her in a Fly;
When near thy Path, as often as Spring appears,
The sportive Goddess buzzes round thy Ears:
Now in some Pebble's curious Vein is seen,
Or on some Leaf bestows unusual Green.
Then Sleep shall wrap thee in her downy Arms,
And round thy wearied Head diffuse her Charms;
Lest growing Pride thy peaceful Schemes o'erthrow,
And Thought succeed, -- my most destructive Foe.
The watery Nymphs shall tune the tinkling Vales,
And gentle Zephyrs harmonize their Gales:
For thy repose instruct, with Rival Joy,
Their Streams to murmur, and their Winds to sigh.
Thus shall thou spend the sweetly flowing Day,
Till lost in Bliss thou breath thy Soul away:
How easy a Transition should thou find,
Were to thy Fate Annihilation joined!

VIRTUE. FLY, fly, fond Youth, the too indulgent Maid,
Nor err, by such fantastic Scenes betrayed.
Though in my Path the prickly Thorn be seen,
And the waste Turf produce a fainter Green;
Though no gay Rose, or purple Product shine,
The rugged Surface still conceals the Mine;
And each unsightly Object can supply
More lasting Pleasure, more substantial Joy.
But should those airy glittr'ing Toys allure,
Yet whence could Sloth the mighty Boon procure?
Or whence receive, or how those Gifts bestow,
Which I alone possess -- her greatest Foe?
I from old Ocean rob the treasured Store,
And hidden Gems through every Realm explore:
'Twas I the rugged Brilliant first revealed,
By tenfold Strata in the Earth concealed:
It Is I the shapeless Surface still refine,
And teach the rugged Brilliant how to shine.
Where blooms the Rose, where spires the shapely Tree,
Where smiles the Grape, without fair Industry?
But grant we Sloth the Scene herself has drawn,
The mossy Grotto, and the flowery Lawn:
Let Frankincense with every Wind exhale,
And Philomela breath in every Gale;
Let Brilliants sparkle, (dear Machines of Pride!)
And from the Poplar flow the Amber Tide:
Let gay Pomona, quitting all around,
For choicest Fruits select the hallowed Ground;
To tread the favored Soil should Virtue cease,
Nor mossy Grotts, nor flowery Lawns could please:
Nor ought Pomona's luscious Gifts avail:
The Sound harmonious; or the spicy Gale.
See thou those Rocks in dreadful Pomp arise,
And barren Cliffs that sweep the vaulted Skies?
Those Fields whence Phoebus all their Moisture drains,
And, too profusely kind, disrobes the Plains?
When I vouchsafe to tread the lonely Soil,
Those Rocks seem lovely, and those Deserts smile;
Often on those pathless Wilds as I appear,
(With Converse sweet his lonely Steps to cheer)
Those Cliffs the Exile has with Pleasure viewed,
And called that Desert, "Blissful Solitude!
Known by its airy Height and towering Spires,
Behind that Scene Fame's lofty Dome retires.
Steep the Ascent by which to Fame we rise,
Yet equal to the Labor is the Prize:
From thence you gain an earthly Crown; from thence -- you reach the Skies.
Far, far below the downy Throne is seen
That lulls to Rest Ignavia's softer Queen:
Thence to Fame's Turrets often She lifts her Eyes,
Desirous still, still impotent to rise.
Often, when resolved to gain those shining Towers,
The pensive Queen the dire Ascent explores;
Comes onward, wafted by the gummy Trees,
Some Sylvan Music, or some scented Breeze;
She turns her Head; her own gay Realm she spies,
And all the airy Resolution dies.
Thus still in vain these gilded Visions please
The Wretch of Glory, whilst the Slave of Ease;
Doomed ever in ignoble State to pine,
Boast her own Scenes, and languish after mine.

LOVE and MUSIC.
SHall Love alone for ever claim
An universal Right to Fame,
An undisputed Sway?
Or has not Music equal Charms,
To fill the Breast with strange Alarms,
And make the World obey.
The Thracian Bard, as Poets tell,
Could mitigate the Powers of Hell;
Even Pluto's nicer Ear:
His Arts, no more than Love's, we find
To Deities or Men confined,
Drew Brutes in Crowds to hear.
Whatever favorite Passion reigned,
The Poet still his Right maintained
Over all that ranged the Plain:
The siercer Tyrants could assuage,
Or fire the timorous into Rage,
Whenever he changed the Strain.
In milder Lays the Bard began;
Soft Notes through every Finger ran,
And echoing charmed the place:
See! fawning Lions gaze around,
And, taught to quit their savage Sound,
Assume a gentler Grace.
When Cymon viewed the fair One's Charms,
Her ruby Lips, and snowy Arms,
And told her Beauties over:
When Love reformed his awkard Tone,
And made each clownish Gesture known,
It showed but equal Power.
The Bard now tries a sprightlier sound,
When all the feathered Race around
Perceive the varied Strains;
The soaring Lark the Note pursues;
The timorous Dove around him cooes,
And Philomel complains.
An equal Power of Love I Have seen
Incite the Deer to scour the Green,
And chase his barking Foe.
Sometimes has Love, with greater might,
To challenge -- nay -- sometimes -- to fight
Provoked the enamored Beau.
When Silvia treads the smiling Plain,
How glows the Heart of every Swain,
By pleasing Tumults tossed!
When Handel's solemn Accents roll,
Each Breast is fired, each raptured Soul
In sweet Confusion lost.
If she her melting Glances dart,
Or he his dying Airs impart,
Our Spirits sink away.
Enough, enough! dear Nymph, give over;
And thou, great Artist! urge no more
Thy unresisted Sway.
Thus Love or Sound affects the Mind:
But when their various Powers are joined,
Fly, daring Mortal, fly!
For when Selinda's Charms appear,
And I her tuneful Accents hear --
I burn, I faint, I die!
COLEMIRA.
A Culinary ECLOGUE.
Nec tantum Veners, quantum studiosa culinae.
NIght's sable Clouds had half the Globe overspread,
And Silence reigned, and Folks were gone to Bed:
When Love, which gentle Sleep can never inspire,
Had seated Damon by the Kitchen Fire.
Pensive he lay, extended on the Ground;
The little Lares kept their Vigils round;
The fawning Cats compassionate his case,
And purr around, and gently lick his Face:
To all his 'plaints the sleeping Curs reply,
And with hoarse Snorings imitate a Sigh.
Such gloomy Scenes with Lover's Minds agree,
And Solitude to them is best Society.
Could I (he cried) express, how bright a grace
Adorns thy morning Hands, and well-wash'd Face;
Thou would, Colemira, grant what I implore,
And yield me love, or wash thy face no more.
Ah! who can see, and seeing, not admire,
Whenever she sets the Pot upon the Fire!
Her Hands outshine the Fire, and redder things;
Her Eyes are blacker than the Pot she brings.
But sure no Chamber-damsel can compare,
When in meridian Luster shines my Fair,
When warmed with Dinner's toil, in pearly rills,
Adown her goodly Cheek the Sweat distills.
Oh! how I long, how ardently desire,
To view those rosy Fingers strike the Lyre!
For late, when Bees to change their Climes began,
How did I see 'em thrum the Drying Pan!
With her! I should not envy G^ his Queen,
Though She in royal Grandeur decked be seen:
Whilst Rags, just severed from my Fair-one's Gown,
In russet Pomp, and greasy Pride hang down.
Ah! how it does my drooping Heart rejoice,
When in the Hall I hear thy mellow Voice!
How would that Voice exceed the Village-Bell,
Would thou but sing, " I like thee Passing well"!
When from the Hearth she bade the Pointers go,
How soft! how easy did her Accents slow!
" Get out, she cried, when Strangers come to Sup,
" One never can raise those snoring Devils up."
Then, full of wrath, she kicked each lazy Brute,
Alas! I envied even that Salute:
'Twas sure misplaced, -- Shock said, or seemed to say,
He had as lief, I had the kick, as they.
If she the mystic Bellows take in hand,
Who like the Fair can that Machine command?
O may thou never by Eolus be seen,
For he would sure demand thee for his Queen.
But should the Flame this rougher aid refuse,
And only gentler Medicines be of use:
With full-blown Cheeks she ends the doubtful strife,
Foments the infant Flame, and puffs it into life.
Such Arts, as these, exalt the drooping Fire,
But in my Breast a fiercer Flame inspire:
I burn! I burn! O! give thy pussing over,
And swell thy Cheeks, and pout thy Lips no more.
With all her haughty Looks, the time I Have seen;
When this proud Damsel has more humble been,
When with nice Airs she hoist the Pan-cake round,
And dropped it, hapless Fair! upon the Ground.
Look, with what charming grace! what winning tricks!
The artful Charmer rubs the Candlesticks:
So bright she makes the Candlesticks she handles,
Often have I said, -- There were no need of Candles.
But thou, my Fair! who never would approve
Or hear, the tender Story of my love;
Or mind, how burns my raging Breast, -- a Button --
Perhaps are dreaming of -- a Breast of Mutton.
Thus said, and wept the sad desponding Swain,
Revealing to the sable Walls his Pain:
But Nymphs are free with those they should deny;
To those, they love, more exquisitely coy!
Now chirping Crickets raise their tinkling Voice,
The lambent Flames in languid Streams arise,
And Smoke in azure Folds evaporates and dies.
COMPARISON.
IT IS by Comparison we know
On every Object to bestow
Its proper share of Praise:
Did each a like Perfection bear,
What Beauty, though divinely Fair,
Could Admiration raise?
Amidst the lucid Bands of Night,
See! Hesperus, serenely bright
Adorns the distant Skies:
But languishes, amidst the blaze,
Of sprightly Sol's meridian Rays, --
Or Silvia's brighter Eyes.
Whenever the Nightingale complains,
I like the melancholy Strains,
And praise the tuneful Bird:
But vainly might she strain her Throat,
Vainly exalt each swelling Note,
Should Silvia's Voice be heard.
When, on the Vi'lets purple Bed.
Supine I rest my weary Head,
The fragrant Pillow charms:
Yet soon such languid Bliss I Would fly,
Would Silvia but the Loss supply,
And take me to her Arms.
The Alabaster's wondrous White,
The Marble's Polish strikes my Sight,
When Silvia is not seen:
But ah! how faint that White is grown,
How rough appears the polished Stone,
Compared with Silvia's Mien!
The Rose, that over the Cyprian Plains,
With Flowers enameled, blooming reigns,
With undisputed Power,
Placed near her Cheek's celestial Red,
(Its Purple lost, its Luster fled,)
Delights the Sense no more.
The SCHOOL-MISTRESS.
A POEM.
In Imitation of Spencer's Style.
IN evrich Mart that stands on British Ground,
In evrich Village less y-known to Fame,
Dwells there, in Cot uncouth, a far renowned,
A Matron old, whom we School-Mistress name;
Who wont unruly Brats with Birch to tame:
They grieven sore in Durance vile y-pent,
Awed by the Power of uncontrouled Dame;
And oft-times on Vagaries idly bent
For Task unconn'd, or unkempt Hair are sore y-shent.
II.
Nar to this Dome is found a Patch so green,
On which the Tribe their Gambols do display:
Als at the Door impris'ning Board is seen;
Lest weakly Wights of smaller size should stray:
Eager, perdie, to bask in sunshine Day:
The Noises intermixed, which thence resound,
Do Learning's little Tenement betray;
Where sits the Dame, disguised in Look profound,
And eyes her fairy Throng, and turns her Wheel around.
III.
Right well knew She each Temper to descry,
To thwart the proud, and the submiss to raise:
Some with vile copper Prize exalt on high,
And some entice with Pittance small of Praise:
And other Sorts with baleful Spriggs affrays:
Eke in her Absence She command does hold,
While with quaint Arts the thoughtless Crowd she sways;
Fore-warned if little Bird their Tricks behold,
'Twill whisper in her Ear, and all the Scene unfold.
IV.
Lo! now, with State, she utters the command.
Eftsoons the Urchins to their Tasks repair;
Their Books of stature small take they in Hand,
Which with pellucid Horn secured are,
To save from Finger wet, the Letters fair:
The Work so quaint, that on their Backs is seen,
St. George's high Achievements does declare;
On which thilk Wight that has y-gazing been
Kens the forthcoming Rod, unpleasing Sight, I ween!
V.
But ah! what Pen his woeful Plight can trace,
Or what Device his loud Laments explain,
The Form uncouth of his disguised Face,
The pallid Hue that dies his Looks amain,
The plenteous Shower that does his Check distain,
When he in abject wise implores the Dame;
Ne hops ought of sweet Reprieve to gain:
Or when from high she levels well her Aim,
And through the Thatch his Cries each falling Stroke proclaim.
VI.
The other Tribe aghast, with sore dismay
Attend, and conn their Tasks with mickle Care:
By turns astony'd evrich Twigg survey,
And from their Fellows furrowed Bum beware;
Knowing, I wist, how each the same may share:
Till Fear has taught 'em a performance meet,
And to the well-known Chest the Dame repair;
Whence often with sugared Cates she does 'em greet,
And Ginger-bread y-rare, now, certes, doubly sweet.
VII.
Now to their Seats they hie with merry glee,
And in beseemly order sitten there;
All but the Wight of Bum y-galled, he
Abhors both Bench, and Stool, and Form, and Chair;
(This Hand in Mouth y-fix'd, that rends his Hair)
And eke with Snubs profound, and heaving Breast,
Convulsions intermitting! does declare
His grievous Wrongs, his Dame's unjust Behest,
And scorns her proffered Love, and shuns to be caress t.
VIII.
Behind some Door, in melancholy Thought,
Mindless of Food, he, dreary Caitiff! pines,
Ne for his Fellows joyance cares ought,
But to the Winds all Merriment resigns.
His Face besprent with liquid Crystal shines;
And many a sullen Look askaunce is sent,
Which for his Dame's Annoyance he designs;
Nathless the more to pleasure him she is bent,
The more does he perverse her 'Haviour past resent.
IX.
Algates the rest from silk Misfortune free,
Stir'n but as Nature does abroad them call;
Then squatten down with Hand beneath each Knee,
Ne seeken out or secret Nook or Wall,
But cack in open Street -- no Shame does them appall.
And may no Carl their Innocence deride,
While they p^ss, boldly, in the face of all;
Turning unawed their Vestments small aside,
Ne covet Hedge, ne Barn their privy Parts to hide.
X.
But when the Hour of Pleasaunce draws near,
They usher forth all debonair and gay;
And standing on the Green, with jocund Leer,
Salute the Stranger passing on his Way.
Some builden fragile tenements of Clay;
Some to the standing Lake their Courses bend,
With Pebbles smooth at Duck and Drake to play:
Thilk to the Huxter's sav'ry Cot y-tend,
In pastry Kings and Queens the allotted Mite to spend.
XI.
Here, as each Season yields a diffrent store,
Each Season's Stores in order ranged been;
Apples with Cabbage-net y-cover'd over,
Galling full sore the unmoney'd Wight are seen,
And Goose-b'rie clad in Liv'ry red, or green:
And here of lovely Dye the Cath'rine Pear,
Fine Pear! as lovely for thy Juice, I ween.
O! may no Wight ever pennyless come there,
Lest led by thee astray, he shameful Theft prepare.
XII.
See! Cherries here, ever Cherries yet abound,
With Thread so white in lusheous Bundles tied,
Scatter, like blooming Maid, their Glances round;
And draw with pampered Look our Eyes aside:
These must be bought though Penury betide;
The Plum of purple Hue, the Nut so brown,
Tempting the passing Swain: thilk Cakes beside,
Whose much-loved Names the Inventress City own,
Rend'ring through Britain's Isle Salopia's Praises known.
The QUILL,
Renowned Machine! important Trifle!
To whom each Art some Tribute owes,
Who to the World thy Praise can stifle?
Or who without thy Aid disclose?
II.
How just Thou prov'st to injured Merit,
When Courts neglect it, hence we find;
Through Thee does Pope Fame's Hill inherit,
And circling Bays his Temples bind.
III.
Yet are the dull, as well as brightest,
Indebted to Thy various Use:
When flattered Noble's Praise Thou writest,
Or gayly deck'st Thy Parent Goose.
IV.
When Peggy's Cleanly Hand Thou gracest,
The ill-plac'd Web Thy Presence flies;
As Thou by Young's Direction chacest
The mis-becoming Stains of Vice.
V.
In Chevy-chace, so famed in Story,
Thou taught'st the unerring Shafts to fly;
When, fatal to the Scottish Glory,
Thy Down imbibed the purple Dye.
VI.
When Chloe formed the Silken Flower,
(Which, by Thy aid, the Artist drew;)
And felt the guilty Needle's Power,
Such was her lovely Finger's Hue.
VII.
When hostile Rage, and Fury lingers,
And Vengeance comes but slowly on;
Thou placed between Machaon's Fingers,
Far, Far excell'st both Sword and Gun!
VIII.
While every grateful Tongue rehearses,
The Monarch's praise; each rolling Year,
How dext'rous Thou, in Squibs, or Verses,
C^r, or Black-shoe-boy declare.
IX.
Unhappy Tooth Thy Aid requiring,
Thou can from Fragments vile refine;
Then, from the generous Work retiring,
Enjoy'st alone the Silver Shrine.
X.
Kneller, to distant Times and Places,
(While Thou confin'dst each straggling Hair,)
Could tell his Art, and Myra's Graces,
How skillful he, and she how fair.
XI.
In Silvia's Spinnet, ever-pleasing,
Thy tributary Aid is known:
When, Poet's Harmony increasing,
His Fame Thou raisest, -- and Thy own.
XII.
Potent, when Handel's Touch obeying,
Thou can to Heaven exalt the Mind:
Yet more, when, Charming Silvia playing,
In her alone an Heaven we find!
-- Albo que simillima cygno
AS Delia lovely Siren! sat
The myrtle Shades among;
Regardless of a farther Fate
Than what her killing Eyes create,
Philander begged a Song.
Too well, alas! the artful knew
He Would not his suit give over;
And cried -- "by walking in the Dew,"
" I Am grown so hoarse" -- "I vow'tis true" --
" Dear Swain, insist no more!" --
At length, to his renewed Address
She yields, yet vows again
She scarce can draw her Breath, much less
In modulated Thrills express,
Or raise one pleasing Strain. --
Suchlike Evasions store the Heart
Of every tuneful She,
That one, unvers'd in Female Art,
Must think them going to impart
Like Swans, their Elegy.
The GOSSIPPING.
A BALLAD.
To the Tune of, King John, and the Abbot of Canterbury.
TO a Gossiping once the Immortals descended,
(As some Sort of People are hugely befriended,)
Where with stout humming Liquor the Tankards ran over,
And each thought he never drank such Nectar before
Derry down, down, Hey derry down.
But what brought they with 'em, these Heavenly Guests?
Folks never go empty to such Sort of Feasts:
Why, they brought neither Sugar, nor Plumbs it is true.
But all made a Promise of what they would do.
Derry down, etc.
Jove gave a Salute to the Mother and smiled,
And said, he would prove a good Friend to the Child;
And would make him one Day, at his Parents Desire.
Or a Lord of a Manor, or Knight of a Shire.
Derry down, etc.
Apollo but cried, as the Bantling should grow,
He Would teach him a Tune on the Bag-pipes, or so:
Or, if he should choose some Employment to kill,
He Would show him the best in the World -- with a Pill.
Derry down, etc.
Diana sat next to her Brother, in Place,
And said, in her Woods he might follow the Chase:
And if Coursing or such like, should ever be his Care;
She, at one Minute's Warning, could show him an Hare.
Derry down, etc.
Then Neptune arose, and the Infant to bless,
In all Sorts of Fishery, promised success:
By the Rivers, or Ponds, let him go where he would,
With Rods, Lines, and so forth -- his Sport should be good.
Derry down, etc.
God Bacchus succeeded, and hiccuping said,
Of all jolly Topers he would make him the Head:
And when each other Toper lay low on the Ground,
This Toper upright, on his Legs should be found.
Derry down, etc.
Mars affirmed with a Volley of Oaths, like a Hector,
In all Sorts of Squabbles, he would be his Protector:
Nor should he ever Sneak, or be any Man's Joke,
For himself would stand by him, -- and see his Head -- broke.
Derry down, etc.
At this up-hop'd Vulcan, that sooty old Blinker,
And swore, he could furnish the Brat with a Tinker;
Mend Kettles, and Pans -- or if that would not do,
He might call at his Shop, should his Horse want a Shoe.
Derry down, etc.
Then Venus she promised to search the World round,
And if ever a buxom Young Lass could be found --
Or, (she simper'd, and said,) If he wanted a whore,
She Would be at his Service, -- she need not say more --
Derry down, etc.
Grim Pluto then whispered in the good-woman's Ear,
So lowly he whispered, one scarcely could hear:
But it was, Sir, to give the Young stripling to know,
He could wink at a Fault, when he came down below.
Derry down, etc.
Minerva, Proserpina, Juno, and more,
Who should, (Critics say) have been mentioned before,
Were going to promise some good to the Child --
But alas! and alack! all their Project was spoiled --
Derry down, etc.
For the Fates being angry they were not invited,
Took ill the Neglect, and resolved to require it:
Let us even cut the Thread in two, one of 'em cried,
So the Bantling b^d him, b^t him, and died.
Derry down, etc.
Let Parents, before they build vast Expectations,
To see their Sons fill up high Places, and Stations,
Be Rulers of Boroughs, or Rulers of States:
Get a Promise, or Note of their Hands, from the Fates.
Derry down, down, Hey derry down.
STANZA's
To the Memory of W. G. Parish-Clerk, Who departed this Life etc. to the
Inexpressible Grief of his Admirers.
In Imitation of Master Sternhold.
O Wight, that travell'st this Churchyard!
Mark what this Stone does tell;
And if thou but unlettered art,
Sit down awhile and spell.
II.
Thou art, God-wot, both brisk and strong,
And think not yet to die.
Lo! ever Death laid me all along,
Just such a one was I.
III.
Death makes the stoutest Mortal start,
Few are courageous then:
Yet, when I saw I must depart,
I boldly cried, -- Amen.
IV.
I wot not well, how others can,
The Folk to Heaven bring;
But well I trow, I was the Man,
That led them in a String.
V.
I hawk'd, and hemmed, and sung and spit,
And vexed my Throat full sore:
Some when I sung, were pleased at it,
And some -- when I gave over.
VI.
Certes, there are will hum a Tune,
And sing a Song right well:
Yet sure no Song was like my Psalm,
No Music like my Bell.
VII.
To praise the L^d did I abound,
(So far, as Sternhold goes:)
And, lest my Lips should spoil the Sound,
I praised him through my Nose.
VIII.
Though wicked Folk might laugh and sneer,
And be to Mirth full prone;
Yet to the Saints it was right dear;
For why? -- the Gospel tone.
IX.
But Death will not to Sound give Way,
To Music not incline:
For, if he would for any stay,
He sure had stayed for mine.
X.
Though now overwhelmed with Mire and Clay,
The Pit does me retain;
Yet do I hope to see a Day
Of getting up again.
XI.
Just so, when Folks at Church are found,
(For this is good and wise)
There is a Time to sit ye down,
And eke a Time to rise.
XII.
And O! may every Reader kind
Bestow one Tear, or Sigh;
For sure 'twill touch him near, to find
That mortal Man should die.
XIII.
And die he must; it is vain to plead
Wit, Scholarship, or Pride:
Great Sternhold, Hopkins, all are fled!
And I, their Servant, died!
Memento mori.
ANACREONTICK.
Io! Bacche! Hor.
SINCE it is decreed by Fate,
Friends must sever, soon or late;
Darkling to their Lodgings roam;
Stagger to their longest Home;
Of all Deities the best,
Bacchus! hear a Son's Request!
Let me metamorphos'd be,
Into some wide-spreading Tree;
In some pleasant flowery Glade,
With my Branches form a Shade.
Lovers there may bless my Boughs;
Topers, merrily carouze.
When, mature and bulky grown,
Thoughtless Swains shall hew me down;
May the Carver, friendly Soul!
Form of me a curious Bowl.
On the large capacious Round,
Somewhere let my Bust be found:
That, when once the jovial Crew
Shall my honest Visage view;
It may kindle fresh Desire,
And a mighty Gout inspire.
Near it, be some Foliage strewn;
Foliage of the Vine alone.
Let some little Bacchus join,
Such as on a Country Sign.
But, with all this Art and Care,
Be it large, as well as fair:
Else, however neat, the Bowl
Never can please the thirsty Soul.
Let it, (if it can be so)
Hold more, than it seems to do.
Let it so capacious be,
That it seem to hold a Sea!
Thus may Bacchus hence remain
Tyrant of the lesser Main.
Use the Refuse, I enjoin,
For the Service of the Vine.
Let my Boughs support the Tree,
In its weakly Insancy.
What remains, may be of Use
To contain the unripen'd Juice:
Forming Butts, and all that may
Profit, in the Toping way.
Thus may I be loved again
By the Care deceiving Train.
It Is my Study, Day and Night,
It Is my only Heart's Delight,
How I may of Service be
To my Dear Fraternity.
Whilst I live -- I Will do my best:
Bacchus grant, O grant the rest! --
To Mr POPE, ON His DUNCIAD.
Urit enim fulgore suo -- Hor.
FAin would successless Folly blame
Thy matchless Works, and thee;
And Envy labors to defame
The Charms, she grieves to see:
Merit, like thine, by these beset,
May bless their dull Designs;
The sparkling Di'mond fixed in Jet,
With added Luster shines.
O! Pope, each friend kind Heaven bestows,
That can thy Fame increase:
Next them, thrice happy in the Foes,
'Twere even Disgrace to please!
With puny Wit, and Spite profound,
The Tribe its Shame pursues;
As Bees, to dart a trivial Wound,
Their little Lives would lose.
It Is theirs, with Self-condemning guilt,
To level harmless Sneers:
It Is thine, like Phoebus, where thou will,
To fix the Ass's Ears.
EVE'S Speech in Milton, upon her Expulsion out of PARADISE.
O Mournful Message! such transcendent Pain
Not Death could give, nor Expectation feign!
Must I then leave these blissful Walks, and Bowers.
My teeming Fruit Trees, and my ripening Flowers?
Each verdant Lawn, and each delightful Grove,
Where I was wont, where Gods might choose, to rove?
Those Pines, and Cedars, which luxuriant rise,
And each fair Object that first met these Eyes?
Yet here I hoped to watch the springing Train;
Here sooth my Fate, and mitigate my Pain;
And here, abandoned Wretch! at least, to know
A lazy Grief, an lndolence of Woe. --
Ye Flowers whose nicer Frame, whose subtle Veins
Refuse the Moisture of less fertile Plains!
Ye Plants, which in no vulgar Soil can rise;
Or bear the Impulse of inclement Skies!
Who now, with glad'ning Streams, your Shoots shall raise;
Or lead, to wanton in the solar Blaze?
Who teach your Tints the kindly'st Change to know,
And, by a just succession, doubly glow?
To each your Names my early Fancy gave;
And strove, from Fate, your Embryo-leaves to save.
To you, at Even I strict attendance paid;
To you, in cool of early Dawn, I strayed.
Adieu, frail Beauty's! doomed no more to share
My Ev'ning's Labor, or my Morning's Care!
And O my blissful Home! my nuptial Bower!
Dear conscious Scene of many a tender Hour!
Thee to adorn, I culled, with pleasing Toil,
The fairest Produce of the choicest Soil:
Round thee, the Vi'let blows, the Myrtle blooms,
The Jasmine twines, -- to lavish soft Perfumes:
There breaths the Rose; and, in sweet Streams, distill
The lovely Languor's of the faint Jonquill.
How shall I then thy fragrant Shelter change,
Over dreary Wilds, and unknown Scenes to range?
How leave this purer Air, these Fruits sublime,
For the gross Product of a coarser Clime?
Where Earth and Air refuse such soft Supplies:
Ungrateful Deserts, and unfriendly Skies!
How shall I part!
JUDITH'S SONG.
THen, fired with Zeal, the Warrior Dame began,
And through applauding Crowds her Accents ran.
Ye rescued Throngs! your tuneful Tribute bring,
Raise the faint Voice, and sweep the slighted String;
Your various Arts, in loftiest Strains, display;
A Theme like mine requires no vulgar Lay;
HE is my Theme, whose great Commands prevail,
When Courage, Vigor, Art and Numbers fail;
At whose resistless Voice unsinew'd, yield
The well-try'd Army, and well-marshall'd Field:
Led by whose Hand, a safe Retreat I found,
Though Nations raged, though Millions stormed around.
From northern Mountains, a stupendous Throng
Of conquering Troops, proud Assure trail'd along:
Whence, Torrents stopped forsook their wonted Shore,
And, bright with Arms, our Hills looked green no more.
Inflamed with Rage, with airy Projects vain,
He threatened Seas of Blood, and Hills of Slain,
That Flames should ravage, where the Sword should spare,
Nor Age, nor Sex redeem the Young or Fair:
The Babe should stain, with harmless Blood, the Sands,
Torn from the Mother's Breast,and trembling Hands,
Not the soft Maid his hardened Breast should move,
Too sierce for Pity, as too rude for Love.
Yet could our God, his boasted Power disarm,
Give manly Fury to a Female Arm!
Not sanguine Youth, nor tall Gigantick Might,
Felled the dire Tyrant in a dubious Fight:
Throughout his Camp, no hostile Fires there flew,
No Poison raged, nor missive Javelin flew,
'Twas Love's soft Flame, (and who could Love control?)
'Twas Beauty's Darts, o'ercame his yielding Soul,
'Twas Judith's Face -- She left her gloomy Veil,
While envious Custom would her Charms conceal:
Her sparkling Eyes, with Tears familiar grown,
She gayly taught, an Office long unknown;
Cheerful She laid her sable Weeds aside,
And, though She shone, She shone for Israel's Pride;
She bade her Robe wave wanton with the Wind,
Within the Purple Tire her Locks confined,
Enslaved the Tyrant with the circling Toy,
And taught the silken Texture to destroy;
Her well-plac'd Gems, his fault'ring Soul o'erthrew,
Her Charms disarmed him, and her Faulchion slew.
The desperate Scene of Death, her Hands displayed,
Lost in Amaze, the Persian Chiefs surveyed;
Chilled with cold Fear the softer Mede beheld:
Yet owned her Courage, as her Charms, excelled.
From either Camp shrill Clamours pierced the Sky,
The Shrieks of Sorrow, and the Shouts of Joy:
Here, the gay Sounds of mirthfulBands were known,
There, the wild Horrors of an Host over thrown.
Stretched on the Plain the slaughtered Victims lie,
Who impious dared JEHOVAH's Aid defy.
'Twas HE alone their haughty Rage could quell,
By HIM the Victors fought, the vanquished fell;
They fought, by HIM, with every Power endu'd,
Force, when they struck, and Speed, when they pursued.
HIS Praises let me sing, whose might divine
No Power can limit, and no Tongue define!
Be HE by Age adored, adored by Youth,
Whose Works are wonders, and whose Words are Truth!
HE spoke -- the Dust an human Form received:
HE breathed -- that human Form respir'd and lived.
Who shall, great God! THY sovereign Will restrain?
Man, Dust, or Nothing, as THY Words ordain!
Though Earth's Foundations at THY sight give Place;
Though deep-fix'd Mountains skip before THY Face;
Quick at THY Breath though slinty Rocks decay,
And flow, like Wax, in liquid Folds away:
Yet gentle Mercy, to THY People shown,
Endears THY Sway, and gilds THY awful Throne:
And, on the pious Suppliant, pleased to shine,
Protects him, fearless midst a Power like THINE.
What though with Gums, our Altars smoke in vain,
The Fumes of Incense, and the Fat of slain;
Though Worship's Pomp THOU can regardless see,
And Earth's rich Fragrance breaths nosweets to THEE:
Bliss still succeeds, when righteous Hands revere,
The Mind untainted, and the Heart sincere.
Peace to all such! but who with impious Arms,
Against THY Israel raise unjust Alarms,
Shall feel THY Angel with unpitying Hand,
Scatter Disease, and Tortures through the Land:
Nor ever returning Peace their spirits cheer,
Raise the sad Heart, or stay the falling Tear.
The TEA-TABLE.
WHEN last I saw the lovely Maid,
'Twas near the Noon of Day;
When rising Nymphs their Fancy aid
With Scandal -- and Bohea.
The pictured Urn an equal Share
Diffused, to all around:
O! that in every Court there were
But Half the Justice found!
Sudden the melting Sweet subsides,
Like Zembla's Hills of Snow;
When from the Heavens descending Tides
Their glittering Tops o'er-slow.
The curling Steams, around the Place
Exhale a nice perfume:
And, from Selinda's beauteous Face,
Call forth celestial Bloom.
And could, alas! destructive prove,
A Nymph, so formed to please;
So like some newborn Queen of Love,
Amidst her infant Seas?
From Bacchus, sprightly Cups our Thoughts
A careless Pleasure share:
Ah! why should Cytherea's Draughts
Refine the Soul to Care?
Yet thence, I felt my Pangs renew,
My Bloom, my Life decay:
And, like the gentle Herb's I drew,
My Spirits sink away.
Whoever, from bright Selinda's Hand,
The fatal Gift obtained,
Have since, exposed to her Command,
Ten thousand Woes sustained.
Sure, if Enchantresses there are,
Whom tortured Hearts obey,
Such only are the blooming Fair,
The only Philtre, Tea.
INSCRIPTION.
To the Memory Of A. L. Esquire, Justice of the Peace for this County
Who, in the whole Course of his Pilgrimage
Through a trifling ridiculous World,
Maintaining his proper Dignity,
Notwithstanding the Scoffs of Ill-dispos'd Persons,
And Wits of the Age,
That ridiculed his Behavior,
Or censured his Breeding;
Following the Dictates of Nature,
Desiring to ease the afflicted,
Eager to set the Prisoner at Liberty,
Without having for his End
The Noise, or Report such Things generally cause
In the World,
(As he was seen to perform them of none)
But the sole Relief and Happiness,
Of the Party in distress;
Himself resting Easy,
When He could render that so;
Not griping, or pinching himself,
To hoard up Superfluities;
Not coveting to keep in his Possession
What gives more Disquietude, than Pleasure;
But charitably diffusing it
To all round about him:
Making the most sorrowful Countenance
To Smile,
In his Presence;
Always bestowing more than he was asked,
Always imparting before he was desired;
Not Proceeding in this Manner,
Upon every trivial suggestion,
But the most mature, and solemn Deliberation;
With an incredible Presence, and undauntedness
Of Mind;
With an inimitable Gravity and Economy
Of Face;
Bidding loud defiance
To Politeness and the Fashion,
Dared let a F^t.
To SELINDA Sailing.
SEE, my Selinda, how the Groves
Deceive the ill-judging Eye!
And, as the Boat more nimbly moves,
More swiftly seem to fly.
So to your Slave with Speed runs on
The Day, when you are near;
But O! how tedious, when you're gone,
The lingering Hours appear!
What secret Cause, Selinda, trace,
Can such Deceit impart: --
The Hours have sure an equal Pace,
But ah! -- not so my Heart.
To SELINDA.
An Apology for having celebrated Others.
PLATO, who to Perfection brought,
And made of gentle Love a Duty,
Wise Plato's Rules have gravely taught
To scale by Steps to perfect Beauty.
II.
Long had I strove, with equal Care,
In thought some perfect Form to find;
I stole a Grace from every Fair,
To deck the Charmer in my Mind.
III.
Guiltless of Love! 'Twas hence I sought
To praise the Sex with nicer Art:
Resolved, the Form my Fancy wrought
Alone, when found, should move my Heart.
IV.
From every fragrant Beauty known
The Bees thus furnish out their Hive;
To None confined; intent alone
On the rich compound, they contrive.
V.
Like Mancha's Knight, I formed a Fair,
My Prowess in her Cause to show:
Nor guessed a real Nymph could share,
Much less, engross my Heart, like YOU.
VI.
Hence then, Selinda, you will discover,
(If not, the sprightlier Muse may show it,)
That then the Poet made the Lover;
As now, the Lover makes the Poet.
CUPID and PLUTUS.
WHen Celia, Love's eternal Foe,
To rich old Gomez first was married;
And angry Cupid came to know,
His Shafts had erred, his Bow mis-carry'd;
II.
He sighed, he wept, he hung his Head,
On the cold Ground, full sad, he laid him;
When Plutus, there by Fortune led,
In this desponding Plight surveyed him.
III.
And sure, he cried, you will own at last
Your boasted Power by mine exceeded:
Say, wretched Boy, now all is past,
How little She your Efforts heeded.
IV.
If with Success you would assail,
Gild, Youngster, doubly gild your Arrows:
Little the feathered Shafts avail,
Though winged from Mamma's Doves and Sparrows.
V.
What though each Reed, each Arrow grew,
Where Venus herself; depend on it,
Twere more for Use, for Beauty too,
A Di'mond sparkled at the End on it.
VI.
Peace, Plutus, Peace! -- the Boy replied;
Were not my Arts by yours infested,
I could each other Power deride,
And rule this Circle, unmolested.
VII.
See yonder Pair! no worldly views
In Chloe's generous Breast resided:
Love bade her the spruce Valet choose,
And she by potent Love was guided.
VIII.
For this! she quits her golden Dreams,
In her gilt Coach no more she ranges;
And her rich Crimson, bright with Gems,
For Cheeks impearl'd with Tears, she Changes.
IX.
Though sordid Celia owned your Power,
Think not so monstrous my disgrace is:
You gained this Nymph -- that very Hour,
I gained a Score in different Places.
Written under a LADY'S Name on a Window.
THree Brilliants fair Selinda graced;
(There Love's Artill'ry lies;)
One from her snowy Finger blazed;
Two sparkled in her Eyes.
The first, which shone with fainter Rays,
Could here her Name impart:
The others drew her charming Face
More deeply, on my Heart.
The SNUFF BOX.
IMmortal Parnel has divinely sung,
How from the plastic Hand Pandora sprung. --
The Deities consulting joined their Care
To grace with all their Arts the rising Fair:
By every God some Blessing was bestowed;
From each bright Goddess some Perfection flowed:
Ambitious those, to form the Pattern well;
These, each to view her Attribute excel.
Venus, elate with hourly Conquest grown,
Jealous of Gifts that might Transcend her own,
Extending far the Powers of Air and Mien,
Just formed a Goddess, where she meant a Queen:
Yet saw each Grace in such Perfection join,
That, with distinguished Luster, none could shine:
Like Jewels, each reflecting various Rays,
Their Colors different, but alike their Blaze.
Thus shone Selinda, when, with matchless Power,
To all around the polished Box she bore.
Love sure had there his treasured Ills confined,
And to the Nymph the fatal Gift consigned:
That thence his Snares, concealed in pungent grains,
Might to soft Hearts convey his pleasing Pains.
With every share she dealt a latent Wound,
While in my Breast superior Pangs I found.
O would the Fair that glittering Toy impart,
And ease the Anguish of a wounded Heart!
For in that radiant Mansion Hope remains,
And who acquires the first, the last obtains.
The ENCHANTRESS.
Anacreontick.
CUPID, on a Summer's Day,
On the flowery Herbage lay;
Underneath the myrtle Shade,
Musing on the amorous Trade.
Round him, in Disorder strewn,
All his warlike Stores were thrown:
Little Spears, and subtle Darts,
Such as pierce the softest Hearts.
Such to grace their Piece or Strain
Painters draw or Poets feign.
Hail, he cried, my favorite Seats!
Pleasing Glooms! and soft Retreats!
Decked with all that is sweet or fair!
Pleasures, which I seldom share!
Other Deities are blessed,
They have each their time of Rest;
But the time I never knew,
When I had not -- What to do.
From this End o'th World to the other,
Mamma bids me make a Pother;
Or She reaches down the Rod,
Cause I am but tiny God --
From these Cares to set me free,
I Will create a Deputy.
In fair Albion Isle renowned,
Is a certain Lady found,
Furnished well with every Grace,
That adorns my Mother's Face.
Then her Eyes! no Rivals know:
None -- but what her Glass can show.
They supply the distant Sun,
Have more Hearts, than I, undone.
Phoebus never approaches nigh,
Since She can his Power supply;
Phoebus will not; why should I?
Yet to make her Power divine,
And the more resemble mine,
I Will a share of Darts consign.
She their Business understands,
She shall take it of my Hands --
Full of's Errand up he rose,
In a Trice to Silvia goes.
Quick his Pinions beat on high,
As the Lark's that scales the Sky,
As my Heart, when Silvia's nigh.
Thus, assured he must prevail,
(Pow'r's a Gift that never can fail)
Thrice he raps -- then tells his Tale.
Here my Muse must change the strain,
Female Fury to explain,
Terms abrupt, and broken Lays
Best will suit the Scolding Phrase.
-- Pray, Sir Cupid, let me know,
Can I wield your filthy Bow?
Can I -- O ye odious Boy!
Your rough Implements employ? --
I Am no Amazon, nor can
Act the Wonders -- of a Man --
Go -- fantastic Witling -- pray go --
Whence you came -- I Am no Virago --
These, he cried (with Aspect sour,)
Keep, in every Shape, their Power.
So you will not the Gift refuse,
Be they -- even whatever you choose.
The Points may form ye -- Jove knows what --
The Points are Gold -- fair Maid -- mind that.
Speak the word, the wanton cries,
Hence a Snuff Box shall arise:
Then the Feather, placed with Care,
May Demolish -- from your Hair:
And the Sticks -- while Ten is counting --
Form ye Fan-sticks -- fit for mounting.
Not Mamma -- I needs must tell ye --
Can in guiding these, excel ye;
Which conducted by your Art,
Shall a surer Fate Impart,
Than they could, whence once a Dart --
Agreed! 'twas done -- ye Beaus beware
Of whatever surrounds the Fair!
Who knows what, to please the Dame,
Cupid's other Darts became? --
It Is a Hazard, I aver,
To receive a Pin of Her.
Je-ne-scai-quoi.
In Imitation of Ld Rochester's POEM upon Nothing.
YE Sages all! no longer vainly try
To each perplexing Doubt to make reply,
But justly solve it with a Je-ne-scai-quoi.
II.
Dear happy Phrase, to ancient Times unknown!
Substantial Forms have long usurped thy Throne,
And subtle Matter reigned, with Glory not its own.
III.
When Reason's Optics can no farther see,
Then Fancy's only must of Service be,
And Fancy's airy Schemes unite at last in Thee.
IV.
Over upper Worlds exulting Sophist's roam,
Till, where they first set out, at last they come;
And reckoning up their Gains find thee the total Sum.
V.
Unnumber'd Folio's, big with Wit's Pretense,
Giants in Stature, but mere Dwarfs in Sense,
Such Knowledge only yield, as thou could best dispense.
VI.
Ah! would thy Friends confess thy gentler Sway,
Their Iliads vast a Nut-shell might convey;
Their Long heroic strains might shrink to Namby's Lay.
VII.
What Is Wit, the wise Man's Scorn, the Poet's Pride,
By those whose wants are greatest, most enjoyed?
Something to Madness much, and more to thee allied.
VIII.
Thou under various Names art still the same,
The Quaker's Light, the fiery Zealot's Aim,
The Poet's fancied Muse, the Lover's fancied Flame.
IX.
Under thy Shield the Critic launches free,
Discovers Charms which no one else can see,
Or damns, triumphant when secured by thee.
X.
Beneath thy Guard the Envious Mind can trace
A Secret Blemish in Selinda's Face;
Or in Melanthe's Mien, the Lover find a Grace.
XI.
Even Beauty's Charms through various Colors shown,
Different in each is still by something Known,
Something, secure to please, expressed by thee alone.
XII.
The Sceptick strove thy general claim to show,
Disowned by Moderns, yet from thee we know
Their wild Debates arose, to thee at last must flow.
XIII.
What makes the restless slight his present Store?
What makes the Miser daily strive for more?
Would they the Truth confess, they must confess thy Power.
XIV.
However stored with Good, or void of Ill
Our Lives appear; yet thou art wanting still,
To mend the tasteless Draught, to gild the unsightly Pill.
VERSES to a LADY.
Together with some Colored Patterns of Flowers.
MADAM!
THOUGH rude the Draughts, though artless seem the Lines,
From one unskilled in Verse, or in Designs;
Often has Goodnature been the Fool's Defense,
And honest Meaning gilded Want of Sense.
Fear not, though Flowers and Beauty grace my Lay,
To praise one Fair, another shall decay.
No Lilly, bright with painted Foliage, here,
Shall only languish, when Selinda's near:
A Fate reversed no smiling Rose shall know,
Nor with reflected Luster doubly glow --
Praises, which languish, when applied to You,
Where flattering Schemes seem obviously true.
Yet sure your Sex is near to Flowers allied,
Alike in Softness, and alike in Pride:
Foes to retreat, and ever fond to shine,
Both rush to Danger, and the Shades decline;
Exposed, the short-lived Pageants of a Day,
To painted Flies, or glittering Pops a Prey:
Changed with each Wind, nor one short Day the same,
Each clouded Sky affects their tender Frame.
In glaring Chloe's man-like Taste and Mien,
Are the gross splendors of the Tulip seen:
Distant they strike, inelegantly gay,
To the near View no pleasing Charms display.
To form the Nymph a vulgar Wit must join,
As coarser Soils will most the Flower refine.
Ophelia's Beauties let the Jasmine paint,
Too faintly soft, too nicely elegant.
Around, with seeming Sanctity, endu'd,
The Passion-flow'r may best express the Prude.
Like the gay Rose, too rigid Silvia shines,
While, like it is guardian Thorn, her Virtue joins --
Happy the Nymph! from all their Failures free,
Happy the Nymph! in whom their Charms agree.
Faint these Productions, till you bid disclose,
The Pink new Splendors, and fresh Tints the Rose:
And yet condemn not trivial Draughts like these,
Formed to improve, and make even Trifles please.
A Power like Yours minuter Beauties warms,
And yet can blast the most aspiring Charms:
Thus at the Rays whence other Objects shine,
The Taper sickens, and it is Flames decline.
When by your Art the purple Vi'let lives,
And the pale Lilly sprightlier Charms receives:
Garters to me shall glow inferior far,
And with less pleasing Luster shine the Star.
Let serious Triflers, fond of Wealth or Fame,
On Toils, like these, bestow too soft a Name;
Each gentler Art with wise Indiff'rence view,
And scorn one Trifle, millions to pursue:
More artful I, their specious Schemes deride,
Fond to please you, by you in these employed;
A nobler Task, or more sublime Desire
Ambition never could form, nor Pride inspire.
The Sweets of tranquil Life, and rural Ease
Amuse securely, nor less justly please.
Where gentle Pleasure shows her milder Power,
Or blooms in Fruit, or sparkles in the Flower;
Smiles in the Groves, the raptured Poet's Theme,
Flows in the Brook, his Naiad of the Stream;
Dawns, with each happier Stroke the Pencil gives,
And, in each livelier Image, smiling lives;
Is heard, when Silvia strikes the warbling Strings,
Selinda speaks, or Philomela sings:
Breaths with the Morn; attends, propitious Maid,
The evening Ramble, and the noonday Glade;
Some visionary Fair she cheats our View,
Then only vigorous, when she is seen like You.
Yet Nature some for sprightlier Joys designed,
For brighter Scenes, with nicer Care, refined.
When the gay Jewel radiant Streams supplies,
And vivid Brilliants meet your brighter Eyes;
When Dress and Pomp around the Fancy play,
By Fortune's dazzling Beauties born away:
When Theaters for you the Scenes forego,
And the Box bows, obsequiously low:
How dull the Plan which Indolence has drawn,
The mossy Grotto, or the slow'ry Lawn!
Though roseate Scents in every Wind exhale,
And silvan Warblers charm in every Gale.
Of these be HERE IS the Choice, whom all approve,
And whom, but those who envy, all must love:
By Nature modeled, by Experience taught,
To know, and pity every female Fault:
Pleased even to hear her Sex's Virtuews shown,
And blind to none's Perfections, but her own:
Whilst, humble Fair! of these too few she knows,
Yet owns too many for the World's Repose:
From Wit's wild Petulance serenely free,
Yet blessed in all that Nature can decree,
Not like a Fire, which, whilst it burns, alarms;
A modest Flame, that gently shines and warms;
Whose Mind, in every Light, can Charms display,
With Wisdom serious, and with Humor gay;
Just as her Eyes in each bright Posture warm,
And fiercely strike, or languishingly charm:
Such are your Honors -- mentioned to your Cost,
Those least can hear them, who deserve them most:
Yet ah! forgive -- the less inventive Muse,
If ever she sing, a copious Theme must choose.
HARBOROUGH. October 7th, 1736.

