THE PRIZE, OR, 2, 5, 3, 8, A Musical Farce in Two Acts, AS PERFORMED BY HIS
MAJESTY'S COMPANY.

Written BY PRINCE HOARE, Esquire.

THE MUSIC BY STORACE. Correctly taken from the Manager's Book.

DUBLIN: Printed for F. FARQUHAR, College-Green.

M,DCC,XCIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
As certain Dramatic Writers postpone the Publication of their Pieces,
intimidated by every mean mercenary Momus of the day, called a Critic, the
Printer, for the present, thus presumes to present the Public with corrected
Copies of such Plays, as, having passed the Theatrical Odeal, have so long been
confined to the bare Representation.

Nor does he, by this accommodation, mean to injure the Authors, but rather
would prepare the way for their approach to the Temple of Fame. For their
encouragement, He assures such Candidates, that the howling sons of Cerberus
are easily soothed by a sop, and that the music of money will readily lull the
most watchful descendant of Argus.

Several of the Printer's Co-temporaries having forced into the world depraved
and mutilated Copies of the Unpublished Plays, he has fallen upon an expedient
of procuring them as Correct as they stand on the Prompter's Book, and
represented at the Royal Theaters. With regard to the following Opera, he only
observes, that others with him have "run in the race to entertain the Public,
but he alone has obtained the PRIZE."

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
LENITIVE Mr. Bannister, Jun. LABEL Mr. Suett, CADDY Mr. Wewitzer, HEARTWELL
Mr. Whitsield, JUBA Mrs. Bland, SERVANT Mrs. Lions, BOY Master Gregson.
WOMEN.
Mrs. CADDY Mrs. Booth, CAROLINE Signora Storace.
ACT I.
SCENE, -- A Room at an Inn. -- HEARTWELL discovered asleep in an Undress on a
Sopha; JUBA sitting by him, playing on a Guittar. After the Tune, HEARTWELL
wakes, JUBA!


JUBA. You call, Massa?


HEART. How long have I been asleep?


JUBA. You sleep long time, Massa; most two hour; sleep do you good; you better
now, Massa; Juba glad you better.


HEART. How unfortunate was this accident during my search after Caroline!
whilst I was every hour in hopes of tracing out the place to which her father
has conveyed her, to be laid up in my bed for six days in an inn; without
money, without friends, without --


JUBA. Don't you sorry, Massa; I your friend,


HEART. Poor little fellow! I have no power at present to reward thee.


JUBA. You good to me, Massa, when I come from my own country -- you very good
when I sick; no mind you no money, you have money bine by.


SONG.
You care of money, care no more,
No tink if you be rich or poor,
My mind employ;
Me stay with you; no sorry, no!
And where away my Massa go,
Go poor black boy.
You good to me, dat keepy here;
No, Massa! dat you never fear;
Long time destroy:
You know death kill, but leave one part,
He never kill de loving heart
Of poor black boy!
HEART. This kind creature's gratitude for the freedom I procured for him is
without bounds.

(Juba bowing)
HEART. Who are you bowing to there?


JUBA. Massa Lenitive, your doctor, he come here:


HEART. I Am not more tired of my sick room than I am of my apothecary; in a
country town one is glad of any assistance that can be met with; but never,
sure, was there such a mixture of ignorance and professional importance, as in
this fellow.


JUBA. He come to door on stair now, Massa.


HEART. Now then, for my ears to be dinn'd with a battery of technical terms.
I Will dismiss him today, I Am determined.


Enter LENITIVE. LEN. Mr. Heartwell, your obedient! you slept well, doubtless,
on the balsamic?


HEART. Thanks to your care and skill, Mr. Lenitive; I Am not quite well.


LEN. By no means, Sir! Yesterday our pulse intimated an approximation to
convalescence; but we are yet much disorderd. Did you take those little
medicines that I ordered you this morning?


HEART. Yes, and want nothing now but fresh air to strengthen me.


LEN. Give me leave, Sir.


Sits down by him on the sopha, pulls out his watch and feels Heartwell 's
pulse. You must keep yourself remarkably quiet; and not suffer any one to speak
to you: in all case. Mr. Heartwell, of a similar nature to yours, where either
laceration or extravasation takes place on the membranous or cartilaginous
fibers -- the -- you will excuseme, Sir -- I Am afraid I don't make myself
perfectly understood?

HEART. Indeed you do not! (aside). Oh, perfectly, Sir! Go on.


LEN. I just remarked, Sir, that where a systole or diastole is caused by any
affection of the intercostal muscles or the diaphragm, in those cases. --


Enter LABEL. LABEL. A letter for you, Sir,

(to Lenitive)
LEN. Bless my soul! you will excuse me, Mr. Heartwell -- some case of importance
-- I Am so overcharged with patients -- great rapidity of ideas, Captain,
requisite fora medicinal person -- one moment weighing the vibration of the
nerves, and another diving into the viscera!


HEART. A mistake might, I presume, be dangerous?


LEN. Fatal, Sir -- absolutely fatal! An accident of the kind happened here
last week -- Doctor Lancet, my opponent -- for merit, Sir -- you know, Sir,
merit every where has its shadow -- Doctor Lancet, Sir, ordered a medicine
styptic, congestive, and anticathartick, which he intended to go directly to
the lungs -- but, unfortunately, not recollecting that his patient's complaint
lay in the plexus heptaticus, and not in the pulmonaria -- the medicine, to be
sure, did its business.


HEART. And the patient's business too, I suppose?


LEN. Exactly so, Sir -- Ha! ha! ha!


LABEL. Ha! ha! ha!


LEN. You Will excuse my young man -- Ha! ha! fond of a joke -- Eh, Label! it was
exactly so, Sir -- I am cautious in saying it -- but you will excuse me whilst I
read this -- the case perhaps is pressing -- Odso! an express from London! a
consultation probably -- nothing more usual Eh, Label! you know, nothing more
common?


LABEL. Oh no, nothing -- nothing more common with us.


LEN. (reads) "Sir, your ticket" -- So, so! an account of one of my lottery
tickets -- ( rises) "Sir, your ticket in the English lottery, No. 78, was on
the tenth day drawn -- a blank!" -- Um! always dabbling in the lottery; never
shall have any luck! -- "And your ticket, No. 2, 5, 3, 8, was this day drawn a
prize of Ten Thousand Pounds principal money!" -- Bless my --


HEART. But pray, Doctor --


LEN. Ten thousand Pounds! (jumps about in extacy.)


HEART. But pray, now, Mr. Lenitive --


LEN. No. 2, 5, 3, 8! a lucky number indeed! I know what I Will do with it -- But
I Will keep it a secret. (apart.)


HEART. Why, what possesses the man! but I say, Doctor Lenitive -- (rises and
follows him about.)


LEN. Oh! I had forgot my patient! (resuming his gravity.)


LABEL. Any orders for the shop, Sir.?


LEN. Damn the shop! -- Eh! what! no, no -- I shall return presently.


LABEL. "Damn the shop!" -- why, I never heard such --

( Exit muttering,)
LEN. You Will excuse me, Sir -- but a case that was particularly interesting --


HEART. A successful one, I presume, by the violent symptoms of your joy?


LEN. Yes, Sir, very successful indeed: more than I could expect.


HEART. That Is the first modest word I ever heard him speak of himself. (
aside.)


LEN. 2, 5, 3, 8! But I forget my patient -- I think you were saying, Sir --


HEART. I was saying, Sir, that I find myself so much recovered as to have no
longer need to trouble you.


LEN. Give me leave, give me leave, Sir; (feels his pulse.) Why, ay, Sir, your
ticket -- poh! your fever, I mean, Sir -- Yes, your fever, as you say, is quite
subsided -- yes -- bless me, how lucky! Ten Thousand Pound! quite subsided,
yes, I say, quite -- However, I would advise you to continue on your couch
another day, Sir -- Ten Thousand! how I shall astonish Mr. Caddy with the news;
and my dear Miss Caroline too -- But -- Zounds, I forgot my patient! I could
wish you, Sir, let me consider -- I cannot think how I shall get the money sent
down to me -- I could wish you not to go out today, Sir.


HEART. Well, Sir, as you please; for one day more, but must I continue my
draughts?


LEN. Drafts! egad, well thought on! I Would better have it sent down in drafts --
drafts! yes, Sir -- no, no -- I -- I shall send you some drops to take.


HEART. But what number?


LEN. Number Two Thousand Five Hundred and Thirty Eight -- a most lucky number!


HEART. Two thousand drops! why, zounds I should be all day in counting 'em!


LEN. Count -- no, no, Sir -- I mean -- no, nine or ten drops -- nine or ten
will be quite sufficient -- I forgot my patient indeed!


HEART. Why sure the man's crazy!


LEN. You Will excuse me, Captain, but I Am engaged to attend Mr. Caddy, and shall
see you again in the afternoon.


HEART. Mr. Caddy, Sir -- Is he in the neighborhood?

(eagerly.)
LEN. He has a house near here, Sir, of which he has lately taken possession;
famous for one of the sinest collection of Chinese curiosities in Europe; which
I am myself going to enrich to day with -- Ten Thousand Pound! I mean -- a
celebrated figure of Chinese Bonze, or High Priest -- I Will give you a
particular account of it -- A --


HEART. Another time if you please. Pray, Mr. Lenitive, has Mr. Caddy a
daughter?


LEN. Two thousand five hundred and thirty-eight!


HEART. How! what!


LEN. Odso! ask pardon, Sir -- Daughter! yes, Sir Miss Caroline, a most
accomplished and amiable young lady -- Well, you will continue in your room
today.


HEART. You Will excuse me, Sir -- Juba! my things to dress!

(In raptures -- Exit Juba.)
LEN. Bless me! his fever's returned! My dear Sir -- you must not think of
stirring out to day -- for -- Ten thousand Pound!


HEART. But I must -- I hope my journey will produce double the sum -- How
Fortunate.


LEN. Fortunate indeed, Sir -- astonishingly fortunate -- but, dear Sir, you
are not aware, that by exposing yourself thus suddenly to the inclemency of the
atmosphere --


HEART. Pray leave me now, Sir.


LEN. You Will close the reticula of the cutis.


HEART. Be gone, I say!


LEN. Be gone! Oh, yes! he is quite delirious -- but consider, Sir, the
coagulation of the juices.


HEART. Zounds! depart, I say.

(driving him off.)
LEN. For a strait waistcoat -- take care, Sir, how you bring on a constipation
of the fluids.


HEART. Death and fire! get out.


LEN. And at the termination of the complaint, produce a mortification of the
noblen interstines; which will finally complete the dissolution of the system.


HEART. Ten thousand Devils fly away with you.


LEN. Ten thousand pounds! 2, 5, 3 8!


(Exit.) HEART. This fellow's certainly mad! there is no end to his
impertinence! -- Juba! ( Enter JUBA.) Bring me pen, ink, and paper directly and
go again to the post office.

( Exit JUBA.)
HEART. Now for my Caroline -- the hope of seeing her revives me to life,
health, and spirits. -- This blockhead Lenitive, has done me some good at last.

(Exit,)
SCENE. The outside of a House in a Rural Situation -- CAROLINE discovered at
the Window after throwing up the sash. AIR AND DUET.
Ah, tell me softly-breathing gale,
Did you my voice obey?
Ah, did you tell the plaintive tale?
The tender sigh convey?
Ah, faithless gales! ye were unkind,
Ye did no sighs convey.
Enter JUBA. JUBA. What singy! hark! so much me please,
How music set my heart at ease!

CAR. Ah, Juba!


JUBA. Is it you? or only fancy no tell true.


CAR. Go haste to let thy master know
The transport of my mind!

JUBA. That voice me sure have in my mind,
Who fingy there I pray?

CAR. Ah, may I hope, if he return
A constant heart to find?

JUBA. Me haste to let my Massa know
The transport of your mind, etc. etc.
Ah Missy! me glad to see you; poor Massa be very glad.


CAR. Is Mr. Heartwell in this town? where is he? how does he do?


JUBA. Ifs, Missy! Massa here at an inn close by; he send me to post a great
many time -- me bring no letter, massa be sad -- but he not.


Mrs CADDY without, Mrs CAD. Caroline!

( calling.)
CAR. Ma'am! -- What is he not? Juba.


Mrs CAD. Caroline, where are you all this while?


CAR. Coming this instant, Ma'am -- But, Juba, tell me of Heartwell -- is not he
well?


JUBA. He no well now, Missy; but he well when he see you.


Mrs. CAD. Caroline, come down directly, and shut the window.


CAR. Coming, Mamma -- Juba, haste to your master, tell him my father has
selected an odious apothecary to be my husband; but that I Am determined I wont
have him.


Mrs. CAD. Why, Caroline, I say --


CAR. Coming, Mamma!


JUBA. Very well, Missy! me tell him -- dis do my Massa heart good -- dis
better dan eat and drink, and potecary's stuff too -- me go tell my Massa dis
now, go to post by and by.


( Exit, CAROLINE shuts the window.) SCENE, an Apothecary's Shop -- Physic,
Phials, etc Enter LENITIVE. LEN. Ten thousand pounds! wherefore should I be an
apothecary? Poh! throw physic to the dogs! I Will be a gentleman! if I marry Miss
Caroline, with the addition of her fortune, I shall make one of the finest
figures in the universe! I was born to gentility! ( struts) I feel it in my
veins -- in my bones -- and the whole mass of my circulation -- But the opening
of my fortune, ay, that is the point -- it would be a nice hit if I could devise
some recipe to surprise Mr. Caddy's family smartly at the time of discovery --
a few grains of the belesprit on this occasion may operate in my favor.


During this speech Label enters, and attempts to speak several times to
Lenitive, at last pulls him by the sleeve, LABEL. Sir! Sir!


LEN. Ha! Label!


LABEL. You Have been very much wanted here, Sir; Lady Blubber and Mrs Restles
have sent to desire you would come directly to'em -- I Have been up at Mrs
Neverwell's -- I Am afraid that will turn out a bad job -- she has taken every
prescription in our day-book -- and I don't know what more can be done for the
poor creature -- she was piteous bad, and crying out with pain!


During the speech Lenitive appear absorbed and unmindful of Label's speaking;
and at last bursts our into a loud laugh. LABEL. How! what does it divert you
Sir?


LEN. That will do! I have got an excellent thought just come in my head!


LABEL. I Am glad of it, for they are all desperate sad,


LEN. Yes, I have it!


LABEL. Dearme, I Am glad of it! Do You think you can cure her sir?


LEN. How it will surprise 'em!


LABEL. Yes, that will surprise 'em indeed and I Am sure it will yield great joy
to the whole family.


LABEL. Eh! why yes as you say, Label! they will all enjoy it mightily. I Will tell
you how I Will manage it.


LABEL. Well, Sir


LEN. You know I have promised to give Mr. Caddy an old Chinese figure: which I
have told him is a High Priest embalmed -- now, as this is a curious case --


LABEL. Quite puzzling, Sir!


LEN. I Will send him two instead of one -- so do you go to the carpenter's?


LABEL. The carpenter's!


LEN. Yes, to be sure the carpenter's!


LABEL. But, dear Sir, the poor lady's situation will not admit of delay; for I
warrant you she is in fits again by this time.


LEN. Fits! who is in fits?


LABEL. Nrs. Neverwell, Sir.


LEN. Mrs. Neverwell, blockhead! Answer me, Label, don't you know I Have got the
Ten thousand pound prize?


LABEL. How, Sir! Ten thousand pound!


LEN. Ah, 2, 5, 3, 8! -- And now I tell you -- if ever you speak a word more to
me about fits or physic again, I Will poison ye, ye dog!


LABEL. Poison me!


LEN. Yes, I Will poison you.


LABEL. No, I fancy you will not venture to do that.


LEN. Not venture! pray why not?


LABEL. Because you will be afraid I shall repay you in kind.


LEN. What! do you pretend to enter the lists with me in my profession! in the
Artc Necandi.


LABEL. And why not pray? I believe I can lay claim to as many pretty little
accidents as yourself.


LEN. Indeed! how so, pray?


LABEL. Yes indeed! and you reaped the benefit of 'em; Who do you think made all
the Mayor's family sick, when you got so many fees from 'em, one after another?


LEN. Why, who?


LABEL. Who but I -- Monsieur Fricandeau, the French cook, was my old
acquaintance; so, under pretense of recommending him some very nice sauce for
the Mayor that I bought him, I whipped in a little saccharum saturni, and gave
the whole family the colic. If you recollect, by making a very slight increase
of their disorder at the beginning you kept 'em under your care for nine weeks.


LEN. Why, yes; that was a snug job, I must own.


LABEL. Therefore, Sir, if you're retiring from business, I should be glad if
you would please to reccommend me.


LEN. Label, you shall succeed me -- Aris secundus Apollo -- you shall be the
second Apollo.


LABEL. Thank ye, Sir.


LEN. I herewith invest you with the insignia of wisdom -- take my cane -- take
my hat -- take my wig -- take my coat, waistcoat --


LABEL. But have not you promised to go to Mr. Caddy's this morning, Sir? you
will not go without your wig, will you?


LEN. That Is true, Label -- I must go once more as an apothecary -- poh! But
never more will I look on a gallipot -- you shall never more know me to have
been an apothecary.


LABEL. Not know you! Lord bless you! why I should know you all the world over
for an apothecary by your talk.


LEN. But you shall now see the difference -- you shall never hear from my
mouth a single word that shall remind you of physic; for certainly nothing is
so vulgar as for a man's conversation to smell of his shop!


LABEL. Lord, Sir, you have begun already! -- Ha! ha! ha! why that is secundum
artem -- "Smell of your shop;"


LEN. Why did I say so?


LABEL. Oh yes you did.


LEN. Did I Smell of my shop! well it was the last motion of physic within my
lips; now be sure you don't let a tittle of my Ten thousand pound pass through
you to any one living -- I Will surprise 'em with the sudden eclat -- break out
on the whole family -- so do you hear, Label, if any patients send to me for
medicines or advice, tell 'em to take notice -- take -- no, plague on it -- that
take is an apothecary's word -- smells of the shop too -- tell 'em to take --


LABEL. At it again, Sir -- take --


LEN. Damnation! tell 'em to take themselves about their business.


Enter BOY with a Basket. BOY. Some bottles, Sir, for your shop!


LEN. Damn the bottles! and the shop!

(Kicks 'em out of the Boy's hand.)
LABEL. There now, see what a number of bottles.


LEN. Damn all numbers but 2, 5, 3, 8! -- Throw physic to the dogs -- 2, 5, 3,
8 -- Ten thousand pounds:


Exit, kicking of basket and breaking the bottles on the shelf as he goes off:
Label and Boy run off. SCENE, a Parlour at CADDY'S. -- Enter CADDY with a
Letter, followed by Mrs CADDY. CAD. Here! here is a fellow throws himself on my
generosity:


Mrs. CAD. Why surely nothing can be handsomer than Mr. Heartwell's behavior
in writing thus to you,


CAD. And what do you think he does it for? Because he does not want my girl
without her fortune.


Mrs. CAD. And no one is more deserving of her fortune and her too.


CAD. But he shall not have it though -- no, no, trade got it, and let trade keep
it; I Will have my daughter happy in my own way -- Mr. Lenitive is a proper
orderly young man, in a good business; a man of science and good taste. Do you
know that he has promised to send me a true old Chinese Bonze today?


Mrs. CAD. Old Bonze; hav'nt you old bones enough of your own already?


CAD. Poh, poh; But where is Caroline all this time? -- Caroline --


Enter CAROLINE. CAR. Did you want me, papa?


CAD. To be sure I do; Look here hussy; you know Mr. Heartwell's hand, I
suppose?

( shows the letter.)
CAR. Oh dear, yes, that I do.


CAD. Didn't I charge you, before you left town, when I retired to this seat,
which I came to entirely on your account; didn't I -- I say, charge you to
break off all acquaintance with Mr. Heartwell, because he had not money enough
to support you?


CAR. Yes papa; and you charged me before we left town to lo^^ Mr. Heartwell;
and, as you changed your mind once, I hoped you might do the same again.


CAD. No jesting, hussy; did not I bring all my family into this retired part
of the country, that we might not be plagued with his visits; and that he might
not even know where to find us?


CAR. Yes, papa; and it being so retired a part of the country, I wished for
Mr. Heartwell to keep me company.


CAD. Why you impudent! -- harkee, hussy hav'nt I done all this to make you
happy?


CAR. I don't know, papa; we differ strangely in our ideas of happiness.


CAD. How, minx! an't I always trying to make you happy, if you would but be
so: but I cannot persuade you to be happy in my way, hav'nt I found for you,
here in the country; a suitable husband in Mr. Lenitive -- a sensible --
respectable -- agreeable --


CAR. Heigho!


CAD. There again; why, hussy, one would think I was asking you to take his
physic instead of him.


CAR. Why indeed papa, his physic is the most agreeable of the two; and you
know this Mr. Lenitive --


CAD. Is a man after my own heart; so don't say a word against him; you know
that a value I have for him; you will thank me the longest day of your life for
procuring you such a husband -- Oh, here he comes; Now let me see how well you
can behave to him.


Enter LENITIVE. LEN. Mrs. Caddy, your most devoted -- Mr Caddy, I Am yours --
My charming amiable Miss Caroline, your most enslaved -- you seem divinely well
this morning -- your looks are the very syrup of roses -- you're a happy man
Mr. Caddy, in being the father of such a sweet young lady -- I protest the very
sight warms my heart like a cardamum:


CAR. Filthy fellow; -- Mr. Lenitive, your love always puts me in mind of your
shop.


LEN. Oh, damn the shop; why what did I say, Miss, did I speak about my shop?


CAR. Yes, you compared me to a drug, and said I warmed your heart like a
cardamum.


LEN. Did I; oh plague of my apothecary's vocabulary.

( retires up.)
CAD. Harkee, Miss, if you're come back to your senses, I advise you to look on
Mr. Lenitive as your husband that is to be; and if you have not yet recovered
'em, I Will send him to ye as a physician.


CAR. Oh, papa, I Will take him as a physician.


CAD. Why, you're not ill, are you?


CAR. No, but I soon should be if he were my husband: and then I must take him
for both,


CAD. Caroline, I Am ashamed of ye.


LEN. Pardon me, Mr. Caddy -- Pray, Miss Caroline -- if I may make bold to feel
the pulse of your inclinations, what can you find to dislike in me?


CAR. Why; I dislike you on the whole. Is not that enough.


LEN. But what do you dislike about me in particular?


CAR. Why I don't like your wig.


LEN. My wig! don't like my wig! fanciful enough! Well, that perhaps time --
how I long to tell her -- but mum -- I shall surprise 'em this afternoon, but
what else do you dislike?


CAR. I don't like your coat.


LEN. Don't like my coat! my wig and my coat, my dear Miss Caroline, perhaps, I
say no more at present, but perhaps time may mend'em


CAR. Then I don't like your face.


LEN. Oh, damn it! time will not mend that!


CAD. Dear Mr. Lenitive, excuse this girl -- she is young and foolish at present
-- Caroline, an't you ashamed of yourself? Mr, Lenitive's dress is suited to
his profession.


LEN. Profession -- fogh! I cannot bear to hear it mentioned. ( Aside), I Will go
directly to Whipstitch, the tailor, and equip myself in the pink of the mode.
-- Mr. Caddy, you will excuse me -- particular business -- Miss Caroline --
suffer me from those bright eyes to take one emollient draught of comfort --
plague on the words of my shop -- they stick to my tongue like a blister.

( going)
CAD. But, Mr. Lenitive, you will not forget the Bonze?


LEN. Hoeret lateri, Mr. Caddy; I Will set in instantly in motion.


CAD. You Will think of me?


LEN. Oh mihi post nullos Caddi memorandi sodales -- 2, 5, 3, 8.

( Exit with Mrs. Caddy.)
CAD. There now! there is a husband for ye -- none of your Heart well's for me,
hark'ee, did not you send word to Heartwell of the place we are retired to?


CAR. Me, papa! not I!


CAD. Come, I know you did -- you have no regard to the pains I take to make
you happy -- I wonder, if I was to disinherit you for your perverseness,
whether Heartwell would travel as far to find you.


CAR. Yes, papa, I Am sure he would -- because --


CAD. Ah, because why, pray?


CAR. Because he told me himself.


CAD. That Is a good reason indeed! No, no, I fancy we should not be troubled
with many of his visits then.


CAR. Nor Mr. Lenitive's either.


CAD. Now don't make me angry, or I Will disinherit you in earnest, and leave
your fortune to your cousin Clara, who is expected here in a few days.


CAR. Now my dear papa! I have hit on a scheme which you must assist me to put
in practice; after which, if you desire it, I am willing to marry Mr. Lenitive.


CAD. A scheme! nonsense! what scheme is it?


CAR. Only to inform Mr. Heartwell and Mr. Lenitive, that you have disinherited
me, and settled your fortune on my cousin Clara; then suffer me to pass for her.


CAD. Well?


CAR. Then we may make trial of 'em both, and find which is the most
disinterested; and see who is in the right, you or I,


CAD. What, and if Heartwell makes love to the supposed cousin --


CAR. I Will marry Lenitive as soon as you please.


CAD. Ah, you little fool! then you will be married tomorrow morning.


CAR. Very well


CAD. But you don't consider, that Clara has been so long in France, she has
more than half forgot the use of her native tongue; how then will you pass for
her without being discovered.


CAR. Nothing more easy; it is only dressing myself out like an Opera dancer,
tossing my head, and imitating the French.


CAD. Hark'e, Caroline, you may imitate your cousin's affectation, and toss
your head about as much as you please; but as long as I have a leg to stand on,
I promise ye none of my family shall ever imitate the French.


CAR. My dear papa, don't misconceive me; I mean to disguise myself, only by an
exposition of their folly; for, however I may copy their ridicule by this
scheme I have in my head, my heart is of true English growth, I assure ye.


CAD. Well, I like the bargain well enouh; I Will send to Lenitive and Heartwell
directly; do you get yourself ready, and mind our agreement.

( Exit.)
CAR. That I will, most rigidly; but if my plot fails, I Will willingly
relinguish all hopes of happiness with my lover.


SONG.
Oh, dear delightful skill,
The wily part to play,
And lead the swain at will,
I think I know the way;
With tears and sighs
I Will now surprise,
Now pleased awhile,
With smiles beguile,
And fairly gain the day,
For I think I know the way.
While mistress of my art,
Each rule I know so pat,
To sway a lover's heart,
Leave me alone for that.
At school when all would try
Our governess to cheat,
Then who so well as I
Could manage the deceit?
With look so sly,
No, sure, not I;
Dear Ma'am, not me,
It could not be!
You know I Am too discreet --
Dear Ma'am, it could not be, etc. etc.
( Exit.) END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, -- Caddy's Museum -- Enter Mr. and Mrs. CADDY. CAD. POOR Caroline! this
matter will soon be settled; she will scarcely go from her word: and I Am sure of
Lenitive. So, thank Heaven, my girl will be happy at last in the way I would
have her.

( A noise without)
Mrs CAD. Hey-day! what is all that noise on the staircase?


Enter SERVANT. SERVE. Sir, Mr. Lenitive's compliments to you and Miss Caroline,
and he has sent two cases.


CAD. Ay, my dear, he sent me word he hoped to present me with a second case,
which I should esteem a no less valuable curiosity than the first; another
Bonze I suppose; this is a son-in-law after my own heart; no sopperies -- no
sineries -- Oh, here they come --


Enter MEN with two Mummy Cases, which they set down and Exit. And here is Mr.
Lenitive -- eh! No, its Label!

Enter LABEL dressed exactly as LENITIVE. CAD. Why, friend, I was in hopes of
seeing your master.


LABEL. Master, Sir, Master! -- Sir, Mr. Lenitive will be here presently -- any
complaints in the family, Sir? as Mr. Lenitive is retiring from business, I
should be glad to be employed during the residuum of your days, Sir -- you may
depend on constant attendance, reasonable bills, and a Copia Medicinorum,
Opitmorum, and Santiffimorum.


CAD. Constant attendance! Why damme, Sir, do you think I mean to bespeak
disorders as I do my shoes, and be ill by the year! Get out of my sight
directly!


LABEL. An old frump! but he is a good customer, and so --

(aside muttering and retiring up.)
CAD. An impudent puppy! His master retiring! No, no, his master is not such a
fool, Now, my dear -- let me see -- Oh, Lord, here is Heartwell, plague on him
for coming just at this moment! he shall not have a sight of the Chinese Bonzes,
though I long to see'em myself, but they are too sacred for the eyes of a fop.


Enter HEARTWELL in Regimentals. CAD. Mr. Heartwell, your servant!


HEART. Is it possible, Sir, I can be so fortunate as --


CAD. I guess what you're going to say, Sir; but you cannot guess what I Am going
to say to you, and so I Will tell you -- You must know, Sir, you will be supris'd
-- but Caroline's perverse behavior has, at last, induced me to transfer my
affections to my niece Clara, to whom I have made over all the fortune I
formerly designed for Caroline.


HEART. How, Sir! Disinherited your own daughter!


CAD. Yes, Sir; disinherited my own daughter! I suppose I may do what I will
with my own? Oh ho! what that alters the case, does it?


HEART. Sir, if you meant only to insult me --


CAD. Insult you! no, Sir; I sent for you only out of respect to you.


HEART. Sir,


CAD. Sir, yes, Sir; I sent for you to offer you my niece Clara's hand, it you
choose her, instead of Caroline's: why, you would scarce know one from the other,
except that Clara is more accomplished from having been educated abroad, and
not so homely as Caroline.


HEART. How, Sir; do you think to make sport of me like an idiot? Be assured,
Sir, your niece's accomplishments are no object to me -- but where is my dear
Caroline? no force shall keep her from me -- her poverty shall be my pride --
and the profit of my commission, though small, shall be lavished on her, and
every effort strained to make her happy as her merit deserves, and so, Sir,
your servant,

(exit.
CAD. Oh, your servant Sir, what I suppose he would persuade me that if he was rich
he would marry Caroline without a fortune -- but I know the world a little too
well, but now, my dear Mrs. Caddy, how I long to see 'em; Opens Case and
discovers a black deformed Chinese Joss. There Is No1. -- I never saw a greater
beauty; it is enough to frighten one to look at it* what awe it inspires! ay,
ay, this is the pride of my intended son-in-law; he is fonder of this than the
whole female race, now Heartwell's a fool; fond of nothing but wine, women, and
such trumpery -- no sense, no taste -- Now if the other be but as great a
curiosity -- if No. 2.


Opens Case. LENITIVE* bolts out with the Lottery Ticket in his hand. LEN.
Number Two Thousand Five Hundred and Thirty Eight; bought at Richardson and
Goodluck's, Charing Cross, opposite the man upon the Black Horse.


CAD. Why what the devil is all this, Mr. Lenitive?


LEN. Mr. Caddy, fortune, who too often confers her favors blindly, has this
day displayed her superior taste by selecting me for her favorite: I come in
this manner to offer to your family an estate of Ten thousand pounds principal
money. Of the many cases I have been engaged in, I have come out of this in the
most brilliant manner,


CAD. Ah. I had rather have had another old Bonze.


LEN. I flatter myself this humor of mine breaking out quite in a new vein --
this dress --


CAD. Dress; why you look like a Tom fool why what the deuce do you mean by
this little jacket?


LEN. Little jacket; why that is my great coat


CAD. Great coat.


LEN. Yes, great coat, every body wear these.


CAD. Why who the deuce makes such great coats?


LEN. Who? why Whipstitch, the London tailor?


CAD. Whipstitch -- where does he live?


LABEL. On the skirts of the town.


LEN. But where is the charming young lady, Mr. Caddy, who has the honor to be
your niece?


CAD. What, you heard all about it then while you was in the case?


LEN. With astonishment!


CAD. Ay, I have my reasons for it; and egad I suspect one more than I thought
-- Well, what say you; Caroline without a fortune, or Clara with one? I give
you your choice -- that is, provided you return to your old coat and wig.


LEN. Pardon me, Mr. Caddy, pray drop the idea of the old coat and wig! the
stomach turns at the bare remembrane.


DUET.
LEN. From my hide and seek chin,
Sometimes out, sometimes in,
How flashy my muslin cascade is!
The pulse no more I squeeze,
But softly as you please;
I now squeeze the hand of the ladies,

LABEL. To all who complain,
Here, I hold out my cane,
For Label a knight of the trade is;
No hand so fair to me,
As the hand that holds a fee,
And I care not a pin for the ladies.

LEN. See my gold cane and wig
I Have hung upon a peg,
Hic coestus urturque repono;
Gentility's my plan,
And I leave my journeyman
The care of the Publico Bono.

LABEL. The world if you try,
First of Doctors am I,
For ills that I know, and I don't know,
Deny it if you can,
Little Label is the man
To take care of the Publico Bono.

( Exeunt.) SCENE, -- Another Chamber at Caddy's. Enter HEARTWELL. HEART. I Will
not leave the house till I find this apothecary; at his shop they assured me he
was here; besides, in waiting I may have a chance of seeing my dear Caroline --
Eh! who comes here?


Enter LENITIVE. LEN. Cousin; Caroline -- take the cousin instead of Caroline
-- Love is a very pretty ingredient in a match to be sure: but love and fortune
make a much pleasanter mixture.


HEART. Your servant, Sir!


LEN. Whom have we hear! Heartwell again? Zounds! how he is recovered since I
left him -- He certainly has not taken his physic.


HEART. Eh! is that my rival yonder -- he is strangely altered in his appcarance
-- Your servant, Sir!


LEN. Sir, your servant!


HEART. May I presume to ask Sir, if your name is not Lenitive, the apothecary?


LEN. Lenitive, Sir -- Luke Lenitive, Esquire. at your service: but apothecary no
more.


HEART. I hear, Sir, that Mr. Caddy has some thoughts of marrying his daughter
to you.


LEN. You hear so -- He! he! he! I believe Sir, there may be some thoughts of
such a thing.


HEART. Have you the lady's consent Sir?


LEN. The lady's consent! Ha! ha! ha! egad that is pleasant enough! I should
think any one that looked at my figure --


HEART. Your figure's as ridiculous as I conceive your pretentions to be; you
look to me like --


LEN. Like what, Sir?


HEART. Like an apothecary.


LEN. The Devil I do!


HEART. And let me advise you, Mr, Apothecary, to be cautious how you proceed!
or you will have more business to settle than you are aware of.


LEN. Sir, I Have left my business! but pray, Captain, have you any right to
prescribe to me? I Have got Ten thousand pound in my pocket, that is more than
every gentleman of the army can boast,


HEART. Hark'e, Mr. Whippersnapper, if you, suffer Mr. Caddy to lay the least
shadow of restraint on his daughter's inclinations, the only choice I shall
leave you will be, the length of your ground the pistol-shot.


LEN. Egad, then I Will choose a sufficient long one.


HEART. But why do I talk of a pistol to a fellow that deserves to be pounded
in his own mortar?


LEN. Let me advise you, Sir, to be on your guard! how vou insult a gentleman
with such language -- Whippersnapper indeed! you will find, Sir. that if once I
take hold of a pistol --


HEART. A pistol! a pestle you mean?


LEN. No, Sir, a pistol -- I mean, a pistol -- P, I, S, T, O, L -- I say, Sir,
if once I take a pestle -- a pistol I mean --


HEART. There, you see now --


LEN. Plague of my tongue -- I say, Sir, if once I take hold of a pistol --


HEART. Ha! ha! ha!


LEN. What do you laugh at, Sir?


HEART. I beg your pardon, Sir -- But I was thinking, as I have escaped safe
from your medicines, I need not much be afraid of any thing else I can receive
from you: you will remember my advice -- Your most obedient, Doctor Apothecary.

( Exit)
LEN. Doctor! Damnation! Oh that ever I should have ever been an apothecary! --
Ecod it would be a neat trick enough to take the cousin, and fob this Copper
Captain off with a girl without a sixpence -- see who will laugh then -- Doctor
indeed! I Will Doctor him -- Oh, here is Mr. Caddy -- Well, Sir, what news of the
young lady?


Enter CADDY. CAD. Take care of your heart, Mr. Lenitive -- egad she will make a
conquest of you -- I have a great mind to give him a hint of the trick --
Yonder she comes, do you see her! she is as like Caroline as one nankeen beaker is
like another.


LEN. (Crosses to, and looks through his glass.) Egad as you say, they are as like
as two pills out of the same box.


CAD. Do You think she is as handsome?


LEN. Handsomer!


CAD. I don't like that -- ( aside.) But, Caroline is the better match for all
that -- Well, here she comes -- I Will leave ye together -- but remember you had
better take Caroline.


LEN. Take Caroline without a fortune -- No -- marriage without money is, as
the Song says, "Bitter to swallow, and hard of digestion."


Enter CAROLINE. (skims across) CAR. Ah, ma chere bon amie la jolie Garcon!


LEN. Egad this is the very thing for me! quite the shapes for a man of my
fortune -- how lucky that I Am a gentleman! I wish she spoke English though,
that I might understand her.


CAR. Ah, Monsieur Lenitive, comme est Beau --


LEN. A Beau! yes, I am that! she is struck with my figure -- Yes, she has a
good taste -- egad she is the first person I Have found in the house who has any.


CAR. Ah, Monsieur, qui'l est a Beau,


LEN. Kill a beau! no, Miss -- I Have cured many -- never killed one in all my
life -- Oh, she means that I shall die for love of her -- Yes, lovely charmer,
in that your charms are more dangerous than medicine -- they are sufficient to
unnerve the fibers of the strongest heart -- pierce the integuments of the
perricordium; and penetrate quite through the solids into the medulla -- Zounds!
this unlucky jargon is always at my tongue's end!


CAR. Monsieur, you speak a to me of physic.


LEN. Ah, she has smelt me out -- I musst alter my system -- Pray, Miss Clara,
did you ever see me before?


CAR. Oui tres souvent.


LEN. What Is that you say, Miss?


CAR. Je parle Francois?


LEN. No, Miss I don't parley in Francoise -- Damn it, that is unlucky too, now
I Am a gentleman!


CAR. Parle Italiano?


LEN. No, Miss, I don't speak French at all.


CAR. No. I believe all languages are alike to him.

( aside)
LEN. What do you say, Miss?


CAR. Que vous etes charmante.


LEN. No, nor Jarman -- I speak all the dead languages but French and Jarman!


CAR. Ah, ce ne maimex pas.


LEN. No, Miss, it is you have maimed me in the heart, and must now be my
physician.


CAR. Ah, I fear you no love a me!


LEN. I entreat you Miss, to throw off those fears -- ( Kneels), Suffer me to
assure you, Miss, that nothing can root out my passion -- I am positive that
neither change of air nor diet could give me the smallest relief -- No, Miss,
the fever of love is so strong upon me, that I Am certain sixteen grains of
James's powders would have no more effect than -- Damnit, I Am nailed to the
counter like a bad shilling.

( rises)
CAR. Ah, pity pauvre Caroline, who will be so much disappoint of so sweet a
gentilhomme.


LEN. Oh dear no; disappointment perhaps may disorder her stomach -- occasion
bile -- but that is all -- I Will venture to assert that a little sal polycrest
and rhubarb, taking regularly three table spoons full, four or five times a day
-- Zounds, I Have got into my shop again!


CAR. You see my cousin no more den?


LEN. Oh your cousin, Miss, would not have done for me at all -- very well in
the country, but would not do to hang upon my arm in the great world -- But
when we go to London we shall see the Italian Opeara, and hear Mounseer Browni,
Signor Kelly, madam Mary, and Signora Scratchi -- and then we shall visit all
the polite place -- Vauxhall Gardens, Apollo Gardens, Bermondsey Spa --


CAR. Ah you make de belle figure.


LEN. A figure? Oh yes, 2, 5, 3, 8, for that.


CAR. Vil you dance a chaccone vid me?


LEN. Pray excuse me, Miss, I never danced in my life -- except after my
patients.

( aside,)
CAR. Vil you sing?


LEN. No, Miss, when I sing -- I -- I don't often sing when I do they -- they
--


CAR. Ah, moque de vous!


LEN. Yes, they smoke me -- they laugh at me!


CAR. If you please I sing a you de Canzonet and grand Air from the Opera at
Paris.


LEN. Oh Lord, ay! that must be charming!


CAROLINE sings. Beaux yeaux, qui causer mon trepas
Revenez en ces lieux pour finer mon martire,
Depuis votre depart je languis je soupire,
Quand vous me dites good bye jusqueau revoir;
How grieve mou coeur leave me en dissefpoir,
Farewell plaisir, no joy till vot retour;
Ah! pity quelque unto my tender amor,
Je meurs pour vos divins appas et je nose.
( Sung to the height of Burlesque and Ridicule.)
LEN. Oh, charming! such melody! such words! though damn me if I understood one
of 'em!


( Aside, and retires up soothing CAROLINE.) Enter JUBA with a Letter,
following CADDY. CAD. Don't ask me about your master!


JUBA. Oh me so glad! so glad -- Massa no here?


CAD. No, I tell you -- He has been gone this half hour.


JUBA. Den me find him -- dis letter make my Massa so happy!

(Exit.)
CAD. Well, Mr. Lenitive, how do you find yourself? what, you're smitten, are you?


LEN. Oh, enchanted!


CAD. And you are willing to take Clara instead of my daughter, are you?


LEN. With raptures! My dear Mr. Caddy, there is as much difference between her
and your daughter as between honey and hieri picra -- Miss Clara has more wit,
more life, more spirit, more air, more -- every thing -- she is sal volatile
itself!


CAD. Now if it was not for the Chinese Bonze he gave me, I could kick him
(Aside) Hey-day! Heartwell here again.


Enter HEARTWELL with a Letter. CAD. Well, what do you come for now, Sir?


HEART. I return to you with a heart panting with hope: the intelligence I have
here received, enables me to offer Miss Caroline, with my hand, a fortune
superior to that which was once her own. I am ready to take her without a
shilling, and only request to receive her from your hand.


CAR. My dear papa! who is in the right now?


HEART. How! Caroline!


LEN. What Caroline!


CAD. Yes, this was all a trick of Caroline's! but you had not sense enough to
see it -- you son of a Gallipot!


LEN. So I Have made a pretty job of it!


Conversation in dumb show between CAROLINE, HEARTWELL, and CADDY. Enter LABEL
with a Letter, LABEL. Mr. Lenitive, here is another letter for you, brought to
my shop, from the Lottery Office.


LEN. Oh, they have sent me a draft for the money, well this will console me for
my loss of credit here.

Reads -- SIR,
We are sorry to be under the disagreeable necessity of --

What Is all this! of apologizing to you, for the unfortunate mistake of a
Figure in your Lottery Ticket, which was not the number of the Prize, but was
immediately afterward drawn. No. 2, 5, 3, 8, was drawn a Blank, but 2, 5, 8, 3,
drawn a Prize of Ten Thousand Pounds; was sold by Branscomb and Bish, at their
Lucky Office, next the Striking Conjurors, at St. Dunstan's.



Damnation! my Prize is a Blank!

OMNES. A Blank! Ha! ha! ha!


LABEL. How, Sir! a blank?


LEN. There Is a mistake in a figure?


LABEL. What in 2, 5, 3, 8?


LEN. Oh curse 2, 5, 3, 8! -- I Will tell you what, Label, I Will have my coat and
wig again.


LABEL. No you don't though -- I Am in possession, and that you know --

( Runs off.)
LEN. I will have my wig, if I get nothing else.


( Snatching at LABEL'S wig as he runs off.) Yes, I Will now resume pill, pestle,
potion, powder, drop,
And all the former jargon of my shop:
Return to Galen, Celsus, Hippocrates,
Since now a Gallipot my whole estate is,
With Lotteries now for ever I Will have done,
Forget 2, 5, 3, 8, and stick to Number One.
FINALE. CAR. The changling's fate we have set to view,
Our own depends alone on you;
To night, if we your smiles obtain,
We Have drawn the Prize we sought to gai

CHORUS. With anxious hearts we look about,
To see if Prize or Blank come out;
More vain of you, than fortune kind.
Since you can see, and she is blind.

FINIS.

