A POEM ON HER Majesty's Birthday.

A POEM ON HER Majesty's Birthday.

By STEPHEN DUCK.

LONDON: Printed for J. Jackson in Pallmall; and T. Cooper in Pater noster-Row:
Where may be had a Poem on his Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland's
Birthday, by the same Author. M.DCC.XXXV.

A POEM ON HER Majesty's Birthday.
O YOU the Monarch's Bliss, the Muse's Friend!
Accept the tribute Duty bids me send:
It Is what the Bard should long before have paid,
But fearful to aspire, has long delayed.
Phoebus alone can Phoebus' Chariot guide,
The Youth who dared to drive it, daring died.
My humble Muse can humble Subjects treat,
But trembles to attempt a Theme so Great!
Yet warm with Gratitude, would fain display
Her Zeal to you, on this auspicious Day.
To you! whose gracious Goodness plumes her Wings,
By whom she lives, by whom inspired she sings;
Long may she Celebrate your Sacred BIRTH;
Long may you stay from Heaven to bless the Earth:
To Cheer the Royal Sovereign of our ISLE;
Increase his Joys, or soften all his Toil,
Who now, while Death in purple Triumph reigns,
And sanguine Floods pollute the distant Plains,
Watchful over Britain's Fate employs his Car,
Or wisely to avert, or bravely meet the War.
O Glorious QUEEN! by Nature formed to bring
The sweetest Comfort to the Justest KING:
Let proud Oppressors, who abuse their Power,
Hear groaning Subjects curse their natal Hour.
You, on that happy Hour, may justly feast
Your Soul with Thoughts of making Thousands blessed;
Whose godlike Bounties, to the Wretched, show,
You're only Powerful to relieve their Woe.
What though the Muse old Annals should explore,
Mark all our Queens, and trace their Virtues over?
Where could she find so much exalted Sense,
Nobly employed like yours, in Truth's Defense?
You strive to make the Seeds of Virtue grow,
To spread the Light which Heaven revealed below:
Yet, free from superstitious Zeal, incline
To make the Rays of moral Goodness shine,
Supporting those, who firm to Truth, defend
That first fixed Law, on which all Laws depend.
Beneath your Influence, Art and Science rear
Their sacred Heads, and flourish by your Care;
This Truth let Oxford's pompous Dome proclaim,
Which boasts the Honor of a Queen's College.
Royal Name;
Lately your Bard surveyed the graceful Scene,
Rising with Bounties of a Generous QUEEN.
O! had the Muse there fledged her Infant Wing,
And early tasted of that learned Spring;
She then had soared in more Heroic lays,
In more majestic Numbers sung your Praise,
But fearful now, must quit the glorious Theme,
Must leave the Architect to speak your Fame,
His Art, shall there, another Athens show,
And there, another GUARDIAN Pallas YOU.
FINIS.

