POEMS AND PLAYS.

BY OLIVER GOLDSMITH, M.B.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR.

PRINTED FOR Wm. Wilson Bookseller and Stationer at Homer's head, No. 6 Dame
Street (...) Dublin.

M,DCC,LXXVII.

CONTENTS.
LIFE of Oliver Goldsmith, M.B. Page i Epitaph on Dr. Goldsmith xi Prologue,
written and spoken by the Poet Laberius, 3 Double Transformation, a Tale 4 A
New Simile, in the Manner of Swift 8 Description of an Author's Bedchamber 11
Letter, addressed to the Printer of the St. James's Chronicle 15 The Hermit, a
Ballad 17 Elegy on the Death of a Mad Dog 24 Stanzas on Woman 26 Traveller, a
Poem 27 Deserted Village, a Poem 49 The Gift 67 Epitaph on Dr. Parnel 68
Epilogue to the Sisters 69 The Hauch of Venison, a Poetic Epistle 71 Song, from
the Oratorio of the Captivity 78 Song ib. The Clown's Reply 79 Epitaph on
Edward Purdon ib. Elegy on Mrs. Mary Blaize 80 Retaliation, a Poem 83
Good-natured Man, a Comedy 95 She stoops to Conquer, a Comedy 207
portrait of Oliver Goldsmith

THE LIFE OF OLIVER GOLDSMITH, M.B. In these Memoirs, which were published in
London, soon after the death of Dr. Goldsmith, were several mistakes, with
respect to our author's age, the time of his admission into the college of
Dublin, etc. which are here corrected from accurate information.

OLIVER GOLDSMITH, son of the Reverend Charles Goldsmith, was born at Elphin,
in the county of Roscommon in Ireland, in the year 1729. His father had four
sons, of whom Oliver was the third. After being well instructed in the
classics, at the school of Mr. Hughes, he was admitted a sizer in
Trinity-college, Dublin, on the 11th of June, 1744. While he resided there, he
exhibited no specimens of that genius, which, in his maturer years, raised his
character so high. On the 27th of February, 1749, O. S. (two years after the
regular time) he obtained the degree of Bachelor of Arts. Soon after, he turned
his thoughts to the profession of physic; and, after attending some courses of
anatomy in Dublin, proceeded to Edinburgh, in the year 1751, where he studied
the several branches of medicine under the different professors in that
university. His beneficent disposition soon involved him in unexpected
difficulties; and he was obliged precipitately to leave Scotland, in
consequence of having engaged himself to pay a considerable sum of money for a
fellow-student.

A FEW days after, about the beginning of the year 1754, he arrived at
Sunderland, near Newcastle, where he was arrested at the suit of one Barclay, a
tailor in Edinburgh, to whom he had given security for his friend. By the
friendship of Mr. Laughlin Maclane and Dr. Sleigh, who were then in the
college, he was soon delivered out of the hands of the bailiff, and took his
passage on board a Dutch ship to Rotterdam, where, after a short stay, he
proceeded to Brussels. He then visited great part of Flanders; and, after
passing some time at Strasbourg and Louvain, where he obtained a degree of
Bachelor in physic, he accompanied an English gentleman to Geneva.

IT is undoubtedly fact, that this ingenious, unfortunate man made most part of
his tour on foot. "Countries wear different appearances to travelers of
different circumstances. A man who is whirled through Europe in a postchaise,
and the pilgrim who walks the grand tour on foot, will form very different
conclusions. Haud inexpertus loquor." Goldsmith 's Present State of Learning in
Europe, 1759.


He had left England with very little money; and, being of a philosophical
turn, and at that time possessing a body capable of sustaining every fatigue,
and a heart not easily terrified by danger, he became an enthusiast to the
design he had formed of seeing the manners of different countries. He had some
knowledge of the French language, and of music; he played tolerably well on the
German flute; which, from an amusement, became at some times the means of
subsistence. His learning produced him an hospitable reception at most of the
religious houses that he visited; and his music made him welcome to the
peasants of Flanders and Germany. 'Whenever I approached a peasant's house
toward night-fall,' he used to say, 'I played one of my most merry tunes, and
that generally procured me not only a lodging, but subsistence for the next
day: but in truth' (his constant expression) 'I must own, whenever I attempted
to entertain persons of a higher rank, they always thought my performance
odious, and never made me any return for my endeavors to please them.'

ON his arrival at Geneva, he was recommended as a proper person for a
traveling tutor to a young man, who had been unexpectedly left a considerable
sum of money by his uncle Mr. S******. This youth, who was articled to an
attorney, on receipt of his fortune determined to see the world; and, on his
engaging with his preceptor, made a proviso, that he should be permitted to
govern himself: and our traveller soon found his pupil understood the art of
directing in money concerns extremely well, as avarice was his prevailing
passion.

DURING Goldsmith's continuance in Switzerland, he assiduously cultivated his
poetical talent, of which he had given some striking proofs at the college of
Edinburgh. It was from hence he sent the first sketch of his delightful
epistle, called the Traveller, to his brother Henry, a clergyman in Ireland.

FROM Geneva Mr. Goldsmith and his pupil proceeded to the south of France,
where the young man, upon some disagreement with his preceptor, paid him the
small part of his salary which was due, and embarked at Marseilles for England.
Our wanderer was left once more upon the world at large, and passed through a
number of difficulties in traversing the greatest part of France. At length his
curiosity being gratified, he bent his course toward England, and arrived at
Dover, the beginning of the winter, in the year 1758.

HIS finances were so low on his return to England, that he with difficulty got
to the metropolis, his whole stock of cash amounting to no more than a few
halfpence! An entire stranger in London, his mind was filled with the most
gloomy reflections in consequence of his embarrassed situation! He applied to
several apothecaries in hopes of being received in the capacity of a
journeyman, but his broad Irish accent, and the uncouthness of his appearance,
occasioned him to meet with insult from most of the medicinal tribe. The next
day, however, a chemist near Fish-street, struck with his forlorn condition,
and the simplicity of his manner, took him into his laboratory, where he
continued till he discovered that his old friend Dr. Sleigh was in London. That
gentleman received him with the warmest affection, and liberally invited him to
share his purse till some establishment could be procured for him. Goldsmith,
unwilling to be a burden to his friend, a short time after eagerly embraced an
offer which was made him to assist the late Rev. Dr. Milner, in instructing the
young gentlemen at the Academy at Peckham; and acquitted himself greatly to the
Doctor's satisfaction for a short time; but, having obtained some reputation by
the criticisms he had written in the Monthly Review, Mr. Griffith, the
principal proprietor, engaged him in the compilation of it; and, resolving to
pursue the profession of writing, he returned to London, as the mart where
abilities of every kind were sure of meeting distinction and reward. Here he
determined to adopt a plan of the strictest economy, and, at the close of the
year 1759, took lodgings in Green-Arbour-court in the Old Bailey, where he
wrote several ingenious pieces. The late Mr. Newbery, who, at that time gave
great encouragement to men of literary abilities, became a kind of patron to
our young author, and introduced him as one of the writers in the Public
Ledger, in which his Citizen of the World originally appeared, under the title
of 'Chinese Letters.' During this time, (according to another account) he wrote
for the British Magazine, of which Dr. Smollet was then Editor, most of those
Essays and Tales, which he afterward collected and published in a separate
volume. He also wrote occasionally, for the Critical Review; and it was the
merit which he discovered in criticizing a despicable translation of Ovid's
Fasti by a pedantic schoolmaster, and his Enquiry into the present state of
learning in Europe, which first introduced him to the acquaintance of Dr.
Smollet, who recommended him to several literati, and to most of the
booksellers by whom he was afterward patronized.


FORTUNE now seemed to take some notice of a man she had long neglected. The
simplicity of his character, the integrity of his heart, and the merit of his
productions, made his company very acceptable to a number of respectable
persons; and, about the middle of the year 1762, he emerged from his mean
apartments near the Old Bailey to the politer air of the Temple, where he took
handsome chambers, and lived in a genteel style. The publication of his
Traveller, his Vicar of Wakefield, and his History of England, was followed by
the performance of his comedy of the Good natured Man at Covent Garden theater,
and placed him in the first rank of the poets of the present age.

OUR Doctor, as he was now universally called, had a constant levee of his
distressed countrymen, whose wants, as far as he was able, he always relieved;
and he has been often known to leave himself even without a guinea, in order to
supply the necessities of others.

ANOTHER feature in his character we cannot help laying before the reader.
Previous to the publication of his Deserted Village, the bookseller had given
him a note for one hundred guineas for the copy, which the Doctor mentioned, a
few hours after, to one of his friends, who observed it was a very great sum
for so short a performance. 'In truth,' replied Goldsmith, 'I think so too, it
is much more than the honest man can afford, or the piece is worth; I have not
been easy since I received it; I will therefore go back and return him his
note:' which he actually did, and left it entirely to the bookseller to pay him
according to the profits produced by the sale of the poem, which turned out
very considerable.

DURING the last rehearsal of his comedy, entitled, She stoops to Conquer,
which Mr. Coleman thought would not succeed, on the Doctor's objecting to the
repetition of one of Tony Lumpkin's speeches, being apprehensive it might
injure the play, the Manager, with great keenness replied, 'Psha, my dear
Doctor, do not be fearful of squibs, when we have been sitting almost these two
hours upon a barrel of gunpowder.' The piece, however, contrary to Mr.
Coleman's expectation, was received with uncommon applause by the audience; and
Goldsmith's pride was so hurt by the severity of the above observation, that it
entirely put an end to his friendship for the gentleman who made it.

NOTWITHSTANDING the great success of his pieces, by some of which, it is
asserted, upon good authority, he cleared 1800 l. in one year, his
circumstances were by no means in a prosperous situation! partly owing to the
liberality of his disposition, and partly to an unfortunate habit he had
contracted of gaming, with the arts of which he was very little acquainted, and
consequently became the prey of those who were unprincipled enough to take
advantage of his ignorance.

JUST before his death he had formed a design for executing an universal
dictionary of arts and sciences, the prospectus of which he actually printed
and distributed among his acquaintance. In this work several of his literary
friends (particularly Sir Joshua Reynolds, Dr. Johnson, Mr. Beauclerc, and Mr.
Garrick) had promised to assist, and to furnish him with articles upon
different subjects. He had entertained the most sanguine expectations from the
success of it. The undertaking, however, did not meet with that encouragement
from the booksellers which he had imagined it would undoubtedly receive; and he
used to lament this circumstance almost to the last hour of his existence.

HE had been for some years afflicted, at different times, with a violent
strangury, which contributed not a little to imbitter the latter part of his
life; and which, united with the vexations he suffered upon other occasions,
brought on a kind of habitual despondency. In this unhappy condition he was
attacked by a nervous fever, which, being improperly treated, terminated in his
dissolution on the 4th day of April, 1774, in the forty-fifth year of his age.
His friends, who were very numerous and respectable, had determined to bury him
in Westminster-abbey, where a tablet was to have been erected to his memory.
His pall was to have been supported by Lord Shelburne, Lord Louth, Sir Joshua
Reynolds, the Hon. Mr. Beauclerc, Mr. Edmond Burke, and Mr. Garrick; but from
some unaccountable circumstances this design was dropped, and his remains were
privately deposited in the Temple burial-ground. A subscription, however, has
since been raised by his friends, to defray the expense of a marble monument
which is now executed by Mr. Nollikens, an eminent Statuary in London, and is
shortly to be placed in Westminster-abbey, with the following inscription,
written by Dr. Samuel Johnson. OLIVARII GOLDSMITH,


AS to his character, it is strongly illustrated by Mr. Pope's line, 'In wit a
man, simplicity a child.'


THE learned leisure he loved to enjoy was too often interrupted by distresses
which arose from the openness of his temper, and which sometimes threw him into
loud fits of passion; but this impetuosity was corrected upon a moment's
reflection, and his servants have been known, upon these occasions, purposely
to throw themselves in his way, that they might profit by it immediately after;
for he who had the good fortune to be reproved was certain of being rewarded
for it. His disappointments at other times, made him peevish and sullen, and he
has often left a party of convivial friends abruptly in the evening, in order
to go home and brood over his misfortunes.

THE universal esteem in which his poems are held, and the repeated pleasure
they give in the perusal, are striking proofs of their merit. He was a studious
and correct observer of nature, happy in the selection of his images, in the
choice of his subjects, and in the harmony of his versification; and, though
his embarrassed situation prevented him from putting the last hand to many of
his productions, his Hermit, his Traveller, and his Deserted Village, bid fair
to claim a place among the most finished pieces in the English language.

AS different accounts have been given of this ingenious man, the writer of
these anecdotes cannot conclude without declaring, that they are all founded
upon facts, and collected by one who lived with him upon the most friendly
footing for a great number of years, and who never felt any sorrow more
sensibly than that which was occasioned by his death.

ON THE DEATH OF DR. GOLDSMITH.
BY W. WOTY.
ADIEU, sweet bard! to each fine feeling true,
Thy virtues many, and thy foibles few;
Those formed to charm even vicious minds, -- and these
With harmless mirth the social soul to please.
Another's woe thy heart could always melt;
None gave more free, -- for none more deeply felt.
Sweet bard, adieu! thy own harmonious lays
Have sculptured out thy monument of praise:
Yes, -- these survive to time's remotest day;
While drops the bust, and boastful tombs decay.
Reader, if numbered in the muses' train,
Go, tune the lyre, and imitate his strain;
But, if no poet thou, reverse the plan,
Depart in peace, and imitate the man.
POEMS, BY DR. GOLDSMITH.
A PROLOGUE, WRITTEN AND SPOKEN BY THE POET LABERIUS, A Roman Knight, whom
CAESAR forced upon the Stage.
PRESERVED BY MACROBIUS. This translation was first printed in one of our
Author's earliest works, the Present State of Learning in Europe. 12mo. 1759.

WHAT! no way left to shun the inglorious stage,
And save from infamy my sinking age.
Scarce half-alive, oppressed with many a year,
What in the name of dotage drives me here?
A time there was, when glory was my guide,
Nor force nor fraud could turn my steps aside;
Unawed by power, and unappal'd by fear,
With honest thrift I held my honor dear:
But this vile hour disperses all my store,
And all my hoard of honor is no more;
For ah! too partial to my life's decline,
Caesar persuades, submission must be mine;
Him I obey, whom Heaven itself obeys,
Hopeless of pleasing, yet inclined to please.
Here then at once I welcome every shame,
And cancel at threescore a life of fame;
No more my titles shall my children tell
The old buffoon will fit my name as well;
This day beyond its term my fate extends,
For life is ended when our honor ends.
THE DOUBLE TRANSFORMATION.
A TALE.
SECLUDED from domestic strife,
Jack Book-worm led a college life;
A fellowship at twenty five
Made him the happiest man alive;
He drank his glass and cracked his joke,
And freshmen wondered as he spoke.
SUCH pleasures unallay'd with care,
Could any accident impair?
Could Cupid's shaft at length transfix,
Our swain arrived at thirty-six?
O had the archer never come down
To ravage in a country town!
Or Flavia been content to stop
At triumphs in a Fleet Street shop.
O had her eyes forgot to blaze!
Or Jack had wanted eyes to gaze.
O! -- But let exclamation cease,
Her presence banished all his peace.
So with decorum all things carried;
Miss frowned, and blushed, and then was -- married.
NEED we expose to vulgar sight,
The raptures of the bridal night?
Need we intrude on hallowed ground,
Or draw the curtains closed around?
Let it suffice, that each had charms;
He clasped a goddess in his arms;
And, though she felt his usage rough,
Yet in a man 'twas well enough.
THE honey-moon like lightning flew,
The second brought its transports too.
A third, a fourth, were not amiss,
The fifth was friendship mixed with bliss:
But, when a twelvemonth pass' away,
Jack found his goddess made of clay;
Found half the charms that decked her face,
Arose from powder, shreds, or lace;
But still the worst remained behind,
That very face had robbed her mind.
SKILLED in no other arts was she,
But dressing, patching, repartee;
And, just as humor rose or fell,
By turns a slattern or a belle:
It Is true she dressed with modern grace,
Half naked at a ball or race;
But when at home, at board or bed,
Five greasy night-caps wrapped her head.
Could so much beauty condescend
To be a dull domestic friend?
Could any curtain lectures bring
To decency so fine a thing?
In short, by night, 'twas fits or fretting;
By day, 'twas gadding or coquetting.
Fond to be seen, she kept a bevy
Of powdered coxcombs at her levy;
The 'squire and captain took their stations,
And twenty other near relations;
Jack sucked his pipe, and often broke
A sigh in suffocating smoke;
While all their hours were passed between
Insulting repartee or spleen.
THUS as her faults each day were known,
He thinks her features coarser grown;
He fancies every vice she shows
Or thins her lip, or points her nose:
Whenever rage or envy rise,
How wide her mouth, how wild her eyes!
He knows not how, but so it is,
Her face is grown a knowing phyz;
And, though her fops are wondrous civil,
He thinks her ugly as the devil.
NOW, to perplex the ravell'd nooze,
As each a different way pursues,
While sullen or loquacious strife
Promised to hold them on for life,
That dire disease, whose ruthless power,
Withers the beauty's transient flower:
Lo! the small pox, whose horrid glare
Levelled its terrors at the fair;
And, rifling every youthful grace,
Left but the remnant of a face.
THE glass, grown hateful to her sight,
Reflected now a perfect fright:
Each former art she vainly tries
To bring back luster to her eyes.
In vain she tries her paste and creams,
To smooth her skin, or hide its seams;
Her country beaux and city cousins,
Lovers no more, flew off by dozens:
The squire himself was seen to yield,
And even the captain quit the field.
POOR Madam now condemned to hack
The rest of life with anxious Jack,
Perceiving others fairly flown,
Attempted pleasing him alone.
Jack soon was dazzled to behold
Her present face surpass the old;
With modesty her cheeks are died,
Humility displaces pride;
For taudry finery is seen
A person ever neatly clean:
No more presuming on her sway
She learns good nature every day;
Serenely gay, and strict in duty,
Jack finds his wife a perfect beauty.
A NEW SIMILE IN THE MANNER OF SWIFT.
LONG had I sought in vain to find
A likeness for the scribbling kind;
The modern scribbling kind, who write,
In wit, and sense, and nature's spite:
'Till reading, I forget what day on,
A chapter out of Took's Pantheon,
I think I met with something there,
To suit my purpose to a hair;
But let us not proceed too furious,
First please to turn to God Mercurius;
You Will find him pictured at full length
In book the second, page the tenth:
The stress of all my proofs on him I lay,
And now proceed we to our simile.
IMPRIMIS, pray observe his hat,
Wings upon either side -- mark that.
Well! what is it from thence we gather?
Why these denote a brain of feather.
A brain of feather! very right,
With wit that is flighty, learning light;
Such as to modern bard's decreed;
A just comparison, -- proceed.
IN the next place, his feet peruse,
Wings grow again from both his shoes;
Designed no doubt, their part to bear,
And waft his godship through the air;
And here my simile unites,
For in a modern poet's flights,
I Am sure it may be justly said,
His feet are useful as his head.
LASTLY, vouchsafe t'observe his hand,
Filled with a snake-incircled wand;
By classick authors, termed caduceus,
And highly famed for several uses.
To wit -- most wond'rously endu'd,
No poppy water half so good;
For let folks only get a touch,
Its soporific virtue's such,
Though never so much awake before,
That quickly they begin to snore.
Add too, what certain writers tell,
With this he drives men's souls to hell.
NOW to apply, begin we then;
His wand's a modern author's pen;
The serpents round about it twined,
Denote him of the reptile kind;
Denote the rage with which he writes,
His frothy slaver, venomed bites;
An equal semblance still to keep,
Alike too both conduce to sleep.
This difference only as the God
Drove souls to Tart'rus with his rod,
With his goosequill the scribbling elf
Instead of others, damns himself.
AND here my simile almost tript,
Yet grant a word by way of postscript.
Moreover, Merc'ry had a failing:
Well! what of that? out with it -- stealing;
In which all modern bards agree,
Being each as great a thief as he:
But even this deity's existence,
Shall lend my simile assistance.
Our modern bards! why what a pox
Are they but senseless stones and blocks?
A DESCRIPTION OF AN AUTHOR'S BEDCHAMBER.
WHERE the Red Lion staring over the way,
Invites each passing stranger that can pay;
Where Calvert's butt, and Parson's black champaign,
Regale the drabs and bloods of Drury Lane;
There in a lonely room, from bailiffs snug,
The Muse found Scroggen stretched beneath a rug;
A window patched with paper, lent a ray,
That dimly showed the state in which he lay;
The sanded floor that grits beneath the tread;
The humid wall with paltry pictures spread:
The royal game of goose was there in view,
And the twelve rules the royal martyr drew;
The seasons, framed with listing, found a place,
And brave prince William showed his lamp-black face:
The morn was cold, he views with keen desire
The rusty grate unconscious of a fire:
With beer and milk arrears, the frieze was scor'd,
And five cracked tea cups dressed the chimney board;
A nightcap decked his brows instead of bay,
A cap by night -- a stocking all the day!
THE HERMIT. A BALLAD.
FIRST PRINTED IN MDCCLXV.
THE FOLLOWING LETTER, ADDRESSED TO THE PRINTER OF THE ST. JAMES'S CHRONICLE,
Appeared in that Paper, in JUNE, 1767.
SIR,
AS there is nothing I dislike so much as news-paper controversy, particularly
upon trifles, permit me to be as concise as possible in informing a
correspondent of yours, that I recommended Blainville's Travels, because I
thought the book was a good one; and I think so still. I said, I was told by
the bookseller that it was then first published; but in that, it seems, I was
misinformed, and my reading was not extensive enough to set me right.

Another correspondent of yours accuses me of having taken a ballad, I
published some time ago, from one The Friar of Orders Gray. -- Reliq. of Anc.
Poetry, vol. 1, p. 243.
by the ingenious Mr. Percy. I do not think there is any great resemblance
between the two pieces in question. If there be any, his ballad is taken from
mine. I read it to Mr. Percy, some years ago; and he (as we both considered
these things as trifles at best) told me, with his usual good humor, the next
time I saw him, that he had taken my plan to form the fragments of Shakespeare
into a ballad of his own. He then read me his little Cento, if I may so call
it, and I highly approved it. Such petty anecdotes as these are scarce worth
printing: and, were it not for the busy disposition of some of your
correspondents, the public should never have known that he owes me the hint of
his ballad, or that I am obliged to his friendship and learning for
communications of a much more important nature.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc. OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

THE HERMIT.
A BALLAD.
"TURN, gentle hermit of the dale,
"And guide my lonely way,
"To where yon taper cheers the vale,
"With hospitable ray.
"For here forlorn and lost I tread,
"With fainting steps and slow;
"Where wilds immeasurably spread,
"Seem lengthening as I go."
"Forbear, my son," the hermit cries,
"To tempt the dangerous gloom;
"For yonder faithless phantom flies
"To lure thee to thy doom.
"Here to the houseless child of want,
"My door is open still;
"And though my portion is but scant,
"I give it with good will.
"Then turn tonight, and freely share
"Whatever my cell bestows;
"My rushy couch and frugal fare,
"My blessing and repose.
"No flocks that range the valley free,
"To slaughter I condemn:
"Taught by that power that pities me,
"I learn to pity them:
"But from the mountain's grassy side
"A guiltless feast I bring;
"A scrip with herbs and fruits supplied,
"And water from the spring.
"Then, pilgrim, turn, thy cares forego;
"All earth-born cares are wrong:
"Man wants but little here below,
"Nor wants that little long."
Soft as the dew from heaven descends,
His gentle accents fell:
The modest stranger lowly bends,
And follows to the cell.
Far in a wilderness obscure
The lonely mansion lay;
A refuge to the neighboring poor,
And strangers led astray.
No stores beneath its humble thatch
Required a master's care;
The wicket opening with a latch,
Received the harmless pair.
And now when busy crowds retire
To take their evening rest,
The hermit trimmed his little fire,
And cheered his pensive guest:
And spread his vegetable store,
And gayly pressed, and smiled;
And, skilled in legendary lore,
The lingering hours beguiled.
Around in sympathetic mirth
Its tricks the kitten tries;
The cricket chirrups in the hearth;
The crackling faggot flies.
But nothing could a charm impart
To sooth the stranger's woe;
For grief was heavy at his heart,
And tears began to flow.
His rising cares the hermit spied,
With answ'ring care oppressed:
"And whence, unhappy youth," he cried,
"The sorrows of thy breast?
"From better habitations spurned,
"Reluctant do thou rove:
"Or grieve for friendship unreturn'd,
"Or unregarded love?
"Alas! the joys that fortune brings,
"Are trifling and decay;
"And those who prize the paltry things,
"More trifling still than they.
"And what is friendship but a name,
"A charm that lulls to sleep;
"A shade that follows wealth or fame,
"And leaves the wretch to weep?
"And love is still an emptier sound,
"The modern fair one's jest:
"On earth unseen, or only found
"To warm the turtle's nest.
"For shame, fond youth, thy sorrows hush,
"And spurn the sex," he said:
But while he spoke, a rising blush
His love-lorn guest betrayed.
Surpised he sees new beauties rise,
Swift mantling to the view;
Like colors over the morning skies,
As bright, as transient too.
The bashful look, the rising breast,
Alternate spread alarms:
The lovely stranger stands confessed
A maid in all her charms.
"And, ah, forgive a stranger rude,
"A wretch forlorn," she cried;
"Whose feet unhallowed thus intrude
"Where heaven and you reside.
"But let a maid thy pity share,
"Whom love has taught to stray;
"Who seeks for rest, but finds despair
"Companion of her way.
"My father lived beside the Tyne,
"A wealthy lord was he;
"And all his wealth was marked as mine,
"He had but only me.
"To win me from his tender arms,
"Unnumber'd suitors came;
"Who praised me for imputed charms,
"And selt, or feigned a flame.
"Each hour a mercenary crowd
"With richest proffers strove:
"Among the rest young Edwin bowed,
"But never talked of love.
"In humble, simplest habit clad,
"No wealth or power had he;
"Wisdom and worth were all he had,
"But these were all to me.
"The blossom opening to the day,
"The dews of heaven refined,
"Could naught of purity display,
"To emulate his mind.
"The dew, the blossoms of the tree,
"With charms inconstant shine;
"Their charms were his, but woe to me,
"Their constancy was mine.
"For still I tried each fickle art,
"Importunate and vain;
"And while his passion touched my heart,
"I triumphed in his pain.
"'Till quite dejected with my scorn,
"He left me to my pride;
"And sought a solitude forlorn,
"In secret, where he died.
"But mine the sorrow, mine the fault,
"And well my life shall pay;
"I Will seek the solitude he sought,
"And stretch me where he lay.
"And there forlorn, despairing hid,
"I Will lay me down and die!
"'It Was so for me that Edwin did,
"And so for him will I."
"Forbid it, Heaven!" the hermit cried,
And clasped her to his breast:
The wondering fair one turned to chide,
'Twas Edwin's self that pressed.
"Turn, Angelina, ever dear,
"My charmer, turn to see
"Thy own, thy long-lost Edwin here,
"Restored to love and thee.
"Thus let me hold thee to my heart,
"And every care resign:
"And shall we never, never part,
"My life -- my all that is mine.
"No, never, from this hour to part,
"We'll live and love so true,
"The sigh that rends thy constant heart,
"Shall break thy Edwin's too."
AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF A MAD DOG.
GOOD people all, of every sort,
Give ear unto my song;
And if you find it wondrous short,
It cannot hold you long.
In Isling-ton there was a man,
Of whom the world might say,
That still a godly race he ran,
Whenever he went to pray.
A kind and gentle heart he had,
To comfort friends and foes;
The naked every day he clad,
When he put on his clothes.
And in that town a dog was found,
As many dogs there be,
Both mungrel, puppy, whelp, and hound,
And curs of low degree.
This dog and man at first were friends;
But when a pique began,
The dog, to gain his private ends,
Went mad and bit the man.
Around from all the neighboring streets,
The wondering neighbors ran,
And swore the dog had lost his wits,
To bite so good a man.
The wound it seemed both sore and sad,
To every christian eye;
And while they swore the dog was mad,
They swore the man would die.
But soon a wonder came to light,
That showed the rogues they ly'd,
The man recovered of the bite,
The dog it was that died.
STANZAS ON WOMAN.
WHEN lovely woman stoops to folly,
And finds too late that men betray,
What charm can sooth her melancholy,
What art can wash her guilt away?
The only art her guilt to cover,
To hide her shame from every eye,
To give repentance to her lover,
And wring his bosom -- is to die.
THE TRAVELLER; OR, A PROSPECT OF SOCIETY. A POEM.
FIRST PRINTED IN M,DCC,LXV.
TO THE REV. HENRY GOLDSMITH.
DEAR SIR,
I AM sensible that the friendship between us can acquire no new force from the
ceremonies of a Dedication; and perhaps it demands an excuse thus to prefix
your name to my attempts, which you decline giving with your own. But as a part
of this Poem was formerly written to you from Switzerland, the whole can now,
with propriety, be only inscribed to you. It will also throw a light upon many
parts of it, when the reader understands, that it is addressed to a man, who,
despising Fame and Fortune, has retired early to Happiness and Obscurity, with
an income of forty pounds a year.

I now perceive, my dear brother, the wisdom of your humble choice. You have
entered upon a sacred office, where the harvest is great, and the laborers are
but few; while you have left the field of Ambition, where the laborers are
many, and the harvest not worth carrying away. But of all kinds of ambition,
what from the refinement of the times, from different systems of criticism, and
from the divisions of party, that which pursues poetical fame is the wildest.

Poetry makes a principal amusement among unpolished nations; but in a country
verging to the extremes of refinement, Painting and Music come in for a share.
As these offer the feeble mind a less laborious entertainment, they at first
rival Poetry, and at length supplant her; they engross all that favor once
shown to her, and though but younger sisters, seize upon the elder's
birthright.

Yet, however this art may be neglected by the powerful, it is still in greater
danger from the mistaken efforts of the learned to improve it. What criticisms
have we not heard of late in favor of blank verse, and Pindaric odes,
chorusses, anapests and iambics, alliterative care and happy negligence! Every
absurdity has now a champion to defend it, and as he is generally much in the
wrong, so he has always much to say; for error is ever talkative.

But there is an enemy to this art still more dangerous, I mean Party. Party
entirely distorts the judgment, and destroys the taste. When the mind is once
infected with this disease, it can only find pleasure in what contributes to
increase the distemper. Like the tiger, that seldom desists from pursuing man
after having once preyed upon human flesh, the reader, who has once gratified
his appetite with calumny, makes, ever after, the most agreeable feast upon
murdered reputation. Such readers generally admire some half-witted thing, who
wants to be thought a bold man, having lost the character of a wise one. Him
they dignify with the name of poet; his tawdry lampoons are called satires, his
turbulence is said to be force, and his phrenzy fire.

What reception a Poem may find, which has neither abuse, party, nor blank
verse to support it, I cannot tell, nor am I solicitous to know. My aims are
right. Without espousing the cause of any party, I have attempted to moderate
the rage of all. I have endeavored to show, that there may be equal happiness
in states, that are differently governed from our own; that every state has a
particular principle of happiness, and that this principle in each may be
carried to a mischievous excess. There are few can judge, better than yourself,
how far these positions are illustrated in this Poem. I am,

DEAR SIR, YOUR MOST AFFECTIONATE BROTHER, OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

THE TRAVELLER; OR, A PROSPECT OF SOCIETY. In this poem several alterations
were made, and some new verses added, as it passed through different editions.
-- We have printed from the ninth, which was the last edition published in the
lifetime of the author.

REMOTE, unfriended, melancholy, slow,
Or by the lazy Scheld, or wandering Po;
Or onward, where the rude Carinthian boor,
Against the houseless stranger shuts the door;
Or where Campania's plain forsaken lies,
A weary waste expanding to the skies;
Wherever I roam, whatever realms to see,
My heart untravell'd fondly turns to thee:
Still to my brother turns, with ceaseless pain,
And drags at each remove a lengthening chain.
Eternal blessings crown my earliest friend,
And round his dwelling guardian saints attend;
Blessed be that spot, where cheerful guests retire
To pause from toil and trim their evening fire;
Blessed that abode, where want and pain repair,
And every stranger finds a ready chair:
Blessed be those feasts with simple plenty crowned,
Where all the ruddy family around
Laugh at the jests or pranks that never fail,
Or sigh with pity at some mournful tale,
Or press the bashful stranger to his food,
And learn the luxury of doing good.
But me, not destined such delights to share,
My prime of life in wandering spent and care:
Impelled, with steps unceasing, to pursue
Some fleeting good, that mocks me with the view;
That, like the circle bounding earth and skies;
Allures from far, yet, as I follow, flies;
My fortune leads to traverse realms alone,
And find no spot of all the world my own.
Even now, where Alpine solitudes ascend,
I sit me down a pensive hour to spend;
And, placed on high above the storm's career,
Look downward where an hundred realms appear;
Lakes, forests, cities, plains extending wide,
The pomp of kings, the shepherd's humbler pride.
When thus Creation's charms around combine,
Amidst the store, should thankless pride repine?
Say, should the philosophic mind disdain
That good, which makes each humbler bosom vain?
Let school-taught pride dissemble all it can,
These little things are great to little man;
And wiser he, whose sympathetic mind
Exults in all the good of all mankind.
Ye glittering towns, with wealth and splendour crowned,
Ye fields, where summer spreads profusion round,
Ye lakes, whose vessels catch the busy gale,
Ye bending swains, that dress the flowery vale,
For me your tributary stores combine;
Creation's heir, the world, the world is mine.
As some lone miser visiting his store,
Bends at his treasure, counts, recounts it over;
Hoards after hoards his rising raptures fill,
Yet still he sighs, for hoards are wanting still:
Thus to my breast alternates passions rise,
Pleased with each good that heaven to man supplies:
Yet often a sigh prevails, and sorrows fall,
To see the hoard of human bliss so small;
And often I wish, amidst the scene, to find
Some spot to real happiness consigned,
Where my worn soul, each wandering hope at rest,
May gather bliss to see my fellows blessed.
But where to find that happiest spot below,
Who can direct, when all pretend to know?
The shudd'ring tenant of the frigid zone
Boldly proclaims that happiest spot his own,
Extols the treasures of his stormy seas,
And his long nights of revelry and ease;
The naked negro, panting at the line,
Boasts of his golden sands and palmy wine,
Basks in the glare, or stems the tepid wave,
And thanks his Gods for all the good they gave.
Such is the patriot's boast, wherever we roam,
His first, best country ever is, at home.
And yet, perhaps, if countries we compare,
And estimate the blessings which they share,
Though patriots flatter, still shall wisdom find
An equal portion dealt to all mankind,
As different good, by art or nature given,
To different nations makes their blessings even.
Nature, a mother kind alike to all,
Still grants her bliss at labor's earnest call;
With food as well the peasant is supplied
On Idra's cliffs as Arno's shelvy side;
And though the rocky crested summits frown,
These rocks, by custom, turn to beds of down.
From art more various are the blessings sent;
Wealth, commerce, honor, liberty, content.
Yet these each other's power so strong contest,
That either seems destructive of the rest.
Where wealth and freedom reign contentment fails,
And honor sinks where commerce long prevails.
Hence every state to one loved blessing prone,
Conforms and models life to that alone.
Each to the favorite happiness attends,
And spurns the plan that aims at other ends;
'Till, carried to excess in each domain,
This favorite good begets peculiar pain.
But let us try these truths with closer eyes,
And trace them through the prospect as it lies:
Here for a while my proper cares resigned,
Here let me sit in sorrow for mankind,
Like yon neglected shrub at random cast,
That shades the steep, and sighs at every blast.
Far to the right where Appennine ascends,
Bright as the summer, Italy extends;
Its uplands sloping deck the mountain's side,
Woods over woods in gay theatric pride;
While often some temple's mouldering tops between,
With venerable grandeur mark the scene.
Could nature's bounty satisfy the breast,
The sons of Italy were surely blessed.
Whatever fruits in different climes were found,
That proudly rise, or humbly court the ground;
Whatever blooms in torrid tracts appear,
Whose bright succession decks the varied year;
Whatever sweets salute the northern sky
With vernal lives that blossom but to die;
These here disporting own the kindred soil,
Nor ask luxuriance from the planter's toil;
While sea-born gales their gelid wings expand
To winnow fragrance round the smiling land.
But small the bliss that sense alone bestows,
And sensual bliss is all the nation knows.
In florid beauty groves and fields appear,
Man seems the only growth that dwindles here.
Contrasted faults through all his manners reign,
Though poor, luxurious, though submissive, vain,
Though grave, yet trifling, zealous, yet untrue,
And even in penance planning sins anew.
All evils here contaminate the mind,
That opulence departed leaves behind;
For wealth was theirs, not far removed the date,
When commerce proudly flourished through the state;
At her command the palace learnt to rise,
Again the long-fall'n column sought the skies;
The canvass glowed beyond even Nature warm,
The pregnant quarry teemed with human form.
Till, more unsteady than the southern gale,
Commerce on other shores displayed her sail;
While naught remained of all that riches gave,
But towns unmann'd, and lords without a slave:
And late the nation found with fruitless skill
Its former strength was but plethoric ill.
Yet, still the loss of wealth is here supplied
By arts, the splendid wrecks of former pride;
From these the feeble heart and long-fall'n mind
An easy compensation seem to find.
Here may be seen, in bloodless pomp arrayed,
The paste-board triumph and the cavalcade;
Processions formed for piety and love,
A mistress or a saint in every grove.
By sports like these are all their cares beguiled,
The sports of children satisfy the child;
Each nobler aim represt by long control,
Now sinks at last, or feebly man's the soul;
While low delights, succeeding fast behind,
In happier meanness occupy the mind:
As in those domes, where Caesar's once bore sway,
Defaced by time and tottering in decay,
There in the ruin, heedless of the dead,
The shelter-seeking peasant builds his shed,
And, wondering man could want the larger pile,
Exults, and owns his cottage with a smile.
My soul turn from them, turn we to survey
Where rougher climes a nobler race display,
Where the bleak Swiss their stormy mansions tread,
And force a churlish soil for scanty bread;
No product here the barren hills afford,
But man and steel, the soldier and his sword.
No vernal blooms their torpid rocks array,
But winter lingering chills the lap of May;
No zephyr fondly sues the mountain's breast,
But meteors glare, and stormy glooms invest.
Yet still, even here, content can spread a charm,
Redress the clime, and all its rage disarm.
Though poor the peasant's hut, his feasts though small,
He sees his little lot the lot of all;
Sees no contiguous palace rear its head
To shame the meanness of his humble shed;
No costly lord the sumptuous banquet deal
To make him loath his vegetable meal;
But calm, and bred in ignorance and toil,
Each wish contracting, fits him to the soil.
Cheerful at morn he wakes from short repose,
Breasts the keen air, and carols as he goes;
With patient angle trolls the finny deep,
Or drives his venurous plough-share to the steep;
Or seeks the den where snow-tracks mark the way,
And drags the struggling savage into day.
At night returning, every labor sped,
He sits him down the monarch of a shed;
Smiles by his cheerful fire, and round surveys
His childrens looks, that brighten at the blaze;
While his loved partner, boastful of her hoard,
Displays her cleanly platter on the board:
And happily too some pilgrim, thither led,
With many a tale repays the nightly bed.
Thus every good his native wilds impart,
Imprints the patriot passion on his heart,
And even those ills, that round his mansion rise,
Enhance the bliss his scanty fund supplies.
Dear is that shed to which his soul conforms,
And dear that hill which lifts him to the storms;
And as a child, when scaring sounds molest,
Clings close and closer to the mother's breast,
So the loud torrent, and the whirlwind's roar,
But bind him to his native mountains more.
Such are the charms to barren states assigned,
Their wants but few, their wishes all confined.
Yet let them only share the praises due,
If few their wants, their pleasures are but few;
For every want that stimulates the breast,
Becomes a source of pleasure when redrest.
Whence from such lands each pleasing science flies,
That first excites desire, and then supplies;
Unknown to them, when sensual pleasures cloy,
To fill the languid pause with finer joy;
Unknown those powers that raise the soul to flame,
Catch every nerve, and vibrate through the frame.
Their level life is but a mouldering fire,
Unquench'd by want, unfann'd by strong desire;
Unfit for raptures, or, if raptures cheer
On some high festival of once a year,
In wild excess the vulgar breast takes fire,
Till buried in debauch, the bliss expires.
But not their joys alone thus coarsely flow:
Their morals, like their pleasures, are but low,
For, as refinement stops, from sire to son
Unaltered, unimprov'd the manners run,
And love's and friendship's finely pointed dart
Fall blunted from each indurated heart.
Some sterner virtues over the mountain's breast
May sit, like falcons cow'ring on the nest;
But all the gentler morals, such as play
Through life's more cultured walks, and charm the way,
These far dispersed, on timorous pinions fly,
To sport and flutter in a kinder sky.
To kinder skies, where gentler manners reign,
I turn; and France displays her bright domain.
Gay, sprightly land of mirth and social ease,
Pleased with thyself, whom all the world can please,
How often have I led thy sportive choir,
With tuneless pipe, beside the murmuring Loire?
Where shading elms along the margin grew,
And freshen'd from the wave the zephyr flew;
And happily, though my harsh touch falt'ring still,
But mocked all tune, and marred the dancer's skill;
Yet would the village praise my wondrous power,
And dance, forgetful of the noontide hour.
Alike all ages. Dames of ancient days
Have led their children through the mirthful maze,
And the gay grandsire, skilled in gestic lore,
Has frisk'd beneath the burden of threescore.
So blessed a life these thoughtless realms display,
Thus idly busy rolls their world away:
Theirs are those arts that mind to mind endear,
For honor forms the social temper here.
Honor, that praise which real merit gains,
Or even imaginary worth obtains,
Here passes current; paid from hand to hand,
It shifts in splendid traffic round the land:
From courts, to camps, to cottages it strays,
And all are taught an avarice of praise;
They please, are pleased, they give to get esteem,
Till, seeming blessed, they grow to what they seem.
But while this softer art their bliss supplies,
It gives their follies also room to rise;
For praise too dearly loved, or warmly sought,
Enfeebles all internal strength of thought.
And the weak soul, within itself unblest,
Leans for all pleasure on another's breast.
Hence ostentation here, with tawdry art,
Pants for the vulgar praise which fools impart;
Here vanity assumes her pert grimace,
And trims her robes of frize with copper lace;
Here beggar pride defrauds her daily cheer,
To boast one splendid banquet once a year;
The mind still turns where shifting fashion draws,
Nor weigh the solid worth of self applause.
To men of other minds my fancy flies,
Embosom'd in the deep where Holland lies.
Methinks her patient sons before me stand,
Where the broad ocean leans against the land,
And, sedulous to stop the coming tide,
Lift the tall rampire's artificial pride.
Onward methinks, and diligently slow
The firm connected bulwark seems to grow;
Spreads its long arms amidst the watery roar,
Scoops out an empire, and usurps the shore.
While the pent ocean rising over the pile,
Sees an amphibious world beneath him smile;
The slow canal, the yellow blossomed vale,
The willow tufted bank, the gliding sail,
The crowded mart, the cultivated plain,
A new creation rescued from his reign.
Thus, while around the wave-subjected soil
Impels the native to repeated toil,
Industrious habits in each bosom reign,
And industry begets a love of gain.
Hence all the good from opulence that springs,
With all those ills superfluous treasure brings,
Are here displayed. Their much-loved wealth imparts
Convenience, plenty, elegance, and arts;
But view them closer, craft and fraud appear,
Even liberty itself is bartered here.
At gold's superior charms all freedom flies,
The needy sell it, and the rich man buys;
A land of tyrants, and a den of slaves,
Here wretches seek dishonorable graves,
And calmly bent, to servitude conform,
Dull as their lakes that slumber in the storm.
Heavens! how unlike their Belgic sires of old!
Rough, poor, content, ungovernably bold;
War in each breast, and freedom on each brow;
How much unlike the sons of Britain now!
Fired at the sound my genius spreads her wing,
And flies where Britain courts the western spring;
Where lawns extend that scorn Arcadian pride,
And brighter streams than famed Hydaspis glide,
There all around the gentlest breezes stray,
There gentle music melts on every spray;
Creation's mildest charms are there combined,
Extremes are only in the master's mind!
Stern over each bosom reason holds her state
With daring aims irregularly great,
Pride in their port, defiance in their eye,
I see the lords of human kind pass by,
Intent on high designs, a thoughtful band,
By forms unfashion'd fresh from Nature's hand;
Fierce in their native hardiness of soul,
True to imagined right, above control,
While even the peasant boasts these rights to scan,
And learns to venerate himself as man.
Thine, Freedom, thine the blessings pictured here,
Thine are those charms that dazzle and endear;
Too blessed indeed, were such without alloy,
But fostered even by Freedom ills annoy;
That independence Britons prize too high,
Keeps man from man, and breaks the social tie;
The self-dependent lordlings stand alone,
All claims that bind and sweeten life unknown;
Here by the bonds of nature feebly held,
Minds combat minds, repelling and repelled.
Ferments arise, imprisoned factions roar,
Represt ambition struggles round her shore,
Till over-wrought, the general system feels
Its motions stop, or phrenzy fire the wheels.
Nor this the worst. As nature's ties decay,
As duty, love, and honor fail to sway,
Fictitious bonds, the bonds of wealth and law,
Still gather strength, and force unwilling awe.
Hence all obedience bows to these alone,
And talent sinks, and merit weeps unknown;
Till time may come, when stripped of all her charms,
The land of scholars, and the nurse of arms,
Where noble stems transmit the patriot flame,
Where kings have toiled, and poets wrote for fame,
One sink of level avarice shall lie,
And scholars, soldiers, kings, unhonour'd die.
Yet think not, thus when Freedom's ills I state,
I mean to flatter kings, or court the great;
Ye powers of truth that bid my soul aspire,
Far from my bosom drive the low desire;
And thou, fair Freedom, taught alike to feel
The rabble's rage, and tyrant's angry steel;
Thou transitory flower, alike undone
By proud contempt, or favour's fost'ring sun,
Still may thy blooms the changeful clime endure,
I only would repress them to secure:
For just experience tells, in every soil,
That those who think must govern those that toil;
And all that freedom's highest aims can reach,
Is but to lay proportioned loads on each.
Hence, should one order disproportioned grow,
Its double weight must ruin all below.
O then how blind to all that truth requires,
Who think it freedom when a part aspires!
Calm is my soul, nor apt to rise in arms,
Except when fast approaching danger warms:
But when contending chiefs blockade the throne,
Contracting regal power to stretch their own,
When I behold a factious band agree
To call it freedom when themselves are free;
Each wanton judge new penal statutes draw,
Laws grind the poor, and rich men rule the law;
The wealth of climes, where savage nations roam,
Pillaged from slaves to purchase slaves at home;
Fear, pity, justice, indignation start,
Tear off reserve, and bear my swelling heart;
Till half a patriot, half a coward grown,
I fly from petty tyrants to the throne.
Yes, brother, curse with me that baleful hour,
When first ambition struck at regal power;
And thus polluting honor in its source,
Gave wealth to sway the mind with double force.
Have we not seen, round Britain's peopled shore,
Her useful sons exchanged for useless ore?
Seen all her triumphs but destruction haste,
Like flaring tapers bright'ning as they waste;
Seen opulence, her grandeur to maintain,
Lead stern depopulation in her train,
And over fields where scattered hamlets rose,
In barren solitary pomp repose?
Have we not seen at pleasure's lordly call,
The smiling long-frequented village fall?
Beheld the duteous son, the sire decayed,
The modest matron, and the blushing maid,
Forced from their homes, a melancholy train,
To traverse climes beyond the western main;
Where wild Oswego spreads her swamps around,
And Niagara stuns with thundering sound?
Even now, perhaps, as there some pilgrim strays
Through tangled forests, and through dangerous ways;
Where beasts with man divided empire claim,
And the brown Indian marks with murderous aim;
There, while above the giddy tempest flies,
And all around distressful yells arise,
The pensive exile, bending with his woe,
To stop too fearful, and too faint to go,
Casts a long look where England's glories shine,
And bids his bosom sympathize with mine.
Vain, very vain, my weary search to find
That bliss which only centers in the mind:
Why have I strayed, from pleasure and repose,
To seek a good each government bestows?
In every government, though terrors reign,
Though tyrant kings, or tyrant laws restrain,
How small of all that human hearts endure,
That part which laws or kings can cause or cure.
Still to ourselves in every place consigned,
Our own felicity we make or find:
With secret course, which no loud storms annoy,
Glides the smooth current of domestic joy.
The lifted ax, the agonizing wheel,
Luke's iron crown, and Damien's bed of steel,
To men remote from power but rarely known,
Leave reason, faith, and conscience, all our own.
THE DESERTED VILLAGE, A POEM.
FIRST PRINTED IN M,DCC,LXIX.
TO SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
DEAR SIR,
I CAN have no expectations in an address of this kind, either to add to your
reputation, or to establish my own. You can gain nothing from my admiration, as
I am ignorant of that art in which you are said to excel; and I may lose much
by the severity of your judgment, as few have a juster taste in poetry than
you. Setting interest therefore aside, to which I never paid much attention, I
must be indulged at present in following my affections. The only dedication I
ever made was to my brother, because I loved him better than most other men. He
is since dead. Permit me to inscribe this poem to you.

How far you may be pleased with the versification and mere mechanical parts of
this attempt, I don't pretend to inquire; but I know you will object (and
indeed several of our best and wisest friends concur in the opinion) that the
depopulation it deplores is no where to be seen, and the disorders it laments
are only to be found in the poet's own imagination. To this I can scarce make
any other answer than that I sincerely believe what I have written; that I have
taken all possible pains, in my country excursions, for these four or five
years past, to be certain of what I allege, and that all my views and inquiries
have led me to believe those miseries real, which I here attempt to display.
But this is not the place to enter into an inquiry, whether the country be
depopulating, or not; the discussion would take up much room, and I should
prove myself, at best, an indifferent politician, to tire the reader with a
long preface, when I want his unfatigued attention to a long poem:

In regretting the depopulation of the country, I inveigh against the increase
of our luxuries; and here also I expect the shout of modern politicians against
me. For twenty or thirty years past, it has been the fashion to consider luxury
as one of the greatest national advantages; and all the wisdom of antiquity in
that particular, as erroneous. Still, however, I must remain a professed
ancient on that head, and continue to think those luxuries prejudicial to
states, by which so many vices are introduced, and so many kingdoms have been
undone. Indeed so much has been poured out of late on the other side of the
question, that, merely for the sake of novelty and variety, one would sometimes
wish to be in the right. I am,

DEAR SIR, YOUR SINCERE FRIEND, AND ARDENT ADMIRER, OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

THE DESERTED VILLAGE.
SWEET AUBURN! loveliest village of the plain,
Where health and plenty cheered the laboring swain,
Where smiling spring its earliest visit paid,
And parting summer's lingering blooms delayed.
Dear lovely bowers of innocence and ease,
Seats of my youth, when every sport could please,
How often have I loiter'd over thy green,
Where humble happiness endeared each scene!
How often have I paused on every charm,
The sheltered cot, the cultivated farm,
The never-failing brook, the busy mill,
The decent church that topt the neighboring hill,
The hawthorn bush, with feats beneath the shade,
For talking age and whispering lovers made!
How often have I blessed the coming day,
When toil remitting lent its turn to play,
And all the village train, from labor free,
Led up their sports beneath the spreading tree,
While many a pastime circled in the shade,
The young contending as the old surveyed;
And many a gambol frolic'd over the ground,
And slights of art and feats of strength went round.
And still as each repeated pleasure tired,
Succeeding sports the mirthful band inspired;
The dancing pair that simply sought renown,
By holding out, to tire each other down;
The swain mistrustless of his smutted face,
While secret laughter titter'd round the place;
The bashful virgin's side-long looks of love,
The matron's glance that would those looks reprove.
These were thy charms, sweet village! sports like these,
With sweet succession, taught even toil to please;
These round thy bowers their cheerful influence shed,
These were thy charms -- But all these charms are fled.
Sweet smiling village, loveliest of the lawn,
Thy sports are fled, and all thy charms withdrawn;
Amidst thy bowers the tyrant's hand is seen,
And desolation saddens all thy green:
One only master grasps the whole domain,
And half a tillage stints thy smiling plain;
No more thy glassy brook reflects the day,
But, choked with sedges, works its weedy way;
Along thy glades, a solitary guest,
The hollow sounding bittern guards its nest;
Amidst thy desert walks the lapwing flies,
And tires their echoes with unvary'd cries.
Sunk are thy bowers in shapeless ruin all,
And the long grass o'ertops the mouldering wall,
And, trembling, shrinking from the spoiler's hand,
Far, far away thy children leave the land.
Ill fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates, and men decay;
Princes and lords may flourish, or may fade;
A breath can make them, as a breath has made:
But a bold peasantry, their country's pride,
When once destroyed, can never be supplied.
A time there was, ere England's griefs began,
When every rood of ground maintained its man;
For him light labor spread her wholesome store,
Just gave what life required, but gave no more:
His best companions, innocence and health;
And his best riches, ignorance of wealth.
But times are altered; trade's unfeeling train
Usurp the land and dispossess the swain;
Along the lawn, where scattered hamlets rose,
Unwieldy wealth, and cumb'rous pomp repose;
And every want to luxury allied,
And every pang that folly pays to pride.
These gentle hours that plenty bade to bloom,
Those calm desires that asked but little room,
Those healthful sports that graced the peaceful scene,
Lived in each look, and brightened all the green;
These, far departing, seek a kinder shore,
And rural mirth and manners are no more.
Sweet AUBURN! parent of the blissful hour,
Thy glades forlorn confess the tyrant's power.
Here, as I take my solitary rounds,
Amidst thy tangling walks, and ruined grounds,
And, many a year elapsed, return to view
Where once the cottage stood, the hawthorn grew,
Remembrance wakes with all her busy train,
Swells at my breast, and turns the past to pain.
In all my wand'rings round this world of care,
In all my griefs -- and GOD has given my share --
I still had hopes my latest hours to crown,
Amidst these humble bowers to lay me down;
To husband out life's taper at the close,
And keep the flame from wasting by repose:
I still had hopes, for pride attends us still,
Amidst the swains to show my book-learn'd skill,
Around my fire an evening group to draw,
And tell of all I felt, and all I saw;
And, as an hare whom hounds and horns pursue,
Pants to the place from whence at first he flew,
I still had hopes, my long vexations past,
Here to return -- and die at home at last.
O blessed retirement, friend to life's decline,
Retreats from care, that never must be mine,
How blessed is he who crowns in shades like these,
A youth of labor with an age of ease;
Who quits a world where strong temptations try,
And, since it is hard to combat, learns to fly!
For him no wretches, born to work and weep,
Explore the mine, or tempt the dangerous deep;
No surly porter stands in guilty state,
To spurn imploring famine from the gate;
But on he moves to meet his latter end,
Angels around befriending virtue's friend;
Sinks to the grave with unperceived decay,
While resignation gently slopes the way;
And, all his prospects bright'ning to the last,
His Heaven com mences ere theworld be past!
Sweet was the sound, when often at ev'ning's close,
Up yonder hill the village murmur rose;
There, as I past with careless steps and slow,
The mingling notes came softened from below;
The swain responsive as the milk-maid sung,
The sober herd that lowed to meet their young;
The noisy geese that gabbled over the pool,
The playful children just let loose from school;
The watch-dog's voice that bay'd the whispering wind,
And the loud laugh that spoke the vacant mind;
These all in sweet confusion sought the shade,
And filled each pause the nightingale had made.
For now the sounds of population fail,
No cheerful murmurs fluctuate in the gale,
No busy steps the grass-grown foot-way tread,
But all the bloomy flush of life is sled.
All but yon widowed, solitary thing,
That feebly bends beside the plashy spring;
She, wretched matron, forced, in age, for bread,
To strip the brook with mantling cresses spread,
To pick her wintry faggot from the thorn,
To seek her nightly shed, and weep till morn;
She only left of all the harmless train,
The sad historian of the pensive plain.
Near yonder copse, where once the garden smiled,
And still where many a garden flower grows wild;
There, where a few torn shrubs the place disclose,
The village preacher's modest mansion rose.
A man he was, to all the country dear,
And passing rich with forty pounds a year;
Remote from towns he ran his godly race,
Nor ere had changed, nor wished to change his place;
Unskilful he to fawn, or seek for power,
By doctrines fashioned to the varying hour;
Far other aims his heart had learned to prize,
More bent to raise the wretched than to rise.
His house was known to all the vagrant train,
He chid their wand'rings, but relieved their pain,
The long-remember'd beggar was his guest,
Whose beard descending swept his aged breast;
The ruined spendthrift, now no longer proud,
Claimed kindred there, and had his claims allowed;
The broken soldier, kindly bade to stay,
Sat by his fire, and talked the night away;
Wept over his wounds, or tales of sorrow done,
Shouldered his crutch, and showed how fields were won.
Pleased with his guests, the good man learned to glow,
And quite forgot their vices in their woe;
Careless their merits, or their faults to scan,
His pity gave ere charity began.
Thus to relieve the wretched was his pride,
And even his failings leaned to Virtue's side;
But in his duty prompt at every call,
He watched and wept, he prayed and felt, for all.
And, as a bird each fond endearment tries,
To tempt its new-fledg'd offspring to the skies;
He tried each art, reproved each dull delay,
Allured to brighter worlds, and led the way.
Beside the bed where parting life was laid,
And sorrow, guilt, and pain, by turns dismayed,
The reverend champion stood. At his control,
Despair and anguish fled the struggling soul;
Comfort came down the trembling wretch to raise,
And his last fault'ring accents whispered praise.
At church, with meek and unaffected grace,
His looks adorned the venerable place;
Truth from his lips prevailed with double sway,
And fools, who came to scoff, remained to pray.
The service past, around the pious man,
With ready zeal, each honest rustic ran;
Even children followed with endearing wile,
And plucked his gown, to share the good man's smile.
His ready smile a parent's warmth expressed,
Their welfare pleased him, and their cares distressed;
To them his heart, his love, his griefs were given,
But all his serious thoughts had rest in heaven.
As some tall cliff that lifts its awful form,
Swells from the vale, and midway leaves the storm,
Though round its breast the rolling clouds are spread,
Eternal sunshine settles on its head.
Beside yon straggling fence that skirts the way,
With blossomed furze unprofitably gay,
There, in his noisy mansion, skilled to rule,
The village master taught his little school;
A man severe he was, and stern to view,
I knew him well, and every truant knew;
Well had the boding tremblers learned to trace
The day's disasters in his morning face;
Full well they laughed with counterfeited glee
At all his jokes, for many a joke had he;
Full well the busy whisper circling round,
Conveyed the dismal tidings when he frowned;
Yet he was kind, or if severe in aught,
The love he bore to learning was in fault;
The village all declared how much he knew;
'Twas certain he could write, and cipher too;
Lands he could measure, terms and tides presage,
And even the story ran that he could gauge:
In arguing too, the parson owned his skill,
For even though vanquished, he could argue still;
While words of learned length, and thundering sound,
Amazed the gazing rustics ranged around,
And still they gazed, and still the wonder grew,
That one small head could carry all he knew.
But past is all his fame. The very spot
Where many a time he triumphed, is forgot.
Near yonder thorn, that lifts its head on high,
Where once the sign-post caught the passing eye,
Low lies that house where nut-brown draughts inspired,
Where grey-beard mirth and smiling toil retired,
Where village statesmen talked with looks profound,
And news much older than their ale went round.
Imagination fondly stoops to trace
The parlour splendors of that festive place;
The white-wash'd wall, the nicely-sanded floor,
The varnished clock that click'd behind the door;
The chest contrived a double debt to pay,
A bed by night, a chest of draw'rs by day;
The pictures placed for ornament and use,
The twelve good rules, the royal game of goose;
The hearth, except when winter chilled the day,
With aspen boughs, and flowers and fennel gay,
While broken tea-cups, wisely kept for show,
Ranged over the chimney, glisten'd in a row.
Vain transitory splendour! could not all
Reprieve the tottering mansion from its fall!
Obscure it sinks, nor shall it more impart
An hour's importance to the poor man's heart;
Thither no more the peasant shall repair,
To sweet oblivion of his daily care;
No more the farmer's news, the barber's tale,
No more the wood-man's ballad shall prevail;
No more the smith his dusky brow shall clear,
Relax his ponderous strength, and lean to hear;
The host himself no longer shall be found
Careful to see the mantling bliss go round;
Nor the coy maid, half willing to be pressed,
Shall kiss the cup to pass it to the rest.
Yes! let the rich deride, the proud disdain,
These simple blessings of the lowly train,
To me more dear, congenial to my heart,
One native charm, than all the gloss of art;
Spontaneous joys, where Nature has its play,
The soul adopts, and owns their firstborn sway;
Lightly they frolic over the vacant mind,
Unenvied, unmolested, unconfined.
But the long pomp, the midnight masquerade,
With all the freaks of wanton wealth arrayed,
In these, ere triflers half their wish obtain,
The toiling pleasure sickens into pain;
And, even while fashion's brightest arts decoy,
The heart distrusting asks, if this be joy.
Ye friends to truth, ye statesmen who survey
The rich man's joys increase, the poor's decay,
It Is yours to judge, how wide the limits stand
Between a splendid and an happy land.
Proud swells the tide with loads of freighted ore,
And shouting Folly hails them from her shore;
Hoards, even beyond the miser's wish abound,
And rich men flock from all the world around.
Yet count our gains. This wealth is but a name
That leaves our useful product still the same.
Not so the loss. The man of wealth and pride,
Takes up a space that many poor supplied;
Space for his lake, his park's extended bounds,
Space for his horses, equipage and hounds;
The robe that wraps his limbs in silken sloth,
Has robbed the neighboring fields of half their growth,
His seat, where solitary sports are seen,
Indignant spurns the cottage from the green;
Around the world each needful product flies,
For all the luxuries the world supplies.
While thus the land adorned for pleasure all
In barren splendour feebly waits the fall.
As some fair female unadorned and plain,
Secure to please while youth confirms her reign.
Slights every borrowed charm that dress supplies,
Nor shares with art the triumph of her eyes:
But when those charms are past, for charms are frail,
When time advances, and when lovers fail,
She then shines forth, solicitous to bless,
In all the glaring impotence of dress.
Thus fares the land, by luxury betrayed,
In nature's simplest charms at first arrayed,
But verging to decline, its splendors rise,
Its vistas strike, its palaces surprise;
While, scourged by famine from the smiling land,
The mournful peasant leads his humble band;
And while he sinks, without one arm to save,
The country blooms -- a garden, and a grave.
Where then, ah, where shall poverty reside,
To 'scape the pressure of contiguous pride?
If to some common's fenceless limits strayed,
He drives his flock to pick the scanty blade,
Those fenceless fields the sons of wealth divide,
And even the bare-worn common is denied.
If to the city sped -- What waits him there?
To see profusion that he must not share;
To see ten thousand baneful arts combined
To pamper luxury, and thin mankind;
To see each joy the sons of pleasure know,
Extorted from his fellow-creature's woe.
Here, while the courtier glitters in brocade,
There the pale artist plies the sickly trade;
Here, while the proud their long-drawn pomps display,
There the black gibbet glooms beside the way.
The dome where Pleasure holds her midnight reign,
Here, richly decked, admits the gorgeous train;
Tumultuous grandeur crowds the blazing square,
The rattling chariots clash, the torches glare.
Sure scenes like these no troubles ere annoy!
Sure these denote one universal joy!
Are these thy serious thoughts -- Ah, turn thine eyes
Where the poor houseless shivering female lies.
She once, perhaps, in village plenty blessed,
Has wept at tales of innocence distressed;
Her modest looks the cottage might adorn,
Sweet as the primrose peeps beneath the thorn;
Now lost to all; her friends, her virtue fled,
Near her betrayer's door she lays her head,
And, pinched with cold, and shrinking from the shower,
With heavy heart deplores that luckless hour,
When idly first, ambitious of the town,
She left her wheel and robes of country brown.
Do thine, sweet AUBURN, thine, the loveliest train,
Do thy fair tribes participate her pain?
Even now, perhaps, by cold and hunger led,
At proud men's doors they ask a little bread!
Ah, no. To distant climes, a dreary scene,
Where half the unequal world intrudes between,
Through torrid tracts with fainting steps they go,
Where wild Altama murmurs to their woe.
Far different there from all that charmed before,
The various terrors of that horrid shore;
Those blazing suns that dart a downward ray,
And fiercely shed intolerable day;
Those matted woods where birds forget to sing,
But silent bats in drowsy clusters cling;
Those poisonous fields with rank luxuriance crowned,
Where the dark scorpion gathers death around;
Where at each step the stranger fears to wake
The rattling terrors of the vengeful snake;
Where crouching tigers wait their hapless prey,
And savage men more murderous still than they;
While often in whirls the mad tornado flies,
Mingling the ravaged landscape with the skies.
Far different these from every former scene,
The cooling brook, the grassy vested green,
The breezy covert of the warbling grove,
That only sheltered thefts of harmless love.
Good Heaven! what sorrows gloom'd that parting day,
That called them from their native walks away;
When the poor exiles, every pleasure past,
Hurg round the bowers, and fondly looked their last,
And took a long farewell, and wished in vain
For seats like these beyond the western main;
And shudd'ring still to face the distant deep,
Returned and wept, and still returned to weep.
The good old sire, the first prepared to go
To newfound worlds, and wept for other's woe;
But for himself, in conscious virtue brave,
He only wished for worlds beyond the grave,
His lovely daughter, lovelier in her tears,
The fond companion of his helpless years,
Silent went next, neglectful of her charms,
And left a lover's for a father's arms.
With louder plaints the mother spoke her woes,
And blessed the cot where every pleasure rose;
And kissed her thoughtless babes with many a tear,
And claspt them close, in sorrow doubly dear;
Whilst her fond husband strove to lend relief
In all the silent manliness of grief.
O luxury! thou cursed by heaven's decree,
How ill exchanged are things like these for thee!
How do thy potions with insidious joy,
Diffuse their pleasures only to destroy!
Kingdoms by thee, to sickly greatness grown,
Boast of a florid vigor not their own.
At every draught more large and large they grow,
A bloated mass of rank unwieldy woe;
Till sapp'd their strength, and every part unsound,
Down, down they sink, and spread a ruin round.
Even now the devastation is begun,
And half the business of destruction done;
Even now, methinks, as pond'ring here I stand,
I see the rural virtues leave the land.
Down where yon anch'ring vessel spreads the sail
That idly waiting flaps with every gale,
Downward they move, a melancholy band,
Pass from the shore, and darken all the strand.
Contented toil, and hospitable care,
And kind connubial tenderness, are there;
And piety with wishes placed above,
And steady loyalty, and faithful love.
And thou, sweet Poetry, thou loveliest maid,
Still first to fly where sensual joys invade;
Unfit in these degenerate times of shame,
To catch the heart, or strike for honest fame;
Dear charming nymph, neglected and decry'd,
My shame in crowds, my solitary pride.
Thou source of all my bliss, and all my woe,
That found'st me poor at first, and keep'st me so;
Thou guide, by which the nobler arts excel,
Thou nurse of every virtue, fare thee well,
Farewell, and O! wherever thy voice be tried,
On Torno's cliffs, or Pambamarca's side,
Whether where equinoctial fervours glow,
Or winter wraps the polar world in snow,
Still let thy voice, prevailing over time,
Redress the rigours of the inclement clime;
Aid slighted truth, with thy persuasive strain;
Teach erring man to spurn the rage of gain,
Teach him, that states of native strength possessed,
Though very poor, may still be very blessed;
That trade's proud empire hastes to swift decay,
As ocean sweeps the labored mole away;
While self-dependent power can time defy,
As rocks resist the billows and the sky.
THE GIFT.
TO IRIS, IN BOW-STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
SAY, cruel Iris, pretty rake,
Dear mercenary beauty,
What annual offering shall I make
Expressive of my duty?
My heart, a victim to thine eyes,
Should I at once deliver,
Say, would the angry Fair One prize
The gift, who slights the giver?
A bill, a jewel, watch, or toy,
My rivals give -- and let 'em.
If gems, or gold, import a joy,
I Will give them -- when I get 'em.
I Will give -- but not the full-blown rose,
Or rose-bud more in fashion;
Such short-lived offerings but disclose
A transitory passion.
I Will give thee something yet unpaid,
Not less sincere, than civil:
I Will give thee -- ah! too charming maid,
I Will give thee -- to the devil.
EPITAPH ON DR. PARNEL.
THIS tomb, inscribed to gentle PARNEL'S name,
May speak our gratitude, but not his fame.
What heart but feels his sweetly-moral lay,
That leads to truth through pleasure's flowery way?
Celestial themes confessed his tuneful aid;
And Heaven, that lent him genius, was repaid.
Needless to him the tribute we bestow,
The transitory breath of fame below:
More lasting rapture from his works shall rise,
While converts thank their poet in the skies.
EPILOGUE TO THE SISTERS.
WHAT! five long acts -- and all to make us wiser!
Our auth'ress sure has wanted an adviser.
Had she consulted me, she should have made
Her moral play a speaking masquerade;
Warmed up each bustling scene, and in her rage
Have emptied all the green-room on the stage.
My life on it, this had kept her play from sinking;
Have pleased our eyes, and saved the pain of thinking.
Well, since she thus has shown her want of skill,
What if I give a masquerade? -- I will.
But how? ay, there is the rub! [pausing] -- I Have got my cue:
The world's a masquerade! the masquers, you, you, you. [To Boxes, Pit, and
Gallery.
Lud! what a group the motley scene discloses!
False wits, false wives, false virgins, and false spouses!
Statesmen with bridles on; and, close beside 'em,
Patriots in party-colored suits that ride 'em.
There Hebes, turned of fifty, try once more
To raise a flame in Cupids of threescore.
These in their turn, with appetites as keen,
Deserting fifty, fasten on fifteen.
Miss, not yet full fifteen, with fire uncommon,
Flings down her sampler, and takes up the woman:
The little urchin smiles, and spreads her lure,
And tries to kill, ere she is got power to cure.
Thus it is with all -- their chief and constant care
Is to seem every thing -- but what they are.
Yon broad, bold, angry spark, I fix my eye on,
Who seems to have robbed his vizor from the lion;
Who frowns, and talks, and swears, with round parade,
Looking, as who should say, dam'me! who is afraid? [Mimicking.
Strip but this vizor off, and sure I am
You Will find his lionship a very lamb.
Yon politician, famous in debate,
Perhaps, to vulgar eyes, bestrides the state;
Yet, when he deigns his real shape to assume,
He turns old woman, and bestrides a broom.
Yon patriot, too, who presses on your sight,
And seems to every gazer, all in white,
If with a bribe his candor you attack,
He bows, turns round, and whip -- the man is black!
Yon critic, too -- but whither do I run?
If I proceed, our bard will be undone!
Well then a truce, since she requests it too:
Do you spare her, and I Will for once spare you.
THE HAUNCH OF VENISON, A POETIC EPISTLE, TO LORD CLARE.
FIRST PRINTED IN MDCCLXV.
THE HAUNCH OF VENISON, A POETIC EPISTLE, TO LORD CLARE.
THANKS, my lord, for your venison, for finer or fatter
Never ranged in a forest, or smoked in a platter;
The haunch was a picture for painters to study,
The fat was so white, and the lean was so ruddy,
Though my stomach was sharp, I could scarce help regretting,
To spoil such a delicate picture by eating;
I had thoughts, in my chambers, to place it in view,
To be shown to my friends as a piece of virtu:
As in some Irish houses, where things are so so,
One gammon of bacon hangs up for a show:
But, for eating a rasher of what they take pride in,
They Would as soon think of eating the pan it is fried in.
But hold -- let me pause -- don't I hear you pronounce,
This tale of the bacon's a damnable bounce;
Well, suppose it a bounce -- sure a poet may try,
By a bounce now and then, to get courage to fly.
But, my lord, it is no bounce: I protest in my turn,
It Is a truth -- and your lordship may ask Mr. Burn. Lord Clare's nephew.

To go on with my tale -- as I gazed on the haunch;
I thought of a friend that was trusty and staunch,
So I cut it, and sent it to Reynolds undrest,
To paint it, or eat it, just as he liked best.
Of the neck and the breast I had next to dispose;
'Twas a neck and a breast that might rival Monroe's:
But in parting with these I was puzzled again,
With the how, and the who, and the where, and the when.
There Is H -- d, and C -- y, and H -- rth, and H -- ff,
I think they love venison -- I know they love beef.
There Is my countryman Higgins -- Oh! let him alone,
For making a blunder, or picking a bone.
But hang it -- to poets who seldom can eat,
Your very good mutton's a very good treat;
Such dainties to them their health it might hurt,
It Is like sending them ruffles, when wanting a shirt.
While thus I debated, in reverie centered,
An acquaintance, a friend as he called himself, entered;
An under-bred, fine-spoken fellow was he,
And he smiled as he looked at the venison and me.
What have we got here? -- Why this is good eating!
Your own I suppose -- or is it in waiting?
Why whose should it be? cried I, with a flounce,
I get these things often; -- but that was a bounce*
Some lords, my acquaintance, that settle the nation,
Are pleased to be kind -- but I hate ostentation.
If that be the case then, cried he, very gay,
I Am glad I have taken this house in my way.
Tomorrow you take a poor dinner with me;
No words -- I insist on it -- precisely at three:
We'll have Johnson, and Burke, all the wits will be there,
My acquaintance is slight, or I Would ask my lord Clare.
And, now that I think on it, as I am a sinner!
We wanted this venison to make out the dinner.
What say you -- a pasty, it shall, and it must,
And my wife, little Kitty, is famous for crust.
Here, porter -- this venison with me to Mile-end;
No stirring -- I beg -- my dear friend -- my dear friend!
Thus snatching his hat, he brusht off like the wind,
And the porter and eatables followed behind.
Left alone to reflect, having emptied my shelf,
And "nobody with me at sea but myself;" See the letters that passed between
his royal highness Henry duke of Cumberland, and lady Grosvenor -- 12o. 1769.

Though I could not help thinking my gentleman hasty,
Yet Johnson, and Burke, and a good venison pasty,
Were things that I never disliked in my life,
Though clogged with a coxcomb, and Kitty his wife.
So next day in due splendour to make my approach,
I drove to his door in my own hackney-coach.
When come to the place where we all were to dine,
(A chair-lumber'd closet just twelve feet by nine:)
My friend bade me welcome, but struck me quite dumb,
With tidings that Johnson, and Burke would not come,
For I knew it, he cried, both eternally fail,
The one with his speeches, and the other with Thrale;
But no matter, I Will warrant we'll make up the party,
With two full as clever, and ten times as hearty.
The one is a Scotchman, the other a Jew,
They both of them merry, and authors like you;
The one writes the Snarler, the other the Scourge;
Some thinks he writes Cinna -- he owns to Panurge.
While thus he described them by trade and by name,
They entered, and dinner was served as they came.
At the top a fried liver, and bacon were seen,
At the bottom was tripe, in a swinging tureen;
At the sides there was spinnage and pudding made hot;
In the middle a place where the pasty -- was not.
Now, my lord, as for tripe it is my utter aversion,
And your bacon I hate like a Turk or a Persian;
So there I sat stuck, like a horse in a pound,
While the bacon and liver went merrily round:
But what vexed me most, was that d -- 'd Scottish rogue,
With his long-winded speeches, his smiles and his brogue,
And, madam, quoth he, may this bit be my poison,
A prettier dinner I never set eyes on;
Pray a slice of your liver, though may I be cursed,
But I Have eat of your tripe, till I Am ready to burst.
The tripe, quoth the Jew, with his chocolate cheek,
I could dine on this tripe seven days in the week:
I like these here dinners so pretty and small;
But your friend there, the-doctor, eats nothing at all.
O -- oh! quoth my friend, he will come on in a trice,
He Is keeping a corner for something that is nice:
There Is a pasty -- a pasty! repeated the Jew;
I don't care, if I keep a corner for it too.
What the de'il, mon, a pasty! re-echo'd the Scot;
Though splitting, I Will still keep a corner for that.
We'll all keep a corner, the lady cried out;
We'll all keep a corner was echoed about.
While thus we resolved, and the pasty delayed,
With looks that quite petrified, entered the maid;
A visage so sad, and so pale with affright,
Waked Priam in drawing his curtains by night.
But we quickly found out, for who could mistake her?
That she came with some terrible news from the baker:
And so it fell out, for that negligent sloven,
Had shut out the pasty on shutting his oven.
Sad Philomel thus -- but let similes drop --
And now that I think on it, the story may stop.
To be plain, my good lord, it is but labor misplaced,
To send such good verses to one of your taste;
You Have got an odd something -- a kind of discerning --
A relish -- a taste -- sicken'd over by learning;
At least, it is your temper, as very well known,
That you think very slightly of all that is your own:
So, perhaps, in your habits of thinking amiss,
You may make a mistake, and think slightly of this.
FROM THE ORATORIO OF THE CAPTIVITY.
SONG.
THE wretch condemned with life to part,
Still, still on hope relies;
And every pang that rends the heart,
Bids expectation rise.
Hope, like the glimmering taper's light,
Adorns and chears the way;
And still, as darker grows the night,
Emits a brighter ray.
SONG.
O Memory! thou fond deceiver,
Still importunate and vain,
To former joys, recurring ever,
And turning all the past to pain;
Thou, like the world, the oppressed oppressing,
Thy smiles increase the wretch's woe?
And he who wants each other blessing,
In thee must ever find a foe.
THE CLOWN'S REPLY.
JOHN TROTT was desired by two witty peers
To tell them the reason why asses had ears?
'An't please you,' quoth John, 'I'm not given to letters,
Nor dare I pretend to know more than my betters;
However from this time I shall never see your graces,
As I hope to be saved! without thinking on asses.'
Edinburgh, 1753.
EPITAPH ON EDWARD PURDON. This gentleman was educated at Trinity College,
Dublin; but having wasted his patrimony, he enlisted as a foot soldier. Growing
tired of that employment, he obtained his discharge, and became a scribbler in
the newspapers. He translated Voltaire's Henriade.

HERE lies poor NED PURDON, from misery freed,
Who long was a bookseller's hack;
He led such a damnable life in this world, --
I don't think, he will wish to come back.
AN ELEGY ON THE GLORY OF HER SEX, MRS. MARY BLAIZE.
GOOD people all, with one accord,
Lament for madam Blaize,
Who never wanted a good word --
From those who spoke her praise.
The needy seldom passed her door,
And always found her kind;
She freely lent to all the poor, --
Who left a pledge behind.
She strove the neighborhood to please,
With manners wondrous winning,
And never followed wicked ways,
Unless when she was sinning.
At church, in silks and satins new,
With hoop of monstrous size,
She never slumber'd in her pew, --
But when she shut her eyes.
Her love was sought, I do aver,
By twenty beaux and more;
The king himself has followed her, --
When she has walked before.
But now her wealth and finery fled,
Her hangers-on cut short all;
The doctors found, when she was dead, --
Her last disorder mortal.
Let us lament, in sorrow sore,
For Kent-street well may say,
That had she lived a twelvemonth more, --
She had not died today.
RETALIATION: A POEM.
FIRST PRINTED IN M,DCC,LXXIV. AFTER THE AUTHOR'S DEATH.
Dr. Goldsmith and some of his friends occasionally dined at the St. James's
coffee-house. -- One day it was proposed to write epitaphs on him. His country,
dialect, and person, furnished subjects of witticism. He was called on for
RETALIATION, and at their next meeting, produced the following poem.

RETALIATION: A POEM.
OF old, when Scarron his companions invited,
Each guest brought his dish, and the feast was united;
If our The master of the St. James's coffee-house, where the doctor, and the
friends he has characterized in this poem, occasionally dined.
landlord supplies us with beef, and with fish,
Let each guest bring himself, and he brings the best dish:
Our Doctor Barnard, dean of Derry in Ireland.
dean shall be venison, just fresh from the plains;
Our Mr. Edmund Burke, member for Wendover, and one of the greatest orators in
this kingdom.
Burke shall be tongue, with a garnish of brains;
Our Mr. William Burke, late secretary to general Conway, and member for Bedwin.
Will shall be wild fowl, of excellent flavor,
And Mr. Richard Burke, collector of Granada.
Dick with his pepper shall heighten their savor:
Our Mr. Richard Cumberland, author of the West-Indian, Fashionable Lover, the
Brothers, and other dramatic pieces.
Cumberland's sweetbread its place shall obtain,
And Doctor Douglas, canon of Windsor, an ingenious Scotch gentleman, who has
no less distinguished himself as a citizen of the world, than a sound critic,
in detecting several literary mistakes (or rather forgeries) of his countrymen;
particularly Lauder on Milton, and Bower's History of the Popes.
Douglas is pudding, substantial and plain:
Our David Garrick, esquire; joint patentee and acting manager of the
Theater Royal, Drury Lane.
Garrick's a sallad; for in him we see
Oil, vinegar, sugar, and saltness agree:
To make out the dinner, full certain I am,
That Counselor John Ridge, a gentleman belonging to the Irish bar.
Ridge is anchovy, and Sir Joshua Reynolds, president of the Royal Academy.
Reynolds is lamb;
That An eminent attorney.
Hickey's a capon, and, by the same rule,
Magnanimous Goldsmith, a goosberry fool.
At a dinner so various, at such a repast,
Who'd not be a glutton, and stick to the last?
Here, waiter, more wine, let me sit while I Am able,
'Till all my companions sink under the table;
Then, with chaos and blunders encircling my head,
Let me ponder, and tell what I think of the dead.
Here lies the good Vide Page 85.
dean, reunited to earth,
Who mixed reason with pleasure, and wisdom with mirth:
If he had any faults, he has left us in doubt,
At least, in six weeks, I could not find 'em out;
Yet some have declared, and it cannot be denied 'em,
That sly-boots was cursedly cunning to hide 'em.
Here lies our good Vide Page 85.
Edmund, whose genius was such,
We scarcely can praise it, or blame it too much;
Who, born for the universe, narrow'd his mind,
And to party gave up what was meant for mankind.
Though fraught with all learning, yet straining his throat,
To persuade Mr. T. Townshend, member for Whitchurch.
Tommy Townshend to lend him a vote;
Who, too deep for his hearers, still went on refining,
And thought of convincing, while they thought of dining;
Though equal to all things, for all things unfit,
Too nice for a statesman, too proud for a wit:
For a patriot too cool; for a drudge, disobedient;
And too fond of the right to pursue the expedient.
In short, 'twas his fate, unemploy'd, or in place, sir,
To eat mutton cold, and cut blocks with a razor.
Here lies honest Vide Page 85.
William, whose heart was a mint,
While the owner never knew half the good that was in it;
The pupil of impulse, it forced him along,
His conduct still right, with his argument wrong;
Still aiming at honor, yet fearing to roam,
The coachman was tipsy, the chariot drove home;
Would you ask for his merits? alas! he had none;
What was good was spontaneous, his faults were his own.
Here lies honest Richard, whose fate I must sigh at;
Alas, that such frolic should now be so quiet!
What spirits were his! what wit and what whim!
Mr. Richard Burke; vide page 85. This gentleman having slightly fractured one
of his arms and legs, at different times, the doctor has rallied him on those
accidents, as a kind of retributive justice for breaking his jests upon other
people.
Now breaking a jest, and now breaking a limb!
Now wrangling and grumbling to keep up the ball!
Now teazing and vexing, yet laughing at all!
In short, so provoking a devil was Dick,
That we wished him full ten times a day at old nick;
But, missing his mirth and agreeable vein,
As often we wished to have Dick back again.
Here Vide page 86.
Cumberland lies, having acted his parts,
The Terence of England, the mender of hearts;
A flattering painter, who made it his care
To draw men as they ought to be, not as they are.
His gallants are all faultless, his women divine,
And comedy wonders at being so fine;
Like a tragedy queen he has dizen'd her out,
Or rather like tragedy giving a rout.
His fools have their follies so lost in a crowd
Of virtues and feelings, that folly grows proud,
And coxcombs alike in their failings alone,
Adopting his portraits are pleased with their own.
Say, where has our poet this malady caught?
Or, wherefore his characters thus without fault?
Say, was it that vainly directing his view
To find out men's virtues, and finding them few,
Quite sick of pursuing each troublesome elf,
He grew lazy at last, and drew from himself?
Here Vide page 86.
Douglas retires from his toils to relax,
The scourge of impostors, the terror of quacks:
Come, all ye quack bards, and ye quacking divines,
Come, and dance on the spot where your tyrant reclines:
When satire and censure encircled his throne,
I feared for your safety, I feared for my own;
But now he is gone, and we want a detector,
Our The Rev. Dr. Dodd.
Dodds shall be pious, our Mr. Kenrick lately read lectures at the Devil
tavern, under the title of 'The School of Shakespeare.'
Kenricks shall lecture;
James Macpherson, esquire; who lately, from the mere force of his style, wrote
down the first poet of all antiquity.
Macpherson write bombast, and call it a style,
Our Vide page 87.
Townshend make speeches, and I shall compile;
New Vide page 86.
Lauders and Bowers the Tweed shall cross over,
No countryman living their tricks to discover;
Detection her taper shall quench to a spark,
And Scotchman meet Scotchman and cheat in the dark.
Here lies Vide page 86.
David Garrick, describe me who can,
An abridgment of all that was pleasant in man;
As an actor, confessed without rival to shine;
As a wit, if not first, in the very first line:
Yet, with talents like these, and an excellent heart,
The man had his failings, a dupe to his art.
Like an ill-judging beauty, his colors he spread,
And beplaster'd, with rouge, his own natural red.
On the stage he was natural, simple, affecting;
'Twas only that, when he was off, he was acting.
With no reason on earth to go out of his way,
He turned and he varied full ten times a day:
Though secure of our hearts, yet confoundedly sick,
If they were not his own by finessing and trick:
He cast off his friends, as a huntsman his pack,
For he knew when he pleased he could whistle them back.
Of praise a mere glutton, he swallowed what came,
And the puff of a dunce, he mistook it for fame;
'Till his relish grown callous, almost to disease,
Who peppered the highest, was surest to please.
But let us be candid, and speak out our mind,
If dunces applauded, he paid them in kind.
Ye Vide page 89.
Kenricks, ye Mr. Hugh Kelly, author of False Delicacy, Word to the Wise,
Clementina, School for Wives, etc. etc.
Kellys, and Mr. William Woodfall, printer of the Morning Chronicle.
Woodfalls so grave,
What a commerce was yours, while you got and you gave?
How did Grub-street re-echo the shouts that you raised,
While he was beroscius'd, and you were beprais'd?
But peace to his spirit, wherever it flies,
To act as an angel, and mix with the skies:
Those poets, who owe their best fame to his skill,
Shall still be his flatterers, go where he will.
Old Shakespeare, receive him, with praise and with love,
And Beaumonts and Bens be his Vide page 90.
Kellys above.
Here Vide page 86.
Hickey reclines, a most blunt, pleasant creature,
And slander itself must allow him goodnature:
He cherished his friend, and he relished a bumper;
Yet one fault he had, and that one was a thumper.
Perhaps you may ask if the man was a miser?
I answer, no, no, for he always was wiser:
Too courteous, perhaps, or obligingly flat?
His very worst foe cannot accuse him of that:
Perhaps he confided in men as they go,
And so was too foolishly honest? ah no!
Then what was his failing? come tell it, and burn ye, --
He was, could he help it? a special attorney.
Here Ibid.
Reynolds is laid, and, to tell you my mind,
He has not left a wiser or better behind;
His pencil was striking, resistless and grand;
His manners were gentle, complying and bland;
Still born to improve us in every part,
His pencil our faces, his manners our heart:
To coxcombs averse, yet most civilly steering,
When they judged without skill he was still hard of hearing:
When they talked of their Raphaels, Corregios and stuff,
He shifted his Sir Joshua Reynolds is so remarkably deaf as to be under the
necessity of using an ear-trumpet in company.
trumpet, and only took snuff.
POSTSCRIPT.
AFTER the fourth edition of this poem was printed, the publisher received the
following epitaph on Mr. Whitefoord, Mr. Caleb Whitefoord, author of many
humorous essays.
from a friend of the late doctor Goldsmith.

HERE Whitefoord reclines, and, deny it who can,
Though he merrily lived, he is now a Mr. W. was so notorious a punster, that
doctor Goldsmith used to say it was impossible to keep him company, without
being infected with the itch of punning.
grave man:
Rare compound of oddity, frolic and fun!
Who relished a joke, and rejoiced in a pun;
Whose temper was generous, open, sincere;
A stranger to flattery, a stranger to fear;
Who scattered around wit and humor at will;
Whose daily bons mots half a column might fill:
A Scotchman, from pride and from prejudice free;
A scholar, yet surely no pedant was he.
What pity, alas! that so liberal a mind
Should so long be to news-paper essays confined!
Who perhaps to the summit of science could soar,
Yet content "if the table he set on a roar;"
Whose talents to fill any station were fit,
Yet happy if Woodfall Mr. H. S. Woodfall, printer of the Public Advertiser.
confessed him a wit.
Ye news paper witlings! ye pert scribbling folks!
Who copied his squibs, and re-echoed his jokes;
Ye tame imitators, ye servile herd, come,
Still follow your master, and visit his tomb:
To deck it, bring with you festoons of the vine,
And copious libations bestow on his shrine;
Then strew all around it (you can do no less)
Mr. Whitefoord has frequently indulged the town with humorous pieces under
those titles in the Public Advertiser.
Cross-readings, ship-news, and mistakes of the press.
Merry Whitefoord, farewell! for thy sake I admit
That a Scot may have humor, I had almost said wit:
This debt to thy memory I cannot refuse,
"Thou best humored man with the worst humored muse."
PLAYS, BY DR. GOLDSMITH.
THF GOOD-NATURED MAN: A COMEDY.
AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN COVENT GARDEN. FIRST PRINTED IN
M,DCC,LXVIII.
PREFACE.
WHEN I undertook to write a comedy, I confess I was strongly prepossessed in
favor of the poets of the last age, and strove to imitate them. The term,
genteel comedy, was then unknown amongst us, and little more was desired by an
audience, than nature and humor, in whatever walks of life they were most
conspicuous. The author of the following scenes never imagined that more would
be expected of him, and therefore to delineate character has been his principal
aim. Those who know any thing of composition, are sensible, that in pursuing
humor, it will sometimes lead us into the recesses of the mean; I was even
tempted to look for it in the master of a spunging-house: but in deference to
the public taste, grown of late, perhaps, too delicate; the scene of the
bailiffs was retrenched in the representation. In deference also to the
judgment of a few friends, who think in a particular way, the scene is here
restored. The author submits it to the reader in his closet; and hopes that too
much refinement will not banish humor and character from ours, as it has
already done from the French theater. Indeed the French comedy is now become so
very elevated and sentimental, that it has not only banished humor and Moliere
from the stage, but it has banished all spectators too.

Upon the whole, the author returns his thanks to the public for the favorable
reception which the Good-natured Man has met with: and to Mr. Colman in
particular, for his kindness to it. It may not also be improper to assure any,
who shall hereafter write for the theater, that merit, or supposed merit, will
ever be a sufficient passport to his protection.

PROLOGUE
WRITTEN BY DR. JOHNSON:
SPOKEN BY MR. BENSLEY. PRESSED by the load of life, the weary mind
Surveys the general toil of human kind;
With cool submission joins the laboring train,
And social sorrow, loses half its pain:
Our anxious bard, without complaint, may share
This bustling season's epidemic care.
Like Caesar's pilot, dignified by fate,
Tossed in one common storm with all the great;
Distressed alike, the statesman and the wit,
When one a borough courts, and one the pit.
The busy candidates for power and fame,
Have hopes, and fears, and wishes, just the same;
Disabled both to combat, or to fly,
Must hear all taunts, and hear without reply.
Uncheck'd on both, loud rabbles vent their rage,
As mongrels bay the lion in a cage.
The offended burgess hoards his angry tale,
For that blessed year when all that vote may rail;
Their schemes of spite the poet's foes dismiss,
Till that glad night, when all that hate may hiss.
This day the powdered curls and golden coat,
Says swelling Crispin, begged a cobler's vote.
This night, our wit, the pert apprentice cries,
Lies at my feet, I hiss him, and he dies.
The great, it is true, can charm the electing tribe;
The bard may supplicate, but cannot bribe.
Yet judged by those, whose voices never were sold,
He feels no want of ill-persuading gold;
But confident of praise, if praise be due,
Trusts without fear, to merit, and to you.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Mr. Honeywood, Mr. POWELL. Croaker, Mr. SHUTER. Lofty, Mr. WOODWARD. Sir
William Honeywood, Mr. CLARKE. Leontine, Mr. BENSLEY. Jarvis, Mr. DUNSTALL.
Butler, Mr. CUSHING. Bailiff, Mr. R. SMITH. Dubardieu, Mr. HOLTOM. Postboy, Mr.
QUICK.
WOMEN.
Miss Richland, Mrs. BULKELEY. Olivia, Mrs. MATTOCKS. Mrs. Croaker, Mrs. PIT.
Garnet, Mrs. GREEN. Landlady, Mrs. WHITE.
Scene, LONDON. THE GOOD-NATURED MAN.
ACT THE FIRST.
SCENE, an apartment in YOUNG HONEYWOOD'S house. Enter SIR WILLIAM HONEYWOOD,
JARVIS. SIR WILLIAM. GOOD Jarvis, make no apologies for this honest bluntness.
Fidelity, like yours, is the best excuse for every freedom.


JARVIS. I cannot help being blunt, and being very angry too, when I hear you
talk of disinheriting so good, so worthy a young gentleman as your nephew, my
master. All the world loves him.


SIR WILLIAM. Say rather, that he loves all the world; that is his fault.


JARVIS. I Am sure there is no part of it more dear to him than you are, though he
has not seen you since he was a child.


SIR WILLIAM. What signifies his affection to me; or how can I be proud of a
place in a heart where every sharper and coxcomb find an easy entrance?


JARVIS. I grant you that he is rather too good-natured; that he is too much
every man's man; that he laughs this minute with one, and cries the next with
another; but whose instructions may he thank for all this?


SIR WILLIAM. Not mine, sure? My letters to him during my employment in Italy,
taught him only that philosophy which might prevent, not defend his errors.


JARVIS. Faith, begging your honor's pardon, I Am sorry they taught him any
philosophy at all; it has only served to spoil him. This same philosophy is a
good horse in the stable, but an errant jade on a journey. For my own part,
whenever I hear him mention the name on it, I Am always sure he is going to play
the fool.


SIR WILLIAM. Don't let us ascribe his faults to his philosophy, I entreat you.
No, Jarvis, his good nature arises rather from his fears of offending the
importunate, than his desire of making the deserving happy.


JARVIS. What it rises from, I don't know. But, to be sure, every body has it,
that asks it.


SIR WILLIAM. Ay, or that does not ask it. I have been now for some time a
concealed spectator of his follies, and find them as boundless as his
dissipation.


JARVIS. And yet, faith, he has some fine name or other for them all. He calls
his extravagance, generosity; and his trusting every body, universal
benevolence. It was but last week he went security for a fellow whose face he
scarce knew, and that he called an act of exalted mu -- mu -- munificence; ay,
that was the name he gave it.


SIR WILLIAM. And upon that I proceed, as my last effort, though with very little
hopes to reclaim him. That very fellow has just absconded, and I have taken up
the security. Now, my intention is to involve him in fictitious distress,
before he has plunged himself into real calamity. To arrest him for that very
debt, to clap an officer upon him, and then let him see which of his friends
will come to his relief.


JARVIS. Well, if I could but any way see him thoroughly vexed, every groan of
his would be music to me; yet faith, I believe it impossible. I have tried to
fret him myself every morning these three years; but, instead of being angry,
he sits as calmly to hear me scold, as he does to his hair-dresser.


SIR WILLIAM. We must try him once more, however, and I Will go this instant to
put my scheme into execution; and I don't despair of succeeding, as, by your
means, I can have frequent opportunities of being about him, without being
known. What a pity it is, Jarvis, that any man's good will to others should
produce so much neglect of himself, as to require correction. Yet, we must
touch his weaknesses with a delicate hand. There are some faults so nearly
allied to excellence, that we can scarce weed out the vice without eradicating
the virtue. [Exit.


JARVIS. Well, go thy ways, sir William Honeywood. It is not without reason
that the world allows thee to be the best of men. But here comes his hopeful
nephew; the strange, good-natured, foolish, open-hearted -- And yet, all his
faults are such that one loves him still the better for them.


Enter HONEYWOOD. HONEYWOOD. Well, Jarvis, what messages from my friends this
morning?


JARVIS. You have no friends.


HONEYWOOD. Well; from my acquaintance then?


JARVIS. ( Pulling out bills) A few of our usual cards of compliment, that is
all. This bill from your tailor; this from your mercer; and this from the
little broker in Crooked-lane. He says he has been at a great deal of trouble
to get back the money you borrowed.


HONEYWOOD. That I don't know; but I Am sure we were at a great deal of trouble
in getting him to lend it.


JARVIS. He has lost all patience.


HONEYWOOD. Then he has lost a very good thing.


JARVIS. There Is that ten guineas you were sending to the poor gentleman and
his children in the Fleet. I believe that would stop his mouth, for a while at
least.


HONEYWOOD. Ay, Jarvis, but what will fill their mouths in the mean time? Must
I be cruel because he happens to be importunate; and, to relieve his avarice,
leave them to insupportable distress?


JARVIS. 'Sdeath! sir, the question now is how to relieve yourself. Yourself --
Hav'nt I reason to be out of my senses, when I see things going at sixes and
sevens?


HONEYWOOD. Whatever reason you may have for being out of your senses, I hope
you will allow that I Am not quite unreasonable for continuing in mine.


JARVIS. You're the only man alive in your present situation that could do so
-- Every thing upon the waste. There Is miss Richland and her fine fortune gone
already, and upon the point of being given to your rival.


HONEYWOOD. I Am no man's rival.


JARVIS. Your uncle in Italy preparing to disinherit you; your own fortune
almost spent; and nothing but pressing creditors, false friends, and a pack of
drunken servants that your kindness has made unfit for any other family.


HONEYWOOD. Then they have the more occasion for being in mine.


JARVIS. Soh! What will you have done with him that I caught stealing your
plate in the pantry? In the fact; I caught him in the fact.


HONEYWOOD. In the fact! If so, I really think that we should pay him his
wages, and turn him off.


JARVIS. He shall be turned off at Tyburn, the dog; we'll hang him, if it be
only to frighten the rest of the family.


HONEYWOOD. No, Jarvis: it is enough that we have lost what he has stolen, let
us not add to it the loss of a fellow creature!


JARVIS. Very fine; well, here was the footman just now, to complain of the
butler; he says he does most work, and ought to have most wages.


HONEYWOOD. That Is but just; though perhaps here comes the butler to complain of
the footman.


JARVIS. Ay, its the way with them all, from the scullion to the
privy-counsellor. If they have a bad master, they keep quarrelling with him: if
they have a good-master, they keep quarrelling with one another.


Enter BUTLER, drunk. BUTLER. Sir, I Will not stay in the family with Jonathan;
you must part with him, or part with me, that is the exex-exposition of the
matter, sir.


HONEYWOOD. Full and explicit enough. But what is his fault, good Philip?


BUTLER. Sir, he is given to drinking, sir, and I shall have my morals
corrupted, by keeping such company.


HONEYWOOD. Ha! ha! He has such a diverting way --


JARVIS. O quite amusing.


BUTLER. I find my wines a-going, sir; and liquors don't go without mouths,
sir; I hate a drunkard, sir.


HONEYWOOD. Well, well, Philip, I Will hear you upon that another time, so go to
bed now.


JARVIS. To bed! Let him go to the devil.


BUTLER. Begging your honor's pardon, and begging your pardon, master Jarvis,
I Will not go to bed, nor to the devil neither. I have enough to do to mind my
cellar. I forgot, your honor, Mr. Croaker is below. I came on purpose to tell
you.


HONEYWOOD. Why didn't you show him up, blockhead?


BUTLER. Show him up, sir! With all my heart, sir. Up or down, all is one to me.
[Exit.


JARVIS. Ay, we have one or other of that family in this house from morning
till night. He comes on the old affair I suppose. The match between his son,
that is just returned from Paris, and miss Richland, the young lady he is
guardian to.


HONEYWOOD. Perhaps so. Mr. Croaker, knowing my friendship for the young lady,
has got it into his head that I can persuade her to what I please.


JARVIS. Ah! If you loved yourself but half as well as she loves you, we should
soon see a marriage that would set all things to rights again.


HONEYWOOD. Love me! Sure, Jarvis, you dream. No, no; her intimacy with me
never amounted to more than friendship -- mere friendship. That she is the most
lovely woman that ever warmed the human heart with desire, I own. But never let
me harbor a thought of making her unhappy, by a connection with one so
unworthy her merits as I am. No, Jarvis, it shall be my study to serve her,
even in spite of my wishes; and to secure her happiness, though it destroys my
own.


JARVIS. Was ever the like! I want patience.


HONEYWOOD. Besides, Jarvis, though I could obtain miss Richland's consent, do
you think I could succeed with her guardian, or Mrs. Croaker his wife; who,
though both very fine in their way, are yet a little opposite in their
dispositions you know.


JARVIS. Opposite enough, heaven knows; the very reverse of each other; she all
laugh and no joke; he always complaining, and never sorrowful; a fretful poor
soul that has a new distress for every hour in the four and twenty --


HONEYWOOD. Hush, hush, he is coming up, he will hear you.


JARVIS. One whose voice is a passing bell --


HONEYWOOD. Well, well, go, do.


JARVIS. A raven that bodes nothing but mischief; a coffin and cross bones; a
bundle of rue; a sprig of deadly night shade; a -- ( Honeywood stopping his
mouth, at last pushes him off.) [ Exit Jarvis.


HONEYWOOD. I must own my old monitor is not entirely wrong. There is something
in my friend Croaker's conversation that quite depresses me. His very mirth is
an antidote to all gaiety, and his appearance has a stronger effect on my
spirits than an undertaker's shop. -- Mr. Croaker, this is such a satisfaction
--


Enter CROAKER. CROAKER. A pleasant morning to Mr. Honeywood, and many of them.
How is this! You look most shockingly to day, my dear friend. I hope this
weather does not affect your spirits. To be sure, if this weather continues --
I say nothing -- But God send we be all better this day three months.


HONEYWOOD. I heartily concur in the wish, though I own not in your apprehensions.


CROAKER. May be not! Indeed what signifies what weather we have in a country
going to ruin like ours? Taxes rising and trade falling. Money flying out of
the kingdom and Jesuits swarming into it. I know at this time no less than an
hundred and twenty-seven Jesuits between Charing Cross and Temple Bar.


HONEYWOOD. The Jesuits will scarce pervert you or me I should hope.


CROAKER. May be not. Indeed what signifies whom they pervert in a country that
has scarce any religion to lose? I Am only afraid for our wives and daughters.


HONEYWOOD. I have no apprehensions for the ladies I assure you.


CROAKER. May be not. Indeed what signifies whether they be perverted or no?
The women in my time were good for something. I have seen a lady dressed from top
to toe in her own manufactures formerly. But now adays the devil a thing of
their own manufactures about them, except their faces.


HONEYWOOD. But, however these faults may be practiced abroad, you don't find
them at home, either with Mrs. Croaker, Olivia or miss Richland.


CROAKER. The best of them will never be canonized for a saint when she is dead.
By the bye, my dear friend, I don't find this match between miss Richland and
my son much relished, either by one side or the other.


HONEYWOOD. I thought otherwise.


CROAKER. Ah, Mr. Honeywood, a little of your fine serious advice to the young
lady might go far: I know she has a very exalted opinion of your understanding.


HONEYWOOD. But would not that be usurping an authority that more properly
belongs to yourself?


CROAKER. My dear friend you know but little of my authority at home. People
think, indeed, because they see me come out in a morning thus, with a pleasant
face, and to make my friends merry, that all is well within. But I have cares
that would break an heart of stone. My wife has so encroach'd upon every one of
my privileges, that I Am now no more than a mere lodger in my own house.


HONEYWOOD. But a little spirit exerted on your side might perhaps restore your
authority.


CROAKER. No, though I had the spirit of a lion! I do rouse sometimes. But what
then! Always haggling and haggling. A man is tired of getting the better before
his wife is tired of losing the victory.


HONEYWOOD. It Is a melancholy consideration indeed, that our chief comforts
often produce our greatest anxieties, and that an increase of our possessions
is but an inlet to new disquietudes.


CROAKER. Ah, my dear friend, these were the very words of poor Dick Doleful to
me not a week before he made away with himself. Indeed, Mr. Honeywood, I nener
see you but you put me in mind of poor -- Dick. Ah there was merit neglected
for you! and so true a friend; we loved each other for thirty years, and yet he
never asked me to lend him a single farthing.


HONEYWOOD. Pray what could induce him to commit so rash an action at last?


CROAKER. I don't know, some people were malicious enough to say it was keeping
company with me; because we used to meet now and then and open our hearts to
each other. To be sure I loved to hear him talk, and he loved to hear me talk;
poor dear Dick. He used to say that Croaker rhim'd to joker; and so we used to
laugh -- Poor Dick. ( Going to cry.)


HONEYWOOD. His fate affects me.


CROAKER. Ay, he grew sick of this miserable life, where we do nothing but eat
and grow hungry, dress and undress, get up and lie down; while reason, that
should watch like a nurse by our side, falls as fast asleep as we do.


HONEYWOOD. To say truth, if we compare that part of life which is to come, by
that which we have past, the prospect is hideous.


CROAKER. Life at the greatest and best is but a froward child, that must be
humored and coax'd a little till it falls asleep, and then all the care is
over.


HONEYWOOD. Very true, sir, nothing can exceed the vanity of our existence, but
the folly of our pursuits. We wept when we came into the world, and every day
tells us why.


CROAKER. Ah, my dear friend, it is a perfect satisfaction to be miserable with
you. My son Leontine shall not lose the benefit of such fine conversation. I Will
just step home for him. I am willing to show him so much seriousness in one
scarce older than himself -- And what if I bring my last letter to the
Gazetteer on the increase and progress of earthquakes? It will amuse us I
promise you. I there prove how the late earthquake is coming round to pay us
another visit from London to Lisbon, from Lisbon to the Canary Islands, from
the Canary Islands to Palmyra, from Palmyra to Constantinople, and so from
Constantinople back to London again. [Exit.


HONEYWOOD. Poor Croaker! His situation deserves the utmost pity. I shall
scarce recover my spirits these three days. Sure to live upon such terms is
worse than death itself. And yet, when I consider my own situation, a broken
fortune, an hopeless passion, friends in distress; the wish but not the power
to serve them -- ( pausing and sighing.)


Enter BUTLER. BUTLER. More company below, sir: Mrs. Croaker and miss Richland;
shall I show them up? But they are showing up themselves. [Exit.


Enter MRS. CROAKER and MISS RICHLAND. MISS RICHLAND. You're always in such
spirits.


MRS. CROAKER. We have just come, my dear Honeywood, from the auction. There
was the old deaf dowager, as usual, bidding like a fury against herself. And
then so curious in antiques! herself the most genuine piece of antiquity in the
whole collection.


HONEYWOOD. Excuse me, ladies, if some uneasiness from friendship makes me
unfit to share in this good humor: I know you will pardon me.


MRS. CROAKER. I vow he seems as melancholy as if he had taken a dose of my
husband this morning. Well, if Richland here can pardon you, I must.


MISS RICHLAND. You would seem to insinuate, madam, that I have particular
reasons for being disposed to refuse it.


MRS. CROAKER. Whatever I insinuate, my dear, don't be so ready to wish an
explanation.


MISS RICHLAND. I own I should be sorry, Mr. Honeywood's long friendship and
mine should be misunderstood.


HONEYWOOD. There Is no answering for others, madam. But I hope you will never
find me presuming to offer more than the most delicate friendship may readily
allow.


MISS RICHLAND. And I shall be prouder of such a tribute from you than the most
passionate professions from others.


HONEYWOOD. My own sentiments, madam: friendship is a disinterested commerce
between equals; love, an abject intercourse between tyrants and slaves.


MISS RICHLAND. And, without a compliment, I know none more disinterested or
more capable of friendship than Mr. Honeywood.


MRS. CROAKER. And, indeed, I know nobody that has more friends, at least among
the ladies. Miss Fruzz, miss Odbody, and miss Winterbottom praise him in all
companies. As for miss Biddy Bundle, she is his professed admirer.


MISS RICHLAND. Indeed! an admirer! I did not know, sir, you were such a
favorite there. But is she seriously so handsome? Is she the mighty thing
talked of?


HONEYWOOD. The town, madam, seldom begins to praise a lady's beauty, till
she is beginning to lose it. ( Smiling.)


MRS. CROAKER. But she is resolved never to lose it, it seems. For, as her
natural face decays, her skill improves in making the artificial one. Well,
nothing diverts me more than one of those fine, old, dressy things, who thinks
to conceal her age, by every where exposing her person; sticking herself up in
the front of a side-box; trailing through a minuet at Almack's; and then, in
the public gardens, looking for all the world like one of the painted ruins of
the place.


HONEYWOOD. Every age has its admirers, ladies. While you, perhaps, are trading
among the warmer climates of youth; there ought to be some to carry on an
useful commerce in the frozen latitudes beyond fifty.


MISS RICHLAND. But, then, the mortifications they must suffer, before they can
be fitted out for traffic. I have seen one of them fret an whole morning at her
hair-dresser, when all the fault was her face.


HONEYWOOD. And yet, I Will engage, has carried that face at last to a very good
market. This good-natured town, madam, has husbands, like spectacles, to fit
every age, from fifteen to fourscore.


MRS. CROAKER. Well, you're a dear good-natured creature. But you know you're
engaged with us this morning upon a strolling party. I want to show Olivia the
town, and the things; I believe I shall have business for you for the whole day.


HONEYWOOD. I am sorry, madam, I have an appointment with Mr. Croaker, which it
is impossible to put off.


MRS. CROAKER. What! with my husband! Then I Am resolved to take no refusal.
Nay, I protest you must. You know I never laugh so much as with you.


HONEYWOOD. Why, if I must, I must. I Will swear you have put me into such
spirits. Well, do you find jest, and I Will find laugh, I promise you. We'll wait
for the chariot in the next room. [Exeunt.


Enter LEONTINE and OLIVIA. LEONTINE. There they go, thoughtless and happy. My
dearest Olivia, what would I give to see you capable of sharing in their
amusements, and as cheerful as they are.


OLIVIA. How, my Leontine, how can I be cheerful, when I have so many terrors
to oppress me? The fear of being detected by this family, and the apprehensions
of a censuring world, when I must be detected --


LEONTINE. The world! my love, what can it say? At worst it can only say that,
being compelled by a mercenary guardian to embrace a life you disliked, you
formed a resolution of flying with the man of your choice; that you confided in
his honor, and took refuge in my father's house; the only one where yours
could remain without censure.


OLIVIA. But consider, Leontine, your disobedience and my indiscretion: your
being sent to France to bring home a sister; and, instead of a sister, bringing
home --


LEONTINE. One dearer than a thousand sisters. One that I am convinced will be
equally dear, to the rest of the family, when she comes to be known.


OLIVIA. And that, I fear, will shortly be.


LEONTINE. Impossible, 'till we ourselves think proper to make the discovery.
My sister, you know, has been with her aunt, at Lions, since she was a child,
and you find every creature in the family takes you for her.


OLIVIA. But may not she write, may not her aunt write?


LEONTINE. Her aunt scarce ever writes, and all my sister's letters are
directed to me.


OLIVIA. But will not your refusing miss Richland, for whom you know the old
gentleman intends you, create a suspicion?


LEONTINE. There, there is my master-stroke. I have resolved not to refuse her;
nay, an hour hence I have consented to go with my father, to make her an offer
of my heart and fortune.


OLIVIA. Your heart and fortune!


LEONTINE. Don't be alarmed, my dearest. Can Olivia think so meanly of my
honor, or my love, as to suppose I could ever hope for happiness from any but
her? No, my Olivia, neither the force, nor, permit me to add, the delicacy of
my passion, leave any room to suspect me. I only offer miss Richland an heart,
I am convinced she will refuse; as I am confident, that, without knowing it,
her affections are fixed upon Mr. Honeywood.


OLIVIA. Mr. Honeywood! You Will excuse my apprehensions; but when your merits
come to be put in the balance --


LEONTINE. You view them with too much partiality. However, by making this
offer, I show a seeming compliance with my father's command; and perhaps, upon
her refusal, I may have his consent to choose for myself.


OLIVIA. Well, I submit. And yet, my Leontine, I own, I shall envy her, even
your pretended addresses. I consider every look, every expression of your
esteem, as due only to me. This is folly perhaps: I allow it; but it is natural
to suppose, that merit which has made an impression on one's own heart, may be
powerful over that of another.


LEONTINE. Don't, my life's treasure, don't let us make imaginary evils, when
you know we have so many real ones to encounter. At worst, you know, if miss
Richland should consent, or my father refuse his pardon, it can but end in a
trip to Scotland; and --


Enter CROAKER. CROAKER. Where have you been, boy? I have been seeking you. My
friend Honeywood here, has been saying such comfortable things. Ah! he is an
example indeed. Where is he? I left him here.


LEONTINE. Sir, I believe you may see him, and hear him too in the next room:
he is preparing to go out with the ladies.


CROAKER. Good gracious, can I believe my eyes or my ears! I Am struck dumb with
his vivacity, and stunned with the loudness of his laugh. Was there ever such a
transformation! ( A laugh behind the scenes, Croaker mimics it.) Ha! ha! ha!
there it goes: a plague take their balderdash; yet I could expect nothing less,
when my precious wife was of the party. On my conscience, I believe, she could
spread an horselaugh through the pews of a tabernacle.


LEONTINE. Since you find so many objections to a wife, sir, how can you be so
earnest in recommending one to me?


CROAKER. I have told you, and tell you again, boy, that miss Richland's
fortune must not go out of the family; one may find comfort in the money,
whatever one does in the wife.


LEONTINE. But, sir, though, in obedience to your desire, I am ready to marry
her; it may be possible, she has no inclination to me.


CROAKER. I Will tell you once for all how it stands. A good part of miss
Richland's large fortune consists in a claim upon government, which my good
friend, Mr. Lofty, assures me the treasury will allow. One half of this she is
to forfeit, by her father's will, in case she refuses to marry you. So, if she
rejects you, we seize half her fortune; if she accepts you, we seize the whole,
and a fine girl into the bargain.


LEONTINE. But, sir, if you will but listen to reason --


CROAKER. Come, then, produce your reasons. I tell you I Am fixed, determined,
so now produce your reasons. When I Am determined, I always listen to reason,
because it can then do no harm.


LEONTINE. You have alleged that a mutual choice was the first requisite in
matrimonial happiness.


CROAKER. Well, and you have both of you a mutual choice. She has her choice --
to marry you, or lose half her fortune; and you have your choice -- to marry
her, or pack out of doors without any fortune at all.


LEONTINE. An only son, sir, might expect more indulgence.


CROAKER. An only father, sir, might expect more obedience; besides, has not
your sister here, that never disobliged me in her life, as good a right as you?
He Is a sad dog, Livy, my dear, and would take all from you. But he shall not, I
tell you he shall not, for you shall have your share.


OLIVIA. Dear sir, I wish you would be convinced that I can never be happy in any
addition to my fortune, which is taken from his.


CROAKER. Well, well, it is a good child, so say no more; but come with me, and
we shall see something that will give us a great deal of pleasure, I promise
you; old Ruggins, the curry-comb-maker, lying in state; I Am told he makes a
very handsome corpse, and becomes his coffin prodigiously. He was an intimate
friend of mine, and these are friendly things we ought to do for each other.
[Exeunt.


ACT THE SECOND.
SCENE, CROAKER'S house. MISS RICHLAND, GARNET. MISS RICHLAND. OLIVIA not his
sister? Olivia not Leontine's sister? You amaze me!


GARNET. No more his sister than I am; I had it all from his own servant; I can
get any thing from that quarter.


MISS RICHLAND. But how? Tell me again, Garnet.


GARNET. Why, madam, as I told you before, instead of going to Lions, to bring
home his sister, who has been there with her aunt these ten years; he never
went further than Paris; there he saw and fell in love with this young lady, by
the bye, of a prodigious family.


MISS RICHLAND. And brought her home to my guardian, as his daughter?


GARNET. Yes, and his daughter she will be. If he don't consent to their
marriage, they talk of trying what a Scotch parson can do.


MISS RICHLAND. Well, I own they have deceived me -- And so demurely as Olivia
carried it too! -- Would you believe it, Garnet, I told her all my secrets; and
yet the sly cheat concealed all this from me?


GARNET. And, upon my word, madam, I don't much blame her; she was loath to
trust one with her secrets, that was so very bad at keeping her own.


MISS RICHLAND. But, to add to their deceit, the young gentleman, it seems,
pretends to make me serious proposals. My guardian and he are to be here
presently, to open the affair in form. You know I am to lose half my fortune if
I refuse him.


GARNET. Yet, what can you do? For being, as you are, in love with Mr.
Honeywood, madam --


MISS RICHLAND. How! idiot; what do you mean? In love with Mr. Honeywood! Is
this to provoke me?


GARNET. That is, madam, in friendship with him; I meant nothing more than
friendship, as I hope to be married; nothing more.


MISS RICHLAND. Well, no more of this! As to my guardian, and his son, they
shall find me prepared to receive them; I Am resolved to accept their proposal
with seeming pleasure, to mortify them by compliance, and so throw the refusal
at last upon them.


GARNET. Delicious! and that will secure your whole fortune to yourself. Well,
who could have thought so innocent a face could cover so much cuteness!


MISS RICHLAND. Why, girl, I only oppose my prudence to their cunning, and
practice a lesson they have taught me against themselves.


GARNET. Then you're likely not long to want employment, for here they come,
and in close conference.


Enter CROAKER, LEONTINE. LEONTINE. Excuse me, sir, if I seem to hesitate upon
the point of putting to the lady so important a question.


CROAKER. Lord! good sir, moderate your fears; you're so plaguey shy, that one
would think you had changed sexes. I tell you we must have the half or the
whole. Come, let me see with what spirit you begin? Well, why don't you? Eh!
What? Well then -- I must, it seems -- Miss Richland, my dear, I believe you
guess at our business; an affair which my son here comes to open, that nearly
concerns your happiness.


MISS RICHLAND. Sir, I should be ungrateful not to be pleased with any thing
that comes recommended by you.


CROAKER. How, boy, could you desire a finer opening? Why don't you begin, I
say? ( To Leont.)


LEONTINE. It Is true, madam, my father, madam, has some intentions -- hem -- of
explaining an affair -- which -- himself -- can best explain, madam.


CROAKER. Yes, my dear; it comes entirely from my son; it is all a request of
his own, madam. And I will permit him to make the best of it.


LEONTINE. The whole affair is only this, madam; my father has a proposal to
make, which he insists none but himself shall deliver.


CROAKER. My mind misgives me, the fellow will never be brought on. ( Aside.)
In short, madam, you see before you one that loves you; one whose whole
happiness is all in you.


MISS RICHLAND. I never had any doubts of your regard, sir; and I hope you can
have none of my duty.


CROAKER. That Is not the thing, my little sweeting; my love! No, no, another
guess lover than I; there he stands, madam, his very looks declare the force of
his passion -- Call up a look, you dog -- But then, had you seen him, as I
have, weeping, speaking soliloquies and blank verse, sometimes melancholy, and
sometimes absent --


MISS RICHLAND. I fear, sir, he is absent now; or such a declaration would have
come most properly from himself.


CROAKER. Himself! madam, he would die before he could make such a confession;
and if he had not a channel for his passion through me, it would ere now have
drowned his understanding.


MISS RICHLAND. I must grant, sir, there are attractions in modest diffidence
above the force of words. A silent address is the genuine eloquence of
sincerity.


CROAKER. Madam, he has forgot to speak any other language; silence is become
his mother tongue.


MISS RICHLAND. And it must be confessed, sir, it speaks very powerfully in his
favor. And yet I shall be thought too forward in making such a confession;
shall not I, Mr. Leontine?


LEONTINE. Confusion! my reserve will undo me. But, if modesty attracts her,
impudence may disgust her. I Will try. ( Aside.) Don't imagine from my silence,
madam, that I want a due sense of the honor and happiness intended me. My
father, madam, tells me, your humble servant is not totally indifferent to you.
He admires you; I adore you; and when we come together, upon my soul I believe
we shall be the happiest couple in all St. James's.


MISS RICHLAND. If I could flatter myself, you thought as you speak, sir --


LEONTINE. Doubt my sincerity, madam? By your dear self I swear. Ask the brave,
if they desire glory? ask cowards, if they covet safety --


CROAKER. Well, well, no more questions about it.


LEONTINE. Ask the sick, if they long for health? ask misers, if they love
money? ask --


CROAKER. Ask a fool, if he can talk nonsense! What Is come over the boy? What
signifies asking, when there is not a soul to give you an answer? If you would
ask to the purpose, ask this lady's consent to make you happy.


MISS RICHLAND. Why indeed, sir, his uncommon ardour almost compels me, forces
me to comply. And yet I Am afraid he will despise a conquest gained with too much
ease: will not you, Mr. Leontine?


LEONTINE. Confusion! ( Aside.) O, by no means, madam, by no means. And yet,
madam, you talked of force. There is nothing I would avoid so much as
compulsion in a thing of this kind. No, madam, I will still be generous, and
leave you at liberty to refuse.


CROAKER. But I tell you, sir, the lady is not at liberty. It Is a match. You
see she says nothing. Silence gives consent.


LEONTINE. But, sir, she talked of force. Consider, sir, the cruelty of
constraining her inclinations.


CROAKER. But I say there is no cruelty. Don't you know, blockhead, that girls
have always a roundabout way of saying yes before company? So get you both gone
together into the next room, and hang him that interrupts the tender
explanation. Get you gone, I say; I Will not hear a word.


LEONTINE. But, sir, I must beg leave to insist --


CROAKER. Get off, you puppy, or I Will beg leave to insist upon knocking you
down. Stupid whelp. But I don't wonder, the boy takes entirely after his
mother. [ Exeunt miss Rich. and Leont.


Enter MRS. CROAKER. MRS. CROAKER. Mr. Croaker, I bring you something, my dear,
that I believe will make you smile.


CROAKER. I Will hold you a guinea of that, my dear.


MRS. CROAKER. A letter; and, as I knew the hand, I ventured to open it.


CROAKER. And how can you expect your breaking open my letters should give me
pleasure?


MRS. CROAKER. Poo, it is from your sister at Lions, and contains good news:
read it.


CROAKER. What a Frenchified cover is here! That sister of mine has some good
qualities, but I could never teach her to fold a letter.


MRS. CROAKER. Fold a fiddlestick. Read what it contains.


CROAKER, reading. 'DEAR NICK,

'AN English gentleman, of large fortune, has for some time made private, though
honorable proposals to your daughter Olivia. They love each other tenderly,
and I find she has consented, without letting any of the family know, to crown
his addresses. As such good offers don't come every day, your own good sense,
his large fortune, and family considerations, will induce you to forgive her.

'Yours ever, RACHEL CROAKER.'

My daughter, Olivia, privately contracted to a man of large fortune! This is
good news indeed. My heart never foretold me of this. And yet, how slily the
little baggage has carried it since she came home. Not a word on it to the old
ones for the world. Yet, I thought, I saw something she wanted to conceal.


MRS. CROAKER. Well, if they have concealed their amor, they shall not conceal
their wedding; that shall be public, I Am resolved.


CROAKER. I tell thee, woman, the wedding is the most foolish part of the
ceremony. I can never get this woman to think of the more serious part of the
nuptial engagement.


MRS. CROAKER. What, would you have me think of their funeral? But come, tell
me, my dear, don't you owe more to me than you care to confess? Would you have
ever been known to Mr. Lofty, who has undertaken miss Richland's claim at the
treasury, but for me? Who was it first made him an acquaintance at lady
Shabbaroon's rout? Who got him to promise us his interest? Is not he a
back-stairs favorite, one that can do what he pleases with those that do what
they please? Is Not he an acquaintance that all your groaning and lamentations
could never have got us?


CROAKER. He is a man of importance, I grant you. And yet, what amazes me is,
that while he is giving away places to all the world, he cannot get one for
himself.


MRS. CROAKER. That perhaps may be owing to his nicety. Great men are not
easily satisfied.


Enter FRENCH SERVANT. SERVANT. An express from monsieur Lofty. He vil be vait
upon your honor's instrammant. He be only giving four five instruction, read
two three memorial, call upon von ambassadeur. He vil be vid you in one tree
minutes.


MRS. CROAKER. You see now, my dear. What an extensive department! Well,
friend, let your master know, that we are extremely honored by this honor.
Was there any thing ever in a higher style of breeding! All messages among the
great are now done by express.


CROAKER. To be sure, no man does little things with more solemnity, or claims
more respect than he. But he is in the right on it. In our bad world, respect is
given, where respect is claimed.


MRS. CROAKER. Never mind the world, my dear; you were never in a pleasanter
place in your life. Let us now think of receiving him with proper respect ( a
loud rapping at the door) and there he is by the thundering rap.


CROAKER. Ay, verily, there he is; as close upon the heels of his own express,
as an indorsement upon the back of a bill. Well, I Will leave you to receive him,
whilst I go to chide my little Olivia for intending to steal a marriage without
mine or her aunt's consent. I must seem to be angry, or she too may begin to
despise my authority. [Exit.


Enter LOFTY, speaking to his servant. LOFTY. And if the Venetian ambassador,
or that teazing creature the marquis, should call, I Am not at home. Dam'me,
I Will be pack-horse to none of them. My dear madam, I have just snatched a
moment -- And if the expresses to his grace be ready, let them be sent off;
they are of importance. Madam, I ask a thousand pardons.


MRS. CROAKER. Sir, this honor --


LOFTY. And Dubardieu! if the person calls about the commission, let him know
that it is made out. As for lord Cumbercourt's stale request, it can keep cold:
you understand me. Madam, I ask ten thousand pardons.


MRS. CROAKER. Sir, this honor --


LOFTY. And, Dubardieu! if the man comes from the Cornish borough, you must do
him; you must do him, I say. Madam, I ask ten thousand pardons. And if the
Russian -- ambassador calls: but he will scarce call today, I believe. And now,
madam, I have just got time to express my happiness in having the honor of
being permitted to profess myself your most obedient humble servant.


MRS. CROAKER. Sir, the happiness and honor are all mine; and yet, I Am only
robbing the public while I detain you.


LOFTY. Sink the public, madam, when the fair are to be attended. Ah, could all
my hours be so charmingly devoted! Sincerely, don't you pity us poor creatures
in affairs? Thus it is eternally; solicited for places here, teized for
pensions there, and courted every where. I know you pity me. Yes, I see you do.


MRS. CROAKER. Excuse me, sir. Toils of empires pleasures are, as Waller says.


LOFTY. Waller, Waller; is he of the house?


MRS. CROAKER. The modern poet of that name, sir.


LOFTY. Oh, a modern! We men of business despise the moderns; and as for the
ancients, we have no time to read them. Poetry is a pretty thing enough for our
wives and daughters; but not for us. Why now, here I stand that know nothing of
books. I say, madam, I know nothing of books; and yet, I believe, upon a land
carriage fishery, a stamp act, or a jag-hire, I can talk my two hours without
feeling the want of them.


MRS. CROAKER. The world is no stranger to Mr. Lofty's eminence in every
capacity.


LOFTY. I vow to gad, madam, you make me blush. I Am nothing, nothing, nothing
in the world; a mere obscure gentleman. To be sure, indeed, one or two of the
present ministers are pleased to represent me as a formidable man. I know they
are pleased to be-spatter me at all their little dirty levees. Yet, upon my
foul, I wonder what they see in me to treat me so! Measures, not men, have
always been my mark; and I vow, by all that is honorable, my resentment has
never done the men, as mere men, any manner of harm -- that is as mere men.


MRS. CROAKER. What importance, and yet what modesty!


LOFTY. Oh, if you talk of modesty, madam! there I own, I Am accessible to
praise: modesty is my foible: it was so, the duke of Brentford used to say of
me. I love Jack Lofty, he used to say: no man has a finer knowledge of things;
quite a man of information; and when he speaks upon his legs, by the Lord he is
prodigious, he scouts them; and yet all men have their faults; too much modesty
is his, says his grace.


MRS. CROAKER. And yet, I dare say, you don't want assurance when you come to
solicit for your friends.


LOFTY. O, there indeed I Am in bronze. Apropos, I have just been mentioning
miss Richland's case to a certain personage; we must name no names. When I ask,
I am not to be put off, madam. No, no, I take my friend by the button. A sine
girl, sir; great justice in her case. A friend of mine. Borough interest.
Business must be done, Mr. Secretary. I say, Mr. Secretary, her business must
be done, sir. That Is my way, madam.


MRS. CROAKER. Bless me! you said all this to the secretary of state, did you?


LOFTY. I did not say the secretary, did I? Well, curse it, since you have
found me out I will not deny it. It was to the secretary.


MRS. CROAKER. This was going to the fountain head at once, not applying to the
understrappers, as Mr. Honeywood would have had us.


LOFTY. Honeywood! he! he! He was, indeed, a fine solicitor. I suppose you have
heard what has just happened to him?


MRS. CROAKER. Poor dear man; no accident, I hope.


LOFTY. Undone, madam, that is all. His creditors have taken him into custody. A
prisoner in his own house.


MRS. CROAKER. A prisoner in his own house! How! At this very time! I Am quite
unhappy for him.


LOFTY. Why so am I. The man, to be sure, was immensely good-natured. But then
I could never find that he had any thing in him.


MRS. CROAKER. His manner, to be sure, was excessive harmless; some, indeed,
thought it a little dull. For my part, I always concealed my opinion.


LOFTY. It cannot be concealed, madam; the man was dull, dull as the last new
comedy! A poor impracticable creature! I tried once or twice to know if he was
fit for business; but he had scarce talents to be groomporter to an orange
barrow.


MRS. CROAKER. How differently does miss Richland think of him! For, I believe,
with all his faults, she loves him.


LOFTY. Loves him! Does she? You should cure her of that by all means. Let me
see; what if she were sent to him this instant, in his present doleful
situation? My life for it, that works her cure. Distress is a perfect antidote
to love. Suppose we join her in the next room? Miss Richland is a fine girl,
has a fine fortune, and must not be thrown away. Upon my honor, madam, I have
a regard for miss Richland; and, rather than she should be thrown away, I
should think it no indignity to marry her myself. [Exeunt.


Enter OLIVIA and LEONTINE. LEONTINE. And yet, trust me, Olivia, I had every
reason to expect miss Richland's refusal, as I did every thing in my power to
deserve it. Her indelicacy surprises me?


OLIVIA. Sure, Leontine, there is nothing so indelicate in being sensible of
your merit. If so, I fear, I shall be the most guilty thing alive.


LEONTINE. But you mistake, my dear. The same attention I used to advance my
merit with you, I practiced to lessen it with her. What more could I do?


OLIVIA. Let us now rather consider what is to be done. We have both dissembled
too long -- I have always been ashamed -- I am now quite weary of it. Sure I
could never have undergone so much for any other but you.


LEONTINE. And you shall find my gratitude equal to your kindest compliance.
Though our friends should totally forsake us, Olivia, we can draw upon content
for the deficiencies of fortune.


OLIVIA. Then why should we defer our scheme of humble happiness, when it is
now in our power? I may be the favorite of your father, it is true; but can it
ever be thought, that his present kindness to a supposed child, will continue
to a known deceiver?


LEONTINE. I have many reasons to believe it will. As his attachments are but
few, they are lasting. His own marriage was a private one, as ours may be.
Besides, I have sounded him already at a distance, and find all his answers
exactly to our wish. Nay, by an expression or two that dropped from him, I am
induced to think he knows of this affair.


OLIVIA. Indeed! But that would be an happiness too great to be expected.


LEONTINE. However it be, I Am certain you have power over him; and am
persuaded, if you informed him of our situation, that he would be disposed to
pardon it.


OLIVIA. You had equal expectations, Leontine, from your last scheme with miss
Richland, which you find has succeeded most wretchedly.


LEONTINE. And that is the best reason for trying another.


OLIVIA. If it must be so, I submit.


LEONTINE. As we could wish, he comes this way. Now, my dearest Olivia, be
resolute. I Will just retire within hearing, to come in at a proper time, either
to share your danger, or confirm your victory. [Exit.


Enter CROAKER. CROAKER. Yes, I must forgive her; and yet not too easily,
neither. It will be proper to keep up the decorums of resentment a little, if
it be only to impress her with an idea of my authority.


OLIVIA. How I tremble to approach him! -- Might I presume, sir -- If I
interrupt you --


CROAKER. No, child, where I have an affection, it is not a little thing can
interrupt me. Affection gets over little things.


OLIVIA. Sir, you're too kind. I Am sensible how ill I deserve this partiality.
Yet, heaven knows, there is nothing I would not do to gain it.


CROAKER. And you have but too well succeeded, you little hussy, you. With
those endearing ways of yours, on my conscience, I could be brought to forgive
any thing, unless it were a very great offense indeed.


OLIVIA. But mine is such an offense -- When you know my guilt -- Yes, you
shall know it, though I feel the greatest pain in the confession.


CROAKER. Why then, if it be so very great a pain, you may spare yourself the
trouble; for I know every syllable of the matter before you begin.


OLIVIA. Indeed! Then I Am undone.


CROAKER. Ay, miss, you wanted to steal a match, without letting me know it,
did you! But, I Am not worth being consulted, I suppose, when there is to be a
marriage in my own family. No, I Am to have no hand in the disposal of my own
children. No, I Am nobody. I Am to be a mere article of family lumber; a piece of
cracked china to be stuck up in a corner.


OLIVIA. Dear sir, nothing but the dread of your authority could induce us to
conceal it from you.


CROAKER. No, no, my consequence is no more; I Am as little minded as a dead
Russian in winter, just stuck up with a pipe in his mouth till there comes a
thaw -- It goes to my heart to vex her.


OLIVIA. I was prepared, sir, for your anger, and despaired of pardon, even
while I presumed to ask it. But your severity shall never abate my affection,
as my punishment is but justice.


CROAKER. And yet you should not despair neither, Livy. We ought to hope all
for the best.


OLIVIA. And do you permit me to hope, sir! Can I ever expect to be forgiven!
But hope has too long deceived me.


CROAKER. Why then, child, it shall not deceive you now, for I forgive you this
very moment. I forgive you all; and now you are indeed my daughter.


OLIVIA. O transport! This kindness overpowers me.


CROAKER. I was always against severity to our children. We have been young and
giddy ourselves, and we cannot expect boys and girls to be old before their time.


OLIVIA. What generosity! But can you forget the many falsehoods, the
dissimulation --


CROAKER. You did indeed dissemble, you urchin you; but where is the girl that
will not dissemble for an husband! My wife and I had never been married, if we had
not dissembled a little beforehand.


OLIVIA. It shall be my future care never to put such generosity to a second
trial. And as for the partner of my offense and folly, from his native honor,
and the just sense he has of his duty, I can answer for him that --


Enter LEONTINE. LEONTINE. Permit him thus to answer for himself. ( Kneeling.)
Thus, sir, let me speak my gratitude for this unmerited forgiveness. Yes, sir,
this even exceeds all your former tenderness: I now can boast the most
indulgent of fathers. The life he gave, compared to this, was but a trifling
blessing.


CROAKER. And, good sir, who sent for you, with that fine tragedy face, and
flourishing manner? I don't know what we have to do with your gratitude upon
this occasion.


LEONTINE. How, sir! Is it possible to be silent, when so much obliged! Would
you refuse me the pleasure of being grateful! of adding my thanks to my
Olivia's! of sharing in the transports that you have thus occasioned?


CROAKER. Lord, sir, we can be happy enough, without your coming in to make up
the party. I don't know what is the matter with the boy all this day; he has got
into such a rhodomontade manner all this morning!


LEONTINE. But, sir, I that have so large a part in the benefit, is it not my
duty to show my joy? Is the being admitted to your favor so slight an
obligation? Is the happiness of marrying my Olivia so small a blessing?


CROAKER. Marrying Olivia! marrying Olivia! marrying his own sister! Sure the
boy is out of his senses. His own sister!


LEONTINE. My sister!


OLIVIA. Sister! How have I been mistaken! [Aside.


LEONTINE. Some cursed mistake in all this I find. [Aside.


CROAKER. What does the booby mean, or has he any meaning. Eh, what do you
mean, you blockhead you?


LEONTINE. Mean, sir -- why, sir -- only when my sister is to be married, that
I have the pleasure of marrying her, sir that is, of giving her away, sir -- I
have made a point of it.


CROAKER. O, is that all. Give her away. You have made a point of it. Then you
had as good make a point of first giving away yourself, as I Am going to prepare
the writings between you and miss Richland this very minute. What a fuss is
here about nothing! Why, what is the matter now? I thought I had made you at
least as happy as you could wish.


OLIVIA. O! yes, sir, very happy.


CROAKER. Do you foresee any thing, child? You look as if you did. I think if
any thing was to be foreseen, I have as sharp a look out as another: and yet I
foresee nothing. [Exit.


LEONTINE, OLIVIA. OLIVIA. What can it mean?


LEONTINE. He knows something, and yet for my life I cannot tell what.


OLIVIA. It cannot be the connection between us, I Am pretty certain.


LEONTINE. Whatever it be, my dearest, I Am resolved to put it out of fortune's
power to repeat our mortification. I Will haste, and prepare for our journey to
Scotland this very evening. My friend Honeywood has promised me his advice and
assistance. I Will go to him, and repose our distresses on his friendly bosom:
and I know so much of his honest heart, that if he cannot relieve our
uneasinesses, he will at least share them. [Exeunt.


ACT THE THIRD.
SCENE, YOUNG HONEYWOOD'S house. BAILIFF, HONEYWOOD, FOLLOWER. BAILIFF. LOOKY,
sir, I have arrested as good men as you in my time: no disparagement of you
neither. Men that would go forty guineas on a game of cribbage. I challenge the
town to show a man in more genteeler practice than myself.


HONEYWOOD. Without all question, Mr. --. I forget your name, sir?


BAILIFF. How can you forget what you never knew? he, he, he.


HONEYWOOD. May I beg leave to ask your name?


BAILIFF. Yes, you may.


HONEYWOOD. Then, pray, sir, what is your name, sir?


BAILIFF. That I didn't promise to tell you. He, he, he. A joke breaks no
bones, as we say among us that practice the law.


HONEYWOOD. You may have reason for keeping it a secret perhaps?


BAILIFF. The law does nothing without reason. I Am ashamed to tell my name to
no man, sir. If you can show cause, as why, upon a special capus, that I should
prove my name -- But, come, Timothy Twitch is my name. And, now you know my
name, what have you to say to that?


HONEYWOOD. Nothing in the world, good Mr. Twitch, but that I have a favor to
ask, that is all.


BAILIFF. Ay, favors are more easily asked than granted, as we say among us
that practice the law. I have taken an oath against granting favors. Would you
have me perjure myself?


HONEYWOOD. But my request will come recommended in so strong a manner, as, I
believe, you will have no scruple ( pulling out his purse) The thing is only
this: I believe I shall be able to discharge this trifle in two or three days
at farthest; but as I would not have the affair known for the world, I have
thoughts of keeping you, and your good friend here, about me till the debt is
discharged; for which, I shall be properly grateful.


BAILIFF. Oh! that is another maxum, and altogether within my oath. For certain,
if an honest man is to get any thing by a thing, there is no reason why all
things should not be done in civility.


HONEYWOOD. Doubtless, all trades must live, Mr. Twitch; and yours is a
necessary one. ( Gives him money)


BAILIFF. Oh! your honor; I hope your honor takes nothing amiss as I does, as
I does nothing but my duty in so doing. I Am sure no man can say I ever give a
gentleman, that was a gentleman, ill usage. If I saw that a gentleman was a
gentleman, I have taken money not to see him for ten weeks together.


HONEYWOOD. Tenderness is a virtue, Mr. Twitch.


BAILIFF. Ay, sir, it is a perfect treasure. I love to see a gentleman with a
tender heart. I don't know, but I think I have a tender heart myself. If all
that I have lost by my heart was put together, it would make a -- but no matter
for that.


HONEYWOOD. Don't account it lost, Mr. Twitch. The ingratitude of the world can
never deprive us of the conscious happiness of having acted with humanity
ourselves.


BAILIFF. Humanity, sir, is a jewel. It Is better than gold. I love humanity.
People may say, that we, in our way, have no humanity; but I Will show you my
humanity this moment. There Is my follower here, little Flanigan, with a wife
and four children, a guinea or two would be more to him, than twice as much to
another. Now, as I cannot show him any humanity myself, I must beg leave you will
do it for me.


HONEYWOOD. I assure you, Mr. Twitch, yours is a most powerful recommendation.
( giving money to the follower)


BAILIFF. Sir, you're a gentleman. I see you know what to do with your money.
But, to business: we are to be with you here as your friends, I suppose. But
^et in case company comes. -- Little Flanigan here, to be sure, has a good
face; a very good face: but then, he is a little seedy, as we say among us that
practice the law. Not well in clothes. Smoke the pocketholes.


HONEYWOOD. Well, that shall be remedied without delay.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Sir, miss Richland is below.


HONEYWOOD. How unlucky! Detain her a moment. We must improve my good friend,
little Mr. Flanigan's appearance first. Here, let Mr. Flanigan have a suit of
my clothes -- quick -- the brown and silver -- Do you hear?


SERVANT. That your honor gave away to the begging gentleman that makes
verses, because it was as good as new.


HONEYWOOD. The white and gold then.


SERVANT. That, your honor, I made bold to sell, because it was good for
nothing.


HONEYWOOD. Well, the first that comes to hand then. The blue and gold then. I
believe Mr. Flanigan will look best in blue. [ Exit Flanigan.


BAILIFF. Rabbit me, but little Flanigan will look well in any thing. Ah, if
your honor knew that bit of flesh as well as I do, you would be perfectly in love
with him. There Is not a prettier scout in the four counties after a shy-cock
than he: scents like a hound; sticks like a weazle. He was master of the
ceremonies to the black queen of Morocco, when I took him to follow me. (
Re-enter Flanigan.) Heh, ecod, I think he looks so well, that I don't care if I
have a suit from the same place for myself.


HONEYWOOD. Well, well, I hear the lady coming. Dear Mr. Twitch, I beg you will
give your friend directions not to speak. As for yourself, I know you will say
nothing without being directed.


BAILIFF. Never you fear me; I Will show the lady that I have something to say
for myself as well as another. One man has one way of talking, and another man
has another, that is all the difference between them.


Enter MISS RICHLAND and her MAID. MISS RICHLAND. You Will be surprised, sir,
with this visit. But you know I Am yet to thank you for choosing my little
library.


HONEYWOOD. Thanks, madam, are unnecessary; as it was I that was obliged by
your commands. Chairs here. Two of my very good friends, Mr. Twitch and Mr.
Flanigan. Pray, gentlemen, sit without ceremony.


MISS RICHLAND. Who can these odd-looking men be! I fear it is as I was
informed. It must be so. ( Aside.


BAILIFF, after a pause. Pretty weather, very pretty weather for the time of
the year, madam.


FOLLOWER. Very good circuit weather in the country.


HONEYWOOD. You officers are generally favorites among the ladies. My friends,
madam, have been upon very disagreeable duty, I assure you. The fair should, in
some measure, recompense the toils of the brave!


MISS RICHLAND. Our officers do indeed deserve every favor. The gentlemen are
in the marine service, I presume, sir?


HONEYWOOD. Why, madam, they do -- occasionally serve in the fleet, madam. A
dangerous service!


MISS RICHLAND. I Am told so. And I own, it has often surprised me, that, while
we have had so many instances of bravery there, we have had so few of wit at
home to praise it.


HONEYWOOD. I grant, madam, that our poets have not written as our soldiers
have fought; but they have done all they could, and Hawke or Amherst could do
no more.


MISS RICHLAND. I Am quite displeased when I see a fine subject spoiled by a
dull writer.


HONEYWOOD. We should not be so severe against dull writers, madam. It is ten
to one, but the dullest writer exceeds the most rigid French critic who
presumes to despise him.


FOLLOWER. Damn the French, the parle vous, and all that belongs to them.


MISS RICHLAND. Sir!


HONEYWOOD. Ha, ha, ha! honest Mr. Flanigan. A true English officer, madam;
he is not contented with beating the French, but he will scold them too.


MISS RICHLAND. Yet, Mr. Honeywood, this does not convince me but that severity
in criticism is necessary. It was our first adopting the severity of French
taste, that has brought them in turn to taste us.


BAILIFF. Taste us! By the Lord, madam, they devour us. Give monseers but a
taste, and I Will be damned but they come in for a bellyful.


MISS RICHLAND. Very extraordinary this.


FOLLOWER. But very true. What makes the bread rising? the parle vous that
devour us. What makes the mutton fivepence a pound? the parle vous that eat it
up. What makes the beer threepence-halfpenny a pot? --


HONEYWOOD. Ah! the vulgar rogues; all will be out. ( Aside.) Right, gentlemen,
very right, upon my word, and quite to the purpose. They draw a parallel,
madam, between the mental taste and that of our senses. We are injured as much
by French severity in the one, as by French rapacity in the other. That Is their
meaning.


MISS RICHLAND. Though I don't see the force of the parallel, yet, I Will own, that
we should sometimes pardon books, as we do our friends, that have now and then
agreeable abfurdities to recommend them.


BAILIFF. That Is all my eye. The king only can pardon, as the law says: for,
set in case --


HONEYWOOD. I Am quite of your opinion, sir. I see the whole drift of your
argument. Yes, certainly, our presuming to pardon any work, is arrogating a
power that belongs to another. If all have power to condemn, what writer can be
free?


BAILIFF. By his habus corpus. His habus corpus can set him free at any time:
for, set in case --


HONEYWOOD. I Am obliged to you, sir, for the hint. If, madam, as my friend
observes, our laws are so careful of a gentleman's person, sure we ought to be
equally careful of his dearer part, his fame.


FOLLOWER. Ay, but if so be a man's nabb'd, you know --


HONEYWOOD. Mr. Flanigan, if you spoke for ever, you could not improve the last
observation. For my own part, I think it conclusive.


BAILIFF. As for the matter of that, mayhap --


HONEYWOOD. Nay, sir, give me leave in this instance to be positive. For, where
is the necessity of censuring works without genius, which must shortly sink of
themselves? what is it, but aiming our unnecessary blow against a victim
already under the hands of justice?


BAILIFF. Justice! O, by the elevens, if you talk about justice, I think I am
at home there: for, in a course of law --


HONEYWOOD. My dear Mr. Twitch, I discern what you would be at perfectly; and I
believe the lady must be sensible of the art with which it is introduced. I
suppose you perceive the meaning, madam, of his course of law.


MISS RICHLAND. I protest, sir, I do not. I perceive only that you answer one
gentleman before he has finished, and the other before he has well begun.


BAILIFF. Madam, you are a gentlewoman, and I will make the matter out. This
here question is about severity and justice, and pardon, and the like of they.
Now to explain the thing --


HONEYWOOD. O! curse your explanations. [Aside.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Mr. Leontine, sir, below, desires to speak with you
upon earnest business.


HONEYWOOD. That Is lucky. ( Aside.) Dear madam, you will excuse me and my good
friends here, for a few minutes. There are books, madam, to amuse you. Come,
gentlemen, you know I make no ceremony with such friends. After you, sir.
Excuse me. Well, if I must. But I know your natural politeness.


BAILIFF. Before and behind, you know.


FOLLOWER. Ay, ay, before and behind, before and behind. [ Exeunt Honeywood,
Bailiff, and Follower.


MISS RICHLAND. What can all this mean, Garnet?


GARNET. Mean, madam? why, what should it mean, but what Mr. Lofty sent you
here to see? These people he calls officers are officers sure enough: sheriff's
officers; bailiffs, madam.


MISS RICHLAND. Ay, it is certainly so. Well, though his perplexities are far
from giving me pleasure, yet I own there is something very ridiculous in them,
and a just punishment for his dissimulation.


GARNET. And so they are. But I wonder, madam, that the lawyer you just
employed to pay his debts, and set him free, has not done it by this time. He
ought at least to have been here before now. But lawyers are always more ready
to get a man into troubles, than out of them.


Enter SIR WILLIAM. SIR WILLIAM. For miss Richland to undertake setting him
free, I own, was quite unexpected. It has totally unhinged my schemes to
reclaim him. Yet, it gives me pleasure to find, that, among a number of
worthless friendships, he has made one acquisition of real value; for there
must be some softer passion on her side that prompts this generosity. Ha! here
before me: I Will endeavor to sound her affections. Madam, as I am the person
that have had some demands upon the gentleman of this house, I hope you will
excuse me, if, before I enlarged him, I wanted to see yourself.


MISS RICHLAND. The precaution was very unnecessary, sir. I suppose your wants
were only such as my agent had power to satisfy.


SIR WILLIAM. Partly, madam. But, I was also willing you should be fully
apprized of the character of the gentleman you intended to serve.


MISS RICHLAND. It must come, sir, with a very ill grace from you. To censure
it, after what you have done, would look like malice; and, to speak favorably
of a character you have oppressed, would be impeaching your own. And sure, his
tenderness, his humanity, his universal friendship, may atone for many faults.


SIR WILLIAM. That friendship, madam, which is exerted in too wide a sphere,
becomes totally useless. Our bounty, like a drop of water, disappears when
diffused too widely. They, who pretend most to this universal benevolence, are
either deceivers, or dupes. Men who desire to cover their private ill nature,
by a pretended regard for all; or, men who, reasoning themselves into false
feelings, are more earnest in pursuit of splendid, than of useful virtues.


MISS RICHLAND. I am surprised, sir, to hear one, who has probably been a
gainer by the folly of others, so severe in his censure of it.


SIR WILLIAM. Whatever I may have gained by folly, madam, you see I am willing
to prevent your losing by it.


MISS RICHLAND. Your cares for me, sir, are unnecessary. I always suspect those
services which are denied where they are wanted, and offered, perhaps, in hopes
of a refusal. No, sir, my directions have been given, and I insist upon their
being complied with.


SIR WILLIAM. Thou amiable woman! I can no longer contain the expressions of my
gratitude: my pleasure. You see before you one, who has been equally careful of
his interest; one, who has for some time been a concealed spectator of his
follies, and only punished, in hopes to reclaim them -- his uncle!


MISS RICHLAND. Sir William Honeywood! You amaze me. How shall I conceal my
confusion? I fear, sir, you will think I have been too forward in my services. I
confess I --


SIR WILLIAM. Don't make any apologies, madam. I only find myself unable to
repay the obligation. And yet, I have been trying my interest of late to serve
you. Having learnt, madam, that you had some demands upon government, I have,
though unasked, been your solicitor there.


MISS RICHLAND. Sir, I Am infinitely obliged to your intentions. But my guardian
has employed another gentleman who assures him of success.


SIR WILLIAM. Who, the important little man that visits here? Trust me, madam,
he is quite contemptible among men in power, and utterly unable to serve you.
Mr. Lofty's promises are much better known to people of fashion, than his
person, I assure you.


MISS RICHLAND. How have we been deceived! As sure as can be, here he comes.


SIR WILLIAM. Does he! Remember I Am to continue unknown. My return to England
has not as yet been made public. With what impudence he enters!


Enter LOFTY. LOFTY. Let the chariot -- let my chariot drive off; I Will visit to
his grace's in a chair. Miss Richland here before me! Punctual, as usual, to
the calls of humanity. I Am very sorry, madam, things of this kind should
happen, especially to a man I have shown every where, and carried amongst us as
a particular acquaintance.


MISS RICHLAND. I find, sir, you have the art of making the misfortunes of
others your own.


LOFTY. My dear madam, what can a private man like me do? One man cannot do
every thing; and then, I do so much in this way every day: let me see;
something considerable might be done for him by subscription; it could not fail
if I carried the list. I Will undertake to set down a brace of dukes, two dozen
lords, and half the lower house, at my own peril.


SIR WILLIAM. And, after all, it is more than probable, sir, he might reject the
offer of such powerful patronage.


LOFTY. Then, madam, what can we do? You know I never make promises. In truth,
I once or twice tried to do something with him in the way of business; but, as
I often told his uncle, sir William Honeywood, the man was utterly
impracticable.


SIR WILLIAM. His uncle! Then that gentleman, I suppose, is a particular friend
of your.


LOFTY. Meaning me, sir? -- Yes, madam, as I often said, my dear sir William,
you are sensible I would do any thing, as far as my poor interest goes, to
serve your family: but what can be done; there is no procuring first-rate places
for ninth-rate abilities.


MISS RICHLAND. I have heard of sir William Honeywood; he is abroad in
employment: he confided in your judgment, I suppose.


LOFTY. Why, yes, madam, I believe sir William had some reason to confide in my
judgment; one little reason, perhaps.


MISS RICHLAND. Pray, sir, what was it?


LOFTY. Why, madam -- but let it go no further -- it was I procured him his
place.


SIR WILLIAM. Did you, sir?


LOFTY. Either you or I, sir.


MISS RICHLAND. This, Mr. Lofty, was very kind indeed.


LOFTY. I did love him, to be sure; he had some amusing qualities; no man was
fitter to be toast-master to a club, or had a better head.


MISS RICHLAND. A better head?


LOFTY. Ay, at a bottle. To be sure, he was as dull as a choice spirit: but
hang it, he was grateful, very grateful; and gratitude hides a multitude of
faults.


SIR WILLIAM. He might have reason, perhaps. His place is pretty considerable,
I Am told.


LOFTY. A trifle, a mere trifle, among us men of business. The truth is, he
wanted dignity to fill up a greater.


SIR WILLIAM. Dignity of person, do you mean, sir? I Am told he is much about my
size and figure, sir.


LOFTY. Ay, tall enough for a marching regiment; but then he wanted a something
-- a consequence of form -- a kind of a -- I believe the lady perceives my
meaning.


MISS RICHLAND. O, perfectly: you courtiers can do any thing, I see.


LOFTY. My dear madam, all this is but a mere exchange: we do greater things
for one another every day. Why, as thus, now: let me suppose you the first lord
of the treasury; you have an employment in you that I want; I have a place in
me that you want; do me here, do you there: interest of both sides, few words,
flat, done and done, and its over.


SIR WILLIAM. A thought strikes me. ( Aside.) Now you mention sir William
Honeywood, madam; and as he seems, sir, an acquaintance of yours; you will be
glad to hear he is arrived from Italy; I had it from a friend who knows him as
well as he does me, and you may depend on my information.


LOFTY. The devil he is! If I had known that, we should not have been quite so
well acquainted. [Aside.


SIR WILLIAM. He is certainly returned; and, as this gentleman is a friend of
yours, he can be of signal service to us, by introducing me to him; there are
some papers relative to your affairs, that require dispatch and his inspection.


MISS RICHLAND. This gentleman, Mr. Lofty, is a person employed in my affairs:
I know you will serve us.


LOFTY. My dear madam, I live but to serve you. Sir William shall even wait
upon him, if you think proper to command it.


SIR WILLIAM. That would be quite unnecessary.


LOFTY. Well, we must introduce you then. Call upon me -- let me see -- ay, in
two days.


SIR WILLIAM. Now, or the opportunity will be lost for ever.


LOFTY. Well, if it must be now, now let it be. But damn it, that is
unfortunate; my lord Grig's cursed Pensacola business comes on this very hour,
and I Am engaged to attend -- another time --


SIR WILLIAM. A short letter to sir William will do.


LOFTY. You shall have it; yet, in my opinion, a letter is a very bad way of
going to work; face to face, that is my way.


SIR WILLIAM. The letter, sir, will do quite as well.


LOFTY. Zounds! sir, do you pretend to direct me; direct me in the business of
office? Do you know me, sir? who am I?


MISS RICHLAND. Dear Mr. Lofty, this request is not so much his as mine; if my
commands -- but you despise my power.


LOFTY. Delicate creature! your commands could even control a debate at
midnight: to a power so constitutional, I am all obedience and tranquillity. He
shall have a letter; where is my secretary? Dubardieu! And yet, I protest I
don't like this way of doing business I think if I spoke first to sir William
-- But you will have it so. [ Exit with Miss Richland.


SIR WILLIAM, alone. Ha, ha, ha! This too is one of my nephew's hopeful
associates. O vanity, thou constant deceiver, how do all thy efforts to exalt,
serve but to sink us! Thy false colorings, like those employed to heighten
beauty, only seem to mend that bloom which they contribute to destroy. I Am not
displeased at this interview: exposing this fellow's impudence to the contempt
it deserves, may be of use to my design; at least, if he can reflect, it will
be of use to himself.


Enter JARVIS. SIR WILLIAM. How now, Jarvis, where is your master, my nephew?


JARVIS. At his wit's end, I believe: he is scarce gotten out of one scrape, but
he is running his head into another.


SIR WILLIAM. How so?


JARVIS. The house has but just been cleared of the bailiffs, and now he is
again engaging tooth and nail in assisting old Croaker's son to patch up a
clandestine match with the young lady that passes in the house for his sister.


SIR WILLIAM. Ever busy to serve others.


JARVIS. Ay, any body but himself. The young couple, it seems, are just setting
out for Scotland; and he supplies them with money for the journey.


SIR WILLIAM. Money! how is he able to supply others, who has scarce any for
himself?


JARVIS. Why, there it is: he has no money, that is true; but then, as he never
said no to any request in his life, he has given them a bill, drawn by a friend
of his upon a merchant in the city, which I am to get changed; for you must
know that I am to go with them to Scotland myself.


SIR WILLIAM. How!


JARVIS. It seems the young gentleman is obliged to take a different road from
his mistress, as he is to call upon an uncle of his that lives out of the way,
in order to prepare a place for their reception, when they return; so they have
borrowed me from my master, as the properest person to attend the young lady
down.


SIR WILLIAM. To the land of matrimony! A pleasant journey, Jarvis.


JARVIS. Ay, but I Am only to have all the fatigues on it.


SIR WILLIAM. Well, it may be shorter, and less fatiguing, than you imagine. I
know but too much of the young lady's family and connexions, whom I have seen
abroad. I have also discovered that miss Richland is not indifferent to my
thoughtless nephew; and will endeavor, though I fear, in vain, to establish that
connection. But, come, the letter I wait for must be almost finished; I Will let
you further into my intentions, in the next room. [Exeunt.


ACT THE FOURTH.
SCENE, CROAKER'S house. LOFTY. WELL, sure the devil's in me of late, for
running my head into such defiles, as nothing but a genius like my own could
draw me from. I was formerly contented to husband out my places and pensions
with some degree of frugality; but, curse it, of late I have given away the
whole Court Register in less time than they could print the title page: yet,
hang it, why scruple a lie or two to come at a fine girl, when I every day tell
a thousand for nothing. Ha! Honeywood here before me. Could miss Richland have
set him at liberty?

Enter HONEYWOOD. Mr. Honeywood, I Am glad to see you abroad again. I find my
concurrence was not necessary in your unfortunate affairs. I had put things in
a train to do your business; but it is not for me to say what I intended doing.


HONEYWOOD. It was unfortunate indeed, sir. But what adds to my uneasiness is,
that while you seem to be acquainted with my misfortune, I, myself, continue
still a stranger to my benefactor.


LOFTY. How! not know the friend that served you?


HONEYWOOD. Cannot guess at the person.


LOFTY. Inquire.


HONEYWOOD. I have; but all I can learn is, that he chooses to remain concealed,
and that all inquiry must be fruitless.


LOFTY. Must be fruitless?


HONEYWOOD. Absolutely fruitless.


LOFTY. Sure of that?


HONEYWOOD. Very sure.


LOFTY. Then I Will be damned if you shall ever know it from me.


HONEYWOOD. How, sir!


LOFTY. I suppose now, Mr. Honeywood, you think my rent-roll very considerable,
and that I have vast sums of money to throw away; I know you do. The world to
be sure says such things of me.


HONEYWOOD. The world, by what I learn, is no stranger to your generosity. But
where does this tend?


LOFTY. To nothing; nothing in the world. The town, to be sure, when it makes
such a thing as me the subject of conversation, has asserted, that I never yet
patronized a man of merit.


HONEYWOOD. I have heard instances to the contrary, even from yourself.


LOFTY. Yes, Honeywood, and there are instances to the contrary, that you shall
never hear from myself.


HONEYWOOD. Ha! dear sir, permit me to ask you but one question.


LOFTY. Sir, ask me no questions: I say, sir, ask me no questions; I Will be
damned, if I answer them.


HONEYWOOD. I will ask no further. My friend! my benefactor, it is, it must be
here, that I am indebted for freedom, for honor. Yes, thou worthiest of men,
from the beginning I suspected it, but was afraid to return thanks; which, if
undeserved, might seem reproaches.


LOFTY. I protest I don't understand all this, Mr. Honeywood. You treat me very
cavalierly. I do assure you, sir. -- Blood, sir, cannot a man be permitted to
enjoy the luxury of his own feelings, without all this parade?


HONEYWOOD. Nay, do not attempt to conceal an action that adds to your honor.
Your looks, your air, your manner, all confess it.


LOFTY. Confess it, sir! Torture itself, sir, shall never bring me to confess
it. Mr. Honeywood, I have admitted you upon terms of friendship. Don't let us
fall out; make me happy, and let this be buried in oblivion. You know I hate
ostentation; you know I do. Come, come, Honeywood, you know I always loved to
be a friend, and not a patron. I beg this may make no kind of distance between
us. Come, come, you and I must be more familiar -- Indeed we must.


HONEYWOOD. Heavens! Can I ever repay such friendship! Is there any way! Thou
best of men, can I ever return the obligation?


LOFTY. A bagatelle, a mere bagatelle. But I see your heart is laboring to be
grateful. You shall be grateful. It would be cruel to disappoint you.


HONEYWOOD. How! Teach me the manner. Is there any way?


LOFTY. From this moment you're mine. Yes, my friend, you shall know it -- I Am
in love.


HONEYWOOD. And can I assist you?


LOFTY. Nobody so well.


HONEYWOOD. In what manner? I Am all impatience.


LOFTY. You shall make love for me.


HONEYWOOD. And to whom shall I speak in your favor?


LOFTY. To a lady with whom you have great interest, I assure you: miss
Richland.


HONEYWOOD. Miss Richland!


LOFTY. Yes, miss Richland. She has struck the blow up to the hilt in my bosom,
by Jupiter.


HONEYWOOD. Heavens! was ever any thing more unfortunate! It is too much to be
endured.


LOFTY. Unfortunate indeed! And yet I can endure it, till you have opened the
affair to her for me. Between ourselves, I think she likes me. I Am not apt to
boast, but I think she does.


HONEYWOOD. Indeed! But, do you know the person you apply to?


LOFTY. Yes, I know you are her friend and mine: that is enough. To you,
therefore, I commit the success of my passion. I Will say no more, let friendship
do the rest. I have only to add, that if at any time my little interest can be
of service -- but, hang it, I Will make no promises -- you know my interest is
yours at any time. No apologies, my friend, I Will not be answered, it shall be
so. [Exit.


HONEYWOOD. Open, generous, unsuspecting man! He little thinks that I love her
too; and with such an ardent passion! -- But then it was ever but a vain and
hopeless one; my torment, my persecution! What shall I do! Love, friendship, a
hopeless passion, a deserving friend! Love, that has been my tormentor; a
friend, that has, perhaps, distressed himself, to serve me. It shall be so.
Yes, I will discard the fondling hope from my bosom, and exert all my influence
in his favor. And yet to see her in the possession of another! --
Insupportable! But then to betray a generous, trusting friend! -- Worse, worse!
Yes, I Am resolved. Let me but be the instrument of their happiness, and then
quit a country, where I must for ever despair of finding my own. [Exit.


Enter OLIVIA, and GARNET, who carries a milliner's box. OLIVIA. Dear me, I
wish this journey were over. No news of Jarvis yet? I believe the old peevish
creature delays purely to vex me.


GARNET. Why, to be sure, madam, I did hear him say, a little snubbing, before
marriage, would teach you to bear it the better afterward.


OLIVIA. To be gone a full hour, though he had only to get a bill changed in the
city! How provoking!


GARNET. I Will lay my life, Mr. Leontine, that had twice as much to do, is
setting off by this time from his inn; and here you are left behind.


OLIVIA. Well, let us be prepared for his coming, however. Are you sure you
have omitted nothing, Garnet?


GARNET. Not a stick, madam -- all is here. Yet I wish you could take the white
and silver to be married in. It Is the worst luck in the world, in any thing but
white. I knew one Bett Stubbs, of our town, that was married in red; and, as
sure as eggs is eggs, the bridegroom and she had a miff before morning.


OLIVIA. No matter. I Am all impatience till we are out of the house.


GARNET. Bless me, madam, I had almost forgot the wedding-ring! -- The sweet
little thing -- I don't think it would go on my little finger. And what if I
put in a gentleman's nightcap, in case of necessity, madam? But here is Jarvis.


Enter JARVIS. OLIVIA. O, Jarvis, are you come at last? We have been ready this
half hour. Now let us be going. Let us fly!


JARVIS. Aye, to Jericho; for we shall have no going to Scotland this bout, I
fancy.


OLIVIA. How! What Is the matter?


JARVIS. Money, money, is the matter, madam. We have got no money. What the
plague do you send me of your fool's errand for? My master's bill upon the city
is not worth a rush. Here it is; Mrs. Garnet may pin up her hair with it.


OLIVIA. Undone! How could Honeywood serve us so! What shall we do? Cannot we go
without it?


JARVIS. Go to Scotland without money! To Scotland without money! Lord how some
people understand geography! We might as well set sail for Patagonia upon a
cork jacket.


OLIVIA. Such a disappointment! What a base insincere man was your master, to
serve us in this manner. Is this his good nature?


JARVIS. Nay, don't talk ill of my master, madam. I will not bear to hear any body
talk ill of him but myself.


GARNET. Bless us! now I think on it, madam, you need not be under any
uneasiness: I saw Mr. Leontine receive forty guineas from his father just
before he set out, and he cannot yet have left the inn. A short letter will
reach him there.


OLIVIA. Well remembered, Garnet; I Will write immediately. How Is this! Bless me,
my hand trembles so, I cannot write a word. Do you write, Garnet; and, upon
second thought, it will be better from you.


GARNET. Truly, madam, I write and indite but poorly. I never was kute at my
larning. But I Will do what I can to please you. Let me see. All out of my own
head, I suppose?


OLIVIA. Whatever you please.


GARNET. ( Writing.) Muster Croaker -- Twenty guineas, madam?


OLIVIA. Ay, twenty will do.


GARNET. At the bar of the Talbot till called for. Expedition -- will be blown
up -- All of a flame -- Quick dispatch -- Cupid, the little god of love -- I
conclude it, madam, with Cupid; I love to see a love-letter end like poetry.


OLIVIA. Well, well, what you please, any thing. But how shall we send it? I
can trust none of the servants of this family.


GARNET. Odso, madam, Mr. Honeywood's butler is in the next room: he is a dear,
sweet man; he will do any thing for me.


JARVIS. He! the dog, he will certainly commit some blunder. He Is drunk and sober
ten times a day.


OLIVIA. No matter. Fly, Garnet: any body we can trust will do. [ Exit Garnet.]
Well, Jarvis, now we can have nothing more to interrupt us. You may take up the
things, and carry them on to the inn. Have you no hands, Jarvis?


JARVIS. Soft and fair, young lady. You, that are going to be married, think
things can never be done too fast: but, we, that are old, and know what we are
about, must elope methodically, madam.


OLIVIA. Well, sure, if my indiscretions were to be done over again --


JARVIS. My life for it, you would do them ten times over.


OLIVIA. Why will you talk so? If you knew how unhappy they make me --


JARVIS. Very unhappy, no doubt: I was once just as unhappy when I was going to
be married myself. I Will tell you a story about that --


OLIVIA. A story! when I Am all impatience to be away. Was there ever such a
dilatory creature! --


JARVIS. Well, madam, if we must march, why we will march; that is all. Though,
odds bobs, we have still forgot one thing we should never travel without -- a
case of good razors, and a box of shaving-powder. But no matter, I believe we
shall be pretty well shaved by the way. [Going.


Enter GARNET. GARNET. Undone, undone, madam. Ah, Mr. Jarvis, you said right
enough. As sure as death Mr. Honeywood's rogue of a drunken butler, dropped the
letter before he went ten yards from the door. There Is old Croaker has just
picked it up, and is this moment reading it to himself in the hall.


OLIVIA. Unfortunate! We shall be discovered.


GARNET. No, madam: don't be uneasy, he can make neither head nor tail of it.
To be sure he looks as if he was broke loose from Bedlam about it, but he cannot
find what it means for all that. O lud, he is coming this way all in the
horrors!


OLIVIA. Then let us leave the house this instant, for fear he should ask
farther questions. In the mean time, Garnet, do you write and send off just
such another. [Exeunt.


Enter CROAKER. CROAKER. Death and destruction! Are all the horrors of air,
fire and water to be levelled only at me! Am I only to be singled out for
gunpowder-plots, combustibles and conflagration! Here it is -- An incendiary
letter dropped at my door. 'To Muster Croaker, these, with speed.' Ay, ay,
plain enough the direction: all in the genuine incendiary spelling, and as
cramp as the devil. 'With speed.' O, confound your speed. But let me read it
once more. ( Reads.) 'Muster Croaker as as soon as yoew see this leve twenty
gunnes at the bar of the Talboot tell caled for or you and yower experetion
will be al blown up.' Ah, but too plain. Blood and gunpowder in every line of
it. Blown up! murderous dog! All blown up! Heavens! what have I and my poor
family done, to be all blown up! ( Reads.) 'Our pockets are low, and money we
must have.' Ay, there is the reason; they will blow us up, because they have got
low pockets. ( Reads.) 'It is but a short time you have to consider; for if
this takes wind, the house will quickly be all of a flame.' Inhuman monsters!
blow us up, and then burn us. The earthquake at Lisbon was but a bonfire to it.
( Reads.) 'Make quick dispatch, and so no more at present. But may Cupid, the
little god of love, go with you wherever you go.' The little god of love!
Cupid, the little god of love go with me! Go you to the devil, you and your
little Cupid together; I Am so frightened, I scarce know whether I sit, stand,
or go. Perhaps this moment I Am treading on lighted matches, blazing brimstone
and barrels of gunpowder. They are preparing to blow me up into the clouds.
Murder! We shall be all burnt in our beds; we shall be all burnt in our beds.


Enter MISS RICHLAND. MISS RICHLAND. Lord, sir, what is the matter?


CROAKER. Murder's the matter. We shall be all blown up in our beds before
morning.


MISS RICHLAND. I hope not, sir.


CROAKER. What signifies what you hope, madam, when I have a certificate of it
here in my hand. Will nothing alarm my family! Sleeping and eating, sleeping
and eating is the only work from morning till night in my house. My insensible
crew could sleep, though rocked by an earthquake; and fry beef steaks at a
volcano.


MISS RICHLAND. But, sir, you have alarmed them so often already, we have
nothing but earthquakes, famines, plagues and mad dogs from year's end to
year's end. You remember, sir, it is not above a month ago, you assured us of a
conspiracy among the bakers, to poison us in our bread; and so kept the whole
family a week upon potatoes.


CROAKER. And potatoes were too good for them. But why do I stand talking here
with a girl, when I should be facing the enemy without? Here, John, Nicodemus,
search the house. Look into the cellars, to see if there be any combustibles
below; and above, in the apartments, that no matches be thrown in at the
windows. Let all the fires be put out, and let the engine be drawn out in the
yard, to play upon the house in case of necessity. [Exit.


MISS RICHLAND, alone. What can he mean by all this? Yet, why should I inquire,
when he alarms us in this manner almost every day! But Honeywood has desired an
interview with me in private. What can he mean? or, rather, what means this
palpitation at his approach! It is the first time he ever showed any thing in
his conduct that seemed particular. Sure he cannot mean to -- but he is here.


Enter HONEYWOOD. HONEYWOOD. I presumed to solicit this interview, madam,
before I left town, to be permitted --


MISS RICHLAND. Indeed! Leaving town, sir? --


HONEYWOOD. Yes, madam; perhaps the kingdom. I have presumed, I say, to desire
the favor of this interview, -- in order to disclose something which our long
friendship prompts. And yet my fears --


MISS RICHLAND. His fears! What are his fears to mine! ( Aside.) We have indeed
been long acquainted, sir; very long. If I remember, our first meeting was at
the French ambassador's. -- Do you recollect how you were pleased to rally me
upon my complexion there?


HONEYWOOD. Perfectly, madam: I presumed to reprove you for painting: but your
warmer blushes soon convinced the company, that the coloring was all from
nature.


MISS RICHLAND. And yet you only meant it, in your good-natured way, to make me
pay a compliment to myself. In the same manner you danced that night with the
most awkward woman in company, because you saw nobody else would take her out.


HONEYWOOD. Yes; and was rewarded the next night, by dancing with the finest
woman in company, whom every body wished to take out.


MISS RICHLAND. Well, sir, if you thought so then, I fear your judgment has
since corrected the errors of a first impression. We generally show to most
advantage at first. Our sex are like poor tradesmen, that put all their best
goods to be seen at the windows.


HONEYWOOD. The first impression, madam, did indeed deceive me. I expected to
find a woman with all the faults of conscious flattered beauty. I expected to
find her vain and insolent. But every day has since taught me that it is
possible to possess sense without pride, and beauty without affectation.


MISS RICHLAND. This, sir, is a style very unsual with Mr. Honeywood; and I
should be glad to know why he thus attempts to increase that vanity, which his
own lessons have taught me to despise.


HONEYWOOD. I ask pardon, madam. Yet, from our long friendship, I presumed I
might have some right to offer, without offense, what you may refuse without
offending.


MISS RICHLAND. Sir! I beg you would reflect; though, I fear, I shall scarce have any
power to refuse a request of yours; yet you may be precipitate: consider, sir.


HONEYWOOD. I own my rashness; but, as I plead the cause of friendship, of one
who loves -- Don't be alarmed, madam -- who loves you with the most ardent
passion; whose whole happiness is placed in you --


MISS RICHLAND. I fear, sir, I shall never find whom you mean, by this
description of him.


HONEYWOOD. Ah, madam, it but too plainly points him out; though he should be too
humble himself to urge his pretensions, or you too modest to understand them.


MISS RICHLAND. Well; it would be affectation any longer to pretend ignorance;
and I will own, sir, I have long been prejudiced in his favor. It was but
natural to wish to make his heart mine, as he seemed himself ignorant of its
value.


HONEYWOOD. I see she always loved him. ( Aside.) I find, madam, you're already
sensible of his worth, his passion. How happy is my friend, to be the favorite
of one with such sense to distinguish merit, and such beauty to reward it.


MISS RICHLAND. Your friend, sir! What friend?


HONEYWOOD. My best friend -- my friend Mr. Lofty, madam.


MISS RICHLAND. He, sir!


HONEYWOOD. Yes, he, madam. He is, indeed, what your warmest wishes might have
formed him. And to his other qualities, he adds that of the most passionate
regard for you.


MISS RICHLAND. Amazement! -- No more of this, I beg you, sir.


HONEYWOOD. I see your confusion, madam, and know how to interpret it. And,
since I so plainly read the language of your heart, shall I make my friend
happy, by communicating your sentiments?


MISS RICHLAND. By no means.


HONEYWOOD. Excuse me; I must; I know you desire it.


MISS RICHLAND. Mr. Honeywood, let me tell you, that you wrong my sentiments
and yourself. When I first applied to your friendship, I expected advice and
assistance; but, now, sir, I see that it is vain to expect happiness from him,
who has been so bad an oeconomist of his own; and that I must disclaim his
friendship, who ceases to be a friend to himself. [Exit.


HONEYWOOD. How is this! she has confessed she loved him, and yet she seemed to
part in displeasure. Can I have done any thing to reproach myself with? No; I
believe not: yet, after all, these things should not be done by a third person;
I should have spared her confusion. My friendship carried me a little too far.


Enter CROAKER, with the letter in his hand, and MRS. CROAKER. MRS. CROAKER.
Ha, ha, ha! And so, my dear, it is your supreme wish that I should be quite
wretched upon this occasion? ha, ha!


CROAKER, mimicking. Ha, ha, ha! and so, my dear, it is your supreme pleasure to
give me no better consolation?


MRS. CROAKER. Positively, my dear; what is this incendiary stuff and trumpery
to me? Our house may travel through the air like the house of Loretto, for aught
I care, if I Am to be miserable in it.


CROAKER. Would to heaven it were converted into an house of correction for
your benefit. Have we not every thing to alarm us? Perhaps, this very moment
the tragedy is beginning.


MRS. CROAKER. Then let us reserve our distress till the rising of the curtain,
or give them the money they want, and have done with them.


CROAKER. Give them my money! -- And pray, what right have they to my money?


MRS. CROAKER. And pray, what right then have you to my good humor?


CROAKER. And so your good humor advises me to part with my money? Why then,
to tell your good humor a piece of my mind, I Would sooner part with my wife.
Here Is Mr. Honeywood, see what he will say to it. My dear Honeywood, look at this
incendiary letter dropped at my door. It will freeze you with terror; and yet
lovey here can read it -- can read it, and laugh.


MRS. CROAKER. Yes, and so will Mr. Honeywood.


CROAKER. If he does, I Will suffer to be hanged the next minute in the rogue's
place, that is all.


MRS. CROAKER. Speak, Mr. Honeywood; is there any thing more foolish than my
husband's fright upon this occasion?


HONEYWOOD. It would not become me to decide, madam; but doubtless, the
greatness of his terrors, now, will but invite them to renew their villainy
another time.


MRS. CROAKER. I told you, he would be of my opinion.


CROAKER. How, sir! do you maintain that I should lie down under such an
injury, and show, neither by my tears, or complaints, that I have something of
the spirit of a man in me?


HONEYWOOD. Pardon me, sir. You ought to make the loudest complaints, if you
desire redress. The surest way to have redress, is to be earnest in the pursuit
of it.


CROAKER. Ay, whose opinion is he of now?


MRS. CROAKER. But don't you think that laughing off our fears is the best way?


HONEYWOOD. What is the best, madam, few can say; but I Will maintain it to be a
very wise way.


CROAKER. But we are talking of the best. Surely the best way is to face the
enemy in the field, and not wait till he plunders us in our very bedchamber.


HONEYWOOD. Why, sir, as to the best, that -- that is a very wise way too.


MRS. CROAKER. But can any thing be more absurd, than to double our distresses
by our apprehensions, and put it in the power of every low fellow, that can
scrawl ten words of wretched spelling, to torment us?


HONEYWOOD. Without doubt, nothing more absurd.


CROAKER. How! would it not be more absurd to despise the rattle till we are
bit by the snake?


HONEYWOOD. Without doubt, perfectly absurd.


CROAKER. Then you are of my opinion?


HONEYWOOD. Entirely.


MRS. CROAKER. And you reject mine?


HONEYWOOD. Heavens forbid, madam. No, sure, no reasoning can be more just than
yours. We ought certainly to despise malice if we cannot oppose it, and not
make the incendiary's pen as fatal to our repose as the highwayman's pistol.


MRS. CROAKER. O! then you think I Am quite right?


HONEYWOOD. Perfectly right.


CROAKER. A plague of plagues, we cannot be both right. I ought to be sorry, or
I ought to be glad. My hat must be on my head, or my hat must be off.


MRS. CROAKER. Certainly, in two opposite opinions, if one be perfectly
reasonable, the other cannot be perfectly right.


HONEYWOOD. And why may not both be right, madam: Mr. Croaker in earnestly
seeking redress, and you in waiting the event with good humor? Pray, let me
see the letter again. I have it. This letter requires twenty guineas to be left
at the bar of the Talbot inn. If it be indeed an incendiary letter, what if you
and I, sir, go there; and, when the writer comes to be paid his expected booty,
seize him?


CROAKER. My dear friend, it is the very thing; the very thing. While I walk by
the door, you shall plant yourself in ambush near the bar; burst out upon the
miscreant like a masqued battery; extort a confession at once, and so hang him
up by surprise.


HONEYWOOD. Yes; but I would not choose to exercise too much severity. It is my
maxim, sir, that crimes generally punish themselves.


CROAKER. Well, but we may upbraid him a little, I suppose? [Ironically.


HONEYWOOD. Ay, but not punish him too rigidly.


CROAKER. Well, well, leave that to my own benevolence.


HONEYWOOD. Well, I do: but remember that universal benevolence is the first
law of nature. [ Exeunt Honeywood and Mrs. Croaker.


CROAKER. Yes; and my universal benevolence will hang the dog, if he had as
many necks as a hydra.


ACT THE FIFTH.
SCENE, an inn. Enter OLIVIA, JARVIS. OLIVIA. WELL, we have got safe to the
inn, however. Now, if the post-chaise were ready --


JARVIS. The horses are just finishing their oats; and, as they are not going
to be married, they choose to take their own time.


OLIVIA. You are for ever giving wrong motives to my impatience.


JARVIS. Be as impatient as you will, the horses must take their own time;
besides, you don't consider, we have got no answer from our fellow-traveller
yet. If we hear nothing from Mr. Leontine, we have only one way left us.


OLIVIA. What way?


JARVIS. The way home again.


OLIVIA. Not so. I have made a resolution to go, and nothing shall induce me to
break it.


JARVIS. Ay; resolutions are well kept, when they jump with inclination.
However, I Will go hasten things without. And I Will call, too, at the bar, to see
if any thing should be left for us there. Don't be in such a plaguey hurry,
madam, and we shall go the faster, I promise you. [ Exit Jarvis.


Enter LANDLADY. LANDLADY. What! Solomon, why don't you move? Pipes and tobacco
for the Lamb there. -- Will nobody answer? To the Dolphin; quick. The Angel has
been outrageous this half hour. Did your ladyship call, madam?


OLIVIA. No, madam.


LANDLADY. I find, as you're for Scotland, madam -- But, that is no business of
mine; married, or not married, I ask no questions. To be sure, we had a sweet
little couple set off from this two days ago for the same place. The gentleman,
for a tailor, was, to be sure, as fine a spoken tailor, as ever blew froth from
a full pot. And the young lady so bashful, it was near half an hour before we
could get her to finish a pint of rasberry between us.


OLIVIA. But this gentleman and I are not going to be married, I assure you.


LANDLADY. May be not. That Is no business of mine; for certain, Scotch
marriages seldom turn out. There was, of my own knowledge, miss Macfag, that
married her father's footman. -- Alack-a-day, she and her husband soon parted,
and now keep separate cellars in Hedgelane.


OLIVIA. A very pretty picture of what lies before me! [Aside.


Enter LEONTINE. LEONTINE. My dear Olivia, my anxiety, till you were out of
danger, was too great to be resisted. I could not help coming to see you set
out, though it exposes us to a discovery.


OLIVIA. May every thing you do prove as fortunate. Indeed, Leontine, we have
been most cruelly disappointed. Mr. Honeywood's bill upon the city has, it
seems, been protested, and we have been utterly at a loss how to proceed.


LEONTINE. How! an offer of his own too. Sure, he could not mean to deceive us.


OLIVIA. Depend upon his sincerity; he only mistook the desire for the power of
serving us. But let us think no more of it. I believe the post-chaise is ready
by this.


LANDLADY. Not quite yet: and, begging your ladyship's pardon, I don't think
your ladyship quite ready for the post-chaise. The north road is a cold place,
madam. I have a drop in the house of as pretty rasberry as ever was tipped over
tongue. Just a thimble full to keep the wind off your stomach. To be sure, the
last couple we had here, they said it was a perfect nosegay. Ecod, I sent them
both away as good natured -- Up went the blinds, round went the wheels, and
drive away postboy, was the word.


Enter CROAKER. CROAKER. Well, while my friend Honeywood is upon the post of
danger at the bar, it must be my business to have an eye about me here. I think
I know an incendiary's look; for, wherever the devil makes a purchase, he never
fails to set his mark. Ha! who have we here? My son and daughter! What can they
be doing here!


LANDLADY. I tell you, madam, it will do you good; I think I know by this time
what is good for the north road. It Is a raw night, madam. -- Sir --


LEONTINE. Not a drop more, good madam. I should now take it as a greater
favor, if you hasten the horses, for I am afraid to be seen myself.


LANDLADY. That shall be done. Wha, Solomon! are you all dead there? Wha,
Solomon, I say. [Exit bawling.


OLIVIA. Well; I dread, lest an expedition begun in fear, should end in
repentance. -- Every moment we stay increases our danger, and adds to my
apprehensions.


LEONTINE. There Is no danger, trust me, my dear; there can be none: if
Honeywood has acted with honor, and kept my father, as he promised, in
employment till we are out of danger, nothing can interrupt our journey.


OLIVIA. I have no doubt of Mr. Honeywood's sincerity, and even his desires to
serve us. My fears are from your father's suspicions. A mind so disposed to be
alarmed without a cause, will be but too ready when there is a reason.


LEONTINE. Why, let him, when we are out of his power. But, believe me, Olivia,
you have no great reason to dread his resentment. His repining temper, as it
does no manner of injury to himself, so will it never do harm to others. He
only frets to keep himself employed, and scolds for his private amusement.


OLIVIA. I don't know that; but, I Am sure, on some occasions, it makes him look
most shockingly.


CROAKER, discovering himself. How does he look now? -- How does he look now?


OLIVIA. Ah!


LEONTINE. Undone.


CROAKER. How do I look now? Sir, I am your very humble servant. Madam, I am
yours. What, you are going off, are you? Then, first, if you please, take a
word or two from me with you before you go. Tell me first where you are going?
and when you have told me that, perhaps, I shall know as little as I did before.


LEONTINE. If that be so, our answer might but increase your displeasure,
without adding to your information.


CROAKER. I want no information from you, puppy: and you too, good madam, what
answer have you got? Eh ( A cry without, stop him.) I think I heard a noise. My
friend Honeywood without -- has he seized the incendiary? Ah, no, for now I
hear no more on it.


LEONTINE. Honeywood without! Then, sir, it was Mr. Honeywood that directed you
hither.


CROAKER. No, sir, it was Mr. Honeywood conducted me hither.


LEONTINE. Is it possible?


CROAKER. Possible! Why, he is in the house now, sir: more anxious about me,
than my own son, sir.


LEONTINE. Then, sir, he is a villain.


CROAKER. How, sirrah! a villain, because he takes most care of your father?
I Will not bear it. I tell you I Will not bear it. Honeywood is a friend to the
family, and I Will have him treated as such.


LEONTINE. I shall study to repay his friendship as it deserves.


CROAKER. Ah, rogue, if you knew how earnestly he entered into my griefs, and
pointed out the means to detect them, you would love him as I do. ( A cry
without, stop him) Fire and fury! they have seized the incendiary: they have
the villain, the incendiary in view. Stop him, stop an incendiary, a murderer;
stop him. [Exit.


OLIVIA. Oh, my terrors! What can this new tumult mean?


LEONTINE. Some new mark, I suppose, of Mr. Honeywood's sincerity. But we shall
have satisfaction: he shall give me instant satisfaction.


OLIVIA. It must not be, my Leontine, if you value my esteem or my happiness.
Whatever be our fate, let us not add guilt to our misfortunes -- Consider that
our innocence will shortly be all we have left us. You must forgive him.


LEONTINE. Forgive him! Has he not in every instance betrayed us? Forced me to
borrow money from him, which appears a mere trick to delay us: promised to keep
my father engaged till we were out of danger, and here brought him to the very
scene of our escape?


OLIVIA. Don't be precipitate. We may yet be mistaken.


Enter POSTBOY, dragging in JARVIS: HONEYWOOD entering soon after. POSTBOY. Ay,
master, we have him fast enough. Here is the incendiary dog. I Am entitled to
the reward; I Will take my oath I saw him ask for the money at the bar, and then
run for it.


HONEYWOOD. Come, bring him along. Let us see him. Let him learn to blush for
his crimes. ( Discovering his mistake.) Death! what is here! Jarvis, Leontine,
Olivia! What can all this mean?


JARVIS. Why, I Will tell you what it means: that I was an old fool, and that you
are my master -- that is all.


HONEYWOOD. Confusion!


LEONTINE. Yes, sir, I find you have kept your word with me. After such
baseness, I wonder how you can venture to see the man you have injured.


HONEYWOOD. My dear Leontine, by my life, my honor --


LEONTINE. Peace, peace, for shame; and do not continue to aggravate baseness
by hypocrisy. I know you, sir, I know you.


HONEYWOOD. Why, will not you hear me! By all that is just, I knew not --


LEONTINE. Hear you, sir! to what purpose? I now see through all your low arts;
your ever complying with every opinion; your never refusing any request; your
friendship as common as a prostitute's favors, and as fallacious; all these,
sir, have long been contemptible to the world, and are now perfectly so to me.


HONEYWOOD. Ha! contemptible to the world! That reaches me. [Aside.


LEONTINE. All the seeming sincerity of your professions, I now find, were only
allurements to betray; and all your seeming regret for their consequences, only
calculated to cover the cowardice of your heart. Draw, villain!


Enter CROAKER, out of breath. CROAKER. Where is the villain? Where is the
incendiary? ( Seizing the postboy.) Hold him fast, the dog; he has the gallows
in his face. Come, you dog, confess; confess all, and hang yourself.


POSTBOY. Zounds! master, what do you throttle me for?


CROAKER, beating him. Dog, do you resist; do you resist?


POSTBOY. Zounds! master, I Am not he; there is the man that we thought was the
rogue, and turns out to be one of the company.


CROAKER. How!


HONEYWOOD. Mr. Croaker, we have all been under a strange mistake here; I find
there is nobody guilty; it was all an error; entirely an error of our own.


CROAKER. And I say, sir, that you're in an error; for there is guilt and double
guilt, a plot, a damned jesuitical pestilential plot, and I must have proof of
it.


HONEYWOOD. Do but hear me.


CROAKER. What, you intend to bring 'em off, I suppose; I Will hear nothing.


HONEYWOOD. Madam, you seem at least calm enough to hear reason.


OLIVIA. Excuse me.


HONEYWOOD. Good Jarvis, let me then explain it to you.


JARVIS. What signifies explanations, when the thing is done?


HONEYWOOD. Will nobody hear me? Was there ever such a set, so blinded by
passion and prejudice! ( To the postboy.) My good friend, I believe you will be
surprised, when I assure you --


POSTBOY. Sure me nothing -- I Am sure of nothing but a good beating.


CROAKER. Come, then, you, madam, if you ever hope for any favor or
forgiveness, tell me sincerely all you know of this affair.


OLIVIA. Unhappily, sir, I Am but too much the cause of your suspicions: you see
before you, sir, one that with false pretenses has stepped into your family to
betray it: not your daughter --


CROAKER. Not my daughter!


OLIVIA. Not your daughter -- but a mean deceiver -- who -- support me, I
cannot --


HONEYWOOD. Help, she is going, give her air.


CROAKER. Ay, ay, take the young woman to the air; I would not hurt a hair of
her head, whose ever daughter she may be -- not so bad as that neither. [
Exeunt all but Croaker.


CROAKER. Yes, yes, all is out; I now see the whole affair: my son is either
married, or going to be so, to this lady, whom he imposed upon me as his
sister. Ay, certainly so; and yet I don't find it afflicts me so much as one
might think. There Is the advantage of fretting away our misfortunes beforehand,
we never feel them when they come.


Enter MISS RICHLAND and SIR WILLIAM. SIR WILLIAM. But, how do you know, madam,
that my nephew intends setting off from this place?


MISS RICHLAND. My maid assured me he was come to this inn, and my own
knowledge of his intending to leave the kingdom, suggested the rest. But what
do I see, my guardian here before us! Who, my dear, sir, could have have
expected meeting you here? to what accident do we owe this pleasure?


CROAKER. To a fool, I believe.


MISS RICHLAND. But, to what purpose did you come?


CROAKER. To play the fool.


MISS RICHLAND. But, with whom?


CROAKER. With greater fools than myself.


MISS RICHLAND. Explain.


CROAKER. Why, Mr. Honeywood brought me here, to do nothing, now I am here; and
my son is going to be married to I don't know who, that is here: so now you are
as wise as I am.


MISS RICHLAND. Married! to whom, sir?


CROAKER. To Olivia; my daughter, as I took her to be; but who the devil she
is, or whose daughter she is, I know no more than the man in the moon.


SIR WILLIAM. Then, sir, I can inform you; and, though a stranger, yet you shall
find me a friend to your family: it will be enough, at present, to assure you,
that, both in point of birth and fortune, the young lady is at least your son's
equal. Being left by her father, sir James Woodville --


CROAKER. Sir James Woodville! What, of the west?


SIR WILLIAM. Being left by him, I say, to the care of a mercenary wretch,
whose only aim was to secure her fortune to himself, she was sent into France,
under pretense of education; and there every art was tried to fix her for life
in a convent, contrary to her inclinations. Of this I was informed, upon my
arrival at Paris; and, as I had been once her father's friend, I did all in my
power to frustrate her guardian's base intentions. I had even meditated to
rescue her from his authority, when your son stepped in with more pleasing
violence, gave her liberty, and you a daughter.


CROAKER. But I intend to have a daughter of my own choosing, sir. A young lady,
sir, whose fortune, by my interest with those that have interest, will be
double what my son has a right to expect. Do you know Mr. Lofty, sir?


SIR WILLIAM. Yes, sir; and know that you are deceived in him. But step this
way, and I Will convince you. [Croaker and Sir William seem to confer.


Enter HONEYWOOD. HONEYWOOD. Obstinate man, still to persist in his outrage!
Insulted by him, despised by all, I now begin to grow contemptible, even to
myself. How have I sunk by too great an assiduity to please! How have I
overtax'd all my abilities, lest the approbation of a single fool should escape
me! But all is now over; I have survived my reputation, my fortune, my
friendships, and nothing remains henceforward for me but solitude and
repentance.


MISS RICHLAND. Is it true, Mr. Honeywood, that you are setting off, without
taking leave of your friends? The report is, that you are quitting England. Can
it be?


HONEYWOOD. Yes, madam; and though I am so unhappy as to have fallen under your
displeasure, yet, thank Heaven, I leave you to happiness; to one who loves you,
and deserves your love; to one who has power to procure you affluence, and
generosity to improve your enjoyment of it.


MISS RICHLAND. And are you sure, sir, that the gentleman you mean is what you
describe him?


HONEYWOOD. I have the best assurances of it, his serving me. He does indeed
deserve the highest happiness, and that is in your power to confer. As for me,
weak and wavering as I have been, obliged by all, and incapable of serving any,
what happiness can I find but in solitude? What hope but in being forgotten?


MISS RICHLAND. A thousand! to live among friends that esteem you, whose
happiness it will be to be permitted to oblige you.


HONEYWOOD. No, madam; my resolution is fixed. Inferiority among strangers is
easy; but among those that once were equals, insupportable. Nay, to show you
how far my resolution can go, I can now speak with calmness of my former
follies, my vanity, my dissipation, my weakness. I will even confess, that,
among the number of my other presumptions, I had the insolence to think of
loving you. Yes, madam, while I was pleading the passion of another, my heart
was tortured with its own. But it is over, it was unworthy our friendship, and
let it be forgotten.


MISS RICHLAND. You amaze me!


HONEYWOOD. But you will forgive it, I know you will; since the confession should
not have come from me even now, but to convince you of the sincerity of my
intention of -- never mentioning it more. [Going.


MISS RICHLAND. Stay, sir, one moment -- Ha! he here --


Enter LOFTY. LOFTY. Is the coast clear? None but friends. I have followed you
here with a trifling piece of intelligence: but it goes no farther, things are
not yet ripe for a discovery. I have spirits working at a certain board; your
affair at the treasury will be done in less than -- a thousand years. Mum!


MISS RICHLAND. Sooner, sir, I should hope.


LOFTY. Why, yes, I believe it may, if it falls into proper hands, that know
where to push and where to parry; that know how the land lies -- eh, Honeywood.


MISS RICHLAND. It is falien into yours.


LOFTY. Well, to keep you no longer in suspense, your thing is done. It is
done, I say -- that is all. I have just had assurances from lord Neverout, that
the claim has been examined, and found admissible. Quictus is the word, madam.


HONEYWOOD. But how! his lordship has been at Newmarket these ten days.


LOFTY. Indeed! Then sir Gilbert Goose must have been most damnably mistaken. I
had it of him.


MISS RICHLAND. He! why sir Gilbert and his family have been in the country
this month.


LOFTY. This month! It must certainly be so -- Sir Gilbert's letter did come to
me from Newmarket, so that he must have met his lordship there; and so it came
about. I have his letter about me; I Will read it to you. ( Taking out a large
bundle.) That Is from Paoli of Corsica, that from the marquis of Squilachi. --
Have you a mind to see a letter from count Poniatowski, now king of Poland --
Honest Pon -- ( Searching.) O, sir, what are you here too? I Will tell you what,
honest friend, if you have not absolutely delivered my letter to sir William
Honeywood, you may return it. The thing will do without him.


SIR WILLIAM. Sir, I have delivered it; and must inform you, it was received
with the most mortifying contempt.


CROAKER. Contempt! Mr. Lofty, what can that mean?


LOFTY. Let him go on, let him go on, I say. You Will find it come to something
presently.


SIR WILLIAM. Yes, sir, I believe you will be amazed, if, after waiting some time
in the antichamber, after being surveyed with insolent curiosity by the
passing servants, I was at last assured, that sir William Honeywood knew no
such person, and I must certainly have been imposed upon.


LOFTY. Good; let me die; very good. Ha! ha! ha!


CROAKER. Now, for my life, I cannot find out half the goodness of it.


LOFTY. You cannot. Ha! ha!


CROAKER. No, for the soul of me; I think it was as confounded a bad answer, as
ever was sent from one private gentleman to another.


LOFTY. And so you cannot find out the force of the message? Why, I was in the
house at that very time. Ha! ha! It was I that sent that very answer to my own
letter. Ha! ha!


CROAKER. Indeed! How! why!


LOFTY. In one word, things between sir William and me must be behind the
curtain. A party has many eyes. He sides with lord Buzzard, I side with sir
Gilbert Goose. So that unriddles the mystery.


CROAKER. And so it does, indeed; and all my suspicions are over.


LOFTY. Your suspicions! What, then, you have been suspecting, you have been
suspecting, have you? Mr. Croaker, you and I were friends; we are friends no
longer. Never talk to me. It Is over; I say, it is over.


CROAKER. As I hope for your favor, I did not mean to offend. It escaped me.
Don't be discomposed.


LOFTY. Zounds! sir, but I am discomposed, and will be discomposed. To be
treated thus! Who am I! Was it for this, I have been dreaded both by ins and
outs! Have I been libelled in the Gazetteer, and praised in the St. James's;
have I been chaired at Wildman's, and a speaker at Merchant-Taylor's Hall; have
I had my hand to addresses, and my head in the print-shops; and talk to me of
suspects!


CROAKER. My dear sir, be pacified. What can you have but asking pardon?


LOFTY. Sir, I will not be pacified -- Suspects! Who am I! To be used thus!
Have I paid court to men in favor, to serve my friends; the lords of the
treasury, sir William Honeywood, and the rest of the gang, and talk to me of
suspects! Who am I, I say, who am I!


SIR WILLIAM. Since, sir, you're so pressing for an answer, I Will tell you who
you are. A gentleman, as well acquainted with politics, as with men in power;
as well acquainted with persons of fashion, as with modesty; with lords of the
treasury, as with truth; and with all, as you are with sir William Honeywood. I
am sir William Honeywood. [Discovering his ensigns of the Bath.


CROAKER. Sir William Honeywood!


HONEYWOOD. Astonishment! my uncle! [Aside.


LOFTY. So then, my confounded genius has been all this time only leading me up
to the garret, in order to fling me out of the window.


CROAKER. What, Mr. Importance, and are these your works? Suspect you! You, who
have been dreaded by the ins and outs: you, who have had your hand to
addresses, and your head stuck up in print-shops. If you were served right, you
should have your head stuck up in the pillory.


LOFTY. Ay, stick it where you will; for, by the Lord, it cuts but a very poor
figure where it sticks at present.


SIR WILLIAM. Well, Mr. Croaker, I hope you now see how incapable this
gentleman is of serving you, and how little miss Richland has to expect from
his influence.


CROAKER. Ay, sir, too well I see it; and I cannot but say I have had some
boding of it these ten days. So, I Am resolved, since my son has placed his
affections on a lady of moderate fortune, to be satisfied with his choice, and
not run the hazard of another Mr. Lofty, in helping him to a better.


SIR WILLIAM. I approve your resolution; and here they come, to receive a
confirmation of your pardon and consent.


Enter MRS. CROAKER, JARVIS, LEONTINE, and OLIVIA. MRS. CROAKER. Where Is my
husband! Come, come, lovey, you must forgive them. Jarvis here has been to tell
me the whole affair; and, I say, you must forgive them. Our own was a stolen
match, you know, my dear; and we never had any reason to repent of it.


CROAKER. I wish we could both say so. However, this gentleman, sir William
Honeywood, has been beforehand with you, in obtaining their pardon. So, if the
two poor fools have a mind to marry, I think we can tack them together without
crossing the Tweed for it [Joining their hands.


LEONTINE. How blessed and unexpected! What, what can we say to such goodness!
But, our future obedience shall be the best reply. And, as for this gentleman,
to whom we owe --


SIR WILLIAM. Excuse me, sir, if I interrupt your thanks, as I have here an
interest that calls me. ( Turning to Honeywood.) Yes, sir, you are surprised to
see me; and I own that a desire of correcting your follies led me hither. I
saw, with indignation, the errors of a mind that only sought applause from
others; that easiness of disposition, which, though inclined to the right, had
not courage to condemn the wrong. I saw, with regret, those splendid errors,
that still took name from some neighboring duty. Your charity, that was but
injustice; your benevolence, that was but weakness; and your friendship, but
credulity. I saw, with regret, great talents and extensive learning, only
employed to add sprightliness to error, and increase your perplexities. I saw
your mind with a thousand natural charms: but, the greatness of its beauty
served only to heighten my pity for its prostitution.


HONEYWOOD. Cease to upbraid me, sir: I have for some time but too strongly
felt the justice of your reproaches. But there is one way still left me. Yes,
sir, I have determined this very hour, to quit for ever a place where I have
made myself the voluntary slave of all; and to seek among strangers that
fortitude which may give strength to the mind, and marshal all its dissipated
virtues. Yet, ere I depart, permit me to solicit favor for this gentleman;
who, notwithstanding what has happened, has laid me under the most signal
obligations. Mr. Lofty --


LOFTY. Mr. Honeywood, I Am resolved upon a reformation, as well as you. I now
begin to find, that the man who first invented the art of speaking truth was a
much cunninger fellow than I thought him. And, to prove that I design to speak
truth for the future, I must now assure you, that you owe your late enlargement
to another; as, upon my soul, I had no hand in the matter. So now if any of the
company has a mind for preferment, he may take my place, I Am determined to
resign. [Exit.


HONEYWOOD. How have I been deceived!


SIR WILLIAM. No, sir, you have been obliged to a kinder, fairer friend for
that favor. To miss Richland. Would she complete our joy, and make the man she
has honored by her friendship happy in her love, I should then forget all, and
be as blessed as the welfare of my dearest kinsman can make me.


MISS RICHLAND. After what is past, it would be but affectation to pretend to
indifference. Yes, I will own an attachment, which, I find, was more than
friendship. And, if my entreaties cannot alter his resolution to quit the
country, I will even try if my hand has not power to detain him. [Giving her
hand.


HONEYWOOD. Heavens! how can I have deserved all this? How express my
happiness, my gratitude! A moment, like this, overpays an age of apprehension.


CROAKER. Well, now I see content in every face; but heaven send we be all
better this day three months.


SIR WILLIAM. Henceforth, nephew, learn to respect yourself. He who seeks only
for applause from without, has all his happiness in another's keeping.


HONEYWOOD. Yes, sir, I now too plainly perceive my errors. My vanity, in
attempting to please all, by fearing to offend any. My meanness in approving
folly, lest fools should disapprove. Henceforth, therefore, it shall be my
study to reserve my pity for real distress; my friendship for true merit; and
my love for her, who first taught me what it is to be happy.


EPILOGUE. The author, in expectation of an Epilogue from a friend at Oxford,
deferred writing one himself till the very last hour. What is here offered,
owes all its success to the graceful manner of the actress who spoke it.

SPOKEN BY MRS. BULKLEY. AS puffing quacks some caitiff wretch procure
To swear the pill, or drop, has wrought a cure;
Thus, on the stage, our play-wrights still depend
For Epilogues and Prologues on some friend,
Who knows each art of coaxing up the town,
And make full many a bitter pill go down.
Conscious of this, our bard has gone about,
And teased each rhyming friend to help him out.
An Epilogue, things cannot go on without it;
It could not fail, would you but set about it.
Young man, cries one, (a bard laid up in clover)
Alas, young man, my writing days are over;
Let boys play tricks, and kick the straw, not I;
Your brother doctor there, perhaps, may try.
What I! dear sir, the doctor interposes;
What, plant my thistle, sir, among his roses!
No, no, I Have other contests to maintain;
Tonight I head our troops at Warwick Lane.
Go, ask your manager -- Who, me! Your pardon;
Those things are not our fort at Covent Garden.
Our author's friends, thus placed at happy distance,
Give him good words indeed, but no assistance.
As some unhappy wight, at some new play,
At the pit door stands elbowing away,
While often, with many a smile, and many a shrug,
He eyes the center, where his friends sit snug;
His simpering friends, with pleasure in their eyes,
Sinks as he sinks, and as he rises rise:
He nods, they nod; he cringes, they grimace;
But not a soul will budge to give him place.
Since then, unhelp'd, our bard must now conform
To 'bide the pelting of this pittiless storm,
Blame where you must, be candid where you can,
And be each critic the Good-natured Man.
SHE STOOPS TO CONQUER: OR, THE MISTAKES OF A NIGHT. A COMEDY.
AS IT IS ACTED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN. FIRST PRINTED IN
M,DCC,LXXII.
TO SAMUEL JOHNSON, L.L.D.
DEAR SIR,
BY inscribing this slight performance to you, I do not mean so much to
compliment you as myself. It may do me some honor to inform the public, that I
have lived many years in intimacy with you. It may serve the interests of
mankind also to inform them that the greatest wit may be found in a character,
without impairing the most unaffected piety.

I have, particularly, reason to thank you for your partiality to this
performance. The undertaking a comedy, not merely sentimental, was very
dangerous; and Mr. Colman, who saw this piece in its various stages, always
thought it so. However I ventured to trust it to the public; and, though it was
necessarily delayed till late in the season, I have every reason to be
grateful. I am,

DEAR SIR, YOUR MOST SINCERE FRIEND AND ADMIRER, OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

PROLOGUE.
BY DAVID GARRICK, ESQUIRE.
Enter Mr. WOODWARD, dressed in black, and holding a handkerchief to his eyes.
EXCUSE me, sirs, I pray -- I cannot yet speak --
I Am crying now -- and have been all the week.
"'It Is not alone this mourning suit," good masters;
"I Have that within" -- for which there are no plasters!
I'ray, would you know the reason why I Am crying?
The comic muse, long sick, is now a dying!
And if she goes, my tears will never stop;
For as a play'r, I cannot squeeze out one drop:
I am undone, that is all -- shall lose my bread --
I Would rather, but that is nothing -- lose my head.
When the sweet maid is laid upon the bier,
Shuter and I shall be chief mourners here.
To her a mawkish drab of spurious breed,
Who deals in Sentimentals, will succeed!
Poor Ned and I are dead to all intents;
We can as soon speak Greek as Sentiments!
Both nervous grown, to keep our spirits up,
We now and then take down a hearty cup.
What shall we do? -- If Comedy forsake us!
They Will turn us out, and no one else will take us.
But, why cannot I be moral? -- Let me try --
My heart thus pressing -- fixed my face and eye --
With a sententious look, that nothing means,
(Faces are blocks, in sentimental scenes)
Thus I begin -- "All is not gold that glitters,
"Pleasure seems sweet, but proves a glass of bitters.
"When ignorance enters, folly is at hand:
"Learning is better far than house and land.
"Let not your virtue trip, who trips may stumble,
"And virtue is not virtue, if she tumble."
I give it up -- morals will not do for me;
To make you laugh, I must play tragedy.
One hope remains -- hearing the maid was ill,
A Doctor comes this night to show his skill.
To cheer her heart, and give your muscles motion,
He, in Five Draughts prepared, presents a potion:
A kind of magic charm -- for be assured,
If you will swallow it, the maid is cured:
But desperate the Doctor, and her case is,
If you reject the dose, and make wry faces!
This truth he boasts, will boast it while he lives,
No poisonous drugs are mixed in what he gives.
Should he succeed, you will give him his degree;
If not, within he will receive no fee!
The college You, must his pretensions back,
Pronounce him Regular, or dub him Quack.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir Charles Marlow, Mr. GARDNER. Young Marlow, (his son) Mr. JEWS.
Hardcastle, Mr. SHUTER. Hastings, Mr. DUBELLAMY. Tony Lumpkin, Mr. QUICK.
Diggory, Mr. SAUNDERS.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Hardcastle, Mrs. GREEN. Miss Hardcastle, Mrs. BULKLEY. Miss Neville, Mrs.
KNIVETON. Maid, Miss WILLEMS.
Landlord, Servants, etc. etc.
SHE STOOPS TO CONQUER: OR, THE MISTAKES OF A NIGHT.
ACT THE FIRST.
SCENE, a chamber in an old-fashioned house. Enter MRS. HARDCASTLE and MR.
HARDCASTLE. MRS. HARDCASTLE. I VOW, Mr. Hardcastle, you're very particular. Is
there a creature in the whole country, but ourselves, that does not take a trip
to town now and then, to rub off the rust a little? There Is the two miss Hoggs,
and our neighbor, Mrs. Grigsby, go to take a month's polishing every winter.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, and bring back vanity and affection to last them the whole
year. I wonder why London cannot keep its own fools at home. In my time, the
follies of the town crept slowly among us, but now they travel faster than a
stage-coach. Its fopperies come down, not only as inside passengers, but in the
very basket.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Ay, your times were fine times, indeed; you have been telling
us of them for many a long year. Here we live in an old rumbling mansion, that
looks for all the world like an inn, but that we never see company. Our best
visitors are old Mrs. Oddfish, the curate's wife, and little Cripplegate, the
lame dancingmaster: and all our entertainment your old stories of prince Eugene
and the duke of Marlborough. I hate such old-fashioned trumpery.


HARDCASTLE. And I love it. I love every thing that is old: old friends, old
times, old manners, old books, old wine; and, I believe, Dorothy, ( taking her
hand) you will own I have been pretty fond of an old wife.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Lord Mr. Hardcastle, you're for ever at your Dorothy's and
your old wife's. You may be a Darby, but I Will be no Joan, I promise you. I Am
not so old as you would make me, by more than one good year. Add twenty to twenty,
and make money of that.


HARDCASTLE. Let me see; twenty added to twenty, makes just fifty and seven.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. It Is false, Mr. Hardcastle: I was but twenty when I was
brought to bed of Tony, that I had by Mr. Lumpkin, my first husband; and he is
not come to years of discretion yet.


HARDCASTLE. Nor ever will, I dare answer for him. Ay, you have taught him
finely.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. No matter, Tony Lumpkin has a good fortune. My son is not to
live by his learning. I don't think a boy wants much learning to spend fifteen
hundred a year.


HARDCASTLE. Learning, quotha! A mere composition of tricks and mischief.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Humor, my dear: nothing but humor. Come, Mr. Hardcastle,
you must allow the boy a little humor.


HARDCASTLE. I Would sooner allow him an horse-pond. If burning the footmens shoes,
frighting the maids, and worrying the kittens, be humor, he has it. It was but
yesterday he fastened my wig to the back of my chair, and when I went to make a
bow, I popt my bald head in Mrs. Frizzle's face.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. And am I to blame? The poor boy was always too sickly to do
any good. A school would be his death. When he comes to be a little stronger,
who knows what a year or two's Latin may do for him?


HARDCASTLE. Latin for him! A cat and fiddle. No, no, the alehouse and the
stable are the only schools he will ever go to.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Well, we must not snub the poor boy now, for I believe we
shall not have him long among us. Any body that looks in his face may see he is
consumptive.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, if growing too fat be one of the symptoms.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. He coughs sometimes.


HARDCASTLE. Yes, when his liquor goes the wrong way.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. I Am actually afraid of his lungs.


HARDCASTLE. And truly so am I; for he sometimes whoops like a speaking trumpet
-- ( Tony hallooing behind the scenes) -- O there he goes -- A very consumptive
figure, truly.


Enter TONY, crossing the stage. MRS. HARDCASTLE. Tony, where are you going, my
charmer? Will Not you give papa and I a little of your company, lovee?


TONY. I Am in hastle, mother, I cannot stay.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. You shall not venture out this raw evening, my dear: You look
most shockingly.


TONY. I cannot stay, I tell you. The three pigeons expects me down every
moment. There Is some fun going forward.


HARDCASTLE. Ay; the alehouse, the old place: I thought so.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. A low, paltry set of fellows.


TONY. Not so low neither. There Is Dick Muggins the exciseman, Jack Slang the
horse doctor, little Aminadab that grinds the music box, and Tom Twist that
spins the pewter platter.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Pray, my dear, disappoint them for one night at least.


TONY. As for disappointing them, I should not so much mind; but I cannot abide
to disappoint myself.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. ( Detaining him) You shall not go.


TONY. I will, I tell you.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. I say you shall not.


TONY. We'll see which is strongest, you or I. [Exit, hawling her out.


HARDCASTLE, solus. Ay, there goes a pair that only spoil each other. But is
not the whole age in a combination to drive sense and discretion out of doors?
There Is my pretty darling Kate; the fashions of the times have almost infected
her too. By living a year or two in town, she is as fond of gauze, and French
frippery, as the best of them.


Enter MISS HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. Blessings on my pretty innocence! dressed out
as usual, my Kate. Goodness! what a quantity of superfluous silk has thou got
about thee, girl! I could never teach the fools of this age, that the indigent
world could be clothed out of the trimmings of the vain.


MISS HARDCASTLE. You know our agreement, sir. You allow me the morning to
receive and pay visits, and to dress in my own manner; and in the evening, I
put on my housewife's dress to please you.


HARDCASTLE. Well, remember I insist on the terms of our agreement; and, by the
bye, I believe I shall have occasion to try your obedience this very evening.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I protest, sir, I don't comprehend your meaning.


HARDCASTLE. Then, to be plain with you, Kate, I expect the young gentleman I
have chosen to be your husband from town this very day. I have his father's
letter, in which he informs me his son is set out, and that he intends to
follow himself shortly after.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Indeed! I wish I had known something of this before. Bless
me, how shall I behave? It Is a thousand to one I shall not like him; our meeting
will be so formal, and so like a thing of business, that I shall find no room
for friendship or esteem.


HARDCASTLE. Depend upon it, child, I Will never control your choice; but Mr.
Marlow, whom I have pitched upon, is the son of my old friend, sir Charles
Marlow, of whom you have heard me talk so often. The young gentleman has been
bred a scholar, and is designed for an employment in the service of his
country. I am told he is a man of an excellent understanding.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Is he?


HARDCASTLE. Very generous.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I believe I shall like him.


HARDCASTLE. Young and brave.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I Am sure I shall like him.


HARDCASTLE. And very handsome.


MISS HARDCASTLE. May dear papa, say no more, ( kissing his hand) he is mine,
I Will have him.


HARDCASTLE. And to crown all, Kate, he is one of the most bashful and reserved
young fellows in all the world.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Eh! you have frozen me to death again. That word reserved,
has undone all the rest of his accomplishments. A reserved lover, it is said,
always makes a suspicious husband.


HARDCASTLE. On the contrary, modesty seldom resides in a breast that is not
enriched with nobler virtues. It was the very feature in his character that
first struck me.


MISS HARDCASTLE. He must have more striking features to catch me, I promise
you. However, if he be so young, so handsome, and so every thing, as you
mention, I believe he will do still. I think I Will have him.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, Kate, but there is still an obstacle. It Is more than an even
wager, he may not have you.


MISS HARDCASTLE. My dear papa, why will you mortify one so? -- Well, if he
refuses, instead of breaking my heart a his indifference, I Will only break my
glass for its flattery. Set my cap to some newer fashion, and look out for some
less difficult admirer.


HARDCASTLE. Bravely resolved! In the mean time I Will go prepare the servants
for his reception; as we seldom see company they want as much training as a
company of recruits, the first day's muster. [Exit.


MISS HARDCASTLE, sola. Lud, this news of papa's, puts me all in a flutter.
Young, handsome; these he put last; but I put them foremost. Sensible,
good-natured; I like all that. But then reserved, and sheepish, that is much
against him. Yet cannot he be cured of his timidity, by being taught to be proud
of his wife? Yes, and cannot I -- But I vow I Am disposing of the husband, before
I have secured the lover.


Enter MISS NEVILLE. MISS HARDCASTLE. I Am glad you're come, Neville, my dear.
Tell me, Constance, how do I look this evening? Is there any thing whimsical
about me? Is it one of my well looking days, child? am I in face today?


MISS NEVILLE. Perfectly, my dear. Yet now I look again -- bless me! -- sure no
accident has happened among the canary birds or the gold fishes. Has your
brother or the cat been meddling? or has the last novel been too moving?


MISS HARDCASTLE. No; nothing of all this. I have been threatened -- I can
scarce get it out -- I have been threatened with a lover.


MISS NEVILLE. And his name --


MISS HARDCASTLE. Is Marlow.


MISS NEVILLE. Indeed!


MISS HARDCASTLE. The son of sir Charles Marlow.


MISS NEVILLE. As I live, the most intimate friend of Mr. Hastings, my admirer.
They are never asunder. I believe you must have seen him when we lived in town.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Never.


MISS NEVILLE. He Is a very singular character, I assure you. Among women of
reputation and virtue, he is the modestest man alive; but his acquaintance give
him a very different character among creatures of another stamp: you understand
me.


MISS HARDCASTLE. An odd character, indeed. I shall never be able to manage
him. What shall I do? pshaw, think no more of him, but trust to occurrences for
success. But how goes on your own affair, my dear? has my mother been courting
you for my brother Tony, as usual?


MISS NEVILLE. I have just come from one of our agreeable tete-a-tetes. She has
been saying a hundred tender things, and setting off her pretty monster as the
very pink of perfection.


MISS HARDCASTLE. And her partiality is such, that she actually thinks him so.
A fortune like yours is no small temptation. Besides, as she has the sole
management of it, I Am not surprised to see her unwilling to let it go out of
the family.


MISS NEVILLE. A fortune like mine, which chiefly consists in jewels, is no
such mighty temptation. But at any rate if my dear Hastings be but constant, I
make no doubt to be too hard for her at last. However, I let her suppose that I
am in love with her son, and she never once dreams that my affections are fixed
upon another.


MISS HARDCASTLE. My good brother holds out stoutly. I could almost love him
for hating you so.


MISS NEVILLE. It is a good-natured creature at bottom, and I Am sure would wish
to see me married to any body but himself. But my aunt's bell rings for our
afternoon's walk round the improvements. Allons. Courage is necessary as our
affairs are critical.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Would it were bed time and all were well. [Exeunt.


SCENE, an alehouse room. Several shabby fellows, with punch and tobacco. TONY
at the head of the table, a little higher than the rest: a mallet in his hand.
OMNES. Hurrea, hurrea, hurrea, bravo.


FIRST FELLOW. Now gentlemen, silence for a song. The 'squire is going to knock
himself down for a song.


OMNES. Ay, a song, a song.


TONY. Then I Will sing you, gentlemen, a song I made upon this alehouse, the
three pigeons.

SONG.
Let schoolmasters puzzle their brain,
With grammar, and nonsense, and learning;
Good liquor, I stoutly maintain,
Gives genus a better discerning.
Let them brag of their heathenish gods,
Their Lethes, their Styxes, and Stygians;
Their qui's, and their quae's, and their quod's,
They Are all but a parcel of pigeons.
Toroddle, toroddle, toroll.
When methodist preachers come down,
A preaching that drinking is sinful,
I Will wager the rascals a crown,
They always preach best with a skinful.
But when you come down with your pence,
For a slice of their scurvy religion,
I Will leave it to all men of sense,
But you my good friend are the pigeon.
Toroddle, toroddle, toroll.
Then come put the jorum about,
And let us be merry and clever,
Our hearts and our liquors are stout,
Here Is the three jolly pigeons for ever.
Let some cry up woodcock or hare,
Your bustards, your ducks, and your widgeons;
But of all the birds in the air,
Here Is a health to the three jolly pigeons.
Toroddle, toroddle, toroll.

OMNES. Bravo, bravo.


FIRST FELLOW. The 'squire has got spunk in him.


SECOND FELLOW. I loves to hear him sing, bekeays he never gives us nothing
that is low.


THIRD FELLOW. O damn any thing that is low, I cannot bear it.


FOURTH FELLOW. The genteel thing is the genteel thing at any time. If so be
that a gentleman bees in a concatenation accordingly.


THIRD FELLOW. I like the maxum of it, master Muggins. What, though I am
obligated to dance a bear, a man may be a gentleman for all that. May this be
my poison if my bear ever dances but to the very genteelest of tunes. Water
Parted, or the minuet in Ariadne.


SECOND FELLOW. What a pity it is the 'squire is not come to his own. It would
be well for all the publicans within ten miles round of him.


TONY. Ecod and so it would master Slang. I Would then show what it was to keep
choice of company.


SECOND FELLOW. O he takes after his own father for that. To be sure old
'squire Lumpkin was the finest gentleman I ever set my eyes on. For winding the
straight horn, or beating a thicket for a hare, or a wench, he never had his
fellow. It was a saying in the place, that he kept the best horses, dogs, and
girls in the whole county.


TONY. Ecod, and when I Am of age, I Will be no bastard, I promise you. I have
been thinking of Bett Bouncer and the miller's gray mare to begin with. But,
come, my boys, drink about and be merry, for you pay no reckoning. Well,
Stingo, what is the matter?


Enter LANDLORD. LANDLORD. There be two gentlemen in a post-chaise at the door.
They have lost their way upo' the forest; and they are talking something about
Mr. Hardcastle.


TONY. As sure as can be, one of them must be the gentleman that is coming down
to court my sister. Do they seem to be Londoners?


LANDLORD. I believe they may. They look woundily like Frenchmen.


TONY. Then desire them to step this way, and I Will set them right in a
twinkling. ( Exit landlord.) Gentlemen, as they may not be good enough company
for you, step down for a moment, and I Will be with you in the squeezing of a
lemon. [Exeunt mob.


TONY, solus. Father-in-law has been calling me whelp, and hound, this half
year. Now, if I pleased, I could be so revenged upon the old grumbletonian. But
then I Am afraid -- afraid of what! I shall soon be worth fifteen hundred a
year, and let him frighten me out of that if he can.


Enter LANDLORD, conducting MARLOW and HASTINGS. MARLOW. What a tedious
uncomfortable day have we had of it! We were told it was but forty miles across
the country, and we have come above threescore.


HASTINGS. And all, Marlow, from that unaccountable reserve of yours, that
would not let us inquire more frequently on the way.


MARLOW. I own, Hastings, I am unwilling to lay myself under an obligation to
every one I meet; and often stand the chance of an unmannerly answer.


HASTINGS. At present, however, we are not likely to receive any answer.


TONY. No offense, gentlemen. But I Am told you have been inquiring for one Mr.
Hardcastle in those parts. Do you know what part of the country you are in?


HASTINGS. Not in the least, sir, but should thank you for information.


TONY. Nor the way you came?


HASTINGS. No, sir; but if you can inform us --


TONY. Why, gentlemen, if you know neither the road you are going, nor where
you are, nor the road you came, the first thing I have to inform you is, that
-- you have lost your way.


MARLOW. We wanted no ghost to tell us that.


TONY. Pray, gentlemen, may I be so bold as to ask the place from whence you
came?


MARLOW. That Is not necessary toward directing us where we are to go.


TONY. No offense; but question for question is all fair, you know. Pray,
gentlemen, is not this same Hardcastle a cross-grained, old-fashioned,
whimsical fellow, with an ugly face; a daughter, and a pretty son?


HASTINGS. We have not seen the gentleman, but he has the family you mention.


TONY. The daughter, a tall, trapesing, trolloping, talkative maypole -- the
son, a pretty, well-bred, agreeable youth, that every body is fond of.


MARLOW. Our information differs in this. The daughter is said to be well-bred
and beautiful; the son, an awkward booby, reared up, and spoiled at his
mother's apron-string.


TONY. He-he-hem -- Then, gentlemen, all I have to tell you is, that you will not
reach Mr. Hardcastle's house this night, I believe.


HASTINGS. Unfortunate!


TONY. It Is a damned long, dark, boggy, dirty, dangerous way. Stingo, tell the
gentlemen the way to Mr. Hardcastle's; ( Winking upon the landlord.) Mr.
Hardcastle's of Quagmire Marsh, you understand me.


LANDLORD. Master Hardcastle's! Lock-a-daisy, my masters, you're come a deadly
deal wrong! When you came to the bottom of the hill, you should have crossed
down Squash-lane.


MARLOW. Cross down Squash-lane!


LANDLORD. Then you were to keep straight forward, 'till you came to four roads.


MARLOW. Come to where four roads meet!


TONY. Ay; but you must be sure to take only one of them.


MARLOW. O sir, you're facetious.


TONY. Then keeping to the right, you are to go side-ways till you come upon
Crack-skull common: there you must look sharp for the track of the wheel, and
go forward, 'till you come to farmer Murrain's barn. Coming to the farmer's
barn, you are to turn to the right, and then to the left, and then to the right
about again, till you find out the old mill --


MARLOW. Zounds, man! we could as soon find out the longitude!


HASTINGS. What Is to be done, Marlow?


MARLOW. This house promises but a poor reception; though perhaps the landlord
can accommodate us.


LANDLORD. Alack, master, we have but one spare bed in the whole house.


TONY. And to my knowledge, that is taken up by three lodgers already. ( After a
pause, in which the rest seem disconcerted) I have hit it. Don't you think,
Stingo, our landlady could accommodate the gentlemen by the fireside, with --
three chairs and a bolster?


HASTINGS. I hate sleeping by the fireside.


MARLOW. And I detest your three chairs and a bolster.


TONY. You do, do you? -- then let me see -- what -- if you go on a mile
further, to the Buck's Head; the old Buck's Head on the hill, one of the best
inns in the whole county?


HASTINGS. O ho! so we have escaped an adventure for this night, however.


LANDLORD. ( Apart to Tony) Sure, you ben't sending them to your father's as an
inn, be you?


TONY. Mum, you fool you. Let them find that out. ( To them) You have only to
keep on straight forward, till you come to a large old house by the road side.
You Will see a pair of large horns over the door. That Is the sign. Drive up the
yard, and call stoutly about you.


HASTINGS. Sir, we are obliged to you. The servants cannot miss the way?


TONY. No, no: but I tell you though, the landlord is rich, and going to leave
off business; so he wants to be thought a gentleman, saving your presence, he!
he! he! He Will be for giving you his company, and ecod if you mind him, he will
persuade you that his mother was an alderman, and his aunt a justice of peace.


LANDLORD. A troublesome old blade to be sure; but a keeps as good wines and
beds as any in the whole country.


MARLOW. Well, if he supplies us with these, we shall want no further
connection. We are to turn to the right, did you say?


TONY. No, no; straight forward. I Will just step myself, and show you a piece of
the way. ( To the landlord) Mum.


LANDLORD. Ah, bless your heart, for a sweet, pleasant -- damned mischievous
son of a whore. [Exeunt.


ACT THE SECOND.
SCENE, an old-fashioned house. Enter HARDCASTLE, followed by three or four
awkward servants. HARDCASTLE. WELL, I hope you're perfect in the table exercise
I have been teaching you these three days. You all know your posts and your
places, and can show that you have been used to good company, without ever
stirring from home.


OMNES. Ay, ay.


HARDCASTLE. When company comes, you are not to pop out and stare, and then run
in again, like frighted rabbits in a warren.


OMNES. No, no.


HARDCASTLE. You, Diggory, whom I have taken from the barn, are to make a show
at the side-table; and you, Roger, whom I have advanced from the plough, are to
place yourself behind my chair. But you're not to stand so, with your hands in
your pocket. Take your hands from your pockets, Roger; and from your head, you
blockhead you. See how Diggory carries his hands. They Are a little too stiff,
indeed, but that is no great matter.


DIGGORY. Ay, mind how I hold them. I learned to hold my hands this way, when I
was upon drill for the militia. And so being upon drill --


HARDCASTLE. You must not be so talkative, Diggory. You must be all attention
to the guests. You must hear us talk, and not think of talking; you must see us
drink, and not think of drinking; you must see us eat, and not think of eating.


DIGGORY. By the laws, your worship, that is parfectly unpossible. Whenever
Diggory sees yeating going forward, ecod he is always wishing for a mouthful
himself.


HARDCASTLE. Blockhead! Is not a belly-full in the kitchen as good as a
belly-full in the parlour? Stay your stomach with that reflection.


DIGGORY. Ecod I thank your worship, I Will make a shift to stay my stomach with
a slice of cold beef in the pantry.


HARDCASTLE. Diggory, you are too talkative. Then if I happen to say a good
thing, or tell a good story at table, you must not all burst out a-laughing, as
if you made part of the company.


DIGGORY. Then ecod your worship must not tell the story of old grouse in the
gun room: I cannot help laughing at that -- he! he! he! -- for the soul of me.
We have laughed at that these twenty years -- ha! ha! ha!


HARDCASTLE. Ha! ha! ha! The story is a good one. Well, honest Diggory, you may
laugh at that -- but still remember to be attentive. Suppose one of the company
should call for a glass of wine, how will you behave? A glass of wine, sir, if
you please. ( To Diggory) -- Eh, why don't you move?


DIGGORY. Ecod, your worship, I never have courage till I see the eatables and
drinkables brought upo' the table, and then I Am as bauld as a lion.


HARDCASTLE. What, will nobody move?


FIRST SERVANT. I Am not to leave this pleace.


SECOND SERVANT. I Am sure it is no pleace of mine.


THIRD SERVANT. Nor mine, for sartain.


DIGGORY. Wauns, and I Am sure it canna be mine.


HARDCASTLE. You numbskulls! and so while, like your betters, you are
quarrelling for places, the guests must be starved. O you dunces! I find I must
begin all over again. -- But don't I hear a coach drive into the yard? To your
posts, you blockheads. I Will go in the mean time and give my old friend's son a
hearty reception at the gate. [ Exit Hardcastle.


DIGGORY. By the elevens, my pleace is gone quite out of my head.


ROGER. I know that my pleace is to be every where.


FIRST SERVANT. Where the devil is mine?


SECOND SERVANT. My pleace is to be no where at all; and so ize go about my
business. [Exeunt servants, running about as if frighted, different ways.


Enter SERVANT with candles, showing in MARLOW and HASTINGS. SERVANT. Welcome,
gentlemen, very welcome. This way.


HASTINGS. After the disappointments of the day, welcome once more, Charles, to
the comforts of a clean room and a good fire. Upon my word, a very well-looking
house; antique, but creditable.


MARLOW. The usual fate of a large mansion. Having first ruined the master by
good housekeeping, it at last comes to levy contributions as an inn.


HASTINGS. As you say, we passengers are to be taxed to pay all these fineries.
I have often seen a good sideboard, or a marble chimney-piece, though not
actually put in the bill, inflame a reckoning confoundedly.


MARLOW. Travelers, George, must pay in all places. The only difference is,
that in good inns, you pay dearly for luxuries; in bad inns, you are fleeced
and starved.


HASTINGS. You have lived pretty much among them. In truth, I have been often
surprised, that you who have seen so much of the world, with your natural good
sense, and your many opportunities, could never yet acquire a requisite share
of assurance.


MARLOW. The Englishman's malady. But tell me, George, where could I have
learned that assurance you talk of? My life has been chiefly spent in a
college, or an inn, in seclusion from that lovely part of the creation that
chiefly teach men confidence. I don't know that I was ever familiarly
acquainted with a single modest woman -- except my mother -- But among females
of another class you know --


HASTINGS. Ay, among them you are impudent enough of all conscience.


MARLOW. They are of us, you know.


HASTINGS. But in the company of women of reputation I never saw such an idiot,
such a trembler; you look for all the world as if you wanted an opportunity of
stealing out of the room.


MARLOW. Why man that is because I do want to steal out of the room. Faith, I
have often formed a resolution to break the ice, and rattle away at any rate.
But I don't know how, a single glance from a pair of fine eyes has totally
overset my resolution. An impudent fellow may counterfeit modesty, but I Will be
hanged if a modest man can ever counterfeit impudence.


HASTINGS. If you could but say half the fine things to them that I have heard
you lavish upon the bar-maid of an inn, or even a college bed-maker --


MARLOW. Why, George, I cannot say fine things to them; they freeze, they
petrify me. They may talk of a comet, or a burning mountain, or some such
bagatelle. But to me, a modest woman, dressed out in all her finery, is the most
tremendous object of the whole creation.


HASTINGS. Ha! ha! ha! At this rate, man, how can you ever expect to marry?


MARLOW. Never, unless, as among kings and princes, my bride were to be courted
by proxy. If, indeed, like an eastern bridegroom, one were to be introduced to
a wife he never saw before, it might be endured. But to go through all the
terrors of a formal courtship, together with the episode of aunts, grandmothers
and cousins, and at last to blurt out the broad staring question of, Madam,
will you marry me? No, no, that is a strain much above me I assure you.


HASTINGS. I pity you. But how do you intend behaving to the lady you are come
down to visit at the request of your father?


MARLOW. As I behave to all other ladies. Bow very low. Answer yes, or no, to
all her demands -- But for the rest, I don't think I shall venture to look in
her face, till I see my father's again.


HASTINGS. I Am surprised that one who is so warm a friend can be so cool a
lover.


MARLOW. To be explicit, my dear Hastings, my chief inducement down was to be
instrumental in forwarding your happiness, not my own. Miss Neville loves you,
the family don't know you, as my friend you are sure of a reception, and let
honor do the rest.


HASTINGS. My dear Marlow! But I Will suppress the emotion. Were I a wretch,
meanly seeking to carry off a fortune, you should be the last man in the world
I would apply to for assistance. But miss Neville's person is all I ask, and
that is mine, both from her deceased father's consent, and her own inclination.


MARLOW. Happy man! You have talents and art to captivate any woman. I Am doomed
to adore the sex, and yet to converse with the only part of it I despise. This
stammer in my address, and this awkward prepossessing visage of mine, can never
permit me to soar above the reach of a milliner's 'prentice, or one of the
duchesses of Drury Lane. Pshaw! this fellow here to interrupt us.


Enter HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. Gentlemen, once more you are heartily welcome.
Which is Mr. Marlow? Sir, you're heartily welcome. It Is not my way, you see, to
receive my friends with my back to the fire. I like to give them a hearty
reception in the old style at my gate. I like to see their horses and trunks
taken care of.


MARLOW (aside.) He has got our names from the servants already. ( To him) We
approve your caution and hospitality, sir. ( To Hastings) I have been thinking,
George, of changing our traveling dresses in the morning. I am grown
confoundedly ashamed of mine.


HARDCASTLE. I beg, Mr. Marlow, you will use no ceremony in this house.


HASTINGS. I fancy, George, you're right: the first blow is half the battle. I
intend opening the campaign with the white and gold.


HARDCASTLE. Mr. Marlow -- Mr. Hastings -- gentlemen -- pray be under no
constraint in this house. This is Libertyhall, gentlemen. You may do just as
you please here.


MARLOW. Yet, George, if we open the campaign too fiercely at first, we may
want ammunition before it is over. I think to reserve the embroidery to secure
a retreat.


HARDCASTLE. Your talking of a retreat, Mr. Marlow, puts me in mind of the duke
of Marlborough, when we went to besiege Denain. He first summoned the garrison.


MARLOW. Don't you think the ventre dor waistcoat will do with the plain brown?


HARDCASTLE. He first summoned the garrison, which might consist of about five
thousand men --


HASTINGS. I think not: brown and yellow mix but very poorly.


HARDCASTLE. I say, gentlemen, as I was telling you, he summoned the garrison,
which might consist of about five thousand men --


MARLOW. The girls like finery.


HARDCASTLE. Which might consist of about five thousand men, well appointed
with stores, ammunition, and other implements of war. Now, says the duke of
Marlborough, to George Brooks, that stood next to him -- You must have heard of
George Brooks -- I Will pawn my dukedom, says he, but I take that garrison
without spilling a drop of blood. So --


MARLOW. What, my good friend, if you gave us a glass of punch in the mean
time, it would help us to carry on the siege with vigor.


HARDCASTLE. Punch, sir! ( Aside) This is the most unaccountable kind of
modesty I ever met with.


MARLOW. Yes, sir, punch. A glass of warm punch, after our journey, will be
comfortable. This is Liberty-hall, you know.


HARDCASTLE. Here Is cup, sir.


MARLOW. ( Aside) So this fellow, in his Liberty-hall, will only let us have
just what he pleases.


HARDCASTLE. ( Taking the cup) I hope you will find it to your mind. I have
prepared it with my own hands, and I believe you will own the ingredients are
tolerable. Will you, be so good as to pledge me, sir? Here, Mr. Marlow, here is
to our better acquaintance. ( drinks.)


MARLOW. ( Aside) A very impudent fellow this! but he is a character, and I Will
humor him a little. Sir, my service to you. ( drinks.)


HASTINGS. ( Aside) I see this fellow wants to give us his company, and forgets
that he is an innkeeper, before he has learned to be a gentleman.


MARLOW. From the excellence of your cup, my old friend, I suppose you have a
good deal of business in this part of the country. Warm work, now and then, at
elections, I suppose.


HARDCASTLE. No, sir, I have long given that work over. Since our betters have
hit upon the expedient of electing each other, there is no business 'for us
that sell ale.'


HASTINGS. So, then you have no turn for politics I find.


HARDCASTLE. Not in the least. There was a time, indeed, I fretted myself about
the mistakes of government, like other people; but finding myself every day
grow more angry, and the government growing no better, I left it to mend
itself. Since that, I no more trouble my head about Heyder Ally, or Ally Cawn,
than about Ally Croaker. Sir, my service to you.


HASTINGS. So that with eating above stairs, and drinking below, with receiving
your friends within, and amusing them without, you lead a good pleasant
bustling life of it.


HARDCASTLE. I do stir about a great deal, that is certain. Half the differences
of the parish are adjusted in this very parlour.


MARLOW. ( After drinking) And you have an argument in your cup, old gentleman,
better than any in Westminsterhall.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, young gentleman, that, and a little philosophy.


MARLOW. ( Aside) Well, this is the first time I ever heard of an innkeeper's
philosophy.


HASTINGS. So then, like an experienced general, you attack them on every
quarter. If you find their reason manageable, you attack it with your
philosophy; if you find they have no reason, you attack them with this. Here Is
your health, my philosopher. ( drinks)


HARDCASTLE. Good, very good, thank you; ha! ha! Your generalship puts me in
mind of prince Eugene, when he fought the Turks at the battle of Belgrade. You
shall hear.


MARLOW. Instead of the battle of Belgrade, I believe it is almost time to talk
about supper. What has your philosophy got in the house for supper?


HARDCASTLE. For supper, sir! ( Aside) Was ever such a request to a man in his
own house!


MARLOW. Yes, sir, supper, sir; I begin to feel an appetite. I shall make
devilish work tonight in the larder, I promise you.


HARDCASTLE. ( Aside) Such a brazen dog sure never my eyes beheld. ( To him)
Why really, sir, as for supper I cannot well tell. My Dorothy, and the
cook-maid, settle these things between them. I leave these kind of things
entirely to them.


MARLOW. You do, do you?


HARDCASTLE. Entirely. By-the-bye, I believe they are in actual consultation
upon what is for supper this moment in the kitchen.


MARLOW. Then I beg they will admit me as one of their privy council. It Is a way
I have got. When I travel, I always choose to regulate my own supper. Let the
cook be called. No offense I hope, sir.


HARDCASTLE. O no, sir, none in the least; yet I don't know how: our Bridget,
the cook-maid, is not very communicative upon these occasions. Should we send
for her, she might scold us all out of the house.


HASTINGS. Let Us see your list of the larder then. I ask it as a favor. I
always match my appetite to my bill of fare.


MARLOW. ( To Hardcastle, who looks at them with surprise) Sir, he is very
right, and it is my way too.


HARDCASTLE. Sir, you have a right to command here. Here, Roger, bring us the
bill of fare for to-night's supper. I believe it is drawn out. Your manner, Mr.
Hastings, puts me in mind of my uncle, colonel Wallop. It was a saying of his,
that no man was sure of his supper till he had eaten it.


HASTINGS. ( Aside) All upon the high ropes! His uncle a colonel! We shall soon
hear of his mother being a justice of peace. But let us hear the bill of fare.


MARLOW. ( Perusing) What Is here? For the first course; for the second course;
for the desert. The devil, sir, do you think we have brought down the whole
joiners company, or the corporation of Bedford, to eat up such a supper? Two or
three little things, clean and comfortable, will do.


HASTINGS. But, let us hear it.


MARLOW. ( Reading) For the first course at the top, a pig, and pruin sauce.


HASTINGS. Damn your pig, I say.


MARLOW. And damn your pruin sauce, say I.


HARDCASTLE. And yet, gentlemen, to men that are hungry, pig, with pruin sauce,
is very good eating.


MARLOW. At the bottom, a calve's tongue and brains.


HASTINGS. Let your brains be knocked out, my good sir; I don't like them.


MARLOW. Or you may clap them on a plate by themselves. I do.


HARDCASTLE. ( Aside) Their impudence confounds me. ( To them) Gentlemen, you
are my guests, make what alterations you please. Is there any thing else you
wish to retrench or alter, gentlemen?


MARLOW. Item. A pork pie, a boiled rabbit and sausages, a florentine, a
shaking pudding, and a dish of tiff -- taff -- taffety cream!


HASTINGS. Confound your made dishes, I shall be as much at a loss in this
house as at a green and yellow dinner at the French ambassador's table. I Am for
plain eating.


HARDCASTLE. I Am sorry, gentlemen, that I have nothing you like, but if there
be any thing you have a particular fancy to --


MARLOW. Why, really, sir, your bill of fare is so exquisite, that any one part
of it is full as good as another. Send us what you please. So much for supper.
And now to see that our beds are air'd, and properly taken care of.


HARDCASTLE. I entreat you will leave all that to me. You shall not stir a step.


MARLOW. Leave that to you! I protest, sir, you must excuse me, I always look
to these things myself.


HARDCASTLE. I must insist, sir, you will make yourself easy on that head.


MARLOW. You see I Am resolved on it. ( Aside) A very troublesome fellow this,
as ever I met with.


HARDCASTLE. Well, sir, I Am resolved at least to attend you. ( Aside) This may
be modern modesty, but I never saw any thing look so like old-fashioned
impudence. [ Exeunt Marlow and Hardcastle.


HASTINGS, solus. So I find this fellow's civilities begin to grow troublesome.
But who can be angry at those assiduities which are meant to please him? Ha!
what do I see? Miss Neville, by all that is happy!


Enter MISS NEVILLE. MISS NEVILLE. My dear Hastings! To what unexpected good
fortune? to what accident, am I to ascribe this happy meeting?


HASTINGS. Rather let me ask the same question, as I could never have hoped to
meet my dearest Constance at an inn.


MISS NEVILLE. An inn! sure you mistake! My aunt, my guardian, lives here. What
could induce you to think this house an inn?


HASTINGS. My friend, Mr. Marlow, with whom I came down, and I, have been sent
here as to an inn, I assure you. A young fellow whom we accidentally met at a
house hard by directed us hither.


MISS NEVILLE. Certainly it must be one of my hopeful cousin's tricks, of whom
you have heard me talk so often, ha! ha! ha!


HASTINGS. He whom your aunt intends for you? he of whom I have such just
apprehensions?


MISS NEVILLE. You have nothing to fear from him, I assure you. You Would adore him
if you knew how heartily he despises me. My aunt knows it too, and has
undertaken to court me for him, and actually begins to think she has made a
conquest.


HASTINGS. Thou dear dissembler! You must know, my Constance, I have just
seized this happy opportunity of my friend's visit here to get admittance into
the family. The horses that carried us down are now fatigued with their
journey, but they will soon be refreshed; and then, if my dearest girl will trust
in her faithful Hastings, we shall soon be landed in France, where even among
slaves the laws of marriage are respected.


MISS NEVILLE. I have often told you, that, though ready to obey you, I yet
should leave my little fortune behind with reluctance. The greatest part of it
was left me by my uncle, the India director, and chiefly consists in jewels. I
have been for some time persuading my aunt to let me wear them. I fancy I Am
very near succeeding. The instant they are put into my possession you shall
find me ready to make them and myself yours.


HASTINGS. Perish the baubles! Your person is all I desire. In the mean time,
my friend Marlow must not be let into his mistake. I know the strange reserve
of his temper is such, that if abruptly informed of it, he would instantly quit
the house before our plan was ripe for execution.


MISS NEVILLE. But how shall we keep him in the deception? Miss Hardcastle is
just returned from walking; what if we still continue to deceive him? -- This,
this way -- [They confer.


Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. The assiduities of these good people teize me beyond
bearing. My host seems to think it ill manners to leave me alone, and so he
claps not only himself but his old-fashioned wife on my back. They talk of
coming to sup with us too; and then, I suppose, we are to run the gauntlet
through all the rest of the family. -- What have we got here! --


HASTINGS. My dear Charles! Let me congratulate you! -- The most fortunate
accident! -- Who do you think is just alighted?


MARLOW. Cannot guess.


HASTINGS. Our mistresses, boy, miss Hardcastle and miss Neville. Give me leave
to introduce miss Constance Neville to your acquaintance. Happening to dine in
the neighborhood, they called, on their return, to take fresh horses here.
Miss Hardcastle has just stepped into the next room, and will be back in an
instant. Was Not it lucky? eh!


MARLOW. ( Aside) I have been mortified enough of all conscience, and here
comes something to complete my embarrassment.


HASTINGS. Well! but was not it the most fortunate thing in the world?


MARLOW. Oh! yes. Very fortunate -- a most joyful encounter -- But our dresses,
George, you know are in disorder -- What if we should postpone the happiness
'till tomorrow? -- Tomorrow at her own house -- It will be every bit as
convenient -- and rather more respectful -- Tomorrow let it be. [Offering to
go.


MISS NEVILLE. By no means, sir. Your ceremony will displease her. The disorder
of your dress will show the ardour of your impatience. Besides, she knows you
are in the house, and will permit you to see her.


MARLOW. O! the devil! how shall I support it? hem! hem! Hastings, you must not
go. You are to assist me, you know. I shall be confoundedly ridiculous. Yet,
hang it! I Will take courage. Hem!


HASTINGS. Pshaw, man! it is but the first plunge, and all is over. She Is but a
woman, you know.


MARLOW. And of all women, she that I dread most to encounter!


Enter MISS HARDCASTLE as returned from walking, a bonnet, etc. HASTINGS,
introducing them. Miss Hardcastle, Mr. Marlow. I Am proud of bringing two
persons of such merit together, that only want to know, to esteem each other.


MISS HARDCASTLE. ( Aside) Now, for meeting my modest gentleman with a demure
face, and quite in his own manner. ( After a pause, in which he appears very
uneasy and disconcerted.) I Am glad of your safe arrival, sir -- I Am told you
had some accidents by the way.


MARLOW. Only a few madam. Yes, we had some. Yes, madam, a good many accidents,
but should be sorry -- madam -- or rather glad of any accidents -- that are so
agreeably concluded. Hem!


HASTINGS. ( To him) You never spoke better in your whole life. Keep it up, and
I Will insure you the victory.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I Am afraid you flatter, sir. You that have seen so much of
the finest company can find little entertainment in an obscure corner of the
country.


MARLOW. ( Gathering courage) I have lived, indeed, in the world, madam; but I
have kept very little company. I have been but an observer upon life, madam,
while others were enjoying it.


MISS NEVILLE. But that, I am told, is the way to enjoy it at last.


HASTINGS. ( To him) Cicero never spoke better. Once more, and you are
confirmed in assurance for ever.


MARLOW. ( To him) Hem! Stand by me then, and when I Am down, throw in a word or
two to set me up again.


MISS HARDCASTLE. An observer, like you, upon life, were, I fear, disagreeably
employed, since you must have had much more to censure than to approve.


MARLOW. Pardon me, madam. I was always willing to be amused. The folly of most
people is rather an object of mirth than uneasiness.


HASTINGS. ( To him) Bravo, bravo. Never spoke so well in your whole life.
Well! Miss Hardcastle, I see that you and Mr. Marlow are going to be very good
company. I believe our being here will but embarrass the interview.


MARLOW. Not in the least, Mr. Hastings. We like your company of all things. (
To him) Zounds! George, sure you will not go? how can you leave us?


HASTINGS. Our presence will but spoil conversation, so we'll retire to the
next room. ( To him) You don't consider, man, that we are to manage a little
tete-a-tete of our own. [Exeunt.


MISS HARDCASTLE. ( After a pause) But you have not been wholly an observer, I
presume, sir: the ladies I should hope have employed some part of your
addresses.


MARLOW. ( Relapsing into timidity) Pardon me, madam, I -- I -- I -- as yet
have studied -- only -- to -- deserve them.


MISS HARDCASTLE. And that, some say, is the very worst way to obtain them.


MARLOW. Perhaps so, madam. But I love to converse only with the more grave and
sensible part of the sex. -- But I Am afraid I grow tiresome.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Not at all, sir; there is nothing I like so much as grave
conversation myself; I could hear it for ever. Indeed I have often been
surprised how a man of sentiment could ever admire those light airy pleasures,
where nothing reaches the heart.


MARLOW. It Is -- a disease -- of the mind, madam. In the variety of tastes
there must be some who wanting a relish -- for -- um -- a -- um.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I understand you, sir. There must be some, who wanting a
relish for refined pleasures, pretend to despise what they are incapable of
tasting.


MARLOW. My meaning, madam, but infinitely better expressed. And I cannot help
observing -- a --


MISS HARDCASTLE. ( Aside) Who could ever suppose this fellow impudent upon
such occasions. ( To him) You were going to observe, sir --


MARLOW. I was observing, madam -- I protest, madam, I forget what I was going
to observe.


MISS HARDCASTLE. ( Aside) I vow and so do I. ( To him) You were observing,
sir, that in this age of hypocrisy something about hypocrisy, sir.


MARLOW. Yes, madam. In this age of hypocrisy there are few who upon strict
inquiry do not -- a -- a -- a --


MISS HARDCASTLE. I understand you perfectly, sir.


MARLOW. ( Aside) Egad! and that is more than I do myself.


MISS HARDCASTLE. You mean that in this hypocritical age there are few that do
not condemn in public what they practice in private, and think they pay every
debt to virtue when they praise it.


MARLOW. True, madam; those who have most virtue in their mouths, have least of
it in their bosoms. But I Am sure I tire you, madam.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Not in the least, sir; there is something so agreeable and
spirited in your manner, such life and force -- pray, sir, go on.


MARLOW. Yes, madam. I was saying -- that there are some occasions -- when a
total want of courage, madam, destroys all the -- and puts us -- upon a -- a --
a --


MISS HARDCASTLE. I agree with you entirely, a want of courage upon some
occasions assumes the appearance of ignorance, and betrays us when we most want
to excel. I beg you will proceed.


MARLOW. Yes, madam. Morally speaking, madam -- But I see miss Neville
expecting us in the next room. I would not intrude for the world.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I protest, sir, I never was more agreeably entertained in all
my life. Pray go on.


MARLOW. Yes, madam. I was -- But she beckons us to join her. Madam, shall I do
myself the honor to attend you?


MISS HARDCASTLE. Well then, I Will follow.


MARLOW. ( Aside) This pretty smooth dialogue has done for me. [Exit.


MISS HARDCASTLE, sola. Ha! ha! ha! Was there ever such a sober sentimental
interview? I Am certain he scarce looked in my face the whole time. Yet the
fellow, but for his unaccountable bashfulness, is pretty well too. He has good
sense, but then so buried in his fears, that it fatigues one more than
ignorance. If I could teach him a little confidence, it would be doing somebody
that I know of a piece of service. But who is that somebody? -- That, faith, is
a question I can scarce answer. [Exit.


Enter TONY and MISS NEVILLE, followed by MRS. HARDCASTLE and HASTINGS. TONY.
What do you follow me for, cousin Con? I wonder you're not ashamed to be so
very engaging.


MISS NEVILLE. I hope, cousin, one may speak to one's own relations, and not be
to blame.


TONY. Ay, but I know what sort of a relation you want to make me though; but
it will not do. I tell you, cousin Con, it will not do; so I beg you will keep your
distance, I want no nearer relationship. [She follows, coquetting him to the
back scene.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Well! I vow, Mr. Hastings, you are very entertaining. There Is
nothing in the world I love to talk of so much as London, and the fashions,
though I was never there myself.


HASTINGS. Never there! You amaze me! From your air and manner, I concluded you
had been bred all your life either at Ranelagh, St. James's, or Tower Wharf.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. O! Sir, you're only pleased to say so. We country persons can
have no manner at all. I Am in love with the town, and that serves to raise me
above some of our neighboring rustics; but who can have a manner, that has
never seen the Pantheon, the Grotto Gardens, the Borough, and such places where
the nobility chiefly resort? All I can do, is to enjoy London at second-hand. I
take care to know every tete-a-tete from the scandalous magazine, and have all
the fashions, as they come out, in a letter from the two miss Rickets of
Crookedlane. Pray how do you like this head, Mr. Hastings?


HASTINGS. Extremely elegant and degagee, upon my word, madam. Your friseur is
a Frenchman, I suppose?


MRS. HARDCASTLE. I protest I dressed it myself from a print in the ladies
memorandum-book for the last year.


HASTINGS. Indeed! Such a head in a side-box, at the playhouse, would draw as
many gazers as my lady may'ress at a city ball.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. I vow, since inoculation began, there is no such thing to be
seen as a plain woman; so one must dress a little particular or one may escape
in the crowd.


HASTINGS. But that can never be your case, madam, in any dress. ( bowing)


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Yet, what signifies my dressing when I have such a piece of
antiquity by my side as Mr. Hardcastle: all I can say will never argue down a
single button from his clothes. I have often wanted him to throw off his great
flaxen wig, and where he was bald, to plaster it over, like my lord Pately,
with powder.


HASTINGS. You are right, madam; for, as among the ladies, there are none ugly,
so among the men there are none old.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. But what do you think his answer was? Why, with his usual
Gothic vivacity, he said I only wanted him to throw off his wig to convert it
into a tete for my own wearing.


HASTINGS. Intolerable! At your age you may wear what you please, and it must
become you.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Pray, Mr. Hastings, what do you take to be the most
fashionable age about town?


HASTINGS. Some time ago, forty was all the mode; but I Am told the ladies
intend to bring up fifty for the ensuing winter.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Seriously. Then I shall be too young for the fashion.


HASTINGS. No lady begins now to put on jewels 'till she is past forty. For
instance, miss there, in a polite circle, would be considered as a child, as a
mere maker of samplers.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. And yet Mrs. Niece thinks herself as much a woman, and is as
fond of jewels as the oldest of us all.


HASTINGS. Your niece, is she? And that young gentleman, a brother of yours, I
should presume?


MRS. HARDCASTLE. My son, sir. They are contracted to each other. Observe their
little sports. They fall in and out ten times a day, as if they were man and
wife already. ( To them) Well, Tony, child, what soft things are you saying to
your cousin Constance this evening?


TONY. I have been saying no soft things; but that it is very hard to be
followed about so. Ecod! I Have not a place in the house now that is left to
myself, but the stable.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Never mind him, Con, my dear. He Is in another story behind
your back.


MISS NEVILLE. There Is something generous in my cousin's manner. He falls out
before faces to be forgiven in private.


TONY. That Is a damned confounded -- crack.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Ah! he is a sly one. Don't you think they are like each other
about the mouth, Mr. Hastings? The Blenkinsop mouth to a T. They Are of a size
too. Back to back, my pretties, that Mr. Hastings may see you. Come, Tony.


TONY. You had as good not make me, I tell you. ( measuring.


MISS NEVILLE. O lud! he has almost cracked my head.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. O the monster! For shame, Tony. You a man, and behave so!


TONY. If I Am a man, let me have my fortin. Ecod! I Will not be made a fool of no
longer.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Is this, ungrateful boy, all that I Am to get for the pains I
have taken in your education? I that have rocked you in your cradle, and fed
that pretty mouth with a spoon! Did not I work that waistcoat to make you
genteel? Did not I prescribe for you every day, and weep while the receipt was
operating?


TONY. Ecod! you had reason to weep, for you have been dosing me ever since I
was born. I have gone through every receipt in the complete huswife ten times
over; and you have thoughts of coursing me through Quincy next spring. But,
ecod! I tell you, I Will not be made a fool of no longer.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Was Not it all for your good, viper? Was Not it all for your
good?


TONY. I wish you would let me and my good alone then. Snubbing this way when I Am
in spirits. If I Am to have any good, let it come of itself; not to keep dinging
it, dinging it into one so.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. That Is false; I never see you when you're in spirits. No,
Tony, you then go to the alehouse or kennel. I Am never to be delighted with
your agreeable, wild notes, unfeeling monster!


TONY. Ecod! mamma, your own notes are the wildest of the two.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Was ever the like? But I see he wants to break my heart, I
see he does.


HASTINGS. Dear madam, permit me to lecture the young gentleman a little. I Am
certain I can persuade him to his duty.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Well! I must retire. Come, Constance, my love. You see, Mr.
Hastings, the wretchedness of my situation: was ever poor woman so plagued with
a dear, sweet, pretty, provoking, undutiful boy. [ Exeunt Mrs. Hardcastle and
Miss Neville.


HASTINGS, TONY. TONY, singing. "There was a young man riding by, and fain
would have his will. Rang do didlo dee." -- Don't mind her. Let her cry. It Is
the comfort of her heart. I have seen her and sister cry over a book for an
hour together, and they said, they liked the book the better the more it made
them cry.


HASTINGS. Then you're no friend to the ladies, I find, my pretty young
gentleman?


TONY. That Is as I find 'um.


HASTINGS. Not to her of your mother's choosing, I dare answer? And yet she
appears to me a pretty well-tempered girl.


TONY. That Is because you don't know her as well as I. Ecod! I know every inch
about her; and there is not a more bitter cantanckerous toad in all christendom.


HASTINGS. ( Aside) Pretty encouragement this for a lover!


TONY. I have seen her since the height of that. She has as many tricks as a
hare in a thicket, or a colt the first day's breaking.


HASTINGS. To me she appears sensible and silent!


TONY. Ay, before company. But when she is with her play-mate she is as loud as a
hog in a gate.


HASTINGS. But there is a meek modesty about her that charms me.


TONY. Yes, but curb her never so little, she kicks up, and you're ^lung in a
ditch.


HASTINGS. Well, but you must allow her a little beauty. -- Yes, you must allow
her some beauty.


TONY. Bandbox! She Is all a made up thing, mun. Ah! could you but see Bet
Bouncer of these parts, you might then talk of beauty. Ecod, she has two eyes
as black as sloes, and cheeks as broad and red as a pulpit cushion. She Would make
two of she.


HASTINGS. Well, what say you to a friend that would take this bitter bargain
off your hands?


TONY. Anon.


HASTINGS. Would you thank him that would take miss Neville, and leave you to
happiness and your dear Betsy?


TONY. Ay; but where is there such a friend, for who would take her?


HASTINGS. I am he. If you but assist me, I Will engage to whip her off to
France, and you shall never hear more of her.


TONY. Assist you! Ecod I will, to the last drop of my blood. I Will clap a pair
of horses to your chaise that shall trundle you off in a twinkling, and may be
get you a part of her fortin beside, in jewels, that you little dream of.


HASTINGS. My dear squire, this looks like a lad of spirit.


TONY. Come along then, and you shall see more of my spirit before you have
done with me. ( singing.)

We are the boys
That fears no noise
Where the thundering cannons roar.
[Exeunt.
ACT THE THIRD.
Enter HARDCASTLE, solus. HARDCASTLE. WHAT could my old friend sir Charles mean
by recommending his son as the modestest young man in town? To me he appears
the most impudent piece of brass that ever spoke with a tongue. He has taken
possession of the easy chair by the fire side already. He took off his boots in
the parlour, and desired me to see them taken care of. I Am desirous to know how
his impudence affects my daughter. -- She will certainly be shocked at it.


Enter MISS HARDCASTLE, plainly dressed. HARDCASTLE. Well, my Kate, I see you
have changed your dress as I bid you; and yet, I believe, there was no great
occasion.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I find such a pleasure, sir, in obeying your commands, that I
take care to observe them without ever debating their propriety.


HARDCASTLE. And yet, Kate, I sometimes give you some cause, particularly when
I recommended my modest gentleman to you as a lover today.


MISS HARDCASTLE. You taught me to expect something extraordinary, and I find
the original exceeds the description.


HARDCASTLE. I was never so surprised in my life! He has quite confounded all
my faculties!


MISS HARDCASTLE. I never saw any thing like it: and a man of the world too!


HARDCASTLE. Ay, he learned it all abroad, -- what a fool was I, to think a
young man could learn modesty by traveling. He might as soon learn wit at a
masquerade.


MISS HARDCASTLE. It seems all natural to him.


HARDCASTLE. A good deal assisted by bad company and a French dancing master.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Sure you mistake, papa! A French dancingmaster could never
have taught him that timid look, -- that awkward address, -- that bashful
manner --


HARDCASTLE. Whose look? whose manner, child?


MISS HARDCASTLE. Mr. Marlow's: his mauvaise honte, his timidity struck me at
the first sight.


HARDCASTLE. Then your first sight deceived you; for I think him one of the
most brazen first sights that ever astonished my senses.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Sure, sir, you rally! I never saw any one so modest.


HARDCASTLE. And can you be serious! I never saw such a bouncing swaggering
puppy since I was born. Bully Dawson was but a fool to him.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Surprising! He met me with a respectful bow, a stammering
voice, and a look fixed on the ground.


HARDCASTLE. He met me with a loud voice, a lordly air, and a familiarity that
made my blood freeze again.


MISS HARDCASTLE. He treated me with diffidence and respect; censured the
manners of the age; admired the prudence of girls that never laughed; tired me
with apologies for being tiresome; then left the room with a bow, and, madam, I
would not for the world detain you.


HARDCASTLE. He spoke to me as if he knew me all his life before. Asked twenty
questions, and never waited for an answer. Interrupted my best remarks with
some silly pun, and when I was in my best story of the duke of Marlborough and
prince Eugene, he asked if I had not a good hand at making punch. Yes, Kate, he
asked your father if he was a maker of punch!


MISS HARDCASTLE. One of us must certainly be mistaken.


HARDCASTLE. If he be what he has shown himself, I Am determined he shall never
have my consent.


MISS HARDCASTLE. And if he be the sullen thing I take him, he shall never have
mine.


HARDCASTLE. In one thing then we are agreed -- to reject him.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Yes. But upon conditions. For if you should find him less
impudent, and I more presuming; if you find him more respectful, and I more
importunate -- I don't know -- the fellow is well enough for a man -- Certainly
we don't meet many such at a horse race in the country.


HARDCASTLE. If we should find him so -- But that is impossible. The first
appearance has done my business. I Am seldom deceived in that.


MISS HARDCASTLE. And yet there may be many good qualities under that first
appearance.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, when a girl finds a fellow's outside to her taste, she then
sets about guessing the rest of his furniture. With her, a smooth face stands
for good sense, and a genteel figure for every virtue.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I hope, sir, a conversation begun with a compliment to my
good sense will not end with a sneer at my understanding?


HARDCASTLE. Pardon me, Kate. But if young Mr. Brazen can find the art of
reconciling contradictions, he may please us both, perhaps.


MISS HARDCASTLE. And as one of us must be mistaken, what if we go to make
further discoveries?


HARDCASTLE. Agreed. But depend on it I Am in the right.


MISS HARDCASTLE. And depend on it I Am not much in the wrong. [Exeunt.


Enter TONY, running in with a casket. TONY. Ecod! I have got them. Here they
are. My cousin Con's necklaces, bobs and all. My mother shall not cheat the poor
souls out of their fortin neither. O! my genus, is that you?


Enter HASTINGS. HASTINGS. My dear friend, how have you managed with your
mother? I hope you have amused her with pretending love for your cousin, and
that you are willing to be reconciled at last? Our horses will be refreshed in
a short time, and we shall soon be ready to set off.


TONY. And here is something to bear your charges by the way, ( giving the
casket) your sweetheart's jewels. Keep them, and hang those, I say, that would
rob you of one of them.


HASTINGS. But how have you procured them from your mother?


TONY. Ask me no questions, and I Will tell you no fibs. I procured them by the
rule of thumb. If I had not a key to every drawer in mother's bureau, how could
I go to the alehouse so often as I do? An honest man may rob himself of his own
at any time.


HASTINGS. Thousands do it every day. But to be plain with you; miss Neville is
endeavoring to procure them from her aunt this very instant. If she succeeds,
it will be the most delicate way at least of obtaining them.


TONY. Well, keep them, till you know how it will be. But I know how it will be
well enough, she would as soon part with the only sound tooth in her head.


HASTINGS. But I dread the effects of her resentment, when she finds she has
lost them.


TONY. Never you mind her resentment, leave me to manage that. I don't value
her resentment the bounce of a cracker. Zounds! here they are. Morris. Prance.
[ Exit Hastings.


TONY, MRS. HARDCASTLE, and MISS NEVILLE. MRS. HARDCASTLE. Indeed, Constance,
you amaze me. Such a girl as you want jewels? It will be time enough for
jewels, my dear, twenty years hence, when your beauty begins to want repairs.


MISS NEVILLE. But what will repair beauty at forty, will certainly improve it
at twenty, madam.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Yours, my dear, can admit of none. That natural blush is
beyond a thousand ornaments. Besides, child, jewels are quite out at present.
Don't you see half the ladies of our acquaintance, my lady Killday-light, and
Mrs. Crump, and the rest of them, carry their jewels to town, and bring nothing
but paste and marcasites back.


MISS NEVILLE. But who knows, madam, but somebody that shall be nameless would
like me best with all my little finery about me?


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Consult your glass, my dear, and then see if, with such a
pair of eyes, you want any better sparklers. What do you think, Tony, my dear?
does your cousin Con, want any jewels, in your eyes, to set off her beauty?


TONY. That Is as thereafter may be.


MISS NEVILLE. My dear aunt, if you knew how it would oblige me.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. A parcel of old-fashioned rose and table-cut things. They
would make you look like the court of king Solomon at a puppet-shew. Besides, I
believe I cannot readily come at them. They may be missing for aught I know to
the contrary.


TONY. ( Apart to Mrs. Hardcastle.) Then why don't you tell her so at once, as
she is so longing for them. Tell her they are lost. It Is the only way to quiet
her. Say they are lost, and call me to bear witness.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. ( Apart to Tony.) You know, my dear, I Am only keeping them
for you. So if I say they are gone, you will bear me witness, will you? He! he! he!


TONY. Never fear me. Ecod! I Will say I saw them taken out with my own eyes.


MISS NEVILLE. I desire them but for a day, madam. Just to be permitted to show
them as relics, and then they may be locked up again.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. To be plain with you, my dear Constance; if I could find
them, you should have them. They Are missing, I assure you. Lost, for aught I
know; but we must have patience wherever they are.


MISS NEVILLE. I Will not believe it; this is but a shallow pretense to deny me.
I know they are too valuable to be so slightly kept, and as you are to answer
for the loss.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Don't be alarmed, Constance. If they be lost, I must restore
an equivalent. But my son knows they are missing, and not to be found.


TONY. That I can bear witness to. They are missing, and not to be found, I Will
take my oath on it.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. You must learn resignation, my dear; for though we lose our
fortune, yet we should not lose our patience. See me, how calm I am.


MISS NEVILLE. Ay, people are generally calm at the misfortunes of others.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Now, I wonder a girl of your good sense should waste a
thought upon such trumpery. We shall soon find them; and, in the mean time, you
shall make use of my garnets till your jewels be found.


MISS NEVILLE. I detest garnets.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. The most becoming things in the world to set off a clear
complexion. You have often seen how well they look upon me. You shall have
them. [Exit.


MISS NEVILLE. I dislike them of all things. You shall not stir. -- Was ever any
thing so provoking to mislay my own jewels, and force me to wear her trumpery.


TONY. Don't be a fool. If she gives you the garnets, take what you can get. The
jewels are your own already. I have stolen them out of her bureau, and she does
not know it. Fly to your spark, he will tell you more of the matter. Leave me to
manage her.


MISS NEVILLE. My dear cousin.


TONY. Vanish. She Is here, and has missed them already. Zounds! how she fidgets
and spits about like a catharine wheel.


Enter MRS. HARDCASTLE. MRS. HARDCASTLE. Confusion! thieves! robbers! we are
cheated, plundered, broke open, undone.


TONY. What Is the matter, what is the matter, mamma? I hope nothing has happened
to any of the good family!


MRS. HARDCASTLE. We are ^obbed. My bureau has been broke open, the jewels
taken out, and I Am undone.


TONY. Oh! is that all? Ha! ha! ha! By the laws, I never saw it better acted in
my life. Ecod, I thought you was ruined in earnest, ha, ha, ha.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Why boy, I am ruined in earnest. My bureau has been broke
open, and all taken away.


TONY. Stick to that; ha, ha, ha, stick to that. I Will bear witness, you know,
call me to bear witness.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. I tell you, Tony, by all that is precious, the jewels are
gone, and I shall be ruined for ever.


TONY. Sure I know they are gone, and I am to say so.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. My dearest Tony, but hear me. They Are gone, I say.


TONY. By the laws, mamma, you make me for to laugh, ha! ha! I know who took
them well enough, ha! ha! ha!


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Was there ever such a blockhead, that cannot tell the
difference between jest and earnest. I tell you I Am not in jest, booby.


TONY. That Is right, that is right: you must be in a bitter passion, and then
nobody will suspect either of us. I Will bear witness that they are gone.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Was there ever such a cross-grained brute, that will not hear
me! Can you bear witness that you're no better than a fool? Was ever poor woman
so beset with fools on one hand, and thieves on the other.


TONY. I can bear witness to that.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Bear witness again, you blockhead you, and I Will turn you out
of the room directly. My poor niece, what will become of her! Do you laugh, you
unfeeling brute, as if you enjoyed my distress?


TONY. I can bear witness to that.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Do you insult me, monster? I Will teach you to vex your mother,
I will.


TONY. I can bear witness to that. [He runs off, she follows him.


Enter MISS HARDCASTLE and MAID. MISS HARDCASTLE. What an unaccountable
creature is that brother of mine, to send them to the house as an inn, ha! ha!
I don't wonder at his impudence.


MAID. But what is more, madam, the young gentleman, as you passed by in your
present dress, asked me if you were the bar-maid? He mistook you for the
bar-maid, madam.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Did he? Then as live, I Am resolved to keep up the delusion.
Tell me, Pimple, how do you like my present dress. Don't you think I look
something like Cherry in the Beaux Stratagem?


MAID. It Is the dress, madam, that every lady wears in the country, but when
she visits, or receives company.


MISS HARDCASTLE. And are you sure he does not remember my face or person?


MAID. Certain of it.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I vow, I thought so; for though we spoke for some time
together, yet his fears were such, that he never once looked up during the
interview. Indeed, if he had, my bonnet would have kept him from seeing me.


MAID. But what do you hope from keeping him in his mistake?


MISS HARDCASTLE. In the first place, I shall be seen, and that is no small
advantage to a girl who brings her face to market. Then I shall perhaps make an
acquaintance, and that is no small victory gained over one who never addresses
any but the wildest of her sex. But my chief aim is to take my gentleman off
his guard, and, like an invisible champion of romance, examine the giant's
force before I offer to combat.


MAID. But are you sure you can act your part, and disguise your voice, so that
he may mistake that, as he has already mistaken your person?


MISS HARDCASTLE. Never fear me. I think I have got the true barcant. -- Did
your honor call? -- Attend the Lion there. -- Pipes and tobacco for the Angel.
-- The Lamb has been outrageous this half hour.


MAID. It will do, madam. But he is here. [ Exit Maid.


Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. What a bawling in every part of the house. I have scarce
a moment's repose. If I go to the best room, there I find my host and his
story. If I fly to the gallery, there we have my hostess with her curtesy down
to the ground. I have at last got a moment to myself, and now for recollection.
[Walks and muses.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Did you call, sir? Did your honor call?


MARLOW. ( Musing.) As for miss Hardcastle, she is too grave and sentimental for
me.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Did your honor call? [She still places herself before him,
he turning away.


MARLOW. No, child, ( musing.) Besides, from the glimpse I had of her, I think
she squints.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I Am sure, sir, I heard the bell ring.


MARLOW. No, no. ( musing.) I have pleased my father, however, by coming down,
and I Will tomorrow please myself by returning. ( Taking out his tablets, and
perusing.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Perhaps the other gentleman called, sir?


MARLOW. I tell you, no.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I should be glad to know, sir. We have such a parcel of
servants.


MARLOW. No, no, I tell you. ( Looks full in her face.) Yes, child, I think I
did call. I wanted -- I wanted -- I vow, child, you are vastly handsome.


MISS HARDCASTLE. O la, sir, you will make one ashamed.


MARLOW. Never saw a more sprightly malicious eye. Yes, yes, my dear, I did
call. Have you got any of your -- a -- what do you call it in the house?


MISS HARDCASTLE. No, sir, we have been out of that these ten days.


MARLOW. One may call in this house, I find, to very little purpose. Suppose I
should call for a taste, just by way of trial, of the nectar of your lips;
perhaps I might be disappointed in that too.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Nectar! nectar! That Is a liquor there is no call for in these
parts. French, I suppose. We keep no French wines here, sir.


MARLOW. Of true English growth, I assure you.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Then it is odd I should not know it. We brew all sorts of
wines in this house, and I have lived here these eighteen years.


MARLOW. Eighteen years! Why one would think, child, you kept the bar before
you were born. How old are you?


MISS HARDCASTLE. O! sir, I must not tell my age. They say women and music
should never be dated.


MARLOW. To guess at this distance you cannot be much above forty (
approaching). Yet nearer I don't think so much ( approaching). By coming close
to some women they look younger still; but when we come very close indeed -- (
attempting to kiss her).


MISS HARDCASTLE. I'ray, sir, keep your distance. One would think you wanted to
know one's age as they do horses, by mark of mouth.


MARLOW. I protest, child, you use me extremely ill. If you keep me at this
distance, how is it possible you and I can be ever acquainted?


MISS HARDCASTLE. And who wants to be acquainted with you? I want no such
acquaintance, not I. I Am sure you did not treat miss Hardcastle that was here
awhile ago in this obstropalous manner. I Will warrant me, before her you looked
dashed, and kept bowing to the ground, and talked, for all the world, as if you
was before a justice of peace.


MARLOW. ( Aside) Egad! She has hit it, sure enough. ( To her) In awe of her,
child? Ha! ha! ha! A mere, awkward, squinting thing, no, no. I find you don't
know me. I laughed, and rallied her a little; but I was unwilling to be too
severe. No, I could not be too severe, curse me!


MISS HARDCASTLE. O! then, sir, you are a favorite, I find, among the ladies?


MARLOW. Yes, my dear, a great favorite. And yet, hang me, I don't see what
they find in me to follow. At the ladies club in town, I Am called their
agreeable Rattle. Rattle, child, is not my real name, but one I Am known by. My
name is Solomon's. Mr. Solomon's, my dear, at your service. ( Offering to salute
her.)


MISS HARDCASTLE. Hold, sir; you are introducing me to your club, not to
yourself. And you're so great a favorite there, you say?


MARLOW. Yes, my dear. There Is Mrs. Mantrap, lady Betty Blackleg, the countess
of Sligo, Mrs. Langhorns, old miss Biddy Buckskin, and your humble servant,
keep up the spirit of the place.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Then it is a very merry place, I suppose?


MARLOW. Yes, as merry as cards, supper, wine, and old women can make us.


MISS HARDCASTLE. And their agreeable Rattle, ha! ha! ha!


MARLOW. ( Aside) Egad! I don't quite like this chit. She looks knowing,
methinks. You laugh, child!


MISS HARDCASTLE. I cannot but laugh to think what time they all have for
minding their work or their family.


MARLOW. ( Aside) All Is well; she don't laugh at me. ( To her) Do you ever
work, child?


MISS HARDCASTLE. Ay, sure. There Is not a screen or a quilt in the whole house
but what can bear witness to that.


MARLOW. Odso! Then you must show me your embroidery. I embroider and draw
patterns myself a little. If you want a judge of your work you must apply to
me. [Seizing her hand.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Ay, but the colors don't look well by candlelight. You shall
see all in the morning. [Struggling.


MARLOW. And why not now, my angel? Such beauty fires beyond the power of
resistance. -- Pshaw! the father here! My old luck: I never nicked seven that I
did not throw ames ace three times following. [ Exit Marlow.


Enter HARDCASTLE, who stands in surprise. HARDCASTLE. So, madam. So I find
this is your modest lover. This is your humble admirer that kept his eyes fixed
on the ground, and only adored at humble distance. Kate, Kate, art thou not
ashamed to deceive your father so?


MISS HARDCASTLE. Never trust me, dear papa, but he is still the modest man I
first took him for, you will be convinced of it as well as I.


HARDCASTLE. By the hand of my body I believe his impudence is infectious!
Didn't I see him seize your hand? Didn't I see him hawl you about like a
milk-maid? and now you talk of his respect and his modesty, forsooth!


MISS HARDCASTLE. But if I shortly convince you of his modesty, that he has
only the faults that will pass off with time, and the virtues that will improve
with age, I hope you will forgive him.


HARDCASTLE. The girl would actually make one run mad! I tell you I Will not be
convinced. I am convinced. He has scarcely been three hours in the house, and
he has already encroached on all my prerogatives. You may like his impudence,
and call it modesty. But my son-in-law, madam, must have very different
qualifications.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Sir, I ask but this night to convince you.


HARDCASTLE. You shall not have half the time, for I have thoughts of turning
him out this very hour.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Give me that hour then, and I hope to satisfy you.


HARDCASTLE. Well, an hour let it be then. But I Will have no trifling with your
father. All fair and open, do you mind me.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I hope, sir, you have ever found that I considered your
commands as my pride; for your kindness is such, that my duty as yet has been
inclination.


ACT THE FOURTH.
Enter HASTINGS and MISS NEVILLE. HASTINGS. YOU surprise me! Sir Charles Marlow
expected here this night? Where have you had your information?


MISS NEVILLE. You may depend upon it. I just saw his letter to Mr. Hardcastle,
in which he tells him he intends setting out a few hours after his son.


HASTINGS. Then, my Constance, all must be completed before he arrives. He
knows me; and should he find me here, would discover my name, and perhaps my
designs, to the rest of the family.


MISS NEVILLE. The jewels, I hope, are safe.


HASTINGS. Yes, yes. I have sent them to Marlow, who keeps the keys of our
baggage. In the mean time, I Will go to prepare matters for our elopement. I have
had the Squire's promise of a sresh pair of horses; and, if I should not see
him again, will write him further directions. [Exit.


MISS NEVILLE. Well! success attend you. In the mean time, I Will go amuse my
aunt with the old pretense of a violent passion for my cousin. [Exit.


Enter MARLOW, followed by a servant. MARLOW. I wonder what Hastings could mean
by sending me so valuable a thing as a casket to keep for him, when he knows
the only place I have is the seat of a post-coach at an inn-door. Have you
deposited the casket with the landlady, as I ordered you? Have you put it into
her own hands?


SERVANT. Yes, your honor.


MARLOW. She said she would keep it safe, did she?


SERVANT. Yes, she said she would keep it safe enough; she asked me how I came by
it? and she said she had a great mind to make me give an account of myself. [
Exit Servant.


MARLOW. Ha! ha! ha! They Are safe however. What an unaccountable set of beings
have we got amongst! This little bar-maid though runs in my head most
strangely, and drives out the absurdities of all the rest of the family. She Is
mine, she must be mine, or I Am greatly mistaken.


Enter HASTINGS. HASTINGS. Bless me! I quite forgot to tell her that I intended
to prepare at the bottom of the garden. Marlow here, and in spirits too!


MARLOW. Give me joy, George! Crown me, shadow me with laurels! Well, George,
after all, we modest fellows don't want for success among the women.


HASTINGS. Some women you mean. But what success has your honor's modesty been
crowned with now, that it grows so insolent upon us?


MARLOW. Didn't you see the tempting, brisk, lovely, little thing that runs
about the house with a bunch of keys to its girdle?


HASTINGS. Well! and what then?


MARLOW. She Is mine, you rogue you. Such fire, such motion, such eyes, such
lips -- but, egad! she would not let me kiss them though.


HASTINGS. But are you so sure, so very sure of her?


MARLOW. Why man, she talked of showing me her work above-stairs, and I am to
improve the pattern.


HASTINGS. But how can you, Charles, go about to rob a woman of her honor?


MARLOW. Pshaw! pshaw! We all know the honor of the bar-maid of an inn. I
don't intend to rob her, take my word for it, there is nothing in this house, I
snan't honestly pay for.


HASTINGS. I believe the girl has virtue.


MARLOW. And if she has, I should be the last man in the world that would
attempt to corrupt it.


HASTINGS. You have taken care, I hope, of the casket I sent you to lock up?
It Is in safety?


MARLOW. Yes, yes. It Is safe enough. I have taken care of it. But how could you
think the seat of a post-coach at an inn door a place of safety? Ah! numbskull!
I have taken better precautions for you than you did for yourself. -- I have --


HASTINGS. What!


MARLOW. I have sent it to the landlady to keep for you.


HASTINGS. To the landlady!


MARLOW. The landlady.


HASTINGS. You did?


MARLOW. I did. She Is to be answerable for its forthcoming, you know.


HASTINGS. Yes, she will bring it forth, with a witness.


MARLOW. Was Not I right? I believe you will allow that I acted prudently upon
this occasion?


HASTINGS. ( Aside) He must not see my uneasiness.


MARLOW. You seem a little disconcerted though, methinks. Sure nothing has
happened?


HASTINGS. No, nothing. Never was in better spirits in all my life. And so you
left it with the landlady, who, no doubt, very readily undertook the charge?


MARLOW. Rather too readily. For she not only kept the casket; but, through her
great precaution, was going to keep the messenger too. Ha! ha! ha!


HASTINGS. He! he! he! They Are safe however.


MARLOW. As a guinea in a miser's purse.


HASTINGS. ( Aside) So now all hopes of fortune are at an end, and we must set
off without it. ( To him) Well, Charles, I Will leave you to your meditations on
the pretty bar-maid, and, he! he! he! may you be as successful for yourself as
you have been for me. [Exit.


MARLOW. Thank ye, George! I ask no more. Ha! ha! ha!


Enter HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. I no longer know my own house. It Is turned all
topsey-turvey. His servants have got drunk already. I Will bear it no longer, and
yet, from my respect for his father, I Will be calm. ( To him) Mr. Marlow, your
servant. I Am your very humble servant. ( bowing low.


MARLOW. Sir, your humble servant. ( Aside) What Is to be the wonder now?


HARDCASTLE. I believe, sir, you must be sensible, sir, that no man alive ought
to be more welcome than your father's son, sir. I hope you think so?


MARLOW. I do from my soul, sir. I don't want much entreaty. I generally make
my father's son welcome wherever he goes.


HARDCASTLE. I believe you do, from my soul, sir. But though I say nothing to
your own conduct, that of your servants is insufferable. Their manner of
drinking is setting a very bad example in this house, I assure you.


MARLOW. I protest, my very good sir, that is no fault of mine. If they don't
drink as they ought they are to blame. I ordered them not to spare the cellar.
I did, I assure you. ( To the side scene) Here, let one of my servants come up.
( To him) My positive directions were, that as I did not drink myself, they
should make up for my desiciencies below.


HARDCASTLE. Then they had your orders for what they do! I Am satisfied!


MARLOW. They had, I assure you. You shall hear from one of themselves.


Enter SERVANT drunk. MARLOW. You, Jeremy! Come forward, sirrah! What were my
orders? Were you not told to drink freely, and call for what you thought fit,
for the good of the house?


HARDCASTLE. ( Aside) I begin to lose my patience.


JEREMY. Please your honor, liberty and Fleet Street for ever! Though I Am but a
servant, I Am as good as another man. I Will drink for no man before supper, sir,
dammy! Good liquor will sit upon a good supper, but a good supper will not sit
upon -- hiccup -- upon my conscience, sir.


MARLOW. You see, my old friend, the fellow is as drunk as he can possibly be.
I don't know what you would have more, unless you would have the poor devil soused in a
beer-barrel.


HARDCASTLE. Zounds! he will drive me distracted if I contain myself any longer.
Mr. Marlow. Sir; I have submitted to your insolence for more than four hours,
and I see no likelihood of its coming to an end. I Am now resolved to be master
here, sir, and I desire that you and your drunken pack may leave my house
directly.


MARLOW. Leave your house! -- Sure you jest, my good friend? What, when I Am
doing what I can to please you.


HARDCASTLE. I tell you, sir, you don't please me; so I desire you will leave my
house.


MARLOW. Sure you cannot be serious? At this time o'night, and such a night.
You only mean to banter me?


HARDCASTLE. I tell you, sir, I Am serious; and, now that my passions are
rouzed, I say this house is mine, sir; this house is mine, and I command you to
leave it directly.


MARLOW. Ha! ha! ha! A puddle in a storm. I shall not stir a step, I assure you. (
In a serious tone) This, your house, fellow! It Is my house. This is my house.
Mine, while I choose to stay. What right have you to bid me leave this house,
sir? I never met with such impudence, curse me, never in my whole life before.


HARDCASTLE. Nor I, confound me if ever I did. To come to my house, to call for
what he likes, to turn me out of my own chair, to insult the family, to order
his servants to get drunk, and then to tell me This house is mine, sir. By all
that is impudent it makes me laugh. Ha! ha! ha! Pray, sir, ( bantering) as you
take the house, what think you of taking the rest of the furniture? There Is a
pair of silver candlesticks, and there is a fire-screen, and here is a pair of
brazen nosed bellows, perhaps you may take a fancy to them?


MARLOW. Bring me your bill, sir, bring me your bill, and let us make no more
words about it.


HARDCASTLE. There are a set of prints too. What think you of the rake's
progress for your own apartment?


MARLOW. Bring me your bill, I say; and I Will leave you and your infernal house
directly.


HARDCASTLE. Then there is a mahogony table, that you may see your own face in.


MARLOW. My bill, I say.


HARDCASTLE. I had forgot the great chair, for your own particular slumbers,
after a hearty meal.


MARLOW. Zounds! bring me my bill, I say, and let us hear no more on it.


HARDCASTLE. Young man, young man, from your father's letter to me, I was
taught to expect a well-bred modest man, as a visitor here, but now I find him
no better than a coxcomb and a bully; but he will be down here presently, and
shall hear more of it. [Exit.


MARLOW. How Is this! Sure I have not mistaken the house! Every thing looks like
an inn. The servants cry, coming. The attendance is awkward; the bar-maid too
to attend us. But she is here, and will further inform me. Whither so fast,
child. A word with you.


Enter MISS HARDCASTLE. MISS HARDCASTLE. Let it be short then. I Am in a hurry.
( Aside) I believe he begins to find out his mistake, but it is too soon quite
to undeceive him.


MARLOW. Pray, child, answer me one question. What are you, and what may your
business in this house be?


MISS HARDCASTLE. A relation of the family, sir.


MARLOW. What, a poor relation?


MISS HARDCASTLE. Yes, sir. A poor relation appointed to keep the keys, and to
see that the guests want nothing in my power to give them.


MARLOW. That is, you act as the bar-maid of this inn.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Inn. O law -- What brought that in your head? One of the best
families in the county keep an inn! Ha, ha, ha, old Mr. Hardcastle's house an
inn!


MARLOW. Mr. Hardcastle's house! Is this house Mr. Hardcastle's house, child?


MISS HARDCASTLE. Ay, sure. Whose else should it be?


MARLOW. So then all is out, and I have been damnably imposed on. O, confound my
stupid head, I shall be laughed at over the whole town. I shall be stuck up in
caricatura in all the print-shops. The Dullissimo Maccaroni. To mistake this
house of all others for an inn, and my father's old friend for an innkeeper.
What a swaggering puppy must he take me for. What a silly puppy do I find
myself. There again, may I be hanged, my dear, but I mistook you for the
bar-maid.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Dear me! dear me! I Am sure there is nothing in my behavior to
put me upon a level with one of that stamp.


MARLOW. Nothing, my dear, nothing. But I was in for a list of blunders, and
could not help making you a subscriber. My stupidity saw every thing the wrong
way. I mistook your assiduity for assurance, and your simplicity for
allurement. But its over -- This house I no more show my face in.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I hope, sir, I have done nothing to disoblige you. I Am sure I
should be sorry to affront any gentleman who has been so polite, and said so
many civil things to me. I Am sure I should be sorry ( pretending to cry) if he
left the family upon my account. I Am sure I should be sorry, people said any
thing amiss, since I have no fortune but my character.


MARLOW. ( Aside) By heaven, she weeps. This is the first mark of tenderness I
ever had from a modest woman, and it touches me. ( To her) Excuse me, my lovely
girl, you are the only part of the family I leave with reluctance. But to be
plain with you, the difference of our birth, fortune and education, make an
honorable connection impossible; and I can never harbor a thought of seducing
simplicity that trusted in my honor, of bringing ruin upon one, whose only
fault was being too lovely.


MISS HARDCASTLE. ( Aside) Generous man! I now begin to admire him. ( To him)
But I Am sure my family is as good as miss Hardcastle's, and though I Am poor,
that is no great misfortune to a contented mind, and, until this moment, I never
thought that it was bad to want fortune.


MARLOW. And why now, my pretty simplicity?


MISS HARDCASTLE. Because it puts me at a distance from one, that if I had a
thousand pound I would give it all to.


MARLOW. ( Aside) This simplicity bewitches me, so that if I stay I Am undone. I
must make one bold effort, and leave her. ( To her) Your partiality in my
favor, my dear, touches me most sensibly, and were I to live for myself alone,
I could easily six my choice. But I owe too much to the opinion of the world,
too much to the authority of a father, so that -- I can scarcely speak it -- it
affects me. Farewell. [Exit.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I never knew half his merit till now. He shall not go, if I
have power or art to detain him. I Will still preserve the character in which I
stooped to conquer, but will undeceive my papa, who, perhaps, may laugh him out
of his resolution. [Exit.


Enter TONY, MISS NEVILLE. TONY. Ay, you may steal for yourselves the next
time. I have done my duty. She has got the jewels again, that is a sure thing;
but she believes it was all a mistake of the servants.


MISS NEVILLE. But, my dear cousin, sure you will not forsake us in this distress.
If she in the least suspects that I am going off, I shall certainly be locked
up, or sent to my aunt Pedigree's, which is ten times worse.


TONY. To be sure, aunts of all kinds are damned bad things. But what can I do?
I have got you a pair of horses that will fly like Whistlejacket, and I Am sure
you cannot say but I have courted you nicely before her face. Here she comes, we
must court a bit or two more, for fear she should suspect us. [They retire, and
seem to fondle.


Enter MRS. HARDCASTLE. MRS. HARDCASTLE. Well, I was greatly fluttered, to be
sure. But my son tells me it was all a mistake of the servants. I shall not be
easy, however, till they are fairly married, and then let her keep her own
fortune. But what do I see! fondling together, as I Am alive. I never saw Tony
so sprightly before. Ah! have I caught you, my pretty doves! What, billing,
exchanging stolen glances, and broken murmurs. Ah!


TONY. As for murmurs, mother, we grumble a little now and then, to be sure.
But there is no love lost between us.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. A mere sprinkling, Tony, upon the flame, only to make it burn
brighter.


MISS NEVILLE. Cousin Tony promises to give us more of his company at home.
Indeed, he shall not leave us any more. It will not leave us cousin Tony, will it?


TONY. O! it is a pretty creature. No, I Would sooner leave my horse in a pound,
than leave you when you smile upon one so. Your laugh makes you so becoming.


MISS NEVILLE. Agreeable cousin! Who can help admiring that natural humor,
that pleasant, broad, red, thoughtless, ( patting his cheek) ah! it is a bold
face.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Pretty innocence.


TONY. I Am sure I always loved cousin Con's hazle eyes, and her pretty long
fingers, that she twists this way and that, over the haspicholls, like a parcel
of bobbins.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Ah, he would charm the bird from the tree. I was never so
happy before. My boy takes after his father, poor Mr. Lumpkin, exactly. The
jewels, my dear Con, shall be yours incontinently. You shall have them. Is Not
he a sweet boy; my dear? You shall be married tomorrow, and we'll put off the
rest of his education, like Dr. Drowsy's sermons, to a fitter opportunity.


Enter DIGGORY. DIGGORY. Where Is the 'squire? I have got a letter for your
worship.


TONY. Give it to my mamma. She reads all my letters first.


DIGGORY. I had orders to deliver it into your own hands.


TONY. Who does it come from?


DIGGORY. Your worship mun ask that of the letter itself.


TONY. I could wish to know, though ( turning the letter, and gazing on it.)


MISS NEVILLE. ( Aside) Undone, undone. A letter to him from Hastings. I know
the hand. If my aunt sees it, we are ruined for ever. I Will keep her employed a
little if I can. ( To Mrs. Hardcastle) But I have not told you, madam, of my
cousin's smart answer just now to Mr. Marlow. We so laughed -- You must know,
madam -- This way a little, for he must not hear us. [They confer.


TONY. ( Still gazing) A damned cramp piece of penmanship, as ever I saw in my
life. I can read your print hand very well. But here there are such handles,
and shanks, and dashes, that one can scarce tell the head from the tail. "To
Anthony Lumpkin, esquire." It Is very odd, I can read the outside of my letters,
where my own name is, well enough. But when I come to open it, it is all --
buzz. That Is hard, very hard; for the inside of the letter is always the cream
of the correspondence.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Ha! ha! ha! Very well, very well. And so my son was too hard
for the philosopher.


MISS NEVILLE. Yes, madam; but you must hear the rest, madam. A little more
this way, or he may hear us. You Will hear how he puzzled him again.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. He seems strangely puzzled now himself, methinks.


TONY. ( Still gazing) A damned up and down hand, as if (...) was disguised in
liquor. ( Reading) Dear sir. Ay, that is that. Then there is an M, and a T, and
an S, but whether the next be an izzard or an R, confound me, I cannot tell.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. What Is that, my dear. Can I give you any assistance?


MISS NEVILLE. Pray, aunt, let me read it. No body reads a cramp hand better
than I. ( twitching the letter from her) Do you know who it is from?


TONY. Cannot tell, except from Dick Ginger the feeder.


MISS NEVILLE. Ay, so it is. ( pretending to read) Dear 'squire, hoping that
you're in health, as I am at this present. The gentlemen of the Shake-bag club
has cut the gentlemen of Goose-green quite out of feather. The odds -- um --
odd battle -- um -- long fighting -- um -- here, here, it is all about cocks,
and fighting; it is of no consequence, here, put it up, put it up. [Thrusting
the crumpled letter upon him.


TONY. But I tell you, miss, it is of all the consequence in the world. I would
not lose the rest of it for a guinea. Here, mother, do you make it out. Of no
consequence! [ Giving Mrs. Hardcastle the letter.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. How Is this! ( reads) Dear 'squire, I Am now waiting for miss
Neville, with a post-chaise and pair, at the bottom of the garden, but I find
my horses yet unable to perform the journey. I expect you will assist us with a
pair of fresh horses, as you promised. Dispatch is necessary, as the hag (ay
the hag) your mother, will otherwise suspect us. Yours, Hastings. Grant me
patience. I shall run distracted. My rage choaks me.


MISS NEVILLE. I hope, madam, you will suspend your resentment for a few moments,
and not impute to me any impertinence, or sinister design, that belongs to
another.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. ( Curtesying very low.) Fine spoken, madam, you are most
miraculously polite and engaging, and quite the very pink of curtesy and
circumspection, madam. ( Changing her tone) And you, you great ill-fashioned
oaf, with scarce sense enough to keep your mouth shut. Were you too joined
against me? But I Will defeat all your plots in a moment. As for you, madam,
since you have got a pair of fresh horses ready, it would be cruel to
disappoint them. So, if you please, instead of running away with your spark,
prepare, this very moment, to run off with me. Your old aunt Pedigree will keep
you secure, I Will warrant me. You too, sir, may mount your horse, and guard us
upon the way. Here, Thomas, Roger, Diggory, I Will show you, that I wish you
better than you do yourselves. [Exit.


MISS NEVILLE. So now I Am completely ruined.


TONY. Ay, that is a sure thing.


MISS NEVILLE. What better could be expected from being connected with such a
stupid fool, and after all the nods and signs I made him.


TONY. By the laws, miss, it was your own cleverness, and not my stupidity,
that did your business. You were so nice and so busy with your Shake-bags and
Goose-greens, that I thought you could never be making believe.


Enter HASTINGS. HASTINGS. So, sir, I find by my servant, that you have shown
my letter, and betrayed us. Was this well done, young gentleman.


TONY. Here Is another. Ask miss there who betrayed you. Ecod, it was her doing,
not mine.


Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. So I have been finely used here among you. Rendered
contemptible, driven into ill manners, despised, insulted, laughed at.


TONY. Here Is another. We shall have old Bedlam broke loose presently.


MISS NEVILLE. And there, sir, is the gentleman to whom we all owe every
obligation.


MARLOW. What can I say to him, a mere boy, an idiot, whose ignorance and age
are a protection.


HASTINGS. A poor contemptible booby, that would but disgrace correction.


MISS NEVILLE. Yet with cunning and malice enough to make himself merry with
all our embarrassments.


HASTINGS. An insensible cub.


MARLOW. Replete with tricks and mischief.


TONY. Baw! damme, but I Will fight you both one after the other, -- with baskets.


MARLOW. As for him, he is below resentment. But your conduct, Mr. Hastings,
requires an explanation. You knew of my mistakes, yet would not undeceive me.


HASTINGS. Tortured as I am with my own disappointments, is this a time for
explanations. It is not friendly, Mr. Marlow.


MARLOW. But, sir --


MISS NEVILLE. Mr. Marlow, we never kept on your mistake, till it was too late
to undeceive you. Be pacified.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. My mistress desires you will get ready immediately,
madam. The horses are putting to. Your hat and things are in the next room. We
are to go thirty miles before morning. [Exit servant.


MISS NEVILLE. Well, well; I Will come presently.


MARLOW. ( To Hastings) Was it well done, sir, to assist in rendering me
ridiculous. To hang me out for the scorn of all my acquaintance. Depend upon
it, sir, I shall expect an explanation.


HASTINGS. Was it well done, sir, if you're upon that subject, to deliver what
I entrusted to yourself, to the care of another, sir.


MISS NEVILLE. Mr. Hastings. Mr. Marlow. Why will you increase my distress by
this groundless dispute. I implore, I entreat you --


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Your cloak, madam. My mistress is impatient. Exit
Servant.


MISS NEVILLE. I come. Pray be pacified. If I leave you thus, I shall die with
apprehension.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Your fan, muff, and gloves, madam. The horses are
waiting.


MISS NEVILLE. O Mr. Marlow! if you knew what a scene of constraint and
ill nature lies before me, I Am sure it would convert your resentment into pity.


MARLOW. I Am so distracted with a variety of passions, that I don't know what I
do. Forgive me, madam. George, forgive me. You know my hasty temper, and should
not exasperate it.


HASTINGS. The torture of my situation is my only excuse.


MISS NEVILLE. Well, my dear Hastings, if you have that esteem for me that I
think, that I am sure you have, your constancy for three years will but
increase the happiness of our future connection. If --


MRS. HARDCASTLE. ( Within) Miss Neville. Constance, why Constance, I say.


MISS NEVILLE. I Am coming. Well, constancy. Remember, constancy is the word.
[Exit.


HASTINGS. My heart! How can I support this. To be so near happiness, and such
happiness.


MARLOW. ( To Tony) You see now, young gentleman, the effects of your folly.
What might be amusement to you, is here disappointment, and even distress.


TONY. ( From a reverie) Ecod, I have hit it. It Is here. Your hands. Yours and
yours, my poor Sulky. My boots there, ho. Meet me two hours hence at the bottom
of the garden; and if you don't find Tony Lumpkin a more good-natured fellow
than you thought for, I Will give you leave to take my best horse, and Bet
Bouncer into the bargain. Come along. My boots, ho. [Exeunt.


ACT THE FIFTH.
SCENE continues. Enter HASTINGS and SERVANT. HASTINGS. YOU saw the old lady
and miss Neville drive off, you say.


SERVANT. Yes, your honor. They went off in a post coach, and the young
'squire went on horseback. They Are thirty miles off by this time.


HASTINGS. Then all my hopes are over.


SERVANT. Yes, sir. Old sir Charles is arrived. He and the old gentleman of the
house have been laughing at Mr. Marlow's mistake this half hour. They are
coming this way.


HASTINGS. Then I must not be seen. So now to my fruitless appointment at the
bottom of the garden. This is about the time. [Exit.


Enter SIR CHARLES and HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. Ha! ha! ha! The peremptory tone
in which he sent forth his sublime commands.


SIR CHARLES. And the reserve with which I suppose he treated all your advances.


HARDCASTLE. And yet he might have seen something in me above a common
innkeeper, too.


SIR CHARLES. Yes, Dick, but he mistook you for an uncommon innkeeper, ha! ha!
ha!


HARDCASTLE. Well, I Am in too good spirits to think of any thing but joy. Yes,
my dear friend, this union of our families will make our personal friendships
hereditary; and though my daughter's fortune is but small --


SIR CHARLES. Why, Dick, will you talk of fortune to me. My son is possessed of
more than a competence already, and can want nothing but a good and virtuous
girl to share his happiness and increase it. If they like each other, as you
say they do --


HARDCASTLE. If, man! I tell you they do like each other. My daughter as good
as told me so.


SIR CHARLES. But girls are apt to flatter themselves, you know.


HARDCASTLE. I saw him grasp her hand in the warmest manner myself; and here he
comes to put you out of your ifs, I warrant him.


Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. I come, sir, once more, to ask pardon for my strange
conduct. I can scarce reflect on my insolence without confusion.


HARDCASTLE. Tut, boy, a trifle. You take it too gravely. An hour or two's
laughing with my daughter will set all to rights again. She Will never like you
the worse for it.


MARLOW. Sir, I shall be always proud of her approbation.


HARDCASTLE. Approbation is but a cold word, Mr. Marlow; if I am not deceived,
you have something more than approbation thereabouts. You take me.


MARLOW. Really, sir, I have not that happiness.


HARDCASTLE. Come, boy, I Am an old fellow, and know what is what, as well as you
that are younger. I know what has past between you; but mum.


MARLOW. Sure, sir, nothing has past between us but the most profound respect
on my side, and the most distant reserve on hers. You don't think, sir, that my
impudence has been past upon all the rest of the family.


HARDCASTLE Impudence! No, I don't say that -- not quite impudence -- though
girls like to be played with, and and rumpled a little too sometimes. But she
has told no tales, I assure you.


MARLOW. I never gave her the slightest cause.


HARDCASTLE. Well, well, I like modesty in its place well enough. But this is
over-acting, young gentleman. You may be open. Your father and I will like you
the better for it.


MARLOW. May I die, sir, if I ever --


HARDCASTLE. I tell you, she don't dislike you; and as I Am sure you like her --


MARLOW. Dear sir -- I protest, sir --


HARDCASTLE. I see no reason why you should not be joined as fast as the parson
can tie you.


MARLOW. But hear me, sir --


HARDCASTLE. Your father approves the match, I admire it, every moment's delay
will be doing mischief, so --


MARLOW. But why will not you hear me? By all that is just and true, I never gave
miss Hardcastle the slightest mark of my attachment, or even the most distant
hint to suspect me of affection. We had but one interview, and that was formal,
modest and uninteresting.


HARDCASTLE. ( Aside) This fellow's formal modest impudence is beyond bearing.


SIR CHARLES. And you never grasped her hand, or made any protestations!


MARLOW. As heaven is my witness, I came down in obedience to your commands. I
saw the lady without emotion, and parted without reluctance. I hope you will
exact no further proofs of my duty, nor prevent me from leaving a house in
which I suffer so many mortifications. [Exit.


SIR CHARLES. I Am astonished at the air of sincerity with which he parted.


HARDCASTLE. And I Am astonished at the deliberate intrepidity of his assurance.


SIR CHARLES. I dare pledge my life and honor upon his truth.


HARDCASTLE. Here comes my daughter, and I would stake my happiness upon her
veracity.


Enter MISS HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. Kate, come hither, child. Answer us
sincerely, and without reserve; has Mr. Marlow made you any professions of love
and affection?


MISS HARDCASTLE. The question is very abrupt, sir! But since you require
unreserved sincerity, I think he has.


HARDCASTLE. ( To sir Charles) You see.


SIR CHARLES. And pray, madam, have you and my son had more than one interview?


MISS HARDCASTLE. Yes, sir, several.


HARDCASTLE. ( To sir Charles) You see.


SIR CHARLES. But did he profess any attachment?


MISS HARDCASTLE. A lasting one.


SIR CHARLES. Did he talk of love?


MISS HARDCASTLE. Much, sir.


SIR CHARLES. Amazing! And all this formally?


MISS HARDCASTLE. Formally.


HARDCASTLE. Now, my friend, I hope you are satisfied.


SIR CHARLES. And how did he behave, madam?


MISS HARDCASTLE. As most professed admirers do. Said some civil things of my
face, talked much of his want of merit, and the greatness of mine; mentioned
his heart, gave a short tragedy speech, and ended with pretended rapture.


SIR CHARLES. Now I Am perfectly convinced, indeed. I know his conversation
among women to be modest and submissive. This forward canting ranting manner by
no means describes him, and, I am confident, he never sat for the picture.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Then what, sir, if I should convince you to your face of my
sincerity? If you and my papa, in about half an hour, will place yourselves
behind that screen, you shall hear him declare his passion to me in person.


SIR CHARLES. Agreed. And if I find him what you describe, all my happiness in
him must have an end. [Exit.


MISS HARDCASTLE. And if you don't find him what I describe -- I fear my
happiness must never have a beginning. [Exeunt.


SCENE changes to the back of the garden. Enter HASTINGS. HASTINGS. What an
idiot am I, to wait here for a fellow, who probably takes a delight in
mortifying me. He never intended to be punctual, and I Will wait no longer. What
do I see. It is he, and perhaps with news of my Constance.


Enter TONY, booted and spattered. HASTINGS. My honest 'squire! I now find you
a man of your word. This looks like friendship.


TONY. Ay, I Am your friend, and the best friend you have in the world, if you
knew but all. This riding by night, by the bye, is cursedly tiresome. It has
shook me worse than the basket of a stagecoach.


HASTINGS. But how? Where did you leave your fellow travelers? Are they in
safety? Are they housed?


TONY. Five and twenty miles in two hours and a half is no such bad driving.
The poor beasts have smoaked for it: rabbet me, but I Would rather ride forty miles
after a fox, than ten with such varment.


HASTINGS. Well, but where have you left the ladies? I die with impatience.


TONY. Left them! Why where should I leave them, but where I found them?


HASTINGS. This is a riddle.


TONY. Riddle me this then. What Is that goes round the house, and round the
house, and never touches the house?


HASTINGS. I Am still astray.


TONY. Why that is it, mon. I have led them astray. By jingo, there is not a pond
or slough within five miles of the place but they can tell the taste of.


HASTINGS. Ha, ha, ha, I understand; you took them in a round, while they
supposed themselves going forward. And so you have at last brought them home
again.


TONY. You shall hear. I first took them down Feather-bed-lane, where we stuck
fast in the mud. I then rattled them crack over the stones of Up-anddown Hill
-- I then introduced them to the gibbet on Heavy-tree Heath, and from that,
with a circumbendibus, I fairly lodged them in the horse-pond at the bottom of
the garden.


HASTINGS. But no accident, I hope.


TONY. No, no. Only mother is confoundedly frightened. She thinks herself forty
miles off. She Is sick of the journey, and the cattle can scarce crawl. So if
your own horses be ready, you may whip off with cousin, and I Will be bound that
no soul here can budge a foot to follow you.


HASTINGS. My dear friend, how can I be grateful?


TONY. Ay, now its dear friend, noble 'squire. Just now, it was all idiot, cub,
and run me through the guts. Damn your way of fighting, I say. After we take a
knock in this part of the country, we kiss and be friends. But if you had run
me through the guts, then I should be dead, and you might go kiss the hangman.


HASTINGS. The rebuke is just. But I must hasten to relieve miss Neville; if
you keep the old lady employed, I promise to take care of the young one. [ Exit
Hastings.


TONY. Never fear me. Here she comes. Vanish. She Is got from the pond, and
draggled up to the waist like a mermaid.


Enter MRS. HARDCASTLE. MRS. HARDCASTLE. Oh, Tony, I Am killed. Shook. Battered
to death. I shall never survive it. That last jolt that laid us against the
quickset hedge has done my business.


TONY. Alack, mamma, it was all your own fault. You would be for running away
by night, without knowing one inch of the way.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. I wish we were at home again. I never met so many accidents
in so short a journey. Drenched in the mud, overturned in a ditch, stuck fast
in a slough, jolted to a jelly, and at last to lose our way. Whereabouts do you
think we are, Tony?


TONY. By my guess we should come upon Crackskull common, about forty miles
from home.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. O lud! O lud! The most notorious spot in all the country. We
only want a robbery to make a complete night on it.


TONY. Don't be afraid, mamma, don't be afraid. Two of the five that kept here
are hanged, and the other three may not find us. Don't be afraid. Is that a man
that is galloping behind us? No; it is only a tree. Don't be afraid.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. The fright will certainly kill me.


TONY. Do you see any thing like a black hat moving behind the thicket?


MRS. HARDCASTLE. O death!


TONY. No, it is only a cow. Don't be afraid, mamma; don't be afraid.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. As I Am alive, Tony, I see a man coming toward us. Ah! I Am
sure on it. If he perceives us we are undone.


TONY. ( Aside) Father-in-law, by all that is unlucky, come to take one of his
night walks. ( To her) Ah, it is a highwayman, with pistils as long as my arm. A
damned ill-looking fellow.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Good heaven defend us! He approaches.


TONY Do you hide yourself in that thicket, and leave me to manage him. If
there be any danger I Will cough and cry hem. When I cough be sure to keep close.
[ Mrs. Hardcastle hides behind a tree in the back scene.


Enter HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. I Am mistaken, or I heard voices of people in
want of help. Oh, Tony, is that you. I did not expect you so soon back. Are
your mother and her charge in safety?


TONY. Very safe, sir, at my aunt Pedigree's. Hem.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. ( From behind) Ah death! I find there is danger.


HARDCASTLE. Forty miles in three hours; sure, that is too much, my youngster.


TONY. Stout horses and willing minds make short journies, as they say. Hem.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. ( From behind) Sure he will do the dear boy no harm.


HARDCASTLE. But I heard a voice here; I should be glad to know from whence it
came?


TONY. It was I, sir, talking to myself, sir. I was saying that forty miles in
four hours was very good going. Hem. As to be sure it was. Hem. I have got a
sort of cold by being out in the air. We'll go in, if you please. Hem.


HARDCASTLE. But if you talked to yourself, you did not answer yourself. I am
certain I heard two voices, and am resolved ( raising his voice) to find the
other out.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. ( From behind) Oh! he is coming to find me out. Oh!


TONY. What need you go, sir, if I tell you. Hem. I Will lay down my life for the
truth -- hem -- I Will tell you all, sir. [detaining him.


HARDCASTLE. I tell you, I will not be detained. I insist on seeing. It Is in
vain to expect I Will believe you.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. ( Running forward from behind) O lud, he will murder my poor
boy, my darling. Here, good gentleman, whet your rage upon me. Take my money,
my life, but spare that young gentleman, spare my child, if you have any mercy.


HARDCASTLE. My wife! as I Am a christian. From whence can she come, or what
does she mean!


MRS. HARDCASTLE. ( Kneeling) Take compassion on us, good Mr. Highwayman. Take
our money, our watches, all we have, but spare our lives. We will never bring
you to justice, indeed we will not, good Mr. Highwayman.


HARDCASTLE. I believe the woman's out of her senses. What, Dorothy, don't you
know me?


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Mr. Hardcastle, as I Am alive! My fears blinded me. But who,
my dear, could have expected to meet you here, in this frightful place, so far
from home. What has brought you to follow us?


HARDCASTLE. Sure, Dorothy, you have not lost your wits. So far from home, when
you are within forty yards of your own door. ( To him) This is one of your old
tricks, you graceless rogue you. ( To her) Don't you know the gate, and the
mulberry-tree; and don't you remember the horsepond, my dear?


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Yes, I shall remember the horsepond as long as I live; I have
caught my death in it. ( To Tony) And is it to you, you graceless varlet, I owe
all this. I Will teach you to abuse your mother, I will.


TONY. Ecod, mother, all the parish says you have spoiled me, and so you may
take the fruits on it.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. I Will spoil you, I will. [Follows him off the stage. Exit.


HARDCASTLE. There Is morality, however, in his reply. [Exit.


Enter HASTINGS and MISS NEVILLE. HASTINGS. My dear Constance, why will you
deliberate thus? If we delay a moment, all is lost for ever. Pluck up a little
resolution, and we shall soon be out of the reach of her malignity.


MISS NEVILLE. I find it impossible. My spirits are so sunk with the agitations
I have suffered, that I am unable to face any new danger. Two or three years
patience will at last crown us with happiness.


HASTINGS. Such a tedious delay is worse than inconstancy. Let us fly, my
charmer. Let us date our happiness from this very moment. Perish fortune. Love
and content will increase what we possess beyond a monarch's revenue. Let me
prevail.


MISS NEVILLE. No, Mr. Hastings; no. Prudence once more comes to my relief, and
I will obey its dictates. In the moment of passion, fortune may be despised,
but it ever produces a lasting repentance. I Am resolved to apply to Mr.
Hardcastle's compassion and justice for redress.


HASTINGS. But though he had the will, he has not the power to relieve you.


MISS NEVILLE. But he has influence, and upon that I am resolved to rely.


HASTINGS. I have no hopes. But since you persist, I must reluctantly obey you.
[Exeunt.


SCENE changes. Enter SIR CHARLES and MISS HARDCASTLE. SIR CHARLES. What a
situation am I in. If what you say appears, I shall then find a guilty son. If
what he says be true, I shall then lose one, that, of all others, I most wished
for a daughter.


MISS HARDCASTLE. I am proud of your approbation, and to show I merit it, if
you place yourselves as I directed, you shall hear his explicit declaration.
But he comes.


SIR CHARLES. I Will to your father, and keep him to the appointment. [Exit sir
Charles.


Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. Though prepared for setting out, I come once more to take
leave, nor did I, till this moment, know the pain I feel in the separation.


MISS HARDCASTLE. ( In her own natural manner) I believe these sufferings
cannot be very great, sir, which you can so easily remove. A day or two longer,
perhaps, might lessen your uneasiness, by showing the little value of what you
now think proper to regret.


MARLOW. ( Aside) This girl every moment improves upon me. ( To her) It must
not be, madam. I have already trifled too long with my heart. My very pride
begins to submit to my passion. The disparity of education and fortune, the
anger of a parent, and the contempt of my equals, begin to lose their weight;
and nothing can restore me to myself, but this painful effort of resolution.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Then go, sir. I Will urge nothing more to detain you. Though my
family be as good as hers you came down to visit, and my education, I hope, not
inferior, what are these advantages without equal affluence? I must remain
contented with the slight approbation of imputed merit; I must have only the
mockery of your addresses, while all your serious aims are fixed on fortune.


Enter HARDCASTLE and SIR CHARLES from behind. SIR CHARLES. Here, behind this
screen.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, ay, make no noise. I Will engage my Kate covers him with
confusion at last.


MARLOW. By heavens, madam, fortune was ever my smallest consideration. Your
beauty at first caught my eye; for who could see that without emotion. But
every moment that I converse with you, steals in some new grace, heightens the
picture, and gives it stronger expression. What at first seemed rustic
plainness, now appears refined simplicity. What seemed forward assurance, now
strikes me as the result of courageous innocence, and conscious virtue.


SIR CHARLES. What can it mean! He amazes me!


HARDCASTLE. I told you how it would be. Hush!


MARLOW. I am now determined to stay, madam, and I have too good an opinion of
my father's discernment, when he sees you, to doubt his approbation.


MISS HARDCASTLE. No, Mr. Marlow, I will not, cannot detain you. Do you think I
could suffer a connection, in which there is the smallest room for repentance?
Do you think I would take the mean advantage of a transient passion, to load
you with confusion? Do you think I could ever relish that happiness, which was
acquired by lessening yours?


MARLOW. By all that is good, I can have no happiness but what is in your power
to grant me. Nor shall I ever feel repentance, but in not having seen your
merits before. I will stay, even contrary to your wishes; and though you should
persist to shun me, I will make my respectful assiduities atone for the levity
of my past conduct.


MISS HARDCASTLE. Sir, I must entreat you will desist. As our acquaintance began,
so let it end, in indifference. I might have given an hour or two to levity;
but seriously, Mr. Marlow, do you think I could ever submit to a connection,
where I must appear mercenary, and you imprudent? Do you think I could ever
catch at the confident addresses of a secure admirer?


MARLOW. ( Kneeling) Does this look like security. Does this look like
confidence. No, madam, every moment that shows me your merit, only serves to
increase my diffidence and confusion. Here let me continue --


SIR CHARLES. I can hold it no longer. Charles, Charles, how have thou deceived
me! Is this your indifference, your uninteresting conversation!


HARDCASTLE. Your cold contempt; your formal interview. What have you to say
now?


MARLOW. That I Am all amazement! What can it mean!


HARDCASTLE. It means that you can say and unsay things at pleasure. That you
can address a lady in private, and deny it in public; that you have one story
for us, and another for my daughter.


MARLOW. Daughter! -- this lady your daughter!


HARDCASTLE. Yes, sir, my only daughter. My Kate, whose else should she be?


MARLOW. Oh, the devil!


MISS HARDCASTLE. Yes, sir, that very identical tall squinting lady you were
pleased to take me for, ( curtesying) she that you addressed as the mild,
modest, sentimental man of gravity, and the bold forward agreeable Rattle of
the ladies club; ha, ha, ha.


MARLOW. Zounds, there is no bearing this; it is worse than death.


MISS HARDCASTLE. In which of your characters, sir, will you give us leave to
address you. As the faultering gentleman, with looks on the ground, that speaks
just to be heard, and hates hypocrisy; or the loud confident creature, that
keeps it up with Mrs. Mantrap, and old miss Biddy Buckskin, till three in the
morning; ha, ha, ha.


MARLOW. O, curse on my noisy head. I never attempted to be impudent yet, that
I was not taken down. I must be gone.


HARDCASTLE. By the hand of my body, but you shall not. I see it was all a
mistake, and I am rejoiced to find it. You shall not, sir, I tell you. I know
she will forgive you. Will Not you forgive him, Kate. We'll all forgive you. Take
courage, man. [They retire, she tormenting him to the back scene.


Enter MRS. HARDCASTLE, TONY. MRS. HARDCASTLE. So, so, they are gone off. Let
them go, I care not.


HARDCASTLE. Who gone?


MRS. HARDCASTLE. My dutiful niece and her gentleman, Mr. Hastings, from town.
He who came down with our modest visitor here.


SIR CHARLES. Who, my honest George Hastings! As worthy a fellow as lives, and
the girl could not have made a more prudent choice.


HARDCASTLE. Then, by the hand of my body, I Am proud of the connection.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Well, if he has taken away the lady, he has not taken her
fortune, that remains in this family to console us for her loss.


HARDCASTLE. Sure Dorothy you would not be so mercenary?


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Ay, that is my affair, not yours. But you know if your son,
when of age, refuses to marry his cousin, her whole fortune is then at her own
disposal.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, but he is not of age, and she has not thought proper to wait
for his refusal.


Enter HASTINGS and MISS NEVILLE. MRS. HARDCASTLE. ( Aside) What, returned so
soon! I begin not to like it.


HASTINGS. ( To Hardcastle) For my late attempt to fly off with your niece, let
my present confusion be my punishment. We are now come back, to appeal from
your justice to your humanity. By her father's consent, I first paid her my
addresses, and our passions were first founded in duty.


MISS NEVILLE. Since his death, I have been obliged to stoop to dissimulation
to avoid oppression. In an hour of levity, I was ready even to give up my
fortune to secure my choice. But I Am now recovered from the delusion, and hope
from your tenderness what is denied me from a nearer connection.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. Pshaw, pshaw, this is all but the whining end of a modern
novel.


HARDCASTLE. Be it what it will, I Am glad they are come back to reclaim their
due. Come hither, Tony boy. Do you refuse this lady's hand whom I now offer you?


TONY. What signifies my refusing. You know I cannot refuse her till I Am of age,
father.


HARDCASTLE. While I thought concealing your age, boy, was likely to conduce to
your improvement, I concurred with your mother's desire to keep it secret. But
since I find she turns it to a wrong use, I must now declare, you have been of
age these three months.


TONY. Of age! Am I of age, father?


HARDCASTLE. Above three months.


TONY. Then you will see the first use I Will make of my liberty. ( taking miss
Neville's hand) Witness all men by these presents, that I, Anthony Lumpkin,
esquire, of BLANK place, refuse you, Constantia Neville, spinster, of no place
at all, for my true and lawful wife. So Constance Neville may marry whom she
pleases, and Tony Lumpkin is his own man again.


SIR CHARLES. O brave 'squire.


HASTINGS. My worthy friend.


MRS. HARDCASTLE. My undutiful offspring.


MARLOW. Joy, my dear George, I give you joy sincerely. And could I prevail
upon my little tyrant here to be less arbitrary, I should be the happiest man
alive, if you would return me the favor.


HASTINGS. ( To miss Hardcastle) Come, madam, you are now driven to the very
last scene of all your contrivances. I know you like him, I Am sure he loves
you, and you must and shall have him.


HARDCASTLE. ( Joining their hunds) And I say so too. And, Mr. Marlow, if she
makes as good a wife as she has a daughter, I don't believe you will ever repent
your bargain. So now to supper. Tomorrow we shall gather all the poor of the
parish about us, and the mistakes of the night shall be crowned with a merry
morning; so, boy, take her; and as you have been mistaken in the mistress, my
wish is, that you may never be mistaken in the wife.


EPILOGUE.
By DR. GOLDSMITH.
WELL, having stooped to conquer with success,
And gained a husband without aid from dress,
Still as a bar-maid, I could wish it too,
As I have conquered him to conquer you:
And let me say, for all your resolution,
That pretty bar-maids have done execution.
Our life is all a play, composed to please,
"We have our exits and our entrances."
The first act shows the simple country maid,
Harmless and young, of every thing afraid;
Blushes when hired, and with unmeaning action,
"I hopes as how to give you satisfaction."
Her second act displays a livelier scene, --
The unblushing bar-maid of a country inn,
Who whisks about the house, at market caters,
Talks loud, coquets the guests, and scolds the waiters.
Next the scene shifts to town, and there she soars,
The chop-house toast of ogling connoisieurs.
On 'squires and cits she there displays her arts,
And on the gridiron broils her lover's hearts --
And as she smiles, her triumphs to complete,
Even common councilmen forget to eat.
The fourth act shows her wedded to the 'squire,
And madam now begins to hold it higher;
Pretends to taste, at Operas cries caro,
And quits her Nancy Dawson, for Che Faro.
Doats upon dancing, and in all her pride,
Swims round the room, the Heinel of Cheapside:
Ogles and leers with artificial skill,
Till having lost in age the power to kill,
She sits all night at cards, and ogles at spadille.
Such, through our lives, the eventful history --
The fifth and last act still remains for me.
The bar-maid now for your protection prays,
Turns female Barrister, and pleads for Bays.
EPILOGUE
TO BE SPOKEN IN THE CHARACTER OF TONY LUMPKIN. This came too late to be spoken.

BY J. CRADDOCK, ESQUIRE.
WELL -- now all is ended -- and my comrades gone,
Pray what becomes of mother's nonly son?
A hopeful blade! -- in town I Will fix my station,
And try to make a bluster in the nation.
As for my cousin Neville, I renounce her,
Off -- in a crack -- I Will carry big Bett Bouncer.
Why should not I in the great world appear?
I soon shall have a thousand pounds a year;
No matter what a man may here inherit,
In London -- 'gad, they have some regard to spirit.
I see the horses prancing up the streets,
And big Bett Bouncer, bobs to all she meets;
Then hoikes to jiggs and pastimes every night --
Not to the plays -- they say it a'n't polite;
To Sadler's-Wells perhaps, or Operas go,
And once by chance, to the roratorio.
Thus here and there, for ever up and down,
We'll set the fashions too, to half the town;
And then at auctions -- money never regard,
Buy pictures like the great, ten pounds a yard;
Zounds, we shall make these London gentry say,
We know what is damned genteel as well as they.
FINIS.

