

La Vergne inn.

E Kirkall Sculp.
THE RESURRECTION. A POEM.

Written by Mr. ADDISON.

Venient cito Saecula, cum jam
Socius Calor ossa revisat,
Animataque Sanguine vivo
Habitacula pristina gestet.
Prud. LONDON: Printed for E. CURLL in Fleet Street. 1718. Price Six Pence.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Lines are esteemed by the best Judges to be the finest Sketch of
the Resurrection, that any Age or Language has produced: Nor do their only
Excellence consist in being an accurate Poem; but also in being an exact Copy
of the Painter's Old Fuller.
Original upon the Altar in Magdalen College; but so much improved with all the
strongest Figures and most lively Embellishments of a poetical Description,
that the Reader receives a double Satisfaction in seeing the two Sister-Arts so
useful to each other in borrowing mutual Helps, and mutual Advantages.

It is, indeed, wonderful to find in the narrow Compass of so few Pages all the
most dreadful Circumstances of that last terrible Crisis of Time: The Poem is a
beautiful and succinct Epitome of all that has or can ever be said on that
important Subject; the very Text, which the ingenious Mr. Young has so largely
and elegantly paraphrased upon in his excellent Poem on the LAST DAY.

Mr. Addison is to be distinguished through all his Performances both Latin and
English, (and in his Latin, particularly in the following one, and that on the
Peace of Riswick), by the strength of his Images, and by a forcible and
unaffected vivacity of Expression, which none of our Moderns have attained to
in so much Perfection; and which is very rarely to be met with even in any of
the Ancients since Virgil and Horace.

Having mentioned Mr. Addison, I cannot avoid congratulating my Country on his
Preferment to one of her greatest Civil Employments; nor forbear observing how
happy we are in a KING, who has shown the World that he will distribute his
Favors amongst those only, whom Merit and Virtue shall recommend to his
Service.

With what uncommon Luster must that Man appear to Posterity, who is not only
the best Writer and most candid Patron of the Age he lives in; but also the
finest Gentleman, the sincerest Friend, the most affectionate Husband, the most
accomplished Statesman, and the most exemplary Christian? Under every one of
these Views Mr. Addison gains the Esteem and Admiration even of the bitterest
Enemies to that Cause which he so warmly espouses; of the most furious
Partisans and the most prejudiced of Mankind.

I must forbear to enlarge any farther on the Character of that truly great and
good Man, lest I draw upon my self the imputation of a Flatterer, by relating
what all the World (except himself only) will allow to be the severest Truth.

I shall make no excuse for offering the following Poem to the World in an
English DRESS, and under all the Disadvantages of an imperfect Translation. I
have often read it in the Original with the greatest Pleasure and Satisfaction;
and I hope it will need no Apology to be willing to communicate so useful and
sublime an Entertainment, in the best manner I can, to those of my
Fellow Subjects who are not qualified to read it in the Latin Original.

RESURRECTIO DELINEATA Ad Altar Col. Magd. Oxon.
EGregios fuci tractus, calamique labores,
Surgentesque hominum formas, ardentiaque ora
Judicis, and simulacra modis pallentia miris
Terribilem visu pompam, Tu Carmine Musa
Pande novo, vatique sacros accende furores.
Olim Planitiem (quam nunc foecunda Colorum
Insignit Pictura) inhonesto and simplice cultu
Vestiit albedo, sed ne rima ulla priorem
Agnoscat faciem, mox fundamenta futurae
Substravit Pictor tabulae, humoremque sequacem
Per muros traxit; velamine moenia crasso
Squallent obducta, and rudioribus illita fucis.
Utque (polo nondum stellis fulgentibus apto)
Ne spatio moles immensa dehiscat inani,
Per cava coelorum, and convexa patentia late
Hinc atque hinc interfusus fluitaverat Ether;
Mox radiante novum torrebat lumine mundum
Titan, and pallens alienos mitius ignes
Cynthia vibrabat; crebris nunc consitus astris
Scintillare polus, nunc fulgor Lacteus omne
Diffluere in Coelum, longoque albescere tractu.
Sic, operis postquam lusit primordia Pictor,
Dum sordet paries, nullumque fatetur Apellem,
Cautius exercet calamos, atque art tenacem
Confundit viscum, succosque attemperat, omnes
Inducit tandem formas; apparet ubique
Muta cohors, and Picturarum vulgus inane.
Aligeris muri vacat ora suprema Ministris,
Sparsaque per totam Coelestis turba Tabellam
Raucos inspirat lituos, buccasque tumentes
Inflat, and attonitum replet clangoribus orbem.
Defunctis sonus auditur, tabulamque per imam
Picta gravescit humus, terris emergit apertis
Progenies rediviva, and plurima surgit imago.
Sic, dum foecundis Cadmus dat semina sulcis,
Terra tumet praegnans, animataque gleba laborat,
Luxuriatur ager segete spirante, calescit
Omne solum, crescitque virorum prodiga messis.
Jam pulvis varias terrae dispersa per oras,
Sive inter venas teneri concreta metalli,
Sensim diriguit, seu sese immiscuit herbis,
Explicita est; molem rursus coalescit in unam
Divisum funus, sparsos prior alligat artus
Junctura, aptanturque iterum coeuntia membra.
Hic nondum specie perfecta refurgit imago,
Vultum truncata, atque inhonesto vulnere nares
Manca, and adhuc deest informi de Corpore multum*
Paulatim in rigidum hic vita insinuata cadaver
Motu aegro vix dum redivivos erigit artus.
Inficit his horror vultus, and imagine tota
Fusa per attonitam pallet formido figuram.
Detrahe quin oculos Spectator, and ora nitentem
Si poterint perferre diem, medium inspice murum,
Qua sedet orta Deo proles, Deus ipse, sereno
Lumine persusus, radiisque inspersus acutis.
Circum tranquillae funduntur tempora flammae,
Regius ore vigor spirat, nitet Ignis ocellis,
Plurimaque effulget Majestas Numine toto.
Quantum dissimilis, quantum o! mutatus ab illo,
Qui peccata luit cruciatus non sua, vitam
Quando luctantem cunctata morte trahebat!
Sed frustra voluit defunctum Golgotha numen
Condere, dum victa fatorum lege triumphans
Nativum petiit coelum, and super aethera vectus
Despexit Lunam exiguam, Solemque minorem.
Jam latus effossum; and palmas ostendit utrasque,
Vulnusque infixum pede, clavorumque recepta
Signa, and transacti quondam vestigia ferri.
Umbrae huc felices tendunt, numerosaque coelos
Turba petunt, atque immortalia dona capessunt.
Matres, and longae nunc reddita Corpora vitae
Infantum, Juvenes, Pueri, innuptaeque Puellae
Stant circum, atque avidos jubar immortale bibentes
Affigunt oculos in Numine; Laudibus ether
Intonat, and laeto ridet Coelum omne triumpho.
His Amor impatiens conceptaque gaudia mentem
Funditus exagitant, imoque in pectore fervent.
Non aeque exultat flagranti cord Sibylla,
Hospite cum tumet incluso, and praecordia fentit
Mota Dei stimulis, nimioque calentia Phoebo.
Quis tamen ille novus perstringit lumina fulgor?
Quam Mitra effigiem distinxit Pictor, honesto
Surgentem e tumulo, Alatoque Satellite fultam?
Agnosco faciem, vultu latet alter in illo
Wainfletus, sic ille oculos, sic ora ferebat:
Eheu quando animi par invenietur Imago!
Quando alium similem virtus habitura! --
Irati innocuas securus Numinis iras
Aspicit, impavidosque in Judice figit ocellos.
Quin age, and horrentem commixtis Igne tenebris
Jam videas scenam, multo hic stagnantia suco
Moenia flagrantem liquefacto Sulphur rivum
Fingunt, and falsus tanta art accenditur Ignis,
Ut toti metuas tabulae, ne flamma per omne
Livida serpat opus, tenuesque absumpta recedat
Pictura in cineres, propriis peritura favillis.
Huc turba infelix agitur, turpisque videri
Infrendet dentes, and rugis contrahit ora.
Vindex a tergo implacabile saevit, and ensem
Fulmineum vibrans acie flagrante scelestos
Jam Paradiseis iterum depellit ab oris.
Heu! quid agat tristis? quo se coelestibus iris
Subtrahat? o! quantum vellet nunc aethere in alto
Virtutem colere! at tandem suspiria ducit
Nequicquam, and sero in lacrymas effunditur; obstant
Sorts non revocandae, and inexorabile Numen.
Quam varias aperit veneres Pictura! periti
Quot calami legimus vestigia! quanta colorum
Gratia se profert! tales non discolor Iris
Ostendat, vario cum lumine floridus imber
Rore nitet toto, and gutta scintillat in omni.
O fuci nitor, o pulchri durate Colores!
Nec, Pictura, tuae languescat gloria formae,
Dum lucem videas, qualem exprimis ipsa, supremam*
Jo. Addison,
e Coll. Magd. 1699.
THE RESURRECTION A POEM.
THE Pencil's glowing Lines and vast Command,
And Mankind rising from the Painter's Hand,
The awful Judge arrayed in beamy Light,
And Specter trembling at the dreadful sight,
To sing, O! Muse, the pious Bard inspire,
And waken in his Breast the Sacred Fire.
The hallowed Field, a bare white Wall of late,
Now clothed in gaudy Colors, shines in State;
And lest some little Interval confess
It Is ancient simple Form, and homely Dress,
The skilful Artist laid over every Part,
The first Foundation of his future Art,
Over the wide Frame his ductile Colors led,
And with thick Daubings all the Wall overspread.
As ever you spangling Orbs were hung on high,
Lest one great Blank should yawn through boundless Sky,
Through the wide heavenly Arch, and trackless Road
In Azure volumes the pure Ether flowed;
The Sun at length burns out, intensely bright,
And the pale Crescent sheds her borrowed Light;
With thick-sown Stars the radiant Pole is crowned,
Of milky Glories a long Tract is found,
Overflows, and whitens all the Heavens around.
So when the Groundwork of the Piece was laid,
Nor yet the Painter had his Art displayed,
With slower Hand, and Pencil more divine
He blends each Color, heightens every Line,
Till various Forms the breathing Picture wears,
And a mute Groupe of Images appears.
Celestial Guards the topmost height attend,
And Crowds of Angels over the Wall descend;
With their big Cheeks the deaf'ning Clarions wind,
Whose dreadful Clangors startle all Mankind;
Even the Dead hear; the Laboring Graves Conceive,
And the swollen Clod in Picture seems to heave:
Ten thousand Worlds revive to better Skies,
And from their Tombs the thronging Coarses rise.
So when famed Cadmus sowed the fruitful Field,
With pregnant Throws the quickened Furrow swelled;
From the warm Soil sprung up a warlike Train,
And Human harvests covered all the Plain.
And now from every Corner of the Earth
The scattered Dust is called to second Birth;
Whether in Mines it formed the ripening Mass,
Or humbly mixed, and flourished in the Grass:
The severed Body now unites again,
And kindred Atoms rally into Men;
The various Joints resume their ancient Seats,
And every Limb its former Task repeats.
Here an imperfect Form returns to Light,
Not half renewed, dishonest to the Sight;
Maimed of his Nose appears his blotted Face,
And scarce the Image of a Man we trace:
Here by Degrees infused, the vital Ray
Gives the first Motion to the panting Clay:
Here on the guilty Brow pale Horrors glare,
And all the Figure labors with Despair.
From Scenes like these now turn thy wondering Sight,
And, if thou can withstand such Floods of Light,
Look! where thy SAVIOR fills the middle Space;
The Godhead opening in his awful Face;
See! what mild Beams their gracious Influence shed,
And how the pointed Radiance crowns his Head!
Around his Temples lambent Glories shine,
And on his Brow sits Majesty Divine;
His Eye Balls lighten the Celestial Fires,
And every Grace to Speak the God conspires.
How changed from him, who came to be Betrayed,
And who for Man the precious Ransom paid!
Who did on Earth such arduous Toils sustain,
And patient bore an irksom Life of Pain:
But Death and Hell subdued, the Deity
Ascends Triumphant to his native Sky;
And rising far above the Ethereal Height,
The Sun and Moon diminished to his Sight.
And now to View he bare'd his bleeding side,
And his pierced Hands and Feet, in Crimson died;
Still did the Nails the recent Scars reveal,
And bloody Tracks of the transfixing Steel.
Hither in Crowds the Blessed shape their Flight,
And throng the Mansions of Immortal Light;
The fruitful Matron and the spotless Maid,
And Infants, with a longer Life repaid,
Stand round; and drinking in Celestial Rays,
On their REDEEMER fix with ardent Gaze,
And all the Heavens resound with Hymns of Praise.
Each Bosom Kindles with Seraphic Joy,
And conscious Raptures all the Soul employ.
Not equal Raptures swell the Sybil's Breast,
When by the inmate Deity possessed;
When Phoebus the Prophetic Maid inspires,
And her Limbs tremble with convulsive Fires.
But whence this sudden Blaze of dazzling Light!
What Mitred Brow is that, which greets my Sight?
Forth from a stately Tomb he lifts his Head,
And to the Skies on Angels Wings is sped.
I know the Form -- alike the Look and Mien,
Another William Wainflet, Bishop of Winchester. He was the Founder of Magdalen
College, and the Hall adjoining.
WAINFLET in his Face is seen:
When will, alas! such spotless Worth be found?
When will a Mind with equal Virtues crowned?
Fearless he sees almighty Vengeance rise,
And fixes on his GOD his guiltless Eyes.
But now far different Scenes our Wonder claim,
Horrent with Darkness and Malignant Flame*
(...) The labored Wall delusive Picture hides
And liquid Sulphur rolls in burning Tides;
So Strong, so fierce, the painted Flames arise,
The pale Spectator views them with surprise;
Believes the blazing Wall indeed to burn,
And fears the Frame should into Ashes turn.
Hither in ghastly Crowds the Guilty haste,
Obscene with Horror and with shame defaced;
With haggard Looks the gloomy Fiends appear,
They gnash their foamy Teeth, and frown severe.
A stern Avenger, with relentless Mind,
Waving a flamy Faulchion, stalks behind;
With which, as once from Paradise he drove,
He drives the Sinner from the Joys above.
What shall he do forlorn? or whither fly,
To shun the Ken of an All-seeing Eye?
What would he give amongst the Just to shine,
And fall before Omnipotence Divine?
But oh! too late in Sighs he vents his Woe,
Too late his Eyes with gushing Tears overflow!
Vain are his Sighs and fruitless are his Tears,
Vengeance and Justice stop the Almighty's Ears.
See! with what various Charms the Piece is fraught,
And with what pregnant Marks of Judgment wrought!
With how much Grace the living Colors glow!
Not brighter Colors paint the watery Bow;
When the fresh Showers her various Luster share,
And every Drop with Spangles decks the Air.
O! may the Painter's Labors never fade,
Nor wastful Time their shining Charms invade,
'Till the first Dawn of that Eternal Light,
Which by his fruitful Pencil shines so Bright.
FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed for E. CURLL.
I. THE Artful Wife, a Comedy. Price 1 s. II. The Poetical Works of Nicolas
Row, Esquire Pr. 4 s. III. Esther Queen of Persia. A Poem in Four Books. By Mr.
Henley. Pr. 1 s. 6 d. IV. Boileau's Lutrin: and his Art of Poetry. Adorned with
Cuts. Pr. 2 s. 6 d. V. The Poetical Works of the late Earl of Halifax. To which
is prefixed his Lordship's Life, including the History of his Times, and a
Character of his Writings, by Mr. Addison. Pr. 5 s. VI. Letters, Poems, and
Tales, Amorous, Satirical and Gallant, which passed between Dr. Swift, Mrs.
Long, the Lady Mary Chambers, Lady Betty Cromwell, Sir William Wyvil. Col.
Codrington, and other Persons of Distinction. Pr. 2 s. VII. Mr. Dennis' Remarks
upon Mr. Pope's Translation of Homer. Pr. 1 s. 6 d. VIII. The Confederates. A
Farce. By Mr. Joseph Gay, Pr. 1 s. IX. The Hoop-Petticoat: An Heroi-Comical
Poem. By Mr. Joseph Gay. Pr. 1 s. X. The Art of Dress. An Heroi-Comical Poem.
Pr. 1 s. XI. The Rape of the Smock. An Heroi-Comical Poem. Pr. 1 s. XII. Mr.
Pomfret's Poems, Pr. 2 s. XIII. Mr. Young's Poem on the Last Day. The Third
Edition corrected throughout, and very much improved. Adorned with three
curious Cuts. 12 o Pr. 1 s. XIV. The History of the Lady Jane Gray. A Poem in
two Books. By Mr. Young. Adorned with Cuts. 8 o. Pr. 1 s. XV. Mac-Dermot: Or,
The Irish-Fortune-Hunter. A Poem in Six Cantos. Pr. 1 s. XVI. Pope's
Miscellany, etc. in Two Parts, Complete. Price 1 s. XVII. The Rape of the
Bucket: An Heroi-Comical Poem. 8 o. Pr. 1 s. 6 d. XVIII. A Second Collection of
Poems. By Matthew Prior, Esquire 8 o. Pr. 1 s. XIX. Mr. Philips's Poems. Pr. 1 s.
XX. Mr. Reynardson's Poems. Pr. 1 s. XXI. Mr. Sewell's Poems. Pr. 1 s. 6 d.

