A REVIEW OF THE London Dispensatory.

Wherein are considered, the INCONSISTENCIES OF SOME MEDICINES, AND THE REAL
MERIT of OTHERS.

Addressed to the COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS.

LONDON: Printed for J. COOK, at Shakespeare's Head, in Paternoster Row. 1764.

(Price One Shilling and Sixpence.)

(...) are Mills now in Use, by which all these Things, Bezoar excepted, are
ground. If this Method is not thought certain, let them be pounded, mixed with
Water, and the finer Parts poured off and dried for Use; let this be done till
all is fine enough. This is a much quicker and easier Way than the other.

Axungiae Porcinae Sevique Ovilli Curatio.

The Purification or Trying of Hogs Lard and Mutton Sewet.

The first is the Province of an old Woman; Deers Sewet may be obtained of
Keepers, as cheap and good, ready tried.

Axungiae Viperinae Curatio.

The Purification of Vipers Fat.

This is a necessary Prescription, the Virtues are so eminent.

Mellis Despumatio.

Clarifying of Honey.

Very neat and pretty.

Scillae Coctio, (lege Scillarum Coctio.)

The Baking of Squills.

It is intended by this Process to lessen its Acrimony. They are not prescribed
thus in the Theriaca Andromachi.

Scillae Exsiccatio, (lege Scillarum.)

The Drying of Squills.

Very great.

Rhubarbari and Nucis Moschatae Torrefactio.

The Roasting of Rhubarb and Nutmeg.

Neither of these sometimes can be powdered alone without drying; ridiculous.

Spongiae Ustio.

The Burning of Sponge.

Let the Sponge be placed in a covered earthen Vessel, in a hot Oven, till it
is become friable; not till it is black, as then it loses a great Part of its
Virtue.

Cornu Cervi Calcinatio.

The Calcination of Hartshorn.

The Horn or Bones left after distilling the Spirit, will answer for this as
well as any.

Pulparum Extractio, (lege Expressio.)

The Extraction, or Expression of Pulps.

This is a little necessary.

Styracis Colatio.

The Straining of Storax.

Not very necessary.

Opium Colatum, (lege Opij Colatio.)

The Straining of Opium, Assafetida, etc.

In my Opinion there is not a great Occasion for it.

Millepedarum Praeparatio.

Preparation of Millepedes.

The best Method in Use.

CONSERVAE.
CONSERVES.

Half of these Conserves would be enough; as I imagine, they are never given
for their Virtues, but merely as a Basis for Medicines more efficacious.

CONDITA.
PRESERVES.

These belong to the Confectioner, where they may be had.

SUCCI.
JUICES.

Succi Scorbutici.

The Scorbutic Juices.

Not fit for a Dispensatory Prescription, or to keep in the Shop.

Rob Baccarum Sambuci.

Rob of Elder-berries.

Very little used, and seldom kept.

Elaterium.

Elaterium.

Should be kept, though little used.

EXTRACTA ET RESINAE.
EXTRACTS AND RESINS.

Extractum Rad. Enulae Campanae.

Extract of Elecampane Roots.

This is the worst Extract among the whole. The rest in general are good. One
Extract of Bark and Guaiacum is enough.

Extractum Glycyrrhizae.

Extract of Liquorice.

This is far preferable to the common Juice of the Shops, when well made, and
free from Dirt.

Extractum Jalap.

Extract of Jalap.

I know of no Advantage this has over the Powder.

Extractum Catharticum.

The Cathartic Extract.

This is a drastic Purge; is generally given to great Advantage, joined with an
Opiate.

Gummi and Resina Aloes.

Gum and Resin of Aloes.

This is a pretty Preparation to separate the Gum and Rosin of the Aloes.

OLEA PER EXPRESSIONEM.
EXPRESSED OILS.

Oleum Amygdalinum.

Oil of Almonds.

Almonds, whether bitter or sweet, yield the same Oil; and Mustard-seeds yield
an Oil the very same.

Ol. Lini.

Oil of Linseed.

To be obtained by Pressure, without Heat.

OLEA PER DISTILLATIONEM.
DISTILLED OILS, or ESSENTIAL OILS.

We could very well spare half without any Detriment. The Oleum Origani, and
Oleum Buxi, are the same in point of Virtue and Strength.

Oleum Lateritium.

Oil of Bricks.

Nonsense.

Oleum Picis Barbadensis.

Oil of Barbados Tar.

This is very little used.

Oleum Terebinthinae.

Oil of Turpentine.

I should prefer to this, the

Oleum Terebinthinae AEthereum.

The Ethereal Oil of Turpentine.

Balsamum of Terebinthiae.

Balsam of Turpentine.

This is used by some Surgeons as a Digestive.

Oleum Copaiva Compositum.

Compound Oil of Balsam of Copaiba.

We do not want it.

SALES ET SALINA.
SALTS AND SALINE PREPARATIONS.

Nitrum Purificatum.

Purified Nitre.

The indissoluble Part is left in the Filter. The Addition of a little nitrous
Acid makes the Crystals larger and finer. The Liquor left after
Crystallization, is a kind of Epsom Salt dissolved; hence was originally made
Magnesia, with the Addition of an Alkali, but is now made thus.

Magnesia Alba.

White Magnesia.

Dissolve a Quantity of Epsom Salts in a large Portion of Water, filter.

Dissolve in another Portion of Water about the same Quantity of Pearl Ashes,
filter.

Mix these two Solutions together, and the Magnesia will be precipitated in the
Form of a white Powder. Let this be washed with fresh Parcels of Water twice a
Day, till the Water is become insipid; then dry the Powder on a Chalk-stone for
Use. This is the only laxative Absorbent we have.

Alumen Ustum.

Burnt Alum.

Vitriolum Calcinatum.

Calcined Vitriol.

The Alum and the Vitriol are, by this Process, deprived of a Quantity of Water
they contained, and thus rendered proportionably stronger. The Fire should not
be too fierce, or too long continued, especially in the Alum, lest Part of the
Acid be dissipated also.

Sal Absinthij and Tartari.

Salt of Wormwood and Tartar.

All fixed alkaline Salts are alike, whether they are made from Wormwood,
Tartar, or Pearl Ashes. Hence one Salt, under the common Name of Sal Alkalinus
Fixus, would answer all our Purposes.

Sal Alkalinus Fixus.

Fixed Alkaline Salt.

Take Pearl Ashes, dissolve them in a sufficient Quantity of Water; then filter
and evaporate.

Lixivium Tartari.

Ley of Tartar.

There can be no Difference, whether the Salt attracts the Water from the Air,
or whether the Water is added extemporaneously.

Tartarum Solubile.

Soluble Tartar.

This is only an Union of an Acid with an Alkaline; is a tedious Process, and
may be as well made thus:

Take three Parts of Crystals of Tartar, and one Part of fixed alkaline Salt,
mix in a Powder; and a proper Name would be

Sal Neutralis.

The Neutral Salt.

Lixivium Saponarium.

Soap Ley.

This may be had at any Time, of any Strength, of the Makers of soft Soap.

Sapo Amygdalinus.

Almond Soap.

This is a tedious Preparation; and when done, is by no means preferable to the
Venice or Castile Soap.

Causticum Commune Fortius.

Common Stronger Caustic.

The Lime is ordered to be kept in a Vessel close corked, to abate its
Acrimony; the Intention is destroyed by the Corking. It is for many Reasons
unfit for a Shop Prescription, and Caustics of any Strength may be made
extemporaneously; and, for a Caustic to rub Wounds with, the Causticum Lunare,
or the Lapis Infernalis, with Care to prevent its liquefying, is far preferable.

Causticum Commune Mitius.

Common Milder Caustic.

Beneath all Criticism.

Acetum Distillatum, vel Spiritus Aceti.

Distilled Vinegar, or Spirit of Vinegar.

The Vinegar, by this Process, loses its Oil; great Part of the first Running
is not acid, the latter is.

Sal Diureticus.

Diuretic Salt.

This is nothing but a Combination of a fixed Alkali with a vegetable Acid. The
Process is tedious, and the Salt is seldom found properly neutralised; an
extemporaneous Prescription of the same would answer full as well.

Spiritus Vitrioli Tenuis and Fortis.

The Weak and Strong Spirit of Vitriol.

These Spirits are not peculiar to Vitriol; they are the Acids of the Sulphur
of Vitriol, which is by no means different from the common Brimstone. Now that
Sulphur is the best, which yields the larger Proportion of Oil in the easiest
Manner. Does the Vitriolic do this? No; then I would change the Names to

Spiritus Sulphuris Tenuis and Fortis.

The Weak and Strong Spirit of Vitriol.

The Process is too well known to the Chemists at this Time to give a
Prescription in this Place.

Colcothar Vitrioli.

Colcothar of Vitriol.

By the Change of the above, this Process is lost; but it is no more than a
Calx deprived of its Acid; which may be done by urging the Vitriolum Calcinatum
with a very fierce Fire, till it becomes of a deep purplish, red Color.

Spiritus Nitri Glauberi.

Glauber's Spirit of Nitre.

The Oil of Vitriol being the stronger, forces over the Acid of the Nitre, and
unites with the Alkali into a kind of vitriolated Tartar or Nitre, which may be
purified by Solution, Filtration, and Crystallization.

Spiritus Salis Marini Glauberi.

Glauber's Spirit of Sea Salt.

The Oil of Vitriol acts in the same Manner by the Acid of the Sea Salt, as by
the nitrous Acid, and unites with the alkaline Basis into a neutral Salt.

Aqua Fortis.

Aqua Fortis.

This is nothing more than Spirit of Nitre, with a small Proportion of the
vitriolic Acid, about one tenth, and may be thus made extemporaneously.

Aqua Fortis Composita.

Compound Aqua Fortis.

A Combination of the three different mineral Acids in unequal Proportions, may
be as well made extemporaneously, by the Addition of a few Drops of Spirit of
Sea Salt, one Ounce of Spiritus Sulphuris, vel Vitrioli Fortis, and nine Ounces
of Spirit of Nitre.

Sal Vitrioli.

Salt of Vitriol.

This is only purified white Vitriol; and being only used externally, a clear
white Vitriol will do as well.

Tartarum Vitriolatum.

Vitriolated Tartar.

Nitrum Vitriolatum.

Vitriolated Nitre.

These are die same Thing under different Names; and the Residuum left after
the Distillation of Glauber's Spirit of Salt, is a vitriolated Tartar, the
Solution and Filtration will purify it. If the Residuum is wanting at any Time,
the Tartarum Solubile, or the Sal Neutralis, may be used, and is the same in
every Virtue.

Sal Catharticus Glauberi.

Glauber's Cathartic Salt.

There is but little Difference between this and the above, in both the Acid is
the same; the Alkali of one is the Basis of Nitre, and the Alkali of the other
is the Basis of Sea Salt, which are little different; the Virtues are nearly
similar, so similar, that, in my Opinion, they might be used indiscriminately.

Spiritus Salis Marini Coagulatus.

Spirit of Sea Salt Coagulated.

Lege

Sal Marinus Neutralis.

Sea Salt Neutralized.

Spiritus Vitrioli Dulcis.

Dulcified Spirit of Vitriol.

The Spirit of Wine is a kind of attenuated Oil, and has the Power of
dulcifying acid Spirits; the Spirit, with a Portion of the Acid, is thrown over
a little volatilized. The same may be said of

Spiritus Nitri Dulcis.

Dulcified Spirit of Nitre.

Spiritus Sulphuris per Campanam.

Spirit of Sulphur by the Bell.

This is nothing more or less than Spirit of Vitriol, so is a useless Form.

Spiritus, Sal and Oleum Succini.

Spirit, Salt, and Oil of Amber.

The Purification of the Salt deprives it of a great Part of its Virtue.

Spiritus, Sal, and Oleum Cornu Cervi.

Spirit, Salt, and Oil of Hartshorn.

The College have ordered the Horns only, but the Bones of the Heart are as
good; and the Bones of the Ox, etc. are as good as these. Hence it is, that the
Spirit has been sold so cheap already, and might be afforded much cheaper still.

The Correction of the Spirit by repeated Rectification, is very necessary.

Spiritus, Sal, and Oleum Fuliginis.

Spirit, Salt, and Oil of Soot.

These are very analogous to the above, and need not a distinct Place in the
Pharmacopoeia, as the Spirit, Salt and Oil, may be obtained from Hearts Horns
and Bones much readier.

Sal Volatilis Salis Ammoniaci.

Volatile Salt of Sal Ammoniac.

The medical Qualities of this are not different from those of Salt of
Hartshorn; the Ingredients should be well dried before they are mixed.

Spiritus Salis Ammoniaci.

Spirit of Sal Ammoniac.

The London Dispensatory was collected by those who never, in my Opinion, made
a Medicine in their Lives.

They have rejected the Spirit of Sal Ammoniac with Quicklime, but the
Volatile Tincture of Bark they cannot make with this Spirit that they have
ordered: Hence the Necessity of the other Spirit.

Spiritus Salis Ammoniaci Dulcis.

Dulcified Spirit of Sal Ammoniac.

The Necessity of this Medicine I cannot see; it may be made with Spirit of
Wine and the Volatile Salt extemporaneously.

Spiritus Volatilis Foetidus.

Foetid Volatile Spirit.

This may be made with Spirit and the Foetid Tincture.

Spiritus Volatilis Aromaticus.

Aromatic Volatile Spirit.

Take Pimento or Jamaica Pepper, two Ounces; Volatile Salt of Sal Ammoniac, one
Pound; Essence of Lemons, one Ounce; Water, four Pints. Distill off what is good.

If the other be preferred, there is no need of Distillation.

RESINOSA ET SULPHUREA.
RESINOUS AND SULPHUROUS PREPARATIONS.

Flores Benzoini.

Flowers of Benjamin.

The Method of subliming with a Paper Cone, is preferable to the Use of a
Retort.

Flores Sulphuris.

Flowers of Sulphur.

The Sulphur is here purified, and not altered.

Flores Sulphuris Loti.

Washed Flowers of Sulphur.

This is a very necessary Preparation.

Balsamum Sulphuris Simplex.

The Simple Balsam of Sulphur.

This is a very coarse and inelegant Medicine.

Sulphur Praecipitatum.

Precipitated Sulphur.

This is a very bad Prescription; for the Acid of Vitriol forms with the
calcareous Earth a Salt of the Kind, called Selenites, which is precipitated
with the Sulphur, and cannot be washed off by repeated Ablutions, for it is
indissoluble in Water. This would not happen, if the Hepar Sulphuris was
dissolved in Water: But here the Acid would form with the alkaline Salt a
Tartarum Vitriolatum, which, being soluble in Water, the Sulphur would be
precipitated alone; but even then it is not superior to the Flores Sulphuris
Loti.

Aqua Sulphurata.

Sulphurated Water.

This is nothing but Water acidulated with the Acid of Sulphur.

METALLICA.
METALLIC PREPARATIONS.

Chalybis Rubigo Praeparata.

The Rust of Steel Prepared.

The Steel in this Process is not so far demetallized, as by the Action of a
strong Fire, which reduces it to a perfect Calx, by entirely consuming the
Phlogiston.

Chalybs cum Sulphur Praeparatus.

Steel prepared with Sulphur.

The Mars Sulphuratus is a much better Prescription; it is on the whole only
Steel deprived of its Phlogiston.

Flores Martiales.

Martial Flowers.

Sal Ammoniac is a semi-volatile Salt, and has the Property of volatilizing
many other Bodies. Iron is not volatile, but is rendered so by the Sal
Ammoniac, its Acid being destroyed.

Lixivium Martis.

The Ley of Iron.

The Residuum is Iron united with an Acid, which it nearly saturates. If
exposed to the Air, it attracts the Humidity which dissolves it.

Sal Martis.

Salt of Steel.

This is nothing more than green Vitriol or Copperas; the only Difference there
is or can be, is the Purity.

Causticum Lunare.

Lunar Caustic.

This is the concentrated Acid of Nitre, saturated with Silver.

Saccharum Saturni.

Sugar of Lead.

Is a Solution of Lead in the vegetable Acid; therefore a neutral Salt of Lead,
with a Predominancy of Alkali.

Lapis Medicamentosus.

Medicinal Stone.

This is nothing more than a Mixture; there happens not any Change, except
possibly the Lytharge is a little corroded by the Vinegar.

Stannum Pulveratum.

Powdered Tin.

The Tin is here deprived of its Phlogiston.

Argenti Vivi Purificatio.

The Purification of Quicksilver.

This Process is as good as any, for Mercury is more volatile than any other
Metal, so will fly off first; if carefully performed, it needs no washing.

Aurum Musivum.

Mosaic Gold.

This seems to be only Tin colored by the Sulphur, and has no Advantage
superior to powdered Tin.

Aethiops Mineralis.

Aethiops Mineral.

If the Sulphur be dried well, and warmed before the Fire, and the Mortar
warmed, the Union will be performed the sooner.

Cinnabaris Factitia.

Artificial Cinnabar.

The Union of the Mercury and Sulphur are more intimate in this than in the
above; their Virtues are similar.

Mercurius Corrosivus Sublimatus, vel Albus.

Corrosive Mercury Sublimate, or White Corrosive Mercury.

This is Mercury combined with the Acid of Sea Salt. The Acid of Vitriol
decompounds the Sea Salt and the Nitre, whose Acids unite to the Mercury. The
Acid of Sea Salt, which has the greatest Affinity to the Mercury, sublimes
united to it, the Acid of Nitre escapes. The Residuum is a Calx of Iron, a
Glauber's Salt, formed by the Acid of Vitriol and the Basis of the Sea Salt,
and a Tartarum Vitriolatum from the Union of the same Acid, with the Basis of
the Nitre. This is not an elegant Process, for the Nitre seems of no Use, and a
more easy Way of combining them is this: -- Take of the White Mass in making
the Mercurius Emeticus Flavus, grind it with an equal Weight of Sea Salt, then
sublime. Here the Acids change their Bases, the Mercury will unite with the
Acid of Sea Salt; and we shall have a Glauber's Salt left behind, from the
Combination of the Acid of Vitriol with the alkaline Basis of the Sea Salt.

Mercurius Dulcis Sublimatus.

Dulcified Mercury Sublimate.

The Sublimate is by this Process deprived of much of its Acid, consequently
less powerful.

Mercurius Calcinatus.

Calcined Mercury.

The Mercury is here deprived of its Phlogiston, without the Assistance of an
Acid; hence the great Advantage it has over the other Mercurials.

Mercurius Praecipitatus Albus.

White Precipitate of Mercury.

This Medicine is a kind of Calomel; in the former, the Acid is dulcified by
the alkaline Salt, in the latter it is dissipated by the Sublimations.

Mercurius Corrosivus Ruber.

The Mercurial Red Corrosive.

This succeeds as well with the pure Acid of Nitre, as with the Aqua Fortis.
This Preparation is a concentrated Acid of Nitre, mixed with a small Proportion
of the Acid of Sea Salt, and saturated with Mercury.

Mercurius Corallinus.

Corralline Mercury.

The Red Corrosive undergoes very little Change by this Process.

Mercurius Emeticus Flavus.

The Yellow Mercurial Emetic.

This is the Acid of Vitriol, saturated with Mercury; and though at first acid,
is by the Ablutions rendered perfectly neutral.

Sulphur Antimonij Praecipitatum.

Precipitated Sulphur of Antimony.

This Sulphur may be obtained much easier thus: Boil equal Parts of crude
Antimony in Powder, and a fixed alkaline Salt; filter the Solution, in which
drop Spirit of Sea Salt, and the Sulphur will precipitate.

Crocus Antimonij.

Crocus of Antimony.

In this Process the Sulphur is thrown off; but the Quantity of Nitre is not
sufficient to demetallize and calcine the Regulus.

Crocus Antimonij Lotus.

Washed Crocus of Antimony.

The Acid of Vitriol forms, with the alkaline Basis of the Nitre, a Tartarum
Vitriolatum, which adheres and is united to the Crocus Antimonij. In this
Process it is washed off.

Tartarum Emeticum.

Emetic Tartar.

This is a Combination of the Reguline Part of Antimony with a vegetable Acid.

Calx Antimonij.

Calx of Antimony.

Here the Nitre is sufficient to destroy, not only the Sulphur, but also the
Phlogiston of the Regulus.

Causticum Antimoniale.

The Antimonial Caustic.

The purest Acid of Sea Salt will not act on Antimony, when applied to it in
its ordinary Form; but the Regulus may be dissolved in it in its concentrated
State, and while raised in Vapor. The Remains in the Retort are the Sulphur of
the Antimony, united with the Mercury of the Corrosive Sublimate, which, being
sublimed together, make

Cinnabaris Antimonij.

Cinnabar of Antimony.

This consists of the same Principles, and is in every Respect the same with
the Factitious Cinnabar above described.

AQUAE STILLATITIAE SIMPLICES.
SIMPLE DISTILLED WATERS.

Aqua Alexeteria Simplex.

Simple Alexeterial Water.

The Ingredients are few and well chosen. This is a very pretty Simple Water.

Aqua Seminum Anethi.

Water of Dill-Seed.

This is disagreeable, and seldom kept.

Aqua Corticum Aurantiorum Simplex.

The Simple Distilled Water of Orange-Peel.

This contains a considerable Degree of the aromatic Qualities of the
Orange-peel.

Aqua Castorei.

Water of Castor.

This is a very improper Drug for the Still, the Dearness of it rendering the
Sophistication of it common; and in this Disguise is not perceptible so soon.
We having a Tincture, this might be very well spared.

Aqua Cinnamoni Simplex.

Simple Cinnamon Water.

Cinnamon imparts considerable Virtue to the Simple Water, but then it is
liable to grow sourish, and part with its Oil; a Decoction of Cinnamon will
answer all the Purposes better than this.

Aqua Faeniculi.

Fennel Water.

If the sweet Fennel-seeds contain more Fragrancy, the others have more
aromatic Warmth and Pungency.

Aqua Menthae Piperitidis Simplex.

Simple Pepper-Mint Water.

This is the very best Simple Water of the Shops.

Aqua Menthae Vulgaris Simplex.

Simple Spear-Mint Water.

The Simple Alexiterial Water will answer for this.

Aqua Piperis Jamaicensis.

Water of Jamaica Pepper.

Vastly inferior, though ordered on the same Plan as the Simple Pepper-mint Water.

Aqua Pulegij Simplex.

Simple Penneroyal Water.

A very useful Simple Water.

Aqua Rosarum Damascenarum.

Damask Rose Water.

Experience has sufficiently testified, that the Damask Roses have no
Excellence above the White; they may be used indiscriminately.

AQUAE STILLATITIAE SPIRITUOSAE, ET SPIRITUS.
SPIRITUOUS DISTILLED WATERS, AND SPIRITS.

Aqua Alexeteria Spirituosa.

Spirituous Alexeterial Water.

I don't think there is any Occasion for a Spirituous and Simple Water from
such Plants as these; it may however stand.

Aqua Alexeteria Spirituosa cum Aceto.

Spirituous Alexeterial Water with Vinegar.

The Difference of the Angelica Leaves in this and the above Water, is of
little Consequence; there needs not two Distillations; but take of the above
distilled Water eight Parts, of Vinegar one Part, mix.

Aqua Seminum Anisi Composita.

Compound Aniseed Water.

This Water is very disagreeable.

Aqua Corticum Aurantiorum Spirituosa.

The Spirituous Water of Orange-Peel.

This Water is preferable to the Simple.

Aqua Seminum Cardamomi.

Water of Cardamom-Seeds.

The greater Part of the Virtue of the Cardamom-seeds is not elevated by
Distillation with Spirit.

Aqua Seminum Carui.

Water of Carraway-Seeds.

This Water is not equal in Strength to a Tincture drawn with Rectified Spirit.

Aqua Cinnamomi, Spirituosa.

Spirituous Cinnamon Water.

Not equal, at least not superior, to the Tincture of Cinnamon.

Aqua. Juniperi Composita.

Compound Juniper Water.

This is very well prescribed.

Aqua Menthae Piperitidis Spirituosa.

The Spirituous Water of Pepper-Mint.

The Simple Water contains all the Virtues of the Pepper-mint, in the same Dose
with this, the aromatic Warmth is sufficient; and needs not the Assistance of a
spirituous Vehicle, which renders it too hot for the Stomach.

Aqua Menthae Vulgaris Spirituosa.

Spirituous Spear-Mint Water.

This is preferable to the Simple Water, but not superior to the Alexeterial.

Aqua Nucis Moschatae.

Nutmeg Water.

The Quantity of Nutmegs is too small to give any thing but a Smell to this
Water; it is however inoffensive in not being nauseous.

Aqua Pulegij Spirituosa.

Spirituous Pennyroyal Water.

This Water is not equal in Elegance to the Simple Water of the same Plant.

Aqua Raphani Composita.

Compound Water of Horse Radish.

In this Water there are more Nutmegs than in the Nutmeg Water.

Spiritus Lavendulae Simplex.

Simple Spirit of Lavender.

This is as well made with the Essential Oil and Rectified Spirit; as also

Spiritus Roris-marini.

Spirit of Rosemary.

Spiritus Lavendulae Compositus.

Compound Spirit of Lavender.

This is a Tincture. Why both the Spirit of Lavender and of Rosemary are put
in, I cannot conceive. The Spices might be increased to four Times their
present Quantity to Advantage.

DECOCTA ET INSUSA.
DECOCTIONS AND INFUSIONS.

Decoctum Album.

White Decoction.

This Name is nothing determinate. Decoction of Burnt Hartshorn, is a more
proper Name. The Quantity of Gum Arabic is too small, and the Addition of about
a Dram of Cinnamon wanting.

Decoctum Commune pro Clystere.

Common Decoction for Glysters.

Thin Gruel is full as good for most Intentions.

Decoctum Pectorale.

Pectoral Decoction.

If a neat Decoction is required, only one Ounce of Figs should be used; the
Quantity of Ingredients is too great for the Decoction; if thus made, it is
thick and inelegant.

Aqua Hordeata.

Barley Water.

It is said that some Money was given for this Prescription, and therefore set
down in this verbose Manner.

Fotus Communis.

Common Fomentation.

The College are in some Prescriptions luxuriant, as in the Aqua Raphani
Composita, and in the Decoctum Pectorale, etc. and in others remarkably sparing
in the Quantity of the Ingredients, as in the Aqua Nucis Moschatae, Spiritus
Lavendulae Compositus, etc. And in this Medicine before us, the Ingredients
might certainly be used to more Advantage in a much larger Quantity, if used so
at all, and this without burthening the Menstrua with the Quantity of the
Ingredients.

Jus Viperinum.

Viper Broth.

This has no Advantage over Chicken Broth alone. It is in Fact a great deal
owing to such Medicines as these, that Physic has fallen into great Disrepute.

Mucilago Seminum Cydoniorum.

Mucilage of Quince-Seeds.

Why have not Mucilage of Gum Arabic and Gum Tragacanth been prescribed also?

Serum Aluminosum.

Alum Whey.

This deserves more Notice than it has.

Serum Scorbuticum.

Scorbutic Whey.

This is a very ridiculous Whey.

Infusum Amarum Simplex.

The Simple Bitter Infusion.

This is a very pretty transparent Infusion.

Infusum Amarum Purgans.

The Purging Bitter Infusion.

There is no Occasion for two Bitter Infusions; the Infusion of Sena may be
added or given occasionally.

Infusum Senae Commune.

Common Infusion of Sena.

The Crystals of Tartar hardly dissolve; the Cardamom-seeds render all aqueous
Menstrua turbid; the Infusion might with Harm be altered thus -- Sena-leaves,
two Ounces, Carraway -- seeds bruised, two Drams; pour on them boiling Water,
to strain off a Quart. If the Ingredients were boiled in the Water, it would be
better, and the Name altered to Decoctum Senae.

Infusum Senae Limoniatum.

Infusion of Sena with Lemon.

If the above Infusion of Sena be prescribed or made, this Form will be
unnecessary, as the Lemon Juice may be added occasionally.

Aqua Calcis Simplex.

Simple Lime Water.

Rain Water answers best.

Aqua Calcis Minus Composita.

The Less Compound Lime Water.

Aqua Calcis Magis Composita.

The More Compound Lime Water.

One would think the College, by these Prescriptions, thought that Lime Water
contained as much Virtue as the Bishop of Cloyne supposed lay in Tar Water.

Tinctura Rosarum.

Tincture of Roses.

Lege Infusum Rosarum.

Acetum Scilliticum.

Vinegar of Squills.

The Spirit should be added before it has thrown down its Foeces; if not, fresh
Foeces will be thrown down on the Addition.

VINA.
WINES.

Vinum Aloeticum Alkalinum.

Alkaline Aloetic Wine.

This Menstruum is too much burdened also; the Articles are well chosen for
the general Intention.

Vinum Amarum.

Bitter Wine.

This is every Way inferior to the Spirituous Tincture.

Vinum Antimoniale.

Antimonial Wine.

The Washing of the Crocus is immaterial; this is the same if made with the
Glass of Antimony.

Vinum Chalybeatum.

Chalybeate Wine.

This Wine is much better made with Heat than without.

Vinum Croceum.

Saffron Wine.

A spirituous Tincture is better than a vinous, and keeps better.

Vinum Ipecacoanhae.

Ipecacoanha Wine.

The Addition of a stomachic Medicine, is, I think, of no Use in an Emetic Wine.

Vinum Viperinum.

Viper Wine.

It is of little Use, or Consequence.

Tinctura Rhabarbari Vinosa.

Tincture of Rhubarb in Wine.

This may pass very well.

Tinctura Sacra.

Sacred Tincture.

This should be made with good old Mountain; the Name should be, Vinum Aloes
vel Aloeticum.

Tinctura Thebaica.

Thebaic Tincture.

Wine is not a proper Menstruum for Opium.

TINCTURAE SPIRITUOSAE.
SRIRITUOUS TINCTURES.

Tinctura Amara.

The Bitter Tincture.

This is intended for keeping; is an excellent Medicine for the Uses designed
as a Stomachic.

Tinctura Antimonij.

Tincture of Antimony.

This is nothing more than a Tincture of Hepar Sulphuris.

Tinctura Aromatica.

Aromatic Tincture.

This is a very warm and serviceable Aromatic.

Tinctura Cantharidum.

Tincture of Cantharides.

This Tincture loses its Virtue by keeping, if not properly secured.

Tinctura Cardamomi.

Tincture of Cardamoms.

This is preferable to the Distilled Water, and may supply its Place, Regard
being had to the Quantities.

Tinctura Castorei.

Tincture of Castor.

The best Tincture is made with Rectified Spirit; this extracts all the fine
Parts of the Castor, and leaves the coarse, ungrateful Parts of it behind.

Tinctura Cinnamomi.

Tincture of Cinnamon.

This is preferable to the Aqua Cinnamomi Spirituosa, as it is stronger of the
Cinnamon.

Tinctura Corticis Peruviani Simplex.

The Simple Tincture of the Peruvian Bark.

Proof Spirit dissolves both the gummy and resinous Parts of the Bark; hence
this is strong of the Virtues of the Drug.

Tinctura Corticis Peruviani Volatilis.

Volatile Tincture of the Peruvian Bark.

Those who have endeavored to make this Tincture with the College Spirit of
Sal Ammoniac, have been foiled; the Pungency of the Spirit with Lime, is by the
Bark corrected and united; they form a Medicine of great Virtue.

Tinctura Foetida.

The Foetid Tincture.

The Assafoetida should be rubbed and divided by Sand, before it is put to the
Spirit, as directed in the Tinctura Sacra.

Tinctura Fuliginis.

Tincture of Soot.

If the Assafoetida was double in Quantity, it would not be amiss.

Tinctura Guaiacina Volatilis.

Volatile Tincture of Gum Guaiacum.

This is a good Medicine.

Tinctura Jalapii.

Tincture of Jalap.

The Menstruum is too much loaded; it would be full as strong from six Ounces.

Tinctura Japonica.

Tincture of Japan Earth.

Here also the Menstruum is loaded; it would answer better made with the Earth
and Tincture of Cinnamon already made.

Tinctura Florum Martialium.

Tincture of Martial Flowers.

This is an elegant Chalybeate Tincture.

Tinctura Martis in Spiritu Salis.

Tincture of Iron in Spirit of Salt.

The Spirit of Salt does not dissolve so much of the Iron as the Vitriolic
Acid; but it has this Advantage, it mixes uniformly with Rectified Spirit.

Tinctura Melampodij.

Tincture of Black Hellebore.

By much the best Preparation of Black Hellebore.

Tinctura Myrrhae.

Tincture of Myrrh.

The Myrrh should be powdered and mixed with Sand, to keep it divided.

Tinctura Rhabarbari Spirituosa.

Tincture of Rhubarb in Spirit.

There is no Occasion for this, every Purpose being answered by the Vinous
Tincture.

Tinctura Saturnina.

The Saturnine Tincture.

This is a strong Styptic, and dangerous Preparation of Lead; its Use has been
often followed by terrible Symptoms, when even given in small Quantities.

Tinctura Senae.

Tincture of Sena.

This is a very useful Tincture; there are more Raisins than necessary used.

Tinctura Serpentariae.

Tincture of Snake-Root.

A very good and useful Tincture.

Tinctura Stomachica.

Stomachic Tincture.

A very pleasant Tincture of some Warmth.

Tinctura Styptica.

The Styptic Tincture.

The Addition of a little Oak Bark, or any vegetable Astringent, makes this
Tincture of a fine black Color.

Tinctura Valerianae Simplex.

The Simple Tincture of Valerian.

Tinctura Valerianae Volatilis.

The Volatile Tincture of Valerian.

Neither of these Medicines require any Commendations or Remarks.

Tinctura Veratri.

Tincture of White Hellebore.

This is not wanting, except in Bedlam; and there, I believe seldom, we have
Antimonials.

Balsamum Guaiacinum.

Balsam of Guaiacum.

This contains a large Proportion of the Gum.

Balsamum Traumaticum.

Vulnerary Balsam.

This is very well prescribed.

Elixir Aloes.

Elixir of Aloes.

There is too much Saffron for the Quantity of Menstruum.

Elixir Paregoricum.

Paregoric Elixir.

The Quantity of Benjamin is too small to make it a Pectoral Medicine,
otherwise than as an Opiate, by allaying the Irritation. It is on the whole an
excellent Medicine; the Oil of Aniseeds is excessively nauseous, and would be
better omitted.

Elixir Vitrioli Acidum.

Acid Elixir of Vitriol.

Elixir Vitrioli Dulce.

Dulcified Elixir of Vitriol.

Neither of these require Remarks.

Elixir Myrrhae Compositum.

Compound Elixir of Myrrh.

A Tincture made with Savine in Tincture of Myrrh would do better alone; the
Tincture of Castor might be added occasionally.

MIXTURAE.
MIXTURES.

Julepum e Camphora.

The Camphorated Julep.

This is strongly impregnated with the Virtues of the Camphor.

Julepum e Creta.

The Chalk Julep.

Julepum e Moscho.

The Musk Julep.

May be still continued.

Emulsio Communis.

Common Emulsion.

There is here not enough Gum Arabic.

Lac Ammoniaci.

Milk of Gum Ammoniac.

Lege Solutio Ammoniaci.

Spiritus Vinosus Camphoratus.

Camphorated Spirits of Wine.

Proper to be kept in the Shops.

SYRUPI.
SYRUPS.

Syrupus ex Allio.

Syrup of Garlic.

A very nauseous Preparation for a Syrup.

Syrupus ex Althaea.

Syrup of Marshmallows.

The Marshmallows are not dear; but the Syrup is extremely similar to the
Pectoral Syrup, and is not any way better.

Syrupus e Corticibus Aurantiorum.

Syrup of Orange-Peel.

A very grateful Syrup; but if cold Water was poured on the Peel, the Syrup
would be still more grateful.

Syrupus Balsamicus.

Syrup of Balsam.

If the Syrup was made with the Addition of Tincture of the Balsam, according
to the Edinburgh Form, it would be less Trouble.

Syrupus Caryophyllorum Rubrorum.

Syrup of Clove July-Flowers.

The Scarcenese of these Flowers renders this Syrup liable to Sophistication;
it is not wanting.

Syrupus Croci.

Syrup of Saffron.

We have Simple Syrup and Saffron Wine.

Syrupus Cydoniorum.

Syrup of Quinces.

A very pretty Syrup, of an agreeable Flavor and slight Astringency.

Syrupus e Succo Limonum, Mororum, etc.

Syrup of Lemon Juice, Mulberries, etc.

Very agreeable.

Syrupus e Meconio.

Diacodion.

Observe the Cautions.

Syrupus Papaveris Erratici.

Syrup of Wild Poppies.

While we have Diacodion, this is not wanting; except by some curious
Pickpockets to color Simple Waters with, and sell them for Fever Juleps, which
is a Practice very common.

Syrupus Pectoralis.

Pectoral Syrup.

This is much the same in Virtue as the Syrup of Marshmallows.

Syrupus Rosarum Solutivus.

Solutive Syrup of Roses.

Needs no Amendment, the Sugar need not be double refined.

Syrupus Scilliticus.

Syrup of Squills.

If Honey should disagree, we have the Vinegar of Squills and Simple Syrup;
there is no Occasion to keep this.

Syrupus Simplex.

The Simple Syrup.

The most useful Syrup in the whole.

Syrupus e Spina Cervina.

Syrup of Buckthorn.

Extremely nauseous, is only fit for Glysters; a coarse Sugar will do full as
well.

Syrupus Violarum.

Syrup of Violets.

A very pretty Syrup for Children.

Syrupus Zinziberis.

Syrup of Ginger.

A very good Addition.

Confectio Alkermes.

Confection of Kermes.

A light Subastringent, little used.

MELLA ET OXYMELLITA.
HONEYS AND OXYMELLS.

Mel AEgyptiacum.

Egyptian Honey.

This is a very inelegant Preparation, of little Use and less Virtue. -- Only
fit for the Physicians Horses Heels; and for them provided, I suppose.

Mel Elatines.

Honey of Fluellin.

Of little Use and Virtue.

Mel Helleboratum.

Honey of Hellebore.

Seldom ventured on; seldom to be met with good.

Mel Rosaceum.

Honey of Roses.

May be kept.

Mel Solutivum.

Solutive Honey.

The Cummin-seeds are extremely offensive; but it being principally for
Clysters, it may pass, though Substances more proper might be added
extemporaneously, at the Discretion of the Prescriber.

Oxymel ex Allio.

Oxymel of Garlic.

Garlic is too indelicate for any Prescription.

Oxymel Scilliticum.

Oxymel of Squills.

A very good Medicine.

Oxymel Simplex.

Simple Oxymel.

Necessary to be kept.

PULVERES.
POWDERS.

Pulvis Antilyssus.

Powder against the Bite of a Mad Dog.

A mere Plaything, not dangerous in itself, but in the Delay from other
Medicines.

Pulvis Ari Compositus.

Compound Powder of Cuckow-Pint.

The Salt of Wormwood renders this Medicine liable to become moist; it might be
added occasionally.

Pulvis e Bolo Compositus sine Opio.

Compound Powder of Bole without Opium.

If one Ounce of Nutmegs were used instead of half an Ounce of Long Pepper, the
Medicine would not be the worse.

Pulvis e Bolo Compositus cum Opio.

Compound Powder of Bole with Opium.

A Mistake might happen, in one being used for the other; I would not trust to
it. The Quantity of any liquid Opium might be added in any Form occasionally.

Pulvis e Cerussa Compositus.

Compound Powder of Ceruss.

This may stand unaltered.

Pulvis e Chelis Cancrorum Compositus.

Compound Powder of Crabs Claws.

The Simple Powder is as good.

Pulvis Bezoardicus.

Bezoardic Powder.

If instead of Bezoar, Brick-dust was used, the Powder would be as good.

Pulvis Contrayervae Compositus.

Compound Powder of Contrayerva.

Take the Simple Powder of Crabs-claws, the Powder will be as good.

Pulvis e Myrrha Compositus.

Compound Powder of Myrrh.

These Ingredients would more unexceptionably make a Pill than a Powder.

Pulvis e Scammonio Compositus.

Compound Powder of Scammony.

But little used.

Pulvis e Sena Compositus.

Compound Powder of Sena.

Not a good Prescription.

Pulvis Sternutatorius.

Sneezing Powder.

Alias Snuff.

Pulvis e Succino Compositus.

Compound Powder of Amber.

This receives no Virtue from the Amber. If the Quantity of the Gum Olibanum
was increased to that of the Amber, and vice versa, the Powder would not be the
worse.

Pulvis e Tragacantha Compositus.

Compound Powder of Gum Dragant.

Would be rather better if thus made -- Gum Dragant, Gum Arabic, Marshmallow
Roots and Sugar, each equal Parts.

Hiera Picra.

The Socotrine Aloes may be used for the Gum.

Species Aromaticae.

Aromatic Species.

Neat and elegant.

Species e Scordio sine and cum Opio.

Species of Scordium without and with Opium.

The Pulveres e Bolo Compositi contain the same Virtues with less Trouble.

TROCHISCI ET TABELLAE.
TROCHES AND LOZENGES.

Saccharum Rosaceum.

Sugar of Roses.

This will grow moist and run about.

Trochisci Bechici Albi.

White Pectoral Troches.

The Liquorice prevents their being white.

Trochisci Bechici Nigri.

Black Pectoral Troches.

This is not better than Extract of Liquorice, nor the preceding than
Sugar Candy.

Trochisci e Nitro.

Troches of Nitre.

Nitre and Sugar.

Trochisci e Scilla.

Troches of Squills.

Are of no Use but for the Theriaca Andromachi.

Trochisci e Sulphur.

Troches of Sulphur.

A needless Preparation; as is also

Trochisci e Terra Japonica.

Troches of Japan Earth.

Tabellae Cardialgicae.

Heart-burn Lozenges.

They might be made rather better thus -- Prepared Chalk and double-refined
Sugar, each four Ounces; Oil of Nutmegs, half a Scruple; of Cinnabar, two
Drams; Mucilage of Gum Arabic or Dragant, a sufficient Quantity to form Troches.

PILLULAE.
PILLS.

Pillulae Aromaticae.

Aromatic Pills.

An Aromatic Pill without a Purgative would be rather better; a Purgative might
be added, but cannot be taken away, occasionally.

Pillulae ex Colocynthide Simpliciores.

The More Simple Pills of Coloquintida.

Pillulae ex Colocynthide cum Aloes.

Pills of Coloquintida with Aloes.

Why these are made two Preparations, no satisfactory Reason can be given; the
first is sufficient, as we have the Extractum Catharticum.

Pillulae Ecphracticae.

Deobstruent Pills.

The Ingredients are ill suited for such a Form.

Pillulae Gummosae.

Gum Pills.

The Assafoetida might be increased to one Ounce in Quantity.

Pillulae Mercuriales.

Mercurial Pills.

Turpentine is not necessary to unite the Mercury; a little Honey or Balsam of
Sulphur will do as well.

Pillulae Rufi.

Rufus's Pills.

A good Form.

Pillulae Saponaceae.

Soap Pills.

Venice Soap may be used.

Pillulae Styrace.

Pills of Storax.

One Opiate Pill is enough.

ELECTARIA.
ELECTARIES.

Electarium e Baccis Lauri.

Electary of Bay Berries.

This, though contracted, is even now superfluous.

Electarium e Casia.

Electary of Cassia.

If the Pulp of Cassia is kept, this need not.

Electarium Lenitivum.

Lenitive Electary.

The Liquorice is of no Use; the Sugar need not be double refined.

Electarium e Scammonio.

Electary of Scammony.

May be made occasionally.

Electarium e Scordio.

Electary of Scordium.

If the Pulvis e Bolo Compositus was used, it might be called Electarium e Bolo.

Balsamum Locatelli.

Locatellus's Balsam.

The Saunders is of no Service; a little prepared Bole would do better.

Confectio Cardiaca.

The Cordial Confection.

If the Evaporation is performed in that called a Cold-still, the Spirit will
be saved, and useful: The Saffron is better put in in Powder.

Confectio Paulina.

Confection called Paulina.

Two Peppers need not be used.

Mithridatium, sive Confectio Damocratis.

Mithridate, or Damocrates's Confection.

Every Powder ought to be weighed separate.

Philonium Londinense.

The London Philonium.

If Cinnamon was used instead of the White Pepper, the Medicine would be warm
enough.

Theriaca Andromachi.

Venice Treacle.

The Powders ought here also to be weighed separate.

AQUAE MEDICAMENTOSAE.
MEDICATED WATERS.

Aqua Aluminosa Bateana.

Bate's Alum Water.

Little used.

Aqua Sapphirina.

The Sapphire-coloured Water.

This is Limewater, tinged by an Erosion of Copper, with a little Sal
Ammoniacum.

Aqua Vitriolica Coerulea.

Blue Vitriolic Water.

Styptic.

Aqua Vitriolica Camphorata.

Camphorated Vitriolic Water.

Little used.

Lotio Saponacea.

The Saponaceous Lotion.

Mix all together, and shake them well; there needs no Trouble of Rubbing.

OLEA PER INFUSIONEM ET DECOCTIONEM.
OILS BY INFUSION AND DECOCTION.

Oleum Hyperici.

Oil of St. John's Wort.

This Oil receives some Virtue from the Flowers.

Oleum e Mucilaginibus.

Oil of Mucilages.

This is a very uncouth and inelegant Prescription. The Marshmallows are of no
Service; and, on the whole, it is nothing more than Olive Oil, with a little
Linseed Oil.

Oleum Sambucinum.

Oil of Elder.

Oleum Viride.

Green Oil.

However these may be prized from the Virtues of the Ingredients, I much
question if any good can be produced. That the Wormwood, etc. should give any,
appears inconsistent; and the Green Oil is especially ridiculous.

EMPLASTRA.
PLASTERS.

Emplastrum ex Ammoniaco cum Mercurio.

The Ammoniacum Plaster with Mercury.

This is a very unsuitable Plaster.

Emplastrum Attrahens.

Drawing Plaster.

This is seldom used but for Blisters. If equal Parts of all the Ingredients
were used, the Composition would be full as good, and rather milder.

Emplastrum Cephalicum.

Cephalic Plaster.

This Plaster is epispastic.

Emplastrum Commune.

Common Plaster.

Here is not Oil enough by near one Half.

Emplastrum Commune Adhaesivum.

Common Sticking Plaster.

This may be made occasionally, by adding a little powdered Rosin to the common
Plaster.

Emplastrum Commune cum Gummi.

Common Plaster with Gums.

A warm serviceable Plaster, and convenient, where a Cataplasm cannot be used.

Emplastrum Commune cum Mercurio.

Common Plaster with Mercury.

A good mercurial Plaster.

Emplastrum e Cymino.

Cummin Plaster.

The Cummin-seeds are too disagreeable to be hid by either Musk or Assafoetida.

Emplastrum e Minio.

Red-Lead Plaster.

There is no Difference between this and the common Plaster.

Emplastrum e Mucilaginibus.

Plaster of Mucilages.

Plaster with Gum Ammoniac, is a more proper Name.

Emplastrum Roborans.

Strengthening Plaster.

I suppose by preventing Perspiration in the Part, the Sticking Plaster,
colored with Bole, is more used, and is as good.

Emplastrum e Sapone.

Soap Plaster.

A good Plaster.

Emplastrum Stomachicum.

Stomach Plaster.

The Soap Plaster, with the Addition of a little Oil of Mace, Mint, etc. is a
better Stomach Plaster.

Emplastrum Vesicatorium.

Blistering Plaster.

The Vinegar is of no Use. The following Form is full as good: -- Take Burgundy
Pitch, eight Ounces; common Turpentine, three Ounces; Cantharides, two Ounces
and a half.

UNGUENTA ET LINIMENTA.
OINTMENTS AND LINIMENTS.

Unguentum Simplex.

Simple Ointment,

For Use not preferable to Hogs Lard; it helps fill the Catalogue.

Unguentum Album.

White Ointment.

Simple Ointment is whiter than this.

Lege Unguentum Eolliens.

Emollient Ointment.

Unguentum Album Camphoratum.

Camphorated White Ointment.

Lege Unguentum Emolliens Camphoratum.

Camphorated Emollient Ointment.

Unguentum Basilicum Flavum.

Yellow Basilicum.

This is a very rough Digestive, sticking and disagreeable; if made thus, would
be better -- Oil Olive, one Quart; yellow Rosin and yellow Wax, one Pound.

Unguentum Basilicum Nigrum.

Black Basilicum.

Unnecessary.

Unguentum Basilicum Viride.

Green Basilicum.

Unfit for a College Prescription. One of the Committee had been a Farrier, and
recommended this on that Account.

Unguentum Coeruleum Fortius and Mitius.

The Stronger and Weaker Blue Ointment.

There is no Need of any thing to unite the Quicksilver with the Lard, if the
Lard contains no Water, from which it may be freed by the Fire. It will mix
with the Quicksilver without any Assistance. It may be divided by a little,
then the whole added. Sometimes the Ointment is required, equal Parts of each;
if it was kept so, it might be weakened at Pleasure.

Unguentum e Gummi Elemi.

Ointment of Gum Elemi.

This too stiff by two Pints of Oil.

Unguentum e Mercurio Praecipitato.

Ointment with Precipitate of Mercury.

An extemporaneous Prescription.

Unguentum e Pice.

Ointment of Tar.

Inelegant.

Unguentum Sambucinum.

Ointment of Elder.

This is more usually made with Hogs Lard.

Unguentum Saturninum.

Ointment of Lead.

If the Quantity of Sugar of Lead be added to the White or Emollient Ointment,
it will be as well.

Unguentum e Sulphur.

Ointment of Sulphur.

Extemporaneous.

Unguentum Tripharmacum.

Ointment of three Ingredients.

A ridiculous Name. Unguentum Defensivum.

Unguentum Tutiae.

Ointment of Tutty.

Any soft Animal Fat will do.

Unguentum ad Vesicatoria.

Ointment for Blisters.

Should be made softer.

Unguentum Viride.

Green Ointment.

Not better after all than Hogs Lard.

Linimentum Album.

White Liniment.

This is not soft enough to be essentially different from the Ointment.

Linimentum Saponaceum.

Soap Liniment.

Spirits of Wine, soft Soap and Camphire, are more used.

Linimentum Tripharmacum.

Liniment of three Ingredients.

There is no Reason why we should have Ointment and Liniment too.

Linimentum Volatile.

Volatile Liniment.

Very good.

CERATA.
CERATES.

Ceratum Album.

White Cerate.

This is rather better to dress Blisters with than the Emplastrum Attrahens.

Ceratum Citrinum.

Yellow Cerate.

This is of no manner of Consequence.

Ceratum Epuloticum.

Cicatrizing Cerate.

If four Ounces of the common Plaster were used, the Cerate would be still
better.

Ceratum Mercuriale.

Mercurial Cerate.

Is not wanted.

EPITHEMATA.
EPITHEMS.

Epithema Vosicatorium.

Blistering Epithem.

This is useful to blister in the Smallpox, etc.

Epithema Volatile.

Volatile Epithem.

An extemporaneous Form.

Cataplasma e Cymino.

Cummin Cataplasm.

Is easily made when ordered.

Cataplasma Suppurans.

Suppurating Cataplasm.

White Bread and Milk; or the common Plaster with Gums, will answer much better.

Coagulum Aluminosum.

Alum Curd.

This is but little used; seems more prescribbed by a old Woman than a
Physician.

FINIS.

