BLUNDRELLA: OR, THE IMPERTINENT. A TALE.

Hunc neque dira venena, nec hosticus auferat ensis:
Nec laterum dolor, aut tussis nec tarda podagra:
Garulus hunc quando consumet cumque loquaces,
Si sapiat, vitet simulatque adoleverit aetas.
Hor. Ser. Lib. 1. Sat. 9. To which is Added The BEAU MONDE, OR, THE Pleasures
of St. JAMES'S. A NEW BALLAD.

To the Tune of, Oh! London, is a fine Town, etc.

The SECOND EDITION.



LONDON: Printed for A. DODD, at the Peacock, without Temple Bar, and Sold by
the Booksellers of London and Westminster. Price 6 d. MDCCXXX.

BLUNDRELLA: OR, THE IMPERTINENT. A TALE.
THE Tea was drank and taken away,
No Soul had any thing to say;
The Weather, and the usual din
A fresh were going to begin;
Fashion and Scandal, drained before,
On Carpet had been brought once more,
But for Blundrella, common Pest,
Of the Polite, the standing Jest.
BLUNDRELLA Idol of the Vain,
And first in the Loquacious Train;
In all things ignorant and weak,
Yet on all Subjects would she speak;
And of her own Perfections vaunted,
Still daunting all, herself undaunted;
Of a most contradicting Spirit,
And envious of another's Merit.
This Creature thus, with saucy Air,
Addressed Belinda, blooming Fair.
MADAM! I Am told you sing; I long
To have the honor of a Song:
Much better bred than to refuse,
Belinda pleads the old Excuse;
She Is caught a Cold, and feigns a Cough,
But that, alas! will not bring her off;
Blundrella urges her Request,
Now seconded by all the rest.
AT length, unwilling to appear
Affected, peevish, or severe,
The lovely Virgin tuned her Voice,
More out of Complaisance than Choice:
While all were with her Music pleased,
But she who had the Charmer teased;
Who, rude, unmanner'd, and abrupt!
Did thus Belinda interrupt:
MADAM, (said the affected Thing)
Did you never hear Squallinda sing?
I Have heard her sing that very Song,
Would charm the whole Seraphic Throng;
Of all the Singers her for me,
She sings so sweet, so clear, so free!
But, Madam! cannot you sing another?
That Song, I hope, has got a Brother:
Let us have that which the Fustina
Sings when she hangs on Senisino;
Its Name I have forgot, no matter,
It Is that which makes the Boxes clatter:
Or, Madam! but I beg your Pardon,
There is a Song, that in the Garden
Cuzzoni sings unto her Son;
That, or another, it is all one.
BELINDA blushed with Shame and Rage;
But yet, unwilling to engage
So bold a Foe in such a Fray,
She let the Creature have her Way:
And, though at sight she sung her Part,
And was a Mistress in the Art,
Pleaded her want of Voice and Skill;
Which made Blundrella prouder still.
Who grew insufferably vain,
And altered both her Voice and Strain.
SHE talked of Singers and Composers,
Of their Admirers and Opposers,
Of the Cuzzoni and Faustini,
Of Handel and of Bononcini;
One was to rough, the other to smooth,
Artillo only hit her Tooth;
And Tamo Tanto was a Song
Would give her Pleasure all day long.
FULL loftily she gave her Vote,
This had no Voice, and that no Throat;
That Heideigger had received a Letter,
And we should shortly have a better;
A Messenger was sent to Dover
To wait the Lady's coming over,
Who should no sooner hither come,
But she would strike all others dumb.
SHE likewise grew exceeding witty
Upon the Consorts in the City;
It Is true, she liked the Castle best,
But yet she made 'em both a Jest:
Nor did she much admire the Crown,
But as 'twas the other End of the Town.
SHE next of Masters 'gan to preach;
The English were not fit to teach,
Italians were the only Men,
And even of those not one in ten;
For she had heard a Lady say,
Scarce two in Town could sing or play.
WHAT with Composers, Players, Singers,
Performance, Gusto, Voices, Fingers,
She ran herself quite out of breath,
And talked the Company to Death.
WHEN happily, with engaging Air,
Eugenio, darling of the Fair,
Who touches charmingly the Flute,
Entered, and struck Blundrella mute;
And kept her Clack-eternal under
For near a Minute, There Is a wonder!
EUGENIO must expect his Share;
For scarce he had assumed a Chair,
But she, impatient, Silence broke,
And thus the Eternal Teazer spoke.
NOW for a Tune, my pretty Man!
Nay, you shall play, say what you can:
Ladies! he is the delightful'st Creature
You never knew, no Soul play sweeter:
Nay, prithee now don't make a Rout,
Here it is Egad, come -- pull it out.
WHAT mortal Man could stand the Trial!
He must consent, there is no denial,
So, for mere quiet Sake, he plays,
While she even stifles him with Praise,
And worries the poor Man to death,
Nor suffers him to take his breath;
But calls for Tune on Tune so fast,
Eugenio is quite tired at last,
And begs a Truce upon Parole,
He Will play anon with all his soul.
NOW you must know Belinda's Charms
Had given his Heart no small Alarms;
He was her Servant most avowed
And happiest of the sighing Crowd.
Sophronia, being her near Relation,
Happily laid hold on this Cessation;
And, to Eugenio drawing near,
She whispered softly in his Ear,
Told him Blundrella's vile Assurance,
And sweet Belinda's mild Endurance.
EUGENIO instantly was fired,
Rage and Revenge his Mind inspired:
He re-assum'd his Spech and Flute,
And thus Blundrella did salute;
Madam, (said he) before I go,
Your dear Commands I Would gladly know.
BLUNDRELLA reared her Crest aloft,
And begged him to play something soft:
What think you, Madam, of AL OMBRA?
That Is poor dull Stuff, do ye like SGOMBRA?
Si Caro, if you please, said she:
He played the Tune of Children three.
She was in Raptures, and entreated
The self same Tune might be repeated.
HE changed his Airs, and, to her Shame,
She took ten others for the same.
In short, Eugenio played her off,
And made her all the Circle's Scoff:
While, stupid she! ascribed to Wit and Sense
The Laughter raised by her Impertinence.
THE BEAU MONDE, OR THE Pleasures of St. JAMES'S. A BALLAD.
To the Tune of, Oh! LONDON is a fine-Town, etc.
OH! St. James's is a lovely Place,
It Is better than the City;
For there are Balls and Operas,
And every Thing that is pretty.
There Is little Lady CUZZONI,
And bouncing Dame FAUSTINA,
The Duce a Bit will either Sing
Unless they are each a QUEEN -- a,
And when we have ek'd out History,
And made them Rival Queens,
They Will warble sweetly on the Stage,
And scold behind the Scenes:
Oh! St. James's, etc.
When having filled their Pockets full,
No longer can they stay;
But turn their Backs upon the Town,
And scamper all away.
The Belles and Beaux cry after them,
With all their might and main;
And HEIDEGGER is sent in haste
To fetch 'em back again.
Oh! St. James's, etc.
Then Hey! for a Subscription
To the Opera, or the Ball;
The Silver Ticket walks about
Until there comes a Call.
This puts them into doleful Dumps,
Who were both blithe and Gay;
There Is nothing spoils Diversion more
Than telling what is to pay.
Oh! St. James's, etc.
There Is POPE has made the witlings mad,
Who labor all they can;
To pull his Reputation down,
And maul the Little Man.
But Wit and he so close are linked,
In vain is all this Pother;
They never can demolish one
Without destroying 'tother.
Oh! St. James's, etc.
And there is Miss POLLY PEACHUM lugs
Our Nobles by the Ears,
'Till PONDER WELL by far Exceeds
The Music of the Spheres.
When lo! to show the Wisdom Great
Of LONDON's famous Town,
We set her up above her self,
And then we take her down.
Oh! St. James's, etc.
And, there is your Beaux, with powdered Clothes,
Bedaub'd from Head to Shin;
Their Pocket-holes adorned with Gold,
But not a souse within:
And there is your pretty Gentlemen,
All dressed in Silk and Satin;
That get a Spice of every Thing,
Excepting Sense and Latin.
Oh! St. James's, etc.
And there is your Cits that have their Tits,
In Finsbury so sweet.
But costlier Tits they keep, God wot!
In Bond and Poultney-Street.
And there is your green Nobility,
On Citizens so witty,
Whose Fortune and Gentility,
Arose from LONDON's City.
Oh! St. James's, etc.
We go to Bed when others rise,
And Dine at Candlelight;
There Is nothing mends Complexion more,
Than turning Day to Night.
For what is Title, Wealth, or Wit,
If Folks are not Genteel?
Or how can they be said to live,
Who know not what is QUADRILLE.
Oh! St. James's, etc.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. l. 1. for Blunderella, r. Blundrella. P. 7. l. 10. for you never knew
no Soul play sweeter, r. you ever knew, -- no Soul play sweeter. p. 8. l. 7.
for Spech, r. Speech.


