THE BUSY BODY: A COMEDY. As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE,
By Her Majesty's Servants.

Written by Mrs. SUSANNA CENTLIVRE.

The Second Edition.

Quem tulit ad scenam ventoso Gloria curru,
Exanimat lentus Spectator, sedulus inflat.
Sic Leve, sic parvum est, animum quod laudis avarum
Subruit aut resicit --
Horat. Epist. Lib. II. Ep. 1. LONDON, Printed for BERNARD LINTOTT, at the
Cross-Keys between the TWO Temple-Gates in Fleet Street.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN Lord SUMMERS, Lord-President of Her MAJESTY's
most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Lordship,
AS it is an Established Custom in these latter Ages, for all Writers,
particularly the Poetical, to shelter their Productions under the Protection of
the most Distinguished, whose Approbation produces a kind of Inspiration, much
superior to that which the Heathenish Poets pretended to derive from their
Fictitious Apollo: So it was my Ambition to Address one of my weak Performances
to Your Lordship, who, by Universal Consent, are justly allowed to be the best
Judge of all kinds of Writing.

I was indeed at first deterred from my Design, by a Thought that it might be
accounted unpardonable Rudeness to obtrude a Trifle of this Nature to a Person,
whose sublime Wisdom moderates that Council, which at this Critical Juncture,
overrules the Fate of all Europe. But then I was encouraged by Reflecting,
that Lelius and Scipio, the two greatest Men in their Time, among the Romans,
both for Political and Military Virtues, in the height of their important
Affairs, thought the Perusal and Improving of Terence's Comedies the noblest
way of unbinding their Minds. I own I were guilty of the highest Vanity, should
I presume to put my Composures in Parallel with those of that Celebrated
Dramatist; But then again, I hope that Your Lordship's native Goodness and
Generosity, in Condescension to the Taste of the Best and Fairest part of the
Town, who have been pleased to be diverted by the following SCENES, will excuse
and overlook such Faults as your nicer Judgment might discern.

And here, my Lord, the Occasion seems fair for me to engage in a Panegyric
upon those Natural and Acquired Abilities, which so brightly Adorn your Person:
But I shall resist that Temptation, being conscious of the Inequality of a
Female Pen to so Masculine an Attempt; and having no other Ambition than to
Subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble and Most Obedient Servant, SUSANNA
CENTLIVRE.

PROLOGUE.
By the Author of TUNBRIDGE-WALKS.
THOUGH modern Prophets were exposed of late,
The Author could not Prophesy his Fate:
If with such Scenes an Audience had been fired,
The Poet must have really been Inspired.
But these, alas! are Melancholy Days
For Modern Prophets and for Modern Plays.
Yet since Prophetic Lies please Fools of Fashion,
And Women are so fond of Agitation;
To Men of Sense I Will Prophesy anew,
And tell you wondrous things that will prove true;
Undaunted Colonels will to Camps repair,
Assured, there'll be no Skirmishes this Year;
On our own Terms will flow the wished for Peace,
All Wars, except 'twixt Man and Wife, will cease.
The Grand Monarch may wish his Son a Throne,
But hardly will advance to lose his own.
This Season most things bear a smiling Face;
But Play'rs in Summer have a dismal Case,
Since your Appearance only is our Act of Grace.
Court Ladies will to Country Seats be gone,
My Lord cannot all the Year live Great in Town;
Where wanting Opera's, Basset, and a Play,
They Will sigh, and stitch a Gown, to pass the time away.
Gay City-Wives at Tunbridge will appear,
Whose Husbands long have labored for an Heir;
Where many a Courtier may their Wants relieve,
But by the Waters only they Conceive.
The Fleet Street Sempstress -- Toast of Temple Sparks,
That runs Spruce Neckcloths for Attorney's Clerks;
At Cupid's Gardens will her Hours regale,
Sing fair Dorinda, and drink Bottl'd Ale.
At all Assemblies Rakes are up and down.
And Gamesters, where they think they are not known.
Should I denounce our Author's Fate to Day,
To cry down Prophecies, you would damn the Play:
Yet Whims like these have sometimes made you Laugh,
It Is Tattling all, like Isaac Bickerstaff.
Since War and Places claim the Bards that write,
Be kind and bear a Woman's Treat to Night;
Let your Indulgence all her Fears allay,
And none but Woman-Haters damn this Play.
EPILOGUE.
IN me you see one Busie-Body more;
Though you may have enough of one before.
With Epilogues, the Busie-Body's Way,
We strive to help, but sometimes mar a Play.
At this mad Sessions, half condemned ever tried,
Some, in three Days, have been turned off, and died.
In spite of Parties, their Attempts are vain,
For like false Prophets, they never rise again.
Too late, when cast, your Favor one beseeches,
And Epilogues prove Execution-Speeches.
Yet sure I spy no Busybodies here,
And one may pass since they do every where.
Sour Critics Time and Breath and Censures waste,
And baulk your Pleasures to refine your Taste.
One busy Don ill-timed high Tenets Preaches,
Another yearly shows himself in Speeches.
Some snivling Cits would have a Peace for spite,
To starve those Warriors who so bravely fight.
Still of a Foe upon his Knees afraid,
Whose well-bang'd Troops want Money, Heart and Bread.
Old Beaux, who none, not even themselves can please,
Are busy still, for nothing -- but to teize
The Young; so busy to engage a Heart;
The Mischief done, are busy most to part.
Ungrateful Wretches, who still cross one's Will,
When they more kindly might be busy still!
One to a Husband, who never dreamt of Horns,
Shows how dear Spouse with Friend his Brows adorns.
The Officious Tell-tale Fool (he should repent it)
Parts three kind Souls that lived at Peace contented.
Some with Law-Quirks set Houses by the Ears.
With Physic one what he would heal impairs.
Like that dark mob'd up Fry, that neighboring Curse,
Who to remove Love's Pains bestow a worse.
Since then this meddling Tribe infest the Age,
Bear one awhile exposed upon the Stage.
Let none but Busybodies vent their Spite,
And with good Humor Pleasure crown the Night.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN
Sir George Airy. A Gentleman of Four Thousand a Year in Love, with Miranda.
Acted by Mr. Wilks. Sir Francis Gripe. Guardian to Miranda and Marplot, Father
to Charles, in Love with Miranda. Mr Estcourt. Charles. Friend to Sir George,
in Love with Isabinda. Mr. Mills. Sir Jealous Traffic. A Merchant that had
lived sometime in Spain, a great Admirer of the Spanish Customs, Father to
Isabinda. Mr. Bullock. Marplot, A sort of a silly Fellow, Cowardly, but very
Inquisitive to know every Body's Business, generally spoils all he undertakes,
yet without Design. Mr. Pack. Whisper. Servant to Charles. Mr. Bullockjun.
WOMEN.
Miranda. An Heiress, worth Thirty Thousand Pound, really in Love with Sir
George, but pretends to be so with her Guardian Sir Francis. Mrs. Cross.
Isabinda. Daughter to Sir Jealous, in Love with Charles, but designed for a
Spanish Merchant by her Father, and kept up from the sight of all Men. Mrs.
Rogers. Patch. Her Woman. Mrs. Saunders. Scentwell. Woman to Miranda. Mrs.
Mills.
THE BUSY BODY.
ACT I. SCENE The Park.
Sir George Airy meeting Charles. Cha. HA! Sir George Airy! A Birding thus
early, what forbidden Game roused you so soon? For no lawful Occasion could
invite a Person of your Figure abroad at such unfashionable Hours.


Sir Geo. There are some Men, Charles, whom Fortune has left free from
Inquietudes, who are diligently studious to find out Ways and Means to make
themselves uneasy.


Cha. Is it possible that any thing in Nature can ruffle the Temper of a Man,
whom the four Seasons of the Year compliment with as many thousand Pounds, nay!
and a Father at Rest with his Ancestors.


Sir Geo. Why there it is now! a Man that wants Money thinks none can be unhappy
that has it; but my Affairs are in such a whimsical Posture, that it will
require a Calculation of my Nativity to find if my Gold will relieve me or not.


Cha. Ha, ha, ha, never consult the Stars about that; Gold has a Power beyond
them; Gold unlocks the Midnight Councils; Gold out-does the Wind, becalms the
Ship, or fills her Sails; Gold is omnipotent below; it makes whole Armies
fight, or fly; it buys even Souls, and bribes the Wretches to betray their
Country: Then what can thy Business be, that Gold will not serve thee in?


Sir Geo. Why, I Am in Love.


Cha. In Love! -- Ha, ha, ha, ha; In Love, Ha, ha, ha, with what, prithee, a
Cherubin?


Sir Geo. No, with a Woman.


Cha. A Woman, Good, Ha, ha, ha, and Gold not help thee?


Sir Geo. But suppose I Am in Love with two --


Cha. Ay, if you are in Love with two hundred, Gold will fetch 'em, I warrant
thee, Boy. But who are they? who are they? come.


Sir Geo. One is a Lady whose Face I never saw, but witty as an Angel; the
other beautiful as Venus --


Cha. And a Fool --


Sir Geo. For ought I know, for I never spoke to her, but you can inform me; I
am charmed by the Wit of One, and dye for the Beauty of the Other?


Cha. And pray, which are you in Quest of now?


Sir Geo. I prefer the Sensual Pleasure, I Am for her I Have seen, who is thy
Father's Ward, Miranda.


Cha. Nay, then I pity you; for the Jew my Father will no more part with her,
and 30000 Pound, than he would with a Guinea to keep me from starving.


Sir Geo. Now you see Gold cannot do every thing, Charles.


Cha. Yes, for it is her Gold that bars my Father's Gate against you.


Sir Geo. Why, if he is this avaricious Wretch, how came thou by such a
liberal Education?


Cha. Not a Souse out of his Pocket, I assure you? I had an Uncle who defrayed
that Charge, but for some little Wildnesses of Youth, though he made me his Heir,
left Dad my Guardian till I came to Years of Discretion, which I presume the
old Gentleman will never think I am; and now he has got the Estate into his
Clutches, it does me no more good, than if it lay in Prester John's Dominions.


Sir Geo. What can thou find no Stratagem to redeem it?


Cha. I have made many Essays to no purpose; though Want, the Mistress of
Invention, still tempts me on, yet still the old Fox is too cunning for me -- I
am upon my last Project, which if it fails, then for my last Refuge, a Brown
Musket.


Sir Geo. What is it, can I assist thee?


Cha. Not yet, when you can, I have Confidence enough in you to ask it.


Sir Geo. I am always ready, but what does he intend to do with Miranda? Is she
to be sold in private? or will he put her up by way of Auction, at who bids
most? If so, Egad, I Am for him; my Gold, as you say, shall be subservient to my
Pleasure.


Cha. To deal ingenuously with you, Sir George, I know very little of Her, or
Home; for since my Uncle's Death, and my Return from Travel, I have never been
well with my Father; he thinks my Expenses too great, and I his Allowance too
little; he never sees me, but he quarrels; and to avoid that, I shun his House
as much as possible. The Report is, he intends to marry her himself.


Sir Geo. Can she consent to it?


Cha. Yes faith, so they say; but I tell you, I am wholly ignorant of the
matter. Miranda and I are like two violent Members of a contrary Party; I can
scarce allow her Beauty, though all the World does; nor she me Civility, for that
Contempt: I fancy she plays the Mother-in-law already, and sets the old
Gentleman on to do mischief.


Sir Geo. Then I Have your free Consent to get her.


Cha. Ay and my helping-hand, if occasion be.


Sir Geo. Pugh, yonder is a Fool coming this way, let us avoid him.


Cha. What Marplot, no no, he is my Instrument; there is a thousand Conveniences
in him, he will lend me his Money when he has any, run of my Errands and be proud
on it; in short, he will Pimp for me, Lie, for me, Drink for me, do any thing but
fight for me, and that I trust to my own Arm for.


Sir Geo. Nay then he is to be endured; I never knew his Qualifications before.


Enter Marplot with a Patch cross his Face. Marpl. Dear Charles, yours, -- Ha!
Sir George Airy, the Man in the World, I have an Ambition to be known to
(aside.) Give me thy Hand, dear Boy --


Cha. A good Assurance! But hark ye, how came your Beautiful Countenance
clouded in the wrong place?


Marpl. I must confess it is a little Mal-a-propos, but no matter for that; a
Word with you, Charles; Prithee, introduce me to Sir George -- he is a Man of
Wit, and I Would give ten Guineas to --


Cha. When you have 'em you mean.


Marpl. Ay, when I have 'em; pugh, pox, you cut the Thread of my Discourse -- I
would give ten Guineas, I say, to be ranked in his Acquaintance: Well, it is a
vast Addition to a Man's Fortune, according to the Rout of the World, to be
seen in the Company of Leading Men; for then we are all thought to be
Politicians, or Whigs, or Jacks, or High-Flyers, or Low-Flyers, or Levellers --
and so forth; for you must know, we all herd in Parties now.


Cha. Then a Fool for Diversion is out of Fashion, I find.


Marpl. Yes, without it be a mimicking Fool, and they are Darlings every where;
but prithee introduce me.


Cha. Well, on Condition you will give us a true Account how you came by that
Mourning Nose, I will.


Marpl. I Will do it.


Cha. Sir George, here is a Gentleman has a passionate Desire to kiss your Hand.


Sir Geo. Oh, I honor Men of the Sword; and I presume this Gentleman is lately
come from Spain or Portugal -- by his Scars.


Marpl. No really, Sir George, mine sprung from civil Fury, happening last
Night into the Groom-Porters -- I had a strong Inclination to go ten Guineas
with a sort of a, sort of a -- kind of a Milk Sop, as I thought: A Pox of the
Dice, he flung out, and my Pockets being empty, as Charles knows they sometimes
are, he proved a surly North-Britain, and broke my Face for my Deficiency.


Sir Geo. Ha! ha! and did not you draw?


Marpl. Draw, Sir, why, I did but lay my Hand upon my Sword to make a swift
Retreat, and he roared out. Now the Deel a Ma sol, Sir, gin ye touch yer Steel,
Ise whip mine through yer Wem.


Sir Geo. Ha, ha, ha,


Cha. Ha, ha, ha, ha, safe was the Word, so you walked off, I suppose


Marpl. Yes, for I avoid fighting, purely to be serviceable to my Friends you
know --


Sir Geo. Your Friends are much obliged to you, Sir, I hope you will rank me in
that Number.


Marpl. Sir George, a Bow from the side Box, or to be seen in your Chariot,
binds me ever yours.


Sir Geo. Trifles, you may command 'em when you please.


Cha. Provided he may command you --


Marpl. Me! why I live for no other purpose -- Sir George, I have the Honor to
be caressed by most of the reigning Toasts of the Town, I Will tell 'em you are
the finest Gentleman --


Sir Geo. No, no, prithee let me alone to tell the Ladies -- my Parts -- can
you convey a Letter upon Occasion, or deliver a Message with an Air of
Business, Ha!


Marpl. With the Assurance of a Page and the Gravity of a Statesman.


Sir Geo. You know Miranda!


Marpl. What, my Sister Ward? Why, her Guardian is mine, we are Fellow
Sufferers: Ah! he is a covetous, cheating, sanctified Curmudgeon; that Sir
Francis Gripe is a damned old --


Cha. I suppose, Friend, you forget that he is my Father --


Marpl. I ask your Pardon, Charles, but it is for your sake I hate him. Well, I
say, the World is mistaken in him, his Out side Piety, makes him every Man's
Executor, and his Inside Cunning, makes him every Heir's Jailer. Egad, Charles,
I Am half persuaded that you are some Ward too, and never of his getting: For
thou art as honest a Debauchee as ever Cuckolded Man of Quality.


Sir Geo. A pleasant Fellow.


Cha. The Dog is Diverting sometimes, or there would be no enduring his
Impertinence: He is pressing to be employed and willing to execute, but some
ill Fate generally attends all he undertakes, and he oftener spoils an Intreague
than helps it --


Marpl. If I miscarry it is none of my Fault, I follow my Instructions.


Cha. Yes, witness the Merchant's Wife.


Marpl. Pish, Pox, that was an Accident.


Sir Geo. What was it, prithee?


Cha. Why, you must know, I had lent a certain Merchant my hunting Horses, and
was to have met his Wife in his Absence: Sending him alone with my Groom to
make the Complement, and to deliver a Letter to the Lady at the same time; what
does he do, but gives the Husband the Letter, and offers her the Horses.


Marpl. I remember you was even with me, for you denied the Letter to be yours,
and swore I had a design upon her, which my Bones paid for.


Cha. Come, Sir George, let us walk round, if you are not engaged, for I have
sent my Man upon a little earnest Business, and I have ordered him to bring me
the Answer into the Park.


Marpl. Business, and I not know it, Egad I Will watch him.


Sir Geo. I must beg your Pardon, Charles, I am to meet your Father.


Cha. My Father!


Sir Geo. Aye! and about the oddest Bargain perhaps you ever heard of; but I Will
not impart till I know the Success.


Marpl. What can his Business be with Sir Francis? Now would I give all the
World to know it; why the Devil should not one know every Man's Concern. (Aside.


Cha. Prosperity to it whatever it be, I have private Affairs too; over a Bottle
we'll compare Notes.


Marpl. Charles knows I love a Glass as well as any Man, I Will make one; shall
it be to Night? Ad I long to know their Secrets. (Aside.


Enter Whisper. Whis. Sir, Sir, Mrs. Patch says Isabinda's Spanish Father has
quite spoiled the Plot, and she cannot meet you in the Park, but he infallibly
will go out this Afternoon, she says; but I must step again to know the Hour.


Marpl. What did Whisper say now? I shall go stark mad, if I Am not let into
this Secret. (Aside.


Cha. Cursed Misfortune, come along with me, my Heart feels Pleasure at her
Name. Sir George, yours; we'll meet at the old Place the usual Hour.


Sir Geo. Agreed; I think I see Sir Francis yonder.

(Exit.
Cha. Marplot, you must excuse, I am engaged.

(Exit.
Marpl. Engaged, Egad I Will engage my Life I Will know what your Engagement is.

(Exit.
Miran. (Coming out of a Chair.) Let the Chair wait: My Servant, that dogged Sir
George, said he was in the Park.

Enter Patch. Ha! Mis Patch alone! did not you tell me you had contrived a way
to bring Isabinda to the Park?


Patch. Oh, Madam, your Ladyship cannot imagine what a wretched Disappointment
we have met with: Just as I had fetched a Suit of my Clothes for a Disguise,
comes my old Master into his Closet, which is right against her Chamber Door;
this struck us into a terrible Fright -- At length I put on a grave Face, and
asked him if he was at leisure for his Chocolate, in hopes to draw him out of
his Hole; but he snap'd my Nose off; No, I shall be busy here this two Hours;
at which my poor Mistress seeing no way of Escape, ordered me to wait on your
Ladyship with the sad Relation.


Miran. Unhappy Isabinda! Was ever any thing so unaccountable as the Humor of
Sir Jealousy Traffic.


Patch. Oh, Madam, it is his living so long in Spain, he vows he will spend half
his Estate, but he will be a Parliament Man, on purpose to bring in a Bill for
Women to wear Veils, and the other odious Spanish Customs -- He swears it is
the height of Impudence to have a Woman seen barefaced even at Church, and
scarce believes there is a true begotten Child in the City.


Miran. Ha, ha, ha, how the old Fool torments himself! Suppose he could
introduce his rigid Rules -- does he think we could not match them in
Contrivance? No, no; Let the Tyrant Man make what Laws he will, if there is a
Woman under the Government, I warrant she finds a way to break 'em: Is his Mind
set upon the Spaniard for his Son-in-law still?


Patch. Ay, and he expects him by the next Fleet, which drives his Daughter to
Melancholy and Despair: But, Madam, I find you retain the same gay, cheerful
Spirit you had, when I waited on your Ladyship. -- My Lady is mighty good
humored too; and I have found a way to make Sir Jealousy believe I am wholly
in his Interest, when my real Design is to serve her; he makes me her Jailer,
and I set her at Liberty.


Miran. I knew thy Prolifick Brain would be of singular Service to her, or I
had not parted with thee to her Father.


Patch. But, Madam, the Report is that you are going to marry your Guardian.


Miran. It is necessary such a Report should be, Patch.


Patch. But is it true, Madam?


Miran. That Is not absolutely necessary.


Patch. I thought it was only the old strain, coaxing him still for your own,
and railing at all the young Fellows about Town: In my Mind, now, you are as
ill plagued with your Guardian, Madam, as my Lady is with her Father.


Miran. No, I have Liberty, Wench, that she wants; what would she give now to
be in this dissabilee, in the -- open Air, nay more, in pursuit of the young
Fellow she likes, for that is my Case, I assure thee.


Patch. As for that, Madam, she is even with you; for though she cannot come
abroad, we have a way to bring him home in spite of old Argus.


Miran. Now Patch, your Opinion of my Choice, for here he comes -- Ha! my
Guardian with him; what can be the meaning of this? I Am sure Sir Francis cannot
know me in this Dress -- Let Us observe 'em.

(They withdraw.
Enter Sir Francis Gripe and Sir George Airy. Sir Fran. Verily, Sir George,
thou will repent throwing away thy Money so, for I tell thee sincerely,
Miranda, my Charge does not love a young Fellow, they are all vicious, and
seldom make good Husbands; in sober Sadness she cannot abide 'em.


Miran. (Peeping.) In sober Sadness you are mistaken -- what can this mean?


Sir Geo. Look ye, Sir Francis, whether she can or cannot abide young Fellows
is not the Business; will you take the fifty Guineas?


Sir Fran. In good truth -- I will not, for I knew thy Father, he was a hearty
wary Man, and I cannot consent that his Son should squander away what he saved,
to no purpose.


Mirand. (Peeping.) Now, in the Name of Wonder, what Bargain can he be driving
about me for fifty Guineas?


Patch. I wish it ben't for the first Nights Lodging, Madam.


Sir Geo. Well, Sir Francis, since you are so conscientious for my Father's
sake, then permit me the Favor, Gratis.


Miran. (Peeping.) The Favor! OF my Life, I believe it is as you said, Patch.


Sir Fran. No verily, if thou do not buy thy Experience, thou will never be
wise; therefore give me a Hundred and try Fortune.


Sir Geo. The Scruples arose, I find, from the scanty Sum -- Let me see -- a
Hundred Guineas -- (Takes 'em out of a Purse and chinks 'em.) Ha! they have a
very pretty Sound, and a very pleasing Look -- But then, Miranda -- But if she
should be cruel --


Miran. (Peeping.) As Ten to One I shall --


Sir Fran. Ay, do consider on it, He, he, he, he.


Sir Geo. No, I Will do it.


Patch. Do It, what, whether you will or no, Madam?


Sir Geo. Come to the Point, here is the Gold, sum up the Condition --


Sir Fran. (Pulling out a Paper.)
Miran. (Peeping.) Ay for Heaven's sake do, for my Expectation is on the Rack.


Sir Fran. Well at your own Peril be it.


Sir Geo. Aye, aye, go on.


Sir Fran. Imprimis, you are to be admitted into my House in order to move your
Suit to Miranda, for the space of Ten Minutes, without Let or Molestation,
provided I remain in the same Room.


Sir Geo. But out of Ear shot --


Sir Fran. Well, well, I don't desire to hear what yousay, Ha, ha, ha, in
consideration I am to have that Purse and a hundred Guineas.


Sir Geo. Take it -- Gives him the Purse,


Miran. (Peeping.) So, it is well it is no worse, I Will fit you both --


Sir Geo. And this Agreement is to be performed to Day.


Sir Fran. Aye, aye, the sooner the better, poor Fool, how Miranda and I shall
laugh at him -- Well, Sir George, Ha, ha, ha, take the last sound of your
Guineas, Ha, ha, ha. (Chinks 'em.)

(Exit.
Miran. (Peeping.) Sure he does not know I am Miranda.


Sir Geo. A very extraordinary Bargain I have made truly, if she should be
really in Love with this old Cuff now -- Psha, that is morally impossible -- but
then what hopes have I to succeed, I never spoke to her --


Miran. (Peeping.) Say you so? Then I am safe.


Sir Geo. What though my Tongue never spoke, my Eyes said a thousand Things, and
my Hopes flattered me hers answered 'em. If I Am lucky -- if not, it is but a
hundred Guineas thrown away.

( Miranda and Patch come forwards.
Miran. Upon what Sir George?


Sir Geo. Ha! my Incognito -- upon a Woman, Madam.


Miran. They are the worst things you can deal in, and damage the soonest; your
very Breath destroys 'em, and I fear you will never see your Return, Sir George,
Ha, ha!


Sir Geo. Were they more brittle than China, and dropped to pieces with a Touch,
every Atom of her I have ventured at if she is but Mistress of thy Wit,
balances Ten times the Sum -- Prithee let me see thy Face.


Miran. By no means, that may spoil your Opinion of my Sense --


Sir Geo. Rather confirm it, Madam.


Patch. So rob the Lady of your Gallantry, Sir.


Sir Geo. No Child, a Dish of Chocolate in the Morning never spoils my Dinner;
the other Lady, I design a set Meal; so there is no danger --


Miran. Matrimony! Ha, ha, ha; what Crimes have you committed against the God
of Love, that he should revenge 'em so severely to stamp Husband upon your
Forehead --


Sir Geo. For my Folly in having so often met you here, without pursuing the
Laws of Nature, and exercising her command -- But I resolve ever we part now,
to know who you are, where you live, and what kind of Flesh and Blood your Face
is; therefore unmask and don't put me to the trouble of doing it for you.


Miran. My Face is the same Flesh and Blood with my Hand, Sir George, which if
you will be so rude to provoke.


Sir Geo. You Will apply it to my Cheek -- The Ladies Favors are always Welcome;
but I must have that Cloud withdrawn. (Taking hold of her) Remember you are in
the Park, Child, and what a terrible thing would it be to lose this pretty
white Hand.


Miran. And how will it sound in a Chocolate-House; that Sir George Airy rudely
pulled off a Ladies Mask, when he had given her his Honor, that he never
would, directly or indirectly endeavor to know her till she gave him Leave.


Patch. I wish we were safe out.


Sir Geo. But if that Lady thinks fit to pursue and meet me at every turn like
some troubled Spirit, shall I be blamed if I inquire into the Reality? I would
have nothing dissatisfied in a Female Shape.


Miran. What shall I do? (Pause.


Sir Geo. Ay, prithee consider, for thou shall find me very much at thy Service.


Batch. Suppose, Sir, the Lady should be in Love with you.


Sir Geo. Oh! I Will return the Obligation in a Moment.


Patch. And marry her?


Sir Geo. Ha, ha, ha, that is not the way to love her, Child.


Miran. If he discovers me I shall die -- Which way shall I escape? -- Let me
see. (Pauses.)


Sir Geo. Well, Madam --


Miran. I have it -- Sir George, it is fit you should allow something; if you will
excuse my Face, and turn your Back (if you look upon me I shall sink, even
masked as I am) I will confess why I have engaged you so often, who I am, and
where I live?


Sir Geo. Well, to show you I Am a Man of Honor I accept the Conditions. Let me
but once know those, and the Face will not be long a Secret to me.


Patch. What mean you, Madam?


Miran. To get off.


Sir Geo. It Is something indecent to turn ones Back upon a Lady; but you
command and I obey. (Turns his Back.) Come, Madam, begin --


Miran. First then it was my unhappy Lot to see you at Paris. (Draws back a
little while and speaks) at a Ball upon a Birthday; your Shape and Air charmed
my Eyes; your Wit and Complaisance my Soul, and from that fatal Night I loved
you. (Drawing back.) And when you left the Place, Grief seized me so -- No Rest
my Heart, no Sleep my Eyes could know. --

Last I resolved a hazardous Point to try,
And quit the Place in search of Liberty.
(Exit.
Sir Geo. Excellent -- I hope she is Handsome -- Well, Now, Madam, to the other
two Things: Your Name, and where you live? -- I am a Gentleman, and this
Confession will not be lost upon me. -- Nay, prithee don't weep, but go on --
for I find my Heart melts in thy Behalf -- speak quickly or I shall turn about
-- Not yet. -- Poor Lady, she expects I should comfort her; and to do her
Justice, she has said enough to encourage me. (Turns about.) Ha? gone! The
Devil, jilted? Why, what a Tale has she invented -- of Paris, Balls, and
Birth-Days. -- Egad I Would give Ten Guineas to know who this Gypsy is. -- A Curse
of my Folly -- I deserve to lose her; what Woman can forgive a Man that turns
his Back.

The Bold and Resolute, in Love and War,
To Conquer take the Right, and swiftest Way;
The boldest Lover soonest gains the Fair,
As Courage makes the rudest Force obey,
Take no denial, and the Dames adore ye,
Closely pursue them and they fall before ye.

The End of the First ACT.
ACT the Second.
Enter Sir Francis Gripe, Miranda. Sir Fran. HA, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Miran. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha; Oh, I shall die with Laughing. -- The most
Romantic Adventure: Ha, ha! What does the odious young Fop mean? A Hundred
Pieces to talk an Hour with me; Ha, ha.


Sir Fran. And I am to be by too; there is the Jest: Adod, if it had been in
Private, I should not have cared to trust the young dog.


Mirand. Indeed and Indeed, but you might Gardy -- Now methinks there is no Body
Handsomer than you: So Neat, so Clean, so Good-humored, and so Loving. --


Sir Fran. Pretty Rogue, Pretty Rogue, and so thou shall find me, if thou do
prefer thy Gardy before these Caperers of the Age, thou shall outshine the
Queen's Box on an Opera Night; thou shall be the Envy of the Ring (for I will
carry thee to Hide-Park) and thy Equipage shall Surpass, the what -- do you call
'em Ambassadors.


Miran. Nay, I Am sure the Discreet Part of my Sex will Envy me more for the
Inside Furniture, when you are in it, than my Outside Equipage.


Sir Fran. A Cunning Baggage, a faith thou art, and a wise one too; and to show
thee thou have not chose amiss, I Will this moment disinherit my Son, and Settle
my whole Estate upon thee.


Miran. There Is and old Rogue now: (Aside.) No, Gardy, I would not have your
Name be so Black in the World -- You know my Father's Will runs, that I am not
to possess my Estate, without your Consent, till I Am Five and Twenty; you shall
only abate the odd Seven Years, and make me Mistress of my Estate to Day, and
I Will make you Master of my Person to Morrow.


Sir Fran. Humph? that may not be safe -- No, Chargy, I Will Settle it upon thee
for Pin-money; and that will be every bit as well, thou know.


Miran. Unconscionable old Wretch, Bribe me with my own Money -- Which way
shall I get out of his Hands? (Aside.


Sir Fran. Well what art thou thinking on, my Girl, ha? How to banter Sir
George?


Miran. I must not pretend to banter: He knows my Tongue too well: (Aside.) No,
Gardy, I have thought of a way will confound him more than all I could say, if
I should talk to him Seven Years.


Sir Fran. How Is that? Oh! I Am Transported, I Am Ravished, I Am Mad --


Miran. It would make you Mad, if you knew all, (Aside.) I Will not answer him
one Word, but be Dumb to all he says --


Sir Fran. Dumb, good; Ha, ha, ha. Excellent, ha, ha, I think I have you now,
Sir George, Dumb! he will go Distracted -- Well, she is the wittiest Rogue -- Ha,
ha, Dumb! I can but laugh, ha, ha, to think how damned Mad he will be when he
finds he has given his Money away for a Dumb Show. Ha, ha, ha.


Miran. Nay, Gardy, if he did but know my Thoughts of him, it would make him
ten times Madder: Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Fran. Ay, so it would Chargy, to hold him in such Derision, to scorn to
answer him, to be Dumb: Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Enter Charles. Sir Fran. How now, Sirrah, Who let you in?


Char. My Necessity, Sir.


Sir Fran. Sir, your Necessities are very Impertinent, and ought to have sent
before they Entered.


Char. Sir, I knew 'twas a Word would gain Admittance no where.


Sir Fran. Then, Sirrah, how durst you Rudely thrust that upon your Father,
which no Body else would admit?


Char. Sure the Name of a Son is a sufficient Plea. I ask this Lady's Pardon if
I have intruded.


Sir Fran. Ay, Ay, ask her Pardon and her Blessing too, if you expect any thing
from me.


Miran. I believe yours, Sir Francis, in a Purse of Guinea's would be more
material. Your Son may have Business with you, I Will retire.


Sir Fran. I guess his Business, but I Will dispatch him; I expect the Knight
every Minute: You Will be in Readiness.


Miran. Certainly! my Expectation is more upon the Wing than yours, old
Gentleman.

[Exit.
Sir Fran. Well, Sir!


Char. Nay, it is very Ill, Sir; my Circumstances are, I Am sure.


Sir Fran. And what is that to me, Sir: Your Management should have made them
better.


Char. If you please to entrust me with the Management of my Estate, I shall
endeavor it, Sir.


Sir Fran. What to set upon a Card, and buy a Lady's Favor at the Price of a
Thousand Pieces, to rig out an Equipage for a Wench, or by your carelessness
enrich your Steward to fine for Sheriff, or put up for Parliament Man.


Char. I hope I should not spend it this way: However, I ask only for what my
Uncle left me; Yours you may dispose of as you please, Sir.


Sir Fran. That I shall, out of your Reach, I assure you, Sir. Adod these young
Fellows think old Men get Estates for nothing but them to squander away, in
Dicing, Wenching, Drinking, Dressing, and so forth.


Char. I think I was born a Gentleman, Sir; I Am sure my Uncle bred me like one.


Sir Fran. From which you would infer, Sir, that Gaming, Whoring, and the Pox,
are requisits to a Gentleman.


Char. Monstrous! when I would ask him only for a Support, he falls into these
unmannerly Reproaches; I must, though against my Will, employ Invention, and by
Stratagem relieve my self (Aside.


Sir Fran. Sirrah, what is it you mutter, Sirrah, ha? (Holds up his Cane.) I
say, you shall not have a Groat out of my Hands till I please -- and may be I Will
never Please, and what is that to you?


Char. Nay, to be Robbed, or have one's Throat Cut is not much --


Sir Fran. What Is that, Sirrah? would ye Rob me, or Cut my Throat, ye Rogue?


Char. Heaven forbid, Sir, -- I said no such thing.


Sir Fran. Mercy on me! What a Plague it is to have a Son of One and Twenty,
who wants to Elbow one out of one's Life, to Edge himself into the Estate.


Enter Marplot. Marpl. Egad he is here -- I was afraid I had lost him: His
Secret could not be with his Father, his Wants are Public there -- Guardian,
-- your Servant Charles, I know by that sorrowful Countenance of thine. The old
Man's Fist is as close as his strong Box -- But I Will help thee --


Sir Fran. So: Here Is another extravagant Coxcomb, that will spend his Fortune
before he comes to it; but he shall pay swinging Interest, and so let the Fool
go on -- Well, what does Necessity bring you too, Sir?


Marpl. You have hit it, Guardian -- I want a Hundred Pound.


Sir Fran. For what?


Marpl. Po'gh, for a Hundred Things. I cannot for my Life tell you for what.


Char. Sir, I suppose I have received all the Answer I am like to have.


Marpl. Oh, the Devil, if he gets out before me, I shall lose him again.


Sir Fran. Ay, Sir, and you may be marching as soon as you please -- I must see
a Change in your Temper ever you find one in mine.


Marpl. Pray, Sir, dispatch me; the Money, Sir, I Am in mighty haste.


Sir Fran. Fool, take this and go to the Cashier; I shall not be long plagued with
thee. (Gives him a Note.


Marpl. Devil take the Cashier, I shall certainly have Charles gone before I
come back again. (Rams out.


Char. Well, Sir, I take my Leave -- But remember, you expose an only Son to
all the Miseries of wretched Poverty, which too often lays the Plan for Scenes
of Mischief.


Sir Fran. Stay Charles, I have a sudden Thought come into my Head, may prove
to thy Advantage.


Char. Ha, does he Relent?


Sir Fran. My Lady Wrinkle, worth Forty Thousand Pound, sets up for a Handsome
young Husband; she praised thee the other Day; though the Match-makers can get
Twenty Guinea's for a sight of her, I can introduce thee for nothing.


Char. My Lady Wrinkle, Sir, why she has but one Eye.


Sir Fran. Then she will see but half your Extravagance, Sir.


Char. Condemn me to such a piece of Deformity! Toothless, Dirty, Wry-neck'd,
Hunch-back'd Hag.


Sir Fran. Hunch-back'd! so much the better, then she has a Rest for her
Misfortunes; for thou will Load her swingingly. Now I warrant you think, this
is no Offer of a Father; Forty Thousand Pound is nothing with you.


Char. Yes, Sir, I think it is too much; a young Beautiful Woman with half the
Money would be more agreeable. I thank you, Sir, but you chose better for your
self, I find.


Sir Fran. Out of my Doors, you Dog; you pretend to meddle with my Marriage,
Sirrah!


Char. Sir, I obey: But --


Sir Fran. But me no Buts -- Be gone, Sir: Dare to ask me for Money again --
Refuse Forty Thousand Pound! Out of my Doors, I say, without Reply.

(Exit. Char.
Enter Servant. Serve. One Sir George Airy enquires for you, Sir.


Enter Marplot Running. Marpl. Ha? gone! Is Charles gone, Guardian?


Sir Fran. Yes; and I desire your wise Worship to walk after him.


Marpl. Nay, Egad, I shall Run, I tell you but that. Ah, Pox of the Cashier for
detaining me so long, where the Devil shall I find him now. I shall certainly
lose this Secret.

(Exit. hastily.
Sir Fran. What is the Fellow distracted? -- Desire Sir George to walk up --
Now for a Trial of Skill that will make me Happy, and him a Fool: Ha, ha, ha,
in my Mind he looks like an Ass already,


Enter Sir George. Sir Fran. Well, Sir George, Dee ye hold in the same Mind? or
would you Capitulate? Ha, ha, ha: Look here are the Guinea's, (Chincks them.)
Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Geo. Not if they were twice the Sum, Sir Francis: Therefore be brief, call
in the Lady, and take your Post -- if she is a Woman, and not seduced by
Witchcraft to this old Rogue, I Will make his Heart ache; for if she has but one
Grain of Inclination about her, I Will vary a Thousand Shapes, but find it.
(Aside.


Enter Miranda. Sir Fran. Agreed -- Miranda. There Sir George, try your
Fortune, (Takes out his Watch.)


Sir Geo. So from the Eastern Chambers breaks the Sun, Dispels the Clouds, and
gilds the Vales below. (Salutes her.


Sir Fran. Hold, Sir, Kissing was not in our Agreement.


Sir Geo. Oh! That Is by way of Prologue: -- Prithee, Old Mammon, to thy Post.


Sir Fran. Well, young Timon, it is now Four exactly; one Hour, remember, is
your utmost Limit, not a Minute more. (Retires to the bottom of the Stage.


Sir Geo. Madam, whether you will Excuse or Blame my Love the Author of this rash
Proceeding depends upon your Pleasure, as also the Life of your Admirer; your
sparkling Eyes speak a Heart susceptible of Love; your Vivacity a Soul too
delicate to admit the Embraces of decayed Mortality.


Miran. (Aside.) Oh, that I durst speak --


Sir Geo. Shake off this Tyrant Guardian's Yoke, assume your self, and dash his
bold aspiring Hopes; the Deity of his Desires, is Avarice; a Heretic in Love,
and ought to be bananish'd by the Queen of Beauty. See, Madam, a faithful
Servant kneels, and begs to be admitted in the Number of your Slaves.

( Miranda gives him her Hand to raise him.
Sir. Fran. I wish I could hear what he says now. (Running up.) Hold, hold,
hold, no Palming, that is contrary to Articles --


Sir Geo. Death, Sir, Keep your Distance, or I Will write another Article in your
Guts. (Lays his Hand to his Sword.)


Sir Fran. (Going back.) A Bloody-minded Fellow! --


Sir Geo. Not answer me! Perhaps she thinks my Address too grave: I Will be more
free -- Can you be so unconscionable, Madam, to let me say all these fine
things to you without one single Compliment in Return? View me well, am I not a
proper Handsome Fellow, ha? Can you prefer that old, dry, withered, sapless Log
of Sixty-five, to the vigorous, gay, sprightly Love of Twenty-four? With
snoring only he will awake thee, but I with ravishing Delight would make thy
Senses dance in Consort with the joyful Minutes -- ha? Not yet? Sure she is
dumb -- Thus woul'd I steal and touch thy Beauteous Hand, (Takes hold of her
Hand) till by degrees I reached thy snowy Breasts, then ravish Kisses thus,
(Embraces her in Ecstasie.


Miran. (Struggles and flings from him) O Heavens! I shall not be able to
contain my self. (Aside.


Sir Fran. (Running up with his Watch in his Hand) Sure she did not speak to
him -- There Is Three Quarters of the Hour gone, Sir George -- Adod, I don't
like those close Conferences --


Sir Geo. More Interruptions -- You will have it, Sir, (Lays his Hand to his
Sword.


Sir Fran. (Going back.) No, no, you shall not have her neither. (Aside.


Sir Geo. Dumb still -- Sure this old Dog has enjoined her silence; I Will try
another way -- I must conclude, Madam, that in Compliance to your Guardian's
Humor, you refuse to answer me -- Consider the Injustice of his Injunction.
This single Hour cost me a hundred Pound -- and would you answer me, I could
purchase the 24 so: However, Madam, you must give me leave to make the best
Interpretation I can for my Money, and take the Indication of your silence for
the secret Liking of my Person: Therefore, Madam, I will instruct you how to
keep your Word inviolate to Sir Francis, and yet answer me to every Question:
As for Example, When I ask any thing to which you would reply in the
Affirmative, gently Nod your Head -- thus; and when in the Negative, thus;
(Shakes his Head) and in the doubtful, a tender Sigh, thus, (Sighs.


Miran. How every Action charms me -- but I Will fit him for Signs I warrant him.
(Aside.


Sir. Fran. Ha, ha, ha, ha, poor Sir George, Ha, ha, ha, ha. (Aside.


Sir Geo. Was it by his desire that you are dumb, Madam, to all that I can say?


Miran. (Nods.)
Sir Geo. Very well! she is tractable I find -- And is it possible that you can
love him? Miraculous! ( Miran. Nods.) Pardon the bluntness of my Questions, for
my Time is short; may I not hope to supplant him in your Esteem? ( Miran.
Sighs.) Good; she answers me as I could wish -- You Will not consent to marry him
then? ( Miran. Sighs) How, doubtful in that -- Undone again -- Humph! but that
may proceed from his Power to keep her out of her Estate till Twenty-five; I Will
try that -- Come, Madam, I cannot think you hesitate on this Affair out of any
Motive but your Fortune -- Let him keep it till those few Years are expired;
make me happy with your Person, let him enjoy your Wealth -- ( Miran. holds up
her Hands.) Why, what Sign is that now? Nay, nay, Madam, except you observe my
Lesson, I cannot understand your meaning --


Sir Fran. What a Vengeance, are they talking by Signs, 'ad I may be fooled
here; what do you mean Sir George?


Sir Geo. To cut your Throat if you dare Mutter another Syllable.


Sir Fran. Od! I wish he were fairly out of my House.


Sir Geo. Pray, Madam will you answer me to the Purpose? ( Miran. shakes her
Head, and points to Sir Francis.) What! does she mean she will not answer me to
the Purpose, or is she afraid yon' old Cuff should understand her Signs? --
Aye, it must be that, I perceive Madam, you are too apprehensive of the Promise
you have made to follow my Rules; therefore I Will suppose your Mind and answer
for you -- First, for my self, Madam, that I am in Love with you is an
infallible Truth. Now for you: (Turns on her side.) Indeed, Sir, and may I
believe it -- As certainly, Madam, as that it is Daylight, or that I Die if you
persist in Silence -- Bless me with the Music of your Voice, and raise my
Spirits to their proper Heaven: Thus low let me entreat; ever I Am obliged to
quit this Place, grant me some Token of a favorable Reception to keep my Hopes
alive. (Arises hastily turns of her side.) Rise, Sir, and since my Guardian's
Presence will not allow me Privilege of Tongue, Read that and rest assured you
are not indifferent to me. (Offers her a Letter.) Ha! right Woman! But no (she
strikes it down) matter, I Will go on.


Sir Fran. Ha! what is that a Letter -- Ha, ha, ha, thou art balked.


Miran. The best Assurance I ever saw -- (Aside.


Sir Geo. Ha? a Letter, Oh! let me Kiss it with the same Raptures that I would
do the dear Hand that touched it. (Opens it.) Now for a quick Fancy, and a long
Extempore -- What Is here? (Reads.) "Dear, Sir George, this Virgin Muse I
consecrte to you, which when it has received the Addition of your Voice, 'twill
charm me into Desire of Liberty to Love, which you, and only you can "fix. My
Angel! Oh you transport me! (Kisses the Letter.) And see the Power of your
Command; the God of Love has set the Verse already; the flowing Numbers Dance
into a Tune, and I Am inspired with a Voice to sing it.


Miran. I Am sure thou art inspired with Impudence enough.


Sir Geo. (Sings.) Great Love inspire him;
Say I admire him.
Give me the Lover
That can discover
Secret Devotion
From silent Motion;
Then don't betray me,
But hence convey me.

Sir Geo. (Taking hold of Miranda.) With all my Heart, this Moment let us
Retire.

(Sir Francis coming up hastily.)
Sir Fran. The Hour is expired, Sir, and you must take your leave. There, my
Girl, there is the Hundred Pounds, which thou have won, go, I Will be with you
presently, Ha, ha, ha, ha.

(Exit Miranda.
Sir Geo. Ads Heart, Madam, you will not leave me just in the Nick, will you?


Sir Fran. Ha, ha, ha, she has nicked you, Sir George, I think, Ha, ha, ha:
Have ye any more Hundred Pounds to throw away upon Courtship, Ha, ha, ha,


Sir Geo. He, he, he, he, a Curse of your fleering Jests -- Yet, however ill I
succeeded, I Will venture the same Wager, she does not value thee a spoonful of
Snuff -- Nay more, though you enjoined her Silence to me, you will never make her
speak to the Purpose with your self.


Sir Fran. Ha, ha, ha, did not I tell thee thou would repent thy Money? Did
not I say she hated young Fellows, Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Geo. And I Am positive she is not in Love with Age.


Sir Fran. Ha, ha, no matter for that, Ha, ha, she is not taken with your Youth,
nor your Rhetoric to boot, ha, ha.


Sir Geo. Whatever her Reasons are for disliking of me, I am certain she can be
taken with nothing about thee.


Sir Fran. Ha, ha, ha; how he swells with Envy! -- Poor Man, poor Man -- Ha,
ha; I must beg your Pardon, Sir George; Miranda will be impatient to have her
share of Mirth: Verily we shall laugh at thee most egregiously; Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Geo. With all my Heart, faith -- I shall laugh in my turn too -- For if
you dare marry her, old Beelzebub, you would be Cuckolded most egregiously;
Remember that, and Tremble --

She that to Age her Beauteous Self resigns,
Shows witty Management for close Designs.
Then if you are graced with fair Miranda 's Bed,
Actaeon 's Horns she means shall crown thy Head.
(Exit.
Sir Fran. Ha, ha, ha; he is mad.

These fluttering Fops imagine they can Wind,
Turn, and Decoy to Love all Women-kind:
But here is a Proof of Wisdom in my Charge,
Old Men are Constant, Young Men live at large.
The Frugal Hand can Bills at Sight defray,
When he that Lavish is, has Naught to pay.
(Exit.
SCENE Changes to Sir Jealous Traffick's House.
Enter Sir Jealous, Isabinda, Patch following. Sir Jeal. What in the Balcone
again, notwithstanding my positive Commands to the contrary! -- Why don't you
write a Bill upon your Forehead, to show Passengers there is something to be
let --


Isab. What harm can there be in a little fresh Air, Sir?


Sir Jeal. Is your Constitution so hot, Mistress, that it wants Cooling, ha?
Apply the virtuous Spanish Rules, banish your Taste, and Thoughts of Flesh,
feed upon Roots, and quench your Thrist with Water.


Isab. That and a close Room would certainly make me die of the Vapors.


Sir Jeal. No, Mistress, it is your High-fed, Lusty, Rambling, Rampant Ladies --
that are troubled with the Vapors; it is your Ratifia, Persico, Cinnamon,
Citron, and Spirit of Clary, cause such Swi -- m -- ing in the Brain, that
carries many a Guinea full-tide to the Doctor. But you are not to be bred this
way; no Galloping abroad, no receiving Visits at home; for in our loose
Country, the Women are as dangerous as the Men.


Patch. So I told her, Sir; and that it was not Decent to be seen in a Balcone
-- But she threatened to slap my Chaps, and told me, I was her Servant, not her
Governess.


Sir Jeal. Did she so? But I Will make her to know, that you are her Duenna: Oh
that incomparable Custom of Spain! why here is no depending upon old Women in my
Country -- for they are as wanton at Eighty, as a Girl of Eighteen; and a Man
may as safely trust to Asgill's Translation, as to his great Grand-Mother's not
marrying again.


Isab. Or to the Spanish Ladies Veils and Duennas, for the Safeguard of their
Honor.


Sir Jeal. Dare to ridicule the cautious Conduct of that wise Nation, and I Will
have you locked up this Fortnight without a Peep-hole.


Isab. If we had but the Ghostly Helps in England, which they have in Spain, I
might deceive you if you did. -- Sir, it is not the Restraint, but the Innate
Principles, secures the Reputation and Honor of our Sex -- Let me tell you,
Sir, Confinement sharpens the Invention, as want of Sight strengthens the other
Senses, and is often more pernicious, than the Recreation innocent Liberty
allows.


Sir Jeal. Say you so, Mistress; who the Devil taught you the Art of Reasoning?
I assure you, they must have a greater Faith than I pretend to, that can think
any Woman innocent who requires Liberty. Therefore, Patch, to your Charge I
give her; Lock her up till I come back from Change: I shall have some sauntring
Coxcomb, with nothing but a Red Coat and a Feather, think, by Leaping into her
Arms, to Leap into my Estate -- But I Will prevent them; she shall be only
Signeur Babinetto's.


Patch. Really, Sir, I wish you would employ any Body else in this Affair; I
lead a Life like a Dog with obeying your Commands. Come, Madam, will you please
to be Locked up.


Isab. Ay, to enjoy more Freedom than he is aware of. (Aside.

(Exit with Patch.
Sir Jeal. I believe this Wench is very true to my Interest: I am happy I met
with her, if I can but keep my Daughter from being blown upon till Signeur
Babinetto arrives; who shall marry her as soon as he comes, and carry her to
Spain as soon as he has married her; she has a pregnant Wit, and I Would no more
have her an English Wife, than the Grand Signior's Mistress. (Exit.


Enter Whisper. Whisp. So, I see Sir Jealous go out; where shall I find Mrs.
Patch now.


Enter Patch. Patch. Oh Mr. Whisper, my Lady saw you out at the Window, and
ordered me to bid you fly, and let your Master know she is now alone.


Whisp. Hush, speak softly; I go, I go: But hark'e Mrs. Patch, shall not you
and I have a little Confabulation, when my Master and your Lady is engaged?


Patch. Ay, ay, Farewell. (Goes in and shuts the Door.


Re-enter Sir Jealous Traffic meeting Whisper. Sir Jeal. Sure whilst I was
talking with Mr. Tradewel, I heard my Door clap. (Seeing Whisper.) Ha! a Man
lurking about my House; who do you want there, Sir?


Whisp. Want -- want, a pox, Sir Jealous! what must I say now? --


Sir Jeal. Ay, want; have you a Letter or Message for any Body there? -- O my
Conscience, this is some He-Bawd --


Whisp. Letter or Message, Sir!


Sir Jeal. Ay, Letter or Message, Sir.


Whisp. No, not I, Sir.


Sir Jeal. Sirrah, Sirrah, I Will have you set in the Stocks, if you do'nt tell
me your Business immediately.


Whisp. Nay, Sir, my Business -- is no great matter of Business neither; and
yet it is Business of Consequence too.


Sir Jeal. Sirrah, don't trifle with me.


Whisp. Trifle, Sir, have you found him, Sir?


Sir Jeal. Found what, you Rascal.


Whisp. Why Trifle is the very Lap-Dog my Lady lost, Sir; I fancied I see him
run into this House. I Am glad you have him -- Sir, my Lady will be overjoyed
that I have found him.


Sir Jeal. Who is your Lady Friend?


Whisp. My Lady Love-puppy, Sir.


Sir Jeal. My Lady Love-puppy! then prithee carry thy self to her, for I know
no other Whelp that belongs to her; and let me catch ye no more Puppy-hunting
about my Doors, lest I have you pressed into the Service, Sirrah.


Whisp. By no means, Sir -- Your humble Servant; I must watch whether he goes,
or no, before I can tell my Master. (Exit.


Sir Jeal. This Fellow has the Officious Leer of a Pimp; and I half suspect a
Design, but I Will be upon them before they think on me, I warrant 'em (Exit.


SCENE Charles's Lodging.
Enter Charles and Marplot. Char. Honest Marplot, I thank thee for this Supply;
I expect my Lawyer with a Thousand Pound I have ordered him to take up, and
then you shall be repaid.


Marpl. Pho, pho, no more of that: Here comes Sir George Airy --


Enter Sir George. Cursedly out of Humor at his Disappointment; see how he
looks! Ha, ha, ha.

Sir Geo. Ah, Charles, I am so humbled in my Pretensions to Plots upon Women,
that I believe I shall never have Courage enough to attempt a Chambermaid
again. -- I Will tell thee.


Char. Ha ha; I Will spare you the Relation by telling you -- Impatient to know
your Business with my Father, when I saw you Enter, I slipped back into the next
Room, where I overheard every Syllable.


Sir Geo. That I said -- But I Will be hanged if you heard her Answer -- But
prithee tell me, Charles, is she a Fool?


Char. I never suspected her for one; but Marplot can inform you better, if
you will allow him a Judge.


Marpl. A Fool! I Will justify she has more Wit than all the rest of her Sex put
together; why she will Rally me, till I have not one word to say for my self.


Char. A mighty Proof of her Wit truly --


Marpl. There must be some Trick in it, Sir George, Egad I Will find it out if it
cost me the Sum you paid for it.


Sir Geo. Do and Command me --


Marpl. Enough, let me alone to Trace a Secret. --

Enter Whisper, and speaks aside to his Master. The Devil! Whisper here again,
that Fellow never speaks out; is this the same, or a new Secret? Sir George,
will not you ask Charles what News Whisper brings?


Sir Geo. Not I, Sir; I suppose it does not relate to me.


Marpl. Lord, Lord, how little Curiosity some People have! Now my chief
Pleasure lies in knowing every Body's Business.


Sir Geo. I fancy, Charles, thou have some Engagement upon thy Hands: I have a
little Business too. Marplot, if it falls in your way to bring me any
Intelligence from Miranda, you will find me at the Thatched House at Six --


Marpl. You do me much Honor.


Char. You guess right, Sir George, wish me Success.


Sir Geo. Better than attended me. Adieu.

(Exit.
Char. Marplot, you must Excuse me --


Marpl. Nay, nay, what need of any Excuse amongst Friends! I Will go with you.


Char. Indeed you must not.


Marpl. No, then I suppose it is a Duel, and I will go to secure ye.


Char. Secure me? Why you will not fight?


Marpl. What then! I can call People to part ye.


Char. Well but it is no Duel, consequently no Danger. Therefore prithee be
answered.


Marpl. What is it a Mistress then? -- Mum -- You know I can be silent upon
occasion.


Char. I wish you could be civil too: I tell you, You neither must nor shall go
with me. Farewell.

(Exit.
Marpl. Why then -- I must and will follow you.

(Exit.
The End of the Second Act.
ACT the Third.
Enter Charles. Char. WELL, here is the House, which holds the lovely Prize
quiet and serene; here no noisy Footmen throng to tell the World, that Beauty
dwells within; no Ceremonious Visit makes the Lover wait; no Rival to give my
Heart a Pang; who would not scale the Window at Midnight without fear of the
jealous Father's Pistol, rather than fill up the Train of a Coquet, where every
Minute he is jostled out of Place. (Knocks fostly.) Mrs. Patch. Mrs. Patch.


Enter Patch. Patch. Oh, are you come, Sir? All Is safe.


Char. So in, in then.


Enter Marplot. Marpl. There he goes: Who the Devil lives here? Except I can
find out that, I am as far from knowing his Business as ever; gad I Will watch,
it may be a Bawdy House, and he may have his Throat cut, if there should be any
Mischief, I can make Oath he went in. Well, Charles, in spite of your
Endeavor to keep me out of the Secret, I may save your Life for ought I know:
At that Corner I Will plant my self, there I shall see whoever goes in, or comes
out. Gad, I love Discoveries. (Exit.


SCENE Draws. Charles, Isabinda, and Patch. Isab. Patch. look out sharp; have a
care of Dad.


Patch. I warrant you.

(Exit.
Isab. Well, Sir, if I may judge your Love by your Courage, I ought to believe
you sincere; for you venture into the Lions Den when you come to see me.


Char. If you would consent whilst the furious Beast is abroad, I Would free you from
the Reach of his Paws.


Isab. That would be but to avoid one Danger by running into another; like the
poor Wretches who fly the Burning Ship, and meet their Fate in the Water. Come,
come, Charles, I fear if I consult my Reason, Confinement and Plenty is better
than Liberty and starving. I know you would make the Frolic pleasing for a little
time, by saying and doing a World of tender things; but when our small
Substance is once exhausted, and a Thousand Requisits for Life are wanting,
Love, who rarely dwells with Poverty, would also fail us.


Char. Faith, I fancy not; methinks my Heart has laid up a Stock will last for
Life; to back which, I have taken a Thousand Pound upon my Uncle's Estate; that
surely will support us, till one of our Fathers relent.


Isab. There Is no trusting to that my Friend, I doubt your Father will carry
his Humor to the Grave, and mine till he sees me settled in Spain.


Char. And can ye then cruelly resolve to stay till that cursed Don arrives,
and suffer that Youth, Beauty, Fire and Wit to be sacrificed to the Arms of a
dull Spaniard, to be immured and forbid the sight of any thing that is Humane.


Isab. No, when it comes to the Extremity, and no Stratagem can relieve us,
thou shall list for a Soldier, and I Will carry thy Knapsack after thee.


Char. Bravely resolved; the World cannot be more savage than our Parents, and
Fortune generally assists the Bold; therefore consent now: Why should we put it
to a future Hazard? Who knows when we shall have another Opportunity?


Isab. Oh you have your Ladder of Ropes, I suppose, and the Closet Window
stands just where it did; and if you have not forgot to write in Characters, Patch
will find a way for our Assignations. Thus much of the Spanish Contrivance my
Father's Severity has taught me, I thank him; though I hate the Nation, I admire
their Management in these Affairs.


Enter Patch. Patch. Oh, Madam, I see my Master coming up the Street.


Char. Oh the Devil, would I had my Ladder now, I thought you had not expected
him till Night; why, why, why, why, what shall I do; Madam?


Isab. Oh! for Heaven's sake! don't go that way, you will meet him full in the
Teeth: Oh unlucky Moment! --


Char. Adsheart, can you shut me into no Cupboard, Ram me into no Chest, ha?


Patch. Impossible, Sir, he searches every Hole in the House.


Isab. Undone for ever! if he sees you, I shall never fee you more.


Patch. I have thought on it: Run you to your Chamber, Madam; and Sir, come you
along with me, I Am certain you may easily get down from the Balcone.


Char. My Life, Adieu -- Lead on, Guide.

(Exit.
Isab. Heaven preserve him.

(Exit.
SCENE Changes to the Street.
Enter Sir Jealous, with Marplot behind him. Sir Jeal. I don't know what is the
matter, but I have a strong suspicion all is not right within; that Fellow's
sauntring about my Door, and his Tale of a Puppy had the Face of a Lie
methought. By St. Jago, if I should find a Man in the House, I Would make
Mince-meat of him --


Marpl. Ah poor Charles -- ha? Agad he is old -- I fancy I might bully him, and
make Charles have an Opinion of my Courage.


Sir Jeal. My own Key shall let me in; I Will give them no Warning. (Feeling for
his Key.


Marpl. What Is that you say, Sir? (Going up to Sir Jealous.


Sir Jeal. What Is that to you, Sir? (Turns quick upon him.


Marpl. Yes, it is to me Sir; for the Gentleman you threaten is a very honest
Gentleman. Look to it; for if he comes not as safe out of your House as he went
in, I have half a dozen Mirmidons hard by shall beat it about your Ears.


Sir Jeal. Went in? What is he in then? Ah! a Combination to undo me -- I Will
Mirmidon you, ye Dog you -- Thieves, Thieves. (Beats Marplot all this while he
cries Thieves.


Marpl. Murder, Murder; I was not in your House, Sir.


Enter Servant. Serve. What Is the matter, Sir?


Sir Jeal. The Matter, Rascals? Have you let a Man into my House; but I Will flea
him alive; follow me, I Will not leave a Mousehole unsearch'd; if I find him, by
St. Jago I Will equip him for the Opera.


Marpl. A Duce of his Cane, there is no trusting to Age -- what shall I do to
relieve Charles? Egad, I Will raise the Neighborhood -- Murder, Murder -- (
Charles drops down upon him from the Balcone.) Charles, faith I Am glad to see
thee safe out with all my Heart.


Char. A Pox of your Bawling: How the Devil came you here?


Marpl. Here, gad, I have done you a piece of service; I told the old
Thunderbolt, that the Gentleman that was gone in was --


Char. Was it you that told him, Sir? (Laying hold of him.) God's Death, I could
crush thee into Atoms.

(Exit Charles.)
Marpl. What will you choke me for my Kindness? -- will my enquiring Soul never
leave searching into other People's Affairs, till it gets squeezed out of my
Body? I dare not follow him now, for my Blood, he is in such a Passion -- I Will
to Miranda; if I can discover ought that may oblige Sir George, it may be a
means to reconcile me again to Charles. (Exit.


Enter Sir Jealous and Servants. Sir Jeal. Are you sure you have searched every
where?


Serve. Yes, from the Top of the House to the Bottom.


Sir Jeal. Under the Beds, and over the Beds?


Serve. Yes, and in them too, but found no Body, Sir.


Sir Jeal. Why, what could this Rogue mean?


Enter Isabinda and Patch. Patch. Take Courage, Madam, I saw him safe out.
(Aside to Isab.


Isab. Bless me! what is the matter, Sir?


Sir Jeal. You know best -- Pray where is the Man that was here just now?


Isab. What Man, Sir? I saw none!


Patch. Nor I, by the Trust you repose in me; do you think I would let a Man
come within these Doors, when you were absent?


Sir Jeal. Ah Patch, she may be too cunning for thy Honesty; the very Scout
that he had set to give Warning discovered it to me -- and threatened me with
half a Dozen Mirmidons -- But I think I mauled the Villain. These Afflictions
you draw upon me, Mistress!


Isab. Pardon me, Sir, it is your own Ridiculous Humor draws you into these
Vexations, and gives every Fool pretense to banter you.


Sir Jeal. No, it is your idle Conduct, your Coquetish Flurting into the Balcone
-- Oh with what Joy shall I resign thee into the Arms of Don Diego Babinetto.


Isab. And with what Industry shall I avoid him! (Aside.


Sir Jeal. Certainly that Rogue had a Message from some body or other; but
being balked by my coming, popt that Sham upon me. Come along ye Sots, let us
see if we can find the Dog again. Patch, lock her up; Do You hear?

(Exit with Servants.
Patch. Yes, Sir -- ay, walk till your Heels ache, you will find no Body, I
promise you.


Isab. Who could that Scout be, which he talks of?


Patch. Nay, I cannot imagine, without it was Whisper.


Isab. Well, dear Patch, let us employ all our Thoughts how to escape this
horrid Don Diego, my very Heart sinks at his Terrible Name.


Patch. Fear not, Madam, Don Carlo shall be the Man, or I Will lose the
Reputation of Contriving; and then what is a Chambermaid good for?


Isab. Say thou so, my Girl: Then --

Let Dad be Jealous, multiply his Cares,
While Love instructs me to avoid the Snares;
I Will, spite of all his Spanish Caution show
How much for Love a British Maid can do.
(Exit.
SCENE Sir Francis Gripe's House.
Sir Francis and Miranda meeting. Miran. Well, Gardee, how did I perform my
Dumb Scene?


Sir Fran. To Admiration -- Thou dear little Rogue, let me buss thee for it:
Nay, adod, I will, Chargee, so muzle, and tuzle, and hug thee; I will, I faith,
I will. (Hugging and Kissing her.


Miran. Nay, Gardee, don't be so lavish; who would Ride Post, when the Journey
lasts for Life?


Sir Fran. Ah wag, ah wag -- I Will buss thee again for that.


Miran. Faugh! how he stinks of Tobacco! what a delicate Bedfellow I should
have!


Sir Fran. Oh I Am Transported! When, when, my Dear will thou convince the World
of thy Happy Day? when shall we marry, ha?


Miran. There Is nothing wanting but your Consent, Sir Francis.


Sir Fran. My Consent! what does my Charmer mean?


Miran. Nay, it is only a Whim: But I Will have every thing according to form --
Therefore when you sign an Authentic Paper, drawn up by an able Lawyer, that I
have your Leave to marry, the next Day makes me yours, Gardee.


Sir Fran. Ha, ha, ha, a Whim indeed! why is it not Demonstration I give my
Leave when I marry thee.


Miran. Not for your Reputation, Gardee; the malicious World will be apt to
say, you tricked me into Marriage, and so take the Merit from my Choice. Now I
will have the Act my own, to let the idle Fops see how much I prefer a Man
loaded with Years and Wisdom.


Sir Fran. Humph! Prithee leave out Years, Chargee, I Am not so old, as thou
shall find: Adod, I Am young; there is a Caper for ye. (Jumps.


Miran. Oh never excuse it, why I like you the better for being old -- But I
shall suspect you don't love me, if you Refuse me this Formality.


Sir Fran. Not Love thee, Chargee! Adod I do love thee better than, than, than,
better than -- what shall I say? Egad, better than Money, I faith I do --


Miran. That Is false I Am sure (Aside.) To prove it'do this then.


Sir Fran. Well, I will do it, Chargee, provided I bring a License at the same
time.


Miran. Ay, and a Parson too, if you please; Ha, ha, ha, I cannot help Laughing
to think how all the young Coxcombs about Town will be mortified when they hear
of our Marriage.


Sir Fran. So they will, so they will; Ha, ha, ha.


Miran. Well, I fancy I shall be so happy with my Gardee!


Sir Fran. If wearing Pearls and Jewels, or eating Gold, as the old Saying is,
can make thee happy, thou shall be so, my Sweetest, my Lovely, my Charming, my
-- verily I know not what to call thee,


Miran. You must know, Gardee, that I am so eager to have this Business
concluded, that I have employed my Woman's Brother, who is a Lawyer in the
Temple, to settle Matters just to your Liking, you are to give your Consent to
my Marriage, which is to your self you know: But Mum, you must take no notice
of that. So then I will, that is, with your Leave, put my Writings into his
Hands; then to Morrow we come slap upon them with a Wedding that no body
thought on; by which you seize me and my Estate, and I suppose make a Bonfire
of your own Act and Deed.


Sir Fran. Nay, but Chargee, if --


Miran. Nay, Gardee, no Ifs -- Have I refused three Northern Lords, two British
Peers, and half a score Knights, to have you put in your Ifs? --


Sir Fran. So thou have indeed, and I will trust to thy Management. Od, I Am all
of a Fire.


Miran. It Is a wonder the dry Stubble does not blaze.


Enter Marplot. Sir Fran. How now! who sent for you, Sir? What Is the Hundred
Pound gone already?


Marpl. No, Sir, I don't want Money now.


Sir Fran. No; that is a Miracle! But there is one thing you want, I Am sure.


Marpl. Ay, what is that, Guardian?


Sir Fran. Manners; what, had I no Servants without?


Marpl. None that could do my Business, Guardian, which is at present with this
Lady.


Miran. With me, Mr. Marplot! what is it, I beseech you?


Sir Fran. Ay, Sir, what is it? any thing that relates to her may be delivered
to me.


Marpl. I deny that.


Miran. That Is more than I do, Sir:


Marpl. Indeed, Madam; why then to proceed: Fame says that you and my most
conscionable Guardian here designed, contrived, plotted and agreed, to chouse a
very civil, honorable, honest Gentleman, out of a Hundred Pound.


Miran. That I contrived it!


Marpl. Ay you -- You said never a Word against it, so far you are Guilty.


Sir Fran. Pray tell that civil, honorable, honest Gentleman, that if he has
any more such Sums to fool away, they shall be received like the last; Ha, ha,
ha, ha, choused, quotha! But hark ye, let him know at the same time, that if he
dare to report I tricked him of it, I shall recommend a Lawyer to him shall
show him a Trick for twice as much; Do You hear? Tell him that.


Marpl. So, and this is the way you use a Gentleman, and my Friend.


Miran. Is the Wretch thy Friend?


Marpl. The Wretch! Look ye, Madam, don't call Names; Egad I will not take it.


Miran. Why you will not beat me, will you? Ha, ha.


Marpl. I don't know whether I will or no.


Sir Fran. Sir, I shall make a Servant show you out at the Window, if you are
saucy.


Marpl. I am your most humble Servant, Guardian; I design to go out the same
way I came in. I would only ask this Lady, if she does not think in her Soul
Sir George Airy is not a fine Gentleman.


Miran. He dresses well.


Sir Fran. Which is chiefly owing to his Tailor, and Valet de Chamber.


Miran. And if you allow that a Proof of his being a fine Gentleman, he is so.


Marpl. The judicious part of the World allow him Wit, Courage, Gallantry and
Management; though I think he sorfeited that Character, when he flung away a
hundred Pound upon your dumb Ladyship.


Sir Fran. Does that gaul him? Ha, ha, ha.


Miran. So Sir George remaining in deep Discontent, has sent you his trusty
Squire to utter his Complaint: Ha, ha, ha.


Marpl. Yes, Madam; and you, like a cruel, hard-hearted Jew, value it no more
-- than I would your Ladyship, were I Sir George, you, you, you --


Miran. Oh, don't call Names. I know you love to be employed, and I Will oblige
you, and you shall carry him a Message from me.


Marpl. According as I like it: What is it?


Miran. Nay, a kind one you may be sure -- First tell him, I have chose this
Gentleman to have, and to hold, and so forth. (Clapping her Hand into Sir
Francis's


Sir Fran. Oh the dear Rogue, how I dote on her! (Aside.


Miran. And advise his Impertinence to trouble me no more, for I prefer Sir
Francis for a Husband before all the Fops in the Universe.


Marpl. Oh Lord, O Lord! She Is bewitched, that is certain; Here Is a Husband for
Eighteen -- Here Is a Shape -- Here Is Bones rattling in a Leathern Bag. (Turning
Sir Francis about.) Here Is Buckrum and Canvass, to scrub you to Repentance.


Sir Tran. Sirrah, my Cane shall teach you Repentance presently.


Marpl. No faith, I have felt its Twin-brother from just such a withered Hand
too lately.


Miran. One thing more, advise him to keep from the Garden Gate on the left
Hand; for if he dare to saunter there, about the Hour of Eight, as he used to
do, he shall be saluted with a Pistol or a Blunderbuss.


Sir Fran. O monstrous! why Chargee; did he use to come to the Garden Gate?


Miran. The Gardner described just such another Man that always watched his
coming out, and fain would have bribed him for his Entrance -- Tell him he
shall find a warm Reception if he comes this Night.


Marpl. Pistols and Blunderbusses! Egad, a warm Reception indeed; I shall take
care to inform him of your Kindness, and advise him to keep farther off.


Miran. I hope he will understand my meaning better, than to follow your
Advice. (Aside.


Sir Fran. Thou have signed, sealed, and taken Possession of my Heart, for
ever, Chargee, Ha, ha, ha; and for you, Mr. Sauce-box, let me have no more of
your Messages, if ever you design to inherit your Estate, Gentleman.


Marpl. Why there it is now. Sure I shall be out of your Clutches one Day. --
Well, Guardian, I say no more; but if you be not as errant a Cuckold, as ever
drove Bargain upon the Exchange, or paid Attendance to a Court, I am the Son of
a Whetstone; and so your humble Servant.

(Exit.
Miran. Don't forget the Message; Ha, ha,


Sir Fran. I am so provoked! -- it is well he is gone.


Miran. Oh mind him not, Gardee, but let us sign Articles, and then --


Sir Fran. And then -- Adod, I believe I am Metamorphos'd; my Pulse beats high,
and my Blood boils, methinks -- (Kissing and Hugging her.


Miran. Oh fie, Gardee, be not so violent; Consider the Market lasts all the
Year -- Well, I Will in and see if the Lawyer be come, you will follow.

(Exit.
Sir Fran. Ay, to the World's End, my Dear. Well, Frank, thou art a lucky
Fellow in thy old Age, to have such a delicate Morsel, and Thirty Thousand
Pound in love with thee; I shall be the Envy of Batchelors, the Glory of
Married Men, and the Wonder of the Town. Some Guardians would be glad to
compound for part of the Estate, at dispatching an Heiress, but I engross the
whole: O! Mihi praeteritos referet si Jupiter Annos.

(Exit.
SCENE Changes to a Tavern; discovers Sir George and Charles with Wine before
them, and Whisper waiting.
Sir Geo. Nay, prithee don't be Grave, Charles; Misfortunes will happen, Ha,
ha, ha, it is some Comfort to have a Companion in our Sufferings.


Char. I am only apprehensive for Isabinda, her Father's Humor is implacable;
and how far his Jealousy may transport him to her Undoing, shocks my Soul to
think.


Sir Geo. But since you escaped undiscovered by him, his Rage will quickly lash
into a Calm, never fear it.


Char. But who knows what that unlucky Dog, Marplot, told him; nor can I
Imagine what brought him hither; that Fellow is ever doing Mischief; and yet,
to give him his due, he never designs it. This is some Blundering Adventure,
wherein he thought to show his Friendship, as he calls it: A Curse on him.


Sir Geo. Then you must forgive him; what said he?


Char. Said! nay, I had more mind to cut his Throat, than hear his Excuses.


Sir Geo. Where is he?


Whisp. Sir, I saw him go into Sir Francis Gripe's just now.


Char. Oh! then he is upon your Business, Sir George; a thousand to one but he
makes some Mistake there too.


Sir Geo. Impossible, without he huffs the Lady, and makes Love to Sir Francis.


Enter Drawer. Draw. Mr. Marplot is below, Gentlemen, and desires to know if he
may have Leave to wait upon ye.


Char. How civil the Rogue is when he has done a fault!


Sir Geo. Ho! Desire him to walk up. Prithee, Charles, throw off this Chagreen,
and be good Company.


Char. Nay, hang him, I Am not angry with him. Whisper, fetch me Pen, Ink, and
Paper.


Whisp. Yes Sir.

(Ex. Whisp.
Enter Marplot. Char. Do but mark his sheepish Look, Sir George.


Marpl. Dear Charles, don't o'rwhelm a Man -- already under insupportable
Affliction. I Am sure I always intend to serve my Friends; but if my malicious
Stars deny the Happiness, is the fault mine?


Sir Geo. Never mind him, Mr. Marplot; he is eat up with Spleen. But tell me,
what says Miranda?


Marpl. Says -- nay, we are all undone there too.


Char. I told you so; nothing prospers that he undertakes.


Marpl. Why can I help her having chose your Father for Better for Worse?


Char. So: There Is another of Fortune's strokes. I suppose I shall be edged out
of my Estate with Twins every Year, let who will get 'em.


Sir Geo. What is the Woman really possessed?


Marpl. Yes with the Spirit of Contradiction, she railed at you most
prodigiously.


Sir Geo. That Is no ill Sign.


Enter Whisper, with Pen, Ink and Paper. Marpl. You Would say it was no good Sign,
if you knew all.


Sir Geo. Why prithee?


Marpl. Hark'e, Sir George, Let me warn you, pursue your old Haunt no more, it
may be dangerous.

( Charles sits down to write.
Sir Geo. My old Haunt, what do you mean?


Marpl. Why in short then, since you will have it, Miranda vows if you dare
approach the Garden-Gate at Eight a Clock, as you used, you shall be saluted
with a Blunderbuss, Sir. These were her Words; nay, she bid me tell you so too.


Sir George, Ha! The Garden-Gate at Eight, as I used to do! There must be a
Meaning in this. Is there such a Gate, Charles?


Char. Yes, yes; it opens into the Park, I suppose her Ladyship has made many a
scamper through it.


Sir Geo. It must be an Assignation then. Ha, my Heart springs with Joy, it is a
propitious Omen. My dear Marplot, let me embrace thee, thou art my Friend, my
better Angel --


Marpl. What do you mean, Sir George?


Sir Geo. No matter what I mean. Here take a Bumper to the Garden-Gate, ye dear
Rogue, you.


Marpl. You have Reason to be transported, Sir George; I have saved your Life.


Sir Geo. My Life! thou have saved my Soul, Man. Charles, if thou do not
pledge this Health, may thou never taste the Joys of Love.


Char. Whisper, be sure you take care how you deliver this (gives him the
Letter) bring me the Answer to my Lodgings.


Whisp. I warrant you, Sir.


Marpl. Whither does that Letter go? -- Now dare I not ask for my Blood.


Char. Now I Am for you.


Sir Geo. To the Garden-Gate at the Hour of Eight, Charles, along, Huzza!


Charl. I begin to conceive you.


Marpl. That Is more than I do, Egad -- to the Garden-Gate, Huzza, (Drinks.) But
I hope you design to keep far enough off on it, Sir George.


Sir Geo. Ay, ay, never fear that; she shall see I despise her Frowns, let her
use her Blunderbuss against the next Fool, she shall not reach me with the Smoke,
I warrant her, Ha, ha, ha.


Marpl. Ah, Charles, if you could receive a Disappointment thus En Cavalier,
one should have some comfort in being beat for you.


Char. The Fool comprehends nothing.


Sir Geo. Nor would I have him; prithee take him along with thee.


Char. Enough: Marplot, you shall go home with me.


Marpl. I Am glad I Am well with him however. Sir George, yours. Egad, Charles,
asking me to go home with him, gives me a shrewd Suspicion there is more in the
Garden-Gate than I comprehend. Faith, I Will give him the drop, and away to
Guardians, and find it out.


Sir Geo. I kiss both your Hands -- And now for the Garden-Gate.

It Is Beauty gives the Assignation there,
And Love too powerful grows to admit of Fear.
(Exit.
The End of the Third Act.
ACT the Fourth.
SCENE the Outside of Sir Jealous Traffick's House, Patch peeping out of Door.
Enter Whisper. Whisp. HA, Mrs. Patch, this is a lucky Minute, to find you so
readily, my Master dies with Impatience.


Patch. My Lady imagined so, and by her Orders I have been scouting this Hour
in search of you, to inform you that Sir Jealous has invited some Friends to
Supper with him to Night, which gives an Opportunity to your Master to make use
of his Ladder of Ropes: The Closet Window shall be open, and Isabinda ready to
receive him; bid him come immediately.


Whisp. Excellent! He Will not disappoint, I warrant him: But hold, I have a
Letter here, which I Am to carry an Answer of. I cannot think what Language the
Direction is.


Patch. Pho, it is no Language, but a Character which the Lovers invented to
avert Discovery. Ha, I hear my old Master coming down Stairs, it is impossible
you should have an Answer; away, and bid him come himself for that -- Be gone,
we are ruined if you're seen, for he has doubled his Care since the last
Accident.


Whisp. I go, I go.

(Exit.
Patch. There go thou into my Pocket. (Puts it besides, and it falls down.) Now
I Will up the Back-Stairs, lest I meet him. Well, a dextrous Chambermaid is the
Ladies best Utensil, I say.

(Exit.
Enter Sir Jealous with a Letter in his Hand. Sir Jeal. So, this is some
Comfort; this tells me that Seignior Don Diego Babinetto is safely arrived; he
shall marry my Daughter the Minute he comes, ha. What Is here (takes up the
Letter Patch dropped) A Letter! I don't know what to make of the Superscription.
I Will see what is within side, [opens it] humph; it is Hebrew I think. What can
this mean. There must be some trick in it; this was certainly designed for my
Daughter, but I don't know that she can speak any Language but her
Mother Tongue. No matter for that, this may be one of Love's Hieroglyphics,
and I fancy I saw Patch's Tail sweep by. That Wench may be a Slut, and instead
of guarding my Honor, betray it; I Will find it out I Am resolved; who is there?
What answer did you bring from the Gentlemen I sent you to invite?


Serve. That they would all wait of you, Sir, as I told you before, but I suppose
you forgot, Sir.


Sir Jeal. Did I so, Sir, but I shall not forget to break your Head, if any of
them come, Sir.


Serve. Come, Sir, why did you not send me to desire their Company, Sir?


Sir Jeal. But I send you now to desire their Absence; say I have something
extraordinary fallen out, which calls me abroad contrary to Expectation, and
ask their Pardon, and do you hear, send the Butler to me.


Serve. Yes, Sir.

[Exit.
Enter Butler. Sir Jeal. If this Paper has a Meaning I Will find it. Lay the
Cloth in my Daughter's Chamber, and bid the Cook send Supper thither presently.


Butl. Yes, Sir, -- hey day, what is the Matter now?

[Exit.
Sir Jeal. He wants the Eyes of Argus, that has a young handsome Daughter in
this Town, but my Comfort is, I shall not be troubled long with her. He that
pretends to rule a Girl once in her Teens, had better be at Sea in a Storm, and
would be in less Danger.

For let him do, or Counsel all he can,
She thinks and dreams of nothing else but Man.
[Exit.
SCENE Isabinda's Chamber, Isabinda and Patch.
Isab. Are you sure, no Body saw you speak to Whisper?


Patch. Yes, very sure Madam, but I heard Sir Jealous coming down Stairs, so I
clapped this Letter into my Pocket. (feels for the Letter.


Isab. A Letter! give it me quickly.


Patch. Bless me! what is become on it -- I Am sure I put it -- (Searching still.


Isab. Is it possible, thou could be so careless -- Oh! I Am undone for ever
if it be lost.


Patch. I must have dropped it upon the Stairs. But why are you so much alarmed,
if the worst happens no body can read it, Madam, nor find out whom it was
designed for.


Isab. If it falls into my Father's Hands the very Figure of a Letter will
produce ill Consequences. Run and look for it upon the Stairs this Moment.


Patch. Nay, I Am sure it can be no where else. -- (As she is going out of the
Door meets the Butler.) How now, what do you want?


Butl. My Master ordered me to lay the Cloth here for his Supper.


Isab. Ruined past Redemption -- (Aside.


Patch. You mistake sure; what shall we do?


Isab. I thought he expected Company to Night -- Oh! poor Charles -- Oh!
unfortunate Isabinda.


Butl. I thought so too, Madam, but I suppose he has altered his Mind. (Lays
the Cloth, and Exit.


Isab. The Letter is the Cause; this heedless Action has undone me: Fly and
fasten the Closet Window, which will give Charles notice to retire. Ha, my
Father, oh! Confusion.


Enter Sir Jealous. Sir Jeal. Hold, hold, Patch, whither are you going. I Will
have no body stir out of the Room till after Supper.


Patch. Sir, I was only going to reach your easy Chair -- Oh! wretched
Accident!


Sir Jeal. I Will have no body stir out of the Room. I don't want my easy Chair.


Isab. What will be the event of this? (Aside.


Sir Jeal. Hark ye, Daughter; do you know this Hand?


Isab. As I suspected -- Hand do you call it, Sir? It Is some School-boy's
Scraul.


Patch. Oh! Invention, thou Chamber-maids best Friend, assist me.


Sir Jeal. Are you sure you don't understand it?

( Patch. Feels in her Bosom, and shakes her Coats.)
Isab. Do you understand it, Sir?


Sir Jeal. I wish I did.


Isab. Thank Heaven you do not. (Aside.) Then I know no more of it than you do
indeed, Sir.


Patch. Oh Lord, Oh Lord, what have you done, Sir? Why the Paper is mine, I
dropped it out of my Bosom. (Snatching it from him.


Sir Jeal. Ha! yours, Mistress.


Isab. What does she mean by owning it. (Aside.


Patch. Yes, Sir, it is.


Sir Jeal. What is it? Speak,


Patch. Why, Sir, it is a Charm for the Toothache -- I have worn it this seven
Year, 'twas given me by an Angel for ought I know, when I was raving with the
Pain; for no body knew from whence he came, nor whither he went, he charged me
never to open it, lest some dire Vengeance befall me, and Heaven knows what will
be the Event. Oh! cruel Misfortune that I should drop it, and you should open
it -- If you had not opened it --


Isab. Excellent Wench. (Aside.


Sir Jeal. Pox of your Charms and Whims for me; if that be all, it is well
enough; there, there, burn it, and I warrant you no Vengeance will follow.


Patch. So, all is right again thus far. (Aside.


Isab. I would not lose Patch for the World -- I Will take courage a little.
(Aside.) Is this Usage for your Daughter, Sir? Must my Virtue and Conduct be
suspected? For every Trifle, you immure melike some dire Offender here, and
deny me all Recreations which my Sex enjoy, and the Custom of the Country and
Modesty allow; yet not content with that, you make my Confinement more
intolerable by your Mistrusts and Jealousies; would I were dead, so I were free
from this. (Weeps.


Sir Jeal. To morrow rids you of this tiresome Load, -- Don Diego Babinetto
will be here, and then my Care ends, and his begins.


Isab. Is he come then? Oh how shall I avoid this hated Marriage? (Aside.


Enter Servants with Supper. Sir Jeal. Come will you sit down?


Isab. I cannot eat, Sir.


Patch. No, I dare swear he has given her Supper enough. I wish I could get
into the Closet -- (Aside.


Sir Jeal. Well, if you cannot eat, then give me a Song whilst I do.


Isab. I have such a Cold I can scarce speak, Sir, much less sing. How shall I
prevent Charles coming in. (Aside.


Sir Jeal. I hope you have the use of your Fingers, Madam. Play a Tune upon
your Spinnet, whilst your Woman sings me a Song.


Patch. I Am as much out of Tune as my Lady, if he knew all. (Aside.


Isab. I shall make excellent Music. (Sits down to play.


Patch. Really, Sir, I Am so frighted about your opening this Charm, that I
cannot remember one Song.


Sir Jeal. Pish, Hang your Charm; come, come, sing any thing.


Patch. Yes, I Am likely to sing truly, (Aside) humph, humph, bless me, Sir, I
cannot raise my Voice, my Heart pants so.


Sir Jeal. Why, what does your Heart pant so that you cannot play neither? Pray
what Key are you in, ha?


Patch. Ah, would the Key was turned of you once. (Aside.


Sir Jeal. Why don't you sing, I say?


Patch. When Madam has put her Spinnet in Tune, Sir, humph, humph --


Isab. I cannot play, Sir, whatever ails me. (Rising.


Sir Jeal. Zounds sit down, and play me a Tune, or I Will break the Spinnet about
your Ears.


Isab. What will become of me? (Sits down and plays.


Sir Jeal. Come Mistress. (To Patch


Patch. Yes, Sir. (Sings, but horridly out of Tune.


Sir Jeal. Hey, hey, why you are a top of the House, and you are down in the
Cellar. What is the meaning of this? Is it on purpose to cross me, ha?


Patch. Pray Madam, take it a little lower, I cannot reach that Note -- nor any
Note I fear.


Isab. Well, begin -- Oh! Patch we shall be discovered.


Patch. I sink with the Apprehension, Madam, -- humph, humph -- (Sings) (
Charles pulls open the Closet Door.


Char. Music and Singing

It Is thus the bright Celestial Court above,
Beguiles the Hours with Music and with Love.
Death! her Father there, (The Women shriek) then I must fly --

(Exit into the Closet) (Sir Jealous rises up hastily, seeing Charles slip back
into the Closet.
Sir Jeal. Hell and Furies, a Man in the Closet --


Patch. Ah! a Ghost, a Ghost -- he must not enter the Closet --

( Isabinda throws her self down before the Closetdoor as in a Sound.
Sir Jeal. The Devil! I Will make a Ghost of him I warrant you. (Strives to get
by.


Patch. Oh hold, Sir, have a care, you will tread upon my Lady -- who waits
there? Bring some Water: Oh! this comes of your opening the Charm: Oh, oh, oh,
oh. (Weeps aloud.


Sir Jeal. I Will charm you, House-wife, here lies the Charm, that conjured this
Fellow in I Am sure on it, come out you Rascal, do so: Zounds take her from the
Door, or I Will spurn her from it. and break your Neck down Stairs.


Isab. Oh, oh, where am I -- He Is gone, I heard him leap down. (Aside to Patch.


Patch. Nay, then let him enter -- here, here Madam, smell to this; come give
me your Hand; come nearer to the Window, the Air will do you good.


Sir Jeal. I would she were in her Grave. Where are you, Sirrah? Villain,
Robber of my Honor! I Will pull you out of your Nest. (Goes into the Closet.


Patch. You Will be mistaken, old Gentleman, the Bird is flown.


Isab. I Am glad I have 'scap'd so well. I was almost dead in earnest with the
Fright.


Re-enter Sir Jealous out of the Closet. Sir Jeal. Whoever the Dog were he has
escaped out of the Window, for the Sash is up. But though he is got out of my
Reach, you are not: And first Mrs. Pandor, with your Charms for the Toothache,
get out of my House, go, troop; yet hold, stay, I Will see you out of my Doors my
self, but I Will secure your Charge ever I go.


Isab. What do you mean, Sir? Was she not a Creature of your own providing?


Sir Jeal. She was of the Devil's providing for ought I know.


Patch. What have I done, Sir, to merit your Displeasure?


Sir Jeal. I don't know which of you have done it; but you shall both suffer
for it, till I can discover whose Guilt it is: Go, get in there, I Will move you
from this side of the House (Pushes Isabinda in at the other Door, and locks
it; puts the Key in his Pocket.) I Will keep the Key my self: I Will try what Ghost
will get into that Room. And now forsooth I Will wait on you down Stairs.


Patch. Ah, my poor Lady -- Down Stairs, Sir, but I will not go out, Sir, till I
have looked up my Clothes.


Sir Jeal. If thou were as naked as thou were born, thou should not stay
to put on a Smock. Come along, I say; when your Mistress is married you shall
have your Rags, and every thing that belongs to you; but till then -- (Exit
pulling her out.


Patch. Oh! barbarous Usage for nothing.


Re-enter at the lower end. Sir Jeal. There, go, and come no more within sight
of my Habitation, these three Days, I charge you. (Slaps the Door after her.


Patch. Did ever any Body see such and old Monster!


Enter Charles. Patch. Oh! Mr. Charles your Affairs and mine are in an ill
Posture.


Char. I am immured to the Frowns of Fortune: But what has befal'n thee?


Patch. Sir Jealous, whose suspicious Nature's always on the Watch; nay, even
whilst one Eye sleeps, the other keeps Sentinel; upon sight of you, flew into
such a violent Passion, that I could find no Stratagem to appease him, but in
spite of all Arguments, locked his Daughter into his own Apartment and turned
me out of Doors.


Char. Ha! oh, Isabinda.


Patch. And swears she shall neither see Sun or Moon, till she is Don Diego
Babinetto's Wife, who arrived last Night, and is expected with Impatience.


Char. He dies, yes, by all the Wrongs of Love he shall; here will I plant my
self, and through my Breast he shall make his Passage, if he enters.


Patch. A most heroic Resolution. There might be ways found out more to your
Advantage. Policy is often preferred to open force.


Char. I apprehend you not.


Patch. What think you of personating this Spaniard, imposing upon the Father,
and marrying your Mistress by his own Consent.


Char. Say thou so my Angel! Oh could that be done, my Life to come would be
too short to recompense thee: But how can I do that, when I neither know what
Ship he came in, nor from what part of Spain; who recommends him, nor how
attended.


Patch. I can solve all this. He is from Madrid, his Father's Name Don Pedro
Questo Portento Babinetto. Here Is a Letter of his to Sir Jealous, which he
dropped one Day; you understand Spanish, and the Hand may be counterfeited: You
conceive me, Sir.


Char. My better Genius, thou have revived my drooping Soul: I Will about it
instantly. Come to my Lodgings, and we'll concert Matters.


(Exeunt. SCENE a Garden Gate open, Scentwell waiting within.
Enter Sir George Airy. Sir Geo. So, this is the Gate, and most invitingly
open: If there should be a Blunderbuss here now, what a dreadful Ditty would my
Fall make for Fools; and what a Jest for the Wits; how my Name would be roared
about Streets! Well I Will venture all.


Scentw. Hist, hist, Sir George Airy --

(Enters.
Sir Geo. A Female Voice, thus far I Am safe, my Dear.


Scentw. No, I Am not your Dear, but I Will conduct you to her, give me your Hand;
you must go through many a dark Passage and dirty Step before you arrive. --


Sir Geo. I know I must before I arrive at Paradise; therefore be quick, my
charming Guide.


Scentw. For ought you know; come, come your Hand and away.


Sir Geo. Here, here Child, you cannot be half so swift as my Desires.

(Exeunt.
SCENE the House.
Enter Miranda. Miran. Well let me reason a little with my mad self. Now don't
I transgress all Rules to venture upon a Man, without the Advice of the Grave
and Wise; but then a rigid knavish Guardian who would have married me! To whom?
Even to his nauseous self, or no Body. Sir George is what I have tried in
Conversation, inquired into his Character, am satisfied in both. Then his Love!
Who would have given a hundred Pound only to have seen a Woman he had not
infinitely loved? So I find my liking him has furnished me with Arguments
enough of his side; and now the only Doubt remains whether he will come or no.


Enter Scentwell. Scentw. That Is resolved, Madam, for here is the Knight.

Exit Scentwell.
Sir Geo. And do I once more behold that lovely Object, whose Idea fills my
Mind, and forms my pleasing Dreams!


Miran. What beginning again in Heroicks! -- Sir George, don't you remember how
little Fruit your last Prodigal Oration produced, not one bare single Word in
answer.


Sir Geo. Ha! the Voice of my Incognita -- Why did you take Ten Thousand ways
to captivate a Heart your Eyes alone had vanquished.


Miran. Prithee, no more of these Flights; for our Time's but short, and we
must fall into Business: Do you think we can agree on that same terrible
Bugbear, Matrimony, without heartily repenting on both sides.


Sir Geo. It has been my wish since first my longing Eyes beheld ye.


Miran. And your happy Ears drank in the pleasing News, I had Thirty Thousand
Pound.


Sir Geo. Unkind! Did I not offer you in those purchased Minutes to run the
risque of your Fortune, so you would but secure that lovely Person to my Arms.


Miran. Well, if you have such Love and Tenderness, (since our Woing has been
short) pray reserve it for our future Days, to let the World see we are Lovers
after Wedlock; twill be a Novelty --


Sir Geo. Haste then, and let us tie the Knot, and prove the envied Pair --


Miran. Hold! not so fast; I have provided better than to venture on dangerous
Experiments headlong -- My Guardian, trusting to my dissembled Love, has given
up my Fortune to my own dispose; but with this Proviso, that he to Morrow
Morning weds me. He is now gone to Doctors-Commons for a License.


Sir Geo. Ha, a License!


Miran. But I have planted Emissaries that infallibly take him down to Epsom,
under pretense that a Brother Usurer of his is to make him his Executor; the
thing on Earth he covets.


Sir Geo. It Is his known Character.


Miran. Now my Instruments confirm him this Man is dying, and he sends me word
he goes this Minute; it must be to Morrow ever he can be undeceived. That time
is ours.


Sir Geo. Let us improve it then, and settle on our coming Years, endless,
endless Happiness.


Miran. I dare not stir till I hear he is on the Road -- then I and my Writings,
the most material point, are soon removed.


Sir Geo. I have one Favor to ask, if it lies in your power, you would be a
Friend to poor Charles, though the Son of this tenacious Man: He is as free from
all his Vices, as Nature and a good Education can make him; and what now I have
Vanity enough to hope will induce you, he is the Man on Earth I love.


Miran. I never was his Enemy, and only put it on as it helped my Designs on
his Father. If his Uncle's Estate ought to be in his Possession, which I
shrewdly suspect, I may do him a singular piece of Service.


Sir Geo. You are all Goodness.


Enter Scentwell. Scentw. Oh, Madam, my Master and Mr. Marplot are just coming
into the House.


Miran. Undone, undone! if he finds you here in this Crisis, all my Plots are
unravelled.


Sir Geo. What shall I do! cannot I get back into the Garden?


Scentw. Oh, no! he comes up those Stairs.


Miran. Here, here, here! can you condescend to stand behind this
Chimney-Board, Sir George?


Sir Geo. Any where, any where, dear Madam, without Ceremony.


Scentw. Come, come, Sir; lie close --

(They put him behind the Chimney-Board.
Enter Sir Francis and Marplot: Sir Francis peeling an Orange. Sir Fran. I
could not go, though it is upon Life and Death, without taking leave of dear
Chargee. Besides this Fellow buz'd in my Ears, that thou might be so
desperate to shoot that wild Rake which haunts the Garden-Gate; and that would
bring us into trouble, dear --


Miran. So, Marplot brought you back then: I am obliged to him for that, I Am
sure -- (Frowning at Marplot aside.


Marpl. By her Looks she means she is not obliged to me. I have done some
Mischief now, but what I cannot imagine.


Sir Fran. Well, Chargee, I have had three Messengers to come to Epsom to my
Neighbor Squeezum's, who, for all his vast Riches, is departing. (Sighs.


Marpl. Ay, see what all you Usurers must come to.


Sir Fran. Peace, ye young Knave! Some Forty Years hence I may think on it --
But, Chargee, I Will be with thee to Morrow, before those pretty Eyes are open; I
will, I will, Chargee, I Will rouse you, I faith. -- Here Mrs. Scentwell, lift up
your Lady's Chimney-Board, that I may throw my Peel in, and not litter her
Chamber.


Miran. Oh my Stars! what will become of us now?


Scentw. Oh, pray Sir give it me; I love it above all things in Nature, indeed
I do.


Sir Fran. No, no, Hussy; you have the Green Pip already, I Will have no more
Apothecary's Bills. (Goes toward the Chimney.


Miran. Hold, hold, hold, dear Gardee, I have a, a, a, a, a Monkey shut up
there; and if you open it before the Man comes that is to tame it, it is so wild
'twill break all my China, or get away, and that would break my Heart; for I am
fond on it to distraction, next thee dear Gardee. In a flattering Tone.


Sir Fran. Well, well, Chargee, I will not open it; she shall have her Monkey,
poor Rogue; here throw this Peel out of the Window.

(Exit Scentwell.
Marpl. A Monkey, dear Madam, let me see it; I can tame a Monkey as well as the
best of them all. Oh how I love the little Miniatures of Man.


Miran. Be quiet, Mischief, and stand farther from the Chimney -- You shall not
see my Monkey -- why sure -- (Striving with him.


Marpl. For Heaven's sake, dear, Madam, let me but peep, to see if it be as
pretty as my Lady Fiddle-Faddle's. Has it got a Chain?


Miran. Not yet, but I design it one shall last its Lifetime: Nay, you shall
not see it -- Look, Gardee, how he teazes me!


Sir Fran. (Getting between him and the Chimney.) Sirrah, Sirrah, let my
Chargee's Monkey alone, or Bambo shall fly about your Ears, What is there no
dealing with you?


Marpl. Pugh, pox of the Monkey! here is a Rout: I wish he may Rival you.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, they put two more Horses in the Coach, as you
ordered, and it is ready at the Door.


Sir Fran. Well, I am going to be Executor, better for thee, Jewel. B'ye
Chargee, one buss! -- I Am glad thou have got a Monkey to divert thee a little.


Miran. Thank'e, dear Gardee. -- Nay, I Will see you to the Coach.


Sir Fran. That Is kind, adod.


Miran. Come along, Impertinence. (To Marplot.


Marpl (Stepping back.) Egad, I will see the Monkey now. (Lifts up the Board,
and discovers Sir George.) Oh Lord, Oh Lord! Thieves, Thieves, Murder!


Sir Geo. Dam'e, you unlucky Dog! it is I, which way shall I get out, show me
instantly, or I Will cut your Throat.


Marpl. Undone, undone! At that Door there. But hold, hold, break that China,
and I Will bring you off. (He runs off at the Corner, and throws down some China.


Re-enter Sir Francis, Miranda, and Scentwell. Sir Fran. Mercy on me! what is
the matter?


Miran. Oh you Toad! what have you done?


Marpl. No great harm, I beg of you to forgive me: Longing to see the Monkey, I
did but just raise up the Board, and it flew over my Shoulders, scratched all
my Face, broke yon' China, and whisk'd out of the Window.


Sir Fran. Was ever such an unlucky Rogue! Sirrah, I forbid you my House. Call
the Servants to get the Monkey again; I would stay my self to look it, but that
you know my earnest Business.


Scentw. Oh my Lady will be the best to lure it back; all them Creatures love
my Lady extremely.


Miran. Go, go, dear Gardee; I hope I shall recover it.


Sir Fran. B'ye, b'ye, Dear'e. Ah, Mischief, how you look now! B'ye, b'ye.

(Exit.
Miran. Scentwell, see him in the Coach, and bring me word.


Scentw. Yes, Madam,


Miran. So, Sir, you have done your Friend a signal piece of Service, I suppose.


Marpl. Why look you, Madam! if I have committed a fault, thank your self; no
Man is more Serviceable when I am let into a Secret, nor none more unlucky at
finding it out. Who could divine your Meaning, when you talked of a
Blunderbuss, who thought of a Rendevous? and when you talked of a Monkey, who
the Devil dreamt of Sir George?


Miran. A sign you converse but little with our Sex, when you cannot reconcile
Contradictions.


Enter Scentwell. Scentw. He Is gone, Madam, as fast as the Coach and Six can
carry him.


Enter Sir George. Sir Geo. Then I may appear.


Marpl. Dear, Sir George, make my Peace! On my Soul, I did not think of you.


Sir Geo. I dare swear thou did not. Madam, I beg you to forgive him.


Miran. Well, Sir George, if he can be secret.


Marpl. Ods heart, Madam, I Am as secret as a Priest when I Am trusted.


Sir Geo. Why it is with a Priest our Business is at present.


Scentw. Madam, here is Mrs. Isabinda's Woman to wait on you.


Miran. Bring her up,

Enter Patch. How do'e Mrs. Patch, what News from your Lady?


Patch. That Is for your private Ear, Madam. Sir George, there is a Friend of
yours has an urgent Occasion for your Assistance.


Sir Geo. His Name.


Patch. Charles.


Marpl. Ha! then there is something a-foot that I know nothing of. I Will wait on
you, Sir George.


Sir Geo. A third Person may not be proper perhaps; as soon as I have
dispatched my own Affairs, I am at his Service. I Will send my Servant to tell
him, I Will wait upon him in half an Hour.


Miran. How come you employed in this Message, Mrs. Patch?


Patch. Want of Business, Madam. I am discharged by my Master, but hope to
serve my Lady still.


Miran. How! Discharged! you must tell me the whole Story within.


Patch. With all my Heart, Madam.


Marpl. Pish! Pox, I wish I were fairly out of they House. I find Marriage is
the end of this Secret: And now I am half mad to know what Charles wants him
for. (Aside.


Sir Geo. Madam, I Am doubly pressed, by Love and Friendship: This Exigence
admits of no delay. Shall we make Marplot of the Party?


Miran. If you will run the Hazard, Sir George; I believe he means well.


Marpl. Nay, nay, for my part, I desire to be let into nothing: I Will be gone,
therefore pray don't mistrust me. (Going.


Sir Geo. So now has he a mind to be gone to Charles: But not knowing what
Affairs he may have upon his Hands at present, I Am resolved he shall not stir: No,
Mr. Marplot, you must not leave us, we want a third Person. (Takes hold of him.


Marpl. I never had more mind to be gone in my Life.


Miran. Come along then; if we fail in the Voyage, thank your self for taking
this ill starr'd Gentleman on Board.


Sir Geo. That Vessel never can Unsuccessful prove,
Whose Freight is Beauty, and whose Pilot Love.

The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT the Fifth.
Enter Miranda, Patch, and Scentwell. Miran. WELL, Patch, I have done a strange
bold thing! my Fate is determined, and Expectation is no more. Now to avoid the
Impertinence and Roguery of an old Man, I have thrown myself into the
Extravagance of a young one; if he should despise, slight or use me ill,
there is no Remedy from a Husband, but the Grave; and that is a terrible
Sanctuary to one of my Age and Constitution.


Patch. O fear not, Madam, you will find your Account in Sir George Airy; it is
impossible a Man of Sense should use a Woman ill, endued with Beauty, Wit and
Fortune. It must be the Lady's fault, if she does not wear the unfashionable
Name of Wife easy, when nothing but Complaisance and good Humor is requisite
on either side to make them happy.


Miran. I long till I am out of this House, lest any Accident should bring my
Guardian back. Scentwell, put my best Jewels into the little Casket, slip them
into thy Pocket, and let us march off to Sir Jealous's.


Scentw. It shall be done, Madam.

(Exit Scentwell.
Patch. Sir George will be impatient, Madam; if their Plot succeeds, we shall
be well received; if not, he will be able to protect us. Besides, I long to
know how my young Lady fares.


Miran. Farewell, old Mammon, and thy detested Walls; 'twill be no more sweet
Sir Francis, I shall be compelled to the odious Task of Dissembling no longer
to get my own, and coax him with the wheedling Names of my Precious, my Dear,
dear Gardee. O Heavens!


Enter Sir Francis behind. Sir Fran. Ah, my sweet Chargee, don't be frighted.
(She starts.) But thy poor Gardee has been abused, cheated, fooled, betrayed,
but no body knows by whom.


Miran. (Aside.) Undone! past Redemption.


Sir Fran. What will not you speak to me, Chargee!


Miran. I Am so surpised with Joy to see you, I know not what to say.


Sir Fran. Poor, dear Girl! But do'e know that my Son, or some such Rogue, to
rob or murder me, or borh, contrived this Journey? For upon the Road I met my
Neighbor Squesezum well, and coming to Town.


Miran, Good lack, good lack! what Tricks are there in this World!


Enter Scentwell, with a Diamond Necklace in her Hand; not seeing Sir Francis.
Scentw. Madam be pleased to tie this Neck-lace on, for I cannot get it into the
-- (Seeing Sir Francis.


Miran. The Wench is a Fool, I think! could you not have carried it to be
mended, without putting it in the Box?


Sir Fran. What Is the matter?


Miran. Only Dear'e, I bid her, I bid her -- Your ill Usage has put every thing
out of my Head. But will not you go, Gardee, and find out these Fellows, and have
them punished! and, and --


Sir Fran. Where should I look them, Child? No I Will sit me down contented with
my Safety, nor stir out of my own Doors, till I go with thee to a Parson.


Miran. (Aside.) If he goes into his Closet I am ruined. Oh! bless me in this
Fright, I had forgot Mrs. Patch.


Patch. Ay, Madam, and I stay for your speedy Answer.


Miran. (Aside.) I must get him out of the House. Now assist me, Fortune.


Sir Fran. Mrs. Patch, I profess I did not see you: How do thou do, Mrs.
Patch? Well, don't you repent leaving my Chargee?


Patch. Yes, every body must love her -- but I came now -- Madam, What did I
come for? My Invention is at the last Ebb. (Aside to Miranda.


Sir Fran. Nay, never whisper, tell me.


Miran. She came, dear Gardee to invite me to her Lady's Wedding, and you shall
go with me Gardee, it is to be done this Moment to, a Spanish Merchant; Old Sir
Jealous keeps on his Humor, the first Minute he sees her, the next he marries
her.


Sir Fran. Ha, ha, ha, I Would go if I thought the sight of Matrimony would tempt
Chargee to perform her Promise: There was a smile, there was a consenting Look
with those pretty Twinklers, worth a Million. Ods precious, I am happier than
the Great Mogul, the Emperor of China, or all the Potentates that are not in
Wars. Speak, confirm it, make me leap out of my Skin.


Miran. When one has resolved, it is in vain to stand shall I, shall I; if ever
I marry, positively this is my Wedding Day.


Sir Fran. Oh! happy, happy Man -- Verily I will beget a Son, the first Night
shall disinherit that Dog Charles. I have Estate enough to purchase a Barony,
and be the immortalizing the whole Family of the Gripes.


Miran. Come then Gardee, give me thy Hand, let us to this House of Hymen.

My Choice is fixed, let good or ill betide,


Sir Fran. The joyful Bridegroom I,


Miran. And I the happy Bride.

(Exeunt.
Enter Sir Jealous meeting a Servant. Serve. Sir, here is a couple of Gentlemen
enquire for you; one of them calls himself Seignior Diego Babinetto.


Sir Jeal. Ha! Seignior Babinetto! Admit 'em instantly -- Joyful Minute; I Will
have my Daughter married to Night.


Enter Charles in Spanish Habit, with Sir George dressed like a Merchant. Sir
Jeal. Senior, beso Las Manos vuestra merced es muy bien venido en esta tierra.


Char. Senhor, soy muy humilde, y muy obligado Cryado de vuestra merced: Mi
Padre Embia a vuestra merced, los mas profondos de sus respetos; y a
Commissionado este Mercadel Ingles, de concluyr un negocio, que me Haze el mas
dichoso hombre del mundo, Haziendo me su yerno.


Sir Jeal. I am glad on it, for I find I have lost much of my Spanish. Sir, I am
your most humble Servant. Seignior Don Diego Babinetto has informed me that you
are commissioned by Seignior Don Pedro, etc. his worthy Father.


Sir Geo. To see an Affair of Marriage consummated between a Daughter of yours,
and Seignior Diego Babinetto his Son here. True, Sir, such a Trust is reposed
in me as that Letter will inform you. I hope 'twill pass upon him. (Aside.)
(Gives him a Letter.


Sir Jeal. Ay, it is his Hand. (Seems to read.


Sir Geo. Good -- you have counterfeited to a Nicety, Charles. (Aside to
Charles.


Char. If the whole Plot succeeds as well, I Am happy.


Sir Jeal. Sir I find by this, that you are a Man of Honor and Probity; I
think, Sir, he calls you Meanwell.


Sir Geo. Meanwell is my Name, Sir.


Sir Jeal. A very good Name, and very significant.


Char. Yes Faith, if he knew all. (Aside


Sir Jeal. For to Mean-well is to be honest, and to be honest is the Virtue of
a Friend, and a Friend is the Delight and Support of Human Society.


Sir Geo. You shall find that I Will discharge the part of a Friend in what I
have undertaken, Sir Jealous.


Char. But little does he think to whom. (Aside.


Sir Geo. Therefore, Sir, I must entreat the Presence of your fair Daughter,
and the Assistance of your Chaplain; for Seignor Don Pedro strictly enjoined me
to see the Marriage Rites performed as soon as we should arrive, to avoid the
Accidental Overtures of Venus.


Sir Jeal. Overtures of Venus.


Sir Geo. Ay, Sir, that is, those little Hawking Females that traverse the
Park, and the Playhouse to put off their damaged Ware -- they fasten upon
Foreigners like Leeches, and watch their Arrival as carefully, as the Kentish
Men do a Ship-wreck. I warrant you they have heard of him already.


Sir Jeal. Nay, I know this Town swarms with them.


Sir Geo. Ay, and then you know the Spaniards are naturally Amorous, but very
Constant, the first Face fixes 'em, and it may be dangerous to let him ramble
ever he is tied.


Char. Well hinted. (Aside.


Sir Jeal. Pat to my Purpose -- Well, Sir, there is but one thing more, and
they shall be married instantly.


Char. Pray Heaven, that one thing more don't spoil all. (Aside.


Sir Jeal. Don Pedro writ me Word in his last but one, that he designed the Sum
of Five Thousand Crowns by way of Jointure for my Daughter; and that it should
be paid into my Hand upon the Day of Marriage.


Char. Oh! the Devil. (Aside.


Sir Jeal. In order to lodge it in some of our Funds, in case she should become
a Widow, and return for England.


Sir Geo. Pox on it, this is an unlucky Turn. What shall I say? (Aside.


Sir Jeal. And he does not mention one Word of it in this Letter.


Char. I don't know how he should.


Sir Geo. Humph! True, Sir Jealous, he told me such a Thing, but, but, but, but
-- he, he, he, he -- he did not imagine that you would insist upon the very
Day, for, for, for, for Money you know is dangerous returning by Sea, an, an,
an, an --


Char. Zounds, say we have brought it in Commodities. (Aside to Sir George.


Sir Geo. And so Sir, he has sent it in Merchandise, Tobacco, Sugars, Spices,
Limons, and so forth, which shall be turned into Money with all Expedition: In
the mean time, Sir, if you please to accept of my Bond for Performance.


Sir Jeal. It is enough, Sir, I am so pleased with the Countenance of Seignior
Diego, and the Harmony of your Name, that I Will take your Word, and will fetch
my Daughter this Moment. Within there (Enter Servant) desire Mr. Tackum my
Neighbor's Chaplain to walk hither.


Serve. Yes, Sir.

(Exit.
Sir Jeal. Gentlemen, I Will return in an Instant.

(Exit.
Char. Wondrous well. Let me embrace thee.


Sir Geo. Egad that 5000 l. had like to have ruined the Plot.


Char. But that is over! And if Fortune throws no more Rubs in our way.


Sir Geo. Thou Wilt carry the Prize -- but hist, here he comes.


Enter Sir Jealous, dragging in Isabinda. Sir Jeal. Come along, you stubborn
Baggage you, come along.


Isab. Oh hear me, Sir! hear me but speak one Word,
Do not destroy my everlasting Peace;
My Soul abhors this Spaniard you have chose,
Nor can I wed him without being cursed.

Sir Jeal. How Is that!


Isab. Let this Posture move your tender Nature. (Kneels.
For ever will I hang upon these Knees;
Nor loose my Hands till you cut off my hold,
If you refuse to hear me, Sir.

Char. Oh! that I could discover my self to her. (Aside.


Sir Geo. Have a care what you do. You had better trust to his Obstinacy,
(Aside.


Sir Jeal. Did you ever see such a perverse Slut, Off I say. Mr. Meanwell pray
help me a little.


Sir Geo. Rise, Madam, and do not disoblige your Father, who has provided a
Husband worthy of you, one that will Love you equal with his Soul, and one that
you will Love, when once you know him.


Isab. Oh! never, never. Could I suspect that Falsehood in my Heart, I would
this Moment tear it from my Breast, and straight present him with the
Treacherous Part.


Char. Oh! my charming faithful Dear. (Aside.


Sir Jeal. Falsehood! why, who the Devil are you in Love with? Ha! Don't provoke
me, for by St. Jago I shall beat you, Housewife.


Char. Heaven forbid; for I shall infallibly discover my self if he should.
(Aside.


Sir Geo. Have Patience, Madam! and look at him: Why will you prepossess your
self against a Man that is Master of all the Charms you would desire in a
Husband?


Sir Jeal. Ay, look at him, Isabinda, Senior pase vind adelante.


Char. My Heart bleeds to see her grieve, whom I imagined would with Joy
receive me. Senior a obligue me vuestra merced de sumano.


Sir Jeal. (Pulling up her Head.) Hold up your Head, hold up your Head,
Housewife, and look at him: Is there a properer, handsomer, better shaped
Fellow in England, ye Jade you? Ha! see, see the obstinate Baggage shuts her
Eyes; by St. Jago, I have a good mind to beat 'em out. (Pushes her down.


Isab. Do then, Sir, kill me, kill me instantly.
It Is much the kinder Action of the Two,
For 'twill be worse than Death to wed him.

Sir Geo. Sir Jealous, you are too passionate. Give me leave, I Will try by
gentle Words to work her to your Purpose.


Sir Jeal. I pray do, Mr. Meanwell, I pray do; she will break my Heart. (Weeps)
There is in that, Jewels of the Value of 3000 l. which were her Mother's; and a
Paper wherein I have settled one half of my Estate upon her now, and the whole
when I dye. But provided she marries this Gentleman, else by St. Jago, I Will
turn her out of Doors to beg or starve. Tell her this, Mr. Meanwell, pray do.
(Walks off.


Sir Geo. Ha! this is beyond Expectation -- Trust to me, Sir, I Will lay the
dangerous Consequence of disobeying you at this Juncture before her, I warrant
you.


Char. A sudden Joy runs through my Heart like a propitious Omen. (Aside.


Sir Geo. Come, Madam, do not blindly cast your Life away just in the Moment
you would wish to save it.


Isab. Pray cease your Trouble, Sir, I have no wish but sudden Death to free me
from this hated Spaniard. If you are his Friend inform him what I say; my Heart
is given to another Youth, whom I love with the same strength of Passion that I
hate this Diego; with whom, if I am forced to wed, my own Hand shall cut the
Gordian Knot.


Sir Geo. Suppose this Spaniard which you strive to shun should be the very Man
to whom you would fly?


Isab. Ha!


Sir Geo. Would you not blame your rash Result, and curse those Eyes that would
not look on Charles.


Isab. On Charles! Oh you have inspired new Life, and collected every wandering
Sense. Where is he? Oh! let me fly into his Arms (Rises.


Sir Geo. Hold, hold, hold, God's Death, Madam, you will ruin all, your Father
believes him to be Seignor Barbinetto. Compose your self a little, pray Madam.
(He runs to Sir Jealous.


Char. Her Eyes declare she knows me. (Aside.


Sir Geo. She begins to hear Reason, Sir, the fear of being turned out of Doors
has done it. (Runs back to Isabinda.


Isab. It Is he, oh! my ravished Soul.


Sir Geo. Take heed, Madam, you don't betray your self. Seem with Reluctance to
consent, or you are undone, (runs to Sir Jealous) speak gently to her, Sir, I Am
sure she will yield, I see it in her Face.


Sir Jeal. Well, Isabinda, can you refuse to bless a Father, whose only Care is
to make you happy, as Mr. Meanwell has informed you. Come, wipe thy Eyes; nay,
prithee do, or thou will break thy Father's Heart; see thou bring'st the Tears
in mine to think of thy undutiful Carriage to me. (Weeps.


Isab. Oh! do not weep, Sir, your Tears are like a Poniard to my Soul; do with
me what you please, I am all Obedience.


Sir Jeal. Ha! then thou art my Child again.


Sir Geo. It Is done, and now Friend the Day's thy own.


Char. The happiest of my Life, if nothing Intervene.


Sir Jeal. And will thou love him?


Isab. I will endeavor it, Sir.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, Here is Mr. Tackum


Sir Jeal. Show him into the Parlour -- Senior tome vind sueipora; cete Momento
les Juntta les Manos. (Gives her to Charles.


Char. Oh! transport -- Senior yo la recibo Como se deve un Teforo tan Grande.
Oh! my Joy, my Life, my Soul. (Embrace.


Isab. My Faithful everlasting Comfort.


Sir Jeal, Now, Mr. Meanwell let us to the Parson,

Who, by his Art will join this Pair for Life,
Make me the happiest Father, her the happiest Wife.
(Exit.
SCENE Changes to the Street before Sir Jealous's Door.
Enter Marplot, Solus. Marpl. I have hunted all over the Town sor Charles, but
cannot find him; and by Whisper's scouting at the End of the Street, I suspect
he must be in the House again. I Am informed too that he has borrowed a Spanish
Habit out of the Playhouse: What can it mean?

Enter a Servant of Sir Jealous's to him, out of the House. Hark'e, Sir, do you
belong to this House?


Serve. Yes, Sir.


Marpl. Pray can you tell if there be a Gentleman in it in Spanish Habit?


Serve. There is a Spanish Gentleman within, that is just a going to marry my
young Lady, Sir.


Marpl. Are you sure he is a Spanish Gentleman?


Serve, I Am sure he speaks no English, that I hear of.


Marpl. Then that cannot be him I want; for it is an English Gentleman, though I
suppose he may be dressed like a Spaniard, that I enquire after.


Serve. Ha! who knows but this may be an Impostor? I Will inform my Master; for if
he should be imposed upon, he will beat us all round, (Aside.) Pray, come in,
Sir, and see if this be the Person you enquire for.


SCENE Changes to the Inside of the House.
Enter Marplot. Marpl. So, this was a good Contrivance: If this be Charles, now
will he wonder how I found him out.


Enter Servant and Sir Jealous. Sir Jeal. What is your earnest Business,
Blockhead, that you must speak with me before the Ceremony's past? Ha! who is
this?


Serve. Why this Gentleman, Sir, wants another Gentleman in Spanish Habit, he
says.


Sir Jeal. In Spanish Habit! it is some Friend of Seignior Don Diego's, I
warrant. Sir, I suppose you would speak with Seignior Barbinetto --


Marpl. Hy-day! what the Devil does he say now! -- Sir, I don't understand you.


Sir Jeal. Don't you understand Spanish, Sir?


Marpl. Not I indeed, Sir.


Sir Jeal. I thought you had known Seignior Barbinetto.


Marpl. Not I, upon my word, Sir.


Sir Jeal. What then you would speak with his Friend, the English Merchant, Mr.
Meanwell.


Marpl. Neither, Sir; not I.


Sir Jeal. Why who are you then, Sir? And what do you want? (In an angry Tone.


Marpl. Nay, nothing at all, not I, Sir. Pox on him! I wish I were out, he
begins to exalt his Voice, I shall be beaten again.


Sir Jeal. Nothing at all, Sir! Why then what Business have you in my House? ha?


Serve. You said you wanted a Gentleman in Spanish Habit.


Marpl. Why, ay, but his Name is neither Barbinetto nor Meanwell.


Sir Jeal. What is his Name then, Sirrah, ha? Now I look at you again, I believe
you are the Rogue threatened me with half a Dozen Mirmidons -- Speak, Sir, who
is it you look for? or, or --


Marpl. A terrible old Dog! -- Why, Sir, only an honest young Fellow of my
Acquaintance -- I thought that here might be a Ball, and that he might have
been here in a Masquerade; it is Charles, Sir Francis Gripe's Son, because I
know he used to come hither sometimes.


Sir Jeal. Did he so? -- Not that I know of, I Am sure. Pray Heaven that this be
Don Diego -- If I should be tricked now -- Ha! my Heart misgives me plaguily --
within there! stop the Marriage -- Run, Sirrah, call all my Servants! I Will be
satisfied that this is Seignior Pedro's Son ever he has my Daughter.


Marpl. Ha, Sir George, what have I done now?


Enter Sir George with a drawn Sword between the Scenes. Sir Geo. Ha! Marplot,
here -- Oh the unlucky Dog -- what is the matter, Sir Jealous?


Sir Jeal. Nay, I don't know the matter, Mr. Meanwell.


Marpl. Upon my Soul, Sir George -- (Going up to Sir Geo.


Sir Jeal. Nay then, I Am betrayed, ruined, undone: Thieves, Traitors, Rogues!
(Offers to go in.) Stop the Marriage, I say --


Sir Geo. I say, go on Mr. Tackum -- Nay, no Entering here, I guard this
Passage, old Gentleman; the Act and Deed were both your own, and I Will see 'em
signed, or die for it.


Enter Servant. Sir Jeal. A pox on the Act and Deed! -- Fall on, knock him down.


Sir Geo. Ay, come on, Scoundrils! I Will prick your Jackets for you.


Sir Jeal. 'Zounds, Sirrah, I Will be revenged on you. (Beats Marplot.


Sir Geo. Ay, there your Vengeance is due; Ha, ha.


Marpl. Why what do you beat me for? I have not married your Daughter.


Sir Jeal. Rascals! why don't you knock him down?


Serve. We are afraid of his Sword, Sir; if you will take that from him, we'll
knock him down presently.


Enter Charles and Isabinda. Sir Jeal. Seize her then.


Char. Rascals, retire; she is my Wife, touch her if you dare, I Will make Dogs
meat of you.


Sir Jeal. Ah! downright English: -- Oh, oh, oh, oh!


Enter Sir Francis Gripe, Miranda, Patch, Scentwell, and Whisper. Sir Fran.
Into the House of Joy we enter without knocking: Ha! I think it is the House of
Sorrow, Sir Jealous.


Sir Jeal. Oh Sir Francis! are you come? What was this your Contrivance, to
abuse, trick, and chouse me of my Child!


Sir Fran. My Contrivance! what do you mean?


Sir Jeal. No, you don't know your Son there in Spanish Habit.


Sir Fran. How! my Son in Spanish Habit. Sirrah, you will come to be hanged; get
out of my sight, ye Dog! get out of my sight.


Sir Jeal. Get out of your sight, Sir! Get out with your Bags; let us see what
you will give him now to maintain my Daughter on.


Sir Fran. Give him! He shall be never the better for a Penny of mine -- and
you might have looked after your Daughter better, Sir Jealous. Tricked, quotha!
Egad, I think you designed to trick me: But look ye, Gentlemen, I believe I
shall trick you both. This Lady is my Wife, do you see? And my Estate shall
descend only to the Heirs of her Body.


Sir Geo. Lawfully begotten by me -- I shall be extremely obliged to you, Sir
Francis.


Sir Fran. Ha, ha, ha, ha, poor Sir George! You see your Project was of no use.
Does not your Hundred Pound stick in your Stomach? Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Geo. No faith, Sir Francis, this Lady has given me a Cordial for that.
(Takes her by the Hand.


Sir Fran. Hold, Sir, you have nothing to say to this Lady.


Sir Geo. Nor you nothing to do with my Wife, Sir.


Sir Fran. Wife, Sir!


Miran. Ay really, Guardian, it is even so. I hope you will forgive my first
Offense.


Sir Fran. What have you choused me out of my Consent, and your Writings then,
Mistress, ha?


Miran. Out of nothing but my own, Guardian.


Sir Jeal. Ha, ha, ha, it is some Comfort at least to see you are over-reached
as well as my self. Will you settle your Estate upon your Son now?


Sir Fran. He shall starve first.


Miran. That I have taken care to prevent. There, Sir, is the Writings of your
Uncle's Estate, which has been your due these three Years. (Gives Char. Papers.


Char. I shall study to deserve this Favor.


Sir Fran. What have you robbed me too, Mistress! Egad I Will make you restore
'em. -- Huswife, I will so.


Sir Jeal. Take care I don't make you pay the Arrears, Sir. It Is well its no
worse, since it is no better. Come, young Man, seeing thou have outwitted me,
take her, and Bless you both.


Char. I hope, Sir, you will bestow your Blessing too, it is all I Will ask. (Kneels.


Sir Fran. Confound you all!


Marpl. Mercy upon us! how he looks! (Exit.


Sir Geo. Ha, ha, never mind his Curses, Charles; thou wilt thrive not one jot
the worse for 'em. Since this Gentleman is reconciled, we are all made happy.


Sir Jeal. I always loved Precaution, and took care to avoid Dangers. But when
a thing was past, I ever had Philosophy to be easy.


Char. Which is the true sign of a great Soul: I loved your Daughter, and she
me, and you shall have no reason to repent her Choice.


Isab. You will not blame me, Sir, sor loving my own Country best.


Marpl. So here is every body happy, I find, but poor Pilgarlick. I wonder what
Satisfaction I shall have, for being cuff'd, kicked, and beaten in your Service.


Sir Jeal. I have been a little too familiar with you, as things are fallen
out; but since there is no help for it, you must forgive me.


Marpl. Egad I think so -- But provided that you be not so familiar for the
future.


Sir Geo. Thou have been an unlucky Rogue.


Marp. But very honest.


Char. That I Will vouch for; and freely forgive thee.


Sir Geo. And I Will do you one piece of Service more, Marplot, I Will take care
that Sir Francis make you Master of your Estate.


Marpl. That will make me as happy as any of you.


Patch. Your humble Servant begs leave to remind you, Madam.


Isab. Sir, I hope you will give me leave to take Patch into favor again.


Sir Jeal. Nay, let your Husband look to that, I have done with my Care.


Char. Her own Liberty shall always oblige me. Here Is no Body but honest
Whisper and Mrs. Scentwell to be provided for now. It shall be left to their
Choice to Marry, or keep their Services.


Whisp. Nay then, I Will stick to my Master.


Scentw. Coxcomb! and I prefer my Lady before a Footman.


Sir Jeal. Hark, I hear Music, the Fiddlers smell a Wedding. What say you young
Fellows, will ye have a Dance?


Sir Geo. With all my Heart; call 'em in.


A DANCE. Sir Jeal. Now let us in and refresh our selves with a cheerful Glass,
in which we'll bury all Animosities: And

By my Example let all Parents move,
And never strive to cross their Childrens Love;
But still submit that Care to Providence above.

FINIS.

