THE NORTHERN-STAR. A POEM.

Written by Mr. HILL.

LONDON: Printed for E. Berington at the Cross-Keys near Essex-street End in
the Strand, and J. Morphew near Stationers' Hall MDCCXVIII. Price One Shilling.

THE PREFACE To Mr. POPE.
SIR,
I Am so little inclined to trouble even Men of Merit, with the Address of such
Trifles as These, that it was impossible I should so much as have thought of
Yourself with that View, if Honest Bernard, your Bookseller, had not informed
me, That You (I suppose it was out of the Fullness of your known Zeal for our
Church and Constitution) had taken upon you to assert, that Printing any thing
in Praise of the Czar of Russia would be received as a Satyr on the Government.

It Is possible, that under this Disguise of Opinion, Your Excess of
Good-breeding may have concealed your Dislike of the Performance; for I find it
a Difficulty to conceive, how so whimsical an Objection could come into a Head,
so well stored with Judgment, as we are to conclude Yours to be, from Your
Essay on Criticism.

Let either of these sage Cases be the Right, I consider their Importance as
Equal; and take this Occasion, with a Frankness, like Your own, to assure You,
that my Esteem for Your Genius as a Poet, is so very considerable, that it is
hardly exceeded by my Contempt of Your Vanity.

What led me to embrace an Opportunity of knowing Your Opinion, was a
Disposition which two Lines in Your Essay abovementioned shall explain for me;

Trust not Your-self; but Your Defects to know,
Make Use of Every Friend: -- And Every Foe:
I could not, I confess, consider you as a Friend, having that very great
Misfortune to languish under, of not being reckoned in the Number of Your
Acquaintance: But in the Last of the two Lights, I presumed, I might regard
You, since Mr. Dennis, for whose Skill in Judging I profess an Esteem, has
assured us, that You are a Kind of Foe to every Body but Your-self, and on that
Foundation, supports his rough Attempt to pull the Lyon's Skin from a certain
little Ass he there mentions, and I fear he means You, Sir.

When I considered You in this Character, I made no doubt but any Poem would
have had the Good Fortune to come out of Your Hands well examined, that I
should have heard of Rough Verse, improper Sentiments, and a World of Poetical
Errors: But I profess Your Penetration over-shot all my Fears, and I cannot
find Words to express my Astonishment at Your Capacity, when Mr. Lintott lisp'd
out, That Mr. Pope said, there were several good Things in the Northern-Star,
BUT, it would be taken for an Insult on the Government: FOR, though the Czar is
King George 's Ally; yet we are likely to quarrel with Sweden; and Muscovy,
whispered Bernard, lies, he says, in the North!

If this pleasant Discovery was Your Real Opinion, we must, I Am asraid, learn
to pity the Weakness of a Judgment, which, I know, is Heroic enough to wish
rather for Envy, though a sturdier Passion, and agree with You heartily, that,

A Little Learning is a dangerous Thing.
But if you disliked the Poem, as a Poem, why did you not fairly avow the
Disrelish? I could have owned a Conviction of Error, with the same
Satisfaction, I feel, when I repay a Civility. Shall I put you in Mind, that
Dislike not owned openly, stands condemned by a Judge, whose Sentence Mr. Pope,
of all Mankind, will be the last to appeal from,

Be Niggards of Advice, on no Pretense,
For the worst Avarice is that of Sense:
With mean Complacence never betray your Trust,
Nor be so civil, as to prove unjust:
Pope 's Essay on Criticism.

I must, by no Means, imagine, that a supercilious Result, from Neglect of
examining into the Merits of a Cause, he pretends to decide, can he charged
with any Justice on the Author of the following Lines, unless he was religious
enough to write them, with Design to lash himself by Way of Penance.

Of all the Causes, which conspire to blind
Man's Erring Judgment, and misguide the Mind;
What the weak Head, with strongest Bias, rules,
Is, Pride, the neverfailing Vice of Fools.
Whatever Nature has, in Worth, denied,
She gives. in large Recruits, of needful Pride:
In short, if I writ Verse often enough to make my Vanity Rampant; I should
shrewdly suspect, that you were mightily taken with this Poem, since you
thought it worth your while to give it an ill Character; for You* who rever
iie, have told the World, and I suppose you assert Nothing but from Your own
Knowledge,

That still the Worst with most Regret, Commend,
And each bad Writer is as bad a Friend.
And while Self-Love each jealous Writer rules,
Contending Wits become the Sport of Fools:
But. if I was not afraid, that You would think me Ill-natured, I would observe
in your Favor, on this Occasion, that though all these foregoing Verses are Your
own Words, they way posibly be very different from Your Sentiments; for I
remember, that, among the rest, You, tell us, by Way of Warning.

That Men of Wit may their own Rules invade,

As Kings dispense with Laws, themselves have made.

I will therefore take Advantage, from my having been pretty conversant with
your Writings, to seek a better Reason yet, for the Oddness of your Notion,
that this Northern-Star is a Satyr on the Government. Your abovementioned
Cabinet of Sentences is so well furnished, that, like a Masquerade-shop at
Venice. it will give a Man what Face he pleases in a Twinkling; but I presume,
I have hit the Right Nail, when I stop at the following Simile.

All seems infected, that the infected Spy,
As all looks Yellow to the Jaundic'd Eve:
But however, tho* as Teague in the Comedy, finds his Mouth run from one Side
to the other, and cannot for his Life say Ladyship to Mrs. Day, without
laughing in her Face, I cannot without much Difficulty grow Grave, when I
compare the Judge with the Sentence; yet to allow all possible fair Quarter,
let us suppose, that the Czar, as He is not; were now actually our Enemy -- Are
his Merits less shining? Does His Glory depend on His Friendship for Britain?
Contemptible Meanness of Thought! Is it necessary toward becoming a Patriot,
among the English, that every Thing must be hated, that is* Foreign? At that
Rate the toto divisos orb Britannos would be more applicable to our Humor
than it is to our Sitvation.

Next to deserving well ourselves, it is the noblest Perfection of Nature, to
admire and applaud those, who do so; But to have no Ear open to Renown at a
Distance, were base, vain and brutal, equally distasteful to Humanity and
Wisdom. We may talk what we please of our Natural Advantages. There is one
Natural Defect, which will shadow them All; and which makes it impossible to
widen our Power, till we enlarge our Conceptions.

I am apt to believe that Nothing has contributed more to this Narrowness of
Mind, than the Flatteries of our Poets: who generally writing for a precarious
Subsistence, can no Way so easily succeed, as by falling in with the Weakness
and Bias of Men's Natures; and hence all our Women are Nymphs, Angels, or
Goddesses; our Men, Demi-Hero's; all our Soldiers are invincible; all our
Generals beyond Caesar; all our Kings like Augustus; and every Lord who has a
Penny in his Pocket, and a Crotchet in His Imagination, a very Mecaenas.

A Poet should sometimes stand high, and look wide for a Subject; If He is
always Domestic, He will be often unnatural. Virgil's celebrated Praise of his
Italy, had been Falsehood and F^attery, applied to Great Britain. He knew and
admired the Delights of His Country, and acted as became Him, when he justly
commended them. But our Highway-Poets, whose utmost Reach of Skill is a Poor
Imitation, forget that they make Themselves contemptible* instead of
ornamenting their Subject, when Peace in our Climate is dressed in her Olives;
when Pan fills our Woods, and Tritons our Seas; and our Shepherds sit Piping,
like the Swains of Arcadia.

A mere Poet, that is to say, a Wretch, who has nothing but the Jingle in his
Brain to ring Chimes to his Vanity, and whose whole Trade is Rhyme-jobbirg;
such a Creature is certainly the most worthless Encumbrance of his Country. His
Arrogance is the only Thing more Remarkable than his Ignorance. The fantastical
Merit that swells him, is, like other Ill-Humors* the more noxious for its
Thinness. Useful Science is an Air much too Gross for His Intellects: Biting
Scorn, and Universal Neglect turn their Points on His Conceitedness, and while
the whole World strives in vain to correct him by Disgrace and Reproaches, All
that Tempest to Him is no more, than Blowing Wind in a Bladder, the stronger
the Puff, the more boisterous the Swelling.

All this, Mr. Pope must reeds know, between his double Capacity, of Poet and
Critic; and, if so, He has given a Judgment, as well corrupt, as ridiculous, in
attributing to Party the Endeavors of Justice. But if after all, it was not
the Subject, but the Poem, that found no Favor in His Eyes, I will take upon
me to assure Him, it sues not for the Blessing: Let him like it as ill as He
pleases, I dare at least, undertake, it shall easily defend it self against any
Attack, of His making; which, pray Sir, inform Him, since you are His greatest
Admirer, and oblige

Your Most Humble Servant, A. HILL.

THE Northern Star. A POEM.
BORN in an Age, when Virtue's Vigor fails,
Where Praise is Dumb, or Speaks, as Change prevails;
Where struggling Courage stoops to Want's Control,
And Fortune's every Tide o'erwhelms the Soul;
Where hard-press'd Poverty the Contest flies,
And with low Flattery, shameful Succor buys;
Where ill-judg'd Worth, by Power, and Wealth, is weighed,
And servile Poets make their Art a Trade.
Rise, Genr'ous Muse! And let the Wand'rers know,
It Is base to Praise, where they no Praises owe:
That Justice scorns an undue Fame to sell;
And Nothing claims Renown, but Doing-well;
That He dishonours Verse, who bows his Theme,
To Great Men's Fortune, or to Rich Men's Phlegm;
That, through all Forms, the Muse should Merit trace,
A Blessing, unconfined to Rank, or Place;
That Narrow Minds conceive not Virtue right,
And Worlds, not Realms, should be the Poet's Flight.
Extend thy Truth-plum'd Wings, Unbiased Muse!
Discern with Caution, but with Boldness choose:
If, in some dusky Corner, thou shall find
A ragged Fortune hide a noble Mind,
Disperse the Cloud, and be the Labor thine,
To teach such shame-fac'd Virtue how to shine.
Or, where thou see some wealthy Churl withold
The enlivening Use of His imprisoned Gold,
If meanly Proud, the Wretch disdains to weigh
The Wise Man's Wants against the treasured Clay;
With pointed Satyr pierce his stubborn Soul,
Till Sense of Shame does Pride of Heart control.
Over Statesmens Actions keep a watchful Eye,
The Stains, they make, assume the blackest Dye!
If, raised by Chance, some Wretch, not formed for Sway,
Exerts the Covered Beast, and hunts for Prey:
If, all untaught in Power, He drives with Rage,
And, blustering, shakes His temporary Stage,
Whisper unwelcom Notice in His Ear,
That where Abuse spreads wide, Revenge is near.
But stay! To nobler Aims address thy View,
And mark the mighty Deeds, which Monarchs do:
Their Good Example sways unfix'd Mankind,
And dim-ey'd Princes make whole Nations Blind
When God-like Caesar ruled Ungrateful Rome,
And Budding Empire shot a fragrant Bloom,
His Virtues made those Slaves more blessed than He,
Who Murdered Him, to be, unsafely, Free.
When Bloody Nero filled That Caesar's Throne,
Corrupted Justice durst no Virtue own:
Degenerate Rome became the Villain's Post,
And He was safest, there, whose Guilt was most.
Undreading, therefore, when Occasion calls,
Enter Proud Palaces, Imperious Walls;
There, Good, or Ill, detect the reigning Fact,
For Truth is Truth, however Princes act.
Sublimely fired, I snatch the Glorious Aim,
It Is Great indeed, to give the Royal Fame!
But, where, O! Spotless Light of Reason's Eye!
Where, among Princes, shall I Virtue spy?
Shall my own Sov'reign's Praise enrich my Lines?
No: -- With known Force, Domestic Glory shines:
Vain were the Thought, and needless the Design,
To say, to Angels, Heaven is all Divine.
Northward, unbridl'd Muse! Direct thy Flight,
Where a New Sun adorns the Land of (1) Night:
Where Arts, and Arms, a Rising Empire sound,
Doomed to refine the World, and Girt it round.
Thou, Mighty CZAR! in that (2) Contracted Name,
Shall outweigh Caesar, in thy Power and Fame!
Led by thy Forming Hand, Victorious still,
And almost New-created, by Thy Skill,
Intrepid Legions wait thy Doomful Nod,
As Hosts, from Moses, watched the Will of God.
Thou, God like Object of my Muse's Praise,
Thou, Best Invoked! Inspire my Rising Lays!
Kindle my Glowing Soul with Fire like Thine,
And lend me Bluze, to make Thy Wonders shine.
Though right to mark How towering Eagles fly,
Requires the Sharpness of an Eagle's Eye,
Though High-rais'd View does best a Prospect show,
Which He can Ill describe who stands too low,
Yet, if, aspiring to the Theme, I find
Thy Glory's Luster strike my opening Mind,
O! Prince, the Grateful Arrogance forgive!
No Genuine Muse, so charmed, can silent live!
Perish that narrow Pride, from Custom grown,
That makes Men blind to Merits not their own:
Briton, and Russian, differ but in Name,
In Nature's Sense, All Nations are the same:
One Universe claims One Creator's Care,
And Man is Reason's Subject Everywhere.
While untrac'd Nile, with swelling Torrent strays,
And Oozy Wealth, in Annual Floods, conveys,
Memphia's rich Plains confessed Improvement know,
And to the spreading Stream, Huge Harvests owe:
Yet does not Egypt, singly, praise the Nile,
Which, greatly partial, does on Egypt smile:
Egypt, and All the World, the River claim;
Egypt, in Influence, and the World, in Fame:
So Russia, nearest, feals the Inbred Heat:
But the warmed World the distant Brightness greet.
Ages, obscurely passed, unmarked by Fame,
Had almost robbed this Empire of its Name:
Unmeasured States lay hid, in noiseless Reign,
And Russia took up half our World in vain:
Weakly inspired, the Mass did slowly roll,
Like some huge Giant, with a Pigmy's Soul:
Till Ripening Time an Equal Genius sent,
Divinely sized to suit the vast Event:
He breathed Prolific Vigor over the Land,
And molded Order, with his skilful Hand;
The swelling Energy of Power spread wide,
And bore down proud Obstruction like a Tide:
In sudden State, a dreadful Empire rose
Which, Late, no Hope, and, Now, no Danger knows.
In Marble Quarries, thus, to swell their Gain,
Men blow up hollow Rocks, with nitrous Grain;
Too weak, at first, the Blast often fails its End,
And frustrate Clouds, with forceless Flash, ascend:
But when, well suited to the Cavern's Size,
A stronger Heap the experienced Artist tries,
No more, in vain, the expandid Thunder breaks,
But, bursting All, impetuous Passage makes:
The groaning Mountain Nods, with rugged State,
And yields, reluctant, to its forceful Fate:
The Cave, unroof'd, with sudden Splendour, bright,
Glitters, with mingled Rocks, and Newborn Light.
Did not, O Prince! Thy Love of Art's soft Charms
Ungrind the keener Influence of thy Arms;
Well might the Jealous World malign Thy Sway,
And, anxious, wink, against Thy Stream of Day!
But Thy Great Soul has taught Thee, that the Brave
Wish not to conquer, but with View to save:
That it is a Monarch's Task to steer his Reign,
Betwixt the wild Extremes of Mean, and Vain:
To curb Presumption's Childhood with Restraint,
And punish Treason, while it is called Complaint:
The noblest Way, to make His Subjects Free,
They safe in Property, in Empire, He.
Knowledge, with Joy, should consecrate to Fame
The lucid Clearness of Her Champion's Flame:
His Double-grasping Hand, at once, displays
The Martial Laurel, and the Peaceful Bays:
Beneath His Shade, where no bold Tempests blow,
Safely, they twine together, as they grow:
Not so, of old, when, fierce, in horrid Arms,
The needy North poured forth Her Gothic Swarms:
Roughly they warred, on Worth they could not taste,
And, blindly, laid the Tracks of Learning waste:
This Heaven remembered, and, with Kind Command,
Called for Atonement from the barbarous Land,
The Conscious Prince, Disdainful of the Crime,
Guiltless, springs forward, to Uncurse His Clime,
And nobly vows, to teach the Nations more,
Than the World's Empire, Ruined, Lost before.
Illustrious Nature! Fitly framed for Power!
So Gods, for Incense, did their Blessings shower!
So Russia's Chief, Himself a God, in This,
Rewards Subjection, with unmeasured Bliss!
How vast the Engine! And the Force how Great!
That can, so swiftly move such Ponderous Weight!
Enormous Man! who, while His boundless Sway
O'erspreads a Crowd of Nations every Way,
Measures not Greatness by His Country's Length,
Nor will to kneeling Millions owe His Strength:
But, Heav'n-like Self-dependent, Vigor shows,
And gives, not takes, what Power from Number flows.
Divinely stored with Views, and rich in Schemes
For Loading Fame with everlasting Themes;
With Glories He Enamels over a Land,
Which almost owed Distinction (3) to His Hand.
From frozen Climes, where Nature, stiff with Cold,
Nourished no Hope, and, without Joy, grew Old,
Warmed by the Monarch's Worth, we rising saw,
A Spring of Virtue, and a Bloom of Law.
Doubly supreme, This Prince, with wide Control,
Directs the Body, and impow'rs the Soul:
While Common Kings their Views supinely scan,
And measure what they Will, by what they Can,
Thou do, at once, with overpow'ring Sway,
Command, and make Men Able to Obey.
Transporting Thought! Let me indulge thee long:
Thou show what Cause makes Crowns, and Kingdoms, strong!
No more, by Civil Broils, let Nations bleed
For fancied Benefits, they do not need:
Those Subjects the most Glorious Freedom share,
Whom We call Slaves, in such a Sovereign's Care.
Slaves are low Wretches, who, deceived by Names,
Promote, unknowingly, their Spoiler's Aims:
Who dream, Rebellion makes a Nation free,
And hug new Chains, mistook for Liberty;
Till, waking into Thought, they miss their Gain,
And kick against some Fellow-Traytor's Reign.
If just Athenians, by their Theseus led,
Theseus, who gave their scattered Limbs a (4) Head;
In lasting Praise, embalmed His cherished Fame,
When Naught of His was left 'em, but His Name.
If wise Licurgus is immortal grown,
He, whom Laconia Proudly called Her own;
Whose worshipped Ghost kept Living Power in Awe,
And gave a long Descent of Hero's Law:
If Romulus lives, Glorious, to this Day,
For pointing out to Rome her future Way:
For calling Courage in, from Private Harms,
To mightier Mischief, in united Arms,
What Praise, Prodigious Prince! Shall dare to tread,
In awful Circles, near thy sacred Head!
To whom, not one small Portion, singly, kneels,
In Thanks for separate Benefits it feels;
But Nations, (5) Numberless, as Lybian Sands,
Adore the Bounties of thy Reaching Hands;
Thy Hands, to whom, Delighted with thy Praise,
God, gave not Lands to Govern, but to Raise.
New-blown Ambition fires each Northern Soul,
And thaws the Icy Influence of the Pole:
The shaggy (6) Samoid, shaking off his Snow,
Warms His cold Breast, with New Desire to Know:
The rugged Tartars, from whose swarthy Bands,
A Gloom of Horror used to shade Thy Lands;
Charmed with Thy Virtues, bow before Thy Throne,
Assume new Natures, and fixed Dwellings own.
New Beams of Learning, active as the Wind,
Now first break out, and light up Half Mankind:
Dark Superstition, like a Mist, dispelled,
Quits a Dominion, through Long Ages held;
And Russian Arms a glittering Terror cast,
Over Lands, where scarce the Russian (7) Name has past.
Shame on the Bards of our degenerate Days,
Who prostitute to Gain their sullied Lays!
Who think it needless for a Muse to roam;
And, poorly, place their whole Regard at Home.
The World's my Country; Born, no matter where,
Man is a Denizen of Earth and Air!
The Just, who, in full Light, All Merit show,
Love, even, the Hostile Virtues of a Foe.
Weak, with Astonishment, my Verse pursues,
And flags beneath, this towering Prince's Views:
Where are the lost Effects of Statesmens Wiles?
Whose ill-schem'd Policy the World beguiles!
How have they vainly beat one devious Road!
And sighed, at Growing France, with false Forebode!
While, Unobserved, the exulting Northern Bear,
Grin'd, over Universal Empire there!
Thence sudden Fleets have shadowed distant (8) Seas,
With Power, self-raised, and Scorning slow Degrees:
At Pleasure they descend on Every Shore,
And starting Nations hear new Thunder roar.
The Swede, alarmed, does Fortune's Change upbraid,
And sees the assaulted Enemy invade:
The assisted Dane learns Jealousy from Fear,
And hates his Helper's Strength, displayed too near:
The furrowed Baltic a Third Lord obeys,
And to strange Keels, Unwilling Homage pays.
The Virgin (9) Caspian This bold Lover woo's,
Nor vainly for Her envied Favor sues:
Already won, She has Her Love confessed,
And given Him Leave to wander over her Breast:
Persia's heaped Wealth will Her huge Portion be:
And Eastern Kings shall give Her Lord the Knee.
A Rival Power, in Naval Struggle (10) tried,
And stretched along the stormy Euxine's Side:
Has taught the Porte's Imperial Walls to shake,
And shall, the Sultan's Iron Scepter break:
Grecia's lost Fame shall be restored by Thee,
O Monarch! Doomed to set an Empire free!
Yoked (11) Hellespont, whose Stream, submissive glides
Indignant, and a conquered World divides:
Shall see, while, thence, Thy bursting Thunder roars,
Europe, and Asia, trembling to Her Shores.
Thence may the floating Towers, which boast thy Sway,
New-greet their Russia, by an (12) untried Way.
While, thus, thy awful Power more awful grows,
They swell Thy Glory, who Thy Aims oppose:
The self-priz'd Lords of China's boasted Land,
Feel their Pride (13) faint, beneath thy Powerful Hand:
The Trackless Wilds, which both vast States divide,
Are, yearly, even when armed with Winter, tried:
Over Realms of Snow thy fearless Sleds can fly,
And bring, at Ease, the dreadful Distance nigh:
In vain, opposed, their long-fam'd Wall they see,
It keeps them In, but cannot keep Out Thee!
Zemla's High Cliffs, Eternal Hills of Frost!
Where proud Discov'ry has so often been (14) lost,
Through all the Ages of the World, till now,
Have checked the Keels, that would those Oceans Plough;
Like Nature's Barrier's, they all Search withstood,
And bound Ambition up in freezing Blood;
Reserved by Fate, and for thy Reign designed,
Thy piercing Eye shall the wished Passage find;
Or to the Western World, the Eastern join,
And see the Profit, and the Glory Thine.
Stop, Headstrong Muse! And ever we Higher go,
Look down, with Caution, on the Depth below;
Prospects, so vast, the Rash Approacher fright,
And, dazzling, wound the uncollected Sight:
Congratulate, a while, the promised Gain,
And, with some Joy, relax Thy Wonder's Strain!
Shall then, at last, beneath propitious Skies,
The Cross, triumphant, over the Crescent, rise!
Shall we behold Earth's long-sustain'd Disgrace
Revenged, in Arms, on Osman's haughty Race!
Shall modern Greece shake off a Captive's Shame,
And look, unblushing, at Her Ancient Fame!
Shall Orphans cease, in vain, lost Bliss to know,
And curse the thriving Authors of their Woe!
Shall Widows, old in Chains, their Offspring save,
And weep, lamented, over their Husband's Grave!
'Twill be! Prophetic (15) Greece rehopes Her-Own:
And Hails Her Caesar, on the Russian Throne!
Athens again shall teach; Corinth aspire;
And Theban Breasts glow, with rekindling Fire:
Once more Bizantium, destined long to shine,
Shall rear the ruined Name of Constantine.
Transcendent Prince! How happy must thou be!
What can thou look upon, unblessed by Thee!
What inward Peace must Thy brave Bosom know,
Whence Conscious Virtue does, so strongly, flow!
The Toil of Ages past in Ruins lies,
How well-tim'd, therefore, does Thy Greatness rise!
To show how swiftly destined Glory climbs,
And build Examples, for succeeding Times!
Such are the Kings, who make God's Image shine,
And, justly, dare assert their Right Divine!
No Earth-born Love of Rapine whets their Will,
Or tempts their Power, Unhostile Blood to spill;
But, mindful with what Hope Wise Men obey,
They shower down Comforts from their gentle Sway;
To raise the Humble, They extend their Hand,
And chase Oppression from their Rescued Land:
With well-weigh'd Justice, They both sheath, and draw,
The Sword of Battle, and the Sword of Law:
Skilled in the Means, They never miss the End;
But govern, Cool, what They, with Warmth, defend.
How blessed were Man, would Heaven, hereafter, please,
That all Earth's Princes should be formed like These!
Wish it, O Muse, however the Wish be Vain;
It gives some Joy to hope the unlikely'st Gain:
Let me, at least, the fancied Change create!
And hug the Prospect of a Bliss, too Great:
Say, Muse! What Happiness from Thence might flow?
And what Improvement would blind Fortune know?
Were such the Happy State of Nations made,
No silent Modesty would Merit shade:
The Rays of Honor, scattered wide about,
Would reach to Virtue, or enquire Her out:
Distressful Innocence would Shelter sind,
And Sense of Misery make the Mighty kind:
A faithful Minister Each Post would fill,
Not raised by Faction, but preferred for Skill.
The Judges Bench, by Justice, crowned with Awe,
Would break that Bulk of Form, which blunts the Law:
Would, from Oppression, cleanse the Road to Right,
And clear the Films of Brib'ry from Men's Sight.
Truth, always owned, would need no Help from Power,
Nor Rich Men's Wills the Poor Man's Wants devour:
Distinguished Distribution would arise,
And, to Deserve, would be to Win, the Prize.
Thou, Russian Star! That makes the Pole outshine
The Torrid Brightness of the Burning Line!
Drawn by Thy beamy Force, I still would gaze;
But my Eyes ache, beneath the oppressive Blaze!
Descend, Rash Muse! From the bold Theme retire;
Thy Fall were dangerous, if thy Flight were higher!
Forbear, Great Prince! nor, with such Swiftness, bless;
Shook by our Fears, we wish Thy Merit less:
Say, what new Heights were left, for Thee to try,
If, as thy Fame, thy Body could not die?
And Heaven will scarce thy Now-mourn'd Absence bear,
When Earth yields no New Labor, worth Thy Care!
But, while, amazed, Thy Miracles we trace,
Teach us, where, first, we should our Wonder place:
Hard the Decision! Which Most Honor won,
Thy Actions, or the Speed, with which they are done!
When Rome, that Glittering, that Immortal, Name,
Aspired to Rule, and panted after Fame,
Age copying Age, strove, with progressive Will,
To push the same Design, with Equal Skill:
And, when Eight (16) hundred Laboring Years were past,
The late propitious Fortune smiled at last.
Not such slow Rise, O Prince! Thy Russia fears:
Thou see not Glory through such Depth of Years:
At once resolved, at once the Columns rise,
Which lift thy dreadful Fabric to the Skies:
Form, and Degrees, let Earthy Spirits need,
Thy Soul, Excentric, moves, with inbred Speed;
Makes Nature shake; and raises, in a Day,
What, with less Ease, in Ages, shall decay!
So, when young Time, in Chains, Existence kept,
And huddl'd Nature in dark Chaos slept,
The Eternal Word, to set Distinction free,
But spoke the Almighty Fiat -- Let there Be.
Millions of Ways the starting Atoms flew;
Like clung to Like, and sudden Order grew:
Sruggling in Clouds, awhile, Confusion lay;
Then died, at once, and lost it self in Day.
Explanatory NOTES, Referred to, in the POEM.
(1) I Call Russia The Land of Night, not only Literally, as its general
Distance from the Sun occasions tedious and uncomfortable Winters, but also in
a Metaphorical Sense, because an almost total Absence of the Arts (till this
Czar's Reign) had wrapped the Country in a Night of Ignorance.

(2) In that Contracted Name. Czar is a Contraction of the Word Caesar, and is
used to signify a King, or Emperor, not only in the Russian Tongue, but the
Sclavonian, and some others; and, no doubt, derived its Rise from that Title of
the Roman Emperors. Nor is there any other Difference in the Words than the
Contraction only, since the ancient Latin Pronunciation was not Caesar, as we
speak it, but the C being pronounced as a K, made Kaisar, and, in that Manner,
it was undoubtedly spoken by the Romans. The Germans have no other Title for
the Emperors to this Day, than Kaisar, which the smallest Variation changes
into Czar, according to the Russian Appellation.

(3) Almost owed Distinction to his Hand. Though the Czars of Russia have for
many Ages been possessed of very large Dominions, and a Power as extensive, and
unbounded, as most other Princes; yet, partly by their distant Situation, and
partly by their Want of Skill in Arms and Arts, it is certain that they are but
lately become Known to these Parts of Europe, and were never formidable, 'till
they owed it to the Genius of their present Monarch.

(4) Gave their scattered Limbs a Head. Every Body knows that Theseus gathered
the Athenians into a Body, from a dispersed and solitary Way of living; and
founded and peopled the City of Athens, which was before but a little Village,
though a Kingly Seat, where he brought them to a Relish of Society, and usefully,
instructed them in the Knowledge of improving their united Power.

(5) Nations, Numberless as Lybian Sands. The Hyperbole may plead more than
Poetical License to excuse it; for, if, according to the Practice of Great Part
of the East, and the West Indies, each distinct Tribe or Herd, may be indulged
in their Ambition to be thought a particular Nation, as most Writers have
practiced, Then may the petty Herds of Tartars, almost every where surrounding
Russia, added to the wild Variety of Inhabitants in Siberia, Samoieda, etc. who
depend upon the Czar, be called Numberless, without much Help from the
Hyperbole.

(6) The Shaggy Samoid. The Samoiedes are a People subject to the Czar, and
inhabiting a large Tract of Land, from Nova Zemla, to the Neighborhood of
Archangel, and extending along the Tartarian Sea. They neither Plough nor Sow,
their Country being too cold to produce Corn; so that they live chiefly on
dried Fish and Turnips, and the Flesh of a Kind of Deer, which feeds on the
Moss of their Heaths: And, with the Skins of these Deer, having a very thick,
warm Fur, they cloth and defend themselves from the Sharpness of the Frost,
and covering themselves all over, keep the Snow from blowing in at their Necks;
and live three Months, in the Year, without Sight of the Sun.

(7) Over Lands, where scarce the Russian Name has past. Notwithstanding the
just Notion, which Europe has conceived for some Years past, of the formidable
Power of the Russian Arms, yet is their Country so little known, to the
Generality of other Nations, that it is almost Universally called Muscovy, though
that is only the Name of its old Capital Muscow: And the English might, with
the same Justice, in foreign Countries, be called by no other Name than The
Londoners.

(8) Thence sudden Fleets have shadowed Distant Seas. It is known, that the
Cza^ has on a sudden, covered the Baltic, with a powerful Fleet of Men of War
and Galleys; which was sufficiently seen, when He transported His Army to join
with the King of Denmark, in the intended Descent upon Schonen: And on the
other Side of His Dominions, He has built a Fleet against the Turks, to serve
upon the Black-Sea, most of which Ships, being of very great Force, were built
at Veronize, a Town seated on a Branch of the famous Tanais, and falling into
the Palue Maotis, not far from the City of Azoph.

(9) The V^rgin Caspian. The Czar has caused Ships to be sent down the Volga
into the Caspian-Sea, to make Discoveries on the Side of Georgia, Persia,
Armenia, and independent Tartary, and a considerable Trade, for the Products of
the East Indies, is already carried on, from several Ports in that Sea, to
Astracan, and thence dispersed over Russia, by the Volga and the Don. This Sea
is called the Virgin-Caspian, because it has no known Communication with any
other, being the largest Lake in the Universe, about five hundred Miles long,
and, in Breadth, four hundred; and by Means of this Sea, the Czar has at all
Times, an Inlet into the Heart of Pers^a and the Indies, whenever he shall
think of extending His Conquests that Way.

(10) A Rival Power, in Naval Struggle tried. The Turks, 'till the Reign of
this Illustrious Prince the Czar, possessed Entire Dominion in the Euxine: But
the Russian Fleets can now dispute their Title; and, of this, the Turks have
had Experience ever since the Year 1696. when the Loss of Azoph was the
Consequence of an Overthrow at Sea, by the Russian Galleys, commanded by the
Czar in Pers^n. The Terror this Defeat occasioned at Constantinople was so
great, that they built new Castles on the Bosphorus, and took all possible
Precautions to prevent some future Attempt that Way, by the Russian Navy; but
so much in Vain, that I am convinc^d and could justify it by Reason and
Demonstration, that, if the Czar should, as it is now likely he will, declare
War against the Turks, he may, with the smallest Expense, or Hazard,
imaginable, begin his Success by laying Constantinople in Ashes, or possessing
it, if he pleases, and maintaining it against all possible Efforts of the
Ottoman Power.

(11) Yoked Hellespont. The Passage of this famous Chanel is guarded, and made
as the Turks falsely believe, impossible to be forced, by two old Castles,
called the Dardanelles; one seated on the Asian Side, the other on the
European, about three Quarters of a Mile asunder; and having each a Platform of
prodigious outof-Size Artillery, carrying Stone Bullets of two or three Foot
Diameter.

(12) Now greet their Russia by an untried Way. If Constantinople were in the
Hands of the Czar; and the Hellespont; by that Means subject to Him, His Ships
from the South Parts of His Dominions, bordering on Circassia, might, through the
Bosphorus, Propontis, Hellespont, and Aegean, pass into the Mediterran an, and
coming through the Streights Mouth, sail Northward, and reach Russia again, at
the Port of Archangel.

(13) Feel their Pride shake, etc. The Chinese, though vastly distant from
Russia, have been warred upon by that Nation, and made to conceive very
different Idea's of them, from those which their Pride had before suggested to
them: And the Czar duly sensible of the many Advantages, which may arise from
a perfect Discovery of that Immensity of Desert, which divides Him from China,
has completed that Design, and built Forts and large Towns, all the Way, at
proper Distances, for the Defense, and Entertainment of His Subjects, who
travel, every Year from one Empire to the other by Land, carrying out and
bringing back such Commodities, as are most in Demand by the Merchants of both
Nations. They set out, when the Winter has covered all the Country with Snow,
and the Surface of that Snow is so hardened by Frost, that they are drawn with
great Swiftness over it, in Sleds, by a large Kind of Deer; they, who ride in
the Sled, being covered with thick, and warm Furs, for Defense against the
Severity of the Cold.

(14) Where Proud Discov'ry has so often been lost. Abundance of Ships have been
lost, and great Numbers of excellent Mariners been frozen to Death, in the
Search of a North Eastern Passage to China and Japan, by the Way of Nova Zemla,
and the great Sea of Tartary. If there is such a Passage, as there must be,
unless the Russian Dominions are joined on the North, to America, The Czar has
a Design to discover it; and will undoubtedly succeed in it, because His
Situation affords him an Advantage, which no other Monarch is Master of.

(15) Prophetic Greece re-hopes Her own. There has, long, been a Prophecy among
the Greeks. that their Redemption from the Turkish Yoke, shall be owing to a
fair, white hair'd People from the North; and they are strongly, and
universally persuaded, that the Russians are the People, meant in the Prophecy.

(16) And, when eight hundred laboring Tears were past. Though the Romans,
assisted by the Strength of their National Virtue, in the Infancy of their
Power, grew suddenly Glorious, yet they reached not the Height of their Empire,
till the Days of Trajan; which Summit of Authority is hinted at by the Aspiring
to Rule, and Panting after Fame, in the Poem.

FINIS.

