Mr Addison.



POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.

WITH A DISSERTATION UPON The Roman POETS.

By Mr. ADDISON.

LONDON: Printed for E. CURLL in Fleet Street. 1719.

PREFACE.
NOW the Translations of Mr. Addison's POEMS appear together, it may not be
improper to make a few Observations on Modern Latin Poetry, and in particular
the following Compositions.

Since the general Disuse and Corruption of the Latin Tongue, there are not
many Attempts in Poetry in that Language that retain the Purity and Graces of
the Augustan-Age. The Italians, by the Encouragement of the House of MEDICIS,
first began the Study and Imitation of the best Roman Poets; and about the Time
of Leo the Xth, there appeared a great Number of fine Genius's, who endeavored
to shake off the Barbarity, and polish the Rust of an ignorant Age. The Event
very near answered their Expectations, and the Muses seemed to be re-instated
in their old Land of Inheritance. The Reader may see a Collection of their best
Pieces in a Volume intitul'd Poetae Italici; but among all of them Vida is the
most pure and elegant, though some are offended at the perpetual Imitation of his
Darling VIRGIL. The French have nothing considerable that I have seen in this
way, but Rapin, whose Poems every where discover a Roman Coloring; and as he
does not follow VIRGIL'S Expression so nearly as Vida, he is more agreeable to
the Judicious. Vida with an easy Felicity adapts VIRGIL'S Words to every
Subject, Rapin chooses rather to imitate his manner of Expression than borrow
his very Phrases: So that we may say of these Two, as Mr. Dryden does of
Fletcher's and Johnson's copying Shakespeare: One imitates him most, and the other
best.
The Dutch themselves have some no mean Latin Poems, as is evident from the
Works of Grotius and Heinsius. Buchanan is the just boast of the Scots Nation:
He was a perfect Master of the Latin Tongue, knew all its Strength and
Beauties, and very happily transfused them into his own Poems. That neglected
Piece of his De Sphaera is upon so nice and difficult a Subject as fine and
noble a Poem as ever was wrote; though I don't know by what Fate, the Modern
Critics are never pleased to mention it to his Honor. I beg their Pardons for
calling them Critics, a Name too glorious for these Borrowers of others
Opinions, who live upon the Plunder of Scaliger and Rapin without consulting
the Originals; where, if they have happened to praise any thing, these
Gentlemen take all upon trust, and are Strangers to every Fault and Excellence
they have omitted to Blame or Commend.

As to our own Nation, the Occasional Copies in the University Collections, are
the best Poems we have; the chief of which are published in the Musae
Anglicanae, though I have read a great many more which deserve an equal Honor.
Out of these we have singled the Poems of Mr. Addison, as the most shining
Ornaments of that Work, and given the unlearned Reader the Pleasure of admiring
them in his Native Language. I will not say that it is absolutely necessary to
be a good Latin Poet in order to become a good English One, but I am sure that
he who imitates the Ancients in their own Language will slide more easily into
their way of Thinking, adapt their Graces by Degrees, and beautifully
transplant them into his Mother Tongue; and these are no vulgar Beauties in an
English Poem. I could mention how successfully this was done by Milton
formerly, and in our Times by Mr. Addison, if it did not draw me into too great
a length of Preface, which more properly belongs to the following Pieces.

Most of these, though very perfect in their kinds, I am apt to believe were
designed as Trials of a great Genius, after the modest manner of the Ancients,
who began to sport and play in Essays of their Poetical Strength before they
attempted Subjects of a greater Dignity. To speak of them in general, I observe
that the Language is Pure, Elegant, and Sounding; the Versification easy and
numerous, happily adapted to the different Subjects it describes, free from the
affected Turns, Puerile Levities, and other Flatnesses, which betray a false
Taste, and Defect of Judgment. The Critic every where accompanies the Poet,
and even here a discerning Eye might have seen the Promises of a CAMPAIGN and a
CATO.

The Battle of the Pygmies and Cranes, The Puppet-Show, and The Bowling-Green,
are of the Mock-Heroic kind, the Subjects mean and trivial, seemingly incapable
of Poetical Ornaments, but are raised to the Heroic, by a splendid Boldness of
Expression, a Pomp of Verse, by Metaphors, Allusions, and Similitudes drawn
from Things of a higher Class, and such as are suited by Nature to convey Ideas
of Greatness and Magnificence to the Mind. VIRGIL, in his Georgicks, is the
great Master in this way, with this Difference only, that his is a serious
Geandeur, this a Mimic one, his produces Admiration, this Laughter.

The Resurrection is a noble Piece, drawn after the Painter with a masterly
Hand. As it has been spoken to by the Translator, I leave the Reader to his
Observations.

The Barometer is a fine Philosophical Poem, describing the Effects of the Air
on that wonderful Instrument with great Exactness, as well as in the most
beautiful Poetry. The Odes to Dr. Burnett and Dr. Hannes are written in the
true Spirit of HORACE, and are only equaled among the Moderns by those
excellent ones of the Latter.

The Peace of Reswick is here placed last, but first in the Original, in which
the Author seems to have exerted all his Powers, to make it shine above his
other Compositions. It is, indeed, a Masterpiece, the Images are chosen with a
nice Judgment, worked up with a Delicacy of Imagination, and placed in the
strongest Light. Every thing strikes at the first View, and yet will bear the
strictest Eye to re-examine it. The Descriptions being both just and
surprising, put the Mind upon the full stretch as they are preparing, and
exceed the boldest Expectations when finished. Upon this occasion I cannot help
remarking, that the Art of War being so much changed since the Roman Times, it
must be a difficult Task to find Words in that Language to express even the
common Ideas of a Modern Battle; but to do it in all its terrible Scenes of new
Inventions was reserved for the Pen of Mr. Addison.

The Translators, I hope, need not make any excuse to the Reader, though they
will want an Apology to the Author, whose Excellencies their Copies but faintly
imitate. All that I can say in our Defense, is, that some of them have fell
into much worse Hands before, who have mangled his Sense, and debased his
Poetry, by a cold, unspirited Translation. Thus if he does some Kindness in a
moral way, who takes off part of an Injury, though he cannot redress the Whole, we
may hope at least to be forgiven who have corrected many Abuses cast on Mr.
Addison by former Authors, though we could not in all things do him the Justice
he deserves.

(...) inv. E Kirkall. sculp.



Ad Insignissimum Virum D. THO. BURNETTUM, Sacrae Theoriae Telluris Autorem.
NON usitatum carminis alitem,
BURNETTE, poscis, non humiles modos:
Vulgar plectrum, languidaeque
Respuis officium camoenae.
Tu mixta rerum semina conscius,
Molemque cernis dissociabilem,
Terramque concretam, and latentem
Oceanum gremio capaci:
Dum veritatem quaerere pertinax
Ignota pandis, sollicitus parum
Utcunque stet commune vulgi
Arbitrium and popularis error.
Auditur ingens continuo fragor,
Illapsa tellus lubrica deserit
Fundamina, and compage fracta
Suppositas gravis urget undas.
Impulsus erumpit medius liquor,
Terras aquarum effusa licentia
Claudit vicissim; has inter orbis
Reliquiae fluitant prioris.
Nunc and recluso carcere lucidam
Balaena spectat solis imaginem,
Stellasque miratur natantes,
Et tremulae simulacra lunae.
Quae pompa vocum non imitabilis!
Qualis calescit spiritus ingeni!
Ut toll is undas! ut frementem
Diluvii reprimis tumultum!
Quis tam valenti pectore ferreus
Ut non tremiscens and timido pede
Incedat, orbis dum dolofi
Detegis instabiles ruinas?
Quin haec cadentum fragmina montium
Natura vultum sumere simplicem
Coget refingens, in priorem
Mox iterum reditura formam.
Nimbis rubentem sulphureis Jovem
Cernas; ut udis saevit atrox Hyems
Incendiis, commune mundo
Et populis meditata Bustum!
Nudus liquentes plorat Athos nives,
Et mox liquescens ipse adamantinum
Fundit cacumen, dum per imas
Saxa fluunt resoluta valles.
Jamque alta coeli moenia corruunt,
Et vestra tandem pagina (proh nefas!)
BURNETTE, vestra augebit ignes,
Heu socio peritura mundo.
Mox aequa tellus, mox subitus viror
Ubique rident: En teretem Globum!
En laeta vernantis Favoni
Flamina, perpetuosque flores!
O pectus ingens! O animum gravem,
Mundi capacem! si bonus auguror,
Te, nostra quo tellus superbit,
Accipiet renovata civem.
Jo. Addison,
e Coll. Magd. Oxon. 1699.
AN ODE To the Learned Dr. Thomas Burnett, AUTHOR of The Theory of the EARTH.
I.
NO common Height the Muse must soar,
That would thy Fame in Numberstry;
Nor dare in humble Verse adore,
But rise with Thee above the Sky,
You ask a bold and lofty strain,
And what we meanly sing, disdain.
II.
You Nature's early Birth explore,
Her disunited Frame disclose,
From what mixed Cause, and jarring Power,
The Infant Earth to Being rose:
How, in her Circling Bosom sleep
The imprisoned Seas, and Bounded Deep.
III.
Resolved great hidden Truths to trace,
Each Learned Fable you despise;
And, pleased, enjoy the famed disgrace,
To think, and reason, singly wise:
Each Tale reject by Time allowed,
And nobly leave the erring Crowd.
IV.
Hark! from her weak Foundations tore,
The bursting Earth asunder flies,
And, prop'd by yielding Seas no more,
The dreadful Crack alarms the Skies:
Whose Arches rent, their Weight forego,
And plunge in opening Gulphs below.
V.
Now rushing from their watery Bed,
The driving Waves disdain a shore;
And with resistless Force overspread
That Orb, which checked their Rage before:
While scattered over the foamy Tide,
All Nature's floating Ruins ride.
VI.
New Heavens disclosed, the Silver Train
The SUN beneath their Waves admire;
And gliding through the enlight'ned Main,
Gaze at each STAR'S diminished Fire.
Well pleased, the MOON'S bright Orb survey,
Trembling along their Azure Way.
VII.
How strong each Line, each Thought how great,
With what an Energy you rise!
How shines each Fancy? with what Heat
Does every glowing Page surprise?
While spouting Oceans upward flow,
Or sink again to Caves below.
VIII.
As Nature's Doom you thus impart,
The moving Scene we scarce endure;
But, shrinking, ask our anxious Heart,
If on our Earth we tread secure?
Whose Fate unmoved, as you pursue,
We start and tremble but to view.
IX.
Yet these Remains, we now behold,
Which Towering once in Hills arose;
Shall from a New and fairer Mould
A New and fairer Earth compose:
Which to her Fate shall Owe her Bloom,
And rise more lovely from her Tomb.
X.
Yet see This beauteous Fabric end,
This Second Pride of Fate expire;
While gushing from the Clouds descend
The Burning Storm, the Liquid Fire;
Where Worlds and Men consuming lie,
And in One bright Confusion Die.
XI.
Their naked Tops the Hills admire,
No longer white with fleecy Dew;
And as they moan the spreading Fire,
Add to the Flames dissolving too:
While Rocks from melting Mountains flow,
And roll in Streams through Vales below.
XII.
And now the Kindling Orbs on high
All Nature's mournful End proclaim;
When thy great WORK, (Alas!) must die,
And feed the rich victorious Flame:
Give Vigor to the wasting Fire,
And with the World TOO SOON expire.
XIII.
Once more her Bloom the Earth renews,
Smoothed into Green, eternal Vales;
Her Glebe still moist with fragrant Dews,
Her Air still rich with balmy Gales:
No Change her Flowery Seasons breed,
But Springs retire, and Springs succeed.
XIV.
Oh say, Thou Great, Thou Sacred Name,
What Scenes Thy thoughtful Breast employ,
Capacious as that mighty Frame
You raise with Ease, with Ease destroy?
Each World shall boast thy Fame; and YOU,
Who charmed the OLD, shall grace the NEW.
AD D.D. HANNES, INSIGNISSIMUM MEDICUM and POETAM.
O QUI canoro blandius Orpheo
Vocale ducis carmen, and exitu
Feliciore luctuosis
Saepe animam revocas ab umbris,
Jam seu solutos in numerum pedes
Cogis, vel aegrum and vix animae tenax
Corpus tueris, seu cadaver
Luminibus penetras acutis;
Opus relinquens eripe te morae,
Frontemque curis solicitam explica,
Scyphumque jucundus require
Purpureo gravidum Lyaeo.
Nunc plena magni pocula postules
Memor WILHELMI, nunc moveat sitim
Minister ingens, Imperique
Praefidium haud leve, MONTACUTUS.
Omit tandem triste negotium
Gravesque curas, heu nimium pius!
Nec caeteros cautus mederi
Ipse tuam minuas salutem.
Frustra cruorem pulsibus incitis
Ebullientem pollice comprimis,
Attentus explorare venam
Quae febris exagitet tumentem:
Frustra liquores quot Chymica expedit
Fornax, and error sanguinis, and vigor
Innatus herbis te fatigant:
Serius aut citius sepulchro
Debemur omnes, vitaque deseret
Expulsa morbis corpus inhospitum,
Lent^mque deflebunt nepotes
(Reliiquias Animae) cadaver.
Manes videbis Tu quoque fabulas,
Quos pauciores fecerit Ars tua;
Suumque victorem vicissim
Subjiciet Libitina victrix.
Decurrit illi vita beatior
Quicunque Lucem non nimis anxius
Reddit molestam, urgetve curas
Sponte sua satis ingruentes;
Et quem dierum lene fluentium
Delectat ordo, vitique mutuis
Felix amicis, gaudiisque
Innocuis been temperata.
Jo. Addison,
e Coll. Magd. Oxon. 1699.
AN ODE TO Dr. HANNES, An Eminent PHYSICIAN and POET.
I.
WHILE flying over the Golden Strings,
You gently wake the tuneful Lyre;
Or tender, as when ORPHEUS sings,
With softer Sounds the Harp inspire:
Sad fleeting Ghosts with Art constrain
Back to a kinder Life again.
II.
Whether, in graceful Lays you shine,
And Verse your easy Hours employ;
Or give the Soul, her mouldring Shrine
Decayed, a Fairer to enjoy:
The Body, cold in Death, explore
Thy Skill could only, not restore.
III.
Awhile thy learned Toil decline,
Nor anxious more, in smiles allow
The Circling Glass, the Generous Wine,
TO unbend, and smooth thy cheerful Brow:
Nor longer to thy self severe,
In the rich Draught forget thy care.
IV.
Now with thy Monarch's Glory fired,
Let Great NASSAU thy Thirst inflame;
Or by his MOUNTAGUE The late Earl of Halifax.
inspired,
Record the Patriot's faithful Name:
By whose wise Arts, and watchful Pains,
HE Rules in Peace, in Safety Reigns!
V.
At length thy mournful Task forbear,
From sad'ning Thoughts some respite find;
And while we bless thy pious Care,
Be to thy self, in pity, kind:
Inspired with your own Blessings, live;
Nor want Your self that Bloom you give.
VI.
In vain the Blood's tumultuous Tide,
And circling Stream your Hand restrains;
Taught over the Pulses to preside,
And well explore the bubbling Veins:
That with the Fever's swelling Heat
Glow more inflamed, more fiercely beat.
VII.
In vain you try each Chymic Power,
Trace to its Spring the Sanguine Wave;
And kindly search each healing Flower
For Helps to guard us from the Grave:
In endless Bloom to bid us live,
Which THOU, nor THEY (Alas) can give.
VIII.
One certain Fate by Heaven decreed,
In spite of Thee we all must try;
When from her bursting Prison freed,
The mounting Soul shall claim the Sky:
Our Sons must once lament our Doom,
And shed their Sorrows round our Tomb.
IX.
Thou too shall with pale Horror see
The Fabled Ghosts which glare below,
Which to the Shades, restrained by Thee,
In thinner Shoals, descending, flow:
And Death, whose Power you now defy,
Shall boast, her Conqueror can Die.
X.
His Life alone is greatly blessed,
Whom no intruding Griefs annoy;
Who smiles each happy Day, possessed
Of cheerful Ease, and harmless Joy:
Nor sadly soothing his own Cares,
Augments himself the Weight he bears.
XI.
Pleased, with a few selected Friends,
He views each smiling Evening close;
While each succeeding Morn ascends,
Charged with Delights, unmarked with Woes
In Pleasures innocently gay,
Wears the Remains of Life away.
PYGAIO-GEPANO-AIA, SIVE, PRAELIUM INTER PYGMAEOS and GRUES commissum.
PEnnatas acies, and lamentabile bellum
Pygmeadum refero: parvas tu, Musa, cohortes
Instrue: tu gladios, mortemque minantia rostra,
Offensosque Grues, indignantesque pusillam
Militiam celebra; volucrumque hominumque tumultus.
Heroum ingentes animos and tristia bella
Pieridum labor exhausit, versuque sonoro
Jussit, and aeterna numerorum assurgere pompa:
Quis lectos Grajum juvenes, and torva tuentem
Thesea, Quis pedibus velocem ignorant Achillem?
Quem dura Aeneae certamina, quem GULIELMI
Gesta latent? fratres Thebani, and flebile fatum
Pompei quem non delassavere legentem?
Primus ego intactas acies, gracilemque tubarum
Carmine depingam sonitum, nova castra secutus;
Exiguosque canam pugiles, Gruibusque malignos
Heroas, nigrisque ruentem e nubibus hostem.
Qua solis tepet ortu, primitiisque diei
India laeta rubet, medium inter inhospita saxa
(Per placidam vallem, and paucis accessa vireta)
Pygmaeum quondam steterat, dum fata sinebant,
Imperium. Hic varias vitam excoluere per arts
Seduli, and assiduo fervebant arva popello.
Nunc si quis dura evadat per saxa viator,
Desertosque lares, and valles ossibus albas
Exiguis videt, and vestigia parva stupescit.
Desolata tenet victrix impune volucris
Regna, and securo crepitat Grus improba nido.
Non sic, dum multos stetit insuperabilis annos
Parvula progenies; tum, si quis cominus ales
Congredi, and immixtae auderet se credere pugnae,
Miles atrox aderat, sumptisque feroculus armis
Sternit humi volucrem moribundam, humerisque reportat
Ingentem praedam; caesoque epulatur in host.
Saepe improvisas mactabat, saepe juvabat
Diripere aut nidum, aut ulcisci in prole parentem.
Nempe larem quoties multa construxerat art,
Aut uteri posuisset onus, volucremque futuram;
Continuo vultu spirans immane minaci
Omnia vastaret miles, foetusque necaret
Immeritos, vitamque abrumperet imperfectam,
Cum tepido nondum maturuit hostis in ovo.
Hinc causae irarum, bella hinc, fatalia bella,
Atque acies letho intentae, volucrumque virumque
Commissae strages, confusaque mortis imago.
Non tantos motus, nec tam memorabile bellum
Maeonius quondam sublimi carmine Vates
Lusit; ubi totam strepituque armisque paludem
Miscuit: hic (visu miserabile!) corpora murum
Sparsa jacent juncis transfixa, hic gutture rauco
Rana dolet, pedibusque abscisso poplite ternis
Reptat humi, solitis nec sese saltibus effert.
Jamque dies Pygmaeo aderat, quo tempore caesi
Poenituit foetus, intactaque maluit ova.
Nam super his accensa graves exarsit in iras
Grus stomachans; omnesque simul, quas Strymonis unda,
Aut stagnum Mareotidis, imi aut uda Caystri
Prata tenent, adsunt; Scythicaque excita palude,
Et conjurato volucris descendit ab Istro,
Stragesque immensas and vulnera cogitat absens,
Exacuitque ungues ictum meditata futurum,
Et rostrum parat acre, fugaeque accommodat alas.
Tantus amor belli, and vindictae arrecta cupido.
Ergo ubi ver nactus proprium, suspensus in alto
Aere concussis exercitus obstrepit alis,
Terraeque immensos tractus, semotaque long
Aequora despiciunt, Boreamque and nubila tranant
Innumeri. Crebro circum ingens fluctuat ether
Flamine, and assiduus miscet coelum omne tumultus.
Nec minor in terris motus, dum bella facessit
Impiger, instituitque agmen, firmatque phalangas,
Et furit arreptis animosus homuncio telis:
Donec turma duas composta excurrat in alas,
Ordinibasque frequens, and mart instructa perito.
Jamque acies inter medias sese arduus infert
Pygmeadum ductor, qui majestate verendus,
Incessaque gravis, reliquos supereminet omnes
Mole Gigantea, mediamque assurgit in ulnam.
Torvior aspectu (hostilis nam insculpserat unguis
Ore cicatrices) vultuque ostentat honesta
Rostrorum signa, and crudos in pectore morsus.
Immortali odio, aeternisque exercuit iris
Alituum Gentem, non illum impune volucris
Aut ore, aut pedibus peteret confisus aduncis.
Fatalem quoties Gruibus distrinxerat ensem,
Truncavitque alas, celerique fugam abstulit hosti!
Quot fecit strages! Quae nudis funera pullis
Intulit, heu! Quoties implevit Strymona fletu!
Jamque procul sonus auditur, piceamque volantum
Prospectant nubem, bellumque hostesque ferentem.
Crebrescit tandem, atque oculis se plurimus offert
Ordinibus structus variis exercitus ingens
Alituum, motisque eventilat era pennis.
Turba polum replet, specieque immanis obumbrat
Agmina Pygmaeorum, and densa in nubibus haeret:
Nunc densa, at patriis mox reddita rarior oris.
Belli ardent studio Pygmaei, and lumine saevo
Suspiciunt hostem; nec longum tempus, and ingens
Turba Gruum horrifico sese super agmina lapsu
Praecipitat gravis, and bellum sperantibus infert.
Fit fragor; avulsae volitant circum era plumae.
Mox defessa iterum levibus sese eripit alis,
Et vires reparata iterum petit impete terras.
Armorum pendet fortuna: hic fixa volucris
Cuspide, sanguineo sese furibunda rotatu
Torquet agens circum, rostr^mque intendit in hostem
Imbelle, and curvos in morte recolligit ungues.
Pygmaei hic stillat lentus de vulnere sanguis,
Singultusque ciet crebros, pedibusque pusillis
Tundit humum, and moriens unguem execratur acutum.
Aestuat omne solum strepitu, tepidoque rubescit
Sanguine, sparguntur gladii, sparguntur and alae,
Unguesque and digiti, commistaque rostra lacertis.
Pygmeadum saevit, mediisque in millibus ardet,
Ductor, quem late hinc atque hinc pereuntia cingunt
Corpora fusa Gruum; mediaque in morte vagatur,
Nec plausu alarm, nec rostri concidit ictu.
Ille Gruum terror, illum densissima circum
Miscetur pugna, and bellum omne laborat in uno:
Cum, subito appulsus (sic Di voluere) tumultu
Ex inopino ingens and formidabilis Ales
Comprendit pedibus pugnantem; and (triste relatu)
Sustulit in coelum; Bellator ab unguibus haeret
Pendulus, agglomerat strepitu globus undique densus
Alituum; frustra Pygmaei lumine maesto
Regem inter nubes lugent, solitoque minorem
Heroem aspiciunt Gruibus plaudentibus escam.
Jamque recrudescit bellum, Grus desuper urget
Pygmaeum rostro, atque hostem petit ardua morsu;
Tum fugit alta volans; is sursum brachia jactat
Vulneris impatiens, and inanes saevit in auras.
Talis erat belli facies, cum Pelion ingens
Mitteret in coelum Briareus, solioque Tonantem
Praecipitem excuteret; sparguntur in aethere toto
Fulminaque scopulique: flagrantia tela deorsum
Torquentur Jovis acta manu, dum vasta Gigantum
Corpora fusa jacent, semiustaque sulphur fumant.
Viribus absumptis penitus Pygmeia tandem
Agmina languescunt; ergo pars vertere terga
Horribili perculsa metu, pars tollere vocem
Exiguam; late populus Cubitalis oberrat.
Instant a tergo volucres, lacerantque trahuntque
Immites, certae gentem extirpare nefandam.
Sic Pygmaei domus multos dominata per annos,
Tot bellis defuncta, Gruum tot laeta triumphis,
Fundit^s interiit: Nempe exitus omnia tandem
Certus Regna manner, sunt certi denique fines,
Quos ultra transire nefas: sic corruit olim
Assyriae Imperium, sic magnae Persidis imis
Sedibus eversum est, and majus utroque Latinum.
Elysii valles nunc agmine lustrat inani,
Et veterum Heroum miscetur grandibus umbris
Plebs parva: aut, si quid fidei mereatur anilis
Fabula, Pastores per noctis opaca pusillas
Saepe vident umbras, Pygmaeos corpore cassos.
Dum secura Gruum, and veteres oblita labores,
Laetitiae penitus vacat, indulgetque choreis,
Angustosque terit calls, viridesque per orbs
Turba levis salit, and Lemurum cognomine gauder.
Jo. Addison, M.A.
e Coll. Magd. Oxon. 1699.
THE BATTLE OF THE PYGMIES and CRANES.
THE Feathered Warriors, and the Pigmy-State,
Record, Oh Muse! their Battles, and their Fate.
Sing their great Wars, and as their Troops engage,
Guide the low Heroes, and direct their Rage.
Here Swords all flaming for the Fight display;
There Beaks as vengeful, and as keen as they:
Dreadfully mingling in one lofty Strain,
The Pygmies Courage, and the Foes Disdain.
While Birds and Men in dire dread Conflicts try
The Earth's Command, and Empire of the Sky.
Already fair in Verse each Warrior's Name,
The Muse has greatly sung, and paid with Fame.
His hardy Toil with Transport each admires,
The Poet rising, as the Chief inspires.
To distant Time the Muse has handed down
The Grecian Valor, and her Youths Renown.
How sternly brave in Fight great THESEUS glows;
How swift ACHILLES drives upon his Foes.
AENEAS' Fame with Wonder we peruse,
And WILLIAM'S wreaths are green in every Muse.
While Theban Chiefs, and POMPEY'S mournful Name,
Weary each Eye, and tire us with their Fame.
My bolder Muse, unsung in ancient Lays,
New Battles ranges, and new Camps surveys;
In Verse the Trumpet's Silver Sound describes,
And fatal to the Cranes, the Pygmy Tribes.
Dark through the Air, while hovering Nations flow,
And from the Clouds descends the Feathered Foe.
Where happy India boasts a warmer Ray,
And, smiling, blushes at the Birth of Day:
Embraced by Rocks, a flowery Vale is seen,
By Few frequented, and for ever green.
Here high in Fame (till Heaven that Fame withstand)
The spreading Pygmy Nations wide command;
By various Arts a frugal Life sustain,
While laboring Millions throng each crowded Plain.
But now their Desert Realms, as we descry,
Untilled their Vales, their Bowers unpeopled lie.
While Bones of mighty Dwarfs, and Warriors slain,
Strike every Eye, and whiten all the Plain.
These Realms are now by Victor-Cranes possessed;
There safe they triumph in each airy Nest.
Not thus they moan'd their Country's Fate of old,
When Subject States their Monarchs Arm controlled.
The Soldier then, when ever the Foe drew near,
Grasped hard his Sword, and, dreadful, shook his Spear:
Till gasping now, and breathless on the Ground,
Deep in his Breast he drives the deadly Wound.
His Shoulders scarce the ponderous Spoil convey,
Alive his Terror, and, when dead, his Prey.
Often in the Grove her curious Mansions hung,
His Rage o'erthrows, and slays the Crying Young.
The Mother-Bird, from far, beholds with Pain
Her Kingdoms rifled, and her Infants slain;
Whose little Lives their Parents Guilt atone
For Crimes alas! expiring, not their own.
His Breast no Pity to their Cries will give;
Doomed by his Sword to dye, before they live;
Ever yet a Form the imperfect Young enjoys;
And in the Egg the future Foe destroys.
From this dire Spring immortal Discords rose,
Which wrought the Sons of Fame unnumber'd Foes:
While warring Troops disturb the Earth and Sky,
And Birds, and Men, confused together, dye.
Less Tumults from less noble Causes sprung,
The Grecian Bard of old sublimely sung.
While Thundering Arms, and meeting Hosts around,
Mix in one Noise, and all the Lake Homer's Batrachemuomachia.
confound.
Here scattered over the bloody Plains are laid
Expiring Mice, by Bulrush-Spears destroyed:
There limping Frogs, distained with generous Gore,
In deep hoarse Plaints their absent Limbs deplore:
Unactive now, forget their springing Bound,
And hardly trail their sluggish Weight along the Ground.
Now the great Morn her Light began disclose:
That Morn, which fatal to the Pygmies rose,
When they shall rue the Rashness of their Guilt,
And wish the Young unslain, the Egg unspilt.
For this the vengeful Sires in War engage,
Burn with Revenge, and call forth all their Rage;
Sad with Regret, they summon from afar
Wide distant Nations to the airy War.
What Troops remote Strymonian Waters breed,
And over Caisters flowery Meadows feed:
What hardy Bands the Scythian Lakes supply,
Or poured from Ister's Banks obscure the Sky;
Confed'rate join -- with Slaughter all around
Their Bosomsswell, and, absent, seem to wound.
Each whet their Talons, and their Beaks prepare
To gore the Battle, and confuse the War.
For speedy Flight the sounding Pinions dressed,
Such Thirst of Vengeance heaves each Warrior's Breast.
Now Spring arrived, the gathering Troops on high
Cut the mid Air, and sail along the Sky.
Beneath their Wings as they sublimely soar,
Wide Empires stretch, and wider Oceans roar.
Through the bleak North as they their Legions guide,
The Day grows darker, and the Clouds divide.
Fan'd with the Blast, and trembling as they fly,
A loud deep Murmur runs along the Sky.
Nor less on Earth the Pygmy Fury glows,
Whose Chiefs for Fight the Martial Troops dispose,
Direct the War -- and as the Foe draws near,
Each gripes his Sword, and, eager, shakes his Spear.
While closely wedged, and dreadful to the Foe,
Their double Battle hides the Plain below.
And now the MONARCH of the Pygmy Throng,
Advancing, stalks with ample Strides along;
Slowly he moves, Majestically tall;
Towers over his Subjects, and o'erlooks 'em all.
A Giant-Pygmy, whose high Spirits swell,
Elated with the Size of half an Ell.
Stern was his Visage -- for his Face all over
Of Savage Clans the dire Impressions bore;
And seam'd with ghastly Wounds his manly Breast;
Still owned the Foe, and still the Nails confessed.
Hence Wrath, immortal Wrath, his Bosom fired
To quell the Nations, and his Fall conspired:
Who joined in Arms his Fury to restrain,
Whet keen their Claws, and plunge their Beaks in vain.
Often, as his Sword its Edge in Battle shows,
To lop a Pinion, and retard his Foes,
What Heaps of Dead, what Mountains of the slain,
What Slaughter reddens all the slippery Plain?
While sighing over Strymonian Lakes alone,
Sad Widows languish, and sad Orphans moan.
Now broken Murmurs, sounding from afar,
Presage the Approaches of the flying War.
Black with the Foe, the Clouds they now descry
Cleaving the Air, and marching through the Sky.
Winged Troops disclosing, as they wide unfold;
And what they heard aloft, they now behold.
In solemn State above, and strict Array,
A dreadful Scene the hovering Troops display.
Their spreading War extends along the Skies,
And the fanned Air before their Pinions flies.
All Heaven is crowded, and the dark'ning Foe,
Hung in the Clouds, obscures the Camp below;
With gloomy Horror shades the nether Plain,
And Millions, never to view their Native Groves again.
The Pygmy Troops beneath, in firm Array,
With eager Looks the hanging Foe survey:
Up to the Clouds their vengeful Eyes they turn,
Demand the Fight, and for the Combat burn.
When lo! the Cranes, descending from on high,
Rush through the Air, and dart along the Sky.
Amidst his Ranks they drive their plunging Bands,
And give that Battle which the Foe demands.
Both Hosts engage -- dire deaf'ning Murmurs rise,
And Clouds of Feathers floating fill the Skies.
The fainting Birds, their Vigor to repair,
Now leave the Field, and skim aloft in Air:
Their Strength renewed, they shoot along the Plain,
Mix in the Fight, and urge the War again.
Each side an equal Part of Glory shares,
And Conquest yet for neither Host declares.
Here a brave Warrior wounded as he flies,
In circling Eddies whirls around the Skies:
Still as the Foe his fruitless Vengeance tires,
Collects his Talons, and in Rage expires.
There gently streaming from the Heroes Veins,
A Pygmy's Gore the Purple Field distains;
Deep Murmurs from his heaving Heart resound;
Panting he falls, and beats the bleeding Ground.
While Shades of Death overspread his swimming Eyes,
Curses the Foe's avenging Claws, and dies.
And now the Ghostly Fields of Death, all over
Confused with Noise, and warm with smoking Gore;
From every Eye a soft Compassion draw;
Here shines a Sword, there sprawls a trembling Claw:
While copious Slaughter gluts the slippery Plain
With Wings of Birds, and Limbs of Mortals slain.
The Pygmy-Chief, his Faulchion waving high,
Wide wasting drops -- while Millions round him die.
Amidst Ten Thousand Deaths secure he springs,
Mocks their sharp Beaks and persecuting Wings.
To stop his wasting Sword, the avenging Foe
In circling Troops around the Warrior flow.
Dark over his Helmet thronging Legions spread,
And all the Battle rages round his Head.
When lo! a Crane, swift shooting from above,
(Such was the Will and dire Decree of JOVE)
Caught in his wounding Talons, as he flies,
Fast gripes the Foe, and bears him through the Skies.
A Cloud of Birds the Captive- King surround,
Clap their glad Wings, and waft him from the Ground:
While bore aloft, and lessening as he soars,
Each Pygmy views his Lord, and each deplores.
But sigh in vain, their Monarch's Arm o'erpower'd,
Their Monarch vanquished first, and then devoured.
But see the War once more revives on high,
Sounds through the Air, and ranges over the Sky.
The Pygmy's Sword around with Vengeance drove;
The Cranes disdain, and gore him from above.
Then skim aloft; the sprawling Chief with Pain
Shrinks from the Wound, and waves his Arm in vain.
Such was the War, when Mountains tossed on high,
Shook JOVE'S High Throne, and labored up the Sky.
While Heaven and Earth a doubtful Fight prepare,
And Rocks and Thunders mingle in the Air.
Till the winged Bolt, all flaming from above,
Launched from the dreadful red Right Hand of JOVE,
Confounds the War. His falling Rival's slain,
Gasp over the Fields -- and smoking hide the Plain.
And now their Vigor spent, their Martial Fire
Glowing in vain, the Pygmy-Troops retire.
Pale with Despair they leave the fatal Field,
For Pity raise their shrill low Voice, and yield.
But fierce behind the Cranes pursue their way;
Dart from above, and tear the flying Prey.
Through Fields of Death the mangled Warriors chase,
And in one Battle end the faithless Race.
The Pygmy-Nation, thus so long renowned,
Overspread with Laurels, and with Trophies crowned,
Resigns her Fame -- for Heaven and partial Fate
To Earth's great Empires fix one certain Date;
Assign the Period to each Nation's Fame.
Thus rose, and thus expired the Assyrian Name;
Thus sunk (alike their Glory, and their Doom)
Thy Pride, O Persia, and thy Grandeur, Rome.
Now mixed with Shades of mighty Heroes slain,
The empty Troops overspread the Elysian Plain:
And if the important Story be allowed,
Confirmed by Fame, each Night the Fairy-Crowd,
Unbody'd Forms, by wondering Shepherds seen,
Skim through the Gloom, and wanton over the Green.
With Schemes of War no more their Bosoms glow,
Forget their Labors, and their Feathered Foe.
But sportive now in wanton Dances round,
With narrow Tracks they mark the flowery Ground:
A greener Turf the verdant Ring supplies,
And in the Fairy-Name the Pygmy dies.
BAROMETRI DESCRIPTIO.
QUa penetrat fossor terrae caeca antra, metallo
Foecunda informi, rudibusque nitentia venis;
Dum stupet occultas gazas, nummosque futuros,
Eruit argenti latices, nitidumque liquorem;
Qui nullo effusus prodit vestigia tractu,
Nec terram signo revolubilis imprimit udo,
Sed fractus sparsim in globulos formam usque rotundam
Servat, and in teretes lapsans se colligit orbs.
Incertum qua fit natura, an negligat ultra
Perficier, jubar and maturus inutile temnat;
An potius solis vis imperfecta relinquat
Argentum malee coctum, divitiasque fluentes:
Quicquid erit, magno se jactat nobilis usu;
Nec Deus effulfit magis aspectabilis olim,
Cum Danaen flavo circum pretiosus amictu
Ambiit, and, gratam suadente libidine formam,
Depluit irriguo liquefactum Numen in Auro.
Quin age, sum tubum fragilem, cui densior aer
Exclusus; fundo vitri subsidat in imo
Argenti stagnum; ut pluvia impendente metallum
Mobile descendat, vel contr^, ubi postulat aestus,
Prodeat hinc liquor emergens, and rursus inane
Occupet ascensu, tubulumque excurrat in omnem.
Jam coeli faciem, tempestatesque futuras,
Conscia lympha monet, brumamque and frigora narrat.
Nam quoties liquor insurgit, vitreoque canali
Sublatum nequeunt ripae cohibere priores;
Tum laetos sperare dies licet, arva fatentur
Aestatem, and large diffuso lumine rident.
Sin sese immodicum attollens Argenteus humor,
Et nimium oppressus, contendat ad ardua vitri,
Jam fitiunt herbae, jam succos flamma feraces
Excoquit, and languent consumto prata virore.
Cum vero tenues nebulas spiracula terrae
Fundunt, and madidi fluitant super aequora fumi,
Pabula venturae pluviae; tum fusile pondus
Inferiora petit; nec certior Ardea coelos
Indicat humentes, medias quando aetheris oras
Tranando, crassa fruitur sublimius aura,
Discutit and madidis rorantia nubila pennis.
Nunc guttae agglomerant, dispersas frigora stipant
Particulas, rarusque in nimbum cogitur humor:
Prata virent, segetem foecundis imbribus ether
Irrigat, and bibulae radici alimenta ministrat.
Quin ubi plus aequo descendens unda metalli
Fundum amat, impatiens pluviae, metuensque procellam,
Agricolae caveant; non hoc impune colonus
Aspicit; ostendet mox foeta vaporibus aura
Collectas hyemes, tempestatemque sonoram.
At licet Argentum mole incumbente levatum
Subsidat, penitusque imo se condat in alveo,
Caetera quaeque tument; eversis flumina ripis
Expatiata ruunt, spumantibus, aestuat undis
Diluvium, rapidique effusa licentia ponti.
Nulla tacet secreta poli mirabile vitrum,
Quin varios coeli vultus and tempora prodit.
Ante refert, quando tenui velamine tutus
Incedes, quando sperabis frigidus ignem.
Augurio hoc fretus, quanquam atri nubila coeli
Dirumpunt obscura diem, pluviasque minantur;
Machina si neget, and sudum promittat apertum,
Audax carpat iter nimbo pendente viator;
Nec metuens imbrem, poscentes Messor aristas
Prosternat: terrae jam bruma incumbit inermis,
Frigoraque haud nocitura cadunt, feriuntque paratos.
Jo. Addison, A.B.
e Coll. Magd. Oxon. 1699.
THE BAROMETER: OR, WEATHER-GLASS.
IN those dark Caverns of the teeming Earth,
Where Nature gives to various Metals Birth:
Where massy Bars of Oar unfashion'd lay,
And her Veins glitter with a ruddy Ray;
There, as the wondering Workman views the Mine
With secret Riches fraught, and future Coin,
His Hands a shining Silver Fountain force,
That runs, and rowls unmarking of its Course.
No Signs, no moistened Tracts of Earth betray
Or its first-flowing, or returning way;
Though broke, in gathered Globes it still appears,
And recollects it self in rounded Spheres.
None know its Nature: whether greatly born,
The noble Fluid slow Perfection scorn;
And ripe, and finished in it self, despise
Subliming Sun-light, and maturing Skies.
Or rather, if the Sun's imperfect Beam
Leave it a loose, unripen'd Silver Stream,
A Fluid Treasure: Whatsoever it be,
It boasts of Uses of a high Degree.
But see the Fact: A Glassy Tube prepare,
And from the Vessel pump the grosser Air:
The Bottom let the Silver Lake supply,
Obsequious to the Motions of the Sky:
That so, when gathering Showers in Air depend,
The fluctuating Metal may descend.
And when the warmer, sultry Heats advise,
The quick-emerging Liquor may arise,
Possess the Void, from every Distance pass,
And leave, and fill, all Spaces of the Glass.
The Tube thus fixed; the Conscious Liquors tries,
And tells before the Temper of the Skies.
In its bright Face you certainly behold
The distant Winter, and the future Cold.
For when the mounting Fluid upward tends,
And in the Glassy Channel high ascends;
Then comes the Promise of serener Days,
A brighter SUN in purer Ether plays;
And laughing Fields confess the Summer Rays.
But if the Silver Stream by too great Weight
Swells much, and rises to the top-most Height;
Then fade the withered Herbs, the Juices fly,
The Plants grow thirsty, and the Meadows die.
But when the breathing Earth thin Mists exhales,
And murky Smoke depends on heavy Gales,
Or slowly sailing over the Surface low'rs,
The Cause, and Nutriment of future Showers:
Then from their Height the ponderous Liquids flow;
Sink down, and form a Silver Lake below.
Observers draw not from the Bittourn's Play,
Surer Presages of a weeping Day;
When the Bird mounts beyond her common Height,
And in the middle Ether shapes her Flight;
Sportful enjoys the misty Clouds, and flings
The dropping Moisture from her flaggy Wings.
But now the Cold produces new Effects,
The scattered Drops in shining Orbs collects.
Then Fields look green, in fruitful Showers the Rain
Soaks the dry Roots, and swells the teeming Grain.
But when the Streaming Metal's lucid Weight
Falls deeply down, and loves a lower State;
As if impatient of the Show'ry Skies,
Retires, and, fearful of the Tempest, flies.
That Sight, ye cautious Swains, observe with Skill:
Portentous Sign! and Ominous of Ill!
Soon will the pregnant Air her Vapors show;
Winter come armed, and sounding Whirlwinds blow.
But though the Fluid lesser pressed subsides,
And almost all its Silver Substance hides:
Yet other things beyond their Limits swell,
Streams burst their Banks, and mighty Floods rebel,
In frothy Tides each boiling Deluge raves,
And Seas overflow with mad licentious Waves.
This wondrous Glass a thousand Truths displays,
And all the Secrets of the Skies betrays.
By this the Face of Heaven is justly shown;
The Changes told, and all the Seasons known.
This tells you when to trust a lose Attire,
And warns you when to hope a Winter Fire.
On this Prognostic Trav'lers may rely,
Though the Clouds gather, and obscure the Sky,
And threaten Tempests to the doubtful Eye.
Yet if inspecting of the sure Machine,
The Glass deny, and promise it serene;
Beneath the hanging Shower they safe may go;
And fearless of the Rain the Swain may mow.
This faithful Glass the Wrath of Heaven defies,
Makes Winter pointless, and disarms the Skies:
Frosts, Colds, and Tempests, when by This prepared,
Fall Innocent, and meet us on our Guard.
MACHINAE GESTICULANTES.
ADmiranda cano levium spectacula rerum,
Exiguam gentem, and vacuum fine mente popellum;
Quem, non surreptis coeli de fornice flammis,
Innocua melior fabricaverat art Promotheus.
Compita qua risu fervent, glomeratque tumultum
Histrio, delectatque inhiantem scommate turbam;
Quotquot laetitiae studio aut novitate tenentur,
Undique congressi permissa sedilia complent.
Nec confusus honos; nummo subsellia cedunt
Diverso, and varii ad pretium stat copia scamni.
Tandem ubi subtrahitur velamen, lumina passim
Angustos penetrant aditus, qua plurima visum
Fila secant, ne, cum vacuo datur ore fenestra,
Pervia fraus pateat: mox stridula turba penates
Ingreditur pictos, and moenia squallida fuco.
Hic humiles inter scenas, angustaque claustra,
Quicquid agunt homines, Concursus, Bella, Triumphos,
Ludit in exiguo plebecula parva Theatro.
Sed praeter reliquos incedit HOMUNCIO rauca
Voce strepens; major subnectit fibula vestem,
Et referunt vivos errantia lumina motus;
In ventrem tumet immodicum; pone eminet ingens
A tergo gibbus; Pygmaeum territat agmen
Major, and immanem miratur turba Gigantem.
Hic magna fretus mole, imparibusque lacertis
Confisus, gracili jactat convitia vulgo,
Et crebro solvit, lepidum caput, ora cachinno.
Quanquam res agitur solenni seria pompa,
Spernit sollicitum intractabilis ille tumultum,
Et risu importunus adest, atque omnia turbat.
Nec raro invadit molles, pictamque protervo
Ore petit Nympham, invitoque dat oscula ligno.
Sed comitum vulgus diversis membra fatigant
Ludis, and vario lascivit mobile saltu.
Saepe etiam gemmis rutila, and spectabilis auro,
Lignea gens prodit, nitidisque superbit in ostris.
Nam, quoties festam celebrat sub Imagine lucem,
Ordine composito Nympharum incedit honestum
Agmen, and exigui Proceres, parvique Quirites.
Pygmaeos credas positis mitescere bellis,
Jamque, infensa Gruum temnentes prelia, tutos
Indulgere jocis, tenerisque vacare choreis.
Tales, cum medio labuntur fidera coelo,
Parvi subsiliunt Lemures, populusque pusillus
Festivos, rediens sua per vestigia, gyros
Ducit, and angustum crebro pede pulsitat orbem.
Mane patent gressus; hinc fuccos terra feraces
Concipit, in multam pubentia gramina surgunt
Luxuriem, tenerisque virescit circulus herbis.
At non tranquillas nulla abdunt nubila luces,
Saepe gravi surgunt bella, horrida bella, tumultu.
Arma cient truculenta cohors, placidamque quietem
Dirumpunt pugnae; usque adeo insincera voluptas
Omnibus, and mistae castigant gaudia curae.
Jam gladii, tubulique ingesto sulphur foeti,
Protensaeque hastae, fulgentiaque arma, minaeque
Telorum ingentes subeunt; Dant claustra fragorem
Horrendum, ruptae stridente bitumine chartae
Confusos reddunt crepitus, and sibila miscent.
Sternitur omne solum pereuntibus; undique caesae
Apparent turmae, civilis crimina belli.
Sed postquam insanus pugnae deferbuit aestus,
Exuerintque truces animos, jam Mart fugato,
Diversas repetunt arts, curasque priores.
Nec raro prisci Heroes, quos Pagina sacra
Suggerit, atque olim peperit felicior aetas,
Hic parva redeunt specie. Cano ordine cernas
Antiquos prodire, agmen venerabile, Patres.
Rugis sulcantur vultus, prolixaque barbae
Canities mento pendet: sic tarda senectus
TITHONUM minuit, cum moles tota Cicadam
Induit, in gracilem sensim collecta figuram.
Nunc tamen unde genus ducat, quae dextra latentes
Suppeditet vires, quem poscat turba moventem,
Expediam. Truncos opifex and inutile lignum
Cogit in humanas species, and robore natam
Progeniem telo efformat, nexuque tenaci
Crura ligat pedibus, humerisque accommodat armos,
Et membris membra aptat, and artubus insuit artus.
Tunc habiles addit trochleas, quibus art pusillum
Versat onus, molique manu famulatus inerti
Sufficit occultos motus, vocemque ministrat.
His structa auxiliis jam machina tota peritos
Ostendit sulcos, duri and vestigia ferri:
Hinc salit, atque agili se sublevat incita motu,
Vocesque emittit tenues, and non sua verba.
Jo. Addison, A.B.
e Coll. Magd. Oxon. 1699.
THE PUPPET-SHOW.
OF Trivial Things I sing surprising Scenes,
Crowds void of Thought, and Nations in Machines.
A Race Diminutive; whose Frames were built
Free from the Sacrilege of ancient Guilt;
Who from a better new PROMETHEUS came;
Nor boast the Plunder of Celestial Flame.
There, where facetious Andrew rises high,
And draws the Peopled Street beneath his Eye;
With witty Jests the gaping Crowd derides,
Distorts their Muscles, and fatigues their Sides.
All Sons of Mirth, the Gay, the Curious come,
Enter the Booth, and fill the spacious Room.
Not undistinguished are the Honors there;
But different Seats their different Prices bear.
At length, when now the Curtain mounts on high,
The narrow Scenes are opened to the Eye;
Where Wire-Partitions twinkle to the Sight,
That cut the Vision, and divide the Light.
Ingenious Artifice! of sure Deceit,
Since naked Prospects would betray the Cheat.
And now the squeaking Tribe proceeding roams
Over painted Mansions, and illustrious Domes.
Within this humble Cell, this narrow Wall,
Assemblies, Battles, Conquests, Triumphs, All
That Human Minds can Act, or Pride survey,
On their low Stage, the Little Nation play.
But One above the rest distinguished stalks;
A Hero, who in hoarser Accents talks.
Large is the Buckle that his Vest controuls;
His Mimic Eye with living Motion rowls.
His Belly turgid of enormous Size;
Behind his Back a Bulk of Mountain lies.
Huge, manly, tall, he frights the Pygmy-Court,
Who fly and wonder at his Giant-Port.
Audacious Hero He; who much relies
On his unequal Arm, and haughty Size.
Of these Superior Gifts and Talents proud,
He mocks and rallies all the Lesser Crowd:
Scatters his Satire round, and often provokes
The Crowd to Laughter by facetious Jokes.
Even when some serious Action is displayed,
And solemn Pomps in long Procession made,
He uncontrollable, of Humor rude,
Must with unseasonable Mirth intrude:
Scornful he grins upon their Tragic Rage,
And disconcerts the Fable of the Stage.
Sometimes the graceless Wight with saucy Air,
Makes rude Approaches to the painted Fair.
The Nymph retires, he scorns to be withstood,
And forces Kisses on the unwilling Wood.
Not so his Fellows of inferior Parts,
They please the Theater with various Arts,
Lascivious Sport, in circling Turns advance,
And tire their little Limbs in active Dance.
Sometimes the Wooden People you behold,
Attired in rich Array of figured Gold:
Rows of dissembled Jewels blaze around,
And Robes of Tyrian Purple stain the Ground.
For when their Tribes in Pageantry display
The Mimic Grandeur of some Solemn Day,
The painted Nymphs proceed a comely Train,
In Order just, and brighten all the Plain.
Nobles of Stature small attract the Eyes,
And last the Commons of an humbler Size.
The pleased Spectator, as these Scenes he views,
The Pygmy-Nation in his Mind renews:
He fancies now the Cranes Invasions cease;
Their warlike Souls are softened by a Peace,
And now secure in guiltless Sports they play,
Laugh down the Sun, and dance away the Day.
Thus, when the Stars obtain their Midnight Sphere,
A Race like these of Human Form appear;
The Fairy Train, that dancing in the Dark,
Return in Circles, and their Footsteps mark:
The merry Goblins, constant to the Round,
In measure trip, and beat the hallowed Ground.
The Morn betrays the Print. The fruitful Earth
From hence teems pregnant with a juicy Birth,
Luxuriant Growths of bolder Grass are seen,
That rise in Circles of a deeper Green.
Yet O! some Clouds obscure their peaceful Days,
Wars, horrid Wars, disastrous Tumults raise.
The Joys of Peace are broke by rough Alarms,
Their Troops breath Slaughter, and prepare for Arms.
So insincere is mortal Bliss! so sure
Care blends our Joys, and makes them all impure!
Now Swords, and warring Arms the Prospect mar,
Protended Spears that glitter from afar,
And sulfurous Tubes; dread Equipage of War.
The Din of Fight begins; a direful Sound
Flies through the Dome, and shakes the Walls around,
From the burst Volumes sputt'ring Sulphurs tossed
Promiscuous Hiss, and Sounds in Sounds are lost.
Confusion reigns; the Field of War bespread,
Reveals, unhappy View! her Heaps of Dead:
Thick on all Hands, extended on the Stage,
Slain Troops appear, the Guilt of Civil Rage.
But when they have allayed their Martial Ire,
And their calm Spirits breath a sober Fire;
The War concluded. They resume their Parts,
Repeat their former Toils, and various Arts.
Now often the Heroes of the Sacred Page;
Great Souls! the Product of a better Age,
Redeemed and rescued from the silent Urn,
On this low Stage in Miniature return.
There may you see a venerable Band
Of Patriarch-Sires in hoary Order stand;
Their Faces furrowed, as they once appeared,
And their Chins clothed with Silver Lengths of Beard.
So, long consuming Age, from Day to Day,
Contracted TITHON by a slow Decay.
From wasting Stage to Stage he gradual past,
And sunk into a Grasshopper at last.
Now sing we, whence the Puppet-Actors came,
What hidden Power supplies the hollow Frame;
What cunning Agent over the Scenes presides,
And all the secret Operation glides.
The Turner shapes the useless Log with Care,
And forces it a Human Form to wear:
With the sharp Steel he works the Wooden Race,
And lends the Timber an adopted Face.
Tenacious Wires the Legs and Feet unite,
And Arms connected keep the Shoulders right.
Adapted Organs to fit Organs join,
And Joints with Joints, and Limbs with Limbs combine.
Then adds he active Wheels and Springs unseen,
By which he artful turns the small Machine,
That moves at Pleasure by the secret Wires;
And last his Voice the senseless Trunk inspires.
From such a Union of Inventions came,
And to Perfection grew the Puppet Frame;
The Workman's Mark its Origin reveal,
And own the Traces of the forming Steel.
Hence are its Dance, its Motions, and its Tone,
Its squeaking Voice, and Accents not its own.
THE RESURRECTION: A POEM.
Venient cito Saecula, cum jam
Socius Calor ossa revisat,
Animataque Sanguine vivo
Habitacula pristina gestet.
Prud.
The FOURTH EDITION.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Lines are esteemed by the best Judges to be the finest Sketch of
the Resurrection, that any Age or Language has produced: Nor do their only
Excellence consist in being an accurate Poem; but also in being an exact Copy
of the Painter's Original upon the Altar in Magdalen College; but so much
improved with all the strongest Figures and most lively Embellishments of a
Poetical Description, that the Reader receives a double Satisfaction in seeing
the two Sister-Arts so useful to each other, in borrowing mutual Helps, and
mutual Advantages.

It is, indeed, wonderful to find in the narrow Compass of so few Pages all the
most dreadful Circumstances of that last terrible Crisis of Time: The Poem is a
beautiful and succinct Epitome of all that has or can ever be said on that
important Subject; the very Text, which the ingenious Mr. Young has so largely
and elegantly paraphrased upon, in his excellent Poem on the LAST DAY.

Mr. Addison is to be distinguished through all his Performances both Latin and
English (and in his Latin, particularly in the following one, and that on the
Peace of Reswick,) by the Strength of his Images, and by a forcible and
unaffected Vivacity of Expression, which none of our Moderns have attained to
in so much Perfection; and which is very rarely to be met with even in any of
the Ancients since Virgil and Horace.

Having mentioned Mr. Addison, I cannot avoid congratulating my Country on his
Preferment to one of her greatest Civil Employments; nor forbear observing how
happy we are in a KING, who has shown the World that he will distribute his
Favors amongst those only, whom Merit and Virtue shall recommend to his
Service.

With what uncommon Luster must that Man appear to Posterity, who is not only
the best Writer, and most candid Patron of the Age he lives in; but also the
finest Gentleman, the sincerest Friend, the most affectionate Husband, the most
accomplished Statesman, and the most exemplary Christian? Under every one of
these Views Mr. Addison gains the Esteem and Admiration even of the bitterest
Enemies to that Cause which he so warmly espouses, of the most furious
Partisans, and the most prejudiced of Mankind.

I must forbear to enlarge any farther on the Character of that truly great and
good Man, lest I draw upon my self the Imputation of a Flatterer, by relating
what all the World (except himself only) will allow to be the severest Truth.

I shall make no Excuse for offering the following Poem to the World in an
English DRESS, and under all the Disadvantages of an imperfect Translation. I
have often read it in the Original with the greatest Pleasure and Satisfaction;
and I hope it will need no Apology to be willing to communicate so useful and
sublime an Entertainment, in the best manner I can, to those of my
Fellow Subjects who are not qualified to read it in the Latin Original.

RESURRECTIO DELINEATA Ad Altar Coll. Magd. Oxon.
EGregios fuci tractus, calamique labores,
Surgentesque hominum formas, ardentiaque ora
Judicis, and simulacra modis pallentia miris,
Terribilem visu pompam, Tu Carmine Musa
Pande novo, vatique sacros accende furores.
Olim Planitiem (quam nunc foecunda colorum
Insignit Pictura) inhonesto and simplice cultu
Vestiit albedo, sed ne rima ulla priorem
Agnoscat faciem, mox fundamenta futurae
Substravit Pictor tabulae, humoremque sequacem
Per muros traxit; velamine moenia crasso
Squallent obducta, and rudioribus illita fucis.
Utque (polo nondum stellis fulgentibus apto)
Ne spatio moles immensa dehiscat inani,
Per cava coelorum, and convexa patentia late
Hinc atque hinc interfusus fluitaverat Ether;
Mox radiante novum torrebat lumine mundum
Titan, and pallens alienos mitius ignes
Cynthia vibrabat; crebris nunc consitus astris
Scintillare polus, nunc fulgor Lacteus omne
Diffluere in Coelum, longoque albescere tractu.
Sic, operis postquam lusit primordia Pictor,
Dum sordet paries, nullumque fatetur Apellem,
Cautius exercet Calamos, atque art tenacem
Confundit viscum, succosque attemperat, omnes
Inducit tandem formas; apparet ubique
Muta cohors, and Picturarum vulgus inane.
Aligeris muri vacat ora suprema Ministris,
Sparsaque per totam Coelestis turba Tabellam
Raucos inspirat lituos, buccasque tumentes
Inflat, and attonitum replet clangoribus orbem.
Defunctis sonus auditur, tabulamque per imam
Picta gravescit humus, terris emergit apertis
Progenies rediviva, and plurima surgit imago.
Sic, dum foecundis Cadmus dat semina sulcis,
Terra tumet praegnans, animataque gleba laborat,
Luxuriatur ager segete spirante, calescit
Omne solum, crescitque virorum prodiga messis.
Jam pulvis varias terrae dispersa per oras,
Sive inter venas teneri concreta metalli,
Sensim diriguit, seu sese immiscuit herbis,
Explicita est; molem rursus coalescit in unam
Divisum funus, sparsos prior alligat artus
^unctura, aptanturque iterum coeuntia membra.
Hic nondum specie perfecta resurgit imago,
Vultum truncata, atque inhonesto vulnere nares
Manca, and adhuc deest informi de corpore multum.
^aulatim in rigidum hic vita insinuata cadaver
^otu aegro vix dum redivivos erigit artus.
^ficit his horror vultus, and imagine tota
^usa per attonitam pallet formido figuram.
Detrahe quin oculos Spectator, and, ora nitentem
(...) poterint perferre diem, medium inspice murum,
Qua sedet orta Deo proles, Deus ipse, sereno
^umine perfusus, radiisque inspersus acutis.
^rcum tranquillae funduntur tempora flammae,
^egius ore vigor spirat, nitet Ignis ocellis,
^urimaque effulget Majestas Numine toto.
Quantum dissimilis, quantum o! mutatus ab illo,
Qui peccata luit cruciatus non sua, vitam
Quando luctantem cunctata morte trahebat!
Sed frustra voluit defunctum Golgotha Numen
Condere, dum victa fatorum lege triumphans
Nativum petiit coelum, and super aethera vectus
Despexit Lunam exiguam, Solemque minorem.
Jam latus effossum, and palmas ostendit utrasque,
Vulnusque infixum pede, clavorumque recepta
Signa, and transacti quondam vestigia ferri.
Umbrae huc felices tendunt, numerosaque coelos
Turba petunt, atque immortalia dona capessunt.
Matres, and longae nunc reddita corpora vitae
Infantum, Juvenes, Pueri, innuptaeque Puellae
Stant circum, atque avidos jubar immortale bibentes
Affigunt oculos in Numine; laudibus ether
Intonat, and laeto ridet coelum omne triumpho.
His Amor impatiens conceptaque gaudia mentem
Funditus exagitant, imoque in pectore fervent.
Non aeque exultat flagranti cord Sibylla,
Hospite cum tumet incluso, and praecordia sentit
Mota Dei stimulis, nimioque calentia Phoebo.
Quis tamen ille novus perstringit lumina fulgor?
Quam Mitra effigiem distinxit Pictor, honesto
Surgentem e tumulo, alatoque Satellite fultam?
Agnosco faciem, vultu later alter in illo.
WAINFLETUS, sic ille oculos, sic ora ferebat:
^heu quando animi par invenietur Imago!
Quando alium similem virtus habitura! --
^ati innocuas securus Numinis iras
^spicit, impavidosque in Judice figit ocellos.
Quin age, and horrentem commixtis igne tenebris
^am videas scenam; multo hic stagnantia fuco
^oenia, flagrantem liquefacto sulphur rivum
^ingunt, and falsus tanta art accenditur Ignis,
Ut toti metuas tabulae, ne flamma per omne
^ivida serpat opus, tenuesque absumpta recedat
^ictura in cineres, propriis peritura favillis.
^uc turba infelix agitur, turpisque videri
^frendet dentes, and rugis contrahit ora.
^index a tergo implacabile saevit, and ensem
^ulmineum vibrans acie flagrante scelestos
^m Paradiseis iterum depellit ab oris.
^eu! quid agat tristis? quo se coelestibus iris
^ubtrahat? o! quantum vellet nunc aethere in alto
^irturem colere! at tandem suspiria ducit
Nequicquam, and sero in lacrymas effunditur; obstant
^rtes non revocandae, and inexorabile Numen.
Quam varias aperit veneres Pictura! periti
Quot calami legimus vestigia! quanta colorum
Gratia se profert! tales non discolor Iris
Ostendat, vario cum lumine floridus imber
Rore nitet toto, and gutta scintillat in omni.
O fuci nitor, o pulchri durate colores!
Nec, Pictura, tuae languescat gloria formae,
Dum lucem videas, qualem exprimis ipsa, supremam.
Jo. Addison, A.B.
e Coll. Magd. Oxon. 1699.
F^ller Pinxit ad Alt: Coll: Magd: Oxon: Delin Mburg. sculpt. Univ. (...)



THE RESURRECTION: A POEM.
THE Pencil's glowing Lines and vast Command,
And Mankind rising from the Painter's Hand,
The awful Judge arrayed in beamy Light,
And Specter trembling at the dreadful Sight,
To sing, O Muse, the pious Bard inspire,
And waken in his Breast the Sacred Fire.
The hallowed Field, a bare white Wall of late,
Now clothed in gaudy Colors, shines in State;
And lest some little Interval confess
Its ancient simple Form, and homely Dress;
The skilful Artist laid over every Part
The first Foundation of his future Art:
Over the wide Frame his ductile Colors led,
And with strong Primings all the Wall overspread.
As ever yon spangling Orbs were hung on high,
Lest one great Blank should yawn through boundless Sky,
Through the wide heavenly Arch and trackless Road
In Azure Volumes the pure Ether flowed;
The Sun at length burns out, intensely bright,
And the pale Crescent sheds her borrowed Light.
With thick-sown Stars the radiant Pole is crowned,
Of milky Glories a long Tract is found,
Overflows, and whitens all the Heavens around.
So when the Groundwork of the Piece was laid,
Nor yet the Painter had his Art displayed,
With slower Hand, and Pencil more divine,
He blends each Color, heightens every Line;
Till various Forms the breathing Picture wears,
And a mute Groupe of Images appears.
Celestial Guards the topmost height attend,
And Crowds of Angels over the Wall descend;
With their big Cheeks the deaf'ning Clarions wind,
Whose dreadful Clangors startle all Mankind:
Even the Dead hear; the laboring Graves conceive,
And the swollen Clod in Picture seems to heave:
Ten thousand Worlds revive to better Skies,
And from their Tombs the thronging Coarses rise.
So when famed Cadmus sowed the fruitful Field,
With pregnant Throws the quickened Furrow swelled:
From the warm Soil sprung up a warlike Train,
And Human Harvests covered all the Plain.
And now from every Corner of the Earth
The scattered Dust is called to second Birth;
Whether in Mines it formed the ripening Mass,
Or humbly mixed, and flourished in the Grass.
The severed Body now unites again,
And kindred Atoms rally into Men:
The various Joints resume their ancient Seats,
And every Limb its former Task repeats.
Here an imperfect Form returns to Light,
Not half renewed, dishonest to the Sight;
Maimed of his Nose appears his blotted Face,
And scarce the Image of a Man we trace.
Here by Degrees infused, the vital Ray
Gives the first Motion to the panting Clay:
Slow to new Life the thawing Fluids creep,
And the stiff Joints wake heavily from Sleep.
Here on the guilty Brow pale Horrors glare,
And all the Figure labors with Despair.
From Scenes like these now turn thy wondering Sight,
And if thou can withstand such Floods of Light,
Look! where thy SAVIOR fills the middle Space,
The SON of GOD, true Image of his Face,
Himself eternal GOD, ever Time began her Race.
See! what mild Beams their gracious Influence shed,
And how the pointed Radiance crowns his Head!
Around his Temples lambent Glories shine,
And on his Brow sits Majesty Divine;
His Eye Balls lighten with Celestial Fires,
And every Grace to speak the God conspires.
But ah! how changed, ah! how unlike the same
From Him, who patient wore the Mortal Frame;
Who through a Scene of Woes drew painful Breath,
And struggled with a sad, slow, long-drawn Death:
Who gave on Golgotha the dreadful Groan,
Bearer of other's Sins, and Sufferings not his own.
But Death and Hell subdued, the Deity
Ascends Triumphant to his native Sky;
And rising far above the Ethereal Height,
The Sun and Moon diminish to his Sight.
And now to View he bare'd his bleeding side,
And his pierced Hands and Feet, in Crimson died;
Still did the Nails the recent Scars reveal,
And bloody Tracks of the transfixing Steel.
Hither in Crowds the Blessed shape their Flight,
And throng the Mansions of immortal Light;
The menial Twelve, The Apostles, as thus described, are painted on the Altar,
though not mentioned in Mr. Addison's Latin Poem.
an ever faithful Band,
Around their Master sit on either Hand;
Each Martyr-Saint in Glory shines confessed,
Immortal Pleasures rushing to his Breast;
Sees Worlds up-rising from the silent Tomb
To final Judgment and eternal Doom;
They mark each fatal Word, each dreadful Nod;
And bless the Righteous Sentence of their GOD.
The fruitful Matron and the spotless Maid,
And Infants, with a longer Life repaid,
Stand round; and drinking in Celestial Rays,
On their REDEEMER fix with ardent Gaze,
And all the Heavens resound with Hymns of Praise.
Each Bosom kindles with Seraphic Joy,
And conscious Extacies the Soul employ.
Not equal Raptures swell the Sybil's Breast,
When by the inmate Deity possessed;
When Phoebus the Prophetic Maid inspires,
And her Limbs tremble with convulsive Fires.
But whence this sudden Blaze of dazzling Light!
What Mitred Brow is that, which greets my Sight?
Forth from a stately Tomb I see him Rise,
And mount with Guards of Angels to the Skies.
I know the Form -- alike the Look and Mien,
Another WAINFLET William Wainflet, Bishop of Winchester. He was the Founder of
Magdalen College, and the Hall adjoining.
in his Face is seen.
When will, alas! such spotless Worth be found?
When will a Mind with equal Virtues crowned?
Fearless he sees Almighty Vengeance rise,
And fixes on his GOD his guiltless Eyes.
But now far different Scenes our Wonder claim,
Horrent with Darkness and Malignant Flame;
The labored Wall delusive Picture hides,
And liquid Sulphur rolls in burning Tides:
So strong, so fierce, the painted Flames arise,
The pale Spectator views them with Surprise:
Believes the blazing Wall indeed to burn,
And fears the Frame should into Ashes turn.
Hither in ghastly Crowds the Guilty haste,
Obscene with Horror, and with Shame defaced:
With haggard Looks the gloomy Fiends appear,
They gnash their foamy Teeth, and frown severe.
A stern Avenger with relentless Mind,
Waving a flamy Faulchion, stalks behind;
With which, as once from Paradise he drove,
He drives the Sinner from the Joys above.
What shall he do forlorn? or whither fly,
To shun the Ken of an All-seeing Eye?
What would he give among the Just to shine,
And fall before Omnipotence Divine?
But oh! too late in Sighs he vents his Woe,
Too late his Eyes with gushing Tears overflow!
Vain are his Sighs, and fruitless are his Tears,
Vengeance and Justice stop the Almighty's Ears.
See! with what various Charms the Piece is fraught,
And with what pregnant Marks of Judgment wrought!
With how much Grace the living Colors glow!
Not brighter Colors paint the watery Bow;
When the fresh Showers her various Luster share,
And every Drop with Spangles decks the Air.
O! may the Painter's Labors never fade,
Nor wasteful Time their shining Charms invade,
No envious Darkness shade the beauteous Tints,
Till the Piece sees the LAST GREAT DAY it Paints.
SPHAERISTERIUM.
HIC, ubi graminea in latum sese explicat aequor
Planities, vacuoque ingens patet area campo,
Cum solemn nondum fumantia prata fatentur
Exortum, and tumidae pendent in gramine guttae,
Improba falx noctis parva incrementa prioris
Desecat, exiguam radens a cespite messem:
Tum motu assiduo saxum versatile terram
Deprimit extantem, and surgentes atterit herbas.
Lignea percurrunt vernantem turba palaestram
Uncta, nitens oleo, formae quibus esse rotundae
Artificis ferrum dederat, facilisque moveri.
Ne tamen offendant incauti errore globorum,
Quaeque suis incisa notis stat sphaera; sed unus
Hanc vult, quae infuso multum inclinata metallo
Vertitur in gyros, and iniquo tramite currit;
Quin alii diversa placet, quam parcius urget
Plumbea vis, motuque sinit procedere recto.
Postquam ideo in parts turbam distinxerat aequas
Confilium, aut sors: quisque suis accingitur armis.
Evolat Orbiculus, quae cursum meta futurum
Defignat; jactique legens vestigia, primam,
Qui certamen init, sphaeram demittit, at illa
Leniter effusa, exiguum quod ducit in Orbem,
Radit iter, donec sensim primo impete fesso
Subsistat; subito Globus emicat alter and alter.
Mox ubi funduntur late agmina crebra minorem
Sparsa per Orbiculum, stipantque frequentia metam,
Atque negant faciles aditus; jam cautius exit,
Et leviter sese insinuat revolubile lignum.
At si forte globum, qui misit, spectat inertem
Serpere, and impressum subito languescere motum,
Pone urget Sphaerae vestigia, and anxius instat,
Objurgatque moras, currentique imminet orbi.
Atque ut segnis honos dextrae servetur, iniquam
Incusat terram, ac surgentem in Marmore nodum.
Nec risus tacuere, globus cum volvitur actus
Infami jactu, aut nimium vestigia Plumbum
Allicit, and Sphaeram a recto trahit insita virtus.
Tum qui projecit, strepitus effundit inanes,
Et, variam in speciem distorto corpore, falsos
Increpat errores, and dat convitia ligno.
Sphaera sed, irarum temnens ludibria, coeptum
Pergit iter, nullisque movetur surda querelis.
Illa tamen lauds summumque meretur honorem,
Quae non dirumpit cursum, absistitque moveri,
Donec turbam inter crebram dilapsa supremum
Perfecit stadium, and metae inclinata recumbit.
Hostis at haerentem Orbiculo detrudere Sphaeram
Certat, luminibusque viam signantibus omnes
Intendit vires, and missile fortiter urget:
Evolat adducto non segnis Sphaera lacerto.
Haud ita profiliens Eleo carcere pernix
Auriga invehitur, cum raptus ab axe citato
Currentesque domos videt, and fugientia tecta.
Si tamen in duros, obstructa Satellite multo,
Impingant socios, confundatque orbibus orbs;
Tum fervit bilis, fortunam damnata cerbam,
Atque Deos atque astra vocat crudelia. --
Si vero incursus faciles, aditumque patentem
Inveniat, partoque hostis spolietur honor:
Turba fremit confusa, sonisque frequentibus, Euge,
Exclamant Socii; plausu strepit omne Viretum.
Interea fessos inimico Sirius astro
Corripit, and salsas exudant corpora guttas;
Lenia jam Zephyri spirantes frigora, and umbrae
Captantur, vultuque fluens abstergitur humor.
Jo. Addison, A.B.
e Coll. Magd. Oxon. 1699.
THE BOWLING-GREEN.
WHere smooth and level as the Summer Main,
A spacious Area opens on the Plain;
While with descending Dews the Herbage sweats,
Nor feels the rising Sun's intenser Heats,
The sharpened Scythe prevents the grassy Height,
And reaps the scanty Harvest of the Night:
The rolling Stone renews its Morning Round,
To crush the springing Turf, and sink the knotty Ground.
And now the polished Globes, a numerous Band,
Prepared for Motion by the Artist's Hand;
Glittering with Oil, and splendid to the Sight,
Over the soft, verdant Surface speed their Flight.
But least some Bowler should his Cast disown,
By different Marks the different Orbs are known:
For Gamesters vary; some prefer the Bowl,
That biased wheels obliquely to the Goal:
While others will a different Choice approve
Of those, which in a Line directly move.
The chosen Numbers part on either side,
As, or Consent, or doubtful Lots divide:
Each Chief assumes his Arms; when now behold
The Jack exulting over the Surface rolled;
At which their missive Orbs the Bowlers aim,
And who arrives the nearest, wins the Game.
The Leader poises in his Hand the Bowl,
And gently launches to the distant Goal:
The current Orb prolongs its circling Course,
Till by Degrees it loses all its Force.
When now another over the Level bounds,
And Orb succeeding Orb the Block surrounds:
Scattered they lie, and barricade the Green,
That scarce a single Bowl can pass between.
When now with better Skill, and nicer Care,
The dext'rous Youth renews the Wooden War,
Beyond the rest his winding Timber flies,
And works insinuating, and wins the Prize.
But if perchance he sees, with Madness stung,
The lagging Wood move impotent along;
If its faint Motion languish on the way,
And, short of Length, it press the verdant Lay:
Nimbly he strides behind across the Grass,
And bending hovers over the rolling Mass;
Least foul Disgrace should on his Arm redound,
He blames the Rising-Rub and guilty Ground.
What sudden Laughter echoes over the Green,
When some unlucky, artless Cast is seen;
When the too ponderous Lead with stubborn Force
Allures the Globe from its appointed Course?
The Bowler chafes, and fruitless Rage ensues,
His Body to a Thousand Postures screws:
He blames he knows not what, with angry Blood,
He frets, he stamps, and damns the erroneous Wood:
The erroneous Wood his fruitless Rage disdains,
And still its former, wayward Course maintains.
But if a Bowl, dismissed with equal Strength,
Obtains exactly the intended Length,
And, nicely passing through the crouding Balls,
Prone on the passive Jack incumbent falls:
With loud Applause the splitting Heavens they rend,
And all the Caster and the Cast commend.
When now the adverse Foe projects around
His careful Eyes, and marks the ambient Ground:
And, studious the contiguous Globes to part,
He summons all his Strength and all his Art;
The exerted Vigor of his Nerves applies,
And rapid from his Arm the brandished Engine flies.
Scarce half so swiftly to the Eleian Goal
With rival Speed the whirling Chariots roll;
While the fleet Axle mocks the lagging Wind,
And leaves the flying Village far behind.
When, if the Wooden Guards immure the Foe,
And break the Vengeance of the whirling Blow;
If the conflicting Orbs are driven around,
And, loosely scattered, strew the Olympic Ground:
He chides his Fate, his fervid Spleen boils high,
Calls the Gods false, and Damns the guilty Sky.
But if his Bowl with easy Passage slide,
And with a Clash the wedded Orbs divide;
His Partners shout, the Crowd espouse his Cause,
And the wide Plain re-murmurs with Applause.
Mean while the Dog Star burns with sultry Heat,
And every Limb is drowned in briny Sweat:
They court the shady Breeze, and cool of Day,
And from their Temples wipe the trickling Drops away.
PAX GULIELMI AUSPICIIS Europae reddita, 1697.
HONORATISSIMO VIRO CAROLO MONTAGUE ARMIGERO, SCACCHARII CANCELLARIO, AERARII
PRAEFECTO, REGI a SECRETIORIBUS CONSILIIS, etc.
CUM tanta auribus tuis obstrepat vatum nequissimorum turba, nihil est cur
queraris aliquid inusitatum tibi contigisse, ubi praeclarum hoc argumentum meis
etiam numeris violatum conspexeris. Quantum virtute bellica praestent Britanni,
recens ex rebus gestis testatur gloria; quam vero in humanioribus Pacis studiis
non emineamus, indicio sunt quos nuper in lucem emisimus versiculi. Quod si
CONGREVIUS ille tuus divino, quo solet, furore correptus materiam hanc non
exornasset, vix tanti esset ipsa Pax, ut illa laetaremur tot perditissunis
Poetis tam misere decantata. At, dum alios insector, mei ipsius oblitus fuisse
videor, qui haud minores forsan ex Latinis tibi molestias allaturus sum, quam
quas illi ex vernaculis suis carminibus attulerunt; nisi quod inter ipsos
cruciatus lenimentum aliquod dolori tribuat tormenti varietas. Nec quidem
unquam adduci possem, ut poema patrio sermon conscriptum oculis tuis
subjicerem, qui ab istis conatibus caeteros omnes scribendo non minus deterres,
quam favendo excitaveris.

HUMANITATIS TUAE CULTOR DEVOTISSIMUS, JOSEPHUS ADDISON.

PAX GULIELMI AUSPICIIS Europae reddita, 1697.
POstquam ingens clamorque virum, strepitusque tubarum,
Atque omnis belli cecidit fragor; Aspice, Caesar,
Quae tibi solliciti, turba importuna, Poetae
Munera deducunt: generosae a pectore flammae,
Diraeque armorum effigies, simulachraque belli
Tristia diffugiant: O tandem absiste triumphis
Expletus, penitusque animo totum excute Martem.
Non ultrae ante oculos numeroso milite campi
Miscentur, solito nec fervent arva tumultu;
Stat circum alta quies, curvoque innixus aratro
Desertas fossas, and castra minantia castris
Rusticus invertit, tacita formidine lustrans
Horroremque loci, and funestos stragibus agros.
Jamque super vallum and munimina longa virescit
Expectata seges, jam propugnacula rident
Vere novo; insuetos mirabitur incola culmos,
Luxuriemque soli, and turgentem a sanguine messem.
Aspicis ut toto excitus venit Advena mundo
Bellorum invisens sedem, and confusa ruinis
Oppida, and eversos flammarum turbine muros!
Ut trepidos rerum Annals, tristemque laborum
Inquirit seriem, attonitis ut spectat ocellis
Semirutas turres, and adhuc polluta cruore
Flumina, famososque ORMONDI vulnere campos!
Hic, ubi saxa jacent disperso infecta cerebro,
Atque interruptis hiscunt divortia muris,
Vexillum intrepidus ( Honoratissimus D. Dominus CUTTS Baro de Gowran, etc.
) fixit, cui tempora dudum
Budenses palmae, Peregrinaque laurus obumbrat.
Ille ruens aciem in mediam, qua ferrea grando
Sparsa furit circum, and plumbi densissimus imber,
Sulphuream noctem, tetrasque bitumine nubes
Ingreditur, crebroque rubentem fulgure fumum.
Ut vario anfractu, and disjectis undique saxis
Moenia discedunt, scopulisque immane minantur
Desuper horrificis, and formidabile pendent!
Hic pestem occultam, and foecundas sulphur moles
Cernere erat, magno quas inter mota tumultu
Praelia fervebant; subito cum claustra, fragore
Horrendum disrupta tonant, semiustaque membra,
Fumantesque artus, laniataque corpora lethum
Corripit inform, and rotat ater in aethere turbo.
Sic, postquam Enceladi dejecit fulmine fratres
Coelicolum pater, and vetuit contemnere Divos:
Divulsam terrae faciem, ingentesque ruinas
Mortales stupuere; altum hinc mirantur abesse
Pelion, invertique imis radicibus Ossam;
Hic fluvium moles inter confusaque saxa
Reptare, atque aliis discentem currere ripis.
Stant dubii, and notos montes umbrasque requirunt,
Errore ambiguo elusi, and novitate locorum.
Nempe hic AURIACI nuper vexilla secutae
Confluxere acies, hic, aspera corda, Britanni,
Germanusque ferox, and juncto foedere Belga,
Quique truci Boreae, and coelo damnatus iniquo
Vitam agit in tenebris, and qui dudum ore perusto
Decolor admoti prodit vestigia Phoebi,
Undique convenient, totum conscripta per orbem
Agmina, N^ssovique latus socialibus armis
Circumfusa tegunt, fremitusque and murmura miscent,
Tam vario disjuncta situ, tot dissona linguis.
Te tamen e mediis, ( Intellig. Insig. Dom. Christoph. Codrington, unus ex
Regii Satellitii Praefectis.
) Ductor Fortissime, turmis
Exere, Tu vitam (si quid mea carmina possunt)
Accipies, populique encomia sera futuri,
Quem varias edoctum arts, studiisque Minervae
Omnibus ornatum Marti Rhedycina furenti
Credidit invita, and tanto se jactat Alumno.
Hunc nempe ardorem, atque immensos pectoris aestus
Non jubar Arctoum, aut nostri penuria coeli,
Sed plaga torridior, qua sol intentius omnes
Effundit radios, totique obnoxia Phoebo
India progenuit, tenerisque incoxit ab annis
Virtutem immodicam, and generosae incendia mentis.
Jam quoque torpentem qui infelix suspicit Arcton,
Brumamque aeternam frigusque perambulat, ursae
Horridus exuviis, GULIELMI ingentia facta
Describit sociis, pugnataque in ordine bella
Attentus numerat, neque brumam aut frigora curat.
En! vastos nivium tractus and pallida regna
Deserit, imperio extremum ( Muscoviae Imperator.
) Qui subjicit orbem,
Indigenasque hyemes, Britonumque Heroa pererrat
Luminibus tacitis; subeunt nunc fusa Namurcae
Moenia, nunc tardo quae sanguine plurima fluxit
Boinia, nunc dubii palma indiscreta Seneffi.
Quae facies and quanta viri! Quo vertice in auras
Assurgit! Quali firmat vestigia gressu,
Majestate rudi, and torvo spectabilis ore!
Sic olim Alcides, immania membra Leonis
Instratus spoliis, vasta se mole ferebat,
Evandri amplexus dextramque adjungere dextrae
Cum peteret, tectisque ingens succederet hospes.
Dum pugnas, GULIELME, tuas, camposque cruentos
Accipit, in venis ebullit vividus humor,
Corda micant crebro, and mentem ferit aemulus ardor.
Non jam Riphaeos hostis populabitur agros
Impune, aut agitabit inultas Sarmata praedas.
Quis tamen ille procul fremitus, Quae murmura vulgi
NASSOVUM ingeminant? video cava littora circum
Fervere remigibus, subitisque albescere velis.
Anglia solve metus, and inanes mitte querelas,
NASSOVI secura tui, desiste tumentes
Prospicere in fluctus animo suspensa, trucesque
Objurgare notos, tardamque requirere puppim:
Optatus tibi Caesar adest, nec ut ante videbis
Sollicitum belli studiis, fatalia Gallo
Consilia and tacitas versantem in pectore pugnas.
Olli grata Quies and Pax tranquilla verendum
Composuit vultum, lae^osque afflavit honores.
Ut denso circum se plurimus agmine miles
Agglomerat lateri, ut patriam veteresque penates
Respicit exultans! juvat ostentare recentes
Ore cicatrices, and vulnera cruda, notasque
Mucronum insignes, afflataque sulphur membra.
Chara stupet conjux, reducisque incerta mariti
Vestigat faciem; trepida formidine proles
Stat procul, and patrios horrescit nescia vultus.
Ille graves casus, duri and discrimina belli
Enumerat, tumidisque instaurat praelia verbis.
Sic, postquam in patriam foecunda heroibus Argo
Phryxeam attulerat pellem, lanamque rigentem
Exposuit Graiis, and tortile velleris aurum,
Navita terrificis infamia littora monstris
Describit, mixto spirantem incendia fumo
Serpentem, vigilesque feras, plaustroque gementes
Insolito tauros, and anhelos igne juvencos.
Te tamen, O quantis GULIELME erepte periclis,
Accipimus reducem, tibi Diva Britannia fundit
Plebemque and Proceres, medias quacunque per urbes
Ingrederis, crebrae consurgunt undique pompae,
Gaudiaque and plausus; mixto ordine vulgus euntem
Circumstat fremitu denso: Tibi Jupiter annum
Serius invertit, luces mirata serenas
Rider Hyems, festoque vacat coelum omne triumpho.
Jamque ( Celsissimus Princeps Dux Glocestrensis.
) Nepos tibi parvus adest, laetoque juventae
Incessu, and blando testatur gaudia risu.
Ut Patrius vigor atque elati gratia vultus
Caesareum spirant, majestatemque verendam
Infundunt puero! ut Matter formosa serenat
Augustam frontem, and sublimia temperat ora!
Agnosco faciem ambiguam, mixtosque parents.
Ille tuas, GULIELME, acies, and tristia bella,
Pugnasque innocua dudum sub imagine lusit.
Nunc indignanti similis fugitiva pusillae
Terga premit turmae, and falsis terroribus implet,
Sternitque exiguum ficto cognomine Gallum.
Nunc simulat turres, and propugnacula parva
Nominibus signat variis; subitoque tumultu
Sedulus infirmas arces, humilemque Namurcam
Diruit; interea generosae in pectore flammae
Assurgunt sensim juveni, notat ignis honestas
Purpureo fervore genas, and amabilis horror.
Quis tamen Augustae immensas in carmine pompas
Instruet, in luteos ubi vulgo effusa canales
Vina rubent, variatque infectas purpura sordes?
Quis lapsus referet stellarum, and fictile coelum,
Qua laceram ostendunt redolentia compita chartam,
Sulphuris exuvias, tubulosque bitumine cassos?
En procul attonitam video clarescere noctem
Fulgore insolito! ruit undique lucidus imber,
Flagrantesque hyemes; crepitantia sidera passim
Scintillant, totoque pluunt incendia coelo.
Nec minus in terris Vulcanus mill figuras
Induit, ignivomasque feras, and fulgida monstra,
Terribiles visu formas! hic membra Leonis
Hispida mentitur, tortisque comantia flammis
Colla quatit, rutilasque jubas; hic lubricus Anguem
Ludit, subsiliens, and multo sibilat igne.
Laetitiam ingentem atque effusa haec gaudia civis
Jam tandem securus agit, positoque timore
Exercet ventos, classemque per ultima mundi
Impune educit, pelagoque licentius errat.
Seu constricta gelu, medrisque horrentia Cancri
Mensibus arva videt; seu turpida malit olenti
Tendere vela noto, qua thurea flamina miscet
Aeolus, and placidis perfundit odoribus auras.
Vos animae illustres heroum, umbraeque recentes,
Quarum trunca jacent and adhuc stillantia crudis
Corpora vulneribus, quibus haec optabilis orbi
Parta quies, nondum NASSOVO abducite vestro
Fida satellitia, at solitis stipate catervis
Ductorem, and tenues circum diffundite turmas.
Tuque MARIA, tuos non unquam oblita Britannos,
O Diva, O patiens magnum expectare maritum,
Ne terris Dominum invideas, quanquam amplius illum
Detineant, longamque agitent sub vindice pacem.
Jo. Addison, A.M.
e Coll. Magd. Oxon.
THE PEACE OF RESWICK.
To the Honorable Charles Montague, Esquire Chancellor of the Exchequer, First
Lord-Commissioner of the TREASURY, and Privy-Councellor to the KING.
SINCE your Ears are continually pestered by a wretched Set of Poets, you have
no Reason to complain of any new Misfortunes happening to you, when you shall
find the following noble Subject debased by my Numbers. The Honor they have
lately acquired by their Conquests, plainly shows how much the English excel
all others in the Art of War; but how unequally low we are in the politer
Studies of Peace, is evident from the Verses we have lately published. The
Oxford Verses on the Peace.
If your Darling CONGREVE had not exerted his Divine Poetical Fury, with his
usual Happiness, in the adorning of this Subject, the PEACE it self had been
hardly worth our Joy, since it has been so miserably celebrated by so many vile
Poetasters. But while I am blaming others, I may seem forgetful of my self, who
perhaps may give you as much trouble in my Latin Compositions, as they have
before done in their English, unless the Variety of the Torment may bring some
Mitigation to the Pain you are to suffer. For my part, I never could prevail
upon my self to offer you a POEM written in our Native Tongue, since you your
self deter all others by your own Compositions from such an Attempt, as much as
you excite them by your Favor and Humanity. I am,

SIR, Your most devoted, humble Servant, Joseph Addison.

THE PEACE OF RESWICK.
WHEN now the Tumult of the Battle dies,
No Shouts the Earth, no Trumpets wake the Skies;
Accept, Great Leader, what the Pious Throng
(Less dreadful Music, and a softer Song)
To sooth the Vengeance of thy Soul, inspire,
And ease thy Bosom of its restless Fire.
Let Wars no more, all Nature hushed to rest,
Nor Scenes of Ruin roll within thy Breast;
No Schemes of Death, delightful to thy Eyes,
Swell in thy Thoughts, and charm Thee as they rise:
Already Famed, the Chase of Fame give over;
Nor, dark with Laurels, shade thy Brows with more.
No more dire Camps a glittering Horror yield,
Nor swarming Millions hide the crowded Field:
No Shouts or Tumults shake the sounding Plain,
But downy Peace, and solemn Silence reign.
With Furrows now the Peasant all around
Cuts the wide Camp, and turns the Warlike Mound.
Now Rampires dreadful to the Foe descries,
Rising aloft, and threatening as they rise.
Over Fields of Death the Waste of War persues,
Sighs the sad Scene, and trembles as he views;
While richer Blades along the Bulwarks wave,
And Greens arise to strew the Warrior's Grave.
Luxuriant Ears the fertile Glebe supplies,
The Harvest bending, where the Hero dies.
See! distant Worlds invited from afar
To trace the Ruins of the finished War;
Wide gaping Walls, and shattered Towers admire,
O'erturn'd in Tempests of tumultuous Fire.
Long Tracks of Death astonished they explore,
Now view the Warriors Toil, and now deplore;
While Streams of Blood each Current still distain,
And ORMOND'S Wounds ennoble all the Plain.
Where you steep Rampires rise with Slaughter Red,
Still moist with Gore, and crimsoned with the Dead,
The The Lord CUTTS, Baron of Gowran, etc.
Chief his Standard fixed, whose Temples round
Defended Buda, with her Laurels bound.
Through thickest Troops he breaks his glorious Way,
And Floods of Fire in vain command his Stay.
The bursting Shells aloft, and sweeping Ball,
Around the Hero unregarded fall;
While through dark Flames he rushes to the Fight,
And Vapors, streaked with Lengths of ruddy Light.
See threatening once, and, dreadful, to behold
A ghastly Breach the yawning Towers unfold;
Amazing still the broken Ruins show,
Enormous hang, and shade the Plain below.
Now treacherous Caves beneath the Earth are found,
Where Beds of Sulphur swell the cavern'd Ground.
Here mingling Hosts in vain their Courage try,
Guiltless of Death, yet doomed, alas! to Die.
For lo! the opening Mound asunder flies,
And hurls at once whole Armies to the Skies;
While Limbs of mangled Heroes upward drove,
Shoot from the bursting Earth, and reek above.
The burning Troops abandoned to Despair,
In Flames ascend, and smoke along the Air.
So when the lifted Arm of angry JOVE
Drives the red Bolt, all flaming from above,
Persues the Foe with Thunder down the Skies,
Nature's sad Ruins all her Sons surprise;
Amazed they view her rugged Form, and moan
Great Pelion lost, and Ossa's Height overthrown.
Here Streams over craggy Rocks mistake their way,
New Banks design, and through new Channels stray;
The wild Confusion all around admire,
Their former Hills, and vanished Shades require.
Here, led by WILLIAM'S Fortune and his Fame,
United Worlds to guard the Monarch came:
Fair Belgia's Sons the hardy Britons join,
And Nations nursed beyond the sounding Rhine;
While faithful Austria from her shining Towers
Sends out by Millions her victorious Powers:
With these, the eager Northern Bands conspire,
And wanting PHOEBUS' Light, yet boast his Fire.
While swarthy Troops to the great Cause inclined,
Forsake the Day, and leave their Sun behind.
From Climes remote, and distant Skies around,
Close gathering Bands the pious KING surround;
By Nature parted, Worlds together join,
Unite the Frozen Pole, and burning Line;
Their Language different, yet their Swords agree,
All drawn alike for Freedom, and for THEE.
And THOU, Great Colonel Codrington, Colonel of the King's Guards.
Chief, in War a dreaded Name,
Foremost in Dangers, as the first in Fame;
If Isis to thy Worth a Life can give,
Thine shall elude the Grave, and ever live!
While Arts and Arms to form thy Youth combine,
And both MINERVA'S in each Action shine:
With fond Reluctance she resigns her Prize
And gives Thee up to Fame with weeping Eyes.
Our fainty Sun's too languid to inspire,
Thy Soul with Vengeance, and thy Breast with Fire.
Thy sultry India, where the God of Day
Shoots on the Earth, direct, his burning Ray,
Ripens thy Godlike Vigor, and bestows
A Heat intense, as that with which he glows.
From his kind Beams thy kindling Ardour came,
Who lent the Spark, then nursed it to a Flame.
Now Nations whom no Summer Suns beguile,
(Rough with the shaggy Bear's enormous Spoil)
Attentive hear the Story of thy Fame,
Forget their Clime, and glow at WILLIAM'S Name.
Beneath their Breast, as thy great Battles roll,
Each feels new Heat, and burns beneath his Pole;
Thy Godlike Deeds each freezing Arm inspire,
And warmed by Thee, they ask no other Fire.
See the Great Chief, The Czar of Muscovy.
whose Empires stretched around,
Nature alone can shut, and Oceans bound;
Forsake his snowy Realms, his chilling Skies,
And marks the Hero with astonished Eyes:
His Eyes the awful Warrior round explore,
And in his Looks he reads his Battles over:
The vast Idea carrying to his view
The Forts He stormed, and Millions that He slew.
Here great Namur, and there the bleeding Boyne,
With Slaughter swelled, present their numerous slain.
While to Seneff, his Thoughts in Raptures run,
Where both deserved the Palm, which neither won.
How great his Mien! what Port his Steps maintain!
Rising he moves, and Awful heads the Plain:
Stern Majesty sits lowering on his Face,
With comely Terror mixed, and frowning Grace.
So with Evander, when His Royal Guest,
(A Lion's curling Mane his Shoulders dressed)
His Hand in Leagues of holy Friendship joins;
Thus fierce he looks, and thus Majestic shines.
As WILLIAM'S Deeds the Hero entertain,
Quick beats his Heart, and swells each bursting Vein:
The Blood more sprightly runs its circling Rounds,
And flaming through the Purple Channels Bounds;
The Britons Triumphs rising to his view,
He glows, He fights, and seems to Triumph too:
In Thought elate, He now the Foe distains,
And drives the Tartar over the Russian Plains.
But hear! what joyful Shouts at Distance rise,
Break through the Air, and doubling fill the Skies;
With WILLIAM'S Name the hollow Shores rebound,
And echoing Vales repeat the Darling Sound:
No more Fair Albion on the Beach reclined,
With Tears augments the Seas, with Sighs the Wind:
Nor chides the envious Gale, and angry Main,
That from her Eyes so long their Bliss detain.
The lingering Bark no more creates her Woe,
Which flying over the Waves -- yet still is slow.
See the vast Fleet the parting Seas divide,
Whitening the Surge, and cuts the foamy Tide;
Arrived at last she drops the dashing Oar,
While PEACE, and WILLIAM, land on Albion's Shore.
No Battles now within his Bosom roll,
Awake his Rage, and fire the Warrior's Soul:
His Thoughts no longer painting to his Eye
What Foe shall Bleed the next, what Rival Die.
Soft Passions now, and every milder Grace
Smile in his Looks, and smooth the Hero's Face:
No more dread Vengeance reddens at his Eyes,
While in the melting KING the Warrior Dies.
See! how their LORD the British Youth surrounds,
And prize their Safety scarce above their Wounds.
With comely Scars each Warrior's Bosom red,
Asserts how well he fought, how often he bled.
To his loved Home, as now the Soldier flies,
Joy swells his Heart, and wets his bubling Eyes.
The trembling Wife explores her Lover's Face,
Still coy, and doubtful of her Lord's Embrace;
Hangs on his Neck, confused with mixed Surprise;
And satisfies her Love, before her Eyes.
The Infant starting, as the Sire draws near,
Deep in the Mother's Bosom hides his Fear.
He to the astonished Crowd recounting over
The Deaths he gave, and hardy Toils he bore:
His own Exploits, his own full Praises crown,
And pompous Words set off his past Renown.
So when the Ship, with Argive Heroes fraught,
Back to her Greece the shining Treasure brought;
With wonder All, the burnished Prize behold,
Rigid and stiff with Curls of flaming Gold.
Still pale with Fear the Soldier numbers over
Dire dreadful Forms that guard the wakeful Shore.
Here Streams of Fire from hissing Serpents rise,
Light the dusk Air, and flash along the Skies.
There glowing Bulls no Labors ever could tame,
Groan at the Wain, and snort a living Flame.
For thy Return what grateful Trophies rise,
What honest Joy overflows each Briton's Eyes!
To meet thy Fame, from all her joyful Towers,
Thy Isle her Populace, and Nobles pours;
All to their great Returning MONARCH kind,
Joy smiles before, and Transport shouts behind.
While mingling Murmurs, and Applauses round,
Delight thy Ear, and please while they confound.
To aid the spreading Pomp thy Heavens supply
Uncommon Luster, and a fairer Sky,
Keep back the Progress of the rolling Year,
While Summer Suns the flowery Winter cheer.
Now the loved His Royal Highness WILLIAM Duke of Gloucester.
YOUTH in all his Beauty's Pride,
And smiling Bloom adorns the Hero's side.
Each Parent striving with alternate Care,
Divide their Love, to form him Great and Fair;
While in his Looks the Sire commanding lives,
The Goddess smooths the Charms, the Hero gives:
Each manly Feature, and severer Grace,
By Beauty softened dies upon his Face:
With different Glories each the BOY inspire,
One gives the Sweetness, and one lends the Fire.
In Wars already thoughtful to engage,
He acts thy Battles over with Mimic Rage;
Here pressing eager on the flying Foe,
His boiling Veins with artful Vengeance glow,
Till from his Arm as swiftly he retires,
Stopped by his Sword, a fancied Gaul expires.
There his young Breast, and Courage to inflame,
He builds low Towers, and gives to each their Name.
Namure's feigned Walls awhile his Force disdain,
Which falls at last, and, smoking, hides the Plain:
In Sieges thus his Arm the Youth employs,
Till what his Hand erects, his Sword destroys.
While eager now to reach thy virtuous Fame,
His Bosom hardly bounds the restless Flame:
A rising Red his youthful Cheeks inspires,
And stains his Lillies over with purple Fires.
But oh! what Muse an equal Strength supplies
To paint Augusta's Triumphs as they rise?
Through whose glad Streets the Grape her Juice bestows,
Each sordid Channel purpling where it flows.
What Verse can reach the lighted Orbs on high,
And falling Luster of the artful Sky?
While Stars of Sulphur through Heav'ns-Azure glow,
And fall and smoke from bursting Shells below.
See the fair Night her Rival Beams display,
Forget her Shades, and emulate the Day.
Forth from the Clouds the Heaven a Torrent pours
Of falling Light, and rains in burning Showers.
While Meteors blazing through the Winter Sky,
Trail a long Length of Fire, and crackling Die.
As thus the Spheres with shining Wonders glow,
A Thousand hideous Forms surprise below:
Bright, horrid Monsters, ghastly to the Eye,
In various Shapes the artful Flames belly.
Here a fierce Lion we with Dread admire,
Shake his red Mane, and rough with Curls of Fire:
There dressed in Flames a slippery Serpent slides,
Burns with feigned Life, and hisses as he glides.
Each Subject now while WILLIAM fills the Throne,
Springs with new Life, and calls that Life his own:
To Nature's Bounds their Fleets control the Main,
No Dangers dread, and every Foe disdain.
Secure They wander; and while He is kind,
The Sea no Terrors has, no Rage the Wind.
Whether to freezing Climes their Course they hold
Over Icy Waves, and bound with Summers cold;
Or cross those Oceans, where perfuming Gales,
And Blasts of Incense swell the driving Sails.
Ye Sacred SHADES, who from above complain,
Your reeking Wounds the Fields of Death distain;
Still to your Isle your great Assistance lend,
And whom the Warriors saved their Ghosts defend.
Let WILLIAM still your kind Protection prove,
His Pride on Earth, and Guardians when above.
And while your Friendship thus survives the Grave,
Your Love secures that Bliss your Courage gave.
And thou, MARIA, whose indulgent Breast
Labors with Wishes for Britannia's Rest;
If Europe's dawning PEACE a while delay
Thy Lord's Embrace, forgive the Hero's stay;
Till jarring Worlds by HIS Command agree,
In vain recalled by Empire, and by THEE.
THE TABLE.
AD Insignissimum Virum D. THO. BURNETTUM, Sacrae Theoriae Telluris Autorem.
Page 7 To the Learned Doctor Thomas Burnett, Author of The Theory of the Earth.
Page 9
Ad D.D. HANNES, Insignissimum Medicum and Poetam. Page 17 To Dr. Hannes, an
eminent Physician and Poet. Page 19
PYGAIO-GEPANO-AIA, sive Praelium inter Pygmaeos and Grues commissum. Page 25
The Battle of the Pygmies and Cranes. Page 31
BAROMETRI Descriptio. Page 51 The Barometer: Or, Weather-Glass. Page 55
Machinae Gesticulantes. Page 63 The Puppet-Show. Page 67
RESURRECTIO delineata ad Altar Coll. Magd. Oxon. Page 87 The Resurrection.
Page 95
SPHAERISTERIUM. Page 109 The Bowling-Green. Page 113
Pax GULIELMI Auspiciis Europae reddita, 1697. Page 125 The Peace of Reswick.
Page 139

Mr. ADDISON'S DISSERTATION ON THE Roman POETS.

Price One Shilling.

AUTHORS Names.
I. Virgil. II. Lucretius. III. Ovid. IV. Statius. V. Lucan. VI. Claudian. VII.
Horace. VIII. Juvenal. IX. Plautus. X. Terence. XI. Seneca. XII. Martial. XIII.
Catullus. XIV. Tibullus. XV. Propertius.
A DISSERTATION Upon the most celebrated Roman POETS.

Written originally in LATIN BY Joseph Addison, Esquire

Made ENGLISH by CHRISTOPHER HAYES, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for E. CURLL in Fleet Street. MDCCXVIII.

DISSERTATIO DE INSIGNIORIBUS ROMANORUM POETIS.
OMNIUM in re Poetica maxim inclaruerunt Romani, and Romanorum VIRGILIUS:
Optimae quaeque Regulae huic Arti inservientes non tam Criticorum Praeceptis
quam MARONIS exemplo sunt depromendae: Ut ideo de reliquis Heroici Carminis
Scriptoribus, recte statuamus Virtutes and Vitia quae apud singulos occurrunt,
lectioni conferamus Virgilianae; qui, si ullibi defecerit Bucolicis, nonnunquam
puriorem immiscuit Styli elegantiam quam quae Pastoribus conveniat, and saepe
grandior sonat Carminum Majestas quam quae tenui avenae consona videatur: Apud
quemlibet Georgicorum librum inimitabili quadam Sermonis Elegantia Res rusticae
explicantur, sed ultimus de Apum Natura valde praeter caeteros animum delectat;
ubi dum in tenui Argumento procedit Poema, solennem quandam Sententiarum and
Verborum Pompam studiose affectet Poeta; Apum ideo Opera Cyclopum assimulat
Laboribus, nec majori Carminum tumultu AENEAE and TURNI recitat Certamina, quam
hasce Insectorum Turmas inter sese depraeliantes. Ubique exiguae Reipublicae
Duces, Populi, Studia, Mores, and tenue illud Imperium quod intra Alvearii
Angustias exercetur, venusta nescio qua Carminis Magnificentia exprimuntur:
Quin hoc certe in toto Opere praecipue occurrit admirandum, quomodo dum
Plantationis, Pastionis, and Agriculturae curas exequitur Poeta, omissis
usitatioribus loquendi formulis, materiae tam incultae locutionem Poeticam
accommodaret, quomodo ignobiliori depressus Argumento nunquam ad Stylum
Plebeium Orationem demiserat; sed tanta undique apparet Locutionum vis, ut
multi (quamvis temere) Georgicos etiam Aeneidi praetulisse non dubitarint; sed
in hoc Opere, per Argumentum, non licuit alias Poeseos Parts praestitisse quam
Styli and Descriptionum Elegantiam. Quod ad utrumque attinet, illud sibi
proprium semper vendicat MARONIS Pagina, ut quicquid exprimat mira quadam
Dulcedine animum ingrediatur, and quod describat melius quam si Oculis
subjiciatur, tanquam praesens intueamur.

In Styli puritate proxime accedit LUCRETIUS, cujus Dictio, si obsoletae
aliquando Verborum Antiquitati, and Numeris pene solutis agnoscas, illorum
Palato qui Roman sapiunt, persuavis videatur. In Descriptionibus tamen
CLAUDIANO secundus debetur Honos, qui amoenas Rerum Imagines ubique
venustissima contexuit Oratione, in hoc solummodo vitiosus, quod fusius quam
par est semper expatietur, eosdem Versus diversis exponat Loquendi Modis; in
hac Art sese maxim profecisse satis noverat CLAUDIANUS, de quacunque enim re
satagit, assidue semper quaerit quae describenda sunt, imo plurima sumpsit
Argumenta quae tota in Descriptionibus occupantur, ut videre est in
Praefationibus, in Idylliis, in Libris de Raptu PROSERPINAE, de PHAENICE,
HISTRICE, TORPEDINE, and plerisque Epigrammatum.

OVIDIUS (ut erat Aulici Ingenii Homo) terso quidem and polito Carmine res
exhibuit amatorias, in caeteris tamen Operibus istiusmodi occurrit Sermo quali
in Triviis uti solent: Ille enim Ingenio suo confisus de operosiori Dictione
elaboranda parum erat satis solicitus: In Libro tamen Metamorphoseos varias
optime depinxit Animalium Mutationes, dum prior paulatim exuitur Forma and nova
superinducitur.

Utrumque hoc quod jam tractamus Poetis Officium non raro optime praestitit
PAPINIUS, LUCANUS neutrum, cujus Dictio quanquam multum sonat inflata, nulla
tamen Phraseorum aut Epithetorum Venustate animatur, sed Orationi magis solutae
convenit quam Poeticae, imo certe tali plerunque utitur Verborum delectu,
qualem vel Liber dedignetur Sermo. Et quanquam in Descriptionibus saepissime
versatur, and in hujusmodi diverticula nunquam non excurrit, raro tamen, ut
debet, Opus absolvit: Jam vero quod ad STATIUM attinet; plurima certe composuit
summis Poetarum invidenda, sed inter magnas Virtutes maxima occurrunt Vitia; in
Dictione enim Verba nimis admittit sesquipedalia, nullaque de Argumento habita
ratione vana numeris miscet Tonitrua: Nec minus in Descriptionibus peccat;
nimio enim calori indulgens, dum totis viribus excellere conatur, ultra Finem
tendit opus, et in tumorem excrescit; in utrumque hujusmodi vitium aliquando
incidit CLAUDIANUS. Jam vero quoniam de VIRGILII Aeneidis Argumento varii multa
scripserunt and praeclara, pauca solummodo de STATII and LUCANI Carminibus sunt
advertenda; utpote quae Latinorum omnium sola Epica haberi debent. De LUCANO id
saepe in Disputationem venit, an Historia qua constat Pharsalicum Poema,
idoneum sit Heroici Carminis Argumentum. Vera ideo Heroicae Poeseos Natura
inquirenda est, quam apud Librum de Dignitate and Augmentis Scientiarum his
Verbis optime exhibuit VERULAMIUS nostras. Ex quo satis patet veram Historiam
cum Epico Poemate male convenire; and proinde LUCANUM quoad Argumentum maxim
defecisse. Quinque in illius Poemate maxim emicant Heroes, CAESAR, POMPEIUS,
BRUTUS, CATO, and CICERO: Omnes sane tam Vita insignes quam Morte luctuosi;
quorum Virtutes (quantum licuit per humanam Naturam) Perfectioni istae
Heroicae, quam reliqui Poetae Ducibus suis falso tribuerunt, proxime
accesserant. LUCANUS CAESARI undique oblatrat, POMPEII Parts ambitiose fovet,
sed BRUTI and CATONIS Encomia, ob Stoicum (credo) illud Ingenium, quod cum his
habuit commune, maxim celebrat: Et plurima certe quae LUCANO objicias
Philosophiae hujuscemodi sunt referenda: Inde immodicus iste Ingenii tumor, and
ambitiosa Sententiarum ostentatio, quam cum illa Hominum turba semper habet in
Deliciis; inde quae magna sunt, quam quae bona sunt, maluit praeferre. Hinc
etiam in eximia illa Poeseos Virtute Passionibus excitandis ipse (qui omnes
Philosophiae Affectus tanquam illicitos existimavit) male successerat, cujus
Vitii unicum tantum (ut taceam caetera) Argumentum proferam: Postquam in Pugna
Pharsalica CAESAR de Pompeio Victoriam reportaverit, LUCANUS maxim debuit, si
aliquid ab ipsa Historia alienum protulisset, lugubri quodam Carmine immeritam
doluisse POMPEII sortem; quippe in toto Opere summo habuit honor; vel saltem
ipsum POMPEIUM (ut ingens patuit Doloris Argumentum) aut de amissa Romae
Liberate, aut de Amicorum Mortibus, aut de propriis querentem Infortuniis,
introduxisse oportuit. Poeta tamen ab omni hujusmodi Dolor tam long abest, ut
POMPEIUM, obnixe hortaretur, postquam victus a Bello decesserat, ut CAESARIS
Victoris sui commiserescat, quia nempe CAESAR non sine Scelere Victoria potitus
est; Nonne juvat pulsum bellis cessisse, nec istud
Prospexisse (nefas!) spumantes coede catervas?
Respice turbatos in cursu sanguinis amnes,
Et soceri miserere tui; Quo pectore Romam
Intrabit factus compis felicior istis?
Quis tulerit Poetam tam ridicule philosophantem? quasi vero POMPEIUS Senex,
Exul, Miser, Triumumphatus, ob Victorem suum quamvis scelestum Commiserationem
quandam conciperet: Illum quidem maxim Stoice sapuisse oporterat, qui omnibus
hisce Fortunae Donis spoliatus, tantam in nuda Virtute poneret Felicitatem. Sed
nullus Poetarum nisi VIRGILIUS hujusmodi afficiat Dolor: Alii plerunque dum
moerorem aliquem Lectoribus inducerent, in illo peccant, quod nimia Prolixitate
sese in questus effundant, nec unquam satis Lachrymarum exhaustum esse
sentiant, vel Ingenium, quod maxim possint, Versibus infundendo, faciunt ut
magis Carmina miremur, quam materiam lugeamus. De utroque cavit VIRGILIUS, qui
mera semper Simplicitate luctuosa ut in se sunt exhibuit; and leviter quicquid
dolet perstrinxerat: "Lamentationes enim, inquit CICERO, debent esse breves and
concisae, quia Lachryma subito exarescit, and difficile est Auditorem aut
Lectorem in summo illo animi affectu tenere." Ut vero ad STATIUM redeamus, illi
quidem Spiritus non raro feliciter assurgit, cui dum temperare nequit, nescio
quas projicit Ampullas, and vana Carminibus addit Numerorum Terriculamenta.
THEBAIDIS quidem Argumentum Ingenii sui Truculentiae, sed non Heroico Poemati
satis aptum videatur: ETEOCLES enim, POLYNICES, and TYDEUS, quorum gesta hoc
Carmine celebrantur, nihil habent eorum, si unicam Fortitudinem demas, quae
convenient Heroibus: Imo in toto Poemate nulla nisi Scelerum, qualia sunt
Parricidii, Perfidiae, Immanitatis, Odiorum proferuntur Exemplaria; dum in
omnibus fere quos suo Carmine induxit VIRGILIUS praeclara quaedam illucescunt,
and in ipso AENEA summam Pietatem erga Does, Natum, Conjugem, Amicos, and
Parentem, Oculis semper habemus subjectam. Epitheta plerunque STATIANA multum
sonant metaphorice, dum inanimatis illa tribuuntur quae Animalibus convenient.
In Verbis tamen nec raro sine maxima Elegantia Metaphoras consectatur
CLAUDIANUS; VIRGILIUS in utrisque parcissimus; STATIUS plurimas rerum
similitudines composuit, multum saepe de VIRGILII Ingenio referentes, in qua
art melius successerat LUCANUS, si aliquid unquam mediocre admiserat; sed dum
VIRGILIUS ad Apes, ad Formicas, and istiusmodi Natura ludicra descendit, nihil
unquam nisi Quercum fulminatam, Terrae Exitium, aut Mundi Conflagrationem
ebuccinat LUCANUS. Et hisce tandem, quorum alii non operae Pretium duxerunt
meminisse, de Heroicis Scriptoribus breviter perstrictis; de Satyricis restat
dicendum; quorum omnium JUVENALIS and HORATIUS Palmam dubiam quidem fecerunt:
Inter Literatos enim multum discrepat, utrum mordax illa Ingenii acerbitas, qua
suam armavit paginam JUVENALIS, an potius HORATII festivae Irrisiones, magis
Satyrae conveniant: Ut vero de utroque rectius statuatur, pauca prius sunt
advertenda. Ob infamem vitae suae lasciviam, etiam nunc temporis, male audit
HORATIUS; Virtutem tamen semper rigide coluit JUVENALIS: Ille in absolutissima
AUGUSTI Aula versatus est, hic in pessima DOMITIANI Tempora incidisset: Proinde
ut ad sua and Saeculi utriusque Ingenia Opera accommodarent Poetae, HORATIUS
totus in ludicro exercetur Argumento, nec Morum Licentiam, sed indecoras
quasdam Aulicorum Ineptias plerunque insectatur; non ideo abfuisset quin
irridetur, si aliqua Styli severitate ad leviuscula hujusmodi castiganda se
accinxisset: Gravissima tamen in Temporibus suis reprehendit JUVENALIS, and de
Vitiis ubique queritur quae vel pudeat recitare, and isti sane Materiae, summa
Mentis Indignatio, Orationis Ardor, and Ingenii Acrimonia, rectissime aptari
videantur. Quamvis ubi ad Jocularia Animum demittit, non raro Satyris
Festivitatem fundit HORATIANAM. Uterque ideo (modo diversum consulas
Argumentum) suo quidem Genere perfectissimus emicuit; in quo Ridiculum Acri
melius, in hoc Acre Ridiculo. Reliqua certe HORATII Opera, Admiratione potius
sunt digna quam Encomiis, nec majora solum Vituperatione, sed etiam Laud. Jam
vero quod ad Dramaticos attinet, PLAUTI and TERENTII Argumenta, Sales,
Elegantiae ubique adeo vulgantur, ut nihil de novo possit adjici: De SENECA
vero tam diverse sentiunt, ut alii inter summos Tragicorum, alii infra Infimum
annumerent: Illi quidem Ingenium valde magnum, Oration elegans and concisa,
abundat Sententiis plerunque acutis, Stoicam semper Philosophiam, quam amplexus
est, redolentibus. Unde omnibus fere, qui Artem Dramaticam parum sapiunt,
semper est in Deliciis; si tamen ad hanc respicias, Tragoediae ubique plurimum
laborant, and istud vitii (ut reliqua praetermittam) SENECAE peculiare
videatur, ut quoscunque inducat Interlocutores, nulla, ad Personas quas
sustinet, habita ratione, eundem semper unicuique tribuat loquendi modum: Omnes
severiora spirant Philosophiae Dogmata, and quae Stoae magis conveniant quam
Theatro. Eadem semper Styli Magnificentia superbiunt Rex, and Nuncius: Imo
ipsam Nutricem (plurima enim tam acute profert) Stoicorum Praeceptis non
mediocriter imbutam sentias. Inter Epigrammatistas potissimum emicuerunt
MARTIALIS and CLAUDIANUS; Ille semper in extremo Poemate Ingenii subjecit
acumen, and saepe similia insequitur Verborum Tintinnabula; Hic per totum
Epigramma suum dispergit Salem, and venustissima ubique utitur Latinitatis
Elegantia. Caeterum tamen Poetarum Vulgus, de istiusmodi mediocribus sunt, quos
nec Dii nec Homines concesserunt; and quamvis una aut altera apud affectatas
CATULLI Oratiunculas, TIBULLI aut PROPERTII inhonestam paginam, and Carmina
incuriosa, illucescat Virtus, non tamen est Operae Pretium Gemmas inter
Stercora eruere.

Jo. Addison,
e Coll. Magd. Oxon.
A DISSERTATION Upon the most celebrated Roman POETS.

Made English from the Latin Original BY CHRISTOPHER HAYES, Esquire

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1718.

A DISSERTATION Upon the most celebrated Roman POETS.
OF all the Nations in the World, the Romans have most excelled in the Art of
Poetry, and even among the Romans VIRGIL has been the most deservedly
celebrated; from whom the justest Rules of this Art are rather to be taken,
than from the dry Precepts of the Critics. To the End therefore that we may
the more truly ascertain the Beauties and Faults which occur among the rest of
the Writers of Heroic Poetry, let us compare them with the Style of VIRGIL;
who, if he be in any Thing deficient, it is when he has sometimes in his
Eclogues mingled such a Purity of Style, as is not entirely agreeable with the
Dialect of Shepherds; and frequently the Dignity of his Verse seems no Way
consonant to the Rural Pipe. In every Book of his Georgicks, he treats of
Country Affairs with an inimitable Elegancy of Style; but, above all, we are
most delighted with his last Book, Of the Nature of BEES; where, in a Poem on
so inconsiderable a Subject, our Author purposely affects a peculiarly solemn
and pompous Style. In this Piece he compares the Labors of the BEES to those
of the Cyclops; and in the same lofty Numbers recounts the Skirmishes of these
little Insects among themselves, as he does the Rencounters of AENEAS and
TURNUS. All along, the Generals of this small Republic, the Populace, the
Factions, the Customs and Forms of Government exercised within the narrow
Limits of the Bee-hive, are described with an inexpressible Beauty and
Magnificence. Throughout the whole Work, what mostly raises our Admiration, is,
that in the Persuit of his Discourse on Planting, Grazing, and Agriculture,
(waving the common Forms of Speech) he suits his Poetic Diction to so unpolite
a Theme; how, seemingly depressed with the Meanness of his Subject, he never
sinks into a Plebeian Style; but the Force and Energy of his Expression are so
conspicuous, that many, too rashly indeed, have not scrupled to prefer the
Georgicks to the Aeneid: But in a Work of this Nature, no other Parts of Poetry
could be displayed, except an Elegance of Style and Description: In both these
Ways VIRGIL has this peculiar to himself, that he captivates the Soul with his
wonderful Sweetness, and his Descriptions are as lively, as if we had the
Object placed before our Eyes.

In the Purity of his Style next follows LUCRETIUS, whose Diction, allowing for
his Obsoleteness, and Numbers almost Prosaick, may challenge a Share of Praise
in those who have any Taste of the Roman Eloquence: For Descriptions however,
the second Post of Honor is due to CLAUDIAN, who has throughout, in a most
beautiful Style, interwoven his agreeable Images; faulty in this alone, that he
expatiates upon his Subjects beyond all Decency, and frequently gives us the
same Thoughts, diversified only in Expression. In this Art CLAUDIAN well knew
the Progress he had made, for on whatsoever Topic he is engaged, he diligently
searches out Matter for Description, nay most of the Subjects he has wrote upon
are wholly such, as may be seen in his Prefaces, his Eclogues, his Books of the
Rape of PROSERPINE, his Phoenix, his Porcupine, his Cramp-Fish, and most of his
EPIGRAMS.

OVID (like a true Courtier as he was) describes the Affairs of Love in neat
and polite Verse. In the rest of his Works we meet with the more vulgar Way of
Expression; for trusting to a good Genius, he was little solicitous about
forming a more elaborate Style; but yet in his Metamorphoses, he has painted in
the greatest Perfection the various Changes of all Creatures, and his
Transformations succeed one another with a most surprising Celerity.

STATIUS has frequently discharged both these Requisites of a Poet we just now
observed; LUCAN neither, whose Diction, although very bombast, is not enlivened
either by beautiful Phrases or Epithets, but comes nearer Prose than Poetry;
nay, there is in him commonly such a mean Choice of Words, as is sometimes even
beneath Prose it self: And although he abounds in Descriptions, and is always
making Excursions of that Kind, yet he seldom finishes his Work as he ought, or
brings his Thoughts to any Justness of Conclusion.

But now as to STATIUS, he has given us Compositions worthy of the Envy of the
best Poets: But with all his Beauties he has greater Faults; for in his
Expression he makes too much Use of Gigantick Words, and, not considering his
Subject, mingles useless Thunder in his Numbers: Nor is he less faulty in his
Descriptions, for, encouraging too great a Heat, while he attempts to excel, he
shoots beyond his Mark, and swells unnaturally. Of both which Extremes CLAUDIAN
is too often guilty.

And now, since there have been many Pieces written, and those of Note, on the
Subject of VIRGIL'S Aeneis, (and less Notice is taken of the Poetry of STATIUS
and LUCAN) to whose Productions only the Latins allow the Title of Epick
Poetry. As to LUCAN, it has been often disputed whether his Pharsalia be a
proper Subject for an Heroic Poem. For the Decision of this Point, we must
enquire into the true Nature of Heroic Poetry, which our Countryman the Lord
BACON has admirably described in his Treatise of The Advancement of Learning.
From whence it is sufficiently manifest, that History and Epic Poetry are by no
means proper Companions; and therefore that LUCAN has very much failed in his
principal Subject: The five Heroes who make the greatest Figure in his Poem,
are CAESAR, POMPEY, BRUTUS, CATO, and CICERO; each of them indeed as
distinguishable in their Lives, as they were lamented at their Deaths; Men
whose Virtues, allowing for the Frailties of human Nature, came nearest to that
Pitch of Heroic Perfection which other Poets have falsely attributed to their
Heroes. LUCAN every where rails at CAESAR, and passionately espouses POMPEY'S
Interest, but most of all celebrates the Characters of BRUTUS and CATO for that
Spirit of Stoicism, which he had equally imbibed with them: And indeed most of
the Faults objected to LUCAN, are rather to be imputed to this Kind of
Philosophy. From whence sprung that boundless Vein of Wit, and that peculiar
Affectation of a lofty Style, which, like that Sect of Men, he always delighted
in, and therefore gives the Preference rather to great, than good Actions: And
upon this Account, in raising the Passions, (that most excellent Part of
Poetry) he succeeded but ill, because upon the Principles of his Philosophy,
the Passions themselves were accounted as absolutely unlawful. To confirm this,
(passing by many others) I will produce but one Instance: After CAESAR had
obtained the Victory over POMPEY in the Battle of Pharsalia, LUCAN certainly
(if he had enlarged on any Circumstance foreign to his Story) should, upon so
remarkable an Occasion, have brought in POMPEY lamenting his unhappy Fate in
the most mournful Strain; especially since he pays so high a Deference to him
throughout his whole Work; or at least (as there was an open Field for Grief)
he should have introduced POMPEY, either complaining of Rome's lost Liberty,
the Death of his Friends, or his own Misfortunes. But LUCAN is so far from
raising the Passions to this just Height, that he warmly advises POMPEY (when
vanquished he retires from the Field of Action) to commiserate the Condition of
his Conqueror CAESAR, because he had not won the Day but by unjustifiable
Methods. Don't you rejoice that your superior Foes
Have snatched you from a Scene of future Woes?
That blessed in Exile you escape the Sight
Of bleeding Armies in domestic Fight?
Behold each River drags her tardy Flood,
Choked up with Carnage and distained with Blood;
Your Victor-Sire with pitying Eyes survey,
Nor envy him the Fortune of the Day:
How shall he enter Rome devoid of Shame,
Who on the public Ruins builds his Name?
Who can bear to hear the Poet philosophizing in this ridiculous Manner? As if
POMPEY, a Man in Years, an Exile, Miserable, and Vanquished, should have any
Concern upon him for the Crimes of his Conqueror: He ought to have been very
much stoiciz'd indeed, who, despoiled of all the Goods of Fortune, could place
the Sum of his Felicity in mere naked Virtue. But none of the Poets have
touched this Passion of Grief like VIRGIL. The Generality of other Writers,
when they attempt to move their Readers, offend in this Point, that they are
too prolix in spinning out their Complaints, and think their Flood of Tears
inexhaustible; or else, while they labor to express the Greatness of their
Genius, in the Profuseness of their Verse, rather raise our Admiration at the
Flowing of their Numbers, than excite our Pity in the Catastrophe of their
Story. VIRGIL has carefully avoided both these Extremes, and dresses his Images
of Sorrow in their native Simplicity; and whoever he makes to grieve, he always
does it with a quick and tender Compassion: For according to CICERO, our
Expressions of Grief ought to be short and concise, because our Tears quickly
dry up, and it is unnatural to detain either an Auditor or a Reader in too long
a Suspension of Grief.

But to return to STATIUS, his Spirit is indeed lofty and aspiring, to which
while he gives too great a Loose, he runs into Bombast, and to his Poetry often
adds useless sounding Words. The Subject of his Thebais seems indeed suited to
the Barbarity of his Genius, but is beneath the Dignity of an Heroic Poem. For
neither ETEOCLES, POLYNICES, nor TYDEUS, whose Actions are recorded in this
Poem, have any Thing in them, except their Valor, agreeable to Heroes: Nay,
throughout the whole Piece there are no Examples produced, unless of Persons
infamous for the most flagitious Enormities, such as Parricide, Treachery,
Cruelty, and Revenge; while, on the contrary, every Thing Praiseworthy shines
bright in VIRGIL'S Heroes, and in the Person of AENEAS we have placed before
our Eyes an Instance of consummate Piety toward the GODS, his Son, his Wife,
his Friends, and his Father. The Epithets of STATIUS are generally forced and
very metaphorical, while such Properties are ascribed to Inanimates, as really
only belong to Animals. In the Choice of his Words, and frequently in his
Metaphors, he is followed by CLAUDIAN with the utmost Elegance; VIRGIL is
sparing in both these Particulars; STATIUS abounds much with Similitudes, in
which he seems to imitate VIRGIL; but in this Instance LUCAN had had better
Success, if he had hit upon the proper Medium: But while VIRGIL stoops down to
the humble Subjects of Bees, Ants, and other such like delightful Themes of
Nature; on the other Hand, LUCAN bellows out nothing but Stories of Oaks split
by Lightning, Earthquakes, and the World's Conflagration. Let this, in short,
suffice observable concerning the Writers of Heroic Poetry, in itself new, and
never before taken Notice of.

Something now remains to be said of the Satyrists, among whom whether JUVENAL
or HORACE have most Right to the Bays, it is difficult to determine; for it has
been long a Dispute among the Learned, whether that Keenness and Bitterness of
Expression with which JUVENAL has armed his Satires, or HORACE'S more jocose
Lampoons are most agreeable to the End of SATIRE. Now that we may give a
clearer Decision on this Head, a few Things must be premised. HORACE bears to
this Day, an ill Character for the Looseness of his Conduct in Life. JUVENAL
was a rigid Practiser of Virtue. The one was conversant in the most perfectly
polite Court of AUGUSTUS; the other lived in the Dregs of DOMITIAN'S Time; and
therefore both these Poets accommodated their Writings to the Manners of the
different Ages they lived in: For HORACE is entirely upon the ludicrous, and
persues not so much the Licentiousness of the Times, as the ridiculous
Fopperies of some particular Courtiers; for had he attempted to correct these
Trifles with Severity, he had not missed of being laughed at: But JUVENAL
lashes the grossest Crimes prevalent in his Time, and complains of Enormities
which he was ashamed to mention, and nothing less than the highest Resentment
of Soul, Ardency of Expression, and Sharpness of Speech, could be an equal
Match to Crimes so notorious; though whenever he descends to be jocose, we
frequently meet with the Pleasantry of HORACE. Both of them, allowing for the
different Manner of their Writing, are perfect Masters in their several Ways;
in the one shines the Ridicule, in the other the Severe. The rest of HORACE'S
Pieces are so admirable, that they exceed our highest Encomiums, and are not
only beyond our Dislike, but above our Praise.

As to what concerns the Dramatick Poets, PLAUTUS and TERENCE bear away the
Bell, whose Plots, Turns, and Elegancy of Style, are so well known, that
nothing new can be said upon them.

As to SENECA, Mankind have had different Opinions of him; some have ranked him
with the best Tragoedians, others have sunk him below the worst. He certainly
had a great Genius, an elegant and concise Way of Expression; he abounds with
smart Turns, which always savor much of that Stoicism of which he was a
Follower, upon which Account he has always been esteemed by those who have had
little or no Taste of Dramatick Poetry; but then if we consider him as such,
his Tragedies are throughout too elaborate; and this, to pass by his other
Faults, seems peculiarly SENECA'S, that he makes all his Actors (without any
Regard to the Characters they bear) talk in the same Strain; all of them
inculcate rigid philosophical Dogmata, and such Morality as is rather fit for
the Schools of the Stoics, than the Roman Theater: For with him the King and
the Slave strut in the same Buskin; nay, you may perceive the Nurse herself
deeply tinged with the Principles of Stoicism.

Among the Epigrammatists, MARTIAL and CLAUDIAN have bore the greatest
Reputation; the first, for the severe Point in the Close of his Epigrams, and
the peculiar Jingle of his Words. The other, for dispersing the Poignancy of
his Wit throughout his Epigrams, and that in the most beautiful Latin Phrase.

The rest of the Herd of the Latin Poets creep so low in their Numbers, that
they are beneath the Notice either of GODS or Men: And though we may now and then
discover in the affected Harangues of CATULLUS, and the obscene Poetry of
TIBULLUS and PROPERTIUS, some not disagreeable Pieces, yet it is not worth our
while to rake the Dunghills for the Sake of the JEWELS.

ERRATA.
Page 5 Lin. 16 read eosdemque. p. 13 l. 12 r. oportuerat.

POSTSCRIPT.
The Passage of the Lord Vide Tract. de Dignitate and Augmentis Scientiarum.
Fol. Land. 1638, Cap. XIII. Page 64.
BACON, which seems to be referred to by Mr. ADDISON, in the 9th Page of the
foregoing DISSERTATION.

-- de Poesi Narrativa, sive eam Heroicam appellare placet (modo hoc intelligas
de Materia, non de Versu) ea a Fundamento prorsus nobili excitata videtur, quod
ad dignitatem humanae Naturae imprimis spectat. Cum enim Mundus sensibilis sit
Anima rationali dignitate inferior, videtur Poesis haec humanae Naturae
largiri, quae Historia denegat; atque Animo umbris rerum utcunque fatisfacere,
cum solida haberi non possint. Si quis enim Rem acutius introspiciat, firmum ex
Poesi sumitur argumentum, Magnitudinem Rerum magis illustrem, Ordinem magis
perfectum, and Varietatem magis pulchram, Animae humanae complacere, quam in
Natura ipsa post Lapsum reperire ullo modo possit. Quapropter, cum Res gestae,
and Eventus, qui vere Historiae subjiciuntur, non sint ejus Amplitudinis, in
qua Anima humana sibi satisfaciat, praesto est Poesis, quae Facta magis Heroica
confingat: Cum Historia vera successus rerum, minime pro meritis Virtutum and
Scelerum narret; corrigit eam Poesis, and exitus, and fortunas secundum merita,
and ex lege Nemeseos exhibet: Cum Historia vera, obvia rerum satietate and
similitudine, animae humanae fastidio sit; reficit eam Poesis inexpectata and
varia, and vicissitudinem plena canens. Adeo ut Poesis ista, non solum ad
delectationem, sed etiam ad Animi magnitudinem, and ad Mores conferat. Quare
and merito etiam Divinitatis cujuspiam particeps videri possit; quia animum
erigit, and in sublime rapit: rerum simulachra ad animi desideria accommodando,
non animum rebus (quod ratio facit and Historia) submittendo. Thus translated,
in the English Edition, by Dr. RAWLEY.

As for Narrative Poesy, or, if you please, Heroical, (so you understand it of
the Matter, not of the Verse) it seems to be raised altogether from a noble
Foundation, which makes much for the Dignity of Man's Nature. For seeing this
sensible World is in Dignity inferior to the Soul of Man, Poesy seems to endow
human Nature with that which History denies; and to give Satisfaction to the
Mind, with, at least, the Shadow of Things, where the Substance cannot be had.
For if the Matter be thoroughly considered, a strong Argument may be drawn from
Poesy, that a more stately Greatness of Things, a more perfect Order, and a
more beautiful Variety delights the Soul of Man, than any Way can be found in
Nature since the Fall. Wherefore, seeing the Acts and Events which are the
Subject of true History, are not of that Amplitude as to content the Mind of
Man, Poesy is ready at Hand to feign Acts more Heroical. Because true History
reports the Successes of Business not proportionable to the Merit of Virtues
and Vices, Poesy corrects it, and presents Events and Fortunes according to
Desert, and according to the Law of Providence: Because true History, through the
frequent Satiety and Similitude of Things, works a Distaste and Misprision in
the Mind of Man; Poesy cheereth and refreshes the Soul, chanting Things rare,
and various, and full of Vicissitudes. So as Poesy serves and conferreth to
Delectation, Magnanimity, and Morality; and therefore it may seem deservedly to
have some Participation of Divineness, because it does raise the Mind to
Things, as Reason and History do. FINIS.

