A PRELIMINARY INTRODUCTION TO THE ACT OF SEA-BATHING; WHEREIN IS SHOWN Its
Nature, Power, and Importance; WITH SOME NECESSARY HINTS FOR THE ATTENTION OF
VISITERS, AT THE WATERING PLACES, PREVIOUS TO, AND DURING A COURSE OF BATHING

BY JOHN ANDERSON, M.D., F.A.S., C.M.^. etc. PHYSICIAN TO, AND A DIRECTOR OF,
THE GENERAL SEA-BATHING INFIRMARY, AT MARGATE.

MARGATE

PRINTED FOR C. DILLY, IN THE POULTRY, AND E. MURRAY, FLEET STREET, LONDON; TO
BE HAD AT THE LIBRARIES MARGATE, RAMSGATE, AND BROADSTAIRS.

1795.

PRELIMINARY INTRODUCTION TO SEA-BATHING.
IT may be proper to inform the READER, that, in compliance with the request of
some highly distinguished gentlemen of the faculty, I have undertaken to write
on the nature, power, influence, and effect of Seawater and Sea-bathing, cold
and hot, and submitted the manuscripts to be read before a learned MEDICAL
SOCIETY, in London; and also to be reviewed by sundry learned medical friends;
and the reports on them are highly flattering, but which it may be prudent to
conceal till the public opinion is known.

The subject matter, thus assigned me to sift and handle, is sufficiently
interesting; and stands in much need of farther investigation. Sea-bathing is
certainly more practiced, at the present day, than a knowledge of it is yet
possessed. There is in it great room to advance, explain, enforce, and
restrain. What I deliver shall, though connected, be in distinct tracts, in
order to relieve the reader, and make them come easy to the purchaser: the
whole will be the result of long practical experience, and the facts supported
by respectable living evidence, of gentlemen of the faculty on the coast, and
long-standing sagacious sea-bathing guides, male and female, at MARGATE. Where
any thing is left doubtful or equivocal, it is for professional men, resident
at the sea-watering places, to advance a step farther, and add to, and refine
on, my arguments, and the importance of the design; and by their being thus
faithful interpreters of the hidden treasures of nature, will manifest
themselves to be what they profess, the guardians of health, and the truly
adopted sons and heirs of Apollo, the Inventor of Medicine. Divisum sic breve
fiet opus. None else are, or can be competent to the task; as seabathing
involves in it a knowledge of the animal economy, and of general medical
practice, founded on just physical reasoning; call it theory if you will.
Experience without nice conception of the truths necessary, demonstrable by
reason, to enable us to draw just deductions from the phenomena, for
application to particular objects, is no experience at all: it is worse than
none; for it involves in obscurity, and fixes an idea in the mind, narrow in
its compass, hazardous in the enterprise, and often false in the conclusion; so
that it brings nothing to the temple of truth and knowledge; and, neither
promotes, completes, or actuates to new inventions or any useful discovery of
the several dependencies, causes, and connection of things, so far as comes
within the ken of human intelligence. All theory beyond this, is as vain and
fruitless as that of simple curs barking and leaping after the wild birds of
the sky, or at the light of, and specks in the moon. There is not the same
Libertas philosophica in Ars Medica as in Licentia poetica for the flights of
fancy. As speculative literature is baseless, our faith is left free; nothing
less than solid truth can be rested on; it is the great barrier against the
floods of error, ignorance, and skeptical hypothesis, or fictious sophistry. In
truth, there is certitude, of what is good or bad: in ignorance, diffidence,
doubt, and danger.

"So want of knowing truth does fools delude,
And error from the right way does exclude,
All those that doubt;" --
HORACE. The Stoics esteem him mad who is blindly led by ignorance instead of
truth. Diffidence and obstinacy, though opposite in themselves, are both in the
line of defection. Diffidence is no just excuse for the concealment of an
important fact; others may theorize thereon. Theory helps us out in the
knowledge of reasons and causes, for settling our judgments upon the best and
most rational principles.

Theory and practice, like two heavenly bodies, attract light on each other:
the one without the other is like the statue of Polyphemus without an eye, or a
lamp without oil. Every man has some theory or other -- good or bad: -- his
cannot be wrong whose practice is uniformly successful: it is in full proof, if
actions are allowed to be stronger than words. In strict logic, it is not
allowed to pass from the hypothesis to the thesis: the hypothetical principle
must be proved, before the consequences can be admitted: opinion must be
implanted, or resolution determined, before reasons for that opinion can be
known: illustration and just representation, by example, is required to
enlighten and instruct the understanding, or the truth of a doctrine cannot be
confirmed, or its principles established. Sir Isaac Newton says, "As in
mathematics, so in natural philosophy, the investigation of difficult things,
by way of analysis, ought ever to precede the method of composition. This
analysis consists in making experiments and observations, and in drawing
general conclusions from them by induction, and admitting of no objections
against the conclusions, but such as are taken from experiments and
observations, or other certain truths: and although the arguing from
experiments and observations by induction, be no demonstration of general
conclusions, yet it is the best way of reasoning, which the nature of things
admit of, and may be looked upon as so much the stronger, by how much the
induction is more general: and if no exception occur from phenomena, the
conclusion may be pronounced generally. But if at any time afterward, any
exceptions do occur from experiments, it may be pronounced, with such
exceptions as shall occur. By this way of analysis, we may proceed from
compounds to ingredients, and from motions to the forces producing them; and in
general from effects to their causes, and from particular causes to more
general ones, till the argument ends in the most general." Op. p. 380. l. 31.

The theory required, founded on the light of nature, concerning man, his
diseases, affections, (bodily and mental) dependencies, mutations,
diversisications, resistances, sympathies and antipathies, indicating and
contra-indicating symptoms, concordant and discordant opinions and principles,
together with the force and influence of the planetary system on our orb, is
infinite, obscure, and mavelous to human wisdom, yet does honor to the
eternal immutable Being, who has not only created, but preserves the variety.
There is nothing without its counteracting opponent: there is no disease
without its antidote: vice, has virtue: hatred, love: malevolence, charity: --
theorists oppose; and, by their opposing opinions, truth comes out, and the
arts and sciences are refined and improved. This system of opposition is
maintained throughout the whole animal and vegetable creation: "All nature is
but art unknown to thee;
All chance, direction, which thou can not see;
All discord, harmony not understood;
All partial Evil, universal Good:
And, spite of Pride, in erring Reason's spite,
One truth is clear, Whatever is, is Right."
POPE.

All theories may be referred to the general laws of motion. Sea-bathing
comprehends in it the powers and qualities of fluidity, gravity, pressure,
attraction, repulsion, stimulation, friction, attrition, and velocity; cold,
heat, humidity, dryness, effluvia, etc.

If what I offer to the public shall meet with a reception equal to the
intention, to awaken and persuade my fellow creatures, upon rational grounds,
to keep out of the road that leads to pain, sorrow, and premature death, and
embrace health, that inestimable blessing which gives relish to all our
enjoyments, my ambition will be amply gratified in being permitted to add my
mite to the public fund of preservatory knowledge.

Although I write from the locality of my situation, yet the observations I
have made, the important facts I have industriously collected, and the dubious
points I have more fully ascertained, are so general as to serve equally well
for every other eligible sea-bathing place at home or abroad.

Neither the advantages of Sea-bathing, at Margate, nor the salubrious property
of the air of Thanet, have hitherto commanded medical attention equal to what
their importance deserve, consequently are not sufficiently known to the
public. Res ipsa loquitur. Sea-bathing has certainly worked its own way more
than by any industry of the saculty.

During twelve years and upwards that I resided at KINGSTON, Surry, before I
came to Margate, though I was allowed to be fortunate, under heaven, in
relieving pain and distress, yet I wish to throw a veil over my ignorance of
the power and effects of Sea-bathing, as of those I recommended to it, some
returned no better, some worse; and some I sent to the cold sea-bath whom I
ought to have sent to the warm, et vice versa, which I heartily acknowledged in
my Medical Remarks the moment I knew better, wherefore there is but too much
room to conclude, that all those who returned benefitted, were more indebted to
chance than to any precise judgment or theory of mine. I have to plead for it,
I was an inland practiser, when all my knowledge of it was derived from the
very few practical treatises I had seen, or could obtain on the subject; and
neither of those I saw were so perfect as to give me adequate ideas of it for
practice: some, in some things, egregiously misled me: some others were misled
themselves; and it making no part of academical education, my mind was not
prompted to consider the efficacy of Seawater as any thing beyond that of a
mere wash for a foul skin, whereas there is no part, I will say, of the whole
materia medica, yet known so extensively efficacious, under judicious
direction, or detrimental, under indiscreet, ill-timed management. If it was
not capable of doing harm, it would be incapable of doing good.

In those simples which dwell the most virulent poisons, dwell also, the most
potent, salutary virtues: "There is some soul goodness in things evil,
Would men observingly distill it out."
SHAKESPEARE.

The most capital things of nature lie generally out of the common track; and,
therefore the man who aims at great and useful discovery, must take much upon
himself, for few will follow until the point is fully ascertained; and it is
well if he does not meet with discouragement for his diligent inquiry.

In proportion to our confidence, proficiency, and enlarged views of nature, so
are the miseries of mankind abridged, and the means are multiplied for yielding
a comfortable existence. It is for me, and for every one of us, who undertake
the important charge of lives, to open and expand our ideas, for receiving more
ample and more enlarged views of the discoverable things of nature, her silent
ways, the dispensations of providence, and the exigencies of man; which, if
every one did, we should see fewer improper objects arrive at the sea-watering
places, with very inadequate directions and large packages of compounded drugs,
which no rational practitioner, physician, or apothecary, can act with and
under, by which some have severely suffered, others received no benefit, and
the water forsooth, blamed for what it had no hand in. Lamentabili dictu! --
None have fuffered at MARGATE, except the indiscreet and unthinking, or who
have been so unfortunate as to be badly advised and injudiciously directed, no
matter whether by those on the coast or inland, who have not yet acquired a
competent knowledge of the state, qualities, powers, order, affinity, and
appropriation of the objects of nature to the seminal and radical causes of
distemper, or the patients ability of body to sustain the proposed means for
receiving relief.

I have observed some to have come, and, under judicious direction, receive
much benefit; come a second time, resting on their own judgment and experience,
and suffer.

Those who are dead and insensible to all the warm emotions and pleasing
sensations that result from the act of self-preservation -- the amor sui -- we
cannot expect to resuscitate. I say with Horace: "Let none but learned doctors
physic give,
Let each mechanic by his calling live."


And with Pliny: "The arts would be happy if only artists might judge of them
and practice them."

By an improper application of sea-bathing, through ignorance, the intention of
the bath is frustrated, the symptoms of a complaint aggravated, new fatal ones
brought on, and the voice of nature is silenced. That eloquent, and much
enlightened genius, the late Dr. JOHN MORGAN, Professor of Medicine in the
College of Philadelphia, in his Anniversary Discourse, published in 1765, has
the following spirited passage, which does honor to his humanity.

"Should we," says he, "for a moment turn our eyes upon the man, who dares to
enter upon the practice of physic, without being properly initiated into the
science, or instructed in the important duties of the profession, he would soon
present us with a melancholy prospect. If not past all feelings of humanity,
what compunctions of conscience, what remorse would not fill his breast from
practicing at random and in the dark; not knowing whether his prescriptions
might prove a wholesome remedy or a destructive poison. To discover the nature
of an uncommon disease, or to account for an unusual symptom, puzzles his
invention. -- Ignorant of every true principle, from which, by just reasoning,
he might be able to deduce practical inferences, he knows not what prognostic
to make, or what plan of treatment to observe -- Unsteady and irresolute, he
attempts a variety of means; such as either avail not, or such as heighten the
danger of the disease, already too violent, he may thus interrupt the salutary
attempts of nature, or, not knowing how to second them, tamper with the life of
the patient, and idly waiting to see what nature herself is capable of doing,
neglect to succor her, till it is too late, and the fatal hand of death is
just closing the gloomy scene. -- Wretched is the case of those whom chance, or
misinformed judgment, shall throw into his hands, to fall victims of his
temerity -- Great is the havoc which his ignorance spreads on every side,
robbing the affectionate husband of his darling spouse, or rendering the tender
wife a helpless widow; -- increasing the number of orphans; -- mercilessly
depriving them of their parents support; -- bereaving the afflicted parents of
their only comfort and hope, by the untimely death of their beloved infants,
and laying whole families desolate. Remorseless so to human kind! Actuated by
more than savage cruelty! Hold, hold, thy exterminating hand! --

"Glad should I be to moderate this too exact description of the effects of
ignorant and presumptuous practice; but what judgment can we pass on those, who
have been scarcely instructed in the first elements of medical science, and yet
force themselves into practice, as if they meant to sport themselves with human
life and human calamities?"

If medicine be allowed to be a great blessing in the hands of the sagacious
and wise, and as a sword in the hands of the foolish and furious, so is
sea-bathing. Too much being assumed and taken for granted, is the reason so
little progress has hitherto been made in its theory for guiding the hand of
practice. The greatest enemy to wisdom and prudence is precipitation.

Nine years ago I happened to come to MARCATE in quest of strength, after a
long and severe fever; and receiving a very sensible benefit the first season
by sea-bathing, and the salubrious air of Thanet, I was thereon led to make
inquiry into their special effects on other visitors, and what I actually saw,
and was credibly informed of by some of the bathing guides, I thought
important, and it not being generally known, I immediately published it in my
Medical Remarks on Evacuations. Since that time, I have had frequent
opportunity of observing more minutely their effects on others under various
states, circumstances, and conditions of body: in simple and complicated, acute
and chronic, casual and inherent complaints; and every year's experience gives
manifold proofs of their very great utility to health: they restore and
preserve. There are but few distempers incident to human nature in which either
the cold, the warm, or vapor seawater bath, and the air of a salubrious spot
on the margin of the main, such as Thanet, are not equal to meet and prove more
or less beneficial in. I have seen, on a well directed course, diseases not
only palliated, but many cured by them, after having baffled the power of
medicine in rational artists hands. These baths are certainly most excellent
auxiliaries to medicine, diet, exercise, and amusement, as these are to them,
which accounts for the great flux and re-flux of company, from the king to the
beggar, to, and from the sea-watering places, during the temperate seasons;
"Where Baths give vigor and the Waters health."

Or, as a late ingenious MARGATE visitant to mount Parnassus describes it; "The
briny wave does thousands save,
Alike from Grave and Crutches;
Makes Aged young, the feeble strong,
Or Beggar, Duke, or Duchess."
COLEMAN.

Seawater is not a mere simple homogeneous elemental fluid simplex
simplicitur, but nature's richly saturated compound. It contains, say chemical
philosophers, a muriatic bitter purging salt, calcarious earth, and sulphurous
bitumen: and Boil, and other naturalists agree in there being a subtle
aetherial spirit in water, which some call fixed air, some phlogiston or
inflammable air, besides a pure air, which airs become elastic, as seen by the
sparkling air bubbles.

The proportion of the principles of seawater vary in some distant seas, and
in deep and in shallow water: some say the sea is more salt in summer than in
winter, warmer in a tempest than in a calm. There is in seawater, besides its
original native principles, the impregnation of submarine plants, such as the
Quercus Marinus, or sea-wreck, and other plants; the slime, sperm, and
excrementitious parts of fishes; their, and other dead bodies, rain, dew, hail,
snow, springs, and the disemboguing of rivers and ponds; together with fossils,
minerals, and the refuse of ships, etc. the combination of all which
heterogeneous particles render seawater, on stagnation and being close kept,
quickly corruptible. After a long calm at sea the stench is very offensive, and
that which issues forth on opening a cask of seawater, that has been kept for
some time in the hold of a ship, is intolerable, nay deadly. If it were not for
the tides there would be no living near the sea in a calm. As the aerial spirit
in waters is extremely fugitive, they are all better drank on the spot than at
a distance, and the more they are crowded with their principles they spoil the
sooner.

The sea-beach on the coast of Thanet is made up of fine sand, intermixed with
chalk that breaks off from the cliffs after intense long continued frost, and
is melted by the flowing tides: those cliffs that gave to Britain the ancient
name of Albion: "That pale, that white-faced shore,
Whose foot spurns back the ocean's roaring tides."
SHAKESPEARE.

Thus, there is a bottom that is remarkably clean, soft, smooth, yet invariably
firm and gently sloping from the fending banks, which render Thanet's coast
very inviting to bathe.

The seawater at MARGATE is not only pure, but strong of its native
principles, by reason no rivers run into the ocean to make it muddy and
brackish nearer than the Thames and Medway, both thirty miles to the westward,
and these repelled back again by the flood tide.

The first three or four years I stood a mere spectator and inquirer into the
power, influence, and effects of sea-bathing before ever I thought myself
competent to direct a course of it: it was to me a new study, though an ancient
practice; for Homer tells us, that Ulysses and his comrades bathed in warm
water and in the sea to refresh themselves after fatigue, before they dined. He
mentions purifyng the Atrides in the sea.

Although we have the testimony and suffrage of some of the greatest
philosophers and sage physicians, in the different ages of the world, for the
cold spring and soft tepid baths being the most universal remedies in the whole
compass of nature; yet in a medicinal light they are far, very far inferior in
efficacy to the warm and cold seawater baths, only they are not so convenient
or so easy for all, at all times, to come at. If few speak for, few speak
against them, because they are not competent of their power and effects; and,
if they are not of their ill as well as good, we cannot take their silence to
be suffrage.

At first I met with much difficulty in obtaining intelligence; for the
faculty, and the sea-bathing guides at MARGATE, all told me they never had been
put on the line of observing; for, if they had, they said they could have
furnished me with many important facts of the power and effect, both good and
ill, of sea-bathing: "They build on sands, which unmoved they find,
It Is because there was no wind."
COWLEY.

And my not meeting with a scrip on the subject in any of the libraries that
afforded me the least satisfaction, I had to persevere in wading through thick
shades of darkness till I came into fair light, when I clearly saw the
impropriety of their receiving all that came without exeeption, as if
sea-bathing was an universal sovereign specific remedy for all complaints,
whatever were their nature or cause; was proper at all times, and suited to all
constitutions, temperaments, states, and conditions of body, modes of living;
and that by one mode of bathing only, and of pushing the bath indiscriminately
beyond what nature can bear. Can there be any error, theoretical or practical,
more absurd or unphilosophical? Art is subservient to nature; to relieve,
polish, and improve nature. If nature and art do not go hand in hand, and
mutually accord, nothing will be perfected or established in any art or
science. Nature will be led, but not driven.

Although many discoveries are made in natural history, yet many are still to
make, and the point of view necessary to place many things in for a just
application is still much wanting, defective, and but imperfectly understood.
This we may apply to sea-bathing as much as to any part of medical practice.
When we talk of sea-bathing being efficacious in this, or in that complaint, we
must mean to comprehend with it the state and condition of body at the time it
has to operate upon. The cold spring and soft tepid baths may almost wholly be
referred to strictum and laxum, even the Sainted Wells, in which they are very
powerful.

Having seven years ago cautioned the MARGATE bathing guides against receiving
any ailing persons, except with, and by the suffrage of the faculty; and the
guides themselves seeing the p^^priety of this, from some unfortunate accidents
that happened that season and before, to improper and unprepared persons; to
some of whom I had been called, but too late in some instances for ^^t to
restore; I have not seen or heard of any since suffering violence by
sea-bathing. I had no other way to prevent embarrassment that might in future
acrue to ignorant and misled persons. The guides were not to blame; they were
not competent, and their bread depends wholly on the multiplicity that bathe.
We must rather impute to visitors themselves neglecting to apply for proper
advice on the spot, which the poorest person that comes recommended may have.
The French have a true saying of the English in respect to their health, which
is, "that they do not think themselves sick soon enough, and they think
themselves well too soon."

Notwithstanding of the many drawbacks on sea-bathing, whilst the bountiful
ocean answers the peremptory demands of thousands and tens of thousands of
proper claiments every year, it must ever be solicited aad embraced by the sons
and daughters of affliction. Still it is no universal panacea; its gifts are by
no means appropriated for, or dispensed to all; nor are all applicants equally
capable of receiving them. There neither is, or can be any universal remedy to
supersede all the other parts of GOD'S creation: -- do away all degrees of
comparison -- invert the order of nature, and leave nothing for the inquiry,
intelligence, or employment of man: "Take but degree away, unhinge that string,
And hark what discord follows: each thing meets
In mere appugnancy."
SHAKESPEARE.

A generous cordial to a person fainting and satigued, is a comfortable
reviving thing, but fiery ardent spirit to one with a hot stomach and inflamed
blood, is adding fuel to the fire, or like giving a man a soporiferous draught
in a lethargy. How often, alas! have I seen the misery of a disorder thus
confirmed by injudicious, illtimed administration, that a judicious physician
would, by quite an opposite treatment, have easily subdued. How often, on the
other hand, have I rejoicingly beheld many a valuable life, that had been
dispaired of by one set of men, restored speedily by others, who attended more
minutely to the nice discriminating circumstances of nature, for facilitating
the means she uses in her conflict with death. Though fifteen or twenty years
since, some of these live useful members of society; yet how few are these,
comparatively speaking, to the number of drowned persons restored annually to
life by the Humane Society, after vital action in the heart, arteries and
respiratory organs, had, for almost an incredible length of time, been
suspended? And also to the number of great cures performed in our hospitals,
after the complaints had baffled the art of sagacious private practisers? which
shows the advantage of art where rational men of the faculty have strict
justice done to their practice:

Hoc est Vivere bis posse priore frui. Every instance of resuscitation
corroborates to serve as a spur to us not to abandon nature too soon in her
difficulties, when we every day see what she is capable of doing for giving
relief in distress, with a little judicious well-timed help: but though the
benignant hand of providence continues to anticipate on many occasions, the
interposition of art by effecting her own work; yet men of judgment,
understanding, experience, and observation, know that she is frequently
interrupted and retarded therein by the officious hands of ignorance, temerity,
and professional juglers.

"An honest man's the noblest work of God." Perseverence in doing good to our
distressed fellow creatures is the crown and perfection of all virtues: every
other principle of virtue attends it. If there are any ulcered souls that think
this a burden, or a drawback on trade, let not their judgment counteract or
silence the voice of nature -- the will of their creator and preserver. Let
them consider, if the world was made for Caesar, it was for Titus too.

Those only who are in familiar habits with nature, can know any thing of her
ways and the methods she takes in causing, and carrying off disease, and
purifying the blood of noxious particles, that associate with the mass and bear
down the fabric. The art is not to render the blood by the remedy in a worse
state than it found it; which every medicine will do if injudiciously used, and
the most potent one too the soonest.

To treat a disease rationally, it is not only necessary to know the remedy,
but the natural constitution and acquired diathesis of the blood it has to act
upon. The sagacious physician has many signs and tokens given him for his guide
in the local and universal complaint; even the aspect of the countenance on the
bed of sickness serves to enable him to make a genuine presage of the issue.
This is called the semiotic or art of presaging by exterior signs. The disease,
constitution, state, and nature's indications (salutary and erroneous) being
known, she instantly presents to his enlightened mind what is calculated for
opposing the morbid symptoms, and bringing relief out of the abundant stock
from his extensive researches, under the protection of an all-attentive
providence, without being tossed on the fluctuating wave of conjectural opinion
or uncertainty: thus experience founded on analogy and comparative fact,
imparts her observations to reason, and enables it to support, by fair
evidence, solid conclusions against the common enemy ignorance, which saps the
foundation, and undermines all genuine learning. Example has the force of
command.

Scientific principles certainly rest on praecognita, fixed, leading, or
standing self-evident axioms, which are the objects of our senses -- come
within the sphere or cognizance of our intellectual faculties, and are
consistent with reason and truth: on these science is enlarged and improved.
Medical science being the most extensive of any, it taking in the whole compass
and domain of nature, many things are yet beyond the amplitude of our
intellectual view; and therefore its supporting pillars cannot all be reckoned,
and our philosophy has not taught us to reduce infinite variety to difinite
limitation without loss. How narrow and unstable all the systems of medical
theory yet extant! every one having been so sullied by the improvements of the
succeeding generation, that there is not one that has yet stood the test of
half a century. HIPPOCRATES' (pater noster arts medicoe) excepted, which will
stand as long as nature is true to herself: upon it we may make new acquests
every day, it having endless store to improve on, but upon none else that I
know. How short and fluctuating the College Catalogue of remedies to natures
plan of the materia medica, as if all the rest beyond it were an useless mass
of rubbish, only fit for being cast away, while Deus et natura nihil faeiunt
frustra. CICERO, in his Academicks, speaks almost in these words: "I do not
direct my thoughts to the little bear but the great bear, called Helice or
Charles' wain, those famous seven north stars; that is, my ideas are to be
enlarged, not narrowed, and therefore I must wander and expatiate a great deal
farther. Absolute restriction is giving at once an effectual check to the
spirit of inquiry, and locking up the human understanding in the dark vale of
ignorance. The most enlightened genius, with every advantage, knows but in
part; and all that physicians do, or can know of nature, may be resolved into
principles of observation and physical fact. Their researches and disquisitions
into occult and inscrutable paths; such as primordial efficient causes and
inbred virtues, or to unravel that combination of causes which we call chance,
more especially supernatural causes and their influences, would be fruitless,
vain, arrogant, and bewildering, if not irreverent, that being nature itself;
and nature is the art of the GODHEAD.

The dark profundity of heavens high plan,
Is known to angels, but concealed from man.
It is well if we can obtain a side glance, or a passing smile.

Though much remains to be discovered before we arrive at the ne plus ultra,
yet enough is discovered of things and their virtues, to enable the human mind
to form just ideas of the infinite wisdom, power, justice, and goodness of the
great GOD of universal nature, whose benificence pours forth and discloses his
blessings to every living thing, conducted by fixed and immutable laws, and the
rule and order of his dispensation is the felicity of the universe.

In every flower that blooms, or shrub that grows,
The GODHEAD smiles triumphant over his FOES.
Or, as LUCRETIUS more fully has it; "God is in sea, and land, and air, and sky,
What would we more, all is DEITY.
Whatever we see, or wheresoe'er we go,
We must see GOD, whether we will or no."


After what is said in this preliminary discourse, it will appear evident to
the rational READER, that inasmuch as it is for physicians, and their brethren
of the faculty, at the sea-watering places to explore and industriously acquire
a competent knowledge of the nature, power, influence, and effect of
sea-bathing, and its essential supporting auxilliaries for the relief of pain,
agony, and distress; it is for visitors themselves not to be too indolent or
refractory, to taking, and being guided by reason and judicious counsel on the
spot, not only previous to, but from time to time, during a course of bathing,
to prevent embarrassment, and to allow the bath to have fair play for answering
the end and intention of it; for no writer can lay down rules to answer all and
every one's case invariably; therefore to act laudably and gain success is the
triumph of wisdom; it is the way to be acquainted with nature: "Know all the
good that individuals find,
Or GOD or NATURE meant to mere mankind;
Reason's whole pleasure, all the joys of sense,
Lie in three words, Health, Peace, and Competence."
POPE.

END OF THE INTRODUCTION.
Published by the same Author.
MEDICAL REMARKS on Natural, Spontaneous, and Artificial Evacuation.

A PRACTICAL ESSAY on the good and bad Effects of Seawater and Sea-Bathing.

NEARLY READY FOR THE PEESS, A PRACTICAL ESSAY on the Power, Influence, and
Effect -- good and bad, of the tepid, warm, hot, and vapor Seawater Bath; AND
One or Two more little Tracts, as necessary Accompanyments to them.


