SACRED DRAMAS: CHIEFLY INTENDED FOR YOUNG PERSONS: THE SUBJECTS TAKEN FROM THE
BIBLE. TO WHICH IS ADDED, SENSIBILITY, A POEM.

All the Books of the BIBLE are either most admirable and exalted Pieces of
Poetry, or are the best materials in the world for it. COWLEY. LONDON: PRINTED
FOR T. CADELL IN THE STRAND.

M DCC LXXXII.

TO HER GRACE THE DUCHESS OF BEAUFORT; THESE SACRED DRAMAS ARE, WITH THE MOST
PERFECT RESPECT, INSCRIBED: AS, AMONG THE MANY AMIABLE AND DISTINGUISHED
QUALITIES WHICH ADORN HER MIND, AND ADD LUSTER TO HER RANK, HER EXCELLENCE IN
THE MATERNAL CHARACTER GIVES A PECULIAR PROPRIETY TO HER PROTECTION OF THIS
LITTLE WORK; WRITTEN WITH AN HUMBLE WISH TO PROMOTE THE LOVE OF PIETY AND
VIRTUE IN YOUNG PERSONS; BY HER GRACE'S MOST OBEDIENT, MOST OBLIGED, AND MOST
HUMBLE SERVANT,

H. MORE.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I AM as ready as the most rigid Critic, to confess, that nothing can be more
simple and inartificial than the plans of the following Dramas. In the
construction of them I have seldom ventured to introduce any persons Never,
indeed, except in DANIEL, and that of necessity; as the Bible furnishes no more
than two persons, Daniel and Darius; and these were not sufficient to carry on
the business of the Piece.
of my own creation: Still less did I imagine myself at liberty to invent
circumstances. I reflected, with awe, that the place whereon I stood was holy
ground. All the latitude I permitted myself, was, to make such persons as I
selected, act under such circumstances as I found, and express such sentiments
as, in my humble judgment, appeared not unnatural to their situations. -- Some
of the speeches are so long as to retard the action; for I rather aspired after
moral instruction, than the purity of Dramatic Composition. The very terms of
Act and Scene are avoided, because I was unwilling to awaken the attention of
the Reader to my deficiencies in critical exactness.

It may be thought that I have chosen, perhaps, the least important passage in
the eventful Life of David, for the foundation of the Drama which bears his
name. Yet even in this, his first exploit, the sacred Historian represents him
as exhibiting no mean lesson of modesty, humility, courage, and piety: virtues
not only admirable, but imitable; and within the reach of every Reader. Many
will think that the introduction of Readiness daughter would have added to the
effect of the piece: and I have no doubt but that it would have made the
intrigue more complicated and more interesting, had this Drama been intended
for the Stage. There, all that is tender, and all that is terrible in the
passions, find a proper place. But I write for the Young, in whom it will be
always time enough to have them awakened; I write for a class of Readers, to
whom it is not easy to accommodate one's subject It would not be easy, I
believe, to introduce Sacred Tragedies on the English Stage. The scrupulous
would think it profane, while the profane would think it dull. Yet the
excellent RACINE, in a dissipated country, and a voluptuous court, ventured to
adapt the story of Athaliah to the French Theater; and it remains to us a
glorious monument of its Author's courageous piety, and of the perfection of
the Dramatic Art.


A very judicious and learned friend has remarked, that the Reflections of King
Hezekiah breathe rather too much of the spirit of Christianity; for that it is
scarcely probable he had so settled a belief in the general judgment. I feel
the justness of the objection, without having been able to obviate it. I wished
to convey a strong idea of this great leading truth, and have, perhaps
improperly, ascribed sentiments to a Jewish monarch, merely because I wished to
impress them on the Christian Reader.

The Critic and the Scholar, if any such should honor these pages with their
attention will find ample matter on which to exercise their candor and their
charity; qualities so natural to genius and to learning, that even the
feebleness of my performance will not be able to obstruct the exertion of them
in favor of my intention.

The amiable Poet Cowley.
from whom I have taken my motto, after showing the superiority of the Sacred,
over the Profane Histories (some instances of which I have noticed in my
Introduction), concludes with the following remark, which I may apply to myself
with more propriety than it was used by the Author: -- I am far from assuming
to myself, to have fulfilled the duty of this weighty undertaking; and I shall
be ambitious of no other fruit from this weak and imperfect attempt of mine,
but the opening of a way to the courage and industry of some other persons, who
may be better able to perform it thoroughly and successfully.

CONTENTS.
THE INTRODUCTION, Page 1 MOSES, Page 11 DAVID AND GOLIATH, Page 45 BELSHAZZAR,
Page 125 DANIEL, Page 191 HEZEKIAH, Page 255 SENSIBILITY, Page 267
THE INTRODUCTION.
O For the sacred energy which struck
The harp of Jesse's son! or for a spark
Of that celestial flame which touched the lips
Of blessed Isaiah Isaiah, chap. vi.
, when the Seraphim
With living fire descended, and his soul
From sin's pollution purged! or one faint ray,
(If human things to heavenly I may join)
Of that pure spirit which inflamed the breast
Of Milton, God's own poet! when, retired,
In fair enthusiastic vision rapt,
The nightly visitant deigned bless his couch
With inspiration, such as never flowed
From Aganippe's fount, or Acidale:
Then, when the sacred fire within him burnt,
He spoke, as man or angel might have spoke,
When man was pure, and Angels were his guests.
It will not be. -- Nor prophet's burning zeal;
Nor muse of fire, nor yet to sweep the strings
With sacred energy to me belongs;
Nor with Miltonic hand to touch the chords
That wake to ecstacy. From me, alas!
The secret source of harmony is hid;
The magic powers which catch the ravished soul
In melody's sweet maze, and the clear streams
Which to pure Fancy's yet untasted springs
Enchanted lead. Of these I nothing know;
Yet, all unknowing, dare invoke thy aid,
Spirit of Truth! who graciously have said,
That none who ask in faith should ask in vain.
You I invoke not now, ye fabled nine!
I not invoke you, though you well were sought
In Greece and Latium, by immortal bards,
Whose siren song enchants, and shall enchant,
Through Time's wide-circling round, though false their faith,
And less than human were the gods they sung.
Though false their faith, they taught the best they knew,
And, blush O Christians! lived above their faith.
They would have blessed the beam, and hailed the day,
Which chased the moral darkness from their souls,
Oh! had their minds received the clearer ray
Of true devotion, they had learned to scorn
Their deities impure, their senseless gods,
And wild mythology's fantastic maze.
Pure PLATO! how had thy chaste spirit hailed
A faith so fitted to thy moral sense!
What had thou felt to see the fair romance
Of high imagination, the bright dream
Of thy pure fancy more than realiz'd!
O sweet enthusiast! thou had blessed a scheme
Fair, good, and perfect. How had thy rapt soul,
Caught fire, and burnt with a diviner flame!
For even thy fair idea never conceived
Such plenitude of love, such boundless bliss,
As Deity made visible to sense.
Unhappy BRUTUS! philosophic mind!
Great 'midst the errors of the Stoic school!
How had his kindling spirit joy'd to find
That his loved virtue was no empty name;
Nor had he met the vision at Philippi,
Nor had he sheathed his bloody dagger's point,
Or in the breast he loved, or in his own.
The Pagan page how far more wise than ours!
They with the gods they worshipped graced their song;
Our song we grace with gods we disbelieve;
The manners we adopt without the creed.
Shall Fiction only raise poetic flame,
And shall no altars blaze, O TRUTH! to thee?
Shall falsehood only please, and fable charm?
And shall eternal Truth neglected lie?
Because immortal, slighted or profaned?
Truth has our reverence only, not our love;
Our praise, but not our heart. A deity,
Confessed, but shunned, acknowledged, not adored:
She comes too near us, and she shines too bright.
Her penetrating beam at once betrays
What we would hide from others and ourselves.
Why shun to make our duty our delight?
Let pleasure be the motive (and allow
That immortality be quite forgot):
Where shall we trace through all the page profane,
A livelier pleasure, and a purer source
Of innocent delight, than the fair book
Of holy Truth presents? For ardent youth,
The sprightly narrative; for years mature,
The moral document, in sober robe
Of grave philosophy arrayed; which all
Had heard with admiration, had embraced
With rapture; had the shades of Academe,
Or the learned Porch produced it. Then, O then,
How Wisdom's hidden treasures had been couched
Beneath fair Allegory's graceful veil!
Do not the powers of soul-enchanting song,
Strong imag'ry, bold figure, every charm
Of eastern flight sublime, apt metaphor,
And all the graces in thy lovely train,
Divine Simplicity! assemble all
In Sion's songs, and bold Isaiah's strain?
Why should the classic eye delight to trace
How Pyrrha and the famed Thessalian Deucalion.
king
Restored the ruined race of lost mankind;
Yet turn, incurious, from the patriarch saved,
The righteous remnant of a deluged world?
Why are we taught, delighted, to recount
Alcides' labors, yet neglect to learn
How mighty Sampson led a life of toil
Herculean? Pain and peril marked them both;
A life eventful, and disastrous death.
Can all the tales which Grecian records yield;
Can all the names the Roman page records,
Renowned for friendship and surpassing love;
Can gallant Theseus and his brave compeer;
Orestes, and the partner of his toils;
Achates and his friend; Euryalus
And blooming Nisus, pleasant in their lives,
And undivided by the stroke of death;
Can each, can all, a lovelier picture yield
Of virtuous friendship; can they all present
A tenderness more touching than the love
Of Jonathan and David? -- Speak, ye young!
You who are undebauch'd by fashion's lore,
And, unsophisticate, from nature judge,
Say, is your quick attention stronger drawn,
By wasted Thebes, than Pharaoh's smitten hosts?
Or do the vagrant Trojans yield a theme
More grateful to the eager appetite
Of young impatience, than the wandering tribes,
By Moses through the thirsty desert led?
The beauteous Iphigenia.
Maid (though tender is the tale),
Whose guiltless blood on Aulis' altars streamed,
Smites not the bosom with a softer pang
Than Jephthah's daughter, doomed like her to die.
Such are the lovely themes which court the muse!
Scarce yet essayed in verse. O let me mourn
That heav'n-descended song should ever forget
Its sacred dignity and high descent;
Should ever so far its origin debase,
To spread corruption's bane, to lull the bad
With flattery's opiate strain; to taint the heart
Of innocence, and silently infuse
Delicious poison, whose insidious charm
Feeds the sick mind, and fondly ministers
Unwholesome pleasure to the fever'd taste;
While its fell venom, with malignant power,
Strikes at the root of virtue, withering all
Her vital energy. Oh! for some balm
Of sovereign power to raise the drooping muse
To all the health of virtue! to infuse
A generous warmth, to rouse an holy pride,
And give her high conceptions of herself!
For me, eternal Spirit! let thy word
My path illume! O thou compassionate God!
Thou know our frame, thou know we are but dust,
From dust a Seraph's zeal thou will not ask,
An Angel's purity. Oh! as I strive,
Though with a feeble voice and flagging wing,
A glowing heart, but pow'rless hand, to tell
The faith of favored man to heaven; to trace
The ways inscrutable of heaven to man;
May I, by thy celestial guidance led,
Fix deeper in my heart the truths I sing!
In my own life transcribe whatever of good
To others I propose! and by thy rule
Correct the irregular What in me is dark
Illumine, what is low raise and support.
PARADISE LOST.
, reform the wrong,
Exalt the low, and brighten the obscure!
Still may I note how all the agreeing parts
Of this well-ordered fabric, join to frame
One fair, one finished, one harmonious whole!
Trace the close links which form the perfect chain
In beautiful connection; mark the scale,
Whose nice gradations, with progression true,
For ever rising, end in Deity!
MOSES IN THE BULRUSHES: A SACRED DRAMA.

I will assert eternal Providence,
And justify the ways of God to man.
PARADISE LOST. PERSONS of the DRAMA.
HEBREW WOMEN.
JOCHEBED, Mother of MOSES. MIRIAM, his Sister. EGYPTIANS. The PRINCESS, King
PHARAOH's daughter; and other Attendants.
SCENE, on the Banks of the NILE. The subject is taken from the Second Chapter
of the Book of Exodus.

MOSES IN THE BULRUSHES:
PART I.
JOCHEBED, MIRIAM. JOCHEBED. WHY was my prayer accepted? why did heaven
In anger hear me when I asked a son?
Ye dames of Egypt! happy, happy mothers!
No tyrant robs you of your fondest hopes;
You are not doomed to see the babes you bore,
The babes you nurture bleed before your eyes!
You taste the transports of maternal love,
And never know its anguish! Happy mothers!
How different is the lot of thy sad daughters,
O wretched Israel! Was it then for this?
Was it for this the righteous arm of GOD
Rescued his chosen people from the jaws
Of cruel want, by pious Joseph's care?
Joseph! the elected instrument of heaven,
Decreed to save illustrious Abraham's race,
What time the famine raged in Canaan's land.
Israel, who then was spared, must perish now!
Oh thou mysterious power! who have involved
Thy wise decrees in darkness, to perplex
The pride of human wisdom, to confound
The daring scrutiny, and prove the faith
Of thy presuming creatures! clear this doubt;
Teach me to trace this maze of Providence:
Why save the fathers if the sons must perish?

MIRIAM. Ah me, my mother! whence these floods of grief?

JOCHEBED. My son! my son! I cannot speak the rest.
Ye who have sons can only know my fondness!
Ye who have lost them, or who fear to lose,
Can only know my pangs! none else can guess them.
A mother's sorrows cannot be conceived
But by a mother -- Wherefore am I one?

MIRIAM. With many prayers thou did request this son,
And heaven has granted him.

JOCHEBED. O sad estate
Of human wretchedness! so weak is man,
So ignorant and blind, that did not GOD
Sometimes withhold in mercy what we ask,
We should be ruined at our own request.
Too well thou know, my child, the stern decree,
Of Egypt's cruel king, hard-hearted Pharaoh;
"That every male, of Hebrew mother born,
"Must die." Oh! do I live to tell it thee?
Must die a bloody death! My child, my son,
My youngest born, my darling must be slain!

MIRIAM. The helpless innocent! and must he die?

JOCHEBED. No: if a mother's tears, a mother's prayers,
A mother's fond precautions can prevail,
He shall not die. I have a thought, my Miriam!
And sure the GOD of mercies who inspired,
Will bless the secret purpose of my soul,
To save his precious life.

MIRIAM. Hop'st thou that Pharaoh --

JOCHEBED. I have no hope in Pharaoh, much in GOD;
Much in the ROCK OF AGES.

MIRIAM. Think, O think,
What perils thou already have incurred,
And shun the greater which may yet remain.
Three months, three dangerous months thou have preserved
Thy infant's life, and in thy house concealed him!
Should Pharaoh know!

JOCHEBED. Oh! let the tyrant know,
And feel what he inflicts! Yes, hear me, Heaven!
Send thy right aiming thunderbolts -- But hush,
My impious murmurs! Is it not thy will;
Thou, infinite in mercy? Thou permitt'st
This seeming evil for some latent good.
Yes, I will laud thy grace, and bless thy goodness
For what I have, and not arraign thy wisdom
For what I fear to lose. Oh, I will bless thee,
That Aaron will be spared! that my firstborn
Lives safe and undisturbed! that he was given me
Before this impious persecution raged!

MIRIAM. And yet who knows but the fell tyrant's rage
May reach his precious life?

JOCHEBED. I fear for him,
For thee, for all. A doting parent lives
In many lives; through many a nerve she feels;
From child to child the quick affections spread,
For ever wandering, yet for ever fixed.
Nor does division weaken, nor the force
Of constant operation ever exhaust
Parental love. All other passions change
With changing circumstances; rise or fall,
Dependant on their object; claim returns;
Live on reciprocation, and expire
Unfed by hope. A mother's fondness reigns
Without a rival, and without an end.

MIRIAM. But say what Heaven inspires to save thy son?

JOCHEBED. Since the dear fatal morn which gave him birth,
I have revolved in my distracted mind
Each means to save his life: and many a thought
Which fondness prompted, prudence has opposed
As perilous and rash. With these poor hands
I Have framed a little ark of slender reeds;
With pitch and slime I have secured the sides.
In this frail cradle I intend to lay
My little helpless infant, and expose him
Upon the banks of Nile.

MIRIAM. It Is full of danger.

JOCHEBED. It Is danger to expose, and death to keep him.

MIRIAM. Yet, Oh! reflect. Should the fierce crocodile,
The native and the tyrant of the NILE,
Seize the defenseless infant!

JOCHEBED. Oh, forbear!
Spare my fond heart. Yet not the crocodile,
Nor all the deadly monsters of the deep,
To me are half so terrible as PHARAOH,
That heathen king, that royal murderer!

MIRIAM. Should he escape, which yet I dare not hope,
Each sea-br^n monster, yet the winds and waves
He cannot 'scape.

JOCHEBED. Know, GOD is every where;
Not to one narrow, partial spot confined;
No, not to chosen ISRAEL: He extends
Through all the vast infinitude of space.
At his command the furious tempests rise,
The blasting of the breath of his displeasure:
He tells the world of waters when to roar;
And at his bidding, winds and seas are calm.
In HIM, not in an arm of flesh, I trust;
In HIM, whose promise never yet has failed,
I place my confidence.

MIRIAM. What must I do?
Command thy daughter, for thy words have waked
An holy boldness in my youthful breast.

JOCHEBED. Go then, my MIRIAM! go, and take the infant.
Buried in harmless slumbers there he lies:
Let me not see him -- spare my heart that pang.
Yet sure, one little look may be indulged,
One kiss -- perhaps the last. No more, my soul!
That fondness would be fatal -- I should keep him.
I could not doom to death the babe I clasped:
Did ever mother kill her sleeping boy?
I dare not hazard it -- The task be thine.
Oh! do not wake my child; remove him softly;
And gently lay him on the river's brink.

MIRIAM. Did those magicians, whom the sons of EGYPT
Consult, and think all potent, join their skill,
And was it great as EGYPT's sons believe;
Yet all their secret wizard arts combined,
To save this little ark of Bulrushes,
Thus fearfully exposed, could not effect it.
Their spells, their incantations, and dire charms
Could not preserve it.

JOCHEBED. Know this ark is charmed
With spells, which impious EGYPT never knew.
With invocations to the living GOD
I twisted every slender reed together,
And with a prayer did every ozier weave.

MIRIAM. I go.

JOCHEBED. Yet ever thou go, observe me well.
When thou have laid him in his watery bed,
O leave him not; but at a distance wait
And mark what Heaven's high will determines for him.
Lay him among the flags on yonder beach,
Just where the royal gardens meet the Nile.
I dare not follow him, Suspicion's eye
Would note my wild demeanor; Miriam, yes,
The mother's fondness would betray the child.
Farewell! GOD of my fathers, oh protect him!

MOSES IN THE BULRUSHES:
PART II.
SCENE, The Banks of the NILE. Enter MIRIAM, after having deposited the child.
YES, I have laid him in his watery bed,
His watery grave, I fear! -- I tremble still;
It was a cruel task -- still I must weep!
But ah! my mother, who shall sooth thy griefs?
The flags and sea-weed will awhile sustain
Their precious load, but it must sink ever long!
Sweet babe, farewell! Yet think not I will leave thee;
No, I will watch thee till the greedy waves
Devour thy little bark: I Will sit me down,
And sing to thee, sweet babe! Thou can not hear,
But 'twill amuse me while I watch thy fate.
She sits down on a bank and sings. SONG. I.
THOU, who can make the feeble strong,
O GOD of Israel, hear my song!
Not mine such notes as Egypt's daughters raise,
It Is thee, O GOD of Hosts, I strive to praise.
II.
Ye winds, the servants of the LORD,
Ye waves, obedient to his word,
O spare the babe committed to your trust,
And Israel shall confess the LORD is just!
III.
Though doomed to find an early grave,
This helpless infant thou can save;
And he whose death is doomed by Pharaoh's hand,
May rise a prophet to redeem the land.
She rises, and looks out. Who moves this way? of royal port she seems;
Perhaps sent hither by the hand of Heaven,
To prop the falling house of Levi. -- Soft!
I Will listen unperceived, these trees will hide me.
She stands behind. Enter the PRINCESS of EGYPT, attended by a train of Ladies.
PRINCESS. No farther, Virgins; here I mean to rest,
To taste the pleasant coolness of the breeze,
Perhaps to bathe in this translucent stream.
Did not our holy law The ancient Egyptians used to wash their bodies four
times every twenty-four hours.
enjoin the ablution
Frequent and regular; it still were needful,
To mitigate the fervors of our clime.
IANTHE, stay -- the rest at distance wait.
They all go out, except one. The PRINCESS looks out. Sure, or I much mistake,
or I perceive
Upon the sedgy margin of the Nile
A chest; entangled in the reeds it seems;
Discern'st thou ought?

IANTHE. Something, but what I know not.

PRINCESS. Go and examine, what this sight may mean.

Exit maid. MIRIAM, behind. O blessed, beyond my hopes! he is discovered;
My brother will be saved! who is this stranger?
Ah! it is the Princess, cruel Pharaoh's daughter.
If she resemble her inhuman Sire,
She must be cruel too; yet fame reports her
Most merciful and mild: -- I Will mark the event,
And pray that Heaven may prompt her to preserve him.

Re-enter IANTHE, PRINCESS. Have thou discovered what the vessel is?

IANTHE. Oh, Princess, I have seen the strangest sight!
Within the vessel lies a sleeping babe,
A fairer infant have I never seen!

PRINCESS. Who knows, but some unhappy Hebrew woman
Has thus exposed her infant, to evade
The stern decree of my too cruel Sire.
Unhappy mothers! often my heart has bled
In secret anguish over your slaughtered sons.

IANTHE. Should this be one my Princess knows the danger.

PRINCESS. No danger should deter from acts of mercy.

MIRIAM, behind. A thousand blessings on her princely head!

PRINCESS. Too much the sons of Jacob have endured
From royal Pharaoh's unrelenting hate;
Too much our house has crushed their alien race.
Is It not enough, that cruel taskmasters
Grind them by hard oppression and stern bondage?
Is It not enough, my father owes his greatness,
His palaces, his fanes magnificent;
Those structures which the world with wonder views,
To the hard toils of much insulted Israel?
To them his growing cities owe their splendour,
Their labors built fair Rameses and Pythom;
And now, at length, his still increasing rage,
To iron bondage adds the guilt of murder.
And shall this little helpless infant perish?
Forbid it justice, and forbid it, heaven!

IANTHE. I know, thy royal father fears the strength
Of this still growing race, who flourish more
The more they are oppressed; he dreads their numbers.

PRINCESS. Apis forbid! Pharaoh afraid of Israel!
Yet should this outcast race, this hapless people
Ever grow to such a formidable greatness;
(Which all the gods avert, whom Egypt worships),
This infant's life can never serve their cause,
Nor can this single death prevent their greatness.

IANTHE. I know not that: by weakest instruments
Sometimes are great events produced; this child
Perhaps may live to serve his upstart race
More than an host.

PRINCESS. How ill does it beseem
Thy tender years, and gentle womanhood
To steel thy breast to Pity's sacred touch!
So weak, so unprotected is our sex,
So constantly exposed, so very helpless,
That did not Heaven itself enjoin compassion,
Yet human policy should make us kind,
Lest we should need the pity we resuse.
Yes, I will save him -- lead me to the place;
And from the feeble rushes we'll remove
The little ark, which cradles this poor babe.

The PRINCESS and maid go out. MIRIAM comes forward. How poor were words, to
speak my boundless joy!
The Princess will protect him; bless her, Heaven!
She looks out after the Princess, and describes her action. With what
impatient steps she seeks the shore!
Now she approaches where the ark is laid!
With what compassion, with what angel-sweetness,
She bends to look upon the infant's face!
She takes his little hand in here is -- he wakes --
She smiles upon him -- hark! alas, he cries;
Weep on, sweet babe! weep on, till thou have touched
Each chord of pity, wakened every sense
Of melting sympathy, and stolen her soul.
She takes him in her arms -- O lovely Princess!
How goodness heightens beauty! now she clasps him
With sondness to her heart, she gives him now
With tender caution to her damsel's arms:
She points her to the palace, and again
This way the Princess bends her gracious steps;
The virgin-train retire, and bear the child.

Re-enter the PRINCESS. PRINCESS. Did ever innocence and infant-beauty
Plead with such dumb but powerful eloquence?
If I, a stranger, feel these soft emotions,
What must the mother who exposed him feel!
Go, setch a woman of the Hebrew race,
That she may nurse the babe; and, by her garb,
Lo such a one is here!

MIRIAM. Princess, all hail!
Forgive the bold intrusion of thy servant,
Who stands a charmed spectator of thy goodness.

PRINCESS. I have redeemed an infant from the waves,
Whom I intend to nurture as mine own.

MIRIAM. My transports will betray me! [Aside.] Generous Princess!

PRINCESS. Know thou a matron of the Hebrew race,
To whom I may confide him?

MIRIAM. Well I know
A prudent matron of the house of Levi,
Her name Jochebed is, the wife of Amram;
Gentle she is, and famed throughout her tribe
For soft humanity; full well I know
That she will rear him with a mother's love.
[Aside.] Oh truly spoke! a mother's love indeed!
To her despairing arms I mean to give
This precious trust; the nurse shall be the mother!

PRINCESS. With speed conduct this matron to the palace.
Yes, I will raise him up to princely greatness,
And he shall be my son; his name be Moses,
For I have drawn him from the perilous flood.
They go out. She kneels. Thou Great Unseen! who causest gentle deeds,
And smil'st on what thou causest; thus I bless thee,
That thou did deign consult the tender make
Of yielding human hearts, when thou ordain'd'st
Humanity a virtue! Did incline
The natural bias of the soul to mercy,
Then made that mercy duty! Gracious Power!
Made the keen rapture exquisite as right:
Beyond the joys of sense; as pleasure sweet;
As reason constant, and as instinct strong!

MOSES IN THE BULRUSHES.
PART III.
Enter JOCHEBED. I HAVE almost reached the place -- with cautious steps
I must approach to where the ark is laid,
Lest from the royal gardens any spy me.
-- Poor babe! ever this the pressing calls of hunger
Have broke thy short repose; the chilling waves,
Perhaps, have drenched thy little shivering limbs.
What -- what must he have suffered! -- No one sees me:
But soft, does no one listen? -- Ah! how hard,
How very hard for fondness to be prudent!
Now is the moment, to embrace and feed him.
She looks out. Where Is Miriam? she has left her little charge,
Perhaps through fear, perhaps she was detected.
How wild is thought! how terrible conjecture!
A mother's fondness frames a thousand fears,
And shapes unreal evils into being.
She looks toward the river. Ah me! where is he? soul-distracting sight!
He is not there -- he is lost, he is gone, he is drowned!
Tossed by each beating surge my infant floats;
Cold, cold and watery is thy grave, my child!
O no -- I see the ark -- Transporting sight!
She goes toward it What do I see? Alas, the ark is empty!
The casket's left, the precious gem is gone!
You spared him, pitying spirits of the deep!
But vain your mercy; some insatiate beast,
Cruel as Pharaoh, took the life you spared --
And I shall never, never see him more!
Enter MIRIAM. JOCHEBED. Come, and lament with me thy brother's loss!

MIRIAM. Come, and adore with me the God of Jacob!

JOCHEBED. Miriam -- the child is dead!

MIRIAM. He lives, he lives!

JOCHEBED. Impossible: Oh! do not mock my grief!
See thou that empty vessel?

MIRIAM. From that vessel
The Egyptian Princess took him.

JOCHEBED. Pharaoh's daughter?
Then still he will be slain.

MIRIAM. His life is safe,
For know, she means to rear him as her own.

JOCHEBED. Falls on her knees in rapture. To GOD the LORD, the glory be
ascribed!
Oh magnified for ever be thy might,
Who can plant mercy in a Heathen's heart,
And from the depth of evil bring forth good!

She rises. MIRIAM. O blessed event, beyond our warmest hopes!

JOCHEBED. What! shall my son be nurtured in a court,
In princely grandeur bred? taught every art,
And every wondrous science Egypt knows?
Yet ah! I tremble, Miriam; should he learn,
With Egypt's polished arts, her baneful faith!
O worse exchange for death! Yes, should he learn
In yon' proud palace to disown his hand
Who thus has saved him: should he ever embrace,
(As sure he will, if bred in Pharaoh's court)
The gross idolatries which Egypt owns,
Her graven images, her brutish gods:
Then shall I wish he had not been preserved,
To shame his fathers, and deny his faith.

MIRIAM. Then, to dispel thy sears, and crown thy joy,
Hear farther wonders -- Know, the generous Princess
To thy own care thy darling child commits.

JOCHEBED. Speak, while my joy will give me leave to listen!

MIRIAM. By her commissioned, thou behold'st me here,
To seek a matron of the Hebrew race
To nurse him; thou, my mother, art that matron. --
I said, I knew thee well; that thou would rear him
Even with a mother's fondness; she who bare him
(I told the Princess) could not love him more.

JOCHEBED. Fountain of Mercy! whose pervading eye
Beholds the heart, and sees what passes there,
Accept my thoughts for thanks! I have no words --
How poor were human language to express
My gratitude, my wonder, and my joy!

MIRIAM. Yes, thou shall pour into his infant mind
The purest precepts of the purest faith.

JOCHEBED. O! I will fill his tender soul with virtue,
And warm his bosom with devotion's flame!
Aid me, celestial spirit! with thy grace,
And be my labors with thy influence crowned:
Without it they were vain. Then, then, my Miriam,
When he is furnished, against the evil day,
With God's whole armor 2 Thessalonians. chap. v. Also, Ephesians. chap. vi.
, girt with sacred truth,
And as a breast plate, wearing righteousness,
Armed with the spirit of God, the shield of Faith,
And with the helmet of salvation crowned,
Inured to watching and disposed to prayer;
Then may I send him to a dangerous court,
And safely trust him in a perilous world,
Too full of tempting snares and fond delusions!

MIRIAM. May bounteous Heaven thy pious cares reward!

JOCHEBED. O Amram! O my husband! when thou come,
Wearied at night, to rest thee from the toils
Imposed by haughty Pharaoh; what a tale
Have I to tell thee! yes -- thy darling son
Was lost and is restored; was dead and lives!

MIRIAM. How joyful shall we spend the live-long night
In praises to JEHOVAH; who thus mocks
All human foresight, and converts the means
Of seeming ruin into great deliverance!

JOCHEBED. Had not my child been doomed to such strange perils,
As a fond mother trembles to recall;
He had not been preserved.

MIRIAM. And mark still farther:
Had he been saved by any other hand,
He had been still exposed to equal ruin.

JOCHEBED. Then let us join to bless the hand of Heaven,
That this poor outcast of the house of Israel,
Condemned to die by Pharaoh, kept in secret
By my adventurous fondness; then exposed
Even by that very fondness which preserved him,
Is now, to fill the wondrous round of mercy,
Preserved from perishing by Pharaoh's daughter,
Saved by the very hand which sought to crush him!
Wise and unsearchable are all thy ways,
Thou GOD of MERCIES! -- Lead me to my child!

DAVID AND GOLIATH: A SACRED DRAMA.

O bienheureux mill fois,
L'Enfant que le Seigneur aim,
Qui de bonne heure entend sa voix,
Et que ce Dieu daigne instruire lui-meme!
Loin du monde eleve; de tous les dons des Cieux.
Il est orne d^s sa naissance;
Et du mechant l'abord contagieux
N'altere point son innocence.
ATHALIE. PERSONS of the DRAMA.
SAUL, King of ISRAEL. ABNER, his General. JESSE. ELIAB, Son of JESSE.
ABINADAB, Son of JESSE. DAVID. Son of JESSE. GOLIATH, the PHILISTINE Giant.
PHILISTINES, ISRAELITES, etc. etc. CHORUS OF HEBREW WOMEN.
The SCENE lies in the Camp, in the Valley of ELAH, and the adjacent Plain.

The subject of the Drama is taken from the Seventeenth Chapter of the First
Book of KINGS.

DAVID AND GOLIATH:
PART I.
SCENE, a Shepherd's Tent on a Plain. DAVID, under a spreading tree, plays on
his harp, and sings. I.
GREAT Lord of all things! power divine!
Breathe on this erring heart of mine
Thy grace serene and pure;
Desend my frail, my erring youth,
And teach me this important truth,
The humble are secure.
II.
Teach me to bless my lowly lot,
Confined to this paternal cot,
Remote from regal state;
Content to court the cooling glade,
Inhale the breeze, enjoy the shade,
And love my humble fate.
III.
No anxious vigils here I keep,
No dreams of gold distract my sleep,
Nor lead my heart astray;
Nor blasting Envy's tainted gale
Pollutes the pleasures of the vale,
To vex my harmless day.
IV.
Yon' tower which rears its head so high,
And bids defiance to the sky,
Invites the hostile winds:
Yon' branching oak extending wide,
Provokes destruction by its pride,
And courts the fall it finds.
V.
Then let me shun the ambitious deed,
And all the dangerous paths which lead
To honors falsely won.
Lord! in thy sure protection blessed,
Submissive will I ever rest,
And may thy will be done!
He lays down his harp, and rises. DAVID. This shepherd's life were dull and
tasteless all,
Without the charm of soothing song or harp:
With it, not undelightful is the haunt
Of wood, or lonely grove, or russet plain,
Made vocal by the muse. With this loved harp,
This daily solace of my cares, I soothed
The melancholy monarch, when he lay,
Smit by the chill and spirit-quenching hand
Of blank despair. God of my fathers! hear me
Here I devote my harp, my verse, myself,
To thy blessed service! gladly to proclaim
Glory to God on high, on earth good will
To man; to pour my grateful soul before thee;
To sing thy power, thy wisdom, and thy love,
And every gracious attribute: to paint
The charms of heaven-born virtue! So shall I,
(Though with long interval of worth) aspire
To imitate the work of saints above,
Of Cherub and of Seraphim. My heart,
My talents all I am, and all I have,
Is thine, O Father! Gracious Lord! accept
The humble dedication! Offered gifts
Of slaughtered bulls, and goats sacrifical,
Thou have refused: but lo! I come, O Lord,
To do thy will! the living sacrifice
Of an obedient heart I lay before thee!
This humble offering more shall please Thee, Lord!
Than horned bullocks, ceremonial rites,
New moons, appointed passovers, and fasts!
Yet those I too will keep; but not instead
Of holiness substantial, inward worth;
As commutation cheap for pious deeds,
And purity of life. But as the types
Of better things: as fair external signs
Of inward holiness and secret truth.
But sec, my father, good old Jesse comes!
To cheer the setting evening of whose life,
Content, a simple shepherd here I dwell,
Though Israel is in arms, and royal Saul,
Encamped in yonder field, defies Philistia.

JESSE, DAVID. JESSE. Blessed be the gracious Power who gave my age
To boast a son like thee! Thou art the staff
Which props my bending years, and makes me bear
The heavy burden of declining age
With fond complacence. How unlike thy fate,
O venerable Eli! But two sons,
But only two, to gild the dim remains
Of life's departing day, and bless thy age,
And both were curses to thee! Witness, Heaven!
In all the tedious catalogue of pains
Humanity turns over, if there be one
So terrible to human tenderness,
As an unnatural child!

DAVID. O, my loved father!
Long may thou live, in years and honors rich;
To taste, and to communicate the joys,
The thousand fond, endearing charities
Of tenderness domestic; Nature's best
And loveliest gift, with which she well atones
The niggard boon of fortune.

JESSE. O, my son!
Of all the graces which adorn thy youth,
I, with a father's fondness, must commend
Thy tried humility. For though the Seer
Poured on thy chosen head the sacred oil,
In sign of future greatness, in sure pledge
Of highest dignity; yet here thou dwell'st,
Content with toil, and careless of repose;
And (harder still for an ingenuous mind)
Content to be obscure: content to watch,
With careful eye, thine humble father's flock!
O, earthly emblem of celestial things!
So Israel's shepherd watches over his fold;
The weak ones in his fost'ring bosom bears,
And gently leads, in his sustaining hand,
The feeble ones with young.

DAVID. Know thou, my father,
Ought from the field? for though so near the camp,
Though war's proud ensigns stream on yonder plain,
And all Philistia's swarming hosts encamp,
Opposed to royal Saul, beneath whose banners
My brothers lift the spear; I have not left
My fleecy charge, by thee committed to me
To learn the present fortune of the war.

JESSE. And wisely have thou done. Thrice happy land,
Who shall submit one day to his command
Who can so well obey! Obedience leads
To certain honors. Not the towering wing
Of eagle-plum'd ambition mounts so surely
To Fortune's highest summit, as obedience.
A distant sound of trumpets. But why that sudden ardour, O my son?
That trumpet's sound (though so remote its voice,
We hardly catch the echo as it dies)
Has roused the mantling blood in thy young cheek:
Kindled the martial spirit in thine eye,
And my young shepherd feels an hero's fire!

DAVID. Thou have not told the posture of the war,
And much my beating bosom pants to hear.

JESSE. Uncertain is the fortune of the field.
I tremble for thy brothers, thus exposed
To constant peril; nor for them alone,
Does the quick feeling agonize my heart.
I too lament, that desolating war
Hangs his fell banner over my native land,
Beloved Jerusalem! O war, what art thou?
After the brightest conquest, what remains
Of all thy glories? For the vanquished, chains!
For the proud victor, what? Alas! to reign
Over desolated nations! a drear waste,
By one man's crime, by one man's lust of power,
Unpeopled! Naked plains and ravaged fields
Succeed to smiling harvests, and the fruits
Of peaceful olive, luscious fig and vine!
Here, risled temples are the cavern'd dens
Of savage beasts, or haunt of birds obscene.
There, populous cities, blacken in the sun,
And in the general wreck, proud palaces
Lie undistinguished, save by the dun smoke
Of recent conflagration. When the song
Of dear-bought joy, with many a triumph swelled,
Salutes the victor's ear, and sooths his pride,
How is the grateful harmony profaned
With the sad dissonance of virgins' cries,
Who mourn their brothers slain! Of matrons hoar,
Who clasp their withered hands, and fondly ask,
With iteration shrill, their slaughtered sons!
How is the laurel's verdure stained with blood,
And soiled with widows' tears!

DAVID. Thrice mournful truth!
Yet when our country's rights, her sacred laws,
Her holy faith are scorned and trampled on,
Then, then religion calls; then GOD himself
Commands us to defend his injured name.
'Twere then inglorious weakness, mean self, love,
To lie inactive, when the stirring voice
Of the shrill trumpet wakes to desperate deeds;
Nor with heroic valor boldly dare
The idolatrous heathen bands, even to the death.

JESSE. GOD and thy country claim the life they gave,
No other cause can sanctify resentment.

DAVID. Sure virtuous friendship is a noble cause!
O were the princely Jonathan in danger,
How would I die, well-pleased, in his desence!
When ('it was long since, then but a stripling boy)
I made short sojourn in his father's palace,
(At first to sooth his troubled mind with song,
His armor-bearer next); I well remember
The gracious bounties of the gallant prince.
How would he sit, attentive to my strain,
While to my harp I sung the harmless joys
Which crown a shepherd's life! How would he cry,
Blessed youth! far happier in thy native worth,
Far richer in the talent Heaven has lent thee,
Than if a crown hung over thy anxious brow.
The jealous monarch marked our growing friendship;
And as my favor grew with those about him,
His royal bounty lessened, till at length,
For Bethl'hem's safer shades I left the court.
Nor would these altered features now be known,
Grown into manly strength; nor this changed form,
Enlarged with age, and clad in russet weed.

JESSE. I have employment for thee, my loved son,
Will please thy active spirit. Go, my boy!
Haste to the field of war, to yonder camp,
Where, in the vale of Elah, mighty Saul
Commands the hosts of Israel. Greet thy brothers:
Observe their deeds; note their demeanor well;
And mark if wisdom on their actions waits.
Bear to them too (for well the waste of war
Will make it needful) such plain healthful viands,
As furnish out our frugal shepherd's board.
And to the valiant captain of their host,
Present such rural gifts as suit our fortune.
Heaped on the board within my tent thou wilt find them.

DAVID. With joy I Will bear thy presents to my brothers,
And to the valiant captain of their host,
The rural gifts thy gratitude assigns him.
What transport to behold the tented field,
The pointed spear, the blaze of shields and arms,
And all the proud accoutrements of war!
But, oh! far dearer transport would it yield me,
Could this right arm alone avenge the cause
Of injured Israel, and preserve the lives
Of guiltless thousands, doomed perhaps to bleed!

JESSE. Let not thy youth be dazzled, O my son!
With deeds of bold emprize, as valor only
Were virtue; and the gentle arts of peace,
Of truth and justice, were not worth thy care.
When thou shall view the splendors of the war,
The gay caparison, the burnished shield,
The plume-crown'd helmet, and the glittering spear,
Scorn not the humble virtues of the shade;
Nor think that Heaven views only with applause
The active merit, and the busy toil
Of heroes, statesmen, and the bustling sons
Of public care, These have their just reward
In wealth, in honors, and the well-earn'd fame
Their high achievements bring. It Is in this sense
That virtue is her proper recompense.
Wealth, as its natural consequence, will flow
From industry; toil with success is crowned:
From splendid actions high renown will spring.
Such is the usual course of human things.
For Wisdom Infinite permits that thus
Effects to causes be proportionate,
And natural ends by natural means achieved.
But in the future estimate which Heaven
Will make of things terrestrial, know, my son,
That no inferior recompense belongs
To the mild passive virtues; meek Content,
Heroic self-denial, nobler far
Than all th'atchievements noisy Fame reports,
When her shrill trump proclaims the proud success
Which desolates the nations. But, on earth,
These are not always fortunate; because
Eternal Justice keeps them for the bliss
Of final recompense, for the dread day
Of general retribution. O my son!
The oftentatious virtues which still press
For notice, and for praise; the brilliant deeds
Which live but in the eye of observation,
These have their meed at once. But there is a joy
To the fond votaries of Fame unknown;
To hear the still small voice of conscience speak
Its whispering plaudit to the silent soul.
Heaven notes the sigh afflicted Goodness heaves;
Hears the low plaint by human ear unheard,
And from the cheek of patient Sorrow wipes
The tear, by mortal eye unseen or scorned.

DAVID. As morning dews their grateful freshness shed,
And cheer the herbage, and the flowers renew;
So do thy words a quickening balm infuse,
And grateful sink in my delighted soul.

JESSE. Go then, my child! and may the Gracious God,
Who blessed our fathers, bless my much-loved son!

DAVID. Farewell, my father! and of this be sure,
That not a precept from thy honored lips
Shall fall, by me unnoticed; not one grace.
One venerable virtue, which adorns
Thy daily life, but I, with watchful care,
And due observance, will in mine transplant it.

Exit DAVID. JESSE. He Is gone! and still my aching eyes pursue,
And strain their orbs still longer to behold him.
Oh! who can tell when I may next embrace him?
Who can declare the counsels of the Lord?
Or when the moment pre-ordain'd by Heaven
To fill his high designs may come? This son,
This blessing of my age, is set apart
For high exploits; the chosen instrument
Of all-disposing Heaven for mighty deeds.
Still I recall the day, and to my mind
The scene is ever present, when the Seer,
Illustrious Samuel, to the humble shades
Of Bethlehem came, pretending sacrifice,
To screen his errand from the jealous king.
He sanctified us first, me, and my sons;
For sanctity increased should still precede
Increase of dignity. When he declared
He came, commissioned from on High, to find,
Among the sons of Jesse, Israel's king;
Astonishment entranced my wondering soul.
Yet was it not a wild tumultuous bliss;
Such rash delight as promised honors yield
To light, vain minds: no, 'twas a doubtful joy
Chastis'd by timorous virtue, lest a gift
So splendid, and so dangerous, might destroy
Him it was meant to raise. My eldest born,
Young Eliab, tall of stature, I presented;
But God, who judges not by outward form,
But tries the heart, forbad the holy prophet
To choose my eldest born. For Saul, he said,
Gave proof, that fair proportion, and the grace
Of limb or feature, ill repaid the want
Of virtue. All my other sons alike
By Samuel were rejected: till, at last,
On my young boy, on David's chosen head,
The prophet poured the consecrated oil.
Yet never did pride elate him, never did scorn
For his rejected elders swell his heart.
Not in such gentle charity to him
His haughtier brothers live: but all he pardons.
To meditation, and to humble toil,
To prayer, and praise, devoted here he dwells.
O may the Graces, which adorn retreat,
One day delight a court! record his name
With saints and prophets, dignify his race,
Instruct mankind, and sanctify a world!

DAVID AND GOLIATH.
PART II.
SCENE, The Camp. ELIAB, ABINADAB, ABNER, ISRAELITES. ELIAB. STILL is the event
of this long war uncertain:
Still do the adverse hosts, on either side,
Protract, with lingering caution, an encounter,
Which must to one be fatal.

ABINADAB. This descent,
Thus to the very confines of our land,
Proclaims the sanguine hope that fires the foe.
In Ephes-dammim boldly they encamp:
The uncircumsised Philistines pitch their tents
On Judah's hallowed earth.

ELIAB. Full forty days
Has the insulting giant, proud Goliath,
The champion of Philistia, fiercely challenged
Some Israelitish foe. But who so vain
To dare such force unequal? who so bent
On sure destruction, to accept his terms,
And rush on death beneath the giant force
Of his enorinous bulk?

ABINADAB. It Is near the time,
When, in the adjacent valley which divides
The opposing armies, he is wont to make
His daily challenge.

ELIAB. Much I marvel, brother!
No greetings from our father reach our ears.
With ease and plenty blessed, he little recks
The daily hardships which his sons endure.
But see! behold his darling son approaches!

ABINADAB. How, David here? whence this unlooked for guest?

ELIAB. A spy upon our actions; sent, no doubt,
To scan our deeds, with beardless gravity
Affecting wisdom; to observe each word,
To magnify the venial faults of youth,
And construe harmless mirth to foul offense.

Enter DAVID. DAVID. All hail, my dearest brothers!

ELIAB. Means thy greeting
True love, or arrogant scorn?

DAVID. Oh, most true love!
Sweet as the precious ointment which bedewed
The sacred head of Aaron, and descended
Upon his hallowed vest; so sweet, my brothers,
Is fond fraternal amity; such love
As my touched bosom feels at your approach.

ELIAB. Still that fine glozing speech, those holy saws,
And all that trick of studied sanctity,
Of smooth-turn'd periods, and trim eloquence,
Which charms thy doting father. But confess,
What do thou here? Is it to soothe thy pride,
And gratify thy vain desire to roam,
In quest of pleasures unallow'd? or come thou,
A willing spy, to note thy brother's deeds?
Where have thou lest those few poor straggling sheep?
More suited to thy ignorance and years
The care of those, than here to wander idly.
Why came thou hither?

DAVID. Is there not a cause?
Why that displeasure kindling in thine eye,
My angry brother? why those taunts unkind?
Not idly bent on sport; not to delight
Mine eye with all this gay parade of war;
To gratify a roving appetite,
Or fondly to indulge a curious ear
With any tale of rumor, am I come:
But to approve myself a loving brother.
I bring the blessing of your aged sire,
With gifts of such plain cates, and rural viands,
As fuit his frugal fortune. Tell me now
Where the bold captain of your host encamps?

ELIAB. Wherefore enquire? what boots it thee to know?
Behold him there: great Abner, famed in arms!

DAVID. I bring thee, mighty Abner, from my father,
(A simple shepherd swain in yonder vale)
Such humble gists as shepherd swains bestow.

ABNER. Thanks, gentle youth! with pleasure I receive
The grateful offering. Why does thy quick eye
Thus wander with unsatisfied delight?

DAVID. New as I am to all the trade of war,
Each sound has novelty; each thing I see
Attracts attention; every noise I hear
Awakes confused emotions; indistinct,
Yet full of charming tumult, sweet distraction.
It Is all delightful hurry! Oh! the joy
Of young ideas painted on the mind,
In the warm glowing colors fancy spreads
On objects not yet known, when all is new,
And all is lovely! Ah! what warlike sound
Salutes my ravished ear?
Sound of Trumpet.
ABNER. It Is the Philistine,
Proclaiming, by his herald, through the ranks,
His near approach. Each morning he repeats
His challenge to our bands.

DAVID. Ha! what Philistine?
Who is he?

ELIAB. Wherefore ask? for thy raw youth,
And rustic ignorance, 'twere fitter learn
Some rural art; some secret to prevent
Contagion in thy flocks; some better means
To save their fleece immaculate. These mean arts,
Of soft inglorious peace, far better suit
Thy low obscurity, than thus to seek
High things, pertaining to exploits of arms,

DAVID. Urged as I am, I will not answer thee.
Who conquers his own spirit, O my brother!
He is the only conqueror. -- Again
That shout mysterious! Pray you tell me who
This proud Philistine is, who sends defiance
To Israel's hardy chieftains?

ABNER. Stranger youth!
So lovely and so mild is thy demeanor,
So gentle, and so patient; such the air
Of candor and of courage, which adorns
Thy blooming features, thou have won my love;
And I will tell thee.

DAVID. Mighty Abner! thanks!

ABNER. Thrice, and no more, he sounds, his daily rule.
This man of war, this champion of Philistia,
Is of the sons of Anak's giant-race.
Goliath is his name. His fearful stature,
Unparalled in Israel, measures more
Than twice two cubits. On his towering head
A helm of burnished brass the giant wears,
So ponderous, it would crush the stoutest man
In all our hosts. A coat of mailed armor
Guards his capacious trunk; compared with which
'The amplest oak, that spreads his rugged arms
In Bashan's groves, were small. About his neck
A shining corslet hangs. On his vast thigh
The plaited cuirass firmly jointed stands.
But who shall tell the wonders of his spear,
And hope to gain belief? of massive iron
Its tempered frame; not less than the broad beam
To which the busy weaver hangs his loom;
Not to be wielded by a mortal hand,
Save by his own. An armor-bearer walks
Before this mighty champion, in his hand
Bearing the giant's shield. Thrice, every morn,
His herald sounds the trumpet of defiance,
Offering at once to end the long-drawn war,
In single combat, against that hardy foe
Who dares encounter him.

DAVID. Say, mighty Abner!
What are the haughty terms of his defiance?

ABNER. Proudly he stalks around the extremest bouds
Of Elah's valley. His herald sounds the note
Of offered battle. Then the furious giant,
With such a voice as from the troubled sky,
In vollied thunder, breaks, thus sends his challenge:
"Why do you set your battle in array,
Ye men of Israel? Wherefore waste the lives
Of needless thousands? Why protract a war
Which may at once be ended? Are not you
Servants to Saul your king? and am not I,
With triumph let me speak it, a Philistine?
Choose out a man from all your armed hosts,
Of courage most approved, and I will meet him,
His single arm to mine. The event of this
Shall fix the fate of Israel and Philistia.
If victory favor him, then will we live
Your tributary slaves; but if my arm
Be crowned with conquest, you shall then live ours,
Give me a man, if your effeminate bands
A man can boast. Your armies I desy."

DAVID. What shall be done to him who shall subdue
This vile idolator?

ABNER. He shall receive
Such ample bounties, such profuse rewards,
As might inflame chill age, or cowardice,
Were not the odds so desperate.

DAVID. Say what are they?

ABNER. The royal Saul has promised that bold hero,
Who shall encounter and subdue Goliath,
All dignity and favor; that his house
Shall be set free from tribute, and ennobled
With the first honors Israel has to give.
And for the gallant conqueror himself,
No less a recompense than the fair princess,
Our monarch's peerless daughter.

DAVID. Beauteous Michal!
It is indeed a boon which kings might strive for.
And has none answered yet this bold defiance?
What, all this goodly host of Israelites,
GOD's own peculiar people! all afraid
TO assert GOD's injured honor and their own?
The king himself, who in his early youth
Wrought deeds of fame! the princely Jonathan!
Not so the gallant youth Philistia feared
At Bozez and at Seneh 1 Samuel, xiv.
; when the earth
Shook from her deep foundations to behold
The wondrous carnage of his single hand
On the uncircumsised. When he exclaimed,
With glorious confidence -- "Shall numbers awe me?
"GOD will protect his own: with him to save,
"It boots not, friends, by many or by few."
This was an hero! Why does he delay
To meet this boaster? For thy courtesy,
Thrice noble Abner, I am bound to thank thee!
Would thou complete thy generous offices?
I dare not ask it.

ABNER. Speak thy wishes freely.
My soul inclines to serve thee.

DAVID. Then, O Abner,
Conduct me to the king! There is a cause
Will justify this boldness.

ELIAB. Braggard, hold!

ABNER. I take thee at thy word, and will, with speed,
Conduct thee to my royal master's presence.
In yonder tent, the anxious monarch waits
The event of this day's challenge.

DAVID. Noble Abner!
Accept my thanks. Now to thy private ear,
If so thy grace permit, I will unfold
My secret soul, and ease my laboring breast,
Which pants with high designs, and beats for glory.

DAVID AND GOLIATH.
PART III.
SCENE, Readiness Tent. SAUL. WHY was I made a king? what I have gained
In envied greatness and uneasy power,
I Have lost in peace of mind, in virtue lost!
Why did deceitful transports fire my soul,
When Samuel placed upon my youthful brow
The crown of Israel? I had known content,
Nay happiness, if happiness unmixed
To mortal man were known, had I still lived
Among the humble tents of Benjamin.
A shepherd's occupation was my joy,
And every guiltless day was crowned with peace.
But now, a sullen cloud for ever hangs
Over the faint sunshine of my brightest hours,
Dark'ning the golden promise of the morn.
I never shall taste the dear domestic joys
My meanest subjects know. True, I have sons,
Whose virtues would have charmed a private man,
And drawn down blessings on their humble sire.
I love their virtues too; but'tis a love
Which jealousy has poisoned. Jonathan
Is all a father's fondness could conceive
Of amiable and good -- Of that no more!
He is too popular; the people dote
Upon th'ingenuous graces of his youth.
Cursed popularity! which makes a father
Detest the merit of a son he loves.
How did their fond idolatry perforce,
Rescue his sentenced life, when doomed by lot
To perish at Beth-aven 1 Samuel, xiv.
, for the breach
Of strict injunction, that of all my bands,
Not one that day should taste of food, and live.
My subjects clamor at this tedious war,
Yet of my numerous armed chiefs, not one
Has courage to engage this man of Gath.
O for a champion bold enough to face
This giant-boaster, whose repeated threats
Strike through my inmost soul! There was a time --
Of that no more! -- I am not what I was.
Should valiant Jonathan accept the challenge,
It Would but increase his favor with the people,
And make the crown sit loosely on my brow.
Ill could my wounded spirit brook the voice
Of harsh comparison 'twixt sire and son.

SAUL, ABNER. ABNER. What meditation holds thee thus engaged,
O king! and keeps thine active spirit bound,
When busy war far others cares demands
Than ruminating thought, and pale despair?

SAUL. Abner, draw near. My weary soul sinks down
Beneath the heavy pressure of misfortune.
O for that spirit which inflamed my breast
With sudden fervor, when, among the seers,
And holy sages, my prophetic voice
Was heard attentive, and the astonished throng,
Wondering, exclaimed, "is Saul among the prophets?"
Where Is that bold arm which quelled the Amalekite,
And nobly spared fierce Agag and his flocks?
It Is past; the light of Israel now is quenched:
Shorn of his beams, my sun of glory sets!
Rise Moab, Edom, angry Ammon, rise!
Come Gaza, Ashdod come! let Ekron boast,
And Askelon rejoice, for Saul -- is nothing,

ABNER. I bring thee news, O king!

SAUL. My valiant uncle!
What can avail thy news? A soul oppressed,
Refuses still to hear the charmer's voice,
However enticingly he charm. What news
Can sooth my sickly soul, while Gath's fell giant
Repeats each morning to my frightened hosts
His daring challenge -- none accepting it?

ABNER. It is accepted.

SAUL. Ha! by whom? how? when?
What prince, what general, what illustrious hero,
What vet'ran chief, what warrior of renown,
Will dare to meet the haughty foe's defiance?
Speak, my brave general! noble Abner, speak!

ABNER. No prince, no warrior, no illustrious chief,
No vet'ran hero dares accept the challenge;
But what will move thy wonder, mighty king!
One trained to peaceful deeds, and new to arms,
A simple shepherd swain.

SAUL. O mockery!
No more of this light tale, it suits but ill
Thy bearded gravity; or rather tell it
To credulous age, or weak believing women;
They love whatever is mavelous, and dote
On deeds prodigious and incredible,
Which sober sense rejects. I laugh to think
Of thy extravagance. A shepherd's boy
Encounter him whom nations dread to meet!

ABNER. Is valor, then, peculiar to high birth?
If Heaven had so decreed, know, scornful king,
That Saul the Benjamite had never reigned.
No: -- Glory darts her soul-pervading ray,
On thrones and cottages, regardless still
Of all the false, chimerical distinctions
Vain human customs make.

SAUL. Where is this youth?

ABNER. Without thy tent he waits. Such humble sweetness,
Fired with the secret conscience of desert;
Such manly bearing, tempered with such softness,
And so adorned with every outward charm
Of graceful form and feature, saw I never.

SAUL. Bring me the youth.

ABNER. He waits thy royal pleasure.

Exit ABNER. SAUL. What must I think? Abner himself is brave,
And skilled in human kind: nor does he judge
So lightly, to be caught by specious words,
And fraud's smooth artifice, without the marks
Of worth intrinsic. But behold he comes!
The youth too with him! Justly did he praise
The candor which adorns his open brow.

Re-enter ABNER and DAVID. DAVID. Hail, mighty king!

ABNER. Behold thy proffered champion.

SAUL. Art thou the youth whose high heroic zeal
Aspires to meet the giant son of Anak?

DAVID. If so the king permit.

SAUL. Impossible!
Why what experience has thy youth of arms?
Where did thou learn the dreadful trade of war?
Beneath what hoary vet'ran have thou served?
What feats achieved, what deeds of bold emprize?
What well-rang'd phalanx, and what charging hosts,
What hard campaigns, what sieges have thou seen?
Have thou ever scaled the city's rampir'd wall,
Or hurled the missile dart, or learned to poise
The warrior's deathful spear? The use of targe,
Of helm and buckler is to thee unknown.

DAVID. Arms I have never seen. I nothing know
Of war's proud discipline. The trumpet's clang,
The shock of charging hosts, the rampir'd wall,
The embattled phalanx, and the warrior spear,
The use of targe and helm to me is new.
My zeal for God, my patriot love of Israel,
And reverence for my king, these are my claims.

SAUL. But, gentle youth, thou have no fame in arms.
Renown, with her shrill clarion, never bore
Thy honored name to many a land remote.
From the fair regions where Euphrates laves
Assyria's borders to the distant Nile.

DAVID. True, mighty king! I am indeed alike
Unblessed by Fortune, and to Fame unknown;
A lowly shepherd-swain of Judah's tribe.
But greatness ever springs from low beginnings.
That very Nile thou mention'st, whose broad stream
Bears fruitfulness and health through many a clime,
From an unknown, penurious, scanty source,
Took its first rise. The forest oak which shades
Thy sultry troops in many a toilsome march,
Once an unheeded acorn lay. O king!
Who never begins, can never ought atchieve
Of glorious. Thou thyself wast once unknown,
'Till fair occasion brought thy worth to light.
Sublimer views inspire my youthful heart,
Than human praise: I seek to vindicate
The insulted honor of the God thou serv'st.

ABNER, It Is nobly said.

SAUL. I love thy spirit, youth!
But dare not trust thy inexperienc'd arm
Against a giant's might. The sight of blood,
Though brave thou feel'st when peril is not nigh,
Will pale thy ardent cheek.

DAVID. Not so, O king!
This youthful arm has been imbrued in blood,
Though yet no blood of man has ever stained it.
Thy servant's occupation is a shepherd.
With jealous care I watched my father's flock:
A brindled lion, and a furious bear,
Forth from the thicket rushed upon the fold,
Seized a young lamb, and tore their bleating spoil.
Urged by compassion for my helpless charge,
I felt a newborn vigor nerve my arm,
And, eager, on the foaming monsters rushed.
The famished lion by his griesly beard,
Enraged, I caught, and smote him to the ground.
The panting monster struggling in my gripe,
Shook terribly his bristling mane, and lashed
His own gaunt, goary sides; fiercely he ground
His gnashing teeth, and rolled his starting eyes,
Bloodshot with agony: then with a groan,
That waked the echoes of the mountain, died.
Nor did his grim associate 'scape my arm;
Thy servant slew the lion and the bear,
I killed them both, and bore their shaggy spoils
In triumph home. And shall I fear to meet
The uncircumsised Philistine? No: that God
Who saved me from the bear's destructive fang,
And hungry lion's jaw, will not he save me
From this Idolater?

SAUL. He will, he will!
Go, noble youth! be valiant and be blessed!
The God thou serv'st will shield thee in the fight,
And nerve thy arm with more than mortal strength.

ABNER. So the bold Nazarite Sampson. See Judges, chap. xiv.
a lion slew,
An earnest of his victories over Philistia.

SAUL. Go, Abner! see the youth be well equipped
With shield and spear. Be it thy care to grace him
With all the fit accoutrements of war.
The choicest mail from my rich armory take,
And gird upon his thigh my own tried sword,
Of noblest tempered steel.

ABNER. I shall obey.

DAVID. Pardon, O king! the coat of plaited mail,
These limbs have never known; it would not shield,
'Twou'd but encumber one who never felt
The weight of armor.

SAUL. Take thy wish, my son.
Thy sword then, and the God of Jacob guard thee!

DAVID AND GOLIATH.
PART IV.
SCENE, another Part of the Camp. DAVID. ETERNAL Justice, in whose awful scale
The Event of battle hangs! Eternal Mercy,
Whose universal beam illumines all!
If, by thy attributes I may, unblam'd,
Address thee; Lord of glory, hear me now!
O teach these hands to war, these arms to fight!
Thou ever present help in time of need!
Let thy broad mercy, as a shield, defend,
And let thine everlasting arms support me!
Then, though the heathen rage, I shall not fear.
Jehovah! be my buckler. Mighty Lord!
Thou, who have deigned by humble instruments,
To manifest the marvels of thy might,
Be present with me now! it is thine own cause!
Thy wisdom will foresee, thy goodness choose,
And thy omnipotence will execute
Thy high designs, though by a seeble arm!
I feel a secret impulse drive me on,
And my soul springs impatient for the fight.
It Is not the heated spirits, or warm blood
Of sanguine youth; and yet I pant, I burn
To meet the insulting foe. I thirst for glory;
Yet not the fading glory of renown,
The perishable praise of mortal man.

DAVID, ELIAB, ISRAELITES. ELIAB. What do I hear, thou truant? thou have dared,
Even to the awful presence of the king,
Bear thy presumption!

DAVID. He who fears the Lord,
Shall boldly stand before the face of kings,
And shall not be ashamed.

ELIAB. But what wild dream
Has urged thee to this deed of desperate rashness?
Thou mean, so have I learned, to meet Goliath,
His single arm to thine.

DAVID. It Is what I mean,
Even on this spot; each moment I expect
His wished approach.

ELIAB. Go home; return, for shame!
Nor madly pull destruction on thy head.
Thy doting father, when thy shepherd's coat,
Drenched in thy blood is brought him, will lament,
And rend his furrowed cheek, and silver hair,
As if some mighty loss had touched his age;
And mourn, even as the partial patriarch mourned,
When Joseph's bloody garment he received,
From his less dear, not less deserving, sons.
But whence that glittering ornament, which hangs
Useless upon thy thigh?

DAVID. It Is the king's gift.
But thou art right; it suits not me, my brother.
Nor sword I mean to wear, nor spear to poize,
Lest men should say I put my trust in ought,
Save an eternal shield.

ELIAB. Then thou indeed
Art bent to seek thy death.

DAVID. And what is death?
Is it so terrible to die, my brother?
Or grant it terrible, say is it not
Inevitable too? If, by eluding death,
When some high duty calls us forth to die,
We could for ever shun it, and escape
The universal lot; then fond self-love,
Then human prudence, boldly might produce
Their fine-spun arguments, their learned harangues,
Their cobweb arts, their phrase sophistical,
Their subtle doubts, and all the specious trick,
Of eloquent cunning laboring for its end.
But since, however protracted, death will come,
Why fondly study, with ingenious pains,
To put it off? -- To breathe a little longer,
Is to defer our fate, but not to shun it:
Small gain! which Wisdom with indiff'rent eye
Beholds. Why wish to drink the bitter dregs
Of life's exhausted chalice, whose last runnings,
Even at the best, are vapid? Why not die,
If Heaven so will) in manhood's opening bloom,
When all the flush of life is gay about us,
When sprightly youth, with many a newborn joy,
Solicits every sense? So may we then,
Present a sacrifice, unmeet, indeed,
(Ah, how unmeet!) but more acceptable
Than the world's leavings; than a worn-out heart,
By vice enfeebled, and by vain desires
Sunk and exhausted!

ELIAB. Hark! I hear a sound
Of multitudes approaching!

DAVID. It Is the giant!
I see him not, but hear his measured pace.

ELIAB. Look, where his ponderous shield is borne before him!

DAVID. Like a broad moon its ample disk protends.
But soft, what unknown prodigy appears?
A moving mountain cased in polished brass!

ELIAB. [ Getting behind DAVID. How Is this? thou do not tremble. Thy firm
joints
Betray no fear: Thy accents are not broken:
Thy cheek retains its red, thine eye its luster.
He comes more near. Do thou not fear him now?

DAVID. No.
The vast colossal statue nor inspires
Respect nor fear. Mere magnitude of form,
Without proportioned intellect and valor,
Nor strikes my soul with reverence nor with awe.

ELIAB. Near, and more near, he comes. I hold it rash
To stay so near him, and expose a life,
Which may hereafter serve the state. Farewell!

Exit. [GOLIATH advances, clad in complete armor. One bearing his shield
precedes him. The opposing armies are seen at a distance, drawn up on each side
of the valley. GOLIATH begins to speak before he comes on. DAVID stands in the
same place, with an air of indifference.] GOLIATH. Where is the mighty man of
war who dares
Accept the challenge of Philistia's chief?
What victor-king, what general drenched in blood,
Claims this high privilege? What are his rights?
What proud credentials does the boaster bring
To prove his claim? What cities laid in ashes?
What ruined provinces? What slaughtered realms?
What heads of heroes, and what hearts of kings,
In battle killed, or at his altars slain,
Has he to boast? Is his bright armoury
Thick set with spears, and swords and coats of mail,
Of vanquished nations, by his single arm
Subdued? Where is the mortal man so bold,
So much a wretch, so out of love with life,
To dare the weight of this uplifted spear,
Which never fell innoxious? Yet I swear,
I grudge the glory to his parting soul
To fall by this right hand. 'Twill sweeten death,
To know he had the honor to contend
With the dread son of Anak. Latest time
From blank oblivion shall retrieve his name,
Who dared to perish in unequal fight
With Gath's triumphant champion. Come, advance!
Philistia's Gods to Israel's. Sound, my herald.
Sound for the battle strait!

Herald sounds the trumpet. DAVID. Behold thy foe!

GOLIATH. I see him not.

DAVID. Behold him here!

GOLIATH. Say, where?
Direct my sight. I do not war with boys.

DAVID. I stand prepared, thy single arm to mine.

GOLIATH. Why, this is mockery, Minion! it may chance
To cost thee dear. Sport not with things above thee:
But tell me who, of all this numerous host,
Expects his death from me? Which is the man
Whom Israel sends to meet my bold defiance?

DAVID. The election of my sovereign falls on me.

GOLIATH. On thee? on thee? by Dagon it is too much!
Thou curled Minion! thou a nation's champion!
'Twou'd move my mirth at any other time;
But trifling's out of tune. Begone, light boy!
And tempt me not too far.

DAVID. I do defy thee;
Thou foul idolater! have thou not scorned
The armies of the living GOD I serve?
By me he will avenge upon thy head
Thy nations' sins and thine. Armed with his name,
Unshrinking, I dare meet the stoutest foe
That ever bathed his hostile spear in blood.

GOLIATH, ironically. Indeed! it is wondrous well! now, by my Gods,
The stripling plays the orator! Vain boy!
Keep close to that same bloodless war of words,
And thou shall still be safe. Tongue-valiant warrior!
Where is thy sylvan crook, with garlands hung,
Of idle field-flowers? Where thy wanton harp,
Thou dainty-finger'd hero? better strike
Its note lascivious, or the lulling lute
Touch softly, than provoke the trumpet's rage.
I will not stain the honor of my spear
With thy inglorious blood. Shall that fair cheek
Be scarr'd with wounds unseemly? Rather go,
And hold fond dalliance with the Syrian maids;
To wanton measures dance, and let them braid
The bright luxuriance of thy golden hair;
They, for their lost Adonis, may mistake
Thy dainty form.

DAVID. Peace, thou unhallowed railer!
O tell it not in Gath, nor let the sound
Reach Askelon, how once your slaughtered Lords,
By mighty Judges, chap. xvi.
Sampson found one common grave:
When his broad shoulder the firm pillars heaved,
And to its base the tottering fabric shook.

GOLIATH. Insulting boy! perhaps thou have not heard
The infamy of that inglorious day,
When your weak hosts at 1 Samuel, chap. v.
Eben-ezer pitched
Their quick-abandon'd tents? Then, when your ark,
Your talisman, your charm, your boasted pledge
Of safety and success, was tamely lost:
And yet not tamely, since by me 'twas won.
When with this good right-arm I thinn'd your ranks,
And bravely crushed, beneath a single blow,
The chosen guardians of this vaunted shrine,
Hophni Commentators say, that the Chaldee Paraphrase makes Goliath boast, that
he had killed Hophni and Phineas, and taken the ark prisoner.
and Phineas. The famed ark itself,
I bore to Ashdod,

DAVID. I remember too,
Since thou provok'st the unwelcome truth, how all
Your blushing priests beheld their idol's shame,
When prostrate Dagon fell before the ark,
And your frail God was shivered. Then Philistia,
Idolatrous Philistia flew for succor
To Israel's help, and all her smitten nobles
Confessed the LORD was GOD, and the blessed ark,
Gladly, with reverential awe restored!

GOLIATH. By Ashdod's fane thou lie. Now will I meet thee,
Thou insect-warrior! since thou dare me thus!
Already I behold thy mangled limbs,
Dissever'd each from each, ever long to feed
The fierce, blood-snuffing vulture. Mark me well!
Around my spear I Will twist thy shining locks,
And toss in air thy head all gash'd with wounds;
Thy lips, yet quivering with the dire convulsion
Of recent death! Art thou not terrified?

DAVID. No.
True courage is not moved by breath of words.
But the rash bravery of boiling blood,
Impetuous, knows no settled principle.
A sev'rish tide, it has its ebbs and flows,
As spirits rise or fall, as wine inflames,
Or circumstances change. But inborn courage,
The generous child of Fortitude and Faith,
Holds its firm empire in the constant soul;
And, like the steadfast pole star, never once
From the same fixed and faithful point declines.

GOLIATH. The curses of Philistia's gods be on thee!
This fine-drawn speech is meant to lengthen out
That little life thy words pretend to scorn.

DAVID. Ha! say thou so? come on then! Mark us well.
Thou come to me with sword, and spear, and shield!
In the dread name of Israel's GOD I come;
The living LORD of HOSTS whom thou defy'st!
Yet though no shield I bring, no arms, except
These five smooth stones I gathered from the brook,
With such a simple sling as shepherds use;
Yet all exposed, defenseless as I am,
The GOD I serve shall give thee up a prey
To my victorious arm. This day, I mean
To make the uncircumcised tribes confess
There is a GOD in Israel. I will give thee,
Spite of thy vaunted strength, and giant bulk,
To glut the carrion kites. Nor thee alone;
The mangled carcasses of your thick hosts,
Shall spread the plains of Elah: till Philistia,
Through all her trembling tents and flying bands,
Shall own that Judah's GOD is GOD indeed!
I dare thee to the trial!

GOLIATH. Follow me.
In this good spear I trust.

DAVID. I trust in Heaven!
The God of battles stimulates my arm,
And fires my soul with ardor not its own.

DAVID AND GOLIATH.
PART V.
SCENE, The Tent of SAUL. SAUL, rising from his couch. OH! that I knew the
black and midnight arts
Of wizard sorcery! that I could call
The slumbering spirit from the shades of hell!
Or, like Chaldean sages, could foreknow
The event of things unacted! I might then
Anticipate my fortune. How I Am fallen!
The sport of vain chimeras, the weak slave
Of fear, and sickly fancy; coveting
To know the arts which foul diviners use.
Thick blood, and moping melancholy, lead
To baleful Superstition, that fell fiend
Whose withering charms blast the fair bloom of virtue.
Why did my wounded pride with scorn reject
The wholesome truths which holy Samuel told me?
Why drive him from my presence? he might now
Raise my sunk soul, and my benighted mind
Enlighten with religion's cheering ray.
He dared to menace me with loss of empire,
And I, for that bold honesty, dismissed him.
"Another shall possess thy throne, he cried,
"A stranger!" This unwelcome prophecy
Has lined my crown, and strewn my couch with thorns.
Each ray of opening merit I discern
In friend or foe, distracts my troubled soul,
Lest he should prove my rival. But this morn,
Even my young champion, lovely as he looked
in blooming valor, struck me to the soul
With jealousy's barb'd dart. O jealousy!
Thou ugliest fiend of hell! thy deadly venom
Preys on my vitals, turns the healthful hue
Of my fresh cheek to haggard sallowness;
And drinks my spirit up!
A flourish of trumpets, shouting, etc. etc. What sounds are those?
The combat is decided. Hark! again,
Those shouts proclaim it! Now, O God of Jacob,
If yet thou have not quite withdrawn from Saul
Thy light and favor, prosper me this once!
But Abner comes! I dread to hear his tale.
Fair Hope, with smiling face, but lingering foot
Has long deceived me.

ABNER. King of Israel, hail!
Now thou art king indeed. The youth has conquered.
Goliath's slain.

SAUL. Oh, speak thy tale again,
Lest my fond ears deceive me.

ABNER. Thy young champion
Has slain the Giant.

SAUL. Then God is gracious still,
In spite of my offenses! But, good Abner,
How was it? tell me all! Where is my champion;
Quick let me press him to my grateful heart,
And pay him a king's thanks. And yet, who knows?
This forward friend may prove an active foe.
No more of that. -- Tell me the whole, brave Abner!
And paint the glorious acts of my young hero!

ABNER. Full in the center of the camp they stood.
The opposing armies ranged on either side
In proud array. The haughty Giant stalked,
Stately, across the valley. Next the youth
With modest confidence advanced. Nor pomp,
Nor gay parade, nor martial ornament,
His graceful form adorned. Goliath strait,
With solemn state, began the busy work
Of dreadful preparation. In one place,
His closely jointed mail an opening left,
For air, and only one: the watchful youth
Marked that the beaver of his helm was up.
Meanwhile the Giant such a blow devised,
As would have crushed him; this the youth perceived,
And from his well-directed sling, he hurled,
With dextrous aim, a stone, which sunk, deep lodged,
In the capacious forehead of the foe.
Then with a cry, as loud and terrible,
As Lybian lions roaring for their young,
Quite stunned, the furious Giant staggered, reeled,
And fell: the mighty mass of man sell prone.
With its own weight his shattered bulk was bruised.
His clattering arms rung dreadful through the field,
And the firm basis of the solid earth
Shook. Chok'd with blood and dust, he cursed his gods,
And died blaspheming! Strait the victor youth
Drew from its sheath the Giant's ponderous sword,
And from the enormous trunk, the goary head,
Furious in death, he severed. The grim visage
Looked threatening still, and still frowned horribly.

SAUL. O glorious deed! O valiant conqueror!

ABNER. The youth so calm appeared, so nobly firm;
So cool, yet so intrepid; that these eyes
Ne'er-saw such temperate valor, so chasti'd
Ne'er-saw such temperate valor, so chastis'd
By modesty.

SAUL. Thou dwell'st upon his praise
With needless circumstance. 'Twas nobly done;
But others too have fought!

ABNER. None, none so bravely.

SAUL. What followed next?

ABNER. The shouting Israelites
On the Philistines rushed, and still pursue
Their routed remnants. In dismay, their bands
Disordered fly. While shouts of loud acclaim
Pursue their brave deliverer. Lo, he comes!
Bearing the Giant's head, and shining sword,
His well-earn'd trophies,

SAUL, ABNER, DAVID. [DAVID bearing GOLIATH's head and sword, He kneels, and
lays both at Readiness feet.] SAUL. Welcome to my heart,
My glorious champion! my deliverer, welcome!
How shall I speak the swelling gratitude
Of my full heart? or give thee the high praise
Thy gallant deeds deserve?

DAVID. O mighty king!
Sweet is the breath of praise, when given by those
Whose own high merit claims the praise they give.
But let not this one fortunate event,
By Heaven directed, be ascribed to me.
I might have fought with equal skill and courage,
And not have gained this conquest; then had shame,
Harsh obloquy, and foul disgrace, befal'n me.
But prosperous fortune gains the praise of valor.

SAUL. I like not this. In every thing superior!
He soars above me (aside). Modest youth, you are right.
And fortune, as thou say, deserves the praise
We give to human valor.

DAVID. Rather say,
The GOD OF HOSTS deserves it.

SAUL. Tell me, youth!
What is thy name, and what thy father's house?

DAVID. My name is David, Jesse is my sire,
An humble Bethle'mite of Judah's tribe.

SAUL. David, the son of Jesse! Sure that name
Has been familiar to me! Nay, thy voice,
Thy form and features, I remember too,
Though faint, and indistinctly.

ABNER. In this Hero
Behold thy sweet musician, he whose harp
Expelled the melancholy fiend, whose power
Enslaved thy spirit.

SAUL. This the modest youth,
Whom, for his skill and virtues, I preferred
To bear my armor?

DAVID. I am he, O king!

SAUL. Why this concealment? tell me, valiant David!
Why did thou hide thy birth and name till now?

DAVID. O king! I would not ought from favor claim,
Or on remembered services presume:
But on the strength of my own actions stand,
Ungrac'd and unsupported,

ABNER. Well he merits
The honors which await him. Why, O king!
Do thou delay to bless his doubting heart
With his well-earn'd rewards? Thy lovely daughter,
By right of conquest his!

SAUL, to DAVID. True -- thou have won her.
She shall be thine -- Yes, a king's word is past.

DAVID. O boundless blessing! What, shall she be mine,
For whom contending monarchs might renounce
Their slighted crowns?

[ Sounds of musical instruments heard at a distance. Shouting and singing. A
grand procession. CHORUS of HEEREW WOMEN.] SAUL. How Is this? what sounds of joy
Salute my ears? what means this pageantry?
This merry sound of tabret and of harp?
What mean these idle instruments of triumph?
These women, who in fair procession move,
Making sweet melody?

ABNER. To pay due honor
To David, are they come.

SAUL. [Aside. A rival's praise
Is discord to the ear of jealousy!

[ Martial symphony. After which CHORU of WOMEN sing.] I.
PREPARE! your festal rites prepare!
Let your triumphs rend the air!
Idol gods shall reign no more,
We the living Lord adore!
Let heathen hosts on human helps repose,
Since Israel's God has routed Israel's foes,
II.
Let remotest nations know,
Proud Goliath's overthrow:
Fallen, Philistia! is thy trust,
Dagon's honor laid in dust!
Who fears the Lord of Glory, need not fear
The brazen armor, nor the lifted spear.
III.
See, the routed squadrons fly!
Hark! their clamours rend the sky!
Blood and carnage stain the field!
See, the vanquished nations yield!
Dismay and terror fill the frightened land;
While conquering David routs the trembling band.
IV.
Lo! upon the tented field,
Royal Saul has thousands killed!
Lo! upon the ensanguin'd plain,
David has ten thousand slain!
Let mighty Saul his vanquished thousands tell,
While tenfold triumphs David's victories swell.
BELSHAZZAR: A SACRED DRAMA.

How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the Morning! How art thou
cut down to the ground, who did weaken the nations! ISAIAH. PERSONS of the
DRAMA.
BELSHAZZAR, King of Babylon. NITOCRIS, the Queen Mother. COURTIERS,
ASTROLOGERS, PARASITES. DANIEL, the JEWISH Prophet. Captive JEWS, etc. etc.
SCENE, BABYLON. Time, Night.

This subject of this Drama is taken from the Fisth Chapter of the Prophet
DANIEL.

BELSHAZZAR.
PART I.
SCENE, Near the Palace of BABYLON. DANIEL, and captive JEWS. DANIEL. PARENT of
life and light! sole source of good!
Whose tender mercies through the tide of time,
In long successive order, have sustained,
And saved the sons of Israel! Thou, whose power,
Delivered righteous Noah from the flood,
The whelming flood, the grave of human kind!
Oh Thou! whose guardian care, and out-stretch'd hand,
Rescued young Isaac from the listed arm,
Raised, at thy bidding, to devote a son,
An only son, doomed by his sire to die.
(Oh, saving Faith, by such obedience proved!
Oh blessed obedience, hallowed thus by faith!)
Thou, who in mercy sav'dst the chosen race,
In the wild desert, and did there sustain them;
By wonder-working love, though they rebelled,
And murmured at the miracles that saved them!
Oh, hear thy servant Daniel! hear, and help!
Thou! whose almighty power did after raise
Successive leaders to defend our race;
Who sentest valiant Joshua to the field,
Thy people's champion, to the conquering field,
Where the revolving planet of the night,
Suspended in her radiant round was stayed,
And the bright sun, arrested in his course,
Stupendously stood still!

CHORUS of JEWS. I.
What ailed thee, that thou stood'st still,
O sun, nor did thy flaming orb decline?
And thou, O moon, in Ajalon's dark vale,
Why did thou long beyond thy period shine?
II.
Was it at Joshua's dread command,
The leader of the Ifraelitish band?
Yes -- at a mortal bidding both stood still;
'Twas Joshua's word, but 'twas JEHOVAH's will.
III.
What all-controuling hand had force
To stop eternal Nature's constant course?
The wandering moon to one fixed spot confine,
But He, whose fiat bade the planets shine?
DANIEL. Oh Thou! who, when thy discontented host,
Tired of Jehovah's rule, desired a king,
In anger gav'st them Saul, and then again
Did wrest the regal scepter from his hand
To give it David -- David, best beloved!
Illustrious David! Poet, prophet, king!
Thou, who did suffer Solomon his son,
To build a glorious temple to thy name,
Oh hear thy servants, and forgive them too,
If, by severe necessity compelled,
We worship here -- we have no temple now;
Altar or sanctuary, none is left.

CHORUS of JEWS. O Judah! let thy captive sons deplore
Thy far-fam'd temple is no more!
Fallen is thy sacred fane, thy glory gone,
Fallen is thy temple, Solomon.
Never did Barbaric kings behold,
With all their shining gems, their burnished gold,
A fane so perfect, bright and fair;
For GOD himself was wont to inhabit there:
Between the Cherubim his glory stood,
While the high priest alone the dazzling splendour viewed.
How fondly did the Tyrian artist strive
His name to latest time should live!
Such wealth the stranger wondered to behold:
Gold were the tablets, and the vases gold.
Of cedar such an ample store,
Exhausted Lebanon could yield no more.
Bending before the Ruler of the sky,
Well might the royal founder cry,
Filled with an holy dread, a reverend fear,
Will GOD in very deed inhabit here?
The heaven of heavens beneath his feet,
Is, for the bright inhabitant unmeet:
Archangels prostrate wait his high commands,
And will he deign to dwell in temples made with hands?
DANIEL. Yes, thou art ever present, Power supreme!
Not circumscribed by time, nor fixed to space,
Confined to altars, nor to temples bound.
In wealth, in want, in freedom or in chains,
In dungeons or on thrones, the faithful find thee!
Even in the burning cauldron thou wast near
To Shadrach and the holy brotherhood:
The unhurt martyrs blessed thee in the flames;
They sought, and found thee; called, and thou wast there.

First JEW. How changed our state! Judah! thy glory's fallen.
Thy joys for hard captivity exchanged;
And thy sad sons breathe the polluted air
Of Babylon, where deities obscene
Insult the living GOD; and to his servants,
The priests of wretched idols, made with hands,
Show contumelious scorn.

DANIEL. It Is Heaven's high will.

Second JEW. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem!
If I not fondly cherish thy loved image,
Even in the giddy hour of thoughtless mirth;
If I not rather view thy prostrate walls
Than haughty Babylon's imperial towers.
Then may my tongue refuse to frame the strains
Of sweetest harmony, my rude right hand
Forget, with sounds symphonious, to accord
The harp of Jesse's son, to Sion's songs.

First JEW. Often, on Euphrates' ever verdant banks,
Where drooping willows form a mournful shade;
With all the pride which prosperous fortunes give,
And all the unfeeling mirth of happy men,
The insulting Babylonians ask a song;
Such songs as erst in better days were sung
By Korah's sons, or heav'n-taught Asaph set
To loftiest measures; then our bursting hearts
Feel all their woes afresh; the galling chain
Of bondage crushes then the freeborn soul
With wringing anguish; from the trembling lip
The unfinished cadence falls, and the big tear,
While it relieves, betrays the woe-fraught soul.
For who can view Euphrates' pleasant stream,
Its drooping willows, and its verdant banks,
And not, to wounded memory recall
The piny groves of fertile Palaestine,
The vales of Solyma, and Jordan's stream?

DANIEL. Firm faith and deep submission to high Heaven,
Will teach us to endure, without a murmur,
What seems so hard. Think what the holy host
Of patriarchs, saints, and prophets, have sustained
In the blessed cause of Truth! And shall not we,
O men of Judah! dare what these have dared,
And boldly pass through the refining fire
Of fierce affliction? Yes, be witness, Heaven!
Old as I am, I will not shrink at death,
Come in what shape it may, if God so will,
By peril to confirm and prove my faith.
Oh! I would dare yon' den of hungry lions,
Rather than pause to fill the task assigned,
By wisdom infinite. Nor think I boast,
Not in myself, but in thy strength I trust,
Spirit of God!

First JEW. Prophet! thy words support,
And raise our sinking souls.

DANIEL. Behold yon' palace,
Where proud Belshazzar keeps his wanton court!
I knew it once beneath another lord,
His grandsire Nebuchadnezzar.
, who subdued Jehoiachin,
And hither brought sad Judah's captive tribes;
Together with the rich and sacred relics
Of our famed temple; all the holy treasure,
The golden vases, and the sacred cups,
Which graced, in happier times, the sanctuary.

Second JEW. May HE, to whose blessed use they were devoted,
Preserve them from pollution, and once more,
In his own gracious time, restore the temple!

DANIEL. I, with some favored youths of Jewish race,
Was lodged in his own palace, and instructed
In all the various learning of the east:
But HE, on whose great name our fathers called,
Preserved us from the perils of a court;
And warned us to avoid the tempting cates
Pernicious lux'ry offered to our taste.
Fell luxury! more perilous to youth
Than storms or quicksands, poverty or chains.

Second JEW. He who can guard against the low baits of sense,
Will find Temptation's arrows hurtless strike
Against the brazen shield of Temperance.
For it is th'inferior appetites enthrall
The man, and quench the immortal light within him;
The senses take the soul an easy prey,
And sink the imprisoned spirit into brute.

DANIEL. Twice Daniel, Chap. ii. and iv.
, by the Spirit of GOD, did I expound
The visions of the king; his soul was touched,
And twice did he repent, and prostrate fall
Before the GOD of Daniel: yet again,
Power, flattery, and prosperity, undid him.
When from the lofty ramparts of his palace,
He viewed the splendors of the royal city,
That magazine of wealth, which proud Euphrates,
Wafts from each distant corner of the earth;
When he beheld the admantine towers,
The brazen gates, the bulwarks of his strength,
The pendent gardens, art's stupendous work,
The wonder of the world! -- The proud Chaldean,
Mad with the insolence of boundless wealth,
And power supreme, conceived himself a God.
"This mighty Babylon is mine," he cried,
" My wondrous power, my godlike arm achieved it.
I scorn submission, own no deity
Above my own." -- While the blasphemer spoke,
The wrath of Heaven inflicted instant vengeance;
Stripped him of that bright reason he abused,
And drove him from the cheerful haunts of men,
A naked, wretched, helpless, senseless thing;
Companion of the brutes, his equals now.

First JEW. Nor does his impious grandson, proud Belshazzar,
Fall short of his offenses; nay, he wants
The valiant spirit, and the active soul,
Of his progenitor: for Pleasure's slave,
Though bound in flowery setters, silky-soft,
Is more subdued, than is the casual victim
Of furious rage, and violent ambition.
Ambition is a fierce, but short-lived fire;
But Pleasure with a constant flame consumes.
War slays her thousands; but destructive Pleasure,
More fell, more fatal, her ten thousands slays:
The young, luxurious king she fondly wooes
In every shape of amorous blandishment;
With adulation smooth ensnares his soul,
With love betrays him, and with wine inflames.
She strews her magic poppies over his couch,
And with delicious opiates charms him down,
In fatal slumbers bound. Though Babylon
Is now invested by the warlike troops
Of the young Cyrus, Persia's valiant prince,
Who, in conjunction with the Median king,
Darius, famed for conquest, now prepares
To storm the city: not the impending horrors
Which ever wait a siege, have power to wake
To thought, or sense, th'intoxicated king.

DANIEL. Even in this night of universal dread,
A mighty army threatening at the gates;
This very night, as if in scorn of danger,
The dissolute Belshazzar holds a feast
Magnificently impious, meant to honor
Belus, the favorite Babylonish idol.
Lewd parasites compose his wanton court,
Whose impious flatt'ries soothe his monstrous crimes;
They justify his vices, and extol
His boastful phrase, as if he were some god.
Whatever he says, they say; what he commands,
Implicitly they do; they echo back
His blasphemies, with shouts of loud acclaim;
And when he wounds the tortured ear of Virtue,
They cry, All hail! Belshazzar live for ever!
Tonight a thousand nobles fill his hall,
Princes, and all the dames who grace the court;
All but the virtuous queen, sage Nitocris;
Ah! how unlike the impious king her son!
She never mingles in the midnight fray,
Nor crowns the guilty banquet with her presence.
The royal fair is rich in every virtue
Which can adorn the queen, or grace the woman.
But for the wisdom of her prudent counsels
This wretched empire had been long undone.
Not famed Semiramis, Assyria's pride,
Could boast a brighter mind, or firmer soul,
Beneath the gentle reign of 2 Kings, Chap. xxv.
Merodach,
Her royal lord, our nation tasted peace.
Our captive monarch, sad Jehoiachin,
Grown gray in a close prison's horrid gloom,
He freed from bondage, brought the hoary king
To taste once more the long-forgotten sweets
Of precious liberty, and cheerful light;
Poured in his wounds the lenient balm of kindness,
And blessed his settting hour of life with peace.

Sound of trumpets is heard at a distance. First JEW. That sound proclaims the
banquet is begun.

Second JEW. Hark! the licentious uproar grows more loud.
The vaulted roof resounds with shouts of mirth,
And the firm palace shakes! Retire, my friends;
This madness is not meet for sober ears.
If any of our race were found so near,
'Twou'd but expose us to the rude attack
Of ribaldry obscene, and impious jests,
From these mad sons of Belial, now inflamed
To deeds of riot from the wanton feast.

DANIEL. Here part we then! but when again to meet,
Who knows save Heaven? Yet, O, my friends! I
An impulse more than human stir my breast.
Rapt in prophetic See the Prophecies of Isaiah, chap. xlvii. and others.
vision, I behold
Things hid as yet from mortal sight. I see
The dart of vengeance tremble in the air,
E're long to pierce the impious king. Even now
The fierce, destroying angel stalks abroad,
And brandishes aloft the two-edged sword
Of retribution keen; he soon will strike,
And Babylon shall weep as Sion wept.
Pass but a little while, and you shall see
This queen of cities prostrate on the earth.
This haughty mistress of the kneeling world,
How shall she sit dishonored in the dust,
In tarnish'd pomp and solitary woe!
How shall she shroud her glories in the dark,
And in opprobrious silence hide her head!
Lament, O virgin daughter of Chaldea!
For thou shall sall, imperial queen! shall fall!
No more Sidonian robes shall grace thy limbs.
To purple garments, sackcloth shall succeed;
And sordid dust and ashes shall supply
The odorous nard and cassia. Thou, who said,
I am, and there is none beside me: thou,
Even thou, imperial Babylon! shall fall:
Thy glory quite eclipsed! The pleasant sound
Of viol and of harp, shall charm no more;
Nor song of Syrian damsels shall be heard,
Responsive to the lute's luxurious note.
But the hoarse bittern's cry, the raven's croak,
The bat's fell scream, the lonely owl's dull plaint,
And every hideous bird with ominous shriek,
Shall scare affrighted Silence from thy walls.
While Desolation, snatching from the hand
Of Time the scythe of ruin, sits aloft,
In dreadful majesty and horrid pomp;
Glancing with sullen pride thy crumbling towers,
Thy broken battlements, and columns fallen;
Then, pointing to the mischiess she has made,
The fiend exclaims, This once was Babylon!

BELSHAZZAR:
PART II.
SCENE, The Court of BELSHAZZAR. The King seated on a magnificent throne.
Princes, Nobles, and Attendants. Ladies of the Court. Music -- A superb
Banquet. First COURTIER. Rises, and kneels. HAIL, mighty king!

Second COURTIER. Belshazzar, live for ever!

Third COURTIER. Sun of the world, and light of kings, all hail!

Fourth COURTIER. With lowest reverence, such as best becomes
The humblest creatures of imperial power,
Behold a thousand nobles bend before thee!
Princes far famed, and dames of high descent:
Yet all this pride of wealth, this boast of beauty,
Shrinks into naught before thine awful eye,
And lives, or dies, as the king frowns, or smiles!

BELSHAZZAR. This is such homage as becomes your love,
And suits the mighty monarch of mankind.

Fifth COURTIER. The bending world should prostrate thus before thee,
And pay, not only praise, but adoration!

BELSHAZZAR. Rises, and comes forward. Let dull philosophy preach self-denial;
Let envious poverty, and snarling age,
Proudly declaim against the joys they know not.
Let the deluded Jews, who fondly hope
Some fancied heaven hereafter, mortify,
And lose the actual blessings of this world,
To purchase others which may never come.
Our Gods may promise less, but give us more.
Ill could my ardent spirit be content
With meagre abstinence, and hungry hope.
Let those misjudging Israelites, who want
The nimble spirits, and the active soul,
Call their blunt feelings virtue: let them drudge,
In regular progression, through the round
Of formal duty, and of daily toil,
And, when they want the genius to be blessed,
Believe their harsh austerity is goodness.
If there be Gods they meant we should be happy,
Why give us else these appetites to be so?
And why, the means to crown them with indulgence?
To burst the feeble bonds which hold the vulgar,
Is noble daring.

First COURTIER. And is therefore worthy
The high imperial spirit of Belshazzar.

Second COURTIER. Behold a banquet which the gods might share.

BELSHAZZAR. Tonight, my friends! your monarch shall be blessed
With every various joy; tonight is ours;
Nor shall the envious gods who view our bliss,
And sicken as they view, tonight disturb us.
Bring all the richest spices of the East,
The odorous cassia, and the dropping myrrh;
The liquid amber, and the fragrant gums;
Rob Gilead of its balms, Belshazzar bids,
And leave the Arabian groves without an odor.
Bring freshest flowers, exhaust the blooming spring,
Twine the green myrtle with the short-lived rose,
And ever, as the blushing garland fades,
We'll learn to snatch the fugitive delight,
And grasp the flying joy ere it escape us.
Come -- fill the smiling goblet for the king;
Belshazzar will not let a moment pass
Unmarked by some enjoyment! The full bowl
Let every guest partake!

Courtiers kneel, and drink. First COURTIER. Here Is to the king!
Light of the world, and glory of the earth,
Whose word is fate!

BELSHAZZAR. Yes, we are likest gods,
When we have power, and use it. What is wealth,
But the blessed means to gratify desire?
I will not have a wish, a hope, a thought,
That shall not know fruition. What is empire?
The privilege to punish and enjoy;
To feel our power in making others fear it;
To taste of pleasure's cup till we grow giddy,
And think ourselves immortal. This is empire!
My ancestors scarce tasted of its joys:
Shut from the sprightly world, and all its charms
In cumbrous majesty, in sullen state,
And dull unsocial dignity they lived;
Far from the sight of an admiring world,
That world, whose gaze makes half the charms of greatness;
They nothing knew of empire but the name,
Or saw it in the looks of trembling slaves;
And all they felt of royalty was care.
But I will see, and know it of myself;
Youth, wealth, and greatness court me to be blessed,
And Power and Pleasure draw with equal force
And sweet attraction: both I will embrace
With fond delight; but this is Pleasure's day;
Ambition will have time to reign hereafter;
It is the proper appetite of age.
The lust of power shall lord it uncontrolled,
When all the generous feelings grow obtuse,
And stern dominion holds, with rigid hand,
His iron rein, and sits and sways alone.
But youth is pleasure's hour!

First COURTIER. Perish the slave,
Who, with officious counsel, would oppose
The king's desire, whose slightest wish is law!

BELSHAZZAR. Now strike the loud-ton'd lyre, and softer lute;
Let me have music, with the nobler aid
Of poesy! Where are those cunning men,
Who boast, by chosen sounds, and measured sweetness,
To set the busy spirits in a flame,
And cool them at their will? who know the art
To call the hidden powers of numbers forth,
And make that pliant instrument, the mind,
Yield to the powerful sympathy of sound,
Obedient to the master's artful hand?
Such magic is in song! Then give me song;
Yet not at first such soul-dissolving strains,
As melt the softened sense; but such bold measures,
As may inflame my spirit to despise
The ambitious Persian, that presumptuous boy,
Who rashly dares even now invest our city,
And menaces the invincible Belshazzar.

A grand CONCERT of MUSIC, after which an ODE. In vain shall Persian Cyrus dare
With great Belshazzar wage unequal war:
In vain Darius shall combine,
Darius, leader of the Median line;
While fair Euphrates' stream our walls protects,
And great Belshazzar's self our fate directs.
War and famine threat in vain,
While this demi-god shall reign!
Let Persia's prostrate king confess his power,
And Media's monarch dread his vengeful hour.
On Dura's Daniel, chap. iii.
ample plain behold
Immortal Belus See a very fine description of the Temple of this Idol.
-- The towering fane
Of Bell, Chaldean Jove, surpassing far
That Doric Temple, which the Elean chiefs
Raised to their thunderer from the spoils of war;
Or that Ionic, where the Ephesian bowed
To Dian, queen of heaven. Eight towers arise,
Each above each, immeasurable height,
A monument at once of Eastern pride,
And slavish superstition, etc. etc.
JUDAH RESTORED, Book I.
, whom the nations own;
Sublime he stands in burnished gold,
And richest offerings his bright altars crown.
Tonight his deity we here adore,
And due libations speak his mighty power.
Yet Belus' self not more we own,
Than great Pelshazzar on Chaldea's throne.
Great Belshazzar, like a god,
Rules the nations with a nod!
To great Belshazzar be the goblet crowned!
Belshazzar's name the echoing roofs rebound!
BELSHAZZAR. Enough! the kindling rapture fires my brain,
And my heart dances to the flattering sounds.
I feel myself a god! Why not a god?
What were the deities our fathers worshipped?
What was great Nimrod, our imperial founder?
What, greater Belus, to whose power divine,
We raise tonight the banquet and the song;
But youthful heroes, mortal, like myself,
Who by their daring earned divinity?
They were but men; nay, some were less than men,
Though now revered as Gods. What was Anubis,
Whom Egypt's sapient sons adore? A dog!
And shall not I, young, valiant, and a king,
Dare more? do more? be greater than the rest?
I will indulge the thought. -- Fill me more wine,
To cherish and exalt the young idea!
He drinks. Never did Olympian Jupiter himself
Quaff such immortal draughts.

First COURTIER. What could that Cannan,
That heaven in hope, that nothing in possession,
That air-built bliss of the deluded Jews,
That promised land of milk, and flowing honey;
What could that fancied Paradise bestow
To match these generous juices?

BELSHAZZAR. Hold -- enough!
Thou have roused a thought; by Heaven I will enjoy it;
A glorious thought! which will exalt to rapture
The pleasures of the banquet, and bestow
A yet untasted relish of delight.

First COURTIER. What means the king?

BELSHAZZAR. The Jews! said thou the Jews?

First COURTIER. I spoke of that undone, that outcast people,
The tributary creatures of thy power,
The captives of thy will, whose very breath
Hangs on the sovereign pleasure of the king.

BELSHAZZAR. When that abandoned race was hither brought,
Were not the choicest treasures of their temple,
(Devoted to their God, and held most precious)
Among the spoils which graced The name of Nebuchadnezzar not being reducible
to verse, I have adopted that of Nebassar, on the authority of the ingenious
and learned Author of Judah Restored.
Nebassar's triumph,
And lodged in Babylon?

First COURTIER. O king! they were,

Second COURTIER. The Jews, with superstitious awe, behold
These sacred symbols of their ancient faith:
Nor has captivity abated ought
The reverend love they bear these holy relics.
Though we deride their law, and scorn their persons,
Yet never have we yet to human use
Devoted these rich vessels, set apart
To sacred purposes.

BELSHAZZAR. I joy to hear it!
Go -- fetch them hither. They shall grace our banquet.
Does no one stir? Belshazzar disobeyed?
And yet you live! Whence comes this strange reluctance?
This newborn reverence for the helpless Jews?
This fear to injure those who cannot revenge it?
Send to the sacred treasury in haste,
Let all be hither brought; -- who answers, dies.
They go out. The mantling wine a higher joy will yield,
Poured from the precious flaggons which adorned
Their far-fam'd temple, now in ashes laid.
Oh! 'twill exalt the pleasure into transport,
To gall those whining, praying Israelites!
I laugh to think what wild dismay will seize them,
When they shall learn the use that has been made
Of all their holy trumpery!

The vessels are brought in. Second COURTIER, It comes!
A goodly show! how bright with gold and gems!
Far fitter for a youthful monarch's board,
Than the cold shrine of an unheeding god.

BELSHAZZAR. Fill me that massy goblet to the brim.
Now, Abraham! let thy wretched race expect
The fable of their faith to be fulfilled;
Their second temple, and their promised king!
Now will they see he is impotent to save,
For had he power to help, he would have hindered
This profanation.

As the king is going to drink, thunder is heard; he starts from the throne,
spies a hand, which writes on the wall these words; MEAN, MEAN, TEKEL UPHARSIN.
He lets fall the goblet, and stands in an attitude of speechless horror. All
start, and are terrified.] First COURTIER, after a long pause. Oh, transcendent
horror!

Second COURTIER. What may this mean? The king is greatly moved!

Third COURTIER. Nor is it strange -- who unappall'd can view it?
Those sacred cups! I doubt we have gone too far.

First COURTIER. Observe the fear-struck king! his starting eyes
Roll horribly. Thrice he essayed to speak,
And thrice his tongue refused,

BELSHAZZAR, in a low trembling voice. Ye mystic words!
Thou semblance of an hand! illusive forms!
Ye dire fantastic images, what are ye?
Dread shadows, speak! Explain your horrible meaning!
Ye will not answer me. -- Yes, yes, I feel
I am a mortal now -- My failing limbs
Refuse to bear me up. I am no god!
Gods do not tremble thus. -- Support me, hold me,
These loosen'djoints, these knees which smite each other,
Betray I Am but a man -- a weak one too!

First COURTIER. In truth it is passing strange, and full of horror!

BELSHAZZAR. Send for the learned magicians, every sage
Who deals in wizard spells and magic charms.

Some go out. First COURTIER. How fares my lord the king?

BELSHAZZAR. Am I a king?
What power have I? Ye lying slaves, I am not.
Oh, soul-distracting sight! but is it real?
Perhaps it is fancy all, or the wild dream
Of mad distemperature, the fumes of wine!
I Will look upon it no more! -- So -- now I Am well!
I am a king again, and know not fear.
And yet my eyes will seek that fatal spot,
And fondly dwell upon the sight that blasts them!
Again, it is there! it is not fancy's work.
I see it still! it is written on the wall.
I see the writing, but the viewless writer,
Who, what is he? Oh, horror! horror! horror!
It cannot be the GOD of these poor Jews,
For what is he, that he can thus afflict?

Second COURTIER. Let not my lord the king be thus dismayed.

Third COURTIER. Let not a phantom, an illusive shade,
Disturb the peace of him who rules the world.

BELSHAZZAR. No more, ye wretched sycophants! no more!
The sweetest note which flattery now can strike,
Harsh and discordant grates upon my soul.
Talk not of power to one so full of fear,
So weak, so impotent! Look on that wall;
If thou would sooth my soul, explain the writing,
And thou shall be my oracle, my God!
Tell me from whence it came, and what it means,
And I Will believe I am again a king!
Friends! princes! ease my troubled breast, and say,
What do the mystic characters portend?

First COURTIER. It Is not in us, O king! to ease thy spirit;
We are not skilled in those mysterious arts
Which wait the midnight studies of the sage;
But of the deep diviners thou shall learn,
The wise astrologers, the sage magicians,
Who, of events unborn, take secret note,
And hold deep commerce with the unseen world.

Enter ASTROLOGERS, MAGICIANS, etc. etc. BELSHAZZAR. Approach, ye sages, it is
the king commands!

They kneel. ASTROLOGERS. Hail, mighty king of Babylon!

BELSHAZZAR. Nay, rise:
I do not need your homage, but your help;
The world may worship, you must counsel me,
He who declares the secret of the king,
No common honors shall await his skill;
Our empire shall be taxed for his reward,
And he himself shall name the gift he wishes.
A splendid scarlet robe shall grace his limbs,
His neck a princely chain of gold adorn,
Meet honors for such wisdom: He shall rule
The third in rank throughout our Babylon.

Second ASTROLOGER. Such recompense becomes Belshazzar's bounty.
Let the king speak the secret of his soul,
Which heard, his humble creatures shall unfold.

BELSHAZZAR, points to the wall. Be It so -- Look there -- behold those
characters!
Nay, do not start, for I will know their meaning!
Ha! answer; speak, or instant death awaits you!
What, dumb! all dumb! where is your boasted skill?
They confer together. Keep them asunder -- No confed'racy --
No secret plots to make your tales agree.
Speak, slaves, and dare to let me know the worst!

First ASTROLOGER. They kneel. O, let the king forgive his faithful servants!


Second ASTROLOGER. O mitigate our threatened doom of death,
If we declare, with mingled grief and shame,
We cannot tell the secret of the king,
Nor what these mystic characters portend!

BELSHAZZAR. Off with their heads! Ye shall not live an hour!
Curse on your shallow arts, your lying science!
It Is thus you practice on the credulous world,
Who think you wise, because themselves are weak!
But, miscreants, ye shall die! the power to punish
Is all that I have left me of a king.

First COURTIER. Great Sir! suspend their punishment awhile.
Behold sage Nitocris, thy royal mother!

BELSHAZZAR. My mother here!

Enter QUEEN. QUEEN. O my misguided son!
Well may thou wonder to behold me here,
For I have ever shunned this scene of riot,
Where wild intemperance and dishonored mirth
Hold festival impure. Yet, O Belshazzar!
I could not hear the wonders which befell,
And leave thee to the workings of despair:
For, spite of all the anguish of my soul
At thy offenses, I Am thy mother still!
Against the solemn prupose I had formed
Never to mix in this unhallowed crowd,
The wondrous story of the mystic writing,
Of strange and awful import, brings me here;
If happily I may show some likely means
To fathom this dark mystery.

BELSHAZZAR. Speak, O queen!
My listening soul shall hang upon thy words,
And prompt obedience follow them!

QUEEN. Then hear me.
Among the captive tribes which hither came
To grace Nebassar's triumph, there was brought
A youth named Daniel, favored by high Heaven
With power to look into the secret page
Of dim futurity's mysterious volume.
The spirit of the holy Gods is in him;
No vision so obscure, no fate so dark,
No sentence so perplexed, but he can solve it:
Can trace each crooked labyrinth of thought,
Each winding maze of doubt, and make it clear,
And palpable to sense. He twice explained
The monarch's mystic dreams. The holy seer
Saw, with prophetic spirit, what befell
The king long after. For his wondrous skill
He was rewarded, honored, and caressed,
And with the rulers of Chaldea ranked;
Though now, alas! thrown by; his services
Forgotten or neglected; such the meed
Which virtue finds in courts.

BELSHAZZAR. Dispatch with speed
A message, to command the holy man
To meet us on the instant.

NITOCRIS. I already
Have sent to ask his presence at the palace;
And, lo! he comes.

Enter DANIEL. BELSHAZZAR. Welcome, thrice venerable sage! approach.
Art thou that Daniel, whom my great forefather
Brought hither with the captive tribes of Judah?

DANIEL. I am that Daniel.

BELSHAZZAR. Pardon, holy Prophet;
Nor let a just resentment of thy wrongs,
And long neglected merit, shut thy heart
Against a king's request, a suppliant king!

DANIEL. The GOD I worship teaches to forgive.

BELSHAZZAR. Then let thy words bring comfort to my soul.
I Have heard the spirit of the Gods is in thee;
That thou can look into the fates of men
With prescience more than human!

DANIEL. Hold, O king!
Wisdom is from above, it is GOD's own gift,
I of myself am nothing; but from him
The little knowledge I possess, I hold;
To him be all the glory!

BELSHAZZAR. Then, O Daniel!
If thou indeed do boast that wondrous gift,
That faculty divine, look there, and tell me!
O say, what mean those mystic characters?
Remove this load of terror from my soul,
And honors, such as kings can give, await thee:
Thou shall be great beyond thy soul's ambition,
And rich above thy wildest dream of wealth:
Clad in the scarlet robe our nobles wear,
And graced with princely ensigns, thou shall stand
Near our own throne, and third within our empire.

DANIEL. O mighty king! thy gifts with thee remain,
And let thy high rewards on others fall.
The princely ensign, nor the scarlet robe,
Nor yet to be the third within thy realm,
Can touch the soul of Daniel. Honor, fame,
All that the world calls great, thy crown itself,
Could never satisfy the vast ambition
Of an immortal spirit, which aspires
To an eternal crown, a crown of glory!

First COURTIER. [Aside. Our priests teach no such notions.

DANIEL. Yet, O king!
Though all unmoved by grandeur or by gift,
I will unfold the high decrees of Heaven,
And strait declare the mystery.

BELSHAZZAR. Speak, O Prophet!

DANIEL. Prepare to hear what kings have seldom heard,
Prepare to hear what these have never told thee,
Prepare to hear the TRUTH. The mighty GOD,
Who rules the sceptres and the hearts of kings,
Gave thy renowned Nebuchadnezzar.
forefather here to reign,
With such extent of empire, weight of power,
And greatness of dominion the wide earth
Trembled beneath the terror of his name,
And kingdoms stood or fell as he decreed.
Oh! dangerous pinnacle of power supreme!
Who can stand safe upon its treacherous top,
Behold the gazing prostrate world below,
Whom depth and distance into pigmies shrink,
And not grow giddy? Babylon's great king
Forgot he was a man, a helpless man,
Subject to pain, and sin, and death, like others!
But who shall fight against Omnipotence?
Or who has hardened his obdurate heart
Against the Majesty of Heaven, and prosper'd?
The GOD he had insulted was avenged;
From empire, from the joys of social life,
He drove him forth; extinguished reason's lamp,
Quenched that bright spark of deity within;
Compelled him, with the forest brutes, to roam
For scanty pasture; and the mountain dews
Fell, cold and wet, on his defenseless head:
Till he confessed -- Let men, let monarchs hear! --
Till he confessed, PRIDE WAS NOT MADE FOR MAN!

NITOCRIS. O, awful instance of divine displeasure!

BELSHAZZAR. Proceed! My soul is wrapped in fixed attention!

DANIEL. O king! thy grandsire not in vain had sinned,
If, from his error, thou had learnt the truth.
The story of his fall thou often have heard,
But has it taught thee wisdom? Thou, like him,
Have been elate with power, and mad with pride.
Like him, thou have defied the Living GOD.
Nay, to bold thoughts have added deeds more bold.
Thou have out-wrought the pattern he bequeathed thee,
And quite outgone example; have profaned,
With impious hand, the vessels of the Temple:
Those vessels, sanctified to holiest use,
Thou have polluted with unhallowed lips,
And made the instruments of foul debauch.
Thou have adored the gods of wood and stone,
Vile, senseless deities, the work of hands;
But HE, THE KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS,
In whom exists thy life, thy soul, thy breath,
On whom thy being hangs, thou have denied.

First COURTIER. Aside to the others. With what an holy boldness he reproves
him!


Second COURTIER. Such is the fearless confidence of virtue!
And such the righteous courage those maintain
Who plead the cause of truth! The smallest word
He utters, had been death to half the court.

BELSHAZZAR. Now let the mystic writing be explained,
Thrice venerable sage!

DANIEL. O mighty king!
Hear then its awful import: God has numbered
Thy days of royalty, and soon will end them.
The All-wise has weighed thee in the even balance
Of his own holy law, and finds thee wanting:
And last, Thy kingdom shall be wrested from thee;
And know, the Mede and Persian shall possess it.

BELSHAZZAR. He starts up. Prophet, when shall this be?


DANIEL. In GOD's own time:
Here my commission ends; I may not utter
More than thou haft heard; but O! remember, king!
Thy days are numbered; hear, repent, and live!

BELSHAZZAR. Say, Prophet, what can penitence avail?
If Heaven's decrees immutably are fixed,
Can prayers avert our fate?

DANIEL. They change our hearts,
And thus dispose Omnipotence to mercy.
It Is man that alters, GOD is still the same.
Conditional are all Heaven's covenants:
And when the uplifted thunder is withheld,
It Is prayer that deprecates the impending bolt.
Good 2 Chronicles. Chap. xxxii. Also, Isaiah, Chap. xxxviii.
Hezekiah's days were numbered too;
But penitence and tears were mighty pleas:
At Mercy's throne they never plead in vain.

He is going. BELSHAZZAR. Stay, Prophet, and receive thy promised gift:
The scarlet robe, and princely chain, are thine;
And let my heralds publish through the land,
That Daniel stands, in dignity and power,
The third in Babylon. These just rewards
Thou well may claim, though sad thy prophecy!

QUEEN. Be not deceived, my son! nor let thy soul
Snatch an uncertain moment's treacherous rest,
On the dread brink of that tremendous gulf
Which yawns beneath thee.

DANIEL. O unhappy king!
Know what must happen once, may happen soon,
Remember, that it is terrible to meet
Great evils unprepared! and, O Belshazzar!
In the wild moment of dismay and death,
Remember thou wast warned! and, O! remember,
Warnings despised are condemnations then!

Exeunt Daniel and Queen. BELSHAZZAR. It Is well -- my soul shakes off its load
of care;
It Is only the obscure is terrible.
Imagination frames events unknown,
In wild fantastic shapes of hideous ruin;
And what it fears, creates! -- I know the worst;
And awful is that worst as fear could feign:
But distant are the ills I have to dread!
What is remote may be uncertain too!
Ha! Princes! hope breaks in! -- This may not be!

First COURTIER. Perhaps this Daniel is in league with Persia,
And bribed by Cyrus to report these horrors,
To weaken and impede the mighty plans
Of thy imperial mind!

BELSHAZZAR. It Is very like.

Second COURTIER. Return we to the banquet.

BELSHAZZAR. Dare we venture?

Third COURTIER. Let not this dreaming Seer disturb the king.
Against the power of Cyrus, and the Mede,
Is Babylon secure. Her brazen gates
Mock all attempts to force them. Proud Euphrates,
A watery bulwark, guards our ample city
From all assailants. And within the walls
Of this stupendous capital are lodged
Such vast provisions, such exhaustless stores,
As a twice ten years siege could never waste!

BELSHAZZAR. Embraces him. My better genius! To the banquet then!


As they are going to resume their places at the banquet, a dreadful uproar is
heard, tumultuous cries, and warlike sounds. All stand terrified. Enter
soldiers, with their swords drawn, and wounded. SOLDIER. Oh, helpless Babylon!
Oh, wretched king!
Chaldea is no more, the Mede has conquered!
The victor Cyrus, like a mighty torrent,
Comes rushing on, and marks his way with ruin!

BELSHAZZAR. Impossible! Villain and slave thou lie!
Euphrates and the brazen gates secure us.
While those remain Belshazzar laughs at danger.

SOLDIER. Euphrates is diverted from its course,
The brazen gates are burst, the city's taken,
Thyself a prisoner, and thy empire loft.

BELSHAZZAR. Oh, Prophet! I remember thee too soon!

He runs out. They follow, in the utmost confusion. Enter several JEWS, MEDES,
and BABY LONIANS. First JEW. He comes, he comes! the long predicted prince,
Cyrus! the destined instrument of Heaven,
To free our captive nation, and restore
Jehovah's Temple! Carnage marks his way,
And conquest sits upon his plume-crown'd helm!

First JEW. What noise is that?

Second JEW. Hark! it is Belshazzar's voice!

BELSHAZZAR. [Without. O Soldier! spare my life, and aid my flight;
Such treasures shall reward the gentle deed,
As Persia never saw! I Will be thy slave;
I Will yield my crown to Cyrus, I Will adore
His Gods and thine -- I Will kneel and kiss thy fect,
And worship thee -- It is not much I ask --
I Will live in bondage, beggary, and pain,
So thou but let me live!

SOLDIER. Die, tyrant die!

BELSHAZZAR. O Daniel! Daniel! Daniel!

Enter SOLDIER. SOLDIER. Belshazzar's dead!
The wretched king breathed out his furious soul
In that tremendous groan.

First JEW. Belshazzar's dead!
Then, Judah! art thou free! The tyrant's fallen!
Jerusalem, Jerusalem is free!

BELSHAZZAR.
PART III.
Enter DANIEL and JEWS. DANIEL. BELL boweth down Isaiah, xlvi.
, and haughty Nebo stoops!
The idols fall; the God and worshipper
Together fall! together they bow down!
Each other, or themselves, they cannot save.
O, Babylon! where is thy refuge now?
Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, meant to save,
Pervert thee; and thy blessing is thy bane!
Where are thy brutish deities, Chaldea?
Where are thy gods of gold? -- Oh, Lord of life!
Thou very God! so fall thy foes before thee!

First JEW. So fell beneath the terrors of thy name
The idol Chemosh, Moab's empty trust;
So Ammonitish Moloch sunk before thee:
So fell Philistine Dagon; so shall fall,
To time's remotest period, all thy foes!

DANIEL. Not for myself, O Judah! but for thee,
I shed these tears of joy. For I no more
Must view the cedars which adorn the brow
Of Syrian Lebanon; no more shall see
Thy pleasant stream, O Jordan! nor the flocks
Which whiten all the mountains of Judea.
Nor Carmel's heights, nor Sharon's flowery vales.
I must remain in Babylon! So Heaven,
To whose awards I bow me, has decreed.
I never shall see thee, Salem! I am old;
And few and toilsome are my days to come.
But we shall meet in those celestial climes,
Compared with which created glories sink:
Where sinners shall have power to harm no more,
And martyred virtue rests her weary head.
Though ere my day of promised grace shall come,
I shall be tried by perils strange and new;
Nor shall I taste of death, so have I learned,
'Till I have seen the captive tribes restored.

First JEW. And shall we view, once more, thy hallowed towers,
Imperial Salem?

DANIEL. Yes, my youthful friends!
You shall behold the second Ezra, chap. i.
temple rise,
With grateful ecstacy; but we, your sires,
Now bent with hoary age; we, whose charmed eyes
Beheld the matchless glories of the first,
Should weep, rememb'ring what we once had seen,
That model of perfection!

Second JEW. Never more
Shall such another structure grace the earth!

DANIEL. Well have you borne affliction, men of Judah!
Well have sustained your portion of distress;
And, unrepining, drank the bitter dregs
Of adverse fortune! Happier days await you.
O guard against the perils of success!
Prosperity dissolves the yielding soul,
And the bright Sun of shining fortune melts
The firmest virtue down. Beware, my friends,
Be greatly cautious of prosperity!
Defend your sliding hearts; and, trembling, think
How those who buffeted affliction's waves
With vigorous virtue, sunk in Pleasure's calm,
He Solomon.
, who of special grace had been allowed
To rear the hallowed fane to Israel's GOD,
By wealth corrupted, and by ease debauched,
Forsook the GOD to whom he raised the fane,
And, sunk in fensual floth, consumed his days,
In vile idolatrous rites! -- Nor think, my sons,
That virtue in sequestered solitude
Is always found. Within the inmost soul
The hidden tempter lurks; nor less betrays,
In the still, seeming safety of retreat,
Than where the treacherous world delusive smiles,
Who thinks himself secure is half undone;
For sin, unwatch'd, may reach the sanctuary:
No place preserves us from it. Righteous Lot
Stemmed the strong current of corruption's tide,
Even in polluted Sodom; safe he lived,
While circumspective Virtue's watchful eye
Was anxiously awake: but in the shade,
Far from the threatening perils which alarm
With visible temptation, secret sin
Ensnared him; in security he fell.

Second JEW. Thy prudent counsels in our hearts shall live,
As if a pen of adamant had engraved them.

First JEW. The dawn approaches; let us part, my friends,
Secure of peace, since tyranny is fallen!

DANIEL. So perish all thine enemies, O Lord!
So, mighty GOD! shall perish all, who seek
Corrupted pleasures in the turbid waves
Of life's polluted stream; and madly quit
The living fountain of perennial grace!

DANIEL: A SACRED DRAMA.

The Righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the Wicked comes in his stead.
PROVERBS of SOLOMON. On peut des plus grands rois surprendre la justice.
Incapables de tromper,
Ils ont peine a s'echapper
Des pieges de l'artifice.
Un coeur noble ne peut soupconner en autrui
La bassesse et la malice
Qu'il ne sent point en lui.
ESTHER. TRAGEDY de RACINE. PERSONS of the DRAMA.
DARIUS, King of MEDIA and BABYLON. PHARNACES, Courtiers, enemies to DANIEL.
SORANUS, Courtiers, enemies to DANIEL. ARASPES, a young MEDIAN Lord, friend and
convert of DANIEL. DANIEL.
SCENE, The City of BABYLON.

The Subject of this Drama is taken from the Sixth Chapter of the Book of the
Prophet Daniel.

DANIEL.
PART I.
PHARNACES, SORANUS. PHARNACES. YES! -- I have noted, with a jealous eye,
The power of this new favorite! Daniel reigns,
And not Darius! Daniel guides the springs
Which move this mighty empire! High he sits,
Supreme in favor both with prince and people!
Where is the spirit of our Median lords,
Tamely to crouch and bend the supple knee
To this new god? By Mithras, it is too much!
Shall great Arbaces' race to Daniel bow?
A foreigner, a Hebrew, and a slave?
Something must be devised, and that right soon,
To shake his credit.

SORANUS. Rather hope to shake
The mountain pine, whose twisting fibers clasp
The earth, deep rooted! Rather hope to shake
The Scythian Taurus from his central base!
No -- Daniel sits too absolute in power,
Too firm in favor, for the keenest shaft
Of nicely-aiming jealousy to reach him.

PHARNACES. Rather he sits too high to sit securely.
Have thou then lived in courts? have thou grown gray
Beneath the mask a subtle statesman wears
To hide his secret soul, and do not know
That, of all fickle Fortune's transient gifts,
Favor is most deceitful? It Is a beam
Which darts uncertain brightness for a moment!
The faint, precarious, sickly shine of power;
Given without merit, by caprice withdrawn.
No trisle is so small as what obtains,
Save that which loses it. It is a breath
Which hangs upon a smile! A look, a word,
A frown, the air-built tower of favor shakes,
And down the unsubstantial fabric falls!
Darius, just and clement as he is,
If I mistake not, may be wrought upon
By prudent wiles, by Flattery's pleasant cup,
Administered with caution.

SORANUS. But the means?
For Daniel's life (a foe must grant him that)
Is so replete with goodness, so adorned
With every virtue, so exactly squared
By wisdom's nicest rules, that 'twere most hard
To charge him with the shadow of offense.
Pure is his fame, as Scythia's mountain snows,
When not a breath pollutes them! O Pharnaces!
I Have scanned the actions of his daily life
With all the industrious malice of a foe;
And nothing meets mine eye but deeds of honor!
In office pure; for equitable acts
Renowned: In justice and impartial truth,
The Grecian Themis is not more severe.

PHARNACES. By yon' bright sun, thou blazon'st forth his praise,
As if with rapture thou did read the page
Where these fair deeds are written!

SORANUS. Thou mistak'st.
I only meant to show what cause we have
To hate and fear him. I but meant to paint
His popular virtues, and his dangerous merit.
Then for devotion, and religious zeal,
Who so renowned as Daniel? Of his law
Observant in the extreme. Thrice every day
With prostrate reverence he adores his God:
With superstitious awe his face he turns
Toward his beloved Jerusalem, as if
Some local, partial God might there be found
To hear his supplication. No affair
Of state; no business so importunate;
No pleasure so alluring; no employ
Of such high import, to seduce his zeal
From this observance due!

PHARNACES. There, there he falls!
Enough, my friend! His piety destroys him.
There, at the very footstool of his God,
Where he implores protection, there I Will crush him!

SORANUS. What means Pharnaces?

PHARNACES. Ask not what I mean!
The new idea floating in my brain,
Has yet received no form. It Is yet too soon
To give it body, circumstance, or breath.
The seeds of mighty deeds are laboring here,
And struggling for a birth! It Is near the hour,
The king is wont to summon us to council.
Ever that, this big conception of my mind
I Will shape to form and being. Thou, meanwhile,
Convene our chosen friends; for I shall need
The aid of all your counsels, and the weight
Of grave authority.

SORANUS. Who shall be trusted?

PHARNACES. With our immediate motive, none, except
A chosen band of friends, who most repine
At Daniel's exaltation. But the scheme
I meditate, must be disclosed to all
Who bear high office; all our Median rulers,
Princes and captains, presidents and lords;
All must assemble! It Is a common cause;
All but the young Araspes, he inclines
To Daniel and his GOD. He sits attent,
With ravished ears, to listen to his lore:
With reverence names Jerusalem, and reads
The volume of the law! No more he bows,
To hail the golden ruler of the Day;
But looks for some great Prophet, greater far,
So they pretend, than Mithras! From him, therefore,
Conceal whatever of injury is devised
Against Daniel. Be it too thy care today,
To keep him from the council.

SORANUS. It Is well thought.
It Is now about the hour of Daniel's prayer,
Araspes too is with him, and today
They will not sit in council. Haste we then!
Designs of high importance, once conceived,
Should be accomplished. Genius to discern,
And courage to atchieve, despise the aid
Of lingering circumspection. The keen spirit
Seizes the prompt occasion, and at once
Plans and performs, resolves and executes!

DANIEL.
PART II.
SCENE, DANIEL's House. DANIEL, ARASPES. ARASPES. PROCEED, proceed, thrice
venerable sage!
Enlighten my dark mind with this new ray,
This dawning of salvation! Tell me more
Of this expected King! this Prince of peace!
This Promise of the nations! this great Hope
Of anxious Israel! This mighty Prophet!
This Balm of Gilead, which shall heal the wounds
Of universal nature! this MESSIAH!
Redeemer, savior, sufferer, victim, GOD!

DANIEL. Enough to animate our faith, we know,
But not enough to soothe the curious pride
Of vain philosophy! Were all revealed,
Hope would have then no object, GOD no fear,
And faith no exercise! Enough to cheer
Our path we see, the rest is hid in clouds,
And Heaven's own shadows rest upon the veiw?

ARASPES. Go on, blessed Sage! I could for ever hear,
Untir'd, thy admonition! Tell me, how
I shall obtain the favor of that GOD
I but begin to know.

DANIEL. By holy deeds,
By deep humility, by faith unfeigned.
O Faith Hebrews, chap. xi.
, thou wonder-working principle!
Eternal substance of our present hope,
Thou evidence of things invisible!
What cannot man sustain, sustained by thee?
The time would sail, and the bright star of day
Would quench his beams in ocean, and resign
His empire to the silver queen of night;
And she again descend the steep of heaven,
If I should tell what wonders Faith achieved,
By Gideon, Barak, and the sapient seer,
Elkanah's son; the pious Gileadite,
Ill-fated Jephthah! He of Sampson
, Zorah too,
In strength unequalled; and the shepherd-king,
Who slew the giant of Gath! Why should I tell
Of holy Prophets, who, by conquering Faith,
Wrought deeds incredible to mortal sense;
Vanquished contending kingdoms, quelled the rage
Of furious pestilence, extinguished fire?
Victorious Faith! others by thee endured
Exile, disgrace, captivity, and death!
Some, uncomplaining, bore (nor be it deemed
The meanest exercise of well-try'd Faith)
The bitter taunts of undeserved reproach;
Despising shame, that death to human pride!

ARASPES. How shall this faith be sought?

DANIEL. By earnest prayer.
Solicit first the wisdom from above;
Wisdom Wisdom of Solomon, chap. vii.
whose fruits are purity and pleace!
Wisdom! that bright intelligence, which sat
Supreme, when with his golden See Paradise Lost, Book vii. l. 225; also
Proverbs, chap. viii. ver. 27.
compasses
The Eternal planned the fabric of the world,
Produced his fair idea into light,
And said, that all was good! Wisdom, blessed beam!
The brightness of the everlasting light!
The spotlesss mirror of the power of GOD!
The reflex image of the all-perfect mind!
A stream translucent, flowing from the source
Of glory infinite; a cloudless light!
Defilement cannot touch, nor sin pollute
Her unstained purity! Not Ophir's gold,
Nor Ethiopia's gems can match her price!
The diamond of the mine is pale before her!
And, like the oil Elisha's bounty blessed,
She is a treasure which does grow by use,
And multiply by spending! She contains,
Within herself, the sum of excellence.
If riches are desired, wisdom is wealth!
If prudence, where shall keen invention find
Artificer more cunning? If renown,
In her right hand it comes! If piety,
Are not her labors virtues? If the lore
Which sage experience teaches, lo! she scans
Antiquity's dark truths; the past she knows,
Anticipates the future; not by arts
Forbidden, of Chaldean sorcerer;
But from the piercing ken of deep foreknowledge;
From her sure science of the human heart;
Weighing effects with causes, ends with means;
And from the probable the certain forms,
With palpable conjecture!

ARASPES. Now, O Prophet!
Explain the secret doubts which rack my mind,
And my weak sense confound. Give me some lino
To sound the depths of Providence! O say,
Why the ungodly prosper? why their root
Shoots deep, and their thick branches flourish fair,
Like the green bay tree? why the righteous man,
Like tender plants, to shivering winds exposed,
Is stripped and torn, in naked virtue bare,
And nipp'd by cruel sorrow's biting blast?
Explain, O Daniel! these mysterious ways,
To my faint apprehension! For as yet
I Have much to learn. Fair Truth's immortal sun
Is sometimes hid in clouds; not that her light
Is in itself defective; but obscured
By my weak prejudice, imperfect Faith,
And all the thousand causes which obstruct
The growth of virtue.

DANIEL. Follow me, Araspes!
Within, thou shall pursue the sacred page,
The book of Life eternal! there thou will see
The END of the ungodly; thou will own
How short their longest period; will perceive
How black a night succeeds their brightest day!
Weigh well this book; and may the Spirit of Grace,
Who stamped the seal of truth on the blessed page,
Descend into thy soul, remove thy doubts,
Clear the perplexed, and solve the intricate,
Till Faith be lost in sight, and Hope in joy!

DANIEL.
PART III.
DARIUS on his throne. PHARNACES, SORANUS, PRINCES, PRESIDENTS, and COURTIERS.
PHARNACES. O King Darius, live for ever!

DARIUS. Welcome!
Welcome, my princes, presidents and friends!
Now tell me, has your wisdom ought devised
To serve the common weal? In our new empire,
Subdued Chaldea, is there ought remains
Your prudence can suggest, to serve the state,
To benefit the subject, to redress
And raise the injured? to assist the oppressed,
And humble the oppressor? If you know,
Speak freely, princes! Wherefore am I king,
Except to poise the awful scale of justice,
With even hand; to minister to want,
To bless the nations with a liberal rule,
Vicegerent of the eternal Oromasdes!

PHARNACES. So absolute thy wisdom, mighty king!
All counsel were superfluous.

DARIUS. Hold, Pharnaces!
No slatt'ry, prince, it is the death of virtue;
Who gives it is of all mankind the lowest,
Save he who takes it. Monarchs are but men;
As feeble and as frail as those they rule,
And born, like them, to die. The Lydian king,
Unhappy Croesus! lately sat aloft,
Almost above mortality; now see him,
Sunk to the vile condition of a slave,
He swells the train of Cyrus! I, like him,
To misery am obnoxious. See this throne;
This very throne the great Nebuchadnezzar.
Nebassar filled;
Yet hence his pride expelled him! Yonder wall,
The dread terrific writing to the eyes
Of proud Belshazzar showed; sad monuments
Of Heaven's tremendous vengeance! and shall I,
Unwarn'd by such examples, cherish pride?
Yet to their dire calamities I owe
The brightest gem that glistens in my crown,
Sage Daniel. If my speech have ought of worth,
Or if my life with ought of good be graced,
To him alone I owe it.

SORANUS. [Aside to Pharnaces, Now, Pharnaces,
Will he run over, and dwell upon his praise,
As if we never had heard it; nay, will swell
The nauseous catalogue with many a virtue
His own fond fancy coins.

PHARNACES. O, great Darius!
Let thine unworthy servant's words find grace,
And meet acceptance in his royal ear,
Who subjugates the East! Let not the king
With anger hear my prayer.

DARIUS. Pharnaces, speak!
I know thou love me; I but meant to chide
Thy flattery, not reprove thee for thy zeal.
Speak boldly, friends, as man should speak to man.
Perish the barbarous maxims of the East,
Which basely would enslave the freeborn mind,
And plunder it of the best gift of Heaven,
Its liberty!

PHARNACES. Then, O Darius, hear me!
Thy princes, and the captains of thy bands,
Thy presidents, the governors who rule
Thy provinces, and I, thine humble creature,
(Less than the least in merit, but in love,
In zeal, and duty, equal with the first);
We have devised a measure to confirm
Thy infant empire; to establish here
Thy power with firm dominion, and secure
Thy growing greatness past the power of change.

DARIUS. I am prepared to hear thee. Speak, Pharnaces!

PHARNACES. The wretched Babylonians long have groaned
Beneath the rule of princes, weak or rash.
The rod of power was falsely swayed alike,
By feeble Merodach, and sierce Belshazzar.
One let the slackened reins too loosely float
Upon the people's neck, and lost his power
By nerveless relaxation. He who followed,
Held with a tyrant's hand the cruel curb,
And checked the groaning nation till it bled.
On different rocks they met one common ruin.
Their edicts were irresolute, their laws
Were feebly planned, their councils ill-advis'd;
Now so relaxed, and now so overstrain'd,
That the tired people, wearied with the weight
They long have borne, will soon disdain control,
Tread on all rule, and spurn the hand that guides 'em.

DARIUS. But say what remedy, Pharnaces?

PHARNACES. Know that too,
Thy servants have provided. Hitherto
They bear the yoke submissive. But to fix
Thy power, and their obedience; to reduce
All hearts to thy dominion, yet avoid
Those deeds of cruelty thy nature starts at --
Thou shoud'st begin by some imperial act
Of absolute dominion, yet unstained
By ought of barbarous. For know, O king!
Wholesome severity, if wisely ruled
With sober discipline, procures respect,
More than the lenient counsels and weak measures
Of frail irresolution.

DARIUS. Now proceed
To thy request.

PHARNACES. Not I, but all request it.
Be thy imperial edict issued strait,
And let a firm decree be this day passed,
Irrevocable, as our Median laws
Ordain, that for the space of thirty days,
No subject in thy realm shall ought request
Of God, or man, except of thee, O king!

DARIUS. Wherefore this strange decree?

PHARNACES. 'Twill fix the crown
With lasting safety on thy royal brow;
And by a bloodless means preserve the obedience
Of this new empire. Think how much 'twill raise
Thy high renown! 'Twill make thy name revered,
And popular beyond example. What!
To be as Heaven, dispensing good and ill
For thirty days! With thine own ears to hear
Thy people's wants, with thine own liberal hands
To bless thy suppliant subjects! O, Darius!
Thou Wilt seem as bounteous as a giving God!
And reign in every heart in Babylon,
As well as Media. What a glorious state,
To be the blessed arbiter of good;
The first efficient cause of happiness!
To scatter mercies with a plenteous hand,
And to be blessed thyself in blessing others!

DARIUS. Is this the general wish?

The Princes and Courtiers kneel. Chief PRESIDENT. Of one, of all.
Behold thy princes, presidents, and lords,
Thy counselors, and captains! See, O king!
Presenting the Edict. Behold the instrument our zeal has drawn:
The edict is prepared. We only wait
The confirmation of thy gracious word,
And thy imperial signet.

DARIUS. Say, Pharnaces,
What penalty awaits the man who dares
Transgress our mandate?

PHARNACES. Instant death, O king!
This statute says, "Should any subject dare
"Petition, for the space of thirty days,
"Of God, or man, except of thee, O king!
"He shall be thrown into yon' dreadful den
"Of hungry lions!"

DARIUS. Hold! Methinks a deed
Of such importance should be wifely weighed.

PHARNACES. We have revolved it, mighty king, with care,
With closest scrutiny.

DARIUS. I Am satisfied.
Then to your wisdom I commit me, princes!
Behold the royal signet, see, it is done!

PHARNACES. [Aside. There Daniel fell! That signet sealed his doom!

DARIUS. [After a pause. Let me reflect! -- Sure I have be too rash!
Why such intemperate haste? But you are wise;
And would not counsel this severe decree
But for the wisest purpose. Yet, methinks,
I might have weighed, and in my mind revolved
This statute, ever, the royal signet stamped,
It had been past repeal! Sage Daniel too!
My counselor, my venerable friend,
He should have been consulted; for his wisdom
I still have found oracular.

PHARNACES. Mighty king!
It Is as it should be! The decree is past
Irrevocable, as the steadfast law
Of Mede and Persian, which can never change.
Those who observe it live, as is most meet,
High in thy grace; who violate it, die.

DANIEL.
PART IV.
SCENE, DANIEL's House. DANIEL, ARASPES. ARASPES. OH, holy Daniel! prophet,
father, friend!
I come, the wretched messenger of ill!
Thy foes complot thy death. For what can mean
This new-made law, extorted from the king,
Almost by force? What can it mean, O Daniel!
But to involve thee in the toils they spread
To snare thy precious life?

DANIEL. How! was the king
Consenting to this edict?

ARASPES. They surprised
His easy nature; took him when his heart
Was softened by their blandishments! They wore
The mask of public virtue to deceive him.
Beneath the specious name of general good,
They wrought him to their purposes: no time
Allowed him to delib'rate. One short hour,
Another moment, and his soul had gained
Her natural tone of virtue.

DANIEL. That great Power
Who suffers evil, only to produce
Some unseen good, permits that this should be:
And, HE permitting, I, well pleased, resign!
Retire, my friend! This is my second hour
Of daily prayer. Anon we'll meet again!
Here, in the open face of that bright sun
Thy fathers worshipped, will I offer up,
As is my rule, petition to our GOD,
For thee, for me, for Solyma, for all!

ARASPES. Oh, stay! what mean thou! sure thou hasy not heard
The edict of the king? I thought, but now,
Thou knew'st its purport. It expressly says,
That no petition henceforth shall be made,
For thirty days, save only to the king;
Nor prayer nor intercession shall be heard
Of any God, or man, but of Darius.

DANIEL. And think thou then my reverence for the king,
Good as he is, shall tempt n.e to renounce
My sworn allegiance to the King of kings?
Have thou commanded legions, tempted death
In various shapes, and shrink'st at danger now?
Come, learn of me; I Will teach thee to be bold,
Though sword I never drew! Fear not, Araspes,
The feeble vengeance of a mortal man,
Whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein
Is he to be accounted of? but fear
The awakened vengeance of the living Lord;
He who can plunge the everlasting soul
In infinite perdition!

ARASPES. Then, O Daniel!
If thou persist to disobey the edict,
Retire, and hide thee from the prying eyes
Of busy malice!

DANIEL. He who is ashamed
To vindicate the honor of his GOD,
Of him the living LORD shall be ashamed,
When he shall judge the tribes!

ARASPES. Yet, O remember,
Often have I heard thee say, the secret heart
Is fair Devotion's Temple; there the saint,
Even on that living altar, lights the flame
Of purest sacrifice, which burns unseen,
Not unaccepted. -- I remember too,
When Syrian Naaman 2 Kings, chap. v.
by Elisha's hand,
Was cleans'd from foul pollution, and his mind,
Enlightened by the miracle, confessed
The Almighty GOD of Jacob, that he deemed it
No flagrant violation of his faith,
To bend at Rimmon's shrine; nor did the Seer
Forbid the rite external.

DANIEL. Know, Araspes,
Heaven deigns to suit our trials to our strength!
A recent convert, feeble in his faith,
Naaman, perhaps, had sunk beneath the weight
Of so severe a duty. But shall I,
Shall Daniel, shall the servant of the Lord,
A vet'ran in his cause; one trained to know,
And do his will; one exercised in woe,
Bred in captivity, and born to suffer;
Shall I, from known, from certain duty shrink
To shun a threatened danger? O, Araspes!
Shall I, advanced in age, in zeal decline?
Grow careless as I reach my journey's end?
And slacken in my pace, the goal in view?
Perish discretion, when it interferes
With duty! Perish the safe policy
Of human wit, where GOD's eternal name
Is put in competition! Shall his law
Be set at naught, that I may live at ease?
How would the heathen triumph, should I fall
Through coward fear! How would God's enemies
Insultingly blaspheme!

ARASPES. Yet think a moment.

DANIEL. No! --
Where evil may be done, it is right to ponder;
Where only suffered, know, the shortest pause
Is much too long. Had great Darius paused,
This ill had been prevented. But for me,
Araspes! to deliberate is to sin.

ARASPES. Think of thy power, thy favor with Darius:
Think of thy life's importance to the tribes,
Scarce yet returned in safety. Live! O, live!
To serve the cause of GOD!

DANIEL. GOD will sustain
Himself his righteous cause. He knows to raise
Fit instruments to serve him. As for me,
The spacious earth holds not a bait to tempt me.
What would it profit me if I should gain
Imperial Ecbatan, the extended land
Of fruitful Media, nay, the world's wide round,
If my eternal soul must be the price?
Farewell, my friend! time presses. I have stolen
Some moments from my duty, to confirm,
And strengthen thy young faith! Let us fulfill
What Heaven enjoins, and leave to Heaven the event!

DANIEL.
PART V.
SCENE, The Palace. PHARNACES, SORANUS. PHARNACES. IT IS done! -- success has
crowned our scheme, Soranus;
And Daniel falls into the deep-laid toils
Our prudence spread.

SORANUS. That he should fall so soon,
Astonishes even me! What! not a day,
No, not a single moment to deser
His rash devotions? Madly thus to rush
On certain peril quite transcends belief!
When happened it, Pharnaces?

PHARNACES. On the instant:
Scarce is the deed accomplished. As he made
His oftentatious prayer, even in the face
Of the bright God of day, all Babylon
Beheld the insult offered to Darius.
For, as in bold desiance of the law,
His windows were not closed. Our chosen bands,
Whom we had placed to note him, strait rushed in,
And seized him in the warmth of his blind zeal,
Ere half his prayer was finished. Young Araspes,
With all the wild extravagance of grief,
Prays, weeps, and threatens. Daniel silent stands,
With patient resignation, and prepares
To follow them. -- But see! the king approaches!

SORANUS. How Is this? deep sorrow sits upon his brow!
And stern resentment fires his angry eye!

DARIUS, PHARNACES, SORANUS. DARIUS. O, deep-laid stratagem! O, artful wile!
To take me unprepared! to wound my heart,
Even where it feels most tenderly, in friendship!
To stab my fame! to hold me up a mark
To future ages, for the perjured prince,
Who slew the friend he loved! O Daniel! Daniel!
Who now shall trust Darius? Not a slave
Within my empire, from the Indian main
To the cold Caspian, but is more at ease
Than I, his monarch! I have done a deed
Will blot my honor with eternal stain!
Pharnaces! O, thou hoary sycophant!
Thou wily politician! thou have snared
Thy unsuspecting master!

PHARNACES. Great Darius!
Let not resentment blind thy royal eyes.
In what am I to blame? who could foresee
This obstinate resistance to the law?
Who could foresee that Daniel would, perforce,
Oppose the king's decree?

DARIUS. Thou, thou foresaw'st it!
Thou knew'st his righteous soul would never endure
So long an interval of prayer. But I,
Deluded king! 'Twas I should have foreseen
His steadfast piety. I should have thought
Your earnest warmth had some more selfish source,
Something that touched you nearer, than your love,
Your counterfeited zeal for me. -- Thou knew'st
How dear I held him; how I prized his truth!
Did I not choose him from a subject world,
Unblessed by fortune, and by birth ungrac'd,
A captive and a Jew? and yet I loved him!
Was he not rich in independent worth?
There, there he fell! If he had been less great,
He had been safe. Thou could not bear his brightness;
The luster of his virtues quite obscured,
And dimmed thy fainter merit. Rash old man!
Go, and devise some means to set me free
From this dread load of guilt! Go, set at work
Thy plotting genius to redeem the life
Of venerable Daniel!

PHARNACES. It Is too late.
He has offended against the new decree;
Has dared to make petition to his God,
Although the dreadful sentence of the act
Full well he knew. And by the established law
Of Media, by that law irrevocable,
Which he has dared to violate, he dies!

DARIUS. Impiety! presumption! monstrous pride! --
Irrevocable! Is there ought on earth
Deserves that name? The eternal laws alone
Of Oromasdes claim it. But, alas!
All human projects are so faintly framed,
So feebly planned, so liable to change,
So mixed with error in their very form,
That mutable and mortal are the same.
But where is Daniel? Wherefore comes he not
To load me with reproaches? to upbraid me
With all the wrongs my barbarous haste has done him?
Where is he?

PHARNACES. He prepares to meet his fate.
This hour he dies, for so the act decrees.

DARIUS. Suspend the bloody sentence! Bring him hither!
Or rather let me seek him, and implore
His dying pardon, and his parting prayer.

DANIEL.
PART VI.
SCENE, DANIEL's House. DANIEL, ARASPES. ARASPES. STILL let me follow thee;
still let me hear
The voice of Wisdom, ere the silver cord
By Death's cold hand be loosened.

DANIEL. Now I Am ready!
No grief; no woman's weakness, good Araspes!
Thou should rejoice my pilgrimage is over,
And the blessed haven of repose in view.

ARASPES. And must I lose thee, Daniel? must thou die?

DANIEL. And what is death, my friend, that I should fear it?
To die! why it is to triumph; it is to join
The great assembly of the good and just;
Immortal worthies, heroes, prophets, saints!
Oh! it is to join the band of holy men,
Made perfect by their sufferings! It Is to meet
My great progenitors! it is to behold
The illustrious Patriarchs, they with whom the Lord
Deigned hold familiar converse! It Is to see
Blessed Noah and his children, once a world!
It Is to behold (oh! rapture to conceive!)
Those we have known, and loved, and lost, below!
Bold Azariah, and the band of brothers,
Who sought, in bloom of youth, the scorching flames!
Nor is it to behold heroic men
Alone, who fought the fight of faith on earth;
But heavenly conquerors, angelic hosts,
Michael and his bright legions, who subdued
The foes of Truth! To join their blessed employ
Of love and praise! To the high melodies
Of choirs celestial to attune my voice,
Accordant to the golden harps of saints!
To join in blessed hosannahs to their King!
Whose face to see, whose glory to behold,
Alone were heaven, though saint or seraph none
There were beside, and only HE were there!
This is to die! Who would not die for this?
Who would not die that he might live for ever?

DARIUS, DANIEL, ARASPES. DARIUS. Where is he? where is Daniel? Let me see him!
Let me embrace that venerable form
Which I have doomed to glut the greedy maw
Of furious lions!

DANIEL. King Darius, hail!

DARIUS. O, injured Daniel! can I see thee thus?
Thus uncomplaining? can I bear to hear
That when the russian ministers of death
Stopped thy unsinish'd prayer, thy pious lips
Had just invoked a blessing on Darius,
On him who sought thy life? Thy murd'rers dropped
Tears of strange pity. Look not on me thus,
With mild benignity! Oh! I could bear
The voice of keen reproach, or the strong flash
Of fierce resentment; but I cannot stand
That touching silence, nor that patient eye
Of meek respect!

DANIEL. Thou art my master still.

DARIUS. I am thy murderer! I have signed thy death!

DANIEL. I know thy bent of soul is honorable:
Thou have been gracious still! Had it been otherwise,
I would have met the appointment of high Heaven,
With humble acquiescence; but to know
Thy will concurred not with thy servant's fate,
Adds joy to resignation.

DARIUS. Here I swear,
By him who sits enthroned in yon bright sun,
Thy blood shall be atoned! On these, thy foes,
Thou shall have ample vengeance.

DANIEL. Hold, O king!
Vengeance is mine, the eternal LORD has said;
And I will recompense, with even hand,
The sinner for the sin. The wrath of man
Works not the righteousness of GOD.

DARIUS. I had hoped
We should have trod this busy stage together,
A little longer; then have sunk to rest,
In honorable age! Who now shall guide
My shattered bark in safety? Who shall now
Direct me? O, unhappy state of kings!
It Is well the robe of majesty is gay,
Or who would put it on? A crown! what is it?
It is to bear the mis'ries of a people!
To hear their murmurs, feel their discontents,
And sink beneath a load of splendid care!
To have your best success ascribed to Fortune,
And Fortune's failures all ascribed to you!
It is to sit upon a joyless height,
To every blast of changing fate exposed!
Too high for hope! too great for happiness!
For friendship too much feared! To all the joys
Of social freedom, and the endearing charm
Of liberal interchange of soul unknown!
Fate meant me an exception to the rest,
And, though a monarch, blessed me with a friend;
And I -- have murdered him!

DANIEL. My hour approaches!
Hate not my memory, king! protect Araspes.
Encourage Cyrus in the holy work
Of building ruined Solyma. Farewell!

DARIUS. With most religious strictness I Will fulfill
Thy last request. Araspes shall be next
My throne and heart. Farewell!
They embrace. Hear, future kings!
Ye unborn rulers of the nations, hear!
Learn from my crime, from my misfortune learn,
Never to trust to weak, or wicked hands,
That delegated power which Oromasdes
Invests in monarchs for the public good.

DANIEL.
PART VII.
SCENE, The Court of the Palace. The sun rising. DARIUS, ARASPES. DARIUS. OH,
good Araspes! what a night of horror!
To me the dawning day brings no return
Of cheerfulness or peace! No balmy sleep
Has sealed these eyes, no nourishment has past
These loathing lips, since Daniel's fate was signed!
Hear what my fruitless penitence resolves --
The thirty days my rashness had decreed
The edict's force should last, I will devote
To mourning and repentance, fasting, prayer,
And all due rites of grief. For thirty days,
No pleasant sound of dulcimer or harp,
Sackbut, or flute, or psaltery shall charm
My ear, now dead to every note of joy!

ARASPES. My grief can know no period!

DARIUS. See that den!
There Daniel met the furious lion's rage!
There were the patient martyr's mangled limbs
Torn piecemeal! Never hide thy tears, Araspes;
It Is virtuous sorrow, unallay'd like mine
By guilt and fell remorse! Let us approach.
Who knows but that dread Power to whom he prayed
So often and so fervently, has heard him!
He goes to the mouth of the den. O, Daniel, servant of the living God!
He whom thou have served so long, and loved so well,
From the devouring lion's famished jaw,
Can he deliver thee?

DANIEL. [From the bottom of the den. He can, he has!

DARIUS. Methought I heard him speak!

ARASPES. O, wondrous force
Of strong imagination! were thy voice
Loud as the trumpet's blast, it could not wake him
From that eternal sleep!

DANIEL. [In the den. Hail! king Darius!
The God I serve has shut the lion's mouth
To vindicate my innocence.

DARIUS. He speaks!
He lives!

ARASPES. It Is no illusion: it is the sound
Of his known voice.

DARIUS. Where are my servants? haste,
Fly swift as lightning, free him from the den,
Release him, bring him hither! Break the seal
Which keeps him from me! See, Araspes! look!
See the charmed lions! -- Mark their mild demeanor;
Araspes, mark! -- they have no power to hurt him!
See how they hang their heads, and smooth their fierceness,
At his mild aspect!

ARASPES. Who that sees this sight,
Who that in aftertimes shall hear this told,
Can doubt if Daniel's God be GOD indeed?

DARIUS. None, none, Araspes!

ARASPES. Ah! he comes; he comes!

Enter DANIEL, followed by multitudes. DANIEL. Hail, great Darius!

DARIUS. Do thou live indeed?
And live unhurt?

ARASPES. O, miracle of joy!

DARIUS. I scarce can trust my eyes! How did thou 'scape?

DANIEL. That bright and glorious Being who vouchsafed
Presence divine, when the three martyred brothers
Essayed the caldron's flame, supported me!
Even in the furious lions' dreadful den,
The prisoner of hope, even there I turned
To the strong hold, the bulwark of my strength,
Ready to hear, and mighty to redeem!

DARIUS. [To Araspes. Where is Pharnaces? Take the hoary traitor;
Take too Soranus, and the chief abettors
Of this dire edict. Let not one escape.
The punishment their deep-laid hate devised
For holy Daniel, on their heads shall fall
With tenfold vengeance. To the lions' den
I doom his vile accusers! All their wives,
Their children too, shall share one common fate!
Take care that none escape. -- Go, good Araspes.

DANIEL. [Araspes goes out. Not so, Darius.
O spare the guiltless; spare the guilty too!
Where sin is not, to punish were unjust;
And where sin is, O king! there fell remorse
Supplies the place of punishment!

DARIUS. No more!
My word is past! Not one request, save this,
Shall thou ever make in vain. Approach, my friends.
Araspes has already spread the tale,
And see, what crowds advance.

PEOPLE. Long live Darius!
Long live great Daniel too, the people's friend!

DARIUS. Draw near, my subjects. See this holy man!
Death had no power to harm him. Yon' fell band
Of famished lions, softened at his sight,
Forgot their nature, and grew tame before him.
The mighty God protects his servants thus!
The righteous thus he rescues from the snare
Of death, while fraud's artificer shall fall
In the deep gulf his wily arts devise
To snare the innocent!

A COURTIER. To the same den
Araspes bears Pharnaces and his friends;
Fallen is their insolence! With prayers and tears,
And all the meanness of high-crested pride,
When adverse fortune frowns, they beg for life.
Araspes will not hear. "You heard not me,
He cries, when I for Daniel's life implored;
His God protected him! see now if yours
Will listen to your cries?"

DARIUS. Now hear,
People and nations! languages and realms,
Over whom I rule! Peace be within your walls!
That I may banish from the minds of men
The rash decree gone out; hear me resolve
To counteract its force by one more just.
In every kingdom of my wide-stretch'd realm,
From fair Chaldea to the extremest bound
Of northern Media, be my edict sent,
And this my statute known. My heralds haste,
And spread my royal mandate through the land,
That all my subjects bow the ready knee
To Daniel's GOD -- for he alone is LORD.
Let all adore, and tremble at his name,
Who sits in glory unapproachable
Above the heavens -- above the heaven of heavens!
His power is everlasting; and his throne,
Founded in equity and truth, shall last
Beyond the bounded reign of time and space,
Through wide eternity! With his right-arm
He saves, and who opposes? He defends,
And who shall injure? In the perilous den
He rescued Daniel from the lion's mouth!
His common deeds are wonders, and his works
One ever-during chain of miracles!

Enter ARASPES. ARASPES. All hail, O king! Darius live for ever!
May all thy foes be as Pharnaces is!

DARIUS. Araspes, speak!

ARASPES. O, let me spare the tale! --
It Is full of horror! Dreadful was the sight!
The hungry lions, greedy for their prey,
Devoured the wretched princes, ere they reached
The bottom of the den.

DARIUS. Now, now confess,
'Twas some superior hand restrained their rage,
And tamed their furious appetites.

PEOPLE. The God of Daniel is a mighty GOD,
He saves and he destroys.

ARASPES. O, friend! O, Daniel!
No wavering doubts can ever more disturb
My settled faith.

DANIEL. To GOD be all the glory!

REFLECTIONS OF KING HEZEKIAH, IN HIS SICKNESS.

Set thine house in order, for thou shall die. ISAIAH, xxxviii. REFLECTIONS OF
KING HEZEKIAH, IN HIS SICKNESS.
WHAT, and no more? -- Is this my soul, said I,
My whole of being? -- Must I surely die?
Be robbed at once of health, of strength, of time,
Of youth's fair promise, and of pleasure's prime?
Shall I no more behold the face of morn,
The cheerful daylight, and the spring's return?
Must I the festive bower, the banquet leave,
For the dull chambers of the darksome grave?
Have I considered what it is to die?
In native dust with kindred worms to lie;
To sleep in cheerless cold neglect; to rot;
My body loathed, my very name forgot!
Not one of all those parasites who bend
The supple knee their monarch to attend!
What, not one friend? No, not an hireling slave,
Shall hail GREAT HEZEKIAH in the grave!
Where Is he who falsely claimed the name of Great?
Whose eye was terror, and whose frown was fate;
Who awed an hundred nations from the throne?
See where he lies, dumb, friendless, and alone!
Which grain of dust proclaims the noble birth?
Which is the royal particle of earth?
Where are the marks, the princely ensigns where?
Which is the slave, and which great David's heir?
Alas! the beggar's ashes are not known
From his who lately sat on Israel's throne!
How stands my great account? My soul, survey
The debt ETERNAL JUSTICE bids thee pay!
Should I frail Memory's records strive to blot,
Will Heaven's tremendous reckoning be forgot?
Can I, alas! the awful volume tear?
Or raze one page of the dread register?
"Prepare thy house, thy heart in order set,
"Prepare, the Judge of Heaven, and Earth to meet."
So spoke the warning Prophet. -- Awful words!
Which fearfully my troubled soul records.
Am I prepared? and can I meet my doom,
Nor shudder at the dreaded wrath to come?
Is all in order set, my house, my heart?
Does no besetting sin still claim a part?
Does no one cherished vice with lingering pace,
Reluctant leave me to the work of grace?
Did I each day for this great day prepare,
By righteous deeds, by sin-subduing prayer?
Did I each night, each day's offense repent,
And each unholy thought and word lament?
Still have these ready hands the afflicted fed,
And ministered to Want her daily bread?
The cause I knew not did I well explore?
Friend, advocate, and parent of the poor?
Did I, to gratify some sudden gust
Of thoughtless appetite; some impious lust
Of pleasure or of power, such sums employ
As would have crowned pale penury with joy?
Did I in groves forbidden altars raise,
Or molten Gods adore, or idols praise?
Did my firm faith to Heaven still point the way?
Did charity to man my actions sway?
Did meek-ey'd Patience all my steps attend?
Did generous Candor mark me for her friend?
Did I unjustly seek to build my name
On the pil'd ruins of another's fame?
Did I, like hell, abhor the insidious lie,
The low deceit, the unmanly calumny?
Did my fixed soul the impious wit detest?
Did my firm virtue scorn the unhallowed jest;
The sneer profane, and the poor ridicule
Of shallow Infidelity's dull school?
Did I still live as born one day to die,
And view the eternal world with constant eye?
If so I lived, if so I kept thy word,
In mercy view, in mercy hear me, LORD!
My holiest deeds indulgence will require,
The best but to forgiveness will aspire;
If Thou my purest services regard,
'Twill be with pardon only, not reward!
How imperfection's stamped on all below!
How sin intrudes in all we say or do!
How late in all the insolence of health,
I charmed the Assyrian This is an anachronism. Hezekiah did not show his
treasures to the Assyrian till after his recovery from his sickness.
by my boast of wealth!
How fondly, with elab'rate pomp, displayed
My glittering treasures! with what triumph laid
My gold and gems before his dazzled eyes,
And found a rich reward in his surprise!
O, mean of soul! can wealth elate the heart,
Which of the man himself is not a part?
O, poverty of pride! O, foul disgrace!
Disgusted Reason, blushing, hides her face.
Mortal, and proud! strange contradicting terms!
Pride for Death's victim, for the prey of worms!
Of all the wonders which the eventful life
Of man presents; of all the mental strife
Of warring passions; all the raging fires
Of furious appetites, and mad desires,
Not one so strange appears as this alone,
That man is proud of what is not his own.
How short is human life! the very breath
Which frames my words accelerates my death.
Of this short life how large a portion's fled!
To what is gone I am already dead;
As dead to all my years and minutes past,
As I, to what remains, shall be at last.
Can I my cares and pains so far forget,
To view my vanished years with fond regret?
Can I again my worn-out fancy cheat?
Indulge fresh hope? solicit new deceit?
Of all the vanities weak man admires,
Which greatness gives, or sanguine youth desires,
Of these, my soul, which have thou not enjoyed?
With each, with all, thy sated powers are cloyed.
What can I then expect from length of days?
More wealth, more wisdom, pleasure, health, or praise?
More pleasure! hope not that, deluded king!
For when did age increase of pleasure bring?
Is health, of years prolonged the common boast?
And dear-earn'd praise, is it not cheaply lost?
More wisdom! that indeed were happiness;
That were a wish a king might well confess:
But when did Wisdom covet length of days,
Or seek its bliss in pleasure, wealth, or praise?
No! -- Wisdom views with an indifferent eye
All finite joys, all blessings born to die.
Wisdom on earth is an immortal guest,
Compelled to starve at an unreal feast:
A spark, which upward tends by nature's force;
A stream, diverted from its parent source;
A drop, dissever'd from the boundless sea;
A moment, parted from eternity;
A broken ray, which seeks its central soul;
A part, which longs to mingle with its whole;
A pilgrim, panting for the rest to come;
An exile, anxious for his native home.
Why should I ask my forfeit life to save?
Is Heaven unjust, which dooms me to the grave?
Was I with hope of endless days deceived?
Or of loved life am I alone bereaved?
Let all the great, the rich, the learned, the wise,
Let all the shades of Judah's monarchs rise,
And say, if genius, learning, empire, wealth,
Youth, beauty, virtue, strength, renown, or health,
Has once reversed the immutable decree
On Adam passed, of man's mortality?
What -- have these eyes never seen the felon worm
The damask cheek devour, the finished form?
On the pale rose of blasted beauty feed,
Or riot on the lip so lately red?
Where are our fathers? Where the illustrious line
Of holy prophets, and of men divine?
Live they for ever? Do they shun the grave?
Or when did Wisdom its professor save?
When did the brave escape? When did the breath
Of Eloquence charm the dull ear of Death?
When did the cunning argument avail,
The polished period, or the varnished tale;
The eye of lightning, or the soul of fire,
Which througing thousands crowded to admire?
Even while we praise the verse the poet dies,
And silent as his lyre great David lies.
Thou, blessed Isaiah! who, at God's command,
Now speak repentance to a guilty land,
Must die! as wise and good thou had not been,
As Nebat's son, who taught the land to sin!
And shall I then be spared? O monstrous pride!
Shall I escape when Solomon has died?
If all the worth of all the saints was vain --
Peace, peace, my troubled soul, nor dare complain!
Lord! I submit. Complete thy gracious will!
For if Thou slay me Job.
, I will trust Thee still.
O be my will so swallowed up in thine,
That I may do thy will in doing mine!
SENSIBILITY: A POETICAL EPISTLE TO THE HON. MRS. BOSCAWEN.

Spirits are not finely touched but to fine issues. SHAKESPEARE. The following
little Poem was sent several years ago, as an Epistle to the honored Friend to
whom it is inscribed. It has since been enlarged, and several passages have
been added, or altered, as circumstances required.

SENSIBILITY: A POETICAL EPISTLE TO THE HON. MRS. BOSCAWEN.
ACCEPT, BOSCAWEN! these unpolished lays,
Nor blame too much the verse you cannot praise.
For you far other bards have waked the string;
Far other bards for you were wont to sing.
Yet on the gale their parting music steals,
Yet, your charmed ear the loved impression feels.
You heard the lyres of LYTTELTON and YOUNG;
And this a Grace, and that a Seraph strung.
These are no more! -- But not with these decline
The Attic chasteness, and the flame divine.
Still, sad Milton calls Euripides -- Sad Electra's Poet.
Elfrida's Poet shall complain,
And either WARTON breathe his classic strain.
Nor fear lest genuine poesy expire,
While tuneful BEATTIE wakes old Spenser's lyre.
His sympathetic lay his soul reveals,
And paints the perfect Bard from what he feels.
Illustrious LOWTH! for him the muses wove,
The fairest garland from their greenest grove.
Though Latian bards had gloried in his name,
When in full brightness burnt the Latian flame;
Yet, fired with nobler hopes than transient Bays,
He scorned the meed of perishable praise;
Spurned the cheap wreath by human science won,
Borne on the wing sublime of Amos' son:
He seized his mantle as the Prophet flew,
And caught some portion of his spirit too.
To snatch bright beauty from devouring fate,
And bid it boast with him a deathless date;
To show how Genius See his Discourses to the Academy.
fires, how Taste restrains,
While what both are his pencil best explains,
Have we not REYNOLDS? Lives not JENYNS yet,
To prove his lowest title was a Wit?
Though purer flames thy hallowed zeal inspire
Than ever were kindled at the Muse's fire;
Thee, mitred See the Bishop's admirable Poem on Death.
CHESTER! all the Nine shall boast:
And is not JOHNSON theirs, himself an host?
Yes: -- still for you your gentle stars dispense
The charm of friendship, and the feast of sense.
Yours is the bliss, and Heaven no dearer sends,
To call the wisest, brightest, best -- your friends.
With CARTER trace the wit to Athens known,
Or find in MONTAGU that wit our own.
Or, pleased, attend CHAPONE's instructive page,
Which charms her own, and forms the rising age.
Or boast in WALSINGHAM the various power,
To soothe the lonely, grace the lettered hour;
To polisn'd life its highest charm she gives,
Whose song is music, and whose canvass lives.
DELANY shines, in worth serenely bright,
Wisdom's strong ray, and Virtue's milder light;
And she who blessed the friend, and graced the page
Of Swift, still lends her luster to our age:
Long, long protract thy light, O star benign!
Whose setting beams with added brightness shine!
O, much-loved BARBAULD! shall my heart refuse
Its tribute to thy Virtues and thy Muse?
While round thy brow the Poet's wreathe I twine,
This humble merit shall at least be mine,
In all thy praise to take a generous part;
Thy laurels bind thee closer to my heart:
My verse thy merits to the world shall teach,
And love the genius it despairs to reach.
Yet, what is wit, and what the Poet's art?
Can Genius shield the vulnerable heart?
Ah, no! where bright imagination reigns,
The fine-wrought spirit feels acuter pains:
Where glow exalted sense, and taste refined,
There keener anguish rankles in the mind:
There feeling is diffused through every part,
Thrills in each nerve, and lives in all the heart:
And those whose generous souls each tear would keep
From others' eyes, are born themselves to weep.
Say, can the boasted powers of wit and song,
Of life one pang remove, one hour prolong?
Presumptuous hope! which daily truths deride;
For you, alas! have wept -- and GARRICK died!
Never shall my heart his loved remembrance lose,
Guide, critic, guardian, glory of my muse!
Oh shades of Hampton! witness as I mourn,
Could wit or song clude his destined urn?
Though living virtue still your haunts endears,
Yet buried worth shall justify my tears!
GARRICK! those powers which form a friend were thine;
And let me add, with pride, that friend was mine:
With pride! at once the vain emotion's fled;
Far other thoughts are sacred to the dead.
Who now with spirit keen, yet judgment cool,
The unequal wand'rings of my muse shall rule?
Whose partial praise my worthless verse ensure?
For Candor smiled when GARRICK would endure.
If harsher critics were compelled to blame,
I gained in friendship what I lost in fame;
And friendship's fost'ring smiles can well repay
What critic rigor justly takes away.
With keen acumen how his piercing eye
The fault concealed from vulgar view would spy!
While with a generous warmth he strove to hide,
Nay vindicate, the fault his judgment spied.
So pleased, could he detect a happy line,
That he would fancy merit even in mine.
Oh generous error, when by friendship bred!
His praises flattered me, but not misled.
No narrow views could bound his liberal mind;
His friend was man, his party human kind.
Agreed in this, opposing statesmen strove
Who most should gain his praise, or court his love.
His worth all hearts as to one center drew;
Thus Tully's Atticus was Caesar's too.
His wit so keen, it never missed its end;
So blameless too, it never lost a friend;
So chaste, that modesty never learned to fear,
So pure, religion might unwounded hear.
How his quick mind, strong powers, and ardent heart,
Impoverished nature, and exhausted art,
A brighter bard records Mr. Sheridan's Monody.
, a deathless muse! --
But I his talents in his virtues lose:
Great parts are Nature's gift; but that he shone
Wise, moral, good and virtuous -- was his own.
Though Time his silent hand across has stole,
Softening the tints of sorrow on the soul;
The deep impression long my heart shall fill,
And every mellow'd trace be perfect still.
Forgive, BOSCAWEN, if my sorrowing heart,
Intent on grief, forget the rules of art;
Forgive, if wounded recollection melt --
You best can pardon who have oft'nest felt.
You, who for many a friend and hero mourn,
Who bend in anguish over the frequent urn;
You who have found how much the feeling heart
Shapes its own wound, and points itself the dart;
You, who from tender sad experience feel
The wounds such minds receive can never heal;
That grief a thousand entrances can find,
Where parts superior dignify the mind;
Would you renounce the pangs those feelings give,
Secure in joyless apathy to live?
For though in souls where taste and sense abound,
Pain through a thousand avenues can wound;
Yet the same avenues are open still,
To casual blessings as to casual ill.
Nor is the trembling temper more awake
To every wound which misery can make,
Than is the finely-fashion'd nerve alive
To every transport pleasure has to give.
For if, when home-felt joys the mind elate,
It mourns in secret for another's fate;
Yet when its own sad griefs invade the breast,
Abroad, in others blessings, see it blessed!
Even the soft forrow of remembered woe,
A not unpleasing sadness may bestow.
Let not the vulgar read this pensive strain,
Their jests the tender anguish would profane:
Yet these some deem the happiest of their kind,
Whose low enjoyments never reached the mind;
Who never a pain but for themselves have known,
Nor ever felt a sorrow but their own;
Who call romantic every finer thought,
Conceived by pity, or by friendship wrought.
Ah! wherefore happy? where is the kindred mind?
Where, the large soul that takes in human kind?
Where, the best passions of the mortal breast?
Where, the warm blessing when another's blessed?
Where, the soft lenitives of others pain,
The social sympathy, the sense humane?
The sigh of rapture and the tear of joy,
Anguish that charms, and transports that destroy?
For tender Sorrow has her pleasures too,
Pleasures which prosperous Dullness never knew.
She never knew, in all her coarser bliss,
The sacred rapture of a pain like this!
Nor think the cautious only are the just;
Who never was deceived I would not trust.
Then take, ye happy vulgar! take your part
Of sordid joy which never touched the heart.
Benevolence, which seldom stays to choose,
Lest pausing Prudence teach her to refuse;
Friendship, which once determined, never swerves,
Weighs ever it trusts, but weighs not ever it serves;
And soft-ey'd Pity, and Forgiveness bland,
And melting Charity with open hand;
And artless Love, believing and believed,
And generous Confidence which never deceived;
And Mercy stretching out, ere Want can speak,
To wipe the tear from pale Affliction's cheek;
These ye have never known! -- then take your part
Of sordid joy which never touched the heart.
Ye who have melted in bright Glory's flame,
Or felt the spirit-stirring breath of fame!
Ye noble few! in whom her promised meed
Wakes the great thought, and makes the wish the deed!
Ye who have tasted the delight to give,
And, God's own agents, bid the wretched live;
Who the chill haunts of Desolation seek,
Raise the sunk heart, and flush the fading cheek!
Ye who with pensive Petrarch love to mourn,
Or weave fresh chaplets for Tibullus' urn;
Who cherish both in Hammond's plaintive lay,
The Provence myrtle, and the Roman bay!
Ye who divide the joys, and share the pains
Which merit feels, or Heaven-born Fancy feigns;
Would you renounce such joys, such pains as these,
For vulgar pleasures, or for selfish ease?
Would you, to 'scape the pain the joy forego,
And miss the transport to avoid the woe?
Would you the sense of real sorrow lose,
Or cease to woo the melancholy Muse?
No, Greville Beautiful Ode to Indifference.
! no! -- Thy song though steeped in tears,
Though all thy soul in all thy strain appears;
Yet would thou all thy well-sung anguish choose,
And all the inglorious peace thou begg'st, refuse.
Or you, BOSCAWEN! when you fondly melt,
In raptures none but mothers ever felt;
And view, enamored, in your beauteous race,
All LEVESON's sweetness, and all BEAUFORT's grace!
Yet think what dangers each loved child may share,
The youth if valiant, and the maid if fair;
That perils multiply as blessings flow,
And constant sorrows on enjoyments grow:
You who have felt how fugitive is joy,
That while we clasp the phantom we destroy;
That life's bright sun is dimmed by clouded views,
And who have most to love have most to lose;
Yet from these fair possessions would you part,
To shield from future pain your guarded heart?
Would your sond mind renounce its tender boast,
Or wish their opening bloom of promise lost?
Yield the dear hopes which break upon your view,
For all the quiet Dullness ever knew?
Debase the objects of your tenderest prayer.
To save the dangers of a distant care?
Consent, to shun the anxious fears you prove,
They less should merit, or you less should love?
Yet, while I hail the Sympathy Divine,
Which makes, O man! the wants of others thine:
I mourn heroic JUSTICE, scarcely owned,
And PRINCIPLE for SENTIMENT dethroned.
While FEELING boasts her ever-tearful eye,
Stern TRUTH, firm FAITH, and manly VIRTUE fly.
Sweet SENSIBILITY! thou soothing power,
Who shedd'st thy blessings on the natal hour,
Like fairy favors! Art can never seize,
Nor affectation catch thy power to please:
Thy subtle essence still eludes the chains
Of Definition, and defeats her pains.
Sweet Sensibility! thou keen delight!
Thou hasty moral! sudden sense of right!
Thou untaught goodness! Virtue's precious seed!
Thou sweet precursor of the generous deed!
Beauty's quick relish! Reason's radiant morn,
Which dawns soft light before Reflexion's born!
To those who know thee not, no words can paint,
And those who know thee, know all words are faint!
It Is not to mourn because a sparrow dies;
To rave in artificial ecstasies:
It Is not to melt in tender Otway's fires;
It Is not to faint when injured Shore expires:
It Is not because the ready eye overflows
At Clementina's, or Clarissa's woes.
Forgive, O Richardson! nor think I mean,
With cold contempt, to blast thy peerless scene:
If some faint love of virtue glow in me,
Pure spirit! I first caught that flame from thee.
While soft Compassion silently relieves,
Loquacious Feeling hints how much she gives;
Laments how often her wounded heart has bled,
And boasts of many a tear she never shed.
As words are but the external marks, to tell
The fair ideas in the mind that dwell;
And only are of things the outward sign,
And not the things themselves, they but define;
So exclamations, tender tones, fond tears,
And all the graceful drapery Pity wears;
These are not Pity's self, they but express
Her inward sufferings by their pictured dress;
And these fair marks, reluctant I relate,
These lovely symbols may be counterfeit.
Celestial Pity! why must I deplore,
Thy sacred image stamped on basest ore?
There are, who fill with brilliant plaints the page,
If a poor linnet meet the gunner's rage:
There are, who for a dying sawn display
The tenderest anguish in the sweetest lay;
Who for a wounded animal deplore,
As if friend, parent, country were no more;
Who boast quick rapture trembling in their eye,
If from the spider's snare they save a fly;
Whose well-sung sorrows every breast inflame,
And break all hearts but his from whom they came:
Yet, scorning life's dull duties to attend,
Will persecute a wife, or wrong a friend;
Alive to every woe by fiction dressed;
The innocent he wronged, the wretch distressed,
May plead in vain; their sufferings come not near,
Or he relieves them cheaply with a tear.
Not so the tender moralist of Tweed;
His Man of Feeling, is a man indeed.
Oh, blessed Compassion! Angel Charity!
More dear one genuine deed performed for thee,
Than all the periods Feeling ever can turn,
Than all thy soothing pages, polished STERN!
Not that by deeds alone this love's expressed,
If so, the affluent only were the blessed.
One silent wish, one prayer, one soothing word,
The precious page of Mercy shall record;
One soul-felt sigh by pow'rless Pity given,
Accepted incense! shall ascend to Heaven.
Since trifles make the sum of human things,
And half our misery from our foibles springs;
Since life's best joys consist in peace and ease,
And few can save or serve, but all may please:
Oh! let the ungentle spirit learn from hence,
A small unkindness is a great offense.
Large bounties to bestow we wish in vain;
But all may shun the guilt of giving pain.
To bless mankind with tides of flowing wealth,
With power to grace them, or to crown with health,
Our little lot denies; but Heaven decrees
To all, the gift of minist'ring to ease.
The gentle offices of patient love,
Beyond all flattery, and all price above;
The mild forbearance at another's fault,
The taunting word, suppressed as soon as thought;
On these Heaven bade the bliss of life depend,
And crushed ill-fortune when he made a FRIEND.
A solitary blessing few can find,
Our joys with those we love are interwin'd;
And he, whose helpful tenderness removes
The obstructing thorn which wounds the breast he loves,
Smooths not another's rugged path alone,
But scatters roses to adorn his own.
The hint malevolent, the look oblique,
The obvious satire, or implied dislike;
The sneer equivocal, the harsh reply,
And all the cruel language of the eye;
The artful injury, whose venomed dart,
Scarce wounds the hearing while it stabs the heart;
The guarded phrase whose meaning kills, yet told,
The list'ner wonders how you thought it cold;
Small slights, contempt, neglect unmixed with hate,
Make up in number what they want in weight.
These, and a thousand griefs minute as these,
Corrode our comfort, and destroy our ease.
As this strong feeling tends to good or ill,
It gives fresh power to vice or principle;
It Is not peculiar to the wife and good;
It Is passion's flame, the virtue of the blood.
But to divert it to its proper course,
There Wisdom's power appears, there Reason's force;
If, ill-directed, it pursues the wrong,
It adds new strength to what before was strong;
Breaks out in wild irregular desires,
Disordered passions, and illicit fires.
But if the virtuous bias rule the soul,
This lovely feeling then adorns the whole;
Sheds its sweet sunshine on the moral part,
Nor wastes on fancy what should warm the heart,
Cold and inert the mental powers would lie,
Without this quickening spark of Deity.
To draw the rich materials from the mine,
To bid the mass of intellect refine;
To melt the sirm, to animate the cold,
And Heaven's own impress stamp on nature's gold;
To give immortal MIND its sinest tone,
Oh, SENSIBILITY! is all thy own.
THIS is the etherial flame which lights and warms,
In song transports us, and in action charms.
It Is THIS that makes the pensive strains of GRAY This is meant of the Elegy in
a Country Churchyard, of which exquisite Poem, Sensibility is, perhaps, the
characteristic beauty.

Win to the open heart their easy way.
Makes the touched spirit glow with kindred fire,
When sweet SERENA's Triumphs of Temper.
poet wakes the lyre.
It Is THIS, though Nature's hidden treasures lie,
Bare to the keen inspection of her eye,
Makes PORTLAND's face its brightest rapture wear,
When her large bounty smooths the bed of care.
It Is THIS that breathes through SEVIGNE's sweet page,
That nameless grace which soothes a second age.
It Is THIS, whose charms the soul resistless seize,
And gives BOSCAWEN half her power to please.
Yet, why those terrors? why that anxious care,
Since your last Admiral Boscawen's only remaining son was then in America, and
at the battle of Lexington.
hope the deathful war will dare?
Why dread that energy of soul which leads
To dangerous glory by heroic deeds?
Why tremble lest his ardent soul aspire? --
You fear the son because you knew the sire.
Hereditary valor you deplore,
And dread, yet wish to find one hero more.
THE END.
Just Published, Written by the same AUTHOR.
1. SEARCH AFTER HAPPINESS. 7th Edition. 2. PERCY, a Tragedy: As it was acted
at the Theater Royal in Covent Garden. 2d Edition. 3. The FATAL FALSEHOOD, a
Tragedy: As it was acted at the Theater Royal Covent Garden. 2d Edition. 4. SIR
ELDRED OF THE BOWER, AND THE BLEEDING ROCK, two Legendary Tales. 2d Edition. 5.
ESSAYS FOR YOUNG LADIES. 2d Edition. 6. INFLEXIBLE CAPTIVE. 3d Edition. 7. ODE
TO DRAGON.

