THE SHADOWS of SHAKESPEARE: A MONODY, OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH of Mr. GARRICK.
BEING APRIZE POEM, WRITTEN FOR THE VASE AT BATH-EASTON. THE SECOND EDITION.

BY COURTNEY MELMOTH.

That you may see
His Shadows, as they pass.
SHAKESPEARE. BATH: Printed and Sold by R. CRUTTWELL: Sold also by Messrs,
BULL, TAILOR, SHELDON, TENNENT, and SHRIMPTON, Booksellers, in Bath; and by E.
and C. DILLY, in the Poultry, London.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

Just Published, By the same AUTHOR, In THREE POCKET VOLUMES, Price 7s. 6d.
sewed, Embellished with a beautiful FRONTISPIECE, SHENSTONE-GREEN: OR, THE NEW
PARADISE LOST. BEING A HISTORY of HUMAN NATURE.

Had I a Fortune of Eight or Ten Thousand Pounds a Year, I would build myself a
Neighborhood. SHENSTONE. Printed for R. BALDWIN, No. 47, in Paternoster Row,
LONDON; and to be had of the BATH BOOKSELLERS.

THE SHADOWS OF SHAKESPEARE.
I.
SOON as the breath of Rumor blew
This solemn theme into the general ear,
To holy Solitude I flew,
And bade the Muse her sympathy prepare!
There closeted with Thought,
The brain its shapeless travail wrought!
The season to the subject solemnly did suit:
Day's dazzling orb was wholly down;
Pale Cynthia sat upon her silver throne;
The obtrusions of the light were closed
It seemed, as SILENCE self reposed,
For with the Air, the Earth and all her sons were mute:
All but the wretched, who like me,
The gentle vigils kept of sympathy.
With cordial awe I hailed the shading night,
And kissed her dusky robe which muffled thus the light.
II.
Base busy World, begone, begone, I said,
To mighty GARRICK yield the serious mind,
This awful Now be sacred to the dead,
And turn the cautious key on human kind.
III.
The Dead -- ah, me! -- what dead? -- Here it began
The florid Poet felt himself a Man.
And is he dead, whose wonder-working art
So often tore, and touched, and tuned the heart?
Whose piercing eye intelligence could give,
And bid long-buried beings look and live?
Whose voice enriched the verse his Shakespeare writ,
And gave to every word its weight of wit;
No sentence blemished, marred no golden line,
But polished, as he drew it from the mine;
Whose tongue grew wanton in his Shakespeare's cause,
And gave to crowded Theaters their laws;
Whose powerful accents, softened or sublime,
Free from all frippery, false pause, false chime,
Chained, as to the attracting center, every ear;
And, all commanding, sawy'd the smile and tear:
Is it to Him the Muse must pay
Her tributary lay?
For him, must aching Memory pour the strain,
Must she her darling GARRICK'S loss complain?
IV.
The heart was hurt -- It could no more --
Along each finer nerve swift shot the misery,
Even Nature shed her pensive shower;
The mighty Mother wept, alas! with me:
The imperial Goddess mourned her own decay,
(Mixed universal with our human clay)
And wished she could a second birth bestow
On this her Representative below.
But, ah! it cannot be,
So the rich debt was paid, to poor Humanity.
V.
Then in the sable stole of woe,
All conscious of the blow,
Pale her cheek, her eye declining,
Half obedient, half repining;
Her visage marked by many a tear,
(Poured from the crystal source of grief sincere)
In awful state,
Unfortunate and great,
MELPOMENE came on,
Afflicted for her Son,
And thrice, methought, the BOWL she lifted high,
And thrice she threw on Heaven the pity-moving eye;
Then, like the statue of Despair,
Stood fixed -- her DAGGER poised in air.
VI.
Now 'twas THALIA first conceived a pain,
'Twas now she echoed back her sister's sighs again;
The jest, the laugh, the look, were over,
Her cunning was no more;
The comic mirth, the comic pride,
Her wit, her whim, with GARRICK died;
Disdainful then the mask she flung
To vacant air -- and thus forlorn she sung:
And ah! away with random rhyme,
Tinsel, ill-suited to the time;
Away with leisure's coxcomb line,
The couplet quaint, the stanza fine;
Far from our verse be now the pun, the point,
The period measured joint by joint;
The elaborate trade of poesy forbear --
Or rather paint the workings of despair;
Scorn the vain edging ^able Verse assumes,
And let dark Elegy pass on, in all her pompous plumes.
The honor of the Dead in view,
A juster path will we pursue;
SHAKESPEARE HIMSELF, who best our state can feel,
Shall the sad tale in his own language tell.
VII.
The inspiring Goddess, mortals FANCY name,
With all her magic armed, now near me came
Her waving wand, deep midnight deeper made,
With her I went -- to where our GARRICK laid.
Cynthia lent a feeble ray,
To light us on our way!
FANCY with printless footsteps trod,
As if advancing toward a GOD!
Methought we easy entrance found,
And the drear Abbey walked around.
How fearful thus, ye Heavens! to tread,
The dampsome vaults which close the dead!
VIII.
But soft --
As at the foot of mighty SHAKESPEARE'S tomb
I kneel -- sudden along the fretted ailes
Innumerous SHADY FORMS, by the pale moon's
Imperfect beam beheld, -- in various guise --
(Each in the habit worn in days of Nature)
Appear, and pour their potent spells upon me!
Awed by a sight so strange, aloft I stood,
And wist not what to do: -- the figures moved!
On near approach I knew them for the TRAIN
Of SHAKESPEARE: In procession sad,
Strait, one by one his hallowed homage paid
Over GARRICK'S grave all bending.
IX.
ARIEL first,
(Not sight-deceiving, as her custom was,
When in the bowels of the earth she dived;
"Or mounted on the sharp wind of the North,
"Or on the curling clouds, or sunny ray,
"Nor like a spirit at ease") but with step
Deliberate -- She, and her fellow-ministers,
("Brimful of sorrow and dismay") stood mute,
Then gazed upon the grave, -- then sunk in sighs.
X.
PROSPERO,
The great magician, next -- (whose high command
"Waked sleepers in their graves, and let them forth")
Beheld the vanishing instruments of 's art,
And spoke --
"Have ye, which are but air,
"A touch, a feeling of our loss extreme;
"And shall not I, one of his kind, be kindlier?
"Our revel then is done; and this our Actor
"Is no more! Lost is the book of Conjuration: --
"He regulated all our mystic charms: -- He Is dead!
"The cloud-capt towers, the gorgeous palaces,
"The solemn temples, the great globe itself;
"Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve,
"And, like the baseless fabric of a vision,
"Leave not a wreck behind."
XI.
He said, and passed.
The weir'd Sisters then, hag-born and horrid,
Muttered their melancholy homage hoarse;
Cold distillations of distress extreme
Fell down the furrows of each wint'ry cheek:
Thrice paced they piteous round the hallowed earth,
Acknowledging their Lord. To GARRICK'S grave,
Bowed every swarthy She. -- To end their rites,
Imagination's OWL flapp'd her fell wing,
And, wailing, shrieked as 'cross the dome she slew:
Sudden, the whirring wizards disappear,
And horse themselves upon the viewless winds.
XII.
The gentle ROMEO was the third which came;
And oh! he said, "Turn back dull Earth -- ah, me!
"Can I go forward when my friend is here?
"It is even so -- Then I defy you stars!
"Romeo shall never more be Romeo now
"His occupation's gone." --
XIII.
The noble CORIOLANUS was the fourth,
Whose very shade looked martial -- firm he strode,
And thus with Roman dignity exclaimed,
In honor of the Dead:
" My fame like thine
"Demands an equal voice, an equal tongue:
"All eyes spoke of thee, and the bleared sights
"Were spectacled to see thee -- the veiled dames
"Commit the wave of white and damask, in
"Their nicely gauded cheeks, to th'wanton spoil
"Of Phoebus' burning kisses: such a pother,
"As if that whatsoever God that tuned thy throat
"Were slyly crept into thy human powers,
"To give thee grace and posture. Often, great shade!
"The dumb men thronged to see thee, and the blind
"To hear thee speak. To thee have Nobles bended,
"As to Jove's Statue; and the Commons made
"A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts
"As never were seen the like." -- The soldier passed.
XIV.
The fifth sad spirit that stalked by was LEAR'S,
Mad as the vexed sea still; and singing often;
Crowned, as of old, by Shakespeare's hand; with fumiter,
With hardocks, hemlocks, nettles, cuckoo flowers,
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In the suftaining corn --
At sight of GARRICK'S tomb his wounds again
Bled fresh. Tottering he moved; his words were wild.
"You do me wrong to call me out of the grave!
"And yet I know thee, Man! -- Heaven has thee now!
"Thou were Lear's friend. -- In faith I do remember. --
"Yes, we were both as stout a pair: -- but why
"This truant disposition? Is the greatest man
"So poor and forked an animal in death? --
"Off, off, you lendings, come unbutton here -- Poor shade!
"No more of that, no more of that. --
XV.
The figure swift succeeding was the THANE'S,
Languid and penitent. -- His hand he waved
As 'twere in honor of the man, whose voice
Did blow his base design in every ear:
Malice was dead within him, and he wept;
Then striking thrice his bosom, thus he cried:
"Oh Nature! how thyself thou blazon'dst
"In this thy Son; formed in thy prodigality
"To hold thy mirror up, and give the time
"Its very form and pressure: -- when he spoke
"Each aged ear played truant at his tales,
"And younger hearers were quite ravished;
"So valuable was his discourse. -- Yet, being dead,
"I am a man again!" -- He rushed along.
XVI.
The gallant ANTHONY then onward strode
And paused -- as 'erst over Caesar's corse: -- then spoke:
"Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
"That ever lived in the tide of Times!
"Here was an Actor -- when comes such ANOTHER?
XVII.
The next a female form, of PERCY's line,
A race for ever noble -- thus her tribute gave:
-- "Thou were the very glass
"Wherein the noblest youth did dress themselves;
"There were no legs that practiced not thy gait;
"There were no eyes that practiced not thy looks;
"Even those that spoke but low and tardily
"Would turn their own perfections to abuse,
"To seem like Thee: So that in speech, in gait,
"In accents, and affections of delight,
"Thou were the mark and glass, copy and book,
"To fashion others; and on thee, as on
" My Harry and the Sun, bright Honor stuck,
"As sticks the Sun in the gray vault of Heaven."
XVIII.
And now, the melancholy JAQUES advanced,
And, full of matter, thus in few, exclaimed:
"Why all the World's a stage,
"And all the Men and Women merely players:
"They have their exits and their entrances;
"And THIS MAN, in his time, played many parts.
" Life! No more on it; it is a tale, told
"By an idiot, signifying nothing."
XIX.
At last, with philosophic step,
Swift-streaming eye, and arms entwined close,
The sacred shade of his OWN HAMLET came:
Long time he paused -- long time around he looked,
Then fixed his view upon the grave, and spoke:
"'It Is not now, seems; in verity, it is;
"Oh, what a grace was seated on that brow!
"An eye, like Mars, to threaten or command;
"A combination and a form indeed,
"Where every God did seem to set his seal,
"To give the world assurance of a Man!
"And is it come to this? -- but hush, my heart!
"He was a Man, take him for all in all,
"We may not look upon his like aga
XX.
While wrapped in wonder of these various shows
The sovereign shade of SHAKESPEARE awful rose,
His many-colour'd wand he waved,
And soon the mournful train again were engraved.
(Now was His genius even more divine,)
And all alone he stood before his GARRICK'S shrine.
Rest, rest, perturbed spirits, then, he said,
To me belongs th'inestimable dead;
To each it is given to breathe, to fall;
It Is the fixed lot of all that soar or crawl.
For Thee, much honored friend,
What glories marked thy end!
Applauding nations own thy fame,
And, with their SHAKSPEARE'S, blend their GARRICK'S name.
Together then we mount on high,
It Is OUR'S to TRIUMPH, it is the WORLD'S to SIGH.
THE END.

