A SHORT TREATISE ON ONANISM; OR, The DETESTABLE VICE of SELF-POLLUTION.

Describing the Variety of nervous and other Disorders, that are occasioned by
that shameful Practice, or too early and excessive VENERY, and directing the
best Method for their Cure.

Quippe nec ira duem tantum, nee tela, nec hosts,
Quantum sola noces, animis illapsa voluptas.
SILIUS ITALICUS. By a PHYSICIAN in the COUNTRY.

The SECOND EDITION,

LONDON: Printed and sold by FLETCHER and Co. Booksellers, at the
Oxford-Theatre, the North-Side of St. Paul's Churchyard. 1767.

A SHORT TREATISE ON ONANISM.
Physicians are agreed that Copulation,
When age adult, and high-brac'd nerves invite,
Should neither be immoderately desired,
Nor dreaded to excess. The good old man
Is by his tame frigidity admonished,
Not to engage in the dull drudgery,
Mistaken for enchanting scenes of pleasure;
Lest thus he snap his feeble thread of life.
But what more base, more noxious to the body,
Than by the power of fancy to excite
Such lewd ideas of an absent object;
As rouse the organs formed for nobler ends,
To rush into the embraces of a phantom,
And do the deed of personal enjoyment!
THE PREFACE.
THIS little Treatise was at first not intended to be published separate, but
only to be annexed to another work of the author's, printed at the same time,
entitled, Observations on Specific Medicines, etc. But as many may have an
occasion to peruse this part without the other, who would not care to be at the
expense of purchasing both together, a few copies were printed off separate for
this reason.

All the merit which the author pretends to in this, as well as in the other
Treatise, is, his having offered to mankind the means for relief, established
upon reiterated experience, (the most infallible foundation for the science of
physic) which will scarce ever fail of giving satisfaction to the miserable
patient; especially if the rules and directions prescribed, and given with the
medicines herein recommended, are strictly adhered to.

In long protracted and obstinate cases, which will not easily yield to the
general method of cure, herein mentioned, the author desires to be consulted
either in person or by letter. He requests those who send their cases, to be
very particular with respect to the symptoms of their indisposition, length of
time they have been afflicted, what means they have already used, and likewise
their age, present degree of strength, constitution, habit of body, etc. and
all letters, (post-paid) directed to him, to be left at Mr Fletcher's and Co.
booksellers, at the Oxford-Theatre, on the North-Side of St. Paul's Church
Yard, shall have due attention paid them, and be answered with all the speed
that the distance of place will admit of.

LONDON, Nov. 1766. W. FARRER.

A SHORT TREATISE ON ONANISM.
MASTUPRATIO, or Manustupratio; Manual Stupration, or Self-Pollution, is a vice
hardly to be named, much less to be practiced in a country, where virtue,
decency, or politeness, have the least regard paid to them; and this abominable
and unmanly practice is productive of the most deplorable, and generally
incurable disorders.

Providence has implanted in human nature what is by some called, the Passion
of Love, and by others, the Appetite of Lust, for very wise purposes; but has
given us reason to restrain this necessary inclination, and keep it within due
limits. Every day, however, furnishes us with cases which evince, that reason
is not always a balance against the appetites; for boys regardless, or perhaps
ignorant of the consequences, too frequently indulge themselves in this
preposterous method of venery; and it is beyond a doubt, that many, more
advanced in years, who are long immured in colleges and cloisters, and at last
elope from their cells, utterly destitute of science, and equally unacquainted
with the world and books, are not less guilty of this enormous vice.

These by a most detestable kind of magic, conjure up at pleasure an ideal
Venus, and thus never want an opportunity of enjoying an imaginary mistress.
The frequent repetition of these execrable pleasures induce an infinitude of
the worst disorders; such as Lethargies, Vertigo's, Atrophys, Apoplexies,
Palsies, Lowness of Spirits, Hypochondriacal Disorders, Amauroses, a Tabes
Dorsalis, and the worst species of a Gonorrhaea, most commonly attended with an
utter impotence as to real enjoyments; besides an innumerable train of various
nervous complaints, such as are the frequent attendants upon a declining age,
when the vigor of youth begins to wear off.

These disorders chiefly derive their origin from those universal convulsions,
that always attend the emission of the Semen; and if we consider the human
body, as made up of flexible pipes, and yielding fluids, we shall readily
understand how Convulsions wear out the constitution, and produce these
effects, viz. by destroying the strength and elasticity of the solid parts. And
that the extacy which accompanies venereal enjoyments is of the nature of a
convulsion, is not hard to be conceived. Quincy, in his explanation of
Sanctorius's Aphorisms expressly says, that "At the time of coition, the fibers
are intensely drawn up; that too frequent use of this exercise, cannot but be
very prejudicial to health by overstraining and destroying the force of the
fibers" Sect iv. Aphorism i.
; the natural consequence of which must be a springyness and action upon their
contents. Hence perspiration is lessened, Mala a nimio Coitu orta mediate a
Perspiratione. Sanctor. Sect. vi. Aphorism iii.
the fluids run into preternatural cohesions, and obstructions are generated.
And this morbid condition is still augmented by an excessive loss of the Semen
itself, since the blood is thereby robbed of its most pure, balsamic, and
invigorating particles.

Besides, it is worthy of remark, that people who are accustomed to such
filthiness, are not so easily cured of any chronical distemper as those who are
free from it; for as Celsus, speaking about venereal intercourses, prudently
remarks, Cavendumne in secunda valetudine adversae presidia consumantur: that
is, "We should take care of consuming wantonly in a state of health, what would
be our support during sickness."

The Semen verile, is a fluid of the most elaborate and noble production in the
whole body, except that of the nerves, if such there be; and it is this vital
feed which makes men hot, robust, hairy, of a strong and deep voice, bold and
courageous, and fit to contrive, or execute any enterprise. Men are a proof of
this; whereas they who are destitute of vital Seed, are wrinkled, pale, weak,
of a shrill voice, without hair, beardless and effeminate; such are eunuchs.
For we know from experience, when the secretory organs of this juice are
destroyed by castration before the time of puberty, as is frequently done in
Italy to preserve the voice; or if by any accident a man is deprived of his
testicles after this age, the destruction of these marks of verility also
follow, in confirmation of this Boerhaave has given us an instance of fact.
"There was, says he, an intrepid soldier, who, aspiring after the reward
proposed by the general, to him who would first fix the standard in the enemies
fort, climbed through the thick battery of the enemy, but unfortunately the
fire of a cannon took off both his testicles; yet he recovered, and became at
length effeminate, not in mind but in body. The strength of the several muscles
of the genital parts still continued, and nothing toward his virility but his
testicles, and yet his voice soon altered, and beard fell off, etc." But the
man who is retentive of the seminal juices, becomes bold, hardy and strong,
like the beasts of the forest; witness the Athletae of old, who led chaste
lives.

Therefore as the Semen is, as it were, the flower and choicest part of the
blood and nervous fluid, so venery ought to be only moderately used; lest too
great an evacuation of this substance prove prejudicial to health. A frequent
ejection of the Semen requires a sound and vigorous habit of body, because it
exhausts the strength, and weakens the person; hence Pythagoras when asked,
when coition was to be used, wisely answered, "When you have an inclination to
render yourself weaker."

As venery then only agrees with persons of robust and vigorous constitutions,
so the use of it is principally beneficial to health, after the stomach is
empty, and perspiration duly performed, especially if the person has slept
well, and taken aliments of a nutritive quality, and easy digestion. All these
things are of such a nature, as to increase the strength and vigor of the
body, and consequently to favor venery, or at least prevent the bad effects it
would otherwise have. It is also to be observed, that it is more salutary in
Spring than at any other season of the year.

The person who would often engage in venery, ought to guard against all
surfeits, hunger, labors, excessive studies, venesections, watchings, purges,
and every thing which can in the least impair and destroy the strength.

Celsus observes,

"That we ought not too eagerly to pursue, or too sollicitously to avoid,
intercourses with the tender sex. Pleasures of this kind, rarely indulged,
render the body alert and active, but if too frequently repeated, weak,
languid, and inactive. And as the proper degree of these pleasures is not to be
estimated by the number of repetitions, but by the constitution, the age, and
the strength of the person; so we may take it for granted, with respect to this
particular, that the enjoyment which is neither followed by weakness, nor
succeeded by pain, is not prejudicial.

The day is the worst season for pleasures of this kind, especially if they are
succeeded by a full meal; the night is less hazardous, but even then subsequent
fatigue, with long watching, render it improper. It is also to be abstained
from in summer, because at that time, it is subject to throw the humors into
preternatural commotions."

But as moderation in every thing contributes to health, so likewise does
temperate venery, and every one ought carefully to consider what his
constitution can bear. For a very robust person may safely indulge himself in a
degree of venery, which would remarkably weaken one of a worse constitution.

Persons of a tender and delicate habit of body, and weak Crasis of blood and
spirits, should by no means indulge themselves in venereal engagements, without
great moderation and caution; those who are either too young, or too old, and
those who are lately recovered from a disease, ought also to abstain from
venery, lest they bring on too great a relaxation of the nerves, and by
overstraining the fibers that compose all the parts of their bodies, injure and
weaken their several functions in the animal system, and become liable to all
those disorders that have been already mentioned.

Thus they, who by nature were stronger than others, have, by intemperance,
rendered themselves much weaker than those who were naturally weak; and those
who were much weaker by nature, have, by their temperance, become superior in
strength, to those who were stronger; for nothing renders an animal robust, but
the seminal juice, which is therefore of great efficacy and importance toward
health, strength and magnanimity, as well as procreation.

But as there are too many, who do not attend to the rules here laid down, so
much as would be convenient for them, perhaps the following case may be of some
importance, to such as have not yet utterly destroyed their constitutions, by
an immoderate pursuit after pleasures.

"A young man of twenty-five years of age, of a phlegmatico-sanguine habit, and
who from his very infancy, had a tender constitution, when about fifteen years
of age, learnt of a wicked school-fellow, the execrable trick of Mastupration.
He indulged himself in this vile and unmanly practice, very frequently, even
almost daily, from the fifteenth to the twenty-third year of his age, and
applied himself at the same time to writing in a very small character; by which
means he contracted such an excessive weakness of his head and eyes, that these
latter were frequently convulsed, during his preposterous entertainment.

Some time ago, while he was wickedly employed in this manner, and his design
upon the very point of being executed, some person or other unexpectedly
knocked at his chamber door, which accident put him into such confusion, that
the ultimate scene of his diversion was left unaccomplished. Upon this he
immediately felt so exquisite a pain, and so vehement a tension in his
testicles, and spermatic vessels, that he could not walk without the utmost
difficulty. The force of his genius, and the sight of his eyes, seemed at the
same time to be diminished and impaired.

Though he had the danger, with which this execrable practice threataned him,
in full view, yet after the pain of his testicles was removed, he was so much
infatuated as to repeat his crime, and begin afresh his former course; but he
was soon after seized with the like pain in his genitals, and especially in his
testicles, where the pain was accompanied with a very considerable tension. By
the use of external and internal medicines for about half a year, he also got
this disorder removed, but with some difficulty.

Soon after he was seized with a swelling in those vessels, which go to the
left testicle. The swelling appeared larger than ordinary after his meals, but
was not accompanied with pain, unless, when by his folly he brought a stimulus
on the parts; but though it was void of pain, it was attended with another very
unlucky circumstance, for it remains with him to this very day. To this was
joined so great a weakin his head and eyes, that when he was about to read any
thing, he seemed to be drunk, and flushed with wine; the pupils of his eyes
were extremely dilated, and his eyes themselves racked with darting pains,
accompanied with some degree of tension; his eyelids seemed, as it were,
oppressed with a kind of weight; in the morning they were conglutinated
together, and watered very much; but this was not all, for both corners of his
eyes, besides the violent pains with which they were racked, were also clogged
and stuffed with a whitish kind of matter.

In this deplorable state he was obliged to give over reading, and interrupt
the course of his studies, for the space of six months, during which time he
only employed himself in exercise and recreation, and in taking the medicines,
which were judged proper for one in his condition; by which means he recovered
so far, as to be able to apply himself to his studies for two or three hours a
day, which he can still do; but if at any time he should chance to protract his
application, and lengthen out his studies beyond their stated time, he is
immediately seized with the above symptoms; besides, he was become so lean that
his body was little more than a skeleton; and though his appetite was good, yet
he was indisposed after his meals, and was affected with a kind of drunkenness.

But when he got a juster sense of things, and had for almost the space of two
years abstained from his former practices, and from all commerce with women, he
began to be troubled with very frequent nocturnal pollutions, by which he found
his body gradually more and more weakened, and his strength impaired; so that
now what seemed principally to be regarded was the removal of this imbecility,
which was after some time entirely cured, by the use of my STRENGTHENING
ELECTUARY, of which more will be said hereafter."

From this account, we learn, that Venery used either too soon or too often,
not only impairs the strength of the body in general, but also debilitates the
noble functions of the brain and eyes, to such a degree, that the loss becomes
almost irreparable.

I have had an opportunity of seeing a great many cases, where persons well
advanced in years, have by immoderate venery, not only brought upon their eyes
redness, darting pains, accompanied with tension, a heavy sensation, as if a
weight was laid upon them, and a frequent shedding of tears, but likewise such
a weakness of sight, that they were rendered incapable either to read or write;
and I have found that in these very cases, the pupils were always dilated, as
they are in a Gutta Serena, by reason of the weakened, or lost tone of the
muscular and nervous sibres which surround them. But why need I stop here?
since I myself knew two cases, in which a Gutta Serena itself was brought on by
excessive venery, and a long series of grief.

Hence it appears how great and surprising a consent there is between the
seminal parts, or rather the spirituous seminal fluid itself, and the fabric of
the eye, which is composed of the finest membranes, nerves and muscular fibers,
as well as the most clear and transparent fluids.

The lymphatic seminal fluid is almost of the same nature and quality with that
fluid which is secreted in the brain, and distributed through all the nerves of
the body; for which reason, the more plentiful the evacuation of the former is,
the more scanty and defective the secretion of the other in the brain must of
course be. Hence also a reason may be assigned why those youths, who begin too
early to taste the forbidden joys of Venus, sustain a considerable loss of
memory, and are rendered unfit for study; and likewise why persons farther
advanced in years, who are excessively addicted to venereal pleasure, lose
their strength, and bring on a premature death.

The reason of the nocturnal pollutions in the case just recited, is very
plain; for the more copious and frequent the afflux of the humors, especially
of the seminal matter, has been to the organs destined for generation, either
by the force of imagination or otherwise; I say the more frequent and copious
such an afflux has been, the more the spermatic vessels are dilated and
relaxed, and the seminal juice for that very reason, flows into them in a
greater quantity, and lays a foundation for those wanton ideas, and seminal
excretions, which even during sleep affect people of a warm imagination.

But the most formidable species of this disease, is when the retaining vessels
are so extremely relaxed, as to permit the seminal juices to pass off upon the
slightest stimulus, as a luscious idea, or conversation with a woman, after
straining at the discharge of the excrements, or after riding on horseback in
consequence of a relaxation. In the night time the same accident happens from
venereal dreams, with a sensation of enjoyment; and this is frequently attended
with a continual weeping, or gleet, which exhausts the strength of the patient.

The matter of this flux is an humid, thin, cold, colorless substance, called
by Hippocrates, a Liquid Semen Burnet. Hippocrat. Contract. p. 114.
which is void of foecundity: for how is it possible that nature thus
refrigerated, should emit a prolific juice? Those afflicted with this disorder
must of necessity become old in habit of body, slow, languid, dull, spiritless,
silent, feeble, wrinkled, unactive, pale, effeminate, of a weak appetite, cold,
with a heaviness of the limbs, and a numbness of the legs, weak, lazy, and
indisposed for all manner of action; in many subjects this disorder is the
forerunner of a Palsy; but it oftener terminates in that species of a
Consumption, called by physicians Tabes Dorsalis.

A Tabes Dorsalis is a violent disorder, little treated of by physicians,
though fully described by Hippocrates Tabes Dorsalis ex spinali medulla oritur,
praecipue vero recentes sponsos and libidinosos corripit, febris sunt expertes,
been comedunt, and colliquantur. Quod sit ita affectum perconteris, asseret
sibi videri, ex superioribus partibus a capite velut formicas in spinam
demitti, cumque urinam and stercus reddit, semen genitale copiosum and liquidum
ei prodit, neque generatio fit, and inter dormiandum, cum uxore dormiat necne
veneris Iudibria patitur. Cumque alias, tum praecipue per locum arduum, iter
facerit, aut cucurrerit, anhelosus, and imbecilis evadit. Caput gravatur, and
aures sonant. Hic temporis progressu vehementibus febribus correptus, perit ex
lipyria febre. Burnet. Hippocrat. Contract. p. 114.
. The symptoms which presage this Consumption, I have for the most part
observed to be these, an hypochondriacal oppression, melancholy, and too much
thoughtfulness, pain in the back, and often in the head, an aching pain,
rolling and hanging down of the testicles, a weakness of memory and sight, and
a decay of strenght; there is a sense of weight and giddiness of the head, and
a ringing in the ears, and as the disorder proceeds, all the symptoms are
increased, the legs swell, as in dropical cases; in some, Ulcers arise on the
loins, some of which are healed, whilst others rise in their stead. At last, a
violent Cataract arising, the patient is rendered totally blind; these are
followed by some others; as a thirst, an hectical disposition, an Atrophy, a
wasting of the flesh, etc. etc. till at last the body is brought to the highest
degree of a Consumption; and that very often without any cough, or any other
remarkable sign of a Consumption of the Lungs.

These are the most common disorders that ensue from the excessive use of
Venery, and the preposterous practice of Self-Pollution, for the cure of which
I have two medicines which I shall recommend; the first, which answers the
first intention of cure, viz. the stopping of the Gonorrhaea, is my
STRENGTHENING ELECTUARY, which braces up and strengthens the weakened and
relaxed solids, warms and invigorates the habit, promotes digestion, and
thereby furnishes the dispirited and impoverished blood, with laudable and
benign chyle.

The other medicine is my RESTORATIVE NERVOUS ELIXIR, which is perhaps the most
stimulating Restorative that medicine can produce, and in the last decays of
life, will still supply the vital lamp with some recruits; it is good in all
Languors, Weakness, and Decays of the constitution, for it strengthens all
parts of the body, especially the stomach, when relaxed and disordered with
frequent debauches, and by restoring the oscillation of the fibers, quickens
the various motions, and gives fresh vigor to the animal functions. It is an
admirable remedy for those who have been in a manner wore out with venereal
engagements, especially if their pleasures have been purchased at the expense
of a few salivations, or a frequent use of mercurial medicines, and it will
revive any constitution that it not quite mouldered into rottenness. But they
best deserve such a Restorative, who by acute diseases, such as malignant
Fevers, the Smallpox, and the like, have been so broke and shattered in their
constitutions, as hardly to be within a possibility of recovery. For in such it
will to admiration repair the impoverished juices, and fill again the veins
with a warm, generous, nutritive blood.

It is excellent in diseases of the head, arising from a consent with the
stomach, such as the Vertigo, Headache, Sleepy Diseases, dread of an Apoplexy,
Weakness of the memory and sight, and a noise or ringing in the ears. In
Scrophulous habits also, which are leaning toward Consumptions, it will be of
the utmost service. And when young persons are not so early happy in their
conjugal embraces as many wish to be, and it be suspected from a coldness, and
insufficiency upon that account on either side, the use of this medicine cannot
fail to render their intercourse prolific, as it actually romoves the causes of
impotency in one sex, and of sterility, or barrenness, in the other. But the
use of it is varily to be indulged, lest with it be kindled a heat that
reasonable coition cannot assuage. And let such as indulge themselves too
lavishly in these enjoyments, be careful how they spur nature, and prompt with
such helps, lest they run off their life and strength too precipitately, for
the best constitutions in the world, wear out and sink under the frequent
repetition of such profusion, as the frequent straining any elastic body
whatsoever, will weaken more and more it is spring, till it is quite lost,
notwithstanding all the helps of art to preserve it.

To conclude. The omnipotent Creator has given us Passions for very wise and
good ends; which seem to be, that thereby we may be urged with a kind of
impetuosity to shun evil, and embrace good; wherefore the passions are not bad
in themselves, it is by their excess that they become vicious, when they rise
to so extravagant a pitch, as not to be governed by the dictates of reason. But
we ought to use our best endeavors to keep them within proper bounds, and the
more difficult the conflict, the more glorious will be the victory.

We have all a natural propensity to pleasures; but these are of two very
different sorts, the sensual and the mental. Sensual pleasures engross the
greatest part of mankind, while these few only, quos equus amavit Jupiter, are
taken with the beauties of the mental. And the reason why so many run after
pleasures of the first sort, seems to be, because they hardly ever allow
themselves an opportunity of tasting the sweets of an upright conscience, or of
feeling that joy, which arises to a good man, from the moderation of his
irregular desires; and being entirely devoted to the gratification of their
sensual appetites, they never give attention to the real charms of virtue.
Wherefore whosoever desires to enjoy this solid happiness, ought to enure
himself by degrees to the love of virtue, and ever carefully to avoid adding
fuel to the fire of his passions.

Apposite to these sentiments is that saying which Cicero puts into the mouth
of Cato, as by him received from the great Archytas of Terentum; that nature
never afflicted mankind with a more capital plague, than bodily pleasure; the
eager desires of which spur on to enjoyment with ungovernable rashness. De
Senectute. Cap. xii.


And the rest of what that great philosopher has written on this subject, must
delight the mind of every wise man in the perusal. Wherefore, Virtue's
exclamation in Silius Italicus, is very just: Quippe nec ira Deum tantum, nec
tela, nec hosts,
Quantum sola noces, animis illapsa voluptas Punicorum. Lib. xv. Ver. 94.
.
Pleasure by gliding on the minds of men,
More mischiefs have thou wrought than hostile arms,
Than wrath of Gods.


But as the due government of the passions strengthens the mind, so temperance
in diet renders the body less exposed to these turbulent motions. And this rule
holds good, not only in those, who are naturally of a hot constitution, but
even in those who curb their appetites; because it keeps them in a state of
tranquillity. And this is the way in general to resist these evils, or at least
to diminish their effects.

As for those who would have us to be entirely devoid of passions, and to
suppress all the affections of the mind, as if they were so many evils; they
certainly have a wrong notion of the wisdom, and goodness of the Almighty
Creator, who has inserted, and, as it were, interwoven them into our frame for
excellent purposes; for they are not only beneficial to individuals upon many
occasions, but even necessary for keeping up society and connexions between
mankind.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The MEDICINES recommended in this Treatise, with full directions for their
use, may be had by the author's particular order, of Mr. Fletcher and Co.
booksellers, at the Oxford-Theatre, the North-Side of St. Paul's Churchyard;
and by their appointment in most of the principal Towns in England.
1. THE Restorative Nervous Elixir, for the recovery of decayed and broken
constitutions. For those who have been in a manner wore out with venereal
engagements, by long courses of mercurial medicines, or by salivations; for all
those nervous and other disorders, that arise from the shameful practice of
Self-Pollution; for Venereal Impotency; and for all disorders of the head and
nerves which proceed from a weakness and debility of the nervous system. In
bottles at 10s. 6d. 2. A Strengthening Electuary, for the cure of that species
of Gonorrhoea, which is owing to a weakness of the seminal vessels. It cures
all kinds of Agues, and all disorders of the stomach and primae viae, which
proceed from a relaxation and decay of their tone (the common consequence of
hard drinking) an overflowing of the Menses and Lochia, and prevents Abortion.
In pots at 5s. 3d.
Where also may be had the following Specific Medicines, recommended by the
author in his Observations on Specific Medicines, etc. viz.
1. A Pectoral Elixir, for the cure of all diseases of the breast; such as
Coughs, Catarrhs, Fluxions, Difficulty of Breathing, Asthmas, Empyemas,
Consumptions, (if curable) and Vomica of the Lungs. -- It cures the Toothache
if applied with a bit of cotton, and all kinds of Wounds and Bruises. In
bottles at 4s. 2. A Specific Tincture, etc. for the cure of every kind of
Dropsy. In parcels at 7s. 6d. 3. A Cephalic Electuary, for the certain cure of
the Epilepsy (if it is not hereditary) and Palsy; for Virtigo's and all kinds
of Convulsions, and particularly for that odd disorder called St. Vitus's
Dance. In pots at 10s. 6d. and 5s. 3d. 4. Anodyne Mineral Balsam, for the cure
of the Jaundice, for Fits of the Stone and Gravel; for the Heart-burn and
Cholic; and outwardly, for all contractions of the limbs, and fixed pains of
the Gout and Rheumatism. In bottles at 3s. 6d. 5. Catholic Pills, for the
Diseases peculiar to Women; such as a Chlorosis, or Green Sickness, and a
Suppression of the Menses; and particularly for all the various hysteric and
nervous Disorders incident to the female Sex, in the decline of life, when the
Menses cease. As also for the cure of all hysteric and hypochondriac disorders.
In boxes at 3s. 6d. 6. An Essence, for the cure of every species and degree of
the Venereal Disease, Flying Pains and Head-Achs, the relics of ill cures. A
few drops of this medicine in a glass of water is a dose, and in slight cases,
in eight or ten days, the cure is effected, without any inconveniency to the
patient. It is also excellent in the Leprosy and Scurvy, and all disorders that
proceed from an impurity of the blood and humors. In bottles at 3s. 7. A
Chemical Fluid, for the certain cure of the Itch, and all defadations of the
skin, and for healing old and inveterate Ulcers. In bottles at 1s. 6d. 8. Worm
Powders, for the cure of all kinds of Worms, whether in infants or adults. In
parcels at 2s.
For a more particular account of these Remedies, and the diseases in which
they are proper, see the author's OBSERVATIONS, etc. abovementioned; price 2s.
6d. which may be had at each place where the medicines are sold.

N. B. All these Specific Remedies are signed by the author in his own hand
writing, and sealed with his coat of arms, to prevent impositions. They will
keep any length of time after they have been opened, provided they are again
well stopped, or tied over, and will be equally efficacious seven years after,
as when they were first purchased.


