A SHORT ESSAY ON THE VIRTUES OF Dr. NORRIS's ANTIMONIAL DROPS.

THE SECOND EDITION.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A CATALOGUE OF CURES, INCONTESTIBLY PROVING ^^EIR SOVEREIGN
EFFICACY IN FEVERS.

DR. NORRIS respectfully hopes the nobility and gentry will excuse this manner
of communicating to them an Account of his Antimonial Drops; particularly when
he assures them, his principal view, by this method, is to render as universal
as possible so great a benefit to mankind.

"It was by the method of transmitting cases and cures, that physic first began
to be formed into a science; by the same it must be improved, and brought, if
possible, to perfection." TEMPLEMAN. SHORT ESSAY, etc.
THOUGH there is nothing should less plead for an apology to the public than
addressing them on what so immediately and importantly concerns them, the
continuance and restoration of their health; yet in a metropolis like this, --
where the necessitous, the ignorant, and adventurous are every hour practicing
on the constitutions of their fellow creatures; -- the most distant possibility
of my being classed in this number would have prevented this address, was I not
at the same time so conscious, from many years absolute experience in a variety
of cases, of the superior efficacy of this medicine; that, abstracted from all
other considerations, I should hold myself chargeable, in point of duty, to
omit making it as universal as possible.

Upon this principle, then, and the corroborating success of this medicine for
many years I beg leave to recommend to the Public NORRIS's ANTIMONIAL DROPS;
which, upon a certainty of their composition and salutary effects, I pronounce
a specific in the following disorders -- Inflammatory Fevers, Putrid Bilious
Fevers, Slow Latent (commonly called) Nervous Fevers, and Putrid Sore Throats,
etc. insomuch that, in a vast variety of cases, where life has been often
despaired of, and under some of the most respectable of the faculty, there has
been no one instance (at least that has ever come to my knowledge) of their
being found ineffectual.

I am however aware, that, from the title of this medicine, many may have their
doubts; as Antimony, of all other physical productions, has been considered as
the most violent, and dangerous in it is effects: I will not contradict this
popular apprehension; on the contrary, I think it generally well founded; but
this I will pledge myself to say, that from my particular manner of preparing
it, it is efficacy can only be equalled by it is safety; that it is a medicine of
such singular or unique quality, that it may be taken with equal safety in
infancy or old age, by delicate or robust constitutions in small or large
quantities; and so far from producing any of those violent operations, the
usual effects of Antimony, it recovers nature in the most friendly manner
imaginable, operating without any sensible difference than a degree of
perspiration, etc. proportioned to the necessity of the disease.

It is to be lamented, that, upon many occasions, in fevers, physicians are
obliged to wait for what they call the crisis of the disorder, and many days
are often elapsed in this intermediate, doubtful state, before any thing can be
pronounced in respect to an opinion on the patient; but this medicine is so
immediate, yet innocent, in it is effects, that it waits for no crisis or
particular period; it may be taken in the first, middle, or latter stages of
the disorder, and in any quantities, with safety; in short, it wants but to
meet the disease to give it an absolute overthrow.

From these positive declarations, I am not insen2ible what a risque I may be
thought to run, both in respect to my own character and fortune; and indeed I
should feel myself unworthy not only of the public patronage I have received,
but of the common benefits of mankind, could I be so lost to my own honor and
conscience, for the mere sake of interested views, thus to recommend a
medicine, which I even remotely doubted of it is success; but the repeated
proofs I have had of it is never-failing efficacy, it is immediate, powerful, and
safe effects, all give me a consciousness of communicating it to the world
under the most positive and certain assurances.

These drops, besides being a specific for fevers, I have often known succeed
in a variety of other disorders, such as bad digestion, nervous headaches,
latent scurvies, (the source of many evils) and infallably in gouty habits,
where insensible perspiration is suppressed. And indeed when the extent of
their powers, as an universal deobstruent, which lead to a general
strengthening and restoration of nature, are considered, the universality of
their effects will cease to be wondered at.

Having thus given a summary account of the virtues of these Antimonial Drops,
I am aware of the objections which will naturally arise from a comparative view
of the general mode of medicinal administration, and that which prevails in
this essay: I am likewise aware of the formidable opposition which every great
discovery in medicine must unavoidably meet with, not only from it is opposition
to established practice, but the uncharitable endeavors of interested men,
who, under the specious pretense of it is not being in common use, have
invariably reprobated all such (however beneficial to mankind) as dangerous or
uncertain. Though the use of these Antimonial Drops would be a convincing
answer to such insinuations; yet, as many have not experienced their effects;
and as I would willingly obviate every difficulty, as well for the sake of my
own reputation as the satisfaction of the Public; I shall submit the following
apology for my conduct.

It is generally objected to those, who have labored through a painful course
of years, and have been at great expenses in the discovery, and preparation of
medicine, that to make a mystery for private emolument of what so essentially
affects public benefit, is repugnant to those principles of universal charity,
which should actuate the human breast: -- This, at first blush, I own seems
plausible, but then it should be considered, that the means of throwing this
into Common Use, may destroy its effects; as the excellency of a medicine
depends not so much on the subject from which it is taken, as the great care
and judgment in the preparation. A common chemist, in shortening the necessary
period of preparation, dispensing with accidents substituting
apparently-similar bodies or by any of those various means, which may save his
time, or increase his profits, may think himself sufficiently justified for so
doing by the usage of trade: But the more careful chemist, conscious that the
least accident or mismanagement is frequently sufficient to extinguish the
virtues of his process, and having nothing so much at heart, as the credit of
his medicine, is barred by no labor, no time, no expenses, no disappointments,
in bringing to perfection this his favorite object.

Permit me then to rank myself in this last class, who, from dedicating the
best part of my life to Chemical processes, must necessarily be supposed to be
well acquainted with the minutest preparation of medicine; and on the credit of
this experience let me add; that, what from the judgment and accuracy required,
together with the many accidents to which it is liable, the process of my
Antimonial Drops can scarcely be completed in the way of Common business. This
consideration then alone, I flatter myself, will fully justify my conduct to
the judicious and impartial part of mankind.

I have already been sufficiently explicit in enumerating the virtues of this
medicine; I do not therefore mean to take up any more of the attention of the
Public; otherwise, than as the PRESERVATION and RESTORATION of health form the
principal and greatest blessing of life, that they strictly examine into it is
merits. If it turns out to be productive of those benefits I have mentioned;
surely I cannot be thought presuming to expect that a public reward should
follow so public a benefit. If on the contrary I should be found one of those
forward daring empyricks, who are heedless what sacrifices they make to their
own interests; let me be branded with that infamy, which those who endeavor to
deceive mankind in such important matters deserve.

And here I beg leave to request all those who have honored me with their
confidence, and who by experience or observation are vouchers of the efficacy
of this medicine, to favor me with their names and address, that, by the
permitted publication of such authority, to be from time to time added to this
essay, I may be the better enabled to render as universal as possible so great
a benefit to mankind.

Duke-street, Westminster. THO. NORRIS.

CURES BY THE SOLE USE OF DR. NORRIS's ANTIMONIAL DROPS.
N. B. Those with initial letters being desirous of extending the use of this
medicine for the benefit of others, yet, for some private reasons and
particular connections, are unwilling to have their names made public, but may
be privately referred to, on application to me at my house, Duke-street,
Westminster.
-- W. Esquire. THIS gentleman, struck with some expressions in my directions,
(viz. "A Fever is produced by an extraordinary exertion of the powers of
nature, to expel whatever has a tendency to be destructive or noxious to the
animal economy") was determined, after having sufficiently proved many things
ineffectual, to send for me; which he did. I found him sorely afflicted with a
Bilious, Putrid Fever, attended with a most violent Vomiting and Purging, and
in all appearance near a dissolution; however, being convinced of the healing
powers of my medicine, I gave him a smile of hope, and after administering a
small dose, lest him to rest. The next day I found him considerably better, and
in a few days, without other assistance, he was perfectly cured.

The Rev. Sidney Swinney, D. D. Fellow of the Royal and Antiquarian Societies.
THIS gentleman has experienced the superior efficacy of this medicine, in a
nervous disorder with which he had been afflicted three years; and, in various
cases, of others who took it by his recommendation.

SIR,
I Was sorely afflicted with a lingering Fever, occasioned by a cold, which
brought on a loss of appetite and weakness of stomach, that would suffer very
little nourishment to stay on it. After more than six months illness, my
physicians Drs. Addington and Ford.
having so far given me over as to discontinue their prescriptions, thinking
every possible means had been tried, at last consented that your Drops should
be administered: the first dose gave manifest signs of amendment, and in a
short continuance of them I was restored from the brink of the grave to perfect
health. It is now upwards of five years since I experienced their happy
effects; since which I have not only recommended but administered them to many
in fevers, and do declare I never found them to fail in a single instance. This
you have my permission to make public for the benefit of mankind.

I am, SIR, Your very humble servant, GEORGE TEGETMEYER.
Lambeth Palace, Jan. 13, 1775.

Mrs. G.
THIS gentlewoman had been afflicted many months with a Slow, Latent, Nervous
Fever, with a total loss of appetite and bad digestion; insomuch that she was
reduced to a very deplorable condition. In this state, after every advice and
assistance of the faculty, and when her recovery was generally despaired of,
she was induced by the persuasion of Mr. Teygetmeyer to try my Antimonial
Drops; which, to the astonishment of herself and all who knew her, very soon
restored her to perfect health.

John White, servant to Mr. Teygetmeyer.
NOtwithstanding this man was delirious, and had every dangerous symptom that
could possibly attend an Acute Inflammatory Fever; upon taking my Antimonial
Drops a gentle perspiration ensued, and a very copious sweat soon followed,
which carried off his Fever in a few hours; and, in a few days he was able to
go about his business.

"SIR,
MY servant was delirious, and in all respects so bad in an Inflammatory Fever,
attended with a putrid disposition, that it was generally thought she could not
recover; but on taking these Drops she presently began to mend, and the
continuance of one small bottle perfected her cure.

Some time after my son had a violent Inflammatory Fever, and from the almost
immediate effects of these Drops on my servant, and the good report I had heard
of them from many of my acquaintance, I trusted in them altogether, and gave
him no other medicine; I gave them to him freely, which threw him into a fine
perspiration and a sweet sleep; the Fever was carried off in a few hours, and
he recovered health and strength in a few days. This you have my permission to
publish for the good of mankind, believing your Antimonial Drops to be the most
safe and effectual remedy for Fevers ever yet discovered.

I am, SIR, Your very humble servant, JOHN ARNOLD."
John-street, Adelphi, Jan. 21. 1775.

To Dr. Norris, Duke-street, Westminster.
Letter from George Downing, Esquire;
"SIR,
I HAVE read your treatise on the Antimonial Drops, and having experienced
their good effects in a variety of instances in my family for above six years,
I consider it as a duty to add to your catalogue my testimony of their safety
and efficacy; of which, to particularize no other, there cannot be a stronger
proof than the following case:

A daughter of mine, sixteen years of age, of a delicate constitution, was last
autumn seized with a Putrid Fever and sore throat; so rapid was the disease in
it is progress, that she was near a dissolution before your Drops were
administered. We gave them in large doses, and very freely, by which the danger
was presently overcome, and my daughter soon perfectly restored to health. You
have my permission to subjoin this to your Essay, and am,

SIR, Your most humble servant, GEORGE DOWNING."
Brompton, Jan. 10, 1775.

To Dr. Norris, Duke-street, Westminster.
MR. F. a respectable tradesman in the city of London. His daughter, a weakly
delicate child, about five years of age, was sorely afflicted with a swelled
stomach, and constipation in her bowels; together with indigestion, a Slow
Fever, and a sharp corrosive humor in her blood. To the inexpressible joy of
her parents, who had despaired of her recovery, she is happily restored to
health, by the virtues of this invaluable medicine. Two of his servants were
cured of a Putrid Fever; the one in his own house, very speedily, and went
about his business in a few days; the other soon after was attacked with the
same disorder: for reasons best known to his master he sent him to Islington,
and put him under the care of an apothecary there, but hearing very unfavorable
accounts of him daily, he went to see him, and sent for the apothecary, who
told him, among other things, that his Fever was a very dangerous one, and must
wait for a crisis, etc. This not appearing satisfactory to the old gentleman,
he discharged the apothecary, and immediately sent for me. Let it suffice to
say that I was under the necessity of giving this young man three times more in
quantity of the Drops than is ordinarily prescribed, before the desired effect
was produced; he began to take them about eight o clock in the morning, and
between that and five in the evening he had taken four fifths of a half guinea
bottle, without their having the least sensible effect; he then called for a
large basin of tea, which he drank, and about six had a very profuse sweat, in
which he continued the whole night, and slept comfortably. I made him a visit
the next day, and found him equal to my wishes; and the day following
pronounced him out of danger, which I reported to his master. In a week or ten
days after I saw him about his business.


REMARKS.
Very few people pay that attention to the directions given with the medicine
which they ought; if they did there would be very little occasion for my
visits, particularly in Fevers.

The following Case you have in the gentleman's own words:
"IN the month of July, 1774, my eldest son was seized with a most violent
Fever and neverceasing excessive headache, which defied all the various
medicines that acknowledged skill and attention could prescribe for thirteen
days and nights together, until he was evidently sinking under dedebilitating
vomits, blisters, and four bleedings; the despairing father trembling for the
fate of a youth who had never once swerved from the strictest rules of duty,
and who but very recently lost another most promising youth, under
circumstances exactly similar; and therefore as a last resource in such
imminent danger, he applied for Dr. Norris's Antimonial Drops, which in one
night carried off the violent headache, and through a soft easy sweat, that
terminated in a sound sleep, every dangerous symptom was at once removed; which
I dutifully attest, to allay th excruciating anguish of all other unhappy
parents in the like melancholy sorrow and distress for their beloved offspring,
sinking, helpless, and without any hope of further relief from fast approaching
dissolution. This, Sir, you have my permission to publish for the good of
mankind.

ALEXANDER DINGWALL."
Charing Cross, Jan. 25, 1775.

To Dr. Norris, Duke-street, Westminster.
A Letter from the Rev. Mr. Chauncy, Rector of Ayot St. Peter, in Hertfordshire.
"SIR,
I Was greatly afflicted with a weak stomach, frequent head-achs, a vitiated
appetite, and a scorbutic habit; let it suffice to say that your Antimonial
Drops, without the assistance of any other medicine, under God, have restored
me to a good state of health. My wife also, by a short continuance of them, was
cured of a Nervous Fever, frequent head-achs, and a general loathing of food.
This you have my permission to subjoin to your Essay, and am,

SIR, Your humble servant, CHARLES CHAUNCY."


To Dr. Norris, Duke-street, Westminster.
-- H. Esquire.

WAS cured by these Drops of a Slow Latent Fever, indigestion, crudities, etc.
This gentleman, from a charitable motive, has had much experience of the
sovereign effects of this medicine in an Endemial Fever, which prevailed in his
neighborhood. To use his own words, "This Fever prevailed in my absence from
home; my housekeeper administered them to the poor, as long as she had any; all
who took them recovered, and two, for whom she had none left, died."

Mrs. D'Haynes, Prince's-Court, Story's Gate, Westminster,
WAS afflicted with a violent pain in her chest, a weak stomach and bad
digestion, attended with a Slow Nervous Fever; she is perfectly restored to
health by the sole use of this medicine.

Mrs. May, No. 8, Buckingham-street, York-buildings,
WAS afflicted with the most distressing Miliary Fever I ever was acquainted
with, which species of Fever is universally allowed to be of longer continuance
(though not so dangerous) and require more judgment in treating it, than any
other kind of Fever; notwithstanding, under a course of my Antimonial Drops,
taken according to directions, she was perfectly cured in seventeen days,
which, in the common way of treating it, rarely happens in as many weeks. This
she is ready to attest when called upon.

Mrs. Ann Wright, James-street, Golden-square,
CURED of a most violent pain in her stomach, so excruciating at times as not
to be described, attended with a total loss of appitite, so that very little
nourishment would stay on her stomach. In two years continuance of this malady,
her strength and spirits were quite exhausted, and her skin became very yellow;
insomuch that she was reduced to the most deplorable state. After proving every
effort of the faculty vain, and taking various specifics to no good purpose,
she was induced by the recommendation of a gentleman who had sufficiently
proved their virtues, to take my Antimonial Drops, one small bottle of which
restored her to perfect health.

SIR,
I Caught a severe cold on the 18th of July, 1773, which terminated in a
violent Inflammatory Fever that continued till the 5th day of August following,
when few signs of life appearing, your Antimonial Drops were administered as
the last effort to restore me, when, to the surprise of all my friends, in the
course of three days, I was perfectly recovered, without any other sensible
effect than a degree of perspiration. This you have not only my permission but
my request you will make public for the good of mankind.

THO. HEPBURN.
Finch-lane, Cornhill, Jan. 27, 1775.

REMARKS.
This young man after bleeding, blistering, leeches applied to his temples, and
every other means in common practice made use of to no good purpose; his
brother, with whom he lives, was advised to try in this desperate case my
Antimonial Drops; he made some enquiries about me at the Carolina Coffee-house
in Birchin-lane, where I frequently go when in the city; satisfied with Mr.
Carr's, and several gentlemen's report of me there, the Drops were immediately
administered according to directions; the next day I happened to call at the
coffee-house, when Mr. Carr, who keeps it, after reciting what had past, was
sorry to inform me the young man was no better, and then past all hope; that as
I was so near he thought it advisable I should call; I did; and, never did I
see a human being so near death: I could feel no pulse; he lay on his back with
his eyes wide open and fixed, speechless, and motionless to all appearance.
Being the first instance of my Antimonial Drops failing in Fevers, at least
that ever came to my knowledge, made me more particularly inquisitive about the
administration of them, when, (to my great surprise) the brother of my patient
assured me with much concern, they were administered according to directions,
and he had taken of nothing else since, but the apothecary's stuffs, as he
called them, every two hours, as they were directed to be given. There was no
time to be lost in reproof; it was now one o'clock at noon, I immediately
dispatched a messenger to Mr. Parker's, for a half guinea bottle of Drops, a
table spoonful of which was poured down that instant, with directions, if he
lived an hour and an half, to repeat it, and continue to give him that quantity
every two hours after, till a sweat or some visible signs of amendment were
discovered; and then to diminish the dose gradually; that no other medicine
should be administered on any account, but, to let him have as much baum tea,
or any simple diluting liquor as they could get down, by little and little,
every now and then; the blunder committed before, made them now doubly diligent
and punctual; I called the next day, and found the Fever was quite gone; but
such a lassitude and stupidity remained as exceeds all description. The nurse
informed me he lay very quiet till five o'clock; about six, he began to
perspire, and continued so to do the whole night plentifully; sleeping all the
time; which from his laying very still and motionless, and as she thought
breathless too, made her several times conclude he was dead, till by laying on
her hand every now and then she was satisfied to the contrary. I then ordered
the Drops to be given very sparingly, not above twenty or thirty, every two or
three hours, till I called the next day, when I pronounced him out of danger,
and ordered him to be wrapped up in a blanket, put into a carriage, and taken
somewhere to breathe a purer air as soon as possible, which was accordingly
done the next day. He soon gathered strength, and in a few days was able to
return to his business, and has continued ever since in good health and spirits.

CERTIFICATE.
I, Thomas Reynolds, master of the ship Mentor, belonging to the port of
London, do hereby certify to whom it may concern, that upon my late voyage from
St. Kitt's to Carolina, with negro slaves, several of them falling ill of
Fevers, and some of them very dangerously so, I administered to them Dr.
Norris's Antimonial Drops, and they all perfectly recovered, without the aid of
any other medicine whatsoever.

THOMAS REYNOLDS.
London, Oct. 15, 1773.
REMARKS.
This gentleman informed me, that from Africa to St. Kitt's, he had lost
upwards of seventy slaves, not being able to prevail on the surgeon to
administer my Antimonial Drops to them. When he arrived at St. Kitt's the
doctor quitted the ship, and the captain then had about seventy slaves left,
which he was to take to Carolina: in the passage ten or twelve of them were
seized with the same Fever the others died of; being then without a surgeon, he
had recourse to my Antimonial Drops, which recovered them; verily believing, if
timely administered, nine out of ten of those that were lost might have been
saved. These Drops were sent, by way of experiment, at the instance of a worthy
gentleman, a merchant in the city, much interested in African affairs, and
under the peculiar care of Captain Reynolds, the only one, he said, he could
depend upon to make a just report; before which, and since, several small boxes
were sent to merchants at Liverpool, for the same purpose, and some few from
the port of London also; but, strange to tell! when immediately under the care
and administration of the surgeon, all their influence were gone, and they
became of none effect. It would be no very easy matter to prevail upon many
commanders of ships who sail without surgeons, to credit this report from their
own experience. This I am very well assured of, and could venture my credit,
reputation, and fortune, upon the event, that if the surgeons of ships were
actuated by the same disinterested principles; my Antimonial Drops would prove
a great acquisition not only to the African company in preserving their
negroes, but the lives of thousands subject to putrid fevers in hot climates.

Letter from Capt. Stott, of his majesty's frigate the Juno, to Dr. Norris.
"IN justice to you, and from a desire of being serviceable to the community,
particularly that part of it which I have the honor to be a member of, I send
you, attested by the officers of his majesty's ship Juno, under my command, an
account of the effects of your Antimonial Drops, in the course of my late
voyage to and from Falkland's Island.

In the outward passage, by the surgeon of the ship's report to me, of the 5th
of April last, it appeared, that Geo. Hunter, and Laur. Pittman, two of the
seamen, were taken ill with Malignant Fevers; that having for several days been
given the usual medicines without effect, he thought them past a possibility of
recovery; judging this a fit opportunity to make a trial of the efficacy of
your drops, (for notwithstanding the recommendations which were given me of
them, and which induced me to take them with me, I had resolved to let every
usual means take place before I gave them) I then therefore gave a bottle to
the surgeon, and desired they might be administered; he said, it would, he
believed, be of little consequence whatever was given them, as he thought they
could not live to the next day, however, he would try them; the next morning,
in his account to me of the sick, he told me the men were much better, and he
believed they would recover, which from that time they did, and were soon after
able to do their duty in the ship.

On the 27th of July following, being in the southern part of the Torrid zone,
Mr. Joslin, the boatswain of the ship, was taken ill of the same Fever, with
the like symptoms as the two former, and after the surgeon had represented to
me, that he had used all the means in his power for his recovery, to no
purpose, the Antimonial Drops were given, and had the desired effect, by his
immediate recovery.

Sometime afterward, in the southern ocean, Ja. Hamm, and Evan Williams, the
one a boy, the other a marine, were seized with a fever, and were, by the
surgeons report to me, given over for many days; the Drops were given them
also, which produced a plentiful sweating, and their immediate recovery. Such
repeated success gives me the highest opinion of the virtues and efficacy of
your Antimonial Drops, and on these grounds I cannot too strongly recommend
them.

I also enclose you the surgeon's attestation taken from the journals of his
practice in the ship, and which, as well as this letter, you are at liberty to
make public. Wishing you every success,

I am, SIR, Your most obedient humble servant," JN. STOTT.
JUNO, Portsmouth, Jan. 5, 1772.

"We, the undermentioned officers of his majesty's said ship Juno, do also
testify what is mentioned in the above letter, and are of the same opinion with
regard to Dr. Norris's Antimonial Drops."

CHAR. C. CROOK, 1st Lieutenant WM. BARROW, 2d Lieutenant. JA. HOLROYD,
Master. WILL. JOSLIN, Boatswain. THO. TURNER, Purser.
"The surgeon's attestation, taken from his journal."
"5th of April, 1771. Geo. Hunter taken ill of a malignant fever; symptoms, a
headache, vomiting, burning heat for many days; the medicines given had no
effect; then the purging came on, with an insensibility; he continued in that
state four or five days; when Dr. Norris's Antimonial Drops were given, which
threw him into a perspiration, and he recovered.

Same day Laurence Pittman was taken ill; symptoms the same as Hunter, and
given over; when the Antimonial Drops were administered, which, without any
sensible operation, had the desired effect.

27th July, Mr. Joslin was taken ill of the same fever, as Hunter and Pittman,
symptoms the same, and after medicines being given to no effect, and given
over, the Antimonial Drops were given, and had the desired effect.

James Hamm and Evan Williams were both seized with the same fever; symptoms
the same; and were both given over for many days; the Antimonial Drops were
then given, which brought on a plentiful sweating, and both recovered.

JOHN BOYD, Surgeon."


Extract of a Letter from Robert Williams, Merchant, to Dr. Norris,
Duke-street, Westminster.
Newborn, North Carolina, 3 Mo. the 1st, 1772. "Much respected Friend,
THY favor, with a box of Antimonial Drops, I received by means of our Friend
Air, about 16 last 12 mo. They have gained great reputation in these parts,
and being the time of our general assembly in Newbern, and my own acquaintance
being very extensive in this province, I had an opportunity of recommending
them to many people; carried some to our good governor Martin. Immediately on
receiving them, I gave some to my own child, about two years old, who was
feverish, and much out of order. Every one in my family could observe a sudden
change for the better: I have continued to give him a few at times, and the
child is brave and hearty. Another child, about twelve months old, that had
been long sick, had lost all appetite, I advised them, which in a few days
recovered his health and appetite. A negro man in my own employ, about 23 years
of age, by much wading in the water, got a severe pleurisy; it being about 20
miles from where I reside myself, they bled him, after some days sweated him;
he went out before his sweat was off, and grew so bad, they sent me word they
thought he would die. I immediately dispatched orders to give him the
Antimonial drops, and he soon recovered.

Two persons, that had them of me, were cured of stubborn coughs, which, I
believe, would soon have terminated in consumptions.

A married woman, not with child, catched a considerable cold, which occasioned
a suppression of the m --, with fever and great pains. I advised the use of the
drops, which soon abated the pains, fever, and headache, and in about two days
time set nature to act for herself in the natural way.

I mention those few particulars, more for the conviction of others than thy
own confirmation. Indeed, for my own part, I believe the drops to be the most
sovereign remedy ever yet found out, for what thou recommends them, and may
prove advantageous in many cases which are not mentioned in thy directions."


Mr. Thomas Carter, Attorney at Law, at Mr. Cracraft's, Philpot-lane.
WAS miserably afflicted with a depression of spirits, bad digestion, and a
debility of natural strength, proceeding from a most violent scorbutic habit;
but is now in perfect health, by the sole use of Dr. Norris's Antimonial Drops.

THO. CARTER.


Green-arbour-court, Old-bailey, June 15, 1773. SIR,
FROM extreme weakness, and a total loss of appetite, I was reduced to so
deplorable a state that I had five successive miscarriages; in my sixth
pregnancy your Antimonial drops were administered, which restored my appetite
and digestion, and strengthened me to my full time in a happy delivery. I
recovered to the astonishment of all who knew me, and, together with my child,
am preserved in health, by the sole use of this invaluable medicine.

A. BROOKS.


SIR,
"I Had for many years a violent scorbutic humor, which at last not only grew
troublesome, but occasioned my breaking out in blotches, with continual
itching, attended with a heaviness and sudden heats, particularly after eating,
so that I became very disagreeeble to myself. After six weeks application of
these drops I felt every desired benefit, and am now in a better state of
health and vigor than I ever had before. I have administered with my own hands
the drops to many people in Fevers; in all I have succeeded, and in some cases
where the patients have been greatly despaired of. This you have my permission
to subjoin to your essay; and I am,

SIR, Your very humble servant, R. CRACRAFT."
Philpot lane, April 23, 1772.

A Letter from William Norris, Esquire; of Nonesuch, Willshire.
"SIR,
AS you seem desirous of communicating to the public the observations which
have been made by those who have either taken themselves, or administered to
others, your Antimonial preparation, (of which so formidable a notion has been
entertained) I cannot but think it incumbent on me, in consequence of the good
effects I have experienced from it, both in myself and family, to transmit you
a short account of the result. With regard to myself, my constitution is rather
valetudinary, and has been so as long as I can remember. It is now about
fifteen years since it was first invaded by the gout, which I think I may call
hereditary, as I cannot accuse myself of any irregularities adequate to the
severity with which I have been visited by this formidable enemy.

Among many causes that combine to bring on the gout, I was always of opinion,
that an obstrncted perspiration was one. To remove this, I was advised, when
perspiration was suppressed, to take your Antimonial Drops frequently and
plentifully; these, by promoting a good digestion, and it is consequent
attendant, a brisk circulation of the fluids, kept open my pores, which before,
upon any sudden change in the air from heat to cold, were generally closed.

In the fits of the gout I frequently take them in small quantities, and find
them promote, assisted by small dilutive liquors, sensible perspiration in a
high degree; and, upon any uneasy sensations in the stomach or bowels, during
the fit, they seldom fail to remove the cause. In Fevers, either Putrid or
Inflammatory, frequent occasions have offered to try their effects in a
numerous family of my own; and, from repeated experience, I never found them
fail of success, and that by removing the disease in a very few days.

Thus much I am warranted to say in their favor, and think them possessed of
much greater virtues than even I have described.

I am, SIR, Your most obedient humble servant, WM. NORRIS."
Bedford-row, Feb. 2, 1775.

SIR,
"TO be silent where the health of mankind is concerned, I deem a crime; must
therefore return you my sincere thanks for the great advantage I and my son
experienced, within these few months, from the use of your justly esteemed
Antimonial Drops, we were both attacked with a putrid fever and sore throat, he
in particular so bad that he became delirious; but, on taking a proper dose, or
two of the Drops, both were in a few hours much relieved, and in a short time
restored to perfect health. Beside my own experience of their salutary effects,
I have known several since that have been cured by them of Fevers, and in
consequence I take the liberty of recommending them strongly to all persons
laboring under such disorders, as one of the most sovereign remedies. If you
think proper, you have my permission to make this letter public, as it is but
doing common justice to that heavenly medicine, and my fellow creatures also.

I am, SIR, Your much obliged and most humble servant, PAUL MAYLOR."
Bennett street, Story's-gate, West-minster, Dec. 19, 1774.

To Dr. Norris, Duke-street, Westminster.
"SIR,
I Was greatly oppressed with a bilious disorder, and severely afflicted with
an hereditary gout; insomuch that for the most part of my time I was rendered
incapable of doing any business, 'till by the generous effects of your
Antimonial Drops my bilious complaints are removed; and each fit of the gout
rendered so short, by supporting a gentle perspiration universally, when it
came on, which they never yet failed to do in all my experience of them. I have
used them, at times, these five years and never enjoyed a better state of
health than since I have taken of them; wishing the same good effects on others
that I have experienced from them,

I am SIR, Your very humble servant, R. LEDGLEY."
Crown-court, Butcher-Row, Jan. 15, 1775.

To Dr. Norris, Duke-street, Westminster.
"SIR,
I Have read your late publication on the virtues of your Antimonial Drops. In
justice to the medicine, and in compliance to truth, I think it my duty to give
the following account of them within my own knowledge.

I had a Slow Fever upon me for several years, and could find no relief. When I
heard of the efficacy of your Drops, I immediately got a bottle, and took them
as directed; in a few hours I found relief, and in a short time after a perfect
cure. It is now upwards of two years, and I never had the least return. I have
since administered them to my spouse and niece, both in violent Fevers; a
copious sweat ensued, and the Fever ceased in a few hours, without a relapse.
Finding their efficacy such, I recommended them to several friends, to half a
score at least, in similar cases, in all which they had the desired effect; I
do not know of their failing in a single instance. This you have my permission
to publish for the good of mankind.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc. EDWARD SHUTE."
No. 1, Inner Temple, King's-bench-walks, Feb. 6, 1775.

To Dr. Norris, Duke-street, Westminster.
Letter from Mr. Anderson, Merchant, in Fenchurch-street.
"SIR,
I Was for some time troubled with a Slow Fever, with loss of appetite, and
lowness of spirits; but by taking your Antimonial Drops I was soon perfectly
relieved.

I am, SIR, Your most humble servant, RICHARD ANDERSON."
London, Feb. 7, 1775.

DR. NORRIS'S Antimonial Drops, by Royal Authority, are prepared and sold in
bottles at 5 s. 3 d. and 10 s. 6 d. at the Doctor's house, Duke-street,
Westminster, where he gives advice from nine to twelve every day, as usual, and
where (only) vendors, merchants, commanders of ships, and those who take a
quantity for charitable purposes, may be supplied wholesale. The Drops are also
sold retale, by his appointment, at Mr. Kearsly's, No 46, Fleet Street; Mr.
Parker's, White-lioncourt, Birchin-lane; Mr. Davenhill's, No 19, opsite the
Royal Exchange; Mess. Byfield and Hawkesworth's (late Woodfall's)
Charing Cross; Mr. Shropshire, New Bond street; Mr. Cadell's, Bristol; and at
Mr. Faulkner's, Dublin; at all which places this pamphlet may be had gratis.


