A REMARKABLE CASE OF MADNESS, WITH THE DIET AND MEDICINES, USED IN THE CURE.

BY WILLIAM PERFECT, M. D. OF WEST-MALLING, IN KENT, AND MEMBER OF THE LONDON
MEDICAL SOCIETY.

Morbi non Eloquentia sed Remediis curantur. ROCHESTER, PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR,
AND SOLD BY W. GILLMAN, J. MURRAY, FLEET STREET, J. EVANS, PATERNOSTER ROW AND
C. FORSTER, POULTRY, LONDON. 1791.

DEDICATION. TO DR. WILLIAM ROWLEY, Member of the University of Oxford, the
Royal College of Physicians, in London, etc. etc. etc.
SIR,
THE subsequent Case is a proof of the Utility of those Methods you have
recommended for the Treatment of mental derangements, in your excellent
Treatise, on Female, Nervous, Bilious Diseases, etc. I therefore beg leave to
dedicate this little performance to you, as a small Testimony of the Respect
due to a Physician, whose whole Life has been engaged in improving the Art of
Medicine.

And am, Sir, Your most obedient, humble Servant, WILLIAM PERFECT.

A REMARKABLE CASE OF MADNESS.
THE records of medicine cannot perhaps afford an instance similar to the
present, nor do we find in the different writers, who have professedly treated
on maniacal affections, one case wherein, at so early a period as the age of
eleven years, the disorder has appeared with marks so clear and intelligible.
And it is as singular in this instance that there seems no clue leading to the
cause, as predisposing to insanity, no translation of the diseased matter of
any part to the membranes of the brain producing delirium etc, nor diffusion of
bile, sudden subsidence of cutaneous eruptions, absortion of matter from
abscesses, wounds, or ulcers, no scrophulous or cancerous taint of the juices,
no exhibition of deleterious vegetables or mercurial preparations, no sudden
fright, accidental blow, fall, or any hereditary predisposition to mania. No
one of his family on the side of either father or mother having ever been
remembered to have been the least affected with mental disease; in short there
was no obvious cause to which the complaint could be rationally assigned. The
child was looked upon as possessed of no extraordinary share of genius,
ability, nor activity of imagination, nor was he so sprightly as most boys of
that age, but rather of a thoughtful, melancholic disposition, very little
inclined to puerile amusements and diversions; but rather docile and tractable,
he had always been healthy, had never shown a wanton propensity to hard and
indegistible aliment, he had never been too much indulged, nor compelled to any
intense application of mind. It was his custom in the morning to go with other
children to a school at some distance from his home, and to return in the
evening. On the twenty ninth of January, 1789, he returned unusually low and
dull, little notice was then taken of the alteration in his appearance; but
upon his return from school the following day, the depression and lowness being
much more visible, a serious enquiry took place, as to the cause of his
complaint, but his answers seemed rather extorted, were vague, unconnected, and
inconclusive he seemed hurried at the sight of strangers, often turned pale,
trembled, had an angry acute staring look, with dilated pupils, and dreadful
apprehensions, frequently looked fearfully about, as if he suspected some ill
design, sometimes he appeared timid and distressed sig^ed much, and had not
more than a quarter of an hours sleep throughout the whole night. January 31st,
from a supposition of costiveness, some manna was dissolved and given him,
which operated once, but did not relieve him in the least, he appeared all the
day unusually strange in his manner and actions. Fear, distress, and shame,
alternately occupied his mind but he did not at any time advert to any one
object in particular, nor upon the strictest examination could it be found that
he had been lately terrified, or undergone the least degree of scholastic
admonitory discipline, or that his temper had been ruffled in any shape
whatever. He was sat up with, had very little sleep, not more than two hours in
the whole night. In the morning, February 1st, he spoke rather more rationally
than he had done before, but complained of a pain in his head with giddiness,
weakness, and rather a dimness of fight, that his eyes ached and were painful,
and that he scarcely knew where he was, and said he was very sleepy; he laid
down to sleep, but was so restless and distressed in mind, as not to get any,
and if a word were spoken, it made him peevish, and petulant, and the least
motion from the bye standers became an immediate object of fresh inquietude and
vexation. Having some degree of rigor, and his legs and feet feeling very cold,
by the directions of his mother, they were very judiciously immersed in warm
water, and he was put to bed again, when the same distressful ideas occasioned
the same watchfulness as before, and he slept not so much as an hour in the
whole night, often waking in great perturbation of mind, sometimes sighing, as
if he labored under great affliction and at intervals incessantly talking and
rambling with quick transition from one subject to another, without the least
reason or coherence whatever. February 2d, the family apothecary was sent for,
who found him in the state as before describeed with an alienation of mind
without a fever; the skin harsh and dry, he had had little or no perspiration
from the time he was taken, sometimes very wakeful and loquacious, at others
stupid, absent, and musing, and the pulse rather below the natural standard at
his age; sinapisms were ordered to the feet, and a blister to the back, which
were applied in the evening; he passed the night in a more uneasy and restless
manner than before, and in the morning, at the particular request of the
apothecary, another practitioner was consulted. February 3d, his sleep during
the night had been less disturbed, but of very short duration, at most not more
than ten or fifteen minutes at a time, and in the intervals frequently
interrupted with sighs and startings. February 4th, all the former signs of
mental derangement recurred, and there appeared not the least alteration for
the better, the blister had discharged but little, and he having been costive,
for some time, four stimulant clysters were successively injected; but returned
again, just tinged with the feces, and without any apparent good effect. Until
February 18th, he continued alternately in a silent stupid or distressfully
obstreperous slate; but at intervals began to show some signs of returning
reason, which continued to furnish hopes of recovery, until February 14th, when
he reverted entirely into his former bad state, had a miserably distressing
night, with the aggravated symptoms of distorted eyes, and oppressed
respiration; neither was he in the least better all that Day nor the following
night; the blister at his back discharged tolerably well, was kept open, and an
issue was also opened in his arm. February 15th, etc, he took emetics twice,
which had no manner of effect either upwards or downwards; bolusses of camphor
were prescribed and given; but still he remained in a gloomy and perturbed
state of mind without any sever until February 19th, when becoming much worse
in every respect, and by way of revulsion, it was thought necessary to apply
blisters to the legs, which was done, and a very bad night ensued; for it was
with much difficulty he was kept in bed; besides the ordinary symptoms of
melancholy, he was at times more irascible and furious than at any former
period of his illness. February 20th, all day he appeared to labor under the
most excruciating and intense sensations of anxiety and anguish, and passed a
dreadful night. February 21st. the same symptoms continued without the least
mitigation, until toward the morning, when a sullen silence and reserve,
accompanied with some degree of sleep supervened, relaxing from which, for some
hours, he appeared rational, and more calm and composed than he had been for
some time before; but this was an interval of short duration, for February 22d.
he grew much worse, with cold shuddering, great difficulty of breathing, was
furious, and became quite raving, so that two strong people could not hold him,
down in his bed, without much exertion, and in this state, with very little
variation, he continued until February 27th. when soon after some loose feces,
procured by a laxative medicine, he suddenly became more easy and composed,
passed more water than he had done for several days before, slept with much
less interruption, seemed to be more rational, and in some degree, recoverd his
usual spirits, but February 28th. he reverted to his former state of horror and
dejection, and seemed scarcely to know or attend at all to external objects.
March 1st. he was apparently less distressed and agitated in his mind. March
2d, produced some comfortable hopes that he was getting better, which in some
degree alleviated the painful feelings of maternal affection, that had so long
been upon the rack on account of his sufferings; but this cessation of parental
solicitude, was only protracted until March 7th, when he again appeared low and
sad, and much deranged in mind, and complained of a pain and weight in his
head, which was directed to be shaved and embrocated with distilled vinegar,
and a blister to the head was also advised as essentially necessary; but the
idea of its application was so distressing to his friends, as to preclude for
the present all thoughts of it; another emetic much stronger than either of the
former was next thought of and administered accordingly; but proved as
inefficacious in its operation as either of the preceding, neither occasioning
nausea, vomiting, or purging; but some small degree of dampness on the skin was
thought to be in consequence of it. Hitherto every medical effort had proved
fruitless, and the poor little sufferer obtained no palliation of the symptoms.
March 9th. Still a victim to the ravages and returns of this merciless malady,
he was seized with dismal apprehensions, and groundless fears. The faculties of
his mind were weak and timid. Taciturnity and meditation took place of horror
and depression, tears and lamentations, which recurred and remitted in
proportion as his ruminating paroxysms were longer or shorter, his nights were
passed in watchfulness, and his days in sadness, with lucid intervals of
momentary duration, until March 13th, when the solitary state of his mind
changed, on a sudden, into distraction audacity and violence,; the dilirium
appearing to have taken a turn directly opposite to its former genus, so that
from the desponding, he was now become the raving maniac, and the situation of
himself and friends was rendered truly deplorable indeed. At this crisis of
calamity a blister to the head was again proposed, and the former objections
giving way to the emergency of the case, was applied, when the next day he was
infinitely worse, and more restless and unmanagable than he had ever been
before. The causticity of the blister occasioned the most violent excitement,
and thereby counterbalanced every benefit which might have arisen from its
discharge, and indeed in a very long and extensive practice I never remember to
have seen more than two instances of the good effects of vesication to the
head, one of which was in a phrenitic complaint where torpidity and langour had
been brought on by profuse evacuations, and the other in a maniacal affection,
of some standing, when the powers of nature had been debilitated by inanition.
In the indiscriminate uses of epispastics to the head, for the cure of cerebral
disorders, particularly where an overfulness is already obvious, much mischief
may be apprehended from their ardent and powerfully stimulating influence.
March 15th, the patient became so very raving and restless, that having no
strait waistcoat, nor using any ligatures to his arms and legs, it was as much
as three people could keep him from getting out of bed, in which frantic and
turbulent state he continued until March 17th, when another emetic was
administered, but with the same ineffecacy as before. March 21st. The violence
of the disorder seemed abated, and on that and the following day he was not so
loud and raving as he had been for many days before but often muttered to
himself, and appeared stupid, absent, and musing. March 23d, he continued more
still and quiet, but very low and melancholic, at any time scarcely spoke loud
enough to be heard, and remained in this depressed state until March 26, when
he seemed to recover more or his usual spirits, and was at times tolerably
consistent and rational. March 27th, his former symptoms recurring, my advice
and attendance was thought necessary, and when with the most feeling anxiety
and symphathetic concern, the whole of the foregoing account was recollected,
and given me in detail, as far as her memory could assist her, by the afflicted
mother of the patient, whom I found removed to a remote part of the house, and
lodged in a darkened room, with an assistant on each side the bed, for the
purpose of coercion when necessary, and notwithstanding the length of his
confinement, the violence of his disorder, and the many relapses to which he
had been subject, he had not that morbid or emaciated appearence which might
have been expected. Approaching to the bedside, I did not at first seem to
attract his attention, but after speaking to him he turned round, and in a low
desponding manner, said, "He should never be any better, but that I might do as
I pleased with him, that his father was not able to provide for him, and that
he had never been able to learn so quick as other boys;" to which I made him
the most consolatory answers I could suggest, and soothed him as much as
possible; at the same time assuring him of the great probability which I
entertained of doing him good, and of getting him quite well, provided my rules
and directions were punctually followed; by this means appearing to have gained
his good opinion, he smiled, and seemed pleased; and to do my little patient
justice, when in his senses, and capable of so doing, he cheerfully strove to
second my endeavors to assist him, by an implicit obedience to my advice and
instructions. Perceiving that he frequently made sudden efforts to jump out of
the bed, and that the attendants in endeavoring to restrain him, irritated him
the more, I recommended the use of a strait waistcoat, which I had brought with
me for that purpose, and which was used before I left the house, and continued
occasionally to the end of the cure. From the first beginning of his disorder,
his appetite had been much depraved: upon examination I perceived a small
degree of tension about the epigastric region; but not attended with any pain,
nor had there been the least degree of inflammation in the stomach or bowels;
his breath had at times been fetid, but not extremely so, and was now rather
offensive; the urine had been sometimes high colored, and at others pale and
limpid; but had never been observed to deposit any kind of sediment, and in
general had been made in smaller quantities than was natural. His deglutition
had been observed to be more difficult, when under the paroxysm of dejection,
and in his most delirious state, with a slight degree of deafness, moisture of
the eyes, dimness of sight, and an involuntary discharge of tears, he talked
much more inconsistent than when I first saw him, and complained of specter
and frightful dreams: often when at the best, I was informed, he appeared
drowsy and ready to fall a sleep, he had frequent eructationry, and his feet
were remarked to have been alternately hot, dry, and cold, his eyes
sufficiently indicated the perturbed state of his mind, their pupils were
greatly distended, and the lids tumid and red, with a sordid rheum adhering to
the edges, his face was florid, but neither bloated nor swelled, he expressed
some childishly ridiculous fears, appeared very forgetful, with a small degree
of stupor, and upon asking him where he was most in pain, after two or three
times waving his hand, as if in doubt, he at last pointed to his forehead, he
appeared to have an equal degree of heat over the whole body, nor was there the
least augmentation thereof in his head and temples, he was naturally inclined
to costiveness, and the stools he had had through the course of his disorder,
(when not procured by medicine,) where generally high colored, and at the
distance of two or three days; he had not the least degree of fever, and the
functions of his mind were apparently injured and deranged, he frequently
changed his position in bed with an extraordinary degree of velocity and
strength, and was so little debilitated, that he appeared to have a greater
share of muscular strength, than in a healthy state, is common to boys of his
age. I observed that he seemed rather pleased in every opportunity to give his
attendants fresh occasion to watch and guard him, his respiration was not in
the least oppressed, and he had no sickness at his stomach, his deep had been
much interrupted, and seldom long continued, his sweats had been partial, and
never once either profuse or general, chiefly in the night, and seldom
continued more than a few minutes at a time; probably from the disturbed state
of his mind, and the restlessness of his body consequent thereon. In the
paroxysms he had been sometimes heard to grind and gnash his teeth; had never
appeared thirsty, nor at any time had he drank with eagerness and voracity; his
voice was much lower than its natural pitch, and seemed incapable of continued
distinct articulation. The pulse was low, at about sixty, and scarcely
perceptable, but though so low and weak, I considered it as a fallacious guide,
and that its present state was a certain indication either of some obstruction
in the heart or lungs, or some degree of oppression in the cerebellum. I was
therefore fully satisfied with the expediency of taking away some blood as the
best preliminary step to the cure. Venesection was accordingly performed, and
about six ounces of blood taken from the arm; immediately after which the
vibrations of the artery were manifestly more distinct and somewhat
accelerated; the blood, when cold, was covered with a a very thin cake of
gluten, adhered to the basin, was very bilious, and the serum was of a
yellowish color. Soon after the operation, the child spoke rationally for some
time, seemed much less drowsy; was more inclined to sleep, than he was before,
but in about an hour relapsed into his former state. I directed a seton to be
made between the scapuloe in the direction of the spine; that his feet should
be frequently immersed in a warm pediluvium of salt and water, and with a view
to induce perspiration, that he should often recline his head over the edge of
an earthen vessel, and receive the fumes of warm vinegar and water; that he
should be restrained by the use of the waistcoat, as occasion should require;
and be talked to as little as possible. Considering the proximate cause of his
disorder to arise from a turgency and detension in the cerebral vessels, I
recommended the diet to be cooling, plain and slender, with almost a total
abstinence from liquid food, that drinks of all sorts should be sparingly
admitted; and in their stead directed roasted apples, dried cherries,
tamarinds, or current jelly, etc. All objects, which engaged his attention, or
excited the least emotion, were to be removed, with a view to keep his mind
calm and placid; so that all mental irritation being taken off, the aptitude of
frantic paroxysm might be lessened. He was ordered to abstain from all
flatulent, viscid, and gross food, to have more air, and even exercise, when it
could be admitted. As emetics had been so repeatedly tried without effect, and
were thought hazardous, as they force too great a quantity of blood to the
head, I objected to their use, and prescribed a saline purgative mixture, with
the infusion and tincture of sena, to be taken until evacuations should be
procured. Laxatives were continued occasionally to prevent costiveness, and
having in many instances experienced the efficacy and good effects of camphor
in similar disorders, as may be seen in my late publication of SELECT CASES OF
INSANITY, I prescribed as follows,

. Camphoroe ij

S: V: R: iij

Gum: Arabic and Sacc: Alb: a ij Misce simul denique add gradatim aquoe
pluvialis viij cujus capiat coch. ij vel iij ad libitum: for which form I was
in great measure indebted to Dr. Rowley, who in his excellent Treatise on
Female Nervous Diseases, Madness, etc. very judiciously recommends it as a much
better preparation of camphor than the julepum e camphora; because in the
former the dose of camphor may be ascertained, whereas in the latter the finest
particles, by the use of boiling water, evaporate and fly off, so as to render
the remedy of doubtful utility, or perhaps, in a great measure inefficacious.
On the day after my visit, March 28th, I was informed the patient had passed a
tolerable easy night and had derived the expected relief from the purgative
medicine. March 29th, he had some sickness at the stomach, which was attributed
to the camphor, on which account the julep was directed to be given in less
quantities, and not so often, March 30th, the report was still more favorable,
he was more rational, and talked with recollection and propriety, but was
subject to remitting pains in his head. March 31st, he became very low, indeed,
and was in every respect in a state similar to that at the commencement of his
complaint. April 1st, he was tolerably rational; but complained of his head,
with depression of spirits, and cried very much, said "nobody loved him, and
that he should not be happy in a future state." April 2d. having passed a very
indifferent night, he was attacked with cold shiverings and yawning, cried very
much, and entreated his mother to come, which she did; but his distress and
anxiety continued the same as before. The seton began to discharge plentifully,
in the afternoon, his head was easier, he appeared better, and the depressions
were of much shorter duration than they had been. April 3d, he had a tolerable
good night, and was still more rational and quiet than the day before; upon the
whole, there appeared a probable chance of success by a continuation of the
plan first laid down. April 4th, after a tolerable night, early in the morning
the depression returned, his feet being damp and cold, the pediluvium was used;
he had no occasion for opening medicines, having had fecal evacuations
regularly once, and sometimes twice, on the three preceding days; the urine had
continued its proper course. April 5th, the urine was very high colored,
without sediment, or fever, the belly regular, pulse seventy. The discharge
from the seton was little, but from the issue much increased; in the night he
was rather restless, with slight wanderings of the mind, but more rational in
the daytime. The regimen continued to be punctually observed, and the patient
was carried out in the open air upwards of an hour. April 6th, he complained of
his belly, and was observed to rub and pick his nose, with some degree of
lowness, a sudden loss of voice, and paleness of countenance; he complained of
nausea at his stomach, his breath was unusually fetid, in the night, he was
very watchful, and incoherent in his expressions, and had troublesome dreams,
with evident marks of indigestion. April 7th, he was much the same all day, the
night was restless and uneasy, the fetor of the breath continuing, with
pricking sensations of the abdomen and a frequent irritation to stool, induced
an idea of worms being the cause; but as the excrements had never appeared
white or slimy, and none had ever been voided by stool; that they really did
exist was a matter of doubt; however, from the foregoing evidence, I thought it
advisable to try the mercurius saccharatus of the Ebinburgh Dispensatory; both
as a good evacuant, and a safe vermifuge; this medicine after being taken
twice, occasioned two dejections within the space of a few hours; but no worms,
nor any thing of a verminous nature appearing in the stools, and the symptoms
which had given rise to this supposition still continuing, the more effectually
to dislodge them, if they did exist; I prescribed one grain of the gum gut.
gamb. with half a grain of calomel, and an additional proportion of saccharum,
made into the form of a powder, to be exhibited at proper periods, besides
which, I directed some garlic to be cut small, and between whiles to be given
in milk, but neither of these remedies producing the least appearance of worms,
and the patient being apparently not so well in many respects as before, he
discontinued his former regimen and medicines. April 11th. They were had
recourse to again, the purgative medicine being directed to be intermitted as
usual -- we had now a partial suppression of urine, which was soon removed by
mild diuretics. -- It was an observation made by those about him, that he was
always more in his senses, and that his head was always clearest when there was
a plenty of urine, and that this had been the case from the commencement of his
disorder; it was therefore a symptom which more particularly required an
alleviation, and was removed without much difficulty by small doses of the
spiritus nitri dulcis in parsley-root tea, and to the prevention of which the
warm pediluvium, which was constantly continued, did in great measure
contribute. April 12th, he appeared much better in every respect, his mind was
settled and quiet, and he was taken into the air, and except some flatulencies
in the stomach, passed the day in a much more rational manner than at any time
before; but in the evening was again very low, sighed much, and was incongruous
in his speech and behavior, but not turbulently so, he slept but little all
that night, and the next morning appeared drowsy and lowspirited, which was in
great measure attributed to taking cold in his airing the day before. April
13th. After having had a tolerable good night he got up and dressed, walked
about the room and was very rational; the seton which before had been very fore
and painful, discharged more and became easier; having had no stool for two
days, the purgative medicine was given and repeated at proper distances, but
not having its usual effect in the evening, an emollient clyster was
administered, which produced stools of a fetid and loose kind, and he had this
night a more general and long continued perspiration than at any time before
during his illness; but was at intervals watchful and restless. April 14th, he
was very sensible, and at his own request again taken out into the air for some
considerable time, continued tolerably rational all day; but in the evening was
again depressed and low, wandered in his conversation from one subject to
another, and complained of pain and weight in his head. The warm pediluvium was
made use of for half an hour before, and at bedtime, the camphorated julep was
given, his sleep was frequently interrupted with terrifying dreams, he had no
stool, and in the morning awoke very sorrowful and low, and continued in that
state through the greatest part of the day. April 15th, he was much the same,
in the forenoon he took twice of the camphorated julep, and in the afternoon
once of the laxative medicine, which had no effect; he had little or no
appetite, appeared much out of temper, and at times talked wild and
inconsistently; in the evening a clyster was given, which soon after returned
without doing any service. The night was passed in watchfulness, and much
interrupted by frightful dreams. April 16th, he appeared much clearer in his
intellects, but complained of pain in his head, with a tension of the abdomen
and difficult respiration; the oleum ricini was therefore prescribed instead of
the former purgative, the second dose of which procured a stool soon after it
was taken; but he was not able to pass any water, nor had he made a drop for
the last four and twenty hours. The spiritus nitri dulcis was therefore again
directed to be taken in a cupful of parsley-root tea, till he made water freely
-- he continued calm all the day, but not very rational, and had rather a
better night than before. April 17th, he was very low, spoke but little, and at
times was rather absurd in his actions and behavior; continued so all the day,
and passed but a very indifferent night. April 18th, he had a free passage, and
had no occasion for either the drops or oil. April 19th, he was very composed
and consistent; the feet were continued to be immersed in the warm pediluvium,
and continued moist and warm; he perspired during his sleep, which was longer
and but little interrupted; and made water freely; it was of a reddish color,
and deposited alight sediment. April 19th and 20th, he continued in a
comfortable state, had good nights, and his appetite returned. April 21st he
was very low, and complained of his head, and having had no stool for three
days, a spoonful of the oil was given him, which answered the purpose soon
after it was taken; his head was relieved, he continued cool and rational all
the day, and had a very good night. April 22d, At his own particular request he
was placed in a little carriage for several hours, drawn about in the air, and
was indulged in every little amusement that could be thought of; but with the
precaution, that the mental faculty should not be permitted to dwell too long
at a time on any object whatever; he now began to speak and play about in his
usual manner, and with more vivacity, it was observed, than before his disorder
took place. He wished to ride on horseback, but for the present it was thought
improper, and he patiently acquiesced in that opinion. As the singularity of
his case excited much curiosity, many persons had a desire to see him, but none
were admitted so to do, but those he had been previously acquainted with -- if
by chance he saw any strangers, it was remarked that the sight of them did not
hurry and agitate his mind so much as it had done in the former part of his
complaint. He continued in a quiet and rational state under the same regulation
of diet and medicine as before enjoined, until May 10, when after an
indifferent night, very early in the morning he was reattacked with his former
unaccountable lowness of spirits and melancholic ideas, his mind became
alternately agitated with fear and sorrow, suspicion and solicitude, and
continued so all the day, having had no regular stools for the last two days;
some of the oil was given, the first dose of which had no effect; the second
answered the purpose, but from this as well as some sleep which he got in the
first part of the night, he derived but little benefit. The pediluvium and
camphorated julep were continued regularly, and May 12th he appeared much more
tranquil, but complained of pain in the lower bowels, which was removed by a
stimulating clyster, after two doses of the oil had been tried in vain. May
13th, he was affected with a pain in his head, and his eyes being slightly
inflamed, and the lids rather swelled and red, by my direction a surgeon was
sent for to bleed him, who at first objected to the operation, on account of
the lowness in his pulse; but at the request of the mother, through respect to
my advice, his opinion was overruled, and he took away about twelve ounces of
blood; he bled very slow, and did not appear to miss the blood at all; until
his arm was binding up, when he turned pale, his lips became white, and he was
all over in perspiration, but soon recovered without fainting. The pulse, after
bleeding, was observed to be more manifest to the touch, stronger, and rather
more accelerated. Upon enquiry, I found the blood had a slight buffy
appearance, and by way of curiosity upon being divided and put into scales, the
crassamentum weighed six ounces and three quarters, and the serum five ounces
and a half: an experiment made to please the fancy, and for the satisfaction of
the mother of the patient. The seton had discharged little, but the issue very
much, which had been the case all along; after bleeding he passed the night
well, and was tolerably well all the next day. May 15th, he was rather low and
inconsistent in his discourse, having had no stool the usual quantity of oil
was given and repeated, but without effect. May 16th, he was not so low as
yesterday and more consistent, but having made no water all the former day and
night, the scarcity of it was relieved as usual by the drops and parsley-root
tea. May l7th, he was very dull, talked but little, and seemed not much to
attend to external objects. May 18th. Having passed a very good night, and
having had a natural stool in the morning, he appeared much better in every
respect, and was very tractable, still, and rational all day. May 19th, he
appeared quite comfortable and happy, and desired to ride on horseback, which
by my direction was agreed to. At the same time I advised, that he should
receive every admissible gratification. From this time, he continued rational
in his conversation, and consistent in his behavior; but was frequently too
high-spirited, and sometimes rather troublesome to rule, and it was not without
the interposition of some authority, that he was prevailed on to persevere in
any part of the regimen which had been before enjoined; for having recovered
his liberty, and experienced the indulgent partiality naturally resulting from
the joy of the parent, whose tenderest feelings had been so long exercised on
his account, and as he got better, the diet having been allowed to be more
liberal and nutritious, though small in quantity and gradually increased, he
began to consider every restraint with more impatience -- although in general
he conformed to order tolerably well. On account of sudden slight inflammation
and itching in his right eye, it was thought advisable to repeat the bleeding
on the seventh of June, from which time every distressing and tumultuary motion
subsided, and he has continued without interruption in the full plenitude of
his mental faculties, to the comfort and grateful acknowledgment of his worthy
and respectable family. The seton was dried up soon after the last bleeding,
but the issue in the arm has been kept open. It is very singular that ever
since his recovery he has been much more cheerful and sprightly, and not in the
least subject to that lowness and dejection of spirits which had always before
been considered as naturally attached to his temper and disposition.

APPENDIX.
IT may be thought that one Case, however striking, may not be sufficiently
conclusive to determine the efficacy of any new plan of cure, but there are
several more that have come under my observation; amongst these the two
following are worthy the consideration of Medical Practitioners.

A man about Forty-eight years of age, naturally of a melancholic temperament,
without any apparent cause, on a sudden, became sullen, reserved, and morose,
showed a great propensity to suicide, and his mind gradually sunk into the most
distressful state of dejection and melancholy; his memory was very defective,
the lucid intervals were of short and momentary duration, his appetite was
depraved there was a constipation of the bowels, he was sometimes very deaf,
was subject to eructations, with involuntary motion of the eyes; his
countenance was pallid, and his face bloated and swelled, he had often the most
ridiculous fears and apprehensions, and now and then complained of a pain as
though a nail were driven into his head, with an uneasiness in the right
hypochondrium, which upon examination appeared rather hard and swelled; he had
taken several vomits, and had a blister to the head without receiving the least
advantage from either, he had never been in the least restrained from fluids,
but on the contrary suffered to indulge in the free use of those, to which he
was most partial; when he was placed under my care, the pulse was in general
about eighty, rather weak and small, but became evidently stronger and greater,
after the effusion of six ounces of blood from the arm; evacuating cathartics
were prescribed occasionally, a seton was opened between the shoulders in the
direction of the spine; and Ten grains of camphor were administered in a bolus,
four times in a day. Abstinence from fluids was observed with the greatest care
and circumspection, their quantities being gradually abridged, and almost
totally left off for nearly five months successively according to Dr. Rowley's
system, at the end of which period there remained not the least incongruity of
idea, his perception was clear, and his judgment as sound as at any former
period of his life, he voluntarily continued with me some months after the
cure, and has ever since retained the full enjoyment of his health and reason.

A YOUNG lady about the age of twenty seven, naturally of a habit obnoxious to
inflammatory disorders, whose mother had unfortunately been subject to chronic
madness, was suddenly seized with a rigor succeeded by an acute inflammatory
fever, a quick full and tense pulse, great heat, thirst, and acute pains in the
head, back and loins, and slight delirium, with dimness of sight, to moderate
the febrile symptoms venesection, cooling diaphoretics and diluting drinks were
prescribed. On the ninth day from the attack, loose stools and turbid urine,
confirmed the crisis of the disorder, and the more violent symptoms
consequently subsiding, the cortex took place as a tonic, and she was thought
to be in a promising state of convalescence, but an anxiety and solicitude of
mind very unusual to her before her illness, supervening served as a
confirmation to her friends of her being in the full possession of the morbid
patrimony of her mother, her appetite was depraved, her pulse quick and hard,
and her breath was uncommonly hot and offensive, she talked wild, and with
almost incessant vociferation, got but little sleep, with less perspiration,
expressed false fears, and often described images which did not exist, she
often shuddered with cold, and was afterward hot and thirsty, after a
continuation in this phrenetic state for several days, she was committed to my
care. I found she had been suffered to drink copiously of diluting liquors, the
serous vessels were tinged with red blood, the eye lids puffed and tumid, the
tunica albuginea was red and inflamed, and the pupils much distended, there was
an uncommon floridity of the face, a great discoloration of the tongue, and
difficulty of respiration; at intervals she became silent, reserved, and
melancholy, at other times so obstreperous and violent, as to render coercion
absolutely necessary, the pulse was hard and cordlike, and about an hundred and
twenty strokes in a minute, venesectio ad deliquum was advised, the blood
appeared to be in a very inflamed and disordered state, neutral salts were
administered occasionally, the warm pediluvium was directed every night before
she went to bed, camphor and nitre were given at stated intervals, and almost a
total abstinence from fluids, was enjoined for nearly two months, in which time
venesection was thrice repeated; when the mental perturbation which was
evidently dependent on the fever, and a type thereof, together with the primary
cause terminated favorably, she staid with me some months after the cure, had
no relapse, and has remained perfectly clear in her intellects ever since.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 6, line 7, for Absortion, read Absorption

Page 7, -- 10, -- indegistible, -- indigestible

Page 18, -- 10, -- Dilirium, -- Delirium

Page 19, -- 14, -- Langour, -- Langour

Page 21, -- 10, -- was -- were

-- 11, dele and

Page 25, -- 12, -- eructationary, -- eructions

Page 29, -- 11, -- was more, -- and

Page 30, -- 16, after, etc. -- and

-- 18, dele were

This Day were published,

In Two Volumes Octavo, Price Twelve Shillings, Founded on the Correspondence
of the late Learned and Ingenious DR. COLIN MACKENZIE A NEW EDITION, BEING THE
THIRD OF CASES IN MIDWIFERY, WITH REFERENCES, QUOTATIONS AND REMARKS, AND AN
ENGRAVED PLATE OF AN HYDROCEPHALOUS CHILD, INSCRIBED TO DR. S. F. SIMMONS, F.
R. S.

And sold by the Booksellers in the Title Page.

Of whom may be had, Quarto, Price One Shilling, AN ADDRESS TO THE PUBLIC ON
THE SUBJECT OF INSANITY, Embellished with an elegantly Engraved Frontispicce.

ALSO SELECT CASES OF INSANITY, etc.

Price Six Shillings, DEDICATED TO JOHN COAKLEY LETTSOM, M. D. F. R. S. BY
WILLIAM PERFECT, M. D.

Speedily will be Published, A PRACTICAL DISSERTATION ON THE EPILIPSY, AND AN
ESSAY ON FEMALE AND NERVOUS DISORDERS, BY THE SAME AUTHOR.


