MORAL ESSAYS.

[Price one shilling.]

MORAL ESSAYS, IN FOUR EPISTLES.

BY ALEXANDER POPE, ESQUIRE.

Est brevitate opus, ut currat sententia, neu se
Inpediat verbis lassis onerantibus aures:
Et sermon opus est modo tristi, saepe jocoso,
Defendente vicem modo Rhetoris atque Poetae,
Interdum urbani, parcentis viribus, atque
Extenuantis eas consulto.
HOR. GLASGOW: Printed by R. URIE, MDCCLIV.

MORAL ESSAYS.
EPISTLE I.
TO Sir RICHARD TEMPLE, Lord COBHAM.
ARGUMENT. Of the Knowledge and Characters of MEN.
THAT it is not sufficient for this knowledge to consider man in the abstract:
books will not serve the purpose, nor yet our own experience singly, v. 1.
General maxims, unless they be formed upon both, will be but notional, v. 10.
Some peculiarity in every man, characteristic to himself, yet varying from
himself, v. 15. Difficulties arising from our own passions, fancies, faculties,
etc. v. 31. The shortness of life, to observe in, and the uncertainty of the
principles of action in men, to observe by, v. 37, etc. Our own principle of
action often hid from ourselves, v. 41. Some few characters plain, but in
general confounded, dissembled, or inconsistent, v. 51. The same man utterly
different in different places and seasons, v. 71. Unimaginable weaknesses in
the greatest, v. 70, etc. Nothing constant and certain but God and Nature, v.
95. No judging of the motives from the actions; the same actions proceeding
from contrary motives, and the same motives influencing contrary actions, v.
100. II. Yet to form characters, we can only take the strongest actions of a
man's life, and try to make them agree: the utter uncertainty of this, from
nature itself, and from policy, v. 120. Characters given according to the rank
of men of the world, v. 135. And some reason for it, v. 140. Education alters
the nature, or at least character, of many, v. 149. Actions, passions,
opinions, manners, humors, or principles, all subject to change. No judging by
nature, from v. 158 to 178. III. It only remains to find (if we can) his RULING
PASSION: that will certainly influence all the rest, and can reconcile the
seeming or real inconsistency of all his actions, v. 175. Instanced in the
extraordinary character of Clodio, v. 179. A caution against mistaking second
qualities for first, which will destroy all possibility of the knowledge of
mankind, v. 210. Examples of the strength of the ruling passion, and its
continuation to the last breath, v. 222, etc.

EPISTLE I.
YES, you despise the man to books confined,
Who from his study rails at human kind;
Though what he learns he speaks, and may advance
Some general maxims, or be right by chance.
The coxcomb bird, so talkative and grave,
That from his cage cries cuckold, whore, and knave,
Though many a passenger he rightly call,
You hold him no philosopher at all.
And yet the fate of all extremes is such,
Men may be read, as well as books, too much.
To observations which ourselves we make,
We grow more partial for the observer's sake;
To written wisdom, as another's, less:
Maxims are drawn from notions, those from guess.
There Is some peculiar in each leaf and grain,
Some unmarked fiber, or some varying vein:
Shall only man be taken in the gross?
Grant but as many sorts of mind as moss.
That each from other differs, first confess;
Next, that he varies from himself no less:
Add nature's, custom's, reason's, passion's strife,
And all opinion's colors cast on life.
Our depths who fathoms, or our shallows finds,
Quick whirls, and shifting eddies, of our minds?
On human actions reason though you can,
It may be reason, but it is not man:
His principle of action once explore,
That instant it is his principle no more.
Like following life through creatures you dissect,
You lose it in the moment you detect.
Yet more; the difference is as great between
The optics seeing, as the objects seen.
All manners take a tincture from our own;
Or come discolored through our passions shown.
Or fancy's beam enlarges, multiplies,
Contracts, inverts, and gives ten thousand dies.
Nor will life's stream for observation stay,
It hurries all too fast to mark their way:
In vain sedate reflections we would make,
When half our knowledge we must snatch, not take.
Often, in the passions' wild rotation tossed,
Our spring of action to ourselves is lost:
Tired, not determined, to the last we yield,
And what comes then is master of the field.
As the last image of that troubled heap,
When sense subsides, and fancy sports in sleep,
(Though past the recollection of the thought)
Becomes the stuff of which our dream is wrought:
Something as dim to our internal view,
Is thus, perhaps, the cause of most we do.
True, some are open, and to all men known;
Others so very close, they are hid from none;
(So darkness strikes the sense no less than light)
Thus gracious CHANDOS is beloved at sight;
And every child hates Shylock, though his soul
Still sits at squat, and peeps not from its hole.
At half mankind when generous Manly raves,
All know it is virtue, for he thinks them knaves:
When universal homage Umbra pays,
All see it is vice, and itch of vulgar praise.
When flattery glares, all hate it in a queen,
While one there is who charms us with his spleen.
But these plain characters we rarely find;
Though strong the bent, yet quick the turns of mind:
Or puzzling contraries confound the whole;
Or affectations quite reverse the soul.
The dull, flat falsehood serves, for policy:
And in the cunning, truth itself's a lie:
Unthought-of frailties cheat us in the wise;
The fool lies hid in inconsistencies.
See the same man, in vigor, in the gout;
Alone, in company; in place, or out;
Early at business, and at hazard late;
Mad at a fox-chace, wise at a debate;
Drunk at a borough, civil at a ball;
Friendly at Hackney, faithless at Whitehall.
Catius is ever moral, ever grave,
Thinks who endures a knave, is next a knave,
Save just at dinner -- then prefers, no doubt,
A rogue with ven'son to a saint without.
Who would not praise Patritio's high desert,
His hand unstained, his uncorrupted heart,
His comprehensive head! all interests weighed,
All Europe saved, yet Britain not betrayed.
He thanks you not, his pride is in picquette,
New-market-fame, and judgment at a bett.
What made, (say Montagne, or more sage Charron!)
Otho a warrior, Cromwell a buffoon?
A perjured prince a leaden saint revere, VER. 89. -- A perjured prince] Louis
XI. of France wore in his hat a leaden image of the Virgin Mary, which when he
swore by, he feared to break his oath.

A godless regent tremble at a star?
The throne a bigot keep, a genius quit, VER. 91. The throne a bigot keep, a
genius quit,] Philip V. of Spain, who, after renouncing the throne for
religion, resumed it to gratify his queen; and Victor Amadeus II. king of
Sardinia, who resigned the crown, and trying to reassume it, was imprisoned
till his death.

Faithless through piety, and dup'd through wit?
Europe a woman, child, or dotard rule,
And just her wisest monarch made a fool?
Know GOD and NATURE only are the same:
In man, the judgment shoots at flying game;
A bird of passage! gone as soon as found,
Now in the moon perhaps, now under ground.
In vain the sage, with retrospective eye,
Would from the apparent what conclude the why,
Infer the motive from the deed, and show
That what we chanced was what we meant to do.
Behold! if fortune or a mistress frowns,
Some plunge in business, others shave their crowns:
To ease the soul of one oppressive weight,
This quits an empire, that embroils a state:
The same adust complexion has impelled
Charles to the convent, Philip to the field.
Not always actions show the man: we find
Who does a kindness, is not therefore kind;
Perhaps prosperity becalmed his breast,
Perhaps the wind just shifted from the east:
Not therefore humble he who seeks retreat,
Pride guides his steps, and bids him shun the great:
Who combats bravely is not therefore brave,
He dreads a deathbed like the meanest slave:
Who reasons wisely is not therefore wise,
His pride in reasoning, not in acting lies.
But grant that actions best discover man;
Take the most strong, and sort them as you can.
The few that glare, each character must mark,
You balance not the many in the dark.
What will you do with such as disagree?
Suppress them, or miscall them policy?
Must then at once (the character to save)
The plain rough hero turn a crafty knave?
Alas! in truth the man but changed his mind,
Perhaps was sick, in love, or had not dined.
Ask why from Britain Caesar would retreat?
Caesar himself might whisper he was beat.
Why risk the world's great empire for a punk?
Caesar perhaps might answer he was drunk.
But, sage historians! it is your task to prove
One action conduct; one, heroic love.
It Is from high life high characters are drawn:
A saint in crape is twice a saint in lawn;
A judge is just, a chanc'lor juster still;
A gownman, learned; a bishop, what you will;
Wise, if a minister; but, if a king,
More wise, more learned, more just, more every thing.
Court-virtues bear, like gems, the highest rate,
Born where heaven's influence scarce can penetrate:
In life's low vale, the soil the virtues like,
They please as beauties, here as wonders strike.
Though the same sun with all-diffusive rays
Blush in the rose, and in the di'mond blaze,
We prize the stronger effort of his power,
And justly set the gem above the flower.
It Is education forms the common mind,
Just as the twig is bent, the tree's inclined.
Boastful and rough, your first son is a 'squire;
The next a tradesman, meek, and much a liar;
Tom struts a soldier, open, bold, and brave;
Will sneaks a scriv'ner, an exceeding knave:
Is he a churchman? then he is fond of power:
A quaker? sly: A presbyterian? sow'r:
A smart free-thinker? all things in an hour.
Ask men's opinions: Scoto now shall tell
How trade increases, and the world goes well;
Strike off his pension, by the setting sun,
And Britain, if not Europe, is undone.
That gay free-thinker, a fine talker once,
What turns him now a stupid silent dunce?
Some God or Spirit he has lately found;
Or chanced to meet a minister that frowned.
Judge we by nature? Habit can efface,
Interest overcome, or policy take place:
By actions? those uncertainty divides:
By passions? these dissimulation hides:
Opinions? they still take a wider range:
Find if you can, in what you cannot change.
Manners with fortunes, humors turn with climes,
Tenets with books, and principles with times.
Search then the RULING PASSION: there, alone,
The wild are constant, and the cunning known;
The fool consistent, and the false sincere;
Priests, princes, women, no dissemblers here.
This clue, once found, unravels all the rest,
The prospect clears, and Wharton stands confessed.
Wharton, the scorn and wonder of our days,
Whose ruling passion was the lust of praise:
Born with whatever could win it from the wise,
Women and fools must like him or he dies;
Though wondering senates hung on all he spoke,
The club must hail him master of the joke.
Shall parts so various aim at nothing new?
He Will shine a Tully and a Wilmot too. VER. 187. John Wilmot, E. of Rochester,
famous for his wit and extravagancies in the time of Charles the second.

Then turns repentant, and his God adores
With the same spirit that he drinks and whores;
Enough if all around him but admire,
And now the punk applaud, and now the friar.
Thus with each gift of nature and of art,
And wanting nothing but an honest heart;
Grown all to all, from no one vice exempt;
And most contemptible, to shun contempt;
His passion still, to covet general praise,
His life, to forfeit it a thousand ways;
A constant bounty which no friend has made;
An angel tongue, which no man can persuade;
A fool with more of wit than half mankind,
Too rash for thought, for action too refined:
A tyrant to the wife her heart approves;
A rebel to the very king he loves;
He dies, sad outcast of each church and state,
And, harder still! flagitious, yet not great.
Ask you why Wharton broke through every rule?
'Twas all for fear the knaves should call him fool.
Nature well known, no prodigies remain,
Comets are regular, and Wharton plain.
Yet, in this search, the wisest may mistake,
If second qualities for first they take.
When Catiline by rapine swelled his store;
When Caesar made a noble dame a whore;
In this the lust, in that the avarice,
Were means, not ends; ambition was the vice.
That very Caesar, born in Scipio's days,
Had aimed, like him, by chastity at praise.
Lucullus, when frugality could charm,
Had roasted turnips in the Sabin farm.
In vain the observer eyes the builder's toil,
But quite mistakes the scaffold for the pile.
In this one passion man can strength enjoy,
As fits give vigor, just when they destroy.
Time, that on all things lays his lenient hand,
Yet tames not this; it sticks to our last sand.
Consistent in our follies and our sins,
Here honest nature ends as she begins.
Old politicians chew on wisdom past,
And totter on in business to the last;
As weak, as earnest; and as gravely out,
As sober Lanesb'row dancing in the gout. VER. 231. Lanesborow] An ancient
nobleman, who continued this practice long after his legs were disabled by the
gout. Upon the death of prince George of Denmark, he demanded an audience of
the queen, to advise her to preserve her health and dispel her grief by dancing.

Behold a reverend fire, whom want of grace
Has made the father of a nameless race,
Should from the wall, perhaps, or rudely pressed
By his own son, that passes by unblessed:
Still to his wench he crawls on knocking knees,
And envies every sparrow that he sees.
A salmon's belly, Helluo, was thy fate;
The doctor called, declares all help too late:
" Mercy! cries Helluo, mercy on my soul!
" Is there no hope? -- Alas! -- then bring the jowl."
The frugal crone, whom praying priests attend,
Still tries to save the hallowed taper's end,
Collects her breath, as ebbing life retires,
For one puff more, and in that puff expires.
" Odious! in woollen! 'twould a saint provoke,
(Were the last words that poor Narcissa spoke) VER. 247. -- the last words
that poor Narcissa spoke] This story, as well as the others, is founded on
fact, though the author had the goodness not to mention the names. Several
attribute this in particular to a very celebrated actress, who; in detestation
of the thought of being buried in woollen, gave these her last orders with her
dying breath.

" No, let a charming Chintz, and Brussels lace,
" Wrap my cold limbs, and shade my lifeless face:
" One would not, sure, be frightful when one's dead --
" And -- Betty -- give this cheek a little red."
The courtier smooth, who forty years had shined
An humble servant to all human kind,
Just brought out this, when scarce his tongue could stir,
" If -- where I Am going -- I could serve you, Sir?"
" I give and I devise, (old Euclio said,
And sighed) "my lands and tenements to Ned.
Your money, Sir? -- "My money, Sir, what all?
" Why, -- if I must -- (then wept) I give it Paul.
" The manor, Sir? -- "The manor! hold, he cried,
" Not that, -- I cannot part with that" -- and died.
And you! brave COBHAM, to the latest breath
Shall feel your ruling passion strong in death:
Such in those moments as in all the past,
" Oh, save my country, heaven!" shall be your last.
VARIATIONS.
After v. 86, in the former editions, Triumphant leaders, at an army's head,
Hemmed round with glories, pilfer cloth or bread:
As meanly plunder as they bravely fought,
Now save a people, and now save a groat.


VER. 129. in the former editions, Ask why from Britain Caesar made retreat?
Caesar himself would tell you he was beat.
The mighty Czar what moved to wed a punk?
The mighty Czar would tell you he was drunk.


In the former editions, v. 208. Nature well known, no Miracles remain.


MORAL ESSAYS.
EPISTLE II.
TO A LADY.
Of the Characters of WOMEN.
NOTHING so true as what you once let fall,
" Most women have no characters at all."
Matter too soft a lasting mark to bear,
And best distinguished by black, brown, or fair.
How many pictures of one nymph we view,
All how unlike each other, all how true!
Arcadia's Countess, here, in ermin'd pride, VER. 7, 8, 10, etc. Arcadia's
Countess, -- Pastora by a fountain, -- Leda with a swan, -- Magdalen, --
Cecilia -- ] Attitudes in which several ladies affected to be drawn, and
sometimes one lady in them all. -- The poet's politeness and complaisance to
the sex is observable in this instance, amongst others, that, whereas in the
Characters of Men, he has sometimes made use of real names, in the Characters
of Women, always fictitious.

Is there, Pastora by a fountain side. VER. 7, 8, 10, etc. Arcadia's Countess,
-- Pastora by a fountain, -- Leda with a swan, -- Magdalen, -- Cecilia -- ]
Attitudes in which several ladies affected to be drawn, and sometimes one lady
in them all. -- The poet's politeness and complaisance to the sex is observable
in this instance, amongst others, that, whereas in the Characters of Men, he
has sometimes made use of real names, in the Characters of Women, always
fictitious.

Here Fannia, leering on her own good man,
And there, a naked Leda with a swan. VER. 7, 8, 10, etc. Arcadia's Countess,
-- Pastora by a fountain, -- Leda with a swan, -- Magdalen, -- Cecilia -- ]
Attitudes in which several ladies affected to be drawn, and sometimes one lady
in them all. -- The poet's politeness and complaisance to the sex is observable
in this instance, amongst others, that, whereas in the Characters of Men, he
has sometimes made use of real names, in the Characters of Women, always
fictitious.

Let then the fair one beautifully cry,
In Magdalen's loose hair and lifed eye, VER. 7, 8, 10, etc. Arcadia's
Countess, -- Pastora by a fountain, -- Leda with a swan, -- Magdalen, --
Cecilia -- ] Attitudes in which several ladies affected to be drawn, and
sometimes one lady in them all. -- The poet's politeness and complaisance to
the sex is observable in this instance, amongst others, that, whereas in the
Characters of Men, he has sometimes made use of real names, in the Characters
of Women, always fictitious.

Or dressed in smiles of sweet Cecilia shine, VER. 7, 8, 10, etc. Arcadia's
Countess, -- Pastora by a fountain, -- Leda with a swan, -- Magdalen, --
Cecilia -- ] Attitudes in which several ladies affected to be drawn, and
sometimes one lady in them all. -- The poet's politeness and complaisance to
the sex is observable in this instance, amongst others, that, whereas in the
Characters of Men, he has sometimes made use of real names, in the Characters
of Women, always fictitious.

With simp'ring angels, palms, and harps divine;
Whether the charmer sinner it, or saint it,
If folly grows romantic, I must paint it.
Come then, the colors and the ground prepare!
Dip in the rainbow, trick her off in air;
Choose a firm cloud, before it fall, and in it
Catch, ere she change, the Cynthia of this minute.
VER. 21. Instances of contrarieties, given even from such characters as are
most strongly marked, and seemingly therefore most consistent: as, I. In the
Affected, ver. 21, etc.
Rufa, whose eye, quick-glancing over the park,
Attracts each light gay meteor of a spark,
Agrees as ill with Rufa studying Lock,
As Sappho's di'monds with her dirty smock;
Or Sappho at her toilet's greazy task,
With Sappho fragrant at an evening mask:
So morning insects that in muck begun,
Shine, buzz, and fly-blow in the setting-sun.
VER. 29 and 37. II. Contrarieties in the Soft-natured.
How soft is Silia! fearful to offend;
The frail one's advocate, the weak one's friend.
To her, Calista proved her conduct nice;
And good Simplicius asks of her advice.
Sudden, she storms! she raves! you tip the wink,
But spare your censure; Silia does not drink.
All eyes may see from what the change arose,
All eyes may see -- a pimple on her nose.
VER. 29 and 37. II. Contrarieties in the Soft-natured.
Papillia, wedded to her amorous spark,
Sighs for the shades -- "how charming is a park!"
A park is purchased, but the fair he sees
All bathed in tears -- "oh odious, odious trees!"
Ladies, like variegated tulips, show;
It Is to their changes half their charms we owe;
Fine by defect, and delicately weak,
Their happy spots the nice admirer take.
VER. 45. III. Contrarieties in the Cunning and Artful.
'Twas thus Calypso once each heart alarmed,
Awed without virtue, without beauty charmed;
Her tongue hewitch'd as odly as her eyes.
Less wit than mimic, more a wit than wise;
Strange graces still, and stranger flights she had,
Was just not ugly, and was just not mad;
Yet never so sure our passion to create,
As when she touched the brink of all we hate.
VER. 53. IV. In the Whimsical.
Narcissa's nature, tolerably mild,
To make a wash, would hardly stew a child;
Has even been proved to grant a lover's prayer,
And paid a tradesman once to make him stare;
Gave alms at Easter, in a Christian trim,
And made a widow happy, for a whim.
Why then declare goodnature is her scorn,
When it is by that alone she can be born?
Why pique all mortals, yet affect a name?
A fool to pleasure, yet a slave to fame:
Now deep in Tailor and the Book of Martyrs,
Now drinking citron with his grace and Chartres:
Now conscience chills her, and now passion burns;
And atheism and religion take their turns;
A very heathen in the carnal part,
Yet still a sad, good Christian at her heart.
VER. 69. V. In the Lewd and Vicions.
See sin in state, majestically drunk;
Proud as a peeress, prouder as a punk;
Chaste to her husband, frank to all beside,
A teeming mistress, but a barren bride.
What then? let blood and body bear the fault,
Her head's untouched, that noble seat of thought:
Such this day's doctrine -- in another fit
She sins with poets through pure love of wit.
What has not fired her bosom or her brain?
Caesar and Tall-boy, Charles and Charlema'ne.
As Helluo, late dictator of the feast,
The nose of Hautgout, and the tip of taste,
Critiqu'd your wine, and analyz'd your meat,
Yet on plain pudding deigned at home to eat:
So Philomede, lect'ring all mankind
On the soft passion, and the taste refined,
The address, the delicacy -- stoops at once,
And makes her hearty meal upon a dunce.
VER. 87. Contrarieties in the Witty and Refined.
Flavia's a wit, has too much sense to pray;
To toast our wants and wishes, is her way;
Nor asks of God, but of her stars, to give
The mighty blessing, "while we live, to live."
Then all for death, that opiate of the soul!
Lucretia's dagger, Rosamonda's bowl.
Say, what can cause such impotence of mind?
A spark too fickle, or a spouse too kind.
Wise wretch! with pleasures too refined to please;
With too much spirit to be ever at ease;
With too much quickness ever to be taught;
With too much thinking to have common thought:
You purchase pain with all that joy can give,
And die of nothing but a rage to live.
Turn then from wits; and look on Simo's mate,
No ass so meek, no ass so obstinate.
Or her, that owns her faults, but never mends,
Because she is honest, and the best of friends.
Or her, whose life the church and scandal share,
For ever in a passion, or a prayer.
Or her, who laughs at hell, but (like her grace)
Cries, "Ah! how charming, if there is no such place!"
Or who in sweet vicissitude appears
Of mirth and opium, ratafie and tears,
The daily anodyne, and nightly draught,
To kill those foes to fair ones, time and thought.
Woman and fool are too hard things to hit;
For true no-meaning puzzles more than wit.
But what are these to great Atossa's mind?
Scarce once herself, by turns all womankind!
Who, with herself, or others, from her birth
Finds all her life one warfare upon earth:
Shines, in exposing knaves, and painting fools,
Yet is, whatever she hates and ridicules.
No thought advances, but her eddy brain
Whisks it about, and down it goes again.
Full sixty years the world has been her trade,
The wisest fool much time has ever made.
From loveless youth to unrespected age,
No passion gratified except her rage.
So much the fury still out-ran the wit,
The pleasure missed her, and the scandal hit.
Who breaks with her, provokes revenge from hell,
But he is a bolder man who dares be well.
Her every turn with violence pursued,
Nor more a storm her hate than gratitude:
To that each passion turns, or soon or late;
Love, if it makes her yield, must make her hate:
Superiors? death! and equals? what a curse;
But an inferior not dependant? worse.
Offend her, and she knows not to forgive;
Oblige her, and she will hate you while you live:
But die, and she will adore you -- then the bust
And temple rise -- then fall again to dust.
Last night, her lord was all that is good and great;
A knave this morning, and his will a cheat.
Strange! by the means defeated of the ends,
By spirit robbed of power, by warmth of friends,
By wealth of follow'rs! without one distress
Sick of herself through very selfishness!
Atossa, cursed with every granted prayer,
Childless with all her children, wants an heir.
To heirs unknown descends the unguarded store,
Or wanders, heav'n-directed, to the poor.
Pictures like these, dear madam, to design,
Asks no firm hand, and no unerring line;
Some wandering touches, some reflected light,
Some flying stroke alone can hit 'em right:
For how should equal colors do the knack?
Chameleons who can paint in white and black?
" Yet Cloe, sure, was formed without a spot." --
Nature in her then erred not, but forgot.
" With every pleasing, every prudent part,
" Say, what can Cloe want?" -- she wants a heart.
She speaks, behaves, and acts just as she ought;
But never, never, reached one generous thought.
Virtue she finds too painful an endeavor,
Content to dwell in decencies for ever.
So very reasonable, so unmoved,
As never yet to love, or to be loved.
She, while her lover pants upon her breast,
Can mark the figures on an Indian chest;
And when she sees her friend in deep despair,
Observes how much a chintz exceeds mohair.
Forbid it, heaven, a favor or a debt
She ever should cancel -- but she may forget.
Safe is your secret still in Cloe's ear;
But none of Cloe's shall you ever hear.
Of all her dears she never slandered one,
But cares not if a thousand are undone.
Would Cloe know if you're alive or dead?
She bids her footman put it in her head.
Cloe is prudent -- would you too be wise?
Then never break your heart when Cloe dies.
One certain portrait may (I grant) be seen,
Which heaven has varnished out, and made a Queen:
THE SAME FOR EVER! and described by all
With truth and goodness, as with crown and ball:
Poets heap virtues, painters gems at will,
And show their zeal, and hide their want of skill.
It Is well -- but, artists! who can paint or write,
To draw the naked is your true delight.
That robe of quality so struts and swells,
None see what parts of nature it conceals:
The exactest traits of body or of mind,
We owe to models of an humble kind.
If QUEENSBERRY to strip there is no compelling,
It Is from a handmaid we must take a Helen.
From peer or bishop it is no easy thing
To draw the man who loves his God, or king:
Alas! I copy, (or my draught would fail)
From honest Mah'met, or plain parson Hale. VER. 198. Mah'met, servant to the
late king, said to be the son of a Turkish Bassa, whom he took at the siege of
Buda, and constantly kept about his person.

But grant, in public men sometimes are shown, VER. 199. But grant, in public,
etc.] in the former editions, between this and the foregoing lines, a want of
connection might be perceived, occasioned by the omission of certain examples
and illustrations to the maxims laid down; and though some of these have since
been found, viz. the characters of Philomede, Atossa, Cloe, and some verses
following, others are still wanting, nor can we answer that these are exactly
inserted.

A woman's seen in private life alone:
Our bolder talents in full light displayed;
Your virtues open fairest in the shade.
Bred to disguise, in public it is you hide;
There, none distinguish 'twixt your shame or pride,
Weakness or delicacy; all so nice,
That each may seem a virtue, or a vice.
In men, we various ruling passions find; VER. 207. The former part having
shown, that the particular characters of women are more various than those of
men, it is nevertheless observed, that the general characteristic of the sex,
as to the ruling passion, is more uniform.

In women, two almost divide the kind:
Those, only fixed, they first or last obey,
The love of pleasure, and the love of sway.
That nature gives; and where the lesson taught VER. 211. This is occasioned
partly by their nature, partly their education, and in some degree by necessity.

Is but to please, can pleasure seem a fault?
Experience, this; by man's oppression cursed,
They seek the second not to lose the first.
Men, some to business, some to pleasure take;
But every woman is at heart a rake:
Men, some to quiet, some to public strife;
But every lady would be queen for life.
VER. 219. What are the aims and the fate of this sex? -- I. As to power.
Yet mark the fate of a whole sex of queens!
Power all their end, but beauty all the means:
In youth they conquer, with so wild a rage,
As leaves them scarce a subject in their age:
For foreign glory, foreign joy, they roam;
No thought of peace or happiness at home.
But wisdom's triumph is well-tim'd retreat,
As hard a science to the fair as great!
Beauties, like tyrants, old and friendless grown,
Yet hate repose, and dread to be alone,
Worn out in public, weary every eye,
Nor leave one sigh behind them when they die.
VER. 231 -- II. As to pleasure.
Pleasures the sex, as children birds, pursue,
Still out of reach, yet never out of view;
Sure, if they catch, to spoil the toy at most,
To covet flying, and regret when lost:
At last, to follies youth could scarce defend,
It grows their age's prudence to pretend;
Ashamed to own they gave delight before,
Reduced to feign it, when they give no more:
As hags hold sabbaths, less for joy than spite,
So these their merry, miserable night;
Still round and round the ghosts of beauty glide,
And haunt the places where their honor died.
See how the world its veterans rewards!
A youth of frolics, an old age of cards;
Fair to no purpose, artful to no end,
Young without lovers, old without a friend;
A fop their passion, but their prize a sot,
Alive, ridiculous, and dead, forgot!
VER. 249. Advice for their true interest.
Ah! friend! to dazzle let the vain design;
To raise the thought, and touch the heart be thine!
That charm shall grow, while what fatigues the ring,
Flaunts and goes down, an unregarded thing:
So when the sun's broad beam has tired the sight,
All mild ascends the moon's more sober light,
Serene in virgin modesty she shines,
And unobserved the glaring orb declines.
Oh! blessed with temper, whose unclouded ray
Can make tomorrow cheerful as today:
She, who can love a sister's charms, or hear
Sighs for a daughter with unwounded ear;
She who never answers till a husband cools,
Or, if she rules him, never shows she rules;
Charms by accepting, by submitting sways,
Yet has her humor most, when she obeys;
Let fops or fortune fly which way they will;
Disdains all loss of tickets, or codille;
Spleen, vapors, or smallpox, above them all,
And mistress of herself, though China fall.
And yet, believe me, good as well as ill,
Woman's at best a contradiction still.
Heaven, when it strives to polish all it can
Its last best work, but forms a softer man;
Picks from each sex, to make the favorite blessed,
Your love of pleasure, our desire of rest:
Blends, in exception to all general rules,
Your taste of follies, with our scorn of fools:
Reserve with frankness, art with truth allied,
Courage with softness, modesty with pride;
Fixed principles, with fancy ever new;
Shakes all together, and produces -- you.
Be this a woman's fame: with this unblest,
Toasts live a scorn, and queens may die a jest.
This Phoebus promised (I forget the year)
When those blue eyes first opened on the sphere;
Ascendant Phoebus watched that hour with care,
Averted half your parent's simple prayer;
And gave you beauty, but denied the pelf
That buys your sex a tyrant over itself.
The generous god, who wit and gold refines,
And ripens spirits as he ripens mines,
Kept dross for duchesses, the world shall know it,
To you gave sense, good humor, and a poet.
VARIATIONS.
VER. 77. What has not fired etc.] in the MS. In whose mad brain the mixed ideas
roll
Of Tall-boy's breeches, and of Caesar's soul.


After ver. 122. in the MS. Oppressed with wealth and wit, abundance sad!
One makes her poor, the other makes her mad.


After ver. 148, in the MS. This death decides, nor lets the blessing fall
On any one she hates, but on them all.
Cursed chance! this only could afflict her more,
If any part should wander to the poor.


After ver. 198, in the MS. Fain I Would in Fulvia spy the tender wife;
I cannot prove it on her, for my life:
And, for a noble pride, I blush no less,
Instead of Berenice to think on Bess.
Thus while immortal Cibber only sings
(As * and H**y preach) for queens and kings,
The nymph, that never read Milton's mighty line,
May, if she love, and merit verse, have mine.


VER. 207, in the first edition, In several men we several passions find;
In women, two almost divide the kind.


MORAL ESSAYS.
EPISTLE III.
TO ALLEN Lord BATHURST.
ARGUMENT. Of the Use of RICHES.
THAT it is known to few, most falling into one of the extremes, avarice or
profusion, v. 1, etc. The point discussed, whether the invention of money has
been more commodious, or pernicious to mankind, v. 21 to 77. That riches,
either to the avaricious or the prodigal, cannot afford happiness, scarcely
necessaries, v. 89 to 160. That avarice is an absolute frenzy, without an end
or purpose, v. 113, etc. 152. Conjectures about the motives of avaricious men,
v. 121 to 153. That the conduct of men, with respect to riches, can only be
accounted for by the ORDER OF PROVIDENCE, which works the general good out of
extremes, and brings all to its great end by perpetual revolutions, v. 161 to
178. How a miser acts upon principles which appear to him reasonable, v. 179.
How a prodigal does the same, v. 199. The due medium, and true use of riches,
v. 219. The man of Ross, v. 250. The fate of the profuse and the covetous, in
two examples; both miserable in life and in death, v. 300, etc. The story of
Sir Balaam, v. 339 to the end.

EPISTLE III. EPISTLE III.] This epistle was written after a violent outcry
against our author, on a supposition that he had ridiculed a worthy nobleman
merely for his wrong taste. He justified himself upon that article in a letter
to the earl of Burlington; at the end of which are these words: "I have learnt
that there are some who would rather be wicked than ridiculous; and therefore
it may be safer to attack vices than follies. I will therefore leave my betters
in the quiet possession of their idols, their groves, and their high places,
and change my subject from their pride to their meanness, from their vanities
to their miseries; and as the only certain way to avoid misconstructions, to
lessen offense, and not to multiply ill-natured applications, I may probably,
in my next, make use of real names instead of fictitious ones."

P. WHO shall decide, when doctors disagree,
And soundest casuists doubt, like you and me?
You hold the word, from Jove to Momus given,
That man was made the standing jest of heaven;
And gold but sent to keep the fools in play,
For some to heap, and some to throw away.
But I, who think more highly of our kind,
(And surely, heaven and I are of a mind)
Opine, that nature, as in duty bound,
Deep hid the shining mischief under ground:
But when by man's audacious labor won,
Flamed forth this rival to, its sire, the sun,
Then careful heaven supplied two sorts of men,
To squander these, and those to hide again.
Like doctors thus, when much dispute has past,
We find our tenets just the same at last.
Both fairly owning, riches, in effect,
No grace of heaven or token of the elect;
Given to the fool, the mad, the vain, the evil,
To Ward, to Waters, Chartres, and the Devil. VER. 20. JOHN WARD of Hackney,
Esquire. member of parliament, being prosecuted by the duchess of Buckingham, and
convicted of forgery, was first expelled the house, and then stood on the
pillory on the 17th of March 1727. He was suspected of joining in a conveyance
with Sir John Blunt, to secret fifty thousand pounds of that director's
estate, forfeited to the south sea company by act of parliament. The company
recovered the fifty thousand pounds against Ward; but he set up prior
conveyances of his real estate to his brother and son, and concealed all his
personal, which was computed to be one hundred and fifty thousand pounds. These
conveyances being also set aside by a bill in Chancery, Ward was imprisoned,
and hazarded the forfeiture of his life, by not giving in his effects till the
last day, which was that of his examination. During his confinement, his
amusement was to give poison to dogs and cats, and see them expire by slower or
quicker torments. To sum up the worth of this gentleman, at the several aeras
of his life; at his standing in the pillory he was worth above two hundred
thousand pounds; at his commitment to prison, he was worth one hundred and
fifty thousand; but has been since so far diminished in his reputation, as to
be thought a worse man by fifty or sixty thousand.

FR. CHARTRES, a man infamous for all manner of vices. When he was an ensign in
the army, he was drummed out of the regiment for a cheat; he was next banished
Brussels, and drummed out of Ghent on the same account. After a hundred tricks
at the gaming-tables, he took to lending of money at exorbitant interest and on
great penalties, accumulating premium, interest, and capital into a new
capital, and seizing to a minute when the payments became due; in a word, by a
constant attention to the vices, wants, and follies of mankind, he acquired an
immense fortune. His house was a perpetual bawdy house. He was twice condemned
for rapes, and pardoned; but the last time not without imprisonment in Newgate,
and large confiscations. He died in Scotland in 1731, aged 62. The populace at
his funeral raised a great riot, almost tore the body out of the coffin, and
cast dead dogs, etc. into the grave along with it. The following epitaph
contains his character very justly drawn by Dr. Arbuthnot: HERE continues to
rot
The body of FRANCIS CHARTRES,
Who, with an INFLEXIBLE CONSTANCY,
and INIMITABLE UNIFORMITY of life,
PERSISTED,
In spite of AGE and INFIRMITIES,
In the practice of EVERY HUMAN VICE;
Excepting PRODIGALITY and HYPOCRISY:
His insatiable AVARICE exempted him from the first,
His matchless IMPUDENCE from the second.
Nor was he more singular
in the undeviating pravity of his manners,
Than successful
in accumulating WEALTH;
For, without TRADE or PROFESSION,
Without TRUST of PUBLIC MONEY,
And without BRIBE-WORTHY service,
He acquired, or more properly created,
A MINISTERIAL ESTATE.
He was the only person of his time,
Who could CHEAT without the mask of HONESTY,
Retain his primeval MEANNESS
When possessed of TEN THOUSAND a year,
And having daily deserved the GIBBET for what he did,
Was at last condemned to it for what he could not do.
Oh indignant reader!
Think not his life useless to mankind!
PROVIDENCE connived at his execrable designs,
to give to after-ages
A conspicuous PROOF and EXAMPLE,
Of how small estimation is EXORBITANT WEALTH
in the sight of GOD.
By his bestowing it on the most UNWORTHY of ALL MORTALS.
This gentleman was worth seven thousand pounds a year estate in land, and about
one hundred thousand in money.

Mr. WATERS, the third of these worthies, was a man no way resembling the
former in his military, but extremely so in his civil capacity; his great
fortune having been raised by the like diligent attendance on the necessities
of others. But this gentleman's history must be deferred till his death, when
his worth may be known more certainly.




B. What nature wants, commodious gold bestows,
It Is thus we eat the bread another sows.

P. But how unequal it bestows, observe,
It Is thus we riot, while, who sow it, starve:
What nature wants (a phrase I much distrust)
Extends to luxury, extends to lust:
Useful, I grant, it serves what life requires,
But dreadful too, the dark assassin hires:

B. Trade it may help, society extend.

P. But lures the pyrate, and corrupts the friend.

B. It raises armies in a nation's aid.

P. But bribes a senate, and the land's betrayed.
In vain may heroes fight, and patriots rave;
If secret gold sap on from knave to knave.
Once, we confess, beneath the patriot's cloak, VER. 35. -- beneath the
patriot's cloak,] This is a true story, which happened in the reign of William
III. to an unsuspected old patriot, who coming out at the backdoor from having
been closetted by the king, where he had received a large bag of guineas, the
bursting of the bag discovered his business there.

From the cracked bag the dropping guinea spoke,
And gingling down the back-stairs, told the crew,
" Old Cato is as great a rogue as you."
Blessed paper-credit! last and best supply!
That lends corruption lighter wings to fly!
Gold, imp'd by thee, can compass hardest things,
Can pocket states, can fetch or carry kings; VER. 42. -- fetch or carry
kings;] In our author's time, many princes had been sent about the world, and
great changes of kings projected in Europe. The partition-treaty had disposed
of Spain; France had set up a king for England, who was sent to Scotland, and
back again; king Stanislaus was sent to Poland, and back again; the duke of
Anjou was sent to Spain, and Don Carlos to Italy.

A single leaf shall waft an army over,
Or ship off senates to a distant shore; VER. 44. Or ship off senates to some
distant shore;] Alludes to several ministers, counselors, and patriots
banished in our times to Siberia, and to that MORE GLORIOUS FATE of the
PARLIAMENT of PARIS, banished to Pontoise in the year 1720.

A leaf, like Sibyl's, scatter to and fro
Our fates and fortunes, as the winds shall blow:
Pregnant with thousands flits the scrap unseen,
And silent sells a king, or buys a queen.
Oh! that such bulky bribes as all might see,
Still, as of old, encumbered villainy!
Could France or Rome divert our brave designs,
With all their brandies or with all their wines? [found,
What could they more than knights and squires con-
Or water all the quorum ten miles round?
A statesman's slumbers how this speech would spoil!
" Sir, Spain has sent a thousand jars of oil;
" Huge bales of British cloth blockade the door;
" A hundred oxen at your levee roar."
Poor avarice one torment more would find;
Nor could profusion squander all in kind.
Astride his cheese Sir Morgan might we meet;
And Worldly crying coals from street to street,
Whom with a wig so wild, and mein so mazed, VER. 63. Some misers of great
wealth, proprietors of the coal-mines, had entered at this time into an
association to keep up coals to an extravagant price, whereby the poor were
reduced almost to starve, till one of them, taking the advantage of
underselling the rest, defeated the design. One of these misers was worth ten
thousand, another seven thousand a year.

Pity mistakes for some poor tradesman crazed.
Had Colepepper's whole wealth been hops and hogs, VER. 65. Colepepper,] Sir
WILLIAM COLEPEPPER, bart. a person of an ancient family, and ample fortune,
without one other quality of a gentleman, who, after ruining himself at the
gaming-table, past the rest of his days in sitting there to see the ruin of
others; preferring to subsist upon borrowing and begging, rather than to enter
into any reputable method of life, and refusing a post in the army which was
offered him.

Could he himself have sent it to the dogs?
His grace will game: to White's a bull be led,
With spurning heels, and with a butting head.
To White's be carried, as to ancient games,
Fair coursers, vases, and alluring dames.
Shall then Uxorio, if the stakes he sweep,
Bear home six whores, and make his lady weep?
Or soft Adonis so perfumed and fine,
Drive to St. James's a whole herd of swine?
Oh filthy check on all industrious skill,
To spoil the nation's last great trade, quadrille!
Since then, my lord, on such a world we fall,
What say you? B. Say? why take it, gold and all.
P. What riches give us let then enquire:
Meat, fire and clothes. B. What more? P. Meat, clothes, and fire.
Is this too little? would you more than live:
Alas! it is more than Turner finds they give. VER. 82. Turner] One, who, being
possessed of three hundred thousand pounds, laid down his coach, because
interest was reduced from five to four per cent. and then put seventy thousand
into the charitable corporation for better interest; which sum having lost, he
took it so much to heart, that he kept his chamber ever after. It is thought he
would not have outlived it, but that he was heir to another considerable
estate, which he daily expected, and that by this course of life he saved both
clothes and all other expenses.

Alas! it is more than (all his visions past)
Unhappy Wharton, waking, found at last! VER. 84. Unhappy Wharton,] A nobleman
of great qualities, but as unfortunate in the application of them, as if they
had been vices and follies. See his character in the first epistle.

What can they give! to dying Hopkins' heirs? VER. 85. Hopkins,] A citizen,
whose rapacity obtained him the name of Vulture Hopkins. He lived worthless,
but died worth three hundred thousand pounds, which he would give to no person
living, but left it so as not to be inherited till after the second generation.
His counsel representing to him how many years it must be, before this could
take effect, and that his money could only ly at interest all that time, he
expressed great joy thereat, and said, "They would then be as long in spending,
as "he had been in getting it." But the Chancery afterward set aside the will,
and gave it to the heir at law.

To Chartres, vigor; Japhet, nose and ears? VER. 86. Japhet, nose and ears?]
JAPHET CROOK, alias Sir Peter Stranger, was punished with the loss of those
parts, for having forged a conveyance of an estate to himself, upon which he
took up several thousand pounds. He was at the same time sued in Chancery for
having fraudulently obtained a will, by which he possessed another considerable
estate, in wrong of the brother of the deceased. By these means he was worth a
great sum, which (in reward for the small loss of his ears) he enjoyed in
prison till his death, and quietly left to his executor.

Can they, in gems bid pallid Hippia glow,
In Fulvia's buckle ease the throbs below;
Or heal, old Narses, thy obscener ail,
With all the embroid'ry plastered at thy tail?
They might (were Harpax not too wise to spend)
Give Harpax self the blessing of a friend;
Or find some doctor that would save the life
Of wretched Shylock, spite of Shylock's wife:
But thousands die, without or this or that,
Die, and endow a college, or a cat. VER. 96. Die, and endow a college, or a
cat.] A famous duchess of R. in her last will left considerable legacies and
annuities to her cats.

To some, indeed, heaven grants the happier fate,
TO enrich a bastard, or a fon they hate.
Perhaps you think the poor might have their part.
Bond damns the poor, and hates them from his heart: VER. 100. Bond damns the
poor, etc.] This epistle was written in the year 1730, when a corporation was
established to lend money to the poor upon pledges, by the name of the
Charitable Corporation; but the whole was turned only to an iniquitous method
of enriching particular people, to the ruin of such numbers, that it became a
parliamentary concern to endeavor the relief of those unhappy sufferers, and
three of the mangers, who were members of the house, were expelled. By the
report of the committee, appointed to inquire into that iniquitous affair, it
appears, that when it was objected to the intended removal of the office, that
the poor, for whose use it was erected, would be hurt by it, Bond, one of the
directors, replied, Damn the poor. That "God hates the poor," and, "That every
man in want is knave or fool," etc. were the genuine apothegms of some of the
persons here mentioned.

The grave Sir Gilbert holds it for a rule,
That every man in want is knave or fool:
" God cannot love (says Blunt, with tearless eyes)
" The wretch he starves" -- and piously denies:
But the good bishop, with a meeker air,
Admits, and leaves them, providence's care.
Yet to be just to these poor men of pelf,
Each does but hate his neighbor as himself:
Damned to the mines, an equal fate betides
The slave that digs it, and the slave that hides.

B. Who suffer thus, mere charity should own,
Must act on motives powerful, though unknown.
P. Some war, some plague, or famine they foresee,
Some revelation hid from you and me.
Why Shylock wants a meal, the cause is found,
He thinks a loaf will rise to fifty pound.
What made directors cheat in South Sea year?
To live on ven'son when it sold so dear. VER. 118. To live on ven'son]. In the
extravagance and luxury of the South Sea year, the price of a haunch of venison
was from three to five pounds.

Ask you why Phryne the whole auction buys?
Phryne foresees a general excise. VER. 120. -- general excise.] Many people
about the year 1733, had a conceit that such a thing was intended, of which it
is not improbable this lady might have some intimation.

Why she and Sappho raise that monstrous sum?
Alas! they fear a man will cost a plum.
Wise Peter sees the world's respect for gold, VER. 123. Wise Peter] PETER
WALTER, a person not only eminent in the wisdom of his profession, as a
dextrous attorney, but allowed to be a good, if not a safe, conveyancer;
extremely respected by the nobility of this land, though free from all manner of
luxury and ostentation: his wealth was never seen, and his bounty never heard
of, except to his own son, for whom he procured an employment of considerable
profit, of which he gave him as much as was necessary. Therefore the taxing
this gentleman with any ambition, is certainly a great wrong to him.

And therefore hopes this nation may be sold:
Glorious ambition! Peter, swell thy store,
And be what Rome's great Didius was before. VER. 126. Rome's great Didius] A
Roman lawyer, so rich as to parchase the empire when it was set to sale upon
the death of Pertinax.

The crown of Poland, venal twice an age, VER. 127. The crown of Poland, etc.]
The two persons here mentioned were of quality, each of whom in the Missisippi
despised to realize above three hundred thousand pounds; the gentleman with a
view to the purchase of the crown of Poland, the lady on a vision of the like
royal nature. They since retired into Spain, where they are still in search of
gold in the mines of the Asturies.

To just three millions stinted modest Gage.
But nobler scenes Maria's dreams unfold,
Hereditary realms, and worlds of gold.
Congenial souls! whose life one avarice joins,
And one fate buries in the Asturian mines.
Much injured Blunt! why bears he Britain's hate? VER. 133. Much injured
Blunt!] Sir JOHN BLUNT, originally a scrivener, was one of the first projectors
of the South Sea company, and afterward one of the directors and chief
managers of the famous scheme in 1720. He was also one of those who suffered
most severally by the bill of pains and penalties on the said directors. He was
a dissenter of a most religious deportment, and professed to be a great
believer. Whether he did really credit the prophecy here mentioned is not
certain, but it was constantly in this very style he declaimed against the
corruption and luxury of the age, the partiality of parliaments, and the misery
of party-spirit. He was particularly eloquent against avarice in great and
noble persons, of which he had indeed lived to see many miserable examples. He
died in the year 1732.

A wizard told him in these words our fate:
" At length corruption, like a general flood,
" So long by watchful ministers withstood,
" Shall deluge all; and avarice creeping on,
" Spread like a low-born mist, and blot the sun;
" Statesman and patriot ply alike the stocks,
" Peeress and Butler share alike the box,
" And judges job, and bishops bite the town,
" And mighty dukes pack cards for half a crown.
" See Britain sunk in lucre's sordid charms,
" And France revenged of ANNE'S and EDWARD'S arms!"
'Twas no court-badge, great scriv'ner! fired thy brain,
Nor lordly luxury, nor city gain:
No, 'twas thy righteous end, ashamed to see
Senates degenerate, patriots disagree,
And nobly wishing party-rage to cease,
To buy both sides, and give thy country peace.
" All this is madness," cries a sober sage:
But who, my friend, has reason in his rage?
" The ruling passion, be it what it will,
" The ruling passion conquers reason still."
Less mad the wildest whimsey we can frame,
Than even that passion, if it has no aim;
For though such motives folly you may call,
The folly's greater to have none at all.
Hear then the truth: "'It Is heaven each passion sends,
" And different men directs to different ends,
" Extremes in nature equal good produce,
" Extremes in man concur to general use."
Ask we what makes one keep, and one bestow?
That POWER who bids the ocean ebb and flow,
Bids seed-time, harvest, equal course maintain,
Through reconciled extremes of drought and rain,
Builds life on death, on change duration founds,
And gives the eternal wheels to know their rounds.
Riches, like insects, when concealed they lie,
Wait but for wings, and in their season fly.
Who sees pale Mammon pine amidst his store,
Sees but a backward steward for the poor;
This year a reservoir, to keep and spare:
The next, a fountain, spouting through his heir,
In lavish streams to quench a country's thirst,
And men and dogs shall drink him till they burst.
Old Cotta shamed his fortune and his birth,
Yet was not Cotta void of wit or worth:
What though (the use of barbarous spits forgot)
His kitchen vy'd in coolness with his grot!
His court with nettles, moats with cresses stored,
With soups unbought and sallads blessed his board
If Cotta lived on pulse, it was no more
Than bramins, saints, and sages did before;
To cram the rich was prodigal expense,
And who would take the poor from providence?
Like some lone Chartreux stands the good old hall,
Silence without, and fasts within the wall;
No rafter'd roofs with dance and tabor sound,
No noontide bell invites the country round:
Tenants with sighs the smokeless towers survey,
And turn the unwilling steeds another way:
Benighted wanderers, the forest over,
Cursed the saved candle, and unop'ning door;
While the gaunt mastiff growling at the gate,
Affrights the beggar whom he longs to eat.
Not so his son, he marked this oversight,
And then mistook reverse of wrong for right.
(For what to shun will no great knowledge need,
But what to follow, is a task indeed.)
Yet sure, of qualities deserving praise,
More go to ruin fortunes, than to raise.
What slaughtered hecatombs, what floods of wine,
Fill the capacious 'squire, and deep divine!
Yet no mean motive this profusion draws,
His oxen perish in his country's cause;
It Is GEORGE and LIBERTY that crowns the cup,
And zeal for that great house which eats him up.
The woods recede around the naked seat,
The sylvans groan -- no matter -- for the fleet:
Next goes his wool -- to clothe our valiant Bands,
Last, for his country's love, he fells his lands.
To town he comes, completes the nation's hope,
And heads the bold train-bands, and burns a pope.
And shall not Britain now reward his toils,
Britain, that pays her patriots with her spoils?
In vain at court the bankrupt pleads his cause,
His thankless country leaves him to her laws.
The sense to value riches, with the art
TO enjoy them, and the virtue to impart,
Not meanly, nor ambitiously pursued,
Not sunk by sloth, nor raised by servitude;
To balance fortune by a just expense,
Join with economy, magnificence;
With splendour, charity; with plenty, health;
Oh teach us, BATHURST! yet unspoil'd by wealth!
That secret rare, between the extremes to move,
Of mad goodnature, and of mean self-love.

B. To worth or want well-weigh'd, be bounty given,
And ease, or emulate, the care of heaven;
(Whose measure full overflows on human race)
Mend fortune's fault, and justify her grace.
Wealth in the gross is death, but life diffused;
As poison heals, in just proportion used:
In heaps, like ambergrise, a stink it lies,
But well dispersed, is incense to the skies.

P. Who starves by nobles, or with nobles eats?
The wretch that trusts them, and the rogue that cheats.
Is there a lord, who knows a cheerful noon
Without a fiddler, flatt'rer, or buffoon?
Whose table, wit, or modest merit share,
Un-elbow'd by a gamester, pimp, or play'r!
Who copies yours, or OXFORD'S better part, VER. 243. OXFORD'S better part,]
Edward Harley, earl of Oxford. The son of Robert, created earl of Oxford, and
earl Mortimer by queen Anne. This nobleman died regretted by all men of
letters, great numbers of whom had experienced his benefits. He left behind him
one of the most noble libraries in Europe.

To ease the oppressed, and raise the sinking heart?
Wherever he shines, oh fortune, gild the scene,
And angels guard him in the golden mean!
There, English bounty yet a while may stand,
And honor linger ere it leaves the land.
But all our praises why should lords engross?
Rise, honest muse! and sing the MAN of ROSS: VER. 250. The MAN of ROSS:] The
person here celebrated, who with a small estate actually performed all these
good works, and whose true name was almost lost (partly by the title of the Man
of Ross given him by way of eminence, and partly by being buried without so
much as an inscription) was called Mr. John Kyrle. He died in the year 1724,
aged 90, and lies interred in the chancel of the church of Ross in
Herefordshire.

Pleased Vaga echoes through her winding bounds,
And rapid Severn hoarse applause resounds.
Who hung with woods yon mountain's sultry brow?
From the dry rock who bade the waters flow?
Not to the skies in useless columns tossed,
Or in proud falls magnificently lost,
But clear and artless, pouring through the plain
Health to the sick, and solace to the swain.
Whose cause-way parts the vale with shady rows?
Whose seats the weary traveller repose?
Who taught that heav'n-directed spire to rise?
" The MAN of ROSS," each lisping babe replies.
Behold the marketplace with poor overspread!
The MAN of ROSS divides the weekly bread:
He feeds yon almshouse, neat, but void of state,
Where age and want sit smiling at the gate:
Him portion'd maids, apprentic'd orphans blessed,
The young who labor, and the old who rest.
Is any sick! the MAN of ROSS relieves,
Prescribes, attends, the medicine makes, and gives.
Is there a variance; enter but his door,
Balk'd are the courts, and contest is no more.
Despairing quacks with curses fled the place,
And vile attorneys, now an useless race.

B. Thrice happy man! enabled to pursue
What all so wish, but want the power to do
Oh say, what sums that generous hand supply?
What mines to swell that boundless charity?

P. Of debts, and taxes, wife and children clear,
This man possessed -- five hundred pounds a year,
Blush, grandeur, blush! proud courts, withdraw your blaze!
Ye little stars! hide your diminished rays.

B. And what? no monument, inscription, stone?
His race, his form, his name almost unknown?

P. Who builds a church to God, and not to fame,
Will never mark the marble with his name:
Go, search it there, where to be born and die,
Of rich and poor makes all the history;
Enough, that virtue filled the space between;
Proved, by the ends of being, to have been.
When Hopkins dies, a thousand lights attend
The wretch, who living saved a candle's end:
Should'ring God's altar a vile image stands,
Belies his features, nay extends his hands;
That live-long wig which Gorgon's self might own,
Eternal buckle takes in Parian stone. VER. 296. Eternal buckle takes in Parian
stone.] The poet ridicules the wretched taste of carving large perriwigs on
busto's, of which there are several vile examples in the tombs at Westminster
and elsewhere.

Behold what blessings wealth to life can lend!
And see, what comfort it affords our end.
In the worst inn's worst room, with mat half-hung,
The flowers of plaster, and the walls of dung,
On once a flock-bed, but repaired with straw,
With tape-ty'd curtains, never meant to draw,
The George and Garter dangling from that bed
When tawdy yellow strove with dirty red,
Great Villers lies -- alas! how changed from him, VER. 305. Great Villers lies
-- ] This lord, yet more famous for his vices than his misfortunes, having been
possessed of about 50,000 l. a year, and passed through many of the highest
posts in the kingdom, died in the year 1687, in a remote inn in Yorkshire,
reduced to the utmost misery.

That life of pleasure, and that soul of whim!
Gallant and gay, in Cliveden's proud alcove, VER. 307. Cliveden] A delightful
palace, on the banks of Thames, built by the D. of Buckingham.

The bower of wanton Shrewsbury and love; VER. 308. Shrewsbury] The countess of
Shrewsbury, a woman abandoned to gallantries. The earl her husband was killed
by the duke of Buckingham in a duel; and it has been said that during the
combat she held the duke's horses in the habit of a page.

Or just as gay, at council, in a ring
Of mimick'd statesmen, and their merry king.
No wit to flatter, left of all his store!
No fool to laugh at, which he valued more.
There, victor of his health, of fortune, friends,
And fame; this lord of useless thousands ends.
His grace's fate sage Cutler could foresee,
And well (he thought) advised him, "Live like me."
As well his grace replied, "Like you, Sir John?
" That I can do, when all I have is gone."
Resolve me, reason, which of these is worse,
Want with a full, or with an empty purse?
Thy life more wretched, Cutler, was confessed,
Arise, and tell me, was thy death more blessed?
Cutler saw tenants break, and houses fall,
For very want; he could not build a wall.
His only daughter in a stranger's power,
For very want; he could not pay a dower.
A few gray hairs his reverend temples crowned,
'Twas very want that sold them for two pound.
What even denied a cordial at his end,
Banished the doctor, and expelled the friend?
What but a want, which you perhaps think mad,
Yet numbers feel, the want of what he had!
Cutler and Brutus, dying both exclaim,
" Virtue! and wealth! what are ye but a name!"
Say, for such worth are other worlds prepared?
Or are they both, in this their own reward?
A knotty point! to which we now proceed.
But you are tired -- I Will tell a tale -- B. Agreed.

P. Where London's column, pointing at the skies VER. 339. Where London's
column,] The Monument built in the memory of the fire of London, with an
inscription importing that city to have been burnt by the Papists.

Like a tall bully, lifts the head, and lies;
There dwelt a citizen of sober fame,
A plain good man, and Balaam was his name;
Religious, punctual, frugal, and so forth;
His word would pass for more than he was worth.
One solid dish his weekday meal affords,
An added pudding solemnized the Lord's:
Constant at Church, and Change; his gains were sure,
His givings rare, save farthings to the poor.
The devilish was piqu'd such saintship to behold,
And longed to tempt him like good Job of old:
But Satan now is wiser than of yore,
And tempts by making rich, not making poor.
Roused by the prince of air, the whirlwinds sweep
The surge, and plunge his father in the deep;
Then full against his Cornish lands they rore, VER. 355. Cornish] The author
has placed the scene of these shipwrecks in Cornwall, not only from their
frequency on that coast, but from the inhumanity of the inhabitants to those to
whom that misfortune arrives: when a ship happens to be stranded there, they
have been known to bore holes in it to prevent its getting off; to plunder, and
sometimes even to massacre the people: nor has the parliament of England been
yet able wholly to suppress these barbarities.

And two rich ship-wrecks bless the lucky shore.
Sir Balaam now, he lives like other folks,
He takes his chirping pint, and cracks his jokes:
" Live like yourself," was soon my lady's word;
And lo! two puddings smok'd upon the board.
Asleep and naked as an Indian lay,
An honest factor stole a gem away:
He pledged it to the knight; the knight had wit,
So kept the di'mond, and the rogue was bit.
Some scruple rose, but thus he eased his thought,
" I Will now give sixpence where I have a groat;
" Where once I went to church, I Will now go twice --
" And am so clear too of all other vice."
The tempter saw his time; the work he plied;
Stocks and subscriptions pour on every side,
'Till all the Demon makes his full descent
In one abundant shower of cent per cent,
Sinks deep within him, and possesses whole,
Then dubs director, and secures his soul.
Behold Sir Balaam, now a man of spirit,
Ascribes his gettings to his parts and merit;
What late he called a blessing, now was wit,
And God's good providence, a lucky hit.
Things change their titles, as our manners turn:
His compting-house employed the sunday-morn:
Seldom at church ('it was such a busy life)
But duly sent his family and wife.
There (so the devilish ordained) one Christmas-tide
My good old lady caught a cold and died.
A nymph of quality admires our knight;
He marries, bows at court, and grows polite:
Leaves the dull cits, and joins (to please the fair)
The well-bred cuckolds in St. James's air:
First, for his son a gay commission buys,
Who drinks, whores, fights, and in a duel dies:
His daughter flaunts a viscount's tawdry wife;
She bears a coronet and p^x for life.
In Britain's senate he a seat obtains,
And one more pensioner St. Stephen gains.
My lady falls to play; so bad her chance,
He must repair it; takes a bribe from France;
The house impeach him; Coningsby harangues;
The court forsake him, and Sir Balaam hangs:
Wife, son, and daughter, Satan! are thy own,
His wealth yet dearer, forfeit to the crown:
The devil and the king divide the prize,
And sad Sir Balaam curses God and dies.

VARIATIONS.
After ver. 50. in the MS. To break a trust were Peter bribed with wine,
Peter! 'twould pose as wise a head as thine.


VER. 77. Since then, etc.] In the former edit. Well then, since with the world
we stand or fall,
Come take it as we find it, gold and all.


VER. 200. Here I found two lines in the poet's MS. " Yet sure, of qualities
deserving praise,
" More go to ruin fortunes than to raise.


After ver. 218. in the MS. Where one lean herring furnished Cotta's board,
And nettles grew, fit porridge for their lord;
Where mad goodnature, bounty misapplied,
In lavish Curio blazed a while and died;
There providence once more shall shift the scene,
And showing H^Y, teach the golden mean,


After ver. 226. in the MS. That secret rare, with affluence hardly joined,
Which W^n lost, yet B^y never could find;
Still missed by vice, and scarce by virtue hit,
By G^'s goodness, or by S^'s wit.


After ver. 250. in the MS. Trace humble worth beyond Sabrina's shore,
Who sings not him, oh may he sing no more!


VER. 287. thus in the MS. The register inrolls him with his poor,
Tells he was born and died, and tells no more.
Just as he ought, he filled the space between;
Then stole to rest, unheeded and unseen.


VER. 337. in the former editions, That knotty point, my lord, shall I discuss,
Or tell a tale? -- A tale. -- It follows thus.


IMITATIONS.
VER. 182. With soups unbought,] -- dapibus mensas onerabat inemptis.
VIRG.

MORAL ESSAYS.
EPISTLE IV.
TO RICHARD BOIL, Earl of BURLINGTON.
ARGUMENT. Of the Use of RICHES.
THE vanity of expense in people of wealth and quality. The abuse of the word
taste, ver. 13. That the first principle and foundation in this, as in every
thing else, is good sense, ver. 40. The chief proof of it is to follow nature,
even in works of mere luxury and elegance. Instanced in architecture and
gardening, where all must be adapted to the genius and use of the place, and
the beauties not forced into it, but resulting from it, ver. 50. How men are
disappointed in their most expensive undertakings, for want of this true
foundation, without which nothing can please long, if at all; and the best
examples and rules will but be perverted into something burdensome or
ridiculous, ver. 65, etc. to 92. A description of the false taste of
magnificence; the first grand error of which is to imagine that greatness
consists in the size and dimension, instead of the proportion and harmony of
the whole, ver. 97. and the second, either in joining together parts
incoherent, or too minutely resembling, or in the repetition of the same too
frequently, ver. 105, etc. A word or two of false taste in books, in music, in
painting, even in preaching and prayer, and lastly in entertainments, ver. 133,
etc. Yet PROVIDENCE is justified in giving wealth to be squandered in this
manner, since it is dispersed to the poor and laborious part of mankind, ver.
190 [recurring to what is laid down in the first book, ep. ii. and in the
epistle preceding this, ver. 159, etc.] What are the proper objects of
magnificence, and a proper field for the expense of great men, ver. 177, etc.
and finally the great and public works, which become a prince, ver. 191, to the
end.

EPISTLE IV.
IT IS strange, the miser should his cares employ
To gain those riches he can never enjoy:
Is it less strange, the prodigal should waste
His wealth, to purchase what he never can taste?
Not for himself he sees, or hears, or eats;
Artists must choose his pictures, music, meats:
He buys for Topham, drawings and designs, VER. 7. Topham] A gentleman famous
for a judicious collection of drawings.

For Pembroke, statues, dirty gods, and coins;
Rare monkish manuscripts for Hearne alone,
And books for Mead, and butterflies for Sloane. VER. 10. And books for Mead,
and butterflies for Sloane.] Two eminent physicians; the one had an excellent
library, the other the finest collection in Europe of natural curiositles; both
men of great learning and humanity.

Think we all these are for himself? no more
Than his fine wife, alas! or finer whore.
For what has Virro painted, built, and planted?
Only to show, how many tastes he wanted.
What brought Sir Visto's ill-got wealth to waste?
Some Demon whispered "Visto! have a taste."
Heaven visits with a taste the wealthy fool,
And needs no rod but Ripley with a rule. VER. 18. Ripley] This man was a
carpenter, employed by a first minister, who raised him to an architect,
without any genius in the art; and after some wretched proofs of his
insufficiency in public buildings, made him comptroller of the board of works.

See! sportive fate, to punish awkward pride,
Bids Bubo build, and sends him such a guide:
A standing sermon, at each year's expense,
That never coxcomb reached magnificence!
You show us, Rome was glorious, not profuse, VER 23. The earl of Burlington
was then publishing the designs of Inigo Jones, and the antiquities of Rome by
Palladio.

And pompous buildings once were things of use.
Yet shall (my lord) your just, your noble rules
Fill half the land with imitating-fools;
Who random drawings from your sheets shall take,
And of one beauty many blunders make;
Load some vain church with old theatric state,
Turn arcs of triumph to a garden-gate;
Reverse your ornaments, and hang them all
On some patched dog-hole ek'd with ends of wall;
Then clap four slices of pilaster on it,
That, laced with bits of rustic, makes a front.
Shall call the winds through long arcades to rore,
Proud to catch cold at a Venetian door;
Conscious they act a true Palladian part,
And if they starve, they starve by rules of art.
Often have you hinted to your brother peer,
A certain truth which many buy too dear:
Something there is more needful than expense,
And something previous even to taste -- it is sense:
Good sense, which only is the gift of heaven,
And though no science, fairly worth the seven:
A light, which in yourself you must perceive;
Jones and Le Notre have it not to give. VER. 46. Inigo Jones the celebrated
architect, and Mr. Le Notre, the designer of the best gardens of France.

To build, to plant, what ever you intend,
To rear the column, or the arch to bend,
To swell the terras, or to sink the grot;
In all, let nature never be forgot.
But treat the goddess like a modest fair,
Nor over-dress, nor leave her wholly bare;
Let not each beauty every where be spied,
Where half the skill is decently to hide.
He gains all points, who pleasingly confounds,
Surprises, varies, and conceals the bounds.
Consult the genius of the place in all;
That tells the waters or to rise, or fall;
Or helps the ambitious hill the heavens to scale,
Or scoops in circling theaters the vale;
Calls in the country, catches opening glades,
Joins willing woods, and varies shades from shades;
Now breaks, or now directs, the intending lines;
Paints as you plant, and, as you work, designs.
Still follow sense, of every art the soul,
Parts answ'ring parts shall slide into a whole,
Spontaneous beauties all around advance,
Start even from difficulty, strike from chance;
Nature shall join you; time shall make it grow
A work to wonder at -- perhaps a STOW. VER. 70. The seat and gardens of the
lord Viscount Cobham in Buckinghamshire.

Without it, proud Versailles! thy glory falls;
And Nero's terraces desert their walls:
The vast parterres a thousand hands shall make,
LO! COBHAM comes, and floats them with a lake:
Or cut wide views through mountains to the plain,
You Will wish your hill or sheltered seat again. VER. 75, 76. Or cut wide views
through mountains to the plain, You Will wish your hill or sheltered seat again.]
This was done in Hertfordshire, by a wealthy citizen, at the expense of above
5000 l. by which means (merely to overlook a dead plain) he let in the
north wind upon his house and parterre, which were before adorned and defended
by beautiful woods.

Even in an ornament its place remark,
Nor in an hermitage set Dr. Clarke. VER. 78. -- set Dr. Clarke.] Dr. S.
Clarke's busto placed by the queen in the Hermitage, while the Dr. duly
frequented the court.

Behold Villario's ten-years toil complete;
His quincunx darkens, his espaliers meet;
The wood supports the plain, the parts unite,
And strength of shade contends with strength of light;
A waving glow the bloomy beds display,
Blushing in bright diversities of day,
With silver-quiv'ring rills maeander'd over --
Enjoy them, you! Villario can no more;
Tired of the scene parterres and fountains yield,
He finds at last he better likes a field.
Through his young woods how pleased Sabinus strayed,
Or sat delighted in the thick'ning shade,
With annual joy the red'ning shoots to greet,
Or see the stretching branches long to meet!
His son's fine taste an op'ner Vista loves,
Foe to the dryads of his father's groves;
One boundless green, or flourished carpet views, VER. 95. The two extremes in
parterres, which are equally faulty; a boundless green, large and naked as a
field, or a flourished carpet, where the greatness and nobleness of the piece
is lessened by being divided into too many parts, with scrolled works and beds,
of which the examples are frequent.

With all the mournful family of yews; VER. 96. -- mournful family of Yews;]
Touches upon the ill taste of those who are so fond of ever-greens
(particularly Yews which are the most tonsile) as to destroy nobler
forest-trees, to make way for such little ornaments as pyramids of dark-green
continually repeated, not unlike a funeral procession.

The thriving plants, ignoble broomsticks made,
Now sweep those alleys they were born to shade.
At Timon's Villa let us pass a day, VER. 99. At Timon's Villa] This
description is intended to comprize the principles of a false taste of
magnificence, and to exemplify what was said before, that nothing but good
sense can attain it.

Where all cry out, "What sums are thrown away!
So proud, so grand; of that stupendous air,
Soft and agreeable come never there.
Greatness, with Timon, dwells in such a draught
As brings all Brobdignag before your thought.
To compass this, his building is a town,
His pond an ocean, his parterre a down:
Who but must laugh, the master when he sees,
A puny insect, shivering at a breeze!
Lo, what huge heaps of littleness around!
The whole, a labored quarry above ground,
Two Cupids squirt before: a lake behind
Improves the keenness of the northern wind.
His gardens next your admiration call,
On every side you look, behold the wall!
No pleasing intricacies intervene,
No artful wildness to perplex the scene;
Grove nods at grove, each alley has a brother,
And half the platform just reflects the other.
The suffering eye inverted nature sees,
Trees cut to statues, statues thick as trees;
With here a fountain, never to be played;
And there a summer house, that knows no shade;
Here Amphitrite sails through myrtle bowers;
There gladiators fight, or die in flowers; VER. 124. The two statues of the
gladiator pugnant and gladiator moriens.

Un-water'd see the drooping seahorse mourn,
And swallows roost in Nilus' dusty urn.
My lord advances with majestic mien,
Smit with the mighty pleasure, to be seen:
But soft -- by regular approach -- not yet --
First through the length of yon hot terrace sweat; VER. 130. The approaches and
communication of house with garden, or of one part with another, ill-judged,
and inconvenient.

And when up ten steep slopes you have dragged your thighs,
Just at his study-door he will bless your eyes.
His study! with what authors is it stored? VER. 133. His study, etc.] The
false taste in books; a satire on the vanity in collecting them, more frequent
in men of fortune, than the study to understand them. Many delight chiefly in
the elegance of the print, or of the binding; some have carried it so far, as
to cause the upper shelves to be filled with painted books of wood; others
pique themselves so much upon books in a language they do not understand, as to
exclude the most useful in one they do.

In books, not authors, curious is my lord;
To all their dated backs he turns you round;
These Aldus printed, those Du Sueil has bound.
Lo some are vellom, and the rest as good
For all his lordship knows, but they are wood.
For Lock or Milton it is in vain to look,
These shelves admit not any modern book.
And now the chapel's silver bell you hear,
That summons you to all the pride of prayer:
Light quirks of music, broken and uneven,
Make the soul dance upon a jig to heaven.
On painted cielings you devoutly stare, VER. 145. -- And in painting (from
which even Italy is not free) of naked figures in churches, etc. which has
obliged some popes to put draperies on some of those of the best masters.

Where sprawl the saints of Verrio or Laguerre, VER. 146. Where sprawl the
saints of Verrio or Laguerre,] Verrio (Antonio) painted many cielings, etc. at
Windsor, Hamptoncourt, etc. and Laguerre at Blenheim-castle, and other places.

On gilded clouds in fair expansion ly,
And bring all paradise before your eye.
To rest, the cushion and soft Dean invite,
Who never mentions hell to ears polite. VER. 150. Who never mentions hell to
ears polite.] This is a fact; a reverend Dean, preaching at court, threatened
the sinner with punishment in "a place which he thought it not decent to name
in so polite an assembly."

But hark! the chiming clocks to dinner call;
A hundred footsteps scrape the marble hall:
The rich buffet well-colour'd serpents grace, VER. 153. Taxes the incongruity
of ornaments (though sometimes practiced by the ancients) where an open mouth
ejects the water into a fountain, or where the shocking images of serpents,
etc. are introduced in grottos or buffets.

And gaping Tritons spew to wash your face.
Is this a dinner? this a genial room? VER. 155. Is this a dinner, etc.] The
proud festivals of some men are here set forth to ridicule, where pride
destroys the ease, and formal regularity all the pleasurable enjoyment of the
entertainment.

No, it is a temple, and a hecatomb.
A solemn sacrifice, performed in state,
You drink by measure, and to minutes eat.
So quick retires each flying course, you would swear
Sancho's dread doctor and his wand were there. VER. 160. Sancho's dread
doctor] See Don Quixote, chap. xlvii.

Between each act the trembling salvers ring,
From soup to sweet-wine, and God bless the king.
In plenty starving, tantaliz'd in state,
And complaisantly helped to all I hate,
Treated, caressed, and tired, I take my leave,
Sick of his civil pride from morn to eve;
I curse such lavish cost, and little skill,
And swear no day was ever past so ill.
Yet hence the poor are clothed, the hungry fed; VER. 169. Yet hence the poor,
etc.] The moral of the whole, where PROVIDENCE is justified in giving wealth to
those who squander it in this manner. A bad taste employs more hands, and
diffuses expense more than a good one. This recurs to what is laid down in Book
I. Ep. ii. ver. 230-7, and in the epistle preceding this, ver. 161, etc.

Health to himself, and to his infants bread
The lab'rer bears: what his hard heart denies,
His charitable vanity supplies.
Another age shall see the golden ear
Imbrown the slope, and nod on the parterre,
Deep harvests bury all his pride has planned,
And laughing Ceres reassume the land.
Who then shall grace, or who improve the soil?
Who plants like BATHURST, or who builds like BOIL.
It Is use alone that sanctifies expense,
And splendour borrows all her rays from sense.
His father's acres who enjoys in peace,
Or makes his neighbors glad, if he increase:
Whose cheerful tenants bless their yearly toil,
Yet to their lord owe more than to the soil;
Whose ample lawns are not ashamed to feed
The milky heifer and deserving steed;
Whose rising forests, not for pride or show,
But future buildings, future navies, grow:
Let his plantations stretch from down to down,
First shade a country, and then raise a town.
You too proceed! make falling arts your care,
Erect new wonders, and the old repair;
Jones and Palladio to themselves restore,
And be whatever Vitruvius was before:
Till kings call forth the ideas of your mind, VER. 195, 197, etc. 'Till kings
-- bid harbors open, etc.] The poet, after having touched upon the proper
objects of magnificence and expense, in the private works of great men, comes
to those great and public works which become a prince. This poem was published
in the year 1732, when some of the new-built churches, by the act of queen
Anne, were ready to fall, being founded in boggy land (which is satirically
alluded to in our author's imitation of Horace, lib. ii. sat. 2. Shall half the
new-built churches round thee fall)
others were vilely executed, through fraudulent cabals between undertakers,
officers, etc. Dagenham-breach had done very great mischiefs; many of the
highways throughout England were hardly passable; and most of those which were
repaired by turnpikes were made jobs for private lucre, and infamously
executed, even to the entrance of London itself: the proposal of building a
bridge at Westminster had been petitioned against and rejected; but in two
years after the publication of this poem, an act for building a bridge passed
through both houses. After many debates in the committee, the execution was
left to the carpenter abovementioned, who would have made a wooden one; to
which our author alludes in these lines, Who builds a bridge that never drove a
pile?
Should Ripley venture, all the world would smile.
See the notes on that place.

(Proud to accomplish what such hands designed)
Bid harbors open, public ways extend, VER. 195, 197, etc. 'Till kings -- bid
harbors open, etc.] The poet, after having touched upon the proper objects of
magnificence and expense, in the private works of great men, comes to those
great and public works which become a prince. This poem was published in the
year 1732, when some of the new-built churches, by the act of queen Anne, were
ready to fall, being founded in boggy land (which is satirically alluded to in
our author's imitation of Horace, lib. ii. sat. 2. Shall half the new-built
churches round thee fall)
others were vilely executed, through fraudulent cabals between undertakers,
officers, etc. Dagenham-breach had done very great mischiefs; many of the
highways throughout England were hardly passable; and most of those which were
repaired by turnpikes were made jobs for private lucre, and infamously
executed, even to the entrance of London itself: the proposal of building a
bridge at Westminster had been petitioned against and rejected; but in two
years after the publication of this poem, an act for building a bridge passed
through both houses. After many debates in the committee, the execution was
left to the carpenter abovementioned, who would have made a wooden one; to
which our author alludes in these lines, Who builds a bridge that never drove a
pile?
Should Ripley venture, all the world would smile.
See the notes on that place.

Bid temples, worthier of the god, ascend;
Bid the broad arch the dangerous flood contain,
The mole projected break the roaring main;
Back to his bounds their subject sea command,
And roll obedient rivers through the land:
These honors, peace to happy Britain brings,
These are imperial works, and worthy kings.
VARIATIONS.
After ver. 22. in the MS. Must bishops, lawyers, statesmen, have the skill
To build, to plant, judge paintings, what you will?
Then why not Kent as well our treaties draw,
Bridgman explain the gospel, Gibs the law?


THE END.
Just published,

Printed uniformly with this, I. ESSAY on CRITICISM. II. ESSAY on MAN.



