THE WICKLOW MOUNTAINS; OR, THE LAD OF THE HILLS, A COMIC OPERA; IN TWO ACTS.

WRITTEN BY O'KEEFFE.

DUBLIN: PRINTED BY JOHN WHITWORTH, No. 14, EXCHANGE-STREET.

1797.

Persons of the Drama.
MEN.
Franklin, Mr King. Donnybrook, Mr. Lee. Sullivan, Mr. Callan. Felix. Mr. Dunn.
Billy O'Rourke, Mr. Stewart. Redmond O'Hanlon, Mr. Richardson.
WOMEN.
Helen, Mrs. Chapman. Rosa, Mrs. Mahon.
Servants, etc. etc.

THE WICKLOW MOUNTAINS; OR, THE LAD OF THE HILLS.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- A Road.
Enter FRANKLIN and SERVANT. Frank. So, once again have I got up among the
Mountains of Wicklow. Ay, yonder is the very cabin where I supped my bread and
milk, a little chubby-cheek'd younker. Oh! but I Am every hour to expect Mr.
Donnybrook, and his charming daughter from Dublin. William, remember you're not
to drop my name to a soul here.


Serve. Never fear, Sir.


Frank. Well, return to the public-house where we stopped, open the
Portmanteau, and lay out my famous dress!


Serve. Dress! Oh! yes, yes, Sir.


exit. Frank. This delightful country! now mine, thanks to the will of my
crabbed Uncle. In the disguise of the character I assumed so successfully at
the masquerade, I Will see what they are all about here. I can make trial of
Sullivan the post-master's honesty, have a sharp eye too on the old companion
of my childhood, Felix; of whom I have heard such dreadful stories. Lucky my
finding in Dublin the good old woman that nursed us both. My opulent family
left her (and this young man, so long her only support) to indigence. This
letter that she gave me for him, might discover his resources; but I Have
promised, and he shall have it. When metamorphos'd, I may also speak to my
lovely Helen, without her knowing who I am; and if I find her not as amiable as
she is beautiful, then farewell love! now for my disguise, instead of the young
'squire and lord of the manor, I Am an old, merry, jolly, lying, wicked,
mumpping, traveling merchant. (Mimicks) Sleeve-buttons, shirt-buttons,
scissars, threads, tapes and needles, spectacles for all ages! do extend your
charity to the poor old man! -- very well! bravo! bravo!


exit. SCENE II. -- The Mountains.
ROSA, sitting at the door of her cabin, knitting. AIR,
ROSA. Here at her cabin door is Rosa sitting,
But oh! her thoughts in Dublin are with thee,
Move silly fingers, I must mind my knitting,
For ah! my Felix will not think of me;
That does he, says my heart in double beating,
Now blythe from hill to hill he bounds along,
How sweet is absence that can bring such meeting,
Beat, beat, my bosom, to my cheerful song;
Fly, fly, refreshing gales! ah! gently by me,
In passing, softly whisper who is come;
No news of him I love, oh! never come nigh me,
Sing, sing, ye pretty birds, his welcome home.

Enter BILLY O'ROURKE, eating Fruit. Billy. Will you eat some Fraughans, Rosa,
child?


Rosa. Billy, you have been rambling over the mountains, when you should be
teaching the children at Mr. Sullivan's school, you're a pretty usher.


Billy. And you singing here, like a lazy sparrow, when you should mind your
business.


Rosa. Well, now Billy, don't say I waste my time, -- see what I Have been doing,
(takes a shirt from basket) there!


Billy. My new shirt finished! why you have put a ruffle on it! two ruffles!
(joyful) then, blessings on you, do you want to make me a man in a ruffled
shirt? a ruffle on my right hand, and a ruffle on my wrong -- no, my left hand,
and a great long ruffle down my neck! -- next Sunday I shall strut into Chapel,
like a white gilled Turkey-cock. -- No man that ever fold Goats milk on the
Mountains of Wicklow, was -- you talk of Felix! psha! I am --

snaps his fingers and struts. AIR, BILLY.
Some run after the Buck and Do;
Some a Fox will set galloping,
Some will chase a Hare pussey-so,
Chevy their Horses sides walloping;
Gentlemen guzzle up Claret wine,
Ale in the throat will run ripple down,
Ladies tea-talk like a Parrot fine,
O! my Goats milk is the tipple down.
Step out, best leg, and cry, come, body,
When I look smart, give me joy for it,
Genteels shall find that I Am somebody,
Billy O'Rourke is the boy for it. -- Whoop.
My Goat he is fond of skipping high,
Dance he shall at the Hay-market,
My Kid sings so top-tipping -- why
Not ma! ma! sweetly as they Lark it;
Ditches, a good nag brings us over,
Dogs through all troubles will follow man,
If long beards make a philosopher,
Then is my Goat a wife Solomon.
Step out, best leg, etc.
Ruffles shall over my knuckles dab,
Blue silk waistcoat I Will dress in too,
Sullivan's white powdered wig I Will nab,
And take of compliment lessons, two;
Step out, best leg, and cry, come, body,
When I look smart, give me joy for it,
Genteels shall find that I Am somebody,
Billy O'Rourke is the boy for it. -- Whoop.
Step out, best leg, etc.

Enter FRANKLIN, in his disguise. Frank. Ha! I Am glad to see the boys and girls
so sweet to one another. And my honey, were you singing a song for her? the
very birds in the air, set you that gay example -- look among the hens and
chickens, see that tight, smart cockerel, how he chaunts and crows round the
little pullets.


in a feigned voice. Billy. What do you chatter to me about cocks and hens, you
beggarly looking thief? who are you with the devil to you?


Rosa. Oh shame! Billy, you're always abusing every body.


Frank. Let him alone, honey, the poor must bear and forbear. I Will tell you who
I was, for I have had my day.


Billy. So have I.


Frank. Ay, every Dog has his day.


Billy. What do you sell? speak this instant.


shakes him. Frank. Oh! why do you shake one about, as if I was a bag of
cockles?


Rosa. You Have got such a cross way, Billy, by crowing over the little boys in
Mr. Sullivan's school. But you're not an usher here.


Billy. (Ironically) Oh! miss sweet-lips, -- pretty rose-bud! (bows) what do
you sell if you please, Sir?


bows. Frank. Oh Sir! (bows ironically) decent sleevebuttons, and handsome
spectacles for all ages, -- comely pins and needles, and well behaved threads
and tapes. When I cannot sell, I beg -- So either in charity or fair dealing,
I Have always the best of the bargain.


Billy. Bargain! I Am your customer. I Will buy a pair of sleeve buttons for my
new ruffled shirt, (takes it) Oh! how nice you have marked it! as if you would picked
out the letters from your very sampler, and stuck them on, now for the W.O.R.
eh! what! F -- o -- fof!


Rosa. To be sure; it is for Felix.


Billy. Ruffling shirts for Felix! that is pretty behavior.


walks in a passion. Rosa. Don't be angry Billy. Besides his kindness to me,
Felix is good natured to every body. He is generous to all that is in want or
sickness.


Frank. My companion such an excellent character! this is not what I Have been
led to believe.


aside. Rosa. Then Billy, Felix is so handsome, and here he is.


Billy. Here he is, and he is not so handsome.


Frank. Ah! I remember the boyish features, but exceeding well grown up.


aside, Enter FELIX. Billy. You're not as handsome as me! Felix.


struts up to him. Rosa. Felix! why, I believe you have been to Dublin?


Felix. I have my sweet Rosa, and have brought you a silver thimble; and here,
Billy, is a red silk handkerchief for Sunday.


Rosa I thank you Felix, but I cannot accept it.


Billy. Thank ye, Felix, but I cannot accept it, (ties it in a great bow round
his neck) I thank ye, Felix, but indeed I cannot accept it! (ludicrously)
there, that is Felix's way, he is always making presents to the folks, a busy
cur! now I never make presents to any body.


Rosa. Do not be offended, but I must not take any thing from you, till I first
know how you get the money to buy it?


Billy. Felix, I don't want to affront you, but I believe you're a robber!


Frank. How! oh! this may be the malice of rustic jealousy; (aside) but, young
gentleman, your generosity hurts the poor man that wants to live by turning the
penny.


Felix. Oh! I Will not do mischief either. What have you got?


looks. Billy. He Is got sine spectacles. I wish I had a pair to make a present
to my master, Mr. Sullivan, it would save me many lags by the ear. Felix,
dam'me, I Will buy a pair, if you will pay for them?


Felix. Ha, ha, ha! with all my heart. Here then.


gives 'em to Billy, and money to Franklin. Rosa. Felix you have given him two
half crowns. Why, you might have bought 'em for sixpence. Ah! light come, light
go.


Billy. Ay, what is got over the devil's back, is --


Frank Oh fie! don't blame the lad, for helping honest industry.


Rosa. Certainly it is very good in him so far; but his having so much money is
the talk of every soul in Croghan.


Billy You pulled out, the last time you came from Dublin, four guineas, two
half guineas, six crown pieces, three bright farthings, and a bundle of
sixpences. You go from home here without a penny in your pocket -- you stand
behind a windmill on Red-cross-hill, and you rob the gentlemen and ladies, as
they pass in their coaches. Look now, there is a coach coming over the common
yonder, see how Felix watches it, just as a cat would a robbin.


Frank. Then, but for us, he would be at his trade.


apart. Billy. He Is groping for his pistol.


noise and shrieks without. Felix. Those horses are running with the coach down
the hill.


exit. Billy. There Is a lady within -- she is in a blessed way?


Frank. Heavens! it is my Helen and her father.


exit. Rosa. Why don't you go and assist in stopping the horses, Billy?


Billy. Lord, if ever I saw such spirited nags! there they kick and jump. The
coach will have an immense tumble down the quarry. Talk of horses and
carriages. Nothing like a man's own handsome leg.


walks ridiculously. Rosa. There! Felix has caught hold of the bridle of the
first horse.


Billy. See how he rears, and pulls him up in the air! hoo! (shouts) If I
was not sure Mr. Sullivan didn't want me to open school, I Would join in the sun.
But let old Sullivan go to the devil, I will divert myself.


Enter SULLIVAN. Sull. Oh, ho! you're here.


takes him by the ear and leads hint off. Rosa. The gentlefolks are safe;
thanks to my brave Felix.


Re-enter FELIX. Oh, my Felix! how good you are!

Felix. It Is very wrong the ladies not getting out, and walking down that hill.


Rosa. They Are not hurt, I hope.


Felix. Oh! no, no harm, but what the coach maker can repair. But my dear Rosa,
I Am exceedingly hurt by your suspicions.


Rosa. Well, now nobody is bye, do tell me how you get your money?


Felix. The time will come, and very soon, when you shall know how I have a
guinea, for other people's shilling; but while I put it to a good purpose don't
think ill of me. -- I think I may trust Rosa (aside) Come my love, look
pleasant -- I Will call upon you tonight, and then, perhaps I may tell you.


Rosa. I shall expect you to supper. But, dear Felix, let me know no more than
you think proper.


Duet -- FELIX, ROSA.
Both. Ah! dearest love, will you ever love me?
Treasured in vi'lets are sweets for the be;
Is the morning sunbeam cheering, ah?
Is the Lark's first note worth hearing, ah?
Is the dew-drop clear?
Called the snow-drop's tear?
Setting sun do ploughmen joy to see;

Felix. Does Rosa then dote on her own gramachree?


Rosa. Does Felix then dote on his own gramachree?


Felix. My dearest,
My dearest;

Rosa. Say oh! will you love me?


Felix. Do sweet flowers open to the morning ray?
You are my sweet flower;

Rosa. You are the dawn above me,


Felix. Adieu my dearest Rosa!


Rosa. Adieu my dearest Felix!


Both. Oh! may our hours in love serenely glide away.


exeunt separately. SCENE III. -- Sullivan's House.
Enter SULLIVAN. Sull. And you must be courting Rosa, and be damned to you?


Billy. Yes, I must -- and the horses were so rusty.


Sull. I thought Billy, I was postmaster in this here town of Arklow, and
schoolmaster, and that my school was the chapel, and I was owner of three
herring-boats.


Billy. Well, and a'n't you?


Sull. Then as you are my usher, never stand before me with a hat upon your
cangrona, (snatches off his hat, Billy picks it up and wipes it on Sullivan's
coat) and never speak to me without saying, Sir!


Billy. Lord, I could not remember that. It would hurt my intellects.


Sull. What you spalpeen cur! mind you set master Fogerty a copy.


Billy. For your crustiness, Felix's spectacles never rides upon your bandy
nose.


aside. Sull. What, are you talking about my nose?


Billy. I was only saying I wanted a quill for a new pen.


Sull. You want a quill! and pray what do you think the old gander is marching
about the door for? do you hear? write Master Pat. Mulvany's multiplication
table, on his new sheet of brown paper; and tell Master Shamos Meguiggin, that
I Will whip him for drawing dogs and foxes on his new slate; that is, if his
daddy, Mr. Meguiggin. don't send me that sheaf of barley he promised me.


shouts without. Billy. There Is the boys making a hullaballoo at the school
door.


Sull. And why don't you go and open it, you whelp?


Billy. (Takes down lash, slates, books, rules, etc. from a shelf) Oh! if every
babe of 'em does not give me his morning's bread and butter, how my cat will
whisk her nine tails about their legs!


Sull. How do you mean, honey?


Billy. Why, dam'me, so.


whips his legs and runs off. Sull Oh! you cursed hound! eh! 'Squire Donnybrook!


Enter DONNYBROOK, and two FOOTMEN. Don. Come, put down my coat there, I have
done with lace for some time. Ah! Mr. Sullivan, I presume. Well, my friend Sir
Richard, told you I suppose, of my coming down, or rather coming up here, and
that I Will lodge with you.


Sull. Oh! Mr. Donnybrook! then it was your coach that was overturned just now?
well, Sir, you shall have a glass of Claret, and in our Irish way, I will not ask
you whether you will, or no.


Don. No -- I -- prefer a little of your Wicklow Ale.


Sull. And that you shall have -- here, Billy.


Enter BILLY. Billy. May be you want me.


Sull. And where is your Sir? and where is your bow? (Billy bows) arragh boy!
don't kick up your leg in that manner. Suppose Master Me. Fogerty was behind
you, what a devil of a kick you would give him in the shin.


Billy. Sir, will you sit down?


places a chair. Don. Thank ye.


Sull. Then, how dare you ask even the Pope, to sit in my school elbow chair,
and be damned to you.


Billy. Oh! very well, pray Sir, sit on this stool.


takes the chair from him. Don. What Is this?


Sull. 'Squire, don't think me unmannerly, you're welcome to my great chair, if
it was made of gold and ivory; but my usher and my boys, must believe I Am the
greatest bird in the bush. (apart) Billy, boy, from your behavior, I Am sure
the gentleman could not tell what I am.

AIR, SULLIVAN.
Pray look on me Sir, and then guess my vocation,
I Am schoolmaster here, and I teach the young boys;
I squat in my chair, and such cursed botheration,
Enough for to deafen a drum with their noise:
This lad you see here -- you have a hole in your stocking!
apart. Why Sir, he is my usher -- pho Bill, where is your bow?
How neatly be stands -- with your elbows outcocking!
apart. What a mannerly child -- to kick up like a cow:
Then Sir, he can write,
Your soul he would delight,
With his A, B, C, D,
And his D, E, F, G,
And his fa, lal, lal, de, ral, etc.
My boys bring me corn, when their daddies are reaping,
They cipher so famously all on their slate;
I lock up their books, just to teach them book keeping,
Though shut now his mouth; Sir, that cur's full of prate:
In short of my youths, I Am a noble commander,
Fine horses I make out of young ragged colts;
On Sunday before 'em, I walk like a gander,
And they all hop after, like gay turkey polts:
Then Sir, they can write,
Your soul they would delight,
With their A, B, C, D,
And their D, E, F, G,
And their sal, lal, lal, de, ral, etc.

excunt Sullivan and Billy. Don. Why does my daughter sit in the coach?


Foot. Sir, miss Helen's woman was so frightened at the danger, that she fell
quite ill upon it, and my lady observing a smart looking girl at a cottage-door
as we passed through the village, thought she might hire her a little, and so has
walked back to have some talk with the girl herself.


Don. Well, do you see, your lady, my wife; sent me up to the mountains in
slate; but now I Will unstate myself for one month at least. There now, my two
sinecure footmen, take yourselves and my fine gingerbread coach back again to
MerrionSquare. I come hither for sport, -- that I Will have in shooting grouse.
My daughter, miss Helen Donnybrook, comes here for health, that she will quaff up
in fine air, and Goats milk; so begone back to Dublin, you superfine gaudy
rascals; march, trip, skip, hop, bounce!


Foot. Ah! master breaks out now he hasn't my lady to control him (aside)


exit. Re-enter SULLIVAN, calling off. Sull. Come Billy, bring it in. 'Squire,
you have rusticated yourself into a country Fox.


Don. Time and season. In town I was gay; I rattled, swore, guzzled and
gambled; but here I Am rural, simple and serene.


Enter BILLY, with a mug. Billy. Sir, I just now handed miss, your beautiful
daughter, out of the coach. I hope I was not too bold. What a shabby figure I
must have cut; (aside) pray, Squire, what do you do with your old clothes, that
you throw off?


looking at them. Don. Why, I give 'em to my man.


Billy. Your honor's welcome to Arklow; (drinks) master, here is long life to
you.


Sull. Then the devil fly away with your manners.


Don. You should have first taught him a few; come, come, don't be cowed down,
Billy, my man.


Billy. Oh! I Am his man; thank ye Sir! these old clothes I shall be obliged to
wear. 'Squire if you let me serve miss with Goats milk, she shall have a pale
of it under the window every morning, before the crow can shake his ears.


Sull. But, Billy, we should warn Mr. Donnybrook against Felix.


Billy. Right; Sir, never go shooting on the hills, without taking a gun with
you.


Don. Why, it is what I generally do.


Sull. My way.


Don. Felix is, I suppose, that traveling pedlar, that came to assist us, when
we broke down.


Billy. Oh! Sir, no; Felix is a saucy boy, that c^^^^s my Rosa, but he is very
ugly, is not he master?


Sull. Yes; he is a deformed man. Then Felix is (...).


Billy. He would not put one foot before another to oblige a living soul.


Sull. And if he meets you on a common, he would not mind knocking your head
against a stone wall.


Don. Then you shou'dn't enclose the commons.


Billy. And he is so unmannerly, that if you would take off your hat, and say "how
do you do Mr. Felix?". he would stump by you, like the stump of a pigeonh^^se.


Don. So, on a sum up, this Felix is a saucy, rude, ugly, deformed, uncivil
stump of a post? I Am a magistrate, -- he shall not stay here to frighten me, when
I Am running over the sweet, blooming heaths; I Will transport him! the infernal
rascal! ecod! you have fired me so, that if he comes in my way -- Enter FELIX.
ah! my dear worthy lad! (shakes hands) I Am very glad to see you, I longed to
make some acknowledgement and return you my hearty thanks.


Felix. Sir, the pleasure of assisting any that stand in need of it, is to me a
sufficient recompense.


Sull. Billy, I Am amazed!


Billy. Sir, I Am astonished!


Sull. Felix, I charge you before 'Squire Donnybrook, as a common highway
footpaddy.


Don. Then, this is the lad you have been abusing so?


Billy. Sir, he is a robber.


Don. He cannot, he saved my life, my daughter, and my four coach horses!


Sull. Sir, he wears the best of clothes.


Billy. And a ruffled shirt, so he must be a rogue. -- I wish I had ruffles to
my shirt, -- damn him how fine he looks!


aside. Sull. Felix, you either rob, or have sold yourself to the devil for
your gold.


Felix. Neither.


Sull. Why you do more good in the village, than all of us put together, so you
must be a bad man, -- then you're always going to Dublin, and coming back, and
what for?


Billy. And people sends him letters, -- now nobody sends me letters, though I Am
an O'Rourke.


Sull. Well thought on -- as I Am postmaster, and all the letters comes through
my hands, I Will open yours, and find how you get the money.


Felix. Open my letters! then all is blown indeed. The boy is now on the road
with the Arklow mail. (aside.)


exit hastily. Sull. There! he could not stand the charge, but has run away with
himself.


Don. Then, by the time this Felix does good enough to be canonized for a
saint, he will be quite a devil among you all. But am I to have no supper here?


Billy. Suppose Sir, you go and shoot a little; I Will show you such big round
flocks of Grouse. I wish I could get some for a present to Rosa; (aside)
besides, Sir, I shoot a little myself; you shall see how I Will cock one eye, and
wink the other. Hey! they are up! whiz!


points and shouts. Sull. Pray Billy, turn your muzzle another way.


Trio -- DON. SULL. BILLY.
Don. A life of town fashion is all a mere folly,
Grimace, affectation, nor friendship, nor truth,
High up among green hills in altitude jolly,
We rove on the tip toe of pleasure;
The bees in great cities, for drones buz and cluster,
Why blast in smoked dungeons, our rosy cheek'd youth;
To freedom and nature, dull mortals, be juster,
Over mountains our limits come measure.

Sull. A basket of Turf, go bring in my brave Billy,
I love a good sire to comfort my nose,
A bowl of Colcannon, oghone! is the lilly,
And let a big Turkey be roasted.

Billy. I Will bring you of Whiskey a plentiful mether,
And Sir, I Will remember a pitcher of Booze,
Then round your square table we'll sit down together,
And all the fine girls shall be toasted.

exeunt. SCENE IV. -- The Mountains, Rosa's Cabin.
Enter FRANKLIN, in his disguise. Frank. This clash of contradictory reports.
They allow Felix is their universal benefactor, yet all agree that he must get
his money by improper means. Eh! he is here, running out of town this late hour,
is suspicious, -- if, as that clown said, his business should be to collect
from travelers --


retires. Enter FELIX. Felix. Yes, here the post-boy must pass; if there is a
letter for me in the bag, he may for a little cash, give it me and keep secret,
so prevent Sullivan discovering my hidden precious resource. A pity my nurse
was from home, when I called there yesterday, she will be distressed, and perhaps
may write this very post, enough, to let any reader know the means, by which I
have relieved her. (sees Franklin) Is Not that the facetious pedlar?


Frank. (Aside) He sees me, (advances,) tol, lol, lol, (sings) then Heaven
bless you my good young man.


Felix. The same to you.


boy's horn without. Frank. The post-boy --


Felix. Yes, with the Dublin Letters for Arklow, -- I -- I -- want to speak to
him.


Frank. Sure he will not rob the mail! yet so communicative of his villainy!


aside. Felix. I think he has a letter for me, that I would not wish should
fall into the post-master's hands.


Frank. Then it is only a letter for himself he wants out of it, I think, I hope
he is slandered. (aside.) From a girl, eh! ah! ah!


slyly. Felix. He, ha, ha! no faith, it is from my old nurse, that lives in
Dublin.


Frank. Indeed! -- how fortunate!


aside. Felix. To get that from the boy, would make me the happiest fellow in
the world.


half aside. Frank. If your mind is really good, now for a severe trial.
(aside.)


exit unperceived. Felix. Shall I ask the boy or no? upon consideration I Would
better not, he might refuse, and I get vexed, perhaps he would run into town
complaining; then Sullivan would have a handle for his ill will to me. No, if
there is a letter, I Will leave it to chance. Eh! I Am before Rosa's Cabin; well
thought on, I am to be with her; (horn) how sweet that sound, this tranquil
evening, over the hills; but harsh to the voice of love and Rosa.

AIR, FELIX.
The horn shrill, mellow, loud and clear,
May call to chase a fearful deer,
How poor the hunter's pride;
The trumpet puffs in boasting strain,
To fight, and over the verdant plain,
Must flow a crimson tide.
The post-boy's horn, hark! music rare!
Now skims the lake, now fills the dell,
Or sink, or float, upon the air,
Or dying pant, or nobly swell;
His eager sports, let death proclaim,
To camp and forest round;
The lover hears the voice of fame,
When flutes melodious sound.
At rural feasts, the master's skill,
The pipe can warble make at will,
To join the dulcet voice;
Blind minstrel sit in tuneful state,
Thy harp, oh! sweetly modulate,
You charm and we rejoice.
The post-boy's horn, hark! music rare!
Now skims the lake, now fills the dell,
Or sink, or float, upon the air,
Or dying pant, or nobly swell;
Horn, harp, pipe, trumpet, loud proclaim,
Fight, dance, or song around;
The lover hears the voice of fame,
When flutes melodious sound.

Re-enter FRANKLIN. Felix. Ha! my merry, honest fellow here again!


Frank. Young man, the money you generously gave me this morning, for my
spectacles, was four and sixpence over the price, that buys me a jolly stock of
merchandise, and makes me happy; you said, the letter you expected, would make
you so, there it is.


gives it. Felix. God's Death! you hav'n't forced it from the boy?


Frank. Ask no questions, you have it, and be happy.


exit singing. Felix. This is a very dangerous act of kindness; why, there is no
post-mark! she must have sent it in a cover. Then my new venturous friend has
torn it off to prevent detection. Plague on it I wish he had not been so busy.
However, since I have got it, I may as well see, what says my good old woman.


Enter BILLY, with birds in a net. Billy. Oh! they will catch the robber, ecod,
I Have lest Mr. Donnybrook to grope his way home as he can. Pho! let him lay down
on the top of the hill, and roll into the town at the bottom of it, he, he, he!
I Have got all his birds, he has had the sport, but I have the game; Rosa shall
broil all these fat Grouses for her and my snapper (going, sees Felix) What,
Felix! Arklow and the whole country is up, do you know any thing about it?


Felix. About what?


Billy. Why the mail is robbed.


Felix. Ha! then he did force it from the boy. Is he in the habit of doing
these things, or was it the impulse of the moment, to serve me? I observed his
activity in endeavoring to assist the people, when the coach broke down, so
I Will think the best of him. (aside) But Billy, sure there is only one letter
taken, and for that, I Will sooner -- than have a noise -- I myself will pay --
the postage -- out -- of my own pocket, (confused) and then there is no harm
done.


Billy. You Will pay the postage! why, what is it to you? and how came you to
know how many letters were taken? no harm done! Mr. Sullivan says they are
always gibbered upon the spot where the fact is committed, hung up in chains,
as a warning to the Crows, and the Sheep, and the Sea-gulls.


Felix. Wretched man! why would he do this?


aside, and much agitated. Billy. What Is the matter with Felix? he was reading
a letter just now, eh! how! bless my head! he said there was but one letter
taken; oh, ho! then the secret's out, (whistles) this is how Felix gets his
money. (aside) Felix, upon the very spot where we now stand, what a terrible
fine place for a gibbet.


Felix. I Am faint, and tremble.


aside. Billy. Why your face is as white as a Goat's elbow; here is Mr. Sullivan
and the whole posse coming to look for the robber. Ah Felix! I was not quite
out, when I said you hid behind the windmill, to rob the gentlefolks.


Felix. (Alarnted) Me! am I suspected of this?


Billy. Oh! no, you're not suspected, -- pretty well known, -- I Will go in and
tell Rosa, that winds him up with her, she is so honest.


goes into house. Felix. The poor fellow would not have committed this action
but for me; the crime is all mine; unless I give him up, a shameful death must
be my doom. How to escape? Rosa is beloved of all, if the conceals me, they will
not force their way into her cabin. Rosa! Rosa!


Rosa appears at a window. Rosa. Who Is there?


Felix. My love, open the door, quick, quick, and you save my life,


Rosa. Felix, as long as I could, my affection for you, repel'd every thought
to your prejudice; whilst all were in full certainty of your dishonesty, love
whispered. "Rosa, only doubt it," -- but this last action -- Felix I must speak
to you no more, and if possible forget you.


Felix My life is in your hands, will not you preserve it? save me my dear, my
only love.


kneels. Billy. (At the window) get away, we know nothing about you.


Felix. Then this is the cause, treacherous Rosa!


rises. Billy. Come don't you abuse the girls, with your impudent robberies.


Felix. Then life is not worth preserving.


leans against a tree. Billy. Here they come to take him; ecod I Will have the
reward; my beautiful Felix, if you attempt to run away, I Will shoot you flying.


retires. Enter SULLIVAN and REDMOND O'HANLON. Red. When I questioned the boy,
he said the fellow was muffl'd, and he could not swear to him.


Sull. Redmond, I know Felix did this, by his running out of my house, when I
talked about his letter.


Enter DONNYBROOK, gropping. Don. Damn it, I Am quite astray, how shall I get
home?


Sull. Justice Donnybrook! Sir, the mail is robbed!


Don. Ay, you're a pretty parcel of pickpockets; that cursed fellow pretended
to be my guide, led me about and about, then ran away with my birds.


Enter BILLY, hastily from house. Billy. Master, I saw a letter.


Don. Oh! you poaching villain, where is my game?


collars him. Billy. Lord, Sir, none of your game now, we have other fish to fry,
a'n't we going to law? Master, I just this moment saw Felix reading a letter
that he took from the Mail.


Sull. You saw him! then Billy honey, you were the man that was seen with him.


Don. You're an accomplice.


Billy. Me! I was not within ten miles of him.


Red. I know who it was.


Don. There, I knew it was not Felix, an honest e'low, didn't he save me? tender
hearted fellow! didn't he save my daughter? a brave fellow! didn't he in the
danger, put Helen's little lap-dog in his coat pocket?


Billy. Pocketted a dog too; aye, he can afford to pay the tax.


Red. The begging pedlar was Felix's consederate.


Felix. (Advancing) I had no confederate, the crime was all my own.


Don. Indeed! is it possible I could be so deceived in this young man! but what
a foolish knave to own it. (aside) Now Bob, I think this lad is innocent,
because, supposing I was guilty, I Would be hanged if I Would confess it.


Sull. Well, as he has consess'd it, he will be hanged.


Don. Felix must be locked up in the Chapel to night, and tomorrow I Will convey
him under a strong guard, to Wicklow jail.


Sull. Billy, boy, fetch away the childrens copy books, or Felix will be
stealing the paper, to write petitions to the Lord Lieutenant.


Quartetto -- SULL. DON. RED. FELIX.
Sull. Felix you have robbed the mail,

Don. And thus I speak the law's decree;

Sull. Honey you must go to jail,
And hang upon a tree.

Felix. I shall make no resistance,
With hope lost, is existence.

Rosa at window. Ah! how cruel to my jewel,
Love. I have used thee to ill.

Chorus. -- Felix you have robbed the mail, etc.

Felix. Like the glorious sun is death,
Which we cannot bear to look on;
Come, and yet my latest breath,
Shall blessings call on Rosa.

Billy. Strike a light, gay and bright,
Rosa, broil our little grousy;
Felix swing, oh! I Will sing,
Rosa then shall be my spousy.

Rosa. When worth thus from the world departs,
Our prayers to Heaven ascend;
And tears and sighs from grateful hearts,
Thy fleeting soul attend.

Chorus. -- When worth thus from, etc.

Sull. We'll lock you up in the Chapel all night,
Tomorrow to prison as soon as light.

Felix. Come then away, farewell! in your night stories tell;
How fond Felix was betrayed, by a dear lovely maid;
With joy shall I hear the knell, of poor Felix passing bell;
Bear me then quick along, love hear my dying song.

Chorus. Felix you have robbed the mail, etc.

END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE I, -- Inside of Rosa' s Cabin.
Enter ROSA. AIR.
A Linnet pursued, to my window it flew,
It fluttered and trembled, the Hawk was in view;
So plaintively tender, his note still I hear,
Ah! tender indeed, 'twas the voice of my dear:
No pity could move, I the trembler betray,
And thus the vile Hawk, tears my Linnet away.
Where now is my Felix? where soon shall he be?
And what must his thoughts be, if thinking of me?

Enter HELEN. Helen. Ha! good morning to you my dear girl; Rosa, I pretended to
my father, that I Would take an easy, quiet saunter over the hill; but 'twas only
to have a little more chat with you, do you know that I like you vastly?


Rosa. Oh! ma'am, I cannot think that such an ignorant girl as I, could so soon
obtain the favor of a lady.


Helen. Have you ever been in Dublin? no! then you have no idea of the elegant
delights of plays, ridottos, public breakfasts, castle balls, circular road
canters, new garden concerts, and black rock cassinos! Rosa, you shall be my
confidante, ha, ha, ha, both papa and mama think me ill, but, dear, I only
counterfeited, deceived even the doctors, so they sent me into the country.


Rosa. But why miss, did you pretend to be ill?


Helen. Because, mama, so grand! would have me marry a man, only on account of
his having come to an immense estate, by the death of an uncle, and this
compulsion has given me a great aversion for him. -- I hav'n't yet seen him,
but have set him down in my fancy, as a puppy.


Rosa. Aye, but ma'am, since those delights of Dublin, are only to be enjoyed
by rich gentry, a marriage with this gentleman, procures you pleasure to your
heart's content.


Helen. True Rosa, but the content of my heart, is to choose for myself; I
never yet was in love, and 'tisn't mama's experience can convince me it is so
charming.

AIR, HELEN
Virgin snows the landscare spreading,
Wide, one vacant blank display,
Hidden charms our steps over treading.
Ever descends the ardent ray:
Tender thoughts the maid despising.
Cold to nature and her laws,
Love's pure genial flame arising,
Forth each latent passion draws:
Fly my bosom, sage reflection,
Fill the void, some kind affection;
Friendship smiting,
Time beguiling,
Soothing, cheering,
Life endearing,
Till the lover,
I discover;
Who can make me yes repeat,
And my heart, pit, pat, to beat,
Such the spark of life to me.
Or my heart be cold and free.

Enter BILLY, in Donnybrook' s fast clothes, large Wig powdered, etc. with a
slaggon. my father! Rosa. I must be very ill (apart) oh! this lassitude is
intolerable! heigh^!

pretends to faint, Rosa supports her. Rosa. (Not looking at him) Oh, Sir! miss
is so satigu'd and so weak -- will not your honor please to sit down?


Billy. Sir! honor! oh! now she is talking to my garb, (aside) get out of that,
you hussy, how dare you catch ladies in your arms, when I am by?


Rosa. Why gracious! miss, it is only Billy O'Rourke.


Helen. (Starts up) What an impudent creature! to put me to the trouble of
fainting, for nothing, but how came he in papa's clothes?


Rosa. Billy, is not this Felix's ruffled shirt? where did you get it?


Billy. Ask no questions, you -- miss I Have been searching through every room in
our house, and I didn't find you.


takes a glass and trencher from his pocket, sills. Helen. You didn't find me
-- sure!


Billy. So I thought I Would bring this fine glass of Goat's milk, (presents) drink
it miss, for the recovery of your consumption.


Helen. Here offers a little diversion, (aside) was not it you that handed me
out of the coach last night? I thought I remembered it was just such a handsome
young man.


Billy. Eh! hem! Rosa, ladies can find I Am a handsome young man -- Rosa I know
loves me -- I Will vex her; miss, you're a beautiful soul.


Helen. So, I Have made a conquest here, (apart) and pray, is it your way to
squeeze ladies hands, when you gallant them out of coaches?


Billy. Did I? I believe I did, I ask pardon, miss -- ecod I Will throw a sheep's
eye at her.


winks and grimaces. Rosa. Billy, you're very rude to stand and make faces at
the young lady.


Billy. Ah! she is jealous -- go you, and make faces at your fine thief, Felix,
through the spike holes of the chapel, (Rosa weeps) may be now I Am making my
fortune, and don't know it -- she fainted at sight of me -- I Will court her,
(leers and awkwardly pats her with his hat) he, he, he! Rosa is ready to die
with spite, -- she will come and give her a dig with her self, sars, by and bye.


aside. Helen. How shall I keep my countenance?


aside. Billy. It Is well miss hasn't got a cap on her head -- ma'am will not you
swallow the milk? stop! I Will sweeten it with a touch of my own cherry lips;
(drinks it off) ecod it was so nice, it slipped down, before I could whistle
after it.


Helen. Well, this is the completest love scene I ever saw, heard, or read of,
ha, ha, ha!


aside. Rosa. My poor, unhappy Felix! miss Helen might make interest with her
father for him; (aside) madam could I speak a word with you?


Helen. With pleasure, my dear, -- adieu, -- farewell -- bye, bye -- heigho!


exeunt Helen and Rosa. Billy. Well, if this is not being in love with a body,
I Am not Billy O'Rourke; what a rare conception for me to put on this apparel --
how good of her papa to give me them! that jealous wretch to run away with her.
This moment is the nick of my fortune, I wish I had some friend to consult.


walks. Enter SULLIVAN. Sull. This scoundrel Billy! I send him round to the
young gentlemen's daddies and mammies, to tell them I could have no school
today, because of Felix being locked up in the chapel; (sees Billy, stares)
arrah then -- is it -- Billy O'Rourke! what, put on the 'Squire's clothes! and
my new caxen too and be damned to you; oh! I see it, you have put them on to come
courting.


Billy. You may say that.


Sull. But I Will let Rosa know she is not to take my usher's time, if she was as
pretty as a Yellow-hammer. Come you back home, Billy, and mind your affairs.


stretches out his hand. Billy. (Shrinking away) Pho! let my ear alone now, I
beseech you: master, there is a great deal of good sense, under your wig.


Sull. Why, boy, I have sense to be sure; were you going to talk about that?


Billy. Mr. Sullivan, when a man's without a wife, what is he to do?


Sull. Why, he is to do without a wife.


Billy. Yes, Sir, but how is he to get one?


Sull. Court her to be sure.


Billy. No occasion for that -- she I Have chosen, loves me already.


Sull. Then are you so vain as to suppose Rosa likes you?


Billy. Rosa! (snaps his fingers) miss Helen Donnybrook.


proudly. Sull. What! pho! you conceited fop, be easy -- eh! but what reason
have you to think she likes you; Billy, my boy?


Billy. Cannot tell my love secrets; honor, honor, honor!


strikes his breast. Sull. True, nothing like honor, as I say, when I carch you
at my hen-roost, thieving my new laid duck eggs.


Billy. Damn your similies -- miss Helen Donnybrook.


walks about. Sull. Eh! the 'Squire giving him his clothes is some sign of
favor. Now if merely to thwart his proud wife's scheme of marriage for his
daughter, he should give her to O'Rourke, and that the young lady herself
should take a fancy to him. -- I Have heard of grand ladies running away with
drummers, and footmen, and counselors, and such sort of jockies -- Billy, I Will
give -- no I Will lend you my advice; if, when you have succeeded, you will get my
lease renewed without a rise on the farm!


Billy. Well, Sir, I will.


Sull. Then my advice is -- you will make me a present of a hamper of wine!


Billy. Yes, yes.


Sull. Then Billy, listen -- you will give me a Cheshire cheese?


Billy. I will -- I will -- tell me?


Sull. Marry her, if you can.


Billy. You may be sure on it, and if I get her fortune, put me in mind of the
bottle of wine and the pound of Cheshire cheese.


Sull. Pho! a hamper, and a hundred.


Billy. Aye, Sir -- 'twill be a hamper in a hundred.


Bull. Yonder is her father going to the chapel, to examine Felix, run and
propose for her, to him.


Billy. What did she ever do for me, that I should do such a fine thing for her?


Sull. Psha! go and ask his consent -- fie! with that little bit of a pot-lead
on your head -- here is my grand three cocked beaver, ( puts it on) there now,
look fierce.


Billy. She Is in the next room, let me show myself to her.


Sull. Talking to the girl before the daddy, is beginning the alphabet at the
great A, instead of the aperceand. What strange things happen! 'twas but last
Sunday, Father Murphy said; "Mr. Sullivan," said he that Billy O'Rourke, your
usher, will certainly for his wickedness, come to some untimely end, -- and
here you're going to be married, ha, ha, ha!


Billy. Ha, ha, ha!


Sull. We shall split our sides with laughing, when you ask the father to
perform his function, ha, ha, ha!


Billy. Ha, ha, ha! but here is the 'squire -- must look grave -- how is my face?


Sull. Very grave, how is mine?


Billy. Quite grave, I Will put on a bold look, will that do?


Bull. Ay, ay; copper, copper.


SCENE II. -- Fields, with a view of the Chapel.
Enter DONNYBROOK. Don. What do they mean by their mail robbing! my letters
have been delivered me. It Is well my wife let us me know this Franklin has an
estate here, a delicious spot for shooting, -- a good match for Helen, --
sixteen thousand a year, may have a peerage, -- my daughter a countess.


Enter SULLIVAN. Sull. How do you do Sir? come Billy.


Enter BILLY. Don. Eh! who is this?


Billy. I Am so bashful, damn my shame face.


Sull. Arragh! did you say damn? none of your deed and deeds before the
gentleman.


Don. My clothes!


Billy. Put in a good word, praise me.

apart.
Sull. I will. Sir, this Billy has a fine capacity, and he never swears.


Billy. And Sir, I Am so handy.


Don. Handy indeed! do you think I Will ever wear those clothes again?


Billy. There, -- you see he gives them me entirely. 'Squire, if I was even to
spend all my wife's fortune, I could maintain us both, without her wetting a
singer.


Sull. Then Sir, he would send his ten small children to my school.


Don. And pray what is this to me?


Sull. Oh! that is very good! the schooling of his eighteen small children is
nothing to their grandfather; pho! boy, ask his consent at once.


Billy. I will, -- hem! -- damn my blushing face, you ask him?


Sull. I will, -- ask him you.


Don. What are you about?


Billy. Sir, I Am about nineteen, and I Am about six inches high, and five feet
to the back of that, and I intend to be very fat --


Sull. You're fat enough already, that my cupboard can tell.


Billy. And I Have three months wages due to me.


Sull. Oh! boy, you must never ask for that!


Don. These are surprising things! but what is the jest? come to the point.


Billy. Why, Sir, the case is, -- as I don't think it would be fair for me to
run away with your daughter, without --


Don. Run away with my daughter! eh! how! what is that?

fiercely.
Sull. Oh, ho! I see how the consent goes -- because Sir, this vulgar, low bred
scoundrel, has had the assurance to think you would give him miss Helen
Donnybrook in marriage, and be damned to him.


Don. Cursed scoundrel! hark ye, Mr. Sullivan!

exit with smothered rage.
Sull. You go home, and black my boots, and make them shine like white marble!
(snatches his hat and wig off Billy, puts them on himself.)

exit.
Billy. I Am an impudent scoundrel! my twenty little babes shall never learn
manners from you, old Sullivan. Here a young lady falls in love with a young
fellow, merely for his prettyness, and I Am to be badger'd by her codger of a
father. -- I Will be damned if I don't have her though -- this hand that has
squeezed a lady's singer, -- brush coats! -- no, no, Bob Sullivan, I Will back no
more to your moldy cupboard. -- I Will run away with her, or I Will be -- oh!
here is Redmond O Hanlon, though now the constable and the county keeper, yet he
was a heart of steel, that I Am sure of.


Enter REDMOND, goes toward the Chapel. Red. I Will have Felix out of this, then
I Am paid for clapping him up again.


Billy. Redmond, I Have a desperate wicked business, and I want you to help me,
my good fellow.


Red. I cannot -- I Am now going to put irons on Felix.


Billy. You're a bold and a big man, Redmond O'Hanlon, and a fine thief taker,
because you were a thief yourself once.


Red. Yes, I think I Am clever at arresting a man, or doing him an execution of
chattles.


Billy. Aye, but don't you go steal his ducks, that will be over doing it,
quack! quack!


Red. Yes, in Antrim I was a heart of steel, in Clonmel I was a white boy.


Billy. And I Am a tight boy, -- now, there is a nice foul I want to steal.


Red. What, a fish?


Billy. No, a lady I want to run away with.


Red. Lady! I will, -- I most step home for my hanger, this cuts out more work
for me.


Billy. I thank ye.

exit.
AIR, REDMOND.
When young they called me roaring boy,
For blows I took delight in,
My drum I thought a darling toy,
Game chicks I set to fighting;
My play was lusty cudgel raps,
When not my gig top lashing,
The girls I set to pulling caps,
My work was Barley threshing;
The gossips say, ay, they will be sworn,
A dreadful night, when I was born,
The moon in clouds, her face did muffle,
The clements were all at scuffle;
The brook into a torrent swelled,
A rock was split, an oak was foiled;
The neighbors scream'd, "the houses shake,"
The Banshee moan'd, the earth did quake;
A Raven sung a thunder peal!
For then first throbb'd an heart of steel.
At speed I ride, it does me good,
If on a horse that is vicious,
From wrangling Bull, a slice my food,
Such beef-stake how delicious!
Of all my liquors punch I love,
Sweet contradiction jumble,
With joy the craggy cliffs I rove,
So winds and waters rumble.
The gossips say, ay, they will be sworn, etc.
exit. Enter ROSA and HELEX, followed by FRANKLIN. Helen. Come, Rosa, I will
never rest till I have contrived some way to relieve your unhappy Felix

they go toward the chapel.
Frank. Generous girl! the concern she takes for the unfortunate, charms me.
But I Will see how far it will carry her. (aside) From the curiosity of my boyish
rambles, I believe I know more of the country, than all its present
inhabitants. (aside) Rosa, child, you love Felix, -- I know he is innocent, yet
the event of his trial is uncertain. I think he might escape.


Helen. Innocent, I Will be sworn he is.


Rosa. How could he escape?


Frank. There is a way under ground from this very Chapel, to the ruins of the
old abbey, about a mile up among the mountains. I believe I remember an old
ballad about it (sings) "under the font is a little trap door," etc.


Rosa. What, the old abbey yonder; dear, I recollect that cave perfectly.


Helen. Then, Rosa, without telling a soul we'll go by ourselves, and if
possible, free him.

apart.
Rosa. Thank you miss, we will, (apart) we thank you pedlar, an I will not
forget to reward you.

exeunt.
SCENE III. -- Inside of the Chapel.
FELIX, discovered sitting on a form perusing a letter. Felix. This unfortunate
letter! I must either betray the man that took it for me, or suffer in his
stead.

drops the letter. AIR, FELIX.
Life is sure the ocean,
Set in wild commotion,
Or rather say, a gallant ship, hard struggling cross the deep;
Now we are smoothly failing,
Now rough blasts prevailing,
And now becalmed in sight of land, the winds are rocked to sleep.
Whilst below so jolly,
Foes to melancholy,
Sit the jovial laughing crew, around the social bowl;
From the topmast spying,
Jack aloft sits crying,
Inyonder flowery meadow roves the mistress of my soul
All warm his fond fancy,
Presents his loved Nancy,
As reading the letter, last sent by her dear;
Now does she bless him,
Close would caress him,
To her heart press him,
Was the rover near.
Hope does but cozen,
"Hoy" bawls the bo'sen,
From the land we steer;
Now we are smoothly failing,
Now rough blasts prevailing,
And now becalmed the winds are hushed, as rocked to peaceful sleep.
Life is sure the ocean,
Set in wild commotion,
Or rather say, a gallant ship, hard struggling cross the deep.

Sull. (without) Felix, I command you to keep from the door, whilst I open it,
to see whether you're there or no.


Enter SULLIVAN. Come in Billy, why do you hang behind?

Enter BILLY in his own clothes, frightened. very odd, this wretch so beloved,
that all the country is in tears, and sobs at his being locked up.

locks the door. Billy. Master, you needn't mind locking the door till we are
out.


Sull. I must take care of the two offenders.


Billy. Two! sure there is only one.


Sull. You know Felix, before you did this last damnable job of journey work,
you lost your character, by assisting the poor people, and dashing your money
about. Some thought you had found a pot of gold, others said you had sold
yourself to the devil; but all were of one mind, that you went out robbing for
it.


Felix. In a very short time I purposed making a full and open discovery; but
as it has now happened, find it out how you can.


Sull. Then stay there and be hanged, you obstinate, unmannerly blackguard,
till a guard of soldiers come, with their muzzles screwed upon their bagnets,
to take you to Wicklow jail -- then you will be arraigned, then the judge will
put on his little black cap, you will be condemned, the cord will be put round
your neck, and off you go swinging, Billy O'Rourke.


Billy. Why, the Lord have mercy upon me, you great big fool! what do you talk
to me at all? why don't you turn to Felix?


Sull. True; Felix, you will be hanged in chains, and as I write in my boys copy
books, that will learn you wisdom in the days of your youth! -- Eh! what is
here? (picks up the letter) this is one of the letters Felix took from the bag,
it may discover something.

aside and going.
Billy. Now I Will make off.

runs to the (...).
Sull. Where are you going?


Billy. I was not going -- only for Mr. Donnybrook to examine Felix.


Sull. (takes the key from the door) Oh! he has run to look for his daughter,
she and Rosa can neither be found; Redmond O'Hanlon has told the 'Squire, that
some rascal attempted to carry her off.


Billy. Oh lord!

aside.
Sull. Billy, 'twasn't you sure, was it? you deserved only a horse whipping for
your confounded impudence in asking for her, but the youth that tried to steal
her away, will shuffle out of the world with Felix; but I Will go and read this
letter in a corner.

exit.
Billy. (greatly terrified) Yes, I shall swing; a young man gets no good by
following the girls, plague choke 'em, choke! Oh! Felix, should you be happy to
shuffle out of the world in company? I don't mean my company -- I never did any
thing to deserve such treatment, (turns) gone! why old Sullivan has locked me
in too, what have I done? I didn't do any thing -- I never did nothing --
Felix, I Would get you out if I could -- I wish I could get you out, because then I
could get myself out -- Felix, you should try to get out -- it is a great sin to
die whilst we are alive.


Felix. True; death constantly pursues and must overtake us, yet we should keep
our onward way, and not turn to meet him. This simpleton's but sad comfort for
the hour of sorrow.

goes in.
Billy. Is this door? -- no, double locked. (knocks) Felix gone to sit in the
vestry, I will not stay in this dismal place by myself.

going.
Helen. Felix!

sings.
Billy. What Is that?


Helen. Felix!


Billy. This is surely old harry calling this wicked fellow to him.


AIR, HELEN.
Where now thou art is the path to heaven,
Yet sinner, in the world if thou would longer stay,
To thy own choice is the power given,
I am the person that can point the way.
Under the font is a tiny trap door,
Opening to a passage under the floor,
Darkly winding to the ragged pile,
That crumbles down the mountain hence one mile.

Billy. An under ground passage from this chapel to the mountains; what, that
opens at the old abbey! huzza! huzza! thank ye, sweet little cricket, whoever
you are. It Is a fine lonely place, I can get off to Dublin without coming into
Arklow again; (seeks and finds trap) ecod! here it is -- Felix! Felix! hold, if
I take him with me, I shall be hanged for his rescue. No, no, to save going up,
I Will go down.


Re-enter SULLIVAN, with letter. not gone!

shuts it hastily. Sull. Whoever wrote this letter, didn't learn in my
school-hand, it is a crow's claw; but I must read it to prepare proofs before
Mr. Donnybrook comes.


Billy. Mr. Donnybrook coming! then I Am gone for certain!

frightened.
Sull. Billy, where is that pair of spectacles Felix bought for me?


Billy. Yes Sir, I Will go home for them Sir, (joyful) open the door Sir.

Sullivan goes toward the door.
This will be better than escaping under the ground I don't know where.

Sull. (putting the key up) No, Billy, stay here, w^ shall want you to write
his confession.


Billy. Ay, I shall be sent to jail with Felix. (terrified) Hell! death! and
fury! let me out.

very violent.
Sull. Why Billy, what do you curse and swear so for in the chapel? you're
grown such a reprobate, I shou'dn't wonder if the ground was to open and
swallow you up alive!


Billy. Oh, ho! (significantly) (goes to the trap, opens it, and returns
unperceived) Lord! what is that?

looking at the trap, and pretending terror.
Sull. What Is, what!


Billy. A great hole in the earth, bless me!


Sull. (terrified) Ah! too late to bless yourself now.


Billy. What Is the matter with my feet? something pulling them, oh! help, help.

groans.
Sull. Be quiet -- father Murphy told me this would be your end; Billy have
some regard to the school where you were usher, go quietly, don't let them be
sending fire and brimstone up here for you.


Billy. Oh Sir! master! hold me! oh! they will have me down -- oh, help! help!

groans.
Sull. I will not lay a finger upon you, the horrid vengeance that awaits you, may
communicate like electricity -- I am so frightened, I Will sit down, I shall
faint, oh for a pitcher of water to throw over me!

(exit.)
noise without. Enter FELIX. REDMOND and Country People, break open the door.
CHORUS. At the hazard of our lives,
Cattle, cabins, babes and wives,
Generous Felix blythe and free,
Again shall rove the hills and merrily.

Felix. No more I Will violate my country's laws.
Shame and death to choose, how vain,

Chorus. And blot thy life with such a stain.
At the hazard of, etc.

exeunt. SCENE IV. -- A Road.
Enter SULLIVAN, with spectacles on, a letter in his hand. Sull. Billy's
untimely sat has so stupefied me, that I forgot all concerns for this other
rogue. I thought that by the hurly burly at the chapel door, Lucifer was come
for him too -- now this letter -- why it is from his old nurse, (reads) -- your
loving nurse, Margaret Fagan. What, it is all about his worsted stockings?

shouts and clamours without.
Enter REDMOND, hastily. Red. Sir, here is Mr. Franklin, the lord of the manor,
just arrived, and has had Felix put in irons; but he, out of thanks to the
people for rescuing him, has told them of his finding a Gold Mine in Croghan
Mountain, so all is now out, how he came by the cash.

shouts.
Enter Men, Women and Children, with spades, shovels, and diverse implements,
very noisy, Sull. Hey! hey! now where are you all running?


1st. Man. Sure we are going to the Gold Mine.


Sull. The surprise has taken away my breath, -- Felix found a Gold Mine! oh!
the most damnable villain, to keep such a secret to himself, just as a bear
would a bee's nest; I wish I found it, I would not have let a foul know, but now
I Will find it, and refine it, and double refine it, and super-refine it.


2d. Man. Come neighbors.


Sull. Hold! a'n't I a learned man, hav'n't I read big books of chemistry, all
about transmutation, distillation, sublimation, calcination, evaporation,
volatilization, exhalation, dephlequation, concentration, rectification,
saturation, chrystalization, precipitation, conflagration and botheration.


1st. Boy. Is this Gold Mine under the ground, or over the ground?


Sull Very probably. -- Now stand on this side of me, for I am deaf in this
ear, and you cannot understand what. I say to you -- now one word I Have to say to
you all, listen to me, start fair.

Air, SULLIVAN.
About this same Gold Mine, I Have one word to say,
The case I Will explain, by science most clear,
Bad luck to you all, one moment here stay,
And if you would hear,
Your mouths open wide,
Stand on my right side,
Because I Am quite bother'd so, in this left ear.
In troth Mr. Ryan,
I wish you would stand back,
And Mrs. O'Brien,
Have done with your clack,
And Jemmy O'Rooney, Sir, pray lend me your sack.
To be spoken. -- Whilst I explain -- transmutation, distillation, sublimation,
calcination, evaporation, volatilization, exhalation, dephlequation,
concentration, rectification, saturation, chrystalization, precipitation,
conflagration, and botheration.

Ah! now arragh!
Don't touch that wheel barrow;
And neighbors I begs,
You Will keep quiet your legs.
One word I Will sing, so now take care,
And that sweet word is, all start fair.

exit, with the wheel-barrow. SCENE the last.
Croghan Mountains, ruins of an Abbey. Enter DONNYBROOK, and ROSA crying, he
with a fowling-piece. Don. I Will not part with you hussy, till you tell me
where is my daughter; Helen was seen with you.


Rosa. Nay Sir, don't be angry -- miss -- is -- is --


Enter HELEN at an aperture, covered with stones and brambles. Helen. (speaks
at the entrance) Come out my sine little boy.


Don. My daughter in a hole with a fine little boy!


Helen. My father! (aside) now Sir, don't give the poor fellow up again.


Rosa. Oh! Sir, save my Felix!

kneels.
Enter BILLY, from the opening. Billy. Here I am my sweet little cricket, oh!
lord!

seeing Donnybrook.
Helen. What, is it you, you wretch?


Don. Come again from old nick; but I Will send you back to him, you damned, --

presents at Billy, who falls on his knees.
Billy. Oh! mercy!


Enter FRANKLIN, hastily, in his own clothes. Frank. Hold, Sir -- don't let us
have murder too.


Don. He has stole my game, my coat and my girl! (to Helen) quit your mother's
choice, (the pink of fine gentlemen,) for this damned lump of a munster potatoe.


Billy. I Am neither a potatoe nor a turnip, old cabbage head.


Frank. (speaking off) Bring the culprit this way.

Enter FELIX, iron'd, REDMOND and PEOPLE. Convey him immediately to Wicklow;
but my lad, you're very young, you must have had some experienced accomplice;
(turns to Redmond) you mentioned a person, a kind of pedlar, that was seen
loitering, come confess, (to Felix) was not that beggerman your confederate?


Don. Yes, that rascally old thief did it all.


Frank. Give him up, and by my honor I not only promise you a pardon, but a
high reward for your discovery of a Gold Mine on my estate.


Felix. Sir, if I die for it, my word to the last: the crime was all my own.


Billy. His last speech and true dying words.


Red. I say all the mischief was done by that cursed rogue, the pedlar.


Billy. Ay 'Squire, 'twas he that set me on to affront miss Helen, he told me
himself that he stole two ponies, four cows, a lamb and a finger post.


Rosa. He Is a very good creature.


Helen. A brave old fellow.


1st. Man. I wish we could catch the damned rogue.


Frank. Silence!

sings. A farden! a farden! my fortune much decayed is,
Of all the hands outstretch'd to me,
Oh! blessings on the ladies.
Addressing all around, they affect extreme surprise. Then Felix, you
possitively will not hang me? your hand -- do you forget your old companion,
master Tom Franklin, who was nursed with you in you very cabin. I myself
brought you that letter from Doblin, and made the boy tell the sham story of
the mail robbery -- my disguise and stratagem have proved, that your generosity
and gratitude, are superior to, even the concern for your life; and madam, (to
Helen) your humane efforts to save a life so valuable, have acted more
powerfully on my heart, than all I had before felt from the force of your
charms.


Don. Ha, ha, ha! Helen, this is Mr. Franklin, your mother's choice.


Helen. Indeed! then Sir, your protection was but selfish -- if I Am worth
having --


Felix. I recollect you Sir, you are indeed the good natured young gentleman
that, when we were children, honored me with his friendship.


Rosa. My dear Felix, can you forgive me.


Felix. My innocent Rosa, had I been the villain you supposed me, your conduct
displayed but the purity of your heart.


Enter SULLIVAN with a sack, followed by country people. Sull. Stay away all of
you with your pans and pails, until your betters are served. Billy! oh, then,
king Plutus has sent you up with this cargo of golden curses; not a thumb upon
the Gold, until I have filled my barley sacks.


Frank. Hold, Sir, as lord of the manor. I shall presume to lay a finger upon
it: but, my lovely Helen, is the angel of the Mine, and it is all at her
disposal; Felix has given the example, who not only discovered the Gold Mine,
but the far more valuable secret of putting Gold to its noblest use, deeds of
benevolence.


FINALE.
Frank. Hence care and strife! nor damp our joy,
Come friendship, mirth and love,
And every sordid, base alloy,
Let Us from our bosom move;
For was our gold, but Irish brass,
Good humour's stamp can make it pass;
With a sa, la, la, etc.

Felix. To London town our Irish wags,
A fortune hunting run,
And then with heaps of shining bags,
Their paltry souls are won.

Helen and Rosa. If love could ever unite with gain,
Here, lads, come find our golden vein.
With a sa, la, la, etc.

Billy. I Have learnt the letters in my book,
By post you have letters sent,
But till of late, you're such a rook,
You knew not what they meant.

Sull. All letters nonsense are to me,
But letters called G, O, L, D.
With a sa, la, la, etc.

Chorus. Hence, care and strife! etc.

FINIS.

