THE Walking Statue: OR, THE DEVIL IN THE Wine-Cellar. A COMEDY, As it was
Acted at the THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

Printed in the Year 1709. (Price 6 d.)

Persons Represented.
Sir Timothy Tough, an old Knight, Mr. Norris Leenora, his Daughter, Mrs. Moor
Sprightly, a young Gentleman in Love with Leonora, Mr. Bickerstaff Toby,
Sprightly's Man, Mr. Pack Corporal Cuttum, the Statue, Mr. Spiller Servants and
Bearers.


The SCENE London.

THE Walking Statue: OR, THE DEVIL IN THE Wine-Cellar.
SCENE, The Street before Sir Timothy's House. Enter Tobydisguis'd like an
ExchangeGirl with a Band box. TOBY. WELL, -- of all the cross-grained old
Fellows breathing, my Master's Mistresses Father is one of the most hard to be
dealt withal; and therefore it is for a Man of my Parts to succeed in an Assair
that has baffled the Wit of all my Fellow Servants. I persuaded him, before he
tried his own Skill, to make proof of mine, and I Will warrant I Will get the
Letter to the Lady's Hands, if once I come near enough to touch 'em. I have a
strange Inclination to Woman-Hunting ever since I clamber'd over the Housetop,
and got to Bed to Moll at the next Door, through the Garret-Window. Stay, this
is the House; let me see, I think I am Woman enough in the lower Parts, and I
am sure my upper will not fail me. I have Brass enough in my Face, and Depth
enough in my Conscience to be really what I look to be -- an Exchange Girl,
Ifakins, I Will knock, come on it what will; I am sure I am safe enough in this
Dress, for though it is no new thing to find a Knave in Petticoats, it is an
immodest and an unlawful thing to look for him there.

He knocks, and Sir Timothy looks out at the Window.
Sir Tim. Who Is at the Door?


Toby. It Is I.


Sir Tim. It Is I, who is I? What Is your Business?


Toby. I would speak with Madam Leonora, Sir Timothy Tough's Daughter.


Sir Tim. In what Language would you speak with her?


Toby. In what Language? Why in good old English.


Sir Tim. Good old Engllsh! I Would have you to know you must speak good plain
English, if you talk with my Daughter.


Toby. Is your Worship Sir Timothy Tough his own self then?


Sir Tim. I am the Man.


Toby. I beg your Worship's pardon, I come from Mrs. Stitch in the
New-Exchange, so please you, Sir, and have brought home a new Head for the
young Lady.


Sir Tim. Wait, Maiden, you shall have Admittance.

He goes from the Window.
Toby. Rare Fortune, I faith! Well, I must needs say in my own Commendation,
it is not every Body's Talent to manage a thing discreetly. What will this
Master of mine owe me for so great a Service as I shall certainly do him? When
a Man has good luck among Women, they say he was born under Caper-corn, I think
they call it; and I shall go near to prove that Caper-corn my Master's best
Planet. Adsme, I hear 'em opening the Door, now for it.

The Door opens, and enter Sir Timothy with a great Blunderbuss, and two
Servants with Guns and Buff Belts.
Toby. Bless my Heart, what Figures are here?


Sir Tim. Houswife! I suspect you for a wicked Hypocritical designing Person,
that has a felonious intention to corrupt the Obedience of my Daughter, and,
lest you should have more Rogues in Ambush, I issue armed, to defend the Honor
of my Family. What are you? I say what are you?


Toby. Oh, dear Sir! what do you mean? I never did you any harm in my Life, Sir
-- Oh! oh! loving Sir, have Mercy upon me dear Sir, for the sake of my spotless
Virginity.

Runs behind Sir Timothy, who present his Blunderbuss against one of his own
Servants.
Sir Tim. What are you? Speak or you die.


1 Ser. Slife Sir, don't shoot me, I Am Robin.


Sir Tim. Adso, a bad mistake! I am dimsighted truly; but where is the Whore,
the Bawd? I know what sort of a Shop she keeps, by hanging out the Sign of a
Band-box. What do you do behind, Housewife? your Business is with the
Foreparts. Harry, Robin, present with me thus, and when I speak the Word, give
Fire.

They all present their Pieces at Toby.
Toby. Oh dear Gentlemen, spare me, spare me, good Gentlemen, don't shoot me,
and I Will tell you all.

He kneels.
Sir Tim. In the first place, as you hope to preserve that abominable Life of
yours, answer me the Truth, and nothing but the Truth, whence come you?


Toby. From the Exchange, an't please you.


Sir Tim. What business had you?


Toby. The Exchange, Sir.


Sir Tim. And what are you? Jilt, speak presently, what are you?


Toby. The New-Exchange in the Strand Sir.


Sir Tim. What are you the New-Exchange? 'Slife, speak sense or you die, I
don't think the Tone of your Voice treble enough for a Whore, and therefore you
must be a Rogue, Sirrah.


Toby. The New-Exchange indeed, Sir.


Sir Tim. Sirrah, tell me truly what Sex you are of, Sirrah?


Toby. The Exchange, upon my Word, Sir.


Sir Tim. Is the Exchange your Sex, Rogue? Are you a Man, or a Whore, Sirrah?


Toby. About the middle of the Inner Walk Sir.


Sir Tim. Adslife, Robin, make ready.


Toby. Oh! oh! spare my Life, and take my band-box, Sir.


Sir Tim. Give it me, you Whore.


Toby. I Am no Whore, upon my Honor, Sir, I am but 'Squire Sprightly's Rogue
Toby, make the worst of me. Would I were buried 6 Foot deep in my Master's
Dunghill.

Aside. Sir Tim. opens the Band-box, and finds a Letter.
Sir Tim. Let Us see, what is here, a Letter? Oh, Rogue! here, Harry, Robin,
rifle the Ribons, and see if there is never another Snake in the Fools Grass.
What Is here, Puts on a pair of Spectacles. To the lovely Hands of the engaging
Leonora -- Fool, Ass, adzooks this Fellow makes love like an Oxford Scholar.
I Will open the Seal.

He breaks open the Letter, and while the two Fellows are fumbling in the
Band-box, Toby steals back.
Toby. Timor adds -- Wing as.

He runs off.
Sir Tim. Reading. After many vain Endeavors to get a Letter to your Hands,
the trusty Toby undertook -- Oh Rogue, did you so -- I Will -- Ha! where is he?


1 Ser. An't please your Worship, I believe he got off while we were rummaging
the band-box.


Sir Tim. I Will rummage you, you careless Rascals; I Will teach you to plunder
before you have secured the Enemy, you Dogs you.

He beats 'em with the Blunderbuss off the stage. SCENE changes to Sprightly's
House. Sprightly and Toby.
Spright. Nay, Faith, Toby, I pity thee with all my Heart; but thou may
make a moral use of this unlucky Accident, and learn to believe thy self no
wiser than other People. Go, lay aside the Woman, and and take up the Statue;
all things are now ready for the last Trial, and it shall be put in Execution
this very Evening.


Toby, Truly, Sir, if your Worship pleases, I had rather be the Carver's Man,
than the Statue; for if the old Knight should find out a Trick, my Disguise
would be so heavy that I could not run away, and he might chance to shoot me
through the Head with his Blunderbuss.


Spright. Pish! Fool! you know he is so purblind he can scarce see.


Toby. Ay, but if he cannot see, he can feel though; and, Sir, if he should happen
to tickle my Sides, I should burst out a laughing, and discover all.


Spright. It Is impossible he should suspect thee. I saw the Statue at the
Stone-Cutter's, who told me, the old Gentleman expects it to be brought home
every day, My painted Canvas is exactly copied from the Original, and the
Pedestal it is to be placed on in the Hall is so high, that he will not be able to
reach your Sides; or if he did, the Daub is so hard and so thick, 'twou'd
deceive a nicer Touch than his I Will warrant thee. But are the Fellows at hand,
who are to be concerned in the management.


Toby. They are all drinking at the next Alehouse, and the Gentleman who is to
act the Statue instead of me, Sir, is a Man every Inch of him. He married a
Woman who had beat six Husbands to death with the But-ends of their own
Muskets, and in three Nights time made the wild Beast so very tame, Sir, that
she fawns upon him like a Spaniel Bitch when she is afraid of a Kicking.


Spright. Thou have chose an odd sort of a Simile, Toby; but hark! some body
knocks; Go, see who it is.

Toby goes out, and reenters with Cuttum.
Toby. An't please your Worship, this is the Gentleman we were discoursing
about.


Spright. May I know your Name, Sir?


Cuttum. I am vulgarly known by the Name of Corporal Cuttum; I have been a
Soldier from my Cradle, and a Cuckold from my Marriage Bed, Sir: I have run
through all the Mazes of Fortune, but could never lay hold of the Gypsy: I
believe I Am too honest to be prosperous in this Age! and if I live much longer,
I shall be too old to be knavish. I would gladly make some use of my time, Sir;
for I have lately learned to remember, that I come of a Race so much the
Reverse of my way of living hitherto, that egad -- if I continue honest much
longer, I shall be the only Fool of my Family!


Spright. Pray, Mr. Cuttum, what Country are you of?


Cuttum. Why, Sir, to tell you the plain Truth, there is no Country will own
us, and we own no Country; we should be French by our Air, and Spaniards by our
steps, Sir; but a parcel of scoundrel Rogues about Town will needs have the
Cuttums to be an Irish Family, sor no other Reason egad, than the reach of
their assurance.


Spright. Have you no Friends in Town to apply to?


Cut. Yes, Sir, there is a Relation of mine generally known about Town; he is a
kind of a Wit, and has writ Plays; but he has an odd Humor, that makes him
incapable of serving a Kinsman.


Spright. What Humor is that, pray?


Cut. Why, Sir, he has been so fond of fathering Strangers Children, that he
scarce knows how to look upon the Son of a poor Relation.


Spright. Well, Mr. Cuttum, you are a merry Fellow; you know the task and the
reward designed you, I suppose.


Cut. My worthy Friend, Mr. Toby here, has informed me at large; and I am ready
to prove with how much Zeal I would undertake an action of greater difficulty
upon a less temptation.


Spright. I assure you you have heard the utmost of your danger; come the worst
to the worst it is but a beating, and that I presume you could bear with
Resolution.


Cut. Am I a Cuttum, and do you ask that Question? 'slife, Sir! bear a beating?
-- Why, there is not a Branch of our Family, but has Patience enough that way
sor an informing Constable, Bailiff's follower, Female Tatler, or Marshal of
France, egad.


Spright. That Is well; I think all things are now in a readiness, we'll go in,
and about it presently. But heark'e, Toby, is your disguise come home yet?


Toby. Four hours ago, Sir -- But now you talk of a Disguise, am I to be a Jew,
or a Gentile?


Spright. Oh! a Jew by all means. Come along Mr. Corporal; while you are
getting ready I Will instruct you what to say to the Lady, for the ill Success of
my last Letter forbids me all Thoughts of sending another.


Toby. Well! of my Conscience, my Master is the first that ever went about to
send a Message by a Stone Porter! --

They go in. SCENE, Sir Timothy's House; Sir Tim, and Leonora.
Sir Tim. 'Sbud, don't tell me of my Promise; ask any Statesman in Christendom,
if Promises are Chains on a wise Man's Will. It Is true, I told the young Fool
Sprightly he should have you, but that was when no Body of a better Estate was
of his Mind, Girl.


Leon. The ties of Duty, Sir, first led me to encourage Mr. Sprightly's
Addresses, in obedience to your Commands; and now the ties of Honor forbid me
to wrong a Man who so sincerely loves me.


Sir Tim. I gave him my word, that if he could outwit me, he should keep what
he got, with my good Will, and a good Fortune; but alas, poor young Fool, his
Birdlime is no better than Chaff, and an old Fowl is too wise to be taken by
it. I have defeated five or six of his Projects already; and if he comes within
the reach of my Blunderbuss, have at him, by Sir Jeremy.


Leon. Oh, Sir, you are the most barbarous of Fathers! and have contrived this
surest way to make me miserable.


Sir Tim. Goodnow, Goodnow, pretty Turtle-Dove; how naturally it mourns the
loss of its Mate: Come, come, it is just your Sex should share a little in the
Sorrow you bestow, Housewise. A Woman's Tears are like Showers in April, a
necessary Ingredient to make up her natural Composition of Change and
Inconstancy.

Enter a Servant.
Ser. Sir, here is a Man without has brought home a great Stone Thing, that
looks like the Great Turk, Sir.


Sir Tim. How! the Statue! bring him in, bring him in, Sirrah.

Exit Ser.
Leon. Sir, you are likely to talk of what I don't understand, and if you
please I Will retire to my Chamber.


Sir Tim. No, no, pray stay, Daughter; I Will warrant you, if Sprightly was
coming instead of the Statue, you would not be in such haste to be gone; but
you Women never care much for a Man of Marble


Leon. I am all Obedience, Sir.

She turns her Back upon the Door, and leans pensively against the Hangings.
Re-enter the Servant with Toby disguised like a Jew, with great Whiskers and a
short Cloak, followed by four Men bearing in a Frame upon which stands Corporal
Cuttum in the Posture of a Statue.
Toby. Save you, Sir! -- have a care, have a care, gently, gently, I say, --
Sir, Mr. Chissel has sent home your Statue, Sir, and where would you please it
should be set? Have a care, I say, gently, gently.


Sir Tim. Stay, let me put on my Spectacles, and I Will tell you presently --
Humph, who are you, Sir?


Toby. I am by Profession a Statuary, by Country a Portuguese, but brought up
in England; by Quality a Foreman, alias a Journeyman, and by Religion a Jew,
Sir.


Sir Tim. A Jew! adzooks, what have you to do in a Christian Country, Sirrah?


Toby. Ha, ha, you are pleased to be merry, Sir! But where must the Statue be
placed, an't please you?


Sir Tim. Placed? Aside. Egad I don't like this Fellow, he says he is a Jew, but
he looks like a Philistin.


Toby. Set him down there, gently, gently, be careful how you place him, pray,
Gentlemen -- So, now he stands right; go -- stay without till I come to you.

Exit Bearers.
Sir Tim. Let me see how this Statue looks. -- Ads my Life, a pretty piece of
Workmanship truly: But pray, Friend, why did not Mr. Chissel come himself? Am I
so bad a Customer that he must send Servants to do my Business? Nay, and
Heathen Servants too!


Toby. Your Worship, I perceive, is a facetious old Gentleman. But my Master,
an't please you, is sick a present.


Sir Tim. Old Gentleman! Sirrah! Is that your Hebrew Breeding! Get out of my
House, you Rogue! that Levitical Face of thine stirs up my Indignation.


Toby. I beg your pardon heartily, if I have said any thing that offends you,
Sir; but pray don't be in a Passion for nothing; is not the Work done as you
expected it?

All the while Sir Tim. is talking with Toby, Cuttum makes whimsical Motions
from the Table to Leonora, who leans pensively, and don't observe him.
Sir Tim. Expected it, Sirrah! I did not expect to have the Figure to be sent
home by a Rogue of a Jew, Sirrah! Let me look all round the piece, egad, it is
10 to 1 but the superstitious Dog has circumcised my Statue.


Toby. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Tim. Villain, Rascal, what, am I to be laughed at to my Face?


Toby. Ha, ha, ha, you must excuse me, Sir, ha, ha, ha, I vow you are the
pleasant'st Gentleman of your age that ever I met with.


Sir Tim. Again at my age, Sirrah; here, Robin, Jonathan, quickly, bring me my
Blunderbuss. Sirrah, get out of my House, or I Will break off a Limb of the
Statue, and knock out your Brains with it.

He runs to pull off one of the Statue's Legs, and Cuttam kicks him down
backward with the other.
Toby. 'Slife! all is out: I Will make off while I can.

He runs out.
Sir Tim. Rogues! Murder! help! Dogs! Murder! Murder!


Leon. Heavens, Sir! what is the Matter?


Sir Tim. Matter! you Baggage? Don't you see what is the Matter? That long
bearded Rogue of a Jew has affronted me to my Face, and beat out my Teeth
behind my Back. Rogues! Robin, Harry, Jonathan, what, must I be murdered, and
no body come in to my assistance.

He runs out calling the Servants.
Cut. I am glad he is gone, for my Heart ak'd plaguily when he came to pull my
Leg off. It Is a lucky Mistake that he thinks Toby struck him; but I Will take
this Opportunity to speak to the Lady. Madam -- Madam --

He leaps down, and stalks toward Leon. who turns, and shrieks at his
approaching her.
Leon. Oh! Heavens, what is here! Ghosts! Spirits! Devils! ah! help! help! help!


Cut. Nay, now we are all undone, and egad! if you die a Maid, it is no more
than you deserve for your damu'd unseasonable squeaking.

He runs to the Table, and with much ado gets up, and stands in his old
Posture; but for haste mistakes, and puts the wrong Leg forward.
Leon. Ah me! I see too late this is a Trick of Sprightly's.

Enter Sir Timothy, and his Servants. Oh! Sir! I was half frighted, but beg
your pardon for alarming you; being in a melancholy Humor, I had forgot the
Statue stood upon the Table, and looking that way on the sudden took it for a
naked Man.


Sir Tim. Oh! did you so, good Daughter! I see very well what you would be at;
this Excess of your Folly betrays the Lewdness of your Thoughts. Let Us see,
that Rascal Jew beat off my Spectacles -- oh! here they lie -- Well, I vow this
is a very curious piece of Sculpture, no real Flesh and Blood could appear more
lively. If that Knave Chissel had not sent it by a Jew, I could have been
extremely pleased with it. He views Cuttum all round, who expresses a great
deal of Fear. But stay, I forgot to look whether I have not-hurt the Leg though
-- adso! what is here? I am sure this Limb does not stand as it did just now.
Daughter, Daughter. Leon. Sir.


Sir Tim. Look here, is it the right Posture or no?

While Sir Tim. turns to speak to his Daughter, Cut. puts his Leg as it was
before.
Leon. Right, Sir? Yes, pray what ails it?


Sir Tim. Ails it? 'Slife I am bewitched -- I am sure the Devil's either in me,
or my Spectacles; why 'twas but this moment the Leg stood here, and now --


Cut. Death, Sir, stand out of my way, or you're as dead as a door-nail. Aside.
'Slife, I Will be gone while I may; if I stay a quarter of an hour longer, I
shall be pounded in a Mortar.

He leaps down furiously and runs out.
Sir Tim. Hey day! is my House become an enchanted Castle? What a plague, I
shall be hooted at as I walk along the streets if this Jest passes on me. Here
follow me, ye Rascals, I Will statue the Dog, I Will warrant him.

He runs out with his Servants after Cuttum.
Leon. What a wretched Condition has my Folly brought me to? if I slip this
Opportunity of escaping while the House is in so great a Confusion, I shall be
miserable for ever. I Will get out the back-way, and trust fortune for the Event
of my Undertaking.

She goes out. SCENE changes to a Courtyard, with a Well in it. Enter Toby
Frighted.
Toby. Here have I crawled about this quarter of an hour, and can find no means
to reach the Door, without being discovered by some of the old Fellow's
Maidenhead-watchers; and, if I stay here much longer, the danger will be equal.
A Pox take Petticoats for Toby, if this be the Effect of following them. What
shall I do? -- let me think a little -- adsbobs I have it, I have an old black
Mask in my Pocket with Horns upon it, I Will tie it on, and creep down into
yonder Well, it looks like a dry one; or if I am drowned, it is a better Death
than to be drubb'd to Destruction -- I Will lie quietly all Night, and in the
Morning bolt through the Door in my Vizor and black Wastcoat; it may so happen,
that the Rogues will take me for the Devil that they say walks in this
Neighborhood, and give me free Passage -- But first, down Cloak, that if the
Well be deeper than ordinary, I may be sure to fall softly; I Will tie on the
Mask when I Am safe at the bottom. So now for it, Neck or nothing, as the
Proverb says.

He throws down his Cloak, and gets into the Well. Re-enter Sir Timothy, and
the Servants with Guns, Staves, etc.
Sir Tim. Who would have thought that the four Rogues who brought in that Dog
of a Statue, should have waited so cunningly to carry him off again upon
occasion? Adzooks but we mauled them in their Retreat. Go, ye Rogues, get ye
into the Cellar, and drink your selves drunk, as a Reward for your Valor. The
Servants go out bowing. Well, after all, this Sprightly is a brave bold Fellow,
and deserves the Baggage heartily; for I never could imagine till now, that any
Woman in the World was worth a Man's venturing a knock on the Pate for. My
Daughter is afraid of a Reprof, and is crept silently into her Closet. I Will not
disturb her till Morning, but go write an Account of this Nights Works to her
good old Grandmother in the Country.

He goet out. SCENE changes to a Cellar, with a Wicket in the front Scene, and
discovers the Servants sitting round a black Jack, drinking and merry.
1 Ser. Here, honest Thomas, here is to thee.


2 Ser. Prithee, what Subject shall we be on to Night, Politics are grown
musty, Learning is below Men of a genteel Education, and Scandal you know is
taking upon us the Conversation of our Betters.


3 Ser. Why faith, since we have leave to be merry, honest Thomas had best give
us a Song.


2 Ser. A Match, Boys -- I Will sing you a Song of my own making.


1 Ser. Of thy making! What, a Footman turn Poet?


2 Ser. A Footman turn Poet! ay, Sir; why not? Since the Peots have met with
Footmen's Encouragement, Footmen have taken up the Poets Profession.


3 Ser. But how can a Fellow without Learning, Brother Thomas, be Master of
that seeling, touching way that the Poets talk of?


2 Ser. Pugh, Fool, the Art of Poetry is the Gift of Nature, and 'twould be no
new thing to tell the World, that there is many a Footman can touch, and move,
and feel, and stir up the Passions with the best Poet in Christendom. But
listen to the Song, Boys.

Here a SONG.
All Ser. Rarely sung, 'sfaith Thomas.


3 Ser. Adzookers, he has pleased me so well, that I Will even make bold with a
Bottle of the fine Wine my Master has set a cooling in the old Well there, and
treat ye like Gentlemen.


All. Why, that is kindly done now.

3 Ser. rises, and opening the Wicket, takes out a Bottle, and holds it between
him and the Light.
3 Ser. Let Us see, I think I have got the right sort, no, it is not; -- this is
the Rotgut Rhenish --

While the Fellow turns to look at the Bottle, Toby, having put on the black
horned Mask, thrusts his Head out of the Wicket, and the Servant, going to
change the Bottle, strikes it against his Forehead.
3 Ser. Ah! the Devil, the Devil.

Throws down the Bottle, and runs backward.
1 Ser. 'Slife, there is the Devil in good earnest!


Toby. Rogues, Thieves, I Will be among you suddenly.

He tumbles forward into the Cellar.
2 Ser. Oons, Roger, fly, the Devil's amongst us.


All. Help, help! the Devil, the Devil, the Devil!

They beat one another down, and hurry out headlong, and Toby after 'em. The
SCENE changes to the Hall. Enter Sir Timothy with his Blunderbuss.
Sir Tim. Here, Harry, Thomas Jonathan, Rogues, Rascals, where are you? What Is
the Matter below? Hey day! what is here to do? --

Enter Servants running.
1 Ser. Help, help! the Devil!


3 Ser. The Pope, the Pope! the Devil!


2 Ser. Oh, Sir! the Devil has taken possession of your Worship's Cellar.


Sir Tim. The Devil, ye Rogues! and are ye such pitiful, cowardly, unchristian
soul'd Fellows, as to be afraid of the Devil. Adsbob, would he had been
impudent enough to have come into my presence, I Would have Devil'd him with a --
'Slife, Rogues stand out of my way -- Help, help, help!

In the midst of Sir Timothy's Speech, Toby appears at the Hall Door, and the
Knight beats down his Servants, and runs out first; the Men follow, crying out
as before.
Toby. Well, I have better luck now I Am a Devil, than I had when I was a Woman;
and some arch Wags would from thence take occasion to swear that the Devil is
the least of the two Evils. But I have no time to be witty at present. I see
the Street Door open, and will lay hold on the Opportunity.

He goes out. Re-enter Sir Timothy, and the Servants, peeping.
Sir Tim. Is he gone?


1 Ser. I think the Coast is clear at present.

They come forwards.
Sir Tim. I Will ordain a Yearly Thanksgiving to be kept on this Day throughout
my Family, for the wonderful Deliverance. Loud knocking at the Door. Stand
close here, for Heavens sake stand close, for I Am afraid he is a coming again.

They huddle close together, and stand gazing as in Expectation; and enter
Sprightly with Leonora in a Mask, attended by Corporal Cuttum, and Toby, in his
Visor.
Sir Tim. Deliver me, ye Powers, for yonder is the Devil returned with his whole
Family.


Spright. Ha, ha, ha, poon Sir Timothy, it is a Devil of my Breeding.

Pulls off Toby's Mask.
Toby. It Is I, my own self, in very deed, Sir.


Sir Tim. Why then in very deed, Sir, I wish the real Devil would run away with
the pretended one.


Toby. Adsme, Sir, if you wish your Wishes upon me, I Will snatch off my Friend
the Statue's Leg here, and knock your Brains out.


Sir Tim. to Cut. Why, were you the Dog that was turned into Stone, Sir?


Cut. The very same, at your Service, Sir.


Spright. O, Sir, Love has been Author of stranger Metamorphoses, than any in
Ovid.


Sir Tim. And pray, Mr. Sprightly, what pretty Part are you to act in your turn
here?


Spright. A double one, Sir, in Conjunction with this Lady.

Takes off Leonora's Mask, and kneels with her to Sir Tim.
Leon. Our first Request, Sir, is for your pardon; and our next, that you will
please to ratify our Articles of Agreement, according to the Promise you were
pleased to make us.


Sir Tim. Confusion! Furies! Devils! Witchcraft! Rogues! Tricks! Damnation!
Conjuration! and Destraction!

He raves, and stamps, and runs off the Stage.
Spright. Come, lovely Leonora, let us follow him, and mollify his Passion by
Submission and Entreaty; and may our Example teach the World this certain Maxim:

Love, like the Palm Tree, by Oppression grows,
Checked, like stopped Rivers, more impetuous flows,
And, like Antaeus, gathers strength from Blows.

FINIS.

