The Days of Yore: A DRAMA IN THREE ACTS. PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL,
COVENT GARDEN.

BY RICHARD CUMBERLAND, ESQUIRE.

DUBLIN: PRINTED FOR P. WOGAN, P. BYRNE, W. JONES, J. RICE, J. MILLIKEN, AND G.
FOLINGSBY. 1796.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. TOMS. THIS night the Muse devotes to Days of Yore,
When the fierce Dane insulted England's shore;
She, hapless isle, in the wild tempest tossed,
Saw all but her inherent courage lost;
Like some stout ship, which, sinking to her grave,
Surveys what none but British hearts can brave,
Death in a thousand shapes of horror dressed,
Night without stars, and billows without rest;
When some bold voice, loud as the roaring sea,
Cries out -- "All hands! the port is in our lea!"
Instant they rouse -- brace up the swelling sail,
She rights, she lifts, she rides before the gale;
Then safe in port the joyous glass goes round,
And all past sorrows in that glass are drowned.
So in the night of England's deep despair,
Great Alfred, issuing from his secret lair,
Rose like a meteor -- The glad nation heard
His glorious call; and this was Alfred's word --
"Fight, fight! or perish in your country's cause,
"Stand for your king, your liberties, your laws:
"'It Is Alfred leads you on -- his heart is true,
"And he, for whom your bleed, shall bleed for you!"
Sons of that gallant race, to you we give
These pictured scenes, in which your fathers live;
View them with candor, give the sketch some praise,
Which features out the chiefs of ancient days
And recollect whatever here is shown,
Their cause, their courage, both are now your own:
They met the fierce invader at their doors,
No foes but captive foes invade your shores;
Their wives, their daughters, filled the air with cries,
To your kind land the helpless sufferer flies;
Blessed in a king, mild, merciful, and good,
Firm in allegiance to that king they stood,
When they saw death, disease, or danger near,
All, all was terror for a life so dear.
These are the scenes our drama sets to view --
The moral of that fable rests with you.
Dramatis Personae.
ALFRED, King of England Mr. Middleton. ODDUNE, Earl of Devonshire Mr. Harley.
ALRIC, Earl of Northumberland Mr. Toms. GOTHRUN, a Danish Chief Mr. Richardson.
VOLTIMAR, Son of Hastings, the Dane, Mr. Pope. LOTHAIRE, a Page Mrs.
Clendining. MOLLO, Steward to Earl Oddune Mr. Thompson. Lords attending upon
Alfred. SIBALD Mr. M'Cready. EGBERT Lords attending upon Alfred. Mr. Claremont.
REDWALD Lords attending upon Alfred. Mr. Davenport. SWITHUN Lords attending
upon Alfred. Mr. Blurton. ROGER DE MALVERN Lords attending upon Alfred. Mr.
Hull.
Messenger Mr. Williamson. DANE Mr. Abbot.
OSWENA, Widow of Hastings Miss Morris. ADELA, Daughter of Oddune Mrs. Pope.
Danes, Minstrels, Wardours of the Castle, Servants, etc.
SCENE. (Kenwith Castle, and the Country adjoining.)

THE The Days of Yore: A DRAMA IN THREE ACTS.
ACT I.
(A wild and rugged Scene on the Western Coast of England, with a distant View
of the Sea. OSWENA; GOTHRUN. OSWENA. WHY do you follow me? I Will go no further.


Goth. I am your countryman, a vanquished Dane.


Osw. Speak your necessities; is it for food or rest, or shelter from pursuit
of the victorious foe, that you would importune me?


Goth. I need them all, yet ask for nothing but your patient hearing.


Osw. Speak then, and to the point -- be brief.


Goth. It suits me so to be, for I am spent with toil, and sorely bruised in
fight under the walls of Exeter.


Osw. 'Twas a disastrous day --


Goth. A fatal one for Denmark -- what thousands fell in battle, how many of
your wretched countrymen were slaughtered in pursuit, or perished in the sea,
to which they fled, were horrible to tell. All, all is lost -- Alfred,
invincible in arms, reigns in his people's hearts, for virtue and for valor
worthily (of force I must confess it) surnamed the Great.


Osw. If this be all, farewell!


Goth. Nay, lady, hear me out.


Osw. Have I not heard enough? Well may our cause be lost when we have lost our
courage. We have lived in England till we are become fat as the soil, and foggy
as the climate: It is our meanness that makes Alfred great. There was a Dane
that made that great one tremble -- Knew you not Hastings?


Goth. I knew him well, and honor those who loved him; most of all the
illustrious Oswena --


Osw. Hah! do you know me?


Goth. I know you for the widow of my chief -- a noble gem hid in a barbarous
soil.


Osw. Why then do you expose me to discovery? -- Who and what are you?


Goth. Gothrun the Dane -- dishonor never yet was coupled to that name.


Osw. No, nor defeat till now; well may we say Alfred is great, when he has
conquered Gothrun.


Goth. He is unassailable by open war; all England is his garrison; but though we
cannot face him in the field, we may yet foil him by surprise and stratagem --
It Is not the warrior's process, I confess; yet when all nobler means are out of
reach, hope lost, his soldiers spirits sunk, his conqueror triumphant, and his
own life at risque, nature will rouse him, in mere self-defence, to deal the
avenging stroke.


Osw. Strike then, and vindicate your country's cause -- But what can I do,
living here by sufferance under the watchful eye of the Earl Oddune, whose
proud castle overpeers my humble cottage, and keeps all around him in terror
and subjection?


Goth. You have a son -- revenge is his inheritance.


Osw. I have a son -- but such a son, alas! as cannot be inspired with any
noble passion; least of all with ambition or revenge: His mind is like a
tuneless instrument, unstrung, and not to be provoked by any touch, even of a
master's hand.


Goth. Unhappy tidings! if the son of Hastings and Oswena so degenerates, what
hope is left? May I not see your son?


Osw. It were a spectacle to wound the heart of any loyal Dane: Whether his
spirit is debased by spells and filtres (for rumor speaks of such) or that his
father's death has plunged him into grief, enervating his faculties, I cannot
say; but all the noble promise of his youth, like blossoms scattered by the
eastern blight, is withered and decayed.


Goth. No more; we are observed -- some one approaches, whose noble carriage
ill accords with the mean garb he wears.


Osw. It is my son -- it is Voltimar himself -- Oh! that a shrine so rich should
encase naught but beggary!

(VOLTIMAR enters.) How now! whence come you?


Volt. From the sea I come: I have brought fish to feed you: I angled for them
rarely.


Osw. They were but foolish things, to be trepanned by such a witless angler.


Volt. They are Alfred's fish; land, sea, and air are Alfred's. Good chance but
I am questioned for conspiring the death of Alfred's subjects.


Goth. There Is matter in that mind, although derang'd.


Volt. This man's a Dane; I know it by his locks, they are yellow like my
father's; his were a shade betwixt the butter-flower and marygold, but they are
paler since his death; grisly and pale, a sad, sad spectacle. -- There was
blood upon his beard, when I saw him yester-night, as I came home by moonlight
from the beach. He nodded to me thrice, and graciously, as he passed on; but I
was scared, and what small wits I have would not stay by me; -- so he did not
speak -- was not that pitiful?


Osw. Oh, that I had been with you?


Volt. Oh that you had! your senses are entire; mine are -- alas, alas! where
are they?


Osw. Come, come, be pacified -- another night I will go with you to the spot
he visits.


Goth. Do you believe this vision?


Osw. Three several times within these few days past he has repeated the same
tale.


Volt. I have, I have: three times, you are right; and eight days are gone by;
I notch'd them on my staff. I can count ten, and there my learning stops.


Goth. This is most mavelous; his eye is steady, his demeanor grave, and,
though his thoughts are wild, yet are they uttered firmly, and in language
apposite: I can discern no outward symptoms of an unfound mind.


Volt. Go, get you gone! why do you peer at me, and listen to my talk? I am for
Alfred, I; you are a naughty Dane, such are not to be suffered: hence, away
with you!


Goth. Would you drive me away, being a friend and countryman?


Volt. I keep the seas for Alfred; I pay him tribute of the spoil I take; and
when I flesh my hook I do pronounce his name three times for luck, and then the
silly fry come to the bait religiously, and I catch them -- Oh! it is brave
sport -- I Will go again tonight, and if I meet my father on the beach, so you
will watch, good mother, I will call to you -- Good bye to you!


Osw. Stay, Voltimar, I Have a thing to say to you --


Volt. No, no, no; send hence that ugly man; he means no good -- I will not
fight against the king, not I -- besides, the sun is up, and then I sleep till
he reels home to bed like a hot fleckor'd reveller as he is. The moon, the
moon's my mistress; when she is up, then I come out and prowl upon the shore to
plant my ozier traps under the rocks, or fix my baited trimmers in the sand,
when the ebb leaves it dry.


Osw. Have you no feeling for your country's fate? Stay, and this warrior will
describe the battle.


Volt. Let him not tell me what I saw myself. Twelve miles upon the stretch I
ran to Haldown hill, that overlooks the field; the roebuck or the heart cannot
outstrip me on the level plain. I saw the Danish host scattered like sheep. By
sea, earth, air, and fire! if I were other than the the thing I am, I could
have told them where to plant a blow in Alfred's battle, that had made it reel.


Goth. I would this sword was planted in his heart?


Volt. You are not wise, to talk thus to a fool. -- Go, go, begone! Mother,
that yellow Dane will be your ruin -- trust him not. Farewell.

[Exit.
Goth. I Am cast into astonishment, and can form no conjecture of his mind;
whether this spectre has disturbed his reason, or that he feigns infanity for
purposes concealed and secret, is not for me to say; but this I boldly will
aver, his name alone will be a tower of strength, and his important presence
the sure rallying point for all our scattered powers, if by persuasion you can
draw him forth.


Osw. Gothrun, be sure my heart is with your cause, and pants for vengeance:
show me but the form and shape of any hopeful enterprise, and Voltimar, if
words of mine can move him, shall be yours. Come then with me -- rest and
refreshment my poor cottage can still afford; there we'll consult together.

[Exeunt.
(Scene changes to Kenwith Castle, belonging to ODDUNE, Earl of Devonshire.)
(Earl ODDUNE and MOLLO.) Oddune. Mollo!


Mollo. My Lord!


Oddune. Are we provided for tomorrow's festival? This glorious victory of our
King at Exeter, together with the celebration of our daughter's nuptials, will
demand ample largess for our vassals: I am not one that pamper the rich guest,
and leave the poor unfed.


Mollo. Most puissant earl, your careful purveyor has spared no pains to make
provision for an entertainment worthy the princely giver, on a day of so much
joy and triumph. If Kenwith Castle does not blaze tomorrow, let Mollo bear the
blame: your larders do not own one idle hook, your cellars not one empty cask,
and your slaughter-houses stream with the blood of beeves, that makes our
river's tide run purple to the sea.


Oddune. So your execution does but keep pace with your eloquence, all will be
well. Have you bespoke the minstrels?


Mollo. They are forewarned, noble sir: there will be harpers, pipers, and
anticks from all parts, with masks and interludes not void of fancy, though I
say it: 'twill be a glorious wassail.


Oddune. Is Voltimar amongst them? If you have not secured that fool of noble
quality, the lady Adela, who listens to his harp with such delight, will think
your choir imperfect.


Mollo. I have retained the fool; and that his memory might take some root, I
laid him under orders lustily with a good oaken cudgel.


Oddune. Hah! you did so? 'twas an irreverend cudgel, that smote the son of
Hastings: his brave father, who kept our royal Alfred pent in the neatherd's
cottage, would not have let even your words cudgel his ears unpunished.


Mollo. It Is a mere dolt, my lord, sluggish, and only to be taught by blows.


Oddune. Spare your instruction then, and what his nature will not apprehend
with ease, forbear to enforce with cruelty; when he presents himself, as is his
daily duty, at the castle, set him before me. -- Go, observe my orders. --
Adela approaches.

[Exit MOLLO.
(ADELA enters.) Adela. Health and a happy morning to my father.


Oddune. Bless you, my child! and may tomorrow's fun rise with peculiar luster,
to bedeck the fairest bride that England's isle can boast.


Adela. Ah, sir! tomorrow? did you say tomorrow?


Oddune. Can happiness, my child, come out of time? For whom but you, my
darling, and your betrothed, the noble Alric of Northumberberland, are we thus
busied, watching every hour, nay, every minute, such is our impatience, till
those, whom we have station'd in our castle's towers, give signal of his coming?


Adela. Call it a knell, that warns me from the arms of a fond fostering
parent, to receive a husband, perhaps a tyrant, whom I cannot love.


Oddune. How, Adela! you cannot love a man, not less distinguished for a noble
nature than for illustrious birth, graceful in person, courteous in his
manners, and, which confirms his merit, high in the favor of our virtuous king?


Adela. I would the king had favored him so highly, as to have raised his
thoughts to loftier objects than the poor humble Adela.


Oddune. What would you mean by those cold freezing terms? When my heart glows
with joy, why do you chill it? am I not pledged to Alric? are not you? Have you
forgot the sacred sense of honor? Do you not reverence truth, and me your
father? Do you not love me, Adela?


Adela. Oh! with the truest heart I reverence you, love you, and obey -- only
in this let me not offend my father -- if, whilst I submit, I tremble.


(MOLLO enters.) Mollo. My lord, the foolish Voltimar is come.


Adela. Better be foolish, Mollo, than unmerciful; I hear sad tales of you; is
it a manly act to strike a harmless unresisting creature?


Oddune. I have reproved him for it.


Adela. I thank you, sir; it well becomes a hero.


Oddune. Go, tell the Dane that we would see see him here -- tell it
respectfully, as to the son of one who awed this island, at whose frown you
would have cower'd into the dust with terror -- and recollect, that when you
call him foolish, you give yourself the worst of titles; for to strike a fool,
like insult to a woman, what is it but to stamp yourself a coward?

[Exit MOLLO.
Adela. I thank you from my soul.


Oddune. Well, well! you have an interest in that soul, sad though you have
made it. I will be a friend to this poor youth for your sake; none shall hurt
him, when you are far away, and he has lost his gentle patroness.


Adela. Oh! that is kind indeed, most kind and charitable; he will have need of
comfort.


(VOLTIMAR appears, ushered in by MOLLO, who bows, and retires.) Oddune. Now,
Voltimar, what news?


Volt. Good news, great sir; your steward is grown courteous, and forbears to
scoff and strike me. -- Save you, sweet rose! the dew of heaven fall on you!


Oddune. Love you our gentle daughter, my good fellow?


Volt. I would, most noble sir, did I know what love is; if it resembles
weeping, I do that when she looks sad and sorrowful as now.


Adela. Nay, Voltimar, I am not sad, except to hear that Mollo is so harsh.


Volt. Pray be not sad for me; hereafter I will laugh when Mollo beats me, as I
did once to see a scurvy ass kick at the thunder; the thunder did not heed the
foolish insult; for 'twas an ass that kicked, and the clouds were too high to
be injured by his heels.


Oddune. Talk thus, and you shall no more be called the foolish Voltimar, but
Voltimar the philosopher.


Volt. If I outlive tomorrow, I shall merit it. (Aside.


Oddune. What say you of tomorrow? speak out, I heard it not.


Volt. I say tomorrow will be one day more than I have yet outlived.


Oddune. Aye, and the happiest you have seen, we'll hope; therefore array
yourself in your best trim, and screw your harp up to its sprightliest pitch,
for we shall need your minstrelsy.


Volt. My harp and I have quarreled, and are parted.


Oddune. What do you mean? Explain yourself.


Volt. There came your servant, Mollo, high in glee, and warned me to attend
the wedding day of this your beauteous daughter with Earl Alric -- I was to
harp, forsooth, in his Northumbrian ears. -- This summons did not please me --
Was I Earl Alric's harper, I demanded? -- At this your servant grew in wrath,
and with his staff smote me upon the head.


Adela. Impudent varlet, he deserves the death.


Volt. The sun was then just glittering over the waves, and I was sitting on
the sea-beat rock, greeting his rising beams with such poor minstrelsy and
humble oraisons as my small art could furnish: stunned with the stroke, and
somewhat angry to be so saluted, I took my harp, and in a thoughtless moment
dashed it from off the rock, with all my might, into the waste of waters -- The
tuneful victim gave one dying groan, and burst asunder; never again will it
discourse sweet music; the ebbing tide wafted the shivered fragments out of
sight.


Oddune. 'Twas a rash act; and had you not defect of reason for your plea, you
should be chidden for it -- but we'll provide you with another harp.


Volt. I cannot play; my soul is out of tune: if I should touch the string, it
would not speak.


Adela. Urge him no further; let his humor pass.


Oddune. We do not yield to such a stubborn humor; let come what will, he
shall perform tomorrow.


Volt. I cannot harp to Alric, and I will not.


Oddune. What! not if Adela requires it of you?


Volt. She is too merciful; she will not require it.


Oddune. But what if I command it?


Volt. Oh! then I Will play most lustily to Alric, as I did once at Bamflete
fight; the tune has slipped me, but his better recollection will bring it to my
mind.


Oddune. What do you mean? Was you in Bamflete fight?


Volt. I think I was, but I know nothing rightly: I am a fool with a most witty
memory; all things fall from it -- even my own miseries.

(He retires to the back scene.
Adela. Sure you forget his father fell at Bamflete. Lo! how he is rapt!


Oddune. Shame on me, I forgot it -- True, most true; 'twas there the mighty
Hastings fell: I was not in the battle. I Am sorry at my heart to have disturbed
him: I see the filial feelings are alive, weak as his reason is: go, go, and
comfort him.


Adela. Oh! that I could -- going, but stops short. (Bugle sounds.


Oddune. Hark! what is that? the warden on the tower gives the alarm! By all my
hopes, Lord Alric is arrived!


Volt. Hah! Alric --


Adela. Peace! are you mad thus to betray yourself?


Volt. Down, down, my heart!


(One of Earl ODDUNE's Men enters.) Oddune. Speak! is the Earl arrived?


Serve. My lord, it is a courier from the King.


Oddune. Hah! say thou? What does his dispatch import?


Serve. Alfred the Great, having dispersed his foes, and raised the siege of
Exeter, has put his army into march, and purposes this night to be your
lordship's guest at Kenwith Castle.


Oddune. Alfred my guest! -- his kingly purpose is most kind and gracious. --
Now, Adela, your king, who is his people's father, will be yours, and join
your hand to Alric's -- I will forth, and welcome these glad tidings. (Exit
attended.


VOLTIMAR and ADELA. Volt. So! this concludes my destiny. -- Alric is fortune's
minion; I a poor beaten slave.


Adela. Think what I sufFer; agonize me not with your complainings -- above all
things, Voltimar, I do conjure you, by the love you bear me, do not alarm my
father. Words cannot describe what terrors I endured whilst you spoke so
unguarded.


Volt. Who can be calm at such a moment? To you alone the secret is confided
that I have feigned this folly: I need not feign henceforth -- when you are
Alric's bride I shall be nature's scorn, that wretched thing, whose reason
grief has wrecked.


Adela. How terrible is that thought! the bride of Alric? -- No, my heart
revolts! How can my father so approve and favor that cold, obscure,
impenetrable man, whose mind is black as night, his thoughts perplexed and
absent, and whose conscience seems ever to upbraid him, whilst he professes
what he does not feel.


Volt. I know Lord Alric; but for my weak nature, this fate had never befallen
you. -- When my brave father drew his battle forth at Bamflete trenches, I
fought beside him, where it was my chance to encounter this same Alric, and
unhorse him; I had him then at my sword's point, defenseless, prostrate -- Pity
smote my heart, his youth, his cries, his wounded helpless state pleaded for
life; I checked the mortal stroke, and for that act of mercy am repaid with
misery worse than death. -- And does your father think that I play the antic,
and pipe to my own prisoner -- will I Will perish first.


Adela. It shall not be required. -- Oh! Voltimar, if you could see my heart --


Volt. I should behold the victim of obedience; I should then see the very
shrine of virtue witness the struggles of a pure affection, oppressed and
thwarted by paternal power; I should contemplate all that can inspire me with
love, and animate me with courage to brave all dangers, even death itself,
rather than tamely yield you to Lord Alric.


Adela. Ah Voltimar, I fear my doom is sealed, Lord Alric's high nobility --


Volt. The worms had fed on his nobility, but for my mercy --


Adela. My father's will -- the king's authority --


Volt. Is your father's will irrevocable? is not your king compassionate? In
short, is any thing impossible to love ardent as mine, and a soul resolute to
attempt your rescue?


Adela. You terrify me: what do you intend?


Volt. When Hastings lived, Alfred (though now surnamed the Great) was but the
second man in England -- the son of Hastings, vanquished and a prisoner,
depressed by fortune and reduced to assume a counterfeited weakness, is not so
degenerate as to submit tamely without a struggle to a rival, in arms less than
his equal, in nobility not greater.


Adela. Break off! we are observed.


(A Servant enters.) Serve. Lady, the Earl demands your instant presence.


Adela. The Earl shall be obeyed -- I will but drop a word with this poor
ignorant, and follow you --

(Exit Servant. Hear me, and make no answer, or speak softly; you know my
window in the eastern tower, underneath which you have so often harp'd -- be
there at evening-fall, in the still hour. -- I read your answer in your eyes --
Be cautious! not a word more. -- Well, if it must be so, there is my hand! --
now be content, release me. -- Farewell!

[Exit VOLTIMAR.
END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
(An Apartment in the House of OSWENA.) OSWENA and LOTHAIRE. OSWENA. COME
hither, Lothaire! I Have a word in secret for you -- You loved your noble master,
and you will be faithful to his sad widow, though times are changed, and you no
longer are the fine gay page that followed the Lord Hastings, when he held his
court in splendour, and gave law to England.


Loath. I have been faithful ever, and I will be.


Osw. That Is my good lad -- Now mark me! -- here are Danes scattered about, the
relics of the fight at Exeter, who would do noble service, if we could
persuade my son to be amongst them: I have urged him to it, every means I have
tried to stir his stagnant spirit; a cause methinks like our's might move the
very stones to rise and cry for vengeance.


Loath. He fought courageously at Bamflete trenches.


Osw. And sometimes I incline to hope courage so natural to him, will awake
from sleep, and reassume its energy. I noted his emotions as I talked, and though
he answered not, his eyes shot fire, his color came and went, and I do think
the senses that should quicken him afresh, were in commotion -- You can do
much, Lothaire, for you are in his heart; me he regards with caution and
reserve.


Loath. Ah, Madam! if I have any interest in his heart, it is simply that of pity
and benevolence; on matters of such moment as you hint at, I dare not move him,
for since this malady has hung upon him, he will not suffer me to speak of
Denmark; nay, hardly will endure a Dane to approach him.


Osw. It Is true; and sometimes I suspect he feigns this humor, only to avoid
their importunities.


Loath. I cannot tell, but certain it is he has kept all quiet in these
purlieus, where none will stir but at his bidding. With me, although he passes
many hours, he talks but little; fishing is his sport, watching his baits by
night upon the beach, a pensive occupation; sometimes indeed he touches his
harp, and then I sing to him.


Osw. Could you not introduce the madrigal I late gave you, which touches on
his malady?


Loath. I am prepared with it, and only wait his call to sing it to him -- and
see he comes.


Osw. I Will leave you -- Oh! Lothaire, rouse him, redeem him, save him if you
can.

[Exit.
VOLTIMAR and LOTHAIRE. Loath. Bless you, my gentle master!


Volt. Bless you, bless you!


Loath. I Am proud to see you in your best attire.


Volt. It Is a proud day, Lothaire; Kings are abroad: The sun himself is in his
best attire, and so am I.


Loath. It well becomes you: You now show as the son of Hastings should.


Volt. The son of Hastings should be what he is not; he should be braver than
to take a blow from a base menial groom, nobler than to beat the strings of a
poor trembling harp to pleasure the proud ears of young Northumberland. -- I
harp to him! his heart strings shall make music with my sword or ere I Will harp
to him. Mark me, Lothaire! my folly is not constant.


Loath. Would Heaven that it were passed and gone for ever.


Volt. Madmen have intervals of sober reason; fools have the gleamings of a
mind at times. Now if you say this to my mother, Lothaire, you are no friend of
mine -- for she is mad without the loss of reason. -- Answer me this -- what is
the best device to remedy a sick mind?


Loath. I know no other remedy but patience.


Volt. You might as well say to the bedridden wretch -- rise and be well at once.
You have forgot your lesson; 'twas not this that my revengeful mother bade you
say -- she would prescribe rebellion, blood and plunder; those are her Danish
drugs; but I Will not taste them. -- Give me the softening, the assuaging powers,
music and meditation.


Loath. Shall I fetch your harp?


Volt. Not for the world; I love you much too well, to send you on that errand;
my harp is wrecked at sea -- but I Will sit down, and you shall sing to me.


Loath. I have a song; the words are new, the strain familiar, and by your
favorite minstrel old Llewellyn; I caught it from your harp.


Volt. It Is well, his plaintive melody delights me most.


Loath. You may suppose it addressed to some warrior, who being lost to his
country, and buried in profound melancholy, the poet strives to rouse him by
the following strain: "Where is that towering spirit fled
"Which zeal heroic fired?
"Is that creative genius dead
"Which every muse inspired?
"Is it in grief's o'erwhelming tide
"That ardent fire was lost?
"Or have those senses turned aside,
"In love severely crossed?
"Come then, sweet sounds, for you alone
"Can bid the tumult cease,
"Restore his reason to its throne,
"His bosom to its peace.
"The turbid passions shall retire
"Before the minstrel's art,
"And the same hand that sweeps the lyre
"Shall heal the stricken heart."



Volt. Enough, Lothaire! If this will not exercise the foul spirit, it is
because he has no ear for melody -- And now retire; you have done your part,
and whether I redeem my mind, which you think lost, or perish in my folly, you
are clear in your allegiance, and the ever-faithful servant of the noble
Hastings has proved himself the zealous friend of his ignoble son. Leave me
without more words -- I have some thoughts abroad which I would fain call home.


Loath. I Will not disturb your thoughts -- farewell.

[Exit LOTHAIRE.
(VOLTIMAR alone.) Oh England! generous but hostile country, how would thou
tremble did thou know this arm could make thee kingless ere tomorrow! I have
the death of Hastings at my heart -- but I Will not strike so deep; revenge so
terrible I will not take -- Rest, rest, poor land! Denmark has drank too
largely of thy blood. -- Spirit of my illustrious father, if thou it is that
visitest me nightly, foster these meditations! --


(OSWENA and GOTHRUN enter.) Osw. Lo, where he sits! Let us pursue our talk
without regarding him. -- If Alfred's armies are so far advanced, he leaves the
country betwixt them and Exeter open to an attack.


Volt. Aye, aye, more blood -- she lives upon the scent. (aside.)


Osw. What force could you collect on an emergency, and where is it disposed?


Goth. Of those who survived the slaughter, a remnant saved themselves on board
the ships then hovering on the coast. These are entire, and though our
thousands are diminished to hundreds, yet I could disembark a force sufficient
for any sudden enterprise, if such presented itself; if not, I shall go off to
them, and sail for Denmark.


Volt. Sail then, and leave this island to its peace!

[He rises, and comes forward.
Osw. Peace to your folly, mean degenerate Dane!


Volt. Who talks of folly? If I have assumed this weakness, thinking it less
shame to seem the fool of nature than be the slave of man, it is because I have
a spirit indignant of subjection; and you, who think me mean and degenerate,
are in an error.


Osw. Convict me of that error, and stand forth for Denmark.


Volt. Away! I have a better cause than to lay waste with fire and sword
defenseless villages. -- Accursed warfare! worthy only of savages, not soldiers.


Goth. Give us to know your cause, and we'll support it.


Volt. Gothrun, you thirst for blood, so do not I -- You said, when last we
met, you wished your sword was buried in the heart of Alfred. Had I met Alfred
fairly in the fight, where he dealt slaughter round him, I would have proved
the temper of my sword upon his mailed corslet; but had I struck him down, as I
did Alric of Northumberland, I would have scorned to stab a fallen foe; and
when his valor was no longer terrible, I would have reverenced his virtues, and
have spared him.


Osw. Remember we are prisoners of Earl Oddune; and chains, how light soever
they may be, are still inglorious -- Remember too, that the lost standard of
your country, the magic Raefen, the proudest trophy England has to boast,
floats in Earl Oddune's hall.


Volt. Enough: remember on your part, that meekness is the woman's grace, and
to abide ill fortune patiently, a conduct more becoming of your sex than to
resent it proudly. Fare you well!

[Exit VOLTIMAR.
GOTHRUN and OSWENA. Osw. I Am wrapped in wonder; how his spirit towers! how
awful, and how stern!


Goth. Let us not quit him, but follow, and endeavor to obtain some insight
into his mysterious purposes.


Osw. It Is well advised; proceed!

[Exeunt.
(A Hall in Kenwith Castle. The Warders and Servants of the Earl ranged for the
Reeeption of the King. The Danish Standard of the Raven is displayed. Earl
ODDUNE enters hastily.) ODDUNE. Throw wide my gates, or cast them from their
hinges; turn out my warders in their best attire, and let my castle towers, if
it were possible, bow down their heads in honor of our guest. Sound, trumpets!
and salute the sovereign, the savior of his country! Hah! fall back, give
large and ample room; show yourselves courtly to our noble visitors. (Flourish.

(ALFRED, preceded by his Lords and Courtiers, appears through the Gate.) Brave
Sibald, and brave Egbert, welcome, welcome! Redwald, and Kenulph, Swithun, and
my honored kinsman Roger de Malvern -- and, Oh! sight of joy, the head and
heart of England -- my king, my father! (Kneels.


Alfred. Rather say your son; for it was you that nursed my infant hopes, and
taught me how to conquer. -- Rise! Stand up! My heart bounds to embrace you.


Oddune. Each drop of blood that flows from it is Alfred's.


Alfred. We know your love, and rate it at a price not less in value than the
crown we wear: you was our great forerunner; you first track'd the road to
victory, and we have traced your steps at humble distances. If our memory
needed a prompter, we have but to cast our eyes upon that ensign of your
victory, and mend our recollection; but our thoughts are faithful to your
services; and, by the rights of hospitality, which I now claim of you as my
much honored host, I call upon you to demand a boon; and may that banner fall
upon my head, if I refuse it!


Oddune. My gracious liege, it is at my lips already.


Alfred. Speak, and it is granted.


Oddune. Sire, that you will honor with your royal presence my daughter's
nuptials.


Alfred. Which of our Nobles does the Lady Adela make choice of to promote to
this felicity?


Oddune. One whom I looked to have found attending on your highness, Earl Alric
of Northumberland.


Sibald. Heaven give me patience! Did you say Lord Alric!


Oddune. Aye, Sibald, is he not a worthy lord?


Alfred. Our kingdom boasts none worthier. -- You, brave Sibald, of all whom I
have heard, are warmest in your praises of his courage, honor, and
accomplishments; for you are Alric's nearest and most ardent friend; and much
it glads me when my friends and nobles ltve in such love and concord with each
other.


Oddune. Let me then ask, under favor of your highness, this noble lord, why,
when I named Earl Alric for my daughter, he started, and gave signs of such
astonishment?


Sibald. I know my king is just, and I might speak, without offending him, what
truth and honor warrant, though my charge glanced upon his heart even in the
tenderest point; but it is not my custom to appeal till I stand face to face
before my judge, with him who wrongs me; till then I humbly pray our joys may
not be damped by any inference drawn from my incautious words.


Alfred. Let it be so, though I must own I Am touched even to the quick, to
think that any cause of difference should arise betwixt two gallant heroes,
whom I have ever held not less incapable of doing wrong than I myself of
screening the offender; but we'll not show so little courtesy to our kind host,
as to give way to sorrow till it meets us. -- Come, my good lord, you must not
think to keep your castle's richest treasure out of sight: if Lady Adela will
condescend to admit us as we are, in the rough trim of soldiers on their march,
we shall be proud to pay our homage as her faithful knight.


Oddune. Not so, my liege! but, with Lord Sibald's leave, her gracious sponsor.


Alfred. Ah, Sibald, Sibald! But let that grief sleep -- that we may touch upon
no string that jars, we'll visit her alone. -- Lead, I will follow you.

[Exeunt ALFRED and ODDUNE.
SIBALD, EGBERT, REDWALD, SWITHUN, and ROGER DE MALVERN. Egbert. The king is
vexed.


Sibald. I Am sorry at my soul.


Redwald. I know not when I have seen him so much moved.


Roger de M. Lord Oddune too can scarce restrain himself.


Sibald. Roger de Malvern, you have known me long, so have you all; and if I am
no common talker, to let fly my words at random without forecast, am not noted
for one that vouches rashly, and after shrinks from what he has so vouched; I
will believe you will credit me for making good whatever I have hinted or deposed
in hearing of my sovereign and yourselves; till then, though I cannot recall the
words improvidently wrested from me by surprise, I can at least refrain from
adding to a fault which I repent of.


Roger de M. Spoken like yourself, and we, with the same candor, will not
prejudge you or your cause. The king, who loves his friend, as we all know, and
no friend more deservedly than yourself, is yet so pure, so equal in his high
seat of justice, that no appellant has been heard to say, why did he this?


Swithan. The nation, with one voice, will testify to this?


Roger de M. Long may he live and reign, honored, obeyed, and loved! And mark
my words, young lords -- I Am old enough to be a prophet, were I as wise withal.
-- The character of Alfred has not yet attained to half that luster, which in
future times, if Heaven preserves his life, it will diffuse through the admiring
world: victorious as he is, and great in warlike qualities, the powers and
energies of his capacious mind are but obscurely seen, till peace shall give
his meditations scope for action and display: then he will shine; and you, who
may expect to see those glorious days, will call, when I am dead, these words
to mind, and say -- "Malvern predicted rightly."


Sibald. No, my good Lord; we rather hope you will live to witness the fulfillment
of these auspicious words -- then we'll record them joyfully together.


Roger de M. And I shall die content.


Egbert. Die when you may, your memory will be honored to all time. -- Now let
us seek the king, and tender him our duty -- Come my lords!

Exeunt.
(Scene changes to ADELA's Apartment in the Castle.) ADELA. Alfred is now
arrived, and I must face or fly the doom that threatens me. Unhappy Adela!
sealed down to misery, if once the fatal word shall pass my lips in presence of
the king. What shall I do? To whom shall I resort? Is not the father of his
people just, tender of heart, and pitiful to those who kneel to him for mercy?
-- I will kneel. -- Hark, he approaches. -- Benignant Heaven! support me!


(ALFRED, preceded by Earl ODDUNE.) Oddune. Daughter, behold your king! Kneel
now to him, for whom so often you have knelt to Heaven. [She offers to kneel.


Alfred. Not so, fair excellence. -- Saints kneel not to sinners, and kings
themselves will bend the knee to beauty.


Adela. My humble duty waits upon your highness.


Alfred. My love on you -- winged with a thousand wishes that Heaven may
prosper what it has adorned and beautified so highly. -- I am now your guest,
fair Adela, and, if my hopes deceive me not, shall be in nearer trust with you
tomorrow; I have requested therefore of your father admission to you private
and alone.


Oddune. My liege, I have thrown my treasure at your feet, and now resign it to
you.

[Exit ODDUNE.
Alfred. Pray be composed; you tremble, gentle maid.


Adela. I have cause, dread Sir; it is an awful thing to be in presence of him,
whom more than all the world I honor and revere.


Alfred. It is more awful to approach the altar with a backsliding heart. --
Let me know therefore, if with free consent and hearty approbation, you espouse
Lord Alric of Northumberland?


Adela. It is my duty to obey my father.


Alfred. I am to be your father in that office; and how far I am warranted in
conscience to execute that office, will depend on your reply.


Adela. My heart is full -- Oh! that I had dared to speak --


Alfred. Speak, I conjure you! I am all attention.


Adela. You are all goodness, Sir; the power that Heaven has put into your
hands, you, as Heaven's almoner, dispense so bounteously, that misery flies to
you as to a friend, and every child of sorrow owns you for its father. I have
ventured to lift up my eyes toward yours, and I have there discovered beams
of such mild benevolence, that I perceive, where you are present, fear cannot
inhabit even in my woman's heart.


Alfred. If purity and truth could fear my presence, I were a tyrant, which I
trust I am not -- therefore proceed.


Adela. I am in love and duty so fast bound to obey my father's will, and yet
so adverse to this marriage, that I have nothing in my choice but choice of
misery.


Alfred. Adverse to marriage, and yet on the very eve! How is this, Adela? Do
you see good cause to marry Alric, and no cause to love him?


Adela. 'Twould be redemption for me if I could.


Alfred. Have you discovered aught that contradicts what fame reports of him?
-- He may have faults, errors of temper; but integrity and honor are his own.


Adela. It is the test of merit to be praised by him, whose praise resounds
throughout the world. -- Glory enough for Alric, and good cause why I should
honor him whom Alfred favors: but judge me, royal Sir; am I in fault, if
nature, which has given him grace to merit these high honors, has not endowed
me with a heart to love him?


Alfred. What shall I say? It is not in my hand those springs are placed that
guide the will, and govern the affections. Forewarned as I now am, I Will not
approach the altar, there to make a lying deposition, and affront the Majesty
of Heaven. No, Adela, that is past; but when you know how ardently your father
patronizes Alric's suit, I must believe a heart so dutiful as yours would not
oppose his wishes, nor reject a choice so worthy, were it not bestowed upon
some happier lover.


Adela. Ah! gracious Sir! my heart is in your sight: I dare not stand before
you and prevaricate.


Alfred. And wherefore should you? for, if I conjecture rightly, you have
placed your choice on one, whose virtues, valor, and illustrious birth, rank
with the first in England, though hard misfortune has fallen heavy on him.


Adela. How glorious is such praise from Alfred's lips! How godlike such
benevolence! I do perceive you have discovered him.


Alfred. I saw the secret workings of his heart, his horror and surprise, when
your father announc'd your nuptials for tomorrow.


Adela. My father! -- Did my father see all this?


Alfred. Assuredly he did.


Adela. Oh, heaven and earth! then we are both undone, if Voltimar has thus
betrayed himself.


Alfred. How say you? -- Voltimar! -- I speak not of him.


Adela. Sir! -- Not of Voltimar?


Alfred. I speak of Sibald. -- Voltimar's a Dane, the son of Hastings. -- Can
you love a Dane?


Adela. He is a Dane; but noble, brave, and virtuous: he is the son of
Hastings, but merciful to Alfred's friends, as Alfred is to him; the very air
that Alric breathes is Voltimar's: at Bamflete fight he struck him from his
horse, and when he might have spear'd him to the earth, even in the heat and
madness of the battle, in pity he forbore, and gave him life: is not such mercy
lovely?


Alfred. It Is enviably noble; it is heroic.


Adela. I knew to whom it was that I appealed.


Alfred. I Have heard Lord Alric speak of this generous action in terms of
rapturous gratitude, and I trust it never shall be said of my countrymen, that
they suppress the good deeds of an enemy, and only publish evil ones. And now,
fair Adela, thanks for your candor; what you have imparted to me I shall commit
to my most serious thoughts, and in all honorable measures serve you.


Adela. Ah, Sir! I stand in wonder at your goodness, and blush to think that
any thought of me should occupy a mind, where a whole nation's interests are
reposed -- But pity ever marks the hero's character.


Alfred. I shall confer with Voltimar -- Farewell! -- Exit. [Exit.


(ADELA alone) Confer with Voltimar! -- Hark! what is this? -- He strikes upon
the harp; it is his signal, calling me to the window. -- Oh! well timed, blessed
occasion! I can now prepare him for his interview with Alfred, allay his fears,
his jealousies of Alric, and by the sympathy of souls transfuse into his breast
the hope that springs in mine. -- Again he summons me -- I come, I come!


END OF ACT II.
ACT III.
The Castle. ADELA speaks from the window. ADELA. HUSH, hush! not a word more
-- I hear my father's voice. -- Away, away!

[Shuts the casement.
(ODDUNE enters.) Oddune. I left you to your conference with the king; tell me
what passed.


Adela. Alfred is ever gracious.


Oddune. That Is granted; and as such, that you have confided to him your whole
heart, I can well believe. He is now gone forth alone to meet Lord Alric; else
I had heard from him what would have made my question needless.


Adela. You have been ever good to me; and so tender, that you have even
treated my faults with gentleness; therefore it is I am the more afraid to
offend you.


Oddune. Nay, no evasion. I need not to be told your heart is not accordant to
my wishes; in plainer words, you do not love Lord Alric.


Adela. If I may judge of him, he has as little wish to gain my heart, as I
have will to give it him -- Sullen, obscure, and with himself displeased, he
took no pains to recommend his suit, but coldly told me you had given consent,
and hoped I would confirm it. To this I made no answer; nor did he urge me to
it; but taking my silence for his acquittal from an irksome penance, bowed and
departed.


Oddune. Truth to confess, his manners have not pleased me; there seems to be
something upon his mind that presses and dispirits him: time must reveal it. --
Of this be sure, I shall not be less forward to resent contempt, than you are
quick to feel it.


Adela. Upon my knees I thank you. -- Oh! my father, honored, revered, and
loved, save your poor child from misery and destruction!


Oddune. Be patient! rise -- there needs not all this vehemence of prayer to
melt a heart that is not made of marble; I am not one of those obdurate fathers
to stop my ears against the cries of nature -- Was you this instant with the
king? Did you confess yourself to him averse to this impending marriage, and in
like fervent terms?


Adela. I did confess; and he, with a benignity (for which may Heaven crown him
with blessings!) heard and approved my prayer.


Oddune. Hah! did he so? What said he?


Adela. The words, indeed, of Alfred may be repeated; the grace that marks all
that he says or does, who can describe? I pray you let my humble plea approach
you, not through my lips, but Alfred's.


Oddune. It shall be so; you have appealed to Alfred; let Alfred judge betwixt
us. -- Retire to peace.


Adela. Kind Heaven reward and bless you for this goodness!

[Exeunt severally.
(A Grove withoutside the Castle.) ALFRED and ALRIC. Alfred. Here we are
private; and now, my Lord of Northumberland, by the right I have in you as your
king and friend, I call on you to make answer to a few plain questions, which
concern not only your own honor but mine also.


Alric. Sir, if I were as clear in conscience toward all others as I am true
and faithful to your highness, I should not fear the closest scrutiny.


Alfred. Fear nothing; only give me up your heart.


Alric. It Is at my lips, command, and it shall forth.


Alfred. How is it you have suffered me to be informed by any other than
yourself of your engagement with the lady Adela? Is it fitting that you should
have so great a happiness in contemplation, and I your friend not know of it?


Alric. I cannot answer you, but on my knees implore you to dismiss me, as one
no longer worthy to approach you.


Alfred. Stand up; I will not hear you in that posture.


Alric. Ah! my too gracious master, though you can pity errors, you cannot pardon
crimes: I am undone for ever in your thoughts, and have so deeply wronged the
earl of Devonshire, that all the atonement I can tender him is to lay bare my
bosom to his sword, and meet the death I merit. Alas! dread sir, when I forbore
to speak to you of what you term my happiness, it was because I trembled to
reveal my shame: I must not, can not wed the lady Adela.


Alfred. You cannot! why? Does that impediment spring from yourself or her?


Alric. From myself solely; for I deserved the cold reception she gave me.


Alfred. How then are you dishonored with the earl, if, finding her repugnant
to your suit, you modestly withdraw it?


Alric. Because, (to my eternal shame I own it) I made proposals for earl
Oddune's daughter, when I was bound by solemn word and promise to another.


Alfred. My lord, my lord, what plea have you to make for such duplicity?


Alric. None, royal sir, but that I am unhappy in a nature, which, loving
ardently, resents too quickly: In one of these rash moments, on a suspected
slight, when my fond heart 'twixt love and jealousy was rent asunder, almost
bereft of reason, and hurried on by an impetuous passion, I took the desperate
measure that has plunged me in this disgraceful business with earl Oddune.


Alfred. And not with him alone, but with the lady, whose appeal will bear so
hard against you, and whom yet you have not named.


Alric. There I am doubly guilty, for that lady is graced with loveliness so
charming, joined to a nature so ingenuous, that nothing less than folly blind
as mine could have mistaken it -- Born of a noble house, illustrious for its
loyalty, whose branches death has severed without mercy, the lady Bertha --


(SIBALD enters hastily.) Sibald. Has yet a brother living, who will not
suffer insult and perjury to escape his vengeance. My sovereign lord, I kneel
to you for justice.


Alfred. Rise, Sibald; and if we cut short your accusation, it is because the
justice of your appeal is known already, and the Lord Alric by his own
confession stands self-condemned.


Sibald. My wrongs, dread sir, cannot be put aside by an extorted penitence: I
once accounted this unworthy lord my honored, valued friend; he has betrayed
me. You have a heart, my liege, alive to all the feelings of a man; you know
the stabs that a false friend can give, and by your own sensations will allow
for mine.


Alfred. Not to the passions, Sibald, but to justice, make your appeal --
Proceed!


Sibald. My name, great sir, will not be found less frequent or less honored in
our annals than that of Alric; my house can boast as many trophies of a warlike
ancestry; a nobler father and three gallant brothers have died in arms for
Alfred and their country; the Danish sword has gash'd our line so deeply, that
nothing now remains to me but one dear sister, pure as the air she breathes,
and without spot, save that of loving this false faithless man, who has
abandoned her for earl Oddune's daughter; for which act here in your royal
presence I brand him for a traitor to his oath, a perjured traitor, and demand
the lists.


Alfred. A dreadful reference you make, Lord Sibald, and put your cause to an
uncertain issue; but if, when justice tenders you her sword, you still prefer
your own, what you will do, you must; I cannot stay you.


Alric. Nor shall I shun the lists, if he demands them; but I must execrate
those bloody laws, that subject me, on the same day which wedded me to Bertha,
to the dire chance of being found the murderer of her brother.


Sibald. Wedded to Bertha! speak that word again.


Alric. Yes, Sibald, I have asked and obtained pardon of your injured sister;
she has sealed it with her hand before the altar, and let my sovereign say if
I, who have not yet atoned to the father of Adela, am warranted to take up the
gage from the brother of Bertha.


Alfred. I do forbid the lists. -- Sibald, I know you well; no English bosom
wears a braver heart; as well I know Lord Alric, and esteem him worthy no less
praise; yet herein I commend him not, that he should suffer a mere lover's
quarrel to spread into such mischief.


Sibald. Oh! my revered and ever gracious lord, permit me first to embrace him
as a brother, and after cast myself at your feet, and supplicate your influence
with earl Oddune to mediate for his pardon.


Alfred. Rise, Sibald; to this task I willingly accord; for much 'twould wound
my heart, if, when your swords are wanted to repel the invaders of your
country, feuds and dissentions betwixt friend and friend should turn them on
each other -- Follow me to the castle; Alric will keep his station here
without, till we return.

[Exeunt.
ALRIC. Who would not die for such a generous master? faultless himself, he is
all candor to the faults of others, and lives amongst us like a descended
angel, sent to reform our errors by the example of his own perfections.


(VOLTIMAR enters to ALRIC.) Volt. Hah! by my hopes Lord Alric -- Do you know
me?


Alric. Do I know Voltimar? -- My conqueror, my preserver, come to my arms.


Volt. Forbear! there is a spirit within me, sunk, though I am in misery and
despair, that will not suffer you, though now a conqueror in your turn, and
towering far above the wretched son of Hastings, to take this base advantage of
your fortune, and drag a trembling victim to the altar only to riot in the
tears of beauty, and throw your chains upon a heart, that never can be yours.


Alric. Pause from your rage, and say in plainer terms on whose behalf it is
that you accuse me.


Volt. I do accuse you of unmanly conduct -- accuse you on the part of the lady
Adela.


Alric. My conscience does that office, without the aid of other advocates to
plead against me.


Volt. Draw then, and answer one, whom nothing less definitive than death can
satisfy or silence.


Alric. She has a father; him I now expect, he has the prior claim upon my
sword.


Volt. What do you tell me of a father's claim? I love her to distraction, he
destroys her: therefore no more; it is a poor evasion to talk of prior claims
to one, who boasts possession of her heart. Defend yourself.


Alric. I will, but first explain our cause of quarrel.


Volt. Away! you trifle with the time, what more can you desire? -- You are
armed, accoutred, practiced in the combat, and flusht with conquest -- I, a
vanquished prisoner, a poor wretched thing, assuming folly to conceal my shame,
sunk even to beggary, and driven to harp for charitable scraps at great men's
tables. -- Yet by the blood of Hastings, my inheritance, you shall not wed with
Adela.


Alric. I will not wed with Adela; I cannot --


Volt. Go on.


Alric. I am the husband of Lord Sibald's sister -- A broken faith I have to
answer for -- but that is Oddune's quarrel -- If you are Oddune's champion, so
deputed, lo! I draw forth my sword -- set to, and spare not.


Volt. Return your sword into its case again, till Oddune calls it forth: I
have no cause to murmur at your choice, though much to wonder at it.


Alric. Had I no other duty for my sword than to defend the justice of my
choice, I were most happy -- but the time approaches, when I expect Earl Oddune
and the king; that is an interview you will not court.


Volt. No, for if Alfred's eloquence protects you, you will want no other second
in your cause. -- Farewell! assure yourself of a successful issue.

[Exeunt severally.
(Another part of the adjacent country.) GOTHRUN and OSWENA. Goth. Darkness
comes on, the night befriends us; and Heaven itself conspires with our attempt.
Nothing is wanting to ensure success but your son's presence: Alfred and his
nobles are weakly garrisoned in Kenwith Castle. Oh! what a glorious moment will
be lost, if Voltimar will not come forth. He, and he alone, through all these
haunts and purlieus, is the chief can draw our Danes together.


Osw. His power with them is absolute; his voice, like magic, can waft them
where he lists; call them together in a swarm like bees, or scatter them
abroad, and send them hence, each to his hiding place, upon a word.


Goth. Hark! whence is that alarm? We are discovered.


Osw. No, it is Lothaire; I sent him on the heights to give the well-known
signal. There Is not a Dane within ear-reach of it, but will turn out, believing
it the call of Voltimar, who never since his father died has given that bugle
breath. Let us go hence and meet them on the beach; there they will muster.

[Exeunt.


(A party of armed Danes rush in. Scene changes to a Wood.) (VOLTIMAR enters
hastily.) Volt. Are ye all mad? Why is my ear disturbed by your rude clamours?
Who dares to sound that horn?


Dane. Son of our chief, your ever faithful Danes believed it was your
summonss, and obeyed it.


Volt. Send out, and set that insolent before me, whose cursed breath dares to
profane the air with that unholy blast. -- Hah! mother, is it you?


(OSWENA enters.) Osw. All hail, my son! Denmark revives in Voltimar.


Volt. Peace, peace! go home, where women should be found. Busy yourself no
more in these dark doings.


(GOTHRUN and a party bringing in ALFRED.) Goth. Drag him along, or instantly
dispatch him. -- Now, Danes, we'll immolate at least one victim to the manes of
our countrymen. -- How! Voltimar amongst us? -- Joy to you, chief! we seized
this muffled Saxon under the castle walls.


Volt. You seized him! you -- under the castle walls! -- You fled, like deer,
under the walls of Exeter! -- For shame! -- This single man unarmed; with only
Alfred's banner in his hand, had chased you thence a thousand in a herd. --
Behold, I draw a sword in his defense, that never yet lowered its point in
battle; but scorns the coward trade of midnight stabbers. -- Stand at my side,
stranger, and fear nothing!


Alfred. I never yet feared any thing but dishonor.


Goth. Danes, will you let your prize be ravished from you?


Volt. Danes, will you let your honor be disgraced? Friends, if indeed ye do
deserve the name, silence that babbler, send him to his ships, and let him
preach to those with whom he fled. You never served with Gothrun. -- Me you
know; with me you have lived, and breathed the air of England; breathe then the
sentiments of English generosity, and scorn to injure a defenseless man.


Osw. Are you the son of Hastings?


Volt. I am the son of Hastings; and by the immortal spirit of my father, if
one amongst you dares to draw a bow or rear a pike against this Saxon's breast,
I Will thrust my sword into that miscreant's heart, and spurn him to the earth.


Goth. If you're the son of Hastings, by inheritance you are the foe of Alfred.
-- Who can tell? This may be Alfred himself.


Volt. And if it be, I would not, like you, Gothrun, steal on his walk by
night, lurk in his path. -- Be witness for me, Heaven, I would not kill the
father of his people, the patriot lawgiver, the peaceful king, were I to gain
his throne by the assassination.


Alfred. Heroic Voltimar! how grateful to the ears of Alfred would be this
praise, were it his chance to hear it!


Volt. It is the purer praise, because he hears it not. -- If I, who every
night water a father's memory with my tears, and wander forth to meet his
unappeased ghost upon the beach, proclaim the praise of Alfred, his virtues
must be great.


Alfred I can abstain no longer -- I am Alfred.

[Throws off his cloak.
Volt. Hah! -- Alfred!


Alfred. Alfred, and England's king.


Volt. Live, live! great sir!


Goth. Die rather, and atone for all the thousands that are lost to Denmark.

[Advances to kill ALFRED.
Volt. Seize him, disarm him! stop his murderous hand! -- Thou bloody, cruel,
and degenerate Dane! (He is seized.) You are my prisoner now. Thanks,
countrymen, for this! this act becomes you!


Alfred. Thanks to my brave deliverer! and you, who have disarmed that stabber,
you shall find a richer ransom for the living Alfred, than by the bounty you
had gained in Denmark for these dead bones -- for never had you landed them
alive.


Volt. Now all disarm; convert your hostile spears to shepherd's crooks, your
swords to sickles. -- Oh! my worthy friends, we are the last of all our
countrymen, that should conspire against the life of Alfred; for we, above all
others, are debtors to his mercy! The very air we breathe, the food that we
subsist on, the sleep and rest that we enjoy, are Alfred's bounty; and to his
forbearance you are indebted for those peaceful homes to which I now commend
you. -- Go, go! reflect how you are blessed, and in your prayers remember him
that blesses you!

[They depart.
Osw. Look, if they do not vanish at his bidding.


Volt. Peace, Madam! let that angry spirit of yours sink into silence. -- Now,
dread sir, I move you to give this Danish chief safe conduct to his ships; let
him, and the sad remnant of his shattered army, quit your triumphant shores
without hostility on your part, on their's without delay.


Alf. It Is granted to the full of what you ask. We have had ample vengeance on
their rashness; they chastisement too bitter to repeat it.


Goth. Well! be it so; if we have lost a prize, whose capture every English
heart had rued to the last hour of life, I am acquitted. England, farewell for
ever!

[Exit, guarded.
Osw. Ah, Voltimar, will this appease your father's spirit?


Volt. I have heard a warning voice, whose words, with more than mortal
utterance and authority, fell on my ear by night. -- He spoke to me of mercy,
peace, forbearance: him with a filial reverence I obey.


Osw. Why did you feign a folly, only to betray me?


Volt. My folly has been wisdom, and preserved you.


Alfred. Mother and son, forbear! in you, as widow of the illustrious Hastings,
I pardon this high spirit of resentment; but I will combat it with heart so
meek and hand so liberal, that you shall cease in very shame to murmur, and
either feel or feign yourself converted. -- For you, my brave preserver, I have
a happiness in store, which, with the honors I will shower upon you, shall
prove Alfred is not insensible of soul to those who merit his munificence. --
Now let us to the castle. -- Farewell, Madam! guarded by Voltimar, we'll brave
a host.


Osw. Go, my brave son; great must be Alfred's virtues, when they have
conquered me: I yield you to him, and conjure you, Voltimar, be true and
faithful to your generous master, so shall your loyal service and good deeds
cancel the memory of Oswena's errors.

[Exeunt severally.
(Scene the Castle.) ODDUNE, EGBERT, REDWALD, SWITHUN, ROGER DE MALVERN. Roger
de M. The king gone forth alone!


Oddune. Such was his royal pleasure; and whilst there is aught to do in love
and charity the sole of his foot knows no rest. He is now returned in quest of
the Lord Alric, to bear him tidings of our reconcilement.


Roger de M. Who says that Alfred is a mighty conqueror gives him but half his
praise: he is a peacemaker by natural choice, a warrior by necessity.


(SIBALD enters.) Sibald. My Lord of Devonshire, if you have knowledge of any
Danes hovering about this quarter, I must think you will do well to keep a
careful watch. -- As I walked forth but now, I heard a bugle give the call to
arms; 'twas sounded from the wood upon the heights -- Is not the king come in?


(ALRIC enters hastily.) Alric. Noble Earl Oddune, pardon this intrusion: I
held it for my duty to inform you, that as I watched without your castle walls,
an armed party, as I think, of Danes, rushed from the wood near which I had
taken my station, waiting the king's return.


Oddune. Arm, arm, my lords! and let us sally forth -- By heaven and earth, I
will not live an hour if any evil chance befall my king under this roof.


Omnes. Draw, draw! we'll die for Alfred --


(They are rushing out with their swords drawn.) (ALFRED meets them, he is
followed by VOLTIMAR.) Alfred. How now, my friends? all is well.


Omnes. Heaven's mercy guard the sacred life of Alfred!

[They all kneel.
Oddune. Joy to our eyes! the light of England beams upon us bright and serene
as ever.


Alfred. So to be greeted, is indeed a triumph: Heaven sees my heart, and knows
how it is penetrated by these proofs of your unfeigned affection -- Rise, rise,
and tell me what alarmed you thus.


Oddune. These lords had heard strange noises; and Northumberland saw some that
he believed were armed Danes.


Alfred. Here is an armed Dane, the son of Hastings, but no enemy.


Oddune. Poor witless thing! -- a very harmless elf -- where did your highness
cross upon that natural?


Alfred. I Will tell you that anon; -- say first, if you sealed the pardon I sued
out?


Oddune. Thus in your royal presence I confirm it.

[Embraces Alric.
Alric. Oh! my thrice honored lord! this generous pardon binds me for ever to
you.


Oddune. Our king is now amongst us; and who can love and serve him best, shall
be our only contest.


Alric. In that, and only that, I am your rival.


Roger de M. Old as I am, I Will struggle in that race.


Alfred. And see, here is one that will not be the last -- the castle's
beauteous mistress.

(ADELA enters, and makes her reverence to ALFRED.) Lovely Adela; I have a
friend -- I will not speak him more or better than he is, (the best have need
of pardon) but if you will greet him as your father's guest, with a forgiving
smile, I shall be much your debtor. [Presenting ALRIC.


Adela. Prove me, great sir; by some severer task; to welcome Alfred's friend
is easy service.


Oddune. Well said, my child! Now let our joys break forth! where are the
minstrels? Sirrah, you Voltimar, what do you here without a harp? Go, and
provide yourself.


Alfred. Hold, with your leave; I have a word to offer -- Hear me, my noble
friends! If I your king have been assailed and seized, made captive by a band
of roving Danes, and on the point of being forced away or killed upon the spot,
what does that man deserve, who singly stemmed their brutal fury; and, though
himself a Dane, saved me in this extremity, dispersed the traitorous rabble,
and restored me safe and unhurt to you and to my country? -- Speak you, my
lord, for all!

[To ODDUNE.
Oddune. Oh! heaven and earth, amazement stops my tongue; nor can I speak his
merits, or prescribe the measure of our gratitude; it is, as would have been
our loss and misery, above all computation.


Alfred. Would you, my lord, refuse that man a boon, should he request of you?


Oddune. No, though it were my life.


Alfred. Suppose it were the nearest thing to life, nay dearer to you than the
life itself, your lovely daughter.


Oddune. She should be his, or never more be mine.


Alfred. Stand forth, my brave deliverer! -- This is the man.


Oddune. Uphold me, Heaven! -- Voltimar!


Alfred. Voltimar, and Earl of Hastings. Such I create him, by his great
father's name, endowing him with ample manors thereunto pertaining, fit for his
state and title. -- Speak, you my lords, have I your voices to confirm the gift?


Omnes. All, all! the nation hails him our preserver.


Volt. May England never want hearts to defend her king, nor king to copy
Alfred's bright example!


Oddune. Come hither, Adela! where is his folly fled?


Adela. Ah, sir, it is amongst his noblest merits to have feigned that weakness.


Oddune. Nay then, let joy go round -- Adela; do you love your king?


Adela. Heaven be my witness, with a heart how true.


Oddune. Love his deliverer then. -- Now join your hands!


Volt. Oh! my soul's earthly heaven, do I possess thee? words cannot speak my
bliss.


Oddune. You have earned the oaken garland -- Adela shall twine the myrtle in
it; so shall you be crowned by your beloved bride, your grateful country, and
your glorious king.


FINIS.

