THE BEGGAR's OPERA.

As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL IN Lincoln's-Inn-Fields.

Written by Mr. GAY.

-- Nos haec novimus esse nihil. Mart. DUBLIN: Printed by S. POWELL, for GEORGE
RISK, GEORGE EWING and WILLIAM SMITH, Booksellers in Dame's-street, 1728.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Peachum. Mr. Hippesley. Lockit. Mr. Hall. Macheath. Mr. Walker. Filch. Mr.
Clark. Macheath's Gang. Jemmy Twitcher. Mr. H. Bullock. Crook-finger'd Jack.
Mr. Houghton. Wat Dreary. Mr. Smith. Robin of Bagshot. Mr. Lacy. Nimming Ned.
Mr. Pit. Harry Padington. Mr. Eaton. Mat of the Mint. Mr. Spiller. Ben Budge.
Mr. Morgan.
Beggar. Mr. Chapman. Player. Mr. Milward. Constables, Drawer, Turnkey, etc.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Peachum. Mrs. Martin. Polly Peachum. Miss Fenton. Lucy Lockit. Mrs.
Egleton. Diana Trapes. Mrs. Martin. Women of the Town. Mrs. Coaxer. Mrs.
Holiday. Dolly Trull. Mrs. Lacy. Mrs. Vixen. Mrs. Rice. Betty Doxy. Mrs.
Rogers. Jenny Diver. Mrs. Clarke. Mrs. Slammekin. Mrs. Morgan. Suky Tawdry.
Mrs. (...) Molly Brazen. Mrs. S^^^^

INTRODUCTION.
BEGGAR, PLAYER. Beggar. IF Poverty be a Title to Poetry, I am sure Nobody can
dispute mine. I own my self of the Company of Beggars; and I make one at their
weekly Festivals at St. Giles's. I have a small yearly Sallery for my Catches,
and am welcome to a Dinner there whenever I please, which is more than most
Poets can say.


Player. As we live by the Muses, it is but Gratitude in us to encourage
Poetical Merit wherever we find it. The Muses, contrary to all other Ladies,
pay no Distinction to Drels, and never partially mistake the Pertness of
Embroidery for Wit, nor the Modesty of Want for Dullness. Be the Author who he
will, we push his Play as far as it will go. So (though you are in Want) I wish
you Success heartily.


Beggar. This Piece I own was originally writ for the celebrating the Marriage
of James Chariter and Moll Lay, two most excellent Ballad-Singers. I have
introduced the Similes that are in all your celebrated Operas: The Swallow, the
Moth, the Be, the Ship, the Flower, etc. Besides, I have a Prison Scene which
the Ladies reckon charmingly pathetick. As to the Parts, I have observed such a
nice Impartiality to our two Ladies, that it is impossible for either of them
to take Offense. I hope I may be forgiven, that I have not made my Opera
throughout unnatural, like those in vogue; for I have no Recitative: Excepting
this, as I have consented to have neither Prologue nor Epilogue, it must be
allowed an Opera in all its Forms. The Piece indeed has been heretofore
frequently represented by our selves in our great Room at St, Giles's, so that
I cannot too often acknowledge your Charity in bringing it now on the Stage.


Player. But I see it is time for us to withdraw; the Actors are preparing to
begin. Play away the Overture.


[Exeunt. The BEGGAR's Opera.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
SCENE Peachum's House. Peachum sitting at a Table with a large Book of
Accounts before him. AIR I. An old Woman clothed in Gray, etc.
THROUGH all the Employments of Life
Each Neighbor abuses his Brother;
Whore and Rogue they call Husband and Wife:
All Professions be-rogue one another.
The Priest calls the Lawye a Cheat,
The Lawyer be-kaaves the Divine;
And the Statesman, because he is so great,
Thinks his Trade as honest as mine.


A Lawyer is an honest Employment, so is mine. Like me too he acts in a double
Capacity, both against Rogues and for 'em; for it is but fitting that we should
protect and encourage Cheats, since we live by them.


SCENE II.
Peachum, Filch. Filch. Sir, Black Moll has sent word her Trial comes on in
the Afternoon, and she hopes you will order Matters so as to bring her off.


Peach. Why, she may plead her Belly at worst; to my Knowledge she has taken
care of that Security. But as the Wench is very active and industrious, you may
satisfy her that I Will soften the Evidence.


Filch. Tom Gagg, Sir, is found guilty.


Peach. A lazy Dog! When I took him the time before, I told him what he would
come to if he did not mend his Hand. This is Death without Reprieve. I may
venture to Book him. [writes] For Tom Gagg, forty Pounds. Let Betty Sly know
that I Will save her from Transportation, for I can get more by her staying in
England.


Filch. Betty has brought more Goods into our Lock to-year than any five of
the Gang; and in truth, it is a pity to lose so good a Customer.


Peach. If none of the Gang take her off, she may, in the common course of
Business, live a Twelvemonth longer. I love to let Women escape. A good
Sportsman always lets the Hen Partridges fly, because the breed of the Game
depends upon them. Besides, here the Law allows us no Reward; there is nothing
to be got by the Death of Women -- except our Wives.


Filch. Without dispute, she is a fine Woman! 'Twas to her I was obliged for my
Education, and (to say a bold Word) she has trained up more young Fellows to
the Business than the Gaming-table.


Peach. Truly, Filch, thy Observation is right. We and the Surgeons are more
beholden to Women than all the Professions besides.


AIR II. The bonny grey-ey'd Morn, etc.
Filch. It Is Woman that seduces all Mankind,
By her we first were taught the wheedling Arts:
Her very Eyes can cheat; when most she is kind,
She tricks us of our Money with our Hearts.
For her, like Wolves by night we roam for Prey,
And practice every Fraud to bribe her Charms,
For Suits of Love, like Law, are won by Pay,
And Beauty must be fee'd into our Arms.




Peach. But make haste to Newgate, Boy, and let my Friends know what I intend;
for I love to make them easy one way or other.


Filch. When a Gentleman is long kept in suspense, Penitence may break his
Spirit ever after. Besides, Certainty gives a Man a good Air upon his Trial,
and makes him risque another without Fear or Scruple. But I Will away, for it is a
Pleasure to be the Messenger of Comfort to Friends in Affliction.


SCENE III.
Peachum. But it is now high time to look about me for a decent Execution
against next Sessions. I hate a lazy Rogue, by whom one can get nothing 'till
he is hanged. A Register of the Gang, [reading] Crook-finger'd Jack. A Year and
a half in the Service; Let me see how much the Stock owes to his Industry; one,
two, three, four, five Gold Watches, and seven Silver ones. A mighty
clean-handed Fellow! Sixteen Snuff boxes, five of them of true Gold. Six dozen
of Handkerchiefs, four silver-hilted Swords, half a dozen of Shirts, three
Tye-Periwigs, and a Piece of Broad Cloth. Considering these are only the
Fruits of his leisure Hours, I don't know a prettier Fellow, for no Man alive
has a more engaging Presence of Mind upon the Road. Wat Dreary, alias Brown
Will, an irregular Dog, who has an underhand way of disposing of his Goods.
I Will try him only for a Sessions or two longer upon his good Behavior. Harry
Padington, a poor petty-larceny Rascal, without the least Genius; that Fellow,
though he were to live these six Months, will never come to the Gallows with
any Credit. Slippery Sam; he goes off the next Sessions, for the Villain has
the Impudence to have views of following his Trade as a Tailor, which he calls
an honest Employment. Mat of the Miat, listed not above a Month ago, a
promising sturdy Fellow, and diligent in his way; somewhat too bold and hasty,
and may raise good Contributions on the Public, if he does not cut himself
short by Murder. Tom Tipple, a guzzling soaking Sot, who is always too drunk to
stand himself, or to make others stand. A Cart is absolutely necessary for him.
Robin of Bagshot, alias Gorgon, alias Bluff Bob, alias Carbuncle, alias Bob
Booty.


SCENE IV.
Peachum, Mrs. Peachum. Mrs. Peach. What of Bob Booty, Husband? I hope nothing
bad has betided him. You know, my Dear, he is a favorite Customer of mine.
'Twas he made me a Present of this Ring.


Peach. I have set his Name down in the black-List, that is all, my Dear; he
spends his Life among Women, and as soon as his Money is gone, one or other of
the Ladies will hang him for the Reward, and there is forty Pound lost to us for
ever.


Mrs. Peach. You know, my Dear, I never meddle in matters of Death; I always
leave those Affairs to you. Women indeed are bitter bad Judges in these cases,
for they are so partial to the Brave that they think every Man handsome who is
going to the Camp or the Gallows.

AIR III. Cold and Raw, etc.
If any Wench Venus's Girdle wear,
Though she be never so ugly;
Lillies and Roses will quickly appear,
And her Face look wondrous smuggly.
Beneath the left Ear so fit but a Cord,
(A Rope so charming a Zone is!)
The Youth in his Cart has the Air of a Lord,
And we cry, There ^es an Adonis!


But really, Husband, you should not be too hard-hearted, for you never had a
finer, braver set of Men than at present. We have not had a Murder among them
all, these seven Months. And truly, my Dear, that is a great Blessing.


Peach. What a dickens is the Woman always a whimpring about Murder for? No
Gentleman is ever looked upon the worse for killing a Man in his own Defense;
and if Business cannot be carried on without it, what would you have a
Gentleman do?


Mrs. Peach. If I am in the wrong, my Dear, you must excuse me, for Nobody can
help the Frailty of an overscrupulous Conscience


Peach. Murder is as fashionable a Crime as a Man can be guilty of. How many
fine Gentlemen have we in Newgate every Year, purely upon that Article! If they
have wherewithal to persuade the Jury to bring it in Manslaughter, what are
they the worse for it? So. my Dear, have done upon this Subject. Was Captain
Macheath here this Morning for the bank-notes he left with you last Week?


Mrs. Peach Yes, my Dear, and though the Bank has stopped Payment, he was so
cheerful and so agreeable! Sure there is not a finer Gentleman upon the Road
than the Captain! If he comes from Bagshot at any reasonable Hour he has
promised to make one this (...) and me, and Bob Booty, at a Party of Quadrille.
Pray, my Dear, is the Captain rich?


Peach. The Captain keeps too good Company ever to grow rich. Mary-bone and the
Chocolate-houses are his undoing. The Man that proposes to get Money by Play
should have the Education of a fine Gentleman, and be trained up to it from his
Youth.


Mrs. Peach. Really, I am sorry upon Polly's Account the Captain in has not
more Discretion. What business has he to keep Company with Lords and
Gentlemen? he should leave them to prey upon one another.


Peach. Upon Polly's Account! What, a Plague, does the Woman mean? -- Upon
Polly's Account!


Mrs. Peach. Captain Macheath is very fond of the Girl.


Peach. And what then?


Mrs. Peach. If I have any Skill in the Ways of Women, I am sure Polly thinks
him a very pretty Man.


Peach. And what then? You would not be so mad to have the Wench marry him!
Gamesters and Highway men are generally very good to their Whores, but they are
very Devils to their Wives.


Mrs. Peach. But if Polly should be in love, how should we help her, or how can
she help herself? Poor Girl, I am in the utmost Concern about her.

AIR IV. Why is your faithful Slave disdained? etc.
If Love the Virgin's Heart invade,
How, like a Moth, the simple Maid
Still plays about the Flame!
If soon she be not made a Wife,
Her Honor's signed, and then for Life,
She Is -- what I dare not name.



Peach. Look ye, Wife. A handsome Wench in our way of Business is as profitable
as the Bar of a Temple Coffee-House, who looks upon it as her livelihood to
grant every Liberty but one. You see I would indulge the Girl as far as
prudently we can. In any thing, but Marriage! After that, my Dear, how shall we
be safe? Are we not then in her Husband's Power: For a Husband has the
absolute Power over alla Wife's Secrets but her own. If the Girl had the
Discretion of a Court Lady, who can have a dozen young Fellows at her Ear
without complying with one, I should not matter it; but Polly is Tinder, and a
Spark will at once set her on a Flame. Married! If the Wench does not know her
own Profit, sure she knows her own Pleasure better than to make herself a
Property! My Daughter to me should be, like a Court Lady to a Minister of
State, a Key to the whole Gang. Married! If the Affair is not already done,
I Will terrify her from it, by the Example of our Neighbors.


Mrs. Peach. May-hap, my Dear, you may injure the Girl. She loves to imitate
the fine Ladies, and she may only allow the Captain Liberties in the View of
Interest.


Peach. But it is your Duty, my Dear, to warn the Girl against her Ruin, and to
instruct her how to make the most of her Beauty. I Will go to her this Moment,
and sift her. In the mean time, Wife, rip out the Coronets and Marks of these
dozen of Cambric Handkerchiefs, for I can dispose of them this Afternoon to a
Chap in the City.


SCENE V.
Mrs. Peachum. Never was a Man more out of the way in an Argument than my
Husband! Why must our Polly, forsooth, differ from her Sex, and love only her
Husband? And why must Polly's Marriage, contrary to all Observation, make her
the less followed by other Men? All Men are Thieves in Love, and like a Woman
the better for being another's Property.

AIR V. Of all the simple Things we do, etc.
A Maid is like the golden Oar,
Which has Guineas intrinsical in it,
Whose Worth is never known, before
It is tried and impressed in the Mint.
A Wife's like a Guinea in Gold,
Stamped with the Name of her Spouse;
Now here, now there; is bought, or is sold;
And is current in every House.



SCENE VI.
Mrs. Peachum, Filch. Mrs. Peach. Come hither Filch. I am as fond of this
Child, as though my Mind misgive me he were my own He has as fine a Hand at
picking a Pocket as a Woman, and is as nimble-finger'd as a Juggler. If any
unlucky Session does not cut the Rope of thy Life, I pronounce, Boy, thou will
be a great Man in History. Where was your Post last Night, my Boy?


Filch. I played at the Opera, Madam; and considering 'twas neither dark nor
rainy* so that there was no great Hurry in getting Chairs and Coaches* made a
tolerable hand on it. There seven Handkerchiets, Madam.


Mrs. Peach. Colored ones, I see. They are of sure (...) from our Warehouse
at Redriff among the Seamen.


Filch. And this Snuff Box.


Mrs. Peach. Set in Gold! A pretty Encouragement this to a young Beginner.


Filch. I had a rare tug at a charming Gold Watch. Pox take the Tailors for
making the Fobs so deep and narrow! It stuck by the way, and I was forced to
make my Escape under a Coach. Really, Madam, I fear I shall be cut off in the
Flower of my Youth, so that every now and then (since I was pumpt) I have
thoughts of taking up and going to Sea.


Mrs. Peach. You should go to Hockley in the Hole, and to Marybone, Child, to
learn Valor These are the Schools that have bred so many brave Men. I thought,
Boy by this time, thou had lost Fear as well as Shame. Poor Lad! how little
does he know as yet of the Old-Barly! For the first Fact I Will insure thee from
being hanged; and going to Sea, Filch, (...) come time enough upon a Sentence
of Transportation. But now, since you have nothing better to do, even go to
your Book, and learn your Catechism; for really a Man makes but an ill Figure
in the Ordinary's Paper, who cannot give a satisfactory Answer to his
Questions. But, hark you, my Lad, don't tell me a Lie, for you know I hate a
Liar. Do you know of any thing that has past between Captain Macheath and our
Polly?


Filch. I beg you, Madam, don't ask me, for I must either tell a Lie to you or
to Miss Polly; for I promised her I would not tell.


Mrs. Peach. But when the Honor of our Family is concerned --


Filch. I shall lead a sad Life with Miss Polly, if ever she come to know that
I told you. Besides, I would not willingly forefeit my own Honor by betraying
any body.


Mrs. Peach. Yonder comes my Husband and Polly Come, Filch, you shall go with
me into my own Room, and tell me the whole Story. I Will give thee a most
delicious Glass of Cordial that I keep for my own drinking.


SCENE VII
Peachum, Polly. Polly. I know as well as any of the fine Ladies how to make
the most of my self and of my Man too. A Woman knows how to be mercenary,
though she has never been in a Court or at an Assembly. We have it in our
Natures, Papa. If I allow Captain Macheath some trifling Liberties, I have this
Watch and other visible Marks of his Favor to show for it. A Girl who cannot
grant some Things and refuse what is most material, will make but a poor hand
of her Beauty, and soon be thrown upon the Common.

AIR VI. What shall I do to show how much I love her, etc.
Virgins are like the fair Flower in its Luster,
Which in the Garden enamels the Ground;
Near it the Bees in play flutter and cluster,
And gaudy Butterflies frolic around.
But when once plucked, it is no longer alluring,
To Covent Garden it is sent, (as yet sweet,)
There fades, and shrinks, and grows past all enduring,
Rots, stinks, and dies, and is trod under feet.



Peach. You know, Polly, I am not against your toying and trifling with a
Customer in the way of Business, or to get out a Secret, or so. But if I found
out that you have played the fool and are married, you Jade you, I Will cut your
Throat, Hussy. Now you know my Mind.


SCENE VIII.
Peachum, Polly, Mrs. Peachum. AIR VII. Oh London is a fine Town.
Mrs. Peachum in a very great Passion. Our Polly is a sad Slut! nor heeds what
we taught her.
I wonder any Man alive will ever rear a Daughter!
For she must have both Hoods and Gowns, and Hoops to swell her Pride,
With Scarfs and Stays, and Gloves and Lace; and she will have Men beside;
And when she is dressed with Care and Cost, all-tempting, fine and gay,
As Men should serve a Cowcumber, she flings herself away.
Our Polly is a sad Slut, etc.


You Baggage! you Hussy! you inconsiderate Jade! had you been hanged, it would
not have vexed me, for that might have been your Misfortune; but to do such a
mad thing by Choice! The Wench is married, Husband.


Peach. Married! The Captain is a bold Man, and will risque any thing for
Money; to be sure he believes her a Fortune. Do you think your Mother and I
should have lived comfortably so long together, if ever we had been married?
Baggage!


Mrs. Peach. I knew she was always a proud Slut; and now the Wench has played
the Fool and married, because forsooth she would do like the Gentry. Can you
support the Expense of a Husband, Hussy, in gaming, drinking and whoring? have
you Money enough to carry on the daily Quarrels of Man and Wife about who shall
squander most? There are not many Husbands and Wives, who can bear the Charges
of plaguing one another in a handsome way. If you must be married, could you
introduce nobody into our Family but a Highwayman? Why, thou foolish Jade,
thou will be as ill-us'd, and as much neglected, as if thou had married a
Lord!


Peach. Let not your Anger, my Dear, break through the Rules of Decency, for
the Captain looks upon himself in the Military Capacity, as a Gentleman by his
Profession. Besides what he has already, I know he is in a fair way of
getting, or of dying; and both these ways, let me tell you, are most excellent
Chances for a Wife. Tell me Hussy, are you ruined or no?


Mrs. Peach. With Polly's Fortune, she might very well have gone off to a
Person of Distinction. Yes, that you might, you pouting Slut!


Peach. What, is the Wench dumb? Speak, or I Will make you plead by squeezing out
an Answer from you. Are you really bound Wife to him, or are you only upon
liking? [Pinches her.


Polly. Oh! [Screaming.


Mrs. Peach. How the Mother is to be pitied who has handsome Daughters! Locks,
Bolts, Bars, and Lectures of Morality are nothing to them: They break through
them all. They have as much Pleasure in cheating a Father and Mother, as in
cheating at Cards.


Peach. Why, Polly, I shall soon know if you are married, by Macheath's keeping
from our House.


AIR VIII. Grim King of the Ghosts, etc.
Polly. Can Love be controlled by Advice?
Will Cupid our Mothers obey?
Though my Heart were were as frozen as Ice,
At his Flame 'twould have melted away.
When he kissed me so closely he pressed,
'Twas so sweet that I must have complied:
So I thought it both safest and best
To marry, for fear you should chide.




Mrs. Peach. Then all the Hopes of our Family are gone for ever and ever!


Peach. And Macheath may hang his Father and Mother-in-Law, in hope to get into
their Daughter's Fortune.


Polly. I did not marry him (as it is the Fashion) cooly and deliberately for
Honor or Money. But, I love him.


Mrs. Peach. Love him! worse and worse! I thought the Girl had been better
bred. Oh Husband, Husband! her Folly makes me mad! my Head swims! I Am
distracted! I cannot support myself -- Oh! [Faints.


Peach. Lee, Wench, to what a Condition you have reduced your poor Mother! a
Glass of Cordial, this instant. How the poor Woman takes it to Heart!

[ Polly goes out, and returns with it. Ah, Hussy, now this the only Comfort
your Mother has left!


Polly. Give her another Glass, Sir; my Mama drinks double the Quantity
whenever she is out of Order. This, you see, fetches her.


Mrs. Peach. The Girl shows such a Readiness, and so much Concern, that I could
almost find in my Heart to forgive her.

AIR IX. O Jenny, O Jenny, where have thou been.
O Polly, you might have toy'd and kissed.
By keeping Man off, you keep them on.
Polly. But he so teased me,
And he so pleased me,
What I did, you must have done.




Mrs. Peach. Not with a Highwayman -- You sorry Slut!


Peach. A Word with you, Wife. It Is no new thing for a Wench to take Man
without consent of Parents. You know it is the Frailty of Woman, my Dear.


Mrs. Peach. Yes, indeed, the Sex is frail. But the first time, a Woman is
frail, she should be somewhat nice methinks, for then or never is the time to
make her Fortune. After that, she has nothing to do but to guard herself from
being found out, and she may do what she pleases.


Peach. Make your self a little easy; I have a Thought shall soon set all
Matters again to rights. Why so melancholy, Polly? since what is done cannot be
undone, we must all endeavor to make the best of it.


Mrs. Peach. Well, Polly; as far as one Woman can forgive another, I forgive
thee -- Your Father is too fond of you, Hussy.


Polly. Then all my Sorrows are at an end.


Mrs. Peach. A mighty likely Speech in troth, for a Wench who is just married!


AIR X. Thomas, I cannot, etc.
Polly. I like a Ship in Storms, was tossed;
Yet afraid to put in to Land;
For seized in the Port the Vessel's lost,
Whose Treasure is counterband.
The Waves are laid,
My Duty's paid.
O Joy beyond Expression!
Thus, safe ashore,
I ask no more,
My allis in my Possession.




Peach. I hear Customers in a'other Room; Go, talk with 'em, Polly; but come to
us again, as soon as they are gone. -- But, hark ye, Child, if it is the
Gentleman who was here Yesterday about the Repeating-Watch; say, you believe we
cannot get Intelligence of it, till tomorrow. For I lent it to Suly Straddlo,
to make a Figure with it tonight at a Tavern in Drury Lane. If the other
Gentleman calls for the Silver-hilted Sword; you know Beetle-brow'd Jemmy has
it on, and he does not come from Tunbridge till Tuesday Night; so that it
cannot be had till then.


SCENE IX.
Peachum, Mrs. Peachum. Peach. Dear Wife, be a little pacified. Don't let your
Passion run away with your Senses. Polly, I grant you, has done a rash thing.


Mrs. Peach. If she had had only an Intrigue with the Fellow, why the very best
Families have excused and huddled up a Frailty of that sort. It Is Marriage,
Husband, that makes it a Blemish.


Peach. But Money, Wife, is the true Fuller's Earth for Reputations, there is
not a Spot or a Stain but what it can take out. A rich Rogue nowadays is fit
Company for any Gentleman; and the World, my Dear, has not such a Contempt for
Roguery as you imagine. I tell you, Wife, I can make this Match turn to our
Advantage.


Mrs. Peach. I am very sensible, Husband, that Captain Macheath is worth Money,
but I am in doubt whether he has not two or three Wives already, and then if
he should dye in a Session or two, Polly's Dower would come into Dispute.


Peach. That, indeed, is a Point which ought to be considered.

AIR XI. A Soldier and a Sailor.
A Fox may steal your Hens, Sir,
A Whore your Health and Pence, Sir,
Your Daughter rob your Chest, Sir,
Your Wife may steal your Rest, Sir,
A Thief your Goods and Plate.
But this is all but picking;
With Rest, Pence, Chest and Chicken,
It ever was decreed, Sir,
If Lawyer's Hand is fee'd, Sir,
He steals your whole Estate.


The Lawyers are bitter Enemies to those in our Way. They don't care that any
Body should get a Clandestine Livelihood but themselves.


SCENE X.
Mrs. Peachum, Peachum, Polly. Polly. 'Twas only Nimming Ned. He brought in a
Damask Window-Curtain, a Hoop-Petticoat, a Pair of Silver Candlesticks, a
Periwig, and one Silk Stocking, from the Fire that happened last Night.


Peach. There is not a Fellow that is cleverer in his way, and saves more Goods
out of the Fire than Ned. But now, Polly, to your Affair; for Matters must not
be left as they are. You are married then, it seems?


Polly. Yes, Sir.


Peach. And how do you propose to live, Child?


Polly. Like other Women, Sir, upon the Industry of my Husband.


Mrs. Peach. What, is the Wench turned Fool? A Highway-man's Wife, like a
Soldier's, has as little of his Pay; as of his Company.


Peach. And had not you the common Views of a Gentlewoman in your Marriage,
Polly?


Polly. I don't know what you mean, Sir.


Peach. Of a Jointure, and of being a Widow.


Polly. But I love him, Sir: how then could I have Thoughts of parting with him?


Peach. Parting with him! Why, that is the whole Scheme and Intention of all
Marriage Articles. The comfortable Estate of Widow-hood, is the only Hope that
keeps up a Wife's Spirits. Where is the Woman who would scruple to be a Wife,
if she had it in her Power to be a Widow whenever she pleased? If you have any
Views of this sort, Polly, I shall think the Match not so very unseasonable.


Polly. How I dread to hear your Advice! Yet I must beg you to explain yourself.


Peach. Secure what he has got, have him peach'd the next Sessions, and then
at once you are made a rich Widow.


Polly. What, murder the Man I love! The Blood runs cold at my Heart with the
very Thought of it.


Peach. Fie, Polly! What has Murder to do in the Affair? Since the thing
sooner or later must happen, I dare say, the Captain himself would like that we
should get the Reward for his Death sooner than a Stranger. Why, Polly, the
Captain knows, that as it is his Employment to rob, so it is ours to take
Robbers; every Man in his Business. So that there is no Malice in the Case.


Mrs. Peach. Ay, Husband, now you have nicked the Matter. To have him peach'd
is the only thing could ever make me forgive her.


AIR XII. Now ponder well, ye Parents dear.
Polly. Oh, ponder well! be not severe;
So save a wretched Wife!
For on the Rope that hangs my Dear
Depends poor Polly's Life.




Mrs. Peach. But your Duty to your Parents, Hussy, obliges you to hang him.
What would many a Wife give for such an Opportunity!


Polly. What is a Jointure, what is Widow-hood to me? I know my Heart. I cannot
survive him.

AIR XIII. Le printemps rapelle aux arms.
The Turtle thus with plaintive crying,
Her Lover dying,
The Turtle thus with plaintive crying,
Laments her Dove.
Down she drops quite spent with sighing,
Paired in Death, as paired in Love.


Thus, Sir, it will happen to your poor Polly.


Mrs. Peach. What, is the Fool in love in earnest then? I hate thee for being
particular: Why, Wench, thou art a Shame to thy very Sex.


Polly. But hear me, Mother. -- If you ever loved --


Mrs. Peach. Those cursed Play-books she reads have been her Ruin. One Word
more, Hussy, and I shall knock your Brains out, if you have any.


Peach. Keep out of the way, Polly, for fear of Mischief, and consider of what
is proposed to you.


Mrs. Peach. Away, Hussy, Hang your Husband, and be dutiful.


SCENE XI.
Mrs. Peachum, Peachum. [ Polly listening. Mrs. Peach. The Thing, Husband, must
and shall be done. For the sake of Intelligence we must take other Measures,
and have him peach'd the next Session without her Consent. If she will not know
her Duty, we know ours.


Peach. But really, my Dear, it grieves one's Heart to take off a great Man.
When I consider his personal Bravery, his fine Stratagem, how much we have
already got by him, and how much more we may get, methinks I cannot find in my
Heart to have a Hand in his Death. I wish you could have made Polly undertake
it.


Mrs. Peach. But in a Case of Necessity -- our own Lives are in danger.


Peach. Then, indeed, we must comply with the Customs of the World, and make
Gratitude give way to Interest. -- He shall be taken off.


Mrs. Peach. I Will undertake to manage Polly.


Peach. And I Will prepare Matters for the Old-Bailv.


SCENE XII.
Polly. Now I Am a Wretch, indeed. -- Methinks I see him already in the Cart,
sweeter and more lovely than the Nosegay in his Hand! -- I hear the Crowd
extolling his Resolution and Intrepidity! -- What Vollies of Sighs are sent
from the Windows of Holborn, that so comely a Youth should be brought to
Disgrace! -- I see him at the Tree! The whole Circle are in Tears! -- even
Butchers weep! -- Jack Ketch himself hesitates to perform his Duty, and would
be glad to lose his Fee, by a Reprieve. What then will become of Polly! -- As
yet I may inform him of their Design, and aid him in his Escape. -- It shall be
so. -- But then he flies, absents himself, and I bar my self from his dear dear
Conversation! That too will distract me -- If he keep out of the way, my Papa
and Mama may in time relent, and we may be happy. -- If he stays, he is hanged,
and then he is lost forever! -- He intended to lie concealed in my Room, 'till
the Dusk of the Evening: If they are abroad, I Will this Instant let him out,
lest some Accident should prevent him. [Exit, and returns.


SCENE XIII.
Polly, Macheath. AIR XIV. Pretty Parrot, say --
Match. Pretty Polly, say,
When I was away,
Did your Fancy never stray
To some newer Lover?

Polly. Without Disguise,
Heaving Sighs,
Doting Eyes,
My constant Heart discover.
Fondly let me loll!

Match. O pretty, pretty Poll.




Polly. And are you as fond as ever, my Dear?


Match. Suspect my Honor, my Courage, suspect any thing but my Love. -- May my
Pistols miss Fire, and my Mare slip her Shoulder while I am pursued, if I ever
forsake thee!


Polly. Nay, my Dear, I have no Reason to doubt you, for I find in the Romance
you lent me, none of the great Heroes were ever false in Love.


AIR XV. Pray, Fair One, be kind --
Match. My Heart was so free,
It roved like the Be,
'Till Polly my Passion requited;
I sipt each Flower,
I changed every Hour,
But here every Flower is united.




Polly. Were you sentenced to Transportation, sure, my Dear, you could not
leave me behind you -- could you?


Match. Is there any Power, any Force that could tear me from thee? You might
sooner tear a Pension out of the Hands of a Courtier, a Fee from a Lawyer, a
pretty Woman from a Looking-glass, or any Woman from Quadrille. -- But to tear
me from thee is impossible!

AIR VI. Over the Hills and far away.
Were I laid on Greenland 's Coast,
And in my Arms embraced my Lass;
Warm amidst eternal Frost,
Too soon the Half Year's Night would pass.
Polly. Were I sold on Indian Soil,
Soon as the burning Day was closed,
I could mock the sultry Toil,
When on my Charmer's Breast reposed.

Match. And I would love you all the Day,

Polly. Every Night would kiss and play,

Match. If with me you would fondly stray.

Polly. Over the Hills and far away.




Polly. Yes, I would go with thee. But oh! -- how shall I speak it? I must be
torn from thee. We must part.


Match. How! Part!


Polly. We must, we must. -- My Papa and Mama are set against thy Life. They
now, even now are in Search after thee. They are preparing Evidence against
thee. Thy Life depends upon a Moment.

AIR XVII. Gin thou were mine awn thing --
O what Pain it is to part!
Can I leave thee, can I leave thee?
O what Pain it is to part!
Can thy Polly ever leave thee?
But lest Death my Love should thwart,
And bring thee to the fatal Cart,
Thus I tear thee from my bleeding Heart!
Fly hence, and let me leave thee.


One Kiss and then -- one Kiss -- begone -- farewell.


Match. My Hand, my Heart, my Dear, is so rivited to thine, that I cannot
unloose my Hold.


Match. But my Papa may intercept thee, and then I should lose the very
glimmering of Hope. A few Weeks, perhaps, may reconcile us all. Shall thy Polly
hear from thee?


Match. Must I then go?


Polly. And will not Absence change your Love?


Match. If you doubt it, let me stay -- and be hanged.


Polly. O how I fear! how I tremble! -- Go -- but when Safety will give you
leave, you will be sure to see me again; for 'till then Polly is wretched.


AIR XVIII. O the Broom, etc.
Match. [Parting and looking at each other with fondness; he at one door, she at
the other. The Miser thus a Shilling sees,
Which he is obliged to pay,
With Sighs resigns it by degrees,
And fears it is gone for aye.

Polly. The Boy, thus, when his Sparrow's flown,
The Bird in Silence eyes;
But soon as out of Sight it is gone,
Whines, whimpers, sobs and cries.




ACT II.
SCENE I.
A Tavern near Newgate. Jemmy Twitcher, Crook-finger'd Jack, Wat Dreary, Robin
of Bagshot, Nimming Ned, Henry Padington, Matt of the Mint, Ben Budge, and the
rest of the Gang, at the Table, with Wine, Brandy and Tobacco. Ben. BUT
pr'ythee, Matt, what is become of thy Brother Tom? I have not seen him since my
Return from Transportation.


Matt. Poor Brother Tom had an Accident this time Twelvemonth and so clever a
made Fellow he was, that I could not save him from those fleaing Rascals the
Surgeons; and now, poor Man, he is among the Otamys at Surgeon's Hall.


Ben. So it seems, his Time was come.


Jem. But the present Time is ours, and no Body alive has more. Why are the
Laws levelled at us? are we more dishonest than the rest of Mankind? What we
win, Gentlemen, is our own by the Law of Arms, and the Right of Conquest.


Crook. Where shall we find such another Set of practical Philosophers, who to
a Man are above the Fear of Death?


Wot. Sound Men, and true!


Robin. Of tried Courage, and indefatigable Industry!


Ned. Who is there here that would not dye for his Friend?


Harry. Who is there here that would betray him for his Interest?


Matt. Show me a Gang of Courtiers that can say as much.


Ben. We are for a just Partition of the World, for every Man has a Right to
enjoy Life.


Matt. We retrench the Superfluities of Mankind. The World is avaritious, and I
hate Avarice. A covetous Fellow, like a Jack-daw, steals what he was never made
to enjoy, for the sake of hiding it. These are the Robbers of Mankind, for
Money was made for the Free-hearted and Generous, and where is the injury of
taking from another, what he has not the Heart to make use of?


Jem. Our several Stations for the Day are fixed. Good luck attend us all. Fill
the Glasses.


AIR I. Fill every Glass, etc.
Matt. Fill every Glass, for Wine inspires us,
And fires us
With Courage, Love and Joy,
Women and Wine should Life employ,
Is there ought else on Earth desirous?

Chorus. Fill every Glass, etc.




SCENE II.
To them enter Macheath. Match. Gentlemen, well met. My Heart has been with you
this Hour; but an unexpected Affair has detained me. No Ceremony, I beg you.


Matt. We were just breaking up to go upon Duty (...) to have the Honor of
taking the Air with you, Sir, this Evening upon the Heath? I drink a Dram now
and then with the Stage-Coachmen in the way of Friendship and Intelligence; and
I know that about this Time there will be Passengers upon the Western Road, who
are worth speaking with.


Match. I was to have been of that Party -- but --


Matt. But what, Sir?


Match. Is there any Man who suspects my Courage?


Matt. We have all been Witnesses of it.


Match. My Honor and Truth to the Gang?


Matt. I Will be answerable for it.


Match. In the Division of our Booty, have I ever shown the least Marks of
Avarice or Injustice?


Matt. By these Question something seems to have ruffled you. Are any of us
suspected?


Match. I have a fixed Confidence, Gentlemen, in you all, as Men of Honor, and
as such I value and and respect you. Peachum is a Man that is useful to us.


Matt. Is he about to play us any foul Play? I Will shoot him through the Head.


Match. I beg you, Gentlemen, act with Conduct and Discretion. A Pistol is your
last resort.


Mat. He knows nothing of this Meeting.


Match. Business cannot go on without him. He is a Man who knows the World and
is a necessary Agent to us. We have had a slight Difference, and till it is
accommodated I shall be obliged to keep out of his way. Any private Dispute of
mine shall be of no ill Consequence to my Friends. You must continue to act
under his Direction, for the Moment we break loose from him, our Gang is ruined.


Matt. As a Bawd to a Whore, I grant you, he is to us of great Convenience.


Match. Make him believe I have quitted the Gang, which I can never do but with
Life. At our private Quarters I will continue to meet you. A Week or so will
probably reconcile us.


Matt. Your Instructions shall be observed. It Is now high Time for us to repair
to our several Duties; so till the Evening at our Quarters in Moor-fields we
bid you farewell.


Match. I shall wish my self with you. Success attend you. [Sits down melancholy
at the Table.


AIR II. March in Rinaldo, with Drums and Trumpets.
Matt. Let us take the Road.
Hark! I hear the Sound of Coaches!
The Hour of Attack approaches,
To your Arms, brave Boys, and load.
See the Ball I hold!
Let the Chemists toil like Asses,
Our Fire their Fire surpasses,
And turns all our Lead to Gold.




[The Gang, ranged in the Front of the Stage, load their Pistols, and stick
them under their Girdles; then go off singing the first Part in Chorus. SCENE
III.
Macheath, Drawer. Match. What a Fool is a fond Wench! Polly is most
confoundedly bit -- I love the Sex. And a Man who loves money, might as well be
contented with one Guinea, as I with one Woman. The Town perhaps has been as
much obliged to me, for recruiting it with free-hearted Ladies, as to any
Recruiting Officer in the Army. If it were not for us and the other Gentlemen
of the Sword, Drury Lane would be uninhabited.

AIR III. Would you have a young Virgin, etc.
If the Heart of a Man is deprest with Cares,
The Mist is dispelled when a Woman appears;
Like the Notes of a Fiddle, she sweetly, sweetly
Raises the Spirits, and charms our Ears.
Roses and Lillies her Cheeks disclose,
But her ripe Lips are more sweet than those.
Press her,
Caress her
With Blisses,
Her Kisses
Dissolve us in Pleasure, and soft Repose.


I must have Women. There is nothing unbends the Mind like them. Money is not
so strong a Cordial for the Time. Drawer. -- [Enter Drawer] Is the Porter gone
for all the Ladies, according to my Directions?


Draw. I expect him back every Minute. But you know, Sir, you sent him as far
as Hockley in the Holo, for three of the Ladies, for one in Vinegar Yard, and
for the rest of them somewhere about Lewkner's Lane. Sure some of them are
below, for I hear the Bar Bell. As they come I will show them up. Coming,
Coming.


SCENE IV.
Macheath, Mrs. Coaxer, Dolly Trull, Mrs. Vixen, Betty Doxy, Jenny Diver, Mrs.
Slammekin, Suky Tawdry, and Molly Brazen. Match. Dear Mrs. Coaxer, you are
welcome. You look charmingly today. I hope you don't want the Repairs of
Quality, and lay on Paint. -- Dolly Trull! kiss me, you Slut; are you as
amorous as ever, Hussy? You are always so taken up with stealing Hearts, that
you don't allow your self Time to steal any thing else. Ah Dolly, thou will
ever be a Coquette! -- Mrs. Vixen, I Am yours, I always loved a Woman of Wit and
Spirit; they make charming Mistresses, but plaguey Wives -- Betty Doxy! Come
hither, Hussy. Do you drink as hard as ever? You had better stick to good
wholesome Beer; for in troth, Betty, Strong Water will in time ruin your
Constitution. You should leave those to your Betters. -- What! and my pretty
Jenny Diver too! As prim and demure as ever! There is not any Prude, though
ever so high bred, has a more sanctified Look, with a more mischievous Heart.
Ah! thou art a dear artful Hypocrite. -- Mrs. Slamakin! as careless and genteel
as ever! all you fine Ladies, who know your own Beauty affect an Undress -- But
see, here is Suky Tawdry come to contradict what I was saying. Every thing she
gets one way she lays out upon her Back. Why, Suky, you must keep at least a
dozen Tally-men. Molly Brazen! [She kisses him.] That Is well done. I love a
free-hearted Wench. Thou have a most agreeable Assurance, Girl, and art as
willing as a Turtle. -- But hark! I hear Music. The Harper is at the Door. If
Music be the Food of Love, play on. Ever you seat your selves, Ladies, what
think you of a Dance? Come in. [Enter Harper.] Play the French Tune, that Mrs.
Slamekin was so fond of.

[A Dance a la ronde in the French Manner; near the End of it this Song and
Chorus. AIR IV. Cotillon.
Youth's the Season made for Joys,
Love is then our Duty,
She alone who that employs,
Well deserves her Beauty.
Let Us be gay,
While we may,
Beauty's a Flower, despised in decay.
Youth's the Season, etc.
Let us drink and sport today,
Ours is not tomorrow.
Love with Youth flies swift away,
Age is naught but Sorrow.
Dance and sing,
Time's on the Wing,
Life never knows the return of Spring.
Chorus. Let us drink, etc.





Match. Now, pray Ladies, take your Places. Here Fellow, [Pays the Harper.] Bid
the Drawer bring us more Wine. [Ex. Harper.] If any of the Ladies choose Ginn, I
hope they will be so free to call for it.


Jenny. You look as if you meant me. Wine is strong enough for me. Indeed, Sir,
I never drink Strong Water, but when I have the Cholie.


Match. Just the Excuse of the fine Ladies! Why, a Lady of Quality is never
without the Cholic. I hope Mrs. Coaxer, you have had good Success of late in
your Visits among the Mercers.


Coax. We have so many Interlopers -- Yet with Industry, one may still have a
little Picking. I carried a silver flowered Lutestring, and a Piece of black
Padesoy to Mr. Peachum's Lock but last Week.


Vix. There Is Molly Brazen has the Ogle of a Rattle-Snake. She rivetted a
Linnen-draper's Eye so fast upon her, that he was nicked of three Pieces of
Cambric before he could look off.


Braz. Oh dear Madam! -- But sure nothing can come up to your handling of
Laces! And then you have such a sweet deluding Tongue! To cheat a Man is
nothing; but the Woman must have fine Parts indeed who cheats a Woman!


Vix. Lace, Madam, lies in a small Compass, and is of easy Conveyance. But you
are apt, Madam, to think too well of your Friends.


Coax. If any Woman has more Art than another, to be sure, it is Jenny Diver.
Though her Fellow be never so agreeable, she can pick his Pocket as cooly, as
if Money were her only Pleasure. Now that is a Command of the Passions uncommon
in a Woman!


Jenny. I never go to the Tavern with a Man, but in the View of Business. I
have other Hours, and other sort of Men for my Pleasure. But had I your
Address, Madam --


Match. Have done with your Compliments, Ladies; and drink about: You are not so
fond of me, Jenny, as you use to be.


Jenny. It Is not convenient, Sir, to show my Fondness among so many Rivals.
It Is your own Choice, and not the warmth of my Inclination that will determine
you.

AIR V. All in a misty Morning, etc.
Before the Barn-door crowing,
The Cock by Hens attended,
His Eyes around him throwing;
Stands for a while suspended.
Then one he singles from the Crew.
And cheers the happy Hen;
With how do you do, and how do you do,
And how do you do again.



Match. Ah Jenny! thou art a dear Slut.


Trull. Pray, Madam, were you ever in keeping?


Tawd. I hope, Madam, I ha'nt been so long upon the Town, but I have met with
some good Fortune as well as my Neighbors.


Trull. Pardon me, Madam, I meant no harm by the Question; 'twas only in the
way of Conversation.


Tawd. Indeed, Madam, if I had not been a Fool. I might have lived very
handsomely with my last Friend. But upon his missing five Guineas, he turned me
off. Now I never suspected he had counted them.


Slam. Who do you look upon, Madam, as your best sort of Keepers?


Trull. That, Madam, is thereafter as they be.


Slam. I, Madam, was once kept by a Jew; and bating their Religion, to Women
they are a good sort of People.


Tawd. Now for my part, I own I like an old Fellow: for we always make them pay
for what they cannot do.


Vix. A spruce Prentice, let me tell you, Ladies, is no ill thing, they bleed
freely. I have sent at least two or three dozen of them in my time to the
Plantations.


Jenny. But to be sure, Sir, with so much good Fortune as you have had upon the
Road, you must be grown immensely rich.


Match. The Road, indeed, has done me justice, but the Gaming-Table has been
my Ruin.


AIR VI. When once I lay with another Man's Wife, etc.
Jen. The Gamesters and Lawyers are Jugglers alike,
If they meddle your all is in Danger.
Like Gypsies if once they can finger a Souse,
Your Pockets they pick, and they pilfer your House,
And give your Estate to a Stranger.



These are the Tools of a Man of Honor. Cards and Dice are only fit for
cowardly Cheats, who prey upon their Friends. [She takes up his Pistol. Tawdry
takes up the other.


Tawd. This, Sir, is fitter for your Hand. Besides your Loss of Money, it is a
Loss to the Ladies. Gaming takes you off from Women. How fond could I be of
you! but before Company, it is ill bred.


Match. Wanton Hussies!


Jen. I must and will have a Kiss to give my Wine a Zest,


[They take him about the Neck, and make Signs to Peachum and Constables, who
rush in upon him. SCENE V.
To them, Peachum and Constables. Peach. I seize you, Sir, as my Prisoner.


Match. Was this well done Jenny? -- Women are Decoy Ducks; who can trust them!
Beasts, Jades, Jilts, Harpies, Furies, Whores!


Peach. Your Case, Mr. Macheath, is not particular. The greatest Heroes have
been ruined by Women. But to do them justice, I must own they are a pretty sort
of Creatures if we could trust them. You must now, Sir, take your leave of the
Ladies, and if they have a Mind to make you a Visit, they will be sure to find
you at home. The Gentleman, Ladies, lodges in Newgate. Constables, wait upon
the Captain to his Lodgings.


AIR VII. When first I laid Siege to my Chloris, etc.
Mac. At the Tree I shall suffer with pleasure,
At the Tree I shall suffer with pleasure,
Let me go where I will,
In all kinds of Ill,
I shall find no such Furies as these are.




Peach. Ladies, I Will take care the Reckoning shall be discharged.


[Ex. Macheath, guarded with Peachum and Constables. SCENE VI.
The Women remain. Vix. Look ye, Mrs. Jenny, though Mr. Peachum may have made a
private Bargain with you and Suky Tawdry for betraying the Captain, as we were
all assisting, we ought all to share alike.


Coax. I think Mr. Peachum, after so long an acquaintance, might have trusted
me as well as Jenny Diver.


Slam. I am sure at least three Men of his hanging, and in a Year's time too,
(if he did me justice) should be set down to my account.


Trull. Mrs. Slamekin, that is not fair. For you know one of them was taken in
Bed with me.


Jenny. As far as a Bowl of Punch or a Treat, I believe Mrs. Suky will join
with me. -- As for any thing else, Ladies, you cannot in consequence expect it.


Slam. Dear Madam --


Trull. I would not for the World --


Slam. It Is impossible for me --


Trull. As I hope to be saved, madam --


Slam. Nay, then I must stay here all Night --


Trull. Since you command me.


[Exeunt with great Ceremony SCENE VII.
Newgate. Locket, Turnkeys, Mackheath, Constables. Lock. Noble Captain, you are
welcome. You have not been a Lodger of mine this Year and half. You know the
custom, Sir. Garnish, Captain, Garnish. Hand me down those Fetters there.


Mac. Those, Mr. Lockit, seem to be the heaviest of the whole set. With your
leave, I should like the further pair better.


Lock. Look ye, Captain, you know what is fittest for our Prisoners. When a
Gentleman uses me with Civility, I always do the best I can to please him. --
Hand them down I say -- We have them of all Prices, from one Guinea to ten, and
it is fitting every Gentleman should please himself.


Mac. I understand you, Sir. [gives Money.] The Fees here are so many, and so
exorbitant, that few Fortunes can bear the Expense of getting off handsomely, or
of dying like a Gentleman.


Lock. Those, I see, will fit the Captain better. -- Take down the further
pair. Do but examine them, Sir -- Never was better work -- How genteely they
are made! -- They will sit as easy as a Glove, and the nicest Man in England
might not be ashamed to wear them. [He puts on the Chains.] If I had the best
Gentleman in the Land in my Custody I could not equip him more handsomely. And
so, Sir -- I now leave you to your private Meditations.


SCENE VII.
Macheath. AIR VIII. Courtiers, Courtiers think it no harm, etc.
Man may escape from Rope and Gun,
Nay, some have outlived the Doctor's Pill;
Who takes a Woman must be undone,
That Basilisk is sure to kill.
The Fly that sips Treacle is lost in the Sweets,
So he that tastes Woman, Woman, Woman,
He that tastes Woman, Ruin meets.


To what a woeful plight have I brought my self! Here must I (all day long,
'till I am hanged) be confined to hear the Reproaches of a Wench who lays her
Ruin at my Door -- I am in the Custody of her Father, and to be sure if he
knows of the matter, I shall have a fine time on it betwixt this and my
Execution -- But I promised the Wench Marriage. -- What signifies a Promise to
a Woman? Does not Man in Marriage itself promise a hundred things that he never
means to perform? Do all we can, Women will believe us; for they look upon a
Promise as an Excuse for following their own Inclinations. -- But here comes
Lucy, and I cannot get from her -- Would I were deaf!


SCENE IX.
Macheath, Lucy. Lucy. You base Man you, -- how can you look me in the Face
after what has past between us? -- See here, perfidious Wretch, how I am
forced to bear about the load of Infamy you have laid upon me -- O Macheath!
thou host robbed me of my Quiet -- to see thee tortured would give me pleasure.

AIR IX. Alovely Lass to a Friar came, etc.
Thus when a Huswife sees a Rat
In her Trap in the Morning taken,
With pleasure her Heart goes pit a pat,
In Revenge for her loss of Bacon
Then she throws him
To the Dog or Cat,
To be worried, crushed and shaken.



Mac. Have you no Bowels, no Tenderness, my dear Lucy, to see a Husband in
these Circumstances?


Lucy. A Husband!


Mac. In every respect but the Form, and that, my Dear, may be said over us at
any time. -- Friends should not insist upon Ceremonies. From a Man of Honor,
his Word is as good as his Bond.


Lucy. It Is the pleasure of all you fine Men to insult the Women you have
ruined.

AIR X. 'Twas when the Sea was roaring, etc.
How cruel are the Traitors,
Who lie and swear injest,
To cheat unguarded Creatures
Of Virtue, Fame, and Rest!
Whoever steals a Shilling,
Though shame the Guilt conceals:
In Love the perjured Villain
With Boasts the Theft reveals.



Mac. The very first opportunity, my Dear, (have but patience) you shall be my
Wife in whatever manner you please.


Lucy. Insinuating Monster! And so you think I know nothing of the Affair of
Miss Polly Peachum. -- I could tear thy Eyes out!


Mac. Sure Lucy, you cannot be such a Fool as to be jealous of Polly!


Lucy. Are you not married to her, you Brute, you?


Mac. Married! Very good. The Wench gives it out only to vex thee, and to ruin
me in thy good Opinion. It Is true, I go to the House; I chat with the Girl, I
kiss her, I say a thousand things to her (as all Gentlemen do) that mean
nothing, to divert my self; and now the silly Jade has set it about that I am
married to her, to let me know what she would be at. Indeed my, dear Lucy,
these violent Passions may be of ill consequence to a Woman in your condition.


Lucy. Come, come, Captain, for all your Assurance, you know that Miss Polly
has put it out of your power to do me the Justice you promised me.


Mac. A jealous Woman believes every thing her Passion suggests. To convince
you of my Sincerity, if we can find the Ordinary, I shall have no scruples of
making you my Wife; and I know the consequence of having two at a time.


Lucy. That you are only to be hanged, and so get rid of them both.


Mac. I am ready, my dear Lucy, to give you satisfaction -- if you think there
is any in Marriage -- What can a man of Honor say more?


Lucy. So then it seems, you are not married to Miss Polly.


Mac. You know, Lucy, the Girl is prodigiously conceited. No Man can say a
civil thing to her, but (like other fine Ladies) her Vanity makes her think
he is her own for ever and ever.

AIR XI. The Sun had loosed his weary Teams, etc.
The first timo at the Looking-glass
The Mother sets her Daughter,
The Image strikes the smiling Lass
With Self-love ever after.
Each time she looks, she, fonder grown,
Thinks every Charm grows stronger:
But alas, vain Maid, all Eyes but your own
Can see you are not younger.


When Women consider their own Beauties, they are all alike unreasonable in
their demands; for they expect their Lovers should like them as long as they
like themselves.


Lucy. Yonder is my Father -- perhaps this way we may light upon the Ordinary,
who shall try if you will be as good as your Word. -- For I long to be made an
honest Woman.


SCENE X.
Peachum, Lockit with an Account-Book. Lock. In this last Affair, Brother
Peachum, we are agreed. You have consented to go halves in Macheath.


Peach. We shall never fall out about an Execution. -- But as to that Article,
pray how stands our last Year's account?


Lock. If you will run your Eye over it, you will find it is fair and clearly
stated.


Peach. This long Arrear of the Government is very hard upon us! Can it be
expected that we should hang our Acquaintance for nothing, when our Betters
will hardly save theirs without being paid for it. Unless the People in
employment pay better, I promise them for the future, I shall let other Rogues
live besides their own.


Lock. Perhaps, Brother, they are afraid these matters may be carried too far.
We are treated too by them with Contempt, as if our Profession were not
reputable.


Peach. In one respect indeed, our Employment may be reckoned dishonest,
because, like Great Statesmen, we encourage those who betray their Friends.


Lock. Such Language, Brother, any where else, might turn to your prejudice.
Learn to be more guarded, I beg you.

AIR XII. How happy are we, etc.
When you censure the Age,
Be cautions and sage,
Lest the Courtiers offended should be:
If you mention Vice or Bribe,
It Is so pat to all the Tribe;
Each cries -- That was levelled at me.



Peach. Here Is poor Ned Clincher's Name, I see. Sure, Brother Lockit, there was
a little unfair proceeding in Ned's case; for he told me in the Condemned Hold,
that for Value received, you had promised him a Session or two longer without
Molestation.


Lock. Mr. Peachum, -- This is the first time my Honor was ever called in
Question.


Peach. Business is at an end -- if once we act dishonourably.


Lock. Who accuses me?


Peach. You are warm, Brother.


Lock. He that attacks my Honor, attacks my Livelihood. -- And this Usage --
Sir -- is not to be born.


Peach. Since you provoke me to speak -- I must tell you too, that Mrs. Coaxer
charges you with defrauding her of her Information-Money, for the apprehending
of curl-pated Hugh. Indeed, indeed, Brother, we must punctually pay our Spies,
or we shall have no Information.


Lock. Is this Language to me, Sirrah -- who have saved you from the Gallows,
Sirrah!


[Collaring each other. Peach. If I am hanged, it shall be for ridding the
World of an arrant Rascal.


Lock. This Hand shall do the Office of the Halter you deserve, and throttle
you -- you Dog! --


Peach. Brother, Brother, -- We are both in the Wrong, -- We shall be both
Losers in the Dispute -- for you know we have it in our Power to hang each
other. You should not be so passionate.


Lock. Nor you so provoking.


Peach. It Is our mutual Interest; it is for the Interest of the World we should
agree. If I said any thing, Brother, to the Prejudice of your Character, I ask
pardon.


Lock. Brother Peachum -- I can forgive as well as resent. -- Give me your
Hand. Suspicion does not become a Friend.


Peach. I only meant to give you occasion to justify your self: But I must now
step home, for I expect the Gentleman about this Snuff Box, that Filch nimm'd
two Nights ago in the Park. I appointed him at this hour.


SCENE XI.
Lockit, Lucy. Lock. Whence come you, Hussy?


Lucy. My Tears might answer that Question.


Lock. You have then been whimpering and fondling, like a Spaniel, over the
Fellow that has abused you.


Lucy. One cannot help Love; one cannot cure it. It Is not in my Power to obey
you, and hate him.


Lock. Learn to bear your Husband's Death like a reasonable Woman. It Is not the
fashion, nowadays so much as to affect Sorrow upon these Occasions. No Woman
would ever marry, if she had not the Chance of Mortality for a Release. Act
like a Woman of Spirit, Hussy, and thank your Father for what he is doing.


AIR XIII. Of a noble Race was Shenkin.
Lucy. Is then his Fate decreed, Sir?
Such a Man oan I think of quitting?
When first we met, so moves me yet,
O see how my Heart is splitting!




Lock. Look ye, Lucy -- There is no saving him -- So. I think, you must even do
like other Widows -- Buy your self Weeds, and be cheerful.

AIR XIV.
You Will think ever many Days ensue
This Sentence not severe;
I hang your Husband, Child, it is true,
But with him hang your Care.
Twang dang dillo dee.


Like a good Wife, go moan over your dying Husband. That, Child, is your Duty
-- Consider, Girl, you cannot have the Man and the Money too -- so make your
self as easy as you can, by getting all you can from him.


SCENE XII.
Lucy, Macheath. Lucy. Though the Ordinary was out of my way today, I hope, my
Dear, you will, upon the first Opportunity, quiet my Scruples -- Oh Sir! -- my
Father's hard Heart is not to be softened, and I am in the utmost Despair.


Mac. But if I could raise a small Sum -- Would not twenty Guineas, think you,
move him? -- Of all the Arguments in the way of Business, the Perquisite is the
most prevailing. -- Your Father's Perquisites for the Escape of Prisoners must
amount to a considerable Sum in the Year. Money well timed, and properly
applied, will do anything.

AIR XV. London Ladies.
If you at an Office solicit your Due,
And would not have Matters neglected;
You must quicken the Clerk with the Perquisite too,
To do what his Duty directed.
Or would you the Frowns of a Lady prevent,
She too has this palpable Failing,
The Perquisite softens her into Consent;
That Reason with all is prevailing.



Lucy. What Love or Money can do shall be done: for all my Comfort depends upon
your Safety.


SCENE XIII.
Lucy, Macheath, Polly. Polly. Where is my dear Husband? -- Was a Rope ever
intended for this Neck! -- O let me throw my Arms about it, and throttle thee
with Love -- Why do thou turn away from me? -- It Is thy Polly -- It Is thy
Wife.


Mac. Was ever such an unfortunate Rascal as I am!


Lucy. Was there ever such another Villain!


Polly. O Macheath! was it for this we parted? Taken! Imprisoned! Tried!
Hanged! -- cruel Reflection! I Will stay with thee 'till Death -- no Force shall
tear thy dear Wife from thee now, -- What means my Love? -- Not one kind Word!
not one kind Look! think what thy Polly suffers to see thee in this Condition.

AIR XVI. All in the Downs, etc.
Thus when the Swallow, seeking Prey,
Within the Sash is closely pent,
His Consort, with bemoaning Lay,
Without sits pining for the Event.
Her chatt'ring Lovers all around her skim;
She heeds them not (poor Bird!) her Soul's with him.



Mac. I must disown her. [Aside.] The Wench is distracted.


Lucy. Am I then bilk'd of my Virtue? Can I have no Reparation? Sure Men were
born to lie, and Women to believe them! O Villain! Villain!


Polly. Am I not thy Wife? -- Thy Neglect of me, thy Aversion to me too
severely proves it. -- Look on me -- Tell me, am I not thy Wife?


Lucy. Perfidious Wretch!


Polly. Barbarous Husband!


Lucy. Had thou been hanged five Months ago, I had been happy.


Happy. And I too -- If you had been kind to me 'till Death, it would not have
vexed me -- And that is no very unreasonable Request, (though from a Wife) to a
Man who has not above seven or eight Days to live.


Lucy. Art thou then married to another? Have thou two Wives, Monster?


Mac. If Women's Tongues can cease for an Answer -- hear me.


Lucy. I will not -- Flesh and Blood cannot bear my Usage.


Polly. Shall I not claim my own? Justice bids me speak.


AIR XVII. Have you heard of a frolicksome Ditty, etc.
Mac. How happy could I be with either,
Were the other dear Charmer away!
But while you thus teaze me together,
To neither a Word will I say;
But told roll, etc.




Polly. Sure, my Dear, there ought to be be some Prefeference shown to a Wife!
At least she may claim the Appearance of it. He must be distracted with his
Misfortunes, or he could not use me thus!


Lucy. O Villain, Villain! thou have deceived me -- I could even inform against
thee with Pleasure. Not a Prude wishes more heartily to have Facts against her
intimate Acquaintance, than I now wish to have Facts against thee. I would have
her Satisfaction, and they should all out.


AIR XVIII. Irish Trot.
Polly. I Am bubbled.

Lucy. -- I Am bubbled.

Polly. Oh how I am troubled!

Lucy. Bambouzled, and bit!

Polly. -- My Distresses are doubled.

Lucy. When you come to the Tree, should the Hangman refuse,
These Fingers, with Pleasure, could fasten the Noose.

Polly. I Am bubbled, etc.




Mac. Be pacified, my dear Lucy -- This is all a Fetch of Polly's, to make me
desperate with you in case I get off. If I am hanged, she would fain have the
Credit of being thought my Widow -- Really, Polly, this is no time for a
Dispute of this sort; for whenever you are talking of Marriage, I am thinking
of Hanging.


Polly. And have thou the Heart to persist in disowning me?


Mac. And have thou the Heart to persist in persuading me that I am married?
Why, Polly, do thou seek to agravate my Misfortunes?


Lucy. Really, Miss Peachum, you but expose your self. Besides, it is barbarous
in you to worry a Gentleman in his Circumstances.


AIR XIX.
Polly. Cease your Funning;
Force or Cunning
Never shall my Heart trapan.
All these Sallies
Are but Malice
To seduce my constant Man,
It Is most certain,
By their flirting
Women often have Envy shown;
Pleased, to ruin
Others wooing;
Never happy in their own!




Polly. Decency, Madam, methinks might teach you to behave yourself with some
Reserve with the Husband, while his Wife is present.


Mac. But seriously, Polly, this is carrying the Joke a little too far.


Lucy. If you are determined, Madam, to raise a Disturbance in the Prison, I
shall be obliged to send for the Turnkey to show you the Door. I am sorry,
Madam, you force me to be so ill-bred.


Polly. Give me leave to tell you, Madam; These forward Airs don't become you
in the least, Madam. And my Duty, Madam, obliges me to stay with my Husband,
Madam.


AIR XX. Good Morrow, Gossip Joan.
Lucy. Why how now, Madam Flirt?
If you thus must chatter;
And are for flinging Dirt,
Let Us try who best can spatter;
Madam Flirt!

Polly. Why how now, saucy Jade;
Sure the Wench is Tipsy!
How can you see me made [To him,
The Scoff of such a Gipsy!
Saucy Jade! [To her.




SCENE XIV.
Lucy, Macheath, Polly, Peachum. Peach. Where Is my Wench? Ah Hussy! Hussy! --
Come you home, you Slut; and when your Fellow is hanged, hang yourself, to make
your Family some amends.


Polly. Dear, dear Father, do not tear me from him -- I must speak; I have more
to say to him -- Oh! twist thy Fetters about me, that he may not haul me from
thee!


Peach. Sure all Women are alike! If ever they commit the Folly, they are sure
to commit another by exposing themselves -- Away -- Nota Word more -- You are
my Prisoner now, Hussy.


AIR XXI. Irish Howl.
Polly. No Power on Earth can ever divide,
The Knot that Sacred Love has tied.
When Parents draw against our Mind,
The true-love's Knot they faster bind.
Oh, oh ray, oh Amborah -- oh, oh, etc.

[Holding Macheath, Peachum pulling her.


SCENE XV.
Lucy, Macheath. Mac. I am naturally compassionate, Wife; so that I could not
use the Wench as she deserved; which made you at first suspect there was
something in what she said.


Lucy. Indeed, my Dear, I was strangely puzzled.


Mac. If that had been the Case, her Father would never have brought me into
this Circumstance -- No, Lucy, -- I had rather dye than be false to thee.


Lucy. How happy am I, if you say this from your Heart! For I love thee so,
that I could sooner bear to see thee hanged than in the Arms of another.


Mac. But could thou bear to see me hanged?


Lucy. Oh Macheath, I can never live to see that Day.


Mac. You see, Lucy; in the Account of Love you are in my debt, and you must
now be convinced, that I rather choose to die than be another's -- Make me, if
possible, love thee more, and let me owe my Life to thee -- If you refuse to
assist me, Peachum and your Father will immediately put me beyond all means of
Escape.


Lucy. My Father I know has been drinking hard with the Prisoners: and I fancy
he is now taking his Nap in his own Room -- If I can procure the Keys, shall I
go off with thee, my Dear?


Mac. If we are together, 'twill be impossible to lie concealed. As soon as the
Search begins to be a little cool, I will send to thee -- 'Till then my Heart
is thy Prisoner.


Lucy. Come then, my dear Husband -- owe thy Life to me -- and though you Love
me not -- be grateful -- But that Polly runs in my Head strangely.


Mac. A Moment of time may make us unhappy forever.


AIR. XXII. The Lass of Patie's Mill, etc.
Lucy. I like the Fox shall grieve,
Whose Mate has left her side,
Whom Hounds from Morn to Eve,
Chase over the Country wide.
Where can my Lover hide?
Where cheat the weary Pack?
If Love be not his Guide,
He never will come back!




ACT III.
SCENE I.
SCENE Newgate. Lockit, Lucy. Lock. TO be sure, Wench, you must have been
aiding and abetting him to help him to this Escape.


Lucy. Sir, here has been Peachum and his Daughter Polly, and to be sure they
know the ways of Newgate as well as if they had been born and bred in the Place
all their Lives. Why mustall your Suspicion light upon me?


Lock. Lucy, Lucy, I will have none of these shuffling Answers.


Lucy. Well then -- If I know any Thing of him I wish I may be burnt!


Lock. Keep your Temper, Lucy, or I shall pronounce you guilty.


Lucy. Keep yours, Sir, -- I do wish I may be burnt. I do -- And what can I say
more to convince you?


Lock. Did he tip handsomely? -- How much did he come down with? Come Huffy,
cheat your Father; and I shall not be angry with you -- Perhaps, you have made
a better Bargain with him than I could have done -- How much, my good Girl?


Lucy. You know, Sir, I am fond of him, and would have given Money to have kept
him with me.


Lock. Ah Lucy! thy Education might have put thee more upon thy Guard; for a
Girl in the Bar of an Alehouse is always besieged.


Lucy. Dear Sir, mention not my Education -- for 'twas to that I owe my Ruin.

AIR I. If Love's a sweet Passion, etc.
When young at the Bar you first taught me to score,
And bid me be free of my Lips, and no more;
I was kissed by the Parson, the Squire and the Sot,
When the Guest was departed, the Kiss was forgot.
But his Kiss was so sweet, and so closely he pressed,
That I languish'd and pined till I granted therest.


If you can forgive me, Sir, I will make a fair Confession, for to be sure he
has been a most barbarous Villain to me.


Lock. And so you havelet him escape, Hussy -- Have you?


Lucy. When a Woman loves; a kind Look, a tender Word can persuade her to any
thing -- And I could ask no other Bribe.


Lock. Thou will always be a vulgar Slut, Lucy. -- If you would not be looked
upon as a Fool, you should never do any thing upon the Foot of Interest. Those
that act otherwise are their own Bubbles.


Lucy. But Love, Sir, is a Mistortune that may happen to the most discreet
Woman, and in Love we are all Fools alike. -- Notwithstanding all he swore, I
am now fully convinced that Polly Peachum is actually his Wife. -- Did I let
him escape, (Fool that I was!) to go to her? -- Polly will wheedle herself into
his Money, and then Peachum will hang him, and cheat us both.


Lock. So I am to be ruined, because, forsooth you must be in Love! -- a very
pretty Excuse!


Lucy. I could murder that impudent happy Strumpet; -- I gave him his Life, and
that Creature enjoys the Sweets of it. -- Ungrateful Macheath!

AIR II. South Sea Ballad.
My Love is all Madness and Folly,
Alone I lie,
Toss, tumble, and cry,
What a happy Creature is Polly!
Was ever such a Wretch as I!
With Rage I redden like Scarlet,
That my dear inconstant Varlet,
Stark blind to my Charms,
Is lost in the Arms
Of that Jilt, that invagling Harlot!
Stark blind to my Charms,
Is lost in the Arms
Of that Jilt, that inveigling Harlot!
This, this my Resentment alarms.



Lock. And so, after all this Mischief, I must stay here to be entertained with
your Caterwauling Mistress Puss! -- Out of my Sight, wanton Strumpet! you shall
fast and mortify your self into Reason, with now and then a little handsome
Discipline to bring you to your Senses -- Go.


SCENE II.
Lockit. Peachum then intends to outwit me in this Affair; but I Will be even
with him -- The Dog is leaky with his Liquor, so I Will ply him that way, get the
Secret from him, and turn this Affair to my own Advantage. -- Lions, Wolves,
and Vultures don't live together in Herds, Droves or Flocks. -- Of all Animals
of Prey, Man is the only sociable one Eyery one of us preys upon his Neighbor,
and yet we herd together. -- Peachum is my Companion, my Friend -- According to
the Custom of the World, indeed, he may quote thousands of Precedents for
cheating me -- And shall not I make use of the Privilege of Friendship to make
him a Return?

AIR III. Packinton's Pound.
Thus Gamesters united in Friendship are found,
Though they know that their Industry all is a Cheat;
They flock to their Prey at the Dice-Box's Sound,
And join to promote one another's Deceit.
But if by mishap
They fail of a Chap,
To keep in their Hands, they each other entrap.
Like Pikes, lank with Hunger, who miss of their Ends,
They bite their Companions, and prey on their Friends.


Now, Peachum, you and I, like honest Tradesmen, are to have a fair Trial which
of us two can overreach the other. -- Lucy. -- [Enter Lucy] Are there any of
Peachum's People now in the House?


Lucy. Filch, Sir, is drinking a Quartern of Strong Water in the next Room
with Black Moll.


Lock. Bid him come to me.


SCENE III.
Lockit, Filch. Lock. Why, Boy thou look as if thou were half starved; like
a shotten Herring.


Filch. One had need have the Constitution of a Horse to go through the
Business. -- Since the favorite Child-getter was disabled by a Mishap, I have
picked up a little Money by helping the Ladies to a Pregnancy against their
being called down to Sentence. -- But if a Man cannot get an honest Livelihood
any easier way, I am sure, it is what I cannot undertake for another Session.


Lock. Truly, if that great Man should tip off, 'twould be an irreparable Loss.
The Vigor and Prowess of a Knight Errant never saved half the Ladies in
Distress that he has done. -- But, Boy, can thou tell me where thy Master
is to be found?


Filch. At his A Cant Word, signifying, a Warehouse where stolen ccds are
deposited.
Lock, Sir, at the Crooked Billet.


Lock. Very well. -- I have nothing more with you. [Ex. Filch.] I Will go to him
there, for I have many important Affairs to settle with him; and in the way of
those Transactions, I Will artfully get into his Secret. -- So that Macheath
shall not remain a Day longer out of my Clutches.


SCENE IV.
A Gaming-House. Macheath in a fine tarnish'd Coat, Ben Budge, Matt of the
Mint. Mac. I am sorry, Gentlemen, the Road was so barren of Money. When my
Friends are in Difficulties, I am always glad that my Fortune can be
serviceable to them. [Gives them Money.] You see, Gentlemen, I am not a mere
Court Friend, who professes every thing and will do nothing.

AIR IV. Lillibullero.
The Modes of the Court so common are grown,
That a true Friend can hardly be met;
Friendship for Interest is but a Loan,
Which they let out for what they can get.
It Is true, you find
Some Friends so kind,
Who will give you good Counsel themselves to defend.
Insorrowful Ditty,
They promise, they pity,
But shift you for Money, from Friend to Friend.


But we, Gentlemen, have still Honor enough to break through the Corruptions
of the World. -- And while I can serve you, you may command me.


Ben. It grieves my Heart that so generous a Man should be involved in such
Difficulties, as oblige him to live with such ill Company, and herd with
Gamesters.


Matt. See the Partiality of Mankind! -- One Man may steal a Horse, better than
another look over a Hedge -- Of all Mechanics, of all servile Handycrafts-men,
a Gamester is the vilest. But yet, as many of the Quality are of the
Profession, he is admitted amongst the politest Company. I wonder we are not
more respected.


Mac. There will be deep Play tonight at Marybone, and consequently Money may
be picked up upon the Road. Mere me there, and I Will give you the Hint who is
worth Setting.


Matt. The Fellow with a brown Coat with a narrow Gold Binding, I am told, is
never without Money.


Match. What do you mean, Matt? -- Sure you will not think of meddling with him!
-- He Is a good honest kind of a Fellow, and one of us.


Ben. To be sure, Sir, we will put our selves under your Direction.


Mac. Have an Eye upon the Money-Lenders. -- A Rouleau, or two, would prove a
pretty sort of an Expedition. I hate Extortion.


Matt. Those Rouleaus are very pretty Things. -- I hate your Bank Bills. --
There is such a Hazard in putting them off.


Match. There is a certain Man of Distinction, who in his Time has nicked me
out of a great deal of the Ready. He is in my Cash, Ben; -- I Will point him out
to you this Evening, and you shall draw upon him for the Debt. -- The Company
are met; I hear the Dice-box in the other Room. So, Gentlemen, your Servant.
You Will meet me at Marybone.


SCENE V.
Peachum's Lock. A Table with Wine, Brandy, Pipes and Tobacco. Peachum, Lockit.
Lock. The Coronation Account, Brother Peachum, is of so intricate'a Nature,
that I believe it will never be settled.


Peach. It consists indeed of a great Variety of Articles -- It was worth to
our People, in Fees of different Kinds above ten Instalments. -- This is part
of the Account, Brother, that lies open before us.


Lock. A Lady's Tail of rich Brocade -- that, I see, is disposed of.


Peach. To Mrs. Diana Trapes, the Tally-woman, and she will make a good Hand
on it in Shoes and Slippers, to trick out young Ladies, upon their going into
Keeping. --


Lock. But I don't see any Article of the Jewels.


Peach. These are so well known, that they must be sent abroad -- You Will find
them entered under the Article of Exportation. -- As for the Snuff-Boxes,
Watches, Swords, etc. -- I thought it best to enter them under their several
Heads.


Lock. Seven and twenty Women's Pockets complete; with the several things
therein contained; all Sealed, Numbered, and entered.


Peach. But, Brother, it is impossible for us now to enter upon this Affair. --
We should have the whole Day before us. -- Besides, the Account of the last
Half Year's Plate is in a Book by it self, which lies at the other Office.


Lock. Bring us then more Liquor. -- Today shall be for Pleasure -- Tomorrow
for Business. -- Ah Brother, those Daughters of ours are two slippery Hussies
-- Keep a watchful Eye upon Polly, and Macheath in a Day or two shall be our
own again.

AIR V. Down in the North Country, etc.
Lock. What Gudgeans are we Men!
Every Woman's easy Prey.
Though we have felt the Hook, again
We bite and they betray.
The Bird that has been trapt,
When he hears his calling Mate,
To her he flies, again he is clapped
Within the wiry Grate.




Peach. But what signifies catching the Bird, if your Daughter Lucy will set
open the Door of the Cage?


Lock. If Men were answerable for the Follies and Frailties of their Wives and
Daughters, no Friends could keep a good Correspondence together for two Days.
-- This is unkind of you, Brother; for among good Friends, what they say or do
goes for nothing.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, here is Mrs. Diana Trapes wants to speak with you.


Peach. Shall we admit her, Brother Lockit?


Lock. By all means -- She Is a good Customer, and a fine spoken Woman -- And a
Woman who drinks and talks so freely, will enliven the Conversation.


Peach. Desire her to walk in.


[Exit Servant. SCENE VI.
Peachum, Lockit, Mrs. Trapes. Peach. Dear Mrs. Dye, your Servant -- One may
know by your Kiss, that your Ginn is excellent.


Trapes. I was always very curious in my Liquors.


Lock. There is no perfumed Breath like it -- I have been long acquainted with
the Flavor of those Lips -- Have NOT I, Mrs. Dye?


Trapes. Fill it up. -- I take as large Draughts of Liquor, as I did of Love.
-- I hate a Flincher in either.

AIR VI. A Shepherd kept Sheep, etc.
In the Days of my Youth I could bill like a Dove, fa, la, la, etc.
Like a Sparrow at all times was ready for Love, fa, la, la, etc.
The Life of all Mortals in Kissing should pass,
Lip to Lip while we are young -- then the Lip to the Glass, fa, etc.


But now Mr. Peachum, to our Business, -- If you have Blacks of any kind,
brought in of late; Mantoes -- Velvet Scafs -- Petticoats -- Let it be what it
will -- I am your Chap -- for all my Ladies are very fond of Mourning.


Peach. Why, look ye, Mrs. Dye -- you deal so hard with us, that we can afford
to give the Gentlemen, who venture their Lives for the Goods, little or nothing.


Trapes. The hard Times oblige me to go very near in my Dealing. -- To be sure,
of late Years I have been a great Sufferer by the Parliament. -- Three thousand
Pounds would hardly make me amends. -- The Act for Destroying the Mint, was a
severe Cut upon our Business -- 'Till then, if a Customer stepped out of the way
-- we knew where to have her -- No doubt you know Mrs. Coaxer -- there is a
Wench now ('till today) with a good Suit of Clothes of mine upon her Back, and
I could never set Eyes upon her for three Months together -- Since the Act too
against Imprisonment for small Sums, my Loss there too has been very
considerable, and it must be so, when a Lady can borrow a handsome Petticoat,
or a clean Gown, and I not have the least Hank upon her! And, of my Conscience,
nowadays most Ladies take a Delight in cheating, when they can do it with
Safety.


Peach. Madam, you had a handsome Gold Watch of us the other Day for seven
Guineas. -- Considering we must have our Profit -- To a Gentleman upon the
Road, a Gold Watch will be scarce worth the taking.


Trap. Consider, Mr. Peachum, that Watch was remarkable, and not of very safe
Sale. -- If you have any black Velvet Scarfs -- they are a handsome
Winter-wear; and take with most Gentlemen who deal with my Customers. -- It Is I
that put the Ladies upon a good Foot. It Is not Youth or Beauty that fixes their
Price. The Gentlemen always pay according to their Dress from half a Crown to
two Guineas; and yet those Hussies make nothing of bilking of me. -- Then too,
allowing for Accidents. -- I have eleven fine Customers now down under the
Surgeon's Hands, -- what with Fees and other Expenses, there are great
Goings-out, and no Comings-in, and not a Farthing to pay for at least a Month's
clothing. -- We run great Risques -- great Risques indeed.


Peach. As I remember, you said something just now of Mrs. Coaxer.


Trap. Yes, Sir. -- To be sure I stripped her of a Suit of my own Clothes about
two hours ago; and have left her as she should be, in her Shift, with a Lover
of hers at my House. She called him up Stairs, as he was going to Mary-bone in
a Hackney Coach. -- And I hope for her own sake and mine, she will persuade the
Captain to redeem her, for the Captain is very generous to the Ladies.


Lock. What Captain?


Trap. He thought I did not know him -- An intimate Acquaintance of yours, Mr.
Peachum -- Only Captain Macheath -- as fine as a Lord.


Peach. Tomorrow, dear Mrs. Dye, you shall set your own Price upon any of the
Goods you like -- We have at least half a dozen Velvet Scarfs, and all at your
service. Will you give me leave to make you a Present of this Suit of
Night-cloaths for your own wearing? -- But are you sure it is Captain Macheath?


Trap. Though he thinks I have forgot him; no Body knows him better. I have
taken a great deal of the Captain's Money in my Time at a second-hand, for he
always loved to have his Ladies well dressed.


Peach. Mr. Lockit and I have a little business with the Captain; -- You
understand me -- and we will satisfy you for Mrs. Coaxer's Debt.


Lock. Depend upon it -- we will deal like Men of Honor.


Trap. I don't enquire after your Affairs -- so whatever happens, I wash my
Hands on it. -- It has always been my Maxim, that one Friend should assist
another -- But if you please -- I Will take one of the Scarfs home with me. It Is
always good to save something in Hand.


SCENE VII.
Newgate. Lucy. Jealousy, Rage, Love and Fear, are at once tearing me to
pieces. How I am weather-beaten and shattered with Distresses!

AIR VII. One Evening having lost my Way, etc.
I Am like a Skiff on the Ocean tossed,
Now high, now low, with each Billow born,
With her Rudder broke, and her Anchor lost,
Deserted and all forlorn.
While thus I lie rolling and tossing all Night,
That Polly lies sporting on Seas of Delight!
Revenge, Revenge, Revenge,
Shall appease my restless Sprite.


I have the Rats-bane ready. -- I run no Risque; for I can lay her Death upon
the Gin, and so many dye of that naturally that I shall never be called in
Question. -- But say, I were to be hanged -- I never could be hanged for any
thing that would give me greater Comfort, than the poisoning that Slut.


Enter Filch. Filch. Madam, here is our Miss Polly come to wait upon you.


Lucy. Show her in.


SCENE VIII.
Lucy, Polly. Lucy. Dear Madam, your Servant. -- I hope you will pardon my
Passion, when I was so happy to see you last -- I was so overrun with the
Spleen, that I was perfectly out of my self. And really when one has the
Spleen, every thing is to be excused by a Friend.

AIR VIII. Now Roger, I Will tell thee because you are my Son.
When a Wife's in her Pout,
(As she is sometimes, no doubt;)
The good Husband as meek as a Lamb,
Her Vapors to still,
First grants her her Will,
And the quieting Draught is a Dram.
Poor Man! And the quieting Draught is a Dram.


-- I wish all our Quarrels might have so comfortable a Reconciliation.


Polly. I have no Excuse for my own Behavior, Madam, but my Misfortunes. --
And really, Madam, I suffer too upon your Account.


Lucy. But, Miss Polly -- in the way of Friendship, will you give me leave to
propose a Glass of Cordial to you?


Polly. Strong Water are apt to give me the Headache -- I hope, Madam, you
will excuse me.


Lucy. Not the greatest Lady in the Land could have better in her Closet, for
her own private drinking. -- You seem mighty low in Spirits, my Dear.


Polly. I am sorry, Madam, my Health will not allow me to accept of your Offer.
-- I should not have left you in the rude Manner I did when we met last, Madam,
had not my Papa haul'd me away so unexpectedly -- I was indeed somewhat
provoked, and perhaps might use some Expressions that were disrespectful -- But
really, Madam, the Captain treated me with so much Contempt and Cruelty, that I
deserved your Pity, rather than your Resentment.


Lucy. But since his Escape, no doubt all Matters are made up again -- Ah
Polly! Polly! it is I am the unhappy Wife; and he loves you as if you were only
his Mistress.


Polly. Sure, Madam, you cannot think me so happy as to be the Object of your
Jealousy. -- A Man is always afraid of a Woman who loves him too well -- so
that I must expect to be neglected and avoided.


Lucy. Then our Cases, my dear Polly, are exactly alike. Both of us indeed have
been too fond.


AIR IX. O Bessy Bell.
Polly. A Curse attends that Woman's Love,
Who always would be pleasing.

Lucy. The Pertness of the billing Dove,
Like tickling, is but teazing.

Polly. What then in Love can Woman do?


Lucy. If we grow fond they shun us.


Polly. And when we fly them, they pursue.


Lucy. But leave us when they have won us.





Lucy. Love is so very whimsical in both Sexes, that it is impossible to be
lasting. -- But my Heart is particular, and contradicts my own Observation.


Polly. But really, Mistress Lucy, by his last Behavior; I think I ought to
envy you. -- When I was forced from him, he did not show the least Tenderness.
-- But perhaps, he has a Heart not capable of it.

AIR X. Would Fate to me Belinda give --
Among the Men, Coquets we find.
Who court by Turns all Womankind;
And we grant all their Hearts desired,
When they are flattered, and admired.


The Coquets of both Sexes are Self-lovers, and that is a Love no other
whatever can dispossess. I fear, my dear Lucy, our Husband is one of those.


Lucy. Away with these melancholy Reflections, -- indeed, my dear Polly, we are
both of us a Cup too low. -- Let me prevail upon you, to accept of my Offer.

AIR XI. Come, sweet Lass, etc.
Come, sweet Lass,
Let Us banish Sorrow
'Till Tomorrow;
Come, sweet Lass,
Let Us take a chirping Glass.
Wine can clear
The Vapors of Despair;
And make us light as Air;
Then drink, and banish Care.


I cannot bear, Child, to see you in such low Spirits. -- And I must persuade
you to what I know will do you good. -- I shall now soon be even with the
hypocritical Strumpet. [Aside.


SCENE X.
Polly. Polly. All this wheedling of Lucy cannot be for nothing. -- At this
time too! when I know she hates me! -- The Dissembling of a Woman is always the
Forerunner of Mischief -- By pouring Strong Water down my Throat, she thinks
to pump some Secrets out of me. -- I Will be upon my Guard, and will not taste a
drop of her Liquor, I Am resolved.


SCENE X.
Lucy, with Strong Water, Polly. Lucy. Come, Miss Polly.


Polly. Indeed, Child, you have given yourself trouble to no purpose. -- You
must, my Dear, excuse me.


Lucy. Really, Miss Polly, you are so squeamishly affected about taking a Cup
of Strong Water as a Lady before Company. I vow, Polly, I shall take it
monstrously ill if you refuse me. -- Brandy and Men (though Women love them
never so well) are always taken by us with some Reluctance -- unless it is in
private.


Polly. I protest, Madam, it goes against me. -- What do I see! Macheath again
in Custody! -- Now every glimmering of Happiness is lost. [Drops the Glass of
Liquor on the Ground.


Lucy. Since things are thus, I Am glad the Wench has escaped: for by this
Event, it is plain, she was not happy enough to deserve to be poisoned. [Aside.


SCENE XI.
Lockit, Macheath, Peachum, Lucy, Polly. Lock. Set your Heart to rest, Captain,
-- You have neither the Chance of Love or Money for another Escape -- for you
are ordered to be called down upon your Trial immediately.


Peach. Away, Hussies! -- This is not a time for a Man to be hampered with his
Wives. -- You see, the Gentleman is in Chains already.


Lucy. O Husband, Husband, my Heart longed to see thee; but to see thee thus
distracts me!


Polly. Will not my dear Husband look upon his Polly? Why had thou not flown
to me for Protection? with me thou had been safe.


AIR XII. The last time I went over the Moor.
Polly. Hither, dear Husband, turn your Eyes.

Lucy. Bestow one Glance to cheer me.

Polly. Think with that Look, thy Polly dies.

Lucy. O shun me not -- but hear me.

Polly. It Is Polly sues.

Lucy. -- It Is Lucy speaks.

Polly. Is thus true Love requited?

Lucy. My Heart is bursting.

Polly. -- Mine too breaks.

Lucy. Must I

Polly. -- Must I be slighted.




Match. What would you have me say, Ladies? -- You see, this Affair will soon be
at an end, without my disobliging either of you.


Peach. But the settling this Point, Captain, might prevent a Lawsuit between
your two Widows.


AIR XIII. Tom Tinker's my true Love.
Match. Which way shall I turn me? -- How can I decide?
Wives, the Day of our Death, are as fond as a Bride.
One Wife is too much for most Husbands to bear,
But two at a time there is no Mortal can bear.
This way, and that way, and which way I will,
What would comfort the one, the other Wife would take ill.




Polly. But if his own Misfortunes have made him insensible to mine -- A Father
sure will be more compassionate. -- Dear, dear Sir, sink the material Evidence,
and bring him off at his Trial -- Polly upon her Knees begs it of you.

AIR XIV. I am a poor Shepherd undone.
When my Hero in Court appears,
And stands arraigned for his Life;
Then think of poor Polly's Tears;
For Ah! Poor Polly's his Wife.
Like the Sailor he holds up his Hand,
Distressed on the dashing Wave,
To die a dry Death at Land,
Is as bad as a watery Grave.
And alas, poor Polly!
Alack, and well-a-day!
Before I was in Love,
Oh! every Month was May.



Lucy. If Peachum's Heart is hardened; sure you, Sir, will have more Compassion
on a Daughter. -- I know the Evidences is in your Power. -- How then can you be
a Tyrant to me? [Kneeling.

AIR XV. Ianthe the lovely, etc.
When he holds up his Hand arraigned for his Life.
O think of your Daughter, and think I Am his Wife!
What are Cannons, or Bombs, or clashing of Swords?
For Death is more Certain by Witnesses Words.
Then nail up their Lips; that dread Thunder allay;
And each Month of my Life will hereafter be May.



Lock. Macheath's time is come, Lucy. -- We know our own Affairs, therefore let
us have no more Whimpering or Whining.


Peach. Set your Heart at rest, Polly. -- Your Husband is to dye today. --
Therefore, if you are not already provided, it is high time to look about for
another. There Is Comfort for you, you Slut.


Lock. We are ready, Sir, to conduct you to the Old-Boily.


AIR XVI. Bonny Dundee.
Match. The Charge is prepared; the Lawyers are met,
The Judges all ranged (a terrible Show!)
I go, undismayed. -- For Death is a Debt,
A Debt on demand. -- So, take what I owe.
Then farewell, my Love -- Dear Charmers, adieu.
Contented I die -- It Is the better for you.
Here ends all Dispute the rest of our Lives.
For this way at once I please all my Wives.



Now, Gentlemen, I am ready to attend you.


SCENE XII.
Lucy, Polly, Filch. Polly. Follow them, Filch, to the Court. And when the
Trial is over, bring me a particular Account of his Behavior, and of every
thing that happened. -- You Will find me here with Miss Lucy. [Ex. Filch.] But
why is all this Music?


Lucy. The Prisoners, whose Trials are put off till next Session, are diverting
themselves.


Polly. Sure there is nothing so charming as Music! I Am fond of it to
Distraction! -- But alas! -- now, all Mirth seems an Insult upon my Affliction.
-- Let us retire, my dear Lucy, and indulge our Sorrows. -- The noisy Crew, you
see, are coming upon us.

[Exeunt. A Dance of Prisoners in Chains, etc.
SCENE XIII.
The Condemned Hold. Macheath, in a melancholy Posture. AIR XVII. Happy Groves.
O cruel, cruel, cruel Case!
Must I suffer this Disgrace?


AIR XVIII. Of all the Girls that are so smart.
Of all the Friends in time of Grief,
When threatening Death looks grimmer,
Not one so sure can bring Relief,
As this best Friend, a Brimmer. [Drinks.


AIR XIX. Britons strike home.
Since I must swing, -- I scorn, I scorn to wince or whine. [Rises.


AIR XX. Chevy Chase.
But now again my Spirits sink;
I Will raise them high with Wine. [Drinks a Glass of Wine.


AIR XXI. To old Sir Simon the King.
But Valor the stronger grows,
The stronger Liquor we are drinking;
And how can we feel our Woes,
When we have lost the Trouble of Thinking? [Drinks.


AIR XXII. Joy to great Caesar.
If thus -- A Man can die
Much bolder with Brandy. [Pours out a Bumper of Brandy.


AIR XXIII. There was an old Woman.
So I drink off this Bumper. -- And now I can stand the Test,
And my Comrades shall see, that I die as brave as the Best. [Drinks.


AIR XXIV. Did you ever hear of a gallant Sailor.
But can I leave my pretty Hussies,
Without one Tear, or tender Sigh?


AIR XXV. Why are mine Eyes still flowing.
Their Eyes, their Lips, their Busses
Recall my Love. -- Ah must I die!


AIR XXVI. Green Sleeves.
Since Laws were made for every Decree,
To curb Vice in others, as well as me,
I wonder we have not better Company,
Upon Tyburn Tree!
But Gold from Law can take out the Sting;
And if rich Men like us were to swing,
'Twould thin the Land, such Numbers to string
Upon Tyburn Tree!



Jailor. Some Friends of yours, Captain, desire to be admitted -- I leave you
together.


SCENE XIV.
Macheath, Ben Budge, Mat of the Mint. Match. For my having broke Prison, you
see, Gentlemen, I am ordered immediate Execution. -- The Sheriffs Officers, I
believe, are now at the Door. -- That Jemmy Twitcher should peach me, I own
surpised me! -- It Is a plain Proof that the World is all alike, and that even
our Gang can no more trust one another than other People. Therefore, I beg you,
Gentlemen, look well to yourselves, for in all probability you may live some
Months longer.


Matt. We are heartily sorry, Captain, for your Misfortune. -- But it is what we
must all come to.


Match. Peachum and Lockit, you know, are infamous Scoundrels. Their Lives are
as much in your Power, as yours are in theirs. -- Remember your dying Friend!
-- It Is my last Request -- Bring those Villains to the Gallows before you, and
I am satisfied.


Matt. We'll do it.


Jailor. Miss Polly and Miss Lucy entreat a Word with you.


Match. Gentlemen, adieu.


SCENE XV.
Lucy, Macheath, Polly. Match. My dear Lucy -- My dear Polly -- Whatsoever has
past between us is now at an end. -- If you are fond of marrying again, the
best Advice I can give you* is to ship yourselves off for the West Indies,
where you will have a fair Chance of getting a Husband a-piece; or by good Luck,
two or three, as you like best.


Polly. How can I support this Sight!


Lucy. There is nothing moves one so much as a great Man in Distress.


AIR XXVII. All you that must take a Leap, etc.
Lucy. Would I might be hanged!

Polly. -- And I would so too!

Lucy. To be hanged with you.

Polly. -- My Dear, with you.

Match. O leave me to Thought! I fear! I doubt!
I tremble! I droop! -- See, my Courage is out. [Turns up the empty Bottle.

Polly. No Token of Love?

Match. -- See, my Courage is out. [Turns up the empty Pot.

Lucy. No Token of Love?

Polly. -- Adieu.

Lucy. -- Farewell.

Match. But hark! I hear the Toll of the Bell.

Chorus. Tol de roll lol, etc.




Jailor. Four Women more, Captain, with a Child a-piece! See, here they come.


[Enter Women and Children. Match. What -- four Wives more! -- This is too much.
-- Here -- tell the Sheriffs Officers I am ready.


[Exit Macheath guarded. SCENE XVI.
To them, Enter Player and Beggar. Play. But, honest Friend, I hope you don't
intend that Macheath shall be really executed.


Beg. Most certainly, Sir. -- To make the Piece perfect, I was for doing strict
poetical Justice. -- Macheath is to be hanged; and for the other Personages of
the Drama, the Audience must have supposed they were all either hanged or
transported.


Play. Why then, Friend, this is a downright deep Tragedy. The Catastrophe is
manifestly wrong, for an Opera must end happily.


Beg. Your Objection, Sir, is very just; and is easily removed. For you must
allow, that in this kind of Drama, it is no matter how absurdly things are
brought about. -- So -- you Rabble there -- run and cry a Reprieve -- let the
Prisoner be brought back to his Wives in Triumph.


Play. All this we must do, to comply with the Taste of the Town.


Beg. Through the whole Piece you may observe such a Similitude of Manner in
high and low Life, that it is difficult to determine whether (in the
fashionable Vices) the fine Gentlemen imitate the Gentlemen of the Road, or the
Gentlemen of the Road the fine Gentlemen. -- Had the Play remained, as I at
first intended, it would have carried a most excellent Moral. 'Twould have
shown that the lower Sort of People have their Vices in a degree as well as the
Rich: And that they are punished for them.


SCENE XVII.
To them, Macheath with Rabble, etc. Match. So, it seems, I am not left to my
Choice, but must have a Wife at last. -- Look ye, my Dears, we will have no
Controversy now. Let us give this Day to Mirth, and I am sure she who thinks
her self my Wife will testify her Joy by a Dance.


All. Come, a Dance -- a Dance.


Match. Ladies, I hope you will give me leave to present a Partner to each of
you. And (if I may without Offense) for this time, I take Polly for mine. --
And for Life, you Slut, -- for we were really married. -- As for the rest. --
But at present keep your own Secret. [To Polly.

A DANCE.
AIR XXVIII. Lumps of Pudding, etc.
Thus I stand like the Turk, with his Doxies around;
From all Sides their Glances his Passion confound!
For black, brown, and fair, his Inconstancy burns,
And the different Beauties subdue him by turns:
Each calls forth her Charms, to provoke his Desires:
Though willing to all; with but one he retires.
But think of this Maxim, and put off your Sorrow,
The Wretch of Today, may be happy Tomorrow.
Chorus. But think of this Maxim, etc.





FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and sold by G. RISK, G. EWING, and W. SMITH, in
Dame's-street.
A Map of Gibraltar. 0 6 1 The Wife's Relief: or, the Husband's Cure. A Comedy,
by Mr. Charles Johnston. 0 6 1 Fables invented for the Amusement of his
Highness William Duke of Cumberland, by Mr. Gay. Price Bound. 1 7 1 Ditto,
Stich'd. 1 1 0 Ovid's Metamorphoses, in fifteen Books, translated by the most
eminent Hands. In two Volumes, adorned with Sculptures. 5 5 0 Philip of
Macedon. A Tragedy, by Mr. D. Lewis 0 6 1 The Victim. A Tragedy, by Mr.
Johnston. 0 6 1 Fontenelle's Plurality of Worlds. Translated from the French,
by Mr. Glanvill. 2 2 0 The Beau's Duel, or a Soldier for the Ladies, by Mrs.
Centlivre. 0 6 1 Love and a Bottle, by Mr. George Farquhar. 0 6 1 The
Inconstant, or the Way to win him, by Ditto. 0 6 1 Sir Harry Wildair, being the
Sequel of the Trip to the Jubilee, by Ditto. 0 6 1 The Country Lasses, or the
Custom of the Manor, by Mr. Charles Johnson. 0 6 1 The Provoked Husband, or a
Journey to London, by the late Sir John Vanbrugh and Mr. Cibber. 0 6 1 Thsaurus
Aenigmaticus, or a Collection of the most ingenious and diverting Aenigma's or
Riddles. 0 6 1 The Travels of Cyrus, by the Chevalier Ramsay, Octavo. 4 0 0 The
Perplexed Duchess, or Treachery Rewarded. A Novel. 0 6 1 The Life of Prince
Menzicoff. 0 3 0 The Beggar's Opera, by Mr. John Gay. 0 6 1 Sesostris, or
Royalty in Disguise, a Tragedy, by Mr. Sturmy. 0 6 1

Where may be had all the new Plays lately published.


