EPISTLES TO LORENZO.

Nec tardum operior, nec praecedentibus insto. LONDON, M.DCC.LVI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following sheets contain part of several epistolary Rhimes, written on
different occasions and in different parts of Europe. The object of the whole
would be, to reconcile, within the bounds of moderation, the Zealots and
Philosophers of the present age.

The author is sensible the latter, or, as they are called, the advocates for
natural religion, are the greater bigots of the two; and that a superstitious
attachment to infidelity is the masterpiece of Enthusiasm: the rapsodies of
Jacob Boehmen being much more intelligible than the plain demonstrations, of
some modern If the truth of this observation be called in question, the reader
may turn, for conviction, to a late pamphlet, called the Light of nature the
light of the gospel; written by an author, who, for twenty years past has
occasionally obliged the public with works of the same stamp.
freethinkers.

To the end proposed, therefore, the means would be to establish, on undisputed
principles, the certainty of those maxims, which most affect the present and
future happiness of mankind.

With this view it is necessary the author should wear an assumed character and
propose nothing but what Reason, common to all, may allow. In doing this, then,
he would endeavor to show the principal defects and point out the limits of
the Understanding; to prove, a priori, the source of good and evil; the
universal propriety of original sin and the moral necessity of that inseparable
connection between Happiness and misery, Virtue and Vice; the immortality of
the soul being, at the same time, pointed out, from arguments universally
acknowledged and felt.

Such is the general design of the author: that of the present publication is,
to inform himself how far this specimen may give the public room to think him
capable of the whole; or whether any part may be worth a finishing hand.

By the public, also, he would be understood to mean the philosophical part of
the world only; for, as to the gentlemen of the Belles Lettres, he does not
willinigly subject himself to their Censure; having chosen a poetical style for
no worse reason than an incapacity to express the same sentiments better in any
other: Confiding, therefore, in the well-bred humanity of such Critics, he
hopes they will not put his verses to the Horatian torture, by pulling them to
pieces, to examine the disjecta membra Poetae.

EPISTLE THE FIRST. to LORENZO.
While zeal pursues, beyond the Grave,
Whom Priest nor Patriot could save,
Lost St. John, saved and damned by Fame,
An honored and a blasted Name;
Lorenzo asks, ingenuous Youth,
What is, and who beleives, the truth.
Lorenzo, would thou learn of me?
Truth is where all the world agree.
Is there no point where all unite?
I answer, none are in the right.
Yet would thou know, so Skepticks err,
To whom enquiry may refer;
Where trembling doubt and error blind
At once a guard and guide may find,
At once successfully apply,
And give to Falsehood's face the Lie?
Alas! denied the perfect rule,
That serves alike the Knave and Fool,
Alike the Ignorant and the Wise;
Adoring these what those despise.
Whether we judge, from Nature's Law
That Truth infallibly we draw,
Or think the just Criterion given
In Revelation pure from Heaven,
It differs not, unless we find
Some active index in the mind,
Some Ray of Heaven's unerring light,
To guide in this or that aright.
Let Christianity display
It Is wondrous Volume to the day;
The sacred lines, however true,
Alike affect not me and you;
The accepted sense of holy writ
Still resting on the accepting wit.
For who that read but comprehend
As taught by Father, Priest, or Friend:
Or tenets new, more nice than wise,
Peculiar to themselves devise.
How then prevails the sacred text,
If by the comment thus perplexed,
If Heretics, of every kind,
Still in the word their Gospel find;
Still if the spirit hides the flaw
That marrs the letter of the Law!
Let Nature's striking scenes engage
The lettered and unlettered Age,
No fixed Ideas yet we find
Conveyed from hence to Humankind.
When meteors shine or Comets blaze,
Behold the wondering Crito gaze,
Prognosticate, in error wise,
The Judgments gathering in the skies:
The Aurora streaming from the Pole,
What mighty fears his Heart control!
See him confess his angry God,
And dread his mercies as his rod:
Whilst thou, Blasphemer! Crito cries,
Liftst up thine hand against the skies;
Fearless, in Scientific pride,
On the wild whirlwind's wings would ride:
When Thunder splits the Clouds in twain,
Or Lightnings melt them into Rain,
Against Heaven itself so mad to arm,
In magic steel, you brave the storm;
With Franklin, impiously defy
The Thunderers red right arm on high;
Bold Titan! take your mounted stand,
To wrest the Lightenings from his hand.
Thus, by no certain instinct led,
We comprehend what is seen or read;
But, from unlike experience taught,
Peculiar are our modes of thought.
Do pause when Pleas of right or wrong
To captious opponents belong;
While this affirmed or that denied
With equal force on either side?
Avoid Lorenzo vain dispute:
It Is empty triumph to confute.
No Honor whets the Champion's Blade:
Truth warms no Casuist by Trade.
See the winged Cork from side to side
Rebound, the truant school boy's pride!
With equal warmth, with equal noise,
So Disputants, like truant Boys,
Between what Saint or Father says
Bang the light Shittlecock of Faith.
Our first mistake, Lorenzo, this.
All on their faith would found their bliss;
And, here while flattering hope depends,
To truth presumptuous faith pretends.
Thus contradictions are professed,
Yet truth must be to all the test.
But tell me what connection ties
So close the Happy and the Wise.
Ah! what avails the Truth to know,
When Truth the frequent source of woe;
While gilded Fiction's flattering rays
With sunshine beautify our days;
Or, mildly shed, it is silver beams,
Reflected, light our nightly dreams;
While Pleasure and it is laughing train
Dance by the Moonshine of the brain.
From hence does bliss or misery flow,
The truth to know or not to know?
For bliss in vain the Learned explore;
Swift as their search it flies before,
Through every Clime, on every wind,
And leaves their panting wish behind.
O say what truth does science reach,
The Infant's peace of mind to teach!
O say what truth shall faith receive
Exclusive happiness to give!
In Pope or Mufti what is given
But fear of Hell and hope of Heaven;
A view of future bliss or woe,
The guiding prospect here below;
If promised, then, Seraphick skies,
Or Osman's sensual Paradise,
Or, with the Indian, taught t'ascend
To converse with a former friend;
Still if the tenet moves to act,
Words and Opinions bow to Fact;
To truth or Knowledge unconfined
The Bliss or Woe of Humankind:
As happy those who blindly trust
In Pope, or Mufti, if as just;
No more required by gracious Heaven
Than to requiring Man is given.
Let Calvin, then, selecting, rave,
Or Luther souls unsorted save,
Or Peter's heir deny the Keys
Of Heaven to Heretics like these;
Rejecting thou the vain abuse,
Know every System has it is use,
Or new or old, or yours or mine,
Subservient all to Heavens design:
Though truth from each be distant far
As Good hope from the Polar star.
As parts to complex Engines prove,
Inspired, by Mechanism, to move,
This retrogade and that direct,
In different modes to one effect;
So these, or moral or divine,
In nature's grand machine combine.
Machine how vast! how lost is man
In nature's wonder-working plan!
The reason this, -- we ever drew
Of Nature a perspective view;
Fixed to one Station, Time and place,
In power no just survey to trace.
So individuals also draw;
Their eye their rule, their will their law.
No wonder then that wrong and right
Perplex, from various points of Sight;
That widely different both appear
If viewed from thence or seen from here.
Place lights, with art, the shades between;
And black and white the varying scene:
At points opposed each strikes the eyes,
And this affirms what that denies.
The demonstration of his Sight
Who doubts? who knows not black from white
The proofs of both exactly suit,
And evidence supports dispute.
How madly then the world agree
To rave at alien Heresy!
Heirs to Religion's brighter sphere,
How strangely damned and damning here!
Halfwitted Zeal, of all the test,
Itself condemning with the rest:
By Sampson's rage, so thousands lost
Fell but at blinded Sampson's cost.
Lorenzo, is it thyself to please?
Do covet truth in hopes of ease?
Woulds't thou of future bliss or woe
Secure thy hopes and fears below?
Be truth no more thy ardent search;
Behold thy nostrum in the Church;
Faith, by indulgent Heaven, designed,
To help the weak, to lead the blind,
To check the rash, to warn the bold,
T'affright the young, t'amuse the old,
From our ownselves ourselves to save,
And bring us smiling to the Grave.
Ask'st thou what Church? by each confessed
His own superior to the rest.
Enquire of all -- of all inquired,
Their medium is the term desired.
Do thou require this term of me?
Go, seek it in Conformity:
At London, Pekin, or Peru,
A constant rule for ever true.
From hence deduce that golden mean
Each dagger-drawing Church between;
Nor doubt if here thou fixest right:
In half their difference all unite.
Their half of difference, if unknown,
Will Moderation make thine own.
Hard is the task, adventurous Youth,
And bold thy enterprise for truth.
Yet can thou bliss or ease forego,
And burns thy bosom but to know?
Have, in thine earlier hours, been taught
The generous fortitude of thought,
To set blind prejudice apart,
To rend the old Woman from the Heart,
To damn tradition's idle rules,
The Mother and the Nurse of Fools?
The ingenuous muse shall lead the way
Safe in the theme, though rude the lay,
Truth hopes not for poetic praise:
To Fiction sacred are the Bays.
EPISTLE THE SECOND. to LORENZO.
Ruled by no giant hopes or fears,
Whose stature grows with length of years,
In search of Truth, expect to find
The labor suited to the mind;
With genius Nature bearing part,
The strict, yet gentle, nurse of art:
For aim not thou a point to hit,
Beyond the reach of human wit;
Or join, Lorenzo, blindly, those,
Who first would Nature's God disclose.
For, say the voice of reason true;
Be ours a just abstracted view:
Be it the privilege of man
To trace, exactly, Nature's plan;
The scale of Beings in his hands,
To know the point at which he stands,
Compared with all he boasts to know,
As well above him as below:
Yet, if, of human logic vain,
He links to Heaven a kindred chain
Man his conclusions idly draws;
And Heaven prescribes by human laws.
Imagine thou in what degree
A Seraph stands 'tween God and thee:
Conceive thyself a mite unseen
And Being infinite between:
In this Comparison, says Pride,
A Seraph thou, to God allied.
Thy Pride, Lorenzo, disbeleive;
Let Lock nor Addison deceive:
For though Creation's varied plan
Assigns degrees respecting man;
Yet Skeptic know, and learn to fear,
God is beyond thy proper Sphere.
Created Beings, all, his care,
Does he with them Creation share?
Ah no! the System all our own,
God, the Creator, stands alone:
At equal distance all his plan,
The mite, the Seraph or the Man.
Is it not so, the passive clay
Of yon Corinthian Column gay,
That gilt entablature or base,
Or marble of yon shining vase
Resemble more the artist's mind
Than if to meaner use consigned.
Absurd! is Jones's genius known.
By the great model or the stone?
The Pile erect to Trajan's name,
Affected not by empty fame,
The Cross revered, the honored Bust
And trodden floor are kindred dust:
For all, in one degree, respect
Their sovereign Lord, the Architect.
How justly then so ever we plead
That Reason nature's book does read,
As by it is known and written laws
Of each effect we trace the cause,
Those laws can never themselves confine
The legislative Power divine;
Whose will that order first decreed
And bade the effect the cause succeed;
Agent, by some superior scheme,
Of which, in this, we can but dream.
Bear Atticus the Critick's rod.
In vain we, then, define a God,
In vain we attributes bestow;
Or reason, here, from what we know.
Though Science teach, religion warm,
What wild Ideas still we form?
Incongruous embrios of the brain,
That strive to scale the Heavens in vain.
Too short to reach beyond the sky
The focus of the mental eye;
Too cold our most transporting Zeal
To paint what Heavens and light conceal.
Yet will the skeptic ask me why?
Go, rise and to the dog star fly
Thou can not: nor the cause unknown.
Central attraction holds thee down;
A power occult, which, ever thy birth,
Fast bound thee to thy native Earth,
From which thou never can hope to rise
To Lunar plains or solar skies.
Nor less, within it is sphere, confined
The subtle essence of the mind.
Though Heaven has given it power to rove
In Freedom through the plains above;
Has winged it is active feet to run,
With Merc'ry, round the central sun;
Has given it distant Worlds t'explore;
And seas of space without a shore:
Yet, still, within Creation's round,
Within our narrow system bound;
Of what is above or what without
We harbor universal doubt.
Say light prevails, no contrast shade
Outlines the void we would pervade:
If darkness reigns, no chearing ray
Delineates blind Enquiry's way.
Hence, mortal man, must ever be
Thy Author, here, unknown to thee;
Destined thy erring way to trace
Through Nature's parti-colour'd space.
Let Ignorance, then, her Idol dress
In Justice, Love and Happiness;
Adorn with Mercy's golden chain,
With all the virtues grace it is train;
And then adore, in humble plight,
And call those fopperies infinite.
The pagan thus, despised as blind,
Creates his Idol to his mind;
Thinking his deity expressed
By bird or beast he likes the best;
Then bows before it is painted shrine;
And calls his wooden God divine.
Cast the presumptuous thought aside:
It Is not humility but pride;
Unless that truly humble we,
To Adore the God Humanity.
And such it is: for whence arise
Our virtues but from moral ties,
Whose known relations thus define.
That Essence mortals call divine.
Lorenzo, ready for reply,
Lay not thy prompt objection by,
Thou say "thy friend himself deceives,
"Nor God adores, nor God beleives:
"For though the mind the power descries,
"If left it is By Essence is meant, here, those attributes or qualities, by
which we define any known EXISTENCE or distinguish it from any other.
essence in the skies,
"If none believed, or none displayed,
"To what is adoration paid?
"In me no certain Faith is found;
"My deity an empty sound.
Not so: for, granting, Iconfess,
Thy attributes a God express;
Even thou wilt assert "still undefin'd
"The perfect, by the imperfect, mind;
But to thy attributes must join
Thy infinite, or thy divine.
As jugglers, who t'enhance deceit,
To sacred science give their Cheat,
While, with the curtain, still they hide
The slight of hand, too closely eye'd:
So here sly theologues impart
The Hocus pocus of their art,
And hold religion's sacred veil,
Where slights of Understanding fail:
For know, alas, their wisest plan
Displays but a SUPERIOR MAN,
Whom Infinite, the Conjurer's rod,
Presto, converts into a God:
For till they solve our problem right,
And tell us what is infinite,
They still must be reduced to own
Their compound deity unknown:
To all, or reasoning or inspired,
This infinite a term required.
Differs Lorenzo, then, with me?
In terms alone we disagree:
Perfection infinite is thine,
Indefinite Perfection mine.
Condemn not, then, half-understood.
I not deny that perfect, good,
All-gracious, merciful and wise,
God reigns, supreme, beyond the skies.
Neither, it is true, my terms imply;
But, granting none, I none deny:
Requiring but to acquiesce
That thou thy infinite express.
Idly does Bolingbroke refine;
Granting that wisdom is divine,
While, full as idly, he denies
Justice and Goodness to the skies.
Ideas, equally our own,
Our Goodness as our wisdom's known:
To both as hard to reconcile
Or Nature's frown or Nature's smile.
Alas! no attributes of thine
Can ever the deity define;
Impossible to judge, or know,
Of God above from Man below:
Reserved the prospect of the skies
To gratify immortal eyes.
Lorenzo, let us reason right.
No finite spans an infinite;
Unless, with Matho, versed in Arts,
We hold the infinity of parts:
But none the absurdity will plan,
That God can be contained in man;
Though, as absurdly, they suppose
Our qualities the God disclose.
Join'st thou, with Florio, the dispute,
T'enhance each moral attribute;
Pretending these, however crude,
Divine perfection does include;
As Species in a Genus they,
Or parts, which do the whole display.
So, with the grandeur all t'inspire
Of the gay mansion of his sire,
An Idiot Heir, his mother's fool,
Taught his synecdoche, at school,
Conceived by part the whole was shown,
And took a sample of the stone.
Convinced, does Polydore, with me,
That God's indefinite, agree;
Yet argue that our partial view
May still be relatively true:
For, if no abstract lights we gain,
It Is just our best to entertain;
Our God to call that wondrous cause,
In Nature traced, by nature's laws.
Mistake not here, nor God dethrone:
Be the first Cause in Nature known;
It Is but a consequent Effect;
Whose Cause no similars respect.
The God we, then, by this define
Nor self existent nor divine.
Be known Creation's various ties;
Whence Physical relations rise;
Explained, distinct, to mortal sense,
The wondrous scheme of Providence:
Say thou the Knowledge hence derived
Of him those systems has contrived?
Alas! from hence we only trace
The Features of Creation's face;
The front it bears to human-kind:
But not it is self-existing mind.
Should we, presuming to display
The spirit of the golden day,
Thus, call it is essence it is result,
Attraction, Fire, alike occult;
Or say it is Vegetation green;
Who'd think it is the Sun we mean?
So here t'absurdity we fall
Nor thus define a God at all.
Yet while, to thee I freely own,
I reverence a God unknown;
Think not, through Ignorance or Pride
A God was ever yet denied.
No The word ATHEIST is here used to signify, simply, one who denies the being
of a God.
Atheist ever was known on Earth
'Till fiery Zealots gave him birth,
For controversy's sake, their trade,
And damned the Heretic they made.
Does Clody, impudent and vain,
Deny a God, in skeptic strain,
And yet, in ignorance, advance,
That Natures works were made by Chance?
Warm Theologues, absurdly wife,
With their anathemas despise;
For well may Clody these inflame,
Whose God exists but in a name,
A technic term, devised at School:
I pity Clody, as a Fool.
To Epicurus' strains belong
The censures of an Idle song.
For, say "united worlds might join,
"By accident, and not design;
" Atoms might luckily contrive,
"And Strangely find themselves alive,
"Or, by some other scheme as wild,
"The world be Fortune's favorite Child.
Explain the terms -- say what is meant
By atoms, fortune, accident.
What mean thou but th'efficient cause
Of Nature's works and Nature's laws?
O think not, then, the eternal mind
To term or epithet confined;
But take away or change the name;
And Clody's God and mine is the same.
Say thou in Chance a power defined,
Fortuitous, absurd and blind,
Unworthy that stupendous plan,
Which Nature's scenes display to man:
Where grace, with harmony allied,
And wisdom strike, on every side.
Alas! to Clody these unknown:
For wondrous Wisdom's all his own.
In Nature nothing he surveys
That actuates his soul to praise:
In vain the Planets run their course,
Obedient to Attraction's force;
Th'eccentric Comets, far and wide
Pursue the same unerring guide;
In vain describes their varied race,
In equal times, an equal space:
In vain, through microscopic eyes,
Innumerable wonders rise,
On the green leaf whole nations crawl,
And myriads perish in it is fall.
Alas! what bears the barren mind!
What beauty can affect the blind!
Should Clody then his chance disclaim,
And own a deity, by name,
The blundering deist must advance
A God, no wiser than his Chance.
How obvious is the truth! and yet,
What learned volumes have been writ,
How Scholiasts labor to confute
What none do actually dispute!
Of the first cause, or fools or wise,
The pure existence none denies;
But in it is The word ESSENCE is here used in the sense above mentioned. page
28.
essence disagree:
For who defines infinity!
Blush not, Lorenzo, then, to own,
The Eternal God a God unknown;
Whose face, to mortal eye denied,
Can never gratify thy Pride.
To him your votive altars raise,
As Athens did, in ancient days;
Nor dare pollute his sacred shrine
With human sacrifice divine;
But humble adoration bring,
And silent praise, fit offering!
So the Peruvian, pure in heart,
Strange to the guile or guilt of art,
Unawed by tenet, text or tale,
Erects his temple, in the vale,
Sacred to the universal mind,
The God and guide of Human-kind.
No firstlings here affront the skies,
Nor clouds of smoking incense rise:
No Hypocrite, with acid face,
No Convert, tortured into grace,
No solid skull, in wisdom's cowl,
No hooded hawk, nor solemn owl,
Nor blind, nor ominous invade
This spotless consecrated shade:
But, as the native of the spray,
Man hails his maker, with the day,
By Nature taught, Heaven asks no more,
In spirit and in truth to adore.
EPISTLE THE THIRD. to LORENZO.
Nor to the fount of Hippocrene,
Nor groves of laurel, ever green,
Nor where the wanton Graces stray,
With flowers is strewn the muse's way.
Lorenzo, no, I more rejoice
At Reason's rough and manly voice
Than at the sprightliest, softest airs
That ever tickled Fancy's cars;
Though senseless Echo found them sweet,
And bade the public voice repeat.
Lorenzo, systems throw'n aside,
Be Reason, then, our honest guide;
The guide, not only to the mind
In Science deep or sense refined;
But to the plain and honest given
The first, best, artless gift of Heaven
Reason, that sees not but the sense
Of Ciceronian Eloquence.
The limits of our Reason known,
To Heaven resign it is honored throne:
On humbler wings, but rise to know
Thy Heaven on Earth, thy God below:
Content to trace, from Nature's laws,
The effects of an abstracted cause;
The Cause of all the effects we see;
The all we mean by deity.
Adapted thus Enquiry's plan
To truths as relative to Man;
Know Nature's law no less extends
To Physical than moral ends.
What moves the fixed mechanic power,
To shed the soft refreshing shower,
That, in the womb of teeming Earth,
It Is atoms quickens into birth,
Does in the moral scene connect
The cause and consequent effect.
Hence vice the source of human woe,
As springs of streams that from them flow,
On virtue happiness depends,
As matter to the center tends.
Nor less capricious, to the sense,
Physics, indeed, than Providence.
Conceive not then, as skepticks dream,
That nature's an imperfect scheme:
Because, perplexed with grief and pain,
Man covets perfect bliss in vain.
Say thou that Man the work of Heaven,
To him if imperfection's given,
Imperfect must that system be
Whose Lord a being weak as he.
Lorenzo, let not words deceive,
All imperfection's relative:
For of perfection absolute
All Nature is, beyond dispute:
For all from God itself derives;
And all is perfect God contrives.
Man, surely, perfect, then, you will cry.
As Man, most perfect, I reply:
The Creature of his maker's will,
But formed his pleasure to fulfill,
Designed, in wide Creation's plan
To fill the place and act as Man.
For, does capacity t'improve
Perfection positive remove?
As well imperfect might thou say
The rising sun, at dawn of day,
Since with superior heat and light
It blazes in meridian height.
Formed with progressive powers to rise,
In this even man's perfection lies:
Perfect, as such, humanity,
However degraded in degree.
Yet will thou say "is man consigned
"To fill the place by Heaven assigned,
"Impossible to rise or fall;
"Why feels he misery at all?
Another question answers this.
What title have mankind to Bliss?
Correct Ideas let us gain:
Say, what the misery of pain?
In vain, Lorenzo, do thou here
Affected Stoicism fear.
None feels more tenderly than I:
Mine the soft heart and watery eye,
The sanguine hopes, the needless fears,
Yet unsubdued by sense or years.
Yet Ah! how little understood
Mankind's imaginary good.
To Heaven my grateful vows be paid
That Man in human Frailty made;
That grief and ignorance my lot;
In joy and Literature forgot;
Or best remembered, in the taste
They give to improvement's rich repast.
No transport ever had fired my breast,
If born of Sciences possessed,
As when, by native genius fired,
To early knowledge I aspired;
By slow degrees instructed grew,
As Nature opened to my view;
To the weak eye as Hope was given,
Hope! that directs the soul to Heaven.
Hence, though no Stoic, I conceive
All joy and pain comparative.
The glow of Health the bliss of ease
Had never boasted charms to please,
Nor cordial draught nor downy bed
Had ever revived the drooping head,
Had sickness pale and trembling grief
Never wished for wearied eyes, relief.
See Belmont, on the sof;a laid:
What racking Pains his limbs invade!
Take half his Gout; the respite given
He calls a blissful taste of Heaven.
Give but a Youth, dispersing Wealth,
Who riots on the bloom of Health,
That blissful part which yet remains;
And his were Hell's distracting pains;
Pains which no aggravation know!
And yet, so relative our woe,
Inflict them when, by Chloe's kiss,
The amorous Youth dissolves in bliss,
Even these distracting pains were worse,
A mortal's most embitter'd curse.
In By mental sorrows are here meant those reflections, or uneasy sensations,
which are vulgarly supposed, sometimes, to attend the perfect health of the
body.
mental sorrows, thus our grief
Seeks but comparative releif:
The trifling cares that you despise
To some momentous miseries.
Ah me! what threatening danger nigh?
Why swells the tear from Delia's eye?
Ah whence proceeds this sad distress?
From the insignificance of dress.
Thus even to circumstance we owe
The difference of bliss and woe;
Pleasure and pain, as light and shade,
By one the other still displayed.
O what capricious joy and strife
Attend the various scenes of Life!
To wield the Scythe, with sweaty brow,
To turn the soil, beneath the plough,
To sow in hope and reap in joy
Thine Labor! is the sweet employ:
Stranger to hope, from want secure,
Life's easy burden to endure,
To eat the grape nor prune the vine,
Laborious Idleness! is thine.
Yet Idleness of Care complains,
And Labor quarrels with it is pains.
How sunk and terrible to thee
The hollow eye of Poverty,
While Villius meets her with a smile,
And sings or whistles all the while;
Though worn his hands, perplexed his head,
He relishes the sweets of bread,
And many a time, in pleasant rue,
Dances for joy, without a shoe.
Nor less thy woes, nor more thy joy;
Since equal cares thy peace destroy;
Since wanting never, thou never have tried
The effects of being satisfied;
In Plenty little more enjoyed
Than the dull bliss of being cloyed:
The child of Penury but Ease,
As of satiety disease:
Disease, that takes our lives by Stealth
And makes a beggary of Wealth.
When Fortune made thee rich and gay;
It gave the anxiety for play;
Bade, with thy Hawk, thine acres fly;
Thy freehold totter with the die.
Not greater care poor Villius knows;
As Blessed in nothing he can lose.
Thus Plenty, giving bread more white,
But steals the whet of Appetite:
A Blessing, plainly, half-accurst,
That gives me wine but steals my thirst!
Lorenzo farther might we go,
And prove still nearer bliss and woe,
To each inseparably joined;
Alternate regents in the mind:
Yet so precarious in their reign;
Bliss tyrannizes into pain;
And when to cruel pain we bow,
It Is rod grows light, we know not how.
The tension of the extended nerve,
Say Physiologists, may serve
This seeming paradox t'explain;
The affinity of Joy and pain.
As strung the Harp with trembling Wire,
With Nerves so strung the human lyre,
In healthful concord tuned, they say,
Pleasures harmonious Concert play.
But, if their tension more or less,
From Passion, sickness or distress,
Most tremblingly alive all over,
The strings, in discord, charm no more;
But, jarring, plays the ungrateful strain,
With harpy-singers, deaf'ning Pain.
Deduce we, then, Lorenzo, hence
That joys and pains are modes of sense,
As tunes in music, where each note
The simple Gamut has by rote,
And, adventitiously combined,
Please or displease but as they are joined.
Should also passion, sense or art
Wind up too high the nervous part,
The tuneful notes in noise expire,
Or breaking strings unman the Lyre.
For as, excess of Joy or Grief
Finds in a tear the same releif;
The rapture of Cleora's kiss
Inflicts the racking pain of bliss:
The effect the same, while both destroy,
Exquisite pain extatic joy!
Theme of continual dispute!
No relative is absolute:
No Error, such conceived by Man,
A blunder is in Nature's plan;
Nor dare we impiously pretend
Ills absolute from God descend.
The Question old unanswered lies.
From whence did moral evil rise?
Thou say, if power to stand was given,
Man had not fell, the care of Heaven,
No tempter known to lead to vice,
Serpent nor Eve in Paradise.
Lorenzo, in the pride of sense,
Instruction is impertinence:
She therefore, daughter of the wife,
Has long been sheltered in disguise;
Entering, beneath the mask of Sport,
The presence, tho forbid the Court;
So fond with young delight to stray,
And moralize the wanton's play,
That even her precepts still prevail
In every sav'rite Gossip's tale.
Yet so that those, her arts would learn,
May the allegory's face discern:
The moral, then, from Tales deduct,
And let Philosophy instruct.
Here the grand Error that we make,
Morals for Physicals we take;
Like those half mad, amphibious wits,
Who jumble, in their learned fits,
Effects and causes, each for either,
God, man, Heaven, Earth and all together
Fire, spirit, virtue, mixture rare!
With darkness soluble in air.
To Hutchinsonian Idiots leave,
What none but Idiots can conceive:
Nor think thou moral ill exists,
And battles in Creation's lists,
A formal Enemy to man,
Since Nature's monarchy began;
A Being Physical or Power,
Active poor mortals to devour.
For it is impossible a cause
Should counter-act Creation's Laws;
As one or other must prevail,
And one, or both together, fail.
Believe me, then, what Ill we call
Is no abstracted cause at all:
For, stripped Creation of mankind,
No moral ill were left behind:
Owing to the human breast it is rise
For man's first moral action vice.
Lorenzo, state the matter clear.
Be pain and pleasure strangers here:
Strangers to pleasure and to pain,
Induce what motives to complain!
For had we never been grieved or pained
Of vice we never had complained.
Suppose we, then, in Nature's plan
T'exist the microcosm of man;
Asleep in senseless matter's arms,
Which perfect rest nor grieves nor charms:
Should Heaven a conscious mind inspire,
Where reason checks and passions sire,
Nor pain inflict nor pleasure give,
But wake the form alone to live.
Unnerv'd by Hope, unawed by fear,
Alike from all reflections clear,
Suppose to action, then, consigned
This naked, unaffected mind.
Lorenzo, with precision, hence
Let us infer the consequence.
Behold the source of moral ill,
The prior agent was the will;
Reason without the power to act
To censure or advise a fact,
As by Experience naught it knew
Of good or bad, or false or true:
For Reason it is conclusions draws
From similar effect and cause:
No instinct, faculty or sense
That promptly dictates innocence;
That bids us Virtue's steps pursue,
Or points to bliss it never knew.
For, giving reason, then had Heaven
No less than actual pleasure given.
This not supposed -- hence Reason's use
Some known effect must introduce.
Now if as We admit of few received principles, nor would this have been
admitted so easily had it not been what those Philosophers, who doubt of almost
every thing else, will readily agree to.
innate we maintain
A love of bliss and hate of Pain,
Directed as the passions fired,
The will to pleasure first aspired:
If Pleasure was the point attained
Of Pain an equal sense was gained:
As the first tree of Knowledge bore
Of good and evil equal store:
For, when the mind one pleasure knew,
It Is state of perfect rest withdrew:
No Neutral sense it might retain,
As less than pleasure, now, was pain.
Thus, felt the initiated mind
The sting which pleasure left behind,
And Reason did to act commence
On the information of the sense.
If justly then we are taught to know
Vice as the precedent of woe,
What deeds from Passion take their rise
Must, needs, in consequence, be vice.
In guilt original involved,
Here, see the Mystery resolved.
To the first man, no more confined
Than passions found in every mind
Is the first cause of grief and pain,
And Vice's hatred, horrid train.
As Man's the source, so Man's the end.
Ourselves our Crimes alone offend.
Is Heaven's premeditated woe?
Heaven needs no friend nor fears a foe;
Has no vindictive rage in store,
For it is own sake, on man to pour;
Blessed in himself the almighty Cause,
Or kept or broken human laws.
For know, vain man, no act of thine
Renders defective God's design:
No power to human frailty given
To controvert the will of Heaven.
Presume not at so high a price
To rate the iniquity of Vice:
Nor let the vainly-virtuous fool,
Projecting Heaven by line and rule,
Sore-lash'd and wasting to the bone,
The crime of healthier days t'atone,
Conceive, by want of rest or meat,
The eternal purpose to defeat.
Presume not at so low a rate
To value the decrees of Fate.
Even such, in Physics, are the Fools,
Puzzled beyond the maze of schools,
Who boast a power, or, power to form,
Would Nature's fortress take, by storm;
With martial engines, stranger, far,
Than those of Archimedes were;
Madmen Monro could never cure
Of Circles and their quadrature,
Of thinking drunk Creation reels,
Like a slung Coach, on springs and wheels.
Yet say not, therefore, Guilt is free;
Or promise Crimes impunity:
Since it is ordained the sting of woe
To bliss inordinate shall grow;
That each false pleasure bring it is pain,
And every Vice it is kindred train.
Lorenzo, evil understood,
How near the source of moral good!
'Twas Reason taught us this to prize:
For Reason virtue did devise.
Know pleasures, which the passions taste,
In haste are won, are lost in haste,
While their equivalent of pains,
Long, the tenacious mind retains.
Hence, did not Reason check below,
The will would work continual woe.
Reason! bestowed a common friend,
Not to keep faultless, but amend;
To lead self-love, a glutton blind,
Which, else, nor hopes nor fears could bind;
To give it is scene of action light,
And check each sensual appetite:
The bliss of social love to share,
And passion's blunders to repair.
Caelestial Guide! O give my Youth
To Enjoy thy lovelier sister Truth;
For whose Embrace my vows I pay,
In ardent sighs, the enquiring day:
Nor, when enquiring day is over,
Cease by the midnight lamp to pore
Over the dull tale or tedious page
Of saint, or more laborious sage;
Happy if saint or sage could tell
Where I with her might ever dwell.
With thee, bright Truth! for whom alone
My Genius for the verse be known;
Content for thee to change the bays,
The Poet's for thy Lover's praise.

