AN ACCOUNT OF THE RISE, PROGRESS, and STATE OF THE LONDON INFIRMARY, Supported
by CHARITABLE and VOLUNTARY SUBSCRIPTION, For the Relief of Sick and Diseased
MANUFACTURERS, SEAMEN in MERCHANT SERVICE, And their WIVES and CHILDREN, From
the first INSTITUTION on the 3d of November, 1740, to the 12th of May, 1742,
inclusive.

Give that you may receive.

LONDON: Printed in the Year of our Lord 1742.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE LONDON INFIRMARY.
OF all Circumstances that affect the Mind of Man with Compassion, Reasons for
the Institution.
no one seems to touch it so nearly as the seeing our Fellow Creatures
laboring with Diseases, and even perishing under them for want of proper and
timely Assistance; for who that is not savage in Nature can pass regardless by
those Numbers of miserable Objects, who daily present themselves to us, and
whose various Diseases (were all other Motives silent) would be as so many
Tongues, which at once speak their own Anguish and excite our Pity. As the
Characteristick of the English is to be humane and beneficent, so nothing shows
it more than Institutions of a public Nature, such as Hospitals and
Infirmaries, which are here better regulated and supplied with Necessaries,
than in any other Country whatsoever. Some there are of Royal Endowment, and
established Revenue, and others of more modern Institution, erected and
supported by the generous and voluntary Contributions of good and well-disposed
Persons; but all these are by Experience known to be no ways adequate to the
Numbers that seek Assistance from them; for as they can take in no more
Patients than they have Beds, or give Medicine to more than what their Income
will allow, many poor unhappy Creatures must be unavoidably lost. For it is a
Truth well known, that though the City of London is more populous, and by its
Trade and Navigation, the laboring Part thereof are more subject to Accidents
and Diseases than the common People of Paris; yet it appears from the annual
printed Accounts, that the Hotel Dieu alone contains more Patients at one time
than all our Hospitals and Infirmaries together. If such Provision is made for
the diseased Inhabitants of Paris, those of London more immediately require our
Regard; particularly, the British Manufacturers and Seamen, as they are the
chief Support of both our foreign and domestic Trade.

The Strength and Security of Great Britain depending chiefly on its Naval
Power, the Wisdom of the Legislature has showed a peculiar Concern for the
Comfort and Happiness of such infirm and disabled Seamen as have been engaged
in the Service of the Royal Navy: But for Seamen employed only in the Service
of the Merchant, and trading Part of the Kingdom, or the Wives and Families of
such, in Distress by Sickness, no desirable Public Provision has yet been
made, or particularly instituted for their Relief. Nor are our numerous, poor,
industrious Manufacturers, and Artificers, or their Wives and Children, by any
particular Donations or Establishment, sufficiently provided for, under the
Calamity of bodily Diseases and Casualties; though in such afflicting and
melancholy Circumstances, they are incapable of providing for themselves or
Families by their usual Labor and Industry.

These Considerations have induced many benevolent and public spirited
Noblemen, Gentlemen, Merchants and others to turn their Thoughts upon raising
by public Subscription, a LONDON-INFIRMARY, where British Sailors in the
Merchants Service, their Wives and Children; and poor British Manufacturers,
their Wives and Children; are daily admitted, and find Relief, in Distress by
Sickness or Casualties: And this without any Difficulty or Expense of
Admittance.

In order to answer the Ends proposed, Situation.
a large House was taken in Prescot-Street, Goodman's-Fields, which Situation
was judged the most convenient, as being near the usual Abodes of Manufacturers
and Seafaring Men in the Merchants Service, and at a considerable Distance from
any Hospital.

The House is spacious and convenient, Regulation of the House.
contains about forty Beds, properly and airily disposed, is furnished with
Linen, and all necessary Conveniences. The Matron, a sober and discreet
Woman, has the Charge of the House and Furniture; the Direction of the Nurses,
and other Servants; and sees the Diet and Medicines administered according to
Order. Under her, are Nurses, and Watchers, in proportion to the Number of
Patients, of experienced Honesty and Tenderness, who are guided by written
Orders to prevent Misconduct of any kind. Proper Diet for the Patients has been
settled by the Gentlemen of the Faculty engaged in this Charity, and is fixed
up in the Wards for the Satisfaction of the Patients and their Friends.

A Physician and Surgeon of Reputation are appointed, and attend daily,
Physicians and Surgeons.
from Eleven to One, without any Fee or Reward, and give their Advice to all
such poor diseased Objects as think proper to come in those Hours, whether
recommended or not; and other Physicians and Surgeons of Character attend and
advise in all dangerous or extraordinary Cases.

The Dispensary is furnished with Drugs, Dispensary.
which being first viewed and reported Good by a Committee for that Purpose,
are bought at the best hand, and compounded at the Infirmary, where an
Apothecary Resides, who constantly and solely attends the Business thereof.

No Officers or Servants are permitted upon Pain of Expulsion to take of any
Tradesmen, Patients, or other Persons, any Fee, Reward, or Gratification of any
kind, directly or indirectly, for any Service done, or to be done, on Account
of this Infirmary.

And as the Governors of this Charity are desirous that the utmost Regard may
be had to the Souls of the Patients, Chaplain.
as well as their Bodies, a Clergyman of the Church of England has generously
undertaken, without any Gratuity, to read Prayers, and perform the other Duties
of his Function, at the Infirmary.

Every Subscriber of five Guineas Yearly is a Governor of this Charity,
Qualification of a Governor.
and is entitled to send in as many Patients as there are Vacancies of Beds;
but if they cannot be received as In-Patients, they are relieved as
Out-Patients. Every Gentleman giving a Benefaction of thirty Guineas at once,
will be a Governor for Life. -- All Subscriptions are during Pleasure, and
smaller Sums, from well-disposed Persons, will be thankfully received and
acknowledged.

Four Governors in Rotation every Month, Business of Governors.
with any others that are pleased, attend Weekly, in order to receive, and
dismiss Patients, supervise the Proceeding of the House, and do such Business
as is usually done by Committees at other Hospitals, and report the same at the
next Quarterly or General Meeting. There is a General Meeting of the Governors
every Quarter, before whom a Report is made from the Weekly Committees, all
Bylaws are then Confirmed, all Vacancies filled up, and Accounts Audited. Also
an Annual General Meeting of all Subscribers to Revise and Confirm the General
Account of Proceedings, which will immediately after be published for the
Satisfaction of the Public.

The Accounts are kept in a regular mercantile Manner, and the Names of the
Patients, their Employment, Place of Abode, Disorder, the Issue of the Case,
and the Name of the Subscriber who sent them, are inserted in several Columns
in a Book for that Purpose; and are always ready for the Inspection of
Subscribers, as also the Statutes and Bylaws for the particular Regulation of
this Infirmary.

All poor, sick, and lame, Proper Objects.
who are recommended, or appear to the Committee to be truly necessitous, are
received from the Hours of Eleven to One, who are supplied with Advice,
Medicine, Diet, Washing, Lodging, and every comfortable Assistance during their
Cure. No Persons with incurable or infectious Distempers, or of known Ability
to pay for their Cures, are admitted to partake of this Charity; but all
Accidents are received at any Hour of the Day or Night.

This is the Plan of our Proceedings, and though this Work is but in its Infancy,
yet such has been the extraordinary Encouragement given to it, by Numbers of
Distinguished Humanity, that we have the Satisfaction to assure the Public,
that since the 3d of November, 1740, it has pleased God to bless us with such
Success, that upwards of 2000 distressed Objects have been Relieved at the
London Infirmary, and from Laboring under the Oppression of some of the most
malignant Diseases, and unhappy Accidents, have been re-instated in their
Honest and Industrious Capacities of Working; whereby the Public again enjoy
the Benefit of their Labor; They, and their poor Families preserved from
Perishing, and prevented from being a constant Encumbrance to the Community.

The Subscribers are desired to take Notice, that if any Patients shall not
conform to the Rules of the House, or are guilty of any Misbehaviour, they will
be discharged for such Irregularity, and never more relieved by this Charity.

There was a Proposal in the Daily Advertiser of the 17th of May, 1738, for
erecting an Hospital, Infirmary, Surgery, Chapel, and School, for relieving of
poor, aged, and otherwise disabled Seamen in the Merchants Service, their Wives
and Children, by a Subscription to be set on Foot amongst the Merchants,
Owners, Masters, and Officers of Ships, and common Seamen, who were to pay
certain Quarterly Sums according to their several Ranks, which, with the
Contributions of worthy People, might have been sufficient for the desired End:
As the London Infirmary already begun, is calculated to relieve all those who
are disabled by Sickness or Accidents, and their Wives and Children, and
answers that Proposal in Part, and may be the Foundation of the Whole, we hope
those who had so charitably joined in supporting that Subscription, will as
readily interest themselves in this, which, if it pleases God to continue his
Favor and prosper the Undertaking, may in time, by such Encouragement, be
extended to the whole Benefit proposed by that Advertisement.

Such Persons therefore as are inclined to encourage and promote so laudable a
Work, are desired to send their Subscriptions or Benefactions to Mr. Thomas
Minors, Banker, in Lombard Street, who will give proper Receipts for the same:
And any Person inclined by his last Will to bequeath a Legacy to this Charity,
is desired to direct it to be paid to the Treasurer for the Time being, of the
London Infirmary in Goodman's Fields, and that his Receipt shall be a good
Discharge for the same.

The State of the Account from Nov. 3, 1740, to May 12, 1742.
Money Received.
l. s. d. To Cash received by Governors Subscriptions 425 5 0 To Do by
Subscriptions 16 15 2 To Do by the Poor's Box 33 0 11 To Do by Benefactions,
viz. Mrs. Jane Holden, Executrix to the late Samuel Holden Esquire; 100 0 Miss May
21 0 John Peck Esquire; 31 10 152 10 0 627 11 1 Money Expended.
l. s. d. By Household Furniture 99 6 4 By Fireing 32 9 8 By Candles 6 19 4 By
Repairs 67 9 9 By House-Rent and Taxes 33 16 4 By Salaries, Wages and
Gratuities 65 18 2 By In-Patients 81 8 0 By the Dispensary 146 0 0 By Soap 3 9
6 By Stationary-Ware 14 6 11 By Petty Expenses 17 13 4 By Turnery-Ware 1 3 5
570 0 9 Balance 57 10 4 627 11 1

An Account of Patients to the 12th of May, 1742.
Patients in the House 127 Out-Patients 2188 2315 Patients then in the House 29
Out-Patients on the Books 311 340 In-Patients discharged, cured 105 Dead 10
Discharged, incurable 12 127 Out-Patients, cured 815 Dead 93 Discharged, who
did not return Thanks, but most of them known to be cured 876 Incurable 15
Discharged for Misbehaviour, or by Desire 49 1848 Total under Care of this
Infirmary 2315

N. B. Out of this Number, 29 were Casualties received into the House without
Recommendation.

A LIST of GOVERNORS and CONTRIBUTORS.
Charles Duke of Richmond, Lenox, and Aubigny, President. Fotherley Baker, Esquire;
Vice President. Thomas Boehm, Esquire; Treasurer.
Those marked thus are Governors.

A
* Mr. Shute Adams * Mr. Benjamin Allen * John Andree, M.D. * Mr. Claude Aubert
* The Rev. Mr. Audley * Mr. J. Buxton, jun. * Mr. Geo. Burrows * Mr. Peter
Biggot * Mr. Alex. Bolton * Mr. Robert Bray Mr. Tho. Barnard
B
* Right Hon. Charles Lord Baltimore * Matt. Bateman, Esquire; * Sam. Berrington,
Esquire; * Mr. Will. Birkin
C
* John Caswall, Esquire; * Rev. Mr. Calamy * Mr. Tho. Cecil * Rich. Chiswell, Esquire;
* Samuel Cox, Esquire; * Mr. Josiah Cole
D
* James Deacon, Esquire; * Liebert Dorrin, Esquire; * Peter Ducane, Esquire; * Mr. John
Dav. Duvall
E
Mr. Jonathan Eades
F
* Jos. Fawthrope, Esquire; * Jonath. Forward, Esquire; * Rev. Mr. James Foster * Mr.
Jam. Fordham, jun. * Mr. James Freeman
G
* Mr. John Galton * Mr. Benj. Gascoigne * Mr. Henry Giffard * Dr. Graham
H
* John Hawkins, Esquire; * Mr. Quarles Harris * John Harrison, Esquire; * Mr. Robert
Harrison * Mr. John Harrison * Mrs. Jane Holden
J
* John Jesse, Esquire; Mr. Thomas Jenny * John Julian, Esquire; * Mr. John Jaques
K
Mrs. Kellaway
L
* Mr. John Lawford * Lambert Ludlow, Esquire;
M
Miss May * Nicholas Magens, Esquire; * Adam Martyn, Esquire; * Mr. William Martin *
Mrs. Mendes de Costa * Mr. Tho. Meadows * Mr. Thomas Minors Mr. Bowler Miller *
Ebenezer Mussell, Esquire; Mr. Edmund Monday * Robert Mire, Esquire; * William Mire,
Esquire;
N

O

P
* Ambrose Page, Esquire; * Captain Page * John Peck, Esquire; * Mr. George Potter *
Mr. Malachi Postlethwaite Mr. Pearce
Q

R
* Mr. Stephen Riou * John Russell, Esquire; * Captain Rutty
S
* Mr. Deputy R. Sclater * Allen Smith, Esquire; * John Snee, sen. Esquire; * John
Snee, jun. Esquire; * Mr. Robert Snee Mr. And. Smith * Richard Stacey, Esquire; The
Rev. Mr. Sterling Mr. Henry Swan
T
* Mr. James Tailor * George Thornborrough, Esquire; * Mr. Peter Tolot Mr. Geo.
Jervase Tapp
W
* Hon. Maj. Genesis Williamson * Mr. Anth. Wall * Rev. Mr. Cha. Wesley * Rev. Mr.
John Wesley * Mr. Thomas West * Mr. John Waters
Dr. Andree, Physician to the Infirmary. Mr. John Harrison, Surgeon to the
Infirmary. Rev. Mr. Audley, Chaplain to the Infirmary. Mr. Godfrey Webb,
Apothec. to the Infirmary. Mr. Richard Neale, Secretary to the Infirmary.

