POOR VULCAN, A BURLETTA, IN TWO ACTS, AS PEFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, IN
COVENT GARDEN.

LONDON: Printed for G. KEARSLEY, No. 46, Fleet Street, and W. NICOLL, No. 51,
St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCCLXXVII. [Price One Shilling.]

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Vulcan, Crump, Mr. Quick. Jupiter, Stud, Mr. Mattocks. Apollo, Wiseman, Mr.
Robson. Mars, Pike, Mr. Reinhold. Bacchus, Gauge, Mr. Battishill. Adonis, Joe,
Mr. Leoni. Mercury, Drub, Mr. Mahon.
WOMEN.
Venus, Maudlin, Miss Brown. Grace, Miss Days.
Huntsmen, Soldiers, Mob, etc.
POOR VULCAN.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A Saloon supported by Clouds, with a Table, Bottles, Glasses, Bowls, etc.
where Bacchus, Jupiter, Apollo, Mars, and Mercury, are sitting, singing Catches
and Glees. CATCH.

JOIN your right hands, to your glasses, boys,
And let the bowl go round.
Fill a bumper -- higher,
Steady, steady,
Let mirth abound.
Charge your glasses -- poise,
Recover! make ready!
Present! fire!

RECITATIVE.

JUPITER. Bravo, my boys! bravo! bravissimo!
Charming! delightful! exquisitissimo!
Apollo, boy, tip us your manus;
How went our fortes and pianos?

APOLLO. All right; but, I say, bully hector,
Why don't you push about the nectar?

BACCHUS. That Is right, my worthies, charge your glasses:
Come, give us one of your absent lasses. [ To Mars.

MARS. Here Is Venus,

JUPITER. -- Zounds, that is a-propos,
The strangest thing's fallen out: do you know
Vulcan's gone mad --

MERCURY. -- That Is no great wonder,

JUPITER. It Is true, or may I never thunder:
Horn mad!

MARS. -- The fool!

MERCUCRY. -- Oh, dear, Oh, dear!

APOLLO. Tell us the story.

JUPITER. -- You, shall hear. [Takes a petition from his pocket.
AIR.
The humble prayer and petition
Of Vulcan, who his sad condition,
In hopes of satisfaction meeting,
To the God Jupiter sends greeting.
That your petitioner has a wife,
The plague and torment of his life;
That prudent, kind, and constant wishing her,
Humbly sets forth your said petitioner,
That might they but reside on earth,
The many ills that hence have birth,
Would then subside, and Mars, Adonis,
And diverse others of her cronies,
At distance, all his cares might end,
And she, his wife, take up and mend:
To this request don't say him nay,
And your petitioner shall ever pray.

RECITATIVE.

MARS. And have you your permission given?

JUPITER. Yes, yes, they are bundled out of heaven;
The Cyclops -- he -- one of the graces,
And she, in a stage-cloud, took places;
Which diligence soon set them down
Hard by an English country town.
I took a twinkle through the either,
And saw them settled all together.

ACCOMPANIED.

Vulcan, no more; but, goodman Crump --
Here, you behold his anvil thump;
While Venus, where good souls carouse,
Hight Maudlin, keeps a public house.

RECITATIVE.

MARS. Zounds! to what end?

JUPITER. -- Good bully Mars,
To furnish subject for a farce.
Suppose to earth we make descent,
And plague them for their discontent;
Some mortal shape let each assume,

MARS. I Will be a sergeant with my drum.

BACCHUS. I, an exciseman.

JUPITER. A country 'squire, the stag I Will follow,
And echo rouse with whoop and hollow;
Thus Vulcan all his pranks we'll tell of,
And make the black know when he is well off;
But first let us roar another chorus,
And drain the nectar that is before us.
GLEE.
Those mortals say right, in their jovial abodes,
That a glass of good punch is the drink of the gods,
Take only a smack of
The nectar we crack of
You Will find it is punch and no more;
The ingredients they mingle,
Are contraries single,
So are ours, they are the elements four.
Then, Bacchus, for thou art the drunkard's protector,
Issue instant a fiat,
And let who dare deny it,
That nectar's good punch, and that good punch is nectar.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
The Skirts of a Country Town; on one Side a Blacksmith's Shop; on the other, a
Public House, the sign of the Horns. Crump and his Men are at Work. Huntsmen
behind. CHORUS AND AIR.
Blacks. Strike, strike, ton, ton, ton, ron.
Hunts. Sound, sound, tan, ran, ran, tan.
Blacks. Let the hammer resound,
While we take the stroke round,
Ton, ton, ton, ton, ton, ton, ton.
Hunts. Let echo resound
The cry of each hound,
And the horn reply, ta ran, ran ton.
Crump. Here, Maudlin, Grace, plague take you all,
Till I am hoarse you make me bawl.
Enter Grace. Grace. Lord, Sir, you rouse us all so soon --
Crump. You baggage would you lie 'till noon?
Come, come, bestir you -- light the fire,
It Is late in the morn,
And the merry horn,
Says we may soon expect the 'squire. [Crump goes to the Shop, and Grace to the
House
Cho. Strike, strke, etc.
Re-enter Grace. Crump. Grace, is your mistress yet come down;
Tell her I Am going up the town,
But want to see her first --
Grace. -- I go. Sir. [A flute heard behind.
Crump. Hey-day, what piping's that?
Grace. -- It Is Joe, Sir;
The shepherd Joe, who lives just here,
He plays so charmingly, Oh, dear!
Not better, Sir, pip'd Mercury,
When, one of the sister-graces, I
On Ida with the laughing loves --
Crump. Peace, jade, and fetch my hat and gloves.
Cho. Strikle, strike, etc.

RECITATIVE ACCOMPANIED.

CRUMP. Here, take these shoes to farmer Swine,
I Have heard the folks laugh at that sign;
And one cried boo: another chuckled,
That Is sure the house of some old cuckold.
George, go mend farmer Hedgestake's plough;
I dreamed last night, that on my brow,
Large horns grew out; and then, today,
Scarce to the door I Would found my way;
But perched upon that tree, my bane,
The cuckoo -- Zounds! he is there again.
AIR.
Tell me, am I laughed to scorn?
Have I on each brow a horn?
This I suspect, and if it is true,
Quickly answer me -- Cuckoo!
I have my cue,
Alas! it is true,
Hark, she answers me Cuckoo.
II.
That answer's yes, the murder's out,
At least I shall no longer doubt;
But tell me, if to one or two,
Or more I am obliged -- Cuckoo!
What more than two?
Alas! it is true --
Hark, she answers me -- Cuckoo!
III.
In vain then do I beat my pate,
A cuckold am I dubbed by fate,
Behold -- here are my antlers -- boo!
Am I not right, my friend -- Cuckoo!
Then plain to view,
My fears are true;
Hark, she answers me -- Cuckoo!

RECITATIVE.

To what humility I Have buckled!
And shall a god be made a cuckold?
That Joe the shepherd, all her tone is,
He looks smooth-faced so like Adonis!
Then we have a sergeant brings his drums;
A sportsman too -- but here she comes.

Enter Maudlin from the House. AIR.
Venus now no more behold me,
But an humble village-dame,
Coarse and homely trappings sold me,
And mistress Maudlin is my name.
II.
Yet here no less is paid that duty,
Ever due to Venus' worth,
Not more insensible of beauty,
Than gods in heaven, are men on earth.

RECITATIVE.

MAUDLIN. Dear Mister Crump, you make me rise,
Before I scarce have closed my eyes.

CRUMP. Nay, nay, it is not so soon, good mate.

MAUDLIN. The sergeant kept me up so late --

CRUMP. The sergeant! ay! ay!

MAUDLIN. -- Hey! how now?
Why, what a grumbling elf art thou?
You're never easy, ill nor well;
In heaven you thought yourself in hell.

CRUMP. It Is true, good wife, and now I curse
The earth, for some place ten times worse.

MAUDLIN. I see how it is, it stops the breath of me,
'Deed, Mr. Crump, you will be the death of me;
Your false suspicions sink so deep in --

CRUMP. Dear me, I Have set my wife a weeping.
AIR.
When I Have been working in my shop,
You many a time have seen me drop
Some water on the doubtful fire,
When I Have been, etc, etc.
Which damped at first, more dead has grown,
But quickly, by the bellows blown,
Has changed from brown to dusky red,
Then brighter heat and luster shed,
And flamed, and sparkl'd up the higher.
Which damped at first, etc, etc.
II.
Thus trickling tears from you that part,
Have often damped my doubtful heart,
And quenched awhile my passion's heat;
Thus trickling tears, etc, etc.
But soon arous'd by kindling eyes,
I Have felt anew my passion rise,
While sob and sigh, and sigh and sob,
Have made my bosom throb and throb,
And like sledge-hammers on it beat.
But soon arous'd, etc, etc.

MAUDLIN. He Is off, thank heaven, a while at least;
Oh, how I loath the filthy beast!
Such husbands! would the devil had 'em!
Here, Grace! I want you.

Enter Grace from the House. GRACE. -- Coming, Madam.

MAUDLIN. Grace, lose no time, but instant sally
To shepherd Joe, in yonder valley;
Tell him, I Will come to him the moment
I have eat my dinner.

GRACE. -- What a foment!
Lord, Madam, you're in such a magram!
And all for that poor tattered wagram!
If for the 'Squire you made a fuss,
One should not wonder!

MAUDLIN. -- Saucy puss!
I tell you, I am set upon it;
Go, and put on your cloak and bonnet.

GRACE. AIR.
I Would have you to know,
Good Madam Venus,
The difference is not so great between us;
Men, if you need 'em,
In this land of freedom,
At will, a pretty girl secures;
And as for all your airs and graces,
If you come for to go
To talk of faces,
I fancy mine is as good as yours.
You are not with your Jupiters, Ma'am, and your Mars's,
With whom you used to play such farces;
You are here in the region of liberty.
So let us have none of your fine commences;
Why, surely, good Madam, you have lost your senses:
For if so much you think yourself better than me,
I Would have you to know, etc.
[Exit.
RECITATIVE.

MAUDLIN. The saucy baggage! What a clatter!
But privy-counsellors will chatter;
And, faith, in this my situation,
She is of service in that station:
For scarce had I been twenty hours
On earth, but lovers came in showers.
AIR.
My sporting 'Squire to keep at bay
The course I Will double over;
While he intent
On a wrong scent,
Shall always find me stole away,
When he cries, Hark, to cover!
II.
With new-coin'd oaths, my grenadier
May think to storm and bluster,
And swear, by Mars,
My eyes are stars
That light to love: he will soon find here
Such stuff will never pass muster.
III.
Thus will I serve those I distrust,
First laugh at, then refuse 'em;
But, Ah! not so
The shepherd Joe;
He like Adonis looked, when first
I pressed him to my bosom.
[Maudlin goes into the House.
Enter 'Squire Stud, Huntsmen with dogs and a dead hare. STUD. Hoics, hoics, my
boys! House, house, here, hey!
Zounds! why, they are all stolen away.

Enter Maudlin from the house. MAUDLIN. Not all, 'Squire; I Am at home, at least.

STUD. So broke the morning from the east.

MAUDLIN. For shame!

STUD. -- What have you got to eat?

MAUDLIN. Who Is there? Bring hither the cold meat.

STUD. Do, that is my hearty. And, do you hear?
A tankard of my favorite beer.
We'll drink it as we sit in the air.

MAUDLIN. The morning has been pure and fair.

STUD. As fair and lovely as your face.

MAUDLIN. Pha! Did it prove a pleasant chase?
What styles and ditches have you passed?

STUD. I Will tell it you from first to last.
AIR.
The moment Aurora peeped into the room,
I put on my clothes, and I called for my groom:
Will Whistle by this had uncoupled the hounds,
Who, lively and mettlesome, frisk'd over the grounds.
And now we are all saddled, fleet Dapple and Gray,
Seemed longing to hear the glad sound, Hark, away!
II.
'Twas now, by the clock, about five in the morn,
And we all gallopp'd off to the sound of the horn;
Jack Gater, Bill Babbler, and Dick at the Goose;
When, all of a sudden, out starts Mistress Puss.
Men, horses, and dogs, not a moment would stay,
And Echo was heard to cry, Hark, hark away!
III.
The course was a fine one, she took over the plain,
Which she doubled, and doubled, and doubled again;
'Till at last, she to cover returned out of breath;
Where I, and Will Whistle, were in at the death;
Then, in triumph for you, I the hare did display,
And cried to the horns, My boys, hark, hark away.
[Exit to the house.
Enter Grace. MAUDLIN. So, mistress confidence, you're there? [ To Grace.

GRACE. Yes, Ma'am, I come from you know where;
How can you dote on such a clown!

MAUDLIN. If you expect that old silk gown,
You Will change your tone -- you understand me;

GRACE. Ma'am, to be sure, if you command me;
And now I think on him again,
He is the handsomest of men,
His eyes so tender are, and bright --
Is it the blue, Ma'am, shot with white?

STUD. Here Is that, my boys, speaks all men's lingo;
Maudlin, your health -- It Is rare good stingo.
Hey, what the devil's all this drumming!

GRACE. As sure as eggs the Serjeant's coming?

Enter Sergeant Pike and Soldiers. PIKE. AIR.
Come all you gemmen volunteers,
Of glory who would share,
And leaving with your wives your fears,
To the drum head repair;
Or, to the noble Sergeant Pike,
Come, come, without delay;
You Will enter into present pay.
Come, come, the bargain strike;
A golden guinea, and a crown,
Besides, the lord knows what, renown;
His Majesty's the donor;
And if you die,
Why then you lie
Stretched in the bed of honor.
II.
Does any 'prentice work too hard?
Fine clothes would any wear?
Would any one his wife discard?
To the drum head repair.
Or to the, etc.
III.
Is your estate put out to nurse?
Are you a cast off peer?
Have you no money in your purse,
To the drum-head repair.
Or to the, etc.

RECITATIVE.

PIKE. Bring out a flaggon of strong beer --
What, lovely Maudlin, are you there?
May I never conquer, if I bam ye,
You're handsomer than Venus, damme!

STUD. Have you pretensions to that lady, Sir?

PIKE. For love or war, I Am always ready, Sir?
And, should that lady say the word,
To answer you, I Would draw my sword.

STUD. Damme, you would eat it up as soon:
Come, come, friend, you are some poltroon!

Enter Crump. AIR.
Pike. Poltroon! Damnation! Zounds, unhand me;
Either you villain, eat that word,
Or down your throat I Will cram my sword.
Squire. Put by your spit, you understand me;
And if I do not make you roar,
Louder than ever did calf before --
Pike. Let me come at him -- blood and thunder,
Be sure you keep us both asunder.
Squire. Let me come at him, I Will soon convince him,
Pike. Damme, I Will cut him to pieces -- mince him.
Squire. Coward!
Pike. -- Hack him.
Squire. -- Braggart!
Pike. -- Hew him!
Squire Bully!
Pike. -- Tear him!
Squire. -- Scoundrel!
Pike. -- Stew him!
Squire. Swaggering puppy!
Pike. -- Bang and beat him!
Broil him! fry him! roast and eat him.
Crump. I Will try to get them both well basted. [Aside.
Pray let them go, this time is wasted;
Instead of all this prittle prattle,
Let Us have a good old English battle.
Squire. I Will trim your jacket, Sergeant Swagger.
Crump. Come form a ring --
Squire. -- Well, are you ready?
Pike. I never fight before a lady;
But if you will meet with sword and dagger,
Or over a barrel of gunpowder,
I am your man.
Squire. -- Hark, in your ear,
You Would be, I believe, a little prouder,
To have the barrel full of beer.
Pike. Sir, I shall find a time, and soon --
Squire. Go, you're a cowardly poltroon.
Pike. Poltroon! etc.
Crump. See of your conduct, wife, the fruit!
Maud. Come, come, I Will finish the dispute.
Squire, do you love me?
Squire. -- Tell me, do,
If hounds the timid hare pursue?
Maud. Then with the Sergeant, over a cup,
For my sake, make the quarrel up.
Sergeant, do you love me?
Pike. -- Honor bright!
Far better than I love to fight.
Maud. Then with the Squire over a cup,
For my sake make this matter up.
You Have said, you will follow my commands,
Without more fuss then both shake hands.

CATCH.
Then cease all bickering,
Pour the liquor in,
Put about the quart,
To make the quarrel up,
Drink a barrel up,
And love the better for it.

END of the FIRST ACT.
POOR VULCAN.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A Rural Prospect. Enter Joe. RECITATIVE.

WHILE thus a rustic swain I rove,
I envy not the realms above;
What more can Jove himself bestow,
Than what I now enjoy below?
Freedom to chaunt my rural strains,
And sing my love around the plains.
AIR.
A shepherd become, with my pipe and my crook,
What pleasure to loiter beside the clear brook;
While carelessly lying,
Fond birds round me flying,
The sun's glowing fervor allayed by the breeze,
Oh! who would forego such enjoyments as these!
II.
Ye roses and woodbinds, so sweetly that bloom,
Preserve all your charms till my fairest shall come;
With beauty inviting,
With fragrance delighting,
Your brighest perfections to greet her display,
Oh! say it is for her you look lovely and gay.

RECITATIVE.

Enter Maudlin. JOE. May hills and dales a plain appear,
If my dear Maudlin is not here;
May sheep never bleat, nor oxen low --

MAUDILN. -- Nay, nay, no raptures, dearest Joe;
But come to me at nine at night,
I Have managed all things for our flight;
When Crump gets drunk, as soon he will,
I easily can seize the till:
But if I ever am forsook --

JOE. Oh! may I loose my pipe and crook;
May Cupid break his bow and quiver,
Withered be grass, dry be each river;
May all the sheep die with the rot,
When Maudlin is by me forgot!

MAUDLIN. I faithfully believe thee, sweeting;
But I must go -- the club is meeting.

JOE. Ah, Maudlin, Maudlin! that there club
Is in my way a monstrous rub;
For Pike, and Stud, and all those fellows --
I own it makes me devilish jealous.

AIR in DIALOGUE.
Joe. When the sergeant, encouraged by wine,
To your lips once presumed to advance,
Oh! how did I sicken and pine,
That you deigned to bestow him a glance!
And again, when the 'squire from the chase
Returning, bestowed you the spoil;
From my memory I cannot erase,
That the prize you repaid with a smile.
Maud. Ah, my Joey! one day in my place,
(The truth on it you cannot gainsay)
When I sent my suivante, pretty Grace,
You kissed her all on the new hay;
Nay, for selfish designs, dared to own,
You pretended a passion for me;
But attractions and charms I had none,
For Grace was your favorite she.
Joe. The charge to be true, I allow,
'Twas to try if you jealous could prove;
For no other purpose, I vow,
They alone can be jealous who love.
Maud. And, for me, if I smiled on the squire,
'Twas in hope of the profit in view;
Or from Crump to conceal the fond fire,
Which I bear in my bosom for you.
Both. We have each other on the hip,
Be jealous then no longer;
But rather let a little slip
Tie the knot the stronger.
[Exeunt Dancing.
SCENE II.
A Drinking-Room in the Alehouse. A large Table, Bowls, Glasses, etc. Pipes
and Tobacco. Stud, Pike, Crump, Wiseman, Drub, Gauge, etc. discovered sitting
at a Table. [Loud Huzzas. RECITATIVE.

GAGUE. Silence, order! Order, silence!
This plaugy noise is heard a mile hence. [Drinks.

GAUGE. I knock down order. Here, Mistress Grace,
Bring the other bowl. Come, pretty-face,
Drink all our healths.

GRACE. -- No, no, dear 'squire;
My Mistress, bid me, Sir, desire,
You Would presently come to her.

STUD. Hush!
Gemmen, the bowl about let us push.
Here Is love and opportunity!

PIKE. Well, child, what says the lovely she?

GRACE. She Will see you, Sir, after the club.

PIKE. I Will come, and beat, love, rub-a-dub.

GAUGE. What going, 'squire!

STUD. -- I must be jogging.

GAUGE. Nay, pr'ythee, toss off the other noggin.

STUD. It Is little hours --

GAUGE. -- But it is fair weather.
One crash, and we all go together.

AIR.
Gauge. Let every man now give his toast,
Fill up the glass, I Will tell you mine;
Wine is the mistress I love most,
This is my toast -- now give me thine.
II.
Wiseman. Well said, my lad, never let it stand,
I give you Chloe, nymph divine;
May love and wine go hand in hand,
This is my toast -- now give me thine.
III.
Stud. Fill up your glasses to the brink,
Hebe let no one dare decline;
'Twas Hebe taught me first to drink,
This is my toast -- now give me thine.
IV.
Crump. Gemmen, I give my wife, dy'e see,
May all to make her blessed combine;
So she be far enough from me,
This is my toast -- now give me thine.
V.
Pike. Let constant lovers at the feet
Of pale-faced wenches, sigh and pine,
For me, the first kind girl I meet
Shall be my toast -- now give me thine.
VI.
Drub. You toast your wife, and you your lass,
My boys, and welcome, here is the wine;
For my part, he who fills my glass
Shall be my toast -- now give me thine.
VII.
Gauge. Spirit, my lads, and toast away,
I have still one with yours to join;
That we may have enough to pay,
This is my toast -- now give me thine.
CHORUS, and exeunt.
SCENE III.
A Gallery of Bed-Chambers. Enter Maudlin and Grace. GRACE. Your orders are
obeyed.

MAUDLIN. -- Already?

GRACE. I told the 'squire --

MAUDLIN. -- Well, and what said he?

GRACE. Why, Ma'am, he said, he would shortly follow,
And give his Maudlin the view-hollow.

MAUDLIN. And pray, what news from Sergeant Bluff?

GRACE. When I had spoke, cries he -- Enough;
The signal is thy lady's charms,
And I Will be instant under arms!
But now, good mistress of mine,
If I may ask, What Is your design?
When you're gone off, (Lord, who can tell!)
My master may like me as well.

MAUDLIN. Take him; you are welcome, I am sure.

GRACE. Well, dearest me! that will be pure!
AIR.
To shine in the bar, all drawn out in my best!
To be told I am handsome by every guest!
To be civil to all, and yet listen to none!
And when making a bill out, to score two for one!
And if told of the error, though ever so small,
Break off with -- Dear me! did not somebody call?
Lord bless me, where are all my people hum-drumming!
I must even go myself -- Coming, coming, Sir, coming.
II.
When a company comes in, on venison to dine,
Be sure after dinner to set the best wine:
But when they, once in for it, begin to be merry,
Instead of Champagne, send up cider or perry.
And if told of the error, etc.
III.
In short, with a pattern like you for my guide,
I shall score well, and cater, and store, and provide,
Taking care still to put something by on the shelf,
Give my master one half, and take the other myself.
And if told of the error, etc.
[Exit.
RECITATIVE.

MAUDLIN. The wench will do, I see -- But hark,
What noise is that! -- The Squire i'th'dark.

Enter Sergeant Pike. RECITATIVE.

PIKE. Ha! my divinity, art thou there!
Thousands of loves my hearts ensnare;
In short, like Sweden's king at Bender,
Overcome by numbers, I surrender.

MAUDLIN. Well, get you into number seven --
But you will be true.

PIKE. -- I will, by heaven!

MAUDLIN. Do you then love to that degree?

PIKE. I Would hang! I Would drown! I Would starve for thee!
Count all the shot that fly in battle;
Count all the strokes on drums that rattle;
Count every flash; count every pop;
Count all the groans, the wounds! -- Stay, stop;
Count! -- Damme, I Have no more by heart!
I say, Ma'am, metaphor apart,
I love you more than life, believe me.

MAUDLIN. And will you, Sergeant, never deceive me?

PIKE. AIR.
Madam, you know, my trade is war;
And what should I deny it for?
Whenever the trumpet sounds from far,
I long to hack and hew;
Yet, Madam, credit what I say,
Were I this moment called away,
Were all the troops drawn in array,
I Would rather stay with you.
II.
Did drums and sprightly trumpets sound,
And death and carnage stalk around;
Did dying horses bite the ground,
And we no hope in view;
Was the whole army lost in smoke,
Were they the last words that I spoke,
I Would say, and damme if I joke,
I Would rather stay with you.
III.
Did the foe charge us front and rear;
Did even the bravest face appear
Impressed with signs of mortal fear;
Though never veteran knew
So terrible and hot a fight;
Though all my laurels it should blight,
Though I should lose so fine a sight,
I Would rather stay with you.
[Exit.
Enter Joe. RECITATIVE.

MAUDLIN. Now stir not for your life! -- So, so --
What noise is that? It Is my sweet Joe.
Make, dearest love, what haste you're able,
And take two horses from the stable.
This key, I fancy, will unlock it,
And I Have some money in my pocket.

JOE. AIR.
What are Plutus' gilded toys,
What, compared to Love's rich joys!
Toys that worldly mortals prize,
Souls of siner sense despise;
Free together let us rove,
Heart for heart, and love for love.
II.
Free from tumult, frowns and strife,
Free from all that burdens life,
Blythely let us seek the plains
Where eternal pleasure reigns;
Free together let us rove,
Heart for heart, and love for love.
[Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
Enter Crump. RECITATIVE.

Here, Maudlin! Grace! what are you doing?
I Am sure there is some mischief brewing;
Upon the stairs I met the Squire,
And Grace cried -- Mount, Sir, one pair higher.
Then, as below I close kept sentry,
The Sergeant glided through the entry --
Was ever usuage half so scurvy!
They turn my house here topsy-turvy!
I will no longer bear this raillery:
But see a light comes through the gallery.
Enter Grace. Here Grace; in the dark this hour I Have grop'd.
Where is my wife?

GRACE. -- Sir, she is elop'd.

CRUMP. Elop'd -- elop'd! and have I then
Left gods to be thus used by men?
Adieu, my forge, the anvil's clangor,
The red-hot iron's fiery anger!
Ye one-eyed Cyclops! Aetna's roar!
For Vulcan's occupation is no more.
AIR.
O! that a gem'man should thus be tied
Unto a vixenish wanton wife!
I would in heaven that she had died,
And never seen this life.
Flirting, flirting, flirting;
Sporting, sporting, sporting;
Courting, courting, courting;
All, all by turns:
With Stud, or with Pike,
Coquetting alike;
While this poor little head
Dreams nightly in bed,
Of something here that burns and burns,
And feels like sprouting horns.

GRACE. Lord, Sir, don't take it so to heart;
Was I as you are, for my part,
I Would let her go for one more kinder.

CRUMP. That Is true, indeed; but where to find her! --

GRACE. And you don't know? A likely story!
Sir, she I speak of stands before you.

CRUMP. Will you then on me take compassion?

GRACE. Yes to be sure, Sir, it is the fashion,
When Madam such a trick has played.
The husband always takes the maid.

CRUMP. AIR.
Let thundering Jove lead a boisterous life,
Out-thunder'd each hour by the voice of his wife;
Like a Harlequin, let him, disguised, play the fool,
A swan, or a whirlwind, a crow, or a bull;
Of such shifts in no need, of no wife's tongue afraid,
Hereafter, I mean to take up with my maid.
II.
Henceforth, then my wife may parade through the skies,
Like nymphs in the Strand to pick up some new prize,
Of Mars and Adonis and Jove at the call,
For now, thank my stars, I have done with them all.
Of your tricks and your fancies no longer afraid,
Goodnight, all ye gods! -- I Will to bed with my maid.
[ As he is going toward a chamber with Grace, a clap of thunder is heard.
RECITATIVE.

Why, what the devil's this I wonder? [Thunders.
Nearer and nearer comes the thunder,
Some plot against me I Will lay odds!
SCENE the last.
Changes to the Saloon, where all the Gods and Goddesses are discovered. CRUMP.
My rib aagin, by all the gods!

GODS and GODDESSES. Ha, ha, ha, ha! --

CRUMP. -- I smell a rat,
A pretty game they have been at!

JUPITER. How, master Crump! What don't you know,
Your old friends, Sergeant Pike, and Joe?
Squire Stud, Ned Gauge, and Master Drub,
And all the good folks of the club?

VULCAN. I Have nothing sor't, but brazen't it out! [Aside.

MARS. Come, come, old boy, you must not pout;
It Is over now; but, pr'ythee, tell us,
Was not you most confounded jealous?
Did we not finely fret and stew you?

VULCAN. Ha, ha, ha, by the lord I knew you!

JUPITER. Well done, old Vulcan, not to flatter,
You put a good face on the matter:
Then what was meant well, well receive,
To men, through you, advice we give:
This little frolic was designed,
A wholesome lesson for mankind.

FINALE.
Cho. Then be content, ye mortal race,
Nor wish to change, nor fate, nor place;
You must of good and ill have share,
And nature's nature every where.
Jup. Once on a time, when men complained
They were with ills too tightly stained;
I published in a certain town,
That each might lay his burden down,
And take up that, more to his mind,
Some other mortals left behind.
When soon (to see the ways of men)
Each begged to have his own again.
Cho. Then be content, etc.
Mars. I heard you once the tale relate,
A son took up his dad's estate;
But when the youngster had found out
The packet held old age, the gout,
The rheumatism and the stone,
He quickly begged to have his own;
And swore he would never ask for wealth,
So he might have again his health.
Cho. Then be content, etc.
Venus. A lady too, who at a rout,
(Dire chance!) had dropped her false teeth out,
Overwhelmed with shame, soon changed her lot,
With the poor inmate of a cot;
But when she found, on a straw bed,
She must repose, and eat brown bread,
Wear a plain coif, and russet gown,
She wanted false teeth, and the town.
CHORUS. Then be content, etc.

FINIS.

