BIRCH FOR PETER PINDAR, Esquire. A BURLESQUE POEM.

BY PINDAROMASTIX.

-- STULTA EST CLEMENTIA CUM TOT UBIQUE
VATIBUS OCCURRAS, PERITURAE PARCERE CHARTAE.
JUV. LONDON: PRINTED FOR G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON, PATERNOSTER-ROW.

M.DCC.LXXXVIII.

TO THE CRITICAL REVIEWERS.
O YOU who high on learned benches sit,
Dread arbiters of dullness and of wit,
Whose task it is to mark with eagle eye
Where poets sink too low, or soar too high,
Judge well my ups and downs, my wit and meter,
And swear that Pindar's self was never greater;
But ah! you will not, for none can please like Peter.
In Peter's praise you're louder still and louder,
I fear that rogue has given you all love-powder.
O say, dread sirs, what Sop in Pan will please you;
Will fattest haunch of buck or do appease you?
Shall rump and dozen speedily be sent you?
Shall pheasant, hare, and partridge, compliment you?
What Bard can bribe with Sop of The C -- l Reviewers have done the Author the
honor to remark, that his Sop in the Pan was not sufficiently savoury. Quaere,
may not their palates have been vitiated by too long feasting on Peter Pindar's
ragouuts?
better savor?
Nor you reject a poet's proffered favor;
Then, grateful, deign a little helping puff,
One gentle blast from you would be enough.
Say but, the work's replete with wit and fun,
Quick through the land, like wildfire, it would run,
And ere the moon her circling course had rolled,
Two thousand copies would be fairly sold.
In my good luck you all should have a share,
And, sure, you will own such offer's very fair.
-- Perchance your doublets, sirs, are waxing bare --
-- Perchance your linen wants some small repair --
Or if your hats of G -- e the Second's reign,
Too long exposed to sun, and wind, and rain,
Have lost their stiff'ning and their jetty hue,
Your learned heads I Would straightway crown anew;
No longer should your shabby garb proclaim
Neglected merit, and a nation's shame.
TO equip you all genteelly, comme il faut,
On R -- ns our friends, I Would boldly draw;
Nor fear dishonor of protested bill
'Midst rapid sale of Birch, and thriving till.
But if ten thousand copies once were sold,
Your brazen-headed canes should blaze with burnished gold.
And now, dread sirs, if all this will not win you,
Why then, dread sirs, the D -- l, sure, is in you.
But neither you nor he, my sportive Muse shall hinder,
I will have one more slap at wicked Peter Pindar.
BIRCH FOR PETER PINDAR, ESQUIRE. etc.
AH well-a-day!
Ah well-a-day!
What shall I say?
What shall I say?
Ah! in what dictionary shall I find
Meet words to vent the grief that labors in my mind?
O Muse! a hapless brother Bard deplore,
Who Is fallen, fallen, fallen to rise no more.
Mourn all ye friends of Peter and of fun,
Mourn very hard indeed -- and when ye've done,
Come listen to my lay,
And mind what I Have to say.
Now you must know this cock of rhyme
Was hatched in some unlucky time.
Some planet of malignant power
Presided over his natal hour.
I see, I see
The Fates decree,
Or do or say whatever we can
To serve this poor unhappy man,
Some dire disaster must attend,
And so he will come to no good end.
You know, Vide and eme Sop in the Pan.
at Court I got him placed,
But now he is ousted and disgraced.
Did I not give him good advice,
And that not once, but twice or thrice?
But all advice, I fear, is vain,
The rogue has been at his old tricks again.
Nay, what is worse than all that is past,
He now is held in durance fast;
As you will hear, if you will attend
The following story to its end.
Scarce had he warmed himself at Court
Before he fell to wicked sport.
Well fed and clothed, he there begun
To play all sorts of wanton fun.
Complaints were brought from every quarter --
-- One while he would steal a maid of honor's garter,
And by such flattering token prove
How high he stood in maiden's love.
Another while, perdue as dead
He Would couch 'neath maid of honor's bed,
As if intent on nightly wickedness;
But now I Am well assured 'twas nothing less.
Bromfield and Hawkins both declare
That he could do no mischief there,
(I mean in maid of honor's bed)
For all his mischief's in his head.
In ambush thus he only lay
To hear what they in sleep would say,
And then forsooth the wag would run
And tell their secrets all in fun.
On this the maidens all combined,
And in petition formal joined
With loud complaints against our Bard,
Declaring it was very hard
That he their private chambers should invade,
And hear what they in midnight dreaming said;
Such test was far too much for any mortal maid.
Of waking maids, all own, there are great numbers;
But ah! what earthly maid can answer for her slumbers?
But what they most of all things feared,
Was, that he would publish all he heard.
They knew that Peter had a tattling tongue,
Which blabb'd out all, but chief if aught was wrong.
Should he in nightly ambuscade discover
That they, in sleeping fancy only, had a lover,
Of courtly maids, this sland'rous tale
In Peter Pindar's Ode would stand,
And fly forthwith in Palmer's mail
To all the gossips in the land.
In short -- if he must be indulged in suchlike sport,
The sisters, one and all, resolved to quit the Court.
The virtuous maidens rueful plaints were heard,
And full of reason and of truth appeared.
Peter was questioned on these heads
Of maidens garters and their beds,
Was by his master reprimanded,
And to his proper post remanded,
With charge, no more to be so rude
As thus indecently to intrude,
To gratify a curious whim;
For maids or not, what was it to him?
But not the virtuous maids alone,
His fellow servants every one
Complained of saucy Peter,
His gibing and his meter.
But chief of all the Laureat-Bard
With reason good averred, 'twas hard
That he could never make a Birthday Song
To 'scape the witty malice of his tongue.
That when he did his very best,
Of all his words, he would make a jest.
Often as he formed a sober rhyme,
Or strove to soar in verse sublime,
The rogue was sure to mock him with another,
And now would call him Tom, and now would call him Brother.
Long had he borne his arch grimace,
But now grew weary of his place.
Rather than be the butt of monkey Peter,
He Would quit the trade, and deal no more in meter.
To fly from such intol'rable attack,
He Would forfeit both his bays, and marks, and sack.
Of chaplains all he would make a jest,
For Peter never loved a priest.
He always was a very wicked boy,
And never would the Sabbath Day employ
In conning over The phrase is rather stiff-rump'd, but Peter Pindar must
answer for it.
Bible-phrase sublime;
His Sabbaths all were given to fiddling and to rhyme.
His mother told him 'twas a shameful thing
To make such wicked songs about his K -- g.
Ah! son, she would say, 'twill bring thee to the gallows,
As sure as spending Sabbath Day in alehouse.
And as he added year to year,
He more and more alarmed her fear,
Lest he should take to wicked ways,
And in a halter end his days. --
-- But after this digression short,
Let Us now resume our thread at Court,
And Peter's farther pranks report.
Bedchamber lord or page in waiting
Was sure to bear his waggish baiting.
Whoever came to Court
Was Peter's butt and sport.
At every human ailing,
At every human failing,
Whether halt, or blind, or lame,
He Would loll his tongue, and make his game.
With hasty speech, and utt'rance quick,
He Would play you every monkey trick.
It Is said his r -- l master didn't escape
The mimic wagg'ry of this rhyming ape.
At length the courtiers, one and all,
Determined to effect his fall.
And yet the question may admit of doubt,
Wheth'r all their efforts could have got him out;
So much his master loved him,
Till he a traitor proved him.
Now, gentle reader, let us straight repair
To council-hall, and learn what passes there.
And merry people all, throughout the nation,
Pray listen to this droll examination.
P -- y C -- l met. Lord Testy thus addresses the Board. My Lords, you're
summoned here
A horrid tale to hear,
Of Peter Pindar's dark design
(Which calls for punishment condign)
To kill the K -- g, enslave the nation,
And bring us all to desolation.
Battalions thick in armor stood,
Prepared to embark and shed our blood,
To force our wives, our fortunes to devour,
And bring in Popish faith and arbitrary power.
I wish this devilish imp of rhyme
Could be hanged now -- 'twould save our tin
But this is not our English way,
For every rogue must have fair play.
In our proceedings let there be no flaw;
The culprit must be hanged by reg'lar course of law.

A Frenchman appears before the C -- l to inform against Peter Pindar. Ld. T --
y. Where is this Frenchman? If he is in the way,
We now will hear what he has got to say.
But French I do not understand;
Is no interpreter at hand?

Interpreter. O, oui, Milor, and it is pour dat I Am here.

Ld. T -- y. O, are you so? -- a fine interpreter!
Why man, you naught but French can splutter;
I Am sure you cannot two words of English utter.

Interp. O, my good Lor, you please, pardonnez moi;
Der is long time I am in dis emploi,
Pour all my contremen dat come from France,
Pour civilize your peuple, and for teach de dance.

Ld. T -- y, aside. Confound your French impertinence!
But for a moment -- truce with impudence.
Well; first of all, what is this man's name, do you say?

Interp. Milor, son nom, his name, be Speak-Truth.
Parler Vrai.

Ld. T -- y. Now, your name, Monsieur, if you please?

Interp. Faithful Interpreter.
Interpreteur fidele, bien a votre service.

Ld. T -- y. Who is this Parler Vrai, Monsieur?

Interp. Milor, attendez, you shall hear.
Milor, he have de grand bonheur
To be un gentilhomme d'honeur.

Ld. T -- y. Indeed? Then, if you please, let us hear
What business brought his honor here.

Interp. Milor, to Londres he have come pour his plaisir,
And it is pour dat, Milor, he is in England here.

Ld. T -- y. And pray what might he do in his own nation?
Had he no sort of trade or occupation?

Interp. Milor, when he do live in his own place,
He acammode de head, and shave de face.

Ld. T -- y. I thought as much: -- you know him? --

-- Interp. O que oui.
Monsieur be my good friend, mon bon ami.

Ld. T -- y. O, is he so? -- Then let this Parler Vrai
Speak out, and tell us what he has to say.

Interp. to P. V. A present parlez haut and parlez tout.

Ld. T -- y. What Is that? --

-- Interp. Milor, I tell him to speak out.

Parler Vrai deposes. Quand j'etois a la cour de France
Je faisois tres-grande connoissance.
Et j'avois aussi le bonheur
De travailler chez un friseur,
Un homme d'esprit and de bon Sens
Qui coiffoit The Abp. of Sens is now a fellow-sufferer with Peter, and they
may condole with each other. Peter, in his next plot, must make his overtures
to Monsieur Neckar.
l'Archeveque de Sens.
Il connut aussi bien son secretaire
Qui lui racontoit une etrange affair,
D'un certain drole ici en grand emploi,
Meme accoucheur, il avoit dit, a Roi.

Ld. T -- y interrupting. Hark ye, Monsieur Interpreter!
Pray check his honor's glib career,
Or else of all this lengthening tale
We never shall make or head or tail.
Before his honor further goes,
You Will please to explain in verse or prose,
To satisfy each English head
Of what he has already said.
As soon as this is clearly done,
You Will bid his honor then go on;
But please to stop him now and then,
(I leave to your discretion, when)
And give the English sense, as well as you are able,
Or else 'twill be confusion all, like tower of Babel.

Interp. Milor, I will de English meaning tell,
And you shall say, I speak your language well.
Milor, when at de court of France
He say he make grand acquaintance,
And dat he have de happiness
To work vid one friseur who dress
De peruque, and who shave de face
Of Monseigneur de Sens his grace;
Which courtier have good sense to tell
When he do hear some ting nouvelle.
And dat Milor of Sens his secretaire
Did one day tell him of one strange affair,
Of some droll fellow in your nation
En grand emploi and occupation,
Who say dat he have de honneur
To be your K -- g his accoucheur.

Ld. T -- y interrupting. Why, what the d -- l's that, Monsieur?

Interp. Patience, Milor, and you shall hear:
It is for make accouche your K -- g,
When he want do one certain ting.
Dat be one drole affair, ma foi,
To make accoucher un gros Roi,
Like when your wife, Milor, accouche for little boy.
Instant on this, burst forth such loud uproar
As never was heard at C -- l Board before;
Beards, wigs, and noses, wagged all,
And unextinguish'd laughter shook the hall.
Not more when merry Gods above
Surround the festal board of Jove;
While nectar and ambrosia crown the feast,
And Peter Pindar cracks his witty jest.

P. V. to Interp. aside. Mais pourquoi fait-on tant d'eclat de rire?

Interp. Mon ami, o'est la mode en Angleterre.

Ld. T -- y. Come, leave your prattling -- if you don't go on
With this cursed business, we shall never have done.

Interp. to P. V. De finir ce rapport, depechez vous,
Monsieur en grand peruque est fache contre nous.

Parler Vrai proceeds. Je dis qu'un drole ici en grand emploi,
Meme accoucheur, il avoit dit, a Roi,
Pindar son nom, son nom de Bapteme Pierre,
Il avoit bien ecrit, que le derriere
Du Roi ici il guard -- la clef pour cela il tient --
Et que sans lui le Roi ne jamais feroit rien.

Interp. Dat is, Milor, dis Peter Pindar
He write, dat he your K -- g can hinder
From do one certain ting when he have mind,
Because he keep de key of his behind.

On this Lord T -- y gave him such a look!
But not a nerve of dauntless Peter shook.
Parler Vrai continues. Et que pour pension bonne de dix mill livres
Pour lui appreter, comme il faut, des vivres,
Il sera pret de fermer bien son Roi
En sort qu'il ne fasse rien pour tout un moi,
Pendant ce temps lequel est bien critique
Pour servir a leurs plans de politic.

Interp. Dat is, Milor, dis Peter Pindar mention
If dey vil give five hundred pound of pemsion,
Dat he may have roast-beef and wine,
(On which he dearly love to dine)
He vil not let your England K -- g
Pour tirty day do dat same ting;
By dis to give some better chance
To serve de politic of France.

Ld. T -- y. Bravo! Interpreteur fidele,
Thou do thy office very well.
Now let thy brother Parler Vrai
Declare what more he has to say.

Interp. Milor, I know he have no more to tell.

Ld. T -- y. Then you will withdraw -- so far we go on well.

Ld. T -- y, addressing P. Pindar. So! -- here are pretty doing, master Peter
--
-- Since first I heard of thee and thy d -- n'd meter,
I Have all along had some fore-boding thought
That stocks or pillory would be thy lot;
But hanging now, I see, and nothing less
Will serve thy turn: -- Come then; thou would best confess.
Thou Wilt save much cost by such a resolution,
And ease us of the plague of prosecution.

Peter, intrepidly. Hold, hold, my Lord; not quite so fast!
If you are, I am not in haste.
I Have some small skill in law as well as rhyme,
And mean to avail myself of further time.
I Am not to be brow-beaten so
In every action that I do:
I know how far it is safe to go.
Produce your Frenchman -- let him swear
To any given day or year,
I Will prove that at the very time
I was employed in making rhyme,
Or making up a pill,
Or bolus, which you will.
Next, let him swear to place -- then I
Will swear and prove an alibi.
Think not I Am so abandoned and forlorn,
I Have never an affidavit-friend to serve a turn,
If letters signed by me are brought to light,
I Will prove that I can neither read nor write,
And, spite of you and all your law,
I Will save my bacon by some flaw.

Ld. T -- y. Was ever impudence a match for this!
Quondam empiric! say thou, common Fame?
No, no, you are wrong in thy hypothesis;
Old Rock himself was never so void of shame.
Some quondam scrivener, I ween,
Of brazen front, and perjured tongue,
To lie and swear through thick and thin,
And make the rightful cause appear the wrong.
But, Peter, trust not to thy skill
In quirks and quibbles of the law;
I Will squeeze thee in attainder's bill;
Where Is then thy bacon-saving flaw?

Peter. Well; if I must be hanged, I must;
All men must die, and come to dust.
Then what imports it, when or where,
Or soon or late, or here or there?
Reclined on couch, or propp'd in easy chair,
Or pendent high in ambient field of air?
No form of death can scare your dauntless bard;
I Will kiss my friend the hangman, and die hard.

Ld. T -- y. Well, Peter, justice shall be done thee,
Whatever judgment falls upon thee.
Meanwhile I Would have thee better spend thy time,
And leave off this bad trade of making rhyme.

Peter intrepid to the last. No, that, my Lord, I surely will not do;
I Will make one more d -- n'd ode for you.
Insult not over my fallen state,
Perhaps yourself, or soon or late,
May fall like me -- it was the ca^^
Of better men who held your place.
The losing gamesters by and by may win,
Ins may go out, and outs once more come in.
And oh!
If so,
Then your fell foe
Will work your woe.
Impeachments thick
Will follow quick,
And make you kick
Against the prick;
But F -- x will stick
As close as tick,
Nor quit you till he sends you to old Nick.

Ld. T -- y, aside. Sure never impudence on this side Hell
This rascal Peter Pindar's did excel.
Addressing the C -- l. My Lords, this is a horrid, horrid thing,
A foul conspiracy against the K -- g,
To stop the passage of his r -- l life,
I do not say by poison or by knife,
But by a method still more deep and dark,
Such as would leave no indicating mark,
Nor aught of outward symptom that might lead
To trace the author of such shocking deed.
My Lords, in all my reading,
My Lords, in all my pleading,
A case in point I never knew,
The case is altogether new.
Search all King-killing cases,
The Jesuits were but asses,
Compared with this astrictive fellow Peter --
-- D -- n'd costive in his plot, however lax in meter!
My Lords, I freely own I Am no physician,
I cannot speak with Warwick Lane precision --
Nor Galen nor Hippocrates my book,
But old black-letter Littleton with Coke.
But lawyers, sure, may have as good pretense
As any other men to common sense.
Allow me this, and I can reason give
Why in such case no mortal man can live.
To shut such channel must be certain death,
Not more so, stopping up the vital breath.
How long such case might go, I will not say,
I cannot fix the limits to a day;
But to my reason it appears most plain
That half a month would kill the stoutest man.
And sure, you will own, my Lords, in suchlike ail
The K -- g's prerogative can naught avail.
In cases of evacuation,
And every other operation
Pertaining to our common frame,
The r -- l functions are the same
With those which Nature calls from you and me:
In this, my Lords, at least, I trust, we all agree.
Then from your own experience freely speak,
And say what man among you ever went a week.
This said, a gentle murmuring sound
Of hear him! hear him! circled round,
Re-echoed by a large majority,
Though not unanimous the favoring cry.
The Scottish corpse, in deepest wonder,
All sat amazed, as struck with thunder,
To hear Lord T -- y talk at such a rate --
Then crowding all together tete a tete,
Their notes posterior they compared,
And all with one consent declared
Such argument was void of sense,
And counter to their own experience.
Some said the mon was mad -- but all agreed
He Would got a glass of whisky in his head.
At length Tweed-side on T -- y fixed his eye,
And holding forth his leg, up-rose to make reply

Ld. Tweed-side. Hoot mon, ye talk just like a fule
I Will send ye cross the Tweed to schule,
And there ye'll see our bonny lads can gang
Without the like of this the winter lang.
Wous! mon, were we to cast away our meat
Wi' ilka moon, we'd soon hae naught to cat.
Fra side of Tweed to Johnny Groats,
Ye wadna find a peck of oats.
But here is sic wastefu' wark as never was seen!
Ye cram your weams fra morning until even,
And gin ye canna lat it out,
You Are than au fou of bile and gout.
Not sae wi' us -- we gang a moon and mare,
And yet our weams are neither sick nor sare.
My Lords, I dinna speak from partiality,
Nor any cause, my Lords, of nationality.
This Peter Pundar, ye may see,
Is naught to me nae mare than ye.
My Lords, I trow, ye ken full ^eel
I never countenanced the cheel,
Nor mean to do it for this ane thing,
The fallow does nae like his K -- g,
Because he wadna buy his sang;
In that, I own, he is very wrang.
But as to this conspiracy,
I Will wager that it is au a lie.
I canna think that sic a deed
Could ever enter the loon's head.
But if it did, how could he do it?
My Lords, I canna make that out.
Ye ken full weel, to Court he never gangs,
The kallon gets his bread by making sangs.
My Lords, his time's employed the leeve-lang day
To win baubees by lilting of the lay.
As to your idle tales of this and that,
Of accoucheur a Roi, and G -- knows what,
My Lords, I wad believe as soon
[Ld. T -- y giving Ld. Tweed-side a look of disapprobation.] We Are just now
sitting in the moon.
Hoot mon! don't luke at me sae surly,
And make not au this hurly-burly
About a thing of naught,
Till ye hae further sought.
Consider weel what you are about,
Or else ye'll get us au turned out.
Troth mon, I did nae think ye sic a fule,
To bring us here to be the ridicule
Of folks of ilka rank and station,
Bath high and low throughout the nation.
A ballad-maker stop up the K -- g's weam!
O Lourd! O Lourd! we'll au be brought to shame.
My Lords, we munna show our faces,
The folks will call us fules and asses.
And weel I wat some cheel will tak the hint,
And stick us au together in a print.
Yes, yes, my Lords, ye'll see your sels in etches,
Your Lawland lads are deev'lish quick at sketches.
Besides, that fallow Pundar there ere lang
Will link us au into a bonny sang.
Troth, now I think on it, 'twad be better,
Before we rise, to tuck up Peter.
We soon could put him out of the way,
And stop the lilting of his lay.
The loss of sic a loon wad nae be much --
I Have got a bit of inkle in my pouch;
If auld friend T -- y will but gie the beck,
We'll make a noose, and put it round his neck,
And sae even lat him swing,
But dinna tell the K -- g;
If he should speer for Peter, we may say
The loon brak out of jail, and ran away:
And now, my noble Lords, what say ye au?
Wha votes for Highland execution law?
We'd find some hole about the C -- l House
Where he wad lig as still as any mouse.
I see ye laugh, my Lords, and weel ye may,
I dinna mean to hang the lad today;
I only meant a fling at T -- y there,
For bringing us like April ninnies here.
Good faith! I Would hae him luke about,
And see how he can get us out
OF sic a scrape as this -- for should the K -- g
Surprise us in it, 'twad be a serious thing.
He Would turn us out to seek our bread,
Wi' auld friend T -- y at our head.
For wha wad keep sic fules about him?
Sic c -- l's only fit for Gotham.
My Lords, I fear, I Have tedious been,
And by friend T -- y's lukes and ein,
He Is in a deev'lish angry mood I find;
I dinna care for that -- I Will speak my mind.
In points of law, I readily allow,
To him we au mun doff our hats and bow;
On this side Tweed, I mean -- but in a case
OF costive weam he talks just like an ass.
I see he does nae ken what he is about,
If he wad let me, I could help him out;
But this he winna do -- he will hae his way,
And, troth, I fear he will lead us au astray --
-- I see this silly business mun gang on.
Weel, weel, among sae many fules I am but one.
Now let us suppose this Frenchman's tale a fact,
I canna deem't a treasonable act;
For what is a moon? that could nae kill a K -- g.
Did I not tell you, 'twas a common thing
For my North-British countrymen to gang
Two moons or three? -- And yet we are as strange
As ye are here -- as free fra ails, save now and then
A little bit of yuking outwardly in the skin.
As to that babbling Frenchman's silly chat
About a pension, or the like of that,
The tale appears to me an arrant fiction,
And fraught wi' nonsense and wi' contradiction.
If pension was the object of his game,
Ye ken, my Lords, he might hae that at hame.
But pension'd slave he winna be,
Nor sell his Wulks-and-Liberty
For au that K -- gs and Courts can gie.
He does nae like their strait-lac'd ways,
Their proclamations, and their Sabbath Days.
Kirk-ganging orders make him sick;
He likes to wag his feedle-stick,
And thinks it is the better way
To chase the muckle Deel away,
By playing Bobbing Joan, and sic like airs,
Than singing psalms at kirk, and saying prayers.

Lord Sidewind. Here, by your leave, my Lord,
Let me put in a word.
Permit me to object,
That though he did reject
A handsome proffered pension here,
Nathless the culprit might elsewhere
Make hearty zealous application,
Moved both by interest and by inclination.
What though a G -- e has ever been his snarling,
Does this evince that Louis is n't his darling?
I apprehend this was the very matter
Which prompted Peter to become a traitor;
For Brunswick's line he bears a crabb'd affection,
Because the House of Bourbon is his predilection

Ld. Tweedside, in reply. Hoot, hoot, I canna think him sic a ninny,
To pouch a loui rather than a guinea,
And au for naught but love and itch of treason:
Sic deed wad prove the fallow void of reason,
A subject fit, in murky cell
Wi' Bedlamites for aye to dwell.
No, no, my Lords, say what ye will,
The kallon has some conscience still.
K -- g G -- e he says has bairns, and times are hard,
And for this cause he lately has declared
It gangs against his grain, and he is nae willing,
To tak fra him a single siller shilling.
Weel then, I argue thus a fortiori --
Good faith, 'twad be a strange unlikely story,
That, fond of Louis, as ye say he is,
He Would ask for siller at a time like this.
Hoot, hoot, ye ken full weel, my Lords, I trow,
The Grand Monarque's a broken-merchant now;
And to their sorrow, creditors have found
He canna pay a mark in ilka pound.
Is this a time to ask for pension,
Amang sic quarrel and dissension,
That Louis canna get a sous
To pay his tradesmen's bills, and keep his house?
But now, my Lords, I fear you are weary grown
OF my long talk, and T -- y 'gins to frown.
He seems to be in a most deev'lish passion,
As if he would gie us Pundar's sang -- D -- n
Seize ye au. -- Weel, now I Have said my say,
And now my auld friend T -- y fire away.
The color glowed in T -- y's cheek,
Thrice he essayed, but could not speak.
With blow of fist (so fierce his choler burned)
It Is said, he split the C -- l Board in twain.
At length, when wonted powers of voice returned,
He thus begun in high indignant strain.

Ld. T -- y. My Lords, I don't regard one single jot
Of all that sell from that dry-bellied Scot.

Quick, roused at this, and fraught with ire,
His eye balls flashing hostile fire,
Tweed-side retorted: -- D -- n your blude,
Gin I had not a mind as good
For this illib'ral national reflaction
To make your life and saul pay satisfaction;
For au ye luke sae grim, and talk sae big,
I neither heed ye, nor your muckle wig.
Order! order! order! all!
Order echoed through the hall.
Lord Hopeful. O fie! O fie! my Lords, command your passion,
Or else our C -- ls will disgrace the nation.
Rude language this, unmeet to fall
From members grave in C -- l hall.
O, may this fray be never told;
O, may no tongue the tale unfold;
And yet, I speak it with great sorrow,
The tale will all be told tomorrow.
Perhaps even now some patriot-spy
In corner snug is standing by,
To catch up every word that falls
Within the compass of these walls.
O, tell it not in Gath!
O, tell it not in Bath!
But sure it will be told afar,
And sure it will be published near.
Then what will foreign nations say
When they are informed of this affray?
They Will say our C -- l is all riot,
No better than a Polish diet.
O, glorious news for Sh -- d -- n and F -- x!
O, welcome subject for their witty jokes!
How will they chuckle when they once find out
We make as much fracas within as they without!
But in one point they are wiser far than we;
Among themselves they very well agree.
My Lords, our measures only they oppose;
Disdain not to learn wisdom from your foes.

Ld. Courtly. My Lords, I hope you will one and all attend,
And mark the prudence of our premier-friend.
A forward youth he is, of wondrous parts,
He charms our ears, and captivates our hearts:
Persuasion ever dwells upon his tongue
So very much, I never think him wrong.
Endowed with all his father's force and fire,
In wisdom grave the son excels the sire.
In years advanced thrice ten, or little more,
He boasts the cautious temper of three score.
My Lords, let loss of place alarm our fears,
And bind us to this youth, who is wise above his years.

Ld. Make-peace. My Lords, this prudent motion I for one
(In which, I trust, I shall not stand alone)
Most cordially approve: -- And now, my Lords,
I Am up -- I wish to utter a few words;
Happy, if any thing that falls from me
Should be the means to make us all agree.
Revolving this strange matter in my mind,
The only proper method I can find,
Is to call in two men of famous skill,
Well read in every book on costive ill.
The sons of Aesculapius best will know
How far a case like this may safely go.
My Lords, you will own, this is a point that falls
Without the competency of these walls.
The question was no sooner moved,
Than by the Board nem. con. approved.

Enter two Physicians. Ld Category. Well, doctors, you have heard the case, no
doubt;
What are your thoughts upon it? Pray speak out.

Dr. Primus. My Lord, I think the matter
Is possible in nature,
For any man or woman
(Though it is not very common)
In suchlike case to go
For thirty days or so,
Secure from all alarms of dissolution,
Or any injury to constitution.

Ld. C -- y. Did ever case like this in all
Your practice and experience fall?

Dr. P. I cannot say it did --

-- Ld. C -- y. Then reason give
How costive patient in such case could live.

Dr. P. My Lord, in fault of such evacuation,
Our system operates by transpiration,
That is, my Lord, by porous exsudation.

Ld. C -- y to Dr. Secundus. Now, Doctor, give us your advice.

Dr. Secundus. I will, my Lord, and in a trice,
And partly with my friend I say -- Content.
In other points I widely must dissent.
For in default of such evacuation,
I own my learned Brother's transpiration,
In plainer terms, his porous exsudation,
Might help Dame Nature for twelve days or so;
Further than this no mortal man can go.
The stoutest K -- g that ever wore a crown
In half a month must lay his scepter down.

Ld. C -- y to the Board. My Lords, this case is harder than we thought,
And G -- knows when to issue 'twill be brought.
What do you say? Our time should now be spent
In thinking of some new expedient.

Ld. Dinner-bell. My Lords, if my poor feeble voice be heard,
This puzzling point had better be deserr'd,
And to the learned corpse in W -- k-lane reserr'd.
Meanwhile, my Lords, we may go home and dine,
Recruit our spirits with a glass of wine,
May take a little private recreatiion,
And then resume this deep deliberation.
Done, done,
Nem. con.
Now, gentle reader, should some Lord invite thee,
Perhaps a sumptuous dinner may delight thee;
But if no lordly invitations come,
Then cat thy mutton-chop, and be content at home.
But if nor house nor home be thine,
Nor mutton-chop, nor silver coin,
Alas, thy case is very hard,
Thou Would better change it with our Bard.
Peter lives well, and at free charge,
Until he is set once more at large;
And that, I think, must be ere long,
Unless Lord T -- y, right or wrong,
To show how far his power can go
In wreaking vengeance on a foe,
Should grasp him in his arbitrary paw,
And give him Vide State Trials, Bp. A -- y's Case.
Bishop Atterbury's law.
But if he does, this will not hang Peter,
Nor stop the effusions of his meter.
It Is true, such law would make him prance,
And send him cross the sea to France;
But T -- y's utmost malice
No further goes than Calais.
From thence our Bard may strait proceed,
And at Versailles its merits plead.
What though the plot did not succeed,
His will was ready for the deed.
Even good intentions of this sort
Are well received at Bourbon's Court.
It ever was the Gallic nature
To hug a rebel and a traitor;
Whenever they find a rogue in grain,
For future jobs his service they retain.
Here may our Bard snug refuge take,
As did ere while that Yankee snake,
Like Peter fostered by his K -- g
Till he shot forth his vengeful sting,
To wound the land which gave him bread,
And raised from earth his recreant head.
And if capricious Fortune should befriend him,
And old Ben Franklin's wondrous luck attend him,
Peter, high-honour'd by our Gallic foe,
May figure at Versailles a rebel Plenipo.
But now it is time our business should go on,
I wish these guzzling C -- l Lords were done;
For sure they take a tedious while to dine --
-- Oh! here they come well-flush'd with rosy wine;
Two-bottle men, I warrant you, or more;
Two did I say? -- More likely three or four.

President of the Board. Once more, my Lords, we are all in C -- l met.
Let every noble member take his seat.
And now I hope you will be good boys,
Refrain from quarrel and from noise;
Commit no outrage or disorder,
Or I must call you all to order.

Ld. T -- y. My Lord, you have spoken like a prudent man,
And keep us all to order, if you can.

Ld. Category Is there no message come from W -- k lane?
Cannot all the learned there this case explain?

Dr. Deputy. My Lord, in due obedience to your high command,
Deputed from our learned body here I stand.
With long deliberation
On points of transpiration,
Or-porous exsudation,
Our minds are all in deep and dark confusion,
And cannot grope the way to fair conclusion.
My Lords, the members of our college
Do all with one consent acknowledge
The case is not within their knowledge.
The point suspended must remain,
Till France, and Italy, and Spain,
With every other learned nation,
Have penned a Latin dissertation.
When all our rays of science are collected,
We hope sufficient light will be reflected,
Some fair conclusion to make out,
And clear this point beyond all doubt.
Meantime, my Lords, you will not forget
That we have received no money yet.
You know, my Lords, with men of our description
The maxim is -- no guinea, no prescription.
In this one case our brethren all agree,
That nothing must be done without a fee.
This wanting, not a word they will write or speak,
But keep within their teeth their Latin and their Greek.
If then you would know our whole collected sense,
You must not be too sparing of your pence.
Our name is Legion -- we are many,
And every man must have his guinea.
-- Down with a hundred thousand pounds or so --
We'll then begin, and see how far 'twill go.
Instant at name of hundred thousand pounds,
Lord Hopeful, starting from his seat, cried -- Zounds!
This Peter Pindar plagues us more than Hastings, --
Amidst such lavish spendings, and such wastings,
My sinking fund will never go on,
And then, my Lords, we are all undone;
For F -- x and B -- ke will pour forth fierce orations,
And drive us from our places and our stations.
Doctor, we give no answer now;
Tomorrow you shall further know.

Dr. Deputy withdraws. Ld. T -- y to the Board. My Lords, we nothing further
can discover;
This Peter Pindar's trial must -- stand over.
When W -- k-lane this puzzling question clears,
Or stronger evidence from France appears,
I Will send a proper summons to you all,
And hope you will meet me here in C -- l Hall,
Meanwhile, till we have fairly tried him,
Pen, ink, and paper, shall not be denied him.

Peter. Thank you, my Lord, I Will use your favor well,
And this, my next d -- n ode shall tell.

C -- l adjourns. Peter, I see thy cause will tire them out.
Yes, yes, thou wilt get off now, I make no doubt.
But what avails this one escape?
Thou Wilt soon be in another scrape.
For ah! my ill-starr'd rhyming brother,
Thou must be hanged one day or other.
What say thou, Peter, to all this?

Peter. Why, faith, I take it much amiss,
That thou'st stopped short of thy intention,
To sport thy Muse with my suspension.
Long while I Have been in tip-toe expectation
To see how thou would perform the operation.
But this postponing is an artful scheme,
My penetrating eye perceives thy drist,
Thy Muse, unequal to the lofty theme,
Would hide her nakedness with this poor shift.
Forgive me, if I do thee wrong
By rash conjecture of thy song.
I grant thou have some little skill --
-- I see that thou have words at will
In common chat, and suchlike humble sport --
Sermoni propiora -- seems thy forte.
But where is thy simile, and phrase sublime?
For Fancy's flights, I fear, thou have no rhyme.
No; -- loftiness of song is not for thee,
But Homer, Virgil, Milton, and for ME.
And now my hand is fairly in,
I Will show thee how thou must begin,
If thou would boldly soar in epic line,
And rival Homer's lofty song or mine.
Now cock thine eye,
And see me fly.
"Of T -- y's direful wig, of vengeful laws,
"Of plot and costive K -- g, the tragic cause
"Which launched from Tyburn-tree to Pluto's reign
"The soul of tuneful Bard untimely slain,
"Sing heavenly Muse, etc." -- Thus must thy numbers flow
To hurl a lofty Bard to shades below;
And always end thy song with brilliant dash,
Which Frenchmen call eclat, and Englishmen call flash.
Observe my lessons well, and by and by
Thy feeble unfledged Muse may learn to fly.
Now, Peter Pindar, without joking,
You Are grown so saucy and provoking,
Thou Wilt rouse my chol'ric indignation
To give thee such a flagellation
As thou had never yet,
And wilt not soon forget.
Then take this little sample of my skill,
And own I Have similes, as well as words, at will.
1. Fox and Grapes Simile.
As Fox which eyes the ripened grapes,
And knows no fruit is sweeter,
But if he cannot, will not have those grapes;
So'rt thou, O Reynard Peter.
2. The disappointed Swain Simile.
As Swain who woos a pretty maid,
And fain at church would meet her;
But ah! whose rival wins that maid;
So'rt thou, green-willow Peter.
3. The Old Maid Simile.
As ancient Maid who will not wed,
If suitors will not entreat her,
And sorely rails at marriage bed;
So'rt thou, forsaken Peter.
4. Grub-street Bard Simile.
As vilest Bard who mocks his K -- g
In motley dogg'rel meter,
Still disregarded by his K -- g;
So'rt thou, O Grub-street Peter.
5. Pindar and his Muse, like to like,
As is thy darling and prolific Muse
Of easy virtue, and unblushing face;
So'rt thou (forgive me if I wrong accuse)
Devoid of honor, loyalty, or grace.

Peter. What? touch my honor! rather strike me dead. --
-- My dearest rhyming Brother Peter,
So well I love thee and thy meter,
I would not touch a hair upon thy head.
With such a pleasant and facetious fellow
I Would sooner drink a bottle, and be mellow.
My dearest Bard, with thee O may I swing,
If I don't love thee, as thou love thy K -- g.
But as to honor, Peter, say no more,
Repeat no grievance, aggravate no sore.

Peter. Honor I had --

-- Yes, yes, no doubt, no doubt,
But usage hard has worn thy honor out.
But it is no loss, for what can thou
With this same honor have to do?
It never sold thy bolus or thy pill,
It never paid thy printer K -- y's bill.
If then thy honor brings no profit,
What good to thee can ever come of it?
Thy brother wit, Jack Falstaff, used to say
That of such useless bauble he would have none,
Which could not keep him out of danger's way,
Nor heal a wound, nor set a broken bone.
Of Falstaff's prudence I produce this sample,
For Peter Pindar's lesson and example;
For, sure, you are congenial souls
As ever met over flowing bowls,
Or ever carous'd with giddy heir apparent,
Or made disloyal jest of r -- l parent.
O, had I Shakespeare's deathless lyre,
O, would his Muse my verse inspire,
Thy name, O Peter, still should float along
The stream of Time in never-drowning song;
And whilst the years in long succession roll,
Still Jack and Peter should swim cheek by jowl.
-- But now of flourishing enough.
Let Us find the thread where we broke off.
My Muse forgets -- O fie upon her! --
-- But now I recollect -- 'twas honor.
Of this I tell thee once again,
That honor's loss will be thy gain.
This honor would not let thee sing,
Nor mock and ridicule thy K -- g.
Such loyal monitor would strike thee dumb,
And poet Pindar turn to poet mum;
And this would be thy certain ruin,
Thy woeful starving and undoing.
-- But this is only wasting precious time --
I Am now to give thee simile sublime.
The Gibbet Simile.
As when some rogue's on lofty gibbet hung,
Some rogue as impudent as ever swung,
His ghastly corpse all dangling in the air,
Retaining even in death a dire King-killing air.
Sure, Peter, this must freeze thy very blood;
You Are very bad if this will not make thee good.
But since you are so ambitious and presumptuous grown,
I Will hoist thee higher still -- but then I Will fetch thee down.
But be n't afraid, it is all in sport,
And thou wilt receive but little hurt.
Nay, in this game thou wilt be the only winner,
For thou, not I, wilt carry off the dinner.
The Kite Simile.
As when some C-ts-w-d Kite ascends on high,
Waves in the wind, or sails along the sky,
If prey's in view, and hunger presses hard,
Slap down he comes to snatch a chick from poultry yard.
Now, Peter, thou have stolen that chicken,
'Twill serve thee for a little picking.
I guess that you are a greedy elf,
Thou Wilt eat it every bit thyself.
Perchance to K -- y thou would help a wing,
But deuce a bit to me, or even to G -- e thy K -- g.
Peter, I like not shooting in the dark,
Because not one in three may hit thy mark.
Give me that open daylight rebel poet
Who tells his name, nor cares if all men know it.
But thou behind this Pindar's mask art snug
As biting vermin latent close in rug,
By Gods unnam'd, by British men clep'd -- bug.
Yes; this bush-fight
Is thy delight.
How often like coward savage have thou laid
In dark and silent nightly ambuscade,
Thy spiteful feathered shaft to wing
And wound the heart of G -- e thy K -- g,
A K -- g who never injured thee,
But very much offended me,
By such disuse of r -- l shears,
And such neglect of Peter Pindar's ears.
Such cowardly attack
I never will forgive;
I Will point thee out a black
As long as ever I live.
I Have more to add -- which further still will grate;
For though thou art a witty fellow,
With thee I never will be mellow:
Assassins ever were my mortal hate.
Yes; now more seriously I come to think,
I must recall my former hasty motion;
If ever with rebel rogues like thee I drink,
May baneful juice of hemlock be my potion.
Moreover, Peter; if the Fates decree
That judgment must overtake both thee and me
For this our crime
Of wicked rhyme;
If thou and I must both be shipped away,
To found new families at Bot'ny Bay;
Before such foreign trip I take,
This first inquiry will I make,
What passengers are going?
And if I find that thou art there,
I Will cry, rash mariner! forbear,
Nor be thy own undoing.
If life, or ship, or cargo, thy regard,
For once O take a convict's word;
From steerage drag that wicked, wicked Bard,
And toss him headlong overboard.
Now, reader, faith my Muse is at stand
What further sport to give thee on the land;
And so to end the matter,
I Will dash him in the water.
And here I Have such a simile to treat with,
As every day, I Am sure, thou will not meet with;
Thou Wilt swear that even Pindar Peter
Never made a longer or a better.
I Will launch him off in majestoso,
Because it is fit that he should go so.
As when some convict cleaves the watery way:
Condemned to colonize at Bot'ny Bay;
The bark unequal to the sinful freight,
Her timbers groan beneath the pressive weight.
Lo! how the welkin low'rs! what clouds arise!
See! angry Neptune mounts into the skies.
On every side tremendous billows roar,
Old Ocean's roused, and foams from shore to shore.
See! lightnings flash; hark! dreadful thunders roll,
And rend the black'ning sky from pole to pole.
The trembling pilot quits the helm, and leaves
His bark the sport of raging winds and waves.
Hark! what shrieks and dismal skies,
Hark! what crashing,
Hark! what slashing,
Hark! what bumping,
Hark! what thumping,
Rumbling, jumbling,
Fumbling, tumbling,
Cursing, swearing,
Ripping, tearing,
Shouting, bawling,
Mainmast falling,
Planks all starting,
Decks all parting,
Friends lamenting,
Foes relenting,
Ranting, raving,
Mercy craving,
Peter trembling,
Not dissembling,
Pindar quaking
For ode-making,
Vessel rocking, found'ring, sinking,
Sailors wicked and unthinking,
(Ah! not loved grog, but briny water drinking)
Drowning, and blasting one another's eyes.
Pause ad libitum.
There! -- down she goes with Peter Pindar in her:
This it is to have on board a grievous sinner.
-- But lo! who is he that floats upon the main?
By Jupiter, it is Peter up again.
Do all I can to keep him down,
This buoyant fellow will not drown.
I see our poet's tuneful breath
Will not be stopped by watery death.
But now again I Am at a stand
How I shall get him back to land.
O, would some vessel but appear in view,
Or passing to the old world or the new. --
-- Huzza! -- a dolphin, charmed by Peter's song,
Bestrid by Peter, nimbly glides along.
Alternate up and down he steers his course,
Like Master Tommy riding hobbyhorse.
Say, Peter, did thou ever ride so prettily before?
Cheer up, my boy: -- Thou Wilt soon behold thy native shore.
Kind dolphin, speed thy way to Plymouth Sound,
And land thy poet sasc on Cornish ground,
Rejoice, O friends of Peter and of ode,
You Will see him soon: he is posting on the road.
Escaped from perils both of land and main,
Your Bard is turned upon your hands again.
FINIS

