POEMS.

HAEC SAT ERIT, DIVAE, VESTRUM CECINISSE POETAM,
DUM SEDET, ET GRACILI FISCELLAM TEXIT HIBISCO.
VIRGIL. LONDON: PRINTED FOR JOSEPH JOHNSON, IN ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD.
MDCCLXXIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LADY MARY WEST, THESE POEMS ARE RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED
BY

HER LADYSHIP's OBLIGED AND MOST OBEDIENT SERVANT, ANNA LAETITIA AIKIN.
WARRINGTON, Dec. 1st. 1772.
CONTENTS.
CORSICA. Page 1. The Invitation, to Miss B^. 13. The Groans of the Tankard.
25. On the Backwardness of the Spring 1771. 31. Verses written in an Alcove.
33. The Mouse's Petition. 37. To Mrs. P^, with Drawings of Birds and Insects.
41. Characters. 49. On a Lady's writing. 52. Hymn to Content. 53. To Wisdom.
57. The Origin of Song-Writing. 59. Songs. 66. Delia, an Elegy. 82. Ovid to his
Wife. Page 88. To a Lady, with painted Flowers. 95. Ode to Spring. 97. Verses
on Mrs. Row. 101. To Miss R^, on her Attendance on her Mother at Buxton. 104.
On the Death of Mrs. Jennings. 107. Hymns. 110. An Address to the Deity. 125. A
Summer Evening's Meditation. 131.
ERRATA.
Page 20, line ult. for fense read sense.

Page 25, line 2, for theme read themes.

-- for reverend read reverent.

The two pages after the 73d, instead of 66, 67, should be numbered 74, 75; and
the two pages after the 77th, instead of 70, 71, should be numbered 78, 79.

Page 89, line ult. instead of a full stop put a comma.

CORSICA. Written in the year 1769.

-- A manly race
Of unsubmitting spirit, wise and brave;
Who still through bleeding ages struggled hard
To hold a generous undiminish'd state;
Too much in vain!
THOMSON.
HAIL generous CORSICA! unconquered isle!
The fort of freedom; that amidst the waves
Stands like a rock of adamant, and dares
The wildest fury of the beating storm.
And are there yet, in this late sickly age
(Unkindly to the towering growths of virtue)
Such bold exalted spirits? Men whose deeds,
To the bright annals of old GREECE opposed,
Would throw in shades her yet unrivaled name,
And dim the luster of her fairest page.
And glows the flame of LIBERTY so strong
In this lone speck of earth! this spot obscure,
Shaggy with woods, and crusted over with rock,
By slaves surrounded and by slaves oppressed!
What then should BRITONS feel? should they not catch
The warm contagion of heroic ardour,
And kindle at a fire so like their own?
Such were the working thoughts which swelled the breast
Of generous BOSWEL; when with nobler aim
And views beyond the narrow beaten track
By trivial fancy trod, he turned his course
From polished Gallia's soft delicious vales,
From the gray relics of imperial Rome,
From her long galleries of laureled stone,
Her chisel'd heroes, and her marble gods,
Whose dumb majestic pomp yet awes the world,
To animated forms of patriot zeal,
Warm in the living majesty of virtue,
Elate with fearless spirit, firm, resolved,
By forune unsubdued, unawed by power.
How raptured fancy burns, while warm in thought
I trace the pictured landscape; while I kiss
With pilgrim lips devout the sacred soil
Stained with the blood of heroes. CYRNUS, hail!
Hail to thy rocky, deep indented shores,
And pointed cliffs, which hear the chafing deep
Incessant foaming round their shaggy sides:
Hail to thy winding bays, thy sheltering ports
And ample harbors, which inviting stretch
Their hospitable arms to every sail:
Thy numerous streams, that bursting from the cliffs
Down the steep channel'd rock impetuous pour
With grateful murmur: on the fearful edge
Of the rude precipice, thy hamlets brown
And straw-roof'd cots, which from the level vale
Scarce seen, amongst the craggy hanging cliffs
Seem like an eagle's nest aerial built:
Thy swelling mountains, brown with solemn shade
Of various trees, that wave their giant arms
Over the rough sons of freedom; lofty pines,
And hardy fir, and ilex ever green,
And spreading chestnut, with each humbler plant,
And shrub of fragrant leaf, that clothes their sides
With living verdure; whence the clust'ring be
Extracts her golden dews: the shining box,
And sweet-leav'd myrtle, aromatic thyme,
The prickly juniper, and the green leaf
Which feeds the spinning worm; while glowing bright
Beneath the various foliage, wildly spreads
The arbutus, and rears his scarlet fruit
Luxuriant, mantling over the craggy steeps;
And thy own native laurel crowns the scene.
Hail to thy savage forests, awful, deep:
Thy tangled thickets, and thy crowded woods,
The haunt of herds untamed; which sullen bound
From rock to rock with fierce unsocial air
And wilder gaze, as conscious of the power
That loves to reign amid the lonely scenes
Of unbroke nature: precipices huge,
And tumbling torrents; trackless deserts, plains
Fenced in with guardian rocks, whose quarries teem
With shining steel, that to the cultured fields
And sunny hills which wave with bearded grain
Defends their homely produce. LIBERTY,
The mountain goddess, loves to range at large
Amidst such scenes, and on the iron soil
Prints her majestic step: for these she scorns
The green enameled vales, the velvet lap
Of smooth savannahs, where the pillow'd head
Of luxury reposes; balmy gales,
And bowers that breathe of bliss: for these, when first
This isle emerging like a beauteous gem
From the dark bosom of the Tyrrhene main
Reared its fair front, she marked it for her own,
And with her spirit warmed: her genuine sons,
A broken remnant, from the generous stock
Of ancient Greece, from Sparta's sad remains,
True to their high descent, preserved unquench'd
The sacred fire through many a barbarous age:
Whom, nor the iron rod of cruel Carthage,
Nor the dread scepter of imperial Rome,
Nor bloody Goth, nor grisly Saracen,
Nor the long galling yoke of proud Liguria,
Could crush into subjection. Still unquell'd
They rose superior, bursting from their chains
And claimed man's dearest birthright, LIBERTY:
And long, through many a hard unequal strife
Maintained the glorious conflict; long withstood
With single arm, the whole collected force
Of haughty Genoa, and ambitious Gaul:
And shall withstand it, trust the faithful Muse.
It is not in the force of mortal arm,
Scarcely in fate, to bind the struggling soul
That galled by wanton power, indignant swells
Against oppression; breathing great revenge,
Careless of life, determined to be free.
And favoring heaven approves: for see the Man,
Born to exalt his own, and give mankind
A glimpse of higher natures: just, as great;
The soul of counsel, and the nerve of war;
Of high unshaken spirit, tempered sweet
With soft urbanity, and polished grace,
And attic wit, and gay unstudied smiles:
Whom heaven in some propitious hour endowed
With every purer virtue: gave him all
That lifts the hero, or adorns the man.
Gave him the eye sublime; the searching glance
Keen, scanning deep, that smites the guilty soul
As with a beam from heaven; on his brow
Serene, and spacious front, set the broad seal
Of dignity and rule; then smiled benign
On this fair pattern of a God below,
High wrought, and breathed into his swelling breast
The large ambitious wish to save his country.
Oh beauteous title to immortal fame!
The man devoted to the public, stands
In the bright records of superior worth
A step below the skies: if he succeed,
The first fair lot which earth affords, is his;
And if he falls, he falls above a throne.
When such their leader can the brave despair?
Freedom the cause and PAOLI the chief.
Success to your fair hopes! a British muse,
Though weak and powerless, lifts her fervent voice,
And breathes a prayer for your success. Oh could
She scatter blessings as the morn sheds dews,
To drop upon your heads! but patient hope
Must wait the appointed hour; secure of this,
That never with the indolent and weak
Will freedom deign to dwell; she must be seized
By that bold arm that wrestles for the blessing:
It Is heaven's best gift and must be bought with blood.
When the storm thickens, when the combat burns,
And pain and death in every horrid shape
That can appall the feeble, prowl around,
Then virtue triumphs; then her towering form
Dilates with kindling majesty; her mien
Breathes a diviner spirit, and enlarged
Each spreading feature, with an ampler port
And bolder tone, exulting, rides the storm,
And joys amidst the tempest: then she reaps
Her golden harvest; fruits of nobler growth
And higher relish than meridian suns
Can ever ripen; fair, heroic deeds,
And godlike action. It Is not meats, and drinks,
And balmy airs, and vernal suns, and showers
That feed and ripen minds; it is toil and danger;
And wrestling with the stubborn gripe of fate;
And war, and sharp distress, and paths obscure
And dubious. The bold swimmer joys not so
To feel the proud waves under him, and beat
With strong repelling arm the billowy surge;
The generous courser does not so exult
To toss his floating mane against the wind,
And neigh amidst the thunder of the war,
As virtue to oppose her swelling breast
Like a firm shield against the darts of fate.
And when her sons in that rough school have learned
To smile at danger, then the hand that raised
Shall hush the storm, and lead the shining train
Of peaceful years in bright procession on.
Then shall the shepherd's pipe, the muse's lyre,
On CYRNUS' shores be heard: her grateful sons
With loud acclaim and hymns of cordial praise
Shall hail their high deliverers; every name
To virtue dear be from oblivion snatched,
And placed among the stars: but chiefly thine,
Thine, PAOLI, with sweetest sound shall dwell
On their applauding lips; thy sacred name,
Endeared to long posterity, some muse,
More worthy of the theme, shall consecrate
To after ages, and applauding worlds
Shall bless the godlike man who saved his country.
So vainly wished, so fondly hoped the Muse:
Too fondly hoped: The iron fates prevail,
And CYRNUS is no more. Her generous sons,
Less vanquished than overwhelmed, by numbers crushed,
Admired, unaided fell. So strives the moon
In dubious battle with the gathering clouds,
And strikes a splendor through them; till at length
Storms rolled on storms involve the face of heaven
And quench her struggling fires. Forgive the zeal
That, too presumptuous, whispered better things
And read the book of destiny amiss.
Not with the purple coloring of success
Is virtue best adorned: the attempt is praise.
There yet remains a freedom, nobler far
Than kings or senates can destroy or give;
Beyond the proud oppressor's cruel grasp
Seated secure; uninjur'd; undestroy'd;
Worthy of Gods: The freedom of the mind.
The INVITATION: To MISS B^.
Hic gelidi fontes, hic mollia prata, Lycori,
Hic nemus: hic ipso tecum consumerer aevo.
VIRGIL.
HEALTH to my friend, and long unbroken years,
By storms unruffled and unstained by tears:
Winged by new joys may each white minute fly;
Spring on her cheek, and sunshine in her eye:
Over that dear breast, where love and pity springs,
May peace eternal spread her downy wings:
Sweet beaming hope her path illumine still,
And fair ideas all her fancy fill.
From glittering scenes which strike the dazzled sight
With mimic grandeur and illusive light,
From idle hurry, and tumultous noise,
From hollow friendships, and from sickly joys,
Will DELIA, at the muse's call retire
To the pure pleasures rural scenes inspire?
Will she from crowds and busy cities fly,
Where wreaths of curling smoke involve the sky,
To taste the grateful shade of spreading trees,
And drink the spirit of the mountain breeze?
When winter's hand the rough'ning year deforms,
And hollow winds foretell approaching storms,
Then Pleasure, like a bird of passage, flies
To brighter climes, and more indulgent skies;
Cities and courts allure her sprightly train,
From the bleak mountain and the naked plain;
And gold and gems with artificial blaze,
Supply the sickly sun's declining rays:
But soon returning on the western gale
She seeks the bosom of the grassy vale;
There, wrapped in careless ease, attunes the lyre
To the wild warblings of the woodland quire;
The daisied turf her humble throne supplies,
And early primroses around her rise.
We'll follow where the smiling goddess leads,
Through tangled forests or enameled meads;
Over pathless hills her airy form we'll chase,
In silent glades her fairy footsteps trace:
Small pains there needs her footsteps to pursue,
She cannot fly from friendship, and from you.
Now the glad earth her frozen zone unbinds,
And over her bosom breathe the western winds:
Already now the snow-drop dares appear,
The first pale blossom of the unripen'd year;
As FLORA's breath, by some transforming power,
Had changed an icicle into a flower:
Its name, and hue, the scentless plant retains,
And winter lingers in its icy veins.
To these succeed the violet's dusky blue,
And each inferior flower of fainter hue;
Till riper months the perfect year disclose,
And FLORA cries exulting, See my Rose!
The Muse invites, my DELIA haste away,
And let us sweetly waste the careless day.
Here gentle summits lift their airy brow;
Down the green slope here winds the laboring plow;
Here bathed by frequent showers cool vales are seen,
Clothed with fresh verdure, and eternal green;
Here smooth canals, across the extended plain,
Stretch their long arms, to join the distant main:
The sons of toil with many a weary stroke
Scoop the hard bosom of the solid rock;
Resistless through the stiff opposing clay
With steady patience work their gradual way;
Compel the genius of the unwilling flood
Through the brown horrors of the aged wood;
Cross the lone waste the silver urn they pour,
And cheer the barren heath or sullen moor:
The traveller with pleasing wonder sees
The white sail gleaming through the dusky trees;
And views the altered landscape with surprise,
And doubts the magic scenes which round him rise.
Now, like a flock of swans, above his head
Their woven wings the flying vessels spread;
Now meeting streams in artful mazes glide,
While each unmingled pours a separate tide;
Now through the hidden veins of earth they flow,
And visit sulphurous mines and caves below;
The ductile streams obey the guiding hand,
And social plenty circles round the land.
But nobler praise awaits our green retreats;
The Muses here have fixed their sacred seats.
Mark where its simple front yon mansion rears,
The nursery of men for future years:
Here callow chiefs and embryo statesmen lie,
And unfledged poets short excursions try:
While Mersey's gentle current, which too long
By fame neglected, and unknown to song,
Between his rushy banks, (no poet's theme)
Had crept inglorious, like a vulgar stream,
Reflects the ascending seats with conscious pride,
And dares to emulate a classic tide.
Soft music breathes along each opening shade,
And sooths the dashing of his rough cascade.
With mystic lines his sands are figured over,
And circles traced upon the lettered shore.
Beneath his willows rove the inquiring youth,
And court the fair majestic form of truth.
Here nature opens all her secret springs,
And heaven-born science plumes her eagle wings:
Too long had bigot rage, with malice swelled,
Crushed her strong pinions, and her flight witheld;
Too long to check her ardent progress strove:
So writhes the serpent round the bird of Jove;
Hangs on her flight, restrains her towering wing,
Twists its dark folds, and points its venomed sting.
Yet still (if aught aright the Muse divine)
Her rising pride shall mock the vain design;
On sounding pinions yet aloft shall soar,
And through the azure deep untravel'd paths explore.
Where science smiles, the Muses join the train;
And gentlest arts and purest manners reign.
Ye generous youth who love this studious shade,
How rich a field is to your hopes displayed!
Knowledge to you unlocks the classic page;
And virtue blossoms for a better age.
Oh golden days! oh bright unvalued hours!
What bliss (did ye but know that bliss) were yours?
With richest stores your glowing bosoms fraught,
Perception quick, and luxury of thought;
The high designs that heave the laboring soul,
Panting for fame, impatient of control;
And fond enthusiastic thought, that feeds
On pictured tales of vast heroic deeds;
And quick affections, kindling into flame
At virtue's, or their country's honored name;
And spirits light to every joy in tune;
And friendship ardent as a summer's noon;
And generous scorn of vice's venal tribe;
And proud disdain of interest's sordid bribe;
And conscious honor's quick instinctive fense;
And smiles unforced; and easy confidence;
And vivid fancy; and clear simple truth;
And all the mental bloom of vernal youth.
How bright the scene to fancy's eye appears,
Through the long perspective of distant years,
When this, this little group their country calls
From academic shades and learned halls,
To fix her laws, her spirit to sustain,
And light up glory through her wide domain!
Their various tastes in different arts displayed,
Like tempered harmony of light and shade,
With friendly union in one mass shall blend,
And this adorn the state, and that defend.
These the sequestered shade shall cheaply please,
With learned labor, and inglorious ease:
While those, impelled by some resistless force,
Over seas and rocks shall urge their venurous course;
Rich fruits matur'd by glowing suns behold,
And China's groves of vegetable gold;
From every land the various harvest spoil,
And bear the tribute to their native soil:
But tell each land (while every toil they share,
Firm to sustain, and resolute to dare,)
MAN is the nobler growth our realms supply,
And SOULS are ripened in our northern sky.
Some pensive creep along the shelly shore;
Unfold the silky texture of a flower;
With sharpened eyes inspect an hornet's sting,
And all the wonders of an insect's wing.
Some trace with curious search the hidden cause
Of nature's changes, and her various laws;
Untwist her beauteous web, disrobe her charms,
And hunt her to her elemental forms:
Or prove what hidden powers in herbs are found
To quench disease and staunch the burning wound;
With cordial drops the fainting head sustain,
Call back the flitting soul, and still the throbs of pain.
The patriot passion this shall strongly feel,
Ardent, and glowing with undaunted zeal;
With lips of fire shall plead his country's cause,
And vindicate the majesty of laws.
This clothed with Britain's thunder, spread alarms
Through the wide earth, and shake the pole with arms.
That to the sounding lyre his deeds rehearse,
Enshrine his name in some immortal verse,
To long posterity his praise consign,
And pay a life of hardships by a line.
While others, consecrate to higher aims,
Whose hallowed bosoms glow with purer flames,
Love in their heart, persuasion in their tongue,
With words of peace shall charm the listening throng,
Draw the dread veil that wraps the eternal throne,
And launch our souls into the bright unknown.
Here cease my song. Such arduous themes require
A master's pencil, and a poet's fire:
Unequal far such bright designs to paint,
Too weak her colors, and her lines too faint,
My drooping Muse folds up her fluttering wing,
And hides her head in the green lap of spring.
The GROANS of the TANKARD.
Dulci digne mero!
HORAT.
OF strange events I sing, and portents dire;
The wondrous theme a reverend ear require;
Though strange the tale, the faithful Muse believe,
And what she says with pious awe receive.
'Twas at the solemn, silent, noontide hour,
When hunger rages with despotic power,
When the lean student quits his Hebrew roots
For the gross nourishment of English fruits,
And throws unfinished airy systems by
For solid pudding and substantial pie,
When hungry poets the glad summons own,
And leave spare fast to dine with Gods alone;
Our sober meal dispatched with silent haste,
The decent grace concludes the short repast:
Then urged by thirst we cast impatient eyes
Where deep, capacious, vast, of ample size,
The tankard stood, replenished to the brink
With the cool beverage blue-ey'd Naiads drink.
But lo! a sudden prodigy appears,
And our chilled hearts recoil with startling fears;
Its yawning mouth disclosed the deep profound,
And in low murmurs breathed a sullen sound;
Cold drops of dew did on the sides appear;
No finger touched it, and no hand was near;
At length the indignant vase its silence broke,
First heaved deep hollow groans, and then distinctly spoke.
"How changed the scene! for what unpardoned crimes
"Have I survived to these degenerate times?
"I, who was wont the festal board to grace,
"And midst the circle lift my honest face,
"White over with froth, like Etna crowned with snow,
"Which mantled over the brown abyss below,
"Where Ceres mingled with her golden store
"The richer spoils of either India's shore,
"The dulcet reed the Western islands boast,
"And spicy fruit from Banda's fragrant coast.
"At solemn feasts the nectar'd draught I poured,
"And often journey'd round the ample board:
"The portly Alderman, the stately Mayor,
"And all the furry tribe my worth declare;
"And the keen Sportsman often, his labors done,
"To me retreating with the setting sun,
"Deep draughts imbibed, and conquered land and sea,
"And overthrew the pride of France by me.
"Let meaner clay contain the limpid wave,
"The clay for such an office nature gave;
"Let China's earth, enriched with colored stains,
"Pencil'd with gold, and streaked with azure veins,
"The grateful flavor of the Indian leaf,
"Or Mocho's sunburnt berry glad receive;
"The nobler metal claims more generous use,
"And mine should flow with more exalted juice.
"Did I for this my native bed resign,
"From the dark bowels of Potosi's mine?
"Was I for this with violence torn away,
"And dragged to regions of the upper day?
"For this the rage of torturing furnace bore,
"From foreign dross to purge the bright'ning ore?
"For this have I endured the fiery test,
"And was I stamped for this with Britain's lofty crest?
"Unblest the day, and luckless was the hour
"Which doomed me to a Presbyterian's power;
"Fated to serve the Puritanick race,
"Whose slender meal is shorter than their grace;
"Whose moping sons no jovial orgies keep;
"Where evening brings no summons but to sleep;
"No Carnival is even Christmas here,
"And one long Lent involves the meagre year.
"Bear me, ye powers! to some more genial scene,
"Where on soft cushions lolls the gouty Dean,
"Or rosy Prebend, with cherubic face,
"With double chin, and paunch of portly grace,
"Who lulled in downy slumbers shall agree
"To own no inspiration but from me.
"Or to some spacious mansion, Gothic, old,
"Where Comus sprightly train their vigils hold;
"There often exhausted, and replenished often,
"Oh! let me still supply the eternal draught;
"Till care within the deep abyss be drowned,
"And thought grows giddy at the vast profound."
More had the goblet spoke, but lo! appears
An ancient Sybil furrowed over with years;
Her aspect sour, and stern ungracious look
With sudden damp the conscious vessel struck;
Chilled at her touch its mouth it slowly closed,
And in long silence all its griefs reposed:
Yet still low murmurs creep along the ground,
And the air vibrates with the silver sound.
ON THE Backwardness of the SPRING 1771.
Estatem increpitans seram, zephyrosque morantes.
VIRGIL.
IN vain the sprightly sun renews his course,
Climbs up the ascending signs and leads the day,
While long embattled clouds repel his force,
And lazy vapors choke the golden ray.
In vain the spring proclaims the newborn year;
No flowers beneath her lingering footsteps spring,
No rosy garland binds her flowing hair,
And in her train no feathered warblers sing.
Her opening breast is stained with frequent showers,
Her streaming tresses bathed in chilling dews,
And sad before her move the pensive hours,
Whose flagging wings no breathing sweets diffuse.
Like some lone pilgrim, clad in mournful weed,
Whose wounded bosom drinks her falling tears,
On whose pale cheek relentless sorrows feed,
Whose dreary way no sprightly carol chears.
Not thus she breathed on Arno's purple shore,
And called the Tuscan Muses to her bowers;
Not this the robe in Enna's vale she wore,
When Ceres daughter filled her lap with flowers.
Clouds behind clouds in long succession rise,
And heavy snows oppress the springing green;
The dazzling waste fatigues the aching eyes,
And fancy droops beneath the unvaried scene.
Indulgent nature loose this frozen zone;
Through opening skies let genial sunbeams play;
Dissolving snows shall their glad impulse own,
And melt upon the bosom of the May.
VERSES written in an Alcove.
Jam Cytherea choros ducit Venus imminente Luna.
HORAT.
NOW the moon-beam's trembling luster
Silvers over the dewy green,
And in soft and shadowy colors
Sweetly paints the checkered scene.
Here between the opening branches
Streams a flood of softened light,
There the thick and twisted foliage
Spreads the browner gloom of night.
This is sure the haunt of fairies,
In yon cool Alcove they play;
Care can never cross the threshold,
Care was only made for day.
Far from hence be noisy clamor,
Sick disgust and anxious fear;
Pining grief and wasting anguish
Never keep their vigils here.
Tell no tales of sheeted specter,
Rising from the quiet tomb;
Fairer forms this cell shall visit,
Brighter visions gild the gloom.
Choral songs and sprightly voices
Echo from her cell shall call;
Sweeter, sweeter than the murmur
Of the distant water fall.
Every ruder gust of passion
Lulled with music dies away,
Till within the charmed bosom
None but soft affections play:
Soft, as when the evening breezes
Gently stir the poplar grove;
Brighter than the smile of summer,
Sweeter than the breath of love.
Thee, the enchanted Muse shall follow,
LISSY! to the rustic cell,
And each careless note repeating
Tune them to her charming shell.
Not the Muse who wreathed with laurel,
Solemn stalks with tragic gait,
And in clear and lofty vision
Sees the future births of fate;
Not the maid who crowned with cypress
Sweeps along in sceptered pall,
And in sad and solemn accents
Mourns the crested hero's fall;
But that other smiling sister,
With the blue and laughing eye,
Singing, in a lighter measure,
Strains of woodland harmony:
All unknown to fame or glory,
Easy, blithe and debonair,
Crowned with flowers, her careless tresses
Loosely floating on the air.
Then, when next the star of evening
Softly sheds the silent dew,
Let me in this rustic temple,
LISSY! meet the Muse and you.
The MOUSE's PETITION, To Doctor PRIESTLEY.
Found in the TRAP where he had been confined all Night.
Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos.
VIRGIL.
OH! hear a pensive captive's prayer,
For liberty that sighs;
And never let thine heart be shut
Against the prisoner's cries.
For here forlorn and sad I sit,
Within the wiry grate;
And tremble at the approaching morn,
Which brings impending fate.
If ever thy breast with freedom glowed,
And spurned a tyrant's chain,
Let not thy strong oppressive force
A freeborn mouse detain.
Oh! do not stain with guiltless blood
Thy hospitable hearth;
Nor triumph that thy wiles betrayed
A prize so little worth.
The scattered gleanings of a feast
My scanty meals supply;
But if thine unrelenting heart
That slender boon deny,
The cheerful light, the vital air,
Are blessings widely given;
Let nature's commoners enjoy
The common gifts of heaven.
The well taught philosophic mind
To all compassion gives;
Casts round the world an equal eye,
And feels for all that lives.
If mind, as ancient sages taught,
A never dying flame,
Still shifts through matter's varying forms,
In every form the same,
Beware, lest in the worm you crush
A brother's soul you find;
And tremble lest thy luckless hand
Dislodge a kindred mind.
Or, if this transient gleam of day
Be all of life we share,
Let pity plead within thy breast
That little all to spare.
So may thy hospitable board
With health and peace be crowned;
And every charm of heartfelt ease
Beneath thy roof be found.
So when unseen destruction lurks,
Which men like mice may share,
May some kind angel clear thy path,
And break the hidden snare.
To MRS. P^, With some Drawings of BIRDS and INSECTS.
The kindred arts to please thee shall conspire,
One dip the pencil, and one string the lyre.
POPE.
AMANDA bids; at her command again
I seize the pencil, or resume the pen;
No other call my willing hand requires,
And friendship, better than a Muse inspires.
Painting and poetry are near allied;
The kindred arts two sister Muses guide;
This charms the eye, that steals upon the ear;
There sounds are tuned; and colors blended here:
This with a silent touch enchants our eyes,
And bids a gayer brighter world arise:
That, less allied to sense, with deeper art
Can pierce the close recesses of the heart;
By well set syllables, and potent sound,
Can rouse, can chill the breast, can sooth, can wound;
To life adds motion, and to beauty soul,
And breathes a spirit through the finished whole:
Each perfects each, in friendly union joined;
This gives Amanda's form, and that her mind.
But humbler themes my artless hand requires,
Nor higher than the feathered tribe aspires.
Yet who the various nations can declare
That plow with busy wing the peopled air?
These cleave the crumbling bark for insect food;
Those dip their crooked beak in kindred blood:
Some haunt the rushy moor, the lonely woods;
Some bathe their silver plumage in the floods;
Some fly to man; his household gods implore,
And gather round his hospitable door;
Wait the known call, and find protection there
From all the lesser tyrants of the air.
The tawny EAGLE seats his callow brood
High on the cliff, and feasts his young with blood.
On Snowden's rocks, or Orkney's wide domain,
Whose beetling cliffs o'erhang the western main,
The royal bird his lonely kingdom forms
Amidst the gathering clouds, and sullen storms;
Through the wide waste of air he darts his sight
And holds his sounding pinions poised for flight;
With cruel eye premeditates the war,
And marks his destined victim from afar:
Descending in a whirlwind to the ground,
His pinions like the rush of waters sound;
The fairest of the fold he bears away,
And to his nest compels the struggling prey;
He scorns the game by meaner hunters tore,
And dips his talons in no vulgar gore.
With lovelier pomp along the grassy plain
The silver PHEASANT draws his shining train;
On India's painted shore, by Ganges' stream,
He spreads his plumage to the sunny gleam:
But when the wiry net his flight confines,
He lowers his purple crest, and inly pines;
The beauteous captive hangs his ruffled wing
Oppressed by bondage, and our chilly spring.
To claim the verse, unnumber'd tribes appear
That swell the music of the vernal year:
Seized with the spirit of the kindly spring
They tune the voice, and sleek the glossy wing:
With emulative strife the notes prolong
And pour out all their little souls in song.
When winter bites upon the naked plain,
Nor food nor shelter in the groves remain,
By instinct led, a firm united band,
As marshalled by some skilful general's hand,
The congregated nations wing their way
In dusky columns over the trackless sea;
In clouds unnumber'd annual hover over
The craggy Bass, or Kilda's utmost shore:
Thence spread their sails to meet the southern wind,
And leave the gathering tempest far behind;
Pursue the circling sun's indulgent ray,
Course the swift seasons, and overtake the day.
Not so the Insect race, ordained to keep
The lazy sabbath of a half-year's sleep.
Entombed, beneath the filmy web they lie,
And wait the influence of a kinder sky;
When vernal sunbeams pierce their dark retreat,
The heaving tomb distends with vital heat;
The full-form'd brood impatient of their cell
Start from their trance, and burst their silken shell;
Trembling awhile they stand, and scarcely dare
To launch at once upon the untried air:
At length assured, they catch the favoring gale,
And leave their sordid spoils, and high in Either sail.
So when Rinaldo struck the conscious rind,
He found a nymph in every trunk confined;
The forest labors with convulsive throes,
The bursting trees the lovely births disclose,
And a gay troop of damsels round him stood,
Where late was rugged bark and lifeless wood.
Lo! the bright train their radiant wings unfold,
With silver fringed and freckl'd over with gold:
On the gay bosom of some fragrant flower
They idly fluttering live their little hour;
Their life all pleasure, and their task all play,
All spring their age, and sunshine all their day.
Not so the child of sorrow, wretched man,
His course with toil concludes, with pain began:
Pleasure's the portion of the inferior kind;
But glory, virtue, Heaven for Man designed.
What atom forms of insect life appear!
And who can follow nature's pencil here?
Their wings with azure, green, and purple gloss'd,
Studded with colored eyes, with gems embossed,
Inlaid with pearl, and marked with various stains
Of lively crimson through their dusky veins.
Some shoot like living stars, athwart the night,
And scatter from their wings a vivid light,
To guide the Indian to his tawny loves,
As through the woods with cautious step he moves.
See the proud giant of the beetle race;
What shining arms his polished limbs enchase!
Like some stern warrior formidably bright
His steely sides reflect a gleaming light;
On his large forehead spreading horns he wears,
And high in air the branching antlers bears;
Over many an inch extends his wide domain,
And his rich treasury swells with hoarded grain.
Thy friend thus strives to cheat the lonely hour,
With song, or paint, an insect, or a flower:
Yet if Amanda praise the flowing line,
And bend delighted over the gay design,
I envy not, nor emulate the fame
Or of the painter's, or the poet's name:
Could I to both with equal claim pretend,
Yet far, far dearer were the name of FRIEND.
CHARACTERS.
-- semper amabilem.
HORAT.
OH! born to sooth distress, and lighten care;
Lively as soft, and innocent as fair;
Blessed with that sweet simplicity of thought
So rarely found, and never to be taught;
Of winning speech, endearing, artless, kind,
The loveliest pattern of a female mind;
Like some fair spirit from the realms of rest
With all her native heaven within her breast;
So pure, so good, she scarce can guess at sin,
But thinks the world without like that within;
Such melting tenderness, so fond to bless,
Her charity almost becomes excess.
Wealth may be courted, wisdom be revered,
And beauty praised, and brutal strength be feared;
But goodness only can affection move;
And love must owe its origin to love.
Illam quicquid agit, quoquo vestigia flectit,
Componit furtim, subsequiturque decor.
TIBUL.
OF gentle manners, and of taste refined,
With all the graces of a polished mind;
Clear sense and truth still shone in all she spoke,
And from her lips no idle sentence broke.
Each nicer elegance of art she knew;
Correctly fair, and regularly true:
Her ready fingers plied with equal skill
The pencil's task, the needle, or the quill.
So poised her feelings, so composed her soul,
So subject all to reason's calm control,
One only passion, strong, and unconfined,
Disturbed the balance of her even mind:
One passion ruled despotic in her breast,
In every word, and look, and thought confessed;
But that was love, and love delights to bless
The generous transports of a fond excess.
On a LADY's WRITING.
HER even lines her steady temper show;
Neat as her dress, and polished as her brow;
Strong as her judgment, easy as her air;
Correct though free, and regular though fair:
And the same graces over her pen preside
That form her manners and her footsteps guide.
HYMN to CONTENT.
-- natura beatis
Omnibus esse dedit, si quis cognoverit uti.
CLAUDIAN.
O Thou, the Nymph with placid eye!
O seldom found, yet ever nigh!
Receive my temperate vow:
Not all the storms that shake the pole
Can ever disturb thy halcyon soul,
And smooth unaltered brow.
O come, in simplest vest arrayed,
With all thy sober cheer displayed
To bless my longing sight;
Thy mien composed, thy even pace,
Thy meek regard, thy matron grace,
And chaste subdued delight.
No more by varying passions beat,
O gently guide my pilgrim feet
To find thy hermit cell;
Where in some pure and equal sky
Beneath thy soft indulgent eye
The modest virtues dwell.
Simplicity in Attic vest,
And Innocence with candid breast,
And clear undaunted eye;
And Hope, who points to distant years,
Fair opening through this vale of tears
A vista to the sky.
There Health, through whose calm bosom glide
The temperate joys in even tide,
That rarely ebb or flow;
And Patience there, thy sister meek,
Presents her mild, unvarying cheek
To meet the offered blow.
Her influence taught the Phrygian sage
A tyrant master's wanton rage
With settled smiles to meet;
Inured to toil and bitter bread
He bowed his meek submitted head,
And kissed thy sainted feet.
But thou, oh Nymph retired and coy!
In what brown hamlet do thou joy
To tell thy simple tale;
The lowliest children of the ground,
Moss rose, and violet, blossom round,
And lily of the vale.
O say what soft propitious hour
I best may choose to hail thy power,
And court thy gentle sway?
When Autumn, friendly to the Muse,
Shall thy own modest tints diffuse,
And shed thy milder day.
When Eve, her dewy star beneath,
Thy balmy spirit loves to breathe,
And every storm is laid;
If such an hour was ever thy choice,
Often let me hear thy soothing voice
Low whispering through the shade.
To WISDOM.
Dona praesentis rape laetus horae, ac
Linque severa.
HORAT.
O WISDOM! if thy soft control
Can sooth the sickness of the soul,
Can bid the warring passions cease,
And breathe the balm of tender peace,
WISDOM! I bless thy gentle sway,
And ever, ever will obey.
But if thou come with frown austere
To nurse the brood of care and fear;
To bid our sweetest passions die,
And leave us in their room a sigh;
Or if thine aspect stern have power
To wither each poor transient flower,
That cheers the pilgrimage of woe,
And dry the springs whence hope should flow;
WISDOM, thine empire I disclaim,
Thou empty boast of pompous name!
In gloomy shade of cloisters dwell,
But never haunt my cheerful cell.
Hail to pleasure's frolic train;
Hail to fancy's golden reign;
Festive mirth, and laughter wild,
Free and sportful as the child;
Hope with eager sparkling eyes,
And easy faith, and fond surprise:
Let these, in fairy colors dressed,
Forever share my careless breast;
Then, though wise I may not be,
The wise themselves shall envy me.
THE ORIGIN OF SONG-WRITING. Addressed to the Author of Essays on Song-Writing.

Illic indocto primum se exercuit arcu;
Hei mihi quam doctas nunc habet ille manus!
TIBUL.
WHEN Cupid, wanton boy, was young,
His wings unfledged, and rude his tongue,
He loiter'd in Arcadian bowers,
And hid his bow in wreaths of flowers;
Or pierced some fond unguarded heart,
With now and then a random dart;
But heroes scorned the idle boy,
And love was but a shepherd's toy:
When Venus, vexed to see her child
Amidst the forests thus run wild,
Would point him out some nobler game,
Gods, and godlike men to tame.
She seized the boy's reluctant hand,
And led him to the virgin band,
Where the sister muses round
Swell the deep majestic sound;
And in solemn strains unite,
Breathing chaste, severe delight:
Songs of chiefs, and heroes old,
In unsubmitting virtue bold;
Of even valor's temperate heat,
And toils to stubborn patience sweet;
Of nodding plumes, and burnished arms,
And glory's bright terrific charms.
The potent sounds like lightning dart
Resistless through the glowing heart;
Of power to lift the fixed soul
High over fortune's proud control;
Kindling deep, prophetic musing;
Love of beauteous death infusing;
Scorn, and unconquerable hate
Of tyrant pride's unhallowed state.
The boy abashed, and half afraid,
Beheld each chaste immortal maid:
Pallas spread her Egis there;
Mars stood by with threatening air;
And stern Diana's icy look
With sudden chill his bosom struck.
Daughters of Jove receive the child,
The queen of beauty said, and smiled:
(Her rosy breath perfumed the air
And scattered sweet contagion there;
Relenting nature learnt to languish,
And sicken'd with delightful anguish:)
Receive him, artless yet and young;
Refine his air and smooth his tongue;
Conduct him through your favorite bowers,
Enriched with fair perennial flowers,
To solemn shades and springs that lie
Remote from each unhallowed eye;
Teach him to spell those mystic names
That kindle bright immortal flames;
And guide his young unpracticed feet
To reach coy learning's lofty seat.
Ah, luckless hour! mistaken maids!
When Cupid sought the Muses shades:
Of their sweetest notes beguiled,
By the sly insidious child,
Now of power his darts are found
Twice ten thousand times to wound.
Now no more the slackened strings
Breathe of high immortal things,
But Cupid tunes the Muses lyre,
To languid notes of soft desire:
In every clime, in every tongue,
It Is love inspires the poet's song.
Hence Sappho's soft infectious page;
Monimia's woe; Othello's rage;
Abandoned Dido's fruitless prayer;
And Eloisa's long despair;
The garland blessed with many a vow,
For haughty Sacharissa's brow;
And washed with tears the mournful verse
That Petrarch laid on Laura's hearse.
But more than all the sister quire,
Music confessed the pleasing fire.
Here sovereign Cupid reigned alone;
Music and song were all his own.
Sweet as in old Arcadian plains,
The British pipe has caught the strains:
And where the Tweed's pure current glides,
Or Liffy rolls her limpid tides,
Or Thames his oozy waters leads
Through rural bowers or yellow meads,
With many an old romantic tale
Has cheered the lone sequestered vale;
With many a sweet and tender lay
Deceived the tiresome summer-day.
It Is yours to cull with happy art
Each meaning verse that speaks the heart;
And fair arrayed, in order meet,
To lay the wreath at beauty's feet.
SONGS.
I.
COME here fond youth, whoever thou be,
That boasts to love as well as me;
And if thy breast have felt so wide a wound,
Come hither and thy flame approve;
I Will teach thee what it is to love,
And by what marks true passion may be found.
It is to be all bathed in tears;
To live upon a smile for years;
To lie whole ages at a beauty's feet:
To kneel, to languish and implore;
And still though she disdain, adore:
It is to do all this, and think thy sufferings sweet.
It is to gaze upon her eyes
With eager joy and fond surprise;
Yet tempered with such chaste and awful fear
As wretches feel who wait their doom;
Nor must one ruder thought presume
Though but in whispers breathed, to meet her ear.
It is to hope, though hope were lost;
Though heaven and earth thy passion crossed;
Though she were bright as sainted queens above,
And thou the least and meanest swain
That folds his flock upon the plain,
Yet if thou dare not hope, thou do not love.
It is to quench thy joy in tears;
To nurse strange doubts and groundless fears:
If pangs of jealousy thou have not proved,
Though she were fonder and more true
Than any nymph old poets drew,
Oh never dream again that thou have loved.
If when the darling maid is gone,
Thou do not seek to be alone,
Wrapped in a pleasing trance of tender woe;
And muse, and fold thy languid arms,
Feeding thy fancy on her charms,
Thou do not love, for love is nourished so.
If any hopes thy bosom share
But those which love has planted there,
Or any cares but his thy breast enthrall,
Thou never yet his power have known;
Love sits on a despotic throne,
And reigns a tyrant, if he reigns at all.
Now if thou art so lost a thing,
Here all thy tender sorrows bring,
And prove whose patience longest can endure:
We'll strive whose fancy shall be lost
In dreams of fondest passion most;
For if thou thus have loved, oh! never hope a cure.
SONG II.
IF ever thou did joy to bind
Two hearts in equal passion joined,
O son of VENUS! hear me now,
And bid FLORELLA bless my vow.
If any bliss reserved for me
Thou in the leaves of fate should see;
If any white propitious hour,
Pregnant with hoarded joys in store;
Now, now the mighty treasure give,
In her for whom alone I live:
In sterling love pay all the sum,
And I Will absolve the fates to come.
In all the pride of full-blown charms
Yield her, relenting, to my arms:
Her bosom touch with soft desires,
And let her feel what she inspires.
But, CUPID, if thine aid be vain
The dear reluctant maid to gain;
If still with cold averted eyes
She dash my hopes, and scorn my sighs;
O! grant ('it is all I ask of thee)
That I no more may change than she;
But still with duteous zeal love on,
When every gleam of hope is gone.
Leave me then alone to languish;
Think not time can heal my anguish;
Pity the woes which I endure;
But never, never grant a cure.
SONG III.
SYLVIA. LEAVE me, simple shepherd, leave me;
Drag no more a hopeless chain:
I cannot like, nor would deceive thee;
Love the maid that loves again.

CORIN. Though more gentle nymphs surround me,
Kindly pitying what I feel,
Only you have power to wound me;
SYLVIA, only you can heal.

SYLVIA. CORIN, cease this idle teazing;
Love that is forced is harsh and sour:
If the lover be displeasing,
To persist disgusts the more.

CORIN. It Is in vain, in vain to fly me,
SYLVIA, I will still pursue;
Twenty thousand times deny me,
I will kneel and weep anew.

SYLVIA. CUPID never shall make me languish,
I was born averse to love;
Lovers' sighs, and tears, and anguish,
Mirth and pastime to me prove.

CORIN. Still I vow with patient duty
Thus to meet your proudest scorn;
You for unrelenting beauty,
I for constant love was born.

But the fates had not consented,
Since they both did fickle prove;
Of her scorn the maid repented,
And the shepherd of his love.
SONG IV.
WHEN gentle CELIA first I knew,
A breast so good, so kind, so true,
Reason and taste approved;
Pleased to indulge so pure a flame,
I called it by too soft a name,
And fondly thought I loved.
Till CHLORIS came, with sad surprise
I felt the lightning of her eyes
Through all my senses run;
All glowing with resistless charms,
She filled my breast with new alarms,
I saw, and was undone.
O CELIA! dear unhappy maid,
Forbear the weakness to upbraid
Which ought your scorn to move;
I know this beauty false and vain,
I know she triumphs in my pain,
Yet still I feel I love.
Thy gentle smiles no more can please,
Nor can thy softest friendship ease
The torments I endure;
Think what that wounded breast must feel
Which truth and kindness cannot heal,
Nor even thy pity cure.
Often shall I curse my iron chain,
And wish again thy milder reign
With long and vain regret;
All that I can, to thee I give,
And could I still to reason live
I were thy captive yet.
But passion's wild impetuous sea
Hurries me far from peace and thee;
'Twere vain to struggle more:
Thus the poor sailor slumbering lies,
While swelling tides around him rise,
And push his bark from shore.
In vain he spreads his helpless arms,
His pitying friends with fond alarms
In vain deplore his state;
Still far and farther from the coast,
On the high surge his bark is tossed,
And foundering yields to fate.
SONG V.
AS near a weeping spring reclined
The beauteous ARAMINTA pined,
And mourned a false ungrateful youth;
While dying echoes caught the sound,
And spread the soft complaints around
Of broken vows and altered truth;
An aged shepherd heard her moan,
And thus in pity's kindest tone
Addressed the lost despairing maid:
Cease, cease unhappy fair to grieve,
For sounds, though sweet, can never relieve
A breaking heart by love betrayed.
Why should thou waste such precious showers,
That fall like dew on withered flowers,
But dying passion never restored?
In beauty's empire is no mean,
And woman, either slave or queen,
Is quickly scorned when not adored.
Those liquid pearls from either eye,
Which might an eastern empire buy,
Unvalued here and fruitless fall;
No art the season can renew
When love was young, and DAMON true;
No tears a wandering heart recall.
Cease, cease to grieve, thy tears are vain,
Should those fair orbs in drops of rain
Vie with a weeping southern sky:
For hearts overcome with love and grief
All nature yields but one relief;
Die, hapless ARAMINTA, die.
SONG VI.
WHEN first upon your tender cheek
I saw the morn of beauty break
With mild and chearing beam,
I bowed before your infant shrine,
The earliest sighs you had were mine,
And you my darling theme.
I saw you in that opening morn
For beauty's boundless empire born,
And first confessed your sway;
And ever your thoughts, devoid of art,
Could learn the value of a heart,
I gave my heart away.
I watched the dawn of every grace,
And gazed upon that angel face,
While yet 'twas safe to gaze;
And fondly blessed each rising charm,
Nor thought such innocence could harm
The peace of future days.
But now despotic over the plains
The awful noon of beauty reigns,
And kneeling crowds adore;
These charms arise too fiercely bright,
Danger and death attend the sight,
And I must hope no more.
Thus to the rising God of day
Their early vows the Persians pay,
And bless the spreading fire;
Whose glowing chariot mounting soon
Pours on their heads the burning noon;
They sicken, and expire.
DELIA, AN ELEGY.
-- tecum ut longae sociarem gaudia vitae,
Inque tuo caderet nostra senecta sinu.
TIBUL.
YES, DELIA loves! My fondest vows are blessed;
Farewell the memory of her past disdain;
One kind relenting glance has healed my breast,
And balanced in a moment years of pain.
Over her soft cheek consenting blushes move,
And with kind stealth her secret soul betray;
Blushes, which usher in the morn of love,
Sure as the red'ning east foretells the day.
Her tender smiles shall pay me with delight
For many a bitter pang of jealous fear;
For many an anxious day, and sleepless night,
For many a stifled sigh, and silent tear.
DELIA shall come, and bless my lone retreat;
She does not scorn the shepherd's lowly life;
She will not blush to leave the splendid seat,
And own the title of a poor man's wife.
The simple knot shall bind her gathered hair,
The russet garment clasp her lovely breast:
DELIA shall mix amongst the rural fair,
By charms alone distinguished from the rest.
And meek Simplicity, neglected maid,
Shall bid my fair in native graces shine:
She, only she, shall lend her modest aid,
Chaste, sober priestess, at sweet beauty's shrine!
How sweet to muse by murmuring springs reclined;
Or loitering careless in the shady grove,
Indulge the gentlest feelings of the mind,
And pity those who live to aught but love!
When DELIA's hand unlocks her shining hair,
And over her shoulder spreads the flowing gold,
Base were the man who one bright tress would spare
For all the ore of India's coarser mold.
By her dear side with what content I Would toil,
Patient of any labor in her sight;
Guide the slow plough, or turn the stubborn soil,
Till the last, lingering beam of doubtful light.
But softer tasks divide my DELIA's hours;
To watch the firstlings at their harmless play;
With welcome shade to screen the languid flowers,
That sicken in the summer's parching ray.
Often will she stoop amidst her evening walk,
With tender hand each bruised plant to rear;
To bind the drooping lily's broken stalk,
And nurse the blossoms of the infant year.
When beating rains forbid our feet to roam,
We'll sheltered sit, and turn the storied page;
There see what passions shake the lofty dome
With mad ambition or ungoverned rage:
What headlong ruin often involves the great;
What conscious terrors guilty bosoms prove;
What strange and sudden turns of adverse fate
Tear the sad virgin from her plighted love.
DELIA shall read, and drop a gentle tear;
Then cast her eyes around the low-roof'd cot,
And own the fates have dealt more kindly here,
That blessed with only love our little lot.
For love has sworn (I heard the awful vow)
The wavering heart shall never be his care,
That stoops at any baser shrine to bow:
And what he cannot rule, he scorns to share.
My heart in DELIA is so fully blessed,
It has not room to lodge another joy;
My peace all leans upon that gentle breast,
And only there misfortune can annoy.
Our silent hours shall steal unmarked away
In one long tender calm of rural peace;
And measure many a fair unblemished day
Of cheerful leisure and poetic ease.
The proud unfeeling world their lot shall scorn
Who 'midst inglorious shades can poorly dwell:
Yet if some youth, for gentler passions born,
Shall chance to wander near our lowly cell,
His feeling breast with purer flames shall glow;
And leaving pomp, and state, and cares behind,
Shall own the world has little to bestow
Where two fond hearts in equal love are joined.
OVID to his WIFE: Imitated from different Parts of his TRISTIA.
Jam mea cygneas imitantur tempora plumas,
Inficit and nigras alba senecta comas:
TRIST. Lib. iv. Eleg. 8.
MY aged head now stoops its honors low,
Bowed with the load of fifty winters' snow;
And for the raven's glossy black assumes
The downy whiteness of the cygnet's plumes:
Loose scattered hairs around my temples stray,
And spread the mournful shade of sickly gray:
I bend beneath the weight of broken years,
Averse to change, and chilled with causeless fears.
The season now invites me to retire
To the dear lares of my household fire;
To homely scenes of calm domestic peace,
A poet's leisure, and an old man's ease;
To wear the remnant of uncertain life
In the fond bosom of a faithful wife;
In safe repose my last few hours to spend,
Nor fearful nor impatient of their end.
Thus a safe port the wave-worn vessels gain,
Nor tempt again the dangers of the main;
Thus the proud steed, when youthful glory fades,
And creeping age his stiffening limbs invades,
Lies stretched at ease on the luxuriant plain,
And dreams his morning triumphs over again:
The hardly veteran from the camp retires,
His joints unstrung, and feeds his household fires;
Satiate with fame enjoys well-earn'd repose,
And sees his stormy day serenely close.
Not such my lot: Severer fates decree
My shattered bark must plough an unknown sea.
Forced from my native seats and sacred home,
Friendless, alone, through Scythian wilds to roam;
With trembling knees over unknown hills I go,
Stiff with blue ice and heaped with drifted snow:
Pale suns there strike their feeble rays in vain,
Which faintly glance against the marble plain;
Red Ister there, which madly lashed the shore,
His idle urn sealed up, forgets to roar;
Stern winter in eternal triumph reigns,
Shuts up the bounteous year and starves the plains.
My failing eyes the weary waste explore,
The savage mountains and the dreary shore,
And vainly look for scenes of old delight;
No loved familiar objects meet my sight;
No long remembered streams, or conscious bowers,
Wake the gay memory of youthful hours.
I fondly hoped, content with learned ease,
To walk amidst cotemporary trees;
In every scene some favorite spot to trace,
And meet in all some kind domestic face;
To stretch my limbs upon my native soil,
With long vacation from unquiet toil;
Resign my breath where first that breath I drew,
And sink into the spot from whence I grew.
But if my feeble age is doomed to try
Unusual seasons and a foreign sky,
To some more genial clime let me repair,
And taste the healing balm of milder air;
Near to the glowing sun's directer ray,
And pitch my tent beneath the eye of day.
Could not the winter in my veins suffice,
Without the added rage of Scythian skies?
The snow of time my vital heat exhaust,
And hoary age, without Sarmatian frost?
Ye tuneful maids! who once, in happier days,
Beneath the myrtle grove inspired my lays,
How shall I now your wonted aid implore;
Where seek your footsteps on this savage shore,
Whose ruder echoes never were taught to bear
The poet's numbers or the lover's care?
Yet storm and tempest are of ills the least
Which this inhospitable land infest:
Society than solitude is worse,
And man to man is still the greatest curse.
A savage race my fearful steps surround,
Practiced in blood and disciplined to wound;
Unknown alike to pity as to fear,
Hard as their soil, and as their skies severe.
Skilled in each mystery of direst art,
They arm with double death the poisoned dart:
Uncomb'd and horrid grows their spiky hair;
Uncouth their vesture, terrible their air:
The lurking dagger at their side hung low,
Leaps in quick vengeance on the hapless foe:
No steadfast faith is here, no sure repose;
An armed truce is all this nation knows:
The rage of battle works, when battles cease;
And wars are brooding in the lap of peace.
Since CAESAR wills, and I a wretch must be,
Let me be safe at least in misery!
To my sad grave in calm oblivion steal,
Nor add the woes I fear to all I feel!
Yet here, forever here, your bard must dwell,
Who sung of sports and tender loves so well.
Here must he live: but when he yields his breath
O let him not be exiled even in death!
Lest mixed with Scythian shades, a Roman ghost
Wander on this inhospitable coast.
CAESAR no more shall urge a wretch's doom;
The bolt of JOVE pursues not in the tomb.
To thee, dear wife, some friend with pious care
All that of OVID then remains shall bear;
Then will thou weep to see me so return,
And with fond passion clasp my silent urn.
O check thy grief, that tender bosom spare,
Hurt not thy cheeks, nor soil thy flowing hair.
Press the pale marble with thy lips, and give
One precious tear, and bid my memory live:
The silent dust shall glow at thy command,
And the warm ashes feel thy pious hand.
To a LADY, With some painted FLOWERS.
-- tibi lilia plenis
Ecce ferunt nymphae calathis.
VIRGIL.
FLOWERS to the fair: To you these flowers I bring,
And strive to greet you with an earlier spring.
Flowers sweet, and gay, and delicate like you;
Emblems of innocence, and beauty too.
With flowers the Graces bind their yellow hair,
And flowery wreaths consenting lovers wear.
Flowers, the sole luxury which nature knew,
In Eden's pure and guiltless garden grew.
To loftier forms are rougher tasks assigned;
The sheltering oak resists the stormy wind,
The tougher yew repels invading foes,
And the tall pine for future navies grows;
But this soft family, to cares unknown,
Were born for pleasure and delight alone.
Gay without toil, and lovely without art,
They spring to cheer the sense, and glad the heart.
Nor blush, my fair, to own you copy these;
Your best, your sweetest empire is -- to please.
ODE to SPRING.
Hope waits upon the flowery prime.
WALLER.
SWEET daughter of a rough and stormy sire,
Hoar Winter's blooming child; delightful Spring!
Whose unshorn locks with leaves
And swelling buds are crowned;
From the green islands of eternal youth,
(Crowned with fresh blooms, and ever springing shade,)
Turn, hither turn thy step,
O thou, whose powerful voice
More sweet than softest touch of Doric reed,
Or Lydian flute, can sooth the madding winds,
And through the stormy deep
Breathe thy own tender calm.
Thee, best beloved! the virgin train await
With songs and festal rites, and joy to rove
Thy blooming wilds among,
And vales and dewy lawns,
With untir'd feet; and cull thy earliest sweets
To weave fresh garlands for the glowing brow
Of him, the favored youth
That prompts their whispered sigh.
Unlock thy copious stores; those tender showers
That drop their sweetness on the infant buds,
And silent dews that swell
The milky ear's green stem.
And feed the flowering osier's early shoots;
And call those winds which through the whispering boughs
With warm and pleasant breath
Salute the blowing flowers.
Now let me sit beneath the whitening thorn,
And mark thy spreading tints steal over the dale;
And watch with patient eye
Thy fair unfolding charms.
O nymph approach! while yet the temperate sun
With bashful forehead, through the cool moist air
Throws his young maiden beams,
And with chaste kisses woes
The earth's fair bosom; while the streaming veil
Of lucid clouds with kind and frequent shade
Protect thy modest blooms
From his severer blaze.
Sweet is thy reign, but short; The red dog star
Shall scorch thy tresses, and the mower's scythe
Thy greens, thy flowerets all,
Remorseless shall destroy.
Reluctant shall I bid thee then farewell;
For O, not all that Autumn's lap contains,
Nor Summer's ruddiest fruits,
Can aught for thee atone
Fair Spring! whose simplest promise more delights
Than all their largest wealth, and through the heart
Each joy and newborn hope
With softest influence breathes.
VERSES on MRS. ROW.
How from the summit of the grove she fell,
And left it unharmonious --
YOUNG.
SUCH were the notes our chaster SAPPHO sung,
And every muse dropped honey on her tongue.
Blessed shade! how pure a breath of praise was thine,
Whose spotless life was faultless as thy line:
In whom each worth and every grace conspire,
The Christian's meekness and the Poet's fire.
Learned without pride, a woman without art;
The sweetest manners and the gentlest heart.
Smooth like her verse her passions learnt to move,
And her whole soul was harmony and love:
Virtue that breast without a conflict gained,
And easy like a native monarch reigned.
On earth still favored as by heaven approved,
The world applauded, and ALEXIS loved.
With love, with health, with fame, and friendship blessed,
And of a cheerful heart the constant feast,
What more of bliss sincere could earth bestow?
What purer heaven could angels taste below?
But bliss from earth's vain scenes too quickly flies;
The golden chord is broke, ALEXIS dies.
Now in the leafy shade, and widowed grove,
Sad PHILOMELA mourns her absent love.
Now deep retired in FROME's enchanting vale,
She pours her tuneful sorrows on the gale;
Without one fond reserve the world disclaims,
And gives up all her soul to heavenly flames.
Yet in no useless gloom she wore her days;
She loved the work, and only shunned the praise.
Her pious hand the poor, the mourner blessed;
Her image lived in every kindred breast.
THYNN, CARTERET, BLACKMORE, ORRERY approved,
And PRIOR praised, and noble HERTFORD loved;
Seraphic KENN, and tuneful WATTS were thine,
And virtue's noblest champions filled the line.
Blessed in thy friendships! in thy death too blessed!
Received without a pang to endless rest.
Heaven called the Saint matur'd by length of days,
And her pure spirit was exhaled in praise.
Bright pattern of thy sex, be thou my muse;
Thy gentle sweetness through my soul diffuse:
Let me thy palm, though not thy laurel share,
And copy thee in charity and prayer.
Though for the bard my lines are yet too faint,
Yet in my life let me transcribe the saint.
To MISS R^, On her Attendance on her Mother at BUXTON.
With lenient arts extend a mother's breath.
POPE.
WHEN blooming beauty in the noon of power,
While offered joys demand each sprightly hour,
With all that pomp of charms and winning mein
Which sure to conquer needs but to be seen;
When she, whose name the softest love inspires,
To the hushed chamber of disease retires,
To watch and weep beside a parent's bed,
Catch the faint voice, and raise the languid head,
What mixed delight each feeling heart must warm!
An angel's office suits an angel's form.
Thus the tall column graceful rears its head
To prop some mouldering tower with moss overspread,
Whose stately piles and arches yet display
The venerable graces of decay:
Thus round the withered trunk fresh shoots are seen
To shade their parent with a cheerful green.
More health, dear maid! thy soothing presence brings
Than purest skies, or salutary springs:
That voice, those looks such healing virtues bear,
Thy sweet reviving smiles might cheer despair;
On the pale lips detain the parting breath,
And bid hope blossom in the shades of death.
Beauty, like thine, could never reach a charm
So powerful to subdue, so sure to warm.
On her loved child behold the mother gaze,
In weakness pleased, and smiling through decays,
And leaning on that breast her cares assuage;
How soft a pillow for declining age!
For this, when that fair frame must feel decay,
(Ye fates protract it to a distant day)
When thy approach no tumults shall impart,
Nor that commanding glance strike through the heart,
When meaner beauties shall have leave to shine,
And crowds divide the homage lately thine,
Not with the transient praise those charms can boast
Shall thy fair fame and gentle deeds be lost:
Some pious hand shall thy weak limbs sustain,
And pay thee back these generous cares again;
Thy name shall flourish by the good approved,
Thy memory honored, and thy dust beloved.
ON THE DEATH OF MRS. JENNINGS. The Author's Grandmother.

Est tamen quiet, and pure, and eleganter actae aetatis,
placida ac lenis senectus.
Cicero de Senect.
IT IS past: dear venerable shade, farewell!
Thy blameless life thy peaceful death shall tell.
Clear to the last thy setting orb has run;
Pure, bright, and healthy like a frosty sun:
And late old age with hand indulgent shed
Its mildest winter on thy favored head.
For Heaven prolonged her life to spread its praise,
And blessed her with a Patriarch's length of days.
The truest praise was hers, a cheerful heart,
Prone to enjoy, and ready to impart.
An Israelite indeed, and free from guile,
She showed that piety and age could smile.
Religion had her heart, her cares, her voice;
'Twas her last refuge, as her earliest choice.
To holy Anna's spirit not more dear
The church of Israel, and the house of prayer.
Her spreading offspring of the fourth degree
Filled her fond arms, and clasped her trembling knee.
Matur'd at length for some more perfect scene,
Her hopes all bright, her prospects all serene,
Each part of life sustained with equal worth,
And not a wish left unfulfill'd on earth,
Like a tired traveller with sleep oppressed,
Within her childrens' arms she dropped to rest.
Farewell! thy cherished image, ever dear,
Shall many a heart with pious love revere:
Long, long shall mine her honored memory bless,
Who gave the dearest blessing I possess.
HYMNS.
Quid prius dicam solitis parentis
Laudibus? qui res hominum, ac Deorum,
Qui mare, ac terras, variisque mundum
Temperat horis?
HORAT.
HYMN I.
JEHOVAH reigns, let every nation hear,
And at his footstool bow with holy fear;
Let heaven's high arches echo with his name,
And the wide peopled earth his praise proclaim;
Then send it down to hell's deep glooms resounding,
Through all her caves in dreadful murmurs sounding.
He rules with wide and absolute command
Over the broad ocean and the steadfast land;
JEHOVAH reigns, unbounded, and alone,
And all creation hangs beneath his throne:
He reigns alone; let no inferior nature
Usurp, or share the throne of the Creator.
He saw the struggling beams of infant light
Shoot through the massy gloom of ancient night;
His spirit hushed the elemental strife,
And brooded over the kindling seeds of life;
Seasons and months began the long procession
And measured over the year in bright succession.
The joyful sun sprung up the etherial way
Strong as a giant, as a bridegroom gay;
And the pale moon diffused her shadowy light
Superior over the dusky brow of night;
Ten thousand glittering lamps the skies adorning,
Numerous as dew drops from the womb of morning.
Earth's blooming face with rising flowers he dressed,
And spread a verdant mantle over her breast;
Then from the hollow of his hand he pours
The circling waters round her winding shores,
The newborn world in their cool arms embracing,
And with soft murmurs still her banks caressing.
At length she rose complete in finished pride,
All fair and spotless like a virgin bride;
Fresh with untarnish'd lusture as she stood
Her Maker blessed his work, and called it good;
The morning stars with joyful acclamation
Exulting sung, and hailed the new creation.
Yet this fair world, the creature of a day,
Though built by GOD's right hand, must pass away,
And long oblivion creep over mortal things,
The fate of empires, and the pride of kings:
Eternal night shall veil their proudest story,
And drop the curtain over all human glory.
The sun himself, with weary clouds oppressed,
Shall in his silent, dark pavilion rest;
His golden urn shall broke and useless lie,
Amidst the common ruins of the sky:
The stars rush headlong in the wild commotion
And bathe their glittering foreheads in the ocean.
But fixed, O GOD, for ever stands thy throne;
JEHOVAH reigns, a universe alone;
The eternal fire that feeds each vital flame,
Collected, or diffused is still the same.
He dwells within his own unfathomed essence,
And fills all space with his unbounded presence.
But oh! our highest notes the theme debase,
And silence is our least injurious praise;
Cease, cease your songs, the daring flight control,
Revere him in the stillness of the soul:
With silent duty meekly bend before him,
And deep within your inmost hearts adore him.
HYMN II.
PRAISE to GOD, immortal praise, ALTHOUGH the fig tree shall not blossom,
neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the olive shall fail, and
the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and
there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet I will rejoice in the LORD, I will
joy in the GOD of my salvation. HABAKKUK, iii. 17, 18.

For the love that crowns our days;
Bounteous source of every joy,
Let thy praise our tongues employ.
For the blessings of the field,
For the stores the garden yield,
For the vine's exalted juice,
For the generous olive's use:
Flocks that whiten all the plain,
Yellow sheaves of ripened grain;
Clouds that drop their fatt'ning dews,
Suns that temperate warmth diffuse:
All that Spring with bounteous hand
Scatters over the smiling land:
All that liberal Autumn pours
From her rich overflowing stores:
These to thee, my GOD, we owe;
Source whence all our blessings flow;
And for these, my soul shall raise
Grateful vows and solemn praise.
Yet should rising whirlwinds tear
From its stem the ripening ear;
Should the fig-tree's blasted shoot
Drop her green untimely fruit;
Should the vine put forth no more,
Nor the olive yield her store;
Though the sickening flocks should fall,
And the herds desert the stall;
Should thine altered hand restrain
The early and the latter rain;
Blast each opening bud of joy,
And the rising year destroy;
Yet to thee my soul should raise
Grateful vows, and solemn praise;
And, when every blessing's flown,
Love thee -- for thyself alone.
HYMN III.
For EASTER-SUNDAY.
AGAIN the LORD of life and light
Awakes the kindling ray;
Unseals the eyelids of the morn,
And pours increasing day.
O what a night was that, which wrapped
The heathen world in gloom!
O what a sun which broke this day,
Triumphant from the tomb!
This day be grateful homage paid,
And loud hosannas sung;
Let gladness dwell in every heart,
And praise on every tongue.
Ten thousand differing lips shall join
To hail this welcome morn;
Which scatters blessings from its wings,
To nations yet unborn.
JESUS, the friend of human kind,
With strong compassion moved,
Descended like a pitying GOD,
To save the souls he loved.
The powers of darkness leagued in vain
To bind his soul in death;
He shook their kingdom when he fell,
With his expiring breath.
Not long the toils of hell could keep
The hope of JUDAH's line;
Corruption never could take hold
On aught so much divine.
And now his conquering chariot-wheels
Ascend the lofty skies;
While broke, beneath his powerful cross,
Death's iron scepter lies.
Exalted high at GOD's right hand,
And LORD of all below,
Through him is pardoning love dispensed,
And boundless blessings flow.
And still for erring, guilty man,
A brother's pity flows;
And still his bleeding heart is touched
With memory of our woes.
To thee, my Savior, and my king,
Glad homage let me give;
And stand prepared like thee to die,
With thee that I may live.
HYMN IV.
BEHOLD, where breathing love divine,
Our dying Master stands!
His weeping followers gathering round
Receive his last commands.
From that mild teacher's parting lips
What tender accents fell!
The gentle precept which he gave
Became its author well.
"Blessed is the man, whose softening heart
"Feels all another's pain;
"To whom the supplicating eye
"Was never raised in vain.
"Whose breast expands with generous warmth
"A stranger's woes to feel;
"And bleeds in pity over the wound
"He wants the power to heal.
"He spreads his kind supporting arms
"To every child of grief;
"His secret bounty largely flows,
"And brings unasked relief.
"To gentle offices of love
"His feet are never slow;
"He views through mercy's melting eye
"A brother in a foe.
"Peace from the bosom of his GOD,
"My peace to him I give;
"And when he kneels before the throne,
"His trembling soul shall live.
"To him protection shall be shown;
"And mercy from above
"Descend on those who thus fulfill
"The perfect law of love."
HYMN V.
AWAKE, my soul, lift up thine eyes;
See where thy foes against thee rise,
In long array, a numerous host;
Awake, my soul, or thou art lost.
Here giant danger threatening stands
Mustering his pale terrific bands;
There pleasure's silken banners spread,
And willing souls are captive led.
See where rebellious passions rage,
And fierce desires and lusts engage;
The meanest foe of all the train
Has thousands and ten thousands slain.
Thou tread'st upon enchanted ground,
Perils and snares beset thee round;
Beware of all, guard every part,
But most, the traitor in thy heart.
Come then, my soul, now learn to wield
The weight of thine immortal shield;
Put on the armor from above
Of heavenly truth and heavenly love.
The terror and the charm repel,
And powers of earth, and powers of hell;
The man of Calvary triumphed here;
Why should his faithful followers fear?
An ADDRESS to the DEITY.
Deus est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris.
LUCAN.
GOD of my life! and author of my days!
Permit my feeble voice to lisp thy praise;
And trembling, take upon a mortal tongue
That hallowed name to harps of Seraphs sung.
Yet here the brightest Seraphs could no more
Than hide their faces, tremble, and adore.
Worms, angels, men, in every different sphere
Are equal all, for all are nothing here.
All nature faints beneath the mighty name,
Which nature's works, through all their parts proclaim.
I feel that name my inmost thoughts control,
And breathe an awful stillness through my soul;
As by a charm, the waves of grief subside;
Impetuous passion stops her headlong tide;
At thy felt presence all emotions cease,
And my hushed spirit finds a sudden peace,
Till every worldly thought within me dies,
And earth's gay pageants vanish from my eyes;
Till all my sense is lost in infinite,
And one vast object fills my aching sight.
But soon, alas! this holy calm is broke;
My soul submits to wear her wonted yoke;
With shackled pinions strives to soar in vain,
And mingles with the dross of earth again.
But he, our gracious Master, kind, as just,
Knowing our frame, remembers man is dust:
His spirit, ever brooding over our mind,
Sees the first wish to better hopes inclined;
Marks the young dawn of every virtuous aim,
And fans the smoking flax into a flame:
His ears are open to the softest cry,
His grace descends to meet the lifted eye;
He reads the language of a silent tear,
And sighs are incense from a heart sincere.
Such are the vows, the sacrifice I give;
Accept the vow, and bid the suppliant live:
From each terrestrial bondage set me free;
Hush every wish that centers not in thee;
Bid my fond hopes, my vain disquiets cease,
And point my path to everlasting peace.
If the soft hand of winning pleasure leads
By living waters, and through flowery meads,
When all is smiling, tranquil, and serene,
And vernal beauty paints the flattering scene,
Oh! teach me to elude each latent snare,
And whisper to my sliding heart -- Beware:
With caution let me hear the Syren's voice,
And doubtful, with a trembling heart, rejoice.
If friendless, in a vale of tears I stray,
Where briars wound, and thorns perplex my way,
Still let my steady soul thy goodness see,
And with strong confidence lay hold on thee;
With equal eye my various lot receive,
Resigned to die, or resolute to live;
Prepared to kiss the scepter, or the rod,
While GOD is seen in all, and all in GOD.
I read his awful name, emblazon'd high
With golden letters on the illumined sky;
Nor less the mystic characters I see
Wrought in each flower, inscribed on every tree;
In every leaf that trembles to the breeze
I hear the voice of GOD among the trees;
With thee in shady solitudes I walk,
With thee in busy crowded cities talk,
In every creature own thy forming power,
In each event thy providence adore.
Thy hopes shall animate my drooping soul,
Thy precepts guide me, and thy fear control.
Thus shall I rest, unmoved by all alarms,
Secure within the temple of thine arms,
From anxious cares, from gloomy terrors free,
And feel myself omnipotent in thee.
Then when the last, the closing hour draws nigh,
And earth recedes before my swimming eye;
When trembling on the doubtful edge of fate
I stand and stretch my view to either state;
Teach me to quit this transitory scene
With decent triumph and a look serene;
Teach me to fix my ardent hopes on high,
And having lived to thee, in thee to die.
A Summer Evening's Meditation.
One sun by day, by night ten thousand shine.
YOUNG.
IT IS past! The sultry tyrant of the south
Has spent his short-lived rage; more grateful hours
Move silent on; the skies no more repel
The dazzled sight, but with mild maiden beams
Of tempered light, invite the cherished eye
To wander over their sphere; where hung aloft
DIAN's bright crescent, like a silver bow
New strung in heaven, lifts high its beamy horns
Impatient sor the night, and seems to push
Her brother down the sky. Fair VENUS shines
Even in the eye of day; with sweetest beam
Propitious shines, and shakes a trembling flood
Of softened radiance from her dewy locks.
The shadows spread apace; while meeken'd Eve
Her cheek yet warm with blushes, slow retires
Through the Hesperian gardens of the west,
And shuts the gates of day. It Is now the hour
When Contemplation, from her sunless haunts,
The cool damp grotto, or the lonely depth
Of unpierc'd woods, where wrapped in solid shade
She mused away the gaudy hours of noon,
And fed on thoughts unripen'd by the sun,
Moves forward; and with radiant finger points
To yon blue concave swelled by breath divine,
Where, one by one, the living eyes of heaven
Awake, quick kindling over the face of either
One boundless blaze; ten thousand trembling fires,
And dancing lustres, where the unsteady eye
Restless, and dazzled wanders unconfined
Over all this field of glories: spacious field!
And worthy of the master: he, whose hand
With hieroglyphics older than the Nile,
Inscribed the mystic tablet; hung on high
To public gaze, and said, adore, O man!
The finger of thy GOD. From what pure wells
Of milky light, what soft overflowing urn,
Are all these lamps so filled? these friendly lamps,
For ever streaming over the azure deep
To point our path, and light us to our home.
How soft they slide along their lucid spheres!
And silent as the foot of time, fulfill
Their destined courses: Nature's self is hushed,
And, but a scattered leaf, which rustles through
The thick-wove foliage, not a sound is heard
To break the midnight air; though the raised ear,
Intensely listening, drinks in every breath.
How deep the silence, yet how loud the praise!
But are they silent all? or is there not
A tongue in every star that talks with man,
And wooes him to be wise; nor wooes in vain:
This dead of midnight is the noon of thought,
And wisdom mounts her zenith with the stars.
At this still hour the self-collected soul
Turns inward, and beholds a stranger there
Of high descent, and more than mortal rank;
An embryo GOD; a spark of fire divine,
Which must burn on for ages, when the sun,
(Fair transitory creature of a day!)
Has closed his golden eye, and wrapped in shades
Forgets his wonted journey through the east.
Ye citadels of light, and seats of GODS!
Perhaps my future home, from whence the soul
Revolving periods past, may often look back
With recollected tenderness, on all
The various busy scenes she left below,
Its deep laid projects and its strange events,
As on some fond and doting tale that soothed
Her infant hours; O be it lawful now
To tread the hallowed circle of your courts,
And with mute wonder and delighted awe
Approach your burning confines. Seized in thought
On fancy's wild and roving wing I sail,
From the green borders of the peopled earth,
And the pale moon, her duteous fair attendant;
From solitary Mars; from the vast orb
Of Jupiter, whose huge gigantic bulk
Dances in either like the lightest leaf;
To the dim verge, the suburbs of the system,
Where chearless Saturn 'midst her watery moons
Girt with a lucid zone, majestic sits
In gloomy grandeur; like an exiled queen
Amongst her weeping handmaids: fearless thence
I launch into the trackless deeps of space,
Where, burning round, ten thousand suns appear,
Of elder beam; which ask no leave to shine
Of our terrestrial star, nor borrow light
From the proud regent of our scanty day;
Sons of the morning, first born of creation,
And only less than him who marks their track,
And guides their fiery wheels. Here must I stop,
Or is there aught beyond? What hand unseen
Impels me onward through the glowing orbs
Of habitable nature; far remote,
To the dread confines of eternal night,
To solitudes of vast unpeopled space,
The deserts of creation, wide and wild;
Where embryo systems and unkindled suns
Sleep in the womb of chaos; fancy droops,
And thought astonished stops her bold career.
But oh thou mighty mind! whose powerful word
Said, thus let all things be, and thus they were,
Where shall I seek thy presence? how unblam'd
Invoke thy dread perfection?
Have the broad eyelids of the morn beheld thee?
Or does the beamy shoulder of Orion
Support thy throne? O look with pity down
On erring guilty man; not in thy names
Of terror clad; not with those thunders armed
That conscious Sinai felt, when fear appalled
The scattered tribes; thou have a gentler voice,
That whispers comfort to the swelling heart,
Abashed, yet longing to behold her Maker.
But now my soul unused to stretch her powers
In flight so daring, drops her weary wing,
And seeks again the known accustomed spot,
Dressed up with sun, and shade, and lawns, and streams,
A mansion fair and spacious for its guest,
And full replete with wonders. Let me here
Content and grateful, wait the appointed time
And ripen for the skies: the hour will come
When all these splendours bursting on my sight
Shall stand unveiled, and to my ravished sense
Unlock the glories of the world unknown.
THE END.

