THE FOUR SEASONS, AND OTHER POEMS.

By JAMES THOMSON.

LONDON: Printed for J. MILLAN, near Scotland-Yard, White Hall; and A. MILLAR,
in the Strand. M.DCC.XXXV.

SPRING.
B. Picart delin. J. Clark sculp.

London, Printed for and sold by J. Millan near Whitehall.



SPRING.

Inscribed to the RIGHT HONORABLE the Countess of Hertford.

(Price 1 s. 6 d.

SPRING. A POEM.

By Mr. THOMSON.

Et nunc omnis Ager, nunc omnis parturit Arbos,
Nunc frondent Silvae, nunc formosissimus Annus.
VIRG. The SECOND EDITION.

BUCHANANUS



LONDON. Printed for A. MILLAR, at Buchanan's, Head, over against St. Clement's
Church in the Strand. M.DCC.XXXI.

The ARGUMENT.
The Subject proposed. Inscribed to Lady HERTFORD. This Season is described as
it affects the various parts of Nature, ascending from the lower to the higher;
and mixed with Digressions arising from the subject. Its influence on inanimate
Matter, on Vegetables, on brute Animals, and last on Man; concluding with a
Dissuasive from the wild and irregular passion of love, opposed to that of a
purer and more reasonable kind.

SPRING.
COME, gentle SPRING, ETHEREAL MILDNESS, come,
And from the bosom of yon dropping cloud,
While music wakes around, veiled in a shower
Of shadowing roses, on our plains descend.
O HERTFORD, fitted, or to shine in courts,
With unaffected grace; or walk the plain,
With INNOCENCE and MEDITATION joined
In soft assemblage, listen to my song,
That thy own Season paints; when NATURE all
Is blooming, and benevolent like thee.
AND see where surly WINTER passes off,
Far to the north, and calls his ruffian blasts;
His blasts obey, and quit the howling hill,
The shattered forest, and the ravaged vale:
While softer gales succeed, at whose kind touch,
Dissolving snows in livid torrents lost,
The mountains lift their green heads to the sky.
As yet the trembling year is unconfirm'd,
And WINTER often at eve resumes the breeze,
Chills the pale morn, and bids his driving sleets
Deform the day delightless; so that scarce
The Bittern knows the time, with bill ingulpht
To shake the sounding marsh; or from the shore
The Plovers theirs, to scatter over the heath,
And sing their wild notes to the listening waste.
AT last from ARIES rolls the bounteous sun,
And the bright BULL receives him. Then no more
The expansive atmosphere is cramped with cold,
But full of life, and vivifying soul,
Lifts the light clouds sublime, and spreads them thin,
Fleecy, and white, over all-surrounding heaven.
FORTH fly the tepid airs; and unconfined
Unbinding earth, the moving softness strays.
Joyous the impatient husbandman perceives
Relenting nature, and his lusty steers,
Drives from their stalls, to where the well-us'd plow
Lies in the furrow loosened from the frost.
There, unrefusing to the harnessed yoke,
They lend their shoulder, and begin their toil,
Cheered by the simple song, and soaring lark.
Meanwhile incumbent over the shining share
The master leans, removes the obstructing clay,
Winds the whole work, and sidelong lays the glebe.
WHITE through the neighboring fields the sower stalks
With measured step, and liberal throws the grain
Into the faithful bosom of the Ground.
The harrow follows harsh, and shuts the scene.
BE gracious, HEAVEN! for now laborious man
Has done his due. Ye fostering breezes, blow!
Ye softening dews, ye tender showers, descend!
And temper all, thou world-reviving sun,
Into the perfect year! Nor, ye who live
In luxury and ease, in pomp and pride,
Think these lost themes unworthy of your ear.
'Twas such as these the rural MARO sung,
To the full ROMAN court, in all its height
Of elegance and taste. The sacred plow
Employed the kings and fathers of mankind,
In ancient times. And some, with whom compared
You're but the beings of a summer's day,
Have held the scale of justice, shook the lance
Of mighty war, then with descending hand,
Unused to little delicacies, seized
The plow, and greatly independent lived.
YE generous BRITONS, cultivate the plow!
And over your hills, and long withdrawing vales,
Let AUTUMN spread his treasures to the sun,
Luxuriant, and unbounded. As the sea,
Far through his azure, turbulent extent,
Your empire owns, and from a thousand shores
Wafts all the pomp of life into your ports;
So with superior boon may your rich soil,
Exuberant, nature's better blessings pour
Over every land, the naked nations cloth,
And be the exhaustless granary of a world.
NOR through the lenient air alone, this change
Delicious breathes; the penetrative sun,
His force deep darting to the dark retreat
Of vegetation, sets the steaming power
At large, to wander over the verdant earth,
In various hues, but chiefly thee, gay GREEN!
Thou smiling NATURE's universal robe!
United light and shade! where the sight dwells
With growing strength, and ever-new delight!
FROM the moist meadow to the brown-brow'd hill,
Led by the breeze, the vivid verdure runs,
And swells, and deepens to the cherished eye.
The hawthorn whitens; and the juicy groves
Put forth their buds, unfolding by degrees,
Till the whole leafy forest stands displayed,
In full luxuriance, to the sighing gales;
While the deer rustle through the twining brake,
And the birds sing concealed. At once arrayed
In all the colors of the flushing year,
By NATURE's swift and secret-working hand,
The garden glows, and fills the liberal air
With lavish fragrance; while the promised fruit
Lies yet a little embryo, unperceived,
Within its crimson folds. Now from the town
Buried in smoke, and sleep, and noisome damps,
Often let me wander over the dewy fields,
Where freshness breathes, and dash the lucid drops
From the bent bush, as through the fuming maze
Of sweet-briar hedges I pursue my walk;
Or taste the smell of dairy; or ascend
Some eminence, AUGUSTA, in thy plains,
And see the country far diffused around
One boundless blush, one white empurpled shower
Of mingled blossoms; where the raptured eye
Travels from joy to joy, and hid beneath
The fair profusion, yellow AUTUMN spies.
IF brushed from RUSSIAN wilds a cutting gale
Rise not, and scatter from his foggy wings
The bitter mildew, or dry-blowing breathe
Untimely frost; before whose baleful blast,
The full-blown SPRING through all her foliage shrinks,
Into a smutty, wide-dejected waste.
For often engendered by the hazy north,
Myriads on Myriads, insect armies waft
Keen in the poisoned breeze; and wasteful eat
Through buds, and bark, into the blackened Core,
Their eager way. A feeble race! scarce seen,
Save by the prying eye? yet famine waits
On their corrosive course, and kills the year.
Sometimes over cities as they steer their flight,
Where rising vapor melts their wings away,
Gazed by the astonished crowd, the horrid shower
Descends. And hence the skilful farmer chaff.
And blazing straw before his orchard burns;
Till, all involved in smoke, the latent foe
From every cranny suffocated falls;
Or onions, steaming hot, beneath his trees
Exposes, fatal to the frosty tribe:
Nor, from their friendly task, the busy bill
Of little trooping birds instinctive scares.
THESE are not idle philosophic dreams,
Full NATURE swarms with life. The unfaithful fen
In putrid steams emits the livid cloud
Of Pestilence. Through subterranean Cells,
Where searching sunbeams never found a way,
Earth animated heaves. The flowery leaf
Wants not its soft inhabitants. The stone,
Hard as it is, in every winding pore
Holds multitudes. But chief the forest-boughs,
Which dance unnumber'd to the inspiring breeze,
The downy orchard, and the melting pulp
Of mellow fruit the nameless nations feed
Of evanescent Insects. Where the pool
Stands mantled over with green, invisible,
Amid the floating verdure millions stray.
Each liquid too, whether of acid taste,
Potent, or mild, with various forms abounds.
Nor is the lucid stream, nor the pure air,
Though one transparent vacancy they seem,
Devoid of theirs. Even animals subsist
On animals, in infinite descent;
And all so fine adjusted, that the loss
Of the least species would disturb the whole.
Stranger than this the inspective glass confirms
And to the curious gives the amazing scenes
Of lessening life; by WISDOM kindly hid
From eye, and ear of man: for if at once
The worlds in worlds enclosed were pushed to light,
Seen by his sharpened eye, and by his ear
Intensely bended heard, from the choice cate,
The freshest viands, and the brightest wines,
He Would turn abhorrent, and in dead of night,
When silence sleeps over all, be stunned with noise.
THE North-east spends his rage, and now shut up
Within his iron caves, the effusive South
Warms the wide air, and over the void of heaven
Breaths the big clouds with vernal showers distent.
At first a dusky wreath they seem to rise,
Scarce staining ether; but by fast degrees,
In heaps on heaps, the doubling vapor sails
Along the loaded sky, and mingling thick
Sits on the horizon round a settled gloom.
Not such as wintry storms on mortals shed,
Oppressing life, but lovely, gentle, kind,
And full of every hope, and every joy,
The wish of nature. Gradual sinks the breeze
Into a perfect calm; that not a breath
Is heard to quiver through the closing woods,
Or rustling turn the many-twinkling leaves
Of aspin tall. The uncurling floods, diffused
In glassy breadth, seem through delusive lapse
Forgetful of their course. It Is silence all,
And pleasing expectation. Herds and flocks
Drop the dry sprig, and mute-imploring eye
The falling verdure. Hushed in short suspense,
The plumy people streak their wings with oil,
And wait the approaching sign to strike at once
Into the general choir. Even mountains, vales,
And forests seem, expansive, to demand
The promised sweetness. Man superior walks
Amid the glad creation, musing praise,
And looking lively gratitude. At last
The clouds consign their treasures to the fields,
And, softly shaking on the dimply pool
Prelusive drops, let all their moisture flow,
In large effusion over the freshen'd world,
It Is scarce to patter heard, the stealing shower,
By such as wander through the forest-walks,
Beneath the umbrageous multitude of leaves.
But who can hold the shade, while HEAVEN descends
In universal bounty, shedding herbs,
And fruits, and flowers, on NATURE's ample lap?
Imagination fired prevents their growth,
And while the verdant nutriment distills,
Beholds the kindling country color round.
THUS all day long the full-distended clouds
Indulge their genial stores, and well-shower'd earth
Is deep enriched with vegetable life;
Till, in the western-sky, the downward sun
Looks out illustrious from amidst the flush
Of broken clouds, gay-shifting to his beam.
The rapid radiance instantaneous strikes
The illumined mountain through the forest streams,
Shakes on the floods, and in a yellow mist,
Far smoking over the interminable plain,
In twinkling myriads lights the dewy gems.
Moist, bright, and green, the landscape laughs around.
Full swell the woods; their every music wakes,
Mixed in wild consort with the warbling brooks
Increased, th'unnumber'd bleatings of the hills,
The hollow lows responsive from the vales,
Whence blending all the sweetened zephyr springs.
Mean time refracted from yon eastern cloud,
Bestriding earth, the grand ethereal bow
Shoots up immense! and every hue unfolds,
In fair proportion running from the red,
To where the violet fades into the sky.
Here, mighty NEWTON, the dissolving clouds
Are, as they scatter round, thy numerous prism,
Untwisting to the philosophic eye
The various twine of light, by thee pursued
Through the white mingling maze. Not so the swain,
He wondering views the bright enchantment bend,
Delightful, over the radiant fields, and runs
To catch the falling glory; but amazed
Beholds the amusive arch before him fly,
Then vanish quite away. Still night succeeds,
A softened shade, and saturated earth
Awaits the morning beam, to give again,
Transmuted soon by Nature's chemistry,
The blooming blessings of the former day.
THEN spring the living herbs, profusely wild,
Over all the deep-green earth, beyond the power
Of BOTANIST to number up their tribes;
Whether he steals along the lonely dale
In silent search; or through the forest, rank
With what the dull incurious weeds account,
Bursts his blind way; or climbs the mountain rock,
Fired by the nodding verdure of its brow.
With such a liberal hand has NATURE flung
Their seeds abroad, blown them about in winds,
Innumerous mixed them with the nursing mold,
The moistening current, and prolific rain.
BUT who their virtues can declare? Who pierce
With vision pure into these secret stores
Of life, and health, and joy? The food of man
While yet he lived in innocence, and told
A length of golden years, unflesh'd in blood,
A stranger to the savage arts of life,
Death, rapine, carnage, surfeit, and disease,
The lord, and not the tyrant of the world.
THEN the glad morning waked the gladden'd race
Of uncorrupted men, nor blushed to see
The sluggard sleep beneath her sacred beam.
For their light slumbers gently fumed away,
And up they rose as vigorous as the sun,
Or to the culture of the willing glebe,
Or to the cheerful tendance of the flock.
Mean time the song went round; and dance, and sport,
Wisdom; and friendly talk successive stole
Their hours away. While in the rosy vale
Love breathed his infant sighs, from anguish free,
Replete with bliss, and only wept for joy.
Nor yet injurious act, nor surly deed
Was known among these happy sons of heaven;
For reason and benevolence were law.
Harmonious nature too looked smiling on.
Clean shone the skies, cooled with eternal gales,
And balmy spirit all. The youthful sun
Shot his best rays; and still the gracious clouds
Dropped fatness down; as over the swelling mead
The herds and flocks commixing played secure.
Which when, emergent from the gloomy wood,
The glaring lion saw, his horrid heart
Was meeken'd, and he joined his sullen joy.
For music held the whole in perfect peace:
Soft sighed the flute; the tender voice was heard,
Warbling the joyous heart; the woodlands round
Applied their quire; and winds and waters flowed
In consonance. Such were these prime of days.
THIS to the POETS gave the golden age;
When, as they sung in elevated phrase,
The sailor-pine had not the nations yet
In commerce mixed; for every country teemed
With every thing. Spontaneous harvests waved,
Still in a sea of yellow plenty round.
The forest was the vineyard, where untaught
To climb, unprun'd and wild, the juicy grape
Burst into floods of wine. The knotted oak
Shook from his boughs the long transparent streams
Of honey, creeping through the matted grass,
The uncultivated thorn a ruddy shower
Of fruitage shed, on such as sat below,
In blooming ease, and from brown labor free,
Save what the copious gathering, grateful gave.
The Rivers foamed with nectar; or diffuse,
Silent, and soft, the milky maze devolved.
Nor had the spongy, full-expanded fleece,
Yet drunk the TYRIAN dye. The stately ram
Shone through the mead, in native purple clad,
Or milder saffron; and the dancing lamb
The vivid crimson to the sun disclosed.
Nothing had power to hurt the savage soul,
Yet untransfus'd into the tyger's heart,
Burned not his bowels, nor his gamesome paw
Drove on the fleecy partners of his play:
While from the flowery brake the serpent rolled
His fairer spires, and played his pointless tongue.
BUT now whatever these gaudy fables meant,
And the white minutes which they shadowed out,
Are found no more amid those iron times,
Those dregs of life! in which the human mind
Has lost that harmony ineffable,
Which warms the soul of happiness; and all
Is off the poise within; the passions all
Have burst their bounds; and reason half extinct,
Or impotent, or else approving, sees
The foul disorder. Anger storms at large,
Without an equal cause; and fell revenge
Supports the falling rage. Close envy bites
With venomed tooth; while weak, unmanly fear,
Full of frail fancies, loosens every power.
Even love itself is bitterness of soul,
A pleasing anguish pining at the heart.
Hope sickens with extravagance; and grief,
Of life impatient, into madness swells;
Or in dead silence wastes the weeping hours.
These, and a thousand mixed emotions more,
From ever-changing views of good and ill,
Formed infinitely various, vex the mind
With endless storm. Whence, inly-rankling, grows
The selfish thought, a listless inconcern,
Cold, and averting from our neighbor's good;
Then dark disgust, and malice, winding wiles,
Sneaking deceit, and coward villainy:
At last deep-rooted hatred, lewd reproach,
Convulsive wrath, and thoughtless fury, quick
To deeds of vilest aim. Even nature's self
Is deemed, vindictive, to have changed her course.
HENCE in old time, they say, a deluge came;
When the disparting orb of earth, that arched
The imprisoned deep around, impetuous rushed,
With ruin inconceivable, at once
Into the gulf, and over the highest hills
Wide-dash'd the waves, in undulation vast:
'Till, from the center to the streaming clouds,
A shoreless ocean tumbled round the globe.
THE SEASONS since, as hoar TRADITION tells,
Have kept their constant chase; the WINTER keen
Poured out his waste of snows; and SUMMER shot
His pestilential heats; great SPRING before
Green'd all the year; and fruits and blossoms blushed
In social sweetness on the self-same bough.
Clear was the temperate air; an even calm
Perpetual reigned, save what the zephyrs bland
Breathed over the blue expanse; for then nor storms
Were taught to blow, nor hurricanes to rage;
Sound slept the waters: no sulphurous glooms
Swelled in the sky, and sent the lightning forth:
While sickly damps, and cold autumnal fogs,
Sat not pernicious on the springs of life.
But now, from clear to cloudy, moist to dry,
And hot to cold, in restless change revolved,
Our drooping days are dwindled down to naught,
The fleeting shadow of a winter's sun.
AND yet the wholesome herb neglected dies
In lone obscurity, unpriz'd for food;
Although the pure, exhilerating soul
Of nutriment, and health, salubrious breathes,
By HEAVEN infused, along its secret tubes.
For, with hot ravine fired, ensanguin'd man
Is now become the lion of the plain,
And worse. The wolf, who from the nightly fold
Fierce-drags the bleating prey, never drunk her milk,
Nor wore her warming fleece: nor has the steer,
At whose strong chest the deadly tiger hangs,
Ever plowed for him. They too are tempered high,
With hunger stung, and wild necessity,
Nor lodges pity in their shaggy breasts.
But MAN, whom NATURE formed of milder clay,
With every kind emotion in his heart,
And taught alone to weep; while from her lap
She pours ten thousand delicacies, herbs,
And fruits, as numerous as the drops of rain,
And beams that gave them birth: shall he, fair form!
Who wears sweet smiles, and looks erect on heaven,
Ever stoop to mingle with the prowling herd,
And dip his tongue in blood? The beast of prey,
It Is true, deserves the fate in which he deals.
Him, from the thicket, let the hardy youth
Provoke, and foaming through the awakened woods
With every nerve pursue. But you, ye flocks,
What have ye done? Ye peaceful people, what,
To merit death? You, who have given us milk
In luscious streams, and lent us your own coat
Against the winter's cold? Whose usefulness
In living only lies? And the plain ox,
That harmless, honest, guileless animal,
In what has he offended? He, whose toil,
Patient and ever-ready; clothes the land
With all the pomp of harvest; shall he bleed,
And wrestling groan beneath the cruel hands
Even of the clowns he feeds? And that perhaps
To swell the riot of the gathering feast,
Won by his labor? Thus the feeling heart
Would tenderly suggest: but it is enough,
In this late age, adventurous to have touched,
Light on the numbers of the SAMIAN sage.
High HEAVEN beside forbids the daring strain,
Whose wisest will has fixed us in a state,
That must not yet to pure perfection rise.
BUT yonder breathing prospect bids the muse
Throw all her beauty forth, that daubing all
Will be to what I gaze; for who can paint
Like NATURE? Can IMAGINATION boast,
Amid his gay creation, hues like hers?
And can he mix them with that matchless skill,
And lay them on so delicately fine,
And lose them in each other, as appears
In every bud that blows? If fancy then
Unequal fails beneath the lovely task;
Ah what shall language do? Ah where find words
Tinged with so many colors? And whose power
To life approaching, may perfume my lays
With that fine oil, these aromatic gales,
Which inexhaustive flow continual round?
YET, though successless, will the toil delight.
Come then, ye virgins, and ye youths, whose hearts
Have felt the raptures of refining love;
Oh come, and while the rosy-footed MAY
Steals blushing on, together let us walk
The morning dews, and gather in their prime
Fresh-blooming flowers, to deck the braided hair,
And the white bosom that improves their sweets.
SEE, where the winding vale her lavish stores,
Irriguous, spreads. See, how the lilly drinks
The latent rill, scarce oozing through the grass
Of growth luxuriant; or the humid bank
Profusely climbs. Turgent, in every pore
The gummy moisture shines; new luster lends,
And feeds the spirit that diffusive round
Refreshes ail the dale. Long let us walk,
Where the breeze blows from yon extended field
Of blossomed beans: ARABIA cannot boast
A fuller gale of joy than, liberal, thence
Breathes through the sense, and takes the ravished soul.
Nor is the meadow worthless of our foot,
Full of fresh verdure, and unnumber'd flowers,
The negligence of NATURE, wide, and wild;
Where undisguis'd by mimic ART, she spreads
Unbounded beauty to the boundless eye.
It Is here that their delicious task the bees,
In swarming millions, tend. Around, athwart,
This way, and that, the busy nations fly,
Cling to the bud, and with inserted tube,
Its soul, its sweetness, and its manna suck.
The little chemist thus, all-moving HEAVEN
Has taught: and often, of bolder wing, he dares
The purple heath, or where the wild-thyme grows,
And yellow loads him with the luscious spoil.
AT length the finished garden to the view
Its vistas opens, and its alleys green.
Snatched through the verdant maze, the hurried eye
Distracted wanders; now the bowery walk
Of covert close, where scarce a speck of day
Falls on the lengthened gloom, protracted darts;
Now meets the bending sky, the river now
Dimpling along, the breezy-ruffled lake,
The forest running round, the rising spire,
The ethereal mountain, and the distant main.
But why so far excursive? when at hand,
Along the blushing borders, dewy-bright,
And in yon mingled wilderness of flowers,
Fair-handed SPRING unbosoms every grace;
Throws out the snow-drop, and the crocus first,
The daily, primrose, violet darkly blue,
Dew-bending cowslips, and of nameless dies
Anemonies, auriculas a tribe
Peculiar powdered with a shining sand,
Renunculas, and iris many-hued.
Then comes the tulip-race, where beauty plays
Her gayest freaks: from family diffused
To family, as flies the father-dust,
The varied colors run; and while they BREAK
On the charmed FLORIST's eye, he curious stands,
And new-flush'd glories all ecstatic marks.
Nor hyacinths are wanting, nor junquils
Of potent fragrance, nor narcissus white,
Nor stripe'd carnations, nor enameled pinks,
(...) ^ower'd from every bush the damask-rose.
Infinite numbers, delicacies, smells,
With hues on hues expression cannot paint,
The breath of NATURE, and her endless bloom.
HAIL, MIGHTY BEING! UNIVERSAL SOUL
Of heaven and earth! ESSENTIAL PRESENCE, hail!
To THEE I bend the knee; to THEE my thoughts
Continual climb; who, with a master-hand,
Have the great whole into perfection touched.
By THEE, the various vegetative tribes,
Wrapped in a filmy net, and clad with leaves,
Draw the live ether, and imbibe the dew.
By THEE disposed into congenial soils,
Stands each attractive plant, and sucks, and swells
The juicy tide; a twining mass of tubes.
At THY command, the vernal sun awakes
The torpid sap, detruded to the root
By wintry winds, that now, in fluent dance,
And lively fermentation, mounting, spreads
All this innumerous-colour'd scene of things.
ASCENDING from the vegetable world
To higher life, with equal wing ascend,
My panting Muse; and hark, how loud the woods
Invite you forth in all your gayest trim.
Lend me your song, ye nightingales! oh pour
The mazy-running soul of melody
Into my varied verse! while I deduce,
From the first note the hollow cuckoo sings,
The symphony of SPRING, and touch a theme
Unknown to fame, THE PASSION OF THE GROVES.
JUST as the spirit of love is sent abroad,
Warm through the vital air, and on their hearts
Harmonious seizes, the gay troops begin,
In gallant thought, to plume the painted wing;
And try again the long-forgotten strain,
At first faint-warbled. But no sooner grows
The soft infusion prevalent, and wide,
Than, all alive, at once their joy overflows
In music unconfined. Up-springs the lark,
Shrill-voiced, and loud, the messenger of morn;
Ever yet the shadows fly, he mounted sings
Amid the dawning clouds, and from their haunts
Calls up the tuneful nations. Every copse
Thick-wove, and tree irregular, and bush
Bending with dewy moisture, over the heads
Of the coy quiristers that lodge within,
Are prodigal of harmony. The thrush
And wood-lark, over the kind-contending throng
Superior heard, run through the sweetest length
Of notes; when listening PHILOMELA deigns
To let them joy, and purposes, in thought
Elate, to make her night excel their day.
The blackbird whistles from the thorny brake;
The mellow bull-finch answers from the grove:
Nor are the linnets, over the flowering furze
Poured out profusely, silent. Joined to these
Thousands beside, thick as the covering leaves
They warble under, or the nitid hues
That speck them over, their modulations mix
Mellifluous. The jay, the rook, the daw,
And each harsh pipe, discordant heard alone,
Here aid the consort: while the stock-dove breathes
A melancholy murmur through the whole.
IT IS love creates their gaiety, and all
This waste of music is the voice of love;
Which even to birds, and beasts, the tender arts
Of pleasing teaches. Hence the glossy kind
Try every winning way inventive love
Can dictate, and in fluttering courtship pour
Their little souls before her. Wide around,
Respectful, first in airy rings they rove,
Endeavoring by a thousand tricks to catch
The cunning, conscious, half-averted glance
Of their regardless charmer. Should she seem
Softening the least approvance to bestow,
Their colors burnish, and by hope inspired
They brisk advance; then on a sudden struck
Retire disordered; then again approach;
And throwing out the last efforts of love,
In fond rotation spread the spotted wing,
And shiver every feather with desire.
CONNUBIAL leagues agreed, to the deep woods
They haste away, each as their fancy leads,
Pleasure, or food, or secret safety prompts;
That NATURE's great command may be obeyed,
Nor all the sweet sensations they perceive
Indulged in vain. Some to the holly-hedge
Nestling repair, and to the thicket some;
Some to the rude protection of the thorn
Resolve to trust their young. The clested tree
Offers its kind concealment to a few,
Their food its insects, and its moss their nests.
Others apart far in the grassy dale
Their humble texture weave. But most delight
In unfrequented glooms, or shaggy banks,
Steep, and divided by a babbling brook,
Whose murmurs sooth them all the live-long day,
When for a season fixed. Among the roots
Of hazel, pendant over the plaintive stream,
They frame the first foundation of their domes,
Dry sprigs of trees, in artful manner laid,
And bound with clay together. Now it is naught
But hurry hurry through the busy air,
Beat by unnumber'd wings. The swallow sweeps
The slimy pool, to build his hanging house
Ingeniously intent. Often from the back
Of herds and flocks a thousand tugging bills
Pluck hair, and wool; and often, when unobserved,
Steal from the barn the straw; till soft, and warm,
Clean, and complete, their habitation grows.
As thus the patient dam assiduous sits,
Not to be tempted from her tender task,
Or by sharp hunger, or by smooth delight,
Though the whole loosened Spring around her blows,
Her sympathizing lover takes his stand
High on th'opponent bank, and ceaseless sings
The tedious time away; or else supplies
Her place a moment, while she sudden flits
To pick the scanty meal. The appointed time
With pious toil fulfilled, the callow young
Warmed, and expanded into perfect life,
Their brittle bondage break, and come to light,
A helpless family, demanding food
With constant clamor. Oh what passions then,
What melting sentiments of kindly care
Seize the new parents' hearts? Away they fly
Affectionate, and undesiring bear
The most delicious morsel to their young,
Which equally distributed, again
The search begins. So pitiful, and poor,
A gentle pair on providential HEAVEN
Cast, as they weeping eye their clamant train,
Check their own appetites, and give them all.
NOR is the courage of the fearful kind,
Nor is their cunning less, should some rude foot
Their woody haunts molest; stealthy aside
Into the center of a neighboring bush
They drop, and whirring thence alarmed, deceive
The rambling schoolboy. Hence around the head
Of traveller, the white-wing'd plover wheels
Her sounding flight, and then directly on
In long excursion skims the level lawn,
To tempt you from her nest. The wild-duck hence
Over the rough moss, and over the trackless waste
The heath-hen flutters, as if hurt, to lead
The hot pursuing spaniel far astray.
BE not the muse ashamed, here to bemoan
Her brothers of the grove, by tyrant man
Inhuman caught, and in the narrow cage
From liberty confined, and boundless air.
Dull are the pretty slaves, their plumage dull,
Ragged, and all its brightning luster lost;
Nor is that luscious wildness in their notes
That warbles from the beech. Oh then desist,
Ye friends of harmony! this barbarous art
Forbear, if innocence and music can
Win on your hearts, or piety persuade.
BUT let not chief the nightingale lament
Her ruined care, too delicately framed
To brook the harsh confinement of the cage.
Often when returning with her loaded bill,
The astonished mother finds a vacant nest,
By the hard hand of unrelenting clowns
Robbed, to the ground the vain provision falls;
Her pinions ruffle, and low-drooping scarce
Can bear the mourner to the poplar shade;
Where, all abandoned to despair, she sings
Her sorrows through the night; and, on the bough
Sad-sitting, still at every dying fall
Takes up again her lamentable strain
Of winding woe, till wide around the woods
Sigh with her song, and with her wail resound.
AND now the feathered youth their former bounds
Ardent disdain, and weighing often their wings,
Demand the free possession of the sky.
But this glad office more, and then dissolves
Parental love at once; for needless grown,
Unlavish WISDOM never works in vain.
It Is on some evening, sunny, grateful, mild,
When naught but balm is breathing through the woods,
With yellow luster bright, that the new tribes
Visit the spacious heavens, and look abroad
On NATURE's common, far as they can see,
Or wing, their range, and pasture. Over the boughs
Dancing about, still at the giddy verge
Their resolution fails; their pinions still,
In loose libration stretched, the void abrupt
Trembling refuse: till down before them fly
The parent-guides, and chide, exhort, command,
Or push them off. The surging air receives
The plumy burden; and their self-taught wings
Winnow the waving element. On ground
Alighted, bolder up again they lead
Farther and farther on the lengthning flight;
Till vanished every fear, and every power
Roused into life, and action in the void
The exoner'd parents see their soaring race,
And once rejoicing never know them more.
HIGH from the summit of a craggy cliff,
Hung over the green sea, grudging at its base,
The royal eagle draws his young, resolved
To try them at the sun. Strong-pounc'd, and bright
As burnished day, they up the blue sky wind,
Leaving dull sight below, and with fixed gaze
Drink in their native noon: the father-king
Claps his glad pinions, and approves the birth.
AND should I wander to the rural fear,
Whose aged oaks, and venerable gloom,
Invite the noisy rook; with pleasure there,
I might the various polity survey
Of the mixed household kind. The careful hen
Calls all her chirping family around,
Fed, and defended by the fearless cock,
Whose breast with ardour flames, as on he walks
Graceful, and crows defiance. In the pond,
The finely-checker'd duck, before her train,
Rows garrulous. The stately-sailing swan
Gives out his snowy plumage to the gale,
And, arching proud his neck, with oary feet
Bears forward fierce, and beats you from the bank,
Protective of his young. The turkey nigh,
Loud-threatning, reddens; while the peacock spreads
His every-colour'd glory to the sun,
And swims in floating majesty along.
Over the whole homely scene, the cooing dove
Flies thick in amorous chase, and wanton rolls
The glancing eye, and turns the changeful neck.
WHILE thus the gentle tenants of the shade
Indulge their purer loves, the rougher world
Of brutes below, rush furious into flame,
And fierce desire. Through all his lusty veins
The bull, deep-scorch'd, receives the raging fire.
Of pasture sick, and negligent of food,
Scarce seen, he wades among the yellow broom,
While over his brawny back the rambling sprays
Luxuriant shoot; or through the mazy wood
Dejected wanders, nor the enticing bud
Crops, though it presses on his careless sense:
For, wrapped in mad imagination, he
Roars for the fight, and idly butting, feigns
A rival gored in every knotty trunk.
Such should he meet, the bellowing war begins;
Their eyes flash fury; to the hollowed earth,
Whence the sand flies, they mutter bloody deeds,
And groaning vast the impetuous battle mix:
While the fair heifer, redolent, in view
Stands kindling up their rage. The trembling steed,
With this hot impulse seized in every nerve,
Nor hears the rein, nor heeds the sounding whip;
Blows are not felt; but tossing high his head,
And by the well-known joy, to distant plains
Attracted strong, all wild, he bursts away;
Over rocks, and woods, and craggy mountains flies,
And neighing, on the aerial summit takes
The informing gale; then steep-descending, cleaves
The headlong torrents foaming down the hills,
Even where the madness of the straightened streams
Turns in black eddies round: Such is the force
With which his frantic heart, and sinews swell.
NOR, undelighted by the boundless SPRING,
Are the broad monsters of the boiling deep:
From the deep ooze, and gelid cavern roused,
They flounce, and tumble in unwieldy joy.
Dire were the strain, and dissonant, to sing
The cruel raptures of the savage kind:
How the red lioness, her whelps forgot
Amid the thoughtless fury of her heart;
The lank rapacious wolf; the unshapely bear;
The spotted tiger, fellest of the fell;
And all the terrors of the LIBYAN swain,
By this new flame their native wrath sublimed,
Roam the resounding waste in fiercer bands,
And growl their horrid loves. But this the theme
I sing, transported, to the BRITISH fair,
Forbids, and leads me to the mountain-brow,
Where sits the shepherd on the grassy turf,
Inhaling, healthful, the descending sun.
Around him feeds his many-bleating flock
Of various cadence; and his sportive lambs,
This way, and that, convolv'd in friskful glee,
Their little frolicks play. And now the race
Invites them forth; when swift the signal given,
They start away, and sweep the massy mound
That runs around the hill; the rampart once
Of iron war, in ancient barbarous times,
When disunited BRITAIN ever bled,
Lost in eternal broil; ever yet she grew
To this deep-laid, indissoluble state,
Where WEALTH and COMMERCE lift their golden head,
And over our Labors, LIBERTY and LAW
Illustrious watch, the wonder of a world!
WHAT is this MIGHTY BREATH, ye curious say,
Which, in a language rather felt than heard,
Instructs the fowls of heaven; and through their breasts
These arts of love diffuses? What, but GOD?
Inspiring GOD! who boundless spirit all,
And unremitted energy pervades,
Adjusts, sustains, and agitates the whole.
He ceaseless works alone, and yet alone
Seems not to work, with such perfection framed
Is this complex, amazing scheme of things.
But though concealed, to every purer eye
The informing author in his work appears;
His grandeur in the heavens: the sun, and moon,
Whether that fires the day, or falling, this
Pours out a lucid softness over the night,
Are but a beam from him. The glittering stars,
By the deep ear of meditation heard,
Still in their midnight watches sing of him.
He nods a calm. The tempest blows his wrath,
Roots up the forest and o'erturns the main.
The thunder is his voice; and the red flash
His speedy sword of justice. At his touch
The mountains flame. He takes the solid earth,
And rocks the nations. Nor in these alone,
In every common instance GOD is seen;
And to the man who casts his mental eye
Abroad unnotic'd wonders rise. But chief
In thee, boon SPRING, and in thy softer scenes,
The SMILING GOD appears; while water, earth,
And air attest his bounty, which instills
Into the brutes this temporary thought,
And annual melts their undesigning hearts
Profusely thus in tenderness, and joy.
STILL let my song a nobler note assume,
And sing the infusive force of SPRING on man;
When heaven and earth, as if contending, vie
To raise his being, and serene his soul,
Can he forbear to smile with NATURE? Can
The stormy passions in his bosom roll,
While every gale is peace, and every grove
Is melody? Hence, from the bounteous walks
Of flowing SPRING, ye sordid sons of earth,
Hard, and unfeeling, of another's woe,
Or only lavish to yourselves; away.
But come, ye generous breasts, in whose wide thought,
Of all his works, CREATIVE BOUNTY, most,
Divinely burns; and on your open front,
And liberal eye, sits, from his dark retreat
Inviting modest want. Nor only fair,
And easy of approach; your active search
Leaves no cold wintry corner unexplor'd,
Like silent-working HEAVEN, surprising often
The lonely heart with unexpected good.
For you the roving spirit of the wind
Blows SPRING abroad; for you the teaming clouds
Descend in buxom plenty over the world;
And the sun spreads his genial blaze for you,
Ye flower of human race! In these green days,
Sad-pining sickness lifts her languid head;
Life flows afresh; and young-ey'd health exalts
The whole creation round. Contentment walks
The sunny glade, and feels an inward bliss
Spring over his mind, beyond the power of kings
To purchase. Pure serenity apace
Induces thought, and contemplation still.
By small degrees the love of nature works,
And warms the bosom; till at last arrived
To rapture, and enthusiastic heat,
We feel the present DEITY, and taste
The joy of GOD, to see a happy world.
IT IS HARMONY, that world-attuning power,
By which all beings are adjusted, each
To all around, impelling, and impelled,
In endless circulation, that inspires
This universal smile. Thus the glad skies,
The wide rejoicing earth, the woods, the streams,
With every LIFE they hold, down to the flower
That paints the lowly vale, or insect-wing
Waved over the shepherd's slumber, touch the mind
To nature tuned, with a light-flying hand,
Invisible; quick-urging, through the nerves,
The glittering spirits in a flood of day.
HENCE from the virgin's check, a fresher bloom
Shoots, less and less, the live carnation round;
Her lips blush deeper sweets; she breathes of youth;
The shining moisture swells into her eyes,
In brighter flow; her wishing bosom heaves
With palpitations wild; kind tumults seize
Her veins, and all her yielding soul is love.
From the keen gaze her lover turns away,
Full of the dear ecstatic power, and sick
With sighing languishment. Ah then, ye fair!
Be greatly cautious of your sliding hearts;
Dare not the infectious sigh; the pleading eye,
In meek submission dressed, deject, and low,
But full of tempting guile. Let not the tongue,
Prompt to deceive, with adulation smooth,
Gain on your purposed wills. Nor in the bower,
Where woodbines flaunt, and roses shed a couch,
While evening draws her crimson curtains round,
Trust your soft minutes with betraying man.
AND let the aspiring youth beware of love,
Of the smooth glance beware; for it is too late,
When on his heart the torrent softness pours.
Then wisdom prostrate lies; and fading fame
Dissolves in air away: while the fond soul
Is wrapped in dreams of ecstacy, and bliss;
Still paints the illusive form; the kindling grace;
The enticing smile; the modest-seeming eye,
Beneath whose beauteous beams, belying heaven,
Lurk searchless cunning, cruelty, and death:
And still, false-warbling in his cheated ear,
Her siren voice, enchanting, draws him on,
To guileful shores, and meads of fatal joy.
EVEN present in the very lap of love
Inglorious laid; while music flows around,
Perfumes, and oils, and wine, and wanton hours,
Amid the roses fierce Repentance rears
Her snaky crest: a quick returning twinge
Shoots through the conscious heart; where honor still,
And great design against the oppressive load
Of luxury, by fits, impatient heave.
BUT absent, what fantastic pangs arrous'd,
Rage in each thought, by restless musing fed,
Chill the warm cheek, and blast the bloom of life?
Neglected fortune flies; and sliding swift,
Prone into ruin, fall his scorned affairs.
It Is naught but gloom around. The darkened sun
Loses his light. The rosy-bosom'd SPRING
To weeping fancy pines; and yon bright arch
Of heaven, low-bends into a dusky vault.
All nature fades extinct; and she alone
Heard, felt, and seen, possesses every thought,
Fills every sense, and pants in every vein.
Books are but formal dullness, tedious Friends,
And sad amid the social band he sits,
Lonely and inattentive. From the tongue
The unfinished period falls: while, borne away
On swelling thought, his wafted spirit flies
To the vain bosom of his distant fair;
And leaves the semblance of a lover, fixed
In melancholy site, with head declined,
And love-dejected eyes. Sudden he starts,
Shook from his tender trance, and restless runs
To glimmering shades, and sympathetick glooms,
Where the dun umbrage over the falling stream
Romantic hangs; there through the pensive dusk
Strays, in heart-thrilling meditation lost,
Indulging all to love: or on the bank
Thrown, amid drooping lillies, swells the breeze
With sighs unceasing, and the brook with tears.
Thus in soft anguish he consumes the day,
Nor quits his deep retirement, till the moon
Peeps through the chambers of the fleecy east,
Enlightened by degrees, and in her train
Leads on the gentle hours; then forth he walks,
Beneath the trembling languish of her beams,
With softened soul, and wooes the bird of eve
To mingle woes with his: or while the world,
And all the sons of care, lie hushed in sleep,
Associates with the midnight shadows drear;
And, sighing to the lonely taper, pours
His idly-tortur'd heart into the page,
Meant for the moving messenger of love;
Where rapture burns on rapture, every line
With rising frenzy fired. But if on bed
Delirious flung, sleep from his pillow flies.
All night he tosses, nor the balmy power
In any posture finds; till the gray morn
Lifts her pale luster on the paler wretch,
Exanimate by love: and then perhaps
Exhausted nature sinks a while to rest,
Still interrupted by distracted dreams,
That over the sick imagination rise,
And in black colors paint the mimick scene.
Often with the enchantress of his soul he talks;
Sometimes in crowds distressed; or if retired
To secret-winding, flower-enwoven bowers,
Far from the dull impertinence of man,
Just as he, credulous, his thousand cares
Begins to lose in blind oblivious love,
Snatched from her yielded hand, he knows not how,
Through forests huge, and long untravel'd heaths
With desolation brown, he wanders waste,
In night and tempest wrapped; or shrinks aghast,
Back, from the bending precipice; or wades
The turbid stream below, and strives to reach
The farther shore; where succourless, and sad,
Wild as a Bacchanal she spreads her arms,
But strives in vain, borne by the outrageous flood
To distance down, he rides the ridgy wave,
Or whelmed beneath the boiling eddy sinks.
Then a weak, wailing lamentable cry
Is heard, and all in tears he wakes, again
To tread the circle of revolving woe.
These are the charming agonies of love,
Whose misery delights. But through the heart
Should jealousy its venom once diffuse,
It Is then delightful misery no more,
But agony unmixed, incessant rage,
Corroding every thought, and blasting all
Love's paradise. Ye fairy prospects then
Ye beds of roses, and ye bowers of joy,
Farewell! Ye gleamings of departing peace,
Shine out your last! the yellow tinging plague
Internal vision taints, and in a night
Of livid gloom imagination wraps.
Ay then instead of love-enliven'd cheeks,
Of funny features, and of ardent eyes
With flowing raptures bright, dark looks succeed,
Suffus'd, and glaring with untender fire,
A clouded aspect, and a burning cheek,
Where the whole poisoned soul, malignant, sits,
And frightens love away. Ten thousand fears
Invented wild, ten thousand frantic views
Of horrid rivals, hanging on the charms
For which he melts in fondness, eat him up
With fervent anguish, and consuming pine.
In vain reproaches lend their idle aid,
Deceitful pride, and resolution frail,
Giving a moment's ease. Reflection pours,
Afresh, her beauties on his busy thought,
Her first endearments, twining round the soul,
With all the witchcraft of ensnaring love.
Strait the fierce storm involves his mind anew,
Flames through the nerves, and boils along the veins;
While anxious doubt distracts the tortured heart;
For even the sad assurance of his fears
Were peace to what he feels. Thus the warm youth,
Whom love deludes into his thorny wilds,
Through flowery-tempting paths, or leads a life
Of feaver'd rapture, or of cruel care;
His brightest aims extinguished all, and all
His lively moments running down to waste.
BUT happy they! the happiest of their kind!
Whom gentler stars unite, and in one fate
Their hearts, their fortunes, and their beings blend.
It Is not the coarser tie of human laws,
Unnatural often, and foreign to the mind,
That binds their peace, but harmony itself,
Attuning all their passions into love;
Where friendship full-exerts his softest power,
Perfect esteem enlivened by desire
Ineffable, and sympathy of soul,
Thought meeting thought, and will preventing will,
With boundless confidence; for naught but love
Can answer love, and render bliss secure.
Let him, ungenerous, who, alone intent
To bless himself, from sordid parents buys
The loathing virgin, in eternal care,
Well-merited, consume his nights and days:
Let barbarous nations, whose inhuman love
Is wild desire, fierce as the suns they feel;
Let eastern tyrants from the light of heaven
Seclude their bosom-slaves, meanly possessed
Of a mere, lifeless, violated form:
While those whom love cements, in holy faith,
And equal transport, free as nature, live,
Disdaining fear; for what is the world to them,
Its pomp, its pleasure, and its nonsense all!
Who in each other clasp whatever fair
High fancy forms, and lavish hearts can wish,
Something than beauty dearer, should they look
Or on the mind, or mind-illumin'd face,
Truth, goodness, honor, harmony, and love,
The richest bounty of indulgent HEAVEN.
Mean-time a smiling Offspring rises round,
And mingles both their graces. By degrees,
The human blossom blows; and every day,
Soft as it rolls along, shows some new charm,
The father's luster, and the mother's bloom.
Then infant reason grows apace, and calls
For the kind hand of an assiduous care:
Delightful task! to rear the tender thought,
To teach the young idea how to shoot,
To pour the fresh instruction over the mind,
To breathe the inspiring spirit, and to plant
The generous purpose in the glowing breast.
Oh speak the joy! you whom the sudden tear
Surprises often, while you look around,
And nothing strikes your eye but sights of bliss,
All various nature pressing on the heart,
Obedient fortune, and approving HEAVEN.
These are the blessings of diviner love;
And thus their moments fly. The seasons thus,
As ceaseleless round a jarring world they roll,
Still find them happy; and consenting SPRING
Sheds her own rosy garland on their head:
Till evening comes at last, cool, gentle, calm;
When after the long vernal day of life,
Enamored more, as soul approaches soul,
Together, down they sink in social sleep.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by A. MILLAR, at Buchanan's-Head, over against St.
Clement's Church in the Strand.
1. GEorgii Buchanani Scoti, Poetarum sui seculi facile principis, Opera omnia,
ad optimorum codicum fidem summo studio recognita, and castigata: nunc primum
in unum collecta ab innumeris fere mendis, quibus plerique omnes editiones
antea scatebant, repurgata; ac variis insuper notis aliisque utilissimis
accessionibus illustrata and aucta, folio, curante Tho. Ruddimanno, A. M. 2
Tom. 2. Collections relating to the History of Mary Queen of Scotland,
containing a great number of original Papers, never before printed: Also a few
scarce Pieces reprinted, taken from the best copies, by the Learned and
Judicious James Anderson Esquire late Postmaster-General and Antiquary of Scotland.
With an explanatory Index of the obsolete Words; and Preface, showing the
Importance of these Collections. In 4 Vol. on a fine imperial Paper, and a most
beautiful Letter. 4 to.
N. B. There Is a second Edition printed on a smaller Paper.

3. A System of Heraldry, Speculative and Practical: with the true Art of
Blazon, according to the most approved Heralds in Europe. Illustrated with
suitable Examples of armorial Figures and Achievements of the most
considerable Sirnames and Families in Scotland, etc. Together with historical
and genealogical Memorials relative thereto. By Alex. Nisbet Esquire Folio. 4. The
Peerage of Scotland: Containing an historical and genealogical Account of the
Nobility of that Kingdom. Collected from the public Records of the Nation, the
Charters, and other Writings of the Nobility, and from the most approved
Histories. Folio. 5. The Lives and Characters of the Officers of the Crown, and
of the State in Scotland, from the beginning of the Reign of King David I. to
the Union of the two Kingdoms. Collected from the original Charters,
Chartularies, authentic Records, and the most approved Histories: With an
Appendix containing several original Papers relating to the Lives, and
referring to them. Both by George Crafurd Esquire Folio. 6. The History of the
Church under the Old Testament, from the Creation of the World; with a
particular Account of the State of the Jews before and after the Babylonish
Captivity, and down to the present Time: Wherein the Affairs and Learning
before the Birth of Christ, are also illustrated. To which is subjoined a
Discourse to promote the Conversion of the Jews to Christianity. Folio. 7. The
History of the Propagation of Christianity, and Overthrow of Paganism; wherein
the Christian Religion is confirmed; the Rise and Progress of Heathen Idolatry
is considered; the Overthrow of Paganism, and the spreading of Christianity in
the several Ages of the New Testament Church is explained; the present State of
Heathens is enquired into, and Methods for their Conversion offered. Both by
Robert Millar, A. M. The Third Edition, with Additions, Alterations, and a
complete Alphabetical Index. Two Vol. 8 vo. This Book is recommended by the
Bishop of London, in his second Pastoral Letter, page 31. as written by a
faithful and judicious Hand. 8. A Treatise of Music, Speculative, Practical,
and Historical. By Alexander Malcolm. 8 vo, with Cuts. 9. A Vindication of the
true Art of Self-Defence. With a Proposal to the Honorable Members of
Parliament, for erecting a Court of Honor in Great Britain. Recommended to all
Gentlemen, but particularly to the Soldiery. To which is annexed, A short but
very useful Memorial for Swordmen. By Sir Will Hope Bart. late Deputy Governor
of Edinburgh-Castle. 10. The Seasons. A Hymn. A Poem to the Memory of Sir Isaac
Newton. And Britannia, a Poem by Mr. Thomson. With Cuts; both in 4 to and 8 vo.
11. The Tragedy of Sophonisba. Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane; by his
Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr. Thomson. Both in 4 to and 8 vo. 12. Poems, 2
vol. in 12 mo. 13. The Ever-Green; being a Collection of Scots Poems wrote by
the Ingenious before 160o. 2 vol. 12 mo. 14. The Tea-Table Miscellany, or a
Collection of Scots Songs, 3 vol. 15. The Gentle Shepherd; a Scots Pastoral
Comedy.
N. B. The last four published by Allan Ramsay.

16. Eurydice a Tragedy. Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, by his
Majesty's Servants. 17. Philotas, a Tragedy. Acted at the Theater Royal in
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. Written by Philip Frowde Esquire 18. The Works of Mr. Henry
Needler, consisting of original Poems, Translations, Essays, and Letters.
Published by Mr. Duncombe. The 2d Edition. 19. An Essay on the Education of a
young British Nobleman, after he leaves the Schools. To which are added, some
Observations on the Office of an Ambassador. By a Person of Honor. 2d Edition.
20. The System of the Womb, with a particular Account of the Menses,
independent of a Plethora: To which are subjoined, A few Observations relating
to Cold, and its Effects upon the Body. By Thomas Simson, Chandos Professor of
Medicine and Anatomy in the University of St. Andrews. 21. Two Essays of
Panegyricks on the last Words of Prince William of Orange, the Founder of the
Government of the United Provinces. The first republished, with many
considerable Additions. Inscribed to the late King. And the Second but now
published, though inscribed to her Majesty many Years ago, when Princess of
Wales. By a Gentleman of Middlesex. 22. The Tea-Table; or, a Conversation
between some polite Persons of both Sexes, at a Lady's Visiting-day: Wherein
are represented the various Foibles and Affectations, etc. from the Character
of an accomplished Beau, or a modern fine Lady; interspersed with several
entertaining and instructive Stories. In two Parts. By Mrs. Eliza Haywood. 23.
A Discourse, proving that the Apostles were no Enthusiasts. Wherein the Nature
and Influence of Religious Enthusiasm are impartially explained. With a
Preface, containing some Reflections on a late Book, entitled, Christianity as
Old as the Creation; and on what Mr. Woolston alleges with respect to the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. By Archibald Campbell, S.T. P. (Author of the
Enquiry into the Original of Moral Virtue, published by Dr. Innes.) The 2d
Edition. 24. The Regard due to Divine Revelation, and to Pretenses to it
considered. A Sermon preached before the Provincial Synod of Dumfreis, at their
Meeting in October, 1729. on 1 Thessalonians. v. 20, 21. With a Preface, containing
some Remarks on a Book lately published, entitled, Christianity as Old as the
Creation. By Mr. Wallace.
SUMMER.


SUMMER. A POEM.

By JAMES THOMSON.

The FOURTH EDITION, with ADDITIONS.

LONDON: Printed for J. MILLAN, Bookseller, near Whitehall. M.DCC.XXXV. Price 1
s. 6 d.

The ARGUMENT.
The subject proposed. Invocation. Address to Mr. DODINGTON. An introductory
reflection on the motion of the heavenly bodies; whence the succession of the
SEASONS. As the face of nature in this season is almost uniform, the progress
of the poem is a description of a summer's day. Morning. A view of the
sunrising. Hymn to the sun. Forenoon. Rural prospects. Summer infects
described. Noonday. A woodland retreat. A groupe of flocks and herds. A solemn
grove. How it affects a contemplative mind. Transition to the prospect of a
rich well-cultivated country; which introduces a panegyric on GREAT BRITAIN. A
digression on foreign summers. Storm of thunder and lightning. A tale. The
storm over; a serene afternoon. Bathing. Sunset. Evening. The whole concluding
with the praise of Philosophy.

SUMMER.
FROM yonder fields of ether fair disclosed,
Child of the Sun! illustrious Summer comes
In pride of youth, and felt through Nature's depth.
He comes, attended by the fultry Hours,
And ever-fanning Breezes, on his way;
While, from his ardent look, the turning Spring
Averts her blushful face; and earth, and skies,
All-smiling, to his hot dominion leaves.
Hence, let me haste into the mid-wood shade,
Where scarce a sunbeam wanders through the gloom;
And on the dark-green grass, beside the brink
Of haunted stream that by the roots of oak
Rowls over the rocky channel, lie at large,
And sing the glories of the circling year.
Come, Inspiration! from thy hermit seat
By mortal seldom found: may fancy dare,
From thy fixed serious muse, and raptured eye
Shot on surrounding heaven, to steal one look,
Creative of the poet, every power
Exalting to an ecstasy of soul.
And thou, the muse's honor! and her friend!
In whom the human graces all unite:
Pure light of mind, and tenderness of heart;
Genius, and wisdom; the gay social sense,
By decency chastised; goodness and wit,
In seldom-meeting harmony combined;
Unblemished honor, and an active zeal,
For Britain's glory, Liberty, and Man;
O Dodington! attend my rural song,
Stoop to my theme, inspirit every line,
And teach me to deserve thy best applause.
With what a perfect world-revolving power
Were first the unwieldy planets launched along
The illimitable void! Thus to remain,
Amid the flux of many thousand years,
That often has swept the busy race of men,
And all their labored monuments away,
Unresting, changless, matchless, in their course;
To night and day, with the delightful round
Of Seasons, faithful; not excentric once:
So poised, and perfect is the vast machine.
When now no more the alternate Twins are fired,
And Cancer reddens with the solar blaze,
Short is the doubtful empire of the night;
And soon, observant of approaching day,
The meek-ey'd morn appears, mother of dews!
At first faint-gleaming in the dappled east:
Till far over ether shoots the trembling glow;
And, from before the luster of her face,
White break the clouds away. With tardy step,
Brown night retires. Young day pours in apace,
And opens all the lawny prospect wide.
The dripping rock, the mountain's misty top
Swell on the eye, and brighten with the dawn.
Blue through the dusk the smoking currents shine;
And from the bladed field the fearful hare
Limps awkward; while along the forest glade
The wild deer trip, and often turning gaze
At early passenger. Music awakes,
The native voice of undissembled joy;
And thick around the woodland hymns arise.
Roused by the cock, the soon-clad shepherd leaves
His mossy cottage, where with Peace he dwells;
And from the crowded fold in order drives
His flock, to taste the verdure of the morn.
Falsely luxurious, will not man awake,
And, starting from the bed of sloth, enjoy
The cool, the fragrant, and the silent hour,
To meditation due, and sacred song.
And is there ought in sleep can charm the wise?
To lie in dead oblivion, losing half
The fleeting moments of too short a life?
Total extinction of the enlightened soul!
Or else to feverish vanity alive,
Wilder'd, and tossing through distempered dreams?
Who would in such a gloomy state remain,
Longer than nature craves; when every Muse,
And every blooming Pleasure wait without,
To bless the wildy-devious morning walk?
But yonder comes the powerful king of day,
Rejoicing in the east. The lessening cloud,
The kindling azure, and the mountain's brim
Tipped with aetherial gold, his near approach
Betoken glad: and now apparent all,
Aslant the dew-bright earth, and colored air,
He looks in boundless majesty abroad;
And sheds the shining day, that burnished plays
On rocks, and hills, and towers, and wandering streams,
High-gleaming from afar. Prime chearer Light!
Of all material beings first, and best!
Efflux divine! Nature's resplendent robe!
Without whose vesting beauty all were wrapped
In unessential gloom; and thou, red Sun,
In whose wide circle worlds of radiance lie,
Exhaustless Brightness, may I sing of thee!
Who would the blessings, first and last, recount,
That in a full effusion from thee flow,
As soon might number, at the height of noon,
The rays that radiate from thy cloudless sphere,
A universal glory darting round.
It Is by thy secret, strong, attractive force,
As with a chain indissoluble bound.
Thy system rolls entire; from the far bourne
Of slow-paced Saturn to the scarce seen disk
Of Mercury, lost in excessive blaze.
Informer of the planetary train!
Without whose vital and effectual glance,
They would be brute, uncomfortable mass,
And not as now the green abodes of life!
How many forms of being wait on thee!
Inhaling gladness; from the unfettered mind,
By thee sublimed, to that day-living race,
The mixing myriads of thy setting beam.
The vegetable world is also thine,
Parent of Seasons! from whose rich-stain'd rays,
Reflected various, various colors rise:
The freshening mantle of the youthful year;
The wild embroidery of the watery vale;
With all that chears the sense, and charms the heart.
The branching grove thy lusty product stands,
Diffused, and deep; to quench the summer noon,
And crowd a shade for the retreating swain,
When on his russet fields you look direct.
Fruit is thy bounty too, with Juice replete,
Acid, or mild; and from thy ray receives
A flavor, pleasing to the taste of man.
By thee concocted blushes; and, by thee
Fully matur'd, into the verdant lap
Of Industry the mellow plenty falls.
Extensive harvests wave at thy command;
And the bright ear, consolidate by thee,
Bends unwitholding to the reaper's hand.
Even Winter speaks thy power; whose every blast,
Overcast with tempest, or severely sharp
With breathing frost, is eloquent of thee,
And makes us languish for thy vernal gleams.
Shot to the bowels of the teeming earth,
The ripening ore confesses all thy power.
Hence Labor draws his tools; hence waving War
Flames on the day; hence busy Commerce binds
The round of nations in a golden chain;
And hence the sculptured palace, sumptuous, shines
With glittering silver, and refulgent gold.
The unfruitful rock itself impregn'd by thee,
In dark retirement, forms the lucid stone;
Collected light, compact; that polished bright,
And all its native luster let abroad,
Shines proudly on the bosoms of the fair.
At thee the ruby lights his deepening glow,
A bleeding radiance, grateful to the view.
From thee the sapphire, solid ether, takes
His hue cerulean; and, of evening tinct,
The purple-streaming amethyst is thine.
With thy own smile the yellow topaz burns.
Nor deeper verdure dies the robe of Spring,
When first she gives it to the southern gale,
Than the green emerald shows. But, all combined,
Thick through the whitening opal play thy beams;
Or, flying several from its surface, form
A trembling variance of revolving hues,
As the site varies in the gazer's hand.
The very dead creation, from thy touch,
Assumes a mimic life. By thee refined,
In brisker measures, the relucent stream
Frisks over the mead. The precipice abrupt,
Projecting horror on the blackened flood,
Softens at thy return. The desert joys
Wildly, through all his melancholy bounds.
Rude ruins glitter; and the briny deep,
Seen from some pointed promontory's top,
Reflects, from every fluctuating wave,
A glance extensive as the day. But these,
And all the much transported muse can sing,
Are to thy beauty, dignity, and use,
Unequal far, great delegated source,
Of light, and life, and grace, and joy below!
How shall I then attempt to sing of him,
Who, Light Himself, in uncreated light
Invested deep, dwells awfully retired
From mortal eye, or angel's purer ken;
Whose single smile has, from the first of time,

Filled, overflowing, all those lamps of heaven,
That beam for ever through the boundless sky:
But, should he hide his face, the astonished sun,
And all the extinguished stars, would loosening reel,
Wide from their spheres, and chaos come again.
And yet, was every faultering tongue of man,
Almighty Poet! silent in thy praise;
Thy matchless works in each exalted line,
And all the full harmonic universe,
Would vocal, or expressive, thee attest,
The cause, the glory, and the end of all!
To me be nature's volume wide displayed;
And to peruse the broad illumined page,
Or, happily catching inspiration thence,
Some easy passage, raptured, to translate,
My sole delight; as through the falling glooms
Pensive I muse, or with the rising day
On fancy's eagle-wing excursive soar.
Fierce-flaming up the heavens, the piercing sun
Melts into limpid air the high-rais'd clouds,
And morning mists, that hovered round the hills
In party-colored bands; till all unveiled
The face of nature shines, from where earth seems,
Far-stretch'd around, to meet the bending sphere.
Half in a blush of clustering roses lost,
Dew-dropping coolness to the shade retires;
And tyrant heat, dispreading through the sky,
By sharp degrees, his burning influence reigns
On man, and beast, and herb, and tepid stream.
Who can unpitying see the flowery race,
Shed by the morn, their new-flush'd bloom resign,
Before the unbating beam? So fade the fair,
When fevers revel through their azure veins.
But one, the follower of the sun, they say,
Sad when he sets shuts up her yellow leaves.
Weeping all night; and, when he warm returns,
Points her enamored bosom to his ray.
Home, from his morning task, the swain retreats;
His flock before him stepping to the fold:
While the full-udder'd mother lows around
The cheerful cottage then expecting food,
The food of innocence, and health! The daw,
The rook and magpie, to the grey-grown oaks
(That the calm village, in their verdant arms,
Sheltering, embrace) direct their lazy flight;
Where on the mingling boughs they sit embower'd,
All the hot noon, till cooler hours arise.
Faint, underneath, the homely fowls convene;
And, in a corner of the buzzing shade,
The house dog, with the employless greyhound, lies,
Outstretch'd, and sleepy. In his slumbers one
Attacks the nightly thief, and one exults
Over hill and dale; till, wakened by the wasp,
They bootless snap. Nor shall the muse disdain
To let the little noisy summer-race
Live in her lay, and flutter through her song,
Not mean, though simple; to the sun allied,
From him their high descent, direct, they draw.

Waked by his warmer ray, the reptile young
Come winged abroad; by the light air upborn,
Lighter, and full of life. From every chink,
And secret corner, where they slept away
The wintry glooms, by myriads, all at once,
Swarming, they pour: green, speckled, yellow, gray,
Black, azure, brown; more than the assisted eye
Of poring virtuoso can discern.
Ten thousand forms! Ten thousand different tribes!
People the blaze. To sunny waters some
By fatal instinct fly; where on the pool
They, sportive, wheel; or, sailing down the stream,
Are snatched immediate by the springing Trout,
Often beguiled. Some through the green-wood glade
Delight to stray; there lodged, amused, and fed,
In the fresh leaf. Luxurious, others make
The meads their choice, and visit every flower,
And every latent herb; but careful still
To shun the mazes of the sounding be,
As over the blooms he sweeps. Some to the house,
The fold, and dairy, hungry, bend their flight;
Sip round the pail, or taste the curdling cheese:
Often, inadvertent, by the boiling stream
Are pierced to death; or, weltering in the bowl,
With powerless wings around them wrapped, expire.
But chief to heedless flies the window proves
A constant death; where, gloomily retired,
The villain spider lives, cunning, and fierce,
Mixture abhorred! Amid a mangled heap
Of carcasses, in eager watch he sits,
O'erlooking all his waving snares around.
Within an inch the dreadless wanderer often
Passes, as often the ruffian shows his front.
The prey at last ensnared, he dreadful darts,
With rapid glide, along the leaning line;
And, fixing in the fly his cruel fangs,
Strides backward grimly pleased: the fluttering wing,
And shriller sound declare extreme distress,
And ask the helping, hospitable hand.
Echoes the living surface of the ground;
Nor undelightful is the ceaseless hum,
To him who muses through the woods at noon;
Or drowsy shepherd, as he lies reclined,
With half-shut eyes, beneath the floating shade
Of willows gray, close-crouding over the brook.
Let no presuming impious railer tax
Creative Wisdom, as if ought was formed
In vain, or not for admirable ends.
Shall little, haughty ignorance pronounce
His works unwise; of which the smallest part
Exceeds the narrow vision of his mind?
Thus on the concave of a sounding dome,
On swelling columns heaved, the pride of art!
Wanders a critic fly; his feeble ray
Extends an inch around, yet blindly bold
He dares dislike the structure of the whole.
And lives the man, whose universal eye
Has swept at once the unbounded scheme of things;
Marked their dependence so, and firm accord,
As with unfaultering accent to conclude
That This avails naught? Has any seen
The mighty chain of beings, lessening down
From Infinite Perfection to the brink
Of dreary Nothing, desolate abyss!
Recoiling giddy thought: or with sharp glance,
Such as remotely-wafting spirits use,
Beheld the glories of the little world?
Till then alone let zealous praise ascend,
And hymns of heavenly wonder, to that Power,
Whole wisdom shines as lovely on our minds,
As on our smiling eyes his servant-sun.
Thick in yon stream of light, a thousand ways,
Upwards and downwards, thwarting, and convolv'd,
The quivering kingdoms sport; with tempest-wing,
Till Winter sweeps them from the face of day.
Even so luxurious men, unheeding, pass
An idle summer-life in fortune's shine,
A season's glitter! In soft-circling robes,
Which the hard hand of Industry has wrought,
The human insects glow; by Hunger fed,
And cheered by toiling Thirst, they roll about
From toy to trifle, vanity to vice;
Till blown away by Death, Oblivion comes
Behind, and strikes them from the book of life.
Now swarms the village over the jovial mead;
The rustic youth, brown with meridian toil,
Healthful, and strong; full as the summer-rose
Blown by prevailing suns, the blooming maid,
Half-naked, swelling on the sight, and all
Her kindled graces burning over her cheek.
Even stooping age is here; and infant-hands
Trail the long rake, or with the fragrant load
O'ercharg'd, amid the soft oppression roll.
Wide flies the tedded grain; all in a row
Advancing broad, or wheeling round the field,
They spread the tawny Harvest to the sun,
That casts refreshful round a rural smell:
Or, as they rake the green-appearing ground,
And drive the dusky wave along the mead,
Rises the russet hay-cock thick behind,
In order gay. While heard from dale to dale,
Waking the breeze, resounds the blended voice
Of happy labor, love, and social glee.
It Is raging noon; and, vertical, the sun
Shoots through the expanding air a torrid gleam.
Over heaven and earth, far as the darted eye
Can pierce, a dazzling deluge reigns; and all
From pole to pole is undistinguished blaze.
Down to the dusty earth the sight, o'erpower'd,
Stoops for relief; but thence ascending streams,
And keen reflection pain. Burnt to the heart
Are the refreshless fields; their arid hue
Adds a new fever to the sickening soul:
And over their slippery surface wary treads
The foot of thirsty pilgrim, often dipped
In a cross rill, presenting to his wish
A living draught: he seels before he drinks!
Echo no more returns the sandy sound
Of sharpening scythe; the mower, sinking, heaps
Over him the humid hay, with flowers perfumed;
And scarce a chirping grasshopper is heard
Through the dumb mead. Distressful nature pants.
The desert reddens; and the stubborn rock,
Split to the center, sweats at every pore.
The very streams look languid from afar;
Or, through the fervid glade, impetuous hurl
Into the shelter of the crackling grove.
All-conquering heat, oh intermit thy wrath!
And on my throbbing temples potent thus
Beam not so hard! Incessant still you flow,
And still another fervent flood succeeds,
Poured on the head profuse. In vain I sigh,
And restless turn, and look around for night;
Night is far off; and hotter hours approach.
Who can endure! the too resplendent scene
Already darkens on the dizzy sight,
And double objects dance; unreal sounds
Sing deep around; a weight of sultry dew
Hangs deathful on the limbs; shiver the nerves;
The supple sinews sink; and on the heart,
Misgiving, horror lays his heavy hand.
Thrice happy he! that on the sunless side
Of a romantic mountain, forest-crown'd,
Beneath the whole collected shade reclines:
Or in the gelid caverns, woodbine-wrought,
And fresh bedewed with ever-spouting streams,
Sits coolly calm; while all the world without,
Unsatisfied, and sick, tosses in noon.
Emblem instructive of the virtuous man,
Who keeps his tempered mind serere, and pure,
And all his passions aptly harmoniz'd,
Amid a jarring world, with vice inflamed.
Welcome, ye shades! ye bowery thickets, hail!
Ye lofty pines! ye venerable oaks!
Ye ashes wild, resounding over the steep!
Delicious is your shelter to the soul,
As to the hunted heart the sallying spring,
Or stream full-flowing, that his swelling sides
Laves, as he floats along the herbag'd brink.
Cold through the nerves, your pleasing comfort glides;
The heart beats glad; the fresh-expanded eye,
And ear resume their watch; the sinews knit;
And life shoots swift through every lightened limb.
All in the adjoining brook, that shrills along
The vocal grove, now fretting over a rock,
Now scarcely moving through a reedy pool,
Now starting to a sudden stream, and now
Gently diffused into a limpid plain;
A various groupe the herds and flocks compose;
Rural confusion! On the grassy bank
Some ruminating lie; while others stand
Half in the flood, and often bending sip
The circling surface. In the middle droops
The strong laborious ox, of honest front,
Which incompos'd he shakes; and from his sides
The troublous insects lashes with his tail,
Returning still. Amid his subjects safe,
Slumbers the monareh-swain; his careless arm
Thrown round his head on downy moss sustained;
Here laid his scrip, with wholesome viands filled;
And there his sceptre-crook, and watchful dog.
Light fly his slumbers, if perchance a flight
Of angry hornets fasten on the herd;
That startling scatters from the shallow brook,
In search of lavish stream. Tossing the foam,
They scorn the keeper's voice, and scour the plain,
Through all the bright severity of noon;
While, from their laboring breasts, a hollow moan
Proceeding, runs low-bellowing round the hills.
Often in this season too the horse provoked,
While his big sinews, full of spirits, swell,
Trembling with vigor, in the heat of blood,
Springs the high fence; and over the field effus'd,
Darts on the gloomy flood, with steady eye,
And heart estranged to fear: his nervous chest,
Luxuriant, and erect, the seat of strength!
Bears downth' opposing stream: quenchless his thirst,
He takes the river at redoubled draughts;
And with wide nostrils, snorting, skims the wave.
Still let me pierce into the midnight depth
Of yonder grove, of wildest, largest growth;
That, high embowering in the middle air,
Nods over the mount beneath. At every step,
Solemn, and slow, the shadows blacker fall,
And all is awful, silent gloom around.
These are the haunts of meditation, these
The scenes where ancient Bards the inspiring breath,
Extatic felt, and, from this world retired,
Conversed with angels, and immortal forms,
On heavenly errants bent: to save the fall
Of virtue struggling on the brink of vice;
In waking whispers, and repeated dreams,
To hint pure thought, and warned the favored soul,
For future trials fated to prepare;
To prompt the Poet, who devoted gives
His muse to better themes; to sooth the pangs
Of dying Saints; and from the Patriot's breast,
(Backward to mingle in detested war,
But foremost when engaged) to turn the death;
And numberless such offices of love,
Daily, and nightly, zealous to perform.
Shook sudden from the bosom of the sky,
A thousand shapes or glide athwart the dusk,
Or stalk majestic on. Arous'd, I feel
A sacred terror, and severe delight,
Creep through my mortal frame; and thus, methinks,
Those accents murmured in the abstracted ear,
Pronounce distinct. " Be not of us afraid,
" Poor kindred man, thy fellow creatures, we
" From the same Parent-Power our beings drew,
" The, same our Lord, and laws, and great pursuit.
" Once some of us, like thee, through stormy life,
" Toiled, tempest-beaten, ever we could attain
" This holy calm, this harmony of mind,
" Where purity and peace immingle charms.
" Then fear us not; but with responsive song,
" Often in these dim recesses, undisturbed
" By noisy folly, and discordant vice,
" Of nature sing with us, and nature's God.
" And frequent at the middle waste of night,
" Or all day long, in deserts still, are heard,
" Now here, now there, now wheeling in mid-sky,
" Around, or underneath, aerial sounds,
" Sent from angelic harps, and voices joined.
" A happiness bestowed by us, alone,
" On contemplation, or the hallowed ear
" Of Poet, swelling to seraphic strain. "
Thus up the Mount, in visionary muse,
I stray, regardless whither; till the stun
Of a near fall of water every sense
Wakes from the charm of thought: swift-shrinking back,
I stand aghast, and view the broken scene.
Smooth to the shaggy brink a spreading flood
Rolls fair and placid; till collected all,
In one big glut, as sinks the shelving ground,
The impetuous torrent, tumbling down the steep,
Thunders and shakes the astonished country round.
Now a blue watery sheet; anon dispersed,
A hoary mist; then gathered in again,
A darted stream aslant the hollow rock,
This way, and that tormented; dashing thick,
From seep to seep, with wild, infracted course,
And restless roaring to the humble vale.
With the rough prospect tired, I turn my gaze,
Where, in long vista, the soft-murmuring main
Darts a green luster, trembling through the trees;
Or to yon silver-streaming threads of light,
A showery radiance, beaming through the boughs.
Invited from the rock, to whose dark cliff
He clings, the steep-ascending eagle soars,
With upward pinions through the attractive gleam:
And, giving full his bosom to the blaze,
Gains on the sun; while all the feathery race,
Smote with afflictive noon, disordered droop,
Deep in the thicket; or, from bower to bower
Responsive, force an interrupted strain.
The stock-dove only through the forest cooes,
Mournfully hoarse; often ceasing from his plaint,
Short interval of weary woe! again
The sad idea of his murdered mate,
Struck from his side by savage fowler's guile,
Across his fancy comes; and then resounds
A louder song of sorrow through the grove.
Beside the dewy border let me sit,
All in the freshness of the humid air;
There on that rock by Nature's chissel carved
An ample chair, moss-lin'd, and over head
By flowering umbrage shaded; where the be
Strays diligent, and with the extracted sweet
Of honey-suckle loads his little thigh.
And what a various prospect lies around!
Of hills, and vales, and woods, and lawns, and spires,
And towns betwixt, and gilded streams; till all
The stretching landscape into smoke decays.
Happy Britannia! where the Queen of arts,
Inspiring vigor, Liberty abroad
Walks through the land of Heroes, unconfined
And scatters plenty with unsparing hand.
Rich is the soil, and merciful the skies;
Thy streams unfailing in the summer's drought;
Unmatched thy guardian-oaks; thy valleys float
With golden waves; and on thy mountains flocks
Bleat, numberless; while, roving round their sides,
Bellow the blackening herds in lusty droves.
Beneath, thy meadows flame, and rise unquell'd,
Against the mower's scythe. On every hand,
Thy villas shine. Thy country teems with wealth,
And Property assures it to the swain,
Pleased, and unwearied, in his certain toil.
Full are thy cities with the Sons of art;
And trade, and joy, in every busy street,
Mingling are heard: even Drudgery himself,
As at the car he sweats, or dusty hews
The palace-stone, looks gay. Thy crowded ports,
Where rising masts an endless prospect yield,
With labor burn, and echo to the shouts
Of hurried sailor, as he hearty waves
His last adieu, and loosening every sheet,
Resigns the spreading vessel to the wind.
Bold, firm, and graceful, are thy generous youth,
By hardship sinew'd, and by danger fired,
Scattering the nations where they go; and first,
Or in the listed plain, or wintry seas.
Mild are thy glories too, as over the plans
Of thriving peace thy thoughtful sires preside;
In genius, and substantial learning high;
For every virtue, every worth renowned,
Sincere, plain-hearted, hospitable, kind;
Yet like the mustering thunder when provoked;
The dread of tyrants, and the sole resource
Of such as under grim oppression groan.
Thy sons of glory many! thine a More,
As Cato firm, as Aristides just,
Like rigid Cincinnatus nobly poor,
A dauntless soul, erect, who smiled on death.
Frugal, and wise, a Walsingham is thine;
A Drake, who made thee mistress of the deep,
And bore thy name in thunder round the world.
Then flamed thy spirit high; but who can speak
The numerous worthies of the maiden reign?
In Raleigh mark their every glory mixed,
Raleigh, the scourge of Spain! whose breast with all
The sage, the patriot, and the hero burned.
Nor sunk his vigor, when a coward-reign
The warrior fettered, and at last resigned,
To glut the vengeance of a vanquished foe.
Then deep through fate his mind retorted saw,
And with his prison-hours enriched the world;
Yet found no times, in all the long research,
So glorious, or so base, as those he proved,
In which he conquered, and in which he bled.
A Hambden thine, of unsubmitting soul;
Who stemmed the torrent of a downward age,
To slavery prone; and bade thee rise again,
In all thy native pomp of Freedom fierce.
Nor can the muse the gallant Sidney pass,
The plume of war! with every laurel crowned,
The lover's myrtle, and the poet's bay.
Nor him of later name, firm to the cause
Of Liberty, her rough determined friend,
The British Brutus; whose united blood
With Rnssel, thine, thou patriot wise, and calm,
Stained the sad annals of a giddy reign;
Aiming at lawless power, though meanly sunk
In loose inglorious sloth. High thy renown
In Sages too, far as the sacred light
Of science spreads, and wakes the muses' song.
Thine is a Bacon formed of happy mold,
When Nature smiled, deep, comprehensive, clear,
Exact, and elegant; in one rich soul,
Plato, the Stagyrite, and Tully joined.
The generous Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl of Shaftsbury.
Ashley thine, the friend of man;
Who scanned his nature with a brother's eye,
His weakness prompt to shade, to raise his aim,
To touch the finer movements of the mind,
And with the moral Beauty charm the heart.
What need I name thy Boil, whose pious search
Still sought the great Creator in his works,
By sure experience led? And why thy Lock,
Who made the whole internal world his own?
Let comprehensive Newton speak thy fame,
In all philosophy. For solemn song,
Is not wild Shakespeare nature's boast, and thine?
And every greatly amiable muse
Of elder ages in thy Milton met?
His was the treasure of two thousand years,
Seldom indulged to man; a god-like mind,
Unlimited, and various, as his Theme;
Astonishing as Chaos; as the bloom
Of blowing Eden fair; foft as the talk
Of our grand Parents, and as Heaven sublime.
May my song soften as, thy daughters, I,
Britannia, hail! for beauty is their own,
The feeling heart simplicity of life,
And elegance, and taste: the faultless form,
Shaped by the hand of Harmony; the cheek,
Where the live crimson, through the native white
Soft-shooting, over the face diffuses bloom,
And every nameless grace; the parted lip,
Like the red rose-bud, moist with morning-dew,
Breathing delight; and, under flowing jet,
Or sunny ringlets, or of circling brown,
The neck slight-shaded, and the swelling breast;
The look resistless, piercing to the soul,
And by the soul informed, when, dressed in love,
She sits high smiling in the conscious eye.
Island of bliss! amid the suject seas,
That thunder round thy rocky coasts, set up,
At once the wonder, terror, and delight,
Of distant nations; whose remotest shore
Can soon be shaken by thy naval arm;
Not to be shook thyself, but all assaults
Baffling, like thy hoar cliffs the loud sea-wave.
O Thou! by whose almighty Nod the scale
Of empire rises, or alternate falls,
Send forth the saving Virtues round the land,
In bright patrol: white Peace, and social Love;
The tender-looking Charity, intent
On gentle deeds, and shedding tears through smiles;
Undaunted Truth, and Dignity of mind;
Courage composed, and keen; sound Temperance,
Healthful in heart and look; clear Chastity,
With blushes reddening as she moves along,
Disordered at the deep regard she draws;
Rough Industry; Activity untried,
With copious life informed, and all awake:
While, in the radiant front, superior shines
That first paternal Virtue, public Zeal,
Who casts over all an equal, wide survey,
And ever musing on the common weal,
Stll labors glorious with some brave design.
Thus far transported by my country's love,
Nobly digressive from my theme, I Have aimed
To sing her praises in ambitious verse;
While, slightly to recount, I simply meant,
The various summer-horrors, which infest
Kingdoms that scorch below severer suns:
Kingdoms on which, direct, the flood of day
Oppressive falls, and gives the gloomy hue,
And feature gross; or worse, to ruthless deeds,
Wan jealousy, red rage, and fell revenge,
Their hasty spirit prompts. Ill-fated race!
Although the treasures of the sun be theirs,
Rocks rich in gems, and mountains big with mines;
Whence, over sands of gold, the Niger rolls
His amber wave; while on his balmy banks,
Or in the spicy Abyssinian vales,
The citron, orange, and pomegranate, drink
Intolerable day, yet in their coats
A cooling juice contain. Peaceful beneath,
Leans the huge elephant; and in his shade
A multitde of beauteous creatures play,
And birds of bolder note rejoice around.
And often amid their aromatic groves,
Touched (...) the torch of noon, the gummy bark,
Smouldering, begins to roll the dusky wreath.
Instant, so swift the ruddy ruin spreads,
A cloud of incense shadows all the land;
And, over a thousand thundering trees at once,
Riots with lawless rage the running blaze:
But ciefly should fomenting winds assist,
And doubling blend the circulating waves
Of flame tempestuous; or directly on,
Far-streaming, drive them through the forest's length.
But other views await; where heaven above
Glows like an arch of brass; and all below,
The brown-burnt earth a mass of iron lies;
Of fruits, and flowers, and every verdure spoilt;
Barren, and bare, a joyless, weary waste;
Thin-cottag'd; and in time of trying need,
Abandoned by the vanished brook; like one
Of fading fortune by his treacherous friend.
Such are thy horrid deserts, Barca; such
Zaara, thy hot inhospitable sands;
Continuous rising often with the blast,
Till the sun sees no more; and unknit earth,
Shook by the south into the darkened air,
Falls in new hilly kingdoms over the waste.
Hence late exposed (if distant fame says true)
A smothered city from the sandy wave
Emergent rose; with olive-fields around,
Fresh woods, reclining herds, and silent flocks,
Amusing all, and incorrupted seen.
For by the nitrous penetrating salts,
Mixed copious with the sand, pierced, and preserved,
Each object hardens gradual into stone,
Its posture fixes, and its color keeps.
The statue-folk, within, unnumber'd crowd
The streets, in various attitudes surpised
By sudden fate, and live on every face
The passions caught, beyond the sculptor's art.
Here leaning soft, the marble-lovers stand,
Delighted even in death; and each for each
Feeling alone, with that expressive look,
Which perfect Nature only knows to give.
And there the father agonizing bends
Fond over his weeping wife, and infant train
Aghast, and trembling, though they know not why.
The stiffen'd vulgar stretch their arms to heaven,
With horror starting; while in council deep
Assembled full, the hoary-headed sires
Sit sadly-thoughtful of the public fate.
As when old Rome, beneath the raging Gaul,
Sunk her proud turrets resolute on death,
Around the Forum sat the gray divan
Of Senators, majestic, motionless,
With ivory-staves, and in their awful robes
Dressed like the falling fathers of mankind;
Amazed, and shivering, from the solemn sight
The red barbarians shrunk, and deemed them Gods.
It Is here that Thirst has fixed his dry domain;
And walks his wide, malignant round, in search
Of pilgrim lost; or on the In the desert of Araoan are two tombs with
inscriptions on them, importing that the persons there interred were a rich
merchant, and a poor carrier, who both died of thirst; and that the former had
given to the latter ten thousand ducats for one cruise of water.
Merchant's tomb
Triumphant sits, who for a single cruise
Of unavailing water paid so dear:
Nor could the gold his hard associate save.
Here the green serpent gathers up his train,
In orbs immense; then darting out anew,
Progressive, rattles through the withered brake;
And, rolling frightful, guards the scanty fount,
If fount there be: or of diminsh'd size,
But mighty mischief, on the unguarded swain
Steals, full of rancour. Here the savage race
Roam, licensed by the shading hour of blood.
And foul misdeed, when the pure day has shut
His sacred eye. The rabid tiger then,
The fiery panther, and the whisker'd pard,
(Bespeckled fair, the beauty of the waste)
In dire divan, surround their shaggy King,
Majestic, stalking over the burning sand,
With planted step; while an obsequious crowd
Of grinning forms at humble distance wait.
These all together joined from darksome caves,
Where over gnawed bones they slumber'd out the day,
By supreme hunger smit, and thirst intense,
At once their mingling voices raise to Heaven;
And with imperious and repeated roars,
Demanding food, the wilderness resounds,
From Atlas eastward to the frighted Nile.
Unhappy he! who from the first of joys,
Society, cut off, is left alone
Amid this world of death. Ceaseless he sits,
Sad on the jutting eminence, and views
The rolling main, that ever toils below;
Still fondly forming in the farthest verge,
Where the round ether mixes with the wave,
Ships, dim-discover'd, dropping from the clouds.
At evening, to the setting sun he turns
A mournful eye, and down his dying heart
Sinks helpless; while the wonted roar is up,
And hiss continual through the tedious night.
Yet here, even here, into these black abodes
Of monstors, unappall'd, from stooping Rome,
And haughty Caesar, Liberty retired,
With Cato leading through Numidian wilds:
Disdainful of Campania's fertile plains,
And all the green delights of Italy;
When for them she must bend the servile knee,
And fawning take the blessings once her own.
What need I mention those inclement skies,
Where frequent, over the sickening city, Plague,
The fiercest son of Nemesis divine,
Collects a close, incumbent night of death;
Uninterrupted by the living winds,
Forbid to blow a wholesome breeze; and stained
With many a mixture, by the sun suffus'd,
Of angry aspect? Princely Wisdom then
Dejects his watchful eye; and from the hand
Of drooping Justice, ineffectual, falls
The sword, and balance. Mute the voice of Joy;
And hushed the murmur of the busy world.
Empty the streets, with uncouth verdure clad,
And ranged at open noon by beasts of prey,
And birds of bloody beak. The sullen door
No visit knows, nor hears the wailing voice
Of fervent Want. Even soul-attracted friends,
And relatives endeared for many a year,
Savag'd by woe, forget the social tie,
The close engagement of the kindred heart;
And, sick in solitude, successive die,
Untended, and unmourn'd. While to complete
The scene of desolation, wide around,
Denying all retreat, the grim guards stand,
And give the flying wretch a better death.
Much of the force of foreign Summers still,
Of growling hills that shoot the pillar'd flame,
Of earthquake, and pale famine, could I sing;
But equal scenes of horror call me home.
For now, slow-settling, over the lurid grove,
Unusual darkness broods; and growing gains
The broad possession of the sky, surcharged
With wrathful vapor, from the damp abrupt,
Where sleep the mineral generations, drawn.
Thence nitre, sulphur, vitriol, on the day
Steam, and fermenting in yon baleful cloud,
Extensive over the world a reddening gloom!
In dreadful promptitude to spring, await
The high command. A boding silence reigns
Dread through the dun expanse, save the dull sound,
That from the mountain, previous to the storm,
Rowls over the trembling earth, disturbs the flood,
And stirs the forest-leaf without a breath.
Prone, to the lowest vale, the aerial tribes
Descend: the tempest-loving raven scarce
Dares wing the dubious dusk. In rueful gaze
The cattle stand, and on the scouling heavens
Cast a deploring eye; by man forsook,
Who to the crowded cottage hies him fast,
Or seeks the shelter of the downward cave.
It Is dumb amaze, and listening terror all;
When to the quicker eye the livid glance
Appears far south, emissive through the cloud;
And, by the powerful breath of God inflate,
The thunder raises his tremendous voice;
At first low-muttering; but at each approach,
The lightnings flash a larger curve, and more
The noise astounds: till over head a sheet
Of various flame discloses wide, then shuts
And opens wider, shuts and opens still
Expansive, wrapping ether in a blaze.
Follows the loosened, aggravated roar,
Enlarging, deepening, mingling, peal on peal
Crushed horrible, convulsing heaven and earth.
Down comes a deluge of sonorous hail,
In the white, heavenly magazines congealed;
And often fatal to the unshelter'd head
Of man, or rougher beast. Wide-rent the clouds
Pour a whole flood; and yet, its rage unquench'd,
The inconquerable lightning struggles through,
Ragged, and sierce, or in red whirling balls,
And strikes the shepherd, as he shuddering sits,
Presaging ruin, mid the rocky clift.
His inmost marrow feels the gliding flame;
He dies; and, like a statue grim'd with age,
His live dejected posture still remains;
His russet singed, and rent his hanging hat;
Against his crook his sooty cheek reclined;
While, whining at his feet, his hals-slung'd dog,
Importunately kind, and fearful, pats
On his insensate master for relief.
Black from the stroke, above, the mountain-pine,
A leaning shattered trunk, stands scath'd to heaven,
The talk of future ages; and, below,
A lifeless groupe the blasted cattle lie:
Here the soft flocks, with that same harmless look,
They wore alive, and ruminating still,
In fancy's eye; and there the frowning bull,
And ox half-rais'd. A little further, burns
The guiltless cottage; and the haughty dome
Stoops to the base. In one immediate flash,
The forest falls; or, flaming out, displays
The savage-hunts, unpierc'd by day before,
Scared is the mountain's brow; and from, the cliff
Tumbles the smitten rock. The desert shakes,
And gleams, and grumbles, through his deepest dens.
Guilt dubious hears, with deeply-troubled thought;
And yet not always on the guilty head
Falls the devoted flash. Young Celadon
And his Amelia were a matchless twain:
With equal virtue formed, and equal grace,
The same, distinguished by their sex alone:
Hers the mild luster of the blooming morn,
And his the radianee of the risen day.
They loved. But such their guileless passion was,
As in the dawn of time alarmed the heart
Of Innocence, and undissembling Truth.
'Twas friendship, heightened by the mutual wish,
The enchanting hope, and sympathetick glow,
Struck from the charmsul eye. Devoting all
To love, each was to each a dearer self;
Supremely happy in the awakened power
Of given joy. Alone, amid the shades,
Still in harmonious intercourse they lived
The rural day, and talked the flowing heart,
Or sighed, and looked unutterable things.
Thus passed their life, a clear united stream,
By care unrnffled; till in evil hour
The tempest caught them on the tender walk,
Heedless how far. Her breast presageful heaved
Unwonted sighs, and stealing often a look
Of the big gloom, on Celadon her eye
Fell tearful, wetting her disordered cheek.
In vain assuring love, and confidence
In heaven repressed her fear; it grew, and shook
Her frame near dissolution. He perceived
The unequal conflict, and as angels look
On dying saints, his eyes compassion shed,
With love illumined high. " Fear not, he said,
" Fair innocence! thou stranger to offense,
" And inward storm! He, who yon skies involves
" In frowns of darkness, ever smiles on thee,
" With full regard. Over thee the secret shaft
"That wastes at midnight, or the undreaded hour
" Of noon, flies hurtless; and that very voice,
" Which thunders terror through the conscious heart,
" With tongues of seraphs whispers peace to thine.
" It Is safety to be near thee sure, and thus
" To clasp perfection! " From his void embrace,
(Mysterious heaven!) that moment, in a heap
Of pallid ashes fell the beauteous maid.
But who can paint the lover, as he stood,
Struck by severe amazement, hating life,
Speechless, and fixed in all the death of woe!
So, faint resemblance, on the marble-tomb,
The well-dissembl'd mourner stooping stands,
For ever silent, and for ever sad.
As from the face of heaven the shattered clouds
Tumultuous rove, the interminable blue,
Delightful swells into the general arch,
That copes the nations. Nature from the storm
Shines out afresh; and through the lightened air
A higher luster and a clearer calm,
Diffusive, tremble; while, as if in sign
Of danger past, a glittering robe of joy,
Set off abundant by the level ray,
Inverts the fields, yet dropping from distress.
It Is beauty all, and grateful song around,
Joined to the low of kine, and numerous bleat
Of flocks thick-nibbling through the clover'd vale.
And shall the hymn be marred by thankless man,
Most-favour'd; who with voice articulate
Should lead the chorus of this lower world?
Shall ho, so soon forgetful of the hand
That hushed the thunder, and expands the sky,
After the tempest puff his idle vows,
And a new dance of vanity begin,
Scarce ever the pant forsake the feeble heart?
Cheered by the setting beam, the sprightly youth
Speeds to the well-known pool, whose crystal depth
A sandy bottom shows. A while he stands
Gazing the inverted landscape, half afraid
To meditate the blue profound below;
Then plunges headlong down the circling flood.
His ebon tresses, and his rosy cheek
Instant emerge; and through the flexile wave,
At each short breathing by his lip repelled,
With arms and legs according well, he makes,
As humor leads, an easy-winding path;
While, from his polished sides, a dewy light
Effuses on the pleased spectators round.
'Twas then beneath a secret-waving shade,
Where winded into lovely solituctes
Runs out the rambling dale that Damon sat,
Thoughtful, and fixed in philosophic muse:
Damon, who still amid the savage woods,
And lonely lawns, the force of beauty scorned,
Firm, and to false philosophy devote.
The brook ran babbling by; and sighing weak,
The breeze among the bending willows played:
When Sacharissa to the cool retreat,
With Amoret, and Musidora stole.
Warm in their cheek the sultry season glowed;
And, robbed in loose array, they came to bathe
Their fervent limbs in the refreshing stream.
Tall, and majestic, Sacharissa rose,
Superior treading, as on Ida's top
(So Grecian bards in wanton fable sung)
High-shone the sister and the wife of Jove.
Another Pallas Musidora seemed,
Meek-ey'd, sedate, and gaining every look
A surer conquest of the sliding heart.
While, like the Cyprian goddess, Amoret,
Delicious dressed in rosy-dimpled smiles,
And all one softness, melted on the sense.
Nor Paris panted stronger, when aside
The rival-goddesses the veil divine
Cast unconfined, and gave him all their charms,
Than, Damon, thou, the stoic now no more,
But man deep-felt, as from the snowy leg,
And slender foot, the inverted silk they drew;
As the soft touch dissolved the virgin-zone;
And, through the parting robe, the alternate breast,
With youth wild-throbbing, on thy lawless gaze
Luxuriant rose. Yet more enamored still,
When from their naked limbs of glowing white,
In folds loose-floating felt the fainter lawn;
And fair exposed they stood, shrunk from themselves;
With fancy blushing; at the doubtful breeze
Arous'd, and starting, like the fearful fawn.
The Venus of Medicis.
So stands the statue that enchants the world,
Her full proportions such, and bashful so
Bends ineffectual from the roving eye.
Then to the flood they rushed; the plunging fair
The parted flood with closing waves received;
And, every beauty softening, every grace
Flushing afresh, a mellow luster shed:
As shines the lilly through the crystal mild;
Or as the rose amid the morning-dew
Puts on a warmer glow. In various play,
While thus they wantoned; now beneath the wave,
But ill concealed; and now with streaming locks
Rising again; the latent Damon drew
Such draughts of love and beauty to the soul,
As put his harsh philosophy to flight,
The joyless search of long-deluded years;
And Musidora fixing in his heart,
Informed, and humaniz'd him into man.
This is the purest exercise of health.
The kind refresher of the summer-heats;
Nor when, the brook pellucid, Winter keens,
Would I weak-shivering linger on the brink.
Thus life redoubles, and is often preserved
By the bold swimmer, in the swift illapse
Of accident disasterous. Hence the limbs
Knit into force; and the same Roman arm,
That rose victorious over the conquered earth,
First learned, while tender, to subdue the wave.
Even from the body's purity the mind
Receives a secret, sympathetic aid.
Low walks the sun, and broadens by degrees,
Just over the verge of day. The rising clouds,
That shift perpetual in his vivid train,
Their watery mirrors, numberless, opposed,
Unfold the hidden riches of his ray;
And chase a change of colors round the sky.
It Is all one blush from east to west! and now,
Behind the dusky earth, he dips his orb;
Now half immersed; and now a golden curve
Gives one faint glimmer, and then disappears.
For ever running an enchanted round,
Passes the day, deceitful, tedious, void;
As fleets the vision over the formful brain,
This moment hurrying all the impassioned soul,
The next in nothing lost. It Is so to him,
The dreamer of this earth, a chearless blank:
A sight of horror to the cruel wretch;
Who, rolling in inhuman pleasure deep,
The whole day long has made the widow pine;
And snatched the morsel from her orphan's mouth.
To give his dogs. But to the tuneful mind,
Who makes the hopeless heart to sing for joy,
Diffusing kind beneficence around,
Boastless, as now descends the silent dew;
To him the long review of ordered life
Is inward rapture, only to be felt.
Confessed from yonder slow-extinguish'd clouds,
All ether saddening, sober Evening takes
Her wonted station in the middle air;
A thousand Shadows at her beck. First This
She sends on earth; then That of deeper die
Steals soft behind; and then a Deeper still,
In circle following circle, gathers round,
To close the face of things. A fresher breeze
Begins to wave the wood, and stir the stream,
Sweeping with shadowy gust the fields of corn;
While the quail clamours for his running mate.
His folded flock secure, the shepherd home
Hies, merry-hearted; and by turns relieves
The ruddy milk-maid of her brimming pail;
The Beauty, whom perhaps his witless heart,
Unknowing what the joy-mixt anguish means,
Loves fond, by the sincerest language shown
Of cordial glances, and obliging deeds.
Onward they pass, over many a panting height,
And valley sunk, and unfrequented; where
At fall of eve the fairy people throng,
In various game, and revelry to pass
The summer-night, as village-stories tell.
But far about they wander from the grave
Of him, whom his ungentle fortune urged
Against himself to lift the hated hand
Of violence; by men cast out from life,
And after death, to which they drove his hope,
Into the broad way side. The ruined tower
Is also shunned; whose hoary chambers hold,
So night-struck fancy dreams, the yelling ghost.
Among the crooked lanes, on every hedge,
The glowworm lights his lamp; and, through the dark,
Twinkles a moving gem. On Evening's heel,
Night follows fast; not in her winter-robe
Of massy stygian woof, but loose arrayed
In mantle dun. A faint erroneous ray,
Glanced from the imperfect surfaces of things,
Flings half an image on the straining eye.
While wavering woods, and villages, and streams,
And rocks, and mountain-tops, that long retained
The ascending gleam, are all one swimming scene,
Doubtful if seen: whence sudden Vision turns
To heaven; where Venus, in the sterry front,
Shines eminent; and from her genial rise,
When daylight sickens, till it springs afresh,
Sheds influence on earth, to love, and life,
And every form of vegetation kind.
As thus the effulgence tremulous I drink,
With glad peruse, the lambent lightnings shoot
Across the sky; or horizontal dart
Over half the nations, in a minute's space,
Conglob'd, or long. Astonishment succeeds,
And silence, ever the various talk begin.
The vulgar stare; amazement is their joy,
And mystic faith, a fond sequacious herd!
But scrutinous Philosophy looks deep,
With piercing eye, into the latent cause;
Nor can she swallow what she does not see.
With thee, serene Philosophy! with thee,
And thy high praises, let me crown my song!
Effusive source of evidence, and truth!
A luster shedding over the ennobled mind,
Stronger than summer-noon; and pure as that,
Whose mild vibrations sooth the parted soul,
New to the dawning of celestial day.
Hence through her nourished powers, enlarged by thee,
She soaring spurns, with elevated pride,
The tangling mass of cares, and low desires,
That bind the fluttering crowd; and, angel-wing'd,
The heights of Science, and of Virtue gains,
Where all his calm and clear; with Nature round
Or in the starry regions, or the abyss,
To Reason's, and to fancy's eye displayed:
The First up-tracing from the vast inane,
The chain of causes and effects to Him,
Who, all-sustaining, in himself, alone
Possesses Being; while the Last receives
The whole magnificence of heaven and earth.
And every beauty, delicate or bold,
Obvious or more remote, with livelier sense,
A world swift-painted on the attentive mind.
Tutored by thee, hence Poetry exalts
Her voice to ages; and informs the page
With music, image, sentiment, and thought,
Never to die! the treasure of mankind,
Their highest honor, and their truest joy!
Without thee what were unassisted man?
A savage roaming through the woods and wilds,
In quest of prey; and with the unfashion'd furr
Rough-clad; devoid of every honest art,
And elegance of life. Nor home, nor joy
Domestic, mixed of tenderness and care,
Nor moral excellence, nor social bliss,
Nor law were his; nor property; nor swain,
To turn the furrow; nor mechanic hand
Hardened to toil; nor sailor bold; nor trade,
Mother severe of infinite delights!
Nothing, save rapine, indolence, and guile,
And woes on woes, a still-revolving train!
Whose horrid circle had made human life
Than nonexistence worse. But taught by thee
Ours are the plans of policy, and peace;
To live like brothers, and conjunctive all
Embellish life. While thus laborious crowds
Ply the tough oar, Philosophy directs,
Star-led, the helm; or like the liberal breath
Of urgent heaven, invisible, the sails
Swells out, and bears the inferior world along.
Nor to this evanescent speck of earth
Poorly confined, the radiant tracts on high
Are her exalted range; intent to gaze
Creation through; and, from that full complex
Of never-ending wonders, to conceive
Of the sole Being right, who spoke the word,
And nature moved complete. With inward view,
Thence on the ideal kingdom swift she turns
Her eye; and instant, at her virtual glance,
The obedient phantoms vanish or appear;
Compound, divide, and into order shift,
Each to his rank, from plain perception up
To notion quite abstract; where first begins
The world of spirits, action all, and life
Immediate, and unmixed. But here the cloud,
So wills Eternal Providence, sits deep.
Enough for us we know that this dark state,
In wayward passions lost, and vain pursuits,
This infancy of being, cannot prove
The final issue of the works of God;
By Love and Wisdom inexpressive formed,
And ever rising with the rising mind.
The END.
AUTUMN.


AUTUMN. A POEM.

By JAMES THOMSON.

The SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed by N. BLANDFORD, for J. MILLAN, Bookseller near Whitehall.
MDCCXXX. (Price 1 s. 6 d.)

AUTUMN.

Inscribed to the RIGHT HONORABLE ARTHUR ONSLOW, Esquire SPEAKER of the HOUSE OF
COMMONS.

The ARGUMENT.
The subject proposed. Address to Mr. ONSLOW. A prospect of the fields ready
for harvest. Reaping. A tale. A harvest storm. Shooting and hunting, their
barbarity. A ludicrous account of fox-hunting. A view of an orchard.
Wall-fruit. A vineyard. A description of fogs, frequent in the (...) part of
AUTUMN: whence a digression, enquiring into the rise of fountains, and rivers.
Birds of season considered, that now shift their habitation. The prodigious
number of them that cover the northern and western isles of SCOTLAND. Hence a
view of the country. A prospect of the Discolored, fading woods. After a
gentle dusky day, moonlight. Autumnal meteors. Morning: to which succeeds a
calm, pure, Sunshine day, such as usually shuts up the season. The harvest
being gathered in, the country dissolved in joy. The whole concludes with a
panegyric on a philosophical country life.

AUTUMN.
CROWNED with the sickle, and the wheaten shear,
While Autumn, nodding over the yellow plain,
Comes jovial on; the doric reed once more,
Well-pleased, I tune. Whatever the wintry frost
Nitrous prepared; the various-blossom'd Spring
Put in white promise forth; and Summer-Suns
Concocted strong, rush boundless now to view,
Full, perfect all, and swell my glorious theme.
Onslow! the muse, ambitious of thy name,
To grace, inspire, and dignify her song,
Would from the public voice thy gentle ear
A while engage. Thy noble cares she knows,
The patriot-virtues that distend thy thought,
Spread on thy front, and in thy conduct glow;
While listening senates hang upon thy tongue,
Devolving through the maze of eloquence
A roll of periods, sweeter than her song.
But she too pants for public virtue, she,
Though weak of power, yet strong in ardent will,
Whenever her country rushes on her heart,
Assumes a bolder note, and fondly tries
To mix the patriot's with the poet's flame.
When the bright Virgin gives the beauteous days,
And Libra weighs in equal scales the year;
From heaven's high cope the fierce effulgence shook
Of parting Summer, a serener blue,
With golden light irradiate, wide invests
The happy world. Attemper'd suns arise,
Sweet-beam'd, and shedding often through lucid clouds
A pleasing calm; while broad, and brown, below,
Unbounded harvests hang the heavy head.
Rich, silent, deep, they stand; for not a gale
Rolls its light billows over the bending plain;
A calm of plenty! till the ruffled air
Falls from its poise, and gives the breeze to blow.
Rent is the fleecy mantle of the sky;
The clouds fly different; and the sudden sun
By fits effulgent gilds the illumined field,
And black by fits the shadows sweep along.
A gayly checkered, wide-extended view,
Far as the circling eye can shoot around,
Convolv'd, and tossing in a flood of corn.
These are thy blessings Industry! rough Power!
Whom Labor still attends, and Sweat, and Pain;
Yet the kind source of every gentle art,
And all the soft civility of life:
Raiser of human kind! by Nature cast,
Naked, and helpless, out amid the woods,
And wilds, to rude inclement elements;
With various powers of deep efficiency
Implanted, and profusely poured around
Materials infinite; but idle all.
Still unexerted, in the unconscious breast,
Slept the lethargic powers; Corruption still,
Voracious, swallowed what the liberal hand
Of Bounty scattered over the savage year.
And still the sad barbarian, roving, mixed
With beasts of prey; or for his acron-meal
Fought the fierce tusky boar: a shivering wretch!
Aghast, and comfortless, when the red north,
With winter charged, let the mixed tempest fly,
Hail, rain, and snow, and bitter-breathing frost.
Then to the shelter of the hut he fled;
And the wild season, sordid, pined away.
For home he had not; home is the resort
Of love, of joy, of peace, and plenty, where,
Supporting and supported, polished friends,
And dear relations mingle into bliss.
But this the rugged savage never felt,
Even desolate in crowds; and thus his days
Rolled heavy, dark, and unenjoy'd along;
A waste of time! till Industry approached,
And roused him from his miserable sloth;
His faculties unfolded; pointed out,
Where lavish Nature the directing hand
Of Art demanded; showed him how to raise
His feeble force by the mechanic powers,
To dig the mineral from the vaulted earth,
On what to turn the piercing rage of fire,
On what the torrent, and the gathered blast;
Gave the tall ancient forest to his ax;
Taught him to chip the wood, and hew the stone,
Till by degrees the finished fabric rose;
Tore from his limbs the blood-polluted fur,
And wrapped them in the woolly vestment warm,
Or bright in glossy silk, and flowing lawn;
With wholesome viands filled his table, poured
The generous glass around, inspired, to wake
The life-refining soul of decent wit:
Nor stopped at barren, bare necessity;
But still advancing bolder, led him on,
By hardy patience, and experience slow,
To pomp, to pleasure, elegance, and grace;
And breathing high ambition through his soul,
Set science, wisdom, glory in his view,
And bad him be the Lord of all below.
Then gathering men their natural powers combined,
And formed a Public; to the general good
Submitting, aiming, and conducting all.
For this the Patriot-Council met, the full,
The free, and fairly represented Whole,
For this devised the holy guardian laws,
Distinguished orders, animated Arts,
And with joint force Oppression chaining, set
Imperial Justice at the helm; yet still
To them accountable: nor slavish dreamed
That toiling millions must resign their weal,
And all the honey of their search, to such
As for themselves alone themselves have raised.
Hence every form of cultivated life
In order set, protected, and inspired,
Into perfection wrought. Uniting all,
Society grew numerous, high, polite,
And happy. Nurse of art! the city rose;
And stretching street on street by thousands led,
From twining woody haunts, and the tough yew
To bows strong-straining, her aspiring sons.
'Twas naught but labor, the whole dusky groupe
Of clustering houses, and of mingling men,
Restless design, and execution strong.
In every street the sounding hammer plied
His massy task; while the corrosive file,
In flying touches, formed the fine machine.
Then Commerce brought into the public walk
The busy Merchant; the big warehouse built;
Raised the strong crane; choked up the loaded street
With foreign plenty; and on thee, thou Thames,
Large, gentle, deep, majestic, king of floods!
Than whom no river heaves a fuller tide,
Seized for his grand resort. On either hand,
Like a long wintry forest, groves of masts
Shot up their spires; the bellying sheet between
Possessed the breezy void; the sooty hulk
Steered sluggish on; the splendid barge along
Rowed, regular, to harmony; around,
The boat, light-skimming, stretched its oary wings;
While deep the various voice of fervent toil
From bank to bank increased; whence ribb'd with oak,
To bear the British thunder, black, and bold,
The roaring vessel rushed into the main.
Then too the pillar'd dome, magnific, heaved
His ample roof; and Luxury within
Poured out her glittering stores. The canvas smooth,
With glowing life protuberant, to the view
Embodied rose. The statue seemed to breathe,
And soften into flesh, beneath the touch
Of forming art, imagination-flush'd.
All is the gift of Industry; whatever
Exalts, embellishes, and renders life
Delightful. Pensive Winter cheered by him
Sits at the social fire, and happy hears
The excluded tempest idly rave along.
His hardened fingers deck the gaudy Spring.
Without him Summer were an arid waste;
Nor to the autumnal months could thus transmit
These full, mature, immeasurable stores,
That, waving round, recall my wandering song.
Soon as the morning trembles over the sky,
And, unperceived, unfolds the spreading day;
Before the ripened field the reapers stand,
In fair array; each by the lass he loves,
To bear the rougher part, and mitigate
By nameless gentle offices her toil.
At once they stoop, and swell the lusty sheaves;
While, bandied round and round, the rural talk,
The rural scandal, and the rural jest
Fly hearty, to deceive the tedious time,
And chearly steal the sultry hours away.
Behind the master walks, builds up the shocks;
And, conscious, glancing often this way and that
His sated eye, feels his heart heave with joy.
The gleaners spread around, and here and there,
Spike after spike, their sparing harvest pick.
Be not too narrow, husbandmen! but fling
From the full sheaf, with charitable stealth,
The liberal handful. Think, oh grateful think!
How good the God of harvest is to you;
Who pours abundance over your flowing fields;
While these unhappy partners of your kind
Wide-hover round you, like the fowls of heaven,
And ask their humble dole. The various turns
Of fortune ponder; that your sons may want
What now, with hard reluctance, faint, ye give.
The lovely young Lavinia once had friends;
And fortune smiled, deceitful, on her birth.
For in her helpless years deprived of all,
Of every stay, save innocence and Heaven,
She with her widowed mother, feeble, old,
And poor, lived in a cottage, lost far up
Amid the windings of a woody vale;
Safe from the cruel, blasting arts of man;
Almost on Nature's common bounty fed,
Like the gay birds that sung them to repose,
Content, and careless of tomorrow's fare.
Her form was fresher than the morning-rose,
When the dew wets its leaves; unstained, and pure,
As is the lilly, or the mountain snow.
The modest virtues mingled in her eyes,
Still on the ground deject, and darting all
Their humid beams into the blooming flowers:
Or when the stories that her mother told,
Of what her faithless fortune flattered once,
Thrilled in her thought, they, like the dewy star
Of evening, shone in tears. A native grace
Sat fair-proportion'd on her polished limbs,
Veiled in a simple robe; for loveliness
Needs not the foreign aid of ornament,
But is when unadorned adorned the most.
Thoughtless of beauty, she was beauty's self,
Recluse among the woods; if city-dames
Will deign their faith. And thus she went compelled
By strong necessity, with as serene,
And pleased a look as patience can put on,
To glean Palaemon's fields. The pride of swains
Palaemon was, the generous, and the rich,
Who led the rural life in all its joy,
And elegance, such as Arcadian song
Transmits from ancient, incorrupted times;
When tyrant custom had not shackled man,
And free to follow nature was the mode.
He then, his fancy with autumnal scenes
Amusing, chanced beside his reaper-train
To walk, when poor Lavinia drew his eye;
Unconscious of her power, and turning quick
With unaffected blushes from his gaze.
He saw her charming, but he saw not half
The charms her down-cast modesty concealed.
That very moment love and chaste desire
Sprung in his bosom, to himself unknown;
For still the world prevailed, and its dread laugh
Which scarce the firm philosopher can scorn,
Should his heart own a gleaner in the field:
And thus in secret to his soul he sighed.
What pity! that so delicate a form,
By beauty kindled, and harmonious shaped,
Where sense sincere, and goodness seemed to dwell,
Should be devoted to the rude embrace
Of some indecent clown? She looks, methinks,
Of old Acasto's line; and to my mind
Recalls that patron of my happy life,
From whom my liberal fortune took its rise;
Now to the dust gone down; his houses, lands,
And once fair-spreading family dissolved.
I Have heard that, in some waste obscure retreat,
Urged by remembrance sad, and decent pride,
Far from those scenes which knew their better days,
His aged widow and his daughter live;
Whom yet my fruitless search could never find.
Romantic wish, would this the daughter were!
When, strict enquiring, from herself he found
She was the same, the daughter of his friend,
The bountiful Acasto; who can speak
The mingling passion that surpised his heart,
And through his nerves in shivering transport ran?
Then blazed his smothered flame, avowed, and bold;
And as he run her, ardent, over and over,
Love, gratitude, and pity wept at once.
Confused, and frightened at his sudden tears,
Her rising beauties flushed a higher bloom,
As thus Paleemon, passionate, and just,
Poured out the pious rapture of his soul.
And art thou then Acasto's dear remains?
She, whom my restless gratitude has sought
So long in vain? Oh yes! the very same,
The softened image of my noble friend,
Alive, his every feature, every look,
More elegantly touched. Fairer than spring!
Thou sole surviving blossom from the root,
That nourished up my fortune, say, ah where,
In what unsmiling desert, have thou drawn
The kindest aspect of delighted heaven?
Into such beauty spread? and blown so white?
Though poverty's cold wind, and crashing rain,
Beat keen, and heavy, on thy tender years.
O let me now, into a richer soil,
Transplant thee safe! where vernal suns, and showers,
Diffuse their warmest, largest influence;
And of my garden be the pride, and joy!
It ill befits thee, oh it ill befits
Acasto's daughter, his, whose open stores,
Though vast, were little to his ampler heart,
The father of a country, thus to pick
The very refuse of those harvest-fields,
His bounty taught to gain, and right enjoy.
Then throw that shameful pittance from thy hand,
But ill applied to such a rugged task;
With harvest shining all these fields are thine;
And, if my wishes may presume so far,
Their master too, who then indeed were blessed,
To make the daughter of Acasto so.
Here ceased the youth: yet still his speaking eye
Expressed the sacred triumph of his soul,
With conscious virtue, gratitude, and love,
Above the vulgar joy divinely raised.
Nor waited he reply. Won by the charm
Of goodness irresistible, and all
In sweet disorder lost, she blushed consent.
The news immediate to her mother brought,
While, pierced with anxious thought, she pined away
The lonely moments for Lavinia's fate;
Amazed, and scarce believing what she heard,
Joy seized her withered veins, and one bright gleam
Of setting life shone on her evening-hours:
Not less enraptured than the happy pair;
Who flourished long in mutual bliss, and reared
A numerous offspring, lovely like themselves,
And good, the grace of all the country round.
Defeating often the labors of the year,
The sultry south collects a potent blast.
At first, the groves are scarcely seen to stir
Their trembling tops; and a still murmur runs
Along the soft-inclining fields of corn.
But as the aereal tempest fuller swells;
And in one mighty stream, invisible,
Immense, the whole excited atmosphere,
Impetuous rushes over the sounding world;
Strained to the root, the stooping forest pours
A rustling shower of yet untimely leaves.
High-beat, the circling mountains eddy in,
From the bare wild, the dissipated storm,
And send it in a torrent down the vale.
Exposed, and naked, to its utmost rage,
Through all the sea of harvest rolling round,
The billowy plain boils wide; nor can evade,
Though plyant to the blast, its seizing force;
Or whirled in air, or into vacant chaff
Shook waste. And sometimes too a burst of rain,
Swept from the black horizon, broad, descends
In one continuous flood. Still over head
The glomerating tempest grows, and still
The deluge deepens; till the fields around
Ly sunk, and flatted, in the sordid wave.
Sudden, the ditches swell; the meadows swim.
Red, from the hills, innumerable streams
Tumultuous roar; and high above its banks
The river lift; before whose weighty rush,
Herds, flocks, and harvests, cottages, and swains,
Roll mingled down; all that the winds had spared,
In one wild moment ruined, the big hopes,
And well-earn'd treasures of the painful year.
Fled to some eminence, the husbandman,
Helpless beholds the miserable wreck
Driving along, his drowning ox at once
Descending, with his labors scattered round,
He sees; and instant over his shivering thought
Comes winter unprovided, and a train
Of clamant children dear. Ye masters, then
Be mindful of the rough laborious hand,
That sinks you soft in elegance, and ease;
Be mindful of those limbs, in russet clad,
Whose toil to yours is warmth, and graceful pride;
And oh be mindful of that sparing board,
Which covers yours with luxury profuse,
Makes your glass sparkle, and your sense rejoice!
Nor cruelly demand what the deep rains,
And all-involving winds have swept away.
Here the rude clamor of the sportsman's joy,
The gun thick-thundering, and the winded horn,
Would tempt the muse to ling the rural game.
How, in his mid-career, the spaniel struck,
Stiff, by the tainted gale, with open nose,
Out-stretch'd, and finely sensible, draws full,
Fearful, and cautious, on the latent prey;
As in the sun the circling covey bask
Their varied plumes, watchful, and every way
Through the rough stubble turned the secret eye.
Caught in the meshy snare, in vain they beat
Their useless wings, entangled more and more:
Nor on the surges of the boundless air,
Though borne triumphant, are they safe; the gun,
Glanced just, and sudden, from the fowler's eye,
O'ertakes their sounding pinions; and again,
Immediate, brings them from the towering wing,
Dead to the ground; or drives them else dispersed,
Wounded, and wheeling various, down the wind.
These are not subjects for the peaceful muse,
Nor will she stain her spotless theme with such; Then most delighted, when she
smiling sees
The whole mixed animal creation round
Alive, and happy. It Is not joy to her,
This falsely cheerful, barbarous game of death;
This rage of pleasure, which the restless youth
Awakes, impatient, with the gleaming morn;
When beasts of prey retire, that all night long,
Urged by necessity, had roam'd the dark;
As if their conscious ravage shunned the light,
Ashamed. Not so the steady tyrant man,
Who with the thoughtless insolence of power
Inflamed, beyond the most infuriate rage
Of the worst monster that ever howled the waste,
For sport alone takes up the cruel tract,
Amid the beamings of the gentle days.
Upbraid us not, ye wolves! ye tigers fell!
For hunger kindles you, and lawless want;
But lavish fed, in Nature's bounty rolled,
To laugh at anguish, and rejoice in blood,
Is what your horrid bosoms never knew.
Poor is the triumph over the timid Hare!
Shook from the corn, and now to some lone seat
Retired: the rushy fen; the ragged furz,
Stretched over the stony heath; the stubble chapt;
The thistly lawn; the thick, entangled broom;
Of the same friendly hue, the withered fern;
The fallow ground laid open to the sun,
Concoctive; and the nodding sandy bank,
Hung over the mazes of the mountain-brook.
Vain is her best precaution; though she sits
By Nature raised to take the horizon in;
And head couched close betwixt her hairy feet,
In act to spring away. The scented dew
Betrays her early labyrinth; and deep,
In scattered, sullen openings, far behind,
With every breeze she hears the coming storm.
But nearer, and more frequent, as it loads
The sighing gale, she springs amazed, and all
The savage soul of game is up at once:
The pack full-opening, varions; the shrill horn,
Resounded from the hills; the neighing steed,
Wild for the chase; and the loud hunter's shout;
Over a weak, harmless, flying creature, all
Mixed in mad tumult, and discordant joy.
The Stag too, singled from the herd, where long
He ranged the branching monarch of the shades,
Before the tempest drives. At first in speed,
He, sprightly, puts his faith; and, fear-arous'd,
Gives all his swift, aereal soul to flight.
Against the breeze he darts, that way the more
To leave the lessening, murderous cry behind.
Deception short! though fleeter than the winds
Blown over the keen-air'd mountain by the north,
He bursts the thickets, glances through the glades,
And plunges deep into the wildest wood.
If slow, yet sure, adhesive to the tract
Hot-steaming, up behind him comes again
The inhuman rout, and from the shady depth
Expel him, circling through his every shift.
He sweeps the forest often; and sobbing sees
The glades, mild-opening to the golden day;
Where, in kind contest, with his butting friends
He went to struggle, or his loves enjoy.
Often in the full-descending flood he tries
To lose the scent, and lave his burning sides;
Often seeks the herd; the watchful herd alarmed,
With quick consent, avoid the infectious maze.
What shall he do? His once so vivid nerves,
So full of buoyant soul, inspire no more
The fainting course; but wrenching, breathless toil,
Sick, seizes on his heart: he stands at bay;
And puts his last weak refuge in despair.
The big round tears run down his dappled face;
He groans in anguish; while the growling pack,
Blood-happy, hang at his fair, jutting chest,
And mark his beauteous checkered sides with gore.
Of this enough. But if the silvan youth
Whose fervent blood boils into violence,
Must have the chase; behold, despising flight,
The rous'd-up lion, resolute, and slow,
Advancing full on the protended spear,
And coward-band, that circling wheel aloof.
Slunk from the cavern, and the troubled wood,
See the grim wolf; on him his shaggy foe
Viudictive fix, for murder is his trade:
And, growling horrid, as the brindled boar
Grins near destruction, to the monster's heart
Let the dart lighten from the nervous arm.
These Britain Knows not; give, ye Britons, then
Your sportive fury, pityless, to pour
Loose on the sly destroyer of the flock.
Him, from his craggy winding haunts unearth'd,
Let all the thunder of the chase pursue.
Throw the broad ditch behind you; over the hedge
High-bound, resistless; nor the deep morass
Refuse, but through the shaking wilderness
Pick your, nice way; into the perilous flood
Bear fearless, of the raging instinct full;
And as you ride the torrent, to the banks
Your triumph sound sonorous, running round,
From rock to rock, in circling echo tossed;
Then snatch the mountains by their woody tops;
Rush down the dangerous steep; and over the lawn,
In fancy swallowing up the space between,
Pour all your speed into the rapid game.
For happy he! who tops the wheeling chase;
Has every maze evolv'd, and every guile
Disclosed; who knows the merits of the pack;
Who saw the villain seized, and dying hard,
Without complaint, though by an hundred mouths
At once tore, mercyless. Thrice happy he!
At hour of dusk, while the retreating horn
Calls them to ghostly halls of gray renown,
With woodland honors graced; the fox's fur,
Depending decent from the roof; and spread
Round the drear walls, with antic figures fierce,
The stag's large front: he then is loudest heard,
When the night staggers with severer toils;
And their repeated wonders shake the dome.
But first the fuel'd chimney blazes wide;
The tankards foam; and the strong table groans
Beneath the smoking sirloin, stretched immense
From side to side; on which, with fell intent,
They deep incision make, and talk the while
Of England's glory, never to be defaced,
While hence they borrow vigor: or amain
Into the pasty plunged, at intervals,
If stomach keen can intervals allow,
Relating how it ran, and how it fell.
Then sated Hunger bids his brother Thirst
Produce the mighty bowl; the mighty bowl,
Swelled high with fiery juice, steams liberal round
A potent gale, reviving as the breath
Of Maia, to the lovesick shepherdess,
On violets diffused, while soft she hears
Her panting shepherd stealing to her arms,
Nor wanting is the brown october, drawn,
Mature, and perfect, from his dark retreat
Of thirty years; and now his honest front
Flames in the light refulgent, nor ashamed
To vie it with the vineyard's best produce.
Perhaps a while, amusive, thoughtful Whisk
Walks gentle round, beneath a cloud of smoke,
Wreathed, fragrant, from the pipe; or the quick dice,
In thunder leaping from the box, awake
The sounding gammon: while romp-loving miss
Is haul'd about, in gallantry robust.
At last these puling idlenesses laid
Aside, frequent, and full, the dry divan
Close in firm circle; and set, ardent, in
For serious drinking. Nor evasion sly,
Nor sober shift is to the puking wretch
Indulged askew; but earnest, brimming bowls
Lave every soul, the table floating round,
And pavement, faithless to the fuddled foot.
Thus as they swim in mutual swill, the talk,
Vociferate at once by twenty tongues,
Reels fast from theme to theme; from horses, hounds,
To church, or mistress, politics, or ghost,
In endless mazes, intricate, perplexed.
Mean-time, with sudden interruption, loud,
The impatient catch bursts from the joyous heart.
That moment touched is every kindred soul;
And, opening in a full-mouthed Cry of joy,
The laugh, the slap, the jocund curse goes round;
While, from their slumbers shook, the kennel'd hounds
Mix in the music of the day again.
As when the tempest, that has vexed the deep
The dark night long, falls murmuring toward morn;
So their mirth gradual sinks. Their feeble tongues,
Unable to take up the cumbrous word,
Ly quite disslov'd. Before their maudlin eyes,
Seen dim, and blue, the double tapers dance,
Like the sun wading through the misty sky.
Then, sliding sweet, they drop. O'erturn'd above
Lies the wet, broken scene; and stretched below,
Each way, the drunken slaughter; where astride
The lubber Power himself triumphant sits,
Slumbrous, inclining still from side to side,
And steeps them, silent all, in sleep till morn.
But if the rougher sex by this red sport
Are hurried wild, let not such horrid joy
Ever stain the bosom of the British Fair.
Far be the spirit of the chase from them!
Uncomely courage, unbeseeming skill,
To spring the fence, to rein the prancing steed,
The cap, the whip, the masculine attire,
In which they roughen to the sense, and all
The winning softness of their sex is lost.
Made up of blushes, tenderness, and fears,
In them it is graceful to dissolve at woe;
With every motion, every word, to wave
Quick over the kindling cheek the ready blush;
And from the smallest violence to shrink,
Unequal, then the loveliest in their fears;
And by this silent adulation, soft,
To their protection more engaging man.
O may their eyes no miserable sight,
Save weeping lovers, see! a nobler game,
Through love's enchanting wiles pursued, yet fled,
In chase ambiguous. May their tender limbs
Float in the loose simplicity of dress!
And fashioned all to harmony, alone,
Know they to seize the captivated soul,
In rapture warbled from the radiant lip;
To teach the lute to languish; with smooth step,
Disclosing motion in its every charm,
To swim along, and swell the mazy dance;
To train the foliage over the snowy lawn;
To play the pencil, turn the instructive page;
To give new flavor to the fruitful year,
And heighten Nature's dainties; in their race
To rear their graces into second life;
To give society its highest taste;
Well-ordered home man's best delight to make;
And by submissive wisdom, modest skill,
With every kinder, care-elusive art,
To raise the glory, animate the joys,
And sweeten all the toils of human life;
This be the female dignity, and praise.
Ye swains, now hasten to the hazel-bank;
Where, down yon dale, the wildly-winding brook
Falls hoarse from steep to steep. In close array
Fit for the thickets, and the tangling shrub,
Ye virgins, come. For you their latest song
The woodlands raise; the clustered nut for you
The lover finds amid the secret shade;
Or, where they burnish on the topmost bough,
With active vigor crushes down the tree;
Or shakes them ripe from the resigning husk,
A glossy shower, and of an ardent brown,
As are the ringlets of Melinda's hair:
Melinda formed with every grace complete,
Yet these neglecting, above beauty wise,
And far transcending such a vulgar praise.
Hence from the busy, joy-resounding fields,
In cheerful error, let us tread the maze
Of Autumn, unconfined; and vital taste
The breath of orchard big with bending fruit.
Obedient to the breeze, and beating ray,
From the deep-loaded bough a mellow shower,
Incessant melts away. The juicy pear
Lies, in a soft profusion, scattered round.
A various sweetness swells the gentle race;
In species different, but in kind the same,
By Nature's all-refining hand prepared,
Of tempered sun, and water, earth, and air,
In ever-changing composition mixed.
So fares it with those wide-projected heaps
Of apples, which the lusty-handed year,
Innumerous, over the blushing orchard shakes.
A various spirit, fresh, delicious, keen,
Dwells in their gelid pores; and, active, points
The piercing cider for the thirsty tongue:
Thy native theme, and boon inspirer too,
Phillips, facetious bard, the second thou
Who nobly durst, in rhyme-unfetter'd verse,
With British freedom sing the British song;
How, from Silurian vats, high-sparkling wines
Foam in transparent floods; some strong, to cheer
The wintry revels of the laboring hind;
And tasteful some, to cool the summer-hours.
In this glad season, while his last, best beams
The sun sheds equal over the meeken'd day;
Oh lose me in the green, majestic walks
Of, Dodington! thy seat, serene, and plain;
Where simple Nature reigns; and every view,
Diffusive, spreads the pure Dorsetian downs,
In boundless prospect, yonder shagg'd with wood;
Here rich with harvest; and there white with flocks.
Mean time the grandeur of thy lofty dome,
Far-splendid, seizes on the ravished eye.
New beauties rise with each revolving day;
New columns swell; and still the fresh spring finds
New plants to quicken, and new groves to green.
Full of thy genius all! the muses seat;
Where in the secret bower, and winding walk
They twine the bay for thee. Here often alone,
Fired by the thirst of thy applause, I court
The inspiring breeze; and meditate the book
Of Nature, ever-open; aiming thence,
Heart-taught like thine, to learn the moral song.
And, as I steal along, the sunny wall,
Where Autumn basks, with fruit empurpled deep,
My theme still urges in my vagrant thought;
Presents the downy peach; the purple plumb,
With a fine blueish mist of animals
Clouded; the ruddy nectarine; and dark,
Beneath his ample leaf, the luscious fig.
The vine too here her curling tendrils shoots;
Hangs out her clusters, swelling to the south;
And scarcely wishes for a warmer sky.
Turn we a moment Fancy's rapid flight
To vigorous soils, and climes of fair extent;
Where, by the potent sun elated high,
The vineyard heaves refulgent on the day;
Spreads over the vale; or up the mountain climbs,
Profuse; and drinks amid the sunny rocks,
From cliff to cliff increased, the heightened blaze.
Low bend the gravid boughs. The clusters clear,
Half through the foliage seen, or ardent flame,
Or shine transparent; while perfection breathes
White over the turgent film the living dew.
As thus they brighten with exalted juice,
Touched into flavor by the mingling ray;
The rural youth and virgins over the field,
Each fond for each to cull the autumnal prime,
Exulting rove, and speak the vintage nigh.
Then comes the crushing swain; the country floats,
And foams unbounded with the mashy flood;
That by degrees fermented, and refined,
Round the raised nations pours the cup of joy:
The Claret smooth, deep as the lip we press,
In sparkling fancy, while we drain the bowl;
The mellow-tasted Burgundy; and quick,
As is the wit it gives, the bright Champaign.
Now by the cool, declining year condensed,
Descend the copious exhalations, checked
As up the middle sky unseen they stole,
And roll the doubling sogs around the hill.
No more the mountain, horrid, vast, sublime,
Who pours a sweep of rivers from his sides;
And deep betwixt contending kingdoms lays
The rocky, long division; while aloft,
His piny top is, lessening, lost in air:
No more his thousand prospects fill the view
With great variety; but in a night
Of gathering vapor, from the bassled sense,
Sink dark, and total. Nor alone immerst;
The huge dusk, gradual, swallows up the plain.
Vanish the woods. The dim-seen river seems
Sullen, and slow, to roll the misty wave.
Even in the height of noon oppressed, the sun
Sheds weak, and blunt, his wide-refracted ray;
Whence glaring often with many a broaden'd orb
He frights the nations. Indistinct on earth,
Seen through the turbid air, beyond the life,
Objects appear; and, wilder'd, over the waste,
The shepherd stalks gigantick. Till at last
Wreathed close around, in deeper circles still
Successive floating, sits the general fog
Unbounded over the world; and mingling thick,
A formless, gray confusion covers all.
As when of old (so sung the hebrew bard)
Light, uncollected, through the Chaos urged
Its infant way; nor Order yet had drawn
His endless train forth from the dubious gloom.
These roving mists, that constant now begin
To smoke along the hilly country, these,
With mighty rains, the skilled in nature say,
The mountain-cisterns fill, those grand reserves
Of water, scoop'd among the hollow rocks;
Whence gush the streams, the ceaseless fountains play,
And their unfailing stores the rivers draw.
But is this equal to the vast effect?
Is thus the Volga filled? the rapid Rhine?
The broad Euphrates? all the unnumber'd floods,
That large refresh the fair-divided earth;
And, in the rage of summer, never cease
To send a thundering torrent to the main?
What though the sun draws from the steaming deep
More than the rivers pour? How much again,
Over the vexed surge, in bitter-driving showers,
Frequent returns, let the wet sailor say:
And on the thirsty down, far from the burst
Of springs, how much, to their reviving fields,
And feeding flocks, let lonely shepherds sing.
But sure it is no weak, variable cause,
That keeps at once ten thousand thousand floods,
Wide-wandering over the world, so fresh, and clear,
For ever flowing, and for ever full.
And thus some sages, deep-exploring, teach:
That, where the hoarse, innumerable wave,
Eternal, lashes the refounding shore;
Sucked through the sandy Stratum, every way,
The waters with the sandy Stratum rise;
Amid whole angles infinitely strained,
They leave each saline particle behind,
And clear, and sweeten, as they soak along.
Nor stops the restless fluid, mounting still,
Though here and there in lowly plains it springs,
But to the mountain courted by the sand,
That leads it darkling on in faithful maze,
Far from the parent-main, it boils again
Fresh into day; and all the glittering hill
Is bright with spouting rills. The vital stream
Hence, in its subterranean passage, gains,
From the washed mineral, that restoring power,
And salutary virtue, which anew
Strings every nerve, calls up the kindling soul
Into the healthful cheek, and joyous eye:
And whence, the royal maid, Amelia blooms
With new-flush'd graces; yet reserved to bless,
Beyond a crown, some happy prince; and shine,
In all her mother's matchless virtues dressed,
The Carolina of another land.
While Autumn scatters his departing gleams,
Warned of approaching winter, gathered, play
The swallow-people; and tossed wide around,
Over the calm sky, in convolution swift,
The feathered eddy floats. Rejoicing once,
E're to their wintry slumbers they retire;
In clusters clung, beneath the mouldering bank,
And where the cavern sweats, as sages dream.
Or rather into warmer climes conveyed,
With other kindred birds of season, there
They twitter cheerful, till the vernal months
Invite them welcome back: for, thronging, now Innumerous wings are in
commotion all.
Where the Rhine loses his majestic force
In Belgian plains, won from the raging deep
By diligence amazing, and the strong,
Unconquerable hand of Liberty,
The stork-assembly meets; for many a day,
Consulting deep, and various, e're they take
Their plumy voyage through the liquid sky.
And now their rout designed, their leaders chose,
Their tribes adjusted, cleaned their vigorous wings;
And many a circle, many a short essay
Wheeled round and round, in congregation full,
The figured flight ascends; and, riding high
The aerial billows, mixes with the clouds.
Or where the Northern ocean, in vast whirls,
Boils round the naked, melancholy isles
Of farthest Thule, and the Atlantic surge
Pours in among the stormy Hebrides;
Who can recount what transmigrations there
Are annual made? What nations come and go?
And how the living clouds on clouds arise?
Infinite wings! till all the plume-dark air,
And white resounding store are one wild cry
Here the plain, harmless native his small flock,
And herd diminutive of many hues,
Tends on the little island's verdant swell,
The shepherd's sea-girt reign; or, to the rocks
Dire-clinging, gathers his ovarious food;
Or sweeps the fishy shore; or treasures up
The plumage, riling full, to form the bed
Of luxury. And here a while the muse,
High-hovering over the broad cerulean scene,
Sees Caledonia, in romantic view:
Her airy mountains, from the gelid main,
Invested with a keen, diffusive sky,
Breathing the soul acute; her forests huge,
Incult, robust, and tall, by Nature's hand
Planted of old; her azure lakes between,
Poured out extensive, and of watery wealth
Full; winding deep, and green, her fertile vales;
With many a cool, translucent, brimming flood
Washed lovely, from the Tweed, pure parent-stream,
To where the north-inflated tempest foams
Over Orca, or Betubium's highest peak.
Nurse of a people, in misfortune's school
Trained up to hardy deeds; soon visited
By Learnings, when before the Gothic rage
She took her western flight. A generous race
Of unsubmitting spirit, wise, and brave,
Who still through bleeding ages struggled hard,
To hold a hapless, undiminish'd state;
Too much in vain! Hence of ignoble bounds
Impatient, and by tempting glory borne
Over every land, for every land their life
Has flowed profuse, their piercing genius plan'd,
And swelled the pomp of peace their faithful toil.
As from their own clear north, in radiant streams,
Bright over Europe bursts the Boreal Morn.
Oh is there not some patriot, in whose power
That best, that godlike luxury is placed,
Of blessing thousands, thousands yet unborn,
Through late posterity? some, large of soul!
To cheer dejected industry? to give
A double harvest to the pining swain?
And teach the laboring hand the sweets of toil?
How, by the finest art, the native robe
To weave; how, white as hyperborean snow,
To form the lucid lawn; with venturous oar,
How to dash wide the billow; nor look on,
Shamefully passive, while Batavian fleets
Defraud us of the glittering, finny swarms,
That heave our friths, and crowd upon our shores;
How all-enlivening trade to rouse, and wing
The prosperous sail, from every growing port,
Unchalleng'd, round the sea-incircled globe;
And thus united Britain Britain make
Entire, the imperial Mistress of the deep.
Yes, there are such. And full on thee, Argyle,
Her hope, her stay, her darling, and her boast,
From her first patriots, and her heroes sprung,
Thy fond, imploring country turns her eye:
In thee, with all a mother's triumph, sees
Her every virtue, every grace combined,
Her genius, wisdom, her politest turn,
Her pride of honor, and her courage tried,
Calm, and intrepid, in the very throat
Of sulphurous war, on Tenier's dreadful field,
While thick around the deadly tempest flew.
And when the trumpet, kindling war no more,
Pours not the flaming squadrons over the field;
But, fruitful of fair deeds, and mutual faith,
Kind peace unites the jarring world again;
Let the deep olive through thy laurels twine.
For, powerful as thy sword, from thy rich tongue
Persuasion flows, and wins the high debate:
While mixed in thee combine the charm of youth,
The force of manhood, and the depth of age.
Thee, Forbes, too, whom every worth attends,
As Truth sincere, as weeping Friendship kind,
Thee, truly generous, and in silence great,
Thy country feels through her reviving arts,
Plan'd by thy wisdom, by thy soul informed;
And seldom has she felt the friend like thee.
But see the fading, many-colour'd woods,
Shade deepening over shade, the country round
Imbrown; a crowded umbrage, dusk, and dun,
Of every hue, from wan, declining green
To sooty dark. These now the lonesome muse,
Low-whispering, lead into their leaf-strown walks,
And give the Season in its latest view.
Mean-time, light-shadowing all, a sober calm
Fleeces unbounded either; whose least wave
Stands tremulous, uncertain where to turn
The gentle current: while illumined wide,
The dewy-skirted clouds imbibe the sun,
And through their uvid pores his tempered force
Shed over the peaceful world. Then is the time,
For those whom Wisdom, and whom Nature charm,
To steal themselves from the degenerate crowd,
And soar above this little scene of things;
To tread low-thoughted vice beneath their feet;
To sooth the throbbing passions into peace;
And woo lone Quiet in her silent walks.
Thus solitary, and in pensive guise,
Often let me wander over the russet mead,
And through the sadden'd grove, where scarce is heard
One dying strain, to cheer the woodman's toil.
Happily some widowed songster pours his plaint
Far, in saint warblings, through the tawny copse.
While congregated thrushes, linnets, larks,
And each wild throat, whose artless strains so late
Swelled all the music of the swarming shades,
Robbed of their tuneful souls, now shivering sit
On the dead tree, a dull, despondent flock!
With not a brightness waving over their plumes,
And naught save chattering discord in their note,
O let not, aimed from some inhuman eye,
The gun the music of the coming year
Destroy; and harmless, unsuspecting harm,
Lay the weak tribes, a miserable prey!
In mingled murder, fluttering on the ground.
The pale, descending year, yet pleasing still,
A gentler mood inspires; for now the leaf
Incessant rustles from the mournful grove,
Often starting such as, studious, walk below,
And slowly circles through the waving air.
But should a quicker breeze and the boughs
Sob, over the sky the leafy rain streams;
Till choked, and matted with the dreary shower,
The forest-walks, at every rising gale,
Roll wide the withered waste, and whistle bleak.
Fled is the blasted verdure of the fields;
And, shrunk into their beds, the flowery race
Their sunny robes resign. Even what remained
Of bolder fruits falls from the naked tree;
And woods, fields, gardens, orchards, all around
The desolated prospect thrills the soul.
He comes! he comes! in every breeze the Power
Of philosophic Melancholy comes!
His near approach the sudden-starting tear,
The glowing cheek, the mild dejected air,
The softened feature, and the beating heart,
Pierced deep with many a secret pang, declare.
Over all his soul his sacred influence breathes;
In all the bosom triumphs, all the nerves;
Inflames imagination; through the sense
Infuses every tenderness; and far
Beyond dim earth exalts the swelling thought.
Ten thousand thousand fleet ideas, such
As never mingled with the Vulgar's dream,
Crowd fast into the mind's creative eye.
As fast the correspondent passions rise,
As varied, and as high: devotion raised
To rapture, and divine astonishment.
The love of Nature unconfined, and chief
Of human kind; the large, ambitious wish,
To make them blessed; the sigh for suffering worth,
Lost in obscurity; the indignant scorn
Of mighty pride; the fearless, great resolve;
The wonder that the dying patriot draws,
Inspiring glory through remotest time;
The arousing pant for virtue, and for fame;
The sympathies of love, and friendship dear;
With all the social offspring of the heart.
Oh bear me then to vast, embowering shades!
To twilight groves, and visionary vales!
To weeping grottoes, and prophetic glooms!
Where angel-forms athwart the solemn dusk,
Tremendous sweep, or seem to sweep along;
And voices more than human, through the void
Deep-sounding, seize the enthusiastic ear.
And now the western sun withdraws the day;
And humid evening, gilding over the sky,
In her chill progress, to the ground condensed
The ascending vapor throws. Where waters ooze,
Where marshes stagnate, and where rivers wind,
Cluster the rolling fogs, and swim along
The dusky-mantled lawn. Meanwhile the moon
Full-orb'd, and breaking through the scattered clouds,
Shows her broad visage in the crimsoned east.
Turned to the sun direct, her spotted disk,
(Where mountains rise, umbrageous dales descend,
And oceans roll, as optic tube descries)
A lesser earth gives all his blaze again,
Void of its flame, and sheds a softer day.
Now through the passing cloud she seems to stoop,
Now up the pure cerulean rides sublime.
Wide the pale deluge floats; and streaming mild
Over the sky'd mountain to the shadowy vale,
While rocks, and floods reflect the quivering gleam,
The whole air whitens with a boundless tide
Of silver radiance, trembling round the world.
But when, half-blotted from the sky, her light,
Fainting, permits the starry fires to burn,
With keener luster through the depth of heaven;
Or quite extinct, her deaden'd orb appears,
And scarce appears, of sickly, beamless white:
Often in this season, silent from the north
A blaze of meteors shoots, ensweeping first
The lower skies, then all at once converge
High to the crown of heaven, and all at once
Relapsing quick, as quickly reascend,
And mix, and thwart, extinguish, and renew,
All either coursing in a maze of light.
From look to look, contagious through the crowd,
The Pannic runs, and into wondrous shapes
The appearance throws: armies in meet array,
Throng with aerial spears, and steeds of fire;
Till the long lines of full-extended war
In bleeding fight commixt, the sanguine flood
Rowls a broad slaughter over the plains of heaven.
As thus they scan the visionary scene,
On all sides swells the superstitious din,
Incontinent; and busy frenzy talks
Of blood and battle; cities over-turn'd,
And, late at night, in swallowing earthquake sunk,
Or painted hideous with ascending flame;
Of sallow famine, inundation, storm;
Of pestilence, and every great distress;
Empires subvers'd, when ruling fate has struck
The unalterable hour: even Nature's self
Is deemed to totter on the brink of time.
Not so the man of philosophic eye,
And inspect sage; the waving brightness he
Curious surveys, inquisitive to know
The causes, and materials, yet unfix'd,
Of this appearance beautiful, and new.
Now black, and deep, the night begins to fall,
A solid shade, immense. Sunk in the gloom
Magnificent, and vast, are heaven and earth.
Order confounded lies; all beauty void;
Distinction lost; and gay variety
One universal blot: such the fair power
Of Light, to kindle, and create the whole.
Drear is the state of the benighted wretch,
Who then, bewildered, wanders through the dark,
Full of pale fancies, and chimeras huge;
Nor visited by one directive ray,
From cottage streaming, or from airy hall.
Perhaps impatient as he stumbles on,
Struck from the root of slimy ruses, blue,
The wildfire scatters round, or gathertd trails
A length of flame deceitful over the moss;
Whither decoyed by the fantastic blaze,
Now sunk and now renewed, he is quite absorpt,
Rider and horse into the miry gulf:
While still, from day to day, his pining wife,
And plaintive children his return await,
In wild conjecture lost. At other times,
Sent by the better Genius of the night,
Innoxious, gleaming on the horse's mane,
The meteor sits; and shows the narrow path,
That winding leads through pits of death, or else
Instructs him how to take the dangerous ford.
The lengthened night elapsed, the morning shines
Serene, in all her dewy beauty bright,
Unfolding fair the last Autumnal day.
And now the mounting sun dispels the fog;
The rigid hoar-frost melts before his beam,
And hung on every spray, on every blade
Of grass, the myriad dew-drops twinkle round.
Ah see where robbed, and murdered, in that pit,
Lies the still heaving hive; at evening snatched,
Beneath the cloud of guilt-concealing night,
And whelmed over sulphur: while, undreaming ill,
The happy people, in their waxen cells,
Sat tending public cares, and planning schemes
Of temperance, for winter poor; rejoiced
To mark, full-flowing round, their copious stores,
Sudden the dark, oppressive steam ascends:
And, used to milder scents, the tender race,
By thousands, tumble from their honey'd domes,
Convolv'd, and agonizing in the dust.
And was it then for this ye roam'd the spring,
Intent from flower to flower? for this ye toiled
Ceaseless the burning summer-heats away?
For this in Autumn searched the blooming waste,
Nor lost one sunny gleam? for this sad sat?
O man! tyrannic lord! how long, how long,
Shall prostrate nature groan beneath your rage,
Awaiting renovation? When obliged,
Must you destroy? Of their ambrosial food
Can you not borrow? and in just return,
Afford them shelter from the wintry winds;
Or, as the sharp year pinches, with their own
Again regale them on some smiling day?
Hard by, the stony bottom of their town
Looks desolate, and wild; with here and there
A helpless number, who the ruined state
Survive, lamenting weak, cast out to death.
Thus a proud city, populous, and rich,
Full of the works of peace, and high in joy,
At theater, or feast, or sunk in sleep,
(As late, Palermo, was thy fate) is seized
By some dread earthquake, and convulsive hurld,
Sheer from the black foundation, stench-involv'd,
Into a gulf of blue, sulphurous flame.
Hence every harsher sight! for now the day,
Over heaven and earth diffused, grows warm, and high,
Infinite splendour! wide investing all.
How still the breeze! save what the filmy threads
Of dew evaporate brushes from the plain.
How clear the cloudless sky! how deeply tinged
With a peculiar blue! the ethereal arch
How swelled immense! amid whose azure throned
The radiant sun how gay! how calm below
The gilded earth! the harvest-treasures all
Now gathered in, beyond the rage of storms,
Sure to the swain; the circling sense shut up;
And instant Winter bid to do his worst.
While loose to festive joy, the country round
Laughs with the loud sincerity of mirth,
Care shook away. The toil-invigorate youth,
Not needing the melodious impulse much,
Leaps wildly graceful, in the lively dance.
Her every charm abroad, the village-toast,
Young, buxom, warm, in native beauty rich,
Darts not-unmeaning looks; and, where her eye
Points an approving smile, with double force,
The cudgel rattles, and the struggle twists.
Age too shines out; and, garrulous, recounts
The feats of youth. Thus they rejoice; nor think
That, with tomorrow's fun, their annual toil
Begins again the never-ceasing round.
Oh knew he but his happiness, of men
The happiest he! who far from public rage,
Deep in the vale, with a choice few retired,
Drinks the pure pleasures of the rural life.
What though the dome be wanting, whose proud gate
Each morning vomits out the sneaking crowd
Of flatterers false, and in their turn abused,
Vile intercourse! What though the glittering robe,
Of every hue reflected light can give,
Or floating loose, or stiff with mazy gold,
The pride, and gaze of fools! oppress him not.
What though from utmost land, and sea, purvey'd,
For him each rarer, tributary life
Bleeds not, and his insatiate table heaps
With luxury, and death. What though his wine
Flows not from brighter gems; nor sunk in beds,
Often of gay care, he tosses out the night;
Or, thoughtless, sleeps at best in idle state.
What though deprived of these fantastic joys,
That stiil amuse the wanton, still deceive;
A face of pleasure, but a heart of pain;
Their hollow moments undelighted all.
Sure peace is his; a solid life, estranged
To disappointment, and fallacious hope;
Rich in content, in Nature's bounty rich,
In herbs, and fruits; whatever greens the Spring,
When heaven descends in showers; or bends the bough,
When Summer reddens, and when Autumn beams;
Or in the Wintry glebe whatever lies
Concealed, and fattens with the richest sap;
These are not wanting; nor the milky drove,
Luxuriant, spread over all the lowing vale;
Nor bleating mountains; nor the chide of streams,
And hum of bees, inviting sleep sincere
Into the guiltless breast, beneath the shade,
Or thrown at large amid the fragrant hay:
Nor aught beside of prospect, grove, or song,
Dim grottoes, gleaming lakes, and fountain clear.
Here too lives simple truth; plain innocence;
Unsullied beauty; sound, unbroken youth,
Patient of labor, with a little pleased;
Health ever-blooming; unambitious toil;
Calm contemplation, and poetic ease.
Let others brave the flood, in quest of gain,
And beat, for joyless months, the gloomy wave.
Let such as deem it glory to destroy,
Rush into blood; the sack of cities seek;
Unpierc'd, exulting in the widow's wail,
The virgin's shriek, and infant's trembling cry.
Let some far-distant from their native soil,
Urged, or by want, or hardened avarice,
Find other lands beneath another sun.
Let This through cities work his ardent way,
By legal outrage, and established guile,
The social sense extinct; and That ferment
Mad into tumult the seditious herd,
Or melt them down to slavery. Let These
Ensnare the wretched in the toils of law,
Fomenting discord, and perplexing right,
An iron race! and Those of fairer front,
But equal inhumanity, in courts,
And slippery pomp delight, in dark cabals;
Wreathe the deep bow, diffuse the lying smile,
And tread the weary labyrinth of state.
While He, from all the stormy passions free,
That restless men involve, hears, and but hears,
At distance safe, the human tempest roar,
Wrapped close in conscious peace. The fall of kings,
The rage of nations, and the crush of states
Move not the man, who, from the world escaped,
In still retreats, and flowery solitudes,
To Nature's voice attends, from day to day,
And month to month, through the revolving Year;
Admiring, sees her in her every shape:
Feels all her fine emotions at his heart;
Takes what she liberal gives, nor thinks of more.
He, when young Spring protrudes the bursting gems,
Marks the first bud, and sucks the healthful gale
Into his freshen'd soul; her genial hours
He quite enjoys; and not a beauty blows,
And not an opening blossom breathes in vain.
In Summer he, beneath the living shade,
Such as from frigid Tempe wont to fall,
Or Haemus cool, reads what the muse, of these
Perhaps, has in immortal numbers sung;
Or what she dictates writes; and, often an eye
Shot round, rejoices in the vigorous year.
When Autumn's yellow luster gilds the world,
And tempts the sickled swain into the sield,
Seized by the general joy, his heart distends
With gentle throws; and through the tepid gleams
Deep-musing, then the best exerts his song.
Even Winter wild to him is full of bliss.
The mighty tempest, and the hoary waste,
Abrupt, and deep, stretched over the buried earth,
Awake to solemn thought. At night the skies,
Disclosed, and kindled, by refining frost,
Pour every luster on the astonished eye.
A friend, a book, the stealing hours secure,
And mark them down for wisdom. With swift wing,
Over land, and sea, imagination roams;
Or truth, divinely breaking on his mind,
Elates his being, and unfolds his powers;
Or in his breast heroic virtue burns.
The touch of love, and kindred too he feels,
The modest eye, whose beams on his alone
Extatic shine; the little, strong embrace
Of prattling children, twined around his neck,
And emulous to please him, calling forth
The fond parental soul. Nor purpose gay,
Amusement, dance, or song, he sternly scorns;
For happiness, and true philosophy
Still are, and have been of the smiling kind.
This is the life which those who fret in guilt,
And guilty cities, never knew; the life,
Led by primaeval ages, incorrupt,
When God himself, and Angels dwelt with men!
Oh Nature! all-sufficient! over all!
Enrich me with the knowledge of thy works!
Snatch me to heaven; thy rolling wonders there,
World beyond world, in infinite extent,
Profusely scattered over the void immense,
Show me; their motions, periods, and their laws,
Give me to scan; through the disclosing deep
Light my blind way: the mineral Strata there;
Thrust, blooming, thence the vegetable world;
Over that rising system, more complex,
Of animals; and higher still, the mind,
The varied scene of quick-compounded thought,
And where the mixing passions endless shift;
These ever open to my ravished eye;
A search, the flight of time can never exhaust!
But if to that unequal; if the blood,
In sluggish streams about my heart, forbids
That best ambition; under closing shades,
Inglorious, lay me by the lowly brook,
And whisper to my dreams. From Thee begin,
Dwell all on Thee, with Thee conclude my song;
And let me never, never stray from Thee!
The END.
WINTER.
Marble statues in the Garden of Versailes 7 foot high.



WINTER, A POEM; A HYMN ON THE SEASONS: A POEM to the MEMORY of Sir ISAAC
NEWTON; AND BRITANNIA, a POEM.

By JAMES THOMSON.

LONDON: Printed for J. MILLAN, Bookseller, near Whitehall. Price 1 s. 6 d.
M.DCC.XXXIV.

The ARGUMENT.
The subject proposed. Address to Lord WILMINGTON. First approach of WINTER.
According to the natural order of the season, various storms described. Rain.
Wind. Snow. The driving of the snows: a Man perishing among them. A short
digression into RUSSIA. The wolves in ITALY. A winter-evening described, as
spent by Philosophers; by the Country, People; in the City. Frost. Its effects
within the polar circle. Athaw. The whole concluding with philosophical
reflections on a future state.

WINTER.
SEE Winter comes, to rule the varied year,
Sullen, and sad, with all his rising train,
Vapors, and Clouds, and Storms. Be these my theme,
These, that exalt the soul to solemn thought,
And heavenly musing. Welcome, kindred glooms!
Cogenial horrors, hail! with frequent foot,
Pleased have I, in my cheerful morn of life,
When nursed by careless Solitude I lived,
And sung of Nature with unceasing joy,
Pleased have I wandered through your rough domain;
Trod the pure virgin-snows, my self as pure
Heard the winds roar, and the big torrent burst;
Or seen the deep, fermenting tempest brewed
In the red evening-sky. Thus passed the time,
Till through the lucid chambers of the south
Looked out the joyous Spring, looked out, and smiled
To thee, the patron of her first essay,
The muse, O Wilmington! renews her song.
Since has she rounded the revolving Year;
Skim'd the gay Spring; on eagle-pinions borne,
Attempted through the Summer-blaze to rise;
Then swept over Autumn with the shadowy gale,
And now among the Wintry clouds again,
Rolled in the doubling storm, she tries to soar;
To swell her note with all the rushing winds;
To suit her sounding cadence to the floods;
As is her theme, her numbers wildly great:
Thrice happy! could she fill thy judging ear
With bold description, and with manly thought.
For thee the Graces smooth; thy softer thoughts
The Muses tune; nor art thou skilled alone
In awful schemes, the management of states,
And how to make a mighty people thrive:
But equal goodness; sound integrity;
A firm, unshaken, uncorrupted soul,
Amid a sliding age; and burning strong,
Not vainly blazing, for thy country's weal,
A steady spirit, regularly free;
These, each exalting each, the statesman light
Into the patriot; and, the public hope
And eye to thee converting, bid the muse
Record what envy dares not flattery call.
When Scorpio gives to Capricorn the sway,
And fierce Aquarius fouls the inverted year;
Retiring to the verge of heaven, the sun
Scarce spreads over other the dejected day.
Faint are his gleams, and ineffectual shoot
His struggling rays, in horizontal lines,
Through the thick air; as at dull distance seen,
Weak, wan, and broad, he skirts the southern sky;
And, soon descending, to the long dark night,
Wide-shading all, the prostrate world resigns.
Nor is the night unwish'd; while vital heat,
Light, life, and joy the dubious day forsake.
Mean-time, in sable cincture, shadows vast,
Deep-ting'd, and damp, and congregated clouds,
And all the vapoury turbulence of Heaven
Involve the face of things. Thus Winter falls,
A heavy gloom oppressive over the world,
Through nature shedding influence malign,
And rouses all the seeds of dark disease.
The soul of man dies in him, loathing life,
And black with horrid views. The cattle droop
The conscious head; and over the furrowed land,
Red from the plow, the dun discolored flocks,
Untended spreading, crop the wholesome root.
Along the woods, along the moorish fens.
Sighs the sad genius of the coming storm;
And up among the loose, disjointed cliffs,
And fractur'd mountains wild, the brawling brook,
And cave, presageful, send a hollow moan,
Resounding long in listening fancy's ear.
Then comes the father of the tempest forth,
Striding the gloomy blast. First rains obscure
Drive through the mingling skies with vapor vile;
Dash on the mountain's brow, and shake the woods,
That grumbling wave below. The unsightly plain
Lies a brown deluge; as the low-bent clouds
Pour flood on flood, yet unexhausted still
Combine, and deepening into night shut up
The day's fair face. The wanderers of heaven,
Each to his home, retire; save those that love
To take their pastime in the troubled air,
Or skimming flutter round the dimply pool.
The Cattle from the untasted fields return,
And ask, with meaning low, their wonted stalls,
Or ruminate in the contiguous shade.
Thither the household, feathery people crowd,
The crested cock, with all his female train,
Pensive, and wet. Meanwhile the cottage-swain
Hangs over the enlivening blaze, and taleful there
Recounts his simple frolic: much he talks.
And much he laughs, nor recks the storm that blows
Without, and rattles on his humble roof.
Wide over the brim, with many a torrent swelled,
And the mixed ruins of its banks overspread,
At last the rous'd-up river pours along,
Resistless, roaring; dreadful down it comes
From the chapt mountain, and the mossy wild,
Tumbling through rocks abrupt, and sounding far;
Then over the sanded valley floating spreads,
Calm, sluggish, silent; till again constrained,
Betwixt two meeting hills it bursts away,
Where rocks, and woods o'erhang the turbid stream;
There gathering triple force, rapid, and deep,
It boils, and wheels, and foams, and thunders through.
Nature! great parent! whose continual hand
Rolls round the seasons of the changeful year,
How mighty, how majesty are thy works!
With what a pleasing dread they swell the soul!
That sees astonished! and astonished sings!
Ye too, ye winds! that now begin to blow,
With boisterous sweep, I raise my voice to you.
Where are your stores, ye subtle beings! say,
Where your aerial magazines reserved,
Against the day of tempest perilous?
In what far-distant region of the sky,
Hushed in dead silence, sleep you when it is calm?
Late in the lowering sky, red, fiery streaks
Begin to flush about; the reeling clouds
Stagger with dizzy poise, as doubting yet
Which master to obey: while rising slow,
Blank in the leaden-colour'd east, the moon
Wears a wan circle round her sullied orb.
The stars obtuse emit a shivering ray;
Snatched in short eddies plays the fluttering straw;
Loud shrieks the soaring hern; and, skreaming wild,
The circling sea-fowl rise; while from the shore,
Eat into caverns by the restless wave,
And forest-rustling mountain, comes a voice,
That solemn-sounding bids the world prepare.
Then issues forth the storm, with mad control,
And the thin fabric of the pillar'd air
O'erturns at once. Prone, on the passive main,
Descends the ethereal force, and with strong gust
Turns from the bottom the discolored deep.
Through the loud night, that bids the waves arise,
Lashed into foam, the fierce, conflicting brine
Seems, as it sparkles, all around to burn.
Mean-time whole oceans, heaving to the clouds,
And in broad billows rolling gathered seas,
Surge over surge, burst in a general roar,
And anchored navies from their stations drive,
Wild as the winds athwart the howling waste
Of mighty waters. Now the hilly wave
Straining they scale, and now impetuous shoot
Into the secret chambers of the deep,
The full-blown Baltic thundering over their head.
Emerging thence again, before the breath
Of all-exerted heaven they wing their course,
And dart on distant coasts; if some sharp rock,
Or sand insidious break not their career,
And in loose fragments fling them floating round.
Nor raging here alone unrein'd at sea,
To land the tempest bears; and over the cliff,
Where screams the sea-mew, foaming unconfined,
Fierce swallows up the long-resounding shore.
The mountain growls; and all its sturdy sons
Stoop to the bottom of the rocks they shade.
Lone on its midnight side, and all aghast,
The dark, wayfaring stranger breathless toils,
And, often falling, climbs against the blast.
Low waves the rooted forest, vexed, and sheds
What of its tarnish'd honors yet remain;
Dashed down, and scattered, by the tearing wind's
Assiduous fury, its gigantic limbs.
Thus struggling through the dissipated grove,
The whirling tempest raves along the plain;
And on the cottage thatched, or lordly roof,
Keen-fastening, shakes them to the solid base.
Sleep frighted flies; and round the rocking dome,
For entrance eager, howls the savage blast.
(...) Heavy they roll their fleecy world along;
And the sky saddens with the gathered storm.
Through the hushed air the whitening shower descends,
At first thin-wavering; till at last the flakes
Fall broad, and wide, and fast, dimming the day,
With a continual flow. Sudden the fields
Put on their winter-robe, of purest white.
It Is brightness all; save where the new snow melts,
Along the mazy stream. The leafless woods
Bow their hoar Heads. And, ere the languid sun
Faint from the west emits his evening ray,
Earth's universal face, deep-hid, and chill,
Is one wild, dazzling waste. The labourer-ox
Stands covered over with snow, and then demands
The fruit of all his toil. The fowls of heaven,
Tamed by the cruel season, crowd around
The winnowing store, and claim the little boon
That Providence allows. The Red-breast sole,
Wisely regardful of the embroiling sky,
In joyless fields, and thorny thickets, leaves
His shivering fellows, and to trusted man
His annual visit pays. New to the dome
Against the window beats, then brisk alights
On the warm hearth, and hopping over the floor
Eyes all the smiling Family askance,
And pecks, and starts, and wonders where he is;
Till more familiar grown, the table-crumbs
Attract his slender feet. The foodless wilds
Pour forth their brown inhabitants. The hare,
Though timorous of heart, and hard beset
By death in various forms, dark snares, and dogs,
And more unpitying men, the garden seeks,
Urged on by fearless want. The bleating kind
Eye the bleak heaven, and next the glistening earth,
With looks of dumb despair; then sad, dispersed,
Dig for the whither'd herb through heaps of snow.
Now, shepherds, to your helpless charge be kind,
Baffle the raging year, and fill their pens
With food at will; lodge them below the storm,
And watch them strict: for from the bellowing east,
In this dire season, often the whirlwind's wing
Sweeps up the burden of whole wintry plains
In one wide waft, and over the hapless flocks,
Hid in the hollow of two neighboring hills,
The billowy tempest whelms; till upwards urged,
The valley to a shining mountain swells,
Tript with a wreath, high-curling in the sky.
As thus the snows arise; and foul, and fierce,
All winter drives along the darkened air;
In his own loose-revolving fields, the swain
Disaster'd stands; sees other hills ascend
Of unknown joyless brow; and other scenes,
Of horrid prospect, shag the trackless plain:
Nor finds the river, nor the forest, hid
Beneath the white abrupt; but wanders on
From hill to dale, still more and more astray:
Impatient flouncing through the drifted heaps,
Stung with the thoughts of home; the thoughts of home
Rush on his nerves, and call their vigor forth
In many a vain effort. How sinks his soul!
What black despair, what horror fills his heart!
When for the dusky spot, that fancy feigned
His tufted cottage rising through the snow,
He meets the roughness of the middle waste,
Far from the tract, and blessed abode of man:
While round him night resistless closes fast,
And every tempest, howling over his head,
Renders the savage wilderness more wild.
Then throng the busy shapes into his mind,
Of covered pits, unfathomably deep,
A dire descent! beyond the power of frost,
Of faithless boggs; of precipices huge,
Smoothed up with snow; and, what is land unknown,
What water, of the still unfrozen eye,
In the loose marsh, or solitary lake,
Where the fresh fountain from the bottom boils.
These check his fearful steps; and down he sinks
Beneath the shelter of the shapeless drift,
Thinking over all the bitterness of death,
Mixed with the tender anguish nature shoots
Through the wrung bosom of the dying man,
His wife, his children, and his friends unseen.
In vain for him the officious wife prepares
The fire fair-blazing, and the vestment warm;
In vain his little children, peeping out
Into the mingling rack, demand their sire,
With tears of artless innocence. Alas!
Nor wife, nor children more shall he behold,
Nor friends, nor sacred home. On every nerve,
The deadly winter seizes; shuts up sense;
And, over his stronger vitals creeping cold,
Lays him along the snows, a stiffen'd corse, Unstretch'd, and bleaching in the
northern blast.
Ah little think the gay licentious proud,
Whom pleasure, power, and affluence surround;
They, who their thoughtless hours in giddy mirth,
And wanton, often cruel, riot waste;
Ah little think they, while they dance along,
How many feel this very moment, death
And all the sad variety of pain.
How many sink in the devouring flood,
Or more devouring flame. How many bleed,
By shameful variance betwixt man and man.
How many pine in want, and dungeon glooms;
Shut from the common air, and common use
Of their own limbs. How many drink the cup
Of baleful grief, or eat the bitter bread
Of misery. Sore pierced by wintry winds,
How many shrink into the fordid hut
Of chearless poverty. How many shake
With all the fiercer tortures of the mind,
Unbounded passion, madness, guilt, remorse;
Whence tumbled headlong from the height of life,
They furnish matter for the tragic muse.
Even in the vale, where Wisdom loves to dwell,
With Friendship, Peace, and Contemplation joined,
How many, rackt with honest passions, droop
In deep retired distress. How many stand
Around the deathbed of their dearest friends,
Like wailing pensive ghosts awaiting theirs,
And point the parting pang. Thought but fond man
Of these, and all the thousand nameless ills,
That one incessant struggle render life,
One scene of toil, of anguish, and of fate,
Vice in his high career would stand appalled,
And heedless rambling impulse learn to think;
The conscious heart of Charity would warm,
And his wide wish Benevolence dilate;
The social tear would rise, the social sigh;
And into clear perfection, gradual bliss,
Refining still, the social passions work.
And here can I forget the generous few,
Who, touched with human woe, redressive sought
Into the horrors of the gloomy jail?
Unpitied, and unheard, where Misery moans;
Where Sickness pines; where Thirst and Hunger burn,
And poor Misfortune feels the lash of Vice.
While in the land of liberty, the land
Whose every street, and public meeting glows
With open freedom, little tyrants raged:
Snatched the lean morsel from the starving mouth;
Tore from cold, wintry limbs the tattered robe;
Even robbed them of the last of comforts, sleep;
The freeborn Briton to the dungeon chained,
Or, as the lust of cruelty prevailed,
At pleasure marked him with inglorious stripes;
And crushed out lives, by various nameless ways,
That for their country would have toiled, or bled.
Hail patriot-band! who, scorning secret scorn,
When Justice, and when Mercy led the way,
Dragged the detected monsters into light,
Wrench'd from their hand Oppression's iron rod,
And bade the cruel feel the pains they gave.
Yet stop not here, let all the land rejoice,
And make the blessing unconfined, as great.
Much still untouched remains; in this rank age,
Much is the patriot's weeding hand required.
The toils of law, (what dark insidious men
Have cumbrous added to perplex the truth,
And lengthen simple justice into trade)
Oh glorious were the day! that saw these broke,
And every man within the reach of right.
Yet more outrageous is the season still,
A deeper horror, in Siberian wilds;
Where Winter keeps his unrejoicing court,
And in his airy hall the loud misrule
Of driving tempest is for ever heard.
There through the ragged woods absorpt in snow,
Sole tenant of these shades, the shaggy bear,
With dangling ice all horrid, stalks forlorn;
Slow-paced and sourer as the storms increase,
He makes his bed beneath the drifted snow;
And, scorning the complainings of distress.
Hardens his heart against assailing want.
While tempted vigorous over the marble waste.
On sleds reclined, the furry Russian sits;
And, by his rain-deer drawn, behind him throws
A shining kingdom in a winter's day.
Or from the cloudy Alps, and Appenine,
Capt with gray mists, and everlasting snows;
Where nature in stupendous rain lies,
And from the leaning rock, on either side,
Gush out those streams that classic song renowns:
Cruel as death, and hungry as the grave!
Burning for blood! bony, and ghaunt, and grim!
Assembling wolves in torrent troops descend;
And, pouring over the country, bear along,
Keen as the north wind sweeps the glossy snow.
All is their prize. They fasten on the steed,
Press him to earth, and pierce his mighty heart.
Nor can the bull his awful front defend.
Or shake the murdering savages away.
Rapacious, at the mother's throat they fly
And tear the screaming infant from her breast.
The godlike face of man avails him naught.
Even beauty, force divine! at whose bright glance
The generous lion stands in softened gaze,
Here bleeds, a hapless, undistinguished prey.
But if, appriz'd of the severe attack,
The country be shut up, lured by the scent,
On churchyards drear (inhuman to relate!)
The disappointed prowlers fall, and dig
The shrouded body from the tomb; over which,
Mixed with foul shades, and frighted ghosts, they howl.
Now, all amid the rigours of the year,
In the wild depth of Winter, while without
The ceaseless winds blow ice, be my retreat,
Between the groaning forest and the shore,
Beat by a boundless multitude of waves,
A rural, sheltered, solitary, scene;
Where ruddy fire and beaming tapers join,
To chase the cheerless gloom. There let me sit,
And hold high converse with the mighty dead;
Sages of ancient time, as gods revered,
As gods beneficent, who blessed mankind
With arts, and arms, and humaniz'd a world.
Roused at the inspiring thought, I throw aside
The long-lived volume; and, deep-musing, hail
The sacred shades, that slowly-rising pass
Before my wondering eyes. -- First Socrates,
Whose simple question to the folded heart
Stole unperceived, and from the maze of thought
Evolv'd the secret truth -- a god-like man!
Solon the next, who built his commonweal
On equity's wide base. Lycurgus then,
Severely good; and him of rugged Rome,
Numa, who softened her rapacious sons.
Cimon sweet-soul'd, and Aristides just;
With that attemper'd Timoleon.
Hero, mild, and firm,
Who wept the brother while the tyrant bled.
Unconquered Cato, virtuous in extreme.
Scipio, the human warrior, gently brave;
Who soon the race of spotless glory ran,
And, warm in youth, to the po^tic shade,
With friendship, and philosophy, retired.
And, equal to the best, the Pelopidas and Epaminondas.
Theban twain,
Who, single raised their country into fame.
Thousands behind, the boast of Greece and Rome,
Whom Virtue owns, the tribute of a verse
Demand; but who can count the stars of heaven?
Who sing their influence on this lower world?
But see who yonder comes! in sober state,
Fair, mild, and strong, as is a vernal sun:
It Is Phoebus self, or else the Mantuan swain!
Great Homer too appears, of daring wing,
Parent of song! and equal by his side,
The British muse; joined hand in hand they walk,
Darkling, full up the middle steep to fame.
Nor absent are those tuneful Shades, I ween,
Taught by the Graces, whose enchanting touch
Shakes every passion from the various string;
Nor those, who solemnize the moral scene.
First of your kind! society divine!
Still visit thus my nights, for you reserved,
And mount my soaring soul to deeds like yours.
Silence, thou lonely power! the door be thine;
See on the hallowed hour that none intrude,
Save Lycidas the friend, with sense refined,
Learning digested well, exalted faith,
Unstudy'd wit, and humor ever gay.
Or from the muses hill will Pope descend,
To raise the sacred hour, to make it smile,
And with the social spirit warm the heart:
For though not sweeter his own Homer sings,
Yet is his life the more endearing song.
Thus in some deep retirement would I pass
The winter-glooms, with friends of various turn,
Or blithe, or solemn, as the theme inspired:
With them would search, if this unbounded frame
Of nature rose from unproductive night,
Or sprung eternal from the eternal Cause,
Its springs, its laws, its progress and its end.
Hence larger prospects of the beauteous whole
Would gradual open on our opening minds;
And each diffufive harmony unite,
In full perfection, to the astonished eye.
Thence would we plunge into the moral world;
Which, though more seemingly perplexed, moves on
In higher order; fitted, and impelled,
By Wisdom's finest hand, and issuing all
In universal good. Historic truth
Should next conduct through the deeps of time:
Point us how empire grew, revolved, and fell,
In scattered states; what makes the nations smile,
Improves their soil, and gives them double suns;
And why they pine beneath the brightest skies,
In nature's richest lap. As thus we talked,
Our hearts would burn within us, would inhale
That portion of divinity, that ray
Of purest heaven, which lights the glorious flame
Of patriots, and of heroes. But if doomed,
In powerless humble fortune, to repress
These ardent risings of the kindling soul;
Then, even superior to ambition, we
Would learn the private virtues; how to glide
Through shades and plains, along the smoothest stream
Of rural life: or snatched away by hope,
Through the dim spaces of futurity,
With earnest eye anticipate those scenes
Of happiness, and wonder; where the mind,
In endless growth and infinite ascent,
Rises from state to state, and world to world.
And when with these the serious soul is foiled,
We, shifting for relief, would play the shapes
Of frolic fancy; and incessant form
Unnumber'd pictures, fleeting over the brain.
Yet rapid still renewed, and poured immense
Into the mind, unbounded without space:
The great, the new, the beautiful; or mixed,
Burlesque, and odd, the risible and gay;
Whence vivid Wit, and Humor, droll of face,
Call laughter forth, deep-shaking every nerve.
Mean-time the village rouzes up the sire;
While well attested, and as well believed,
Heard solemn, goes the goblin-story round;
Till superstitious horror creeps over all.
Or, frequent in the sounding hall, they wake
The rural gambol. Rustic mirth goes round:
The simple joke that takes the shepherd's heart,
Easily pleased; the long loud laugh, sincere;
The kiss, snatched hasty from the sidelong maid,
On purpose guardless, or pretending sleep;
The leap, the slap, the haul; and, shook to notes
Of native music, the respondent dance.
Thus jocund fleets with them the winter-night.
The city swarms intense. The public haunt,
Full of each theme, and warm with mixed discourse,
Hums indistinct. The sons of riot flow
Down the loose stream of false enchanted joy,
To swift destruction. On the rankled soul
The gaming fury falls; and in one gulf
Of total ruin, honor, virtue, peace,
Friends, families, and fortune headlong sink.
Rises the dance along the lighted dome,
Mixed, and evolv'd, a thousand sprightly ways.
The glittering court effuses every pomp;
The circle deepens; rained from radiant eyes,
A soft effulgence over the palace waves:
While, thick as insects in the summer-shine,
The fop, light-fluttering, spreads his mealy wings.
Dread over the scene the ghost of Hamlet stalks;
Othello rages; poor Monimia mourns;
And Belvidera pours her soul in love.
Assenting terror shakes; the silent tear
Steals over the cheek: or else the comic Muse
Holds to the world the picture of itself,
And raises sly the fair impartial laugh.
Clear frost succeeds; and through the blue serene,
For sight too fine, the ethereal nitre flies:
Killing infectious damps, and the spent air
Storing afresh with elemental life.
Close crowds the shining atmosphere; and binds
Our strengthened bodies in its cold embrace,
Constringent; feeds, and animates our blood;
Refines our spirits, through the new-strung nerves,
In swifter fallies darting to the brain;
Where sits the soul, intense, collected cool,
Bright as the skies, and as the season keen.
All nature feels the renovating force
Of Winter only to the thoughtless eye
In desolation seen. The vacant glebe
Draws in, abundant vegetable soul,
(...) ^athers vigor for the coming year.
A strong glow sits on the lively cheek
Of ruddy fire: and luculent along
The purer rivers flow; their sullen deeps,
Amazing, open to the shepherd's gaze,
And murmur hoarser at the fixing frost.
What art thou, Frost? and whence are thy keen stores
Derived, thou secret all-invading Power,
Whom even the illusive fluid cannot fly?
Is not thy potent energy, unseen,
Myriads of little salts, or hooked, or shaped
Like double wedges, and diffused immense
Through water, earth and either? Hence at eve,
Steam'd eager from the red horizon round,
With the still rage of Winter deep suffus'd,
An icy gale, often shifting, over the pool
Breathes a blue film, and in its mid career
Arrests the bickering stream. The loosened ice,
Let down the flood, and half-dissolv'd by day,
Rustles no more; but to the sedgy bank
Fast grows, or gathers round the pointed stone,
A crystal pavement, by the breath of heaven
Cemented firm; till seized from shore to shore,
The whole detruded river growls below.
Loud rings the frozen earth, and hard reflects
A double noise; while, at his evening watch,
The village-dog deters the nightly thief;
The heifer lows; the distant water-fall
Swells in the breeze, and, with the hasty tread
Of traveller, the many sounding plain
Shakes from afar. The full ethereal round,
Infinite worlds disclosing to the view,
Shines out intensely keen; and, all one cope
Of starry glitter, glows from pole to pole.
From pole to pole the rigid influence falls,
Through the still night, incessant, heavy, strong,
And seizes nature fast. It freezes on;
Till morn, late rising over the drooping world,
Lifts her pale eye unjoyous. Then appears
The various labor of the silent night:
Prone from the dripping eave, and dumb cascade,
Whose idle torrents only seem to roar,
The pendant isicle; the frost-work fair,
Where transient hues, and fancied figures rise;
The liquid kingdom all to solid turned;
Wide-spouted over the brow, the frozen brook,
A livid tract, cold gleaming on the morn;
The forest bent beneath the plumy wave;
And by the frost refined the whiter snow,
Incrusted hard, and sounding to the tread
Of early shepherd, as he pensive seeks
His pining flock, or from the mountain-top,
Pleased with the slippery surface, swist descends.
On blithesome frolicks bent, the youthful swains,
While every work of man is laid at rest,
Fond over the river rush, and shuddering view
The doubtful deeps below. Or where the lake
And long canal the cerule plain extend,
The city pours her thousands, swarming all,
From every quarter; and, with him who slides;
Or skating sweeps, swift as the winds, along,
In circling poise; or else disordered falls,
His feet, illuded, sprawling to the sky,
While the laugh rages round; from end to end,
Increasing still, resounds the crowded scene.
Pure, quick, and sportful, is the wholesome day;
But soon elapsed. The horizontal sun,
Broad over the south, hangs at his utmost noon;
And, ineffectual, strikes the gelid cliff.
The mountain still his azure gloss maintains,
Nor feels the feeble touch. Perhaps the vale
Relents a while to the reflected ray;
Or from the forest falls the clustered snow,
Myriads of gem, that, by the breeze diffused,
Gay-twinkle through the gleam. Heard thick around,
Thunders the sport of those, who, with the gun,
And dog impatient bounding at the shot,
Worse than the season, desolate the fields;
And, adding to the ruins of the year,
Distress the footed, or the feathered game.
But what is this? these infant tempests what?
The mockery of Winter: should our eye
Astonished shoot into the frozen zone;
Where more than half the joyless year is night;
And, failing gradual, life at last goes out.
There undissolving, from the first of time,
Snows swell on snows amazing to the sky;
And icy mountains there, on mountains pil'd,
Seem to the shivering sailor from afar,
Shapeless, and white, an atmosphere of clouds.
Projected huge, and horrid, over the main,
Alps frown on Alps; or rushing hideous down,
As if old Chaos was again returned,
Shake the firm pole, and make an ocean boil.
Whence heaped abrupt along the howling shore,
And into various shapes (as fancy leans)
Worked by the wave, the crystal pillars heave,
Swells the blue portico, the gothic dome
Shoots fretted up; and birds, and beasts, and men,
Rise into mimic life, and sink by turns.
The restless deep itself cannot resist
The binding fury; but in all its rage
Of tempest taken by the boundless frost,
Is many a fathom to the bottom chained,
And bid to roar no more: a bleak expanse,
Shagg'd over with wavy rocks, chearless, and void
Of every life, that from the dreary months
Flies conscious southward. Miserable they!
Who, here entangled in the gathering ice,
Take their last look of the descending sun;
While, full of death, and fierce with tenfold frost,
The long long night, incumbent over their head,
Falls horrible. Such was the Sir Hugh Willoughby, sent by Queen Elizabeth to
discover the north-east passage.
Briton's fate,
As with first prow, (What have not Britons dared!)
He for the passage sought, attempted since
So much in vain, and seeming to be shut
By jealous nature with eternal bars.
In these fell regions, in Arzina caught,
And to the stony deep his idle ship
Immediate sealed, he with his hapless crew,
Each full exerted at his several task,
Froze into statues; to the cordage glued
The sailor, and the pilot to the helm.
Hard by these shores, the last of mankind live;
And, scarce enlivened by the distant sun,
(That rears and ripens man, as well as plants)
Here Human Nature just begins to dawn.
Deep from the piercing season sunk in caves,
Here by dull fires, and with unjoyous cheer,
They wear the tedious gloom. Immersed in furs,
Lie the gross race. Nor sprightly jest, nor song,
Nor tenderness they know; nor ought of life,
Beyond the kindred ^ears that stalk without.
Till long-expected morning looks at length
Faint on their fields (where Winter reigns alone)
And calls the quiver'd savage to the chase.
Muttering, the winds at eve, with hoarser voice
Blow blustering from the south. The frost subdued,
Gradual, resolves into a trickling thaw.
Spotted the mountains shine; loose sleet descends,
And floods the country round. The rivers swell,
Impatient for the day. Broke from the hills,
Over rocks and woods, in broad brown cataracts,
A thousand snow-fed torrents shoot at once;
And, where they rush, the wide-resounding plain
Is left one slimy waste. Those sullen seas,
That wash the ungenial pole, will rest no more
Beneath the shackles of the mighty north;
But, rousing all their waves, resistless heave --
And hark! the lengthening roar continuous runs
Athwart the rifted main: at once it bursts,
And piles a thousand mountains to the clouds.
Ill fares the bark, the wretch's last resort,
That, lost amid the floating fragments, moors
Beneath the shelter of an icy isle,
While night o'erwhelms the sea, and horror looks
More horrible. Can human force endure
The assembled mischiefs that besiege them round:
Heart-gnawing hunger, fainting weariness,
The roar of winds and waves, the crush of ice,
Now ceasing, now renewed with louder rage,
And in dire echoes bellowing round the main.
More to embroil the deep, Leviathan,
And his unwieldy train, in horrid sport,
Tempest the loosened brine; while through the gloom;
Far, from the bleak inhospitable shore,
Loading the winds, is heard the hungry howl
Of famished monsters, there awaiting wrecks.
Yet Providence, that ever-waking eye,
Looks down with pity on the fruitless toil
Of mortals lost to hope, and lights them safe,
Through all this dreary labyrinth of fate.
It Is done! -- dread Winter has subdued the year,
And reigns tremendous over the desert plains.
How dead the vegetable kingdom lies!
How dumb the tuneful! Horror wide extends
His solitary empire. Here, fond man!
Behold thy pictured life; pass some few years,
Thy flowering Spring, thy Summer's ardent strength,
Thy sober Antumn fading into age,
And pale concluding Winter comes at last,
And shuts the scene. Ah! whither now are fled,
Those dreams of greatness? those unsolid hopes
Of happiness? those longings after fame?
Those restless cares? those busy bustling days?
Those gay-spent, festive nights? those veering thoughts,
Lost between good and ill, that shared thy life?
All now are vanished! Virtue sole survives,
Immortal, mankind's never-failing friend,
His guide to happiness on high. -- And fee!
It Is come, the glorious morn! the second birth
Of heaven, and earth! Awakening nature hears
The new-creating word, and starts to life,
In every heightened form, from pain and death
For ever free. The great eternal scheme,
Involving all, and in a perfect whole
Uniting, as the prospect wider spreads,
To reason's eye refined clears up apace.
Ye vainly wise! ye blind presuming! now,
Confounded in the dust, adore that Power,
And Wisdom often arraigned: see now the cause,
Why unassuming Worth in secret lived,
And died, neglected: why the good man's share
In life was gall, and bitterness of soul:
Why the lone widow, and her orphans pined,
In starving solitude; while Luxury,
In palaces, lay prompting his low thought,
To form unreal wants: why heaven-born Truth,
And Moderation fair, wore the red marks
Of Superstition's scourge: why licensed Pain,
That cruel spoiler, that embosom'd foe,
Embittered all our bliss. Ye good distressed!
Ye noble few! who here unbending stand
Beneath life's pressure, yet a little while,
And what you reckon evil is no more;
The storms of Wintry time will quickly pass,
And one unbounded SPRING encircle all.
The END
A HYMN ON THE SEASONS.
THESE, as they change, Almighty Father! these,
Are but the varied God. The rolling Year
Is full of Thee. Forth in the pleasing Spring
Thy Beauty walks, Thy Tenderness and Love.
Wide-flush the fields; the softening air is balm;
Echo the mountains round; the forests live;
And every sense, and every heart is joy.
Then comes thy glory in the Summer-months,
With light, and heat, severe. Prone, then thy Sun
Shoots full perfection through the swelling year.
And often thy voice in awful thunder speaks;
And often at dawn, deep noon, or falling eve,
By brooks and groves, in hollow-whispering gales.
A yellow-floating pomp, thy Bounty shines
In Autumn unconfined. Thrown from thy lap,
Profuse over nature, falls the lucid shower
Of beamy fruits; and, in a radiant stream,
Into the stores of steril Winter pours.
In Winter dreadful Thou! with clouds and storms
Around Thee thrown, tempest over tempest rolled,
Horrible blackness! On the whirlwind's wing,
Riding sublime, Thou bid'st the world be low,
And humblest nature with thy northern blast.
Mysterious round! what skill, what force divine,
Deep-felt, in these appear! a simple train,
Yet so harmonious mixed, so fitly joined,
One following one in such enchanting sort,
Shade, unperceived, so softening into shade,
And all so forming such a perfect whole,
That as they still succeed, they ravish still.
But wondering often, with brute unconscious gaze,
Man marks Thee not, marks not the mighty hand,
That, ever-busy, wheels the silent spheres;
Works in the secret deep; shoots, steaming, thence
The fair profusion that o'erspreads the Spring;
Flings from the sun direct the flaming Day;
Feeds every creature; hurls the Tempest forth;
And, as on earth this grateful change revolves,
With transport touches all the springs of life.
Nature, attend; join every living soul,
Beneath the spacious temple of the sky,
In adoration join; and, ardent, raise
An universal Hymn! to Him, ye gales,
Breathe soft; whose spirit teaches you to breathe.
Oh talk of Him in solitary glooms!
Where, over the rock, the scarcely-waving pine
Fills the brown void with a religious awe.
And ye, whose bolder note is heard afar,
Who shake the astonished world, lift high to heaven
The impetuous song, and say from whom you rage.
His praise, ye brooks, attune, ye trembling rills;
And let me catch it as I muse along.
Ye headlong torrents, rapid, and profound;
Ye softer floods, that lead the humid maze
Along the vale; and thou, majestic main,
A secret world of wonders in thyself,
Sound His tremendous praise; whose greater voice
Or bids you roar, or bids your roarings fall,
Roll up your incense, herbs, and fruits, and flowers,
In mingled clouds to Him; whose sun elates,
Whose hand perfumes you, and whose pencil paints
Ye forests, bend; ye harvests, wave to Him:
Breathe your still song into the reaper's heart,
Homeward, rejoicing with the joyous moon.
Ye that keep watch in heaven, as earth asleep
Unconscious lies, effuse your mildest beams,
Ye constellations, while your angles strike,
Amid the spangled sky, the silver lyre.
Great source of day! best image here below
Of thy creator, ever darting wide,
From world to world, the vital ocean round,
On nature write with every beam his praise.
The thunder rolls: be hushed the prostrate world;
While cloud to cloud returns the dreadful hymn.
Bleat out afresh, ye hills; ye mossy rocks,
Retain the sound: the broad responsive low,
Ye valleys, raise; for the great Shepherd reigns;
And yet again the golden age returns.
Wildest of creatures, be not silent here;
But, hymning horrid, let the desert roar.
Ye woodlands all, awake: a general song
Burst from the groves; and when the restless day,
Expiring, lays the warbling world asleep,
Sweetest of birds! sweet Philomela, charm
The listening shades; and through the midnight hour;
Trilling, prolong the wildly-luscious note;
That night, as well as day, may vouch His praise.
Ye chief, for whom the whole creation smiles;
At once the head, the heart, and mouth of all,
Crown the great Hymn! in swarming cities vast,
Concourse of men, to the deep organ join
The long-resounding voice, oft-breaking clear,
At solemn pauses, through the swelling base;
And, as each mingling frame increases each,
In one united ardor rise to heaven.
Or if you rather choose the rural shade,
To find a fane in every sacred grove;
There let the shepherd's flute, the virgin's chaunt,
The prompting seraph, and the poet's lyre,
Still sing the God of Seasons, as they roll.
For me, when I forget the darling theme,
Whether the Blossom blows, the Summer-Ray,
Russets the plain, delicious Autumn gleams;
Or Winter rises in the reddening east;
Be my tongue mute, may fancy paint no more,
And, dead to joy, forget my heart to beat.
Should fate command me to the farthest verge
Of the green earth, to hostile barbarous climes,
Rivers unknown to song; where first the sun
Gilds Indian mountains, or his setting beam
Flames on the Atlantic isles; it is naught to me;
Since God is ever present, ever felt,
In the void waste, as in the city full;
Rolls the same kindred Seasons round the world,
In all apparent, wise, and good in all;
Since He sustains, and animates the whole;
From seeming evil still educes good,
And better thence again, and better still,
In infinite progression. -- But I lose
Myself in Him, in light ineffable!
Come then, expressive Silence, muse his praise.
The END.
A POEM Sacred to the MEMORY of Sir ISAAC NEWTON.
Inscribed to the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir ROBERT WALPOLE.
SHALL the great Soul of Newton quit this earth,
To mingle with his stars; and every muse,
Astonished into silence, shun the weight
Of honors due to his illustrious name?
But what can man? -- Even now the sons of light,
In strains high-warbled to seraphic lyre,
Hail his arrival on the coast of bliss.
Yet am not I deterred, though high the theme,
And sung to harps of angels, for with you,
Ethereal Flames! ambitious, I aspire
In Nature's general symphony to join.
And what new wonders can ye show your guest!
Who, while on this dim spot, where mortals toil
Clouded in dust, from Motion's simple laws,
Could trace the secret hand of Providence,
Wide-working through this universal frame.
Have ye not listened while he bound the Suns,
And Planets to their spheres! the unequal task
Of human kind till then. Often had they rolled
Over erring Man the year, and often disgraced
The pride of schools, before their course was known
Full in its causes and effects to him,
All-piercing sage! who sat not down and dreamed
Romantic schemes, defended by the din
Of specious words, and tyranny of names;
But, bidding his amazing mind attend,
And with heroic patience years on years
Deep-searching, saw at last the System dawn,
And shine, of all his race, on him alone.
What were his raptures then! how pure! how strong!
And what the triumphs of old Greece and Rome,
By his diminished, but the price of boys
In some small fray victorious! when instead
Of shattered parcels of this earth usurped
By violence unmanly, and sore deeds
Of cruelty and Blood, Nature herself
Stood all subdued by him, and open laid
Her every latent glory to his view.
All intellectual eye, our solar Round
First gazing through, he by the blended power
Of Gravitation and Projection saw
The whole in silent harmony revolve.
From unassisted vision hid, the Moons
To cheer remoter planets numerous poured,
By him in all their mingled tracts were seen.
He also fixed the wandering Queen of Night,
Whether she wanes into a scanty orb,
Or, waxing broad, with her pale shadowy light,
In a soft deluge overflows the sky.
Her every motion clear-discerning, He
Adjusted to the mutual Main, and taught
Why now the mighty mass of water swells
Resistless, heaving on the broken rocks
And the full river turning; till again
The tide revertive, unattracted, leaves
A yellow waste of idle sands behind.
Then breaking hence, he took his ardent flight
Through the blue Infinite; and every Star,
Which the clear concave of a winter's night
Pours on the eye, or astronomic tube,
Far-stretching, snatches from the dark abyss,
Or such as farther in successive skies
To fancy shine alone, at his approach
Blazed into Suns, the living center each
Of an harmonious system: all combined,
And ruled unerring by that single power,
Which draws the stone projected to the ground.
O unprofuse magnificence divine!
O Wisdom truly perfect! thus to call
From a few causes such a scheme of things,
Effects so various, beautiful, and great,
An universe complete! and, O beloved
Of heaven! whose well-purg'd penetrative eye,
The mystic veil transpiercing, inly scanned
The rising, moving, wide-establish'd frame.
He, first of men, with awful wing pursued
The Comet through the long Eliptic curve,
As round innumerous worlds he wound his way;
Till, to the forehead of our evening sky
Returned, the blazing wonder glares anew,
And over the trembling nations shakes dismay.
The heavens are all his own; from the wild rule
Of whirling Vortices, and circling Spheres,
To their first great simplicity restored.
The schools astonished stood; but found it vain
To keep at odds with demonstration strong,
And, unawaken'd, dream beneath the blaze
Of truth. At once their pleasing visions sled,
With the gay shadows of the morning mixed,
When Newton rose, our philosophy sun.
The aerial flow of Sound was known to him,
From whence it first in wavy circles breaks,
Till the touched organ takes the meaning in.
Nor could the darting Beam, of speed immense,
Escape his swift pursuit, and measuring eye.
Even Light itself, which every things displays,
Shone undiscovered, till his brighter mind
Untwisted all the shining robe of day;
And, from the whitening undistinguished blaze,
Collecting every ray into his kind,
To the charmed eye educ'd the gorgeous train
Of Parent-Colours. First the flaming Red
Sprung vivid forth; the tawny Orange next;
And next delicious Yellow; by whose side
Fell the kind beams of all-refreshing Green.
Then the pure Blue, that swells autumnal skies,
Ethereal played; and then, of sadder hue,
Emerg'd the deepen'd Indico, as when
The heavy-skirted evening droops with frost.
While the last gleamings of refracted light
Died in the fainting Violet away.
These, when the clouds distill the rosy shower,
Shine out distinct adown the watery bow;
While over our heads the dewy vision bends
Delightful, melting on the fields beneath.
Myriads of mingling dies from these result,
And myriads still remain -- Infinite source
Of beauty, ever-flushing, ever-new!
Did ever poet image ought so fair,
Dreaming in whispering groves, by the hoarse brook!
Or prophet, to whose rapture heaven descends!
Even now the setting sun and shifting clouds,
Seen, Greenwich, from thy lovely heights, declare
How just, how beauteous the refractive Law.
The noiseless Tide of Time, all bearing down
To vast Eternity's unbounded sea
Where the green islands of the happy shine,
He stemmed alone; and to the source (involved
Deep in primaeval gloom) ascending, raised
His lights at equal distances, to guide
Historian, wilder'd on his darksome way.
But who can number up his labors? who
His high discoveries sing? when but a few
Of the deep-studying race can stretch their minds
To what he knew: in fancy's lighter thought,
How shall the muse then grasp the mighty theme?
What wonder thence that his Devotion swelled
Responsive to his knowledge! for could he,
Whose piercing mental eye diffusive saw
The finished University of things,
In all its order, magnitude, and parts,
Forbear incessant to adore that Power
Who fills, sustains, and actuates the whole.
Say, ye who best can tell, ye happy few,
Who saw him in the softest lights of life,
All un-with-held, indulging to his friends
The vast unborrow'd treasures of his mind,
Oh speak the wondrous man! how mild, how calm,
How greatly humble, how divinely good;
How firm established on eternal truth;
Fervent in doing well, with every nerve
Still pressing on, forgetful of the past,
And panting for perfection: far above
Those little cares, and visionary joys,
That so perplex the fond impassioned heart
Of ever-cheated, ever-trusting man.
This, Conduit, from thy rural hours we hope;
As through the pleasing shade, where Nature pours
Her every sweet, in studious ease you walk;
The social passions smiling at thy heart,
That glows with all the recollected sage.
And you, ye hopeless gloomy-minded tribe,
You who, unconscious of those nobler flights
That reach impatient at immortal life,
Against the prime endearing pivilege
Of Being dare contend, say, can a soul
Of such extensive, deep, tremendous powers,
Enlarging still, be but a finer breath
Of spirits dancing through their tubes awhile,
And then for ever lost in vacant air?
But hark! methinks I hear a warning voice,
Solemn as when some awful change is come,
Sound through the world -- " It Is done! -- The measure's full;
" And I resign my charge. -- Ye mouldering stones,
That build the towering pyramid, the proud
Triumphal arch, the monument effaced
By ruthless ruin, and whatever supports
The worshipped name of hoar antiquity,
Down to the dust! what grandeur can ye boast
While Newton lifts his column to the skies,
Beyond the waste of time -- Let no weak drop
Be shed for him. The virgin in her bloom
Cut off, the joyous youth, and darling child,
These are the tombs that claim the tender tear,
And Elegiac song. But Newton calls
For other notes of gratulation high,
That now he wanders through those endless worlds
He here so well descried, and wondering talks,
And hymns their author with his glad compeers.
O Britain's boast! whether with angels thou
Sit in dread discourse, or fellow-blest,
Who joy to see the honor of their kind;
Or whether, mounted on cherubic wing,
Thy swift career is with the whirling orbs,
Comparing things with things, in rapture lost,
And grateful adoration, for that light
So plenteous ray'd into thy mind below,
From Light Himself; Oh look with pity down
On human-kind, a frail erroneous race!
Exalt the spirit of a downward world!
Over thy dejected country chief preside,
And be her Genius called! her studies raise,
Correct her manners, and inspire her youth.
For, though depraved and sunk, she brought thee forth,
And glories in thy name; she points thee out
To all her sons, and bids them eye thy star:
While in expectance of the second life,
When Time shall be no more, thy sacred dust
Sleeps with her kings, and dignifies the scene.
The END.
BRITANNIA. A POEM.
Written in the Year 1719.
-- Et tantas audetis tollere Moles?
Quos Ego -- sed motos praestat componere fluctus.
Post mihi non simili Poena commissa luetis.
Maturate fugam, Regique haec dicite vestro:
Non illi Imperium Pelagi, Saevumque Tridentem,
Sed mihi sort datum. --
VIRG. BRITANNIA. A POEM.
AS on the sea-beat shore Britannia sat,
Of her degenerate sons the faded fame,
Deep in her anxious heart, revolving sad:
Bare was her throbbing bosom to the gale,
That hoarse, and hollow, from the bleak surge blew;
Loose flowed her tresses; rent her azure robe.
Hung over the deep from her majestic brow
She tore the laurel, and she tore the bay.
Nor ceased the copious grief to bathe her cheek;
Nor ceased her sobs to murmur to the Main.
Peace discontented nigh, departing, stretched
Her dove-like wings. And War, though greatly roused,
Yet mourned his fettered hands. While thus the Queen
Of nations spoke; and what she said the Muse
Recorded, faithful, in unbidden verse.
Even not yon sail, that, from the sky-mixt wave,
Dawns on the sight, and wafts the Royal Youth,
A freight of future glory to my shore;
Even not the flattering view of golden days,
And rising periods yet of bright renown,
Beneath the Parents, and their endless line
Through late revolving time, can sooth my rage;
While, unchastis'd, the insulting Spaniard dares
Infest the trading flood, full of vain War
Despise my Navies, and my Merchants seize;
As, trusting to false peace, they fearless roam
The world of waters wild, made, by the toil,
And liberal blood of glorious ages, mine:
Nor bursts my sleeping thunder on their head.
Whence this unwonted patience? this weak doubt?
This tame beseeching of rejected peace?
This meek forbearance? this unnative fear,
To generous Britons never known before?
And failed my Fleets for this; on Indian tides
To float, unactive, with the veering winds?
The mockery of war! while hot disease,
And sloth distempered, swept off burning crowds,
For action ardent; and amid the deep,
Inglorious, sunk them in a watery grave.
There now they lie beneath the rolling flood,
Far from their friends, and country unaveng'd;
And back the weeping war-ship comes again,
Dispirited, and thin; her sons ashamed
Thus idly to review their native shore;
With not one glory sparkling in their eye,
One triumph on their tongue. A passenger,
The violated Merchant comes along;
That far-sought wealth, for which the noxious gale
He drew, and sweat beneath Equator suns,
By lawless force detained; a force that soon
Would melt away, and every spoil resign,
Were once the British lion heard to roar.
Whence is it that the proud Iberian thus,
In their own well-asserted element,
Dares rouse to wrath the Masters of the Main?
Who told him, that the big incumbent war
Would not, ere this, have rolled his trembling ports
In smoaky ruin? and his guilty stores,
Won by the ravage of a butchered world,
Yet unatton'd, sunk in the swallowing deep,
Or led the glittering prize into the Thames?
There was a time (Oh let my languid sons
Resume their spirit at the rouzing thought!)
When all the pride of Spain, in one dread fleet,
Swelled over the laboring surge; like a whole heaven
Of clouds, wide-roll'd before the boundless breeze.
Gaily the splendid Armament along
Exultant plough'd, reflecting a red gleam,
As sunk the sun, over all the flaming vast;
Tall, gorgeous, and elate; drunk with the dream
Of easy conquest; while their bloated war,
Stretched out from sky to sky, the gathered force
Of ages held in its capacious womb.
But soon, regardless of the cumbrous pomp,
My dauntless Britons came, a gloomy few,
With tempest black, the goodly scene deformed,
And laid their glory waste. The bolts of fate
Resistless thundered through their yielding sides;
Fierce over their beauty blazed the lurid flame;
And seized in horrid grasp, or shattered wide,
Amid the mighty waters, deep they sunk.
Then too from every promontory chill,
Rank fen, and cavern where the wild wave works,
I swept confederate winds, and swelled a storm.
Round the glad isle, snatched by the vengeful blast,
The scattered remnants drove; on the blind shelve,
And pointed rock, that marks the indented shore,
Relentless dashed, where loud the Northern Main
Howls through the fractur'd Caledonian isles.
Such were the dawnings of my liquid reign;
But since how vast it grew, how absolute,
Even in those troubled times, when dreadful Blake
Awed angry Nations with the British Name,
Let every humbled state, let Europe say,
Sustained, and balanced, by my naval arm.
Ah what must these immortal spirits think
Of your poor shifts? These, for their country's good,
Who faced the blackest danger, knew no fear,
No mean submission, but commanded peace.
Ah how with indignation must they burn?
(If ought, but joy, can touch etherial breasts)
With shame? with grief? to see their feeble sons
Shrink from that empire over the conquered feas,
For which their wisdom plan'd, their councils glowed,
And their veins bled through many a toiling age.
Oh first of human blessings! and supreme!
Fair Peace! how lovely, how delightful thou!
By whose wide tie, the kindred sons of men,
Like brothers live, in amity combined,
And unsuspicious faith; while honest toil
Gives every joy, and to those joys a right,
Which idle, barbarous Rapine but usurps.
Pure is thy reign; when, unaccurs'd by blood,
Naught, save the sweetness of indulgent showers,
Trickling distills into the vernant glebe;
Instead of mangled carcasses, sad-seen,
When the blythe sheaves lie scattered over the field,
When only shining shares, the crooked knife,
And hooks imprint the vegetable wound;
When the land blushes with the rose alone,
The falling fruitage, and the bleeding vine.
Oh, Peace! thou source, and soul of social life;
Beneath whose calm, inspiring influence,
Science his views enlarges, Art refines,
And swelling Commerce opens all her ports;
Blessed be the Man divine, who gives us Thee!
Who bids the trumpet hush his horrid clang,
Nor blow the giddy nations into rage;
Who sheaths the murderous blade; the deadly gun
Into the well-pil'd armory returns;
And, every vigor from the work of death,
To grateful industry converting, makes
The country flourish, and the city smile.
Unviolated, him the virgin sings;
And him the smiling mother to her train.
Of him the shepherd, in the peaceful dale,
Chaunts; and, the treasures of his labor sure,
The husbandman of him, as at the plough,
Or team, he toils. With him the sailor sooths,
Beneath the trembling moon, the midnight wave;
And the full city, warm, from street to street,
And shop to shop, responsive, rings of him.
Nor joys one land alone; his praise extends
Far as the sun rolls the diffusive day;
Far as the breeze can bare the gifts of peace,
Till all the happy nations catch the song.
What would not Peace! the Patriot bear for thee?
What painful patience? What incessant care?
What mixed anxiety? What sleepless toil?
Even from the rash protected what reproach?
For he thy value knows; thy friendship he
To human nature: but the better thou,
The richer of delight, sometimes the more
Inevitable War, when russian force
Awakes the fury of an injured state.
Then the good easy man, whom reason rules;
Who, while unhurt, knew nor offense, nor harm,
Roused by bold insult, and injurious rage,
With sharp, and sudden check, the astonished sons
Of violence confounds; firm as his cause,
His bolder heart; in awful justice clad;
His eyes effulging a peculiar fire:
And, as he charges through the prostrate war,
His keen arm teaches faithless men, no more
To dare the sacred vengeance of the just.
And what, my thoughtless sons, should fire you more,
Than when your weil-earn'd empire of the deep
The least beginning injury receives?
What better cause can call your lightning forth?
Your thunder wake? Your dearest life demand?
What better cause, than when your country sees
The sly destruction at her vitals aimed?
For oh it much imports you, it is your all,
To keep your Trade entire, entire the force,
And honor of your Fleets; over that to watch,
Even with a hand severe, and jealous eye.
In intercourse be gentle, generous, just,
By wisdom polished, and of manners fair;
But on the sea be terrible, untamed,
Unconquerable still: let none escape,
Who shall but aim to touch your glory there.
Is there the man, into the lyon's den
Who dares intrude, to snatch his young away?
And is a Briton seized? and seized beneath
The slumbring terrors of a British Fleet?
Then ardent rise! Oh great in vengeance rise;
O'erturn the proud, teach rapine to restore:
And as you ride sublimely round the world,
Make every vessel stoop, make every state
At once their welfare and their duty know.
This is your glory; this your wisdom; this
The native power for which you were designed
By fate, when fate designed the firmest state,
That ever was seated on the subject sea;
A state, alone, where Liberty should live,
In these late times, this evening of mankind,
When Athens, Rome, and Carthage are no more,
The world almost in slavish sloth dissolved.
For this, these rocks around your coast were thrown;
For this, your oaks, peculiar hardened, shoot
Strong into sturdy growth; for this, your hearts
Swell with a sullen courage, growing still
As danger grows; and strength, and toil for this
Are liberal poured over all the fervent land.
Then cherish this, this unexpensive power,
Undangerous to the public ever prompt,
By lavish Nature thrust into your hand:
And, unencumber'd with the bulk immense
Of conquest, whence huge empires rose and fell,
Self-crush'd, extend your reign from shore to shore,
Wherever the wind your high behests can blow,
And fix it deep on this eternal base.
For should the sliding fabrrick once give way,
Soon slackened quite, and past recovery broke,
It gathers ruin as it rolls along,
Steep-rushing down to that devouring gulf,
Where many a mighty empire buried lies.
And should the big redundant flood of Trade,
In which ten thousand thousand Labors join
Their several currents, till the boundless tide
Rolls in a radiant deluge over the land,
Should this bright stream, the least inflected, point
Its course another way, over other lands
The various treasure would resistless pour,
Never to be won again; its ancient tract
Left a vile channel, desolate, and dead,
With all around a miserable waste.
Not Egypt, were, her better heaven, the Nile
Turned in the pride of flow; when over his rocks,
And roaring cataracts, beyond the reach
Of dizzy vision pil'd, in one wide flash
An Ethiopian deluge foams amain;
(Whence wondering fable traced him from the sky)
Even not that prime of earth, where harvests crowd
On untilled harvests, all the teeming year,
If of the fat overflowing culture robbed,
Were then a more uncomfortable wild,
Steril, and void; than of her trade deprived,
Britons, your boasted isle: her Princes sunk;
Her high-built honor moulder'd to the dust;
Unnerv'd her force; her spirit vanished quite;
With rapid wing her riches fled away;
Her unfrequented ports alone the sign
Of what she was; her Merchants scattered wide;
Her hollow shops shut up; and in her streets,
Her fields, woods, markets, villages, and roads,
The cheerful voice of labor heard no more.
Oh let not then waste Luxury impair
That manly soul of toil, which strings your nerves,
And your own proper happiness creates!
Oh let not the soft, penetrating plague
Creep on the freeborn mind! and working there,
With the sharp tooth of many a new-form'd want,
Endless, and idle all, eat out the heart
Of Liberty; the high conception blast;
The noble sentiment, the impatient scorn
Of base subjection, and the swelling wish
For general good, erazing from the mind:
While naught save narrow Selfishness succeeds,
And low design, the sneaking passions all
Let loose, and reigning in the rankled breast.
Induced at last, by scarce-perceiv'd degrees,
Sapping the very frame of government,
And life, a total dissolution comes;
Sloth, ignorance, dejection, flattery, fear,
Oppression raging over the waste he makes;
The human being almost quite extinct;
And the whole state in broad Corruption sinks.
Oh shun that gulf: that gaping ruin shun!
And countless ages roll it far away
From you, ye heaven-belov'd! may Liberty,
The light of life! the sun of human kind!
Whence Heroes, Bards, and Patriots borrow flame,
Even where the keen depressive North descends,
Still spread, exalt, and actuate your powers!
While slavish Southern climates beam in vain.
And may a public spirit from the Throne,
Where every Virtue sits, go copious forth
Live over the land! the finer Arts inspire;
Make thoughtful Science raise his pensive head,
Blow the fresh Bay, bid Industry rejoice,
And the rough Sons of lowest Labor smile.
As when, profuse of Spring, the loosened West
Lifts up the pining year, and balmy breathes
Youth, life, and love, and beauty over the world.
But haste we from these melancholy shores,
Nor to deaf winds, and waves, our fruitless plaint
Pour weak; the country claims our active aid;
That let us roam; and where we find a spark
Of public virtue, blow it into flame.
And now my sons, the sons of freedom! meet
In awful senate; thither let us fly;
Burn in the Patriot's thought, flow from his tongue
In fearless truth; myself, transformed, preside,
And shed the spirit of Britannia round.
This said; her fleeting form, and airy train,
Sunk in the gale; and naught but ragged rocks
Rushed on the broken eye; and naught was heard
But the rough cadence of the dashing wave.
The END.
BOOKS Printed for J. MILLAN, near Charing Cross.
THE CARPENTER's COMPANION, being an accurate and complete Treatise of
Carpenters Works, in which is contained various sorts of Timber-Floors,
Partitions, Bridges, and especially Roofs, with their manner of Framing,
Trussing, etc. made easy to all concerned in Building, but more particularly to
Carpenters. To which is added, the five Orders of Architecture, in a more easy
and concise Method, than any yet published. Exemplified in about 100 Figures,
finely Engraved upon Copper Plates. By James Smith, Carpenter, in a neat Pocket
Volume. Price Bound 4 s. 2. The 2d Edition of the YOUNG BUILDER's RUDIMENTS,
teaching in a plain familiar way, by Question and Answer, all the most useful
Parts of Geometry, Architecture, Mechanics, Mensuration, and Perspective, etc.
To which are now added, the five Orders, several beautiful Doors, Windows, etc.
according to Inigo Jones and others; adorned with above 300 Figures, curiously
Engraved on Copper Plates. Price Bound 7 s. 6d. 3. THOMSON's Four Seasons, and
other Poems, adorned with six curious Cuts, Designed by Mr. Kent, and Engraved
by M. Tardieu at Paris, printed upon a fine Royal Paper, in 4to.
N. B. BRITANNIA is now added, more than was to the Subscribers Books.

4. The CUTS are sold separate for 2 s. 6 s. they are very beautiful, and fit
to be framed. 5. THOMSON's Four Seasons, and all the said other Poems, with
Cuts, in 8vo. Price 6s. bound. 6. The only complete Case, Trial, and
Love Letters of Miss Cadiere and Father J. B. Girard, a Jesuit; wherein it is
proved, that he seduced her and six other Female Votaries, by the abominable
Jesuitical Doctrines of Quietism, Enchantment, Sorcery, and spiritual Incest,
into the most criminal Excesses of Lewdness. Adorned with Copper Plates, in 4
neat Pocket Volumes. Price 10 s. bound. N. B. It Is positively affirmed, that
this Trial cost the Jesuits several Millions to screen their Brother from the
Odium of which they knew he was Guilty. 7. The 2d Edition of a New FRENCH
GRAMMAR, teaching a Person of an ordinary Capacity, without the help of a
Master, to Read, Write, and Speak that Tongue, in less than half the usual
Time, in a Method never attempted before, viz. the Verbs, a Vocabulary, and the
Dialogues, etc. printed in three Columns. 1. the French, as pronounced (leaving
all the Letters out that are not pronounced) 2. the English. 3. the French, as
Written and Spelt. By J. E. Tandon, Teacher of the said Tongue, at her Grace
the Duchess of Marlborough' s. Price Bound 2 s.

