COLUMBUS: AN HISTORICAL PLAY.

ENTERED AT STATIONER'S-HALL.

COLUMBUS: OR, A WORLD DISCOVERED.

AN HISTORICAL PLAY.

AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.

BY THOMAS MORTON, OF THE HONORABLE SOCIETY OF LINCOLN'S END.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR W. MILLER, OLD BOND-SRREET. 1792.

THE spectator and reader of the following performance, will find the manners
and customs of Mexico and Peru introduced, as appertaining to the first
discovered natives of the western world. -- This deviation afforded the author
an opportunity of introducing manners and customs, more congenial to dramatic
use, and more particularly of presenting from MARMONTEL'S INCAS, the pathetic
tale of Cora and Alonzo.

To MR. HARRIS, the author offers his acknowledgments for the extreme attention
he has paid to this performance, and the magnificent decorations he has
bestowed on it.

For the zeal and talent, manifested by the performers, the author's best
thanks are due. --

PROLOGUE.
WRITTEN BY W. T. FITZGERALD, ESQUIRE. SPOKEN BY MR. HOLMAN.
WHEN famed Columbus nobly dared to brave,
The untried perils of the Western wave;
Ten thousand dangers in his passage lay,
Dark was his night, and dreary was his day!
The rude companions of his bold design,
Fatigued with toil, against their chief combine:
When sudden -- bursting on the astonished view!
A world discovered, proved his judgment true. --
"Yet black ingratitude, the Great Man's fate!
"Pursued Columbus with envenomed hate;
"But minds like his a base degenerate race,
"Might meanly persecute -- but not disgrace:
"The noble soul its energy maintains,
"In spite of dungeons, tyranny, and chains."
The sons of Europe found a guileless race,
No fraud was veiled beneath the smiling face;
Their manners, mild, benevolent, and kind,
Pourtrayed the cloudless sunshine of the mind:
Blessed in their Prince's patriarchal reign,
Whose power relieved, but never inflicted pain,
Their placid lives no fancied evils knew;
Their joys were many, and their wants were few.
One custom with their virtues ill agreed,
Which made Humanity with anguish bleed;
Compelled at Superstition's shrine to bow,
The hapless victims of a cruel vow!
Their sweetest maids were often doomed to prove,
No joy in friendship, nor no bliss in love!
Yet love and nature cannot be suppressed,
The sigh will heave, and palpitate the breast;
For spite of vows, which Heaven's wise laws disown,
Love sits triumphant on the heart -- his throne!
And breaks those fetters bigots would impose,
To aggravate the sense of human woes!
The rigid laws of time, and place, our bard,
In this night's drama, ventures to discard:
If here he errs -- he errs with him whose name,
Stands without rival on the rolls of Fame;
Him whom the passions own with one accord,
Their Great Dictator, and despotic Lord!
Who placed aloft on Inspiration's throne,
Made Fancy's magic kingdom all his own,
Burst from the trammels which his muse confined,
And poured the wealth of his exhaustless mind!
Though SHAKSPEARE'S flight no mortal shall pursue --
COLUMBUS' story patronized by you,
Will yield an offering, grateful to his dust --
A British laurel on a hero's bust!

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Columbus Mr. POPE. Alonzo Mr. HOLMAN. Harry Herbert Mr. LEWIS. Doctor Dolores
Mr. QUICK. Bribon Mr. MUNDEN. Roldan Mr. M'CREADY. Valverdo Mr. THOMPSON.
Moscoso Mr. CUBIT. Captain Mr. FARLEY. Adventurers and Soldierss.
INDIANS.
Orozimbo Mr. FARREN. Solasco Mr. HARLEY. Catalpo Mr. POWELL. Cuto Mr. EVATT.
INDIAN WOMEN.
Cora Mrs. POPE. Nelti Mrs. ESTEN.
Priests, Priestesses, Warriors, etc.

* Those Lines with inverted Comma's are omitted in the representation.

COLUMBUS: AN HISTORICAL PLAY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- On one side of the stage a flight of steps, with a Portico leading
to the Temple of the Sun. -- In the background the sea. Time, sunrise.
Catalpo and Priests from the Temple, who range themselves -- then enter
Orozimbo -- they bow to him as he passes. OROZIMBO, prostrating himself to the
sun. SOUL of the universe, who from they glittering throne beamest immortal
splendor, as thou have permitted the stars for their appointed hour to
bespangle the veil of night, now overwhelm all manner of glories in the
greatness of thy effulgence, and be once more welcomed by thy devoted servants
to delight and bless the world! -- Catalpo, conduct hither the virgin destined
to receive a priestess' sacred office.


CATALPO exit, and reenters with SOLASCO, leading in CORA. Solasco (kneels.)
Mighty chief!


Orozimba. Rise, good Solasco.


Solasco. I here present the darling of my age to be devoted to the service of
our god. It will be worse than parting with my life to lose the comforts of her
dear society -- but the bright sun, our glorious deity, demands such excellence
to be consigned alone to do him honor. -- Pardon, my king, an old man's tears;
but nature will not always, without a struggle, yield to duty.


Orozimbo. Thou have, indeed, devoted to thy god a precious treasure; but tell
me, Cora, can thy youthful mind freely resign the livelier joys of social life,
and rest contented in seclusion and tranquillity?


Cora. My father's will has ever swayed my thoughts, from the first hour that
infant sense could learn obedience: -- Should he doom my death, his mandate
would be met with equal resignation.


Orozimbo. Thy pious mind, which knows to yield such duty to a father, will
well befit the service of thy god. -- But hear the sacred tenor of the law
which binds a priestess to her duty. -- Should the heart, to heaven devoted,
become the prey of sacrilegious love, our law consigns its priestess, and the
accomplice of her guilt, to instant death. Her parents and their offspring are
pledges for her faith, and should her flight elude offended justice, their
forfeit lives must expiate her crime. [Cora bows to the sun.] Now to the altar,
and record your vows; then, as our custom is, come forth to shine Queen of this
festive day, the last you are to know exempt from sacred duty.


Exeunt Cora, Solasco, and Priests, to the Temple. During the latter part of
this scene the sun becomes obscured by clouds, and thunder and lightning issue
from them -- the sea much agitated. Catalpho. Great chief, behold what envious
clouds obscure the glories of our god.


Orozimbo. Say, Catalpo, what mean these bodings! A ship appears from behind a
projecting rock. And lo! -- What monster's that, whose wings bear it buoyant on
the angry main?


A cannon is discharged from the ship. Catalpo. See! -- From its throat thunder
and fire burst forth, seeming to brave high heaven.


Orozimbo. Be not dismayed -- summon our warriors. [ to Cuto.] Catalpo, let the
priests attend.


Exeunt. SCENE II. The Country.
Enter Orozimbo meeting Cuto, Warriors, and Indians. Orozimbo. My people, we'll
to the shore -- Should they prove mortal foes, we'll meet their thunders, or if
the engines of infernal power, what can virtue fear? -- Trust me, the Deity we
serve, will reassume his splendor, and protect his chosen people.


Exeunt. SCENE III. A View of an Indian Country.
Enter in procession, Indian Officer -- Warriors -- Indian Music -- Cuto --
Archers -- Standard of the Sun -- Cora -- Priests of the Sun -- Indians bearing
presents and Banners -- Nelti -- Indian Women bearing Presents -- Warriors --
Orozimbo in a Car, burnished with Gold, supported on the shoulders of Indians,
and attended by Nobles with golden Staves -- Warriors. SCENE IV. The Sea Coast.
Three Ships are seen at anchor, and Boats come to Shore with martial Music and
Colors flying. Enter from the Boat, Columbus, Alonzo, Roldan, Valverdo, Harry
Herbert, and the rest of the Spanish Adventurers. -- Columbus lands first, with
his Sword drawn -- he falls and embraces the Earth, during which Time there are
three Cheers, and a discharge of Artillery; then the rest follow and come
forward. Columbus. First, to high Heaven, who thus, with never-fading honor,
has crowned its poorest servant, let me pour forth a heart overwhelmed with
gratitude. And now begin the important work which heaven has delegated to us --
Erect the sacred banner of our faith.

The Cross is erected on one side of the stage.
Alonzo. Brave associates! join with me in praise of him, who has achieved
what ignorance, with sapient shrug, and satisfied, benumbing prudence derided
as the chimera of a madman's fancy: falling at his feet, let us be proud in
being first to pay due homage to such surpassing excellence.

They all kneel.
Columbus. Rise, rise; -- rather, my Alonzo, in these arms receive my thanks,
thou, next to heaven, my firmest friend. Ye men of Spain, let what has passed
admonish you in what may be to come -- keep in your minds the time when we had
gained the course which shut out the eastern world; how you beat your breasts,
oppressed with fear and superstition -- How, with womanish tears, you bade
adieu to life, and blubbered out a requiem for your souls; then embracing
desperation instead of fortitude, I was to be your sacrifice; and this body,
which has been your conduct to wealth and honor, you would have given to the
sea, and ignorance and cowardice would have triumphed.


Valverdo. Mighty Sir, forgive us!


Columbus. Freely, good Valverdo -- Let the man stand forth, who, at a time so
fraught with peril, first discovered land.


Herbert. [Coming forward.] It was my good fortune.


Columbus. Thou art not a Spaniard.


Herbert. No, your Excellency, I am an Englishman; and though we Englishmen are
an odd, whimsical set of fellows, yet we generally contrive (and I trust ever
shall) to keep a good look out ahead when our superior is in danger.


Columbus. Tell me your fortunes.


Herbert. My name is Harry Herbert; I am descended from as respectable and
independent an ancestor as the world can boast, -- an English yeoman; but the
civil wars leaving my family little, which my imprudence soon made less, I
thought that, although King Henry was deprived of the honor of this enterprise,
that did not preclude his subjects; so I shipped myself off for Castille, where
I had just time and cash enough to fall a dozen times in love, and into other
serapes, before I had the honor of embarking on board your Excellency's
squadron.


Columbus. Herbert, thou do honor to thy country.


Herbert. Then, Sir, I am glad, that for once I am even with it; for I am sure
my country does honor to me.

Indian music without.
Roldan. Behold a crowd of people, many of whom seem clad in sacred vestments
-- Their dress and standards bespeak them greatly civilized, and full of wealth.


Enter in procession Indian Warriors, bearing a Standard of the Sun --
Orozimbo, Cora, etc. Orozimbo. [Descends from his car.] Strangers, who seem to
be above the race of mortals, instruct us how to honor you -- If you be
children of the Sun, behold our priests, who with perfumes and libations, will
welcome you to his holy temple; or, if human, here are fruits to feed you,
dwellings to shelter you, and garments to clothe you.


Columbus. Chief, you behold in us the children of mortality; but the power we
serve, in his high mercy, has bestowed upon us superior gifts; thus, through
unknown seas to brave the imperious surge, and to construct engines which can
sweep thousands from the earth -- But that Deity commands us to proclaim his
name with peace -- The King, our master, wishes to enrich thee and himself --
this hardy metal, useful in all the purposes of life, he will exchange for
those thy country may produce.

Presents a hatchet.
Orozimbo. It Is very strange -- Thy King much wrongs himself -- all we have to
render is our gold, but that we find so yielding, and so useless, it were an
injury to offer it -- Indulge the curiosity of a stranger.


[Orozimbo, with Columbus, Roldan, Herbert, Nelti, Catalpo, etc. move up the
stage. Alonzo. Often has a tender glance escaped my eye, impelled by Beauty's
power, and from my bosom the soft sigh instinctively has stolen -- Many a fair
Castilian has enforced this test of admiration, but now my every sense seems
drawn by power magnetic to that lovely saint -- Permit me, fairest creature, to
express my admiration at the charms which now present themselves -- though all
the wonders of a new discovered world display their rival novelties, yet, now
that I behold its first of wonders, all else exacts from me as little notice,
as I, I fear, have power or merit to command from you.


Cora. Strange you wrong yourself, and hold me unskilful to distinguish, when
you suppose desert like yours can pass unnoticed -- Your praises of the humble
Cora, though they have caused no vain emotion, yet ever will the mind receive
with pleasure, praise even unmerited, when it is bestowed by those who claim our
admiration.


Alonzo. All that the warmest fancy can depict in the bright colors of ideal
excellence, can never reach that exquisite perfection nature exhibits -- how
must I bless my happy fortune, that bore me to a clime which boasts an ornament
like thee.


Cora. [Aside.] What new emotion rises in my breast -- I fear to ask my heart
from whence it springs. Oh, Cora! think of thy sacred duty -- think of the vow
which passed thy lips so lately. -- Stranger, though sacred hospitality commanded
me to pay this courtesy, yet now a higher duty enjoins me to desist from
further converse.


Alonzo. Let me entreat one instant --


Cora. It must not be -- my conduct is controlled by rigid laws. Farewell. --
Oh Cora, what days of wretchedness art thou doomed to suffer!


Aside, as she retires to the priests. Alonzo. Alonzo. What could she mean?
"Her conduct is controlled by rigid laws" -- If she be destined to another, my
lot is misery.


Orozimbo [with Columbus, coming forward.] In harmony and peace I rule a free
and happy people, and I were unworthy of my kingdom, did I not endeavor to the
utmost to convert the name of stranger into friend.


[Exeunt Orozimbo and Columbus, hand in hand; Priests follow; then Alonzo,
Roldan, Valverdo, etc. and the Spanish and Indian soldiers -- One party bow to
the cross, the other to the sun.] Manent Herbert and Nelti. Herbert. And so, my
pretty Indian, you live very happily.


Nelti. Yes, all the day long.


Herbert. And have you no monks who pray for you, dispute with you, and burn
you alive when you don't think as they do?


Nelti. Oh! no.


Herbert. Poor devils, what a way they must be in.


Nelti. Don't you come from the other world?


Herbert. What, you see something angelic about me, eh! -- Yes, my love, I come
from a little paradise, called England.


Nelti. Is England a world?


Herbert. A bit of one; but, little as it is, it somehow contrives to manage
all the rest. -- Should you like to live in England?


Nelti. O yes; I suppose English women, armed with spears made of that pretty,
hard iron, climb the mountains, and destroy the wild bull.


Herbert. Destroy the wild bull! No, my dear; our English women find prettier
amusement in encouraging the breed of horned cattle -- the use of the pretty,
hard iron is confined to the men, and no great favorite there; for I know many
flourishers of spontoons, who have a cursed antipathy to cold iron. -- Who is
that elegant creature you were conversing with?


Nelti. Her name is Cora; she was this day admitted a priestess of the Sun. --
The handsomest virgins are always selected to sustain that sacred office.


Herbert. The handsomest! you were then, on that account, not --


Nelti. Did I say the handsomest? Oh dear, I mean they select the most sedate
-- for, from this day she must never leave the temple, or converse with any
except the priests.


Herbert. Except the priests! Go where you will, you find those gentlemen
always contrive to be well taken care of -- would you like to become a
priestess?


Nelti [sighing.] Last night perhaps I should.


Herbert. Charming sensibility! and may I, my sweet girl, interpret that sigh
in my favor?


Nelti. Ah, you will not love me.


Herbert. Not love thee! -- By Magna Charta, I Will resign my life, fortune, and
liberty to thee. -- besides, I Will bring thee beads, clothes, music --


Nelti. Ah, that is not love. -- They only try to please the eye, who find
their actions cannot touch the heart. -- no presents or toys could influence
Nelti. -- no, not if you were to give her an iron javelin and a tame tiger.


Herbert. Indeed! -- very delicate presents for a young lady.


Nelti [aside.] I wish I could make him love me -- how do women in England gain
their lover's hearts?


Herbert. Generally by using them like dogs. -- for, when a woman studiously
avoids looking at a man, abuses him on all occasions, and is kind to every one
else, we naturally conclude they love each other to distraction.


Nelti. [aside] I never can find in my heart to use him ill -- What ugly thing
is that?


Enter Dolores and Bribon, from a boat. Herbert. A doctor of physic, who having
killed all his patients in the old world, except his wife, who would never take
his medicines, has ventured hither, in pursuit of new patients, new fees, and
perhaps a new bedfellow.


Nelti. And what is the other?


Herbert. A lawyer and a coxcomb.


Nelti. What Is a coxcomb?


Herbert. A reptile, my dear, that is found in abundance in all countries, and
yet is not easily described -- it is a kind of mongrel, which men drive from
them, because they hardly consider it as belonging to them, and the women will not
receive, because they think it will not breed.


Dolores. All seems pretty quiet. -- I say, Bribon --


Bribon. What do you say, Doctor Dolores?


Dolores. This seems cursed mild, wholesome, unprofitable air for a physician.
-- But heaven is merciful, wherever I go, patients increase.


Bribon. There seems plenty of gold, and plenty of gold, plenty of law, follows
as naturally as a bill of costs. -- I say, Doctor, do you see that sweet,
pretty, wealthy-looking girl --


Dolores. I fancy I shall have some pretty female practice here. -- I was a
great favorite in Spain; for my maxim was, always to stick to my friends to
the last.


Herbert. Doctor, welcome to the new world. -- So, you kept on board till all
was quiet.


Dolores. To be sure -- consider the importance of my life to you all; but my
chief reason was, that the famous astrologer, Doctor Diego Diablasco, told me
something ill would happen if I were rash -- but there seems no danger --
that is a very pretty girl, and I love a fine young girl, almost as much as I do
fine old gold


Herbert. And have you, Doctor, so soon forgot your old helpmate in Valladolid?


Dolores. Ah, poor old Dorothy! But, Lord, I hate constancy as much as I hate
health [addressing Nelti.] Permit me, sweetest of savages, to enquire after the
state of your health -- how is your pulse? let me feel how it beats -- beats.
--

Takes her hand.
Nelti. Feel how it beats? Perhaps it beats harder than you think


Dolores. Then there is the more necessity I should feel it, my pretty, pretty
--


Nelti. There, then.


Strikes him. Dolores. Zounds! a dozen such patients would do for me!


Herbert. Doctor, I hope to be honored with the hand of this charming girl.


Dolores. Oh, with all my heart -- I Am sure I Have had enough of it -- but you
cannot marry her.


Herbert. Why, thou professor of the glorious art of manslaughter?


Dolores. Because the Pope allows no religious ceremonies with heretics -- all
dealings with them must be in the way of plunder and glorious intrigue.


Herbert. The Pope! pshaw -- I shall sit down here for life, contented with a
little -- I Will build a neat, convenient house, after the fashion of the
country, with a plain silver door, and a diamond knocker. The apartments shall
be merely lined with plates of gold, neatly carved -- the sophas of silver
tissue, and stuffed with the down of humming-birds -- As for fresco-work of
emeralds, rubies, pearls, amethysts, and such nicknacks, my wife may ornament
her dairy and dressing room with them -- in short, I Will have every thing in a
snug, comfortable way, without show or expense


Dolores. Without show or expense! -- Pray, great Sir, -- will you allow a poor
man to gather up the chips, and now and then take a peep into your golden
apartments?


Herbert. Why, Dolores, by the time I build, I fancy you will have a snug leaden
apartment of your own -- so, go count beads instead of ducats, and try not to
cheat young Harry out of his mistress, but old Harry out of your soul.


Exeunt Herbert and Nelti. Bribon. Zounds! let us follow; for who knows, but in
a minute, these savages may knock my brains out, with one of your shin-bones.


Dolores. Come along -- Oh, I wish I had the doctoring of you for a week, you
English mastiff.


Exeunt. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. -- The Spanish Camp.
Enter Columbus, with a party of soldiers, guarding others, chained, meeting
Roldan and Valverdo. Columbus. UNGRATEFUL men, thus, in a moment, to destroy my
brightest hopes. -- see them closely guarded.

Exeunt Soldiers, guarded. Roldan, would thou think it, those wretches (dead to
prudence as to honor) have damned the name of Spaniard, they have reviled the
Indian priests, and with unmanly outrage, have torn away the golden ornamen's
that decked the lovely breasts of innocence. -- The men, exasperated, call to
the Cacique for vengeance; I, at the hazard of my life must follow, and appease
his just resentment.


Exit. Valverdo. Shall then a brave Castilian be disgraced with bonds, for
showing disrespect to vile idolatry?


Roldan. No, Valverdo. -- Soon shall this upstart Genoese, Columbus, feel the
just vengeance of insulted Spain [shewing a paper]. -- My brother in ambition,
look on this paper.


Valverdo. What Is this -- the royal signature?


Roldan. Mark me. -- When our gracious Queen embraced the fortunes of this
foreign Viceroy, even proffered her regal ornaments to equip his fleet, the
minister, Fonesca, jealous of the fame that might attend this enterprise,
worked on the fears of the suspicious Ferdinand, to execute this commission of
control, which, now Columbus' conduct gives pretense, arrays me with the power
of crushing his authority, and with disgrace returning him to Spain.


Valverdo. Glorious hearing!


Roldan. Do thou, Valverdo, tamper with the troops, -- press on their
superstitious minds the injury our faith will suffer by winking at idolatry;
tell them, the way to sudden wealth is easy, had they a fit commander --
insinuate -- but we waste words -- about it, good Valverdo.

Exit Valverdo. 'Twere presumption to instruct a monk in wiles of glozing
cozenage.

Retires up the stage.
Enter Alonzo. The fatal wound is given to all my hopes -- what years of bliss
had my soul fondly pictured as Alonzo's lot -- Oh, lovely Cora, must then thy
beauties never more beam their bright radiance on me? -- Had thou been
doomed to fill another's arms, I had indeed been cursed, but not so deeply; for
I might still have gazed upon thy heavenly form -- have listened to the sweet
melody of thy loved voice, and known delight even in misery -- But all is
gloomy horror now before me.

Roldan. I hope I not untimely interrupt your meditations.


Alonzo. Roldan, the conduct of these Indians obscures our European virtues,
and we are come to be instructed, not to teach -- The good Columbus has
appeased their just resentment, and, at the request of Orozimbo, consents to
liberate the prisoners.


Roldan. It Is well [shews a plan of attack] but as we must secure a place of
safety (for it were madness to repose confidence in savages) here have I drawn
a plan which must render the town an easy capture.


Alonzo. The town a capture!


Roldan. Do thou not understand me?


Alonzo. I hope I do not.


Roldan. There is no safety but in their destruction.


Alonzo. Roldan, thou surely can not be so damned as think it -- What, stab
the fond heart which overflows with love and adoration for thee -- trample down
sacred hospitality, and erect the throne of treachery and murder -- by the
great God of justice, first through this body thou must force thy way, thou
traitor to humanity.


Roldan. Soft-hearted fool, these mawkish virtues have ever been the sainted
garb of cowards.


Alonzo. Coward!

They fight.
Enter Cuto, with Indians, who rush in between'em. Cuto. Thanks to the God,
this arm received the stroke that would have slain thee.

To Roldan.
Alonzo. Good youth, thou bleed'st -- Pray take all care of him [binds his
handkerchief round Cuto' s arm] Roldan, if yet thou need'st a stimulus to
virtue, look on that Indian, and in the name of heaven, stain not thy honor
and thy manhood with treachery and ingratitude.


Roldan. Fortune permits thee now to school me -- but, boy, thou shall feel my
power; go to the Viceroy, tell him that Roldan lacks brotherly affection for
the poor Indians, and add (for by the power of vengeance it is true) that
Roldan is his covenanted foe -- that he has given freedom to those Castilians
he dared disgrace with bonds, and that, by thee, he greets his Excellency with
defiance and contempt.


Exit Roldan. Alonzo. Perfidious, bloody villain! Oh, my friends, dangers I
fear await you -- I blush to say we have among us those whose vileness your
pure nature cannot image. Let us prepare to meet the worst -- summon your
warriors, while I instruct them how best to guard each place of 'vantage -- and
should this Roldan attempt to execute his villainous intent, depend on the
protection of Columbus.


Exit Alonzo, with Indians. SCENE II. A Retired Place.
Enter Columbus. Columbus. All happiness is mingled with alloy -- I Have
triumphed over every opposition malice and folly raised to check my glory -- I,
now, in Europe's eye shall stand arrayed in all the honors which success
commands -- those, who if accident had thwarted my reason-founded schemes would
with important ignorance have scoffed at the silly vague projector -- will now,
with panegyric full as thoughtless, admire my courage, and applaud my
prescience -- yet, when I have attained the summit of my wishes, when I should
give some little rest to my care-worn mind, which long has struggled with
adversity; when I might contemplate with joy, the virtues I have found in this
new world, virtues more rare than all the riches it abounds in, -- I sind I
have conducted to this hapless spot, hearts black with discontent, and factious
jealousy, thirsting for plunder and for blood! But if determined rigor --
virtuous example --


Enter Herbert, running. Herbert. May it please your Excellency -- I beg your
excuse; -- but I am so choked with rage, and breathless with running, that I
have scarce power to tell you -- your troops have mutinied.


Columbus. Mutinied! Explain.


Herbert. Roldan, Sir, that -- but I know a soldier's duty too well, to speak
ill of a superior officer, or I Would tell your Excellency what a cursed inhuman
scoundrel I think him -- Their villainy and ingratitude is beyond belief --
they murmur that you will not give them leave to cut the throats of these innocent
Indians -- They call for Roldan to head them, and I Will do him the justice to
say, he would let them indulge in such pretty, harmless diversion, as long as
there was a throat left in the country.


Columbus. This demands my instant presence -- Herbert, in half an hour, attend
me at the camp.


Exit. Herbert. Oh, if I had that Roldan in England, I Would hang him up without
judge or jury -- though, on recollection, I have fixed on the worst place in the
world for hanging folks up, because a great man like me wills it -- but now for
vengeance -- and yet I don't know how it happens, that although in some things I
am a tolerably active, industrious fellow, yet when I have to seek revenge, I
grow so infernally lazy I can scarce find in my heart to set about it.


Exit. SCENE III. -- The Sea Coast -- a boat stationed.
Enter Roldan, with Troops, meeting Valverdo. Roldan. May I trust that look
propitious -- Oh, let thy words confirm it -- how have thou prospered with the
soldiers?


Valverdo. They more than met my wishes, and the dastard few, whom conscience
kept in doubt, I soon won over by the stimulus of plunder, spiced with our
Church's dispensation -- in a word, they have all sworn, that on a signal
given, they will desert Columbus.


Roldan. And in an hour, to a fairer promiser, would they abandon me. -- It
mads me that I must climb the heights of proud ambition on the shoulders of
such a crew of mongrels. -- My design is to send Columbus, loaded with chains
and accusation, a prisoner to Spain, and with him, those hen-hearted fools,
whose superstitious scruples might prove troublesome.


Valverdo. With deference to your happier policy, do you not risk by this the
wrath of Isabella?


Roldan. Not a whit. For, unless Valverdo, thou have made some saint thy enemy,
who, in mere spite, may work for them a miracle, they will not fatigue the royal
ear with much complaining. -- To be plain, the vessel which shall convey them
hence, is so strained, crazy, and unfit for service, she cannot weather out the
slightest storm, therefore, the first rude wind that blows, will send them to
explore another world. -- But hark, that trumpet speaks Columbus. -- Now,
fortune, be my friend.


Enter Columbus, Moscoso, and Troops. Columbus. Roldan, what means this
outrage, this treason to thy King? Why spur on to desperation and rebellion,
your few mistaken followers, whom my power, did I not abhor revenge, could in
an instant sweep from the earth?


Roldan. Columbus, on thee let me retort the name of traitor. -- I stand here,
chosen by the general voice, the avenger of their wrongs. -- It Is thee they
charge with treason to their King, assert thou wink'st at heresy, and have made
them the slaves of savages. -- How do thou answer?


Enter Herbert. Columbus. Answer to thee? -- Roldan, press not my patience
farther. -- But to convince thee, traitor, how false are thy aspersions, and
that I reign sovereign in my people's love -- mark me, be this the test. [Takes
a spear from one of the soldiers, and throws it between him and Roldan,
dividing the stage.] Let all, who do not in their hearts believe I mean them
fairly, and judge thee worthier to command them, pass that javelin without fear
or doubt. -- Be that the barrier betwixt my influence and thine.


Roldan. Much it glads me thou have proffered so fair a trial; and I swear, if
they approve thee, I will resign into thy hand my sword and life.


Columbus. Now, my brave soldiers, hear my firm intent; I will lead you on to
wealth, but not by massacre; I Will make you all, the wonders of the world, rich
and beloved. -- Then, without control, decide your fate; but, remember, -- you
have but one step to make from honor to disgrace.

[Valverdo, and those on Columbus's side, pass over to Roldan.
Columbus. Be it so -- men without hearts are not worth regretting.


[Herbert, who has been standing on Roldan's side, after eyeing with contempt
those who deserted Columbus, passes between the front of the stage and Roldan,
to Columbus.] Herbert. Great Sir, accept my humble services. -- despise not
him, who honors you -- pray excuse these tears -- let me embrace your knees.


Falls, and embraces his knees. Columbus. My heart! my heart! -- Herbert, thy
gratitude unmans me,

Embraces him.
Roldan. Now, Columbus, look on that paper; by it thou wilt find thy King
distrusted thee [giving the paper.] And pray you all remember, I exerted not
the high authority of which my sovereign thought me worthy, 'till he was
deserted, and despised.


Columbus. Peace, fiery indignation; -- down rebel heart, -- and do not choke
my utterance. -- Well, Viceroy, [giving his staff to Roldan] where are your
racks, -- your instruments of vengeance?


Roldan. Oh, do not fear -- we mean no torture.


Columbus. And think thou, villain, the subtilest inquisitor, who has
out-damn'd his fellows in inventive cruelty, could give a pang like that I
feel, in seeing thee possessed of power to make the happy wretched? -- Oh my
poor Indians, who shall now defend you, when this traitor, fit leader of his
band of demons, like the arch-fiend, new lighted on a world of innocence,
shall diffuse his devilish spirit, and extend hell's empire.


Roldan. Bring forth his chains [Columbus is chained] -- for so the King
enjoined he should be sent to Spain whenever he proved unworthy.


Herbert. Chains! Hell and fury [draws his sword, but is disarmed] Confusion!


Roldan. Captain, observe that with strict attention you obey your orders,
[pointing to Herbert] -- for that stubborn rebel -- bear him to torture.


Columbus. Hold, Roldan -- thy vengeance must be most complete when I descend
to ask a favor from thee -- let my humility glut thy vindictive wrath. --
Allow that Englishman to share my fortunes.


Roldan. Bear him away.


Columbus. Roldan, a wretch like thee should have a coward's caution. -- Do
thou not dread, that in his dying moments, when, in defiance of thy tortures,
(for I can read his noble soul,) he braves thee to the last, and glories in a
death of honor, do thou not fear he may infect this ruffian crew with some
faint sparks of honesty, and make them less fit instruments for thee?


Roldan. Bear him to death.


Herbert. Heaven preserve your Excellency. -- Will you, great Sir, condescend
to indulge the last wish of vanity, and, when you have nothing else to do,
write to England the story of my fate; that when my fortunes shall be enquired
after, my friends, with joy sparkling through a tear, may say, Herbert stuck to
his commander to the last, and died as an Englishman ought.


Columbus. My noble fellow, this hand shall justify thy fame.


Herbert. Then I am easy. -- May your portion of happiness be equal to your
virtues -- farewell. -- [To Roldan.] Perhaps, Sir, you never were at the death
of an English game-cock. -- Will you do me the favor of attending my execution?


Roldan. Take him from my sight.


Herbert. Hands off, reptiles! [to Roldan.] That you are the most infernal
scoundrel the devil ever made a friend of, all your worthy associates about you
will, I dare say, allow -- but I brand you with the name of fool, for enabling
an humble man like me, thus to triumph over you, to defy you -- scorn you --
laugh at you -- Hands off, reptiles!


Exit Herbert, guarded. Columbus. [to Roldan] Is then my triumph for a world's
discovery, and the trophies which I bear to Spain, to tell attending crowds my
glory, a body bowed by ignominious fetters?


Captain. Pardon me, Sir, if I presume to beg, that I may so far mitigate their
rigor, as when on board, to free the noble prisoner from their weight.


Columbus. You know not what you ask -- wish me to forfeit the honors my King
has heaped on me -- no, these are his gracious gifts, and I Have not yet learnt
to disobey him -- and here I vow before that power who cheers the soul of
suffering virtue, though their cankerous rivets corrode my very bones, no hand
but Ferdinand's shall free me from them -- By heaven, my soul pants for the
moment, when thus accoutered, I may meet his presence, and ask him -- how I
have deserved these favors from him.


Officer. All is ready.


Roldan. Bear him then on board.


Exeunt Roldan and Troops. Columbus. Thou guardian of the innocent, to thy
supreme protection I commend the generous natives of this hapless land; assist
them to defend their liberties from the fell grasp of this detested crew -- To
them extend thy mercy; and let me pour my thanks for that celestial fortitude
which glows within my breast -- with it I can defy the storms of fortune, safe
in the approval of a guiltless mind, which, not deserving wrong, can never feel
disgrace.


Exeunt Columbus and Attendants to the Boat. Enter Orozimbo, Alonzo, and Indian
Warriors. -- Alonzo rushes to the top of the Stage. Alonzo. Great chief, your
succors come too late -- alas! he is gone! Oh! for vengeance on that traitor,
Roldan; -- may this arm drive him from the earth, which groans at bearing such
a wretch, and hurl him to the infernal gulf, as yet untenanted by any fiend so
cursed.


Orozimbo. Alonzo, do thou not blush to call these wretches, countrymen, who
spurn at sacred virtue, and seem to court pre-eminence in perdition.


Alonzo. Spain, thou have lost thy glory -- pride and fanaticism have reared
their bloody banner, and virtue flies to foreign climes for shelter --
Orozimbo, to thee and to thy country I dedicate my life -- Hark! [Cannon
discharged] The cannon's ireful throat, wont proudly to proclaim defiance, now
throws along the wave a solemn sound, as knolling a departed friend.


Enter Herbert without his Cloak and Doublet. Herbert. I have escaped the
bloodhounds -- Zounds! how I scampered -- I never before knew I was so
eminently gifted with that fashionable military accomplishment, retreating.


Alonzo. What means this strange appearance?


Herbert. I Will tell you -- that cannibal, Roldan, was, I believe, a little
inclined to be dainty, and, wishing for a choice bit, consigned me over to
Valverdo, who stood man-cook on the occasion -- he ordered me to be scored like
pork, and then to be roasted; and the humane priest remarked, there was not so
excellent a receipt for insuring the love of heaven, as taking half a dozen
heretics and broiling them gently over a slow fire -- Acknowledge Roldan
Viceroy, says he -- I Would see you damned first, says I -- so, watching my
opportunity, I gave the priest a Cornish hug, showed his scullions a specimen
of English wrestling, and off I came, trussed for dressing, as you see me.


Alonzo. Well, my brave friend, thou then wilt aid our cause?


Herbert. Do you suppose that I, who had my forefathers chopped to atoms in
deciding the preference between a red rose and a white one, will stand idle in
the cause of humanity? -- No, give me a sword, and if I don't, without benefit
of clergy, execute that priest, Valverdo, whom the devil has sent hither as his
plenipotentiary, make me commander in chief to all the cowards in Europe.


Alonzo. [to Orozimbo.] Act in pursuance of the plan I gave, and with a rampart
circle in the town, then let but hunger, that harbinger of mutiny once assail
them, they, like opposing poisons, will soon destroy each other, and save your
darts the labor.


Orozimbo. Trust me, brave people, these gods are vulnerable -- soon shall you
behold your javelins burnished with their blood -- hunger and thirst is their's
as well as our's, and the soul of a Spaniard takes its flight from a wound, as
swiftly as an Indian's -- Lead on.


Exeunt. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. -- The Temple of the Sun.
Catalpo and Priests assembled round the Altar. Enter Orozimbo and Alonzo.
Orozimbo. MATCHLESS infamy! how could the villain Roldan think so poorly of me?
the tender of his friendship was sufficient insult, without the terms on which
he offers it. Resign thee to him! purchase by treachery the friendship of a
traitor, -- and for what? Had he the power to raise me above all the glories
ambition ever coveted, should I not, after such a crime, sit pining 'midst my
splendor, the victim of accusing conscience, finding a curse in every blessing.


Alonzo. My heart burns with impatience to lead your valiant troops to just
revenge -- but let vigilance and caution guide us.


Orozimbo. My friend, do thou direct us at thy will -- [to the priests] --
prepare the rites, the sacrifice for war, and let the priestess who was last
received a servant of the Sun, approach the altar with her sacred present.


The priests range round the altar -- folding-doors open, and priestesses enter
and range on each side -- Cora enters, bearing offerings in a golden basket.
Alonzo. It Is she -- it is Cora -- support me, heaven -- this unexpected sight
o'erpowers me. --

[Aside.]
Cora. [not seeing Alonzo, advances and kneels at the altar.] Thou, glorious
Sun, accept our humble offerings -- receive with favor the righteous homage of
our grateful hearts -- If thy children ever have broken the laws of
hospitality, if ever they have failed to greet a stranger with a brother's
love, they nor deserve, nor dare to hope thy fatherly protection -- but if they
have not merited the wrongs they suffer, preserve -- protect them!


[Priests and priestesses prostrate themselves; -- Catalpo takes from the altar
an Indian weapon, and gives it to Cora.] Catalpo. Priestess, bear to our chief
this consecrated weapon, it shall defend the Sun's insulted glory, our
sovereign's, and his people's rights.


[Cora receives the weapon, and in bearing it to Orozimbo, sees Alonzo --
exclaims, -- "Oh, heavens!" -- drops the weapon, and faints -- Alonzo
endeavors to assist her.] Catalpo. [to Alozo.] Forbear -- the proffered
kindness claims our thanks; but thy unhallowed hand would be a profanation to a
priestess' sacred person.


Orozimbo. What means this tremor? -- What shock so suddenly has struck that
lovely frame?


Cora. I know not -- a momentary weakness --


[Cora is borne off by the priestesses. Orozimbo. Let all attention wait her --
it is but the effect of apprehension from her inexperience in her sacred office
--


Alonzo. She seemed much agitated -- How shall I bear this aggregate of misery
-- my agony I fear will speak, what should be hid from all. --

[Aside.]
Orozimbo [to the priests.] Conclude your rites; and may the power supreme
accept our fervent prayers, and be our humble offerings grateful to him.

[The Scene closes.]
SCENE II. An Indian Town.
Enter Dolores and Bribon. Dolores. I tell you, this new world is crammed with
wizzards and astrologers, that whiz about in the night time, raising storms,
tempests, and mischief; and can tell the day a man is to die, with as much
certainty as -- as --


Bribon. As you can the death of your own patients.


Dolores. And can prolong your life year after year as easily -- as you can a
lawsuit.


Bribon. But what cursed luck it is to be cooped up here with a parcel of
savages, who know as much of litigation, as I do of the war-whoop -- here I see
gold enough to make me a judge; but I cannot get a bit big enough to buy a scrap
of parchment.


Dolores. Curse the new world, I say -- there is not a man in it wants a
physician but myself -- If I could but have gone back with Columbus -- he must
by this time be near Spain, and perhaps old Dorothy's dead.


Enter Nelti. Nelti [sighs.] Shall I never see my dear Englishman again? He
pleases my heart when present, but ah, how he plagues it when absent.


Bribon. Singular case -- always plagued my wife when present, pleased her when
absent. -- [addressing Nelti] Most amiable and wealthy savage, behold a lawyer
and a christian, who will give you the fee simple of his heart, and receive in
return, all your love, and aside] all your money. -- Doctor, I wish to join
issue here -- I Will employ you as counsel, -- say something for me.


Dolores. I will -- I will -- [apart to Nelti.] My dear, beautiful goldfinch,
that fellow is a wicked, cheating lawyer.


Bribon. I see he is doing my business for me.


Dolores. Look with an eye of commiseration on one who loves thee. -- Oh, how I
long to kiss those pouting lips.


Nelti. You ugly creature, if you touch me, I Will cry out.


Dolores. [aside.] Cry out, ha, ha! -- when a woman declares she will cry out,
and when I say I will give a man a ducat to save him from starving, I believe
we are both apt to be cursedly worse than our words -- come, one buss -- Oh
lud, oh lud! how much in love I am!


Bribon. You old propagator of poisons, is this the way you plead my cause? By
heaven, my dear, that old assassin has killed more than all the bravoes in
Spain.


Nelti. Is a Doctor a bravo?


Bribon. Yes, my dear, with an university education -- why, you old idol of
grave-diggers, have not you confounded all distinction between a preseription
and a death-warrant -- had not you a regular annuity from the undertakers --
have not you cheated me out of thousands, by making people die so fast, I had
not time to make their wills? -- here is a pretty fellow to make love to a sweet
girl -- Why, he is as blind as justice, as unfeeling as a whipping-post, as
diseased as a lazaretto, and as old as a chancery suit.


Dolores. Oh, you Janus-faced villain -- What, traduce my fame? -- was not I
always a favorite with the women? -- when their husbands were ill, did not the
dear creatures always send for me? -- had not I the honor of receiving a gold
medal from the inquisition for keeping a man alive nine days, during the most
excruciating torture? -- and did not I cure you of a crick in the neck, which
you got by standing in the pillory, you one-ear'd rascal?


Nelti. Yonder I see Herbert, and should he find you here --


Bribon. He, I suppose, would make his cane join issue with my head -- I
abscond.


Exit. Dolores. Oh, you cowardly villain! what, run away -- egad, I Will be off
too.


Exit. Nelti. [alone] Now I Am alone, I Will practice such behavior as, I am
told, the women in the other world use, that I may win the heart of my dear
Englishman. -- First then, I must avoid him -- certainly -- but that I Will do
some other time -- then I must abuse him -- true, but how! -- Oh, were it my
task to praise, how prodigal would this heart be in pouring forth its store,
which niggard now, will not afford one harsh idea. But I must try -- ah, yonder
he comes -- well, I Am quite indifferent whether I see him or not -- I Will not
walk in his way, I Am determined.


Retires up the stage. Enter Herbert. Herbert. It Is always my infernal luck to
be in a rage -- to think that these innocent people, who lived as happily
before the Spaniard's came, as the people in a village do before an attorney
comes among them -- should now have gridirons for beds -- and what they think
worse -- the Spaniards place on their bodies, which were as free as Englishmens
-- an indelible mark of slavery. -- Oh, I hope nobody will contradict me to day
-- I wish I could see Nelti -- her soothing fondness would --

Nelti passes him [singing.] Ah, Nelti, how do you do? [loud.] -- My love! my
love!!

[louder.]
Nelti. Is it you? I declare I did not observe you.


Herbert. No -- what might you be thinking of, my dear?


Nelti. That superior being, the elegant Alonzo.


Herbert. You were? and pray what might induce you?


Nelti. Heigho!

[sighs.]
Herbert. My sweet girl, I Will tell you what. I have been in a most infernal
rage, and I am not sure it is quite abated -- so, to prevent mistakes, kiss me,
-- and, if you please, we'll have no jokes at present; for, though I love joking
pretty well, I love kissing a devilish deal better.


Nelti. [apart] What a charming effect unkindness has -- I Will even give him
plenty on it -- really, Sir, you must possess a considerable share of vanity, in
supposing there is no object worthy my regard but you -- don't deceive yourself
-- you, -- whom Dolores says, kicked the women, and were kicked by the men.


Herbert. He said that, did he? When I have the honor of meeting him, I Will try
whether I have forgot my kicking. But -- zounds, did not you tell me you adored
me?


Nelti. But then I had scarcely seen the elegant Alonzo, the sage Dolores, --
besides, that was some time ago.


Herbert. Whew!!! Oh, there must be some mistake -- certainly one of the
wizards old Dolores talks of must have been busy here -- but come, Nelti, have
done with folly, and tell me you love me sincerely.


Nelti. I wish I could -- but --


Herbert. Damn your buts, yon imp of mischief, what do you mean? -- have you
encouraged me one day, to make my mortifications greater the next? have I left
the jilts of one world to find the same whirligig tricks in another -- don't
provoke me, or, by St. George and his dragon, I Will -- damnation, that a man
cannot, with honor, beat any woman but his wife.


Nelti. Oh dear, I have gone too far -- Harry, Harry!


Herbert. Keep out of my way, or by all the heroes in England I shall never
contain myself -- don't come near me, talk of me, or think of me -- Go to
Alonzo, -- go to the doctor, or go to the devil; and as long as you are as
miserable as I wish you, dam'me if I care where you go --


Exit. Nelti [crying.] I find I don't know how to use a man ill -- I was a fool
for trying it -- I cannot tell how English women manage -- but I am very sure I
was made to use men kindly.


Exit. SCENE IV. -- The Spanish Camp. [Night.]
Enter Moscoso and Spaniards, with booty. Moscoso. Our commander Roldan, must
not think of sharing in this treasure -- damn subordination -- are not we
Christians superior beings? and have not we a right to murder as many Indians
as we think fit?


1st Spaniard. Aye, to be sure; if they will not become Christians quietly, we
must broil them till they do.


Enter Spaniards, pulling in Cuto. 2d Spaniard. This is the sauciest Indian we
have caught yet -- all good words are thrown away upon him, so, bring in the
rack.


Moscoso. Come, be content to work and become a slave, and we'll show you how
to live.


Cuto. No, give me your tortures, and I Will show you how to die.


Enter Roldan. Roldan. The hour seems big with horror, and the vivid lightning,
blazons the murky mantle of the night with awful splendor -- Moscoso, why are
you absent from your guard? -- carry that gold to my tent.


Moscoso. I will not -- I tell you what, Viceroy, my maxim is this, -- always to
obey my commander to the last drop of my blood, while he lets me have my own
way -- why, you are not in Spain! by St. Lucifer, I will not part with the gold,
so, what signifies opposition, when you know you cannot help yourself?


Roldan. Oh, Columbus, how fully art thou now revenged -- [aside] -- execrable
wretch! -- but we are friends -- the common safety requires obedience, and only
to preserve you all from death, I venture to oppose your wills.


Moscoso. Well, well, I am satisfied -- I am of a sweet disposition -- I have
murdered many a man without bearing him the least ill will.


Roldan. Who is that Indian?


Moscoso. I don't know; but he is a damned saucy one, and minds no more dying,
than we do killing him.


Roldan. Has the torture extorted no secrets from him?


Moscoso. We have not began to pinch him yet.


A noise is heard, with thunder and lightning. Roldan. What means this horrid
noise? The earth trembles.


Moscoso. Oh, mercy!


Roldan. Cowards, proceed to extort confession from that reptile.


Moscoso. I will not touch a hair of his head -- do you think I am a savage? how
the ground shakes!


Noise again. Roldan. This war of elements is aweful, and may make these
half-formed villains squeamish.


Aside. Moscoso. Could you find in your heart to torture a poor
fellow creature? We'll release that Indian.

[To Roldan.]
Roldan. Well, be it so. -- [Cuto is released, and exit. But let not souls like
yours be daunted; it is not the first tempest you have witnessed -- cheerly, my
friends.


Exit. Moscoso. I think its quite gone off -- bring that rascally Indian back,
we'll -- Noise increases. Oh, mercy! why, this is an earthquake.


1st Spaniard. Earthquake -- aye, a terrible one.


Moscoso. The earth seems ready to open and swallow us up -- let us find the
priest and get absolution -- Oh, mercy! mercy!


Exeunt. SCENE V. -- A view of the Temple of the Sun. In the back ground a
mountain.
[Thunder and lightning.] Enter Alonzo. Alonzo. Wherever I turn, it is ruin all
and death. The wrath of heaven, roused at the crimes it views, pours forth its
mighty vengeance. -- Oh God of justice -- may thy awful power bury within that
earth their sins incumber, all who for thirst of gold forget humanity, dare to
make thy sacred name a sanction for their crimes. -- In this hour of horror,
how does my anxious heart beat for her fate, who never can be mine -- this
temple's hated walls encircle all that on earth could make me blessed -- but how
can I approach her, and to remain uncertain of her safety, is worse than death
[a harsh noise, and part of the mountain is dislodged.] -- Even now, perhaps,
the earth entombs its richest treasure. [A turret of the temple is thrown down]
-- The dreadful shock increases. -- Spare, spare my Cora!


A violent crash -- a part of the temple is thrown down -- through the chasm
Cora is seen clinging to a column -- Alonzo runs in, and bears her out -- she
faints. Alonzo. Revive, revive, my angel! let no fears assail that spotless
bosom -- Turn not from him, who, 'midst this shock of nature, knows no terror
but for thee.


Cora. Whither am I borne? What art thou? Tell me -- it is he, it is he -- the
constant object of my thoughts!


Alonzo. Has Cora ever bestowed a thought on on her Alonzo." -- Oh joy unhoped
for. -- In this dread hour to share thy fate was all my utmost wishes could
aspire to -- but now to hear thee own a mutual flame, is bliss which bears my
raptured mind almost beyond the check of reason.


Cora. How my heart beats at this unlooked-for meeting. -- How little could I
hope to be thus blessed a few short minutes since, when I expected death at
every rude commotion -- yet, even then, on thee my thoughts were fixed -- thee
I implored to aid me, and my last sigh would have breathed blessings on thee.


Alonzo. Oh my Cora, how shall I tell thee what I feel at this excess of
tenderness. A violent shock, and a Volcano emits its fury. Ha! heaven! my joy
had banished from my thoughts all fear; and must we, must we, at a time like
this, glut the devouring earth, or drown in floods of fire -- let us fly to seek
for safety.


Cora. Safety -- it is here [throwing herself into his arms]. -- within thy arms
I dread no danger.


Alonzo. My heaven of bliss, to die in thy embrace, death would have no power
to inflict a pang, but thy dear life is all I have to hope of happiness on
earth, and heaven direct me to preserve it.


Exeunt. END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- A rich country with an arbor.
Alonzo and Cora discovered. Alonzo. MY Cora, methinks I never lived till now
-- all that has passed of life, has been a dull journey to this point of
happiness.


Cora. Alonzo -- Oh, how that name vibrates through every nerve; and makes such
sweet commotion in each pulse, as though they swelled to emulate my lips, and
strove to utter it. --


Alonzo. How my fancy glows with all the happiness which awaits us -- we'll fly
together to the dear retreats, where nature reigns with uncontrolled dominion
-- there, free from every care which dwells with busy, artificial life, each
day shall greet us with unclouded joy, and each new hour shall bring increase
of bliss -- there shall the dear delights of husband and of father --


Cora. Oh, Alonzo!

[she is near fainting]
Alonzo. Why droops my love?


Cora. Father, said thou? -- that word has from my lethargy roused me to
madness -- What have I done? -- Love has with tyrant power subdued my soul, and
forced from my fond mind each sense of duty and each tie of nature -- where
shall I fly? -- where has the earth a place to hide a wretch like me?


Alonzo. Do not distract me, Cora -- explain these terrors -- be quick to tell
me, that my heart may share in every pang of thine.


Cora. Doomed to the cruell'st lot of human misery, hear all the horrors of my
fate -- when I, with heart which never had felt one sense of passion which it
glows with now, gave up my future days to holy solitude, that I by such a
sacrifice, might heap more honors on a father's head than even his virtues
could procure him -- I then (Oh, heaven) should love ever prove my conqueror,
consigned myself to death, even thee, Alonzo, that rash oath condemned thee too.


Alonzo. Cease to bewail without a cause -- a few short hours will bear us from
the dread of all the terrors which oppress thy fear-struck fancy -- then haste,
my love.


Cora. Whither, Alonzo? -- What, leave my hapless father and my sisters to
expiate my crime -- they are sureties for me -- my flight would doom their
innocence to bleed for my offense.


Alonzo. What do thou utter? -- Am I -- am I the author of such direful ruin
-- am I the murderer of thy guiltless race? -- did not affection check my
ireful arm -- did not my love command me to exist to share thy doom, whatever
fate decree it, no longer would I struggle with the horrors that I feel, but
part with life and misery together.


Cora. Is this the comfort thou can give to Cora? -- Ah, why talk I of
comfort -- comfort's the lot of innocence -- shall guilt like mine -- shall
blind distracted passion, hope to feel the dear felicity that virtue feels --
Leave me, Alonzo, and preserve thyself; then let me fly to meet the worst of
deaths, so I may spare my honored father's life, and save the offspring which
has not disgraced him.


Alonzo. Oh, cease, in pity cease -- let not thy frantic desperation drive thee
to certain ruin.


Cora. Alonzo, can thou counsel parricide -- would thou receive a
murderer to thy arms? -- Lead me to the temple. -- The tumult of the night may
have preserved my flight unknown -- then let me haste. --


Alonzo. Must I resign thee -- must we part -- [taking her hand] Oh, Cora, how
hard a fate is ours.


Cora. Alonzo, if parting thus with thee, or instant death were left me to
decide on, how should I spurn existence so dearly to be purchased. -- But, oh,
my father -- my sisters -- then let despairing love prey on my heart -- the
anguish of remorse shall never reach it.


Exeunt. SCENE II. -- The outside of the Temple.
Enter Alonzo and Cora, with great caution. Alonzo. I have beheld no creature,
all seems as still, as if the late convulsive shock of nature had spared no
beings but ourselves.


Cora. For what a fate Alonzo, are we spared: -- let me not think, or all my
resolution will forsake me -- Leave me before I well can realize our parting;
for if I give scope to the dire thought, madness or death must rob me of all
thought.


Alonzo. I will not, cannot say farewell; for yet, propitious heaven may bless
us with each other.


Cora. Oh! Alonzo, no more --


[Alonzo leads her to the temple -- they embrace -- she goes into the temple.
-- He exit on one side of the stage.] SCENE VI. The town.
Enter Herbert and Nelti with a Quipos. Herbert. Forgive thee, my angel -- name
not the word -- I like a woman to be a little whimsical in trifles, as long as
she has the stamina of affection at bottom -- I am for none of your still,
quiet, good sort of women, that make a man's life one continued dead calm -- no
-- no -- refreshing breezes for me -- when one is sure not to be driven by them
on the rocks of aversion, they render the voyage of life free from languor and
insipidity --


Nelti. Rest assured every future breath of mine shall speak only affection and
esteem -- but, my Herbert, to owe my life to thy protecting arm, is such joy,
as makes me, spite of its awful horrors, bless last night, which thus restored
thee to my aching heart.


Herbert. My charming girl! Egad, I thought it was all over with us.


Nelti. Oh, Herbert! what uneasy hours have I passed, and what melancholy
thoughts have been put into my head -- look here --

[shewing the Quipos.]
Herbert. Who gave you this -- what do you call it?


Nelti. One of our necromancers.


Herbert. Necromancers -- ha! ha! ha!


Nelti. Every body believes in them -- they say they can raise storms and
thunder -- can tell whose lives are joined together --


Herbert. Lives joined together -- a curious doctrine --


Nelti. But I Will never trust them again.


Herbert. No, my dear, trust only to me, and you will certainly not have to deal
with a conjuror.


Nelti. Here come those frights, Dolores and Bribon -- I should like to plague
'em dearly.


Herbert. Should you, you rogue. -- Egad, what you have told me about
necromancers, and the strange opinion of your country, that people's lives are
joined together, has given me an idea which will plague them confoundedly, for
their credulity in astrology is equal to their professional ignorance. -- This
way, and I Will explain.


Retire up the stage. Enter Dolores and Bribon, quarelling. Dolores. Why do you
keep following me, and chattering your cursed jargon --


Bribon. I Will walk where I like, and talk what I like --


"Dolores. Very true -- as nature here asserts her rights, of course monkies
have privilege to chatter without fear of correction, but to compare your
paltry profession with the noble art of healing?


Bribon. Why, to say the truth, Doctors do put people out of their misery.


Dolores. Come, that is better than lawyers, who put them into misery, and leave
them there.


Bribon. Call in a physician, he kills, or nature cures.


Dolores. True; but call in a lawyer, and egad, kill or cure, right or wrong,
is equally fatal -- [seeing Herbert.] -- Zounds! there is Herbert -- tush, be
quiet -- let us listen.


Herbert and Nelti come forward. Herbert. You amaze me! Can it be possible that
your necromancers are so very potent?


Nelti. True indeed, my love.


Herbert. This union of lives is very wonderful, and doubtless very true -- If
old Dolores knew that his life depended on another's fate, how anxious would he
be to know whose --


Dolores and Bribon run forward, and interrupt him. Dolores. I am very anxious.


Bribon. I Would give half my estate to know it.


Dolores. Lives linked together! -- oh! I Have heard of it.


Bribon. So have I -- it is a wonderful discovery!


Dolores. To be sure it is. -- Why, it accounts at once for those cursed
unprofitable apoplexies, What Is that cat-o-nine tails?


Nelti. These varied colored braids explain every thing as your books do.


Herbert. By these knotty hieroglyphics, the necromancers expound the decrees
of fate -- Observe.


Dolores. Keep off -- I would not touch it for the world -- the idea makes me
paralytic. I hope my partner for life is one of these fine healthy Indians --
long life to the worthy creatures -- I love them in my heart, and so I ought --
are not all mankind a kin to one another?


Herbert. So Roldan and his crew seem to think, for they treat the Indians
exactly like poor relations. --


Bribon. I Am exceedingly alarmed -- wonder who they could find to couple with a
lawyer's soul. -- Sweetest of women -- if you would condescend to enquire.


Dolores. Oh, if you would obtain from the necromancer one of these conjuring
things, to inform me who is interested in my unhappy lot, I Would pray for you --
I Would go to the devil for you -- I Would --


Nelti. And never again teaze me with love?


Bribon. Never -- never.


Dolores. I Will hate you as long as I live.


Nelti. Then meet me presently -- you see yonder cave.


Dolores. Yes.


Nelti. That Is the dwelling of the necromancer.


Dolores. I will not go there -- I would not see his devilship for the fame of
AEsculapius.


Bribon. Nor I, to be the Lycurgus of the new world.


Nelti. Well then, I Will take care you shall not see him -- so, follow me, and
I Will get you information will set your hearts at ease.


Exit. Bridon. I declare, what she has said, has made me so ill, I can scarce
stand -- Oh, lord, I am afraid my accomplice is going.


Dolores. Come, Bribon, forget and forgive -- [gives him a phial] and, as you
are ill, there is a pretty, tasteless medicine that I Am sure will do you good,
my dear friend -- Dam'me, but there is a dose for you, however.


Aside and exit. Bribon. [to Herbert.] And does that old fool think I Would ensure
death by taking his cursed potions -- ah, Sir, there is no way to deal with
doctors.


Herbert. I beg your pardon, give them fees while you are well, and nothing
when you are ill, and they are not the mischievous animals you think them.


Bribon. If the necromancer will but speak the truth --


Exit. Herbert. Ha! ha! already I Have performed a miracle -- for there go a
physician and a lawyer, wishing to sind among men health and sincerity -- This
partnership of liver is a whimsical kind of doctrine, and yet, absurd as it
seems, I feel it not altogether untrue, for were my Nelti to die, I believe,
Herbert, thy life would not be worth many days.


Exit. SCENE IV. -- The inside of an Indian house.
Enter Dolores. Dolores. How anxious I am to know whom my precious life is
joined to -- Ah! here comes Nelti -- Tell me, my dear girl --


Enter Bribon. Get out of my way --

Bribon. I tell you what, old Hellebore, I Will -- Ah, here she comes -- now for
it


Enter Nelti with a Quipos. Dolores. Sweetest messenger of fate, tell me the
name of him, the chords of whose heart are so twisted with mine, that one crack
will dissever both.


Nelti. Now attend -- I said to the necromancer, Most profound and learned
sage, on whose life depends that of old Doctor Dominic Dolores? says he, Has he
not a decrepid form -- withered face -- sunk eyes -- pug-nose -- paper lips --
leather cheeks -- straggling teeth -- says I, the description suits exactly --
He then gave me this, which informs me your life is joined to --


Dolores. Whom?


Bribon. I hope some rascal, who will be hanged in a week.


Nelti. Very likely, for it is joined to a lawyer's, and his name is -- Bribon
[with deliberation, and seeming to expound the Quipos] when one dies, the other
will inevitably expire.


Bribon. Oh, lud! Oh, lud!


Dolners. Oh, dear! Oh, dear!


Nelti. I see I Have made you quite happy -- so, good bye.


Exit laughing. Dolores. Oh, cruel fate! that my precious life must depend on
my mortal enemy -- I cannot bear it.


Bribon. To be in the same death-warrant with that old superannuated villain --
Oh, it is too much!


[They each sit down lamenting, look at each other some time -- first, with
fear and anxiety, -- then they smile and draw nearer to each other.] Dolores. I
think it was ridiculous enough in us to quarrel about a silly girl, Eh, Bribon?


Bribon. Very, Doctor; just as if there were not unavoidable miseries enough in
life, without making them.


Dolores. True -- how do you do?


Bribon. You don't look well.


Dolores. My dear friend, let me feel your pulse -- Oh, lord, it is very quick.


Bribon. Dear Doctor, sit down.


Dolores. I say, Bribon, you did not, (may be,) happen to swallow the contents
of the bottle I gave you

[with hesitation.]
Bribon. Oh, the scoundrel! -- [aside] -- First tell me how you are.


Dolores. Why, independent of my care for you, I am very well -- so, you did
not take the medicine? Well, its no great matter -- I Am not offended with you
-- perhaps it is well as it is.


Bribon. What an old villain! If I thought it would not endanger his life, I
would plague him heartily [aside.] I don't think, my dear Doctor, you look ill.


Dolores. Ill! I never was better in my life


Bribon. Egad I will -- I Will plague him [aside] and, thank heaven, the cordial
you gave me, and which I have just swallowed --


Dolores. [greatly alarmed.] Why, you did not take it, did you?


Bribon. Every drop -- I dare say it will do me infinite good.


Dolores. Oh, I dare say it will -- let me feel your pulse again -- perhaps it
may give you a bit of a twinge across the stomach -- but don't mind it.


Bribon. No -- you seem frightened.


Dolores. Not at all -- don't agitate yourself -- let me feel your pulse again
-- how lucky it is, my dear friend -- any thing the matter? -- How lucky, I
say, that the lives of two men should be linked together, who love each other
so sincerely -- Eh, what is the matter?


Bribon. Nothing -- I felt a little ugly pain, but its gone off -- I cannot help
laughing to think we should quarrel about a girl -- Ha, ha! ha, ha!


Dolores. Ha, ha! -- Oh, Lord! Ha, ha, ha! Are you sure the pain's gone off --
Ha, ha! -- Oh, Lord! oh, dear!


Bribon. Oh, there again -- they increase -- they increase -- Oh! oh!


Dolores. I am a miserable old man! What, again, Eh?


Bribon. Have you any more of the bottle?


Dolores. Oh, no -- I have a notion you have had enough of that.

Aside.
Bribon. I Am torn to death -- pray prescribe for me.


Dolores. Oh, Lord! not for the world -- Leave it to nature -- she is the best
physician -- Do you feel better? -- I think you look better.


Bribon. [sitting down on a chair.] I feel I am dying -- as a proof of my love
for you, Doctor, I bequeath you -- (Oh!) all my property whatever, and wish you
a long and happy life.


Dolores. But, zounds! you forget I sha'n't outlive you a minute [Bribon
appears convulsed] -- Oh! he is going -- help! help!


Enter Herbert (after having been peeping.) Herbert. What Is all this bawling?


Dolores. Can nothing save my dear friend? -- my life is wound up in his.


Herbert. Ah, poor Bribon! what, he is going -- now, is not it a shocking thing,
Doctor, that, because this scoundrel is dying, some amiable gentleman will not
live half an hour?


Dolores. O, very shocking! and between you and I, Herbert, I am that amiable,
miserable old gentleman.


Herbert. How will you part with Nelti?


Dolores. Pooh! stuff -- Do you think I mind parting with Nelti, or you, or all
the world? -- No; all my struggles are, how to part with my sweet self, how to
bid adieu to this dear, delicious little body -- Oh! he is going -- he is going.


Herbert. Can you do nothing for him?


Dolores. Bleeding, -- bleeding's all that is left -- If my hand's steady
enough, I Will open a vein.


Herbert. Be sure you cut deep enough.


Dolores. I will -- I will -- but I hav'n't my instruments about me.


Herbert. Here Is my sword.


Dolores. Give it me -- I Will bleed him --


Bribon. [jumping up.] No, you don't -- don't be frightened [ to Dolores] bless
your soul, it was all a fetch.


Dolores. Come to my arms [ to Herbert] what are you grinning at?


Bribon. Ay, what are you --


Dolores. I Will be revenged on him -- I Will trick him out of Nelti yet.


Bribon. What?


Dolores. I Will marry Nelti.


Bribon. What, are you mad? marry a young mettlesome wench that -- pooh --
nonsense -- why, arsenic would not send you to your grave with more expedition.


Herbert. True, Bribon -- I Will go to Nelti -- so, farewell, Doctor.


Going. Dolores. You sha'n't -- you sha'n't -- I demand satisfaction -- Oh, you
cowardly --


[Dolores attempts to follow him, which Bribon prevents -- Herbert returns, in
apparent anger; then Bribon snatches up Dolores in his arms, and runs off with
him. Exit Herbert, laughing. END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE. I. -- Outside of the Temple of the Sun.
Enter Alonzo. Alonzo. STILL must I wander near these awful walls, uncertain of
my fate. -- Though days and weeks pass on, yet naught I gain from lengthened
time, but added woe. -- Still, still I tremble for her life! And were my mind
relieved from that distracting fear, what comfort even then could reach me --
The treasure of my soul's immured in yon impenetrable shrine -- buried for ever
in that grave of youth and beauty. -- Where can I find a thought of ought but
wretchedness --


Stands in a posture of despair. Solasco comes from the Temple and observes
Alonzo. Solasco. Alonzo!


Alonzo. What wou'd'st thou?


Solasco. I come from Cora.


Alonzo. From Cora say thou? I dread --


Solasco. Dread the worst. -- The hapless victim of unholy love sends to Alonzo
her dying blessing.


Alonzo. Oh heaven!


Solasco. Her absence from the temple was discovered. -- She was seen with
thee. -- She begged me to conjure thee by her love, to save thyself from death
by instant flight -- obey her quickly --


Going. Alonzo. Stay, stay I charge thee.


Solasco. I have performed my office; urge not my stay, for I have feelings
hard to be suppressed, and which, if not suppressed, might wound thee.


Alonzo. What can now wound me more?


Solasco. We thought thee perfect, we adored thee with reverence, fit only for
the power whose worship thou have violated.


Alonzo. Forbear old man; cease thy untimely chidings.


Solasco. My woes may surely justify my chidings. -- I, who behold a race, in
which each virtue heaven could give, all honor human power could bestow, has
bloomed for ages, blasted with infamy, with infamy by thee.


Alonzo. "Forbear, forbear." --


Solasco. I, who am doomed to view the dearest object of my doting fondness,
whose goodness often has steeped these aged eyes in tears of joy, to see her
branded with guilt, devoted to destruction. -- Have not I full cause, thus
loudly to complain, and to upbraid thee, -- I, her hapless father? --


Alonzo. Father say thou? [falling on his knees] Thou, the father of my
Cora. -- Oh forgive me; yet how can thou forgive the murderer of thy child?
Strike, strike this weapon in my guilty breast -- Oh give me death; it will at
once to thee be vengeance, and to me be mercy.


Solasco. I seek not vengeance; vengeance is for weaker woes. -- But tell me,
how could thou heap such anguish on a heart that never injured thee?


Alonzo. Oh father, let me call thee so -- wring not my soul thus -- I love thy
daughter with a flame pure as her virtues; think then what I must feel, and
even thou may pity me.


Solasco. If thou do truly love my hapless child, even in the midst of all my
woes, my bosom owns one pang for thee -- The torments of my Cora soon must end.
-- Thine, alas! -- but let me not increase the sorrows I could wish to soothe
-- Farewell -- obey my dying child, and grant her all the joy she now can taste
-- to know that thou art safe.


Alonzo. Think thou I am base enough to live the monument of her
destruction, and my own disgrace. -- No, if my life cannot alone appease your
violated laws, let me at least partake my Cora's doom, and in a fond embrace
expiring, I Will bless the fate, that even in death unites us.


Solasco. Our law allows no partial mitigation -- leave her to meet the doom
thou can not save her from; and do thou bear life a little longer, to give
unhappy Cora, in her dying pangs, one ray of comfort.


Alonzo. Oh my father!


Solasco. Farewell, farewell my son; and if thou can be happy, heaven can
tell I wish thee so.


Exit. Alonzo. Now then the sum of horror is complete. --


Indian instrument sounds. Enter Orozimbo attended. Orozimbo. Alonzo, thy aid
is now our chief reliance -- Roldan prepares to attack us; and since the good
Columbus left our coast, through many tedious months of care and danger, thy
counsel and thy valor, still have been defense and safety to us. But, why
droops the brave Alonzo? -- If any tender scruple of shedding native blood now
check thy wonted ardour, freely avow the generous weakness, -- On thee depends
our fate -- yet would I welcome the loss of empire and of life, rather than
save them by Alonzo's misery.


Alonzo. No -- With honest zeal I draw my sword against the enemies of
innocence, though the same clime has bred us. -- He who regards his country's
real honor, owns for his countrymen, none but the virtuous. -- Yet, Orozimbo,
this heart is bursting with its anguish.


Orozimbo. Thy sorrows, though I am unconscious of the cause, have found their
way into my kindred breast. -- Tell me thy griefs, that I may soothe, perhaps
relieve them.


Alonzo. Thou, thou alone have power to do it.


Orozimbo. Then, by my kingdom, thou shall find relief.


Alonzo. [Looking round] Command that all remain at distance.


Orozimbo. Retire!


Troops retreat to the back of the stage. Alonzo. [Points to the Temple] Behold
those walls! does thy exalted mind, which owns the noblest energies of reason,
does it approve that structure, reared by mistaken zeal, to glorify the Deity,
by the dire sacrifice of all his dearest blessings?


Orozimbo. Say on.


Alonzo. Does she, who, in the prime of youth, when every fine affection of the
soul glows with its noblest fervor, when all the joys of life seem decked with
magic splendor, does she deserve the punishment of guilt, who, buried in yon'
ruthless prison, casts a fond thought on the delights she has lost, dares to
condemn the tyranny which binds her, and claims her right to liberty and love?


Orozimbo. I would aspire to reign beyond the limits of weak prejudice; but
reflect, Alonzo, how sacred are a country's customs.


Alonzo. There, there is the source of half the misery of human kind -- custom
is the vile confounder of virtue and of vice. -- It checks the operation of our
godlike reason, and makes the greatest glory of creation, a being void of will
-- Oh, Orozimbo, soar superior to the mists of error -- when thy great soul
displays unmanacled its glorious attributes -- thou wilt cease to think that God
delights in cruelty, whose blessed infusion in the human heart breathes mercy and
benevolence.


Orozimbo. Often have I admired thy wisdom and thy virtue; but, now methinks, in
thee I hear the voice of heaven, and it shall be obeyed. -- But I must praise
thy wondrous goodness, which can thus plead for other's misery.


Alonzo. There I am unworthy of thy praise -- mine is a selfish zeal -- I Have
sued for one whom I adore; nay for myself I Have sued. -- Oh, Orozimbo, in the
repeal of an inhuman law, thou have restored my forfeit life -- nay more -- the
life of her I love.


Orozimbo. What do I hear?


Enter Cuto. Cuto. Great chief, the foe is on their march -- your warriors are
assembled, anxious for your presence to lead them to victory.


Orozimbo. On my friends.


Alonzo. One moment stay. -- Lest the fell chance of war (which, heaven avert)
should leave my lovely Cora without the generous friend she has found in thee;
first let me bear your royal mandate to the temple, strictly commanding,
(whatever fate may in the battle wait us) pardon and liberty for her.


Orozimbo. I must in person give the important mandate -- Lead on the troops
[to Alonzo,] and I with speed will join you. [to the troops.] I leave you to
the conduct of the brave Alonzo.


Orozimbo goes toward the temple, Alonzo heads the troops -- Exeunt. SCENE
III. A Battle.
Excursions -- Alonzo is seen successfully to attack Roldan, who is relieved by
a party of Spaniards -- Alonzo retreats fighting -- Indians driven across the
stage.] Enter Orozimbo, attended, and Herbert. Orozimbo. Alas! our efforts are,
I fear, in vain.


Herbert. We'll fight, my noble chief, 'till we force victory to crown us --
our deeds shall shame her for inclining to our dastard enemies -- Alonzo bears
about him like an hungry lion.


Orozimbo. Heaven protect and aid him.


Exit. Herbert. What an unlucky dog am I -- I was within six yards of that
destroyer of innocents, Roldan, and yet the villain had the good luck to escape
me -- I have not had a bit of fighting so long, and this whet has given me such
an appetite -- ha, ha! here comes work for me -- now, my boy, Herbert, stick to
them.


Enter two Spaniards. 1st Spaniard. Yield directly, you English deserter.


Herbert. Yes, I am a deserter; but there alone where an Englishman will be
one, from villainy and oppression to honor and humanity -- Have at you,
bloodhounds!


[They fight, seize Herbert's sword-arm, and force him off the stage; during
which Nelti enters in the dress of a female warrior.] Nelti. Herbert in danger
[draws her bow] Aid me, ye powers! [hesitates] Alas! his manly breast presents
itself, and my erring hand may slay my love -- They overpower him -- now,
heaven direct me [she lets fly an arrow] -- he is safe --

[falls on her knees.]
Re-enter Herbert, driving a Spaniard across the stage. Herbert. Saved by a
woman's hand! -- she faints -- the spirit which animated her to preserve me,
now sinks beneath the weight of its own effort -- Good heaven! can it be? --
It Is Nelti.


Hugging her. Nelti. Oh, Herbert, joy has almost the same effect that terror
had, and I am scarce able to bear the excess of happiness your safety gives me.


Herbert. My dear angelic girl, I am in such transport, I scarcely know,
whether I am in earth or in heaven. [shouts.] But let me bestow you in a place
of safety, for you hear I am wanted.


Nelti. Then my business is not done -- I came here to watch your safety, and
I Will not leave you; so, obey me -- you are not the first hero who has had a
female commander.


Herbert. Then act, my love, like a commander, and get out of the reach of
danger as fast as you can -- See how the Indians fly -- Hah! we are surprised,
and our retreat cut off -- This way -- this way --


Exeunt, [a troop of Spaniards pursuing.] SCENE THE LAST. -- A garden of the
Temple of the Sun -- at the upper end an arch.
Enter Catalpo and priests. Catalpo. Though I received, with all apparent
reverence, the mandate of the King, to spare the impious priestess, I but
dissembled, to preserve our sacred rites inviolate -- had I opposed the hated
order, his power would have rescued from our grasp, the object of our vengeance.


Priest. But, say, Catalpo, does no doubt remain of this young priestess'
crime! For, by our chief's command to spare her life, he surely (...) her
innocent.


"Catalpo. There can exist no doubt -- On the (...) which followed that
dreadful night, when ^^e dire war of elements diffused such general horror,
Blessco, whose truth none yet ever doubted, beheld her conducted to the temple
by one of these hated strangers, with whom she parted with every mark of fond
endearment -- Long he concealed this, till at length his conscience sorely
wounded by the guilt he secreted, he on his oath declared to me this
profanation. Instant conduct the offender to her doom.


Enter priests, conducting Cora in procession, with archers and Solasco.
Solasco. [falling on his knees.] Oh, reverend priest, on my devoted head let
fall the vengeance of the offended law -- the crime was mine; I heeded not the
tears which trickled down my Cora's angel-face; I listened not to the reproving
sighs, which forced their way from her lamenting bosom; but, deaf to nature's
voice, compelled her to dedicate her youth to solitude and misery.


Catalpo. Hence, nor offer further insult to offended heaven, by pleading for a
wretch who braves its laws.


Solasco. Sure heaven will pardon a poor old man, who pleads for mercy to his
child -- the offense was mine, then take my forfeit life, but save, O save my
Cora.


Catalpo. Retire; for though no prayers shall urge me to neglect the duty which I
owe to heaven, I do not wish a father's eyes to view the shedding of his
daughter's blood.


Solasco. And does thy piety, thy filial love, then doom thee to destruction?
Cursed Solasco! how worthless art thou of thy child -- thy injustice devoted
her to misery, and in return she dooms herself to death, to save her cruel
father's life.


[Cora throws herself round his neck. Catalpo. Do thou still with impious
stubbornness, persist to keep concealed the partner of thy guilt? Say, who it
was seduced thy innocence?


Cora. Oh, for mercy, spare me so dire a thought -- Shall I be his accuser --
Oh bless, preserve him, Heaven.


Catalpo. This instant meet thy fate.


Enter Cuto. What rash foot dares, unbidden, to approach the sacred Temple?

Cuto. I wish my tidings did not justify intrusion -- Reverend Priest, freedom
is lost -- the barbarous foe has conquered.


Catalpo. [to Cora] Thou have armed the hand of Heaven against us -- its
indignation falls on ourheads in vengeance for thy crime -- Lead to her death.


Cora. [as they seize her] Hold -- does Alonzo live?


Cuto. He was too brave for life -- With ardour more than human he sought the
fiercest dangers of the fight, and hurled destruction round him; but at length
hemmed in by numbers more than mortal arm could force, he must have fallen, to
swell the horrors of this dreadful day.


Cora. Then welcome, death

[fixed in a posture of despair]
Catalpo. Ha! it must be so -- the secret is revealed.


Cora. Lead me to my fate -- Your cruelty will now be mercy -- My soul's
impatient to throw off this load of life, eager to join the spirit of my lord,
and soar in union to the realms of bliss.


Catalpo. Silence this frenzy -- or if thou must be loud in exclamation, curse
with your dying breath your impious violator.


Cora. Peace, monster, dare not to breathe a sound reproachful to my Alonzo's
memory, lest I forget the calm solemnity this awful moment claims, and pour on
thee my curses.


Catalpo. To death with her, and thou, old man, this instant quit the Temple,
or behold thy daughter bleed.


Solasco. Farewell, my child, I Will weep no more. -- This bursting heart will
soon force out a passage for my soul to take its slight and follow thee.


Embraces Cora and Exit. The ceremony takes place, the Archers range, and Cora
is led to the upper part of the stage -- The Archers draw their arrows, then
Alonzo rushes down, covers her with his shield, and exclaims Hold, monsters,
hold! They are astonished at the appearance of Alonzo and drop their bows --
Cora saints, Alonzo bears her forward. Alonzo. My life, my Cora -- Could their
barbarian hands dare point their vengeance at thy lovely form? And have I then
the bliss to clasp thee once again -- Though danger, and though death on every side
surround us, still to enfold thee thus is extacy.


Cora. My loved Alonzo -- They told me thou wen't dead, and I was eager to
escape from life, again to meet thee.


Alonso. By miracle has Heaven preserved me -- But say, what meant those
bloody rites?

[to Catalpo]
Catalpo. Think not thy frenzy shall impede our justice.


[Orozimbo without] Make fast the Temple gates -- The foe will soon be here
[comes forward] Alonzo -- do thou live, my friend?

Alonzo. The arm of heaven was surely stretched to save me -- I forced my way
through the opposing multitude, and seeing all was lost, I came once more to view
this precious treasure, and die defending it -- here I met death in all his
direst horror, clothed in the garb of priestly cruelty, not even thy command
-- their king's decree, could stop the torrent of their barbarous zeal.


Orozimbo. Thou traitor -- hence from my sight -- begone -- [Exit Catalpo] --
death waits us all -- let us meet it as we ought.


Distant shouts. Alonzo. Oh! what a moment of distraction -- must I behold thee
-- [ to Cora] sinking beneath the weight of butchering swords, or worse, leave
thee the victim of a brutal conqueror.


Cora. Can my Alonzo grudge me the bliss to die with him -- souls linked like
ours, the call of death should never summon singly. -- The horrors of
captivity, thou need'st not dread for me. -- This [ snatching Alonzo's
poignard] if the sabres of the foe shrink from shedding a woman's blood, this
shall prevent my lingering in life, when my dear lord has left it.


Noise at the gate of the Temple and shouts. Alonzo. They come -- now then for
death.


Orozimbo. [Embraces Alonzo and Cora] Farewell -- farewell. --


They all stand in postures of defense; a noise is heard like the bursting of a
gate, Herbert rushes in. Herbert. Huzza! victory! victory!


Alonzo. Herbert!


Herbert. [comes down] Victory! -- justice -- happiness. -- [ embraces Alonzo]
huzza!


Alonzo. Instant ease this anxious heart.


Herbert. Give me breath [shouts without] huzza! -- now for it -- in our late
overthrow, finding our retreat cut off, Nelti and I scampered toward the
shore, with a troop of the whiskered bloodhounds at our heels. -- There, to my
surprise I beheld a fleet -- Spanish colors -- they were landing -- I hailed
the first boat -- Who Is your admiral says I -- Columbus! -- Columbus!


Orozimbo and Alonzo. Columbus --


Herbert. I say, Columbus --


Alonzo. Then, Spain, thou have retrieved thy name.


Herbert. Who Is your admiral, says I -- Columbus. --


Alonzo. Say on.


Herbert. He landed, and when I had done crying, I informed him what had
happened. -- On the instant his troops flew to arms. -- But Roldan's crew saved
us the trouble of fighting -- they fell on their coward knees [shouts] but here
they come, and as they ought -- Roldan in chains, and Columbus triumphant.


Alonzo. Hear'st thou, my love -- let these delightful sounds dispel the
hideous horrors which oppressed thee, and elevate thy soul, like mine, to
heavenly bliss.


Cora. Bliss Alonzo! Can happiness be ours?


Alonzo. For ever.

[Embraces her.]
Orozimbo. Receive, Alonzo, receive thy Cora to thy arms, and may the giver of
all bliss shower down upon your faithful loves, his choicest blessings.


Enter in procession -- Trumpeters -- Spanish soldiers -- Others bearing
presents -- Models of guns -- Sailors with model of a ship -- Monks bearing the
bible and cross -- Spanish banners -- Dolores and Bribon -- Spanish soldiers --
Roldan, Moscoso, and Spanish soldiers, chained -- Solasco -- Nelti, with Indian
women scattering flowers -- Banner of the order of Alcantara -- Attendants
bearing insignia -- Columbus. Columbus. Oh, my dear country, for I must call
thee mine, do I again behold thee? This happy hour o'erpays my utmost toil. --
My friends, much have I to enquire.


Alonzo. Great Columbus, till my heart is made acquainted with thy fortunes, I
cannot tell thee of my happiness -- Has Spain redressed thy injuries -- has
Ferdinand --


Columbus. Alonzo, my wrongs were enviable -- captivity was triumph -- When
amidst the applauding shouts of thousands, I approached the royal presence, the
suffering monarch shrunk from the fight, and threw his mantle over his face,
crimsoned with shame; then raised me to his arms, still my pride sustained me;
but when I beheld the beauteous Isabella, try to force from their dire grasp my
galling chains, and on each wound drop a balmy tear, loyalty and love ruthed on
my soul, I embraced her royal feet, and gave her tears for thanks; then all the
pride of pageantry was decreed, but my soul languished for the time, when,
Orozimbo, I might thus again enfold thee, and restore to thee thy kingdom,
freed from the gripe of ruthless tyranny.


Orozimbo. Greatest of men, in firmest confidence of thy excelling virtues, I
repose my people's safety.


Columbus. [to Herbert] My noble Englishman, receive from my hand this lovely
maid, and such benefits as I can bestow, you may command.


Talks apart with Orozimbo, Alonzo, and Cora. Nelti. Now, my dear Herbert, you
will become a great man, and live at your ease.


Herbert. A great man, and be at ease! -- never was such a thing heard of. This
is the sort of being which passes for a great man, and I hope you don't call
this being at ease -- [Erects his head, and walks about struttingly.] -- Ha,
ha! No, my love, it requires a cursed deal more hard labor to impose on the
world, than suits the tranquil indolence of my disposition. And now, that all
may this day be happy, Doctor, a word with you.


Bribon [running before Dolores.] What do you want, Sir, with my friend?


Dolores. Aye, what do you want?


Herbert. Only this, my excellent friends, I have abused your credulity.


Dolores. How?


Herbert. Your lives are independent of each other, and now you may hate him
again as heartily as ever.


Dolores Did not the necromancer?


Nelti. I was the necromancer, old Dominic.


Dolores. You were -- Get out of my way, you --


Kicks at Bribon. Bribon. Ha, ha!


Snaps his fingers at Doroles. Columbus and the rest come forward. Columbus.
That was indeed a triumph. -- See those wretches closely guarded -- their
punishment must not now damp the joy I feel. Oh, were I satisfied no future
Roldans would alarm your peace, I should be blessed indeed. -- Had I earlier
known that Englands monarch would have graced my fortunes with his victorious
banner, then would your freedom been firmly sixed. -- They only, who themselves
are free, give liberty to others.

BRITONS again behold Columbus sue
To have his fortunes patronized by you;
To your support alone he trusts his cause,
And rests his fame, on Englishmens applause.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
WRITTEN BY MILES P. ANDREWS, ESQUIRE. SPOKEN BY MRS. POPE.
OLD stories done -- old times long since forgotten,
Like musty records, little read, and rotten,
Return we now, to periods sounder grown,
To happier days, and readings of our own;
Wherever we open the book, the style is clear,
The interest charming, the conclusions, dear;
Our means are flourishing, our joys not scant,
Possessed of every good, the heart can want,
Old tales of conquests, thrown on distant shelves,
We Have little left to conquer -- but ourselves: --
An arduous task -- and yet to do us right,
We lose no time in entering on the fight;
Miss, scarcely in her teens, attacks Mama,
Already having routed sage Papa;
"I Am not a chit -- I will turn up my locks, --
"I will wear powder, and I will not wear frocks; --
"I hate to dance with boys, now I Am so tall,
"I Am fit for any man, at any ball; --
"You want to keep me back, because its known,
"When girls grow up, their mothers, they grow down."
Pert Master Bobby too, released from school,
Hectors at home, and early learns to rule;
The splendid stud, relinquished by his sire,
In grand display, awaits the youthful Squire;
And while to Cambridge he should studious steer,
New market's course arrests his gay career;
There he, long odds, short betts, pass dice, all pat in,
Sticks to the Greeks, and disregards the Latin;
Flown up to town, our fierce-cock'd, captious Bobby,
Drives to the play, and quarrels in the lobby;
"Sir, you're a scoundrel! damme Sir, you lie" --
"Sir, here is my card, for damme I am -- I." --
Thus is the boy, intent to ape the man,
A puff of discord, and a flash in pan. --
In married life, resolving each to drive,
A sweet contention keeps the flame alive;
"I know my province -- so do I, my Lady --
"You Will prove my torment -- you have proved mine already.
"To guard my rights, my Lord, I must endeavor --
"You're always out -- and you are out for ever --
"Then both I trust are happy, sposo caro -- with ironical tenderness)
"You throw at hazard, and I punt at pharo;
"Each have their object -- so resentment smother --
"Hold out the olive branch, or wear another."
Suffice this raillery -- enough to prove,
Our noblest conquest, is our own self-love;
The Author, who to night has greatly dared,
To brave the issue of your high award;
Though old, the legend whence his scenes he drew,
Humbly presumes, the inserence may be new;
Should then the efforts of his untaught muse,
By just, though small desert, his flights excuse;
Let him enjoy, for all his anxious toils,
That bright reward -- the triumph of your smiles.


