MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS, ADAPTED TO THE Medicine Chests,

FITTED OUT BY WILLIAM RANDALL, CHEMIST, SOUTHAMPTON.

PRINTED IN THE YEAR MDCCXCV, BY T. BAKER.

INTRODUCTION.
HEALTH is so great a blessing, that every attempt directed toward its
preservation must tend to benefit Society, and deserves a share of public
approbation. To relieve the wants of the industrious poor is at all times an
act of charity; but when the vigor and strength so necessary for the pursuit of
their labors are suspended by the fatal powers of disease, and when perhaps the
bread of a numerous family depends upon the speedy recovery of a poor and
afflicted parent, -- at such a time to open the stores of medicine, to dispense
a remedy for the poor sufferer, is an act of exalted humanity. For this purpose
I have selected the following Observations for the assistance of the
benevolent, who feel a wish to relieve, though fearful of prescribing.

When medical assistance can be had, it should be preferred; but disorders
attack suddenly, and it frequently happens that neither advice or medicines can
be procured: in those seasons, the following hints are recommended, with a
sincere wish that they may contribute to the general good of mankind.

WILLIAM RANDALL, Chemist.
SOUTHAMPTON, JULY 18, 1795.
Description of Weights.
ss Half a Scruple, or 10 Grains; j One Scruple, or 20 ditto; ss Half a Dram,
or 30 ditto; ij Two Scruples, or 40 ditto; j One Dram, or 60 ditto; ij Two
Drams, or of an Ounce.
Every impression on the thin weights makes so many grains, the smallest half a
grain.

Small end of pewter measure, two drams, or 120 drops; large end, four drams,
or half an ounce.

N. B. The doses prescribed are for Adults, unless particularly mentioned.

A LIST OF MEDICINES, RECOMMENDED IN THE FOLLOWING COLLECTION.
No. 1. Calcined Magnesia; No. 2. Turkey Rhubarb; No. 3. Powder of Bark; No. 4.
Tincture of Bark; No. 5. Essence of Rhubarb; No. 6. Spirits of Sal Volatile;
No. 7. Nervous Drops; No. 8. Ether; No. 9. Opodeldoc; No. 10. Fryar's Balsam;
No. 11. Antimony Wine; No. 12. Tincture of Guaiacum; No. 13. Salt of Wormwood;
No. 14. Asthmatic Elixir; No. 15. Elixir of Vitriol; No. 16. Liquid Laudanum;
No. 17. Goulard's Extract; No. 18. Essence of Peppermint; No. 19. Nitre; No.
20. Jalap; No. 21. Dr. James's Powders; No. 22. Sweet Spirits of Nitre; No. 23.
Ipecacuanha Powder; No. 24. Cream Tartar; No. 25. Ginger; No. 26. Gum Arabic;
No. 27. Senna Leaves; No. 28. Blister Plaster; No. 29. Liniment to dress
Blisters; No. 30. Yellow Basilicon; No. 31. Turner's Cerate; No. 32. Ointment
of Elder.
AN INDEX, Containing a direction for the choice of the proper medicines, for
the several disorders they are adapted to, and marked according to the number
in the Collection.
Ague, 3, 4. Alteratives, 11. Anodynes, 16. Asthma, 8, 14, 23. Acidity, 1, 13.
Astringent, 2. Apoplexy, 6. Bruises, 9, 17. Bilious Disorders, 2, 5, 23. Burns,
17. Bowel Complaints 1, 2, 5. Blisters to draw, 28. Blisters to heal, 29.
Corroborants, 3, 4. Cholic, 5, 18, 25. Costiveness, 2, 5, 20. Cooling drink,
24. Convulsions, 1, 16. Chilblains, 17. Diarrhoea, 2, 5, 16, 26. Dysentery, 2.
Dropsy, 20. Decay, 4, 7, 15. Diuretic, 19, 22, 26. Eye water, 17. Fevers, 2, 3,
4, 13, 15, 21, 22. Flatulency, 1, 5, 18, 22, 25. Foul Stomach, 11, 13, 23
Fainting Fits, 6, 7. Gout, 8, 12. Giddiness, 1, 2, 5. Gravel, 22. Griping
Pains, 1, 2, 5. Headache, 1, 3, 6, 8. Hysteric Fits, 6, 7, 8. Heart-burn, 1.
Indigestion, 4, 5, 25. Inflammation, 17, 32. Loss of Appetite, 4, 13, 15, 18.
Looseness, 2, 5, 16, 26. Lethargy, 6. Languor, 7. Lowness of Spirits, 7, 18.
Nervous Tremors, 6, 7, 15, 18. Piles, 32. Pleurisy, 19. Perspiration to
promote, 11, 13, 21. Palsy, 8, 12. Purgatives, 2, 5, 20, 27. Rheumatism, 8, 9,
12, 21. Strangury, 19, 26. Spasms, 8, 16. Sickness, 1, 13, 15, 18. Strengthener
of the Stomach, 2, 4, 5, 15. Saline Julap, 13. Toothache, 8. Vomits, 11, 13,
23. Weaknesses, 3, 4, 7, 10. Wounds, cleansing and healing, 10, 30, 31.
Medical Observations, etc.
No. 1. CALCINED MAGNESIA.
AN absorbent; it corrects acidities in the stomach, relieves the heart-burn,
and all symptoms that have an acid for their source; as sickness, giddiness,
headache, vomiting, pain in the stomach, convulsions, and complaints incident
to children, arising from the same cause.

It is preferred to other absorbents, on account of its aperient quality. If
mixed with Rhubarb, it prevents the Rhubarb from leaving a costiveness behind.

DOSE.
Half a dram to one dram, taken in a little plain, or peppermint water. To
children it is given in doses of five grains to twenty grains, and occasionally
a few grains of Rhubarb added.

No. 2. POWDER OF TURKEY RHUBARB.
A mild cathartic; gently astringent, and strengthens the intestines; hence it
is preferred in diarrhoeas, dysenteries, and all disorders proceeding from a
debility and laxity of the fibers; it is frequently indeed given with a view
rather to this stomachic and corroborating virtue, than to its producing any
considerable evacuation. In acute fevers, where there is an apprehension of
producing a diarrhoea by purging medicines, Rhubarb is safe. In diarrhoeas and
dysenteries, Rhubarb is doubly useful; first, by carrying off the peccant
matter, secondly, by strengthening the bowels against a further afflux. A
peculiar excellence in Rhubarb is, its evacuating viscid bile, when lodged in
the bile ducts; in this case, next to Aloes, it is the best among purging
medicines; and it has this advantage over Aloes, viz. that it may be given
where inflammation is attendant, bleeding being premised. In gross habits,
Rhubarb is an useful assistant to secure the efficacy of the Bark, if joined
with it.

DOSE.
From ten grains to forty grains, as a cathartic; from one grain to five
grains, as a corroborant.

Under this head I shall insert two prescriptions, having found them by
experience particularly useful. The Pill, in bilious complaints, and to remove
costiveness -- the Powders, in relaxed habits, to strengthen the tone of the
stomach.

THE ANTIBILIOUS PILL.
Take Rhubarb in fine powder,
Succotrine Aloes in fine powder,
Castile Soap, of each twenty grains;
Emetic Tartar, one grain;
Syrup of Buckthorn, sufficient quantity to mix into a mass, which divide into
twelve pills.
Take two or three at night, going to rest, as occasion may require: be careful
first to mix the Emetic Tartar with the Rhubarb, by degrees; then add the
Aloes, which rub well together; and afterward the Soap.

STRENGTHENING POWDERS.
Take Chamomile Flowers in powder, 24 grains;
Turkey Rhubarb in powder,
Ginger in powder, of each 8 grains:
Mix them well together, and divide into four equal parts. Take one powder
twice a day in a little water* an hour or two before cating.

No. 3. POWDER OF BARK.
The febrisuge virtue, for which alone this medicine was at first recommended,
is now established by long experience. An emetic, which in most cases is
necessary, being taken toward the approach of a paroxysm, (that its operation
may be over before the fit comes on), the Bark is begun at the end of the
paroxysm, or even in the time of the hot fit, and repeated, in doses of half a
dram or more, every third or sourth hour during the intermission: after the
fever has been removed, the medicine should be continued for a time, but more
sparingly, to prevent a return. During the use of the Bark, the pulse, which
between the fits is generally weak and slow, becomes stronger and quicker, the
appetite mends, the patient grows more cheerful, and perspiration increases;
these may be looked upon as sure presages of its success. At first it
frequently occasions a looseness, and this is also salutary; but if the purging
continues too long, it is usually checked, by the addition of a little Opium;
if too great costiveness ensues, recourse is had to gentle, opening medicines,
or clysters. In gross, impure habits, Rhubarb is an useful assistant to secure
the efficacy of the Bark, if joined with it: in agues of the inflammatory kind,
or accompanied with great heat, a little Nitre is joined or interposed.
Peruvian Bark has likewise been found eminently serviceable in gangrenes and
mortifications, proceeding either from an internal or external cause. It has
been applied likewise, and not without success, to the cure of periodic
head-achs, hysteric and hypochondriac fits, and other disorders which have
regular intermissions. By its astringency and aromatic quality it strengthens
the whole nervous system, and proves useful in weaknesses of the stomach, and
sundry chronical disorders, proceeding from too great a laxity of the fibers.
In all cases, moderate exercise generally promotes the effect of the Bark.

DOSE.
From half a dram to two drams.

No. 4. HUXHAM's TINCTURE OF BARK.
As a corroborant and stomachic, it is given in doses of three or four tea
spoons full, and particularly to convalescents, after long fevers; and
sometimes in larger doses, for the cure of agues, in persons averse to taking
the Peruvian Bark in substance.

No. 5. ESSENCE OF RHUBARB.
This medicine is intended for a stomachic and strengthener, as well as for a
purgative. It is of infinite service in weakness of the stomach, indigestion,
laxity of the intestines, diarrhoeas, bilious disorders, cholic, and other
similar complaints.

DOSE.
One table spoonful, as a corroborant; two table spoons full to four, as a
purgative.

No. 6. VOLATILE AROMATIC SPIRIT,
Is a most excellent cephalic, and cordial, either to smell to, or take
inwardly. It is very useful in lethargic and apoplectic cases, headachs,
fainting fits, and nervous complaints.

DOSE.
From ten drops to sixty, in a glass of water, or any other vehicle.

No. 7. NERVOUS DROPS.
This medicine has the reputation of being a cordial of very extraordinary
virtues, and has long been held in great esteem, in all kinds of languors,
fainting fits, weakness of the nerves, lowness of spirits, and decays of age.

DOSE.
From ten to eighty or an hundred drops, on a lump of sugar, or in a glass of
water.

No. 8. ETHER.
It has been given internally, with benefit, in hooping coughs, hysterical
cases, in asthma, and indeed in almost every spasmodic affection.

DOSE.
From ten or twelve drops to a tea spoonful, in a glass of water; which should
be swallowed quick, as it exhales with great celerity.

Externally it has often been found to give ease in violent head-achs, by being
applied to the part; and to relieve the toothache, by being laid on the
afflicted jaw. When it is applied externally, procure a bit of linen rag, of
such a dimension as to be conveniently covered by the palm of the hand; moisten
the rag with the Ether, and instantly apply it to the part affected, pressing
it very close, so as to prevent the escape of its fumes, for two or three
minutes, in which time the rag will be found dry, and may be taken away. It is
sometimes applied externally in paralytic cases, gout, rheumatism, flatulent
and other disorders of the stomach and bowels.

No. 9. OPODELDOC.
It is chiefly employed for external purposes, against rheumatic pains,
sprains, bruises, and such like complaints.

Rub the part affected well with it, before a fire, and afterward apply a
flannel over it.

No. 10. FRYAR's BALSAM.
This balsam stands highly recommended, externally, for cleansing and healing
wounds; and likewise internally, for warming and strengthening the stomach and
intestines, and is used often with advantage for colds and coughs.

DOSE.
From twenty to forty or sixty drops, on a lump of sugar, or in any common
drink.

No. 11. ANTIMONY WINE.
The Antimonial Wine possesses the whole virtues of that mineral, and may be so
dosed and managed as to perform all that can be effected by any antimonial
preparation, with this advantage, that as the active part of the Antimony is
here already dissolved, and rendered miscible with the animal fluids, its
operation is more certain. Given from ten to fifty or sixty drops, it is an
attenuant, alterative, diaphoretic, and diuretic; a few more prove gently
cathartic; and two or three drams or tea spoons full, for the most part
violently emetic. In general, the Ipecacuanha Powder or Wine is preferred as an
emetic, being less violent in its operation.

No. 12. TINCTURE OF GUAIACUM,
Is given with great advantage in rheumatic and arthritic complaints, in which
cases, and against palsies from lead, Dr. DAWSON extols this tincture as almost
a specific. It is given in doses, from a tea to a desert spoonful, morning and
evening, in a cup of milk or water gruel.

No. 13. SALT OF WORMWOOD.
The principal medical effect of Salt of Wormwood is to attenuate the blood and
humors. It destroys acidities in the primae viae, converting them into a mild
aperient salt, and thus removes a cause of many chronical diseases. It resolves
viscid and glutinous humors, by which, and its gentle stimulus, obstructions
are removed, and wherever it passes secretions are promoted.

DOSE.
From five grains to half a dram, and always plentifully diluted with barley
water.

It is also used for making Saline Julaps, often beneficial in severs: but as
the symptoms of these disorders vary much, medical assistance should be had, as
soon as it can be procured. When the symptoms are mild, abstinence in the
patient, free dilution, bathing the seet in warm water, and keeping in bed to
encourage perspiration, with the use of the Saline Julap, will often give
nature an opportunity of exerting her force to overcome the disease, and by
that means stop the progress; but if there is a good deal of oppression and
heat, the pulse full and hard, some sew ounces of blood must be taken away, and
of course medical attendance rendered absolutely necessary.

A SALINE JULAP.
Take two drams of Salt of Wormwood;
three ounces fresh lemon juice, strained;
when the effervescence is over, add four ounces of simple Cinnamon Water, and
simple syrup or sugar about half an ounce; mix together, and take three or four
table spoons full every three or four hours.

This removes sickness at the stomach, relieves vomiting, promotes
perspiration, and may be of service in fevers, especially of the inflammatory
kind.

A VOMITING JULAP.
Dissolve four grains of Emetic Tartar in eight ounces of water, and add to it
half an ounce of syrup.

In the beginning of severs, where there is no topical inflammation, this Julap
may be given in the dose of one table spoonful every quarter or half of an
hour, till it operates. Antimonial vomits serve not only to evacuate the
contents of the stomach, but likewise to promote the different excretions:
hence they are found in fevers to have nearly the same effects as Dr. JAMES'S
Powders.

No. 14. ASTHMATIC ELIXIR,
For cold coughs, and asthmatic complaints. It allays the tickling, which
provokes frequent coughing; and at the same time opens the breast, and gives
greater liberty of breathing.

DOSE.
From twenty to sixty drops, two or three times in a day, in a glass of water,
or a cup of linseed or liquorice tea.

No. 15. ELIXIR OF VITRIOL.
This is a valuable medicine in weakness and relaxation of the stomach, in
continual retchings to vomit, and decays of constitution; particularly in those
proceeding from irregularities, which are accompanied with slow febrile
symptoms, or which follow the suppression of intermittents. It is very usefully
conjoined with a decoction of the Bark.

DOSE.
From ten to thirty or forty drops, taken in a cup of cold spearmint tea, twice
or three times in a day, an hour before eating.

No. 16. LIQUID LAUDANUM,
Should be used very cautiously: it procures sleep, removes obstructions
arising from spasms, abates preternatural irritability, and removes
convulsions, which arise therefrom; it likewise checks violent purgings.

DOSE.
Five drops to thirty may be given in a cup of water gruel, or bailey water.

No. 17. GOULARD's EXTRACT OF SATURN.
From this preparation is prepared the Vegeto-Mineral Water, so much extolled
by Mr. GOULARD, and prepared in the following manner.

VEGETO-MINERAL WATER.
Drop into one quart of distilled water, or Rose Water, one hundred drops of
the Extract of Saturn; then add four tea spoons full of brandy, and shake them
well together.

This is his famous specific for external inflammations, burns, scalds,
chilblains, etc.: when used for an eye-water, it should be more diluted with
Rose Water, about half the Vegeto-Mineral Water, and half Rose Water.

No. 18. ESSENCE OF PEPPERMINT, FOR MAKING PEPPERMINT WATER.
The virtues, and the method of using it, are given in directions round the
bottle. Useful to remove cholic, flatulency, sickness, loss of appetite, etc.

No. 19. NITRE POWDER.
This medicine generally promotes urine, and often gives relief in strangury,
and heat of urine, it is useful in pleurisies, etc. where the inflammation is
owing to a glutinous state of the blood; and often in fevers promotes a
diaphoresis or sweat.

DOSE.
From two or three grains to twenty, taken in a cup of barley water, or water
gruel.

No. 20. POWDER OF JALAP.
A very excellent and safe purging medicine to purify and cleanse the blood,
and in dropsical complaints.

DOSE.
From ten to thirty grains: by adding a few grains of Ginger powder to each
dose, it generally prevents its griping.

No. 21. Dr. JAMES's POWDER, FOR FEVERS, etc.
A particular account of its virtues, and the doses, in the directions round
the bottle.

No. 22. SWEET SPIRITS OF NITRE.
It quenches thirst, promotes the natural secretions, expels flatulencies,
strengthens the stomach, and is recommended as a preservative against the stone
or gravel. Mixed with a small quantity of Spirits of Sal Volatile, it proves a
mild, yet efficacious diaphoretic, and often remarkably diuretic; especially in
some febrile cases, where such a salutary evacuation is wanted.

DOSE.
It may be given from twenty drops to a tea spoonful in any common drink.

No. 23. IPECACUANHA POWDER.
Four or five grains taken in a cup of Chamomile tea, the first thing in the
morning, have been found of great use in bilious disorders, and in habitual
asthmatic indisposition.

DOSE.
From ten to thirty grains given for a vomit.

No. 24. CREAM OF TARTAR.
Boiling water poured on a small quantity, with the peel of a lemon, and a
little sugar, makes an agreeable drink, and adapted to a feverish habit.

No. 25. GINGER POWDER.
This root is warm and aromatic, and a very useful spice in cold flatulent
cholics, and in laxity and debility of the intestines.

DOSE.
From five grains to twenty in a glass of water.

No. 26. GUM ARABIC.
A mild emollient, and hence is serviceable in hectic cases, tickling coughs,
strangury, fluxes, and other disorders proceeding from a thin acrimonious state
of the humors. It may be suffered to dissolve in the mouth gradually, as
occasion may require.

No. 27. SENNA LEAVES.
A mild useful cathartic, made into tea by pouring boiling water on the leaves,
and sweetened with Manna, makes an excellent physic for children; a small bit
of ginger, or a few caraway seeds, put in the infusion, will prevent its
griping.

No. 28. BLISTER PLASTER,
For drawing a blister; to be spread upon leather, according to the size you
wish to have the blister.

No. 29. LINIMENT TO DRESS A BLISTER.
To be spread on rag, and applied to the part when the Blistering Plaster is
taken off. It is also an excellent liniment for cleansing wounds.

No. 30. YELLOW BASILICON.
It is used to spread upon lint, to dress fresh wounds or old ulcers, till they
are perfectly cleansed, then dress with Turner's Cerate.

No. 31. TURNER's CERATE.
This is good in all cases where a healing ointment is required.

No. 32. OINTMENT OF ELDER.
A cooling ointment used in painful inflammations.

Mix two parts of this ointment with one part of Sulphur, and add a few drops
of Liquid Laudanum; this is a good liniment for the outward piles.

depiction of a flower


