A General History OF TRADE, AND Especially Considered as it Respects THE
British Commerce: In which an Attempt is made to State, and Moderate the
present Disputes, about Settling a Commerce between Great Britain and France.

This for the Month of SEPTEMBER

LONDON: Printed for J. Baker, at the Black-Boy in Paternoster Row, 1713.
Price 6 d.

A General History OF TRADE, etc.
I Promised to Concern these Discourses as little as possible with our
Politics, and with the Party Disputes which are among us, and I Will keep my
Word in it as well as it can be done; though I acknowledge it will be very
Difficult to do so, when to the Nations great Disquiet, we are just now almost
going by the Bars about whether we shall Trade to France or No.

It is Impossible to speak of Trade in General and leave out entirely the Trade
to France, and I fear it will be impossible, at least to me, to say what may be
necessary to be said in order to set the Trade to France in a Clear View,
without being Charged with Leaning to one Side or other.

Among the several Opinions about the Trade between England and France, I find
none who have any true knowledge of the Trade in General, but what agree in
this, That there ought to be some Trade opened with France seeing we have made
Peace with them; Likewise all agree, That Trade, such as it shall be, ought to
be Settled and Regulated by Articles and Agreements between the Nations, which
is the thing we call a Treaty of Commerce.

Being thus agreed in the main Point, That some Trade must and ought to be
Settled, and that a Treaty of Commerce ought to be made; the Question remaining
in Debate seems to be only, What degree of Trade with France shall be entered
into, and under what Regulations, Restrictions, Duties and Prohibitions.

Some are of the Opinion, That the Trade to France has always been a Losing
Trade, and that it will be so still, and that as it lies at this time under
Excessive Duties it will be prevented from being so, and that therefore all
those high Duties which are now laid upon the French Importations ought to
remain.

Others say, that as we have laid high Duties on the greatest part of French
Importations here, by which the Quantities Imported will now be reduced: so the
French have Loaded our Woollen Manufactures, and other Exportations thither
with such heavy Duties, or else with Total Prohibitions that effectually
foreclose the Trade so, That as you will Import little from France, you will
Export less to France, and the Balance will run against you worse in matters
of Profit than it did before; these Men therefore are for taking off our high
Duties on every Side, and leaving the Trade, as they say all Trade ought to be,
Free and Unburthened, except with such moderate Impositions as may be no
Grievance either to the Consumer or the Importer.

But a third sort say, there is a Necessary Medium to be observed in this Case,
and that seeing an Opportunity is put into our Hands upon the Occasion of the
Peace, to Settle this Trade to our Advantage, we ought to get all possible
Burdens taken off from our Manufactures and other Exports from hence in
France, and yet at the same time keep on such part of our high Duties upon
French Goods Imported here, as may be sufficient to restrain their Importation
in too great quantities, so as to be prejudicial to our Trade in General, and
cause an Overbalance in the Trade to our Prejudice.

The People who have had the Guiding this Great Affair say they have done this,
and the opposite Party say they have not; one Side Challenges the other, THESE
say, Trade is betrayed, the Portugal Trade ruined, the General Interest
neglected, the Manufactures of England injured, and the French have too much
Advantage; that they will Overbalance us still, and the Trade be yet to our
loss: On the other hand THOSE say, they have Secured the English Commerce
effectually to our Advantage, by Opening a Door to our Trade into France,
having Obliged the Fr. King to take off all his Prohibitions and Additional
Duties from our Importations there, back to the Tariff of 1664. and yet have
shut the Door against the quantity of their Importations here, by leaving on
great part of the Additional Duties which the Trade was Loaded with during the
War, so that the Prices of their Goods, particularly their Wines, Brandy,
Silks, Linen, etc. which are the Principal part of their Importations here,
will be so great, by reason of those Duties remaining on by this Treaty, that
the Consumption will of Course be greatly short of what it was usually in those
times when, as the other allege, their Importation so much Increased and
Overballanc'd us. Again THESE say they have not left Duty enough on to lessen
the said Importations; and that the Duties ought to have been still Higher.
THOSE say the Duties left are sufficient; and that the Advantage is such, and
so great, as that they could not obtain any farther, nor indeed reasonably
insist upon laying higher Duties on French Goods, unless they had at the same
time Consented that some part of the high Duties in France should remain upon
our Goods; which for the Encouragement of our Woollen Manufacture they thought
it not proper to yield to, and they declare that they do think the high Duties
which are to remain on French Goods here, are sufficient to preserve the Trade
to the Advantage of Great Britain.

If I can make any Judgment of the present Dispute, it is, as near as can be,
wholly Comprised in this Abridgment: I shall not enter here into any part of
the Question, it being the business of a History of Trade, rather to Relate
than Decide the Dispute. I am already Charged with being much farther Concerned
in the Difference than I really am; and I shall therefore avoid Disputing any
thing here, but Impartially state the Question, and lay down the state of the
several Duties and Prohibitions on both Sides, as they are now, while the
Treaty is in Suspense and not made Effectual; and as they are to be, if the
said Treaty is to take place; I shall afterward show what the Difference is
that will be between the former Duties before the War, and those, that if the
Treaty take place, are to be the Settled Customs of the Trade; and then shall
leave every Man, by the assistance of those helps, to make a Judgment for
himself.

In order to this, and for the information of those who, though not Imediately
Verst in the Entries Outward and Inwards, or not so much Master of the Book of
Rates as to know every thing without a farther Enquiry, are yet willing to know
in Concise Terms, on what Foot the Trade now stands, and on what Foot it is to
stand, that they may not, as most Men do, Dispute without Book, and talk
rashly, giving their Judgment without any Knowledge of the matter.

I say, for the Information of such as these, I have subjoyned proper Tables of
the several Duties on French Goods, as they now are, and as they are to be if
the Treaty of Comerce takes place.

A Comparison of the Duties on French Goods to be Imported into Great Britain,
as they formerly stood in the time of King Charles II. as they now stand before
the New Treaty of Commerce takes place, and as they are to be, if the said
Treaty of Commerce is made Effectual by the Parliament.
Species and Duties Granted. Gross Duty Net Duty. FRENCH WINES Filled up 12
Car. II. Old Subsidy, 4 10 0 8 10 0 Additional Duty, 4 -- -- 2 15 6 18 Car. II.
Coinage Duty, 0 10 -- 0 10 0 8 -- -- 7 15 0 1 Jac. II. Impost, 8 0 0 6 19 10 16
-- -- 14 15 04 Since the Revolution, the following Duties are laid on over and
above the other. 4 and 5 W. and M. addit. Impost, 8 0 0 7 10 0 7 and 8 Will.
III. French Dusy, 25 0 0 25 0 0 1 Annae, Farther Subsidy, 4 10 0 4 10 0 2 and 3
Annae, Subsidy, 1 10 0 1 10 0 3 and 4 Annae, Subsidy, 3 -- 0 3 -- 0 48 0 0 56 6
4

Note, French Wines Unfill'd up, paid but 7 l. 15 s. 0 per Ton Duty at the end
of Car. II.

King James having obtained the Impost Duty, the Wines paid at the end of his
Reign, 14 l. 14 s. 10 d. per Ton.

But a Ton of French Wine Filled up, Pays now before the New Treaty takes
place, 56 l. 5 s. 4 d.

12 l. per Cent. aba^ed for Leakage.

They pay Unfill'd up, 53 l. 9 s. 6 d. 3 q.

Species and Duties Granted Gross Duty Net Duty PORTUGAL WINES UNFILL'D up. Old
Subsidy 4 10 0 4 10 0 By the Same Laws as Rhenish Addit. Duty 3 -- -- 2 15 6
Cointge 0 10 1 0 10 0 Impost. 12 -- -- 10 9 9 Forth. Subsidy 4 10 0 4 10 0
Subsidy 1 10 0 1 10 0 Subsidy 3 -- -- 3 -- -- 29 -- -- 27 5 3

Note, The Duty of Spanish Wine in the Reign of the late King James the 2 d,
was (filled up) 18 l. 5 s. 3.

The Duty of Portugal Wines by the Account above is Now filled up, 27 l. 3 s.
4. Unfill'd, the Net Duty is 24 l. 1 s. 0.

The French being by the Treaty of Commerce to pay no higher Duty for their
Goods, than are paid for Goods of the like quallity Imported from other
Countries, the Duty their Wines are to pay if the Treaty of Commerce takes
place, is to be the same as the Portugal Wines.

The next Article is the Brandy, of which there are but two Denominations at
the Custom-house, ( viz.) French Brandy, and Spanish Brandy: The French Brandy
paid by the Old Subsidy, but 1 l. 8 s. per Ton Custom during the Reign of King
Charles II. and King James II. and had no Impost or Additional Duty laid on,
till the Excise and French Duty 7 and 8 William III.

The Duties on Brandy then from France and Spain, as they stand at this time
are as follows.

Species and Duties Granted Gross Duty Net Duty. FRENCH BRANDY Single. 12 Car.
2. Old Subsidy 1 10 0 1 8 6 18 Car. 2. Coinage. 1 -- -- 1 -- -- 7 and 8 W. 3.
French Duty 30 -- -- 30 -- -- 1 Annae, further Subsidy 1 10 0 1 8 6 2 and 3
Annae, Subsidy 0 10 0 0 9 6 3 and 4 Annae, Subsidy 1 -- -- 0 19 0 Customs 35 10
0 35 5 6 Excise 46 4 0 46 4 0 81 14 0 81 9 6

When Granted. Names of the Duties. Gross Duty. Net Duty after Disco. SPANISH
BRANDY. 12 Car. 2. Old Subsidy. 1 10 0 1 8 6 18 Car. 2. Coinage. 1 0 0 1 0 0 1
Annoe farth. Subsidy. 1 10 0 1 8 6 2 and 3 Ann. 3. Subsidy. 0 10 0 0 9 6 3 and
4 Ann.. Subsidy. 1 0 1 0 19 0 Customs. 5 10 0 3 5 6 Excise. 46 4 0 46 4 9 51 14
0 51 9 6

So that the French Brandy pays Now, the Treaty not being made Effectual, 81 l.
9 s. 6 d. Single Brandy.

The Spanish Brandy pays Now, the Treaty not being made Effectual, 51 l. 9 s. 6
d.

So that except any particular Article of the Bill of Commerce Explains it
otherwise, the French Brandy, after the Treaty takes place, is to pay 51 l. 9
s. 6 d.

Here follows the Calculation of the present Duties on Foreign Salt, which
being not very different from one another, makes no great matter of Dispute
now; the greatest part of the quantity of Foreign Salt used in Britain is used
in Curing of Fish; and is Drawn back upon the Exportation of the said Fish.

When Granted. Names of the Duties. Gross Duty. Neat Duty aft. Discoun FRENCH
SALT. 12 Car. 2. Old Subsidy 1 0 0 0 19 0 4 and 5 W. and M Add. Impost 5 0 0 4
13 9 2 and 8 W. 3. French Duty 5 0 0 5 0 0 1 Annae Farth. Subsidy 1 0 0 0 19 0
2 and 3 Annae Subsidy 0 6 8 0 6 4 2 and 3 Annae Subsidy 0 13 4 0 12 8 Customs.
13 0 0 12 10 9 Excise on 20 Wey of French Salt, which is 266 13 4 266 13 4 279
13 4 279 4 1 PORTUGAL SALT. 12 Car. 2. Old Subsidy 1 6 8 1 5 4 4 and 5. W. and
M. Add. Subsidy 5 0 0 4 13 9 1 Annae forth. Subsidy 1 6 8 1 5 4 2 and 3 Annae
Subydy 1 6 8 1 5 4 3 and 4 Annae Subsidy Customs 9 0 0 8 9 9 Excise. 266 13 4
266 13 4 Total 275 13 4 275 3 1

Note, The Calculation is made upon 20 Wey of Salt; but the Net Duty of one Wey
is as follows:

French Salt 13 19 2

Portugal Salt 13 15 2

So that if the Treaty take place, the French Salt must pay but 13 l. 15 s. 2
d. per Wey.

When Granted. Names of the Duties. Gross Duty. Net Duty aft. Discount FRENCH
WROUGHT SILKS, except Allamodes. per 20 l. per 20 l. 12 Car. 2 Old Subsidy 2 9
8 1 18 0 Add. Duty, 1 0 0 0 0 0 4 and 9 W and M. Add. Impost 10 0 0 4 0 4 7 and
8 W. 5. French Duty 10 0 0 2 0 0 1 Annae further Subsidy 2 0 0 2 0 0 2 and 3
Annae Subsidy 0 13 0 0 13 4 3 and 4 Annae Subsidy 1 6 8 1 6 8 27 0 0 25 11 7
DUTCH WROUGHT SILKs. 12 Car. 2. Old Subsidy 2 0 0 8 18 0 Add. Duty 1 1 0 0 17 1
2 W. and M. Old Impost. 4 9 0 3 15 0 4 and 5 W. and M. Add. Impost 2 2 0 1 17 6
1 Annae forth. Subsidy 2 0 0 0 12 8 2 and 3 Annae Subsidy 0 13 5 0 12 8 3 and 4
Annae Subsidy 1 6 1 1 5 4 13 0 0 12 3 7

Note, One Pound of French wrought Silk pays Net,

1 l. 5 s. 11 d.

Dutch, 0 12 s. 2 d.

After the Treaty takes place, French Wrought Silks must pay as the Dutch per
Pound, 1 l. 12 s. 11 d.

When Granted Names of the Duty. Gross Duty Net Duty aft. Discount FRENCH
ALAMODES, per 20 l. per 20 l. By the same Laws as for other Wrought Silks Old
Subsidy 4 0 0 3 16 0 Addit. Duty 2 0 0 1 14 3 Add. Impost 20 0 0 18 15 0 French
Duty 20 0 0 20 0 0 forth. Subsidy 4 0 0 3 16 0 Subsidy 1 6 8 1 5 4 Subsidy 1 6
8 2 10 8 54 0 0 51 17 3 DUTCH ALAMODES. Old Subsidy 4 0 0 3 16 0 Addit. Duty 2
0 0 1 14 3 Old Impost 8 0 0 7 10 0 Addit. Impost 12 0 0 11 5 0 forth. Subsidy 4
0 0 3 16 0 Subsidy 1 6 8 1 5 4 Subsidy 2 13 4 2 10 8 34 0 0 31 17 3

Note, One Pound of French Alamodes pays Net,

2 l. 11 s. 10 d..

Dutch 1 l. 11 s. 10 d..

After the Treaty takes place, French Alamodes must pay as the Dutch, 1 l. 11
s. 10 d..

When Granted. Names of the Duties. Gross Duty Net Duty aft. Discount FRENCH
VITRY CANVAS or Sail-Cloth. per 120 Else per 120 Else 12 Car. 3. Old Subsidy 0
5 0 0 4 9 Addit. Duty 0 2 6 0 2 1 4 and 5 W. and M. Add. Impost 1 5 0 1 3 5 7
and 8 W. 3. French Duty 1 5 0 1 5 0 1 Annae Forth. Subsidy 0 1 8 0 1 7 2 and 3
Annae Subsidy 0 5 0 0 4 9 3 4 2 3 1 7 DUTCH HOLLAND DUCK or Sail-Cloth. per 120
Else per 120 Else 12 Car. 2. Old Subsidy 0 5 0 0 4 9 Addit. Duty 0 2 0 0 2 1 1
Annae forth. Subsidy 0 5 0 0 4 9 2 and 3 Annae Subsidy 0 1 8 0 1 7 4 14 2 0 13
2

Note, French Vitry Canvas pays now for every 120 Else, Net Duty, 3 l. 1 s. 7
d..

Hollands Duck pays 13 s. 2 d.

The French, if the Treaty takes place, must pay as the Hollands Duck.

When Granted. Names of the Duty. Gross Duty Net Duty aft. Discount FRENCH
DOWLAS. per 106 Else per 106 Elli 12 Car. 2. Old Subsidy 0 5 0 0 4 9 Addit.
Duty 0 2 6 0 2 1 4 and 5 W. and M. Add. Import 1 5 0 1 3 5 7 and 8 W. 3. French
Duty 1 5 0 1 5 0 1 Annae Fnrth. Subsidy 0 5 0 0 4 9 2 and 3 Annae Subsidy 0 1 8
0 1 7 3 4 2 3 1 7 NARROW GERMANY LINEN. per 106 Else per 106 Else 12 Car. 2.
Old Subsidy 0 3 6 8/20 0 3 4 Addit. Impost. 0 1 9 4/02 0 1 6 2 W. and M. Old
Impost. 6 2 7 16/20 0 2 5 1 Annae Farth. subsidy 0 3 6 8/20 0 3 4 ^ 2 and 3
Annae Subsidy 0 1 2 3/20 0 1 1 0 12 6 19/20 0 11 10

Note, French Dowlas pays now per Piece of 106 Else, 3 l. 1 s. 7 d.

Norrow Germany Linen, 11 s. 10 d.

The French, if the Treaty takes place, must pay as the Narrow Germany Linen,
only ( viz.) 11 s. 10 d. per Piece of 106 Else.



By these Tables of the Duties it may be observed, That as the Duties on the
Goods from other Countries now are, so the Duties of the Goods of like quality
from France are to be by the Treaty of Commerce, if the said Treaty takes
place; and this is in pursuance of that part of the 9th Article of the Treaty,
which provides, that no greater or heavier Duties be laid upon the French
Goods, than is paid by other Nations for Goods of the like quality.

It is not the business of these Tracts, which according to their Title, are to
be a History of Trade, not a Dispute about Trade; I say, it is not my business
so much to Argue, as it is to Relate; and therefore I shall avoid the Dispute:
But although I do avoid Debating, it seems necessary to state the Case upon which
the Parties on either side are Debating so warmly, as it relates to the
Levelling the Duties on the Importation of French Goods, to the same Rate which
Goods of the like quality pay from other Countries.

This Debate relates chiefly to the Trade of Wine from Portugal, the Sum of
which Case is as follows:

Before the war with France began, the Gross of our Importations of Wines was
from France; neither was there any proportion between the quantities, as may
appear by this brief Account,

Wines from France, in the Port of Land. Wines from Portugal, in the Port of
Land. Anno 1686 12760 Ton 289 Ton 1687 15518 Ton 327 Ton 1688 14218 Ton 540 Ton

So that the Proportion, is about One to Fifty Eight; so much did the
Importations of Wine from France, exceed the Importation of Wines from
Portugal; as for the Wines from other Countries, they were not of the like
kind, and therefore do not come into the Question.

All this while, although we had not so great an Export from England to Portugal
as we have had since, yet we had a very great and extended Trade; the reason of
the Increase shall be examined by it self.

The Wine Trade was not only little in quantity, but the Duties paid for it
were greater than the Duties on French Wine for some years, by a very
considerable Sum, as will appear by the Custom-house.

The Trade to Portugal stood then, according to the following Scheme, in which
the Increase of it is also to be observed, the Reasons of that Increase are
very easy to be accounted for, and I must own, could not with any Truth, be
suggested to arise from the Increase of our Demand for their Wines, as shall be
inquired afterward.

A Scheme of the Importation of Wine, from Portugal into England, for Twenty
Seven Years, viz. from the Year 1686, to the Year 1712, inclusive.
Anno Ton 1686 289 1687 327 1688 540 1689 579 1690 1115 1691 2963 1692 6052
1693 8200 1694 9454 1695 3983 1696 6668 1697 4774 School 4051 1699 8703 1700 8287
1701 7408 1702 5926 1703 9267 1704 9927 1705 8450 1706 4637 1707 9006 1708 9633
1709 7666 1710 6712 1711 7555 1712 6703

While the Trade of France stood at a stay, by reason of a stated Prohibition
during the War, the Portuguese found the Demand for their Wines increased to a
degree, that at first their whole Kingdom could not supply; but as the prospect
of the War appeared likely to continue, and the Price the English gave for the
Wines was very encouraging, the Vineyards increased every year to a very great
degree, so that the Portugal Produce of Wine rose from Five or Six Hundred Ton
a year, to Seven or Eight Thousand, as may appear by the Import of the years
since the War.

Yet it must be allowed on one side too in abatement of quantity, that there
have been ways and means made use of to Import great quantities of French Wines
under the denomination of Portuguese Wines; also the Galitia Wines were, during
the prohibition of Trade with Spain, entered under the same Head; so that we are
not to suppose all the Wines which are called Portuguese Wines in the
Custom-house Books, to come really from Portugal.

It happened about the year 1703, that the King of Portugal being earnestly
solicited to break his Neutrality, and Join with the Confederates in the late
War with France and Spain, the Confederates being willing almost upon any Terms
to engage his Portuguese Majesty; the Portuguese, though willing to Engage, yet
took that occasion to make such Conditions, as were particularly for the
advantage of his Subjects in Matters of Trade, and more especially with
relation to their Wines: They knew well enough that the demand for their Wines
in England, was occasioned only by the Prohibition aforesaid, which by the
accident of the War, was laid upon French Wines; They knew also, that when
ever the War came to a Conclusion, and that by a Peace with France, the Trade
for the French Wines should be opened again in England, the Demand for the
P^^tugal Wine would fall off again, and the French Wine would be the Common
Draft of the Nation.

To prevent this, they enter into a Treaty with Mr. Methuen the English
Ambassador, for the keeping the Duties upon French Wine up to a certain height
in England after a Peace, and that the Portugal Wine should always pay a
certain proportion less than the French.

Mr. Methuen ventured to agree to this Treaty, and the Condition was, That the
Portuguese should take off all Prohibitions from the English Woollen Clothes,
and any other English Woollen Manufactures which were then Prohibited in
Portugal; the Tenor of the said Treaty, as it is Translated in the Secretary's
Offices here, is as follows: viz. "That Her Sacred Royal Majesty of
Great Britain may, in her own and the Name of her Successors, be obliged at all
times so to admit into Britain the Wines made of the Portuguese Vineyards, that
at no time whatever, whether there be Peace or War between the Kingdoms of
Britain and France, any thing more may be demanded for the said Wines, under
the name of Duty or Customs, or any other Title whatever, directly or
indirectly, than what the Third Part of the Duty or Customs being deducted,
shall be demanded from an equal Quantity or Measure of French Wine, whither
those Wines shall be Imported into Great Britain, by Hogsheads, or Barrels, or
any other Vessels; but if this Abatement of Customs, as is presumed to be made,
shall be after any manner prejudiced or Abolished, it shall be Just and Lawful
for his Sacred Royal Majesty of Portugal, AGAIN to forbid the Woollen Clothes,
and the rest of the British Woollen Manufactures."

This is the Occasion of the warm Disputes among our Parties at this time, of
which, without determining one way or other, or any way embarking these Tracts
in that Dispute, I shall give an Impartial Abstract, relating, as fairly as I
can, the state of the Question, and what either Party allege for themselves in
their Defense of, or Objections against this Treaty.

The opposers of the Treaty of Commerce with France say, This is a fair, a
just, and a reasonable Treaty; That it is Signed, Ratified, and Exchanged with
the King of Portugal, and ought to be kept Sacred. Whereas on the other hand,
they say, the Treaty of Commerce with France, without any regard to the
Stipulations of this Treaty, and taking no manner of notice of it, has
effectually destroyed and overthrown it, by agreeing to Reduce the Duties on
French Wines to an Equallity with the Wines of like quality from other
Countries, which by consequence includes the Portugal Wines which are of like
quality with the French, and that therefore the Portugal Treaty is thereby
actually broken, the Faith and Honor of the British Nation depreciated and
forfeited, and that the Consequence of it will be, that the Portuguese will
prohibit our Woollen Manufactures, nay, perhaps our whole Trade: Nay, some go
farther, and allege, that the Peace with Pottugal is actually broken by this
Infraction, and that our Trade to Portugal, which is so Considerable and so
Advantageous, will be entirely lost.

I believe the Gentlemen cannot say, but that I have done justice to their
Allegations, and given their Objections their full length, and I hope they will
allow me to do the like on the other Side.

The Advocates for the Treaty of Commerce allege, First, That the Trade to
Portugal stands upon other Foundarions, that the Treaty of Commerce with France
will have very little Influence upon it one way or other; That it is true, the
Importation of Wine from Portugal will lessen, though it is apparent that
Importation will be greater many ways than ever it was before: But that our
Exportation of Woollen Manufactures to Portugal was ever very great, even
before the War, when the Portugal Wines made no figure at all in the Trade, and
were not in all above 2 or 300 Ton in a Year; That the Increase of the Portugal
Trade in these late years, did not take its rise from our Demand of their
Wines, and consequently will not feel any sensible decay or decrease, though we
were never to take any more Wine of them.

They farther allege, That the Portugal Wines will not be so greatly run down
by the French Wine as was formerly, the humor of our Nation running all upon
strong Wines for these several years; so that it is observeable, that no French
Wines are now in esteem but the Rich high-priz'd Clarets, Puntacks, and such
like; That the price of their strongest French Wines is always high, and their
quantity but small; That the Portugal Wine will be bought at least Ten or
Twelve Pound per Ton Cheaper than those Rich French Wines, and will be always
wanted to make the Smaller French Wines Stronger, and the Pale French Wine
Deeper, as was always the Case when the Trade was open, on occasion of a bad
Vintage in France; That although the Treaty with France does not preserve the
Inequality of the Duty between the Portugal and the French Wine, so as to give
the Advantage to the first, as was designed by the Portuguese; yet that the
Inequality of the Price will always be an equivalent to it, the Portugal Wines
being never bought at above 12 l. per Ton, one with another; whereas these say,
that the other Party have Printed, that the French Wine shall always Cost 25 l.
per Ton in France after the Peace.

Thus far they argue as to the Trade: As to the justice of Breaking the Treaty
with Portugal, that is a Case by it self; the People who are for the French
Commerce, answer that part, by falling upon the Treaty it self, and upon the
People that made it; They say, it is a Treaty Inconsistent with the
Constitution of Britain in its nature, and therefore is not to be kept, but is
void of Course, and by the Consequence of things; That he who made it, had he
not been gone to answer it in another World, ought to have answered for it at
the Bar of the House of Lords, and ought to have been Impeached of High Treason.

They allege that this Treaty Limits the Parliament of Great Britain by the
Prerogative of the Crown, stipulating, That the Parliament shall not lay on any
higher Duties than such and such mentioned in that Article, Pretending that a
private Transaction of a Minister or Ambassador shall be binding, and and
Consequently Superior to the Parliament; and that it is in the Power of an
Ambassador to tell the Parliament what Taxes they shall not Lay, and by the
same Rule may tell them what they shall Lay, which is a Power destructive to
the Being and Nature of Parliaments, and cannot be done; That the Parliament
has alone the Power to Determine what Duties shall, or shall not, be Laid upon
the Exportations and Importations of Merchandises, as well as upon any other
things, and no Invasion, that shall be made, or attempted to be made, upon that
Power, can be binding to the People of England; that on this Account, it cannot
be any Injustice, or any Illegal Act for the Parliament to confirm any other
Treaty, which shall Contravene or Rescind that Treaty.

Again, they add, That the Treaty carries, in the Body of it, an express
Supposition, That the Parliament may see Reason to Contravene, Break, or
Rescind it, and therefore makes Provision for such an Incident in a Clause,
which determins what it shall be Lawful for the King of Portugal to do, if the
said Treaty should be broken.

This they allege also, amounts to an Express Stipulation, That the Breach of
this Traty, shall not be esteemed a Breach of the Peace between Great Britain
and Portugal; for that when it says particularly, what it shall be Lawful for
the King of Portugal to do upon such a Breach, it strongly implies, That it
shall not be Lawful for him to take any other measures in that Case, or carry
his Resentment any farther than to the Prohibition of such and such Goods, as
were Prohibited before.

Another Debate arises also from this supposed Infraction of the Portugal
Treaty, by the new Treaty of Commerce with France, ( viz.) That one Party
alleges, That it is expressly said, in case the English do not perform their
part, it shall be Lawful for the King of Portugal to Prohibit the Woollen
Cloth, caeterisque Lanificia, and the rest of the British Woollen Manufactures.

The Advocates for the Treaty Object, That though it is true, that the Words of
the Treaty do express it, in that manner, caeterisque Lanificia; yet that the
Word Rursus Again, explains the meaning of it, That it shall be Lawful for the
King of Portugal, Again to Prohibit, can signify nothing of the British Woollen
Manufactures, but what was Prohibited before.

Then it remains to examine, what British Woollen Manufactures were Prohibited
before. One side affirms, that no more were formerly Prohibited, but the
English Woollen Cloths, and challenges the other to name, what other Woollen
Manufactures were Prohibited, which indeed they have not done, contenting
themselves to affirm, that there were other Woollen Manufactures Prohibited in
Portugal, without saying what they were.

The Truth of this Case, is indeed, something different, from what either Party
pretend to. There were indeed several Pragmaticks, as the Portuguese call them,
Published, as I take it, in the Years 1688, 1692, and 1697, and in other Years,
which were made to prevent the People of Portugal running into the new
Fashions, and change of Habits, according to the Customs of France and Britain;
in order to which, I say those Pragmaticks were made to forbid, not the
Importing only, but wearing any of the medly or mixed Cloths of Great Britain,
or any other Country.

Whether the Words, caeterisque Lanificia, were in those Pragmaticks or no,
does not appear; neither have any side Quoted, Copied, or Translated, either,
or any of those Pragmaticks, to show whether it was or not. On the other hand,
it is certain, that the Portuguese did never refuse to admit the Importation of
any of our Woollen Manufactures into Portugal, upon any pretense whatsoever,
except the said Medly Cloths; and this, I think, without being partial to
either side, I may take for an Assurance, that they were not Prohibited.

Upon the whole, the Nature of the Trade between England and Portugal is such,
that although this Breach of the Clause should happen, yet it does not seem, that
the Circumstances of the Portuguese, would at all admit them to prohibit
Commerce with England, or to Prohibit the Woollen Manufactures in general, as
some People suggest, and that on several Accounts; I shall name but three, as I
said before, because I shall not make these Tracts, which are designed to be
Historical chiefly, meddle at all with the Controversy on either side. 1.
Because though we may not take off so great a quantity of their Wines as we did
before, yet that we should still take off a very great quantity, and which it
would be very well worth their while to dispose of. 2. That England is the only
Market they have in the World, not for their Wines only, but for the other
capital Produce of their Country, such as Oil and Fruit, which if they should
Prohibit a Trade with us, they could by no means find a vent for in any other
Nation; the Dutch taking off but very few of them, and the French none at all.
3. That they are not able to carry on their Trade to Brasils, which is now
increased to such a prodigious Degree, as from Eighteen or Twenty Two Sail of
Ships to a Hundred and Forty Sail, neither without our Manufactures, or without
the stocks of our Merchants, who sell the greatest part of their Goods, to the
Portuguese Merchants, to be paid at the return of the Fleet from the Brasils.


Upon the whole, I think however warm they are on both Sides in that part of
the Quarrel, they Err in this, That they represent the English Trade to be much
more at the Mercy of the Portuguese than it really is; or than consists with
the Honor and Reputation of the British Trade to have it be.

If our Manufactures were not necessary to the Portuguese, they could not be
induced to take off such a very great quantity yearly as they do, by the
Argument of our taking off their Wines; for the utmost value of the Wines being
not above Seventy or Eighty Thousand Pounds per Annum, and the Export of our
Woollen Manufactures amounting, as some say, to Eight Hundred Thousand, and as
others, to a Million of Pounds Sterling a year to Portugal, they would never
make the taking off of Eight Hundred Thousand Pounds in Wines, which is our
part, be the Cause of their taking off a Million from us, which is their part,
and pay the Nine Hundred and Twenty Thousand Pound in Specie to procure it;
this, I say, does not seem rational.

But the true state of the Portugal Trade stands thus: Upon the late Treaty
with Portugal, their King perceiving that by our prohibiting the Importation of
French Wine, our demand for his Country Wines was mightily increased, and that
the Profit to his Subjects was exceeding Great, by Planting more Vineyards, and
Increasing the Vallue of the Lands, and by Consequence of his Revenue; and
likewise foreseeing, that whenever the French Trade should be opened again,
that Demand for Portugal Wines would fall again, Contrived to bring the English
into a Treaty of Inequallity of Custom, in favor of his Wines against the
French, one third part, as by the Article quoted already appears; the
Equivalent for this Favor was the taking off the Prohibition upon our Woollen
Mixed Cloth, as aforesaid; but it does by no means stand with the Circumstances
of the King of Portugal's Subjects, or the Nature of their Commerce, that if
this Article cannot be preserved, he should stop a Commerce, by which all the
rest of the Produce of his Country should be carried off and consumed; this
would ruin the whole Commerce of his Kingdom, and be ten fold more Disadvantage
to him one way, than it would be Advantage to him another.

Again, the quantity of Portugal Wines Imported hither, take them one year with
another, have been about Seven Thousand Ton a year; this cannot be entirely
sunk, and I believe, if all was to happen that can happen by the Treaty, there
cannot be less Imported into England, than one half of that quantity, the
People being, as was noted above, inclined so much to strong Wines, that the
French Trade cannot fully Answer their demand, and all the small thin Wines of
Anjou, and the Banks of Loir, will now, probably, be little worth; so that the
Portugal Wines cannot be supposed to sink above one half; or suppose it may be
about Four Thousand Ton, which is Forty Thousand Pound per Annum, at Ten Pound
per Ton, which Ten Pound per Ton in time of Peace, and open Trade, will be the
top of the Market. Now it does not seem rational to me, I say, to Me, for I
speak my private Opinion, That the King of Portugal should quarrel with
England, Prohibit our Trade, put a stop to a current Demand of a Million per
Annum Import, which pays him a very great Revenue, put a stop to the
Consumption of all the other Growth of his Country which we take off, such as
Oil, Shumack, Figs, Salt, Fruit, etc. and the Salt excepted, no Nation but the
English can take those Goods off, and all this for want of our taking Forty
Thousand Pounds worth of Wine.

Add to this, That by this Method he would hinder the English taking off the
remaining quantity of Wines also, which would be very considerable, and by the
Calculation above, amounts to Forty Thousand Pounds more; and so through us,
quite out of the Channel of Port Wine, which, as it is now, the Draft will not
easily be altered, and the Advantage of the Consumption is so much the Interest
of the Portuguese to preserve, that no one can suppose they would be so weak,
as to throw it away, without sufficient Ground.

For these Reasons, I cannot see room to think, That suppose the worst, nay,
supposing all the Consequences which People fear as to the French Trade
interfering with the Portuguese; yet it not does seem reasonable to think, that
the Portuguese will Prohibit any part of the English Trade, much less the whole
British Trade, of which I shall speak hereafter.

In this posture, the State of the Dispute seems to stand, and as every one is
left to determine in favor of those who they approve most; so I shall not
engage against one Side or other, but Modestly and Calmly give my Thoughts upon
the whole.

It were to be wished, that Party and Passion were left out of these Debates.
Our Trade is an Essential Article, upon which the Felicity of the Nation very
much depends, and which must many ways receive an injury by these Obstructions;
nay, the very Debating these things, awakens the Enemies of our Commerce, and
lets them into some parts of the Dispute, which they should rather be Ignorant
of than know: For Example, 1. While one Paper makes a very great stir, and lays
a vast Weight upon the French falling upon our Manufactures, publishes how
easy it is for them to get away all our Trade, how they Work Cheaper, and
perform their Work as well as the English, and that they are able, not only to
supply themselves, but all the rest of the World, nay, that they could come in
upon us, and Under-sell us at our own Doors; while they do thus, I say, they do
an irreparable Injury to their own Country. 2. On the other hand, While the
opposite Paper publishes, the great Advantages of our Nation in the Treaty,
over the French, and how it is in our hands, to make the French Trade be to the
Gain of the English Nation so many Thousand Pounds a Year. This is alarming the
French, and telling them we have made Fools of them in the Treaty, by which we
set them to Work to retrieve it by all possible Methods; and perhaps, at last,
to find some shift to get out of the Noose, and turn the Advantage against us;
things they are very dexterous in doing.


To descend a little farther in these Particulars, and Discourse them
Impartially, without Reflecting either on one Party or another, It is my
Judgment, that the Extremes on both these Sides, are very destructive at this
time to the General Interest of Trade in Britain.

There is no question to be made, but the preserving the Woollen Manufacture in
Britain, to be, as it ever was since we were first Masters of it, OUR OWN,
Exclusive of all other Nations in the World, is our great Concern, our true
Interest, and is what the Wealth and Prosperity of this Nation really depends
upon.

There is no question to be made, but every Nation round us, who are capable to
make any Progress in such an Attempt, will endeavor as much as in them lies,
to imitate us, in a thing so prodigiously Gainful: The Dutch do it, the
Flemmings have always done it, and the French have been now above Seventy Year,
making gradual steps in it.

What indefatigable, restless Industry, what Severe Application, what all
possible Encouragement from their Government, what their own necessity, which
is the Spring of Invention, is able to do: This is not wanting, nor has been
wanting in France, during the long Reign of the most Politic and Potent Prince
France ever knew, and they do all a Nation in their Circumstances can do, to
come to a Perfection in the Woollen Manufactures.

But they Labor under insuperable Difficulties, and struggle with invincible
Obstacles, which smother the Flame of their Industry, ( viz.) the want of
Wool; this is the main Case, and as Nature has it not, the Soil, the Clime
does not produce it, they, by consequence, cannot have it, but by the supply
from us; nor are they wanting in their Application to get the Wool from us, in
Ireland, in Scotland, and in England, they Rummage, every Creek, and every
Corner, run all Risques, Buy, Bribe, Fetch and Carry, do all that desperate
Diligence can do to get our Wool, and too much Success they have in their
endeavor.

But when all is done that can be done, the Wool they get cannot be a quantity
suitable to the Demand, or sufficient to carry on a National Manufacture; and
also it must be dearer by much than our Manufacturers have it at Home; the
Expense, the Hazard, the Hands employed, the Freights, the Losses, all go into
the Price of that which arives, and is made use of; then the Carriage when
Landed, for Conveying it to Remote Places; this all adds to the Price, and is a
damp upon the Manufactures, which it is not possible to avoid, and which must
necessarily give the great Advantage to our People, who have the Wool at their
own Doors.

I cannot doubt, but our Government, may in time find out some better Method,
than is yet put in practice, for the restraining this Export of Wool, and for
the putting a check upon the French Manufactures the most sensible way; for
nothing is more evedent, than that if the English Wool were effectually kept
at Home, the French could never go on with their Manufacturing to any
considerable degree, and the Government cannot but think it for the public
Service to have all possible assistance to that purpose.

It is not the Business of this Tract, to enquire, what are the especial
Grievances of this Article, and why a Nation, to whose Interest it is so
essential to prevent the Exportation of their Wool, should at the same time
have the Laws for that purpose so ill Executed, as that in almost every part of
the Kingdom the Wool is carried Abroad, not with allowance, we cannot say
that, but with an open Violence, and even sometimes by Force and Blood, several
Murders, Fightings, and Breakings of the Peace, having happened upon this
Occasion in many Parts: As if the French were come to that pass, either of
Insolence in Dealing with us, or necessity of their own Side, that they were
resolved to fetch away our Wool by Force; to this end they make little
Descents and Invasions upon us, such I may rightly call them, for the carrying
off our Wool, Armed either with Money to draw, or Weapons to drive those, who,
in Discharge of their Duty and Office, appear to oppose them. This is so well
known, that I need not enter into Particulars, or enquire, where, when, and in
what manner it is done.

It is sufficient to say by way of Complaint, That the Exportation of Wool
from Her Majesty's Dominions is now so great, that unless some speedy method be
taken to redress this Grievance, and to put a stop to it, we may soon shake
hands with our Foreign Trade, and see our Neighbors rivalling our Manufactures
in a manner, which otherwise they could not hope to do.

There are four Vents by which our Wool is now Unhappily carried out of the
Country, ( viz.) 1. Rumney-Marsh, etc. on the Coast of Kent and Sussex, which
has been the Place made famous for many Years for that Wicked Trade, and where
it was carried on, even during all the late War, with a Correspondence, like
that of a Neutrality, as if the Inhabitants of Normandy and Kent had made a
Cessation, or were two Neutral Nations, not concerned in the War on either
side; and as in the time of War, that corrupt Commerce was carried on, though not
to so great a Degree as formerly, so much more now the Peace is made, is it
renewed to a Degree equal to whatever it was before the War.

Next to this, is the Coast of Lincolnshire, where the Dutch, as in the other
parts, the French, practice the same thing, and have done so for a long time,
though never with so Open and Barefaced a Confederacy as they do now, and where
the French Boats have found the way to share with the Dutch, as a Coast, although
farther off from their own, yet where they are not in Danger of the Cruisers
and Custom-House Vessels, who are employed on the Coast of Sussex, on purpose
to seize them at Sea.

But here, as soon as the said Wool is on Board, they are Safe, and bending
their Course directly over for Holland, they keep along that Shore to Flanders
and France, as they see Occasion.

I may in time, enter upon a more particular Enquiry into this part of that
Corrupt Trade, and how it is managed on Shore, to the Enriching a few private
Men, but to the Impoverishing the Nation; and which, if it be not prevented,
will, in a few Years, make a visible Alteration in the Face of our Trade.

The next Outlet for our Wool has been in Scotland: Before the Union of the
two Kingdoms, the Exportation of their Wool was free and allowed by their Law;
and albeit, their own Wool was not so much desired in France, as being too
Coarse for their Manufactures; yet they found a great Market for it in several
parts of France, for their meaner sort of Goods. But this was not all, as the
Border of Scotland, adjoining to England, was extended a great way from Berwick
to Calisle, for above Sixty Miles, it was not possible to keep the Passages so
well guarded, but that great quantities of English Wool were frequently, and
almost daily, carried in Horse Packs, by private ways into Scotland: In this
Work they were generally so well attended, that although it was often discovered,
by the Officers, yet they could not, without more assistance seize upon it; and
before such assistance could be procured, the Drivers of the Wool, would get
their Horses over the Border, when the Officers, although they stood in view, had
no more Power to act; so that by this means the quantity of English Wool
Exported into Scotland, and from thence into France, was very great, nor was
there any way to prevent it.

After the Union, the same Laws of Trade taking place in both Countries, the
Wool could no more be Exported from Scotland but by Stealth: But the Laws of
that kind being very difficult to be Executed in Scotland, by Reason of the
innumerable Number of Creeks and Coves along that Coast, the small Number of
Officers, their remote Stations from one another, their small Salaries, little
Encouragement, and the easyness of carrying the Wool unsuspected to the Sea
Coast; the Exportation of Wool, is now carried on in that Country to an
extravagant Degree, and it is not easy to prevent the same.

The last Article of this kind is Ireland, and here indeed, Wool, seems to be
one of the Principle Commodities of the Country. They Export it to France, not
as if it was Prohibited, but rather as if it was the allowed Traffic of the
Place: Whole Ships are Freighted with it, they are known when at Sea, by their
being so light in their Loading; and our Sailors say to one another as they
pass them at Sea, There goes an Irish OVLER.

This is farther Demonstrable, from the strange Change that is made in the Face
of the Irish Trade, ( viz.) That whereas they crowded in their Wool so fast
upon us in England, that our People complained of the Glut of Irish Wool, and
that it sunk the Price of our own Wool, which for want of a Trade, lay much on
our Hand; now for these two Years past, the case is quite changed, and the
Irish Wool is not to be had for Money.

What can be the Reason of this? We know the quantity is not Diminshed, nor is
the Trade Increased, that Ireland can Manufacture it at Home, and so cannot
spare it for Exportation, that would be good news for Ireland; but the Truth of
the Case is what I am upon above, viz. That the quantity goes off another way,
the Channel is turned, they have a Secret Vent to France, and there goes away
the Wool.

No Man need seek any farther for a Reason why, or an Account how, the French
came to be Arrived at so great a Perfection in our Manufactures, and to make
such great quantities as it is said they do; here is the true Reason, and till
this be prevented, it will never be otherwise; whereas, if the stream of Wool
were stopped from Britain and Ireland, which are the Fountains, the French would
never be in any Condition to do us any considerable Damage of that kind; for
they really have not the Materials, they have not Wool, neither can any part
of the World supply them.

The next Tract of this Kind, shall enquire farther into this part of Trade,
and make some Essay at a Method to prevent, at least lessen, the Exportation of
our Wool, so as that the French shall not be able to break in upon our Trade;
and then if the new Treaty of Commerce does really, as its Defenders allege,
open the Door of Trade, by taking off the Impositions upon the English Woollen
Manufactures in France, it may be a means to recover our Trade in France, and
render all the Attempts of Manufacturing in France, Abortive and Ineffectual.

FINIS.

