THE OLD WHIG.

NUMB. I.

THE OLD WHIG.

NUMB. I.

ON THE STATE of the PEERAGE.

WITH REMARKS upon the PLEBEIAN.

-- quod optanti Divum promittere nemo
Auderet, volvenda dies en attulit ultro. Virg.
LONDON: Printed: And Sold by J. Roberts in Warwick Lane; and A. Dodd at the
Peacock without Temple Bar. MDCCXIX. [Price 6 d.]

THE OLD WHIG.
On the State of the PEERAGE; with REMARKS upon the PLEBEIAN.
I Find that Men, who have turned their Thoughts to what is now the great
Subject, not only of our Parliamentary Debates, but of our private
Conversation, are apt to complain, it is a Matter of such a perplexed Nature,
and admits of so many Arguments on either Side, that they are rather bewildered
than instructed, by what they have heard in Discourse, or seen in Print, upon
this Occasion. But as, I think, this Perplexity does not arise in Men's Minds
from the Nature of the Thing it self, so much as from the way of handling it; I
shall endeavor to draw out the whole State of this Affair with such Brevity
and Method, as may neither tire nor puzzle the Reader; but carry his Thoughts
through a Series of Observations and Arguments, that will regularly grow out of
one another, and set this Matter in its full Light.

1. Those who are thought the best Writers upon Government, both Ancients and
Moderns, have unanimously agreed in Opinion, that the most perfect and
reasonable Form is a mixed Government, in opposition to that of any single
Person, or any single Order of Men. For whether the Supreme, that is, the
Legislative Power be lodged entirely in a Prince, or in an Aristocracy, or in a
Democracy, it is still looked upon as Tyrannical, and not properly calculated
for the Happiness of the whole Community.

2. It is also established as a Maxim among Political Writers, that the
Division of the Supreme or Legislative Power is most perfect, when it is
distributed into three Branches. If it all centers in one Man, or in a Body of
Men of the same Quality, it is that Form of Government which is called
Tyrannical. If it be thrown into two Branches, it wants a casting Power, and is
under such a divided Authority as would often draw two different Ways, and
produce some time or other such a Discord as would expose the Weaker to that
which had most Strength in it, and by degrees end in a single Authority. If it
consist of four Branches, it wants likewise a casting Power, and is liable to
the same Inconveniences, as when it is composed of Two. And if it be divided
into Five, or more Parts, it necessarily runs into Confusion, and will not long
retain either the Form, or the Name of Government. For this Reason, three
Branches in a Legislature have been always fixed upon, as the proper Number;
because it affords a casting Power, and may moderate any Heats in any two
contending Branches, and overpower the Third in case it should prove
unreasonable, or refuse to come into Measures apparently necessary for the Good
and Preservation of the Community.

3. The most natural and equitable Division of these Three Branches of the
Legislature, is the Regal, the Noble, and the Plebeian: Because the whole
Community is cast under these several Heads, and has not in it a single Member
who is without his Representative in the Legislature of such a Consitution.

4. In the next place it is necessary that these Three Branches should be
entirely separate and distinct from each other, so that no one of them may lie
too much under the Influence and Control of either of the collateral Branches.
For if one part of the Legislature may any ways be invested with a Power to
force either of the other Two to concur with it, the Legislative Power is in
Reality, whatever it may pretend to, divided into no more than Two Branches.

5. It is the usual Boast of Englishmen, that our Government is fixed upon this
triple Basis, which has been allowed even in Speculation, and that by Persons
who could have no Eye to our Constitution, a Form the most accommodated to the
Happiness of a Community, and the most likely to stand secure in its own
Strength. But if upon Examination one Branch of its Legislature is liable on
any Occasion to be entirely mastered and controlled by one of the other, it is
certain that nothing can be more desirable than such an Improvement in our
Constitution as may remove out of it this visible Imperfection. If a King has
Power, when he pleases, to add what Number he shall think fit to a Body of
Nobles, who have a Vote in the Legislature, it is plain he may secure his Point
in that Branch of the Legislature, and by that Means command two Votes out of
Three. This has made many assert, and I wish I could hear a satisfactory Answer
to it, that there are not properly more than Two Branches in our Legislature,
notwithstanding we flatter our selves that they are Three.

6. In this Case, a precarious Power of Nobles, so far subject to the Regal
Power in their Legislative Capacity, might sometimes be more pernicious to the
Public than if the Power of both the Branches were confessedly united in the
Sovereign: Because we might well suppose a bad King would scarce venture upon
some Things, were the whole Odium of them to turn upon himself; whereas a Body
of Peerage, should they only be created in an Emergency to carry any
unjustifiable Design, would serve to divert or silence the Murmurs of the
Public.

7. It is a known Saying of a late British King, That if his Friends could gain
him a House of Commons, he would throw his Troop of Guards into the House of
Lords, rather than miscarry in his Measures. And whether it is impossible for a
Court to gain a House of Commons of what Complexion they please, and what
would be the Consequences at some time or other of their Success in such an
Attempt, whilst the Crown is possessed of a certain Means, by Virtue of its
Prerogative, of filling the House of Lords with its own Creatures, are Points
too evident in themselves to be insisted upon.

8. The foregoing Reflections are like first Principles that have scarce been
ever called into Dispute, and have not only been the avowed Maxims of those who
have been distinguished by the Names of Whigs, but have furnished Matter of
Complaint to every Party in its Turn. This Power of the Prerogative has always
occasioned Murmurs, when either Side has found it exerted to their Prejudice.
We have often wished for a Redress of it, and have now an Opportunity of coming
at it, which if we do not lay hold of is not likely to offer it self again so
long as we are a People.

9. It is proposed, to prevent those many Inconveniences which may arise from
an Arbitrary Creation of Peers, in what Proportion, and at what Time the
Sovereign shall please, to restrain the Peers to a certain Number. It is
evident that such a Law would remedy those many Evils that may proceed from
such sudden and numerous Additions which have been made to the House of Lords
in the most critical Conjunctures. But I find there are Objections made to this
Expedient, from the Consequences it would have upon the Crown.

10. It is represented, That it will be the cutting off a Branch from the
Prerogative. But if this be only the cutting off a Branch which is pernicious
to the Public, it is certainly a very good Argument for doing it, when we can:
And that this Power is of such a Nature can scarce admit of a Dispute. Besides,
that the Crown, far from being lessened by it, will receive a greater Luster,
by parting with a Prerogative that has so often given Offense, and may some
Time turn to the Destruction of the Subject.

11. The Crown, as a Branch of the Legislature, cannot desire a greater
Prerogative than that of a Negative in the passing of a Law; and as it ought
not to influence either House in their Debates, what can a good King desire
more than the Power of approving or rejecting any such Bill, as cannot pass
into a Law without the Royal Assent?

12. The Crown will have still all the Power in it of doing Good to the People,
in which the Prerogative of our British Kings will be still unlimited. In
short, it neither touches the Executive nor the Legislative Power of the Crown,
nor takes away the Prerogative of creating Peers, but only of doing it in such
a Manner as seems repugnant to Reason and Justice. The British King will still
be the Source of Nobility, and hold in himself the Principle of Peerage, though
it is not to be lavished away on Multitudes, or given occasionally to the
Detriment of the Public.

13. Besides, What does the Crown do more in parting with a Branch of its
Prerogative, than what the two other Parts of the Legislature have frequently
done, with Regard to their respective Bodies, when they have found any of their
Rights or Privileges prejudicial to the Community? All such self-denying Acts
are of a popular Nature, and have been passed with the Good-liking and Applause
of their Fellow Subjects. Nay the Crown has never more recommended it self to
the Affection of the People, than when it has retrenched it self in any
exorbitance of Power that did not seem consistent with their Liberty; as in
passing the Bill of Habeas Corpus, and that for establishing Triennial
Parliaments.

14. Indeed were this a Point extorted from the Crown in its Necessities, it
might be generous at such a Juncture to appear in the Defense of the
Prerogative; but this is not our Case, we are only disputing whether we shall
accept of a voluntary Concession made by the Sovereign himself, who out of his
unparalled Goodness has shown, by this Instance, that he places the true
Dignity of a British Monarch, where it always ought to be placed, in the
Liberty of his People.

15. Having considered this Alteration proposed to be made in our Constitution
with relation to the Crown, let us now consider it with regard first to the
House of Commons, and in the next place to the whole Body of the English
Commonalty; and if we find that it will prove advantageous in its Consequences
under both these Views, it is undoubtedly an Alteration very much to be wished
for.

16. The Number of Peers is in a few Reigns increased from 59 to near 220, and
there is no question but that in as few succeeding Reigns their present Number
will be doubled; nor will Posterity be able to see an End of them, unless it be
timely prevented. Nay, we have all the Reason in the World to apprehend that
their Number will hereafter swell in greater Proportions than it has done
hitherto. It is a general Remark, that since the Act has passed for Triennial
Elections, Commoners of great Estates are more desirous than ever of gaining a
Place in the Upper House, which will exempt them from such a constant
Dependence on their Electors, and the frequent Returns of Trouble and Expense
in their Elections. At least it is natural to suppose that every King will make
such Additions as will give his Friends a Majority; nay, if we may conclude
from Experience, every Minister who differs in his Politics from his
Predecessor, will bring to his Assistance a sufficient Number to turn the
Balance in his Favor. And it is obvious to every one how quick is the
Succession of Ministers in this Country.

17. The first good Consequence therefore of the proposed Alteration to the
House of Commons will be this, That it will fill that House with Men of the
largest Fortunes, and the greatest Abilities; for we may well suppose that such
Men will set themselves forward to be elected into such a Seat, when it is the
highest Honor they can have immediately in their View. By this Means, those
will be the Representatives of the People, who have the greatest Stake among
them. Those will have the giving of Money in their Power, who have the most of
it in their Possession. But above all, the Influence of the House of Commons,
and consequently of all the Commons of England, will preserve its self in its
due Strength; for, of all Maxims, none is more uncontested than that Power
follows Property. But what additional Strength would this give the House of
Lords, if the richest Members of the House of Commons may be draughted out of
it in such Numbers as the present Frame of our Constitution permits? Nor would
the Inconvenience be less with respect to Men of great Parliamentary Abilities,
if instead of continuing to add Weight and Authority to the Lower House, they
may be called up at any time to employ the same Abilities in aggrandizing the
Figure of another House.

18. And as the proposed Alteration will be a proper Means to give a Figure to
the House of Commons, so will it likewise be an Expedient to preserve their
Integrity, as it will take off one Method, and indeed the most effectual
Method, of bribing Men of overgrown Fortunes. When a Peerage dangles before
the Eyes of the most wealthy Commoner, it may have Charms in it to one, who
would have a Contempt for any Offers of another kind. A Man's Ambition is as
susceptible of Bribes as his Avarice, and it should be the Care of a
Legislature to cut off all Temptations to Corruption, in the one as well as the
other. It is true, the Alteration proposed would not utterly remove the
Influence of such a Motive, but it would certainly very much weaken it, and
render it infinitely more ineffectual, than what it is at present.

19. If this Method restrains Men of the greatest Figure of the Lower House
from making their way so easily to the Upper, it will evidently tend to the
bringing a greater Number of Places of the highest Trust, Honor or Profit into
the Hands of the most able and wealthy Commoners. Men so accomplished will have
a diffusive Influence both in their own House, and in their respective
Countries, and it will be necessary for all Governments to find out proper
Rewards and Gratifications for such Men; and Gratifications of this kind no
Commoner will envy them, since they enable them to be beneficial to the Body of
People whom they Represent, and do not in their Nature deprive us of their
Strength and Assistance in that Branch of the Legislature to which we belong.

20. However, the proposed Restraint on the Number of Peers, is far from being
an Exclusion of such Commoners, who are recommended by their Fortunes, or their
Abilities. According to the Calculation generally received, there may happen
two Extinctions or Vacancies, taking one Year with another, in the Body of
Peers, as fixed and ascertained by the new Scheme, in case it should obtain.
And surely the Commons of England will think it sufficient to lose annually two
of their most considerable Members, whatever may be the Opinion of particular
Persons, who are in haste to leave their Company.

21. A Restraint upon the Number of the Lords will necessarily restrain the
Influence of that Body in the Election of Members to serve in the Lower House.
It is very well known, that few Members of the House of Commons are advanced to
Peerage, who have not one or more Corporations under their Direction: Nay, that
very often, this is one Reason for their Promotion. If, therefore, this
perpetually increasing Body of Lords continues on the Foot it is now, in
Proportion as their Number is augmented, their Influence in Elections will grow
more general, till at length, as the Upper House are the Creature of the Crown,
the Lower House may be in a great Measure the Creature of the Lords: And it is
worth while to consider, whether in Process of Time, unless seasonably
prevented, the House of Commons may not be filled with the Stewards and
Bailiffs of our Peers.

22. In the next Place, let us see what would be the Consequences from such an
Alteration, upon the whole Bulk of the English Commonalty, which should always
find the first Place in the Thoughts of their Representatives. If they should
gain only this single Advantage, I think it is a very considerable One, that it
will hinder the Nation from being overrun with Lords. We know that in the Sale
of an Estate, it is no small Recommendation to the Buyer, that there is no Lord
within so many Miles of it, and the Distance of such a Borderer is often looked
upon as an Equivalent to a Year's Purchase. But who can be secure from such a
Neighbor, whilst the Species is so apt to increase and multiply? I shall not
insist upon paying of Debts, which is looked upon as a moral Duty among
Commoners, who cannot but be sorry to see any Additions to an Order of Men,
that are sheltered by Privileges from the Demands of their honest and
industrious Creditors. To which many Considerations of the like Nature might be
added, were they not obvious to the private Reflection of every Reader.

23. But the great Point, and which ought to carry the chief Weight with us in
this Case is, that the Alteration now proposed will give such a mighty Power to
the Bulk of the English Commons, as can be never counterballanc'd by the Body
of the Nobility. Should we suppose 235 Peers possessed, one with another, of 5000
l. per Annum, this would amount to no more than 1175000 l. per Annum; and what
is such a Property, and the Power arising out of it, compared with the Power
arising out of the Property of those many Millions possessed by the Commons?
Besides, that the great Accessions of Wealth yearly made in the Body of the
Commons, would give it continually an Increase of Property and Power, which
would accrue to the Body of the Nobles, in case their Door was always open to
Men of overflowing Fortunes, who might find no great Difficulty in procuring an
Entrance.

24. I shall now offer Two fair Questions to any Man, who impartially weighs
these Matters.

First, If two Schemes of Government were proposed to him, in both of which the
Legislature should consist of three Branches, whether he would prefer that
Scheme, in which one of the Branches might be increased at Pleasure by another
of them, or that Scheme in which every Branch should be limited to a certain
stated Number: Nay, if the two Schemes were placed in Parallel with one
another, and considered in their respective Consequences, whether the first
would not appear a most wild and indigested Project?

In the second Place I would propose this Question; If the Lords had been
limited to a certain Number by our Constitution, whether it would not have been
thought unpardonable in any one who should have proposed to have taken off that
Limitation, and left it to the Pleasure of the Crown arbitrarily to add to them
any Number at any Time?

No body can be at a loss to determine himself in these Questions, who
considers this Subject by those plain Lights, which are already exhibited in
this Discourse, and which may be strengthened by many other Considerations.

25. This Subject naturally engages me in one Task more, which is, to examine
the Objections that have been started against this Alteration proposed to be
made in the Constitution of the House of Peers. And here I cannot discover any
Inconvenience which can be said to follow from such an Alteration, that does
not now subsist, or is not answered by some much greater Inconvenience in the
present State of the Peerage. But, that I may not follow the Example of those
who have appeared in Print on the other side of this Debate, in putting weak
Arguments into the Mouth of their Antagonists, I shall answer such Objections
as have been the most approved by those who declare themselves against this
Bill, as they are laid together in a Pamphlet, entitled The Plebeian.

26. As for the Introduction, the Digression upon the Ephori, and the
concluding Paragraph, they are only Arguments ad conflandam invidiam, and such
as are not to be answered by Reason, but by the same angry Strain in which they
are Written, and which would discredit a Cause that is able to support it self
without such an Assistance.

27. At first Sight, says the Plebeian, this Proposal must appear very
Shocking. P. 3.
It carries with it too great an Alteration of the Constitution. This is the
first general Objection, and I wish it had been pursued regularly; but because
it is dropped and resumed in the following Part of the Discourse, I must be
forced to collect those scattered Passages on this Head, as I find them in
different Parts of the Book. This great Objection will be sufficiently
answered, if this Alteration of the Constitution is from Worse to Better; which
I think has been fully proved. As every thing is formed into Perfection by
Degrees, the Wisdom of all Legislatures has embraced every Opportunity of
making such Changes in their Government, as have been advantageous to those who
live under it. This Author himself gives us an eminent Instance of a great
Alteration of our Constitution in the Lower House, under the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, P. 9.
when the Crown erected several new Corporations, and relieved several ancient
and decayed ones from sending any Members at all. I do not make use of this
Increase in the Number of the Commons, as an Argument for an Increase of the
Number of the Lords, which the Author produces as the Reasoning of some People
who are for the Bill. Such People, if any there are, must talk inconsistently
with themselves, since it is the Purport of the Bill to prevent the House of
Lords from growing too Numerous. But it is an unanswerable Argument to show,
that there has been as great an Alteration in one Branch of our Legislature, as
is now proposed to be made in Another, and that such an Alteration should be
introduced into our Form of Government, when there are good Reasons for it; on
which Account our Author himself justifies the abovementioned Alteration in the
House of Commons. Our Author furnishes us with another very good Argument in
this Particular against himself. P. 6.
Whiggism, says he, if I understand it aright, is a Desire of Liberty, and a
Spirit of Opposition to all exorbitant Power in any part of the Constitution.
Formerly the Danger on this Account was from the Crown; but since the Habeas
Corpus Act, and the many Restraints laid upon the Crown in King William 's
Time, and the great and numerous Limitations of the Succession Acts, the
Prerogative of the Crown is reduced so low, that it is not at all dangerous to
the Commons. As we have the Author's Confession in the aforementioned Instance
of an Alteration in the Plebeian, he has here given us an Account of as
remarkable Changes in the Regal Branch of our Government. The Prerogative was
retrenched in those several Instances, because without such Retrenchment the
Power of it appeared exorbitant and dangerous to the Commons. If therefore
there still inheres in the Crown a Power that is exorbitant and dangerous to
the Commons, there is the same Reason why the Commons should lay hold of the
present Opportunity to retrench it. This is the Matter in Debate betwixt us;
but be that as it will, the Argument which the Author here makes use of,
against the Bill in Question, that it carries in it too great an Alteration of
the Constitution, would have been as good an Argument against the Habeas Corpus
Act, or any other of those abovementioned. What is further said upon this
Subject in P. 14. would make a handsome Sentence in a popular Speech, but will
never stand the Test of a strict Examination in a Discourse addressed to the
Reasons and not the Passions of Men. In short it has been for our ancient
Constitution, says the Author, that we have struggled with so much Vigor for
many Years together: It Is for that we have poured out a River of English Blood,
and a Treasure unheard of in any former Age. This Constitution may have its
Imperfections; but faulty as it is, our Ancestors have conveyed down Liberty to
us through that Channel: And we ought to continue it on, as well as we can, to
our Posterity, and not give way to the new-modelling Schemes of every
extraordinary Genius. This is not Arguing but Declaiming. Our Ancestors
remedied several Imperfections from time to time, and we are obliged to them
for having conveyed Liberty down to us through the Channel which they had so
often altered and reformed. And will not our Posterity be as thankful to us, if
we transmit to them their Liberty through the same Channel, when it shall be
only altered for the better Conveyance of it?

28. Having taken off the Force of this main Objection, I shall follow others
as the Author leads me. He tells us that P. 4.
the shutting up the Door of the House of Lords in the manner talked of, cannot
but prove a great Discouragement to virtuous Actions, to Learning and Industry,
and very detrimental to the House of Peers it self, by preventing such frequent
Supplies from going into it as the Nature of such a Body requires; for want of
which, it may in time become corrupt and offensive like a stagnated Pool, which
hitherto has been preserved wholesome and pure by the fresh Streams that pass
continually into it. This Consideration, if it has any Force, cuts down all the
other Arguments drawn from the new Accessions of Figure and Power, which he
supposes would accrue to the House of Lords by the passing of the Bill so much
talked of. Can it be detrimental to the House of Lords, and at the same time
throw into their Hands all the Places and Honors that the Crown can conser
upon them? Will that Body of Men, which would become mean and despicable and
offensive as a stagnated Pool by the Means of this Alteration, be raised by the
same Means to be the most formidable, and the most honored Part in our
Constitution? Or could the same Body degenerate into a public Nuisance, as our
Author represents it, and at the same time be able to overawe both King and
People? Can two fuch contrary Effects be produced from one and the same Cause?
But could we suppose that this Body of Men might thus degenerate; Would they be
able, without numerous Recruits of Wealth, Learning and Industry, to oppose any
thing for the Good of the Community, in Contradiction to the King and People?
But more of this hereafter.

29. Our Author adds, I am not unaware it will be said that the frequent
Extinctions of noble Families will salve this Inconvenience, and make room for
the rewarding of Merit. But, says he, this Expedient, I fear, is not much to be
depended on; for the Uncertainty of the Time when the Crown will have any such
Power, will make it much the same, as if it were never to have it at all; which
is as much as to say, That unless the Crown has Power of making what Number of
Lords it pleases, and at what Time it pleases, and to serve what Turn it
pleases, it had as good have no Power at all of making Peers, which the Author
supposes is the only adequate Power it has of rewarding Merit. Not to ask the
Author whether it be generally virtuous Actions, Learning, or Industry, that
recommend Commoners to the Peerage, or of what other kind the Merit is, which
has been often thus rewarded; I shall only ask him, Whether any Man has so
crying a Merit as immediately requires a Peerage for its Reward? Or whether the
Extinction of Two Titles in a Year will not leave room enough for the Crown to
reward those extraordinary Persons, whose Merits give them such a Demand upon
it? As for another Argument which the Author puts into the Mouth of those whom
he calls Patrons of the Bill proposed, P. 4.
that it will ease the Crown of Importunities, as I think it has no great
Weight in it, I am not concerned to urge any thing in its Defense against the
Plebeian's Answer to it.

30. We come now to the most considerable Paragraph of the whole Book, which I
shall therefore transcribe at length. P. 5 and 6.
But another Consequence of a much higher Nature, attending the Limitation of
the Number of Peers, is the Danger there will be of changing the Constitution
by this means into an Aristocracy: And this may at any time in such case be
effected by the Confederacy of two or three Great Families, which would form
such a Body in the House of Lords, as the Crown would not be able to control.
That this kind of Government is one of the worst Sorts of Knavery, is too well
known to be disputed. In a Democracy, a great many different Persons may come
to have a Share of Power by several Incidents, but in the other case it is
Birth only that intitles to Superiority: And the Milk such Nobles are nursed up
with is Hatred and Contempt for every human Creature, but those of their own
imaginary Dignity. The Question to be stated here is, Whether the House of
Lords under their present Constitution is not as likely to run into an
Aristocracy, as it would be in case their Number should be limited. It appears
very plain to me, that a Body of Peers perpetually Increasing, and capable of
Additions, has in it a natural Tendency to an Aristocracy. Supposing that the
House of Lords from 60 Members is now swelled to 200: These, if increased by
the same Proportion, would in the same Number of Years amount to 666, to which
we may presume there would be still the like proportionable Additions. By this
Means they would in time receive such vast Accessions of Property, as might
Encourage them not only to entertain so ambitious a Design, but in a great
Measure to render it effectual; especially when any Men could be admitted into
their own Order, with their great Abilities in Parliament, or their great
Influence among the People, who might be most capable of opposing their
Encroachments upon the Commons. I do allow that such Additions would be
prejudicial to the Crown; but, this is no Reason, why they would not be made,
as it has not prevented the Additions that have been made in our own Memory.
For though the Crown in general would be a Sufferer by this Method; yet it would
naturally have Recourse to it, as it has formerly, when it labors under any
present Exigency, that can only be removed by such an Expedient. This Danger of
an Aristocracy, every one must confess would be very much abated, and, I think,
utterly removed, by the Limitation of the Lords to such a Number, as is now
proposed. In such a Case, their Property would be so very inconsiderable, when
compared with that of the Commons (as I have before showed to a Demonstration)
that it would render such a Design in them the most Chimerical, and the most
Impracticable. And since it is impossible, that the whole Body of Lords in
their United Strength could be able to establish themselves into an
Aristocracy, the Author's Imagination vanishes, that P. 5.
this may at any Time, in such a Case, be effected by the Confederacy of two or
three great Families, which would form such a Body among the Lords, as the
Crown would not be able to control. If the Author means in this Place by the
Crown not being able to control the Lords, that it would be restrained from
pouring in such a Number as would always sway them to its Inclinations, it is
what ought to be wished for. If he means, that this want of Power in the Crown
would enable them to erect an Aristocracy, it is certainly a wrong Consequence:
Because not only the Crown, but the People would have a Superior Power in them
to the Body of Nobles, and are equally concerned to preserve their Stations in
the Government. The Author after this brings an Argument to prove, that an
Aristocracy is a bad Form of Government, and that a Democracy is preferable to
it, in which I entirely agree with him; but must add, that a mixed Government
made out of Aristocracy, Democracy and Monarchy, is better than either of them.
The Author subjoins, that P. 6.
the Milk which Nobles are nursed up with is Hatred and Contempt of every Humane
Creature, but those of their own imaginary Dignity. If so, the fewer of them
the better. What Commoner would not desire to put a stop to the Increase of
them?

31. The next Objection I meet with is from the great Privileges the Lords are
already possessed of, with relation to P. 7.
Actions de Scandalis Magnatum, etc. which is likewise a very good Reason why
we should hinder the Increase of Persons invested with these Privileges; and as
for the Judicial Power, with that of Imprisoning, they are such as subsist in
their Body as it is now constituted, and therefore cannot be objected to the
proposed Alteration, which would only leave them as they are.

32. P. 7.
The increasing the Number of Peers, says the Author, is always to be wished
for by the Commons: We have seen sufficient Reasons why it should not. Because
the greater their Number, the less considerable they become; the contrary of
which has been evidently proved; and the less within the Influence of Court
Favors: What! when by this very Power of increasing them at Will, it can
secure any Point among them that it pleases? By which means alone Ministers are
kept in awe, and remain in a Situation of being called to Account for their
Actions. Were it otherwise they would be out of the reach of any Accusation:
They would know exactly by whom they were to be tried, and their Judges might
be their Accomplices. And should this once come to be the Case, what might they
not attempt with Impunity? Is this Inconvenience better prevented in a House of
Peers on the bottom it now stands? Can any who has been a good Minister be
secure, if the Crown should add a sufficient number of his Enemies to those who
sit in Judgment upon him? Or is a bad Minister in any Danger, when he may be
sheltered by the Addition of a sufficient number of his Friends?

33. I must not pass over another remarkable Paragraph of the Author upon the
same Argument for increasing the Lords at Pleasure. P. 9.
The great Advantage, says he, that the Number of their Body cannot be
increased, is at present the most valuable Privilege of the House of Commons,
and the only thing that makes them considerable. This is indeed a very poor
Advantage, to found upon it the Grandeur of a House of Commons. Is not the
Power of giving Money and raising Taxes confined to that Body, and which can
never fail to give them the greatest Weight in the Legislature? Will not this
be always the most valuable Privilege of the Commons, and what other Privilege
can make them more considerable? He goes on, The Lords are possessed of many
great Privileges that they will not permit the Commons to share with them; and
therefore the Commons would be highly wanting to themselves, if they should add
this Advantage likewise to the Lords, which is the only one that they can enjoy
distinct from them. Our Author, as it may turn to his Account, sometimes
considers the Lords in their personal Privileges as they are Individuals, and
sometimes as they are a Body of Men in the Legislature. If he here means their
Privileges in the former View, I do allow they are very great ones, and
therefore certainly every Commoner cannot desire an Increase of such
Individuals. But if he here means their Privileges as a Legislative Body, it is
certain that all their Privileges together are not equal to that One, of
commanding the Purse of the Community. So that it is wonderful how he could
advance, that the Number of the House of Commons not being subject to an
Increase, is the only Advantage that they enjoy distinct from the House of
Lords.

34. Our Author next proceeds to speak of the proportion of Property between
the two Houses of Lords and Commons, which is a Point already so fully
discussed, that I shall not trouble the Reader with any Repetitions; but cannot
omit what the Author asserts as an indisputable Point, and which in it self is
the greatest Paradox I ever heard advanced. His Words are P. 10.
indeed if a restraining Bill should pass, I do not doubt but it would be soon
followed with a Bill to prevent Lords from alienating their Estates, for which
many plausible Reasons are to be produced: And then without all Dispute the
Balance of Property will be soon turned on the side of their Lordships: Which
is as much as to say, in plain English, that the Lords will have as much Wealth
amongst 'em as the whole Body of the British Commons, or that one Million will
be a Balance against a hundred Millions. Indeed the House of Lords in their
present Constitution may be always approaching to a Balance in Property with
the Commons, from whence they are continually receiving into their Body such
large Supplies; but if their Number be once limited, you cut off their
Recruits, and lay them under an Impossibility of ever rivalling the other
Branch of the Legislature in this Particular.

35. Our Author's Argument, that a new Power would arise to the House of Lords
from the Alteration so much talked of, is founded upon a Fact which every one
denies at first sight. His Words are these: P. 10, 11.
For as to what is commonly said that the Lords would get nothing, no new Power
would be added to them by this Means; I beg leave to state this Matter in a
proper Light. Suppose the Balance to be now even betwixt the Lords and the
Crown, as it certainly is, or else the Constitution would not subsist in quiet:
Is it not plain to the most common Capacity, that when two Scales are upon an
equal Poise, if you take any Weight out of one of them, you give the Advantage
to the other without putting any Thing into it. The Author here supposes that
the Balance between these two Parts of the Legislature should be even, and so
far I concur with him, that being the chief End which this Alteration has in
view. But I can by no Means suppose with him that they are even, because it is
contrary to Matter of Fact. For we plainly see that the Sovereign has it always
in his Power to make what Division of Party or Opinion he pleases prevail in
that House. As for the Reason of their present supposed Equality, that
otherwise they could not subsist in quiet, it has no Force in it, because we
see very ill-constituted Governments will subsist in quiet for many Ages, not
that they are preserved by a rightly tempered Constitution, which would give
them the greatest Strength, but by other accidental Causes. The ill
Consequences of such an Inequality may be frequently felt and complained of,
though they may not shake the Tranquillity of the Public.

36. I have now gone through every Thing that carries the Face of an Argument
for the Constitution of the House of Lords, as it now stands, or of an
Objection against the Alteration proposed to be made, having only avoided
saying any thing in this Case as it affects the Scottish Nobility, because I
have here considered it only as an English Commoner, and because I have
Thoughts of prosecuting the Subject, as it relates to Scotland, in another
Pamphlet, being unwilling to swell this to a greater Bulk.

37. Since the writing of the foregoing Discourse, I have perused a Pamphlet,
entitled, The Thoughts of a Member of the Lower House, etc. in which the
Author first approves our Constitution as divided into its Three Branches, and
through the whole Course of his Book contends in Effect, that it should consist
of no more than Two; for he supposes the House of Lords instituted only as
Guardians, and Ornaments to the Throne, and to be augmented by the Crown in
such a Proportion, as may strengthen it in Opposition to the House of Commons.
The Reader may see his Scheme in the following Words. P. 9.
There is not, says this Writer, a more certain Maxim in Politics, than that a
Monarchy must subsist by an Army, or Nobility. The first makes it Despotic, and
the latter a free Government. I presume none of those noble Personages
themselves, who have the Honor to make up that Illustrious Body, do believe
they are so distinguished and advanced above their Fellow Subjects for their
own Sakes: They know they are intended the Guardians, as well as Ornaments of
the Monarchy, an essential Prerogative of which it must be to add to and
augment their Number in such Proportion, as to render them a proper Balance
against the Democratical Part of our Constitution, without being formidable to
the Monarchy it self, the Support of which is the Reason of their Institution.
This is a most extraordinary Notion of Government, that one Branch of a
Legislature should be instituted, only to be subservient to the Strength and
Support of another, but it is on this Bottom that he founds his whole
Discourse; and as for his Objections to the proposed Alteration, I find they
are such as I have already obviated in the Course of this Pamphlet. If any
thing remains in them unanswered, it will fall under the last Objection against
the Matter in Debate, which I should not take Notice of, did not I find that it
makes an Impression upon some People's Minds.

38. Suppose, says the Objection, there should be an inflexible Obstinacy in a
House of Peers, what Method would there be left to bring them to a Concurrence
with the two other Branches of the Legislature, when it will not be in the
Power of the King to bring them over to Reason, by flinging in sufficient
Numbers among them? To this I answer, That if the Lords are obstinate in a
Point, that is Reasonable and Beneficial to the Community, it will be happy for
their Country that they should be invested with the proper Power of a
Legislative Branch, not to be overruled to wrong Measures. This may sometimes
be of great Advantage to the Public, if we can possibly suppose, that the two
other Branches may concur in any thing that is not consistent with Justice, or
the National Interest. If the Peers are thus inflexibly obstinate in any
Methods that are Dishonorable, Unjust or Pernicions to their Country; can we
imagine, they could not be influenced into a Compliance, by the Authority of
the two sharing Branches in the Legislature? Or, can we think, they would
persist in Measures which would draw upon them the Displeasure of the Crown,
and the Resentments of the whole Commons of Great Britain? Every Body of Men
takes as much Care as possible to preserve their Credit, and to render
themselves Popular; and we cannot think that any Branch of a Legislature would
be made up of Madmen, or pursue such Measures as must necessarily end in their
Infamy, or their Destruction; especially, when they are infinitely weaker than
either of the other constituent Parts of our Legislature. Could any Person
apprehend such a Behavior from them, I am sure the same Person cannot in his
Heart apprehend their growing up into an Aristocracy. The Peers are so little a
Match for the Crown in Power, or the Commons in Property, much less able to
cope with the united Force of Both; that it is Wildness to suppose them Guilty
of such an unjust and unreasonable Obstinacy, as they know might endanger their
very Being in the British Constitution. And now, I shall only propose it to
every ones Thoughts, whether an Expedient, which will remedy the greatest
Inconvenience that may arise to us, from one of the Branches of the
Legislature, and of which we have had Experience, as has been already
sufficiently explained, should prevail with us to lay it aside, out of a
groundless Fear, that it should expose us to an Inconvenience from another
Branch of the Legislature, which must suppose 'em destitute of common Sense,
void of Honor and Equity, and regardless of Self-preservation, before it can
possibly befall us. To this I shall only add, that whatever Objections are made
against this Alteration in the Constitution may be made against every Form of
Government, in which the Legislature consists of Three distinct Branches, and
that is, against such a Form as has been pronounced the most perfect, by those
who have been the most skilful Politicians, and the most famous for their
Observations on the Nature of Government.

FINIS.

