REMARKS ON A PRINTED PAPER, LATELY HANDED ABOUT, ENTITLED, A Catalogue of the
Sacred Vessels restored by Cyrus; and of the Chief Jews, who returned at first
from the Captivity; together with the Names of the returning Families, and the
Number of the Persons at that Time in each Family: Disposed in such a Manner,
as to show most clearly the great Corruption of Proper Names and Numbers in the
present Text of the Old Testament.

Addressed to all such GENTLEMEN as have received or read the same.

THE SECOND EDITION.

By GRANVILLE SHARP.

LONDON: Printed for B. WHITE, at HORACE'S-HEAD, FLEET STREET. M.DCC.LXXV.

REMARKS ON A PRINTED PAPER, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
HAVING received from a worthy Friend in the country, for whom I have the
greatest esteem, a printed paper, which had been sent him by Dr. Kennicott,
entitled, A Catalogue of the Sacred Vessels restored by Cyrus; and of the
Chief Jews who returned at first from the Captivity, together with the Names of
the returning Families, and the Number of the Persons at that Time in each
Family; disposed in such a manner, as to show most clearly the great corruption
of Proper Names and Numbers in the present Text of the Old Testament; and being
desired to return the said paper when I had perused it, I thought I could not
handsomely do so without sending my opinion of it at the same time. The nature
of the subject is indeed so foreign to my own business and way of life, that I
should scarcely have presumed to meddle with it, had not a point of good
manners to this Gentleman first of all induced me to do so; but afterward,
when I had considered Dr. Kennicott's manner of expressing himself in the title
of this catalogue, I thought myself obliged, through a desire of vindicating
the Holy Scriptures, to apply as closely to the examination of this charge
against them, as my small share of leisure would permit; being apprehensise
that this paper might cause such prejudices against the integrity of the Text
of the Old Testament, as the learned Author himself, perhaps, never conceived,
and would be sorry to have occasioned by his catalogue.

The Letter to my friend, which was the result of this examination, was at my
desire shown to Dr. Kennicott; but the arguments therein had not sufficient
weight to convince him, that some apology was necessary to be made to his
friends, to prevent their misinterpreting his real design in the said
catalogue, and to remove all appearance of his having charged the present Text
of the Old Testament with more faults than it really deserves. Not being able
however to lay aside my own apprehensions of the ill effects which might
possibly be occasioned by this catalogue, I have therefore ventured to print
some of my remarks upon it, lest any person, not having leisure to examine it
sufficiently, should be led to conceive, that all the differences in names and
numbers, found therein, are really corruptions in the present Text of the
Old Testament.

In the first part of the Catalogue the Doctor has compared Ezra's account of
the sacred vessels with the account given of the same in the Book of Esdras;
and, as if he had clearly shown thereby some great corruptions, he has affixed
the following motto to his quotations; viz. non potest verum asseri, quod (1)
In the letter, which I sent to my friend on this subject, I endeavored to
show, that a disagreement in numbers, when the accounts of historians are
compared, is not a sufficient authority to justify a charge of corruption; and
I supposed an example of two historians giving an account of the number of
slain in a battle; the one that 1000 men were killed, and the other that no
less than 2000 were lost in the same battle; and I observed, that, if the
account is true of 2000 being killed, the other account cannot be called a
contradiction to it, because a less number is mentioned therein; and this I
thought sufficient to exemplify, that a smaller number, when given without an
absolute limitation, is no contradiction to a greater number. But it has been
objected to this example, that it is by no means parallel to the case in
question, because the numbers of slain in battle in large armies, as given by
Historians, are, from the nature of the thing, hardly ever to be depended upon;
whereas, when an inventory of goods is given, it is reasonably supposed to be
exact to an unit, because it easily may be so. I will therefore mention another
example, not liable to the same objection, and more proper to be inserted in
these remarks because it is quoted by Dr. Kennicott, (see page 532 of his 1st
dissertation,) viz. In 1 Kings iv. 26. we read that Solomon had 40,000 stalls
for horses, but in 2 Chr. ix. 25. only 4,000. This Dr. Kennicott mentions as
one of the instances of mistakes which are most easilyaccounted for, by
admitting the addition, omission, or transposition of a cipher: and the
Doctor's favorite Author, Father Houbigant, thinks to remove all difficulty
from the same by altering the Text in 1 Kings iv. 26. from (...) to (...) viz.
from 40,000 to 4,000.

But the ingenious Author of a small MS. book, lent me by a worthy and learned
friend, (to whom I have great obligation on this, as well as many other
accounts,) makes it appear very plainly, that the opinions of Bochart and Lud.
Capellus (who think the word (...) instead of 40 should be translated 4) would
cause greater difficulties than what are at present found in the Text; for,
says he, let this Rabbinical use of plural ordinal numbers be what they please;
yet in the Scripture Style they are never taken singularly, and this I affirm
after having examined some hundreds of places, where they are either joined
with appellatives, persons, or things, or greater numbers, as an hundred or
thousand: and so these Hebrew words (...) signify 40,000 beyond exception in
all other Texts they are found in; and so the LXX. turn them here, and Josephus
preserves the same high number. He then proceeds to show the great probability
( from the Riches and Grandeur of Solomon, and the more terrible execution a
Quadriga would make than a Biga,) that Solomon's Chariots were drawn by 4
horses; which opinion he supports by a variety of quotations and learned
arguments; and afterward observes, that, as Solomon had 1400 Chariots, (1
Kings x. 26. and 2 Chronicles. i. 14.) the number of horses, allowing 4 to each
chariot, would require 5600 Stalls, besides the Stalls necessary for the 12,000
single Troop Horses; which numbers will occasion great difficulties if we
suppose that Solomon had only 4000 Stalls. He also observes, that (besides the
Stalls necessary for Solomon's standing forces) standings were necessary for
horses presented to him by foreign Princes, as also for Baggage Mules and
Dromedaries, which must be very numerous, not only for the carriage of
provisions, tents, and other warlike necessaries both for horse and foot, but
also for water, in the vast sandy wild of Arabia Deserta as far as Euphrates.
Moreover, he observes, that as Solomon trafficked by his merchants with horses
brought out of Egypt, furnishing the Kings of Syria and the Hittites; so this
running trade might occasion these stalls to be so numerous, not only serving
the purposes of war, but of traffic. Many more reasons are given by the same
Author, which are confirmed by a great variety of learned quotations and
authorities; but, I trust, that those few I have mentioned are quite sufficient
to prove that Father Houbigant has been much too hasty in altering the Sacred
Text from 40,000 to 4000, and that he has thereby loaded it with a real
difficulty, when he might have avoided the imaginary one, by admitting a very
reasonable and fair solution, which has been approved of by a great variety of
learned commentators; I mean that of construing the word (...) (not Stalls,
but) Stables; which entirely removes all the difficulty: for, supposing each
Stable capable of containing 10 Horses, you very easily account for the number
of 40,000 Stalls: and this opinion is approved of by Abarbinel, Junius, and
Tremellius, Bp. Patrick, Sir Walter Raleigh, Mons. Martin, and a great variety
of other Commentators.

Some have indeed supposed, that the chariot Horses, spoken of in the parallel
passage in 2d Chronicles ix. 25. were but 4000, which King Solomon kept at or
near Jerusalem for his constant guard, and that the other speaks of those which
were dispersed throughout his whole kingdom.

But what is most material to my purpose is observed by the author of the
little treatise abovementioned; viz. the diversity between these two relations
(viz. in 1 Kings iv. 26, and 2 Chronicles. ix. 25.) amounts to 36,000; but, if the
first account is proved true, (which he most clearly has done,) the second must
be so too, as the less is included in the greater number. Now this is the very
conclusion that I drew from my former example, (viz. of the two historians
giving different accounts of the number of men slain in a battle,) which was
objected to: and this is another reason for my having quoted this example of
Solomon's Horses; and I have the more pleasure in doing so, because it is not
liable to the same objection as the former, for the numbers therein may as
reasonably be supposed to be exact to a unit as the account of any other
inventory whatever, because it easily might have been so: we find likewise that
the difficulty therein may reasonably be accounted for without the supposition
of a mistake, or the necessity of having recourse to Father Houbigant's
dangerous and unwarrantable expedient of altering the text.


ita diversum est.

But this account of Esdras is not ita diversum as to amount to a contradiction
of the other, and therefore the doctor's motto is not at all applicable. For
Ezra might at one time make particular mention of such Vessels only as were
perhaps (2) A very apt and ingenious objection has been made to this argument,
and communicated to the writer of these Remarks; who hopes that the worthy and
learned Author will excuse his inserting it here at length, as the omission of
it in this place might perhaps be deemed an injustice to the subject in
question. The Objection was as follows; That Ezra did not mean to mention
particularly the chief vessels only, and then to include the rest in the
general round Sum 5400, is evident from hence, that he does do this before he
comes to make up the Sum 5400; for he throws together all the Vessels, not
before specified, under the article other Vessels, and into the general round
Sum 1000: and this round Sum 1000, added to the particular Sums before
specified, ought, in common sense, to make the Sum total; which here it does
not do.

But, notwithstanding the seeming propriety of this objection, yet, while there
is any reasonable way left of accounting for a difficulty, we ought to be very
cautious of supposing a corruption; not from any idea of the absolute Integrity
of the Hebrew Text, but because many very learned and experienced persons have
led themselves and others into errors by esteeming some difficult passages to
be corrupt, when the truth and integrity of the same might have been very
sufficiently vindicated.

In the present case, though I have not met with any thing, which, in my
opinion, ought to be adopted as the only true interpretation, yet I think that
one of the solutions given by Bp. Patrick is so far reasonable, that it removes
the absolute necessity of supposing a corruption, viz. It is said, in 2 Chronicles.
xxxvi. 18. Nebuchadnezzar carried away all the vessels both great and small.
Now, in the account that is here given, the larger vessels only, which were of
greater bigness and price, are mentioned. (Among which are also reckoned the
1000 other Vessels; which round Sum was not intended to make up the gross, but
only to include all the other great or larger Vessels, the species of which
were not particularized, as Josephus testifies And other great Vessels a
thousand.
, (...) (...).) But the gross Sum comprehends all, both great and small, and
amounts to the number 5400.


chiefly used, or were most remarkable, and might mean to include all the rest
in the general round Sum of 5400; and yet might afterward think proper to
write a more circumstantial history, setting down the exact number of each kind
of vessel, together with the particular amount or total of the whole.

In Josephus the (...). (30) and the (...). (30) correspond very well with the
chargers of gold and basins of gold, mentioned by Ezra. As to the other
numbers, they all differ, as well from the account in Ezra, as from that in
Esdras, except the 1000 other vessels; and the addition of the whole amounts to
no more than 5210 -- yet, as he has not himself given a total number, he cannot
be said to contradict either of the others. Now, as not one of the articles in
the Heb. account of Ezra exceeds the numbers of those in Esdras, there can be
no contradiction therein, because each number may be included in the
corresponding number in Esdras.

And farther; if the number of each article in Ezra had been exactly the same
with those in Esdras, the Sum Total 5400 would have appeared more like a
mistake; but, as they amount to no more than 2499, it is plain that the writer
did not mean to enumerate every single vessel; because he afterward gives a
round Sum Total of even Hundreds, viz. 5400, which is more frequent in
Historians than exact and particular sums: therefore a person must be very
little acquainted with History, who supposes that this is a contradiction to
the Sum Total in Esdras, because the odd number 69 is omitted (3) This
numerical exactness in the Account of Esdras, which is wanting in the Hebrew
Account, has occasioned a supposition that the latter, by some means or other,
has undergone some alteration. But it must be observed that some ancient copies
of the book of Esdras have been equally exact in making the Sum total the
amount of the several sorts of vessels to a unit, notwithstanding that the
particulars are very different, and that the Sum total exceeds the common
reading by 391 vessels. The old Latin Bibles, from which the present Vulgate
was taken, have the reading just mentioned, which was probably translated from
MSS. as ancient as those from which the present Greek Text of Esdras was taken:
and the same reading is found in Tindal's old English Bible, printed in 1549.
Therefore this numerical exactness is not a sufficient proof of the
authenticity of the book of Esdras in this place; so that if the Heb. of Ezra
was to be corrected by it to the same numerical exactness, and if such other
corrections as have been proposed were to take place in the Text of the
Old Testament, I am apt to think that our Holy Bible itself would soon, by too
many, be esteemed as little better than apocryphal.
.

As to the difference of the names by which the Vessels are called, (however
unlike they appear in the English Translation,) yet whoever is acquainted with
the original Text must know that they correspond sufficiently; except indeed
the Heb. word, which is translated knives; and that is capable of being
construed several different ways, but there is not the least reason to suppose
that it has been corrupted.

The next thing that I have to observe is, that Dr. K. has been particularly
unfortunate in fixing upon this part of the sacred History as a proof of the
great corruption of the proper names and numbers in the present Text of the
Old Testament. First,

Because it was the custom of the Babylonians to give new Names to their
captives; so that it was very common among the Jewish Captives to be called by
two names: of this the Book of Daniel gives sufficient proof; and therefore
this difference is of the less consequence, because two different names may
mean the same person.

And, Secondly, because these three Books all agree in the sum total of
persons; (4) This agreement of the three Books in the sum total of Persons has
occasioned a supposition, that the Catalogue in all three was originally the
same; and that all three are now imperfect in some of the particulars, since
the particulars in none of them now amount to the sum 42,360, which is said to
be the sum of each. But there is no proof that the list, which Nehemiah found,
was exactly the same with that from which Ezra copied; for many different
accounts might have been taken by the Persons appointed to number the people,
even under the same title of the Children of the Province that went up out of
Captivity, etc. and though they might find it very easy to agree in the sum
total, even to a unit, by reckoning the people, promiscuously, by fifties,
hundreds, or thousands, (in which method the want of pedigrees would cause no
difficulty,) yet in taking the numbers of the families separately they might be
very liable to differ, on account of the difficulty of ascertaining the
legitimacy of some particular persons in many of the said Families.

It must be observed too, that not one of the three lists mentions the number
of Priests, who were rejected for want of proper Registers, though the names of
their families are the very last in each list, just preceding the Sum total; so
that there is no doubt but that they are included therein notwithstanding:
therefore, as the consent of all three informs us, beyond contradiction, of the
real Sum total, so the want of the number of these Priests in all three lists
seems as clearly to prove that the particular numbers in each were not intended
to make up exactly the said Sum total; because it must otherwise seem very
unaccountable, that all these three Lists, as well as all the ancient versions,
which have been made from them, should happen to be corrupted in the same
identical place.

Dr. Kennicott seemed to be aware of this objection, when he first published
his Catalogue of names in his second Dissertation, page 508, etc. for he has
there omitted these three last names, which have no numbers specified, though
he has thought fit to add them to his second Edition in the printed sheet;
because he must have been convinced, that they ought to be included in the Sum
total, notwithstanding the triple evidence of these Lists, that no number ought
to be added to the same; and, consequently, that the exact number 42,360 was
never intended to be made appear from the addition of the particular Sums in
any of these Lists.


; viz. 42,360; and yet none of their accounts amount to that sum by upwards of
8000: so that were the names and numbers, which are particularized in each
book, much more different than they really are, they could not with justice be
accused of contradiction; because there is sufficient room left in any of these
histories for the mention of many different Families, which might have been
omitted by the others.

Now those who content themselves with the Doctor's Catalogue, without farther
examination, may indeed imagine, that he has shown them most clearly some great
corruptions of proper names, etc. because he has disposed them in such a manner
as to compare the name Bezai in Ezra with Hashum in Nehemiah: and again, Jorah
in Ezra with Bezai in Nehemiah, which should have been placed in the line
above; also Hashum in Ezra (which should have been placed two lines higher)
with Hariph in Nehemiah. Likewise he has placed Lod opposite to Jericho, Hadid
to Lod, Ono to Hadid, and Jericho to Ono, each in a wrong line. So that he must
either allow this to be a great mistake, or else that these names are "disposed
in such a manner" as to prove nothing at all of what he pretends (5) By way of
excuse for Dr. Kennicott, it has been urged, that the names are taken in the
order in which they stand in each writer, to show how the order of the original
Catalogue has been disturbed, and that he did not intend to compare those
names, which are manifestly different, as if meant for the same person: but as
no sufficient evidence has ever yet been produced, that the order of the names
has really been disturbed, in any of the Lists, from what it was when written
by the Authors of each; and as I have, in a former note, shown a probability,
that the Catalogue in all three Lists was not originally exactly the same; and
as this seems to be proved by these very variations in the order of the names;
therefore I think that the Doctor's manner of disposing the names cannot with
justice be defended.
.

At the head of the names the Doctor has placed a Title, viz. "The Twelve Chief
Men," by which people may unwarily be led to suppose that the chief men were
confined to the limited number of Twelve; but the Scriptures make no mention of
a limited number of Chief Men (6) Dr. Kennicott nevertheless informs us, in
page 508, (Second Dissertation,) that the twelve Chiefs represented the twelve
Tribes.
, but only of names: therefore it is not an inconsistency in the account of
Ezra to mention only Eleven names. On this account, likewise, the difference in
the names is of less consequence, because it is not easy to prove that
different persons were not intended to have been expressed thereby: on the
other hand, it may be as difficult to prove that they were; though there is
some appearance of a proof in one instance; viz. the names Reelius and Roimus
in Esdras (if we consider the Greek manner of expressing Hebrew names) will
answer very well to Reelaiah ((...)) in Ezra, and Raamiah ((...)) in Nehemiah;
which last names Dr. K. has compared together as supposing them to have been
originally the same, though the similar names just mentioned in Esdras give us
great reason to believe the contrary.

But, before I leave Dr. Kennicott's twelve Chief Men, I will endeavor to
clear up another difficulty, and will now take his side of the question to
prove, that he has done right in comparing Rehum in Ezra with Nehum in Nehemiah
as the name of one man, notwithstanding the great difference between them in
sound, which may at first sight seem to favor my suggestion about different
persons; and I shall have the more pleasure in doing this, because at the same
time I shall show most clearly that neither the one nor the other is corrupted.
Now every person, who is tolerably acquainted with the Chaldee and Syriac
tongues, must know, that N ((...)) is frequently changed for R ((...)) in words
derived from the Hebrew, and therefore it is much more easy to believe that
Nehemiah, like a Babylonian, wrote (...) for (...) ( Nehum for Rehum) than to
suppose that either of the words has been since corrupted.

Whatever difference there may be between Ezra and Nehemiah in numbers, (which
are of less consequence, as both of them fall so far short of the total,) yet
the difference in names is very immaterial, though Dr. Kennicott has disposed
them in such a manner as to make it seem very considerable.

There is but one name (viz. Hariph) in all this long list of Families,
mentioned by Nehemiah, which has any material difference from those mentioned
by Ezra, and there are but four names in Ezra, viz. Jorah, Magbish, Hagab, and
Asnah, which are not found in Nehemiah; therefore as there are no names in
Nehemiah to compare with these last, excepting the single name Hariph, it is
impossible for Dr. K. to prove any corruption of names in the Hebrew text
throughout this whole list of families.

Perhaps the Doctor may imagine, that the difference of names in the Apocryphal
Greek book of Esdras is a sufficient proof against the integrity of the Hebrew
text of the other two; otherwise he must allow, that his Catalogue proves very
little in this article of names. But, supposing that these differences were
real contradictions, (which they are not,) the suspicion of corruption must of
course fall on the book of (7) See Dr. Kennicott's second Dissertation on the
State of the Hebrew Text, pages 506 and 507, where he entirely gives up the
authority of the Book of Esdras: so that its testimony ought to have but very
little weight (especially with Dr. K. himself) in correcting the Text.
Esdras. First, Because the two best Greek copies of this same book (viz. the
Vatican and Alexandrian copies) differ very much from each other both in the
names and numbers.

Secondly, Because it is not of equal authority with the others, being
apocryphal, and therefore not received into the canon of the Scriptures.

And, Thirdly, Because two evidences against one, though they were all to be of
equal authority, would undoubtedly gain the cause in this critical trial.

But I will now endeavor to show that even the apocryphal Book of Esdras is
not so widely different from the others as the Doctor has made them appear in
his Catalogue; and of this I hope the few examples that follow will be a
sufficient proof.

Verse 15. Aterezias is in the original Greek (...), agreeable to the Hebrew
Ater-Hezekiah.

Verse 18. Bethsamos is (...) in the Alexandrian copy, which is very agreeable
to the Hebrew of Nehemiah, (...) Bithozmouth, or Bethazmaveth.

Verse 20. Gabdes is (...), the genitive of (...), agreeable to the Hebrew Gaba.

Verse 23. Annaas is (...), agreeable to the Hebrew Senaah.

Ver. 25. Carme appears very different from Harim in English, though they are
in the original tongues apparently the same word; for the H, in Harim, ((...)
in (...)) being a rough aspirate, is frequently expressed by the (...) in
Greek, as (...).

Verse 28. Jatal is (...) in the original Greek, agreeable to the Hebrew.

Also Teta is (...), which agrees very well with the Hebrew Hatita.

Sami is (...) in the Vatican copy, which agrees very well with the Hebrew
Shobai, for (...) by the Chaldaeans and Syrians was frequently exchanged both
for (...) and (...): likewise the word (...), as it is expressed in the
Alexandrian copy, is agreeable to the Hebrew (...).

Verse 29. Graba is (...) in the Vatican copy, and (...) in the Alexandrian,
agreeable to the Hebrew Hagaba.

Verse 30. Acua is (...) in the Greek, which is much nearer to Akkub.

Verse 31. Airus should be (...), which is plainly derived from (...) (Reaiah)
by prefixing the (...) or I, a thing very common in Hebrew names. Azia should
be (...), which very well corresponds with (...), called in English Uzza.

Verse 32. Charcus in the original is in the genitive (...), and agrees well
with Barkos.

Nasith is in the Vatican copy (...), which is sufficiently near to Neziah.

Verse 33. Azaphion is in the Alexandrian copy (...), which is much nearer to
Sophereth.

Pharira is in the Alexandrian copy (...), agreeable to the Hebrew (...)
Perida; though the Greek (...) expresses the (...) without dagesch.

Verse 38. Addus. The Doctor has had very little regard to the context, or he
would not have placed this name opposite to Barzillai, in order to show clearly
a great corruption; for he might have been there informed, that Addus married
Augia one of the daughters of Berzelus, and was named after his name. The word
(...) in the Vatican copy is rendered Berzelus, for the Chaldaeans frequently
changed the Hebrew (...) into (...) or (...).

I shall now endeavor to give you some proofs, that Dr. Kennicott has
condemned the proper names and numbers of the present Text of the
Old Testament, as being greatly corrupt, without giving himself the trouble
(for any thing that appears in the catalogue to the contrary) even to examine
the original text; and that he has contented himself with setting down the
names and numbers merely as they occurred in the English translation.

This is not less injustice than if a judge were to condemn a prisoner merely
from the report given of him by others, without permitting him to appear before
him to answer for himself.

My proofs of the Doctor's having merely copied the English Version, I shall
take out of the book of Esdras: because with that (I suppose) he meant to
correct the Hebrew Text.

Verse 13. He has taken the name Sadas, and the number 3222 only from the
English version; for in the Alexandrian copy it is (...) (near to the Hebrew
Azgad) 3622; and (...) 2322 in the Vatican copy: so that he trifles with the
originals if he thinks in this manner to show their corruptions.

Verse 14. He has placed the number 667 to Adonicam as in the English Version
of Esdras, whereas the Vatican copy reads 637, and the Alexandrian 647.

Verse 16. Ananias is called (...) and (...) in the original Greek.

Meterus is expressed by (...) in the original Greek.

Verse 25. Phasseron in the English Version and the Doctor's catalogue has the
number 1047, but in the Vatican copy it has 2047, and in the Alexandrian 2247.
Carme as in the English Version 1017, whereas the Vatican copy has only 217,
and the Alexandrian 2017.

Verse 37. Ladan, as in the English, which is (...) in the original.

Lastly, the number of servants, 7347, is plainly a mistake copied from the
English Version; for the original Greek, as well as the Syriac Version of the
same, is agreeable to the Hebrew 7337.

Now as many of the seeming differences (which the reader, as Dr. Kennicott
supposes in page 507, 2d Dissertation, will view with surprise) are not to be
found in the original, but are occasioned by the Doctor's copying merely from
the English Version; as many other differences in names are caused only by the
changing of letters, according to the common Chaldaean mode of expressing
Hebrew words, and therefore are not liable to the charge of corruption; and as
the most material differences between Ezra and Nehemiah are made by the
Doctor's having placed the names in the order in which they stand in each
writer, which has caused him to compare names manifestly different, as if meant
for the same person; so I must conclude (all these things considered) that not
only the disposition of names, but the whole performance is entirely unfair,
because the Doctor's motto leaves no room for allowances to be made for
whatever may have occasioned the several seeming differences, but condemns them
indiscriminately with a bold insinuation of falsehood, viz. Non potest verum
asseri quod ita diversum est.

The Doctor in his printed Sheet has indeed placed this motto close by the side
of his quotation from the apocryphal Book of Esdras, but it is plain that he
intended thereby to censure the differences in the whole catalogue, because he
prefixed the same unjust motto to his first publication of the Catalogue in his
2d Dissertation, p. 508.

I call this motto unjust, not only because it is there applied
indiscriminately to a quotation from two canonical Books of the Old Testament,
but because St. Jerome's authority is quoted for it, as if he had applied the
same words, for the same purpose, to the Book of Ezra, though it appears very
plainly by St. Jerome's preface to the said Book, that he was speaking only of
differences in the various copies of the Greek Version, when he made use of
those words.

But notwithstanding the many faults, which I have found in the writings of
this Gentleman, yet I have a much better opinion of him, than to suppose, that
he will ever endeavor to evade my censure of his Catalogue, by alleging that
he did not mean by it to show the corruptions of the original Text, but only of
the common English Translation, which he has here copied word for word; and
that he meant the English Translation where he has mentioned the present Text
of the Old Testament.

I say, notwithstanding the improbability that there is of the Doctor's ever
seeking such an evasion, yet he must excuse me if I endeavor to guard against
any sort of shifting-off from the point whatsoever.

Therefore I must observe, that the Text of any author cannot mean a
Translation, especially when a person is speaking of corruptions in it; for the
Corruption of any Text must mean some wilful or accidental alteration from the
original copy of the Author.

No Person therefore, speaking concerning the corruption in a Translation of
any Book, may say that they are corruptions of the present Text of the said
book; because at the same time perhaps the real and original text contains none
of those faults which he complains of.

So that, should the Doctor have really only meant to expose some defects,
which he might imagine he had discovered in the English Version, (though I
cannot think that he intended any such thing by this Catalogue,) yet it must
appear to the Eyes of all those who know him, and his present undertaking, as
if these unjust censures were levelled at the Original Text itself.

There are many other things, I believe, which might be alleged against this
Catalogue, but I shall only beg leave to trouble the reader with two more.

Though there might be many Jewish Families called after the names of places,
as Bethlehem, Ramah, Jericho, etc. yet perhaps Dr. K. may have difficulty to
prove that any Jewish Families were called Tel-melah, Telharsa, Cherub, and
Addan, ( Immer the next name being indeed an exception,) although he has placed
them in his list of families under the running Title of "The Children of."

Now, if he had attended to the context, even of the English Translation, he
might have understood, that these were really the names of places, and not of
families; for we are there informed, that the Families, afterward mentioned,
which went up from the said places, sought their register among those that were
reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found.

Another mistake he has likewise made in comparing Cherub and Addan, the names
of places in Ezra and Nehemiah, with Charaathalar and Aalar, the names of men
mentioned by Esdras; though the context plainly shows that there were no other
than what I say.

I will not however insist on these two last articles, because I presume that I
have before sufficiently proved, that this Catalogue does not show most clearly
the great corruption of proper names and numbers in the present Text of the
Old Testament.

Now, lest my censure of this catalogue should seem to strike obliquely at Dr.
Kennicott's present undertaking of collating the Heb. MSS. which has been
honored with the subscriptions of so many great and learned persons; I think
it necessary, for my own sake, as well as in justice to Dr. Kennicott, to
declare, that I think his collation of Hebrew MSS. a very laudable and useful
undertaking; and that there cannot be the least objection to his new Edition of
the Heb. Bible, if printed according to the proposals offered by him in the
year 1760; viz. ( not with a new Text, but) from one of the best Editions
already published, having the various readings inserted at the bottom of every
page.

I am, Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant, GRANVILLE SHARP.

THE END.

