THE TIMES.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

THE TIMES: A COMEDY.

AS IT IS NOW PERFORMING AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

By Mrs. GRIFFITH.

LONDON: Printed for FIELDING and WALKER, Paternoster-Row; J. DODSLEY,
Pall Mall; T. BECKET, Strand; and T. DAVIES, Russel Street, Covent Garden.

MDCCLXXX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE favorable reception which the following Comedy has met with from a candid
and generous Public, calls for my warmest acknowledgements; and though it may be
of little consequence to them to know the source of so slight an amusement, I
think myself bound by truth and gratitude to own, that the first idea of this
Piece was hinted to me by my ever-respected and lamented friend Mr. GARRICK,
who mentioned GOLDONI's Bourru Bienfaisant, as a sketch that, if adapted to our
times and manners, might be rendered pleasing to an English Audience. Those who
have read the French Piece must judge how far I have profited by GOLDONI's
work; but of this I am certain, that had Mr. GARRICK lived to afford me that
friendly assistance which he has done on former occasions, my Comedy would have
been more worthy of the reception with which it has been honored. I will,
however, hope that, with all its imperfections on its head, the same indulgence
which attended its representation, will follow it into the closet; and that the
Reader will allow me the only merit I presume to claim, that of meaning well.

I gladly take this opportunity of returning my thanks to my much-esteemed
friend, Mr. SHERIDAN, senior, for his kind attention to the getting up my Play,
my ill health not permitting me to attend one Rehearsal. But Mr. SHERIDAN's
friendship, wherever professed, is not of modern growth.

I have more than common acknowledgements to make to all the Performers in my
Comedy; particularly to Mrs. ABINGTON and Miss POPE, who both cheerfully
undertook Parts out of their usual line of acting, and in which they have both
excelled. I should be utterly unable to express my sentiments of Mr. KING, in
the character of SIR WILLIAM WOODLEY, if I were not at liberty seriously to
adopt the very words which he humorously, but justly, speaks of himself, under
a personated character, in The Critic: -- But it is impossible for language to
do justice to Mr. KING! Indeed, he more than merited those repeated bursts of
applause which he drew from a most brilliant and judicious Audience.

I flatter myself, this little tribute to distinguished merit will not be
deemed tedious or impertinent by the Public, for whose opinion I have the
sincerest respect, and to whom I have the honor to be

A much obliged, And most obedient Servant, THE AUTHOR.
London, Dec. 18, 1779.
PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. KING.

TO glow with ardour, and attempt with zeal
The reformation of the public weal,
Is the high duty of the COMIC MUSE;
And though keen Attic Salt allowed to use,
To season Precept, and with Art to tickle
The sores she means to wash with sharpest pickle,
Yet not the rosy, pulpited Divine,
Nor lank-hair'd Methodist with rueful whine,
Is more intent to root out Vice and Folly,
And make ye all lead lives discreet and holy. --
Yet why to clear the field were all their toil,
If weeds overspread not the luxuriant soil?
Congreve or Wesley, Whitfield or Moliere,
In vain might prompt the laugh, or bribe the tear,
If no man felt, or in himself, or neighbor,
Some failing to call forth the zealot's labor; --
If no fair dame descried, 'midst her acquaintance,
Some few who might be mended by repentance.
Loose as the buxom air, the Youth from College
Comes fraught with all Newmarket's hopeful knowledge;
In haste to spend the Estate, not yet his own,
Compleats his ruin ere his beard is grown;
And when to foreign climes he spreads the sail,
It Is not to enlarge his mind, but 'scape a jail.
Then blessed the Poet, happy the Divine,
When Folly gives the Ton from Fashion's Shrine!
But whilst the Priest and Satirist reprove
Those vices which provoke the wrath of JOVE,
Our Author, like the patient Angler sitting
To catch small fry, for humbler palates sitting,
Has served a Meal, not seasoned high with crimes. --
Taste it, and if approved, applaud THE TIMES.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Miss FARREN.

WHILE grave-paced Tragedy, with Oh's! and Starts!
Flies at high game, to move and mend your hearts,
We merrier folks, with spirits blithe and jolly,
Just perch upon some little sprig of folly:
For, in this Age, so pious, chaste, and grave,
To rail at Vice, must surely be to rave!
Yet thanks to here and there a modish fool,
The COMIC MUSE may glean some ridicule.
Jews will be Jews, if dupes can yet be found,
And if one frail one's left on English ground,
She Will find a Phaeton and pair of ponies
To elope -- for all men are not Maccaronies: --
Those precious Dears, at least, would make her wait --
'Twould be so vulgar, not to be too late.
Our sex -- but shall I charge the weaker kind?
Or can those fail to stray, whose guides are blind!
Let men reform themselves, they are our examples --
And goods prove seldom better than their samples.
In former times the gallant British Youth
Were formed for Chivalry, and Love, and Truth --
In such an Age, in such a virtuous Nation,
Love was in woman almost inspiration. --
But now, alas! I speak without a jest,
Women are not inspired -- they are but possessed.
Men are our pilots! They should mark the shelves;
For when they blame us, they reproach themselves.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Sir William Woodley, Mr. KING. Mr. Woodley, Mr. BRERETON. Colonel Mountfort,
Mr. PALMER. Counselor Belford, Mr. BENSLEY. Mr. Bromley, Mr. AICKIN. Forward
(Servant to Mr. Woodley), Mr. BADDELEY. Waters (Servant to Sir William), Mr.
WRIGHTEN.
WOMEN.
Lady Mary Woodley, Mrs. ABINGTON. Mrs. Bromley, Miss POPE. Louisa, Mrs.
BRERETON. Mrs. Williams, (Woman to Lady Mary), Mrs. COLLES.
Gentlemen and Ladies, Players at Whist, Loo, etc.

THE TIMES.
ACT I.
SCENE, A Dressing Room, Books, Music, Clothes scattered about. Mr. WOODLEY
dressing, FORWARD at a distance. SURE, never man was so suddenly involved as I
have been! -- and yet I cannot charge either my wife or myself with any
particular extravagance. We do but live like other people of our rank; and yet,
in less than four years that we have been married, an estate of four thousand
pounds a year has dwindled into nothing! -- Heigh-ho! -- (observing Forward
listening, he hums a tune) -- I can neither get this Air into my head, or out
of it.

Forward. I am often plagued so, myself, Sir, after the first night of a new
Opera, though I have a tolerable ear, and catch a tune pretty readily.

Enter a Footman, and delivers a Letter to Mr. Woodley. He reads it, and
appears agitated.
Woodley. What a proposal! -- I would die first. Get me pen, ink, and paper

(throws the letter on the table).
Forward. (going.) I Will fetch them instantly from the Library, Sir.


Woodley. You need not. I Will write there.

[Exit.
Forward. He seems devilishly flurried by that same letter. I wish I could come
fairly at its contents. It Is no billet-doux, I am certain; for I have never
found him tripping that way, since I have been in the family. It must be some
matter of business, and if it is, it may concern me as well as my master. I
have had my doubts that our affairs were going wrong, for some months past. Our
hall has been crowded with sturdy Tradesmen, and we have had sneaking Jews
closeted in the Library. -- Egad, I Will venture; for where interest is
concerned, even my honor must give way -- (takes up the letter). He may
surprise me, though. -- I wish his shoes creaked (looks out and listens). -- No
-- all is safe yet; and now for the indulgence of a reasonable curiosity. --
(reads.) I find it impossible to trifle any longer with your creditors; the
executions will therefore immediately be laid on, unless you can prevail on
Lady Mary to release her jointure; for there is not even a Jew in Duke's-Place
that will advance a guinea more on your estate, whilst that encumbrance remains.

I am your humble servant, JOHN FLEECE'EM.
P. S. I have scarce cash enough in my hands to discharge the enclosed small
bill of costs.






Here Is a bill, as long as his Taylor's!

Enter Mr. Woodley.
Woodley. Puppy! What are you meddling with those papers for? Give this letter
to James, and order him to carry it instantly.


Forward. Must I not put the things to rights, first, Sir?


Woodley. Do as I order you, and leave the room.


Forward. Ay, and the place, too, as soon as your Honor can provide yourself.
(aside.) I should not choose to depend upon a post obit for my wages.

[Exit.
Woodley. How shall I be able to reveal my situation to Lady Mary! My heart
bleeds for what she must suffer!

Enter a Footman.
Footman. Colonel Mountfort, Sir.


Woodley. Desire him to walk in.

Enter Colonel Mountfort.
Colonel. Good Morrow, Woodley! What, not dressed yet! I expected to find you
booted, and ready to set out for Newmarket. You Will be late on the turf. Your
horses run, I suppose? What matches have you made?


Woodley. None, Colonel. I shall not be there, this Meeting.


Col. You amaze me.


Woodley. (Aside.) Would I had never been there! I am sick of the diversion,
and shall never make another bett on the turf while I live.


Col. Why don't you dispose of your stud, then? It must be an enormous, and now
an useless expense.


Woodley. Horses are the least part of the extravagances incident to racing.


Col. That is selon, Woodley; for I have known several fortunes made on the
turf.


Woodley. True -- but by those only who had none to lose. They are surest to
win, who carry least weight.


Col. Take my advice, then, and sell your horses.


Woodley. Why, faith, I wish they were disposed of. But yet, I don't know, I
should be ashamed, I think, to advertise them, as it might look some-how as if
one could not afford to keep them. Ha! ha! ha!


Col. Ridiculous supposition!


Woodley. Ridiculous, indeed! That you know, Mountfort, is far from the case,
but I really am tired of the sport; and the Meeting, too, is at a time of the
year when there are so many more agreeable amusements to be met with in London,
so that I should be glad to get rid of them, with all my heart.


Col. Let me dispose of them for you, then. I Will be your Auctioneer, and try if
I cannot emblazon their pedigree with a little of that true humor which Charles
Surface bestows on his ancestors, when he sets up their pictures to sale.
Bucephalus, the famous Bucephalus, Gentlemen, descended in a right line from
the renowned quadrupede of that name, which had the honor of carrying a
greater brute than himself -- the immortal Alexander --


Woodley. Bravo! Colonel.


Col. Or shall we deduce his lineage from --


Woodley. You had better consult Tattersall, for their pedigree, as he is your
only herald in those points. Heigh-ho!


Col. Heigh-ho! This is but poor encouragement for me to enter on my new
profession. Surely there is something malignant in the air, at present; for
every man I have conversed with, this morning, seems rather to be depressed
with the gloom of November, than enlivened by the sunshine of April. I have
just now left Jack Knightly and Will Careless calculating, not their
nativities, but their deaths.


Woodley. I saw them both at Boodle's, yesterday, in good health.


Col. Not the more likely to live, for that, I assure you. However, it was not
their natural existence, but their necessary subsistence, that employed their
mathematics.


Mr. Woodley. You astonish me! -- Why, it is but lately they came into
possession of great estates.


Col. True: -- but then they have traveled the modern short and easy road to
ruin, of granting annuities for this twelvemonth past, and are now so nearly
arrived at the last stage of their journey, that I think Jack said he had but
two months to run; and Will flattered himself, that as the summer was
approaching, he might be able to hold out four. I advised their compounding the
terms, and running together for three months each.


Woodley. Poor fellows! I am sorry for them. (aside.) Would I could promise
myself even so long a reprieve.


Col. What! moping again, Woodley? You Will infect me, if I stay. -- Where are
the Ladies? -- In truth, my visit was to them, for I scarce hoped to find you
here. Are Lady Mary and your sister visible? or shall I pass on to your Uncle's
apartment, and pay my respects to him? I think there is a door of communication
to his house from this room. Shall I go this way?


Woodley. That may be a service of danger, Colonel; for I fear Sir William is
not at present much delighted either with his vicinity, or affinity, to any of
this family, except my sister.


Col. I am glad to hear you can except my sweet Louisa; for, notwithstanding
the brusqueness of his manners, I have such an opinion of the old Knight's good
sense and good nature, that I cannot readily acquit those he is offended with,
as wholly free from blame.


Woodley. I subscribe to your censure, as far as it relates to myself; but the
asperity of his behavior to Lady Mary, renders me extremely unhappy; and not
even my past obligations, or future prospects, shall ever make me acquiesce in
his treating my wife with disrespect.


Col. Allow me to say, Woodley, that persons so nearly connected, ought to
dispense with ceremony, in favor of sincerity.


Woodley. That Is a dangerous tenet, Colonel, and may be extended 'till
downright rudeness may be considered but as the privilege of family-chat.


Col. I think you have no cause for such an apprehension, in this case, as Sir
William is quite as singular for goodness of heart, as for a deficiency in that
outward varnish which too often supplies the place of it. But to compound the
argument, let us admit there may be faults on both sides.

Enter Lady Mary, and Louisa.
L. Mary. My dear Woodley, don't I look like a hag, today? Do you know that I
have not slept an hour, the whole night!


Woodley. I Am sorry for it, my dear: -- I hope it was not any illness that
prevented your rest.


L. Mary. No -- I was not the least ill; but the uncommon brilliancy of Lady
Mushroom's earrings, that I saw at the Opera, in the evening, twinkled all
night before my eyes, and would not suffer me to close them.


Col. Vanity has her vigils, I perceive, Ladies.


Louisa. That Is but fair, Colonel, as her festivals seem to bestow such supreme
delight on her votaries of both sexes.


L. Mary. I think, now, that a thousand pounds added to my own, would make them
out-blaze Lady Mushroom's; and I am sure my dear Woodley will not refuse me such a
trifle.


Woodley. I can refuse you nothing -- but we'll talk of it some other time.

Enter a Servant and delivers a Letter to Mr. Woodley, which he just runs his
eye over, and puts up.
L. Mary. What makes you look so grave, my Love? I should almost suppose that
letter was from your Uncle, if he did not live in the same house, and had not a
peculiar delight in seeing the effect of his own ill temper.


Louisa. The reprehensions of sincere friends proceed oftener from kindness,
than ill nature.


L. Mary. (to Woodley.) Will you send for Setwell tomorrow, my Dear, if you
are not at leisure today? I must have this bar taken out, the middle stone
larger, and the drop at least twice this size: and pray hurry him, for I must
positively wear them at Court, next Sunday.


Woodley. (musing) It must be so.


L. Mary. You don't attend to me, Mr. Woodley?


Woodley. O, yes, my Dear, I hear every word you say. Give me the earrings,
I Will carry them myself to the Jeweller.


L. Mary. Here they are; -- but don't be too extravagant: -- I would not have
more than a thousand pounds added, on any account.


Col. I give you credit for that last caution, Lady Mary; as it is uncommon to
hear a wife restraining her husband's generosity to herself, in this day.


L. Mary. His indulgence, Colonel, has ever exceeded my wishes.


Woodley. But never equalled my own. (aside.) My heart is breaking for her.

Enter a Servant, who gives a printed Paper to Lady Mary.
Servant. With Mrs. Bromley's compliments, Madam, and requests you will do her
the honor to call on her.


L. Mary. O! it is the Catalogue she promised to mark for me. My compliments,
and I shall be at her door in a few minutes. -- Louisa, are you disposed for
Christ^e's Rooms, this morning? There are abundance of fine things, and, of
course, fine people, to be there. I delight in an Auction, one meets with so
many things there, one never thought one wanted before.


Louisa. Though it is not my passion, I Will attend your Ladyship with pleasure.


L. Mary. (looking over the Catalogue) See, Woodley, what an unconscionable
creature Bromley is! She has marked a whole side of the Catalogue. -- A luster
that holds a hundred lights! I think I should like that, now, for our grand
saloon, in the country. I own, I should delight vastly to astonish our
neighbors in Dorsetshire -- if ever we go there. Have you any objection, my
Dear?


Woodley. But one, my Dear -- I am to settle with my Banker, to day.


L. Mary. No matter -- Mrs. Bromley shall be my Banker. Her purse is always at
the service of her friends. -- O, here is the sweetest set of fillagree
dressing-plate! -- I must have that, Woodley, instead of the one I have had
these two years. -- It Is absolutely Gothic.


Woodley. (aside.) I cannot wound her by restraint.


L. Mary. Don't you think Mrs. Bromley a delightful creature, Colonel? -- Two
of the largest Seve vases that have ever been imported. I positively must have
them. How good it was in the dear Bromley to note these articles! -- Why don't
you tell me how you like my friend?

(To the Colonel.)
Col. I have not the honor, Madam, of knowing her sufficiently to judge of her
character, and therefore can only speak of it as doubtful.


L. Mary. Doubtful, Colonel!


Louisa. In some cases, Lady Mary, to doubt, is rather to compliment, than to
censure.


Col. And, in other cases, to doubt, is to be certain.


L. Mary. You don't affect to be doubtful, I hope, Miss Woodley?


Louisa. By no means, I assure you. Mrs. Bromley's character is quite clear to
me.


L. Mary. If you talk in this style, Louisa, I shall certainly conclude that
you are jealous of the dear Bromley.


Louisa. I know not on what account I should be so, except in your good graces;
for I hope you don't think me vain enough to attempt rivalling her with her
present Cecisbeo, Sir Harry Granger.


Col. That ridiculous compound of affectation and epicurism! who ruminates upon
every meal, and tries to preserve the relish of his sauces, by a repetition of
their ingredients in every new company that admits him.


L. Mary. You are monstrously censorious, Colonel; but I will allow that he is
a little out of fashion, at present; and for that reason, I have forbidden his
ever coming into this house. The Bromleys dine here today, my Dear (to Mr.
Woodley.) -- But we lose time. The Auction may begin, and some of the dear
things I have set my heart upon be gone before we get there. -- I shall never
forget that old frightful Mandarin, Lord Gobble, for whipping up the Seve China
Dejeuner from me, at the last sale.


Col. Will your Ladyship permit me to have the honor of attending you?


L. Mary. There Is a vacant seat in the coach, and you shall be welcome, if you
will not be spiteful. Good morrow, Woodley! Come, Louisa.

(Exeunt Ladies, and the Colonel.)
Woodley. So -- I am once more left at leisure for my own reflection. Solitude
is said to be a relief to the unhappy; but thought only serves to double my
distress. Surely my poverty begins to be apparent, or Knightly would not write
so pressingly. -- His note surprises me. (Reads) Dear Woodley, I desire you
will, on receipt of this, let me have the three hundred pieces you lost to me
at our last Meeting, as I am just setting off for Newmarket, and must have some
weight of metal to balance the scales on the turf. I shall wait at home for you
exactly one hour, by the best going watch in Europe, and must have the cash by
that time, pos.

Yours ever, T. KNIGHTLY.




The peremptory style of this billet alarms me! Knightly used to be a careless,
liberal fellow; but Mountfort told me just now, that he is on the verge of
ruin. His state, however, is to be envied, in comparison of mine. He falls
alone. No wife, no family, at once to share and aggravate his wretchedness.
I Will go this moment and acquit me of his demand, by parting with these toys --
(takes up the earrings). How much my Mary's beauty added to their luster! Let
me fly from the thought.

[Going. Enter Mr. Bromley.
Bromley. Just on the wing, my dear friend! How lucky thus to catch you flying,
as it were!


Woodley. The good fortune is rather mine, Mr. Bromley.


Bromley. No, no; you compliment. -- But where are the dear, the divine Ladies?
-- May Not I hope to be cheared with one glance from their bright eyes? -- What
a beautiful creature is Lady Mary! -- Do you know she wants but little, very
little, my dear friend, to be the top of the tree, the very paragon of fine
taste and bon ton; and I think she will very soon acquire that little. My Dame
has an excellent hand at touching up the last polish.


Woodley. I allow Mrs. Bromley to be perfectly elegant.


Bromley. No, no; there you are wrong. -- She is pretty, lively, and so forth,
but somewhat subsy, you know. -- But Lady Mary, Lady Mary is the thing! -- But
what is here? (taking up the earrings) -- A new purchase, I presume? They are
fine, very fine, indeed! What now may the value be? -- Some thousands, I
suppose.


Woodley. They did cost a pretty large sum, when they were bought.


Bromley. Not new, then, I perceive -- but fine, very fine, indeed!


Woodley. Lady Mary don't quite like the fashion -- the setting, I mean; -- and
therefore I should not be sorry to part with them -- and buy others.


Bromley. (aside.) O, that alters the case considerably! Let us see -- let us
see. Why now, upon examining them closely, they appear but middling, very
middling, indeed. I don't wonder Lady Mary should not like them -- no luster --
very old fashioned -- they will sell for little or nothing, believe me.


Woodley. They cost me fifteen hundred pounds, about four years ago.


Bromley. Fifteen hundred pounds! -- You amaze me! -- You must have been sadly
imposed upon! very sadly, indeed, my dear friend! What monstrous cheats these
tradesfolks are! -- Why, these jewels, now, will not bring above three hundred.


Woodley. That Is more than the common disproportion between buying and selling,
I should think, Mr. Bromley.


Bromley. I mean in the Trade, Mr. Woodley. Among the Trade, diamonds are a
drug, a mere drug, indeed: and money is a rare jewel in all trades now, I Will
assure you. A Gentleman, or a friend, perhaps, might give more. Come, for the
frolic's sake, I Will turn jeweller myself, and offer you a cool five hundred for
them. What say you? Is it a bargain, Woodley?


Woodley. (aside. I cannot bear the thought of carrying them abroad to sell! --
Well, if you really think they are worth no more --


Bromley. Nay, I have over-rated them; but I never compute by pounds,
shillings, and pence, when dealing with a friend. Diamonds are, as I told you
before, a mere drug; and cash, cash, my dear boy, your only valuable commodity.
Here, here it is (looking in his pocketbook). -- I have not quite so much
about me, I find.


Woodley. That Is unlucky (looking at his watch); for I want three hundred of
it, this very instant.


Bromley. (aside.) Does the wind sit in that point? -- I Will see -- I Will see. O!
here is just the three hundred, cut and dry, my boy. You shall have the other
two this evening at Boodle's. We'll cut a card, or throw a cast for it, or how
you will.


Woodley. I shall not go to Boodle's tonight -- nor do I think I shall ever play
again.


Bromley. (aside.) The knowing-ones are taken in. I would not have given so
much for the jewels, if I had thought so. -- What, not play? That Is good, very
good, indeed! You have a sort of lover's quarrel to the dice, I perceive. But
though they have, I confess, used you a little scurvily, they will make you
amends some other time. One lucky hit, you know, may repay all your losses.


Woodley. They have so often, and so fatally deceived me --


Bromley. That you will trust them again, for all that.


Woodley. I think not. But we shall meet at dinner?


Bromley. Yes, yes; I obey the dear, sweet Lady Mary's invitation. I shall
bring the money with me. Besides, I recollect, that you and I have a little
matter of business to settle; but it shall not break in upon our pleasures, though.
You shall have no trouble but just to set your name. A memorandum is all I
want, my boy.


Woodley. I have a particular reason for desiring that you will not mention the
transaction of the jewels to my wife, or even to yours.


Bromley. Secret -- secret as the grave, my dear friend -- trusty as steel, my
boy. You may always depend upon honest Bob Bromley. We shall be with you at
five, though that is rather early (going). -- Nay, no ceremony.


Woodley. I am going out this moment.

[Exeunt. Enter Forward.
Forward. I have listened and pryed to good purpose, I think, and am thoroughly
confirmed in my resolution of shifting my quarters, tomorrow morning. Up
tents, and away, then! But I cannot help being a little concerned at leaving my
master and Lady; because I am sure I shall never get so good a place again. All
masters -- no servants -- every one did as he liked. It grieves me to think
what a hand the rest of the servants have made of them. There Is the lazy
Housekeeper, the drunken Butler, the cribbing Coachman! -- But what signifies
moralizing! Let me look about me a little, and see if there be any small
matters lying loose, that are of no farther use to my master, and may be of
some to me. -- (Takes up a pair of lace ruffles) These have been worn, but
never washed, and he may miss them. No, that is not probable, as he has at least
twenty pair more than he knows any thing of -- (puts them in his pocket). This
snuff box, too, is but a bauble, of more curiosity than value: I shall accept
of it as a keep-sake -- (pockets it).

Enter Sir William, from the middle door.
Sir Will. By the quietness in the nest, the birds are flown; and I am glad of
it. My apartment smokes a little, today. I Will have the tables brought here,
and try if the game be recoverable: though, to be sure, I have but little hopes;
for sure there never was any man so unlucky. -- Waters!


Forward. (aside) What! is old Square-Toes ruined, too? Egad, I should be glad
of that.


Sir Will. (seeing Forward) -- Why, hey, what are you doing here? -- Waters! I
say --


Forward. Only removing a few useless things of my master's, Sir.


Sir Will. Then you will certainly remove yourself; for I know nothing half so
useless, as a pert, coxcomical, lazy Valet-de-Chambre.


Forward. As your Honor chooses to be alone, I shall retire directly.

[Exit.
Sir Will. Retire! There Is a phrase now for a footman! But these puppies all
mimic their masters, even in their language, and what is worse, in their vices.
I Will answer for it that fellow now, is as idle, as dissipated, and extravagant,
as my nephew himself. But why do I think of a man whose misconduct has so
totally alienated my affections? Yet he was a sweet boy at Eton, and a fine
youth at College. His indiscreet marriage has ruined him -- a fine Lady -- a
Lady of Quality, forsooth, and without a fortune to support her vanity. But, no
matter now -- I renounce them both. -- Waters! -- I wish Louisa was removed
from this scene of folly and extravagance, and safely settled in the country.
There is no other place for a woman to be secure in.

Enter Waters. I wish you would advance, Mr. Slow-boots. I have called you at
least a dozen times.


Waters. I came the very moment --


Sir Will. Well, well, well -- apologies take up time. -- Bring the back-gammon
tables here, then go to Counselor Belford, and desire him to come to me,
directly. -- (Waters going through the middle door) -- Why don't you go the
shortest way?

(pointing to the side-door.)
Waters. Your Honor bid me bring the tables, first.


Sir Will. Of what use are they, when Belford is not here to play? -- (Waters
going) -- No, come back, and fetch the tables, and I Will place the men just to
show you how I was gammoned, and I think you will allow there never was such luck.


Waters. I am utterly ignorant of every point of the game, Sir.


Sir Will. Stupidity in the abstract! How often have you been in the room,
while Belford and I have been playing! Had we been saying or doing any thing we
ought not, you would have picked it up fast enough, I warrant you.


Waters. Indeed, Sir --


Sir Will. No words -- I hate prate -- fly to Mr. Belford's -- [Exit Waters] --
I Will go and show Jones how it was; for though she is my Housekeeper, now, she is
a Parson's daughter, and must understand backgammon. I am sure she will be
astonished at Belford's move.

[Exit.
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE continued. Enter, at opposite doors, Mr. WOODLEY, and Mr. BELFORD.
Woodley. HOW truly do I rejoice to see my good friend Mr. Belford! But may I
flatter myself that the honor of this visit was intended for me?


Belford. I am sorry, my dear Sir, that there should be a necessity for
discriminating the person to whom my respects are paid, in a family I so
equally regard, and which was once so happily united.


Woodley. If indeed you regard this family, or ever had any friendship for me
-- But I cannot speak.


Belford. I am already apprized of your difficulties, and would spare you the
pain of even hinting at them, were it in my power to redress them.


Woodley. Then be assured it is; for amidst all my distresses, nothing afflicts
me half so much as Sir William's implacable resentment against Lady Mary and
me. If he were but reconciled --


Belford. That is, in plain English, my young friend, if he could be reconciled
to your expensive mode of living, he ought in honor to assist in supporting
it. But that, I doubt, will never be brought to pass, though Sir William is
both rich and generous --


Woodley. To all the world, but me.


Belford. In this case, then, you should suspect your own conduct, rather than
his character. -- But remonstrances are useless, now; and I promise to use my
utmost interest to bring about a reconciliation. But I much fear that we shall
not be able to get Lady Mary included in the family-compact; for I know no man
more resolute in what he conceives to be right, than Sir William.


Woodley. My honor, as well as my love, obliges me to vindicate her; and I
here pledge them both, that she is free from blame.


Belford. I am glad to find you still a lover, Mr. Woodley; but I who am but a
friend, in this question, cannot help thinking, that if Lady Mary had spent more
of her time in Dorsetshire, and less at Spa, Paris, and other places of
dissipation and extravagance, she would have been more entitled to Sir
William's esteem, and you would have had less need of his assistance.


Woodley. The fault was mine alone. -- Vain of possessing such a treasure --


Belford. You childishly exposed it to the gaze of fops and foreigners. -- And
let me tell you, Mr. Woodley, you are a lucky man, in these licentious times,
to have preserved such a gem pure and entire, even at the expense of your other
possessions. But, prithee, why don't you now retreat into the country?


Woodley. My wife is quite ignorant of my present circumstances -- I have not
resolution to acquaint her with them -- and to propose quitting London, in this
gay season, without assigning some cause --


Belford. Would, in your situation, be extremely prudent.


Woodley. I cannot bear the thought of giving her uneasiness --


Belford. And so cruelly prefer the evil to the cure.

Enter WATERS.
Waters. I humbly beg your Honor's pardon for my intrusion, but I have been at
your Chambers, and at the Temple Coffee-house, to look for you. My master is
quite impatient to see you, Sir, and one of Mr. Woodley's servants told me you
were here.


Woodley. This seems to fall out luckily. I will not detain you a moment. Dear
Belford, remember what a cause you have in hand.


Belford. Do not distrust my attention to my client, though I cannot warrant
success to the suit.

[Exit Woodley.
Waters. I cannot tell your Honor how proud I am to meet you. My good, dear
master has been as angry with me for not finding you at home, as if I had
committed the greatest of faults; and I would die rather than vex him.


Belford. I know my friend's hasty temper, perfectly well; but I also know that
his goodnature is an over-match for it.


Waters. O, Sir! you don't know how good and generous he is.


Belford. You are mistaken, Waters; I am no stranger to Sir William's
benevolence.


Waters. Indeed, Sir, with submission you are; -- for he takes as much pains to
conceal his goodness, as others do to reveal theirs. He would never forgive me
if he knew I mentioned it; but my heart is so glad, I cannot help telling your
Honor that he apprenticed my eldest boy, last week, and pays for the schooling
of the two youngest.


Belford. These are noble bounties, I confess, Waters; but I think your
feelings on the occasion do as much honor to human nature, as the Knight's
generosity; -- for a liberal hand is more frequently to be met with, than a
grateful heart. -- But where is Sir William?


Waters. I left him going to take a turn in the garden, and I don't in the
least doubt but he will come in as cool as a cucumber, though when he went down
stairs he was as angry with me, as if he had never done me any good.


Belford. Show me the way, and I Will go to him directly.

[Exeunt through the middle door. SCENE changes to a Dressing Room, an elegant
Toilet. Lady MARY, and Mrs. BROMLEY.
L. Mary. (taking up the dressing plate) They are pretty, I confess; but even I
think them rather dear.


Mrs. Bromley. What an idea for my dear Lady Mary! Do you know, now, that the
equipage of Mrs. Stockwell's toilet, the Broker's wife, cost thirteen hundred
pounds?


L. Mary. I remember her at Paris -- an overdressed Thing! -- I thought she had
been a Jeweller's wife, and looked upon her as a stalking shew-glass, to expose
her husband's goods for sale. But the poor man, I suppose, was ruined by her
extravagance.


Mrs. Bromley. Yes, yes, he was done-up, very soon after. But the woman had wit
in her madness, however; for she secreted her paraphernalia, and her chariot
has rolled on her personal fortune, ever since. Women are much wiser,
nowadays, than they used to be.

Enter Mrs. WILLIAMS.
Mrs. Williams. Your Ladyship's masquerade dress is just come home, Ma'am.


L. Mary. Let me see! let me see!


Mrs. Bromley. How beautiful! My dear creature, You Will look a Goddess, and
you will move a Queen!


L. Mary. Ah, Bromley! I have just recollected that I cannot go as a Sultana. I
have sent my earrings to be altered, and the rest of my jewels will make no
figure without them.


Mrs. Bromley. Hire, hire, my Dear.


L. Mary. I don't understand you.


Mrs. Bromley. What a baby, Mrs. Williams! but it is a sweet baby, we must
allow. Why, for fifty, or a hundred guineas, at most, you may hire as many
diamonds as would out-blaze the throne of Dehli.


L. Mary. A hundred guineas! What a sum for one night's vanity! No -- I Will go
as a Shepherdess.


Mrs. Bromley. That would be a disguise, indeed, in these days of martial
ardour, when our whole Sex have exchanged their old fashioned simplicity of
dress and manners, for the military air, the smart cockade, and lively
regimental.


L. Mary. But one may be allowed to look innocent in masquerade, I hope?


Mrs. Bromley. Ha, my little fly one! have I found you out? -- Nothing but a
Corydon could have inspired such an idea.


L. Mary. All dresses, I fancy, are alike to Mr. Woodley.


Mrs. Bromley. Mr. Woodley! Ridiculous! Why, surely, my dear, you don't think
of exposing yourself to be the jest of the whole Town, by going en groupe with
your husband to a Masquerade! -- Would not the dear, good natured Sir Harry
Granger, or even the wise Colonel Mountfort, make a better Corydon for our
sweet Shepherdess, think you?


L. Mary. How idly you talk! -- Mountfort is Louisa's Cecisbeo, and Sir Harry,
I fancy, would be proud to enlist under your banner, in the same capacity.


Mrs. Bromley. This is wilful blindness, Lady Mary, for you cannot avoid seeing
that Sir Harry is your slave. I pity him with all my heart, and w^sh you would
do so too. Poor soul, how he doats upon you!


L. Mary. You Will make me angry, Mrs. Bromley. -- But, prithee, why must I be
treated like a picture for a drawing room, not to be hung up without its
companion? I want no Corydon, I assure you.


Mrs. Bromley. No, to be sure -- quite lonely and discreet. Come, come, my dear
Lady Mary, you were not designed for a simple Shepherdess: -- the Sultana is
your natural character -- born to command, and be adored. But you must and
shall be fine; for let the men say what they will of native charms, our
diamonds add considerably to the luster of our eyes. What say you, Mrs.
Williams?


Mrs. Williams. There never was a truer word spoken, Ma'am; for though my Lady
wants no offsettings, and looks like an angel in any dress --


L. Mary. A truce with your flattery, Williams! -- Take away the dress -- I
shall consider of it.


Mrs. Williams. (aside) Nobody's flattery will go down, now, but Mrs.
Bromley's, it seems.

[Exit.
L. Mary I should like the Sultana, I confess; but --


Mrs. Bromley. But what?


L. Mary. Cannot you guess? You know I have been stripped at play, and have
squandered a great deal of money, this morning. I am sorry I bought these toys.


Mrs. Bromley. Bless me! how you talk? you that have the fondest, and the most
indulgent husband breathing!


L. Mary. For that very reason, my dear Bromley.


Mrs. Bromley. You really talk like a wife of the last century. -- Here Is a
fuss, indeed, about a poor hundred guineas! Do you know, now, that I would not
have this story told of you, in any polite circle, for treble the sum. -- If it
should take wind, you would be sneered to death with encomiums on your Ladyship's
very uncommon prudence.


L. Mary. Why, I should not care to be thought too prudent, neither; so I beg
you will not mention it to any one.


Mrs. Bromley. You may rely on my friendship. -- And now, my Dear, what jewels
would you have?


L. Mary. You cannot imagine how much distressed I am, upon this trifling
subject. I Am resolved not to ask Mr Woodley for money, today.


Mrs. Bromley. Borrow, then. You may command thousands, to my knowledge. Sir
Harry is as rich as all Duke's Place, and I am sure he would be happy to lay
all his treasures at your feet.


L. Mary. Borrow money from Sir Harry Granger! -- You cannot mean it!


Mrs. Bromley. Ha, ha, ha! Sure never mortal was so easily taken-in, as my dear
Lady Mary! You could not think me serious, I hope. -- Not but I know many wives
--


L. Mary. Who are a reproach to their Sex, perhaps.


Mrs. Bromley. No preaching, if you love me! -- I shall get the jewels for you,
on my own credit; for I am resolved that you shall not only be the loveliest,
but the finest woman, in all that dear, gay, motley Assembly, tonight.


L. Mary. I thank you, my dear Bromley. -- I think the dress will become me. --
But I owe you a monstrous deal of money, I Am afraid, already. -- How much is it?


Mrs. Bromley. A trifle, a very trifle, indeed, between such friends! and I
shall be apt to quarrel with you, if ever you mention it again -- let the men
settle it. -- I shall bring the jewels with me at five; 'till then, adio mia
cara.


L. Mary. Mr. Bromley comes, I hope?


Mrs. Bromley. Lord! who knows any thing of a Husband's engagements, my Dear?
But there is no doubt of his attending your summons, on any occasion, for my
poor Bromley dies for you. You are quite a monopolizer, Lady Mary!

[Exit.
L. Mary. What a rattle you are!

[Exit. SCENE changes to Sir WILLIAM 's Apartment Sir WILLIAM and Mr. BELFORD
at Back-gammon.
Sir Will. I tell you, I will hear no more of him. -- If he has destroyed his
fortune, he shall not destroy my peace. -- (throws the dice) Cinque ace. --
Come, come, it is your throw.


Belford. It is amazing, Sir William, that you can be so anxious about this
trifling game, and at the same time so indifferent about your nephew!


Sir Will. I am in earnest about every thing, Mr. Belford; consequently, in my
resentment against my silly nephew, who is a slave to his wife, and a victim to
his vanity. Will you take the box, I say?

(hastily)
Belford. Gently, gently, my good Sir William. -- You have put yourself in a
passion, already.

(rises)
Sir Will. No, Sir, it is you that have put me in a passion. -- I hate gently,
and all the phlegmatic people in the world.


Belford. And yet you and I have been friends, these twenty years.


Sir Will. True, true, my dear Belford! -- and, perhaps, I am indebted to your
gently, for our continuing so. -- But don't put my patience to any further
trial, at present. -- Sit down, I entreat you.


Belford. But one word more, and I have done.


Sir Will. Well, I am patient, but don't harp again on the same string -- No
more of Mr. Woodley.


Belford. You have a noble fortune, Sir William!


Sir Will. Yes, thanks to Providence! more than I have occasion for myself, and
therefore I consider the overplus but as a bank for my friends. -- Do you want
money, Belford? Name the sum, and take it.


Belford. Thank you, Sir William, but it is not my wants I wish you to supply,
but those of your nephew.


Sir Will. What! at it again? I will not give him a doit -- not a doit, Sir. My
fortune shall not be lavished to indulge his vanity, or supply his prodigality.


Belford. I am persuaded he has so thoroughly reflected upon his past folly,
that he would make a proper use of your future kindness.


Sir Will. Let him alter his conduct, first, if he expects I should alter mine.
His repentance may merit my bounty; but my liberality shall not prevent his
reformation.


Belford. But if Mr. Woodley should be undone, what will become of your niece?


Sir Will. Let her share his fate, as she has done his folly -- she has earned
it. -- An extravagant woman, that could not be content to live at one of the
finest Seats in England, but must frisk it to Spa and Paris, forsooth, like the
rest of the silly English, to squander their money, and be laughed at by
Foreigners!


Belford. I understood Miss Woodley had remained in England.


Sir Will. What, Louisa! I did not speak of her -- she is the best girl on
earth. -- No, no -- she shall not suffer for other people's faults. If he has
involved her fortune too, I shall take care of her.


Belford. Do you intend she shall live with you?


Sir Will. No, Sir, no -- I Will have no mistress in my house, but old Jones. I
would not displace her for a Duchess -- it would break the poor woman's heart.
-- But I shall take proper care of Louisa. -- (aside) I wish she was well
married, out of the way.


Belford. But now give me leave, Sir William --


Sir Will. Neither now, nor then, Mr. Belford. The matter is all settled in my
mind, and the game gone quite out of my head. I Will send for Louisa, directly,
and talk this matter over with her. -- Waters! (enter Waters) Step in to Mr.
Woodley's, and desire my niece to come to me immediately.

[Exit Waters.
Belford. I am sorry I have been so unsuccessful in my suit, Sir William, and
wish you a good-day.


Sir Will. You are not angry with me, I hope, Belford? -- I am as sorry for my
nephew's indiscretion as you or any one can be.


Belford. If you are, you will certainly assist him. (aside) But I know it must
be all done in your own way.


Sir Will. Dine with me, and we'll play out our party, after dinner.


Belford. With all my heart, but I shall be too many for you, as usual.

[Exit.
Sir Will. If I had not the greatest regard imaginable for my old friend, I
should hate him abominably, for always beating me at backgammon. But let me
consider, now -- She has ten thousand pounds of her own. I will give her as
much more, at present, and my whole estate, after my death. -- No, no, -- that
will not be acting justly -- Woodley may have children -- They have not offended
me, though their father has; -- and if they should be half so pleasant as he
was when he was a child, I should love them dearly, as I once did him. But I
must strive to forget all that business, now. -- Here comes Louisa.

Enter Lady MARY, who keeps at a distance, without Sir WILLIAM 's looking at
her.
Sir Will. Well, child; you know, I suppose, that my hopeful nephew is totally
ruined --


L. Mary. Sir!


Sir Will. Why don't you come nearer? I wouldn't have all the house hear me. --
(she advances) My nephew, I tell you, is ruined.


L. Mary. I could not have imagined, Sir, when you did me the honor of sending
for me, that you meant to alarm or insult me.


Sir Will. (looking at her) I send for you! I insult you! -- That blundering
Waters! -- No, Madam, you are the last person in the world, except your
husband, that I should think of sending for.


L. Mary. The respect I have for you, Sir, as Mr. Woodley's relation, must make
it extremely painful to me to know that I am so disagreeable to you.


Sir Will. Respect for me, Madam! I don't desire your respect, nor deserve your
respect. -- (aside) If she talks in this way, she will stagger my resolution. --
I wanted to speak with my niece, Madam, and my blundering servant --


L. Mary. Has brought you one that is proud of that title, Sir.


Sir Will. You have a title of your own, Madam. -- I hate titles -- and one
reason why I never married, was because I would not have my wife called my Lady.


L. Mary. I see, Sir William, that you are not inclined --


Sir Will. To converse with Ladies, Madam. -- I would speak with Louisa, upon
business.


L. Mary. I shall no longer obtrude on you, Sir; but before I go, must request
you will explain what you meant by saying that Mr. Woodley was ruined.


Sir Will. (aside) She knows nothing of the matter, I find, and I cannot bear
to shock her. -- I think, Madam, you ought to understand that matter as well as
I. -- Ruined! -- Why, it is a common phrase, at present, Madam. -- Dukes, Lords,
and Commons, nay, the whole Nation, are ruined, Madam -- it is quite the Ton;
and I suppose that neither Mr. Woodley nor you would choose to be out of the
fashion.


L. Mary. I hope, Sir, you will allow that Mr. Woodley's fortune, and my rank,
entitles us --


Sir Will. To be ruined in good company, Madam. -- (aside.) She has touched the
right key now. I Am no more afraid of her. Had she fallen a-crying, I might have
been ruined too.


L. Mary. I am sorry to find, Sir, that your prejudices against Mr. Woodley and
me are so strong, that it would be in vain for us to attempt a justification of
our conduct.


Sir Will. Quite so, indeed, Madam.


L. Mary. I shall therefore take my leave, Sir.

(going.)
Sir Will. (aside.) You have mine, with all my heart.


L. Mary. Shall I send Miss Woodley to you, Sir?


Sir Will. No, Madam, no; I Will send for her when I am a little more composed.
Your servant -- your servant, Madam. -- [Exit Lady Mary] -- Waters! -- What a
martyrdom has this fellow exposed me to! -- Waters! -- (enter Waters) -- Thou
eternal blockhead, dolt, dunderhead --


Waters. Does your Honor speak to me?


Sir Will. No; to the door; to the window; to this table -- Matter itself has
more intelligence than thou.

Enter a Servant.
Serve. Would your Honor please to have dinner served? It is quite ready.


Sir Will. Let it wait.


Serve. Mr. Belford is below, Sir,


Sir Will. Well, well, I Will go then. What a provoking blunder!

[Exeunt. SCENE, Mr. WOODLEY's Dressing Room. Mr. WOODLEY alone. If Belford
should succeed with my uncle, all may yet be well. Something must be done, and
quickly too. I can no longer endure the agony of endeavoring to impose upon
the world, and myself, by personating a borrowed character. But here she comes,
who innocently adds to all my sufferings, and tips the darts of poverty with
anguish!

Enter Lady Mary.
L. Mary. O! my dear Woodley! such a trial ordeal as I have undergone! I
declare I would rather be buried alive, in Dorsetshire, than endure such
another tete-a-tete. He has done every thing, but beat me.


Woodley. I don't comprehend you -- Whom do you mean?


L. Mary. Nay, that is downright perverseness; for I am certain there is not
such another creature upon earth, as your precious Uncle.


Woodley. I hope you have not quarrelled with him, Lady Mary?


L. Mary. No, truly; he has spared me that trouble, by quarrelling with me,
most outrageously.


Woodley. (aside.) Then all my hopes in Belford are at an end. I am very sorry
you happened to come in his way.


L. Mary. I Am sure so am I, Mr. Woodley. The interview was not of my seeking;
and though I was as mild as a lamb, he was as rude as a bear. The deuce take
his blundering servant for bringing me into such a scrape!


Woodley. I should hope that your regard for me would have prevented --


L. Mary. And so it did, I assure you; for I did not laugh, though he said
something so ridiculous, about your being ruined, the Nation being ruined, and
all the world being ruined, that I had much ado to keep my countenance.
However, I behaved very decently all the while, and even condescended to
entreat that he would give you leave to justify your conduct to him.


Woodley. And did my dear Mary obtain his permission?

(with eagerness.)
L. Mary. Your earnestness startles me, Mr. Woodley. Of what consequence can
the old-fashioned opinion of an obstinate Don Choleric, who hates us both, be
of to us? I wish he would endow an Hospital with his fortune, that our
solicitude to please might end with our expectations.


Woodley. Mine should not, I assure you.


L. Mary. That must be as you please, Mr. Woodley; but I declare, that from
this hour --


Woodley. Make no rash vows, Madam. You know not how much you have been, or may
be, indebted to Sir William.


L. Mary. I indebted to him! No, Mr. Woodley, that I positively deny.

Enter Mr. and Mrs. Bromley.
Mr. Bromley. (entering.) And so do I, with both my hands, and all my heart;
for be the question in Law, Physic, or Divinity, I Will pawn my life on it, that
Lady Mary is right.


L. Mary. I am much obliged to you for your good opinion, Mr. Bromley.


Mrs. Bromley. And I wager on Mr. Woodley's side, were it only to keep up the
argument. The question, then?


Mr. Bromley. Ay, ay, the question?


L. Mary. (to Mrs. Bromley.) There are secrets in all families, you know, my
dear Bromley.


Woodley. And it is always prudent to keep them so, Lady Mary.


Mr. Bromley. Very good, very good, indeed.


Mrs. Bromley. Curiosity, thank heaven, is not one of my failings. It Is ever a
mark both of ignorance and ill-breeding. I am astonished how any one can be
infected with such an impertinent weakness.


Mr. Bromley. Yes, yes, my Dame is quite above all silly curiosity -- (aside.)
The veriest eaves-dropper that ever existed. She Will not rest 'till she has got
the whole story, and I shall have it the moment we get home.

Mrs. Bromley shows a Box of Jewels to Lady Mary.
L. Mary. They are quite charming, indeed! I shall outblaze the Queen of
Diamonds.


Woodley. What jewels are these? I hope you have not bought them, Lady Mary!


L. Mary. You hope I have not bought them -- What an odd speech, Mr. Woodley!
No; I have only borrowed them, and will lend you part, if you will go en Turc. I
can spare enough to ornament his turban, cannot I, Bromley?


Mrs. Bromley. Surely you don't persist in making a family party, Lady Mary?


L. Mary. (to Mr. Woodley.) You shall have these.


Woodley. Prithee, don't teize me, Lady Mary -- I shall not go to the
Masquerade.

[Exit.
L. Mary. (aside.) Don't teize me! Something extraordinary must have disturbed
him.


Mr. Bromley. You Will have a charming squeeze at your rout, Lady Mary! Not a
vacant chair to be found in the whole house, I warrant you.


L. Mary. You flatter me. No; I believe there will hardly be any body. Do you
know that I have had a hundred and ninety-one excuses within these two days?


Mrs. Bromley. Ay, but you will have nine hundred and ninety people, for all
that. I hope Lady Sitfast will not come! That woman never orders her carriage till
near one, though she plagues the servant to call it up, every five minutes after
eleven.


L. Mary. Then there is that poor, drooping Mrs. Henpeck, who always loses, and
sits moaning over her losses, and playing the after-game, 'till the servants
are obliged to put her out along with the candles.

Enter Forward.
L. Mary. No more excuses, I hope?


Forward. Dinner is served, please your Ladyship.


Mrs. Bromley. Is Sir Harry Granger come?


L. Mary. O, no; he has no longer the entree here.


Mr. Bromley. I Am heartily sorry for it. No man tempers a sallad like Sir
Harry. He is a perfect compendium of the whole art of cookery, and has more
good receipts in his pocketbook, than ever were published by the celebrated
Hannah Glass.


L. Mary. Most excellent qualifications for a man of fashion!


Mr. Bromley. True, very true, indeed! Eating is the rage, the high ton, at
present, and indeed is one of the most refined of our modern studies. -- Will
your Ladyship permit me the transcendant honor of your fair hand?


L. Mary. I attend Mrs. Bromley.

[Exeunt.
END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, a Dining-Parlour. Sir WILLIAM and Mr. BELFORD at a Table, with a Bottle
and Glasses. Sir Will. I AM no drinking man myself, Belford; but yet I do not
approve of this water system of yours. It keeps the spirits too low --


Belford. To say or do any thing mad or foolish, I grant it may. But if water
does not raise, it never depresses the spirits. Can you say as much for your
generous wine?


Sir Will. Well, well, I will not dispute with you, because I hate argument; and
as you are an honest fellow, I can venture to take my glass cheerfully in your
company, though you don't partake of my liquor. But I Would give something, ay, more
than I Will mention, that you would share only one pint of claret with me, now.


Belford. I have made no vows, Sir William; and to humor a friend can easily
dispense with rules of my own making: So here is your fair niece, Louisa
Woodley, in a bumper.


Sir Will. Thank you, thank you, my good friend! She is a most excellent girl,
and I like to have her toasted by such a man as you. I wish she was well
settled, with all my heart.


Belford. There can be no doubt of her marrying to advantage. She is a fine
young woman, with a fine fortune.


Sir Will. And so may be sacrificed to some fine young man, that may spend her
fortune in finery, as her hopeful brother has done, and leave her a beggar. No,
no, -- I Will prevent that -- I have thought of a match for her -- Fill your
glass, Belford! -- a prudent, sober, sensible man. -- (aside) I wish he would take
the hint.


Belford. Rare qualities, indeed, for a young man of fashion to possess, in
these days, Sir William.


Sir Will. Who told you that he was a young man of fashion? Why, Sir, there
have been no men born, at least, for these last thirty years -- all monkies and
macaronies. No Hearts of Oak, now, Belford, -- all dwindled, dwindled into
aspens!


Belford. Your sarcasm is rather too general, my good friend. Courage is the
birthright of an Englishman, and while one acre of our soil remains, both the
Oak and the Laurel will thrive on it. -- We must not prejudge the rising
generation; and I have not the least doubt but your niece will make a very
proper choice.


Sir Will. A choice! I hope she has been better educated, than to have a
choice, Sir. I was not consulted in her brother's match, and you see the
consequence. -- I shall dispose of Louisa in my own way. -- I have a husband
now in my eye for her, Belford.


Belford. Whoever obtains Miss Woodley, will, I dare say, be a very happy man.


Sir Will. Stick to that, my dear Belford. -- Yes, yes, whoever marries Louisa
will be a very happy man, and I am extremely glad you think so. -- (aside) I
wish he would come to the point.


Belford. You know, Sir William, that I have long been acquainted with Miss
Woodley's merit.


Sir Will. You charm me, my dear Belford. I am glad you know her worth, and you
will therefore cherish it. -- She is mild and timid -- but you will be kind and
gentle to her, even for my sake, my good old friend.


Belford. Kind and gentle to her! and your good old friend!


Sir Will. Why, are not you my friend?


Belford. Most certainly.


Sir Will. Then why all this reiteration? If you marry Louisa --


Belford. I marry her, Sir William!


Sir Will. Yes, Sir -- Did you not, this moment, allow that who ever married
her, would be a very happy man? And I suppose, you can have no possible
objection to being a very happy man, Mr. Belford?


Belford. Yes, Sir, the strongest in the world, if my happiness is to be
purchased at the expense of another's misery. -- But I am wrong for being
serious, when I am certain you do but jest.


Sir Will. In the first place, Sir, I never said any thing in jest, since I was
born. -- And, secondly, Sir, I never was more in earnest, in the whole course
of my life. I therefore request from you a serious answer. -- Jest, indeed! No,
truly, Counselor, I am no joker.


Belford. Why, then, Sir, I should think myself highly honored --


Sir Will. Psha, psha, psha --


Belford. Patience, my good friend --


Sir Will. No, Sir -- I will have no patience with your nonsensical compliments
-- none of your honors, I say.


Belford. In a word, then, Sir William, the disparity of years between
forty-eight and eighteen --


Sir Will. Is just nothing at all. -- What need you tell her you are
forty-eight?


Belford. There will be no occasion, I grant you -- Self-evident propositions
need no proof.


Sir Will. Hark'ye, Belford, you fatigue me to death with your logic and
sophistry. -- The point may be reduced to two words, -- Will you marry my
niece, or no?


Belford. It is a match so infinitely beyond my pretensions, Sir William --


Sir Will. I hope I may be allowed the best judge in that matter, Mr. Belford.


Belford. By no means, Sir William, your partial kindness toward me --


Sir Will. Is almost worn out, by your tiresome, false modesty; -- and, if I
thought I should have as much plague with Louisa, as I have had with you, I Would
renounce my project, and leave her to die an old maid.


Belford. The proposal is so highly favorable to me --


Sir Will. That you consent.


Belford. Were I certain that Miss Woodley's inclinations --


Sir Will. I told you, before, that I could dispose of them as I pleased; so
that if you have no other objection, I shall carry my point, and settle one of
my family to my entire satisfaction, at last.


Belford. It is impossible that I can have any objection, if she has none.


Sir Will. Your hand then, my dear Belford -- It Is a match. -- Order your
clerks to set about the writings directly. -- Your estate lies in
Staffordshire, I think. -- You know I add ten thousand to her fortune.


Belford. But surely, my dear Sir William, Miss Woodley ought to be made
acquainted --


Sir Will. Why, has she not been acquainted with you ever since she was born?
If I mistake not, you were present at her christening. -- The wedding shall be
next week -- The sooner my dear girl is happily settled, the better.


Belford. Your kindness overwhelms me -- but still, Miss Woodley --


Sir Will. Shall be made acquainted with her happiness, this evening. I leave
all the articles of settlement to your own honor. -- I know you will make a
proper provision for my niece, because it is possible you may die before her --
but no pin-money, I charge you -- It Is but a prelude to alimony, believe me.


Belford. I shall endeavor to acquit myself as such a generous confidence
deserves.


Sir Will. Hurry, hurry your clerks, and bring this happy event to a speedy
conclusion, my dear nephew.


Belford. I have the strongest motives to enforce their diligence, as well as
the highest sense of my obligations to your friendship.


Sir Will. No speeches -- hasten the business, and adieu. -- [Exit Belford.] --
I Will speak to Jones, directly, to prepare for the wedding-dinner. She cannot
bear to be hurried; and I Would have every thing magnificent on that day, which I
shall deem the happiest of my whole life; because it will be the first time I
could ever get any of my family to know their own interest, and act as I would
have them.

(going off) Enter Louisa.
Sir Will. I am very glad to see you, my dear child. -- And now what have you
to say to me?


Louisa. I was informed, Sir, by my sister, that you desired to speak with me,
and I am therefore come to receive your commands.


Sir Will. Why, my dear, it will neither be questions nor commands, but
cross-purposes, if you keep at such a distance as will make it impossible we
should hear one another. Come nearer, I say -- What are you afraid of?


Louisa. (advancing.) Sir --


Sir Will. So, so -- that will do. -- And now, my dear child, you cannot imagine
what a heavenly temper I am in, and what favorable dispositions I have toward
you.


Louisa. I am very happy, Sir --


Sir Will. So you will say, my dear, when you know all. But you must deserve my
kindness, by your frankness; -- therefore, first tell me, whether you have any
particular objection to matrimony?


Louisa. It is a subject, Sir, that I have never much thought upon.


Sir Will. That Is singular, now; for I am told that the girls of these days
think of nothing else. But, luckily, there is no occasion for your considering
about the matter, as you have such a friend as I am to consider for you, child.


Louisa. Sir!


Sir Will. And so I shall make your mind easy at once, by letting you know that
I have provided a husband for you.


Louisa. (aside.) Now, Heaven forbid!


Sir Will. And such a one as is not to be met with every day, I assure you -- a
man after my own heart -- has not a fault, Louisa, but that he is a
water-drinker. But I will not anticipate, by telling you his name. He shall
surprise you with it himself. -- Why, hey! -- what is the matter now? You don't
seem at all overjoyed! -- You are not hankering after a title, I hope; for,
believe me, niece, if there be either happiness or virtue left in the present
world, they are only to be met with in the middle ranks of life. What makes you
tremble so?


Louisa. You are not unacquainted with my timidity, Sir.


Sir Will. Yes, yes, I understand the timidity of your whole sex -- (aside.)
Doves before marriage, and Kites after. -- You Will soon get the better of your
timidity, I Will answer for it.


Louisa. As I am certain, Sir, that it is your wish to make me happy --


Sir Will. You are right, my dear; but it must be my own way. Your brother's
want of respect to my opinion, you see, has been his ruin, child. Don't attempt
to copy him, Louisa.


Louisa. If you would but condescend to hear me, Sir --


Sir Will. Why, child, I know every thing already, that you would wish to say.
Your obligations to me, and your modesty, and your timidity, and your
settlement, and all that --


Louisa. Dear Sir, I have not a thought about a settlement --


Sir Will. Well, well, every thing shall be taken care of, except a provision
for a separate maintenance. I bar that; for if you cannot live happily with such
a husband as I have chosen for you, I should think you deserved to starve, though
you were my niece a thousand times.


Louisa. But, my dear uncle --


Sir Will. But, my dear niece, don't insist upon it; for a woman who thinks of
separation at the moment of her union, does not intend to abide by her husband,
as she ought to do, 'till death do them part.


Louisa. I neither think of union nor separation, Sir --


Sir Will. Modest and virtuous that --


Louisa. Hear me but one word, Sir --


Sir Will. Enough's said, enough's said, my dear. Here, take this bill, to
provide for your dress. I Would have every thing handsome. The ladies are great
belles in Staffordshire; and I Would have my niece make as good an appearnace as
any private gentlewoman among them. Why don't you take the bill? It Is for five
hundred pounds, and I hope you think that sufficient.


Louisa. I have no sort of occasion for it, Sir; and if you would but indulge
me with a moment's conversation --


Sir Will. Psha, psha, psha, -- I hate all this affected delicacy. Take money
from the old man whenever you can get it. Hasten your milliners and
mantua-makers, and get all your matters ready by this day se'nnight, for I
will not have the wedding deferred an hour longer. Delays are ever dangerous.

(Exit, throwing the bill on the table.)
Louisa. What, in the name of wonder, can this dear, kind, cruel uncle of mine
intend for me? I almost doubt whether I wake or not. Married in a week, to a
man perhaps I never saw! No, that is impossible -- he is too good to think of
such an union. Possibly Mountfort may have applied for his consent, before he
asked mine! -- Too fond a hope, I fear. -- I wish I could see Counselor
Belford; my uncle keeps no secret from him, and he is a friend to all our
family. I Will write to him to come to me instantly.

(fits down to the table.) Enter Mr. Belford, without seeing Louisa.
Belford. I cannot proceed on this business, in earnest, till Sir William has
had some conference with his niece. It is possible she may dislike the match,
or perhaps be otherwise engaged -- and then I should become the standing jest
of all my brother Benchers. I must speak to Sir William again.


Louisa. My good Mr. Belford, I never was so glad to see you in my whole life.
I have been this moment writing to you.


Belford. You make me the happiest of mortals, Madam. -- (aside This Brief
opens well! I need not be much afraid of being laughed at now.


Louisa. There is something so particular -- (aside I know not how to mention
it -- Mr. Belford, my good uncle has --


Belford. I find completed his kindness, and acquainted you, Madam --


Louisa. No, Sir, but as you share his confidence, I must entreat that you will
inform me -- (besitates)


Belford. (aside) Her modesty distresses me vastly; but I like her the better
for it! I wish I had a speech ready. -- Did not Sir William, Madam, say any
thing of matrimony to you?


Louisa. You cannot imagine, Sir, how he has surprised and terrified me, by
talking of my being to be married in a week.


Belford. You might be surprised, to be sure, Madam; but I don't see any
occasion for your being terrified, any more than for such a violent hurry. The
writings cannot be properly engrossed in that time. The Law seldom keeps pace
with a Lover's wishes; -- and however impatient I may be to expedite this
business, you shall not be hurried, fair Lady, but be at liberty to name your
own day.


Louisa. It shall be Doomsday, then -- However, I thank you, Sir, for allowing
me even a reprieve.


Belford. (aside) Hey-dey! Where sits the wind now? -- You have no absolute
aversion to marriage, I hope, Miss Woodley?


Louisa. I despise affectation, Sir, and am above disguise, with an old friend
like you: -- I have no aversion to marriage, when I can bestow my hand with my
heart; -- but I would rather die, than be sacrificed to a frightful fordid
wretch, who has trepanned my uncle out of his consent, because he despaired of
mine, and takes me merely as an appendage to my fortune.


Belford. (aside) How lucky was my coming back! -- But why should you suppose,
Madam, that your uncle would sacrifice you to a frightful sordid wretch? Your
intended husband is a very different kind of man, I Will assure you, Madam.


Louisa. Let him be what he will, Sir, I shall detest him.


Belford. I never thought, Miss Woodley, that my conduct or character had in
any instance merited your detestation, Madam.


Louisa. Detest you, Mr. Belford! No, that is impossible! -- But how are you
concerned in the matter?


Belford. Not much, at present, Madam; -- for I scorn to take advantage of your
uncle's engagements, unless ratified by your consent.


Louisa. Oh, Mr. Belford!


Belford. Nay, never whimper about it. I own, I suspected, from the first, that
it was rather too good news to be true: -- but don't make yourself unhappy,
Miss Woodley; for I would rather live and die a bachelor, than marry the
finest woman in England, as is now the case (bowing), who was not equally ready
to have and to hold.


Louisa. Generous, worthy man!


Belford. Not more generous than prudent, Madam, on this occasion. But, as I
hope I have now deserved your confidence, Miss Woodley, tell me then, if you
have any particular attachment, and I shall endeavor to serve you with Sir
William; -- though I know I shall, for a time, stand in the light of a culprit
before him, by declining the honor he intended me.


Louisa. You overpower me with obligations, Mr. Belford.


Belford. No speeches, my dear Madam. If I was not sufficiently gratified by
the honor of the act, no acknowledgements could make me amends for the
disappointment; so frankly name the happy man who is to raise my envy, and
complete your happiness.


Louisa. Though I think that a well-placed and mutual affection need not raise
a blush upon the chastest cheek, yet mine will glow when I name Colonel
Mountfort.


Belford. Colonel Mountfort! I Am sorry for it*


Louisa. Why so, Sir?


Belford. Because he is a very pretty fellow, Madam, and for that reason may
fall within your uncle's chapter of coxcombs, and prevent his consent.


Louisa. Then I shall never give mine to marry any man else.


Belford. That Is somewhat in the Knight's own style, Miss Woodley. But I
heartily wish you success, and shall show myself a warmer Friend than a Lover,
by using my best pleadings in my rival's suit.


Louisa. Accept my warmest thanks, my good old friend.

[Exit.
Belford. Ay, ay, -- I knew she would always think of me as her old friend.

[Exit. SCENE changes to Mr. WOODLEY's. A Dining Room. Mr. WOODLEY and Mr.
BROMLEY at a Table, with a Dice-Box.
Woodley. I Will play no more.


Mr. Bromley. Why, to be sure, my dear friend, luck has run confoundedly
against you; but I never saw you give out for such a trifling loss, before.


Woodley. Seven hundred pounds is no trifle, Mr. Bromley!


Mr. Bromley. A trifle, indeed, to a person of your immense fortune!


Woodley. You have made a false estimate of my circumstances. I am rather a
distressed man, at present, Mr. Bromley.


Mr. Bromley. (aside) Are you so? Then it is time for me to take care of myself.
-- You surprise me vastly! Distressed did you say?


Woodley. I hate to repeat it; but it is so true, that I had some thoughts of
applying to your friendship, to extricate me out of my present difficulties,
Mr. Bromley.


Mr. Bromley. Command me, command me, my dear Woodley! Every thing that poor
Bob Bromley has in the world -- (aside) except his money, -- is at your
service. -- But let us clear as we go -- settle our little matters first --
just set your name to this paper -- or will you take another throw, my friend,
and let it be double or quit?

Enter Colonel MOUNTFORT.
Col. For shame, Woodley! -- at hazard in your own house! I thought you had
enough of that at Clubs.


Mr. Bromley. Play among friends is wrong, very wrong, I confess, Colonel; but
one cannot be always grave and wise. -- Come, my dear Woodley, let us make an
end of our business -- the pen, or the box, my dear boy?


Woodley. (aside.) Desperate situations require desperate remedies. -- Give me
the box -- (they throw) Damn the dice!


Mr. Bromley. It Is double, now, you know, my unlucky friend; which makes upon
the whole exactly the sum of seven thousand three hundred and fifty-four
pounds, including the dear Lady Mary's trifling debt to Mrs. Bromley.


Woodley. True, Sir.


Mr. Bromley. Well, I have brought a bond with me, and when I have filled up
the blanks, if you please we'll perfect it in the next room.


Woodley. With all my heart. -- (aside.) Sure never man was so completely
unfortunate! Never, by Heaven, will I touch a die again!


Col. Then I give you joy of your losses; for I know you are too much a man of
honor to break your vow.


Mr. Bromley. Gamesters, like lovers, you know, Colonel -- And after all, now,
this is but matter of form between friends and men of honor, like you and me.
-- Don't you think so, Colonel?


Col. I consider all compulsive obligations between men as a disgrace to human
nature. But while there are such things as knaves in the world, Mr. Bromley, we
must submit to the mean securities of bars and bonds. But between men of
honor, as you say --


Mr. Bromley. Certainly, my dear Sir, men of honor are --


Col. Too often the dupes of knaves, Mr. Bromley.


Mr. Bromley. (aside.) I don't like him. -- We'll talk over the affair you
hinted at in the next room. Command me, on all occasions -- ever -- ever at
your service. But I must attend the ladies. The ladies and the coffee are
powerful attractions to me. You Will follow me, I presume, Colonel?

[Exit.
Col. Yes, with pleasure, through my whole regiment, with a drum at your heels.
I am persuaded, Woodley, that fellow is a knave, and I wish you would exclude
both him and his flaunting wife from yours and Lady Mary's society. I cannot
conceive why you are so partial to them.


Woodley. The great civilities we received from them, at Spa, first attached my
wife to Mrs. Bromley, who was there in the first sets, and even in London,
where people are more nice. She keeps very good company, I assure you, Colonel.


Col. You Will pardon me, Woodley! -- She is seldom seen in public but with some
damaged Dowager of Quality, who would be excluded from society if her title did
not serve as a herald to make way for her Ladyship. -- But enough of them! I am
come to speak to you on a much more interesting subject, and to prove -- what,
however, I cannot doubt -- your friendship for me.


Woodley. Be assured, my dear Mountfort --


Col. I am so -- you need not make professions; -- therefore, with the
frankness of a soldier, I venture to ask the highest proof of your regard, by
consenting to make the fair Louisa mine.


Woodley. My sister!


Col. You seem to hesitate, Mr. Woodley! My fortune is --


Woodley. As unexceptionable as your character, Colonel; and as I truly love
Louisa, and should rejoice in her happiness --


Col. You consent to mine. Is it so, my friend?


Woodley. I know not how to answer you.


Col. You alarm me extremely, Mr. Woodley! For heaven's sake, speak out! --
What can be your objections?


Woodley. None in the world, to you; but circumstanced as I am at present, it
would involve me in the greatest difficulties, to be called upon so suddenly
for ten thousand pounds.


Col. That shall not be the case, Woodley. I should think even Louisa too
dearly purchased, at the expense of distressing you. When I asked for your
sister's hand, I did not demand her purse; nor shall I accept the one, 'till I
have signed a release for the other.


Woodley. Mountfort, that must not, shall not be! I never will accept of such a
sacrifice.


Col. Hark-ye, Woodley! A soldier's character should be uniform; and if there
could be one who was not liberal, I should suspect his courage to be of the
mere animal kind. My fortune is sufficiently ample; and I would as soon mount
my charger, cry stand and deliver, as take money I don't want, from a friend
who does.


Woodley. Your generosity, Colonel --


Col. Is of too selfish a nature to merit praise; for I feel here (laying his
hand to his heart) that the true luxury of fortune lies more in giving, than in
spending.


Woodley. I will not lessen it, by offering thanks. But have you opened your
trenches before the Knight of the Castle yet? (pointing to the middle door) He
used to speak well of you, and his opinion is of some consequence in this
business.


Col. My sentiments are even with the good old Knight's, I assure you. I esteem
his good qualities, and do not dislike even his foibles, as they are truly
natural and unsophisticate. But there, perhaps, you may see me play the usurer,
like any Jew. He may double or treble Louisa's fortune, without the least
impediment from any scruple or modesty of mine.


Woodley. When do you purpose to make the essay?


Col. As soon as possible; for 'till I have paid the proper respect due to him,
I do not think myself entitled to throw myself at Louisa's feet.


Woodley. May success attend you, my generous friend!


Col. Fie, Woodley -- no more of that! -- But adieu.

[Exeunt severally.
END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE, Lady MARY 's Dressing Room. Lady MARY and Mrs. BROMLEY. Mrs. Bromley.
AND so that was all?


L. Mary. Every word, I assure you. But we shall soon make it up, for ours are
but lovers' quarrels.


Mrs. Bromley. Lovers! talk of love after four years marriage! Believe me, Lady
Mary, it is all a farce.


L. Mary. No, my dear Mrs. Bromley, I cannot give you credit against the
feelings of my own heart. I love Mr. Woodley, and I am firmly persuaded that he
has a sincere affection for me, notwithstanding the little peevishness of his
behavior today, which I own makes me apprehend that something must have
ruffled him extremely.


Mrs. Bromley. How did you like his peremptory resolve, of passing the whole
summer in Dorsetshire?


L. Mary. Not at all, I confess; it is frightful to think of it -- though there
is a tolerable neighborhood --


Mrs. Bromley. Of empty houses. -- No creature stays at their family seats,
nowadays, unless it be some antiquated Dowager, who, like an old Gothic
corner cupboard, remains fixed to the freehold.


L. Mary. I vow I will not go into the country -- it is quite mauvais ton -- except
you will come with us; and then we'll fly about to all the bathing-places, and
give a masquerade at one of them.


Mrs. Bromley. I should like to pass a few weeks so, well enough; -- and,
indeed, my dear, you will be quite forgotten, if you don't do something in that
way. But are you sure that Mr. Woodley would like it? for I must say, though I
ask your pardon, Lady Mary, he is dull -- absolutely dull, indeed, my dear.


L. Mary. Why, I own, of late he has been rather gloomy; -- but he is vastly
good-natured, and never before refused any request of mine.


Mrs. Bromley. That may be: -- but had Mr. Bromley talked to me in the same
manner --


L. Mary. You would have loved him just as well as you do now.


Mrs. Bromley. You are admirable at guessing, my dear; -- for as that same
romantic notion of love never was the band of our connection --


L. Mary. You startle me, Mrs. Bromley. Marriage without love must surely be a
state of the greatest unhappiness.


Mrs. Bromley. No, I don't feel in the least unhappy. -- Convenience is the
best matrimonial cement, and keeps many couples together for years, whose love
did not out-last the honey-moon. -- But these are mysteries, into which you
seem not yet initiated.


L. Mary. I hope I shall never know them by experience.

Enter Louisa.
Louisa. My dear sister -- (sees Mrs. Bromley) I thought you were alone; I had
something in particular to tell you.


L. Mary. You alarm me vastly, Louisa! -- What is the matter, my dear? You know
I keep no secrets from Mrs. Bromley.


Louisa. Another time, Lady Mary. Family affairs --


Mrs. Bromley. Pray, my dear, make no stranger of me! -- (aside) I hope
Mountfort has jilted he^* I die to know. -- Has the gallant Colonel deserted,
my dear?


Louisa. Colonel Mountfort, Madam, is no way concerned in the present question.


Mrs. Bromley. (aside) Then I would not give sixpence for the whole story.


L. Mary. You look distressed, Louisa! -- What can have happened? I Am all
impatience.


Louisa. Though I had rather be excused, Lady Mary, yet as you press so
earnestly to know, my Uncle --


Mrs. Bromley. (aside) Psha!


Louisa. Has insisted on my marrying --


Mrs. Bromley. Not himself, hope?


L. Mary. Giddy creature! I Whom, my dear Louisa?


Louisa. Counselor Belford.


Mrs. Bromley. And is that all? I think it a monstrous good match.


L. Mary. Monstrous, indeed! -- Why, he is fifty, at least.


Mrs. Bromley. Fifty! fiddle-stick! What does that signify? He is rich enough
for threescore; and money, money, my dear, qualifies all disproportions.


L. Mary. This is by much too serious a subject for jesting, Mrs. Bromley. --
But Sir William is not your sole Guardian, Louisa; and your brother, I am
certain, will never consent to sacrifice you to his uncle's caprice.


Louisa. I would not, on any account, my dear sister, have my brother oppose
Sir William in any thing, as he is already but too much offended with him.
Besides, I am in hopes that there will not be any occasion for his interposing.


Mrs. Bromley. (aside) She Is coming round, I find.

Enter a Servant.
Serve. Mr. Bromley, Madam, has sent the carriage, and desires to speak with
you, at home, immediately.

[Exit.
Mrs. Bromley. (aside) I Am glad of the release. -- What now can he possibly
want with me? But I am all obedience, though it breaks my heart to leave you.
But I shall return quickly, before any one sits down to Loo. -- And so, my
dear, (to Louisa) I leave you to settle your important matters, which should be
soon determined, were you my sister.

[Exit.
Louisa. Thank Heaven, I am not! -- She is levity itself.


L. Mary. Her lightness, Louisa, extends no farther than her manners: -- her
morals are irreproachable; and when the mind is untainted, its gaiety, like a
colored trimming to a grave suit, serves only to enliven it.


Louisa. You are too partial, sister; for I much fear that you will one day
discover Mrs. Bromley's manners and morals to be both of a piece.


L. Mary. No more upon the subject, at present! -- and in truth I wonder how
you can have spirits to talk of any thing else but your own melancholy
situation. -- Married to Belford! to your Grandfather!


Louisa. I should be sad, indeed, if such a marriage was to take place; -- but
my Intended has generously consented to break off the match, at my request, and
to screen me from Sir William's displeasure, at the same time.


L. Mary. Then the old Barrister is charming, and I think I could be a little
in love with him myself. But I cannot submit to this new insult from Sir
William! What could he mean by disposing of you without deigning to consult Mr.
Woodley? I shall insist upon an explanation of his conduct.


Louisa. I again entreat you, Lady Mary, not to involve my brother farther with
Sir William -- you do not know the consequences.


L. Mary. I am quite weary of all this temporizing, Louisa; and as you are safe
on shore, you must allow me to guide the helm for myself, at present. -- You Will
permit me, at least, to acquaint Mr. Woodley with his uncle's contemptuous
neglect of him in this matter, which I shall go and do directly.

[Exeunt. SCENE changes to Sir WILLIAM 's Apartments. Sir WILLIAM and WATERS.
Sir Will. Well, for once, Waters, I will acknowledge myself the happiest man
in England.


Waters. I am proud to hear that your Honor is so well pleased.


Sir Will. Yes, yes, I am pleased, and I will not be pleased alone -- they shall
be pleased too! -- They shall have a noble service of plate! -- Louisa deserves
every thing -- she behaved like an angel! I thought I should have had more
trouble with her; but though it be strange, it is certainly true, that all
girls like to be married.

Enter a Servant.
Serve. Colonel Mountfort, Sir.


Sir Will. I shall be glad to see him. -- Wa't on him up, Waters. (Exeunt
Waters and Servant) The Colonel is a very good young man, as young men go, at
present -- but nothing to compare to what his father was.

Enter COLONEL and WATERS. I am very glad to see you, my young friend. Set
chairs, Waters.

[Exit Waters.
Colonel. I am much obliged to you, Sir William, and happy to perceive by your
looks that all inquiries after your health must be superfluous.


Sir Will. I thank you, Sir! -- I fancy, indeed, I do look tolerably well, for
serenity of mind goes a great way toward clearing up the countenance; and I do
not know when my spirits have ever been so harmonized, as at this moment.


Col. (aside) How fortunate! -- May I flatter myself, Sir William, that the
present happy temper of your mind will assist my suit, and render you
propitious!


Sir Will. Propitious! Nonsense. -- You are an idle young rogue! -- With such a
noble fortune as yours -- But I will not scold, now. -- You have been on the Turf,
I suppose, or fleeced at the Gaming-table? -- But I hope the Terra Firma is
safe. I should be grieved to see my old friend's estate in the hands of knaves
or sharpers. -- What sum do you want? I know you to be a man of honor.


Col. You quite amaze me, Sir, by suspicions which, I will be bold to say, are
unworthy both of Sir William Woodley and me. I am no gambler, Sir, nor have I
dissipated the noble inheritance derived from my ancestors.


Sir Will. I am heartily glad of it, Sir! -- I ask your pardon, young man. --
(aside) What the deuce, then, can he want from me?


Col. If I were so unfortunately weak, as you for a moment seemed to imagine,
the respect I bear you, would have prevented my applying to you upon such an
occasion, as your good opinion, Sir, is of the greatest consequence to my
happiness.


Sir Will. There you are wrong, Colonel; -- you had much better apply to me,
than to any one else. -- I am no cent. per cent. man -- I never received a
shilling interest from any friend in my life; and I have my doubts whether I
should even take it from the Funds, now that the Nation is so poor. -- But
come, Colonel, if you don't want money, in what other way can I possibly serve
you? I have no interest at Court.


Col. You have an interest, Sir, in what is far dearer to me than either wealth
or preferment: -- your lovely niece, Louisa, Sir --


Sir Will. (aside) Thank Heaven, she is better disposed of!


Col. You pause! -- Do not keep me on the rack, Sir William.


Sir Will. I was only recollecting myself. -- Am much obliged to you, Sir, for
the honor -- I think that is the phrase -- you intend my niece; but she is
married, Sir.


Col. Married, Sir William!


Sir Will. Yes, Sir, -- married, and settled in the country.


Col. This raillery is rather cruel, Sir.


Sir Will. I never joke, Sir. -- I have passed my word that she shall be
married this day se'nnight; and if all the Emperors, Kings, Princes, and
Potentates in Europe, nay the Great Mogul himself, were to demand her in
marriage, William Woodley would not forfeit his promise: so that married she
is, to all intents and purposes, my gay Colonel.


Col. And has Miss Woodley consented, Sir?


Sir Will. Ay, to be sure; I force nobody.


Col. (aside) Confusion! -- Impossible, Sir!


Sir Will. Why should you think so? She is a modest, dutiful girl. It would be
hard, indeed, if I was to have no comfort in my family. But don't be
disheartened, Colonel! Many a gallant soldier has met with a repulse, before
now.


Col. If you could conceive the tenderness of my affection for Miss Woodley,
Sir, you would not treat my sufferings so slightly.


Sir Will. It may be a disappointment, to be sure, Sir, for she is a fine young
woman, I confess; but my friend has her, Sir, and you must think of her no more.


Col. It is not in my power to obey your injunction. -- (aside) I wish it were,
false and ungrateful girl! -- But pray, Sir, who is the envied man so doubly
blessed in your friendship and Miss Woodley's love?


Sir Will. That Is a secret, Colonel.


Col. That, I think, I have a right to know, Sir.


Sir Will. What! you want to exercise your valor a little -- sa, sa, sa, -- by
challenging your rival? But keep your prowess for the common foe: we cannot
spare a soldier, at present, Colonel.


Col. This treatment is unlike yourself, Sir William. But Miss Woodley, I
suppose, will inform me; -- I presume she is not bound to keep the secret.


Sir Will. There you are wrong again, my young hero; for she really is bound by
the strongest of all possible ties -- the not knowing it.


Col. You cannot now be serious, Sir; and I will try if I have yet power enough
over Louisa's heart to make her so -- for I will know my rival. Adieu, Sir
William!

[Exit.
Sir Will. Your servant, Colonel Huff-Cap. What a hot-brained boy! I am doubly
glad Louisa has escaped him: -- I would have no passionate man in the family,
but myself. How lucky it is that Louisa does not know her husband's name! --
Women should ever be kept in ignorance, to prevent mischief. I have conducted
this business most admirably! -- I have some doubts, however, whether my nephew
should not be made acquainted with it; but he does not deserve my confidence,
and he shall not vex me now.

Enter Mr. BELFORD. Sir WILLIAM runs and embraces him. Are all things going on
briskly and cleverly, as they should do, my dear nephew?


Belford. The swiftest bowl does not always hit the jack, Sir William; and
"fair and softly" is an established maxim in the Law.


Sir Will. Well, well, we must submit; but I hope you will use as much dispatch
as possible.


Belford. Dispatch is a term, Sir, not to be found in any Law Dictionary that I
know of; and I fancy it will be a long time before the matters you talk of will
be dispatched.


Sir Will. Why, surely you have a mind to try my temper, with your fair and
softly! But if you knew as much as I do, you would, perhaps, think it worth
while to mend your pace a little; for many things fall out between the cup and
lip, Mr. Belford.


Belford. (aside.) So you will find presently. -- The most material point in this
important affair does not appear to be yet adjusted.


Sir Will. Now -- what can he mean?


Belford. There can be no marriage without the consent of parties; and I don't
find that Miss Woodley --


Sir Will. If I was not in the most heavenly temper, you would put me in a
rage. Have I not told you, Sir, that she had no consent, no choice, but what I
please to give? And in twenty years acquaintance, have you ever known me say an
untruth, Sir? My niece is all compliance and gentleness; and you will be a very
happy man, my dear nephew.


Belford. I should be unworthy of happiness, if I could enjoy it on such terms,
Sir William.


Sir Will. Why, what is the matter, Belford? -- Your head seems to be turned
with your good fortune, and you want to turn mine. No man that is unworthy can
be happy --


Belford. In short, Sir William --


Sir Will. Ay, ay, that is the thing -- now you talk sense! I like in short --
stick to that, my friend. If you want more clerks, don't value expense, I Will
clear all costs -- You know I hate the Law's delay.


Belford. No law, but that of honor, has any thing to do in this case, Sir
William; and however irksome the task, I must beg you will permit me to
undeceive you.


Sir Will. Then you acknowledge you have deceived me? I am thunderstruck!


Belford. No, my good friend -- it is you that have deceived yourself.


Sir Will. Your proposition is false, Sir. I never deceived myself, nor any one
else, since I was born, Sir. I scorn and abhor deceit, Mr. Belford. But come,
Sir, let me know what all this round-about tends to? Despise the chicanery of
your profession, and speak as if you was a witness on the table -- not a Lawyer
at the bar, Sir.


Belford. I fear I shall rather appear a criminal at the bar to you, at
present, Sir William.


Sir Will. What, then, you are married, I suppose? -- have a wife already? Nay,
don't smile, Sir, there is no joke in this matter; and you ought to have been
hanged, if you had married my niece.


Belford. I think so too, though not upon the account you mention, as I give
you my honor I have no wife; and if I continue in my present mood, may venture
to say that I never shall have one.


Sir Will. Mighty well, mighty ill, Mr. Belford! You have rewarded my sincere
friendly attachment --


Belford. With true gratitude, Sir.


Sir Will. Don't offer to say so. What! to spurn my niece with twenty thousand
pounds! Let me tell you, Sir --


Belford. That she is much too good for me.


Sir Will. Why really I begin to think so.


Belford. I rejoice, therefore, my dear friend --


Sir Will. No, Sir, don't rejoice. I am not your friend, nor ever will be your
friend. You have broke my heart -- frustrated all my schemes -- disappointed my
niece. -- Poor girl, I feel for her! -- Young minds are easily broken by grief.
-- You will have much to answer for on her account, I assure you, Mr. Belford.


Belford. I should have much more to answer for to Miss Woodley, Sir William,
if I did not decline the match.


Sir Will. Decline! Zounds, Sir, I will not bear so contemptuous an expression! --
(aside.) I wish I had not been quite so peremptory with the Colonel. -- If I
could bring myself to unsay what I have once uttered, I would give Louisa to
Colonel Mountsort, to vex you.


Belford. I agree with you, Sir William, that it would be a more suitable match.


Sir Will. Don't agree with me, Mr. Belford, I will not suffer it.


Belford. Allow me at least to say --


Sir Will. No, Sir, I will not allow you to say any thing, but yes, or no, to this
simple question: Do you accept, or reject, my niece?


Belford. The phrase is rather too strong, Sir; but I have already told you,
that upon mature consideration, I decline the honor.


Sir Will. Confound your honor, and your consideration too! -- And now, Sir, I
decline any further conversation, connection, or correspondence, with you; and
so, Sir, I am -- no -- I am not, your humble servant.

[Exit.
Belford. His rage will soon subside, and we shall be as good friends as ever.
I am glad his resentment is entirely pointed at me, as it is probable, that to
make his niece amends for the loss of a husb^nd she did not like, he may give
her one she does: -- and so ends, exactly as it should, the matr^monial schemes
of an Old Bachelor!

[Exit. SCENE changes to Mr. BROMLEY's. A Dining Room. Enter Mr. and Mrs.
BROMLEY.
Mrs. Bromley. I wish you would defer it till tomorrow! It will otherwise break
up the assembly, and make a monstrous bustle in the family.


Mr. Bromley A fig for the assembly, and the bustle, too! No, no, my sweet
simpleton, business of some kinds brook no delay.


Mrs. Bromley. You have no right to complain of my simplicity, Mr. Bromley. It
is through me that you get this money from the Woodleys.


Mr. Bromley. Money, child! I have never touched above a thousand pounds of
their cash yet. This piece of paper is all I have got for spending my time with
a dull fool, and endeavoring to persuade him that he was a Solomon, and his
silly wife the Queen of Sheba. But I must be paid for my attendance and
trouble, and in a few minutes I shall convert this manuscript into the sum of
seven thousand three hundred and fifty-three pounds, with costs -- costs must
be added.


Mrs. Bromley. I can have no objection to your being paid for your time and
trouble, my dear. All I desire is, that you may not lay on the execution 'till
tomorrow. Let us devote this evening to pleasure, my dear Brommy. I am to play
gold Loo tonight, and I have a certain presentiment that I shall win
considerably.


Mr. Bromley. As to your winning, I believe you are pretty secure in that
point. You don't leave much to chance, I imagine, my dove. But though you might
win, I shall lose considerably, if this bond be not put in force this very
night. I have been with Woodley's attorney, Mr. Fleece'em, a very honest man,
and for a small token of friendship, he has informed me, that there will be six
executions in the house to morrow.


Mrs. Bromley. Six executions! Nay, then, they are done up, indeed, and it does
not signify much keeping any further terms with them. Yet I still wish you
would postpone this ugly business, 'till we are gone to the masquerade. Poor
Lady Mary! it will be a sad disappointment to her, not to show her finery.


Mr. Bromley. Now you talk of finery, here, look at these!

(showing her Lady Mary 's earrings.)
Mrs. Bromley. Let me see! They are Lady Mary's earrings!


Mr. Bromley. No; they were, my sweet innocent!


Mrs. Bromley. But how came you by them? She told me they were gone to be
new-set.


Mr. Bromley. Ask no questions, but take them, and think yourself happy in such
a provident husband.


Mrs. Bromley. Thank you, my dear Brommy! They are beautiful, indeed! -- I have
long wished for them, I confess.


Mr. Bromley. I must go and expedite this business directly. Don't be
frightened, dove, when the Bailiffs come in. They Will add to Lady Mary's
squeeze, you know. -- But take a little hartshorn in your pocket: -- it will be
proper for you to faint, I think.


Mrs. Bromley. Never fear my acting properly. -- But the carriage is at the
door, and I have twenty places to call at. Shall I set you down at your
lawyer's, to save my dear the fatigue of walking?


Mr. Bromley. How happy am I in such a discreet, tender wife! -- (aside) A
dissembling jade! -- Come, dove.


Mrs. Bromley. I follow, my dear Brommy. -- (aside.) Hateful wretch!

[Exeunt.
END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE, An Antichamber, opening into a Drawing Room. FORWARD, with a Pencil
and Pocketbook. A Foot man in the Drawing Room, placing Card-Tables for a
Rout. FORWARD. FOUR gold Loo tables, with Monsters -- Four p^und four! -- Two
at half-crowns! Thrust them to the lower end of the room, James; they are
seldom worth more than twelve shillings a piece.


James. Where shall I fix the Whist tables, Mr. Forward?


Forward. Damn the Whiskers! Even the gold players never make it worth a
gentleman's while to snuff their candles. I wish the Parliament would put down
all sneaking games! -- A man can neither win or lose a fortune with any degree
of credit at them. No -- Pharo, Pharo's the sport.


James. Is this a Pharaoh's table, Mr. Forward?


Forward. No; but set that in the center, in the best place in the room. That Is
a Macao-table, and ^ome of the birds, I fancy, will be picked pretty bare that
play at it -- Five pound five. -- Do you hear, James? The moment the company's
gone, pack up all the cards and candles, whether used or not, and carry them to
my room: -- I may have occasion for them, if I should see company while I am
out of place.


James. What, you leave us a few packs to make merry with in the Servants Hall,
Mr. Forward? I likes a game at All ^ours, dea^ly.


Forward. Why, servants should have their amusements, as well as their betters,
James; so you may strip the Whist-tables for your own use. The Dons always take
snuff, and fully their cards confoundedly.


James. Thank. you, thank you, Mr. Forward! Must I carry up the candles to your
room that may not be lighted?


Forward. Certainly; the others will only serve for my bedchamber, or to dress
by. I detest tallow.


James. Well, well, I Will do as I Am bid. -- (aside) What a thief it is! and as
great a Jew to a poor fellow servants, as if he was not the same flesh and blood!

[Exit.
Forward. I shall make about twelve pieces packing penny. I wish my master may
win tonight, as I shall call upon him for my wages tomorrow: and, to do him
justice, he is always ready to pay, when he has it. The Funds are low at
present, and a prudent man should not suffer his money to lie dead, especially
in such hands where it may be buried, too.

Enter Lady MARY and Mr. WOODLEY.
L. Mary. Let the ices be brought before eleven, Forward, as I wish the
assembly to break up early. Are the bouquets come from the King's Road? Let
there be a profusion of rofes in all the rooms: they are delicious, at this
^^ason.


Forward. Your Ladyship shall be obeyed -- (aside) for the last time by your
Ladyship's most humble.

[Exit.
L. Mary. Your indifference upon this occasion really amazes me, Mr. Woodley! I
thought you loved your sister.


Woodley. I do, most tenderly, and shall therefore rejoice at seeing her under
the protection of a worthy man.


L. Mary. Bless me! is there nothing but worth to be consid^red, in matrimony?
no allowance to be made for liking? I vow, if you had been fifty times as
worthy as you are, I would never have married you, if you had not been
agreeable, also.


Woodley. Sweet flatterer!

(taking her hand.
L. Mary. But as the match is not to take place, his being agreeable or not is
of no consequence, now.


Woodley. I don't comprehend you.


L. Mary. You don't choose to comprehend me, Mr. Woodley. But still I must say,
that the indignity of Sir William's presuming to dispose of your sister without
your consent, is not to be endured.


Woodley. You are misinformed, my dear. Mountfort asked my consent, before he
applied to Sir William -- I did not see you since.


L. Mary. Mountfort is quite out of the present question, I tell you, Mr.
Woodley.


Woodley. You rave, my dear!


L. Mary. One of us does, that is certain.


Woodley. I am not mad, yet, Madam -- though I have enough to make me so.

(With emotion.
L. Mary. This is too much, Mr. Woodley. Every one takes notice of your
behavior to me, of late; and wonder how I bear it.


Woodley. (looking gravely at her) Did you know what I bear --


L. Mary. From me, Mr. Woodley?


Woodley. Not from, but for, you, Mary.


L. Mary. You terrify me! Explain your meaning, I intereat you.


Woodley. It will too soon cease to be a mystery.


L. Mary. Then, do not let me be the last to know it.


Woodley. Could every pang I now endure, be doubled to save you from the shock
which you must feel, I Would bear them all, without complaining. But ruin comes on
apace! and that you must share it aggravates my distress.


L. Mary. Ungenerous Woodley! to think I would shrink from any misery that
attends on you! But speak your meaning clearly -- suspense is torture -- what
misery awaits us?


Woodley. Our fortune's gone, my Mary! -- We are undone!


L. Mary. Gone! Not all -- my jointure still is left. -- Dispose of that, and
let me go into retirement with you. With pleasure I Will renounce all the
fantastic gaieties of life, and find true happiness in your society.


Woodley Your nobleness of mind but adds to my distress. -- Your jointure! No,
I will live a beggar, all my days, rather than leave you one, when I must leave
you. Somewhat may yet be done to save us from destruction. I have a dependence
on Mr. Bromley's friendship.


L. Mary. So have I; -- but we must be our own friends, my dear. -- I will go
into Dorsetshire, immediately. Let us discharge hal^ our servants, and become
patterns of economy and conjugal happiness.


Woodley. Generous, charming woman! Happiness must attend you, every where.


L. Mary. It Is the inseparable companion of an upright heart; and my dear
Woodley shall soon be convinced from my conduct, that cheerfulness can survive
gaiety, and true love make ample amends for the loss of fortune.


Woodley. Your sense and virtue have removed the heaviest weight that hung upon
my hear^.


L. Mary. Then clear your brow, my d^ar, and let us act the last scene of the
farce with the same spirit as the first.

Enter a Servant.
Serve. Colonel Mountfort, Sir.


Woodley. Show him into my dressing room -- I Will wait on him instantly.

[Exit Serve.
L. Mary. Don't let even Colonel Mountfort perceive your dejection, my dear
Woodley. We should, in kindness to our friends, conceal our sorrows.


Woodley. If Mountfort has succeeded with my uncle, Louisa's happiness will
lighten my distress.


L. Mary. I have not time to ask an explanation of this matter, now. -- But let
me again entreat you to be cheerful: -- something tells me that our situation
is not so bad as you imagine. Let us not anticipate misfortune: -- it is always
too soon to be wretched.


Woodley. I will exert my utmost power, my dear, to emulate your fortitude.

[Exit.
L. Mary. My fortitude! Ah Woodley! little do thou know the perturbation
here. -- Ruin comes on apace! -- The shock was sudden and severe; but 'twas my
love, not resolution, bore me through it. -- And now let me collect myself a
little, and try, by Reason's standard, the value of those joys which I resign.
-- Dress! Will Not my little person look as well in a plain silk, as in all this
finery? Vanity says, Yes. -- Grandeur -- what is it? A magnificent side-board,
a train of useless servants, gay furniture, crowded rooms, and blazing lights,
which but oppress the spirits, without affording enjoyment. Elegance is not
confined to state: her handmaid Neatness shall preside at our board, and render
our rural fare delicious. -- Operas! Ranelagh! Plays! Masquerades! Assemblies!
Company! ay, there is the rub! Society! dear Society! I shall not find, a Mrs.
Bromley in Dorsetshire; but I shall have my Woodley there, and my endeavors
not to let him see I grieve, will soon make me cease to do so. My resolution's
fixed -- I Will acquaint Louisa with it instantly,

[Exit. SCENE changes to Mr. WOODLEY's Dressing Room. Mr. WOODLEY, Colonel
MOUNTFORT.
Woodley. Upon my honor, Colonel, I am as unable to fathom Sir William's
meaning, as you can be. I am certain that no person ever proposed to me for
Louisa, but yourself, and she could not possibly give her consent, before it
was asked.


Colonel. This assurance has revived my hopes a little; but it is impossible my
heart can be at ease, till your sister has pronounced my doom.


Woodley. If she consults her own heart, Mountfort, you will not, I fancy, have
much reason to complain of her sentence. But as she is the only Oedipus that
can expound this riddle, let us apply to her for the explanation.

[Rings.
Colonel. You prevent my wishes, for you have an undoubted right to make the
enquiry.

Enter Servant.
Woodley. Tell my sister I desire to speak with her, immediately.

[Exit Servant.
Colonel. How my heart throbs, at her approach!


Woodley. For shame, my gallant friend!


Colonel. O Woodley! when all one's happiness is staked on the turn of a die,
who would not tremble when he stood the cast?

Enter Servant.
Serve. Miss Woodley, Sir, has just sent to let Sir William know she wishes to
pay her respects to him: -- at her return she will wait upon you.

[Exit.
Colonel. Inhuman girl! She trifles with my anxiety -- perhaps rejoices in it.


Woodley. Lovers are of all beings the most irrationa. I Would hazard my life that
Louisa has never heard of your proposal to Sir William, and of course can know
nothing of your anxiety.


Colonel. She will be soon acquainted with both. But have not you informed her?


Woodley. No, on my honor; I have not seen her since you left me.


Colonel. Your coolness on this subject, Mr. Woodley, by no means accords with
my impatience.


Woodley. You wrong me, Mountfort. Be assured, that your union with Louisa is
an object my heart is set on; but that heart is torn to pieces, at present. --
I cannot speak -- Louisa never stays long with her uncle -- she will return in
a few minutes.


Colonel. They will be years to me.


Woodley. Let us meet her then, before she goes into the drawing room.

[Exit. SCENE changes to Sir WILLIAM 's Apartment. Enter Sir WILLIAM.
Sir William. Poor child! I am very sorry she is coming -- I know not what
excuse to make for Belford -- I fear it will be a grievous disappointment to
her.

Enter LOUISA.
Louisa. I come, Sir, most joyfully to tell you something that I am sure will
give you pleasure.


Sir William, My poor dear! and I have something to tell you, that I am sure
will give you pain.


Louisa. Indeed, Sir, I am so much rejoiced at present, that there are but very
few things that could render me unhappy.


Sir William. (aside) So much the worse -- the shock will be the greater! I
shall never have the courage to tell her. -- The suddenness of this event,
Louisa --


Louisa. Do you know it, Sir?


Sir William. Ay, but too well, my dear.


Louisa. You quite surprise me, Sir! It is not above five minutes, since it was
determined.


Sir William. Yes, yes, it is more than that -- above half an hour. But though
matters have taken an unexpected turn, I would not have you fret, or grieve,
child!


Louisa. So far from it, Sir, that I am quite rejoiced, and flattered myself
that you would be so too, as I know it is a point you have long set your heart
upon; -- and I must do Lady Mary the justice to declare the plan was entirely
her own.


Sir William. Lady Mary! I guessed as much. -- How did she dare to thwart my
schemes?


Louisa. Dear Sir, have you not always wished that my brother and sister should
live in Dorsetshire? and now that Lady Mary has, of her own accord, determined
to quit London, you seem offended.


Sir William. Softly, softly, child; don't hurry me! -- For once in my life, I
perceive I am left behind. -- (aside) So, I find she knows nothing of Belford,
and that work is all to do, yet. -- Go on, my dear! Lady Mary, you say --


Louisa. Has, unsolicited by any one, resolved to give up all the gaiety and
dissipation of this town, and remain in Dorsetshire till my brother's affairs
are entirely retrieved.


Sir William. (aside) She Will not return in a hurry, then, I doubt. -- I am glad
of it, my dear, for your sake, as well as your brother's: -- air and exercise
will be of great use to you. -- (aside) I Am afraid she will stand in need of
them, when she is acquainted with her misfortune.


Louisa. But, my good, dear uncle, will not you give Lady Mary credit for her
prudence? and will not you permit my brother and sister to take leave of you,
before they go?


Sir William. I hate all forms and ceremonies, child! -- They have had my leave
to go into the country, these three years past; and I am less displeased with
your sister, for her prudent resolution. And so, at your request, my dear, you
may all breakfast with me before you set out tomorrow. -- (aside) I Will defer
acquainting her till then, with Belford's behavior.


Louisa. I don't believe, Sir, that they can set out so immediately; but I am
certain they will not defer a moment to accept your kind invitation, on that
account.


Sir William. Stop, child, stop! I will not have them come to me, till the very
hour they are going. If I were to see your brother often, I might be weak
enough to grow fond of him again; so don't let him come, I charge you, 'till
his boots are on. I have trouble enough on my hands for others, already. You
don't know what I suffer on your account, Louisa, at this moment. But you shall
know all about it, when you are setting off for Dorsetshire.


Louisa. (aside) I wish I dare venture to make the good man's mind easy, with
regard to me. -- As I am perfectly resigned to your commands, Sir, on every
occasion, I hope I shall never give you cause for any real trouble.


Sir William. (aside) There now, she will break my heart with her mildness! -- I
hope for your own sake you will be resigned, my dear. But go, child, and tell
your brother and Lady Mary, that I shall be glad to see them on the morning
they are setting out; but not before, upon any account whatever.

[Exit.
Louisa. I rejoice to be the messenger of such glad tidings; for if he sees my
brother, I am certain he will serve him.

[Exit. SCENE, a Drawing Room. Card-tables, with Company at Play. Lady MARY,
LOUISA, Mr. BELFORD, Colonel MOUNTFORT.
1st Whist. Fifty pieces on the rubber!


2d Whist. A bet, my Lord.


1st Loo. A Pam flush!


2d Loo. You seldom deal, I think, without one, Madam.


1st Loo. My Pam box can best answer that hint, Madam; for this is the first
guinea I have been able to put into it, this whole winter. -- But you lose, at
present, Madam, and therefore have leave to speak. -- Please to mark the Loo,
Madam -- it is just sixty guineas.


Louisa. (to Belsord.) How much am 'I obliged to you, my excellent friend, for
so generously saving me from the pain of offending the best of uncles!


Colonel. And let me join my gratitude, Sir, for your having so kindly removed,
I hope, the only obstacle to my happiness, by releasing Sir William from his
promise.


Belford. I heartily wish he may be inclined to transfer his favor to you, Sir.

Enter Mrs. BROMLEY.
1st Loo. My dear cousin, here is a place for you! The Monsters must come in
with Mrs. Bromley.


Mrs. Bromley. I Will wait upon you, in a moment.


2d Loo. The Monsters positively shall not come in, 'till it is a single stake;
-- and then I shall never have a flush after, I suppose.


L. Mary. My dear Bromley, I have a thousand things to say to you of the utmost
importance. I wish you would not play, tonight.


Mrs. Bromley. Not play! you must excuse me, indeed, Lady Mary! Besides, we
shall have time enough to talk over those same important matters, you know, at
the Masquerade.


L. Mary. I shall not go, tonight, and have something so interesting to tell
you --


Mrs. Bromley. (aside) It Is impossible she should suspect any thing. -- Your
Ladyship knows I hate melancholy stories. -- (to the Table) Is the Loo over? --
(aside) I cannot help feeling a little awkward, when I speak to her.


3d Loo. Another flush, as I live! I don't believe we shall have a single
stake, these two hours.


1st Quadrille. Your Ladyship's basted -- you trumpted the King of Diamonds.


2d Quadrille. What then, Madam? Here take the Diamond, I have my game without
it.


3d Quadrille. No, Madam -- a renounce is a Beast.


2d Quadrille. I will not submit to it. -- Judgment! Several. Your Ladyship's a
Beast! a Beast!


2d Loo. What a racket they make, at this paltry play! Not above a crown
a-fish, I dare swear! -- The Loo is just two hundred and forty guineas! --
Deal, Madam.

Enter Mr. WOODLEY, and joins LOUISA.
L. Mary. Not keep your promise, Bromley?


Mrs. Bromley. Why, no, indeed, Madam! I cannot possibly think of rusticating
myself with your Ladyship; -- but if any of the summer camps should happen to
lie near you, I may give you a call, en passant, to see how love and a cottage
agree with you. -- Will you never let me in, Mrs. Henpeck?


3d Loo. Dear Madam, I wish you had been in my place, the whole evening, with
all my heart! I have lost near three hundred pounds in it. -- Heighho!


L. Mary. I had vainly flattered myself, it seems, that my company might have
rendered the country passable, at least, to one who professed herself my friend.


Mrs. Bromley. I always thought your Ladyship very romantic. -- (aside) I wish
she would not teaze me so!


L. Mary. (aside) This shock is much severer to me, than the first I felt, as
friends were dearer to me than fortune. -- But let me rise above her
worthlessness, nor let her see how her unkindness wounds me.


1st Whist. Lurched at four! it is confounded hard!


2d Whist. I bet you three to one.


L. Mary. -- (to Mrs. Bromley) Will Mr. Bromley be here, tonight?


Mrs. Bromley. Certainly. -- Sooner than you wish, I fancy.

(aside.)
L. Mary. (looking earnestly at Mrs. Bromley) Pray, Mrs. Bromley, did you hire
those earrings from my jeweller? I Am glad now, he did not alter them.


Mrs. Bromley. I have never yet been under the necessity of hiring jewels,
Madam, whatever other people may have been. But though the setting of these is
not altered, Madam, the property is; -- for they are mine, at present, I assure
you.


L. Mary. You Will pardon me, Mrs. Bromley. -- Mr. Woodley, pray are not those my
earrings?


Woodley. They were, my dear. -- (aside) This is ungenerous of Bromley! -- I
will explain this matter another time, my dear.


Mrs. Bromley. Nay, Mr. Woodley, it requires but little explanation. Lady Mary
is not so much a child as not to know, that, in this country, and in these
times, property quickly changes hands, from those who have squandered their own
fortunes, and possibly that of others, to those who have been more prudent, and
less lavish.


3d Loo. The Loo is over, Mrs. Bromley. -- Bring the Monsters, Sir.


Mrs. Bromley. I thought it would never be a single stake!

(sits down to the table.
L. Mary. (aside.) Her unkindness would be insupportable, did not the insolence
of it render her despicable.


Colonel. Don't you think, Miss Woodley, that Lady Mary looks uncommonly grave,
this evening?


Louisa. You will not be surprised at her seriousness, when I tell you that she
has determined on quitting London immediately, and retiring with my brother
into Dorsetshire. I shall go with them, Colonel.


Colonel. And I shall as certainly follow my leader. Sir William can have no
objection to my being cantoned in the neighborhood of Woodley Park, I presume?


1st Whist. Four by honors, again! This is the fourth time you have dealt
them, in the rubber. Sixteen out of twenty, are odds that Demoivre could not
play against. -- There Is your money, there is your money, Sir!


2d Whist. No -- double or quit with your Lordship.


1st Whist. I know I am a bubble, but I hate to cut a loser. -- It Is a bet, Sir.


1st Loo. Two Pams, as I hope to be saved!


Mrs. Bromley. Fie, Madam, don't swear! it is vastly ill-bred.


1st Loo. It Is much worse breeding to cheat, Mrs. Bromley.


Mrs. Bromley. Mean creature! I scorn your words.


1st Loo. You should begin by scorning mean actions, Madam. But you shall not take
up the Loo, I assure you -- I have long suspected you of such tricks.


2d Loo. And so have I. -- Heigh-ho! -- she has got a deal of my money. --
Heigh-ho!


3d Loo. And of mine too, I assure you; -- but her surprising luck is now
clearly accounted for.


Mrs. Bromley. I will not touch another card with such vulgar, suspicious wretches.


1st Loo. We have renounced you first, Madam; -- so if you please to rise from
the table, Madam, and I Will take care that you shall never sit down to any other
wherever I am present, I assure you, Madam.


2d Loo. Put all the Monsters out, at once. -- Heigh-ho!


Mrs. Bromley. (rising in a passion, and addressing Lady Mary) I did not think
your Ladyship would stand tamely by, and suffer me to be insulted in your
house; but it is the last time I shall ever come into it, I promise you.


L. Mary. I shall take care that you shall not break that promise, if you should
happen to forget it, Mrs. Bromley.


Mrs. Bromley. You speak like an oracle, without consciousness, Madam; for this
is the last night you will ever have any authority here, believe me: and so I
leave your Ladyship to your future rural felicity.

[Exit.
L. Mary. (to Louisa) Was there ever so sudden and extraordinary a change in
any human creature!


Louisa. It Is rather a discovery, than a metamorphose, my dear Lady Mary! -- I
have long seen through Mrs. Bromley's mask -- 'twas only made of gauze.

Enter FORWARD, and speaks to Mr. WOODLEY.
Forward. There are some Gentlemen below, Sir, who, though not invited, insist
upon coming up.


Woodley. Admit them, directly -- all Gentlemen are welcome.


Forward. I should have done so, Sir, but that these Gentlemen don't seem to be
well enough dressed for my Lady's assembly -- They are but Bailiffs, Sir.


Woodley. Distraction! my disgrace is public, now!


Belford. (to Forward) At whose suit do they come here?


Forward. I think they mentioned Mr. Bromley, Sir.


Woodley. Impossible! he is the very friend I thought of applying to, in my
present difficulties.


Belford. Don't be too confident, Mr. Woodley. I know that fellow to be a
consummate knave.


Colonel. Don't let your spirits sink, my dear Woodley. -- We'll inquire into
the matter, and accommodate it immediately. -- I beg your Ladyship not to be
alarmed -- every thing shall be settled, directly. Try to support your sister's
sinking heart, my dear Louisa.

[Exeunt Colonel, Woodley, and Belford. [Louisa seems to comfort Lady Mary, who
is in Tears, and both go out together.]
2d Whist. Bailiffs, did the fellow say? Egad, I Will decamp in time.

[rises.
1st Whist. You must not stir, 'till the rubber is out, Sir.


2d Whist. Your Lordship must excuse me! -- Such incidents are so common, to be
sure, in the present times, that they cease to be scandalous; but that does not
prevent my being affected by them. I shall remember that seven to four are the
points of our game, and for debts of honor, my Lord, you will always find me
solvent.


3d Whist. These scenes are apt to affect me, too, Charles! -- I never could
stand them. -- Peers are privileged from such sympathies; so let us
countermarch down the back-stairs, together, or we may be lurched, though we
are seven.

[Exeunt 2d and 3d Whist.
2d Loo. I shall faint, if I see them! -- I must go, Ladies.


1st Loo. Let us have another round, Madam! We are all married women, you know.


2d Loo. My antipathy to these harpies was contracted while I was a widow,
Madam. -- It Is your deal, Madam -- Poor Lady Mary! -- Heigh-ho!


1st Loo. Ay, poor Lady Mary, I say too; -- though to be sure, one cannot have
any great compassion for such an extravagant woman.


3d Loo. Compassion! No, truly! -- Such suppers after her routs! though I was
never asked to one of them. That cheat Bromley was one of her chief favorites,
you know.


2d Loo. She is gone out of the room, as I live, without making the least
apology. -- Did you ever hear of such rudeness! I Will never visit her again. --
Heigh-ho!


1st Loo. Nor I. -- It Is time to break up, indeed, when the Lady of the house
has retired! -- I Will carry off this Pam, to triumph over that rude wretch,
Bromley. I shall have the honor of seeing you all, tomorrow night.


Omnes. Certainly.


1st Loo. My coach was not ordered 'till twelve. -- Will you carry me to Lady
Freakish's rout? They never meet there, 'till eleven.


3d Loo. With pleasure. -- But I insist upon telling the story of the Woodleys.


1st Loo. And I of Mrs. Bromley.


2d Loo. Then I have nothing left to do, but to count my losses. -- Heigh-ho!

[Exeunt. SCENE changes to Sir WILLIAM'S Apartment. Sir WILLIAM and WATERS.
Sir William. Why didn't you say I was gone to bed? She Will break my rest, for
this night, at least. She has heard of her misfortune, I fear.

Enter LOUISA.
Louisa. O Sir! --


sir William. (aside) Yes, yes, it is all out, now. -- Nay, my dear child, don't
take on so -- you will break my heart, if you do. -- 'I was not my sault, Louisa.


Louisa. Don't talk or think of faults, now, Sir. -- You know that before this
disgraceful event happened in the family --


Sir William. Don't you talk of it in such a melancholy strain, child; -- it is
no disgrace, I tell you.


Louisa. It Is too public to be concealed, Sir. The Bailiffs are but this moment
gone out of the house.


Sir William. What house? This house? Your brother's house? What! have they
carried him to prison? I thought it would come to this.


Louisa. No, Sir -- Colonel Mountfort generously --


Sir William. What had he to do with it? Why should ^olonel Mountfort, or any
one else? Why didn't they send to me? -- But what have I to do wi^h your
brother, child? He should have gone to pri^on.


Louisa. He would not long have languished there, Sir believe me; a broken
heart would soon have r^l^ased him.


Sir William. Psha, psha -- with your broken heart -- You play the fool with
me! -- My nephew perish in a ga^^! But he has brought it all on himself, you
know, child.


Louisa. I grant that his imprudence, Sir, has exceeded every thing, but your
goodnature.


Sir William. Confound my goodnature! it is for ever bringing me into scrapes
--


Louisa. And bringing others out of them, my dear uncle.


Sir William. Well, well, well -- I want Belford, now, extremely! -- Every
thing falls out unlucky! -- But what of Colonel Mountfort, child?


Louisa. I was going to tell you, Sir, that he became security for my brother,
on the instant.


Sir William. That Is noble! for he did not know that I would discharge the
debt. -- Nay, for that matter, I don't know that I shall -- I promise nothing
-- but I like this action of the Colonel.


Louisa. I rejoice to hear it, Sir.


Sir William. Ay! then perhaps you like the Colonel? Be honest, speak out. -- I
should be glad to make you some amends for a loss you don't yet know of; -- but
I can conceal it no longer. -- Belsord has declared off! -- but he is unworthy
your resentment. The Colonel's father was my friend, and a noble fellow he was!


Louisa. And his son is every way worthy of such a father!


Sir William. (aside) I rejoice to find her so easily reconciled. -- Well, that
matter is settled, for the present. -- But are you certain that your brother
and Lady Mary will hold their resolution of retiring to Dorsetshire?


Louisa. You know, Sir, it was their determined purpose, before this misfortune
happened.


Sir William. That Is something in their favor, to be sure, and I Am glad you
told me of it. -- One good act of choice, is worth all the virtues of
necessity, in the world. -- I should be glad to make their minds easy, tonight
-- But they would thank me, and talk to me, and discompose me, and I should lose my
night's rest -- for I hate thanks. -- I should be glad to see Colonel
Mountfort: -- his behavior has shown a respect to me, and the family.


Louisa. You will meet him now, at my brother's, Sir, where your presence will
make them all happy.


Sir William. Well, child, I can deny you nothing. -- I like to make people
happy, when they will assist me in doing so, themselves; without which the best
endeavors are but labor in vain. -- But the country is the place! -- You must
settle in the country, Louisa! -- There is no safety for good folks in London,
believe me, child.


Louisa. I should hope, Sir, that with prudence and virtue one might be safe
any where.


Sir William. A fig for your prudence -- ay, and for virtue too, against
example! Example, child, is the ruin of us all. We naturally strive to ape
those that are called our Betters, and so become worse than we otherwise should
be. -- But this is no time for moralizing. Do you step in and tell your brother
I am coming. I Will just wrap my cloak round me and follow you.

[Exeunt severally. SCENE changes to Mr. WOODLEY's Dressing Room. Mr. WOODLEY,
Mr. BELFORD, and Colonel MOUNTFORT.
Belford. Fear not, my gallant Colonel! Mr. Woodley shall have ample vengeance
upon that scoundrel Bromley; for as he has evidently altered the date of the
bond, we shall find a way to reward his ingenuity.


Woodley. I know not whether I am most astonished at his villainy, or at my own
weakness in being duped by it.


Colonel. The uprightness of your own heart, my dear Woodley, is the best
excuse for your credulity.

Enter Lady MARY, and LOUISA.
Louisa. I come the happy messenger of joyful tidings! My dear good uncle --
But he is here.

Enter Sir WILLIAM.
Sir William. I Am glad to meet you here, all together, for I have business with
every one of you, jointly and severally. -- And first for you, Colonel, I am
very much obliged to you, Sir, and I scorn to be obliged to any man, without
making him some return for his kindness. I therefore make you a present I
refused you, a few hours ago, for the sake of old Sir Doubtful Deliberation
there. -- But do you take Louisa, and for aught I know, you may make her as
good a husband as he would have done.


Colonel. I shall use my best endeavors, Sir, to deserve --


Sir William. That Is right -- stick to that. -- No thanks, but deserve as much
as ever you can. -- And as for you, Mr. Belford, though I am confoundedly angry
with you, I must get you to settle this young man's affairs; his debts of
honor, his post obits, etc.; though perhaps it may be only affording him an
opportunity for deranging them again. -- That Is the modern phrase, I think, for
being over-head-and-ears in debt.


Woodley. The sufferings my follies have brought upon me, Sir, and the
remembrance of your generosity, will remain too strongly impressed on my mind,
to admit of my relapsing into my former errors; as that would be adding
ingratitude to extravagance, and vice to folly.


Sir William. Well, well, I hope so. -- Kindness should be the strongest tie to
a generous mind, and I suspect you not of any baseness in your nature; --
though, to be sure, you have shown a plentiful lack of wisdom in your conduct.
But misfortunes make Solomon's of us all! -- And now, Madam, (to Lady Mary) to
show you that the merit of your voluntary retirement into the country, is not
lost upon me, I make you a present of this house, for your winter residence.


L. Mary. Your kindness, Sir, --


Sir William. Stop there -- I will not be thanked -- I wish to do as I would be
done by; and as I should not like to be confined in the finest place in the
world, not even Woodley Park, I would not impose such a restraint on one who I
doubt not will hereafter merit my indulgence.


L. Mary. Gratitude overwhelms me, Sir! -- I cannot speak my sense of your
goodness as it deserves.


Sir William. So much the better! -- There are nobler ways of showing one's
sentiments.


L. Mary. They shall be demonstrated in my future conduct, Sir; for the virtue
that arises from the conviction of past errors, must be at once sincere, and
permanent.


FINIS.

