THE CRITIC OR A Tragedy Rehearsed A Dramatic Piece in three ACTS as it is
performed at the THEATER ROYAL in DRURY LANE

BY Richard Brinsley Sheridan Esqr LONDON. Printed for T. Becket, Adelphi,
Strand, MDCCLXXXI.

TO Mrs. GREVILLE.
MADAM,
IN requesting your permission to address the following pages to you, which as
they aim themselves to be critical, require every protection and allowance that
approving taste or friendly prejudice can give them, I yet ventured to mention
no other motive than the gratification of private friendship and esteem. Had I
suggested a hope that your implied approbation would give a sanction to their
defects, your particular reserve, and dislike to the reputation of critical
taste, as well as of poetical talent, would have made you refuse the protection
of your name to such a purpose. However, I am not so ungrateful as now to
attempt to combat this disposition in you. I shall not here presume to argue
that the present state of poetry claims and expects every assistance that taste
and example can afford it: nor endeavor to prove that a fastidious concealment
of the most elegant productions of judgment and fancy is an ill return for the
possession of those endowments. -- Continue to deceive yourself in the idea
that you are known only to be eminently admired and regarded for the valuable
qualities that attach private friendships, and the graceful talents that adorn
conversation. Enough of what you have written, has stolen into full public
notice to answer my purpose; and you will, perhaps, be the only person,
conversant in elegant literature, who shall read this address and not perceive
that by publishing your particular approbation of the following drama, I have a
more interested object than to boast the true respect and regard with which

I have the honor to be, MADAM, Your very sincere, And obedient humble
servant, R. B. SHERIDAN.

PROLOGUE.
By the Honorable RICHARD FITZPATRICK.
THE Sister Muses, whom these realms obey,
Who over the Drama hold divided sway,
Sometimes, by evil counselors, it is said
Like earth-born potentates have been misled:
In those gay days of wickedness and wit,
When Villiers criticiz'd what Dryden writ,
The Tragic Queen, to please a tasteless crow'd,
Had learned to bellow, rant, and roar so loud,
That frightened Nature, her best friend before,
The blustering beldam's company forswore.
Her comic Sister, who had wit it is true,
With all her merits, had her failings too;
And would sometimes in mirthful moments use
A style too flippant for a well-bred Muse.
Then female modesty abashed began
To seek the friendly refuge of the fan,
Awhile behind that slight entrenchment stood,
'Till driven from thence, she left the stage for good.
In our more pious, and far chaster times!
These sure no longer are the Muse's crimes!
But some complain that, former faults to shun,
The reformation to extremes has run.
The frantic hero's wild delirium past,
Now insipidity succeeds bombast;
So slow Melpomene's cold numbers creep,
Here dullness seems her drowsy court to keep,
And we, are scarce awake, whilst you are fast asleep.
Thalia, once so ill behaved and rude,
Reformed; is now become an arrant prude,
Retailing nightly to the yawning pit,
The purest morals, undefiled by wit!
Our Author offers in these motley scenes,
A slight remonstrance to the Drama's queens,
Nor let the goddesses be over nice;
Free spoken subjects give the best advice.
Although not quite a novice in his trade,
His cause to night requires no common aid.
To this, a friendly, just, and powerful court,
I come Ambassador to beg support.
Can he undaunted, brave the critick's rage?
In civil broils, with brother bards engage?
Hold forth their errors to the public eye,
Nay more, even Newspapers themselves defy?
Say, must his single arm encounter all?
By numbers vanquished, even the brave may fall;
And though no leader should success distrust,
Whose troops are willing, and whose cause is just;
To bid such hosts of angry foes defiance,
His chief dependence must be, YOUR ALLIANCE.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Dangle Mr. DODD. Sneer Mr. PALMER. Sir Fretful Plagiary, Mr. PARSONS. Signor
Pasticcio Ritornello, Mr. DELPINI. Interpreter Mr. BADDELEY. Under Prompter Mr.
PHILLIMORE. AND Puff Mr. KING. Mrs. Dangle Mrs. HOPKINS. Italian Girls Miss
FIELD, and the Miss ABRAMS.

Characters of the TRAGEDY.
Lord Burleigh Mr. MOODY. Governor of Tilbury Fort, Mr. WRIGHTEN. Earl of
Leicester Mr. FARREN. Sir Walter Raleigh Mr. BURTON Sir Christopher Hatton Mr.
WALDRON. Master of the Horse Mr. KENNY Beefeater Mr. WRIGHT. Justice Mr.
PACKER. Son Mr. LAMASH. Constable Mr. FAWCETT. Thames Mr. GAWDRY. AND Don
Ferolo Whiskerandos, Mr. BANNISTER, jun. 1st Niece Miss COLLET. 2d Niece Miss
KIRBY. Justice's Lady Mrs. JOHNSTON. Confidant Mrs. BRADSHAW.
AND Tilburina Miss POPE. Guards, Constables, Servants, Chorus, Rivers,
Attendants, etc. etc.

THE CRITIC.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Mr. and Mrs. DANGLE at Breakfast, and reading Newspapers. DANGLE (reading.)]
BRUTUS to LORD NORTH. -- Letter the second, on the STATE OF THE ARMY. -- Pshaw!
To the first L -- dash D of the A -- dash Y. -- Genuine Extract of a Letter
from ST. KITT's. -- COXHEATH INTELLIGENCE. -- It is now confidently asserted
that SIR CHARLES HARDY. -- Pshaw! -- Nothing but about the fleet, and the
nation! -- and I hate all politics but theatrical politics. -- Where Is the
MORNING CHRONICLE?


Mrs. DANGLE. Yes, that is your gazette.


DANGLE. So, here we have it. --

" Theatrical intelligence extraordinary," -- We hear there is a new tragedy in
rehearsal at Drury Lane Theater, called the SPANISH ARMADA, said to be written
by Mr. PUFF, a gentleman well known in the theatrical world; if we may allow
ourselves to give credit to the report of the performers, who, truth to say,
are in general but indifferent judges, this piece abounds with the most
striking and received beauties of modern composition -- So! I am very glad my
friend PUFF's tragedy is in such forwardness. -- Mrs. Dangle, my dear, you will
be very glad to hear that PUFF's tragedy --


Mrs. DANGLE. Lord, Mr. Dangle, why will you plague me about such nonsense? --
Now the plays are begun I shall have no peace. -- Is Not it sufficient to make
yourself ridiculous by your passion for the theater, without continually
teazing me to join you? Why cannot you ride your hobbyhorse without desiring to
place me on a pillion behind you, Mr. Dangle?


DANGLE. Nay, my dear, I was only going to read --


Mrs. DANGLE. No, no; you never will read any thing that is worth listening to:
-- you hate to hear about your country; there are letters every day with Roman
signatures, demonstrating the certainty of an invasion, and proving that the
nation is utterly undone -- But you never will read any thing to entertain one.


DANGLE. What has a woman to do with politics, Mrs. Dangle?


Mrs. DANGLE. And what have you to do with the theater, Mr. Dangle? Why should
you affect the character of a Critic? I have no patience with you! -- haven't
you made yourself the jest of all your acquaintance by your interference in
matters where you have no business? Are not you called a theatrical Quidnunc,
and a mock Maecenas to second-hand authors?


DANGLE. True; my power with the Managers is pretty notorious; but is it no
credit to have applications from all quarters for my interest? -- From lords to
recommend fiddlers, from ladies to get boxes, from authors to get answers, and
from actors to get engagements.


Mrs. DANGLE. Yes, truly; you have contrived to get a share in all the plague
and trouble of theatrical property, without the profit, or even the credit of
the abuse that attends it.


DANGLE. I am sure, Mrs. Dangle, you are no loser by it, however; you have all
the advantages of it: -- mightn't you, last winter, have had the reading of the
new Pantomime a fortnight previous to its performance? And does not Mr. Fosbrook
let you take places for a play before it is advertised, and set you down for a
Box for every new piece through the season? And didn't my friend, Mr. Smatter,
dedicate his last Farce to you at my particular request, Mrs. Dangle?


Mrs. DANGLE. Yes; but was not the Farce damned, Mr. Dangle? And to be sure it
is extremely pleasant to have one's house made the motley rendezvous of all the
lackeys of literature! -- The very high change of trading authors and jobbing
critics! -- Yes, my drawing room is an absolute register-office for candidate
actors, and poets without character; -- then to be continually alarmed with
Misses and Ma'ams piping histeric changes on JULIETS and DORINDAS, POLLYS and
OPHELIAS; and the very furniture trembling at the probationary starts and
unprovoked rants of would-be RICHARDS and HAMLETS! -- And what is worse than
all, now that the Manager has monopoliz'd the Opera-House, haven't we the
Signors and Signioras calling here, sliding their smooth semibreves, and
gargling glib divisions in their outlandish throats -- with foreign emissaries
and French spies, for ought I know, disguised like fiddlers and figure dancers!


DANGLE. Mercy! Mrs. Dangle!


Mrs. DANGLE. And to employ yourself so idly at such an alarming crisis as this
too -- when, if you had the least spirit, you would have been at the head of
one of the Westminster associations -- or trailing a volunteer pike in the
Artillery Ground! -- But you -- of my conscience, I believe if the French were
landed tomorrow, your first enquiry would be, whether they had brought a
theatrical troop with them.


DANGLE. Mrs. Dangle, it does not signify -- I say the stage is "the Mirror of
Nature," and the actors are "the Abstract, and brief Chronicles of the Time:"
-- and pray what can a man of sense study better? -- Besides, you will not
easily persuade me that there is no credit or importance in being at the head
of a band of critics, who take upon them to decide for the whole town, whose
opinion and patronage all writers solicit, and whose recommendation no manager
dares refuse!


Mrs. DANGLE. Ridiculous! -- Both managers and authors of the least merit,
laugh at your pretensions. -- The PUBLIC is their CRITIC -- without whose fair
approbation they know no play can rest on the stage, and with whose applause
they welcome such attacks as yours, and laugh at the malice of them, where they
cannot at the wit.


DANGLE. Very well, Madam -- very well.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Mr. Sneer, Sir, to wait on you.


DANGLE. O, show Mr. Sneer up.

[ Exit Servant. Plague on it, now we must appear loving and affectionate, or
Sneer will hitch us into a story.


Mrs. DANGLE. With all my heart; you cannot be more ridiculous than you are.


DANGLE. Your are enough to provoke --


Enter Mr. SNEER. -- Hah! my dear Sneer, I am vastly glad to see you. My dear,
here is Mr. Sneer.


Mrs. DANGLE. Good morning to you, Sir.


DANGLE. Mrs. Dangle and I have been diverting ourselves with the papers. --
Pray, Sneer, will not you go to Drury Lane theater the first night of Puff's
tragedy?


SNEER. Yes; but I suppose one shall not be able to get in, for on the first night
of a new piece they always fill the house with orders to support it. But here,
Dangle, I have brought you two pieces, one of which you must exert yourself to
make the Managers accept, I can tell you that, for it is written by a person of
consequence.


DANGLE. So! now my plagues are beginning!


SNEER. Aye, I am glad of it, for now you will be happy. Why, my dear Dangle, it
is a pleasure to see how you enjoy your volunteer fatigue, and your solicited
solicitations.


DANGLE. It Is a great trouble -- yet, egad, its pleasant too. -- Why, sometimes
of a morning, I have a dozen people call on me at breakfast time, whose faces I
never saw before, nor ever desire to see again.


SNEER. That must be very pleasant indeed!


DANGLE. And not a week but I receive fifty letters, and not a line in them
about any business of my own.


SNEER. An amusing correspondence!


DANGLE (reading.) "Bursts into tears, and exit." What, is this a tragedy?


SNEER. No, that is a genteel comedy, not a translation -- only taken from the
French; it is written in a style which they have lately tried to run down; the
true sentimental, and nothing ridiculous in it from the beginning to the end.


Mrs. DANGLE. Well, if they had kept to that, I should not have been such an
enemy to the stage, there was some edification to be got from those pieces, Mr.
Sneer!


SNEER. I am quite of your opinion, Mrs. Dangle; the theater, in proper hands,
might certainly be made the school of morality; but now, I am sorry to say it,
people seem to go there principally for their entertainment!


Mrs. DANGLE. It would have been more to the credit of the Managers to have
kept it in the other line.


SNEER. Undoubtedly, Madam, and hereafter perhaps to have had it recorded, that
in the midst of a luxurious and dissipated age, they preserved two houses in
the capital, where the conversation was always moral at least, if not
entertaining!


DANGLE. Now, egad, I think the worst alteration is in the nicety of the
audience. -- No double entendre, no smart inuendo admitted; even Vanburgh and
Congreve obliged to undergo a bungling reformation!


SNEER. Yes, and our prudery in this respect is just on a par with the
artificial bashfulness of a courtezan, who increases the blush upon her cheek
in an exact proportion to the diminution of her modesty.


DANGLE. Sneer cannot even give the Public a good word! -- But what have we
here? -- This seems a very odd --


SNEER. O, that is a comedy, on a very new plan; replete with wit and mirth, yet
of a most serious moral! You see it is called "THE REFORMED HOUSEBREAKER;"
where, by the mere force of humor, HOUSEBREAKING is put into so ridiculous a
light, that if the piece has its proper run, I have no doubt but that bolts and
bars will be entirely useless by the end of the season.


DANGLE. Egad, this is new indeed!


SNEER. Yes; it is written by a particular friend of mine, who has discovered
that the follies and foibles of society, are subjects unworthy the notice of
the Comic Muse, who should be taught to stoop only at the greater vices and
blacker crimes of humanity -- gibbeting capital offenses in five acts, and
pillorying petty larcenies in two. -- In short, his idea is to dramatize the
penal laws, and make the Stage a court of ease to the Old Bailey.


DANGLE. It is truly moral.


Enter SERVANT. Sir Fretful Plagiary, Sir.


DANGLE. Beg him to walk up. -- [ Exit Servant.] Now, Mrs. Dangle, Sir Fretful
Plagiary is an author to your own taste.


Mrs. DANGLE. I confess he is a favorite of mine, because every body else
abuses him.


SNEER. -- Very much to the credit of your charity, Madam, if not of your
judgment.


DANGLE. But, egad, he allows no merit to any author but himself, that is the
truth on it -- though he is my friend.


SNEER. Never. -- He is as envious as an old maid verging on the desperation of
six-and-thirty: and then the insiduous humility with which he seduces you to
give a free opinion on any of his works, can be exceeded only by the petulant
arrogance with which he is sure to reject your observations.


DANGLE. Very true, egad -- though he is my friend.


SNEER. Then his affected contempt of all newspaper strictures; though, at the
same time, he is the sorest man alive, and shrinks like scorched parchment from
the fiery ordeal of true criticism: yet is he so covetous of popularity, that
he had rather be abused than not mentioned at all.


DANGLE. There Is no denying it -- though he is my friend.


SNEER. You have read the tragedy he has just finished, haven't you?


DANGLE. O yes; he sent it to me yesterday.


SNEER. Well, and you think it execrable, don't you?


DANGLE. Why between ourselves, egad I must own -- though he is my friend -- that
it is one of the most -- He Is here [Aside] -- finished and most admirable
perform --

[Sir Fretful without.] Mr. Sneer with him, did you say?


Enter Sir FRETFUL. Ah, my dear friend! -- Egad, we were just speaking of your
Tragedy. -- Admirable, Sir Fretful, admirable!


SNEER. You never did any thing beyond it, Sir Fretful -- never in your life.


Sir FRETFUL. You make me extremely happy; -- for without a compliment, my dear
Sneer, there is not a man in the world whose judgment I value as I do yours. --
And Mr. Dangle's.


Mrs. DANGLE. They are only laughing at you, Sir Fretful; for it was but just
now that --


DANGLE. Mrs. Dangle! -- Ah, Sir Fretful, you know Mrs. Dangle. -- My friend
Sneer was rallying just now -- He knows how she admires you, and --


Sir FRETFUL. O Lord -- I am sure Mr. Sneer has more taste and sincerity than
to -- A damned double-faced fellow!


DANGLE. Yes, yes, -- Sneer will jest -- but a better humored --


Sir FRETFUL. O, I know --


DANGLE. He has a ready turn for ridicule -- his wit costs him nothing. --


Sir FRETFUL. No, egad -- or I should wonder how he came by it.


[Aside. Mrs. DANGLE. Because his jest is always at the expense of his friend.


DANGLE. But, Sir Fretful, have you sent your play to the managers yet? -- or
can I be of any service to you?


Sir FRETFUL. No, No, I thank you; I believe the piece had sufficient
recommendation with it. -- I thank you though. -- I sent it to the manager of
COVENTGARDEN THEATER this morning.


SNEER. I should have thought now, that it might have been cast (as the actors
call it) better at DRURY LANE


Sir. FRETFUL. O lud! no -- never send a play there while I live -- harkee! [
Whispers Sneer.]


SNEER. Writes himself! -- I know he does --


Sir FRETFUL. I say nothing -- I take away from no man's merit -- am hurt at no
man's good fortune -- I say nothing. -- But this I will say -- through all my
knowledge of life, I have observed -- that there is not a passion so strongly
rooted in the human heart as envy!


SNEER. I believe you have reason for what you say, indeed.


Sir FRETFUL. Besides -- I can tell you it is not always so safe to leave a
play in the hands of those who write themselves.


SNEER. What, they may steal from them, hey, my dear Plagiary?


Sir FRETFUL. Steal! -- to besure they may; and, egad, serve your best thoughts
as gypsies do stolen children, disfigure them to make 'em pass for their own.


SNEER. But your present work is a sacrifice to Melpomene, and HE, you know,
never --


Sir FRETFUL. That Is no security. -- A dext'rous plagiarist may do any thing.
-- Why, Sir, for ought I know, he might take out some of the best things in my
tragedy, and put them into his own comedy.


SNEER. That might be done, I dare be sworn.


Sir FRETFUL. And then, if such a person gives you the least hint or
assistance, he is devilish apt to take the merit of the whole. --


DANGLE. If it succeeds.


Sir FRETFUL. Aye -- but with regard to this piece, I think I can hit that
gentleman, for I can safely swear he never read it.


SNEER. I Will tell you how you may hurt him more --


Sir FRETFUL. How? --


SNEER. Swear he wrote it.


Sir FRETFUL. Plague on it now, Sneer, I shall take it ill. -- I believe you
want to take away my character as an author!


SNEER. Then I am sure you ought to be very much obliged to me.


Sir FRETFUL. Hey! -- Sir! --


DANGLE. O you know, he never means what he says.


Sir FRTEFUL. Sincerely then -- you do like the piece?


SNEER. Wonderfully!


Sir FRETFUL. But come now, there must be something that you think might be
mended, hey? -- Mr. Dangle, has nothing struck you?


DANGLE. Why faith, it is but an ungracious thing for the most part to --


Sir FRETFUL. -- With most authors it is just so indeed; they are in general
strangely tenacious! -- But, for my part, I am never so well pleased as when a
judicious critic points out any defect to me; for what is the purpose of
showing a work to a friend, if you don't mean to profit by his opinion?


SNEER. Very true. -- Why then, though I seriously admire the piece upon the
whole, yet there is one small objection; which, if you will give me leave, I Will
mention.


Sir FRETFUL. SIR, you cannot oblige me more.


SNEER. I think it wants incident.


Sir FRETFUL. Good God! -- you surprise me! -- wants incident! --


SNEER. Yes; I own I think the incidents are too few.


Sir FRETFUL. Good God! -- Believe me, Mr. Sneer, there is no person for whose
judgment I have a more implicit deference. -- But I protest to you, Mr. Sneer,
I am only apprehensive that the incidents are too crowded. -- My dear Dangle,
how does it strike you?


DANGLE. Really I cannot agree with my friend Sneer. -- I think the plot quite
sufficient; and the four first acts by many degrees the best I ever read or saw
in my life. If I might venture to suggest any thing, it is that the interest
rather falls off in the fifth. --


Sir FRETFUL. -- Rises; I believe you mean, Sir.


DANGLE. No; I don't upon my word.


Sir FRETFUL. Yes, yes, you do upon my soul -- it certainly don't fall off, I
assure you -- No, no, it don't fall off.


DANGLE. Now, Mrs. Dangle, didn't you say it struck you in the same light?


Mrs. DANGLE. No, indeed, I did not -- I did not see a fault in any part of the
play from the beginning to the end.


Sir FRETFUL. Upon my soul the women are the best judges after all!


Mrs. DANGLE. Or if I made any objection, I am sure it was to nothing in the
piece; but that I was afraid it was, on the whole, a little too long.


Sir FRETFUL. Pray, Madam, do you speak as to duration of time; or do you mean
that the story is tediously spun out?


Mrs. DANGLE. O Lud! no. -- I speak only with reference to the usual length of
acting plays.


Sir FRETFUL. Then I am very happy -- very happy indeed, -- because the play is
a short play, a remarkably short play: -- I should not venture to differ with a
lady on a point of taste; but, on these occasions, the watch, you know, is the
critic.


Mrs. DANGLE. Then, I suppose, it must have been Mr. Dangle's drawling manner
of reading it to me.


Sir FRETFUL. O, if Mr. Dangle read it! that is quite another affair! -- But I
assure you, Mrs. Dangle, the first evening you can spare me three hours and an
half, I Will undertake to read you the whole from beginning to end, with the
Prologue and Epilogue, and allow time for the music between the acts.


Mrs. DANGLE. I hope to see it on the stage next.


DANGLE. Well, Sir Fretful, I wish you may be able to get rid as easily of the
news-paper criticisms as you do of ours. --


Sir FRETFUL. The NEWSPAPERS! -- Sir, they are the most villainous --
licentious -- abominable -- infernal -- Not that I ever read them -- No -- I
make it a rule never to look into a news-paper.


DANGLE. You are quite right -- for it certainly must hurt an author of
delicate feelings to see the liberties they take


Sir FRETFUL. No! -- quite the contrary; -- their abuse is, in fact, the best
panegyric -- I like it of all things. -- An author's reputation is only in
danger from their support.


Mr. SNEER. Why that is true -- and that attack now on you the other day --


Sir FRETFUL. -- What? where?


DANGLE. Aye, you mean in a paper of Thursday; it was completely ill-natured to
be sure.


Sir FRETFUL. O, so much the better. -- Ha! ha! ha! -- I would not have it
otherwise.


DANGLE. Certainly it is only to be laughed at; for --


Sir FRETFUL. -- You don't happen to recollect what the fellow said, do you?


SNEER. Pray, Dangle -- Sir Fretful seems a little anxious --


Sir FRETFUL. -- O lud, no! -- anxious, -- not I, -- not the least. -- I -- But
one may as well hear you know.


DANGLE. Sneer, do you recollect? -- Make out something.

[Aside.
SNEER. I will, [to Dangle.] -- Yes, yes, I remember perfectly.


Sir FRETFUL. Well, and pray now -- Not that it signifies -- what might the
gentleman say?


SNEER. Why, he roundly asserts that you have not the slightest invention, or
original genius whatever; though you are the greatest traducer of all other
authors living.


Sir FRETFUL. Ha! ha! ha! -- very good!


SNEER. That as to COMEDY, you have not one idea of your own, he believes, even
in your common place-book -- where stray jokes, and pilfered witticisms are
kept with as much method as the ledger of the LOST-and-STOLEN-OFFICE.


Sir FRETFUL. -- Ha! ha! ha! -- very pleasant!


SNEER. Nay, that you are so unlucky as not to have the skill even to steal
with taste. -- But that you gleen from the refuse of obscure volumes, where
more judicious plagiarists have been before you; so that the body of your work
is a composition of dregs and sediments -- like a bad tavern's worst wine.


Sir FRETFUL. Ha! ha!


SNEER. In your more serious efforts, he says, your bombast would be less
intolerable, if the thoughts were ever suited to the expression; but the
homeliness of the sentiment stares through the fantastic encumbrance of it is fine
language, like a clown in one of the new uniforms!


Sir FRETFUL. Ha! ha!


SNEER. That your occasional tropes and flowers suit the general coarseness of
your style, as tambour sprigs would a ground of linsey-wolfey; while your
imitations of Shakespeare resemble the mimicry of Falstaff's Page, and are
about as near the standard of the original.


Sir FRETFUL. Ha! --


SNEER. -- In short, that even the finest passages you steal are of no service
to you; for the poverty of your own language prevents their assimilating; so
that they lie on the surface like lumps of marl on a barren moor, encumbering
what it is not in their power to fertilize! --


Sir FRETFUL. (after great agitation.) -- Now another person would be vexed at
this.


SNEER. Oh! but I would not have told you, only to divert you.


Sir FRETFUL. I know it -- I am diverted, -- Ha! ha! ha! -- not the least
invention! -- Ha! ha! ha! very good! -- very good!


SNEER. Yes -- no genius! Ha! ha! ha!


DANGLE. A severe rogue! Ha! ha! ha! But you are quite right, Sir Fretful,
never to read such nonsense.


Sir FRETFUL. To be sure -- for if there is any thing to one's praise, it is a
foolish vanity to be gratified at it, and if it is abuse, -- why one is always
sure to hear of it from one damned good natured friend or another!


Enter SERVANT. Sir, there is an Italian gentleman, with a French Interpreter,
and three young ladies, and a dozen musicians, who say they are sent by LADY
RONDEAU and MRS. FUGE.


DANGLE. Gadso! they come by appointment. Dear Mrs. Dangle do let them know
I Will see them directly.


Mrs. DANGLE. You know, Mr. Dangle, I shall not understand a word they say.


DANGLE. But you hear there is an interpreter.


Mrs. DANGLE. Well, I Will try to endure their complaisance till you come.

[Exit.
SERVANT. And Mr. PUFF, Sir, has sent word that the last rehearsal is to be
this morning, and that he will call on you presently.


DANGLE. That Is true -- I shall certainly be at home. [ Exit Servant.] Now, Sir
Fretful, if you have a mind to have justice done you in the way of answer --
Egad, Mr. PUFF's your man.


Sir FRETFUL. Pshaw! Sir, why should I wish to have it answered, when I tell
you I am pleased at it?


DANGLE. True, I had forgot that. -- But I hope you are not fretted at what Mr.
Sneer --


Sir FRETFUL. -- Zounds! no, Mr. Dangle, don't I tell you these things never
fret me in the least.


DANGLE. Nay, I only thought --


Sir FRETFUL. -- And let me tell you, Mr. Dangle, it is damned affronting in you
to suppose that I am hurt, when I tell you I am not.


SNEER. But why so warm, Sir Fretful?


Sir FRETFUL. Gadslife! Mr. Sneer, you are as absurd as Dangle; how often must
I repeat it to you, that nothing can vex me but your supposing it possible for
me to mind the damned nonsense you have been repeating to me! -- and let me
tell you, if you continue to believe this, you must mean to insult me,
gentlemen -- and then your disrespect will affect me no more than the newspaper
criticisms -- and I shall treat it -- with exactly the same calm indifference
and philosophic contempt -- and so your servant.

[Exit.
SNEER. Ha! ha! ha! Poor Sir Fretful! Now will he go and vent his philosophy in
anonymous abuse of all modern critics and authors -- But, Dangle, you must get
you friend PUFF to take me to the rehearsal of his tragedy.


DANGLE. I Will answer for it, he will thank you for desiring it. But come and help
me to judge of this musical family; they are recommended by people of
consequence, I assure you.


SNEER. I am at your disposal the whole morning -- but I thought you had been a
decided critic in music, as well as in literature?


DANGLE. So I am -- but I have a bad ear. -- Efaith, Sneer, though, I am afraid
we were a little too severe on Sir Fretful -- though he is my friend.


SNEER. Why, it is certain, that unnecessarily to mortify the vanity of any
writer, is a cruelty which mere dullness never can deserve; but where a base and
personal malignity usurps the place of literary emulation, the aggressor
deserves neither quarter nor pity.


DANGLE. That Is ture egad! -- though he is my friend!


SCENE II.
A Drawing Room, Harpsichord, etc. Italian Family, French Interpreter, Mrs.
Dangle and Servants discovered. INTERPRETER. Je dis madame, ja'i l'honneur to
introduce and de vous demander votre protection pour le Signor PASTICCIO
RETORNELLO and pour sa charmante famille.


Signor PASTICCIO. Ah! Vosignoria noi vi preghiamo di favori tevi colla vostra
protezione.


1st. DAUGHTER. Vosignoria fatevi questi grazzie.


2nd DAUGHTER. Si Signora.


INTERPRETER. Madame -- me interpret. -- C'est a dire -- in English -- quils
vous prient de leur fair l'honneur --


Mrs. DANGLE. -- I say again, gentlemen, I don't understand a word you say.


Signor PASTICCIO. Questo Signore spieghero.


INTERPRETER. Oui -- me interpret. -- nous avons les lettres de recommendation
pour Monsieur Dangle de --


Mrs. DANGLE. -- Upon my word, Sir, I don't understand you.


Signor PASTICCIO. La CONTESSA RONDEAU e nostra padrona.


3d DAUGHTER. Si, padre, and mi LADI FUGE.


INTERPRETER. O! -- me interpret. -- Madame, ils disent -- in English -- Qu'ils
ont l'honneur d'etre proteges de ces Demes. -- You understand?


Mrs. DANGLE. No, Sir, -- no understand!


Enter DANGLE and SNEER. INTERPRETER. Ah voici Monsieur Dangle!

All ITALIANS. A! Signor Dangle!


Mrs. DANGLE. Mr. Dangle, here are two very civil gentlemen trying to make
themselves understood, and I don't know which is the interpreter.


DANGLE. Ebien!


INTERPRETER. Speaking together. Monsieur Dangle -- le grand bruit de vos
talents pour la critique and de votre interest avec Messieurs les Directeurs a
tous les Theaters.


Signor PASTICCIO. Speaking together. Vosignoria siete si famoso par la vostra
conoscensa e vostra interessa colla le Direttore da --


DANGLE. Egad I think the Interpreter is the hardest to be understood of the
two!


SNEER. Why I thought, Dangle, you had been an admirable linguist!


DANGLE. So I am, if they would not talk so damned fast.


SNEER. Well I Will explain that -- the less time we lose in hearing them the
better, -- for that I suppose is what they are brought here for.

[ Sneer speaks to Sig. Past. -- They sing trios, etc. Dangle beating out of
time. Servant enters and whispers Dangle.]


DANGLE. Show him up. [ Exit Servant.]

Bravo! admirable! bravissimo! admirablissimo! -- Ah! Sneer! where will you
find such as these voices in England?


SNEER. Not easily.


DANGLE. But PUFF is coming. -- Signor and little Signora's -- obligatissimo!
-- Sposa Signora Danglena -- Mrs. Dangle, shall I beg you to offer them some
refreshments, and take their address in the next room.

[ Exit Mrs. Dangle with the Italians and Interpreter ceremoniously.]
Re-enter SERVANT. Mr. PUFF, Sir!


DANGLE. My dear PUFF!


Enter PUFF. My dear Dangle, how is it with you?


DANGLE. Mr. Sneer, give me leave to introduce Mr. PUFF to you.


PUFF. Mr. Sneer is this? Sir, he is a gentleman whom I have long panted for
the honor of knowing -- a gentleman whose critical talents and transcendant
judgment --


SNEER. -- Dear Sir --


DANGLE. Nay, don't be modest, Sneer, my friend PUFF only talks to you in the
style of his profession.


SNEER. His profession!


PUFF. Yes, Sir; I make no secret of the trade I follow -- among friends and
brother authors, Dangle knows I love to be frank on the subject, and to
advertise myself viva voce. -- I am, Sir, a Practitioner in Panegyric, or to
speak more plainly -- a Professor of the Art of Puffing, at your service -- or
any body else's.


SNEER. Sir, you are very obliging! -- I believe, Mr. Puff, I have often
admired your talents in the daily prints.


PUFF. Yes, Sir, I flatter myself I do as much business in that way as any six
of the fraternity in town -- Devilish hard work all the summer -- Friend
Dangle? never worked harder! -- But harkee, -- the Winter Managers were a
little sore I believe.


DANGLE. No -- I believe they took it all in good part.


PUFF. Aye! -- Then that must have been affectation in them, for egad, there
were some of the attacks which there was no laughing at!


SNEER. Aye, the humourous ones. -- But I should think Mr. Puff, that Authors
would in general be able to do this sort of work for themselves.


PUFF. Why yes -- but in a clumsy way. -- Besides, we look on that as an
encroachment, and so take the opposite side. -- I dare say now you conceive
half the very civil paragraphs and advertisements you see, to be written by the
parties concerned, or their friends? -- No such thing -- Nine out of ten,
manufactured by me in the way of business.


SNEER. Indeed! --


PUFF. Even the Auctioneers now, -- the Auctioneers I say, though the rogues have
lately got some credit for their language -- not an article of the merit
their's! -- take them out of their Pulpits, and they are as dull as Catalogues.
-- No, Sir; -- 'twas I first enriched their style -- 'twas I first taught them
to crowd their advertisements with panegyrical superlatives, each epithet
rising above the other -- like the Bidders in their own Auction-rooms! From ME
they learned to enlay their phraseology with variegated chips of exotic
metaphor: by ME too their inventive faculties were called forth. -- Yes Sir, by
ME they were instructed to clothe ideal walls with gratuitous fruits -- to
insinuate obsequious rivulets into visionary groves -- to teach courteous
shrubs to nod their approbation of the grateful soil! or on emergencies to
raise upstart oaks, where there never had been an acorn; to create a delightful
vicinage without the assistance of a neighbor; or fix the temple of Hygeia in
the fens of Lincolnshire!


DANGLE. I am sure, you have done them infinite service; for now, when a
gentleman is ruined, he parts with his house with some credit.


SNEER. Service! if they had any gratitude, they would erect a statue to him,
they would figure him as a presiding Mercury, the god of traffic and fiction,
with a hammer in his hand instead of a caduceus. -- But pray, Mr. Puff, what
first put you on exercising your talents in this way?


PUFF. Egad sir, -- sheer necessity -- the proper parent of an art so nearly
allied to invention: you must know Mr. Sneer, that from the first time I tried
my hand at an advertisement, my success was such, that for sometime after, I
led a most extraordinary life indeed!


SNEER. How, pray?


PUFF. Sir, I supported myself two years entirely by my misfortunes.


SNEER. By your misfortunes!


PUFF. Yes Sir, assisted by long sickness, and other occasional disorders; and
a very comfortable living I had of it.


SNEER. From sickness and misfortunes! -- You practiced as a Doctor, and an
Attorney at once?


PUFF. No egad, both maladies and miseries were my own.


SNEER. Hey! -- what the plague!


DANGLE. It Is true, efaith.


PUFF. Harkee! -- By advertisements -- "To the charitable and humane!" and "to
those whom Providence has blessed with affluence!"


SNEER. Oh, -- I understand you.


PUFF. And in truth, I deserved what I got, for I suppose never man went through
such a series of calamities in the same space of time! -- Sir, I was five times
made a bankrupt, and reduced from a state of affluence, by a train of
unavoidable misfortunes! then Sir, though a very industrious tradesman, I was
twice burnt out, and lost my little all, both times! -- I lived upon those
fires a month. -- I soon after was confined by a most excruciating disorder,
and lost the use of my limbs! -- That told very well, for I had the case
strongly attested, and went about to collect the subscriptions myself.


DANGLE. Egad, I believe that was when you first called on me. --


PUFF. -- In November last? -- O no! -- I was at that time, a close prisoner in
the Marshalsea, for a debt benevolently contracted to serve a friend! -- I was
afterward, twice tapped for a dropsy, which declined into a very profitable
consumption! -- I was then reduced to -- O no -- then, I became a widow with
six helpless children, -- after having had eleven husbands pressed, and being
left every time eight months gone with child, and without money to get me into
an hospital!


SNEER. And you bore all with patience, I make no doubt?


PUFF. Why, yes, -- though I made some occasional attempts at felo de se; but as
I did not find those rash actions answer, I left off killing myself very soon.
-- Well, Sir, -- at last, what with bankruptcies, fires, gouts, dropsies,
imprisonments, and other valuable calamities, having got together a pretty
handsome sum, I determined to quit a business which had always gone rather
against my conscience, and in a more liberal way still to indulge my talents
for fiction and embellishment, through my favorite channels of diurnal
communication -- and so, Sir, you have my history.


SNEER. Most obligingly communicative indeed; and your confession if published,
might certainly serve the cause of true charity, by rescuing the most useful
channels of appeal to benevolence from the cant of imposition. -- But surely,
Mr. PUFF, there is no great mystery in your present profession?


PUFF. Mystery! Sir, I will take upon me to say the matter was never
scientifically treated, nor reduced to rule before.


SNEER. Reduced to rule?


PUFF. O lud, Sir! you are very ignorant, I am afraid. -- Yes Sir, -- PUFFING
is of various sorts -- the principal are, The PUFF DIRECT -- the PUFF
PRELIMINARY -- the PUFF COLLATERAL -- the PUFF COLLUSIVE, and the PUFF OBLIQUE,
or PUFF by IMPLICATION. -- These all assume, as circumstances require, the
various forms of LETTER TO THE EDITOR -- OCCASIONAL ANECDOTE -- IMPARTIAL
CRITIQUE -- OBSERVATION from CORRESPONDENT, -- or ADVERTISEMENT FROM THE PARTY.


SNEER. The puff direct, I can conceive --


PUFF. O yes, that is simple enough, -- for instance -- A new Comedy or Farce is
to be produced at one of the Theaters (though by the bye they don't bring out
half what they ought to do) The author, suppose Mr. Smatter, or Mr. Dapper --
or any particular friend of mine -- very well; the day before it is to be
performed, I write an account of the manner in which it was received -- I have
the plot from the author, -- and only add -- Characters strongly drawn --
highly colored -- hand of a master -- fund of genuine humor -- mine of
invention -- neat dialogue -- attic salt! Then for the performance -- Mr. DODD
was astonishingly great in the character of SIR HARRY! That universal and
judicious actor Mr. PALMER, perhaps never appeared to more advantage than in
the COLONEL; -- but it is not in the power of language to do justice to Mr.
KING! -- Indeed he more than merited those repeated bursts of applause which he
drew from a most brilliant and judicious audience! As to the scenery -- The
miraculous power of Mr. DE LOUTHER BOURG's pencil are universally acknowledged!
-- In short, we are at a loss which to admire most, -- the unrivalled genius of
the author, the great attention and liberality of the managers -- the wonderful
abilities of the painter, or the incredible exertions of all the performers! --


SNEER. That Is pretty well indeed, Sir.


PUFF. O cool -- quite cool -- to what I sometimes do.


SNEER. And do you think there are any who are influenced by this.


PUFF. O, lud! yes, Sir; -- the number of those who go through the fatigue of
judging for themselves is very small indeed!


SNEER. Well, Sir, -- the PUFF PRELIMINARY?


PUFF. O that, Sir, does well in the form of a Caution. -- In a matter of
gallantry now -- Sir FLIMSY GOSSIMER, wishes to be well with LADY FANNY FETE --
He applies to me -- I open trenches for him with a paragraph in the Morning
Post. -- It is recommended to the beautiful and accomplished Lady F four stars
F dash E to be on her guard against that dangerous character, Sir F dash G;
who, however pleasing and insinuating his manners may be, is certainly not
remarkable for the constancy of his attachments! -- in Italics. -- Here you
see, Sir FLIMSY GOSSIMER is introduced to the particular notice of Lady FANNY
-- who, perhaps never thought of him before -- she finds herself publicly
cautioned to avoid him, which naturally makes her desirous of seeing him; --
the observation of their acquaintance causes a pretty kind of mutual
embarrassment, this produces a sort of sympathy of interest -- which, if Sir
Flimsy is unable to improve effectually, he at least gains the credit of having
their names mentioned together, by a particular set, and in a particular way,
-- which nine times out of ten is the full accomplishment of modern gallantry!


DANGLE. Egad, Sneer, you will be quite an adept in the business.


PUFF. Now, Sir, the PUFF COLLATERAL is much used as an appendage to
advertisements, and may take the form of anecdote. -- Yesterday as the
celebrated GEORGE BON-MOT was sauntering down St. James's-street, he met the
lively Lady MARY MYRTLE, coming out of the Park, -- 'Good God, LADY MARY, I Am
surprised to meet you in a white jacket, -- for I expected never to have seen
you, but in a full-trimmed unifor, and a light-horseman's cap!' -- "Heavens,
GEORGE, where could you have learned that?" -- 'Why, replied the wit, I just
saw a print of you, in a new publication called The CAMP MAGAZINE, which, by
the bye, is a devilish clever thing, -- and is sold at No. 3, on the right hand
of the way, two doors from the printing-office, the corner of Ivy-lane,
Paternoster Row, price only one shilling!'


SNEER. Very ingenious indeed!


PUFF. But the PUFF COLLUSIVE is the newest of any; for it acts in the disguise
of determined hostility. -- It is much used by bold booksellers and
enterprising poets. -- An indignant correspondent observes -- that the new poem
called BEELZEBUB's COTILLION, or PROSERPINE's FETE CHAMPETRE, is one of the
most unjustifiable performances he ever read! The severity with which certain
characters are handled is quite shocking! And as there are many descriptions in
it too warmly colored for female delicacy, the shameful avidity with which
this piece is bought by all people of fashion, is a reproach on the taste of
the times, and a disgrace to the delicacy of the age! -- Here you see the two
strongest inducements are held forth; -- First, that nobody ought to read it;
-- and secondly, that every body buys it; on the strength of which, the
publisher boldly prints the tenth edition, before the had sold ten of the
first; and then establishes it by threatening himself with the pillory, or
absolutely indicting himseif for SCAN. MAG.!


DANGLE. Ha! ha! ha! -- 'gad I know it is so*


PUFF. As to the PUFF OBLIQUE, or PUFF BY IMPLICATION, it is too various and
extensive to be illustrated by an instance; -- it attracts in titles, and
presumes in patents; it lurks in the limitation of a subscription, and invites
in the assurance of crowd and incommodation at public places; it delights to
draw forth concealed merit, with a most disinterested assiduity; and sometimes
wears a countenance of smiling censure and tender reproach. -- It has a
wonderful memory for Parliamentary Debates, and will often give the whole
speech of a favored member, with the most flattering accuracy. But, above all,
it is a great dealer in reports and suppositions. -- It has the earliest
intelligence of intended preferments that will reflect honor on the patrons;
and embryo promotions of modest gentlemen -- who know nothing of the matter
themselves. It can hint a ribband for implied services, in the air of a common
report; and with the carelessness of a casual paragraph, suggest officers into
commands -- to which they have no pretension but their wishes. This, Sir, is
the last principal class in the ART of PUFFING -- An art which I hope you will
now agree with me, is of the highest dignity -- yielding a tablature of
benevolence and public spirit; befriending equally trade, gallantry, criticism,
and politics: -- the applause of genius! the register of charity! the triumph
of heroism! the self defense of contractors! the fame of orators! -- and the
gazette of ministers!


SNEER. Sir, I am completely a convert both to the importance and ingenuity of
your profession; and now, Sir, there is but one thing which can possibly
increase my respect for you, and that is, your permitting me to be present this
morning at the rehearsal of your new trage --


PUFF. -- Hush, for heaven's sake. -- My tragedy! -- Egad, Dangle, I take this
very ill -- you know how apprehensive I am of being known to be the author.


DANGLE. 'Efaith I would not have told -- but it is in the papers, and your name
at length -- in the Morning Chronicle.


PUFF. Ah! those damned editors never can keep a secret! -- Well, Mr. Sneer --
no doubt you will do me great honor -- I shall be infinitely happy -- highly
flattered --


DANGLE. I believe it must be near the time -- shall we go together.


FUFF. No; It will not be yet this hour, for they are always late at that
theater: besides, I must meet you there, for I have some little matters here to
send to the papers, and a few paragraphs to scribble before I go. [Looking at
memorandums.

-- Here is 'a CONSCIENTIOUS BAKER, on the Subject of the Army Bread;' and 'a
DETESTER OF VISIBLE BRICK-WORK, in favor of the new invented Stucco;' both in
the style of JUNIUS, and promised for tomorrow. -- The Thames navigation too
is at a stand -- MISOMUD or ANTI-SHOAL must go to work again directly. -- Here
too are some political memorandums I see; aye -- To take PAUL JONES, and get
the INDIAMEN out of the SHANNON -- reinforce BYRON -- compel the DUTCH to --
so! -- I must do that in the evening papers, or reserve it for the Morning
Herald, for I know that I have undertaken tomorrow; besides, to establish the
unanimity of the fleet in the Public Advertiser, and to shoot CHARLES Fox in
the Morning Post. -- So, egad, I have not a moment to lose!


DANGLE. Well! -- we'll meet in the Green Room.


[Exeunt severally. END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
The THEATER.
Enter DANGLE, PUFF, and SNEER, as before the Curtain. PUFF. NO, no, Sir; what
Shakespeare says of ACTORS may be better applied to the purpose of PLAYS; they
ought to be 'the abstract and brief Chronicles of the times.' Therefore when
history, and particularly the history of our own country, furnishes any thing
like a case in point, to the time in which an author writes, if he knows his
own interest, he will take advantage of it; so, Sir, I call my tragedy The
SPANISH ARMADA; and have laid the scene before TILBURY FORT.


SNEER. A most happy thought certainly!


DANGLE. Egad it was -- I told you so. -- But pray now I don't understand how
you have contrived to introduce any love into it.


PUFF. Love! -- Oh nothing so easy; for it is a received point among poets,
that where history gives you a good heroic out-line for a play, you may fill up
with a little love at your own discretion; in doing which, nine times out of
ten, you only make up a deficiency in the private history of the times. -- Now
I rather think I have done this with some success.


SNEER. No scandal about Queen ELIZABETH, I hope?


PUFF. O Lud! no, no. -- I only suppose the Governor of Tilbury Fort's daughter
to be in love with the son of the Spanish Admiral.


SNEER. Oh, is that all?


DANGLE. Excellent, Efaith! -- I see it at once. -- But will not this appear
rather improbable?


PUFF. To be sure it will -- but what the plague! a play is not to show
occurrences that happen every day, but things just so strange, that though they
never did, they might happen.


SNEER. Certainly nothing is unnatural, that is not physically impossible.


PUFF. Very true -- and for that matter DON FEROLO WISKERANDOS -- for that is
the lover's name, might have been over here in the train of the Spanish
Ambassador; or TILBURINA, for that is the lady's name, might have been in love
with him, from having heard his character, or seen his picture; or from knowing
that he was the last man in the world she ought to be in love with -- or for
any other good female reason. -- However, Sir, the fact is, that though she is
but a Knight's daughter, egad! she is in love like any Princess!


DANGLE. Poor young lady! I feel for her already! for I can conceive how great
the conflict must be between her passion and her duty; her love for her
country, and her love for DON FEROLO WISKERANDOS!


PUFF. O amazing! -- her poor susceptible heart is swayed to and fro, by
contending passions like --


Enter UNDER PROMPTER. UNDER PROMPTER. Sir, the scene is set, and every thing
is ready to begin if you please. --


PUFF. 'Egad; then we'll lose no time.


UNDER PROMPTER. Though I believe, Sir, you will find it very short, for all the
performers have profited by the kind permission you granted them.


PUFF. Hey! what!


UNDER PROMPTER. You know, Sir, you gave them leave to cut out or omit whatever
they found heavy or unnecessary to the plot, and I must own they have taken
very liberal advantage of your indulgence.


PUFF. Well, well. -- They are in general very good judges; and I know I am
luxuriant. -- Now, Mr. HOPKINS, as soon as you please.


UNDER PROMPTER to the Music. Gentlemen, will you play a few bars of
something, just to --


PUFF. Aye, that is right, -- for as we have the scenes, and dresses, egad,
we'll go to it, as if it was the first night's performance; -- but you need not
mind stopping between the acts.

[Exit Under Prompter.]
(Orchestra play. Then the Bell rings.) Soh! stand clear gentlemen. -- Now you
know there will be a cry of down! -- down! -- hats off! silence! -- Then up
curtain, -- and let us see what our painters have done for us.

SCENE II.
The Curtain rises and discovers TILBURY FORT. Two Sentinels asleep. DANGLE.
Tilbury Fort! -- very fine indeed!


PUFF. Now, what do you think I open with?


SNEER. Faith, I cannot guess --


PUFF. A clock. -- Hark! -- ( clock strikes.) I open with a clock striking, to
beget an aweful attention in the audience -- it also marks the time, which is
four o'clock in the morning, and saves a description of the rising fun, and a
great deal about gilding the eastern hemisphere.


DANGLE. But pray, are the sentinels to be asleep?


PUFF. Fast as watchmen.


SNEER. Is Not that odd though at such an alarming crisis?


PUFF. To be sure it is, -- but smaller things must give way to a striking
scene at the opening; that is a rule. -- And the case is, that two great men are
coming to this very spot to begin the piece; now, it is not to be supposed they
would open their lips, if these fellows were watching them, so, egad, I must
either have sent them off their posts, or set them asleep.


SNEER. O that accounts for it! -- But tell us, who are these coming? --


PUFF. These are they -- SIR WALTER RALEIGH, and SIR CHRISTOPHER HATTON. --
You Will know Sir CHRISTOPHER, by his turning out his toes -- famous you know for
his dancing. I like to preserve all the little traits of character. -- Now
attend.


Enter Sir WALTER RALEIGH and Sir CHRISTOPHER HATTON. SIR CHRISTOPHER. True,
gallant Raleigh! --

DANGLE. What, they had been talking before?


PUFF. O, yes; all the way as they came along. -- I beg pardon gentlemen [to
the Actors] but these are particular friends of mine, whose remarks may be of
great service to us. -- Don't mind interrupting them whenever any thing strikes
you.


[To Sneer and Dangle.] SIR CHRISTOPHER. True, gallant Raleigh!
But O, thou champion of thy country's fame,
There is a question which I yet must ask;
A question, which I never asked before --
What mean these mighty armaments?
This general muster? and this throng of chiefs?

SNEER. Pray, Mr. Puff, how came Sir Christopher Hatton never to ask that
question before?


PUFF. What, before the Play began? how the plague could he?


DANGLE. That Is true efaith!


PUFF. But you will hear what he thinks of the matter.


SIR CHRISTOPHER. Alas, my noble friend, when I behold
Yon tented plains in martial symmetry
Arrayed. -- When I count over yon glittering lines
Of crested warriors, where the proud steeds neigh,
And valor-breathing trumpet's shrill appeal,
Responsive vibrate on my listening ear;
When virgin majesty herself I view,
Like her protecting Pallas veiled in steel,
With graceful confidence exhort to arms!
When briefly all I hear or see bears stamp
Of martial vigilance, and stern defense,
I cannot but surmise. -- Forgive, my friend,
If the conjecture's rash -- I cannot but
Surmise. -- Then state some danger apprehends!

SNEER. A very cautious conjecture that.


PUFF. Yes, that is his character; not to give an opinion, but on secure grounds
-- now then.


SIR WALTER. O, most accomplished Christopher.

PUFF. He calls him by his christian name, to show that they are on the most
familiar terms.


SIR WALTER. O most accomplished Christopher, I find
Thy staunch sagacity still tracks the future,
In the fresh print of the o'ertaken past.

PUFF. Figurative!


SIR WALTER. Thy fears are just.

SIR CHRISTOPHER. But where? whence? when? and what
The danger is -- Methinks I fain would learn.

SIR WALTER. You know, my friend, scarce two revolving suns,
And three revolving moons, have closed their course,
Since haughty PHILIP, in despite of peace,
With hostile hand has struck at ENGLAND's trade.

SIR CHRISTOPHER. I know it well.

SIR WALTER. PHILIP you know is proud, IBERIA's king!

SIR CHRISTOPHER. He is.

SIR WALTER. -- His subjects in base bigotry
And Catholic oppression held, -- while we
You know, the protestant persuasion hold.

SIR CHRISTOPHER. We do.

SIR WALTER. You know beside, -- his boasted armament,
The famed Armada, -- by the Pope baptized,
With purpose to invade these realms --

SIR CHRISTOPHER. -- Is sailed,
Our last advices so report.

SIR WALTER. While the Iberian Admiral's chief hope,
His darling son --

SIR CHRISTOPHER, -- Ferolo Wiskerandos hight --

SIR WALTER. The same -- by chance a prisoner has been taken,
And in this fort of Tilbury --

SIR CHRISTOPHER. -- Is now
Confined, -- it is true, and often from you tall turrets top
I Have marked the youthful Spaniard's haughty mien
Unconquered, though in chains!

SIR WALTER. You also know --

DANGLE. -- Mr. Puff, as he knows all this, why does Sir Walter go on telling
him?


PUFF. But the audience are not supposed to know any thing of the matter, are
they?


SNEER. True, but I think you manage ill: for there certainly appears no reason
why Sir Walter should be so communicative.


PUFF. For, egad now, that is one of the most ungrateful observations I ever
heard -- for the less inducement he has to tell all th^s, the more I think, you
ought to be obliged to him; for I am sure you would know nothing of the matter
without it.


DANGLE. That Is very true, upon my word.


PUFF. But you will find he was not going on.


SIR CHRISTOPHER. Enough, enough, -- it is plain -- and I no more
Am in amazement lost! --

PUFF. Here, now you see, Sir Christopher did not in fact ask any one question
for his own information.


SNEER. No indeed: -- his has been a most disinterested curiosity!


DANGLE. Really, I find, we are very much obliged to them both.


PUFF. To be sure you are. Now then for the Commander in Chief, the EARL OF
LEICESTER! who, you know, was no favorite but of the Queen's. -- We left off
-- "in amazement lost!" --


SIR CHRISTOPHER. Am in amazement lost. --
But, see where noble Leicester comes! supreme
In honors and command.

SIR WALTER. And yet methinks,
At such a time, so perilous, so feared,
That staff might well become an abler grasp.

SIR CHRISTOPHER. And so by heaven! think I; but soft, he is here!

PUFF. Aye, they envy him.


SNEER. But who are these with him?


PUFF. O! very valiant knights; one is the Governor of the fort, the other the
master of the horse. -- And now, I think you shall hear some better language: I
was obliged to be plain and intelligible in the first scene, because there was
so much matter of fact in it; but now, efaith, you have trope, figure, and
metaphor, as plenty as noun-substantives.


Enter Earl of LEICESTER, the Governor, and others. LEICESTER. How Is this my
friends! is it thus your new fledged zeal
And plumed valor moulds in roosted-sloth?
Why dimly glimmers that heroic flame,
Whose red'ning blaze by patriot spirit fed,
Should be the beacon of a kindling realm?
Can the quick current of a patriot heart,
Thus stagnate in a cold and weedy converse,
Or freeze in tideless inactivity?
No! rather let the fountain of your valor
Spring through each stream of enterprise,
Each petty channel of conducive daring,
Till the full torrent of your foaming wrath
Overwhelm the flats of sunk hostility!

PUFF. There it is, -- followed up!


SIR WALTER. No more! the fresh'ning breath of thy rebuke
Has filled the swelling canvass of our souls!
And thus, though fate should cut the cable of
[All take hands. Our topmost hopes, in friendship's closing line
We'll grapple with despair, and if we fall,
We'll fall in Glory's wake!

EARL OF LEICESTER. There spoke Old England's genius!
Then, are we all resolved?

ALL, We are -- all resolved.

EARL OF LEICESTER. To conquer -- or be free?

ALL. To conquer, or be free.

EARL OF LEICESTER. All?

ALL. All.

DANGLE. Nem. con. egad!


PUFF. O yes, where they do agree on the stage, their unanimity is wonderful!


EARL OF LEICESTER. Then, let us embrace -- and now --

SNEER. What the plague, is he going to pray?


PUFF. Yes, hush! -- in great emergencies, there is nothing like a prayer!


EARL OF LEICESTER. O mighty Mars!

DANGLE. But why should he pray to Mars?


PUFF. Hush!

EARL OF LEICESTER. If in thy homage bred,
Each point of discipline I Have still observed;
Nor but by due promotion, and the right
Of service, to the rank of Major General
Have risen; assist thy votary now!

GOVERNOR. Yet do not rise, -- hear me!

MASTER OF HORSE. And me!

KNIGHT. And me!

SIR WALTER. And me!

SIR CHRISTOPHER. And me!

PUFF. Now, pray all together.


ALL. Behold thy votaries submissive beg,
That thou will deign to grant them all they ask;
Assist them to accomplish all their ends,
And sanctify whatever means they use
To gain them!

SNEER. A very orthodox quintetto!


PUFF. Vastly well, gentlemen. -- Is that well managed or not? Have you such a
prayer as that on the stage?


SNEER. Not exactly.

(Earl of Leicester to Puff.) But, Sir, you hav'nt settled how we are to get
off here.


PUFF. You could not go off kneeling, could you?

(Sir Walter to Puff.) O no, Sir! impossible!


PUFF. It would have a good effect efaith, if you could! exeunt praying! --
Yes, and would vary the established mode of springing off with a glance at the
pit.


SNEER. O never mind, so as you get them off, I Will answer for it the audience
wont care how.


PUFF. Well then, repeat the last line standing, and go off the old way.


ALL. And sanctify whatever means we use to gain them.

[Exeunt. DANGLE. Bravo! a fine exit.


SNEER. Well, really Mr. Puff. --


PUFF. Stay a moment. --


The SENTINELS get up. 1st SENTINEL. All this shall to Lord Burleigh's ear.

2d SENTINEL. It Is meet it should.

[Exeunt Sentinels. DANGLE. Hey! -- why, I thought those fellows had been
asleep?


PUFF. Only a pretense, there is the art of it; they were spies of Lord
Burleigh's.


SNEER. -- But is not it odd, they were never taken notice of, not even by the
commander in chief.


PUFF. O lud, Sir, if people who want to listen, or overhear, were not always
connived at in a Tragedy, there would be no carrying on any plot in the world.


DANGLE. That Is certain!


PUFF. But take care, my dear Dangle, the morning gun is going to fire.

[Cannon fires.]
DANGLE. Well, that will have a fine effect.


PUFF. I think so, and helps to realize the scene. --

[Cannon twice.] What the plague! -- three morning guns! -- there never is but
one! -- aye, this is always the away at the Theater -- give these fellows a
good thing, and they never know when to have done with it. You have no more
cannon to fire?


PROMPTER from within. No Sir.


PUFF. Now then, for soft music.


SNEER. Pray what is that for?


PUFF. It shows that TILBURINA is coming; nothing introduces you a heroine like
soft music. -- Here she comes.


DANGLE. And her confidant, I suppose?


PUFF. To be sure: here they are -- inconsolable to the minuet in Ariadne!

Soft music.
Enter TILBURINA and CONFIDANT. TILBURINA. Now has the whispering breath of
gentle morn,
Bad Nature's voice, and Nature's beauty rise;
While orient Phoebus with unborrow'd hues,
Clothes the waked loveliness which all night slept
In heavenly drapery! Darkness is fled.
Now flowers unfold their beauties to the sun,
And blushing, kiss the beam he sends to wake them.
The stripped carnation, and the guarded rose,
The vulgar wall flower, and smart gillyflower,
The polyanthus mean -- the dapper daizy,
Sweet William, and sweet marjorum, -- and all
The tribe of single and of double pinks!
Now too, the feathered warblers tune their notes
Around, and charm the listening grove. -- The lark!
The linnet! chafinch! bullfinch! goldfinch! greenfinch!
-- But O to me, no joy can they afford!
Nor rose, nor wall flower, nor smart gillyflower,
Nor polyanthus mean, nor dapper daizy,
Nor William sweet, nor marjoram -- nor lark,
Linnet, nor all the finches of the grove!

PUFF. Your white handkerchief madam --


TILBURINA. I thought, Sir, I was not to use that'till, 'heart rending woe.'


PUFF. O yes madam -- at 'the finches of the grove,' if you please.


TILBURINA. Nor lark,
Linnet, nor all the finches of the grove!

[Weeps. PUFF. Vastly well madam!


DANGLE. Vastly well indeed!


TILBURINA. For, O too sure, heart rending woe is now
The lot of wretched Tilburina!

DANGLE. O! -- it is too much.


SNEER. Oh! -- it is indeed


CONFIDANT. Be comforted sweet lady -- for who knows,
But Heaven has yet some milk-white day in store.

TILBURINA. Alas, my gentle Nofa,
Thy tender youth, as yet has never mourned
Love's fatal dart. -- Else would thou know, that when
The soul is sunk in comfortless despair,
It cannot taste of merryment!

DANGLE. That Is certain.


CONFIDANT. But see where your stern father comes;
It is not meet that he should find you thus.

PUFF. Hey, what the plague! -- what a cut is here! -- why, what is become of
the description of her first meeting with Don Wiskerandos? his gallant
behavior in the sea fight, and the simile of the canary bird?


TILBURINA. Indeed Sir, you will find they will not be missed.

PUFF. Very well. -- Very well!

TILBURINA. The cue ma'am if you please.

CONFIDANT. It is not meet that he should find you thus.

TILBURINA. Thou counsel'st right, but it is no easy task
For barefaced grief to wear a mask of joy.

Enter GOVERNOR. How Is this -- in tears? -- O Tilburina, shame!
Is this a time for maudling tenderness,
And Cupid's baby woes? -- have thou not heard
That haughty Spain's Pope-consecrated fleet
Advances to our shores, while England's fate,
Like a clipped guinca, trembles in the scale!

TILBURINA. Then, is the crisis of my fate at hand!
I see the fleets approach -- I see --

PUFF. Now, pray gentlemen mind. -- This is one of the most useful figures we
tragedy writers have, by which a hero or heroine, in consideration of their
being often obliged to overlook things that are on the stage, is allowed to
hear and see a number of things that are not.


SNEER. Yes -- a kind of poetical second-sight!


PUFF. Yes -- now then madam.


TILBURINA. I see their decks
Are cleared! -- I see the signal made!
The line is formed! -- a cable's length asunder!
I see the frigates station'd in the rear;
And now, I hear the thunder of the guns!
I hear the victors shouts -- I also hear
The vanquished groan! -- and now it is smoke -- and now
I see the loose sails shiver in the wind!
I see -- I see -- what soon you will see --

GOVERNOR. Hold daughter! peace! this love has turned thy brain:
The Spanish fleet thou can not see -- because
-- It is not yet in sight!

DANGLE. Egad though, the governor seems to make no allowance for this poetical
figure you talk of.


PUFF. No, a plain matter-of-fact man -- that is his character.


TILBURINA. But will you then refuse his offer?

GOVERNOR. I must -- I will -- I can -- I ought -- I do.

TILBURINA. Think what a noble price.

GOVERNOR. No more -- you urge in vain.

TILBURINA. His liberty is all he asks.

SNEER. All who asks Mr. Puff? Who is --


PUFF. Egad Sir, I cannot tell. -- Here has been such cutting and slashing, I
don't know where they have got to myself.


TILBURINA. Indeed Sir, you will find it will connect very well.

-- And your reward secure.

PUFF. O, -- if they had'nt been so devilish free with their cutting here, you
would have found that Don Wiskerandos has been tampering for his liberty, and
has persuaded Tilburina to make this proposal to her father -- and now pray
observe the conciseness with which the argument is conducted. Egad, the pro and
con goes as smart a hits in a fencing match. It is indeed a sort of small-sword
logic, which we have borrowed from the French.


TILBURINA. A retreat in Spain!

GOVERNOR. Outlawry here!

TILBURINA. Your daughter's prayer!

GOVERNOR. Your father's oath!

TILBURINA. My lover!

GOVERNOR. My country!

TILBURINA. Tilburina!

GOVERNOR. England!

TILBURINA. A title!

GOVERNOR. Honor!

TILBURINA. A pension!

GOVERNOR. Conscience!

TILBURINA. A thousand pounds!

GOVERNOR. Hah! thou have touched me nearly!

PUFF. There you see -- she threw in Tilburina, Quick, parry cart with England!
-- Hah! thrust in teirce a title! -- parried by honor. -- Hah! a pension over
the arm! -- put by by conscience. -- Then flankonade with a thousand pounds --
and a palpable hit egad!


TILBURINA. Can thou --
Reject the suppliant, and the daughter too?

GOVERNOR. No more; I would not hear thee plead in vain,
The father softens -- but the governor
Is fixed!

[Exit. DANGLE. Aye, that antithesis of persons -- is a most established figure.


TILBURINA. It Is well, -- hence then fond hopes, -- fond passion hence;
Duty, behold I am all over thine --

WISKERANDOS without. Where is my love -- my --

TILBURINA. Ha!

WISKERANDOS entering. My beauteous enemy --

PUFF. O dear ma'am, you must start a great deal more than that; consider you
had just determined in favor of duty -- when in a moment the sound of his
voice revives your passion, -- overthrows your resolution, destroys your
obedience. -- If you don't express all that in your start -- you do nothing at
all.


TILBURINA. Well, we'll try again!

DANGLE. Speaking from within, has always a fine effect.


SNEER. Very.


WISKERANDOS. My conquering Tilburina! How! is it thus
We meet? why are thy looks averse! what means
That falling tear -- that frown of boding woe?
Hah! now indeed I am a prisoner!
Yes, now I feel the galling weight of these
Disgraceful chains -- which, cruel Tilburina!
Thy doting captive gloried in before. --
But thou art false, and Wiskerandos is undone!

TILBURINA. O no; how little do thou know thy Tilburina!

WISKERANDOS. Art thou then true? Begone cares, doubts and fears,
I make you all a present to the winds;
And if the winds reject you -- try the waves.

PUFF. The wind you know, is the established receiver of all stolen sighs, and
cast off griefs and apprehensions.


TILBURINA. Yet must we part? -- stern duty seals our doom:
Though here I call yon conscious clouds to witness,
Could I pursue the bias of my soul,
All friends, all right of parents I Would disclaim,
And thou, my Wiskerandos, should be father
And mother, brother, cousin, uncle, aunt,
And friend to me!

WISKERANDOS. O matchless excellence! -- and must we part?
Well, if -- we must -- we must -- and in that case,
The less is said the better.

PUFF. Hey day! here is a cut! -- What, are all the mutual protestations out?


TILBURINA. Now, pray Sir, don't interrupt us just here, you ruin our feelings.


PUFF. Your feelings! -- but zounds, my feelings, ma'am!


SNEER. No; pray don't interrupt them.


WISKERANDOS. One last embrace. --

TILBURINA. Now, -- farewell, for ever.

WISKERANDOS. For ever!

TILBURINA. Aye, for ever.

[Going. PUFF. God's Death and fury! -- Gadslife! Sir! Madam! if you go out without
the parting look, you might as well dance out -- Here, here!


CONFIDANT. But pray Sir, how am I to get off here?

PUFF. You, pshaw! what the devil signifies how you get off! edge away at the
top, or where you will -- [Pushes the confidant off.] Now ma'am you see --


TILBURINA. We understand you Sir.

Aye for ever.


BOTH. Ohh! --

[Turning back and exeunt. Scene closes.
DANGLE. O charming!


PUFF. Hey! -- it is pretty well I believe -- you see I don't attempt to strike
out any thing new -- but I take it I improve on the established modes.


SNEER. You do indeed. -- But pray is not Queen Elizabeth to appear?


PUFF. No not once -- but she is to be talked of for ever; so that egad you will
think a hundred times that she is on the point of coming in.


SNEER. Hang it, I think its a pity to keep her in the green room all the night.


PUFF. O no, that always has a fine effect -- it keeps up expectation.


DANGLE. But are we not to have a battle?


PUFF. Yes, yes, you will have a battle at last, but, egad, it is not to be by
land -- but by sea -- and that is the only quite new thing in the piece.


DANGLE. What, Drake at the Armada, hey?


PUFF. Yes, efaith -- fire ships and all -- then we shall end with the
procession. -- Hey! that will do I think.


SNEER. No doubt on it.


PUFF. Come, we must not lose time -- so now for the UNDER PLOT.


SNEER. What the plague, have you another plot?


PUFF. O lord, yes -- ever while you live, have two plots to your tragedy. --
The grand point in managing them, is only to let your under plot have as little
connection with your main plot as possible. -- I flatter myself nothing can be
more distinct than mine, for as in my chief plot, the characters are all great
people -- I have laid my under plot in low life -- and as the former is to end
in deep distress, I make the other end as happy as a farce. -- Now Mr. Hopkins,
as soon as you please.


Enter UNDER PROMPTER. UNDER PROMPTER. Sir, the carpenter says it is impossible
you can go to the Park scene yet.


PUFF. The Park scene! No -- I mean the description scene here, in the wood.


UNDER PROMPTER. Sir, the performers have cut it out.


PUFF. Cut it out!


UNDER PROMPTER. Yes Sir.


PUFF. What! the whole account of Queen Elizabeth?


UNDER PROMPTER. Yes Sir.


PUFF. And the description of her horse and side-saddle?


UNDER PROMPTER. Yes Sir.


PUFF. So, so, this is very fine indeed! Mr. Hopkins, how the plague could you
suffer this?


HOPKINS, from within. Sir, indeed the pruning knife --


PUFF. The pruning knife -- zounds the axe! why, here has been such lopping and
topping, I shall not have the bare trunk of my play left presently. -- Very well,
Sir -- the performers must do as they please, but upon my soul, I Will print it
every word.


SNEER. That I would indeed.


PUFF. Very well -- Sir -- then we must go on -- zounds! I would not have
parted with the description of the horse! -- Well, Sir, go on -- Sir, it was
one of the finest and most labored things -- Very well, Sir, let them go on --
there you had him and his accoutrements from the bit to the crupper -- very
well, Sir, we must go to the Park scene.


UNDER PROMPTER. Sir, there is the point, the carpenters say, that unless there
is some business put in here before the drop, they shall not have time to clear
away the fort, or sink Gravesend and the river.


PUFF. So! this is a pretty dilemma truly! -- Gentlemen -- you must excuse me,
these fellows will never be ready, unless I go and look after them myself.


SNEER. O dear Sir -- these little things will happen --


PUFF. To cut out this scene! -- but I Will print it -- egad, I Will print it every
word! [Exeunt.


END OF ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Before the Curtain.
Enter PUFF, SNEER, and DANGLE. PUFF. WELL, we are ready -- now then for the
justices.


[Curtain rises; Justices, Constables, etc. discovered. SNEER. This, I suppose,
is a sort of senate scene.


PUFF. To be sure -- there has not been one yet.


DANGLE. It is the under plot, is not it?


PUFF. Yes. What, gentlemen, do you mean to go at once to the discovery scene?


JUSTICE. If you please, Sir.


PUFF. O very well -- harkee, I don't choose to say any thing more, but efaith,
they have mangled my play in a most shocking manner!


DANGLE. It Is a great pity!


PUFF. Now then, Mr. Justice, if you please.


JUSTICE. Are all the volunteers without?

CONSTABLE. They are.
Some ten in fetters, and some twenty drunk.

JUSTICE. Attends the youth, whose most opprobrious fame
And clear convicted crimes have stamped him soldier?

CONSTABLE. He waits your pleasure; eager to repay
The blessed reprieve that sends him to the fields
Of glory, there to raise his branded hand
In honor's cause.

JUSTICE. It Is well -- it is Justice arms him!
O! may he now defend his country's laws
With half the spirit he has broke them all!
If it is your worship's pleasure, bid him enter.

CONSTABLE. I fly, the herald of your will.
[Exit Constable.
PUFF. Quick, Sir! --


SNEER. But, Mr. Puff, I think not only the Justice, but the clown seems to
talk in as high a style as the first hero among them.


PUFF. Heaven forbid they should not in a free country! -- Sir, I am not for
making slavish distinctions, and giving all the fine language to the upper sort
of people.


DANGLE. That Is very noble in you indeed.

Enter JUSTICE's LADY.
PUFF. Now pray mark this scene.


LADY. Forgive this interruption, good my love;
But as I just now past, a prisoner youth
Whom rude hands hither lead, strange bodings seized
My fluttering heart, and to myself I said,
An if our TOM had lived, he would surely been
This stripling's height!

JUSTICE. Ha! sure some powerful sympathy directs
Us both --

Enter SON and CONSTABLE. JUSTICE. What is thy name?

SON. My name's TOM JENKINS -- alias, have I none --
Though orphan'd, and without a friend!

JUSTICE. Thy parents?
son.
My father dwelt in Rochester -- and was,
As I have heard -- a fishmonger -- no more.

PUFF What, Sir, do you leave out the account of your birth, parentage and
education?


SON. They have settled it so, Sir, here.


PUFF. Oh! oh!


LADY. How loudly nature whispers to my heart!
Had he no other name?

SON. I Have seen a bill
Of his, signed Tomkins, creditor.

JUSTICE. This does indeed confirm each circumstance
The gypsey told! -- Prepare!

SON. I do.

JUSTICE. No orphan, nor without a friend ar't thou --
I am thy father, here is thy mother, there
Thy uncle -- this thy first cousin, and those
Are all your near relations!

MOTHER. O ecstasy of bliss!

SON. O most unlooked for happiness!

JUSTICE. O wonderful event!
[They faint alternately in each others arms.
PUFF. There, you see relationship, like murder, will out.


JUSTICE. Now let us revive -- else were this joy too much!
But come -- and we'll unfold the rest within,
And thou my boy must needs want rest and food.
Hence may each orphan hope, as chance directs,
To find a father -- where he least expects!
[Exeunt.
PUFF. What do you think of that?


DANGLE. One of the finest discovery-scenes I ever saw. -- Why, this under-plot
would have made a tragedy itself.


SNEER. Aye, or a comedy either.


PUFF. And keeps quite clear you see of the other.

Enter SCENEMEN, taking away the Seats.
PUFF. The scene remains, does it?


SCENEMAN. Yes, Sir.


PUFF. You are to leave one chair you know -- But it is always awkward in a
tragedy, to have you fellows coming in in your playhouse liveries to remove
things -- I wish that could be managed better. -- So now for my mysterious
yeoman.


Enter A BEEFEATER. BEEFEATER. Perdition catch my soul but I do love thee.


SNEER. Haven't I heard that line before?


PUFF. No, I fancy not -- Where pray?


DANGLE. Yes, I think there is something like it in Othello.


PUFF. Gad! now you put me in mind on it, I believe there is -- but that is of no
consequence -- all that can be said is, that two people happened to hit on the
same thought -- And Shakespeare made use of it first, that is all.


SNEER. Very true.


PUFF. Now, Sir, your soliloquy -- but speak more to the pit, if you please --
the soliloquy always to the pit -- that is a rule.


BEEFEATER. Though hopeless love finds comfort in despair,
It never can endure a rival's bliss!
But soft -- I am observed. [Exit Beefeater.

DANGLE. That Is a very short soliloquy.


PUFF. Yes -- but it would have been a great deal longer if he had not been
observed.


SNEER. A most sentimental Beefeater that, Mr. Puff.


PUFF. Hark -- I would not have you be too sure that he is a Beefeater.


SNEER. What! a hero in disguise?


PUFF. No matter -- I only give you a hint -- But now for my principal
character -- Here he comes -- LORD BURLEIGH in person! Pray, gentlemen, step
this way -- softly -- I only hope the Lord High Treasurer is perfect -- if he
is but perfect!

[Enter BURLEIGH, goes slowly to a chair and sits.]
SNEER. Mr. Puff!


PUFF. Hush! -- vastly well, Sir! vastly well! a most interesting gravity!


DANGLE. What, is not he to speak at all?


PUFF. Egad, I thought you would ask me that -- yes it is a very likely thing --
that a Minister in his situation, with the whole affairs of the nation on his
head, should have time to talk! -- but hush! or you will put him out.


SNEER. Put him out! how the plague can that be, if he is not going to say any
thing?


PUFF. There Is a reason! -- why, his part is to think, and how the plague! do
you imagine he can think if you keep talking?


DANGLE. That Is very true upon my word!

[Burleigh comes forward, shakes his head and exit.]
SNEER. He is very perfect indeed -- Now, pray what did he mean by that?


PUFF. You don't take it?


SNEER. No; I don't upon my soul.


PUFF. Why, by that shake of the head, he gave you to understand that even though
they had more justice in their cause and wisdom in their measures -- yet, if
there was not a greater spirit shown on the part of the people -- the country
would at last fall a sacrifice to the hostile ambition of the Spanish monarchy.


SNEER. The devil! -- did he mean all that by shaking his head?


PUFF. Every word of it -- If he shook his head as I taught him.


DANGLE. Ah! there certainly is a vast deal to be done on the stage by dumb
show, and expression of face, and a judicious author knows how much he may
trust to it.


SNEER. O, here are some of our old acquaintance.


Enter HATTON and RALEIGH. SIR CHRISTOPHER. My niece, and your niece too!
By heaven! there is witchcraft in it -- He could not else
Have gained their hearts -- But see where they approach;
Some horrid purpose lowering on their brows!

SIR WALTER. Let us withdraw and mark them.
[They withdraw.
SNEER. What is all this?


PUFF. Ah! here has been more pruning! -- but the fact is, these two young
ladies are also in love with Don Whiskerandos. -- Now, gentlemen, this scene
goes entirely for what we call SITUATION and STAGE EFFECT, by which the
greatest applause may be obtained, without the assistance of language,
sentiment or character: pray mark!

Enter the TWO NIECES.
1st NIECE. Ellena here!
She is his scorn as much as I -- that is
Some comfort still.

PUFF. O dear madam, you are not to say that to her face! -- aside, ma'am,
aside. -- The whole scene is to be aside.


1st NIECE. She is his scorn as much as I -- that is
Some comfort still!
[Aside.
2d NIECE. I know he prizes not Pollina's love,
But Tilburina lords it over his heart.
[Aside.
1st NIECE. But see the proud destroyer of my peace.
Revenge is all the good I Have left.
[Aside.
2d NIECE. He comes, the false disturber of my quiet.
Now vengeance do thy worst --
[Aside. Enter WHISKERANDOS. O hateful liberty -- if thus in vain
I seek my Tilburina!

BOTH NIECES. And ever shall!
SIR CHRISTOPHER AND SIR WALTER come forward.
Hold! we will avenge you.

WHISKERANDOS. Hold you -- or see your nieces bleed.!
[The two nieces draw their two daggers to strike Whiskerandos, the two Uncles
at the instant with their two swords drawn, catch their two nieces arms, and
turn the points of their swords to Whiskerandos, who immediately draws two
daggers, and holds them to the two nieces' bosoms.]
PUFF. There Is situation for you! -- there is an heroic group! -- You see the
ladies cannot stab Whiskerandos -- he durst not strike them for fear of their
uncles -- the uncles durst not kill him, because of their nieces -- I have them
all at a dead lock! -- for every one of them is afraid to let go first.


SNEER. Why, then they must stand there for ever.


PUFF. So they would, if I had not a very fine contrivance for it -- Now mind --


Enter BEEFEATER with his Halberd. In the Queen's name I charge you all to drop
Your swords and daggers!
[They drop their swords and daggers.
SNEER. That is a contrivance indeed.


PUFF. Aye -- in the Queen's name.


SIR CHRISTOPHER. Come niece!

SIR RALEIGH. Come niece!
Exeunt with the two nieces.
WHISKERANDOS. What Is he, who bids us thus renounce our guard?

BEEFEATER. Thou must do more, renounce thy love!

WHISKERANDOS. Thou lie -- base Beefeater!

BEEFEATER. Ha! Hell! the lie!
By heaven thou'st roused the lion in my heart!
Off yeoman's habit! -- base disguise! -- off! off!
[Discovers himself, by throwing off his upper dress, and appearing in a very
fine waistcoat.] Am I a Beefeater now?
Or beams my crest as terrible as when
In Biscay's Bay I took thy captive sloop.

PUFF. There, egad! he comes out to be the very Captain of the privateer who
had taken Whiskerandos prisoner -- and was himself an old lover of Tilburina's.


DANGLE. Admirably managed indeed.


PUFF. Now, stand out of their way.


WHISKERANDOS. I thank thee fortune! that have thus bestowed
A weapon to chastise this insolent.
[Takes up one of the swords.
BEEFEATER. I take thy challenge, Spaniard, and I thank
Thee Fortune too! --
Takes up the other sword.
DANGLE. That Is excellently contrived! -- it seems as if the two uncles had
left their swords on purpose for them.


PUFF. No, egad, they could not help leaving them.


WHISKERANDOS. Vengeance and Tilburina!

BEEFEATER. Exactly so --
They fight -- and after the usual number of wounds given, Whiskerandos falls.
WHISKERANDOS. O cursed parry! -- that last thrust in tierce
Was fatal -- Captain, thou have fenced well!
And Whiskerandos quits this bustling scene
For all eter --

BEEFEATER. -- nity -- He would have added, but stern death
Cut short his being, and the noun at once!

PUFF. O, my dear Sir, you are too slow, now mind me. -- Sir, shall I trouble
you to die again?


WHISKERANDOS. And Whiskerandos quits this bustling scene
For all eter --

BEEFEATER. -- nity -- He would have added --

PUFF. No, Sir -- that is not it -- once more if you please --


WHISKERANDOS. I wish, Sir -- you would practice this without me -- I cannot
stay dying here all night.


PUFF. Very well, we'll go over it by and bye -- I must humor these gentlemen!


[Exit Whiskeran. BEEFEATER. Farewell -- brave Spaniard! and when next --

PUFF. Dear Sir, you needn't speak that speech as the body has walked off.


BEEFEATER. That Is true, Sir -- then I Will join the fleet.


PUFF. If you please.

[Exit Beefeater. Now, who comes on?

Enter GOVERNOR, with his hair properly disordered.
GOVERNOR. A hemisphere of evil planets reign!
And every planet sheds contagious phrensy!
My Spanish prisoner is slain! my daughter,
Meeting the dead corse borne along -- has gone
Distract!
[A loud flourish of trumpets. But hark! I am summoned to the fort,
Perhaps the fleets have met! amazing crisis!
O Tilburina! from thy aged father's beard
Thou'st plucked the few brown hairs which time had left!
Exit Governor.
SNEER. Poor gentleman!


PUFF. Yes -- and no one to blame but his daughter!


DANGLE. And the planets --


PUFF. True. -- Now enter Tilburina! --


SNEER. Egad, the business comes on quick here.


PUFF. Yes, Sir -- now she comes in stark mad in white satin.


SNEER. Why in white satin?


PUFF. O Lord, Sir -- when a heroine goes mad, she always goes into white satin
-- don't she, Dangle?


DANGLE. Always -- it is a rule.


PUFF. Yes -- here it is -- ( looking at the book.) 'Enter Tilburina stark mad
in white satin, and her confidant stark mad in white linen.'


Enter TILBURINA and CONFIDANT mad, according to custom. SNEER. But what the
deuce, is the confidant to be mad too?


PUFF. To be sure she is, the confidant is always to do whatever her mistress
does; weep when she weeps, smile when she smiles, go mad when she goes mad. --
Now madam confidant -- but -- keep your madness in the back ground, if you
please.


TILBURINA. The wind whistles -- the moon rises -- see
They have killed my squirrel in his cage!
Is this a grasshopper! -- Ha! no, it is my
Whiskerandos -- you shall not keep him --
I know you have him in your pocket --
An oyster may be crossed in love! -- Who says
A whale's a bird? -- Ha! did you call, my love?
-- He Is here! He Is there! -- He Is every where!
Ah me! He Is no where!

[Exit Tilburina. PUFF. There, do you ever desire to see any body madder than
that?


SNEER. Never while I live!


PUFF. You observed how she mangled the meter?


DANGLE. Yes -- egad, it was the first thing made me suspect she was out of her
senses.


SNEER. And pray what becomes of her?


PUFF. She is gone to throw herself into the sea to be sure -- and that brings
us at once to the scene of action, and so to my catastrophe -- my sea fight, I
mean.


SNEER. What, you bring that in at last?


PUFF. Yes -- yes -- you know my play is called the Spanish Armada, otherwise,
egad, I have no occasion for the battle at all. -- Now then for my
magnificence! -- my battle! -- my noise! -- and my procession! -- You are all
ready?


PROMPTER within. Yes, Sir.


PUFF. Is the Thames dressed?


Enter THAMES with two Attendants. THAMES. Here I am, Sir.


PUFF. Very well indeed -- See, gentlemen, there is a river for you! -- This is
blending a little of the masque with my tragedy -- a new fancy you know -- and
very useful in my case; for as there must be a procession, I suppose Thames and
all his tributary rivers to compliment Britannia with a fete in honor of the
victory.


SNEER. But pray, who are these gentlemen in green with him.


PUFF. Those? -- those are his banks.


SNEER. His banks?


PUFF. Yes, one crowned with alders and the other with a villa! -- you take the
allusions? -- but hey! what the plague! you have got both your banks on one
side -- Here Sir, come round -- Ever while you live, Thames, go between your
banks. ( Bell rings.) -- There, soh! now for it! -- Stand aside my dear friends!
-- away Thames!


[Exit Thames between his banks. [Flourish of drums -- trumpets -- cannon, etc.
etc. Scene changes to the sea -- the fleets engage -- the music plays 'Britons
strike home.' -- Spanish fleet destroyed by fireships, etc. -- English fleet
advances, -- music plays 'Rule Britannia.' -- The procession of all the
English rivers and their tributaries with their emblems, etc. begins with
Handels water music -- ends with a chorus, to the march in Judas Maccabaeus.
-- During this scene, Puff directs and applauds every thing -- then] PUFF.
Well, pretty well -- but not quite perfect -- so ladies and gentlemen, if you
please, we'll rehearse this piece again tomorrow.


CURTAIN DROPS. FINIS.

