GOTHAM. BOOK II. [Price Half a Crown.]

GOTHAM. A POEM. BOOK II. BY C. CHURCHILL.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR; And Sold by G. KEARSLY, opposite St. Martin's
Church, Ludgate Street; W. FLEXNEY, near Gray's-Inn Gate, Holborn; C.
HENDERSON, at the Royal Exchange; J. COOTE, in Paternoster Row; J. GARDENER,
in Charles-Street, Westminster; and J. ALMON, in Piccadilly. MDCCLXIV.

GOTHAM. BOOK II.
HOW much mistaken are the men, who think
That all who will, without restraint, may drink,
May largely drink, even till their bowels burst,
Pleading no right but merely that of thirst,
At the pure waters of the living well,
Beside whose streams the MUSES love to dwell!
Verse is with them a knack, an idle toy,
A rattle gilded over, on which a boy
May play untaught, whilst, without art or force,
Make it but jingle, Music comes of course.
Little do such men know the toil, the pains,
The daily, nightly racking of the brains,
To range the thoughts, the matter to digest,
To cull fit phrases, and reject the rest,
To know the times when HUMOR, on the cheek
Of MIRTH may hold her sports, when WIT should speak,
And when be silent; when to use the powers
Of Ornament, and how to place the flowers,
So that they neither give a tawdry glare,
Nor waste their sweetness in the desert air;
To form (which few can do, and scarcely one,
One Critic in an age can find, when done)
To form a plan, to strike a grand Outline,
To fill it up, and make the picture shine
A full, and perfect piece; to make coy rhyme
Renounce her follies, and with sense keep time,
To make proud sense against her nature bend,
And wear the chains of rhyme, yet call her friend.
Some Fops there are, amongst the Scribbling tribe,
Who make it all their business to describe,
No matter whether in, or out of place;
Studious of finery, and fond of lace,
Alike they trim, as Coxcomb Fancy brings,
The rags of beggars, and the robes of kings.
Let dull Propriety in State preside
Over her dull children, Nature is their guide,
Wild Nature, who at random breaks the fence
Of those tame drudges Judgment, Taste, and Sense,
Nor would forgive herself the mighty crime
Of keeping terms with Person, Place, and Time.
Let liquid Gold emblaze the Sun at noon,
With borrowed beams let Silver pale the Moon,
Let surges hoarse lash the resounding shore,
Let Streams Maeander, and let Torrents roar,
Let them breed up the melancholy breeze
To sigh with sighing, sob with sobbing trees,
Let Vales embroid'ry wear, let Flowers be tinged
With various tints, let Clouds be laced or fringed,
They have their wish; like idle monarch Boys,
Neglecting things of weight, they sigh for toys;
Give them the crown, the scepter, and the robe,
Who will may take the power, and rule the globe.
Others there are, who, in one solemn pace,
With as much zeal, as Quakers rail at lace,
Railing at needful Ornament, depend
On Sense to bring them to their journey's end.
They would not (Heaven forbid) their course delay,
Nor for a moment step out of the way,
To make the barren road those graces wear,
Which Nature would, if pleased, have planted there.
Vain Men! who blindly thwarting Nature's plan
Never find a passage to the heart of man;
Who, bred amongst fogs in Academic land,
Scorn every thing they do not understand;
Who, destitute of Humor, Wit, and Taste,
Let all their little knowledge run to waste,
And frustrate each good purpose, whilst they wear
The robes of Learning with a sloven's air.
Though solid Reasoning arms each sterling line,
Though Truth declares aloud, "This work is mine,"
Vice, whilst from page to page dull Morals creep,
Throws by the book, and Virtue falls asleep.
Sense, mere, dull, formal Sense, in this gay town
Must have some vehicle to pass her down,
Nor can She for an hour ensure her reign,
Unless She brings fair Pleasure in her train.
Let Her, from day to day, from year to year,
In all her grave solemnities appear,
And, with the voice of trumpets, through the streets
Deal lectures out to every one She meets,
Half who pass by are deaf, and the other half
Can hear indeed, but only hear to laugh.
Quit then, Ye graver Sons of lettered Pride,
Taking for once Experience as a guide,
Quit this grand Error, this dull College mode;
Be your pursuits the same, but change the road;
Write, or at least appear to write with ease,
And, if You mean to profit, learn to please.
In vain for such mistakes they pardon claim,
Because they wield the pen in Virtue's name.
Thrice sacred is that Name, thrice blessed the Man
Who thinks, speaks, writes, and lives on such a plan!
This, in himself, himself of course must bless,
But cannot with the world promote success.
He may be strong, but, with effect to speak,
Should recollect his readers may be weak;
Plain, rigid Truths, which Saints with comfort bear,
Will make the Sinner tremble, and despair.
True Virtue acts from Love, and the great end,
At which She nobly aims, is to amend;
How then do those mistake, who arm her laws
With rigor not their own, and hurt the cause
They mean to help, whilst with a zealot rage
They make that Goddess, whom they would have engage
Our dearest Love, in hideous terror rise!
Such may be honest, but they cannot be wise.
In her own full, and perfect blaze of light,
Virtue breaks forth too strong for human sight:
The dazzled eye, that nice but weaker sense,
Shuts herself up in darkness for defense.
But, to make strong conviction deeper sink,
To make the callous feel, the thoughtless think,
Like God made Man, she lays her glory by,
And beams mild comfort on the ravished eye.
In earnest most, when most she seems in jest,
She worms into, and winds around the breast,
To conquer vice, of vice appears the friend,
And seems unlike herself to gain her end.
The Sons of Sin, to while away the time
Which lingers on their hands, of each black crime
To hush the painful memory, and keep
The tyrant Conscience in delusive sleep,
Read on at random, nor suspect the dart
Until they find it rooted in their heart.
Against Vice they give their vote, nor know at first
That, cursing that, themselves too they have cursed,
They see not, till they fall into the snares,
Deluded into Virtue unawares.
Thus the shrewd doctor, in the spleen-struck mind
When pregnant horror sits, and broods over wind,
Discarding drugs, and striving how to please,
Lures on insensibly, by slow degrees,
The patient to those manly sports, which bind
The slackened sinews, and relieve the mind;
The patient feels a change as wrought by stealth,
And wonders on demand to find it health.
Some Few, whom Fate ordained to deal in rimes
In other lands, and here in other times,
Whom, waiting at their birth, the Midwife MUSE
Sprinkled all over with Castalian dews,
To whom true GENIUS gave his magic pen,
Whom ART by just degrees led up to men,
Some Few, extremes well-shunn'd, have steered between
These dangerous rocks, and held the golden mean.
SENSE in their works maintains her proper state,
But never sleeps, or labors with her weight;
GRACE makes the whole look elegant, and gay,
But never dares from SENSE to run astray.
So nice the Master's touch, so great his care,
The Colors boldly glow, not idly glare.
Mutually giving, and receiving aid,
They set each other off, like light and shade,
And, as by stealth, with so much softness blend,
It Is hard to say, where they begin, or end.
Both give us charms, and neither gives offense;
SENSE perfects GRACE, and GRACE enlivens SENSE.
Peace to the Men, who these high honors claim,
Health to their souls, and to their mem'ries fame:
Be it my task, and no mean task, to teach
A reverence for that worth I cannot reach;
Let me at distance, with a steady eye,
Observe, and mark their passage to the sky,
From envy free, applaud such rising worth,
And praise their heaven, though pinioned down to earth.
Had I the power, I could not have the time,
Whilst spirits flow, and Life is in her prime,
Without a sin against Pleasure, to design
A plan, to methodize each thought, each line
Highly to finish, and make every grace,
In itself charming, take new charms from place.
Nothing of Books, and little known of men,
When the mad fit comes on, I seize the pen,
Rough as they run, the rapid thoughts set down,
Rough as they run, discharge them on the Town.
Hence rude, unfinished brats, before their time,
Are born into this idle world of rhyme,
And the poor slattern MUSE is brought to bed
With all her imperfections on her head.
Some, as no life appears, no pulses play
Through the dull, dubious mass, no breath makes way,
Doubt, greatly doubt, till for a glass they call,
Whether the Child can be baptized at all.
Others, on other grounds, objections frame,
And, granting that the child may have a name,
Doubt, as the Sex might well a midwife pose,
Whether they should baptize it, Verse or Prose.
Even what my masters please; Bards, mild, meek men,
In love to Critics stumble now and then.
Something I do myself, and something too,
If they can do it, leave for them to do.
In the small compass of my careless page
Critics may find employment for an age;
Without my blunders they were all undone;
I twenty feed, where MASON can feed one.
When SATIRE stoops, unmindful of her state,
To praise the man I love, curse him I hate;
When SENSE, in tides of passion borne along,
Sinking to prose, degrades the name of song;
The Censor smiles, and, whilst my credit bleeds,
With as high relish on the carrion feeds
As the proud EARL fed at a Turtle feast,
Who, turned by gluttony to worse than beast,
Eat, 'till his bowels gushed upon the floor,
Yet still eat on, and dying called for more.
When loose DIGRESSION, like a colt unbroke,
Spurning Connection, and her formal yoke,
Bounds through the forest, wanders far astray
From the known path, and loves to loose her way,
It Is a full feast to all the mongril pack
To run the rambler down, and bring her back.
When gay DESCRIPTION, Fancy's fairy child,
Wild without art, and yet with pleasure wild,
Waking with Nature at the morning hour
To the lark's call, walks over the opening flower
Which largely drank all night of heaven's fresh dew,
And, like a Mountain Nymph of Dian's crew,
So lightly walks, she not one mark imprints,
Nor brushes off the dews, nor soils the tints;
When thus DESCRIPTION sports, even at the time
That Drums should beat, and Cannons roar in rhyme,
Critics can live on such a fault as that
From one month to the other, and grow fat.
Ye mighty Monthly Judges, in a dearth
Of lettered blockheads, conscious of the worth
Of my materials, which against your will
Often You Have confessed, and shall confess it still,
Materials rich, though rude, enflamed with Thought,
Though more by Fancy than by Judgment wrought,
Take, use them as your own, a work begin,
Which suits your Genius well, and weave them in,
Framed for the Critic loom, with Critic art,
Till thread on thread depending, part on part,
Color with Color mingling, Light with Shade,
To your dull taste a formal work is made,
And, having wrought them into one grand piece,
Swear it surpasses ROME, and rivals GREECE.
Nor think this much, for at one single word,
Soon as the mighty Critic Fiat's heard,
SCIENCE attends their call; their power is owned;
ORDER takes place, and GENIUS is dethroned;
Letters dance into books, defiance hurled
At means, as Atoms danced into a world.
Me higher business calls, a greater plan,
Worthy Man's whole employ, the good of Man,
The good of Man committed to my charge;
If idle Fancy rambles forth at large,
Careless of such a trust, these harmless lays
May Friendship envy, and may Folly praise,
The crown of GOTHAM may some SCOT assume,
And vagrant STUARTS reign in CHURCHILL's room.
O my poor People, O thou wretched Earth,
To whose dear love, though not engaged by birth,
My heart is fixed, my service deeply sworn,
How (by thy Father can that thought be borne,
For Monarchs, would they all but think like me,
Are only Fathers in the best degree)
How must thy glories fade, in every land
Thy name be laughed to scorn, thy mighty hand
Be shortened, and thy zeal, by foes confessed,
Blessed in thy self, to make thy neighbors blessed,
Be robbed of vigor, how must Freedom's pile,
The boast of ages, which adorns the Isle
And makes it great and glorious, feared abroad,
Happy at home, secure from force and fraud,
How must that pile, by ancient Wisdom raised
On a firm rock, by friends admired and praised,
Envied by foes, and wondered at by all,
In one short moment into ruins fall,
Should any Slip of STUART's tyrant race
Or bastard, or legitimate, disgrace
Thy royal seat of Empire! but what care
What sorrow must be mine, what deep despair
And self-reproaches, should that hated line
Admittance gain through any fault of mine!
Cursed be the cause whence GOTHAM's evils spring,
Though that cursed cause be found in GOTHAM's King.
Let War, with all his needy, ruffian band,
In pomp of horror, stalk through GOTHAM's land
Knee-deep in blood; let all her stately towers
Sink in the dust; that Court, which now is our's,
Become a den, where Beasts may, if they can,
A lodging find, nor fear rebuke from Man;
Where yellow harvests rise, be brambles found;
Where vines now creep, let thistles curse the ground;
Dry, in her thousand Valleys, be the Rills;
Barren the Cattle, on her thousand Hills;
Where Power is placed, let Tigers prowl for prey;
Where Justice lodges, let wild Asses bray;
Let Cormorants in Churches make their nest,
And, on the sails of Commerce, Bitterns rest;
Be all, though princes in the earth before,
Her Merchants Bankrupts, and her Marts no more;
Much rather would I, might the will of Fate
Give me to choose, see GOTHAM's ruined state
By ills on ills, thus to the earth weighed down,
Than live to see a STUART wear her crown.
Let Heaven in vengeance arm all Nature's host,
Those Servants, who their Maker know, who boast
Obedience as their glory, and fulfill,
Unquestioned, their great Master's sacred will.
Let raging Winds root up the boiling deep,
And, with destruction big, over GOTHAM sweep;
Let Rains rush down, till FAITH with doubtful eye
Looks for the sign of Mercy in the sky;
Let Pestilence in all her horrors rise;
Wherever I turn, let Famine blast my eyes;
Let the Earth yawn, and, e're They Have time to think,
In the deep gulf let all my subjects sink
Before my eyes, whilst on the verge I reel;
Feeling, but as a Monarch ought to feel,
Not for myself, but them, I Will kiss the rod,
And, having owned the Justice of my God,
Myself with firmness to the ruin give,
And die with those for whom I wished to live.
This (but may Heaven's more merciful decrees
Never tempt his servant with such ills as these)
This, or my soul deceives me, I could bear;
But that the STUART race my Crown should wear,
That Crown, where, highly cherished, FREEDOM shone
Bright as the glories of the midday Sun,
Born and bred Slaves, that They, with proud misrule,
Should make brave, freeborn men, like boys at school,
To the Whip crouch and tremble -- O, that Thought!
The laboring brain is even to madness brought
By the dread vision, at the mere surmise
The thronging Spirits, as in tumult, rise,
My heart, as for a passage, loudly beats,
And, turn me where I will, distraction meets.
O my brave fellows, great in Arts and Arms,
The wonder of the Earth, whom Glory warms
To high Achievements, can your Spirits bend
Through base control (Ye never can descend
So low by choice) to wear a Tyrant's chain,
Or let, in FREEDOM's seat, a STUART reign.
If Fame, who has for ages far and wide
Spread in all realms, the Cowardice, the Pride,
The Tyranny, and Falsehood of those Lords,
Contents You not, search ENGLAND's fair records,
ENGLAND, where first the breath of Life I drew,
Where, next to GOTHAM, my best Love is due.
There once they ruled, though crushed by WILLIAM's hand,
They rule no more, to curse that happy land.
The First, who, from his native soil removed,
Held ENGLAND's scepter, a tame Tyrant proved.
Virtue he lacked, cursed with those thoughts which spring
In souls of vulgar stamp, to be a King;
Spirit he had not, though he laughed at Laws,
To play the bold-fac'd Tyrant with applause;
On practices most mean he raised his pride,
And Craft often gave, what Wisdom often denied.
Never could he feel how truly Man is blessed
In blessing those around him; in his breast,
Crowded with follies, Honor found no room;
Marked for a Coward in his Mother's Womb,
He was too proud without affronts to live,
Too timorous to punish or forgive.
To gain a crown, which had in course of time,
By fair descent, been his without a crime,
He bore a Mother's exile; to secure
A greater crown, he basely could endure
The spilling of her blood by foreign knife,
Nor dared revenge her death who gave him life;
Nay, by fond fear, and fond ambition led,
Struck hands with Those by whom her blood was shed.
Called up to Power, scarce warm on England's throne,
He filled her Court with beggars from his own,
Turn where You would, the eye with SCOTS was caught,
Or English knaves who would be SCOTSMEN thought.
To vain expense unbounded loose he gave,
The dupe of Minions, and of slaves the slave;
On false pretenses mighty sums he raised,
And damned those senates rich, whom, poor, he praised;
From Empire thrown, and doomed to beg her bread,
On foreign bounty whilst a Daughter fed,
He lavished sums, for her received, on Men
Whose names would fix dishonor on my pen.
Lies were his Play-things, Parliaments his sport,
Book-worms and Catamites engrossed the Court;
Vain of the Scholar, like all SCOTSMEN since
The Pedant Scholar, he forgot the Prince,
And, having with some trifles stored his brain,
Never learned, or wished to learn the arts to reign.
Enough he knew to make him vain and proud,
Mocked by the wise, the wonder of the crowd;
False Friend, false Son, false Father, and false King,
False Wit, false Statesman, and false every thing,
When He should act, he idly chose to prate,
And pamphlets wrote, when he should save the State.
Religious, if Religion holds in whim,
To talk with all, he let all talk with him,
Not on God's honor, but his own intent,
Not for Religion sake, but argument;
More vain if some sly, artful, High Dutch slave,
Or, from the Jesuit school, some precious knave
Conviction feigned, than if, to Peace restored
By his full soldiership, Worlds hailed him Lord.
Power was his wish, unbounded as his will,
The Power, without control, of doing ill.
But what he wished, what he made Bishops preach,
And Statesmen warrant, hung within his reach
He dared not seize; Fear gave, to gall his pride,
That Freedom to the Realm his will denied.
Of Treaties fond, o'erweening of his parts,
In every Treaty, of his own mean arts
He fell the dupe; Peace was his Coward care,
Even at a time when Justice called for war;
His pen he would draw, to prove his lack of wit,
But, rather than unsheathe the sword, submit;
TRUTH fairly must record, and, pleased to live
In league with MERCY, JUSTICE may forgive
Kingdoms betrayed, and Worlds resigned to SPAIN,
But never can forgive a RALEIGH slain.
At length (with white let Freedom mark that year)
Not feared by those, whom most he wished to fear,
Not loved by those, whom most he wished to love,
He went to answer for his faults above,
To answer to that God, from whom alone
He claimed to hold, and to abuse the throne,
Leaving behind, a curse to all his line,
The bloody Legacy of RIGHT DIVINE.
With many Virtues which a radiance fling,
Round private men; with few which grace a King,
And speak the Monarch, at that time of life
When Passion holds with Reason doubtful strife,
Succeeded CHARLES, by a mean Sire undone,
Who envied virtue, even in a Son.
His Youth was froward, turbulent, and wild;
He took the Man up, e're he left the child;
His Soul was eager for imperial sway
Ever he had learned the lesson to obey.
Surrounded by a fawning, flattering throng,
Judgment each day grew weak, and Humor strong;
Wisdom was treated as a noisome weed,
And all his follies let to run to seed.
What ills from such beginnings needs must spring!
What ills to such a land, from such a King!
What could She hope! what had she not to fear!
Base BUCKINGHAM possessed his youthful ear;
STRAFFORD and LAUD, when mounted on the throne
Engrossed his love, and made him all their own,
STRAFFORD and LAUD, who boldly dared avow
The traitorous doctrines taught by Tories now;
Each strove t'undo him, in his turn and hour,
The first with pleasure, and the last with power.
Thinking (vain thought, disgraceful to the throne!)
That all Mankind were made for Kings alone,
That Subjects were but Slaves, and what was Whim
Or worse in common men, was Law in him;
Drunk with Prerogative, which Fate decreed
To guard good Kings, and Tyrants to mislead,
Which, in a fair proportion, to deny
Allegiance dares not, which to hold too high
No Good can wish, no Coward King can dare,
And held too high, no English Subject bear;
Besieged by Men of deep and subtle arts,
Men void of Principle, and damned with parts,
Who saw his weakness, made their King their tool,
Then most a slave, when most he seemed to rule;
Taking all public steps for private ends,
Deceived by Favorites, whom he called friends,
He had not strength enough of soul to find
That Monarchs, meant as blessings to Mankind,
Sink their great State, and stamp their fame undone,
When, what was meant for all, they give to One;
Listening uxorious, whilst a Woman's prate,
Modeled the Church, and parcell'd out the State,
Whilst (in the State not more than Women read)
High-Churchmen preached, and turned his pious head;
Tutored to see with ministerial eyes;
Forbid to hear a loyal Nation's cries;
Made to believe (what cannot a Favorite do)
He heard a Nation hearing one or two;
Taught by State-Quacks himself secure to think,
And out of danger, even on danger's brink;
Whilst Power was daily crumbling from his hand,
Whilst murmurs ran through an insulted land,
As if to sanction Tyrants Heaven was bound,
He proudly sought the ruin which he found.
Twelve years, twelve tedious and inglorious years,
Did ENGLAND, crushed by power and awed by fears,
Whilst proud Oppression struck at Freedom's root,
Lament her Senates lost, her HAMPDEN mute.
Illegal taxes, and oppressive loans,
In spite of all her pride, called forth her groans,
PATIENCE was heard her griefs aloud to tell,
And LOYALTY was tempted to rebel.
Each day new acts of outrage shook the state,
New Courts were raised to give new Doctrines weight;
State-Inquisitions kept the realm in awe,
And cursed Star-Chambers made, or ruled the law;
Juries were packed, and Judges were unsound;
Through the whole kingdom not one PRATT was found.
From the first moments of his giddy youth
He hated Senates, for They told him Truth.
At length against his will compelled to treat,
Those whom he could not fright, he strove to cheat,
With base dissembling every grievance heard,
And, often giving, often broke his word.
O where shall helpless Truth for refuge fly,
If Kings, who should protect her, dare to lie?
Those who, the general good their real aim,
Sought in their Country's good their Monarch's fame,
Those who were anxious for his safety, Those
Who were induced by duty to oppose,
Their truth suspected, and their worth unknown,
He held as foes, and traitors to his throne,
Nor found his fatal error till the hour
Of saving him was gone and past, till Power
Had shifted hands, to blast his hapless reign,
Making their Faith, and his Repentance vain.
Hence (be that curse confined to GOTHAM's foes)
War, dread to mention, Civil War arose;
All acts of Outrage, and all acts of shame
Stalked forth at large, disguised with Honor's name;
Rebellion, raising high her bloody hand,
Spread universal havoc through the land;
With zeal for Party, and with Passion drunk,
In Public rage all private Love was sunk,
Friend against Friend, Brother against Brother stood,
And the Son's weapon drank the Father's blood;
Nature, aghast, and fearful lest her reign
Should last no longer, bled in every vein.
Unhappy Stuart! harshly though that name,
Grates on my ear, I should have died with shame,
To see my King before his subjects stand,
And at their bar hold up his royal hand,
At their commands to hear the monarch plead,
By their decrees to see that Monarch bleed.
What though thy faults were many, and were great,
What though they shook the basis of the state,
In Royalty secure thy Person stood,
And sacred was the fountain of thy blood.
Vile Ministers, who dared abuse their trust,
Who dared seduce a King to be unjust,
Vengeance, with Justice leagued, with power made strong,
Had nobly crushed; the King could do no wrong.
Yet grieve not, CHARLES, nor thy hard fortunes blame;
They took thy life, but they secured thy fame.
Their greater crimes made thine like specks appear,
From which the Sun in glory is not clear.
Had Thou in peace and years resigned thy breath
At Nature's call, had Thou laid down in death
As in a sleep, thy name, by Justice borne
On the four winds, had been in pieces torn.
Pity, the Virtue of a generous soul,
Sometimes the Vice, has made thy memory whole.
Misfortunes gave, what Virtue could not give,
And bade, the Tyrant slain, the Martyr live.
Ye princes of the Earth, ye mighty few,
Who, worlds subduing, cannot yourselves subdue,
Who, goodness scorned, wish only to be great,
Whose breath is blasting, and whose voice is fate,
Who own no law, no reason but your will,
And scorn restraint, though it is from doing ill,
Who of all passions groan beneath the worst,
Then only blessed when they make others cursed;
Think not, for wrongs like these unscourg'd to live;
Long may Ye sin, and long may Heaven forgive;
But, when Ye least expect, in sorrow's day,
Vengeance shall fall more heavy for delay;
Nor think that Vengeance heaped on you alone
Shall (poor amends) for injured worlds atone;
No; like some base distemper, which remains,
Transmitted from the tainted Father's veins,
In the Son's blood, such broad and general crimes
Shall call down Vengeance even to latest times,
Call Vengeance down on all who bear your name,
And make their portion bitterness and shame.
From land to land for years compelled to roam,
Whilst Usurpation lorded it at home,
Of Majesty unmindful, forced to fly,
Not daring, like a King, to reign, or die,
Recalled to repossess his lawful throne
More at his people's seeking, than his own,
Another CHARLES succeeded; in the school
Of travel he had learned to play the fool,
And, like pert pupils with dull Tutors sent
To shame their Country on the Continent,
From love of ENGLAND by long absence weaned,
From every Court he every folly gleaned,
And was, so close do evil habits cling,
Till crowned, a Beggar; and when crowned, no King.
Those grand and general powers, which Heaven designed
An instance of his mercy to Mankind,
Were lost, in storms of dissipation hurled,
Nor would he give one hour to bless a world;
Lighter than levity which strides the blast,
And, of the present fond, forgets the past,
He changed and changed, but, every hope to curse,
Changed only from one folly to a worse;
State he resigned to those whom state could please,
Careless of Majesty, his wish was ease;
Pleasure, and Pleasure only was his aim;
Kings of less Wit might hunt the bubble fame;
Dignity, through his reign, was made a sport,
Nor dared Decorum show her face at Court,
Morality was held a standing jest,
And Faith a necessary fraud at best;
Courtiers, their monarch ever in their view,
Possessed great talents, and abused them too;
Whatever was light, impertinent, and vain,
Whatever was loose, indecent, and profane,
(So ripe was Folly, Folly to acquit)
Stood all absolved in that poor bauble, WIT.
In gratitude, alas! but little read,
He let his Father's servants beg their bread,
His Father's faithful servants, and his own,
To place the foes of both around his throne.
Bad counsels he embraced through indolence,
Through love of ease, and not through want of sense;
He saw them wrong, but rather let them go
As right, than take the pains to make them so.
Women ruled all, and Ministers of State
Were for commands at Toilettes forced to wait;
Women, who have, as Monarchs, graced the land,
But never governed well at Second-hand.
To make all other errors slight appear,
In memory fixed, stand DUNKIRK and TANGIER;
In memory fixed so deep, that Time in vain
Shall strive to wipe those records from the brain,
AMBOYNA stands -- Gods, that a King could hold
In such high Estimate, vile, paultry gold,
And of his duty be so careless found,
That, when the blood of Subjects from the ground
For Vengeance called, he should reject their cry,
And, bribed from Honor, lay his thunders by,
Give HOLLAND peace, whilst ENGLISH victims groaned,
And butchered subjects wandered, unaton'd!
O, dear, deep injury to ENGLAND's fame,
To them, to us, to all! to him, deep Shame!
Of all the passions which from frailty spring,
Avarice is that which least becomes a King.
To crown the whole, scorning the public good,
Which through his reign he little understood,
Or little heeded, with too narrow aim
He reassur'd a Bigot Brother's claim,
And, having made time-serving Senates bow,
Suddenly died, that Brother best knew how.
No matter how -- he slept amongst the dead,
And JAMES his Brother reigned in his stead.
But such a reign -- so glaring an offense
In every step against Freedom, Law, and Sense,
Against all the rights of Nature's general plan,
Against all which constitutes an Englishman,
That the Relation would mere fiction seem,
The mock creation of a Poet's dream,
And the poor Bard's would, in this skeptic age,
Appear as false as their Historian's page.
Ambitious Folly seized the seat of Wit,
Christians were forced by Bigots to submit,
Pride without sense, without Religion Zeal,
Made daring inroads on the Commonweal,
Stern Persecution raised her iron rod,
And called the pride of Kings, the power of God,
Conscience and Fame were sacrificed to ROME,
And ENGLAND wept at FREEDOM's sacred tomb.
Her Laws despised, her Constitution wrench'd
From its due, natural frame, her Rights retrenched
Beyond a Coward's suff'rance, Conscience forced,
And healing Justice from the Crown divorced,
Each moment pregnant with vile acts of power,
Her patriot BISHOPS sentenced to the Tower,
Her OXFORD (who yet loves the STUART name)
Branded with arbitrary marks of shame,
She wept -- but wept not long; to arms she flew,
At Honor's call the avenging sword She drew,
Turned all her terrors on the Tyrant's head,
And sent him in despair to beg his bread,
Whilst she (may every State in such distress
Dare with such zeal, and meet with such success)
Whilst She (may GOTHAM, should my abject mind
Choose to enslave, rather than free mankind,
Pursue her steps, tear the proud Tyrant down,
Nor let me wear if I abuse the crown)
Whilst She (through every age, in every land,
Written in gold let REVOLUTION stand)
Whilst She, secured in Liberty and Law,
Found what She sought, a Savior in NASSAU.
END OF THE SECOND BOOK.

