THE OLD MAID. A COMEDY In TWO ACTS, As it is PERFORMED at the THEATER ROYAL in
DRURY LANE.

By Mr. MURPHY.

Tempus erit, quo tu, quae nunc excludis amantem,
Frigida Deserta Nocte jacebis Anus.
OVID. LONDON: Printed for P. VAILLANT, facing Southampton-Street in the
Strand. MDCCLXI.

(Price One Shilling.)

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS the OLD MAID is now adventuring into the world, it would be proper to
acquaint the mere English reader, that the subject of it, and part of the
fable, were taken from a little piece, in one act, called, L'Etourderie, by
Monsieur Fagan. but that the author of these scenes is sensible, how
superfluous that information will be rendered by the assiduity of some people,
who, no doubt, will make a notable discovery of this prodigious crime, and
press it home with all the reproaches of plagiarism, pilfering, borrowing,
robbing, translating, etc. But while this writer can add any thing to the
decent amusements of the public, he is willing to be abused for it, in whatever
manner the illiberal shall think fit.

LINCOLN'S INN, Nov. 18, 1761.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
CLERIMONT, Mr. OBRIEN. Capt. CAPE, Mr. KING. Mr. HARLOW, Mr. KENNEDY. Mr.
HEARTWELL, Mr. PHILLIPS. FOOTMAN, Mr. CASTLE.
WOMEN.
Mrs. HARLOW, Miss HAUGHTON. Miss HARLOW, Miss KENNEDY. TRIFLE, Miss HIPPISLEY.
THE OLD MAID.
ACT I.
Enter Mrs. HARLOW and Miss HARLOW. Mrs. HARLOW. MY dear sister, let me tell
you --


Miss HARLOW. But, my dear sister, let me tell you it is in vain; you can say
nothing that will have any effect.


Mrs. HARLOW. Not if you will not hear me -- only hear me --


Miss HARLOW. Oh! ma'am, I know you love to hear yourself talk, and so please
yourself; -- but I am resolved --


Mrs. HARLOW. Your resolution may alter.


Miss HARLOW. Never.


Mrs. HARLOW. Upon a little consideration.


Miss HARLOW. Upon no consideration.


Mrs. HARLOW. You don't know how that may be -- recollect, sister, that you are
no chicken -- you are not now of the age that becomes giddiness and folly.


Miss HARLOW. Age, ma'am --


Mrs. HARLOW. Do but hear me, sister -- do but hear me -- A person of your
years --


Miss HARLOW. My years, sister! -- Upon my word --


Mrs. HARLOW. Nay, no offense, sister --


Miss HARLOW. But there is offense, ma'am: -- I don't understand what you mean
by it -- always thwarting me with my years -- my years, indeed! -- when
perhaps, ma'am, if I was to die of old age, some folks might have reason to
look about them.


Mrs. HARLOW. She feels it I see -- oh! I delight in mortifying her -- (aside)
-- sister, if I did not love you I am sure I should not talk to you in this
manner -- But how can you make so unkind a return now as to alarm me about
myself? -- in some sixteen or eighteen years after you, to be sure, I own I
shall begin to think of making my will -- How could you be so severe? --


Miss HARLOW. Some sixteen or eighteen years, ma'am! -- If you would own the
truth, ma'am, -- I believe ma'am, -- you would find, ma'am, that the disparity,
ma'am, is not, so very great, ma'am --


Mrs. HARLOW. Well! I vow passion becomes you inordinately -- It blends a few
roses with the lillies of your cheek, and --


Miss HARLOW. And though you are married to my brother, ma'am, I would have you
to know, ma'am, that you are not thereby any way authorized, ma'am, to take
unbecoming liberties with his sister. -- I am independent of my brother, ma'am,
-- my fortune is in my own hands, ma'am, and ma'am --


Mrs. HARLOW. Well! do you know now when your blood circulates a little, that I
think you look mighty well? -- But you was in the wrong not to marry at my age
-- sweet three and twenty! -- you cannot conceive what a deal of good it would
have done your, temper and your spirits, if you had married early --


Miss HARLOW. Insolent! -- provoking -- female malice --


Mrs. HARLOW. But to be waiting till it is almost too late in the day, and
force one's self to say strange things; -- with the tongue and heart at
variance all the time -- "I don't mind the hideous men" -- "I am very happy as
I am" -- and all that time, my dear, dear sister -- to be upon the tenter-hooks
of expectation --


Miss HARLOW. I upon tenter-hooks! --


Mrs. HARLOW. And to be at this work of four grapes, till one is turned of
three and forty --


Miss HARLOW. Three and forty, ma'am! -- I desire, sister -- I desire, ma'am --
three and forty, ma'am --


Mrs. HARLOW. Nay -- nay -- nay -- don't be angry -- don't blame me -- blame my
husband; he is your own brother, you know, and he knows your age -- He told me
so


Miss HARLOW. Oh! ma'am, I see your drift -- but you need not give yourself
those airs, ma'am -- the men don't see with your eyes, ma'am -- years, indeed!
-- Three and forty, truly! -- I Will assure you -- upon my word -- hah! very
fine! -- But I see plainly, ma'am, what you are at -- Mr. Clerimont, madam! --
Mr. Clerimont, sister! that is what frets you -- a young husband, ma'am --
younger than your husband, ma'am -- Mr. Clerimont, let me tell you, ma'am --


Enter TRIFLE. TRIFLE. Oh! rare news, ma'am, charming news -- we have got
another letter --


Miss HARLOW. From whom? -- from Mr. Clerimont? -- where is it?


TRIFLE. Yes, ma'am -- from Mr. Clerimont, ma'am.


Miss HARLOW. Let me see it -- let me see it -- quick -- quick --

reads Madam,
The honor of a letter from you has so filled my mind with joy and gratitude,
that I want words of force to reach but half my meaning. I can only say that
you have revived a heart that was expiring for you, and now beats for you alone
--


There sister, mind that! -- years indeed! --

reads to herself.
Mrs. HARLOW. I wish you joy, sister -- I wish I had not gone to Ranelagh with
her last week -- Who could have thought that her faded beauties would have made
such an impression on him?

aside.
Miss HARLOW. Mind here again, sister. --

(reads) Ever since I had the good fortune of seeing you at Ranelagh, your idea
has been ever present to me; and since you now give me leave, I shall, without
delay, wait upon your brother, and whatever terms he prescribes, I shall
readily subscribe to; for to be your slave is dearer to me than liberty. I have
the honor to remain

The humblest of your admirers, CLERIMONT.


There, sister! --


Mrs. HARLOW. Well! I wish you joy again -- but remember I tell you, take care
what you do. -- He is young, and of course giddy and inconstant.


Miss HARLOW. He is warm, passionate, and tender --


Mrs. HARLOW. But you don't know how long that may last -- and here are you
going to break off a very suitable match, -- which all your friends liked and
approved, a match with captain Cape, who to be sure --


Miss HARLOW. Don't name captain Cape, I beseech you, don't name him --


Mrs. HARLOW. Captain Cape, let me tell you, is not to be despised -- He has
acquired by his voyages to India a very pretty fortune -- has a charming box of
a house upon Hackney-Marsh, -- and is of an age every way suitable to you.


Miss HARLOW. There again now! -- age! age! age! for ever! -- years -- years --
my years! -- But I tell you once for all, Mr. Clerimont does not see with your
eyes -- I am determined to hear no more of captain Cape -- Odious
Hackney-Marsh! -- ah! sister, you would be glad to see me married in a middling
way --


Mrs. HARLOW. I, sister! -- I am sure nobody will rejoice more at your
preferment -- I am resolved never to visit her if Mr. Clerimont marries her --

aside.
Miss HARLOW. Well! well! I tell you, Mr. Clerimont has won my heart -- young
-- handsome -- rich -- town house, country house -- equipage -- To him, and
only him, will I surrender myself -- Three and forty, indeed! -- ha! ha! -- you
see, my dear, dear sister, that these features are still regular and blooming;
-- that the love-darting eye has not quite forsook me; and that I have made a
conquest which your boasted youth might be vain of --


Mrs. HARLOW. Oh! ma'am, I beg your pardon if I have taken too much liberty for
your good --


Miss HARLOW. I humbly thank you for your advice, my sweet dear, friendly
sister -- But don't envy me, I beg you will not; -- don't fret yourself; you cannot
conceive what a deal of good a serenity of mind will do your health -- I Will go
and write an answer directly to this charming, charming letter -- sister --
yours -- I shall be glad to see you, sister, at my house in Hill-street, when I
am Mrs. Clerimont -- and remember what I tell you -- that some faces retain
their bloom and beauty longer than you imagine -- my dear sister -- Come,
Trifle -- let me fly this moment -- Sister, your servant.

Exit with Trifle.
Mrs. HARLOW. Your servant, my dear! -- well! -- I am determined to lead the
gayest life in nature, if she marries Clerimont. -- I Will have a new equipage,
that is one thing -- and I Will have greater routs than her, that is another --
Positively, I must outshine her there -- and I Will keep up a polite enmity with
her -- go and see her, may be once or twice in a winter -- "Ma'am, I am really
so hurried with such a number of acquaintances, that I cannot possibly find
time" -- And then to provoke her, "I wish you joy, sister, I hear you are
breeding" -- ha! ha! -- that will so mortify her -- "I wish it may be a boy,
sister" -- ha! ha! -- and then when her husband begins to despise her, Really,
sister, I pity you -- had you taken my advice, and married the India captain --
your case is a compassionate one -- Compassion is so insolent when a body feels
none at all -- ha! ha! -- it is the finest way of insulting --


Enter Mr. HARLOW. Mr. HARLOW. So, my dear; how are my sister's affairs going
on?


Mrs. HARLOW. Why, my dear, she has had another letter from Mr. Clerimont --
did you ever hear of such an odd unaccountable thing patched up in a hurry here?


Mr. HARLOW. Why it is sudden, to be sure --


Mrs. HARLOW. Upon my word, I think you had better advise her not to break off
with captain Cape --


Mr. HARLOW. No -- not I -- I wish she may be married to one or other of them
-- for her temper is really grown so very sour, and there is such eternal
wrangling between ye both, that I wish to see her in her own house, for the
peace and quiet of mine.


Mrs. HARLOW. Do you know this Mr. Clerimont?


Mr. HARLOW. No; but I have heard of the family -- There is a very fine fortune
-- I wish he may hold his intention.


Mrs. HARLOW. Why, I doubt it vastly --


Mr. HARLOW. And truly so do I -- for between ourselves, I see no charms in my
sister --


Mrs. HARLOW. For my part I cannot comprehend it -- how she could strike his
fancy, is to me the most astonishing thing -- After this, I shall be surprised
at nothing --


Mr. HARLOW. Well! strange things do happen; -- so she is but married out of
the way, I am satisfied -- an old maid in a house is the devil --


Enter a Servant. SERVANT. Mr. Clerimont, Sir, to wait on you --


Mr. HARLOW. Show him in (Exit Servant) -- how comes this visit, pray? --


Mrs. HARLOW. My sister wrote to him to explain himself to you -- Well! it is
mighty odd -- but I Will leave you to yourselves. The man must be an idiot to
think of her --

Aside and Exit.
Enter Mr. CLERIMONT. Mr. HARLOW. Sir, I am glad to have this pleasure.


CLERIMONT. I presume, Sir, you are no stranger to the business that occasions
this visit.


Mr. HARLOW. Sir, the honor you do me and my family --


CLERIMONT. Oh! Sir, to be allied to your family by so tender a tie as a
marriage with your sister, will at once reflect a credit upon me, and conduce
to my happiness in the most essential point -- The lady charmed me at the very
first sight.


Mr. HARLOW (aside.) The devil she did!


CLERIMONT. The sensibility of her countenance, the elegance of her figure, the
sweetness of her manner --


Mr. HARLOW. Sir, you are pleased to -- compliment!


CLERIMONT. Compliment! -- not in the least, Sir --


Mr. HARLOW. The sweetness of my sister's manner (aside) ha! ha!


CLERIMONT. The first time I saw her was a few nights ago at Ranelagh -- Though
there was a crowd of beauties in the room, thronging and pressing all around,
yet she shone amongst them all with superior luster -- She was walking arm in
arm with another lady -- no opportunity offered for me to form an acquaintance
amidst the hurry and bustle of the place, but I enquired their names as they
were going into their chariot -- and learned they were Mrs. and Miss HARLOW.
From that moment she won my heart, and at one glance I became the willing
captive of her beauty --


Mr. HARLOW. A very candid declaration, Sir! -- how can this be? The bloom has
been off the peach any time these fifteen years, to my knowledge -- (aside) --
You see my sister with a favorable eye, Sir.


CLERIMONT. A favorable eye! -- He must greatly want discernment, who has not
a quick perception of her merit.


Mr. HARLOW. You do her a great deal of honor -- but this affair -- is it not
somewhat sudden, Sir? --


CLERIMONT. I grant it -- you may indeed be surprised at it, Sir; nor should I
have been hardy enough to make any overtures to you, -- at least yet a while,
-- if she herself had not condescended to listen to my passion, and authorized
me under her own fair hand to apply to her brother for his consent --


Mr. HARLOW. I shall be very ready, Sir, to give my approbation to my sister's
happiness --


CLERIMONT. No doubt you will -- but let me not cherish an unavailing flame, a
flame that already lights up all my tenderest passions.


Mr. HARLOW. To you, Sir, there can be no exception -- I am not altogether a
stranger to your family and fortune -- His language is warm, considering my
sister's age -- but I will not hurt her preferment -- (aside) -- you will pardon
me, Sir, one thing -- you are very young --


CLERIMONT. Sir, -- I am almost three and twenty.


Mr. HARLOW. But have you consulted your friends?


CLERIMONT. I have -- my uncle, Mr. Heartwell, who proposes to leave me a very
handsome addition to my fortune, which is considerable already -- He, Sir --


Mr. HARLOW. Well! Sir, if he has no objection, I can have none --


CLERIMONT. He has none, Sir; he has given his consent; he desires me to lose
no time -- I will bring him to pay you a visit -- He rejoices in my choice --
you shall have it out of his own mouth -- name your hour, and he shall attend
you --


Mr. HARLOW. Any time today -- I shall stay at home on purpose --


CLERIMONT. In the evening I will conduct him hither -- in the mean time I feel
an attachment here -- The lady, Sir --


Mr. HARLOW. Oh! you want to see my sister -- I will send her to you, Sir, this
instant -- I beg your pardon for leaving you alone -- ha! ha! -- who could have
thought of her making a conquest at last --

Exit.
CLERIMONT (alone.) Sir, your most obedient -- now, Clerimont, now your heart
may rest content -- your doubts and fears may all subside, and joy and rapture
take their place -- Miss Harlow shall be mine -- she receives my vows; she
approves my passion, -- (sings and dances) Soft! here she comes -- Her very
appearance controuls my wildest hopes, and hushes my proud heart into respect
and silent admiration --


Enter Mrs. HARLOW. Mrs. HARLOW. Sir, your servant --


CLERIMONT. Madam

(bows respectfully)
Mrs. HARLOW. I thought Mr. Harlow was here, Sir.


CLERIMONT. Madam, he is but just gone -- how a single glance of her eye
over-awes me!

Aside.
Mrs. HARLOW. I wonder he would leave you alone, Sir -- that is not so polite
in his own house --


CLERIMONT. How her modesty throws a veil over her inclinations! -- my tongue
faulters! -- I cannot speak to her.


Aside. Mrs. HARLOW. He seems in confusion -- a pretty man too! -- That this
should be my sister's luck! --


Aside. CLERIMONT. Madam! --


(Embarrassed.) Mrs. HARLOW. I imagine you have been talking to him on the
subject of the letter you sent this morning. --


CLERIMONT. Madam, I have presumed to --


Mrs. HARLOW. Well! Sir, and he has no objection, I hope --


CLERIMONT. She hopes! Heavens bless her for the word -- (Aside.) -- Madam, he
has frankly consented, if his sister will do me that honor --


Mrs. HARLOW. For his sister, I think I may venture to answer, Sir --


CLERIMONT. Generous! generous creature!


Mrs. HARLOW. You are sure, Sir, of Miss Harlow's admiration, and the whole
family hold themselves much obliged to you --


CLERIMONT. Madam, this extreme condescension has added rapture to the
sentiments I felt before; and it shall be the endeavor of my life to prove
deserving of the amiable object I have dared to aspire to. --


Mrs. HARLOW. Sir, I make no doubt of your sincerity -- I have already declared
my sentiments -- you know Mr. Harlow's -- and if my sister is willing, --
nothing will be wanting to conclude this business -- If no difficulties arise
from her -- for her temper is uncertain -- as to my consent, Sir, your air,
your manner have commanded it -- Sir your most obedient -- I Will send my sister
to you --


Exit. CLERIMONT. Madam, (bowing) I shall endeavor to repay this goodness with
excess of gratitude -- Oh! she is an angel! -- and yet, stupid that I am, I
could not give vent to the tenderness I have within -- it is ever so with
sincere and generous love; it fills the heart with rapture, and then denies the
power of uttering what we so exquisitely feel -- Generous Miss Harlow! who
could thus see through my confusion, interpret all appearances favorably, and
with a dignity superior to her sex's little arts, forego the idle ceremonies of
coquetting, teazing, and tormenting her admirer -- I hear somebody. -- Oh! here
comes mistress Harlow -- what a gloom sits upon her features! -- She assumes
authority here I find -- but I Will endeavor by insinuation and respect --


Enter Miss HARLOW. Miss HARLOW. My sister has told me, Sir --


CLERIMONT. Ma'am --


(bowing cheerfully.) Miss HARLOW. He is a sweet figure.


Aside. CLERIMONT. She rather looks like Miss Harlow's mother than her
sister-in-law --


Aside. Miss HARLOW. He seems abashed -- his respect is the cause -- (Aside) --
My sister told me, Sir, that you was here -- I beg pardon for making you wait
so long --


CLERIMONT. Oh, ma'am (bows) the gloom disappears from her face, but the lines
of ill nature remain --


Aside. Miss HARLOW. I see he loves me by his confusion; -- I Will cheer him with
affability -- (Aside) -- Sir, the letter you was pleased to send, my sister has
seen -- and --


CLERIMONT. And has assured me that she has no objection --


Miss HARLOW. I am glad of that, Sir -- I was afraid --


CLERIMONT. No, ma'am, she has none -- and Mr. Harlow, I have seen him too --
he has honored me with his consent -- Now, madam, the only doubt remains with
you; -- may I be permitted to hope --


Miss HARLOW. Sir, you appear like a gentleman, -- and --


CLERIMONT. Madam, believe me, never was love more sincere, more justly founded
on esteem, or kindled into higher admiration.


Miss HARLOW. Sir, with the rest of the family I hold myself much obliged to
you, and --


CLERIMONT. Obliged! -- it is I that am obliged -- there is no merit on my side
-- it is the consequence of impressions made upon my heart; and what heart can
resist such beauty, such various graces! --


Miss HARLOW. Sir, I am afraid -- I wish my sister heard him (aside) -- Sir, I
am afraid you are lavish of your praise; and the short date of your love, Sir
--


CLERIMONT. It will burn with unabating ardor -- the same charms that first
inspired it, will for ever cherish it, and add new fuel -- But I presume you
hold this style to try my sincerity -- I see that is your aim -- but could you
read the feelings of my heart, you would not thus cruelly keep me in suspense.


Miss HARLOW. Heavens! if my sister saw my power over him -- (aside) -- A
little suspense cannot be deemed unreasonable -- Marriage is an important
affair -- an affair for life -- and some caution you will allow necessary --


CLERIMONT. Madam! -- (disconcerted) -- oh! I dread the sourness of her look!
--


Aside. Miss HARLOW. I cannot help observing, Sir, that you dwell chiefly on
articles of external and superficial merit; whereas the more valuable qualities
of the mind, prudence, good sense, a well-regulated conduct --


CLERIMONT. Oh! ma'am, I am not inattentive to those matters -- oh! she has a
notable household understanding, I warrant her -- (aside) -- but let me entreat
you, madam, to do justice to my principles, and believe me a sincere, a
generous lover --


Miss HARLOW. Sir, I will frankly own that I have been trying you all this
time, and from henceforth all doubts are banished.


CLERIMONT. Your words recall me to new life -- I shall for ever study to merit
this goodness -- But your fair sister -- do you think I can depend upon her
consent? -- May I flatter myself she will not change her mind? --


Miss HARLOW. My sister cannot be insensible of the honor you do us all --
and, Sir, as far as I can act with propriety in the affair, I will endeavor to
keep them all inclined to favor you --


CLERIMONT. Madam --


(bows.) Miss HARLOW. You have an interest in my breast that will be busy for
you --


CLERIMONT. I am eternally devoted to you, madam --


bows. Miss HARLOW. How modest, and yet how expressive he is!


Aside. CLERIMONT. Madam, I shall be for ever sensible of this extreme
condescension, and shall think no pains too great to prove the gratitude and
esteem I bear you -- I beg my compliments to Mr. Harlow, and I shall be here
with my uncle in the evening -- as early as possible I shall come -- my
respects to your sister, ma'am -- and pray, madam, keep her in my interest --
Madam, your most obedient -- I have managed the motherly lady finely, I think
(aside) Madam


Bows, and Exit. Miss HARLOW. What will my sister say now? -- I shall hear no
more of her taunts -- A malicious thing! -- I fancy she now sees that your
giddy fli^ts are not always the highest beauties -- Set her up, indeed! -- Had
she but heard him, the dear man! -- what sweet things he said! and what sweet
things he looked --


Enter Mrs. HARLOW. Mrs. HARLOW. Well, sister! -- how! -- what does he say? --


Miss HARLOW. Say, sister! -- Every thing that is charming -- he is the
prettiest man! --


Mrs. HARLOW. Well! I am glad of it -- but all is well that ends well --


Miss HARLOW. Envy, sister! -- Envy, and downright malice! -- Oh! had you heard
all the tender things he uttered, and with that ecstasy too! that tenderness!
that delight restrained by modesty! --


Mrs. HARLOW. I don't know though; there is something odd in it still --


Miss HARLOW. Oh! I don't doubt but you will say so -- but you will find I have
beauty enough left to make some noise in the world still -- The men, sister,
are the best judges of female beauty -- Don't concern yourself about it, sister
-- Leave it all to them --


Mrs. HARLOW. But only think of a lover you never saw but once at Ranelagh --


Miss HARLOW. Very true! -- but even then I saw what work I made in his heart
-- Oh! I am in raptures with him, and he is in raptures with me -- (Sings) Yes,
I Will have a husband, ay! marry, etc.


Enter Mr. HARLOW. Mr. HARLOW. So, sister! how stand matters now?


Miss HARLOW. As I could wish -- I shall no more be a trouble to you -- he has
declared himself in the most warm and vehement manner -- Though my sister has her
doubts -- she is a good friend -- she is afraid of my success --


Mrs. HARLOW. Pray, sister, don't think so meanly of me -- I understand that
sneer, ma'am.


Miss HARLOW. And I understand you too, ma'am --


Mr. HARLOW. Come, come, I desire we may have no quarrelling -- you two are
always wrangling; but when you are separated, it is to be hoped you will then
be more amicable. Things are now in a fair way -- Though, sister, let me tell you
I am afraid our India friend will think himself ill treated.


Mrs. HARLOW. That Is what I fear too -- that is my reason for speaking --


Miss HARLOW. Oh! never throw away a thought on him. -- Mr. Clerimont has my
heart; and now I think I am settled for life -- Sister, I love to plague her --
now I think I am settled for life -- for life, -- for life, my dear sister --


Enter Servant. SERVANT. Dinner is served, Sir.


Mr. HARLOW. Very well! come, sister, I give you joy -- let us in to dinner.


Miss HARLOW. Oh! vulgar! -- I cannot eat -- I must go and dress my head over
again, and do a thousand things; -- for I am determined I Will look this
afternoon as well as ever I can. --


Exit Mrs. HARLOW. Is not all this amazing, my dear? -- her head is turned --


Mr. HARLOW. Well, let it all pass -- don't you mind it -- don't you say any
thing -- let her get married if she can -- I am sure I shall rejoice at it.


Mrs. HARLOW. And upon my word, my dear, so shall I -- and if I interfere, it
is purely out of friendship. --


Mr. HARLOW. But be advised by me, -- say no more to her. -- If the affair goes
on, we shall fairly get rid of her -- Her peevish humors, and her maiden
temper, are become insupportable. -- Come, let us in to dinner. -- If Mr.
Clerimont marries her, which indeed will be odd enough, -- we shall then enjoy
a little peace and quiet.


Exit. Mrs. HARLOW. What in the world could the man see in her? -- Oh! he will
repent his bargain in a week or a fortnight; that I am sure he will -- she is
gone to dress now! -- ha!ha! -- Oh! how she rolls her pretty eyes in spite, And
looks delightfully with all her might! Ha!ha! delightfully she will look indeed!


Exit. END OF THE FIRST ACT. ACT II.
Enter a Servant, and Capt. CAPE. SERVANT. YES, Sir, my master is at home -- he
has just done dinner, Sir --


Capt. CAPE. Very well then; tell him I would speak a word with him.


SERVANT. I beg pardon, Sir; I am but a stranger in the family -- who shall I
say? --


Capt. CAPE. Capt. Cape, tell him --


SERVANT. Yes, Sir.


Exit. Capt. CAPE. I can hardly believe my own eyes -- god's death! I am almost
inclined to think this letter, signed with Miss Harlow's name, a mere forgery
by some enemy, to drive me into an excess of passion, and so injure us both --
I don't know what to say to it --


Enter Mr. HARLOW. Capt. CAPE. Sir, I have waited on you about an extraordinary
affair -- I cannot comprehend it, Sir -- Here is a letter with your sister's
name -- Look at it, Sir, -- is that her handwriting? --


Mr. HARLOW. Yes, Sir -- I take it to be her writing --


Capt. CAPE. And do you know the contents? --


Mr. HARLOW. I cannot say I have read it -- but --


Capt. CAPE. But you know the purport of it?


Mr. HARLOW. Partly.


Capt. CAPE. You do? -- and is not it base treatment, Sir? -- is it not
unwarrantable? -- can you justify her?


Mr. HARLOW. For my part, I leave women to manage their own affairs -- I am not
fond of inter-meddling --


Capt. CAPE. But, Sir -- let me ask you, -- Was not every thing agreed upon? --
Are not the writings now in lawyers hands? -- Was not next week fixed for our
wedding? --


Mr. HARLOW. I understood it so.


Capt. CAPE. Very well then, and see how she treats me -- She writes me here in
a contemptuous manner, that she recals her promise; -- it was rashly given; --
she has thought better of it; she will listen to me no more; -- she is going to
dispose of herself to a gentleman with whom she can be happy for life -- and "I
desire to see you no more, Sir" -- There, that is free and easy, is not it? --
What do you say to that? --


Mr. HARLOW. Why really, Sir, it is not my affair -- I have nothing to say to
it. --


Capt. CAPE. Nothing to say to it! -- Sir, I imagined I was dealing with people
of honor.


Mr. HARLOW. You have been dealing with a woman, and you know --


Capt. CAPE. Yes, I know -- I know the treachery of the sex -- Who is this
gentleman, pray?


Mr. HARLOW. His name is Clerimont -- they have fixed the affair among
themselves, and amongst them be it for me. --


Capt. CAPE. Very fine! mighty fine! -- is Miss Harlow at home, Sir? --


Mr. HARLOW. She is; and here she comes too --


Capt. CAPE. Very well! -- let me hear it from herself, that is all -- I desire
to hear her speak for herself --


Mr. HARLOW. With all my heart. -- I Will leave you together -- you know,
captain, I was never fond of being concerned in those things --


Exit. Enter Miss HARLOW. Miss HARLOW. Capt. Cape, this is mighty odd -- I
thought, Sir, I desired --


Capt. CAPE. Madam, I acknowledge the receipt of your letter, and, madam, the
usage is so extraordinary, that I hold myself excusable if I refuse to comply
with the terms you impose upon me. --


Miss HARLOW. Sir, I really wonder what you can mean --


Capt. CAPE. Mistake me not, madam; I am not come to whimper or to whine, and
to make a puppy of myself again -- Madam that is all blown over. --


Miss HARLOW. Well then, there is no harm done, and you will survive this I
hope.


Capt. CAPE. Survive it! --


Miss HARLOW. Yes; -- you will not grow desperate I hope -- suppose you were to
order somebody to take care of you, because you know fits of despair are
sudden, and you may rashly do yourself a mischief -- don't do any such thing, I
beg you will not --


Capt. CAPE. This insult, madam! -- Do myself a mischief! -- Madam, don't
flatter yourself that it is in your power to make me unhappy -- it is not
vexation brings me hither, I assure you --


Miss HARLOW. Then let vexation take you away; -- we were never designed for
one another. --


Capt. CAPE. My amazement brings me hither -- amazement that any woman can
behave -- but I don't want to upbraid -- I only come to ask -- for I can hardly
as yet believe it -- I only come to ask if I am to credit this pretty epistle?
--


Miss HARLOW. Every syllable -- therefore take your answer, Sir, and truce with
your importunity. --


Capt. CAPE. Very well, ma'am, very well -- your humble servant, madam -- I
promise you, ma'am, I can repay this scorn with scorn -- with tenfold scorn,
madam, such as this treatment deserves -- that is all -- I say no more -- your
servant ma'am -- but let me ask you -- is this a just return for all the
attendance I have paid you these three years past? --


Miss HARLOW. Perfectly just, Sir, -- three years! -- how could you be a
dangler so long? -- I told you what it would come to -- can you think that
raising a woman's expectation, and tiring her out of all patience, is the way
to make sure of her at last? -- you ought to have been a brisker lover, you
ought indeed, Sir, -- I am now contracted to another, and so there is an end of
every thing between us. --


Capt. CAPE. Very well, madam, -- and yet I cannot bear to be despised by her --
and can you, Miss Harlow, can you find it in your heart to treat me with this
disdain? -- have you no compassion? --


Miss HARLOW. No, positively none, Sir, -- none -- none --


Capt. CAPE. Your own Capt. Cape, -- whom you --


Miss HARLOW. Whom I despise. --


Capt. CAPE. Whom you have so often encouraged to adore you. --


Miss HARLOW. Pray, Sir, don't touch my hand -- I am now the property of
another --


Capt. CAPE. Cannot you still break off with him?


Miss HARLOW. No Sir, I cannot; I will not; I love him, and Sir, if you are a man
of honor, you will speak to me no more; desist, Sir, for if you don't, my
brother shall tell you of it, Sir, and tomorrow Mr. Clerimont shall tell you
of it. --


Capt. CAPE. Mr. Clerimont, madam, shall fight me, for daring --


Miss HARLOW. And must I fight you too, most noble, valiant captain? --


Capt. CAPE. Laughed at too! --


Miss HARLOW. What a passion you are in! -- I cannot bear to see a man in such a
passion -- Oh! I have a happy riddance of you -- the violence of your temper is
dreadful -- I will not stay a moment longer with you -- you frighten me -- you
have your answer, -- and so your servant Sir --


Exit. Capt. CAPE. Ay! she is gone off like a fury, and the furies catch her,
say I -- I will never put up with this -- I will find out this Mr. Clerimont,
and he shall be accountable to me -- Mr. Harlow too shall be accountable to me.
--


Enter Mr. and Mrs. HARLOW. Capt. CAPE. Mr. Harlow -- I am used very ill here,
Sir, by all of you, and Sir, let me tell you --


Mr. HARLOW. Nay; don't be angry with me, Sir, -- I was not to marry you --


Capt. CAPE. But Sir, I cannot help being angry -- I must be angry -- and let me
tell you, you don't behave like a gentleman.


Mrs. HARLOW. How can Mr, Harlow help it, Sir, if my sister --


Mr. HARLOW. You are too warm; you are indeed, Sir, -- let us both talk this
matter over a bottle --


Capt. CAPE. No, Sir -- no bottle -- over a cannon, if you will --


Mrs. HARLOW. Mercy on me, Sir, -- I beg you wont talk in that terrible manner
-- you frighten me, Sir. --


Mr. HARLOW. Be you quiet, my dear, -- Capt. Cape, I beg you will just step
into that room with me; and if, in the dispatching one bottle, I don't acquit
myself of all sinister dealing, why then -- come, come, be a little moderate --
you shall step with me -- I Will take it as a favor -- come, come, you must --


Capt. CAPE. I always found you a gentleman, Mr. Harlow, and so with all my
heart, -- I don't care if I do talk the matter over with you --


Mr. HARLOW Sir, I am obliged to you -- I Will show you the way --


Exeunt. Mrs. HARLOW. It is just as I foresaw -- my sister was sure of him, and
now is she going to break off for a young man that will despise her in a little
time -- I wish she would have Capt. Cape.


Enter Miss HARLOW. Miss HARLOW. Is he gone, sister? --


Mrs. HARLOW. No; and here is the deuce and all to do -- he is for fighting
every body -- upon my word you are wrong -- you don't behave genteelly in the
affair. --


Miss HARLOW. Genteelly! -- I like that notion prodigiously -- an't I going to
marry genteelly?


Mrs. HARLOW. Well, follow your own inclinations -- I will not intermeddle any
more, I promise you -- I Will step into the parlour, and see what they are about.


Exit. Miss HARLOW. As you please, ma'am -- I see plainly the ill-natured thing
cannot bear my success -- Heavens! here comes Mr. Clerimont --


Enter Mr. CLERIMONT. Miss HARLOW. You are earlier than I expected, Sir.


CLERIMONT. I have flown, madam, upon the wings of love -- I have seen my
uncle, and he will be here within this half hour -- every thing succeeds to my
wishes with him -- I hope there is no alteration here, madam, since I saw you
--


Miss HARLOW. Nothing that signifies, Sir --


CLERIMONT. You alarm me -- Mr. Harlow has not changed his mind, I hope.


Miss HARLOW. No, Sir -- he continues in the same mind.


CLERIMONT. And your sister -- I tremble with doubt and fear -- she does not
surely recede from the sentiments she flattered me with.


Miss HARLOW. Why there, indeed, I cannot say much -- she --


CLERIMONT. How!


Miss HARLOW. She -- I don't know what to make of her --


CLERIMONT. Oh! I am on the rack -- in pity, do not torture me --


Miss HARLOW. How tremblingly solicitous he is -- Oh! I have made a sure
conquest (aside.) -- Why, she, Sir --


CLERIMONT. Ay, --


(disconcerted.) Miss HARLOW. She does not seem entirely to approve --


CLERIMONT. You kill me with despair --


Miss HARLOW. Oh! he is deeply smitten, (aside) -- She thinks another match
would suit better --


CLERIMONT. Another match!


Miss HARLOW. Yes, another; an India captain, who has made his proposals; but I
shall take care to see him dismissed.


CLERIMONT. Will you?


Miss HARLOW. I promise you I will -- though he runs much in my sister's head,
and she has taken pains to bring my other relations over to her opinion.


CLERIMONT. Oh! cruel, cruel! -- I could not have expected that from her -- but
has she fixed her heart upon a match with this other gentleman?


Miss HARLOW. Why, truly I think she has -- but my will in this affair must be,
and shall be consulted.


CLERIMONT. And so it ought, ma'am -- your long acquaintance with the world,
madam --


Miss HARLOW. Long acquaintance, Sir! I have but a few years experience only --


CLERIMONT. That is, your good sense, ma'am -- oh! confound my tongue! how that
slipped from me (aside) -- your good sense, -- your early good sense, -- and --
and -- inclination should be consulted.


Miss HARLOW. And they shall, Sir -- hark! -- I hear her -- I Will tell you what
-- I Will leave you this opportunity to speak to her once more, and try to win
her over by persuasion -- It will make things easy if you can -- I am gone, Sir.


Curtsies affectedly, and Exit. CLERIMONT. The happiness of my life will be
owing to you, Madam. -- The woman is really better natured than I thought she
was -- she comes, the lovely tyrant comes --


Enter Mrs. HARLOW. CLERIMONT. She triumphs in her cruelty, and I am ruined --


Aside. Mrs. HARLOW. You seem afflicted, Sir -- I hope no misfortune --


CLERIMONT. The severest misfortune! -- you have broke my heart --


Mrs. HARLOW. I break your heart, Sir? --


CLERIMONT. Yes, cruel fair -- you, -- you have undone me.


Mrs. HARLOW. You amaze me, Sir, pray how can I --


CLERIMONT. And you can seem unconscious of the mischief you have made --


Mrs. HARLOW. Pray unriddle, Sir --


CLERIMONT. Madam, your sister has told me all --


Mrs. HARLOW. Ha! ha! what has she told you, Sir?


CLERIMONT. It may be sport to you -- but to me it is death --


Mrs. HARLOW. What is death?


CLERIMONT. The gentleman from India, madam -- I have heard it all -- you can
give him a preference -- you can blast my hopes -- my fond delighted hopes,
which you yourself had cherished.


Mrs. HARLOW. The gentleman is a very good sort of man.


CLERIMONT. Oh! she loves him, I see -- (aside) -- Madam, I perceive my doom is
fixed, and fixed by you --


Mrs. HARLOW. How have I fixed your doom? -- if I speak favorably of captain
Cape, -- he deserves it, Sir.


CLERIMONT. Oh! heavens! I cannot bear this --


aside. Mrs. HARLOW. I believe there is nobody that knows the gentleman, but
will give him his due praise --


CLERIMONT. Love! love! love! --


aside Mrs. HARLOW. And besides, his claim is in fact prior to yours.


CLERIMONT. And must love be governed, like the business of mechanics, by the
laws of tyrant custom? -- Can you think so, madam?


Mrs. HARLOW. Why, Sir, you know I am not in love.


CLERIMONT. Oh! cruel! -- no, madam, I see you are not.


Mrs. HARLOW. And really now, Sir, reasonably speaking, my sister is for
treating captain Cape very ill -- He has been dancing attendance here these
three years --


CLERIMONT. Yet that you know, when you were pleased to fan the rising flame,
that matchless beauty had kindled in my heart.


Mrs. HARLOW. Matchless beauty! -- ha! ha! -- I cannot but laugh at that --


aside. CLERIMONT. Laugh, madam, if you will at the pangs you yourself occasion
-- yes, triumph, if you will -- I am resigned to my fate, since you will have
it so --


Mrs. HARLOW. I have it so! -- you seem to frighten yourself without cause, --
If I speak favorably of any body else, Sir, -- what then? -- I am not to marry
him, you know.


CLERIMONT. An't you?


Mrs. HARLOW. I! -- no, truly -- thank heaven! --


CLERIMONT. She revives me.


aside. Mrs. HARLOW. That must be as my sister pleases.


CLERIMONT. Must it?


Mrs. HARLOW. Must it? -- to be sure it must?


CLERIMONT. And may I hope some interest in your heart.


Mrs. HARLOW. My heart, Sir!


CLERIMONT. While it is divided, while another has possession of but part of
it. --


Mrs. HARLOW. I don't understand him! -- Why, it has been given away long ago.


CLERIMONT. I pray you do not tyrannize me thus with alternate doubts and fears
-- if you will but bless me with the least kind return --


Mrs. HARLOW. Kind return! what, would you have me fall in love with you?


CLERIMONT. It will be generous to him who adores you.


Mrs. HARLOW. Adore me!


CLERIMONT. Even to idolatry.


Mrs. HARLOW. What can he mean? -- I thought my sister was the object of your
adoration.


CLERIMONT. Your sister, ma'am! I shall ever respect her as my friend on this
occasion, but love -- no -- no -- she is no object for that --


Mrs. HARLOW. No!


CLERIMONT. She may have been handsome in her time, -- but that has been all
over long ago --


Mrs. HARLOW. Well! this is charming -- I wish she heard him now, with her
newfangled airs, (aside.) -- But let me understand you, Sir -- adore me! --


CLERIMONT. You! -- you! -- and only you! -- by this fair hand --


(kisses it.) Mrs. HARLOW. Hold, hold -- this is going too far -- but pray,
Sir, have you really conceived a passion for me?


CLERIMONT. You know I have -- a passion of the tenderest nature.


Mrs. HARLOW. And was that your drift in coming hither?


CLERIMONT. What else could induce me?


Mrs. HARLOW. And introduced yourself here, to have an opportunity of speaking
to me?


CLERIMONT. My angel! don't torment me thus --


Mrs. HARLOW. Angel! and pray, Sir, what do you suppose Mr. Harlow will say to
this?


CLERIMONT. Oh! ma'am -- he! he approves my passion.


Mrs. HARLOW. Does he really? -- I must speak to him about that --


CLERIMONT. Do so, ma'am, you will find I am a man of more honor than to
deceive you --


Mrs. HARLOW. Well! it will be whimsical if he does -- and my sister too, this
will be a charming discovery for her, (aside.) -- Ha! ha! well! really Sir,
this is mighty odd -- I Will speak to Mr. Harlow about this matter this very
moment --


(going.) CLERIMONT. Oh! you will find it all true -- and may I then flatter
myself --


Mrs. HARLOW. Oh! to be sure -- such an honorable project -- I Will step to him
this moment -- and then, sister, I shall make such a piece of work for you --


Exit. CLERIMONT. Very well, ma'am -- see Mr. Harlow immediately -- he will
confirm it to you -- while there is life there is hope -- such matchless
beauty! --


Enter Miss HARLOW. Miss HARLOW. I beg your pardon, Sir, for leaving you all
this time -- Well, what says my sister?


CLERIMONT. She has given me some glimmering hopes.


Miss HARLOW. Well, don't be uneasy about her -- it shall be as I please --


CLERIMONT. But with her own free consent it would be better -- however, to you
I am bound by every tie, and thus let me seal a vow --


(kisses her hand.) Miss HARLOW. He certainly is a very passionate lover --
Lord! he is ready to eat my hand up with kisses -- I wish my sister saw this --
(aside.) -- Hush! I hear Capt. Cape's voice -- the hideous Tramontane! -- he is
coming this way -- I would not see him again for the world -- I Will withdraw a
moment, Sir -- you will excuse me -- Mr. Clerimont -- (kisses her hand and
curtsies very low) your servant Sir -- Oh! he is a charming man.


Curtseys, and Exit. Enter Capt. CAPE. Capt. CAPE. There she goes, the
perfidious! Sir, I understand your name is Clerimont --


CLERIMONT. At your service, Sir.


Capt. CAPE. Then, Sir, draw this moment.


CLERIMONT. Draw, Sir! for what?


Capt. CAPE. No evasion, Sir.


CLERIMONT. Explain the cause.


Capt. CAPE. The cause is too plain -- your making love to that lady who went
out there this moment --


CLERIMONT. That lady! not I, upon my honor, Sir.


Capt. CAPE. No shuffling, Sir -- draw --


CLERIMONT. Sir, I can repel an injury like this -- but your quarrel is
groundless, -- and, Sir, if ever I made love to that lady, I will lay my bosom
naked to your sword, -- That lady! -- I resign all manner of pretension to her
--


Capt. CAPE. You resign her, Sir.


CLERIMONT. Entirely.


Capt. CAPE. Then I am pacified --


(puts up his sword.) CLERIMONT. Upon my word, Sir, I never so much as thought
of the lady.


Enter Mr. HARLOW. Mr. HARLOW. So, Sir -- fine doings you have been carrying on
here --


CLERIMONT. Sir!


Mr. HARLOW. You have been attempting my wife, I find --


CLERIMONT. Upon my word, Mr Harlow --


Mr. HARLOW. You have behaved in a very base manner, and I insist upon
satisfaction; draw, Sir --


CLERIMONT. This is the strangest accident! -- I assure you, Sir, -- only give
me leave --


Mr. HARLOW. I will not give you leave -- I insist --


Capt. CAPE. Nay, nay, Mr. Harlow -- this is neither time or place -- and
besides, hear the gentleman; I have been overhasty, and he has satisfied me --
only hear him --


Mr. HARLOW. Sir, I will believe my own wife -- come on, Sir --


CLERIMONT. I assure you, Mr. Harlow, I came into this house upon honorable
principles -- induced, Sir, by my regard for Miss Harlow --


Capt. CAPE. For Miss Harlow! -- zoons, draw --


CLERIMONT. Again! -- this is downright madness -- two upon me at once -- you
will murder me between you --


Mr. HARLOW. There is one too many upon him, sure enough, -- and so, captain,
put up --


Capt. CAPE. Resign your pretensions to Miss Harlow --


CLERIMONT. Resign Miss Harlow! -- not for the universe -- in her cause I can
be as ready as any bravo of ye all --


(draws his sword.) Mr. HARLOW. For heaven's sake, Capt. Cape -- do moderate
your anger -- this is neither time or place -- I have been too rash myself -- I
beg you will be pacified -- (He puts up.) -- Mr. Clerimont, sheath your sword
--


CLERIMONT. I obey, Sir --


Mr. HARLOW. Capt. Cape. how can you? -- you promised me you would let things
take their course? -- if my sister will marry the gentleman, how is he to
blame? --


Capt. CAPE. Very well, Sir -- I have done -- she is a worthless woman --
that is all --


CLERIMONT. A worthless woman, Sir! --


Capt. CAPE. Ay! worthless --


CLERIMONT. Damnation! -- Draw, Sir!


Mr. HARLOW. Nay, nay, Mr. Clerimont, you are too warm -- and there is a
gentleman coming -- this is your uncle, I suppose --


CLERIMONT. It is --


Enter Mr. HEARTWELL. Mr. HARLOW (aside.) I Will wave all disputes now, that I
may conclude my sister's marriage.


CLERIMONT. Mr. Heartwell, Sir -- Mr. Harlow, Sir. --


HEARTWELL. My nephew has informed me, Sir, of the honor you have done him,
and I am come to give my consent.


Mr. HARLOW. I thought it necessary, Sir, to have the advice of Mr. Clerimont's
friends, as he is very young, and my sister not very handsome.


CLERIMONT. She is an angel, Sir --


HEARTWELL. Patience, Charles, patience. -- My nephew's estate will provide for
his eldest born, and upon the younger branches of his marriage I mean to settle
my fortune.


Mr. HARLOW. Generously spoken, Sir, and so there is no occasion for delay --
who waits there? -- tell the ladies they are wanting --


HEARTWELL. I have ever loved my nephew, and since he tells me he has made a
good choice, I shall be glad to see him happy.


Capt. CAPE. But, Sir, let me tell you, that your nephew has used me very
basely, and Sir --


Mr. HARLOW. Nay, nay, captain, -- this is wrong now; every thing was settled
between us in the other room -- recollect yourself -- do, I beg you will -- Oh!
here come the ladies.


Enter Mrs. HARLOW, and Miss. Miss HARLOW. Now, sister, you shall see I have
completed my conquest --


CLERIMONT. Now then I am happy indeed -- my lovely, charming bride -- thus let
me snatch you to my heart, and thus, and thus --


(embraces Mrs. Harlow.) Mr. HARLOW. Zoons! before my face --


(pushing him away.) CLERIMONT. Prithee, indulge my transport -- my life, my
angel! --


Mr. HARLOW. I desire you will desist, Sir --


CLERIMONT. Nay, nay, prithee be quiet -- my charming, charming wife! --


Mr. HARLOW. That lady is not your wife --


CLERIMONT. How my wife, -- not my wife! -- ecstasy and bliss! --


Mr. HARLOW. Come, come, Sir -- this is too much --


CLERIMONT. Ha! ha! you are very pleasant, Sir.


Mr. HARLOW. Zoons! Sir, no trifling -- that lady is my wife --


CLERIMONT. Sir!


Mr. HARLOW. I say, Sir, that lady is my wife!


Capt. CAPE. Ha! ha! I see through this -- it is a comedy of errors, I believe
--


(sings.) HEARTWELL. What does all this mean?


CLERIMONT. Your wife, Sir! --


Mr. HARLOW. Yes, my wife -- and there is my sister, if you please to take her
--


CLERIMONT. Sir! --


Mr. HARLOW. Sir, this is the lady whom you have desired in marriage.


CLERIMONT. Who I, Sir? -- I beg your pardon -- that lady I took to be your
wife (pointing to Miss Harlow,) -- and that lady (pointing to Mrs. Harlow) I
took to be your sister --


Capt. CAPE. and Mrs. HARLOW. Ha! ha! ha! --


Miss HARLOW. Lord! lord! have I been made a fool of all this time! -- furies!
torture! murder! --


Capt. CAPE. Ha! ha! -- my lady fair is taken in, I think --


Mrs. HARLOW. Sister, the men don't see with my eyes -- ha! ha!


Capt. CAPE. Ha! ha! the gentleman is no dangler, ma'am. --


Mrs. HARLOW. This is a complete conquest my sister has made --


Miss HARLOW. I cannot bear this -- Sir, I desire I may not be made a jest of --
did not you solicit me? -- importune me? --


CLERIMONT. For your interest in that lady, ma'am, -- whom I took for Miss
Harlow -- I beg your pardon if I am mistaken, -- I hope there is no harm done.
--


Miss HARLOW. Yes, Sir, but there is harm done -- I am made sport of -- exposed
to derision -- Oh! I cannot bear this -- I cannot bear it --


(cries.) Mrs. HARLOW. Don't cry, sister -- some faces preserve the bloom
longer than others you know -- ha! ha!


Capt. CAPE. Loll toll loll --


HEARTWELL. I don't understand all this -- is that lady your wife, Sir?


Mr. HARLOW. She is, Sir.


HEARTWELL. And pray, nephew -- you took that lady for Mr. Harlow's sister, I
suppose --


CLERIMONT. I did, Sir. -- I beg pardon for the trouble I have given -- I am in
such confusion, I can hardly --


HEARTWELL. Well, well! the thing is cleared up, and there is no harm done --
but you should have known what ground you went upon -- ha! ha! I cannot help
laughing neither --


Mr. HARLOW. Why faith, nor I -- ha! ha!


CLERIMONT. Since matters have turned so unexpectedly, I beg pardon for my
mistake, and Sir, I take my leave --


(going.) Miss HARLOW. And will you treat me in this manner, Sir? will you draw
me into such a scrape, and not --


CLERIMONT. Ma'am, that gentleman would cut my throat -- his claim is prior to
mine -- and, I dare say, he will be very glad to be reconciled, madam.


Miss HARLOW. You are a base man then, and I reject you -- Capt. Cape I see my
error, Sir, and I resign myself to you.


Capt. CAPE. No, madam, I beg to be excused -- I have been a dangler too long
-- I ought to have been a brisker lover -- I shall endeavor to survive it,
ma'am -- I will not do myself a mischief -- and I have my answer -- I am off,
madam -- loll toll loll --


Mrs. HARLOW. Ha! ha! I told you this, my dear sister --


CLERIMONT. Madam, I dare say the gentleman will think better of it -- Mr.
Harlow, I am sorry for all this confusion, and I beg pardon of the whole
company for my mistake -- Mrs. Harlow, I wish you all happiness, ma'am --
angelic creature! -- what a misfortune to lose her! --


Bows and exit. Capt. CAPE. And I will follow his example -- Miss Harlow I wish
you all happiness, -- angelic creature! what a misfortune to lose her! -- upon
my soul I think you a most admirable (...), and so now you may go, and bewail
your virginity in the mountains -- loll toll loll --


Exit. Miss HARLOW. Oh! oh! I cannot bear to be treated in this manner -- I Will
go and hide myself from the world for ever -- Oh! oh! -- the men are all
savages, barbarians, monsters, and I hate the whole sex -- Oh! oh! --


(cries bitterly,) Exit. Mrs. HARLOW. My dear sister, with her beauty and her
conquests, ha! ha! --


Mr. HARLOW. Ha! ha! very whimsical and ridiculous --


HEARTWELL. Sir, my nephew is young -- I am sorry for this scene of errors, and
I hope you will ascribe the whole to his inexperience --


Mr. HARLOW. I certainly shall, Sir --


Mrs. HARLOW. I cautioned my sister sufficiently about this matter, but vanity
got the better of her, and leaves her now a whimsical instance of folly and
affectation.

In vain the FADED TOAST her mirror tries,
And counts the cruel murders of her eyes;
For ridicule, fly-peeping over her head,
Will point the roses and the lillies dead;
And while, fond soul! she weaves her myrtle chain,
She proves a subject of the comic strain.

FINIS.
PLAYS, etc. Printed for PAUL VAILLANT, Facing SOUTHAMPTON-STREET, in the
STRAND.
1. THE Lying Valet; a Comedy, in Two Acts, by David Garrick, Esquire 2. Lethe; a
Dramatic Satire, in One Act, by David Garrick, Esquire 3. Lilliput; a Dramatic
Entertainment, in One Act. 4. The Male-Coquet, or, Seventeen Hundred and
Fifty-Seven; a Farce, in Two Acts.
By ARTHUR MURPHY, Esquire
5. The Gray's-Inn Journal, 2 Vols. 12mo. 6. The Apprentice; a Farce, in Two
Acts. 7. The Upholsterer, or, What News? A Farce, in Two Acts. 8. The Orphan of
China; a Tragedy, in Five Acts. 9. The Desert Island; a Dramatic Poem, in Three
Acts. 10. The Way to Keep Him; a Comedy, in Three Acts. 11. The same, in Five
Acts. 12. All in the Wrong; a Comedy, in Five Acts. 13. A Poetical Epistle to
Mr. Johnson, fol.
By S. FOOT, Esquire
14. The Knights; a Comedy, in Two Acts. 15. The Englishman in Paris; a Comedy,
in Two Acts. 16. The Englishman returned from Paris; a Farce, in Two Acts.
17. Regulus; a Tragedy. By Mr. Havard. 18. The Letters of Pliny the Younger,
with Observations on each Letter. By John Earl of Orrery, 2 Vols. 8vo. 19.
Hermes, or, a Philosophical Inquiry concerning Language and Universal Grammar.
By J. Harris, Esquire 20. Memoirs of the Marquis of Torcy, Secretary of State to
Lewis XIV. containing the History of the Negociations from the Treaty of
Ryswick to the Peace of Utrecht, 2 Vols. 8vo. 21. The Works of David Mallet,
Esquire 3 Vols. 12mo. 22. Amyntor and Theodora, or, The Hermit; a Poem. By David
Mallet, Esquire 23. Retirement, an Epistle. By M. Potter, 4to, 24. The Life of
Marianne, 2 Vols.
Brutus, Alzire, La Mort de Caesar, Mahomet, Merope, L'Orphelin de la Chine,
Tancrede,
Tragedies. L'Enfant Prodigue, Comedy All by M. de Voltaire.
Likewise a large Collection of single Plays in French, by the best Authors.


