AMELIA. A New ENGLISH OPERA, As it is Performed at the NEW THEATER in the
HAY-MARKET, After the ITALIAN Manner. Set to MUSIC By Mr. JOHN FREDERICK LAMP.

LONDON: Printed for J. WATTS at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court near
Lincoln's End Fields. MDCCXXXII. [Price One Shilling.]

THE ARGUMENT.
CASIMIR, Prince and General of the Hungarian Army, being unfortunately
defeated in a War between him and Osmyn Grand Vizier of the Turks, is taken
Prisoner. Upon the Arrival of this unhappy News, Amelia, Casimir's Wife,
resolves to try all possible Means to effect his Redemption; accordingly she
advises Rodulpho a young Prince, and an intimate Friend of Casimir, to dress
himself in a Turkish Habit, and present her to Osmyn as a Captive taken by him,
imagining that if she could be brought into the Presence of the Grand Vizier,
he would be so deeply captivated with her Beauty, that she could easily induce
him to grant any Favor, upon a seeming Condescension to any thing he should
ask of her in return: With this View she is carried to Osmyn, upon whom she had
the Influence she promised herself, and completed the Redemption of her
Husband. Amelia having thus successfully obtained her desired Ends, soon after
meeting with a good Opportunity, when Osmyn was engaged in other Affairs, makes
her Escape with Rodulpho by Night, and disappoints the Grand Vizier of his
Expectation. Augusta, Casimir's Sister, all this while missing Amelia, and
Rodulpho her Lover, supposes they are gone upon some vicious Design; and
Casimir himself not finding them at home at his Return, concurs with her in the
same Opinion, so that upon her coming back they meet with a Reception much
contrary to what they might naturally hope for after so dangerous an Adventure,
being both instantly put into Confinement: Amelia so highly resents this
undeserved Usage, that she advises Rodulpho not to give Casimir any immediate
Satisfaction about their Undertakings; but Rodulpho finding that such a Delay
would be of dangerous Consequence (a Day being already fixed for their
Execution) resolves to conceal it no longer, but in a Letter to Casimir gives a
genuine Account of all their Proceedings, the Truth of which he is so well
convinced of, that he is instantly reconciled to both his Deliverers, and gives
Augusta to Rodulpho in Marriage as a Gratuity for his extraordinary Friendship.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Osmyn, Grand Vizier, Comma^nder of the Turks. Mr. Waltz. Casimir, Prince and
General of the Hungarian Army. Mr. Kelly. Rodulpho, his Friend, in Love with
Augusta. Mr. Snider.
WOMEN.
Amelia, Wife of Casimir. Miss Arne. Augusta, Sister to Casimir, in Love with
Rodulpho. Mrs. Mason.
Officers, Guards, and Attendants, etc.
SCENE the Frontiers of Hungaria toward Turkey. AMELIA. A New ENGLISH OPERA.
ACT I. SCENE I.
SCENE, A spacious Country. Osmyn at the Head of the Turkish Army. HERE let the
wearied Army rest awhile,
That ere we farther march,
We may have time sedately to consult
The Measures necessary to be taken
To make the Turks victorious;
Then naught remains, but with undaunted Courage
To prosecute our Scheme.
What Toil! what Danger! and what Care!
To Glory lead the Way:
Commanded by the God of War,
The Brave with Joy obey.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A Court before Casimir's Palace. Casimir, Amelia, Augusta, and Rodulpho.
Amelia to Casimir. O let me die, while yet I see
The Comfort of my Heart;
For worse than instant Death 'twill be
From thee, my Love, to part.

Casim. Weep not, Amelia,
My Country's Safety loudly calls me hence,
And I must now inevitably leave thee:
How can these Eyes behold Hungaria ravaged
By bold invading Turks?
No, Heaven is Guardian of our righteous Cause,
And Casimir its Instrument of Vengeance.
Farewell, my Dear, till Conquest brings me back,
To lay my Laurels at Amelia's Feet.
[To Rod.] Rodulpho! I entrust thee with a Charge
Dearer to me than all terrestrial Blessings,
My Sister, and my Wife:
Attest your Friendship by a faithful Care.
Once more farewell, my Friend and Sister;
And oh my dearest Wife! farewell.
What Heart can help bleeding, my Charmer!
To leave one so virtuous and fair;
Sure Heaven will let nothing alarm her,
But make her, for my sake, its Care.
[Exeunt Casimir and Amelia different ways.
SCENE III.
Augusta and Rodulpho. Aug. Oh what a dismal Day is this, Rodulpho!

Rod. Despair not, Princess, of your Brother's Safety;
Am not I almost equally concerned?
To Casimir my Friendship is so great,
That, but for your dear Sake,
Armed by his Side with Pleasure would I march
To shield him, and to share with him the Danger.

Aug. Are you already weary of your Charge?
Go, follow him, it is not yet too late,
I need not your Protection.
Leave me, leave me,
Don't deceive me:
Faithless Lover!
I discover
That another has your Heart.
All your Smiling
Is beguiling,
All your Passion
Affectation,
Go, I see through all your Art.

Rod. You wrong me, fair Augusta;
Can you condemn my real Friendship
To him, whom you so dearly value?
You are the only one of all the Sex
That ever gained my Heart:
Why would you then torment me thus,
And wound me with such undeserved Reproaches?
Friendship, Glory, I disdain,
Thee, my Charmer, to obtain:
Who can other Beauties prize
That has seen those conquering Eyes?
Wrong not then my Flame sincere,
By Suspicion too severe,
Since it is past all Power to move
The Ardour of my constant Love.
[Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
A Prospect of the Turkish Camp. Osmyn, Officers, Guards, and Attendants. Osm.
Be this the Day appointed
To rush with Fury on our Christian Foes.
Now, now, my Mussulmen, exert your Courage;
Those, who in this Engagement fall,
Will be abundantly rewarded
With the eternal Joys of Paradise:
The rest with Spoil and Conquest will return.
Inseparable Blessings thus attend us,
Whether we live or die,
We Are sure of Happiness.
I Will destroy the proud Foe in his Glory,
From our Presence he shall fly,
For I Will conquer or die,
To dubious Fear I am a Stranger:
Let all be so brave, that the Story
May be noted by Fame,
From the Ganges to Them,
And equal the Height of our Danger.
[Exeunt.
SCENE V.
Rodulpho and Amelia. Rod. Oh Princess! why this solemn Face of Mourning?
Provoke not Providence by your Distrust;
It Is time enough to grieve when there is Occasion.

Amel. I feel a secret Boding in my Soul,
A thousand dismal Apprehensions
By turns torment, and rob me of my Rest.
Distracting Fears,
Tormenting Cares,
Perplex my doubtful Mind;
Till his Return,
For whom I mourn,
No Pleasure can I find.

Rod. [to Amel.] Stop this Effusion of your Tears, my Princess!
Your Hope for Casimir's good Success
Should over-weigh the Balance of your Grief.

Enter Augusta, behind. Aug. So close! so kind!
It Is proper to observe them.

Amel. Rodulpho! Well I know your hearty Wishes,
But still the Immenseness of my Passion
Extends to a far greater Pitch,
Than you can think, or I express.

Aug. So very fond! confound her, O ye Gods!
Rodulpho to Amelia.
Oh let not Fears,
Or anxious Cares,
The fair Amelia discontent;
For soon we may
Expect the Day,
Which shall our mutual Joy cement.
[Exeunt Rod. and Amel.
SCENE VI.
Augusta alone. A faithful Friend!
A chaste and virtuous Wife!
Is this the Lover has so often vowed
Eternal Constancy to me?
Is this the Wife so generally famed
For exemplary Goodness?
How is my Brother and my self abused!
But he shall know, and I Will revenge their Infidelity.
Vengeance! Vengeance! swift overtake 'em,
May they never more be blessed!
May the Gods as wretched make them,
As they have rendered me distressed.
Rise, ye fierce infernal Legions,
From the dismal Shades below!
Bear 'em to your darksome Regions,
Plunge 'em deep in endless Woe.
[Exit.
SCENE VII.
A Pavilion. Osmyn, with Attendants. Osm. At length the Sultan's Arms
Have proved triumphant,
And Conquest is the Premium of our Courage.
Bring forth the once renowned Casimir,
Now Osmyn's Captive, and the Sultan's Slave.
[ Casimir enters in Chains. Well, Casimir! you see the Fate of War
Is now decided in our Favor;
These Chains are not to be compared
With the Severities I can inflict,
Unless, upon the Terms I shall propose,
You purchase your Redemption.

Casim. Osmyn! I rather choose to die,
Than on inglorious Terms to purchase Life,
For Death is welcome after this Defeat.

Osm. Christian! it is vain to hope immediate Death,
For I Will consummate my Revenge
By a Protraction of thy Misery:
Were we to live the Series of an Age,
My Vengeance then would be the more complete.
The Eagle with its Prey,
Through Ether cuts his way,
Retaining fast his trembling Prize;
With a relentless Breast,
He bears him to his Nest,
And makes him there a Sacrifice.
[Exeunt.
SCENE VIII.
A Room. Amelia and Rodulpho. Enter Messenger with a Letter. Amel. [to Mess.]
Let me not hear you speak,
Your Looks at once declare
That you're the Bearer of unwelcome News:
Give me the Letter.
[Reads, and swoons, Rodulpho runs to her.
Rod. Dearest Amelia!
Why this sudden Change?

Enter Augusta, aside. Aug. A very kind Embrace!

Amel. Give me the Letter, it is no doubt the last
That I shall from my dearest Lord receive.
Come, sad Companion of eternal Grief!
Let Floods of Tears to Sorrow give Relief.
I Will read and kiss thee all the tedious Day,
And over thee weep till Sight is wept away.
[Exit Amel.
Rod. Lovely Augusta, follow your sad Sister,
And try to comfort her in this Affliction.

Aug. No.
I have too many Sorrows of my own,
You best can sooth her Anguish:
Leave me to my self.

Rod. I cannot leave you thus.

Aug. I will be left, this is no time
For idle Compliments.
[Exit Rodulpho. That all succeeding Times
May shun such monstrous Crimes,
Ye Gods, exert your Power?
On all who thus offend,
Let fiery wrath descend
In an unbounded Shower.

The End of the First Act.
AMELIA.
ACT II. SCENE I.
SCENE Osmyn's Pavilion. Casimir, chained at the Entry. Enter Rodulpho in a
Turkish Habit, with Amelia, likewise disguised. RODULPHO. THUS far, dread
Princess!
I have with due Fidelity attended,
Nor is there any Danger in this World,
Through which I would not venture for your sake,
Yet still deliberate once more with Caution
The Perils of this Undertaking.

Amel. No more Objections:
I Am positive to follow my Intentions,
Or join with me, or leave me to my self.

Rod. 'Twas not on my Account, but yours,
That I was first induced to offer
The well-intended, ill-receiv'd Advice.

Amel. Rodulpho! Well you know my sad Misfortunes,
I Am just distracted with a deep Despair;
Can you not then excuse the harsh Expression?

Rod. Behold yon Wretch that is groveling on the Ground.

Amel. By all my Hopes of Happiness, my Husband!
[ Amelia running toward Casimir, Rodulpho withholding her.
Rod. For Heaven's sake, be not preclpitate,
This is no Season for Discovery.

Amel. O Rodulpho! how can I behold him!
And be prohibited from speaking to him.

Rod. Observe you not a Party near approaching?
We Are ruined if suspected.
So the gentle Turtle-Dove
Bemoans her hapless Captive Love,
When in the Fowler's Snare:
She strives to free him, but in vain,
And hovers round, and round again,
Then drops, killed by Despair.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A Gallery. Augusta, with Attendants. Aug. What, gone! impossible! it cannot be:
To leave the Palace thus at Dead of Night:
Oh false Rodulpho!
Traitor to Friendship, Gratitude, and Love!
But much more false Amelia!
The faithless Spouse of a distressed Husband:
This Conduct will imprint a greater Wound,
Than his Defeat and Loss of Liberty.
To see such Woes dear Casimir oppress,
And slighted by a faithless Wife,
Fills all my Soul with exquisite Distress,
And makes me weary of this Life.
But as an Instance of the cordial Love
I to my injured Brother bear,
I Will by the immortal Powers that rule above,
To Justice bring the guilty Pair.
[Exit.
SCENE III.
Osmyn's Pavilion. Casimir at the Entry, as before. Osmyn, Rodulpho, and
Amelia. Osm. [to Rod.] Tell me, my Mussulman,
By what happy Chance
Thou did obtain this matchless Beauty?

Rod. On an Escort for Forage near the City,
I seized this lovely Christian,
By whose majestic Looks inspired with Awe,
I made a solemn Vow to bring her spotless
To the victorious Osmyn.

Osm. This pleasing Instance of thy Loyalty
Shall ever be graciously remembered,
And thou shall always be our chief Attendant.
[To Amel.] Say, beauteous Christian,
Why thus in Sorrow droops that lovely Head?
Thou art not fallen into Barbarian Hands,
Nor will thou find us hideous, as we are painted.

Amel. The Youngling ravished from its Nest,
Exposed to Danger stands,
But Joy soon warms its panting Breast,
When fallen in gentle Hands.
Little, alas! did I believe
My Life would be restored
By your dread Power, which most conceive
Is not to be implored.
[Exeunt Osmyn, Amelia, and Rodulpho.
SCENE IV.
Casimir alone. O for a deadly Instrument, to end
This most accursed Life!
Since what I now endure is past Forbearance.
No more; it is resolved, I Will so provoke him,
That he must kill me, if he has yet remaining
One Spark of Manhood or Resentment.
The furious Tiger for a while kept under,
Rouses at last, and bursts his Chains asunder;
Inspired with double Rage he flies
Upon his Foes, and self-avenging dies.

SCENE V.
Enter Osmyn, Amelia, and Rodulpho. Osm. Joy of my Heart! the longer I converse,
The more I Am ravished and delighted
With thy incomparable Wisdom.
Thou have a Soul more beauteous than thy Form,
Nor can I live without the blessed Enjoyment
Of both those excellent Perfections.
Lovely Creature! while I Am gazing,
Every Feature more amazing,
All my Soul with Raptures charm.
If such Pleasure's in beholding,
Oh the Transport of enfolding
So much Beauty in my Arms!
[Going on, Casimir obstructs 'em.
Osm. Dare thou obstruct my Way?
Dispatch him straight for his Presumption;
Sever his Head from his detested Body.
[Guards go to kill Casimir, Amelia interposes.
Amel. Make here your Way, for such a Sight
These Eyes can never bear.
[To Osm.] Is this your boasted Mildness?
What from your Fury may not I expect
By this Example of your Cruelty?
How can you vainly thus pretend
To love, when yet you hate?
For if I should but once offend,
I see my instant Fate:
Pity and Love to Heaven allied,
Engross the Godlike Breast,
Where Pity's Entrance is denied,
There Love can never rest.

Osm. At your Request he lives,
But we'll no longer stay
To hear his Insults,
And repent our Mercy.

Amel. You say you love me, let me be convinced
You plainly do, by condescending
To reinstate the Christian in his Liberty;
For I am shocked at this Barbarity,
And while my Soul with Horror overflows,
I cannot think of Love.

Osm. What is it for your sake
I would not grant?
But he is my Enemy avowed;
To give him Freedom is to make him able
To war against us yet a second time;
Ask any other Proof of my Affection,
And my Compliance waits on your Request.

Amel. Too well I am satisfied with one Repulse,
I shall but ask again to be denied.
[To Rod.] What shall I do in this Perplexity?

Rod. Deny her not this Instance of your Favor,
It will remove the Terror of her Mind,
If you release him.

Osm. Such is the Ardour of my Passion,
That I Will engage her at the dearest Rate.
[To her.] To let you see, my Charmer!
I give your Love the preference,
Above all other Views whatsoever,
At your immediate Intercession,
This Christian has his Liberty restored;
I only ask the Tribute of your Heart,
As a Return of Gratitude.

Amel. Who would not with Gladness surrender,
A Heart to a Lover so tender,
Whose Actions his Passion declare?
Assist me, bright Goddess of Beauty!
And Cupid! instruct me my Duty,
To make all his Wishes my Care.

[ Osm. to Cas.] Christian,
At the Request of this celestial Creature,
You have your Life and Liberty.

Cas. Angel of Goodness!
That from the deep Abyss of Desperation
Has called me forth to Life again,
Once more to come to my Amelia's Arms.

Osm. No more, we will not hear your tedious Thanks;
Your Presence only aggravates my Wrath;
So fly while you have free Permission.

Casim. To the Arms of my Dearest I Am flying,
Who doubtless with Sorrow is dying;
Despairing to see me again,
Above all the World I adore her;
O how will my Presence restore her!
And ease her disconsolate Pain!
[Exit Casimir.
SCENE VI.
Osmyn, Amelia. Osm. Now, the delightful Object of my Soul!
Remains there any Favor yet unasked,
That you can wish, or I confer?

Amel. Victorious Osmyn!
I need no other proof of your Affection.

Osm. To one so fair and kind,
Amel. To such a generous Mind,
Both. Surpassing all Treasure,
Who would not with Pleasure
A Heart sincere resign!
Osm. I never can leave thee,
Amel. I Will never deceive thee,
Both. For ever I am thine.

The End of the Second Act.
AMELIA.
ACT III. SCENE I.
A Room in Casimir's Palace. Augusta alone. AUGUSTA. A Brother injured lost!
A Sister false!
A Traitor doubly so to Heaven and me!
Why do I yet survive?
Welcome Resolution!
Guide thou with friendly Force
My trembling Hand,
And with this Poignard
Fathom all my Woes.
[Offers to kill herself.
SCENE II.
Casimir enters. Cas. Why, with uplifted Arms and pointed Steel,
Seek'st thou, Augusta, to destroy
A Life that is not thy own?

Aug. Ye Gods, it is my dear, my injured Brother!
O Casimir, this is a dismal Meeting!

Cas. Is this my welcome?
What is the meaning of this odd Reception?

Aug. Ask me not,
Too soon, alas, you will learn
The woeful Reason.

Cas. Distract me not, but tell me where is Amelia?

Aug. Would she were dead.

Cas. Cursed be the Tongue, that utters such a Thought;
Is there the Wretch can wish Amelia dead?
And art thou she?
Leave this unnatural Sister, Casimir,
And seek thy Love, thy dear Amelia.

Aug. [Aside.] Unhappy Man! I cannot undeceive him,
Lest that upon so shocking a Relation,
Some direful Resolution should ensue.
[Exit.
Cas. My Charmer's very Name
Does all my Soul inflame,
And fills my Heart with Joy:
May both our Troubles cease,
And everlasting Peace
Our future Time employ.
[Exit.
SCENE III.
A Room in Osmyn's Pavilion. Rodulpho alone. The happy Time will soon approach,
In which Augusta's Jealousy shall have
A most agreeable Determination;
For when she knows, that this our quiet Departure
Was to effect dear Casimir's Redemption,
Her Love, now smothered by unjust Suspicions,
Will reassume a greater Blaze.

Enter Amelia in a Fright. Amel. Save me, Rodulpho!
Osmyn no longer will admit Denial,
I must, or die, or yield to his Embraces.

Rod. Amuse him with Pretenses of Compliance,
Then when alone, unguarded and dissolved,
He Is wholly in your Power. This to his Heart.
[Offers her a Dagger.
Amel. What would you have me murder him, Rodulpho?

Rod. Call not that Murder, Princess, which is Justice.

Amel. I will not purchase Liberty so dear,
Sooner I Will kill myself.

Rod. I then suppose, you love this vile Barbarian.

Amel. It Is false, I hate him to the last degree,
But yet, I Will not imbrue my Hands in Blood,
And base Assassination.

Rod. If you're afraid to prosecute the Attempt,
I Will pierce him with the fatal Instrument.

Amel. Rodulpho, be not rash in your Proposals;
Who knows, but some blessed Turn,
When least expected,
May profer Liberty on easier Terms?
Let not Mortals tempt their Fate,
But for Heaven's Decision wait,
And by Resignation show
What to Providence they owe.
That just Power, which weighs the Crime,
Points the Punishment and Time,
Sure, though late will interpose,
And save the injured from their Foes.

SCENE IV.
Casimir alone in an Apartment. Cas. She Is false, insufferably false!
Then farewell Truth and Virtue;
Osmyn, restore me to my Chains again;
For my Amelia's Usage far exceeds
All the Barbarity you could invent.
[Goes to kill himself.
Enter Augusta. Aug. Why, Casimir, with sacrilegious Hands
Do thou attempt what late thou did condemn?

Cas. O my dear Sister, Sharer of my Grief!
Can you forgive those passionate Expressions,
Which lately came from my unwary Tongue?

Aug. It was the height of Love for lost Amelia,
Which caused the inconsiderate Resentment.

Cas. But now -- I find your Wish was just,
The causeless Passion makes me more uneasy.

Aug. No more, my dearest Brother!
But let us now revenge the gross Offense.

Cas. Augusta, your Advice I shall accept,
And put it in immediate Execution.
Just Heavens in my Resentments join,
The Cause is yours as well as mine;
And Vengeance, doubtless, is our due:
O let me, while I thus complain,
See both the Adulterers once again,
To vindicate myself and you.
[Exeunt.
SCENE V.
Amelia and Rodulpho. Amel. Rodulpho, you have shown a Friendship,
Which will admit of no Comparison.
O blessed, though mean Disguise! in which arrayed
We have escaped without Discovery.
[Martial Music at a Distance.
Rod. Madam, we are past the Extremity of Danger;
Behold a Party of Hungarian Horse
This way advancing.

Amel. Casimir's own Troop conducted by himself,
Support me Heaven in this Excess of Joy!

Rod. Now, now, Amelia, all our past Afflictions
Have here an ample Recompense.

SCENE VI.
Enter Officer. Officer. I seize you Prisoners to Prince Casimir.

Amel. Stand off, officious Slave;
I am his Wife.

Officer. We know it, Madam, it is our Lord's Command,
To bring you both to close Confinement.

[ Amel. to Rod. aside.] Since he is so rash,
Let us resolve him nothing;
But still let this unjust Suspicion plague him,
Till a fit Time to prove our Innocence.

Enter Casimir. Cas. [Disguis'd.] O vile lascivious Pair!

Rod. O Casimir!

Cas. You have framed, no doubt,
Some well concerted Story;
But I Am deaf to every thing but Vengeance,
Take from my Presence such detested Objects.
Ah Traitress, wicked and impure!
How can I possibly endure
To see that odicus Face?
Oh that my Heart had not been set
On one who could her Truth forget,
To suffer such Disgrace.
[Exeunt.
SCENE VII.
An Apartment in Osmyn's Pavilion. Osmyn alone. It Is certain she is fled, but
who could think,
That in such beautiful Perfection,
Ingratitude could be concealed;
'Twas for her sake I condescended
To grant the Christian Life and Liberty:
So much her Charms have ravished all my Soul,
That with the fair delusive Creature
Are all my Hopes of Comfort fled:
Now all my Conquests are insipid,
The World and all its rich Possessions
Cannot redress the Anguish I conceive,
By this one Woman's Imposition.
All my Glories I resign,
For a Life that is Divine;
In a lonely desert Cell,
I Will in sweet Retirement dwell;
Unmolested I intend
All my future Years to spend:
Now adieu ye worldly Joys,
Short-lived Splendour, Courts and Noise;
There I only hope to find
Solitude, and Peace of Mind.
[Exit.
SCENE VIII.
A Prison. Rodulpho alone. Rod. To what a hazardous Presumption,
Amelia carries her Resentment:
But there is no reason I should venture Life
Upon the Caprice of a Woman.
This Letter shall to Casimir unfold
The whole of our proceeding.

SCENE IX.
A great Hall. Amelia going to Execution. After a dead March, Enter Augusta.
Aug. Now Traitress! take the just Reward,
Your heinous Crimes demand;
Nor shall Rodulpho long survive you.

Amel. O let me see my Husband ere I die.

Aug. It is in vain to pray for Mercy now.

Amel. What has my Obstinacy brought upon me!
I have murdered both Rodulpho and myself,

Aug. Why is her Death delayed?
Dispatch her instantly.

Amel. Since I must die, I must submit.
But let Rodulpho's Life be spared,
And tell my Casimir we are the Persons,
Who saved him from the barbarous Cruelty,
Which the Grand Vizier threatened on him:
Tell him, I die his chaste and loving Wife,
And that Rodulpho is his faithful Friend,
More he will know, perhaps, when it is too late.
Amelia wishes when she dies
Her dearest Lord may close her Eyes,
And Heaven may open his:
Then will he wish, but all in vain,
To have her rendered back again,
From Realms of endless Bliss.

Enter Casimir snatching the Headman's Sword. Rodulpho follows. Cas. O live
Amelia! live, thou best of Wives!
Rodulpho! live, thou most sincere of Friends!
Embrace him, Sister!
Who, with my dear Amelia,
Effected my Deliverance from Death.
Blessed be the Day that I was taken Captive,
For otherwise I should have never known,
That I had such a Wife and such a Friend:
Unkind Amelia, not to undeceive me!
How could you persevere to such Extremity?

Amel. Unkinder you, that could be so suspicious.

Cas. No more reproaches,
But let one general rejoicing
Run through our Hearts on this Occasion.

Cas. Amel. Let me press thee, O my Charmer,
To a Heart that is only thine;
Never Passion sure was warmer,
Never more did Souls combine.

Casimir to Rodulpho and Amelia. A double Nuptial shall resplend the Day,
For to reward the Friendship of Rodulpho,
I give Augusta to his longing Arms.
And as we have all been equally concerned
In a Variety of great Misfortunes,
So let us now unanimously share
This unexpected Interval of Mirth.
O my Amelia, Pattern to thy Sex!
This Act of thine conveyed to latest Ages,
With Honor and Applause
Shall spread thy Fame,
And Thousands, yet unborn, revere thy Name.

CHORUS. When Dangers Innocence invade,
Just Heaven vouchsafes a timely Aid;
And makes with brighter Luster shine
Virtues concealed in Souls divine.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for J. WATTS, and Sold by the Booksellers both of Town and
Country.
A very curious Edition in QUARTO, of The BEGGAR's OPERA. As it is Acted at the
Theater Royal in Lincoln's End Fields. Written by Mr. GAY. -- Nos haec novimus
esse nihil. Mart. With the OUVERTURE in SCORE, the SONGS and the BASSES, (the
OUVERTURE and BASSES Composed by Dr. PEPUSH) Curiously Engraved on COPPER
PLATES.

In OCTAVO.Lately Published, Curiously Printed in SIX POCKET VOLUMES. The
MUSICAL MISCELLANY: Being a Collection of CHOICE SONGS and LYRICK POEMS. Set to
MUSIC by the most eminent MASTERS, (With the BASSES to each Tune, and
Transposed for the FLUTE) viz. Mr. Attilio. Mr. Barret. Mr. Betts. Mr.
Bononcini. Mr. Bradley. Mr. Brailsford. Mr. Burgess. Mr. Carey. Mr. Charke. Mr.
Cole. Dr. Croft. Mr. Dieupart. Mr. Flemming. Mr. Galliard. Mr. Geminiani. Mr.
Gough. Mr. Grano. Mr. Graves. Dr. Green. Mr. Handel. Mr. Haym. Mr. Holmes. Mr.
Holcomb. Mr. Leveridge. Mr. Monro. Dr. Pepusch. Mr. Potter. Mr. D. Purcell. M.
H. Purcell. Mr. Ramondon. Mr. Ravenscraft. Mr. David Rizzio. Mr. Seedo. Mr. J.
Sheeles. Mr. Trevers. Mr. Vincent. Mr. Webber. Mr. Weldon. Mr. Whichello. Mr.
Anth. Young.
Fifty One NEW FABLES in Verse, (Invented for the Amusement of His Highness
WILLIAM Duke of Cumberland) By Mr. GAY: With Fifty One Cutts, Designed by Mr.
Kent and Mr. Wotton, and Engraved by Mr. Baron, Mr. Vandergucht, and Mr.
Fourdrinier. The Third Edition. TRAGEDIES. PERIANDER, King of Corinth: A
Tragedy. As it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Lincoln's End Fields. Written
by Mr. JOHN TRACY. To which is prefixed, The HISTORY of PERIANDER: Extracted
from the most Authentic Greek and Latin Historians, and the Chevalier Ramsay's
CYRUS. Addressed to the Readers and Spectators of the Tragedy of PERIANDER.
TIMOLEON. A Tragedy. As it is Acted at the Theater Royal, by His Majesty's
Servants. Written by Mr. Benjamin Martyn. The Second Edition.


(...)
