SHORT SKETCH OF TEMPORARY REGULATIONS (UNTIL BETTER SHALL BE PROPOSED) FOR THE
INTENDED SETTLEMENT ON THE GRAIN COAST OF AFRICA, NEAR SIERRA LEONA.

LONDON: PRINTED BY H. BALDWIN, FLEET STREET. M DCC LXXXVI.

A SHORT SKETCH OF TEMPORARY REGULATIONS, etc.
FRANKPLEDGE.
THE most certain and effectual mode of securing peace, right, and mutual
protection, for any community, is the old English system of mutual Frankpledge,
or free suretyship, given by all the householders, for themselves and each
other, in exact numerical divisions of tens and hundreds; which, in the English
lawbooks, is called "Maxima securitas" -- "the greatest security," though it is
now unhappily neglected, and consequently crimes abound and increase; so that,
notwithstanding the horrible increase also of bloody laws to intimidate
offenders, yet there is no effectual security from violence and robbery, either
in our streets or roads, or even in our chambers; since the houses of the rich
and great, nay of the first officers of the state, are not exempted from the
nocturnal intrusion of housebreakers, insomuch that even the Lord Chancellor
and Honorable Speaker of the House of Commons have lately experienced the
common danger, and the deplorable want of the ancient "Maxima securitas." That
fundamental system of English polity is so little known among us at present,
that many well-meaning persons are induced, by their fears, to wish for
security, on a much less eligible plan, formed on the model of the arbitrary
system of government in France, commonly called police, the introduction of
which would be an utter perversion of the first principles of legal government
in England. The inhabitants even of the most distant settlements under the
crown of Great Britain must not adopt any polity that is essentially
inconsistent with the Maxima securitas, ordained and required by the common law
of England.

The community of free African settlers, however, have already adopted (as I am
informed) a small variation from the old English model of numerical divisions,
by forming themselves into divisions of dozens, instead of tithings or tens;
but as this little change is by no means inconsistent with the true principles
and intention of our legal English frankpledge, I am at liberty to acknowledge
a most hearty approbation of it, as being an arrangement far more convenient
and effectual for securing perfect subordination, peace, and good government,
even than the ancient legal divisions into tens or decenaries, because each
dozen will have one chief or headborough, and one assistant headborough, to
govern and lead a complete complement of ten deciners; so that the division may
still with propriety retain the old legal name of a tithing or decenary; and
the hundred division may be rendered literally and strictly an hundred
families, by appointing one hundreder, two chiefs of fifties, and one town
clerk (or clerk of the hundred) over every eight dozens; whereby the legal
hundred, in its civil capacity (for the maintenance of peace, justice, and
common right, according to the first principles of our constitutional polity,
the most effectual for all the purposes of good government) will consist of --
1 Hundreder, or centurion Who in the common law is a high constable and
"justiciarius," or justice of the peace.
, -- 2 Chiefs of fifties -- superior constables, and presiding justices in the
weekly Tithing-courts Or rather, in the courts or four tithings, or dozens,
collected together.
; 1 Town Clerk, or Clerk of the hundred With a proper salary, to register all
judgments and debts, and to be allowed two or more assistants, if necessary,
from the best qualified of the deciners, with suitable salaries also for their
trouble.
, 8 Headboroughs being constables in ordinary. 8 assistant Headboroughs or
constables extraordinary. 80 Deciners -- masters of families or householders
Who, jointly with the chiefs of their several divisions, pledge each other, and
their respective families or dependants for the public peace and common right,
and are termed in law, boni et legales homines, "Good and true men."
, viz. 100 Householders in all, who must equally contribute to support all the
burdens of the state, and of course must be entitled to an equal voice in the
"common council," or parliament, of their settlement; which on the African
coast is called Palaaver; and if the whole body of householders should
hereafter, by God's blessing, become too numerous for a personal attendance in
their common council they will be all equally entitled to elect a proper number
of deputies from their respective divisions to represent them in the supreme
council; and that, in a due and equal proportion to their numbers; for
otherwise their representation would be rendered most banefully delusive and
corrupt!


And in a military capacity the same hundred householders will form a corpse of
militia consisting of 1 Captain 2 Lieutenants 1 Muster master and commissary 8
Sergeants 8 Corporals 80 Milites or men of arms


Amounting altogether to 100 free militia men or armed deciners.

To these must also be added the sons, apprentices, and indentured servants of
the deciners, viz. all the males of 16 years of age and upwards, who by the
common law are required to be armed, and of course to be disciplined in the use
of arms. The average of males above 16 years of age may be stated, I believe,
at three to each family, including all the persons above described: so that in
a few years, if the settlement succeeds, there may probably be added to the 100
armed deciners at least 200 Privates or rank and file.

In all 300 militia men in each hundred division, a corpse that may be rendered
sufficiently effectual to support the executive justice of a free, legal
government, within any extent of land which an hundred families can fairly
occupy, and amply sufficient to supply a roster or rotation of very easy
service in the necessary watch and ward of the settlement.

N. B. This average number of males would be rather too large, were not
apprentices and indentured servants included; but in a new settlement, where
ordinary labor is chiefly wanted, there is a great probability that the
indentured servants will far exceed the number I have estimated.

WATCH AND WARD.
Rotation. -- Exercise. -- Discipline, preserved by Fines of Labor. -- Watch
Duty of Indentured. Servants to be allowed and deducted from the Term of their
Indentures.

THE hundred deciners should serve, three at a time at least, with six
privates, in due rotation, as the nightly guard of the hundred division; which
guard being divided into three parties of one deciner and two privates each,
one party may patrole, whilst the other two are stationed at the gate house, or
watchtower, alternately watching and resting every four hours; but the
patroling and watching party must relieve each other every two hours, until it
is their turn to rest four hours in the inner guard room; by this means the
watch duty may be rendered very easy and equal to all ranks of persons in the
hundred; and even if the captain and four of the oldest deciners, together with
eight of the youngest privates be excused the nightly duty, the rotation of
this easy service to each individual will be only once in thirty-two nights,
viz. less than twelve nights in a year, which cannot interfere with their
ordinary employments: but for the sake of keeping up proper discipline, triple
the number ought to assemble in rotation, every evening and morning, to set and
to discharge the guard, after the performance of a short military exercise all
together, under the inspection of the captain, or one of the lieutenants,
(being previously trained or drilled in small squads under the inspection of
their respective sergeants) and this attendance may be rendered perfectly equal
and regular to all ranks, by a proper roster of service, duly distinguishing
the courses of Watch and Ward from the rotation of attendance for mere exercise.

Want of punctuality in musters, or absence, should be punished in proportion
to the time lost, by equal fines on all ranks of men, estimated at so many days
or hours labor (as hereafter explained) toward the support of the public
Exchequer.

Disobedience of orders on service, and inattention or carelessness in
exercise, and all such other misdemeanors, should be likewise punished by fines
of labor for public profit.

The watch duty of an indentured servant should be rewarded by a deduction of
one day's service from his indentures for each night that he attends on
military duty, which will encourage his vigilance, and win his attention to the
interests of the settlement; and by his being entered on the same roster with
the whole body of deciners, and by serving in due rotation with them, he will
soon perceive the facility and happiness of becoming a deciner himself, by
proper diligence in fulfilling his contract of labor; especially as the
regulations, hereafter to be mentioned, will insure him from the imposition of
more service than is due, and from the fraud or oppression of an unjust master;
and he will acquire still further security by being known, and by becoming
acquainted with other deciners (besides his master) in the militia service.

FREE LABOR.
Free Labor to be the Standard or Medium of Traffic instead of Cash. -- Times
of Labor (public or hired) to be general and uniform. -- Evening Prayer and
the Advantages of it. -- Limitation of Labor per Day to eight Hours. -- Six
Hours on Saturdays. -- That the People may attend the Courts and Folkmotes to
improve their Decernment of Good and Evil.

HUMAN Labor is more essential and valuable than any other article in new
settlements, which chiefly depend on the cultivation and produce of the earth
for their subsistence and commercial profit. On this account, though the price
of provisions is generally lower in new settlements than in communities of long
standing, yet the price of Free Labor is always much higher; and higher still,
or rather infinitely more expensive (however slaveholders may reckon) is the
labor of slaves, besides the abominable injustice, the corruption of manners,
the danger, and other curses, which always attend the toleration of slavery!
Free labor, therefore, in all new settlements, ought to be made the standard,
or medium, whereby to rate the value of all the necessaries of life, as well as
of all articles of commerce in the settlement: a cow, sheep, or hog, or a
bushel of corn, should each be valued at a proportionable number of day's
labor, estimated at eight hours actual labor per day; and a pig, rabbit, or
fowl, at so many hours labor, according to their respective sizes; and for the
fractional estimation of smaller articles, the hours may be reduced to minutes,
and thereby afford an excellent substitute for money as a medium of traffic and
exchange, whereon a paper currency may be established, which will always bear
an intrinsic value, without diminution, as hereafter explained under the head
of Public Revenue.

The daily commencement of public labor and of hired labor, and all the
necessary cessations from labor for rest and refreshment, should be limited to
stated periods of time, rendered uniform and general, throughout the
settlement, by the periodical summons of a public bell, as in our dock yards
and great manufactories, for the more effectual prevention of imposition by the
employer or employed.

By the limitation of labor to eight hours per day, the rateable or legal days
work (instead of continuing from six in the morning to six in the evening, as
with us) will end at four in the afternoon, including two whole hours for
necessary refreshment and rest; unless it should be thought more convenient in
general to begin at five in the morning, and to work three hours till eight,
and then, after resting half an hour at breakfast, to work three hours and an
half more till noon, when a moderate and temperate meal, suitable to the heat
of the climate, may be rendered more refreshing and healthful to the labourer
by a general sestoo, or sleeping time, during the meridean heat till half past
one; which rest of one hour and an half, at one time, will be amply sufficient
to recruit them for the remaining burden of the rateable labor, or legal
day's work, viz. one hour and an half more, ending at three o'clock in the
afternoon, when the evening of the ancients commenced, and the appointed hour
of evening sacrifice in the patriarchal times. If, therefore, the new society
would agree to assemble at that hour, in whatever place they shall afterward
appropriate to religious worship, and there join together in a very short
general form of prayer and evening sacrifice of thanks (in which, to remove all
objections about the value of time, they need not be detained much longer than
about five minutes, to express all that may be absolutely necessary for every
good purpose of prayer and thanksgiving, at least as a daily service) they will
soon be convinced that no human measure is so well calculated to add real
dignity to the ordinary labourer, as well with respect to his own internal
improvement, as in the outward esteem and consideration which it will
necessarily insure to him from others, by continually reminding the rich and
higher ranks of men that the daily labourer is their brother and their equal in
the sight of God, and that all men ought to be equally servants to the same
Lord! I could wish that a short daily morning prayer might also be adopted at
nine o'clock, after breakfast, but I propose with diffidence, lest public
prayers even only once a day should be obtained with difficulty.

As some of the out lots will be distant about two miles from the center of the
township, it may perhaps be more expedient to commence the rateable daily
labor even half an hour sooner still, than I have last proposed, viz. at half
past four in the cool of the morning, whereby all public labor will end at
half past two in the afternoon, which will allow time for laborers in the
distant lots to repair to the general assembly of the township, at evening
prayer. And an officer from every dozen may be ordered to be prepared, by a
previous examination, at the public bank of all the indents in course for each
day's labor; that after being discharged in the public books, they may be
cancelled, and most expeditiously returned to those who have fulfilled them;
all which, by the happy system of Frankpledge, may be most easily effected with
very little loss of time; so that the laborers may return from the center of
the township to their own private lots, and have near five hours of leisure to
themselves to cultivate their own land, even if they work no later than eight
at night, which will allow them ample time for rest, especially as the midday
sestoo will render less sleep necessary at night.

A seventh part of the year shall be appropriated more particularly to God's
service, and shall be duly observed and kept holy, on the penalty of seven
weeks, or forty-two days labor in the public lots for every breach of this
universal law of God, either in buying, selling, or working for pecuniary
profit; or for traveling, unless a very urgent necessity can be proved: and
this penalty to be doubled on a repetition or continuance of the offense. 52
Sundays or days of our Lord.

Two more days shall be appropriated to a religious commemoration of our Lord's
birth and expiatory death, at the usual seasons; and a third day to the great
annual view of Frankpledge, to be appointed at some convenient season, after
the greatest and most general harvest of the year, the remembrance of which
shall also be solemnized on that day by religious thanksgiving both at the
opening and conclusion of the view of Frankpledge; -- so that the 365 days of
the year will be further reduced by the deduction also of 3 Holidays.

The abovementioned Sundays and holidays, amounting to fiftyfive days, being
deducted from the year, there will remain only 310 Days of labor.

365

The days of labor shall be rated throughout the new settlement only at eight
hours actual labor each day, in all agreements or contracts for labor, as
well of apprentices and indentured servants, as of those who are hired by the
day; that all laborers may have some leisure hours every day to cultivate
their own private lots of land. And only six hours labor are to be required by
law on Saturdays, without any deduction from the labourer's profit for the
deficiency, because it is for the public benefit that the people should have
leisure to attend the courts and folkmotes (to be held on Saturdays) in order
that they may gradually improve that natural faculty of reason or knowledge
which is inherited by all men from our first parents, and may "have their
understandings exercised by habit to discern both good and evil."

FREEDOM AND PROTECTION TO STRANGERS.
Limitation of Indentured Service. -- An injured Indentured Servant to be
turned over to the Public Exchequer. -- Fugitive Slaves to be protected, and
allowed to purchase Land by Labor, and after due Time of Probation to be
admitted to the Rank of Deciners.

AS soon as a slave shall set his foot within the bounds of the new settlement,
he shall be deemed a free man, and be equally entitled with the rest of the
inhabitants to the protection of the laws, and to all the natural rights of
humanity. And the service even of indentured servants shall be strictly
limited, viz. no person to be bound for a longer term than five years after the
age of twentyone, or of seven years if bound after the age of fourteen years,
or of ten years if bound after the age of eleven years. And if any indentured
servant shall have just cause to complain of his master's behavior to him, he
shall be turned over to the care of the general asylum for males; and his
labor, for the limited term of his indentures, shall be turned over to the
public Exchequer, which shall purchase of the master all the remaining term of
service. If any slave shall escape from his master in any part of the
neighboring country where the abominable traffic in human beings is tolerated,
and shall apply at any township within the free settlements for an asylum, he
shall be received and protected in the public asylum; for this is required by
an indispensable moral law of God, and, of course, by the laws of England --
Thou shall not deliver unto his master the servant (or slave, for all slaves
are servants) which is escaped from his master unto thee; he shall dwell with
thee, even among you, in that place which he shall choose, in one of thy gates,
where it likes him best: Thou shall not oppress him, Deuteronomy. xxiii. 15, 16. The
stranger, however, shall be required to promise obedience to the laws of the
settlement, and due legal submission to the chiefs of the division, wherein he
is admitted and pledged; and also to enter himself on the public roster of
equal service in Watch and Ward, when of proper age. And in order to obtain his
livelihood, independently of individuals, he shall, if he is above twenty years
of age, be allowed to purchase, of the public Exchequer, one quarter of a lot
of land, for one year's service, consisting of 310 days service of eight hours
each, (and a proportionable addition to the term, if under that age) for which
quarter of a lot, he shall be taxed only one quarter part of a deciner's
contribution to parochial and public exigences and expenses; which
proportionable contribution of labor for taxes shall commence from the time he
receives the land; but the Exchequer shall give him credit for the labor of
purchase until the second year after he receives the land; in the course of
which only half of the labor, viz. 155 days, may be demanded, and the
remainder in the course of the third year, whereby the stranger will have spare
days of labor to enable him (by giving indents for it) to purchase necessaries
for his farm: And he shall be allowed a separate chamber in the public asylum
or inn, until he is able to build an house or cottage upon his own lot. After
he has faithfully discharged his debt of service according to his first
contract with the Exchequer, and also his other contract debts with private
individuals (for all such private debts should be entered in the public
Exchequer, in order to give intrinsic value to the indentures for labor, as
the state of every man's credit and circumstances will then appear on the
public books) he shall be allowed another quarter of a lot on the same terms,
and so on till he has acquired a complete lot; when, if he has by his good and
faithful behavior proved himself worthy of the rank and trust of a deciner, he
shall be admitted to all the privileges and civil rights of the community as a
free member and equal proprietor of the whole settlement.

REDEMPTION FROM SLAVERY.
Redemption from Slavery. -- Price to be repaid by a short limited Service to
the Public Exchequer. -- Profit by Redemption infinitely superior to the
Profits of the Slave Trade.

THOUGH it is a fundamental principle of the settlement, that all slaves shall
be deemed free as soon as they enter it, so that no person can retain, or sell,
or employ, a slave within the bounds of the settlement, yet there can be no
impropriety in providing a means of repaying the expense of redeeming slaves,
on the condition of a short limited service, as an apprentice or indentured
servant, provided that the actual prices given for redemption can be
sufficiently authenticated, that no more may be repaid, except, perhaps, a
limited profit, not exceeding ten per cent. by way of interest, for advancing
the price; and provided also that the said limited service of the contract be
not claimable by any individual, but by the public Exchequer only, after the
redeemed person has consented to work out the price; whereby all possibility of
domestic slavery, or private oppression, will be excluded; and the Exchequer
will give an ample equivalent to the redeemed person, to insure his voluntary
consent to a contract for a limited time of labor, not only by the protection
it will afford him, but also by putting him in possession of a portion of land,
equal to the quarter part of a deciner's lot, to be increased as he discharges
his debt of labor; and by finding him provisions until he shall be able to
raise provisions from his own land. The public Exchequer will be enabled, by
the consent of a majority of the settlers, thus to dispose of land, because all
the unoccupied land in the settlement is to be deemed as common, in which the
whole body of settlers, sent out from England, if above sixteen years of age,
whether indentured or not, shall be entitled to an equal share, and therefore
no land must be appropriated, but by common consent. Suppose the redemption of
a man should cost ten pounds (which I believe is about the average price on the
coast) and suppose the labor of such a stranger be estimated only at sixpence
sterling per day (though it is certainly worth much more, perhaps three or four
times as much) a limited service, by the redeemed person, of five years to the
public Exchequer, as an equivalent for the purchase of a full lot of protected
land, with a gradual introduction to all the privileges of a free English
settlement, will amount, at 310 working days per annum (fifty-two sundays and
three holidays being deducted for the reasons already mentioned under the head
of Free Labor) will amount, I say, to 38l. 15s. out of which, after paying
10l. the price of redemption, and 10 per cent for the advance of money, viz.
1l. more, there will remain in the public Exchequer (toward supplying food
and necessaries to the labourer, till he can provide for himself, and for
risque of loss by sickness or death) the sum of 27l. 15s. the surplus of which,
if the redeemed person lives and does well, becomes the property of the
public, in which he himself enjoys an equal share of profit; so that the
purchase of a slave, under so equitable a regulation, will be really and truly
a Redemption from Slavery to a state of freedom and protection. And if the
voluntary labor of a man should really be worth three times what I have
estimated (as I really believe it is) the profit for redemption, for 11l.
disbursed, will amount to 105l. 5s. which is 956 9/11l. per cent. in favor of
the public Exchequer! Nay, the profit may be fairly estimated at a much higher
rate! for if the free labor, which the redeemed person pays for his lot of
land, be employed by the elected trustees of the Exchequer in the public lots
of land, they may expect to receive at least the ordinary production of land,
for the labor bestowed upon it; which even in our northern climate may be
rated at a triple amount (and much more may certainly be expected in the
fertile and productive climate of Africa) so that the ordinary profit may
fairly be stated at 315l. 15s. for 11l. disbursed, which is at the rate of 2870
5/11;l. per cent. in favor of the public Exchequer in which the redeemed
person himself would have an equal property with the rest of the community. Let
the advocates for slavery show, if they can, that involuntary servitude is
equally profitable! The intolerable expense of all kinds of labor wherever
slavery is permitted, when compared with the price of labor in free countries,
will sufficiently confute them. But more shall be said of the great profits of
Free Labor, under the head of Public Revenue, etc.

AGRARIAN LAW.
Money for purchasing Land, to be invested in Presents for the African Chiefs.
-- Chiefs to be previously acquainted with some necessary Conditions. -- All
the Settlers to be restrained from purchasing Land for private Property, until
the Bargains for the Public Land are concluded. -- The Presents to be deemed
Public Stock. -- All the Settlers above sixteen Years of Age to be equally
entitled to the Land. -- Precautions for fixing on the Spot for the first
Township. -- Settlers to be obedient to the Agent and how long. -- Reserve of
Land. -- Limitation of Land. -- Limitation of landed Possession. -- Manner of
laying out a tenth Lot for the Conductor. -- Also two more Lots for Public
Uses. -- Likewise ten other Public Lots for every hundred private Lots. -- How
to be appropriated. General Asylum for Males and Females, and for married
Persons. -- Hospital for Sick. -- Penitentiary Let. -- Glebe Land. -- No Layman
to have Benefit from the Glebe. -- Limitation of the Cure of Souls. -- Lot for
Parish Clerks and Beadles. -- Under Beadles or Trumpeters. -- Lot for a Town
Clerk. -- Let for two Assistant Clerks of the Hundred. -- One reserved Lot to
make good Deficiencies. -- Allowance of Land to Apprentices and indentured
Servants. -- Sons of Settlers how to purchase Land. -- Indentured Servants
allowed to redeem the Terms of Service and how. -- And to purchase Land by
Labor.

THE money which has been paid into the hands of the trustees to procure land
for the settlement shall be vested in such articles of merchandise, as are
deemed most proper for presents to the petty chiefs or Cabo-sieurs, on the
African coast, and shall be disposed of among them to the best advantage, to
engage their peaceable consent to admit the new settlers, and to give up to
them a sufficient tract of uninhabited land, bordering on the sea, or on some
navigable river or creek where fresh water also may be procured, with every
other natural accommodation suitable and necessary for a proper settlement. But
in treating for the land, the Cabo-sieurs or chiefs shall be informed, as a
necessary part of the agreement, that the land which they are requested to give
up to the new setlers, is intended to be dignified with the title and
privileges of a land of freedom, like England, where no man can be a slave; for
as soon as a slave sets foot on English ground, he immediately becomes free,
provided he conforms himself to the laws of the state. And therefore, if any
slave who has escaped from his master, (in the neighboring country, where
slavery is allowed,) should fairly get within the boundary of the new
settlement, he is afterward to be considered as a free man. And no man must
pursue him to take him away by force, nor be offended with the new settlers for
refusing to deliver him up: because they are indispensably required by the laws
of God, and of England, to protect the slave that has escaped from his master.
(See this further explained under the head of freedom.) This previous
declaration is absolutely necessary to be made, as one means of avoiding future
disputes with the neighboring inhabitants. And in order that as much land as
possible may be procured for the new settlement by the abovementioned presents,
the agent or agents, for the settlers, and every individual among them, shall
be restrained from purchasing or making any agreement whatever for separate
private property in land (on pain of forfeiting all right to a share in the
profits of the settlement) until an agreement is made and concluded for the
whole common stock of land: and until the bounds of it are actually marked out
and made known to the whole body of settlers. An invoice shall be made of all
the articles for presents, in which the money intended for the purchase of land
was invested; so that if any articles remain more than are necessary for the
purpose, they shall be deemed a part of the common stock, and shall be
registered accordingly. The whole body of original settlers that go together
from England above the age of sixteen years, whether male or female,
apprentice, or indentured servant, shall be equally entitled to all the land
within the bounds of the settlement; subject, however, to the rules hereafter
expressed for the appropriation of it, from time to time when wanted: and all
unappropriated land shall be deemed common. No land shall be appropriated but
by the free consent of a majority of the settlers, after a full discussion of
the reasons in the common council, or folkmote.

When the agent-conductor shall have carefully viewed and considered the tract
of country thus vested in the community of settlers, he shall recommend to them
a proper situation for the first encampment and principal township, as nearly
in the center of their territory as the necessary accommodations of a constant
supply of fresh water, and a navigable communication with the sea will permit:
and he shall lay before the community his reasons for the choice, and if any
other person or persons should propose different situations of equal propriety,
the elected heads of dozens, or a sufficient deputation from them must
carefully examine all the proposed situations; and after duly weighing the
reasons assigned for each proposal, they shall make their report to the common
council; and the opinion of the majority shall decide the question; for it is
absolutely necessary that the majority of the settlers should be well satisfied
and contented with the situation of their principal township, whether it be
better or worse than was first proposed. But in all other points they must be
obedient to the advice of the agent-conductor, and follow his directions in
clearing the ground, marking out and entrenching the first encampment, building
temporary barracks, and storehouses, for the accommodation of the whole
community, and in digging, sowing, and planting, in the public grounds, for
the common support of the whole body of settlers; and no man shall separate
himself to work for private emolument, until a small portion of land for a town
lot, and a larger portion for an out lot agreeable to a plan annexed (No. 2)
shall be marked out, and sufficiently cleared by public labor for every
settler; nor until the said portions of land are equally and indifferently
appropriated to each person by lot, to avoid disputes, and shall be duly
registered with the names of the respective proprietors. Whether or not the
separate private houses should be built by joint and public labor, may be
afterward discussed and determined in the common council. Land shall be
reserved in the township for such new settlers as may afterward arrive, which
may in the mean time be cultivatad for public benefit, but it shall not be
appropriated until it is really wanted for such additional settlers as may
afterward join themselves to the community: for no man ought to be the
proprietor of more than one town lot, with its proportional out lot, according
to the limitation here-after mentioned. And therefore if any additional land,
either of town lots or out lots, or both, should be acquired by marriage or by
inheritance, or legacy, or by any other lawful means, the inheritor shall be
allowed three years to dispose of them: but in any other case, if it should be
found out, that one individual possesses more than one town lot, or more land
in out lots, than is declared in the following table, such land and lots shall
be forfeited to the community.

EXCEPTION.
N. B. The agent or first conductor of the settlement is excepted in the above
regulation, because he is to be allowed every tenth lot that is laid out for
private property, on account of his extraordinary care and trouble in agreeing
for the land, and for laying out the lots Memorandum. Mr. Smeathman the agent,
and first proposer of the settlement, having unfortunately caught a putrid
fever of which he died, July 1, 1786, the gentlemen of the committee must now
determine whether this exception ought to be made in favor of any other agent;
or whether this tenth lot ought not rather to be reserved for such public
purposes as the committee may hereafter think proper to direct. As more money
than what is allowed by government will probably be wanted, the reserved tenth
lots may enable the settlers to repay whatever money may be necessary for them
to borrow for the first exigencies of their little community.
. And also such public officers are to be excepted who hold public lots,
hereafter mentioned, in right of their respective offices, as the chaplain,
clerk of the hundred, two assistant clerks of the hundred, and the three
beadles, each of whom may be allowed to possess one separate lot, in their
private capacity, besides their official public lots.

If any man should be dissatisfied with the situation of the first township,
and can find eleven other deciners of the same opinion, they may afterward
dispose of their registered lots, and agree with the community (to whom all the
unoccupied land within the bounds of the settlement does jointly and equally
belong) for sufficient land to form a proportional township in some distant
part, as proposed in the general scheme of the settlement (plate No. 2.)
according to the following limitation.

LIMITATION OF LANDED POSSESSIONS.
NO person shall possess in his or her own right, more land (exclusive of the
Town lot where the person dwells) than the number of acres expressed against
the following descriptions of places, viz. Within 3 miles of the principal town
not more than 20 Acres. Within 3 miles of the sea, navigable river, creek, or
haven in any other part of the settlement not more than 40 Acres. Within 7
miles of Do. not more than 100 Acres. Within 12 miles of Do. not more than 200
Acres.


Whenever nine lots are laid out, a tenth of equal size, shall be laid out
closely adjoining to them, which shall be numbered and registered as the
property of the conductor; or for a reserve to pay public debts (the first
conductor to whom the promise of every tenth lot was made, having lately died
the committee are at liberty to dispose of this reserved land, as they shall
think most just and right) and an account shall be kept of whatever odd number
of lots are laid out at the same time, more than the ten last appropriated, and
less than the amount of another nine; that as other new lots are demanded, the
conductor may have a tenth lot of equal size close adjoining to any of the last
appropriated lots which he shall choose: but, for every ten lots thus marked out
for private property, two lots of equal size, shall be also marked out
adjoining to them, for public uses, to be registered as such, which under the
care of an elected committee, in every district, controlled by the common
council of the state, shall be cultivated by public labor (hereafter more
fully explained) and the produce be appropriated to a public fund for
religious instruction, schools, poor, hospitals, salaries of public officers,
and all such just and reasonable expenses besides as ought to be defrayed by a
public exchequer. And also to every hundred lots laid out for PRIVATE property
ten additional public lots N. B. The public lots are not to be reckoned with
those that are tithed in favor of the conductor, but only the lots which are
laid up for private property.
shall be laid out closely adjoining: viz. One lot for a general asylum for
poor males, under the care and direction of the oldest and most prudent
deciners in the hundred, elected as a committee, expressly for that trust.

Secondly, One lot for a general asylum of poor females, under the care of the
elderly widows, or of such other prudent matrons as shall be elected to the
charge.

Thirdly, One lot for a general asylum of poor families, of both sexes
together, that the branches of a family may not be separated through
misfortunes or poverty; but that each family may be allowed a distinct and
separate habitation to themselves at the public expense, until they can be
otherwise provided, and more comfortably established, under the care and
patronage of the committee of elder deciners above mentioned. Spare chambers
shall also be prepared to accommodate strangers and travelers, as at an inn,
but separately in the said three lots, according to their respective
descriptions of male, female, or family.

Fourthly, One lot for the support of an hospital for the sick and hurt,
divided into separate wards, for males and females, subject respectively to the
visitation and direction of the two separate trusts abovementioned.

And Fifthly, One penitentiary lot to be strongly fenced (with palisades,
ditch, and parapet, having all the defenses reversed or facing inwards) for the
secure confinement of all felonious offenders, and to be divided into three
distinct compartments; two for the separation of the two sexes; and a third for
the married persons of either sex, that they may not be separated from their
spouses, or families, in case they should desire to attend them. And

Sixthly, One lot to be registered as glebe land; and to be reserved for the
chaplain of the hundred, whenever a clergyman duly qualisied shall be elected
by the majority of the deciners or householders in the hundred; but no layman,
during the vacancy, may receive any profit from the glebe, though he may
officiate gratis, as far as a layman may lawfully be allowed to interfere in
the sacred office. And no chaplain shall be inducted to a legal charge or cure
of souls over more than one hundred families of deciners and their dependants,
at one time; with due exception, however, to clergymen of episcopal authority,
in case God's blessing on the settlement should hereafter render the
appointment of bishops necessary.

Seventhly, One lot, half of which to be appropriated to the use of a parish
clerk, who shall also act as a head beadle in all assemblies of the hundred;
and the other half in equal parts to two inferior beadles, for his assistants;
who, as soon as they can be taught, shall have an additional salary as
trumpeters, to summon the people to the courts of justice, and to assemble the
militia at the head quarters in case of public danger.

Eighthly, One lot for a town clerk, or recorder of the hundred, who shall keep
an exact register of all the appropriations of land in his division, the
rosters of service, both civil and military, the judgments of the courts for
fines of labor; and the due registering of all private contracts for labor,
in which duty he shall be subject to the control and account of the public
Exchequer in the principal township.

Ninthly, One lot for two assistant clerks of the hundred to be elected from
the body of deciners, the most prudent and best qualified to acquire a general
knowledge of the principles and maxims of the common law, as well as of the
regulations of the settlement, that they may be able to advise the headboroughs
on all occasions. And

Tenthly, One public lot reserved to make good the deficiencies of any of the
rest, or to be applied to any other public use that the Hundred Court shall
think proper to direct. And if any of these public lots, or any parts thereof,
remain uncultivated, the directors of the nearest bank, with the consent of the
Hundred Court, may cause the superfluous land to be cleared and cultivated for
the increase of the public stock, and revenue.

Every apprentice, or indentured male, above the age of sixteen years, that
shall afterward be introduced into the settlement from Europe, and every male
bred in the settlement, as they arrive at that age, shall be allowed by the
public as many acres of land to himself, adjoining to the out lot of his
parent, or of his master, as will amount to an eighth part of a lot, in order
that he may employ his leisure hours to his own profit; and as soon as he is
twenty-one years of age, he shall have an addition from the public of
one-eighth more, amounting in all to one quarter of a lot, gratis: and the son
of a settler, when arrived at that age, shall be allowed to purchase
three-fourths of a lot more, to complete his proportion for a deciner, at the
rate of half a year's service for each fourth part -- that is in all for 465
days labor to the public: half of which to be demanded before the end of the
second year, and the remainder gradually before the end of the third year. But
with respect to an indentured servant or apprentice, if he shall be able, even
before he is of age, to purchase out his indentures, either by the produce of
his private portion of land, or by entering himself at the town bank, for such
a proportion of his extra hours, or evening's labor, as shall be deemed equal
to his strength, without injury to the labor due to his master, but not
exceeding two hours (making ten hours labor in all per day:) the master must
consent to the redemption, and the late indentured person, even though he is
not of age, shall be allowed to purchase one quarter of a lot in whatever
township he shall choose, for one year's service (viz. 310 days labor paid by
installments as above) to the Exchequer of the township; but on condition
however that if he does not choose to settle in the township of his late master,
he shall give up the land which he there held, on being allowed the value of
it, by the Exchequer; and that he shall previously apply to the headborough or
chief of the division wherein his desired lot is situated, in order to obtain
the assent of the inhabitants to his admission among them; which being granted,
he shall make a public declaration in open court of his sincere intention to
comply with the laws of the settlement, and to behave himself consistently with
the necessary peace and good order of a civilized society. And after he has
approved himself to the vicinage of his new settlement by good behavior, and
by a faithful discharge of the stipulated service or price, he shall be
admitted (if he is twenty-one years of age, or as soon as he attains that age)
to all the civil rights of the community, provided that he solemnly renews the
said declaration at the next public court or folkmote of the district which he
inhabits; and he shall then be allowed to purchase at the public Exchequer as
much more land as will amount to a complete lot. And every indentured European,
above the age of twenty-one, shall be allowed gratis, half a lot of land
adjoining to his master's out lot; and as soon as the limited demand of labor,
due to his master, shall be faithfully discharged, either by service or by
redemption, he shall be allowed to purchase half a lot more for two years
service (with reasonable credit or allowance of time to perform it in) to the
Exchequer or public bank and shall be admitted to all the civil rights of a
deciner, as soon as the stipulated service is faithfully discharged: or sooner,
if the Hundred Court shall be satisfied that he is worthy.

PUBLIC REVENUE AND PAPER CURRENCY OF INTRINSIC VALUE.
Tax on Day's Work required from all Males above eighteen Years of Age. --
Number of Indentures to be given by every Male. -- Indentures how to be
certified. -- Every Man to have an Account of Labor open at the Exchequer,
certified by the proper Officers of his Division. -- Apprentices and Indentured
Servants to be registered. -- Public Labor to be deducted from the Terms of
all Indentured Servants. -- Accounts of Labor how to be settled and
discharged. -- Estimation of Labor. -- Additional Tax on the Rich, and on
those who have more profitable Employments than ordinary Labor. -- The Payment
of Tithes of Property always grievous and inconvenient. -- Tax on Pride and
Indolence. The Advantages of making Ordinary Labor the Medium of Traffic. --
That poor Men will never want Employment, nor lose Time in searching for it. --
Will obtain Credit for Necessaries, and for the Assistance of Artificers. --
Indentures how to be certified, entered, and put in Circulation. -- Indentures
will be ready Cash to the Merchant, Tradesman, or Artificer, and will enable
them to redeem their own more valuable Labor, and to draw on the Bank for
Paper Cash to circulate, or for Labor to accommodate Planters, who will repay
in Produce; that the Indentures will be really as intrinsically valuable as
ready Cash. -- The Author's Doubts. -- A few Objections removed. -- Debts of
Labor to be demanded only by the public Banks. -- Applications either for
Laborers or Labor to be made at the public Banks. -- Planters to pay a small
Commission per Cent. to the Bank for supplying Laborers. -- Laborers to be
summoned in due Rotation some every Day, with due previous Notice, according to
the Dates of their Indentures not balanced. -- Guard against Bankruptcy, and
against Oppression of indentured Laborers. -- In case of Death, Debts of
Labor due to the Exchequer to be made good out of the real and personal Estate
of the Debtor. -- The System of Frankpledge the chief Security of this Revenue.
-- Public Fines and Forfeitures. -- The peculiar Improvement which even
Frankpledge will obtain by Fines of Labor. -- Even Neglect of public Labor
may be turned to the public Advantage. -- The Revenue of Fines reserved to
make up all Deficiences in this Calculation as it would probably amount to a
Third of what is already reckoned, and the Profits of the Sale of Land probably
even more than the Fines. -- The Savings by this Arrangement would be almost as
extraordinary as the Gains.

IN order to establish an efficient public revenue, and at the same time to
render industry and honest daily labor honorable, or at least creditable by
being general. -- All contributions to the state, and all public fines,
(except those laid on persons convicted of felony within the settlement, which
are to be worked out in the penitentiary lots, (before described) shall be
levied in day labor, estimated (whatever a man's calling, art, or ability may
be) at the rate of eight hours work per day of an ordinary labourer; so that
persons who have money, or more valuable employments, may compound, or find a
sufficient substitute accustomed to ordinary labor: but the substitute must be
a free man; because no slave, nor even an apprentice or indentured servant, if
bound for a longer term than what is limited under the general head of freedom,
shall be permitted to work within the bounds of the settlement, lest any
discredit should thereby be thrown on honest labor. And for the same reason
the fines of days work laid on persons convicted of felony, within the
settlement, shall not be entered on the same books of the Exchequer which
contain the names of the rest of the community, but shall be registered in a
distinct book, as a separate branch of the revenue, and shall be worked out in
the penitentiary lots.

All written contracts or indentures for labor, public or private, shall be
entered in the books of the Public Exchequer, to which shall be made complete
indexes of reference, that the state of every man's engagements may easily be
known, whereby no man will have it in his power to dispose of indentures for
more labor than such a reasonable proportion of his leisure as he may be
supposed capable of fulfilling and discharging in due time.

A truth part of the 310 days of labor shall be appropriated to the support of
Religious instruction, schools, widows, poor, and other parochial exigencies.
31 Days.

And also another tenth for other general expenses of the community or state 31
Days.

This public contribution of two-tenths, or one-fifth of the work-days in a
year, shall be equally required of all males above the age of eighteen years,
and shall be estimated at the value only of ordinary labor in cultivating the
earth, amounting for each person, per annum, to sixtytwo days of ordinary
labor 62 Days.

For which every male of the above description shall annually sign indentures
for the undermentioned portions of his labor, viz.

Days Work. 1 Indenture for 20 Days Work 20 20 1 Do. 10 Do. 10 1 Do. 5 Do. 5 4
Indentures for 2 Do. 8 10 Do. 1 Do. 10 10. Do. 4 Hours work or a day each 5 8
Do. 2 Do. or do. 2 16 Do. 1 Do. or do. 2 51 Indentures. Days work of ordinary
labor 62

The small portions of time are necessary to form a rateable medium for the
prices of all kinds of small articles in traffic, and to afford a convenient
exchange when the indentures are circulated like bills in lieu of cash; and for
such articles as may require a still smaller fraction to express any gradual
rising or fall of price, the proper fraction of an hour into sixty minutes,
will be sufficiently small for all purposes; and if any species of so small a
value as one minute (or even as five or fifteen minutes) should be thought
necessary, small pieces of copper or other cheap metals, amber, or particular
kinds of shells or beads, may be substituted for it. But if indentures, (for
the sake of uniformity in the currency) should be preferred, an indenture for
ten minutes, the sixth part of an hour, will amount exactly to one farthing, at
the lowest price of ordinary labor, i. e. one shilling per day.

In the indentures must be expressed the name of the township, or of the
hundred, and the number, or other denomination of the tithing or dozen, wherein
the signer lives; and when the indenture is cut at the figured tally, the
signer of it shall keep the checque in his own possession, but shall deliver
the full number and value of his signed indentures into the Exchequer, in the
presence of the chief of the dozen to which he belongs. If he himself is an
headborough, or chief of a dozen, he shall deliver his indentures in the
presence of his hundreder, or of three other headboroughs, of the same hundred,
and the hundreder himself in the presence of four headboroughs of his own
division.

The entry or counter checque in the public treasury of every man's account of
indentures, for which he is a debtor to the public, shall be carefully
examined and certified by the Hundreders, or their assistants, or at least by
four of the Headboroughs, of the particular division to which each debtor
respectively belongs, which will be very little trouble to each chief, as the
highest will certify only for 100 families; and the regularity of the
frankpledge, and the certain knowledge of each individual in a division, which
every chief obtains by it, will effectually secure every individual from
forgeries; so that no man will be liable to answer any demands for labor, but
what may be amply proved and authenticated by comparing the checques in his own
hands with the certified entry in the Exchequer.

Masters of apprentices, and also of indentured strangers, brought by them into
the settlement, shall be obliged to register the said indentured persons in the
public Exchequer of the township where he lives, together with the terms of
their indentures, on the penalty of 310 days labor for every wilful failure
herein; and he shall be obliged to deduct from the limited time of indentured
service, all the time that the apprentices or servants have worked for the
public benefit.

When a man has worked out, or otherwise redeemed any of the papermoney, for
which he is nominally responsible, and shall have received back the indenture,
after the service, he may produce it at the Exchequer, together with its
corresponding checque, that it may be cancelled in the public account; whereby
the discharge of public debts may be as regularly proved and authenticated as
the just demands abovementioned; and the state of a man's public debt may
always be known at the public Exchequer by the balance of indentures in his
account; and thereby all frauds and impositions may be easily traced and
detected.

As Labor in all new settlements where land is cheap, is, of course, much
higher and more valuable than in old established states, the intrinsic value of
the labor, in the proposed new settlement, might fairly be estimated at double
the price of labor in England; but at present I will rate it only at one
shilling per day, on account of the limitation of eight hours instead of ten,
commonly required in England. About 300 males have already entered their names;
which number multiplied by sixty-two, the tax of days work due from each per
annum, by this regulation, will produce 18,600 days of labor in a year, due to
the public; which, estimated at the low average rate of only 1s. per day, will
amount to 930l. per annum. And as the value or expense of labor, when applied
to land, (at the ordinary estimation of increase by the products of the earth
in return for labor and care) is expected to produce at least triple the
amount of the disbursement, even in our northern climates, so the value of
930l. bestowed in labor on the public lots of land in the fertile and
productive climate of Africa, where very little labor is necessary, might
certainly be estimated much higher: but even at the ordinary rate it will
amount to 2790l. per annum, which is a very great public revenue, if it be
remembered that it is calculated on the very small number of 300 males,
reckoning rich and poor together, which are only the ordinary average number of
males in an hundred division, or 100 families of a well established settlement,
at the rate of three males to a family!

The general contribution, which I have proposed, is equally laid on the poor
as on the rich, the former being equally capable of paying it, and that
certainly with more ease to themselves, by being accustomed to ordinary labor.
Nevertheless the rich (it may be said) ought to contribute more than the poor,
on account of the superior advantages which accrue to them by their association
with the poor in one well regulated political body. The superior advantages I
speak of are -- 1st, The personal ease or exemption from labor, which their
riches may always procure to them in such a society -- and secondly the
effectual security of their property, or wealth, procured in Frankpledge, or
"Maxima securitas," by the equal exertion of persons, who have no property, and
by an equal risque, also of their lives, in case of actual danger. So that it
seems clearly reasonable and just, that the rich and higher ranks of citizens
should contribute more to the public revenue, than the poor; -- but in what
proportion is rather difficult to determine; though it may be readily answered,
that the quantity of riches should, in due proportion, determine the quantity
of contribution; yet this cannot be done without a general tax on property,
which, as experience teaches us, is liable to many inconveniences; so that even
the ancient and ordinary tax of tithes to the clergy is deemed grievously
inconvenient, on account of the difficulties, disputes, quarrels, and
vexations, which too frequently happen, as well in compounding for them as in
the collection of them in kind. The only expedient, therefore, which I am able
to devise, at present, for procuring a larger contribution from the rich, is a
tax on pride and indolence; a tax which, though it will not produce in exact
proportion to the property of the wealthy, will nevertheless most certainly
obtain from the wealthy and luxurious a contribution exactly proportionate to
whatever pride and indolence may be occasioned by the superfluous wealth of the
community: and in aid to this tax on superfluous wealth, the affluence likewise
of the more useful members of society, whose employments procure them a more
profitable reward than they could obtain by ordinary labor, might be made to
yield a reasonable addition to the revenue in consideration of their superior
abilities to contribute, which men of this respectable class certainly have.

TAX on PRIDE and INDOLENCE, and on Persons who have superior Emoluments above
the ordinary Class of Laborers.
THOUGH labor is the common lot of man, according to the divine sentence, or
penal judgment, denounced against our first male parent, -- In the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat bread, till thou return into the ground, etc. Genesis iii. 19.
and though an apostle also has declared, that if any would not work neither
should he eat, yet many persons there are, in every community, who by some
means or other seem to be exempted from the necessity of personal labor, the
ordinary condition of human life! How this may be accounted for, and reconciled
with the divine decree, is stated more at large in my tract on the Law of
Nature, and Principles of Action in Man, p. 21 -- 30. Nothing, therefore,
according to natural religion, can be more reasonable and just, or more
consistent also, according to the second foundation of law, with the revealed
will of God in the holy scriptures, than that all persons who have wealth
sufficient to purchase an exemption from this ordinary lot of man, should be
required to contribute in a larger proportion to the exigencies of the
community, than persons who depend on their daily labor for their daily bread.
And this additional contribution may very easily be levied, without making any
other additional object of taxation than what I have already proposed to be the
single article of general contribution, viz. the two tenths of ordinary labor:
let a redemption of the general tax of sixty-two days' contribution, viz. two
tenths of ordinary labor be required at the rate of a double, or, if
necessary, of a triple value of the service, from all persons who, having no
real bodily infirmity or incapacity, shall decline a personal attendance for
the general contribution, either through pride, by setting themselves up above
their brethren in their own estimation, as superior to the common lot of
ordinary labor, or else by having a better and more reasonable motive, that of
a more profitable occupation for the employment of their time, which will
equally render them capable of paying, without any actual hardship, the
additional tax for the ease, indulgence, and superior profit, which they enjoy
by the purchase.

Suppose there be ten men in an hundred, or thirty males in one hundred
families, whose pride, or wealth, or indolence, would induce them to decline
personal labor: such men ought surely to redeem their exemption at a triple
value, which cannot amount to any real hardship or oppression; as the
alternative, and only hardship to those who may love too well their wealth, and
deem the tax too heavy, is to submit to the ordinary lot of their brethren, in
complying with a short limited service for the public benefit, in which they
themselves have an equal profit. And suppose there be also double that number
of persons in an hundred division, who have useful arts and more profitable
trades and occupations to induce their redemption of personal service: -- The
produce of the tax will be as follows -- the first class of thirty gentlemen,
or idle men, taxed at triple the value of the sixty-two days of ordinary
labor, will pay all together the sum of 279l. but as the sixty-two days of
labor from each is already included in the former general calculation, one
third must be deducted from the estimated value of this additional tax, where
by it is reduced to l. s. d. 186 0 0 The second class of 60 merchants,
tradesman, or useful artificers, who will be induced by more profitable
occupations to redeem their personal labor, will each pay a double tax, viz.
the value of 124 days ordinary labor at 1s. per day which all together is only
6 l. 4 s. per ann. each man; but as they are already charged half that sum, in
the general estimate of contribution, the other half alone must here be
reckoned, viz. 3l. 2s. which multiplied by 60 amounts to 186 0 0 Total
additional tax on the 2 classes abovementioned in one hundred families 372 0 0
Which addition, if laid out on the cultivation of land in the public lots,
would produce three times that value, according to the ordinary increase of
land, for the labor bestowed on it. The risque, indeed, of a misapplication of
the labor, or of a defalcation of the increase, may reasonably be objected,
according to the ordinary misconduct of persons entrusted with the care of
farms, at present in this country; but the same objection will not hold where
Frankpledge is duly established, because the eye of every neighbor would be a
watchful guard against fraud, all being equally interested in the public
profit. I will therefore multiply this additional tax by 3, the ordinary rate
of increase to be expected from the land which is cultivated by it 3 0 0 1116 0
0 To which add the general contribution before estimated at 2790 0 0 The total
amount of revenue for one single division of an hundred families 3906 0 0

Thus an ample source is opened not only of public credit but also of private
security, or trust, in traffic, by the same easy means; whereby poor laboring
men may be enabled to obtain all the necessary articles of merchandise, though
they have no ready money to advance. For, as ordinary labor is rendered the
medium of traffic, instead of cash, the first advantage to a poor industrious
man, accustomed only to ordinary labor, is, that he will, at all times, have
it in his power to obtain employment; in the search of which, with us, many
honest men, in all the three kingdoms, are obliged to leave their native
country. And the second material advantage to him is, that he can always obtain
an immediate credit, proportionable to the value of his unengaged time, for any
articles of trade that he may want, by giving the merchant, or tradesman, in
return for them, an indenture for as many days labor as the purchase is worth;
and he is also enabled to employ a blacksmith, carpenter, or other useful
artificer (in case he should want their assistance on his own lot) by giving
them, in like manner, an indenture, for as many days of ordinary labor, as
will amount to the value of the work. These indentures (as before proposed for
the indentures of general contribution) should express the names of the
hundred, and of the dozen in which the signer is associated, and should be
previously carried by him to be entered at the public Exchequer, or bank, of
the hundred, and be there properly certified, as before proposed; after which
the labourer may cut off the indentures from his checques, at the printed
tally, and pay them to the merchant or tradesman, for the article purchased; or
to the artificer for his job, retaining the checques in his own custody, that
he may always know the amount of his debt of labor. On the other hand, the
merchant, tradesman, or artificer, who receives such an indenture from a poor
labourer, can immediately realize the value of it in his own favor, by paying
it into the public Exchequer, or bank of the township; where, of course, it
will be posted to the credit of his account of labor, and will enable him to
redeem a part of his own indentures, without his own personal labor, which, of
course, is much more valuable than ordinary labor; and in like manner he will
proceed with all other indentures for ordinary labor, that he has procured by
his traffic, or more valuable occupation, always paying them to the credit of
his account at the bank, until the amount exceeds his own debt for public
service: when, from the balance of labor in his favor, according to the
amount of it, he will always be at liberty to draw on the bank for indentures
of days work, either for circulation, as ready cash, or for laborers, to
cultivate his own lot of land, or else occasionally to accommodate planters who
want laborers, and are willing to pay the value of them, in produce, etc.
whereby private credit (as well as public credit, already provided for) will be
amply supported: and the indentures for labor, by which this most essential
public and private service is effected, will be, in fact, A PAPER CURRENCY OF
INTRINSIC VALUE, answering all the purposes of ready cash, as a medium of
traffic, as well as all the necessary purposes of negociable bills, to support
public and private credit; and yet they cannot be, at all, liable to
depreciation!

The advantages appear to me so great and extraordinary, that I can hardly give
credit, as I proceed, to my own estimation of them; and am inclined to suspect
that I am, in some way or other, enormously mistaken; but as I cannot yet find
out my error, I must leave my censure to some more able head. A few obvious
objections, however, I am prepared to remove by a timely proposal of adequate
remedies. As for instance -- Whatever might be deemed troublesome, or
disagreeable, in exacting the payment of these debts of labor, may be
effectually withdrawn from individuals, by investing the public bank of each
township with the sole authority of demanding the labor for the indentures,
that have been respectively entered and certified therein. And that the several
banks may be enabled to realize the value of these indentures, all applications
either for laborers, or labor, shall be made at the several town banks; where
planters may be sure of a supply of laborers, and the labourer equally sure of
a constant supply of work, without danger of oppression, or non payment of
wages, being secured from both by the mediation of the bank, which employs him,
and disposes of his service. And both parties, or at least the planters, ought
to pay some small allowance per cent. to the bank, by way of commission, or
profit for the negotiation. And each bank should regularly summon, (with due
previous notice for every day) a sufficient number of the indentured laborers
that are entered on their books, not only to cultivate the public lots of land
under their care, but also to supply the current daily demand of labor that
may be wanted by planters and other private individuals; but all persons
summoned to labor, shall work on the public lots, until such demands are made,
by which means the laborers will lose no time in waiting for work. The daily
summonses to labor, issued from the bank, should be made in due rotation,
according to the dates of the indentures entered on the books, and according to
the quantity of debt which each individual has to work out. And, that no man
may run deeper in debt, by disposing of his labor to a greater amount than he
may be able to discharge in due time, all indentures whatsoever for the labor
either of apprentices or servants, should be entered at the bank of the
township, where the parties reside, whereby not only the state of every
labourer's debt may be always known, and, of course, likewise his ability to
discharge it, but also, on the other hand, the laborers, apprentices, and
servants themselves, will be thereby more easily protected from the oppression
of such avaritious masters, as might otherwise be inclined to exact more
service than is due by the terms of their contract.

If any person should die before his indentured service is discharged to the
public bank, his land, stock, and effects shall be answerable to the amount of
his deficiency to the public, in preference to all other debts: whereby the
paper currency, will always preserve a standard value; and, at the same time,
afford a most convenient medium for traffic and exchange. If any further
difficulties, more than I have foreseen and guarded against, should still be
objected, I flatter myself that the salutary establishment of Frankpledge will
be sufficient to obviate them all. For this maxima securitas, renders every
individual completely responsible for all debts or demands that can justly be
made upon him, and for all charges against him whatever, because the residence
of the meanest member of society can be most expeditiously known by the public
books; so that he may be immediately traced at any time to his very chamber,
and no individual in Frankpledge can resist the united power of a free people
-- for if any one should neglect or despise the summons of the public bank, his
tithing or dozen may be compelled (on the penalty of a heavy fine for neglect)
to produce him: and should the tithing or dozen neglect, the hundred is
summoned to enforce satisfaction, and so on with respect to higher divisions,
until the strength of the whole community is united, as one man, to render
executive justice, to fine, or otherwise punish all contumacious delinquents
against common sense, and to enforce obedience to the determined justice of the
majority. This occasional mention of misdemeanors and fines, reminds me that I
have omitted to add to the amount of my calculation of Revenue, the profit of
the public fines and forfeitures, which must always be very considerable where
Frankpledge is established; not only, because the regularity and order of the
system renders the levying of fines and forfeitures extremely easy,
expeditious, and free from expense, but also, because the penalties of fines
and forfeitures are, in Frankpledge, extended to the minutest immoralities, and
negligences, in order to render the peace and regularity of society as perfect
as possible. Add to this a very particular advantage, which the ancient mode of
punishing by fines and forfeitures, will acquire by the application of my
proposal of universal calculation by days labor -- an advantage which could
never before be obtained; viz. that the poorest man has, thereby, something to
forfeit, even sometimes very considerable, because his personal labor is
equally valuable, and probably more so, than the labor of a man of superior
rank; so that even the happy system of Frankpledge itself is very materially
improved, and rendered much more effectual, as well as more profitable, by the
proposed addition.

All contempts of legal summonses to labor, would, of course, be finable; as
also apparent sloth, or remissness in working; both of which would thereby be
made effectual to increase the value of the paper currency, instead of
diminishing it, as might be expected. Likewise all contempts of court, neglects
of summons to attend juries; want of punctuality in attending the duties of
Watch and Ward, in the rotation of the public roster; and all inattention or
disobedience while on duty; all breaches of the sabbath, swearing, drunkenness,
and immodesty, as well as fornication and adultery (both of which should be
very strictly, and very severely mulcted, for the more effectual promotion of
honorable marriage) giving or accepting a challenge to fight, even though no
mischief should ensue; all unnecessary wrangling, fighting, or striking, and
even every wilful provocation by word or gesture, and every other misbehaviour
that is inconsistent with the peace, order, and quiet of a happy society, would
be punished by a suitable fine of days' work, in proportion to the offense, by
which altogether this essential article of fines and forfeitures (which, in
England, through neglect of Frankpledge, are hardly an object of consideration)
would necessarily occasion a much larger addition to the public revenue than I
can venture, at present, to estimate; and, therefore, I must beg leave to
reserve this valuable article of fines, to make up any deficiencies, which,
perhaps, may be afterward discovered in my other calculations; to which must
also be added, as a further reserve, the profits arising from the sale of land
for day labor, not yet estimated, though it would probably amount even to more
than the fines.

I have already, without these profitable articles, carried my estimation of
the public Revenue nearly to the amount of 4000l. per annum, for every 100
families, including equally both rich and poor, which far exceeds the
proportionable revenue, I believe, of any kingdom on earth; for indeed, the
same means are not practicable in any country or nation, unless the most
excellent system of Frankpledge be previously established, which I must
frequently repeat. But, for the sake of comparison, let us apply this scheme to
the computed average number of taxable houses or families in England and Wales.
The one million families (as they are commonly estimated) would raise, by
merely taking on themselves the very moderate and equal burden of only a 5th
part of their most ordinary labor, estimated at the low rate of one shilling
per day, together with the additional tax on pride, and the easy levy on
profitable occupations, with the due increase of the whole profit, when applied
to the cultivation of public land, would raise (I say) at the rate of 3906l.
for every hundred families, before calculated, the amazing revenue of 39
millions, and 60 thousands of pounds sterling, per annum. If I am questioned on
the possibility of raising a sum so enormously great, that it far exceeds the
whole annual produce of all our accumulated taxes, customs, and other means of
revenue, I must confess, that I am at a loss how even to satisfy my own doubts
about it; and that I know not what reasons to assign for such an incredible
accumulation of wealth, arising from so trifling a burden laid upon the
people, unless it may be attributed to the effectual employment of all the
laboring poor; and of others capable of labor, and also to the effectual
means of which the proposition seems to promise of rendering that general
employment of ordinary labor profitable, not only in the circulation of the
indentures as bills and cash; but also in the increase which may be naturally
expected from the actual labor, when applied to the earth. But there are other
advantages attending the proposal, which are not yet reckoned.

The previous re-establishment of frankpledge, without which the raising of
such an increased revenue could not be practicable, would, at the same time,
render absolutely unnecessary the greatest part of our most expensive
establishments both civil and military.

So that, upon the whole the gain might fairly be estimated at nearly triple
the effective, or neat amount of all the other deviseable " Ways and Means,
etc. etc." -- That this is not an exaggerated statement of our public
burdens, will be allowed, I believe, by all parties. I wish they were equally
agreed in opinion about the necessary remedy!

GRANVILLE SHARP.
Old Jewry, 3d July, 1786.

