THE AUTHOR. A POEM. BY C. CHURCHILL.

LONDON: Printed for W. FLEXNEY, near Gray's-Inn Gate, Holborn; G. KEARSLY,
opposite St. Martin's Church, Ludgate Street; J. COOTE, in Paternoster-Row; C.
HENDERSON, at the Royal Exchange; J. GARDENER, in Charles-Street, Westminster;
and J. ALMON, in Piccadilly.

MDCCLXIII.

THE AUTHOR.
ACCURSED the man, whom fate ordains, in spite,
And cruel parents teach, to Read and Write!
What need of letters? Wherefore should we spell?
Why write our names? A mark will do as well.
Much are the precious hours of youth misspent,
In climbing Learning's rugged steep ascent;
When to the top the bold advent'rer's got,
He reigns, vain monarch, over a barren spot,
Whilst in the vale of Ignorance below,
FOLLY and VICE to rank luxuriance grow;
Honors and wealth pour in on every side,
And proud Preferment rolls her golden tide.
Over crabbed authors life's gay prime to waste,
To cramp wild genius in the chains of taste,
To bear the slavish drudgery of schools,
And tamely stoop to every pedant's rules,
For seven long years debarred of liberal ease,
To plod in college trammels to degrees,
Beneath the weight of solemn toys to groan,
Sleep over books, and leave mankind unknown,
To praise each senior blockhead's threadbare tale,
And laugh till reason blush, and spirits fail,
Manhood with vile submission to disgrace,
And cap the fool, whose merit is his Place;
VICE CHANCELLORS, whose knowledge is but small,
And CHANCELLORS, who nothing know at all,
Ill-brook'd the generous Spirit, in those days
When Learning was the certain road to praise,
When Nobles, with a love of Science blessed,
Approved in others what themselves possessed.
But Now, when DULLNESS rears aloft her throne,
When LORDLY Vassals her wide Empire own,
When Wit, seduced by Envy, starts aside,
And basely leagues with Ignorance and Pride,
What Now should tempt us, by false hopes misled,
Learning's unfashionable paths to tread;
To bear those labors, which our Fathers bore
That Crown withheld, which They in triumph wore?
When with much pains this boasted Learning's got,
It Is an affront to those who have it not.
In some it causes hate, in others fear,
Instructs our Foes to rail, our Friends to sneer.
With prudent haste the worldly-minded fool,
Forgets the little which he learned at School;
The Elder Brother, to vast fortunes born,
Looks on all Science with an Eye of Scorn;
Dependent Brethren the same features wear,
And younger Sons are stupid as the Heir.
In Senates, at the Bar, in Church and State,
Genius is vile, and Learning out of date.
Is this -- O Death to think! is this the Land
Where Merit and Reward went hand in hand,
Where Heroes, Parent-like, the Poet viewed? --
By whom they saw their glorious deeds renewed;
Where Poets, true to Honor, tuned their lays,
And by their Patrons sanctified their praise?
Is this the Land, where, on our SPENCER'S tongue,
Enamored of his voice, Description hung;
Where JOHNSON rigid gravity beguiled,
Whilst Reason through her Critic fences smiled;
Where NATURE listening stood, whilst SHAKESPEARE played,
And wondered at the Work herself had made?
Is this the Land, where, mindful of her charge
And Office high, fair Freedom walked at large;
Where, finding in our Laws a sure defense,
She mocked at all restraints, but those of Sense;
Where, health and honor trooping by her side,
She spread her sacred empire far and wide;
Pointed the Way, Affliction to beguile,
And bade the Face of Sorrow wear a smile,
Bade those, who dare obey the generous call,
Enjoy her blessings, which GOD meant for all?
Is this the Land, where, in some Tyrant's reign,
When a weak, wicked Ministerial train,
The tools of power, the slaves of interest, planned
Their Country's ruin, and with bribes unmanned
Those wretches, who, ordained in Freedom's cause,
Gave up our liberties, and sold our laws;
When Power was taught by Meanness where to go,
Nor dared to love the Virtue of a foe;
When, like a lep'rous plague, from the foul head
To the foul heart her sores Corruption spread,
Her iron arm when stern Oppression reared,
And Virtue, from her broad base shaken, feared
The scourge of Vice; when, impotent and vain,
Poor Freedom bowed the neck to Slav'ry's chain;
Is this the Land, where, in those worst of times,
The hardy Poet raised his honest rimes
To dread rebuke, and bade controulment speak
In guilty blushes on the villain's cheek,
Bade Power turn pale, kept mighty rogues in awe,
And made them fear the Muse, who feared not Law?
How do I laugh, when men of narrow souls,
Whom folly guides, and prejudice controuls;
Who, one dull drowsy track of business trod,
Worship their Mammon, and neglect their God;
Who, breathing by one musty set of rules,
Dote from the birth, and are by system fools;
Who, formed to dullness from their very youth,
Lies of the day prefer to Gospel truth,
Pick up their little knowledge from Reviews,
And lay out all their stock of faith in news:
How do I laugh, when Creatures, formed like these,
Whom Reason scorns, and I should blush to please,
Rail at all liberal arts, deem verse a crime,
And hold not Truth, as Truth, if told in rhyme?
How do I laugh, when PUBLIUS, hoary grown
In zeal for SCOTLAND'S welfare, and his own,
By slow degrees, and course of office, drawn
In mood and figure at the helm to yawn,
Too mean (the worst of curses Heaven can send)
To have a foe, too proud to have a friend,
Erring by form, which Blockheads sacred hold,
Never making new faults, and never mending old,
Rebukes my Spirit, bids the daring Muse
Subjects more equal to her weakness choose;
Bids her frequent the haunts of humble swains,
Nor dare to traffic in ambitious strains;
Bids her, indulging the poetic whim
In quaint-wrought Ode, or Sonnet pertly trim,
Along the Church Way path complain with GRAY,
Or dance with MASON on the first of May?
"All sacred is the name and power of Kings,
"All States and Statesmen are those mighty Things
"Which, howsoe'er they out of course may roll,
"Were never made for Poets to control."
Peace, Peace thou Dotard, nor thus vilely deem
Of Sacred Numbers, and their power blaspheme;
I tell thee, Wretch, search all Creation round,
In Earth, in Heaven, no Subject can be found
(Our God alone except) above whose weight
The Poet cannot rise, and hold his State.
The blessed Saints above in numbers speak
The praise of God, though there all praise is weak;
In Numbers here below the Bard shall teach
Virtue to soar beyond the Villain's reach;
Shall tear his laboring lungs, strain his hoarse throat,
And raise his voice beyond the trumpet's note,
Should an afflicted Country, awed by men
Of slavish principles, demand his pen.
This is a great, a glorious point of view,
Fit for an English Poet to pursue,
Undaunted to pursue, though, in return,
His writings by the common Hangman burn.
How do I laugh, when men, by fortune placed
Above their Betters, and by rank disgraced,
Who found their pride on titles which they stain,
And, mean themselves, are of their Fathers vain,
Who would a bill of privilege prefer,
And treat a Poet, like a Creditor,
The generous ardour of the Muse condemn,
And curse the storm they know must break on them?
"What, shall a reptile Bard, a wretch unknown,
"Without one badge of merit, but his own,
"Great Nobles lash, and Lords, like common men,
"Smart from the vengeance of a Scribbler's pen?"
What Is in this name of Lord, that we should fear
To bring their vices to the public ear?
Flows not the honest blood of humble swains
Quick as the tide which swells a Monarch's veins?
Monarchs, who wealth and titles can bestow,
Cannot make Virtues in succession flow.
Would Thou, Proud Man, be safely placed above
The censure of the Muse, deserve her Love,
Act as thy Birth demands, as Nobles ought;
Look back, and by thy worthy Father taught,
Who earned those Honors, Thou were born to wear,
Follow his steps, and be his Virtue's heir.
But if, regardless of the road to Fame,
You start aside, and tread the paths of shame.
If such thy life, that should thy Sire arise,
The sight of such a Son would blast his eyes,
Would make him curse the hour which gave Thee birth,
Would drive him, shudd'ring, from the face of earth
Once more, with shame and sorrow, amongst the dead
In endless night to hide his reverend head;
If such thy life, though Kings had made thee more
Than ever King a scoundrel made before,
Nay, to allow thy pride a deeper spring,
Though God in vengeance had made Thee a King,
Taking on Virtue's wing her daring flight,
The Muse should drag thee trembling to the light,
Probe thy foul wounds, and lay thy bosom bare
To the keen question of the searching air.
Gods! with what pride I see the titled slave,
Who smarts beneath the stroke which Satire gave,
Aiming at ease, and with dishonest art
Striving to hide the feelings of his heart!
How do I laugh, when, with affected air,
(Scarce able through despite to keep his chair,
Whilst on his trembling lip pale anger speaks,
And the chafed blood flies mounting to his cheeks)
He talks of Conscience, which good men secures
From all those evil moments guilt endures,
And seems to laugh at those, who pay regard
To the wild ravings of a frantic bard.
"SATIRE, whilst envy and ill-humour sway
"The mind of man, must always make her way,
"Nor to a bosom, with discretion fraught,
"Is all her malice worth a single thought.
"The Wise have not the will, nor Fools the power
"To stop her headstrong course; within the hour,
"Left to herself, she dies; opposing Strife,
"Gives her fresh vigor, and prolongs her life.
"All things her prey, and every man her aim,
"I can no patent for exemption claim,
"Nor would I wish to stop that harmless dart
"Which plays around, but cannot wound my heart:
"Though pointed at myself, be SATIRE free;
"To Her it is pleasure, and no pain to Me."
Dissembling Wretch! hence to the Stoic school,
And there amongst thy brethren play the fool,
There, unrebuk'd, these wild, vain doctrines preach;
Lives there a Man, whom SATIRE cannot reach?
Lives there a Man, who calmly can stand by,
And see his conscience ripp'd with steady eye?
When SATIRE flies abroad on Falshood's wing,
Short is her life indeed, and dull her sting;
But when to Truth allied, the wound she gives
Sinks deep, and to remotest ages lives.
When in the tomb thy pampered flesh shall rot,
And even by friends thy memory be forgot,
Still shall Thou live, recorded for thy crimes,
Live in her page, and stink to aftertimes.
Have Thou no feeling yet? Come, throw off pride,
And own those passions which Thou shall not hide.
S --, who, from the moment of his birth,
Made human Nature a reproach on earth,
Who never dared, nor wished behind to stay,
When Folly, Vice, and Meanness led the way,
Would blush, should he be told, by Truth and Wit,
Those actions, which he blushed not to commit;
Men the most infamous are fond of fame,
And those who fear not guilt, yet start at shame.
But whither runs my zeal, whose rapid force,
Turning the brain, bears Reason from her course,
Carries me back to times, when Poets, blessed
With courage, graced the Science they professed;
When They, in Honor rooted, firmly stood
The bad to punish, and reward the good;
When, to a flame by Public Virtue wrought,
The foes of Feedom They to justice brought,
And dared expose those slaves, who dared support
A Tyrant plan, and called themselves a Court.
Ah! What are Poets now? as slavish those
Who deal in Verse, as those who deal in Prose.
Is there an Author, search the Kingdom round,
In whom true worth, and real Spirit's found?
The Slaves of Booksellers, or (doomed by Fate
To baser chains) vile pensioners of State;
Some, dead to shame, and of those shackles proud
Which Honor scorns, for slavery roar aloud,
Others, half-palsied only, mutes become,
And what makes SMOLLET write, makes JOHNSON dumb.
Why turns you villain pale? why bends his eye
Inward, abashed, when MURPHY passes by?
Do Thou sage MURPHY for a blockhead take,
Who wages war with vice for Virtue's sake?
No, No -- like other Worldlings, you will find
He shifts his sails, and catches every wind.
His soul the shock of interest cannot endure,
Give him a pension then, and sin secure.
With laurell'd wreaths the flatt'rer's brows adorn,
Bid Virtue crouch, bid Vice exalt her horn,
Bid Cowards thrive, put honesty to flight,
MURPHY shall prove, or try to prove it right.
Try, thou State-Juggler, every paltry art,
Ransack the inmost closet of my heart,
Swear You Are my Friend; by that base oath make way
Into my breast, and flatter to betray;
Or, if those tricks are vain, if wholesome doubt
Detects the fraud, and points the Villain out,
Bribe those who daily at my board are fed,
And make them take my life who eat my bread;
On Authors for defense, for praise depend;
Pay him but well, and MURPHY is thy friend.
He, He shall ready stand with venal rimes
To varnish guilt, and consecrate thy crimes,
To make corruption in false colors shine,
And damn his own good name, to rescue thine.
But, if thy niggard hands their gifts withold,
And Vice no longer rains down showers of gold,
Expect no mercy; facts, well grounded, teach,
MURPHY, if not rewarded, will impeach.
What though each man of nice and juster thought,
Shunning his steps, decrees, by Honor taught,
He never can be a Friend, who stoops so low
To be the base betrayer of a foe;
What though, with thine together linked, his name
Must be with thine transmitted down to shame,
To every manly feeling callous grown,
Rather than not blast thine, he will blast his own.
To open the fountain, whence Sedition springs,
To slander Government, and libel Kings,
With Freedom's name to serve a present hour,
Though born, and bred to arbitrary power,
To talk of WILLIAMS with insidious art,
Whilst a vile STUART'S lurking in his heart,
And, whilst mean Envy rears her loathsome head,
Flattering the living, to abuse the dead,
Where is SHEBBEARE? O, let not foul reproach,
Traveling thither in a City-Coach,
The Pill'ry dare to name; the whole intent
Of that Parade was Fame, not Punishment,
And that old, staunch Whig BEARDMORE standing by,
Can in full Court give that report the lie.
With rude unnat'ral jargon to support,
Half Scotch, half English, a declining Court,
To make most glaring contraries unite,
And prove, beyond dispute, that black is white,
To make firm Honor tamely league with shame,
Make Vice and Virtue differ but in name,
To prove that Chains and Freedom are but one,
That to be saved must mean to be undone,
Is there not GUTHRIE? Who, like him, can call
All Opposites to proof, and conquer all?
He calls forth living waters from the rock;
He calls forth children from the barren stock;
He, far beyond the springs of Nature led,
Makes Women bring forth after they are dead;
He, on a curious, new, and happy plan,
In Wedlock's sacred bands joins Man to Man;
And, to complete the whole, most strange, but true,
By some rare magic, makes them fruitful too,
Whilst from their loins, in the due course of years,
Flows the rich blood of GUTHRIE's English Peers.
Do Thou contrive some blacker deed of shame,
Something which Nature shudders but to name,
Something which makes the Soul of man retreat,
And the lifeblood run backward to her seat?
Do Thou contrive, for some base private end,
Some selfish view, to hang a trusting friend,
To lure him on, even to his parting breath,
And promise life, to work him surer death?
Grown old in villainy, and dead to grace,
Hell in his heart, and TYBURNE in his face;
Behold, a Parson at thy Elbow stands,
Lowering damnation, and with open hands
Ripe to betray his Savior for reward;
The Atheist Chaplain of an Atheist Lord.
Bred to the Church, and for the gown decreed,
'Ere it was known that I should learn to read;
Though that was nothing, for my Friends, who knew
What mighty Dullness of itself could do,
Never designed me for a working Priest,
But hoped, I should have been a DEAN at least;
Condemned (like many more, and worthier men,
To whom I pledge the service of my pen),
Condemned (whilst proud, and pampered Sons of Lawn,
Crammed to the throat, in lazy plenty yawn)
In pomp of reverend begg'ry to appear,
To pray, and starve on forty pounds a year;
My Friends, who never felt the galling load,
Lament that I forsook the Packhorse road,
Whilst Virtue to my conduct witness bears
In throwing off that gown, which FRANCIS wears.
What Creature's that, so very pert and prim;
So very full of foppery, and whim;
So gentle, yet so brisk; so wondrous sweet,
So fit to prattle at a Lady's feet,
Who looks, as he the Lord's rich vineyard trod,
And by his Garb appears a man of God?
Trust not to looks, nor credit outward show;
The villain lurks beneath the cassock'd Beau;
That Is an Informer; what avails the name?
Suffice it that the wretch from SODOM came.
His tongue is deadly -- from his presence run,
Unless thy rage would wish to be undone.
No ties can hold him, no affection bind,
And Fear alone restrains his coward mind;
Free him from that, no Monster is so fell,
Nor is so sure a blood-hound found in hell.
His silken smiles, his hypocritic air,
His meek demeanor, plausible and fair,
Are only worn to pave Fraud's easier way,
And make gulled Virtue fall a surer prey.
Attend his Church -- his plan of doctrine view --
The Preacher is a Christian, dull but true;
But when the hallowed hour of preaching's over,
That plan of doctrine's never thought of more;
CHRIST is laid by neglected on the shelf,
And the vile Priest is Gospel to himself.
By CLELAND tutored, and with BLACOW bred,
(BLACOW, whom by a brave resentment led,
OXFORD, if OXFORD had not sunk in same,
Ere this, had damned to everlasting shame)
Their steps he follows, and their crimes partakes,
To Virtue lost, to Vice alone he wakes,
Most lusciously declaims against luscious themes,
And, whilst he rails at blasphemy, blasphemes.
Are these the Arts, which Policy supplies?
Are these the steps, by which grave Churchmen rise?
Forbid it, Heaven; or, should it turn out so,
Let Me, and Mine, continue mean and low.
Such be their Arts, whom Interest controuls;
KIDGELL and I have free and honest souls.
We scorn Preferment which is gained by Sin,
And will, though poor without, have peace within.
THE END.

