CREUSA, Queen of ATHENS.

A TRAGEDY.

As it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane By His MAJESTY's Servants.

WRITTEN BY Mr. WILLIAM WHITEHEAD.

LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY in Pall Mall; and Sold by M. COOPER in
Peter-noster-Row. 1754.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. ROSS. PROLOGUES of old, the Learned in Language say,
Were merely Introductions to the Play,
Spoken by Gods, or Ghosts, or Men who knew
Whatever was previous to the Scenes in view;
And complaisantly came to lay before ye
The several Heads, and Windings of the Story.
But modern Times and British Rules are such,
Our Bards beforehand must not tell too much;
Nor dare we, like the neighboring French, admit
Even Confidantes, who might instruct the Pit,
By asking Questions of the leading Few,
And hearing Secrets, which before they knew.
Yet what we can to help this antique Piece
We will attempt. -- Our Scene tonight is Greece.
And, by the Magic of the Poet's Rod,
This Stage the Temple of the Delphic God!
Where Kings, and Chiefs, and Sages came of old,
Like modern Fools, to have their Fortunes told;
And Monarchs were enthroned, or Nations freed,
As an old Priest, or withered Maid decreed.
Yet think not all were equally deceived,
Some knew, more doubted, many more believed.
In short, these Oracles, and witching Rhimes
Were but the pious Frauds of ancient Times;
Wisely contrived to keep Mankind in awe,
When Faith was Wonder, and Religion Law!
Thus much premised, to every feeling Breast
We leave the Scenes themselves to tell the rest.
-- Yet something sure was to the Critics said,
Which I forget, -- some Invocation made!
Ye Critic Bands, like jealous Guardians, placed
To watch the Encroachments on the Realms of Taste,
From you our Author would two Boons obtain,
Not wholly diffident, nor wholly vain:
Two things he asks; it is modest sure, from you
Who can do all things, to request but two:
First to his Scenes a kind Attention pay,
Then judge! -- with Candor judge -- and we obey.

Persons Represented.
XUTHUS, King of Athens, Mr. BERRY. ILYSSUS, an unknown Youth, Attendant on the
Temple at Delphi, Miss MACKLIN. ALETES, a Grecian Sage, Mr. GARRICK. PHORBAS,
an old Athenian, Mr. MOSSOP. Priests of Apollo. Citizens of Athens. CRUSA,
Queen of Athens, Mrs. PRITCHARD. PYTHIA, Priestess of Apollo, Miss HAUGHTON.
LYCEA, and other Women attending on the Queen, Mrs. COWPER, etc. Virgins
belonging to the Temple. Guards, etc.
Scene, the Vestibule of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, and the Laurel Grove
adjoining.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE BUSSY, Lord Visc. VILLIERS, The following
TRAGEDY is inscribed by His Lordship's Most obliged and most affectionate
humble Servant,

W. WHITEHEAD.

Advertisement.
THE Subject of the following Scenes is so ancient, so slightly mentioned by
Historians, and so fabulously treated by Euripides in his Tragedy of Ion, that
the Author thought himself at liberty to make the Story his own. Some glaring
Circumstances he was obliged to adhere to, which he has endeavored to render
probable.

CRUSA, Queen of ATHENS. A TRAGEDY.
ACT I. The Vestibule of the Temple.
ILYSSUS and Virgins. ILYSSUS. HASTE, haste, ye Virgins; round the Columns twine
Your flowery Chaplets; and with Streams fresh-drawn
Of Castaly, bedew the sacred Porch
Of the great God of Day. Already see
His orient Beam has reached the double Top
Of high Parnassus, and begins to shed
A gleamy Luster over the Laurel Grove!
Haste, haste, ye Virgins. From the Vale beneath
I hear the Noise of Chariots, and of Steeds
Which hither bend their Course, for every Sound
Seems nearer than the former. -- And behold
A reverend Stranger, who perhaps proclaims
The Approach of some great Monarch, to consult
All-seeing Phoebus, or implore his Aid.
Haste, haste, ye Virgins!

Enter PHORBAS. PHORBAS. Tell me, gentle Maids,
And thou, fair Youth, who seem to lead the Train,
Is this the Temple of the Delphic God?

ILYSSUS. It is; and on the middle Point of Earth
Its firm Foundations by immortal Hands
Stand fixed: -- but break we off; the folded Gates
Unbar, and lo! the Priestess' self appears!

The Pythia speaks as she descends from the Temple PYTHIA. Hence, ye profane!
nor with unhallowed Step
Pollute the Threshold of the Delian King
Who slew the Python! -- Say, from whence thou art,
And what thy Business, Stranger.

PHORBAS. Sacred Maid!
From Athens am I come, the Harbinger
Of great Creusa, mine and Athens' Queen

PYTHIA. Comes she on pious Purpose, to adore
The mystic Shrine oracular?

PHORBAS. She does;
And with her comes the Partner of her Bed,
Aeolian Xuthus: he whose powerful Arm
Saved Athens from her Fate, and in return
From good Erectheus' bounteous Hand received
His Daughter and his Crown. -- Half aside.
Would he had found
Some other Recompense!

PYTHIA. Overhearing him. Would he had found?
Old Age is talkative, and I may learn
Somewhat of moment from him. -- Wherefore come they?
Does Famine threaten, or wide-wasting Plague
Infest the Land?

PHORBAS. Thank Heaven, our crowded Streets
Have felt no dire Disease; and Plenty still
Laughs in our blooming Fields. Alas! I fear
The childless Goddess who presides over Athens
Has found a surer Method to declare
How ill she brooks that any Stranger Hand
Should wield the Athenian Scepter.

PYTHIA. Does from her
The Vengeance come?

PHORBAS I know not whence it comes,
But this I know, full fifteen Years have rolled
Since first their Hands were joined, and rolled in vain;
For still the Royal Pair in Silence mourn,
Cursed with a barren Bed. For this they come,
T'explore the latent Cause, and beg of Heaven
To grant an Heir, or teach them where to fix,
On what selected Head, the Athenian Crown.

PYTHIA. And Heaven, no doubt, will hear and grant their Prayer.
Ilssus, haste, and bid the Priests prepare
For Sacrifice. You, Nysa, and your Sisters,
Amid the Laurel Grove with Speed perform
The Morning's due Lustration.
Then hither all return. -- Myself mean while Aside.
Will tempt the Vice of Age, and try to draw Aside.
Some useful Secrets from him. Aside.
The good King
Of whom you spoke, Erectheus, did his People
Esteem and love him as they ought? for Fame
Talked largely of his Worth. He was a King --

PHORBAS. He was my good old Master, such a King
As Heaven but rarely sends. Did we esteem
And love him, do thou ask? O, we adored him,
He was our Father, not our King. -- These Tears
At least may speak my Heart. -- We must not hope
In these degenerate Times to see him equaled.
He never did an unkind Act, but once,
And then he thought the public Good required it;
Though much I fear the Evils we lament
From thence derive their Origin.

PYTHIA. What Act?
What unkind Act?

PHORBAS. O Maid, 'twere long to tell
The whole unhappy Story, yet in part
Hear what to me appears too closely joined
With these our present Ills. There was a Youth
Athenian born, but not of Royal Blood,
His Name Nicander; him unlucky Fate
Had made the Lover of our present Queen
While yet a Maid. What will not Love attempt
In young ambitious Minds? he told his Pain,
And won the Fair in secret to admit,
And to return his Passion. The good King
Was for a Time deceived, but found at last
The audacious Fraud, and drove the guilty Youth
To Banishment perpetual. Some say
'Twas by his Means he fell, though that my Heart
Consents not to believe. Thus much is sure,
Nicander wandered forth a wretched Exile,
And ere few Days had past, upon the Road
Were found his well-known Garments stained with Blood.
Sure Sign of Murder, and as sure a Sign
No needy Robber was the Instrument.

PYTHIA. How bore Creusa this?

PHORBAS. At first her Sorrows
Were loud and frantic. Time at length subdued
Her Rage to silent Grief. The good old King,
To sooth her Woes, consented she should raise
A Tomb to her Nicander; and perform
A Kind of annual Rites to parted Love.

PYTHIA. But that not long continued, for we find
She married Xuthus.

PHORBAS. 'Twas a Match of State,
He saved her Country, and she gave her Hand
Because that Country asked it. But her Heart
Is buried with Nicander. Still to him,
And Xuthus' self permits it, she performs
Her yearly Oft'rings, and adorns with Flowers
An empty Tomb. -- Would he had lived, and reigned
Her wedded Lord! we had not wanted then
The Assistance of a Stranger Arm to guard
The Athenian State, nor had we then been driven
To search for Heirs at Delphi.

PYTHIA. Stop thy Tongue,
Or speak with Reverence of the sacred Shrine.
-- Thy Words were hasty, but thy Silence now
Makes just Atonement for them. -- Then perhaps
Thou think this want of Heirs a Curse entailed
By Heaven on Athens for Nicander's Death
And Xuthus' Reign?

PHORBAS. I am Athenian born,
Nor love Aeolian Kings, however great
And good they may be.

PYTHIA. The Imperial Xuthus
Is much renowned.

PHORBAS. Is virtuous, brave, and pious;
Perhaps too pious.

PYTHIA. How!

PHORBAS. Forgive me, Maid,
I speak my Thoughts with Freedom.

PYTHIA. What thou speak
To me, is sacred. Then perchance thou rank'st
His Journey hither to address the God
Among those Acts which thou would call too pious?

PHORBAS. For me the Gods of Athens would suffice. --
Yet do I pay just Reverence, holy Maid,
To thee, and to thy Shrine.

PYTHIA. Thy Zeal for Athens
Is too intemperate. -- But the Train returns
And interrupts our Converse. Say, Ilyssus,
Are they prepared?

Enter ILYSSUS and Virgins. ILYSSUS. They are, and only wait
The approaching Victims.

PYTHIA. By you Train, the Queen
Is now on her Arrival. Thou, Ilyssus,
Receive her here; while I, as Custom wills,
Deep in the Temple's inmost Gloom retire
And wait the inspiring God. -- Ilyssus, hear;
When thou have paid due Honors to the Queen,
Haste to Aletes, in the Laurel Grove
Impatient I expect him; tell him, Youth,
Things of uncommon Import do demand
His instant Presence. -- But the Crowd approaches.
Stranger, farewell. -- I feel, I feel within
An Heaven-born Impulse, and the Seeds of Truth
Are laboring in my Breast. -- Stranger, farewell.

The Pythia returns to the Temple, and the Gates shut. Enter CREUSA and
Attendants. CREUSA. No farther need we Conduct. Bid the Guards
Return, and wait the King.

PHORBAS. Does ought of Moment
Detain him on the Road?

CREUSA. He stops a while
(...) great Trophonius' Cave, that he may leave
(...) Duty unperform'd. Heaven grant his Zeal
May meet with just Success!

ILYSSUS. Please you, great Queen,
In yon Pavilion to repose, and taste
Some light Refection.

CREUSA. Ha! -- Lycea, -- Phorbas,
What Youth is this? There Is something in his Eyes,
His Shape, his Voice. -- What may we call thee, Youth?

ILYSSUS. The Servant of the God, who guards this Fane.

CREUSA. Bear thou no Name?

ILYSSUS. Ilyssus, gracious Queen,
The Priests and Virgins call me.

CREUSA. Ha! Ilyssus!
That Name's Athenian. Tell me, gentle Youth,
Art thou of Athens then?

ILYSSUS. I have no Country,
Nor know I whence I am.

CREUSA. Who where thy Parents?
Thy Father, Mother?

ILYSSUS. Ever honored Queen,
I never knew a Mother's tender Cares*
Nor heard the Instructions of a Father's Tongue.

CREUSA. How came thou hither?

ILYSSUS. Eighteen Years are past
Since in the Temple's Portal I was found
A sleeping Infant.

CREUSA. Eighteen Years! good Heaven!
That fatal Time recalls a Scene of Woe --
Let me not think. -- Were there no Marks to show
From whom or whence thou were?

ILYSSUS. I have been told
An Osier Basket such as Shepherds weave,
And a few scattered Leaves were all the Bed
And Cradle I could boast.

CREUSA. Unhappy Child!
But more, O ten times more unhappy they
Who lost perhaps in thee their only Offspring!
What Pangs, what Anguish must the Mother feel,
Compelled, no doubt, by some disastrous Fate --
-- But this is all Conjecture. --

ILYSSUS. O great Queen,
Had those from whom I sprung been formed like thee;
Had they ever felt the secret Pangs of Nature,
They had not left me to the desert World
So totally exposed. I rather fear
I am the Child of Lowliness and Vice,
And happy only in my Ignorance.
-- Why should she weep? O if her Tears can fall
For even a Stranger's but suspected Woes,
How is that People blessed where she presides
As Mother, and as Queen! -- Please you, retire?

CREUSA. No, stay. Thy Sentiments at least bespeak
A generous Education. Tell me, Youth,
How has thy Mind been formed?

ILYSSUS. In that, great Queen,
I never wanted Parents. The good Priests
And pious Priestess, who with Care sustained
My helpless Infancy, left not my Youth
Without Instruction. But O, more than all,
The kindest, best good Man, a neighboring Sage
Who has known better Days, though now retired
To a small Cottage on the Mountain's Brow,
He deals his Blessings to the simple Swains
In Balms and powerful Herbs. He taught me Things
Which my Soul treasures as its dearest Wealth,
And will remember ever. The good Priests,
It Is true, had taught the same, but not with half
That Force and Energy; Conviction's self
Dwelt on Aletes' Tongue.

CREUSA. Aletes, said thou?
Was that the good Man's Name?

ILYSSUS. It is, great Queen,
For yet he lives, and guides me by his Counsels.

CREUSA. What did he teach thee?

ILYSSUS. To adore high Heaven,
And venerate on Earth Heaven's Image, Truth!
To feel for others Woes, and bear my own
With manly Resignation. -- Yet I own
Some things he taught me which but ill agree
With my Condition here.

CREUSA. What things were those?

ILYSSUS. They were for Exercise, and to confirm
My growing Strength. And yet I often told him
The Exercise he taught resembled much
What I had heard of War. He was himself
A Warrior once.

CREUSA. And did those Sports delight thee!

ILYSSUS. Great Queen, I do confess my Soul mixed with them.
Whenever I grasped the Osier-platted Shield,
Or sent the mimic Javelin to its Mark,
I felt I know not what of Manhood in me.
But then I knew my Duty, and repressed
The swelling Ardor. It Is to Shades, I cried,
The Servant of the Temple must confine
His less ambitious, not less virtuous Cares.

CREUSA. Did the good Man observe, and blame thy Ardor?

ILYSSUS. He only smiled at my too forward Zeal;
Nay seemed to think such Sports were necessary
To soften what he called more rig'rous Studies.

CREUSA, -- Why should she weep? O if her Tears can fall
For even a Stranger's but suspected Woes,
How is that People blessed where she presides
As Mother, and as Queen! -- Please you, retire?

CREUSA. No, stay. Thy Sentiments at least bespeak
A generous Education. Tell me, Youth,
How has thy Mind been formed?

ILYSSUS. In that, great Queen,
I never wanted Parents. The good Priests
And pious Priestess, who with Care sustained
My helpless Infancy, left not my Youth
Without Instruction. But O, more than all,
The kindest, best good Man, a neighboring Sage
Who has known better Days, though now retired
To a small Cottage on the Mountain's Brow,
He deals his Blessings to the simple Swains
In Balms and powerful Herbs. He taught me Things
Which my Soul treasures as its dearest Wealth,
And will remember ever. The good Priests,
It Is true, had taught the same, but not with half
That Force and Energy; Conviction's self
Dwelt on Aletes' Tongue.

CREUSA. Aletes, said thou?
Was that the good Man's Name?

ILYSSUS. It is, great Queen,
For yet he lives, and guides me by his Counsels.

CREUSA. What did he teach thee?

ILYSSUS. To adore high Heaven,
And venerate on Earth Heaven's Image, Truth!
To feel for others Woes, and bear my own
With manly Resignation. -- Yet I own
Some things he taught me which but ill agree
With my Condition here.

CREUSA. What things were those?

ILYSSUS. They were for Exercise, and to confirm
My growing Strength. And yet I often told him
The Exercise he taught resembled much
What I had heard of War. He was himself
A Warrior once.

CREUSA. And did those Sports delight thee!

ILYSSUS. Great Queen, I do confess my Soul mixed with them.
Whenever I grasped the Osier-platted Shield,
Or sent the mimic Javelin to its Mark,
I felt I know not what of Manhood in me.
But then I knew my Duty, and repressed
The swelling Ardor. It Is to Shades, I cried,
The Servant of the Temple must confine
His less ambitious, not less virtuous Cares.

CREUSA. Did the good Man observe, and blame thy Ardor?

ILYSSUS. He only smiled at my too forward Zeal;
Nay seemed to think such Sports were necessary
To soften what he called more rig'rous Studies.

CREUSA. -- Suppose when I return to Athens, Youth,
Thou should attend me thither! would thou trust
To me thy future Fortunes?

ILYSSUS. O most gladly!
-- But then to leave these Shades where I was nursed
The Servant of the God, how might that seem?
And good Aletes too, the kind old Man
Of whom I spoke? -- But wherefore talk I thus,
You only throw these tempting Lures to try
The Ambition of my Youth. -- Please you, retire.

CREUSA. Ilyssus, we will find a time to speak
More largely on this Subject, for the present
Let all withdraw and leave us. Youth, farewell,
I see the Place, and will retire at leisure.
Lycea, Phorbas, stay.

ILYSSUS. Aside. How my Heart beats!
She must mean something sure. Though good Aletes
Has told me polished Courts abound in Falsehood.
But I will bear the Priestess' Message to him,
And open all my Doubts.

Exit. PHORBAS. Great Queen, why stand'st thou silent? something seems
To labor in thy Breast.

CREUSA. Alas! good Phorbas,
Did thou observe that Youth? When first my Eye
Glanced on his beauteous Form, methought I saw
The Person of Nicander.

PHORBAS. Gracious Queen,
Your Heart misleads your Eyes. The Image there
Too deeply six'd makes every pleasing Object
Bear some Resemblance to itself.

CREUSA. Lycea,
And yet, though thou wast there I well believe
Thy Youth can scarce remember how he looked,
When from the Fight triumphant he returned
Graced with the victor Laurel; such a Wreath
As now Ilyssus wears. Indeed, Lycea,
Thy Mother, had she lived, had thought as I do.
Nay when he spoke the Voice too was Nicander's.
I know not what to think, perhaps 'twas Fancy,
Perhaps 'twas something more.

PHORBAS. Illustrious Queen,
You do abuse your noble Mind, and lend
To mere illusions of the Brain, the Force
And Power to make you wretched. Grant there were
Some slight Resemblance of Nicander's Form
In young Ilyssus, though my Eyes perceive not
Even the most distant Likeness, grant there were,
Yet wherefore should the Sight so nearly touch thee,
Casual Similitude, we know too well
Nicander left no Heir.
She seems disturbed. I say not this,
Great Queen, to heighten but relieve your Sorrows,
And banish from your Breast each vain Surmise
Which Fancy might suggest.

CREUSA. Too well indeed,
O Phorbas, much too well indeed we know
Nicander left no Heir to his Perfections,
No Image of himself. -- And yet, good Phorbas,
Blame not my Folly, nor demand a Reason
If I entreat thee to examine strictly
The Fortunes of this young Unknown. The Priests
Or Priestess may know more than they entrust
To his unwary Youth. The Sage he spoke of,
Could thou not search him out; it is somewhere near
He dwells, I think, upon the Mountain's Brow.
Thou wonder'st at me, call it if thou please
A Woman's Weakness; but obey me, Phorbas.

PHORBAS. You say I wonder, it is indeed to see
My honored Queen employ her Thoughts thus idly
On Griefs long past; when things of dear Concern
To her and Athens should alarm her nearly.

CREUSA. What things of near Concern?

PHORBAS. See thou not, Queen,
Thy Crown, Erectheus' Crown, the Crown of Athens,
Wavering in Fortune's Power?

CREUSA. The Gods will fix it.

PHORBAS. The Gods? Ah, great Creusa, may my Fears
Be vain and groundless; but I fear the Gods
Have left us to ourselves. When we resigned
The Athenian Scepter to a Stranger Hand
We did reject their Guidance. Wherefore come we
To Delphi now, but that the offended Gods
Have turned too long an inattentive Ear
To our ill-judg'd Petitions.

CREUSA. Why ill-judg'd?
We asked for Heirs.

PHORBAS. We did; for Xuthus' Heirs,
The Race of Aeolus. -- I know, great Queen,
They were to spring from thee; but Heaven permits not
The native Pureness of the Athenian Soil
Should mix with foreign Clay. I wish we find not
More alien Kings at Delphi.

CREUSA. Think thou Xuthus
Deceives us then? His Worth, his Piety,
Forbid the Thought. Besides, the sacred Place
Admits not of Deceit.

PHORBAS. Credulity
Is not the Vice of Age. Forgive me, Queen,
If I suspect that Piety which brings us
To search for Kings at Delphi. Might not Athens
Have chosen her own Monarch? Her brave Youth,
Her bearded Sages, are they not the Flower
And Pride of Greece? Nay, might not thou, Creusa,
With liberal Hand bestow the Imperial Wreath?
And who has better Right?

CREUSA. The Gods, who gave it
To me, and my great Ancestors.

PHORBAS. Whatever
The Gods bestow can never be resumed
Though we repent. The pious Populace
Will reverence Kings from Heaven.

CREUSA. And wherefore not?

PHORBAS. O Queen, perhaps my Fears are too officious,
But let thy Servant beg --

CREUSA. I know thy Zeal
For me, and for thy Country. Rest assured,
Creusa never will consent to ought
Which can endanger Athens.

PHORBAS. My Heart thanks thee!

CREUSA. Mean while the Youth Ilyssus --

PHORBAS. Should the King
Confirmed by Oracles presume to fix
A Stranger on the Throne. --

CREUSA. He will not do it.

PHORBAS. I hope he will not, yet --

CREUSA. The Youth I spoke of,
Will thou enquire? --

PHORBAS. Should Xuthus lay aside
His usual Mildness, and assume at once
The Monarch and the Husband, could thou then --

CREUSA. In Athens' Cause I could resist them all.
But cease these vain Suspicions. A few Hours
Will prove thy Fears were groundless. Meanwhile, Phorbas
Thou will find Methods to inform thyself
Touching this unknown Youth.

PHORBAS. By yonder Guards
The King should be at hand.

CREUSA. I will retire
To the Pavilion, and expect him there.
Yet hear me, Phorbas; let not Xuthus know
Why thou inquire.

PHORBAS. Xuthus has other Cares.

CREUSA. The Priestess too, I would confer with her.
Though that Lycea may perform. Farewell,
And prosper in thy Task. -- Alas, Lycea,
Exit Phorbas. There is a Secret labors in my Breast,
But Fate forbids that I should give it Utterance.
This boding Heart was early taught to feel
Too sensibly; each distant Doubt alarms it;
It starts at Shadows. -- But retire we, Maid,
Grief is the unhappy Charter of our Sex;
The Gods who gave us readier Tears to shed
Gave us more Cause to shed them.

Exeunt. The End of the First ACT.
ACT II. The Laurel Grove.
ALETES and ILYSSUS. ALETES. SEEMED she disturbed when she beheld thee?

ILYSSUS. Much;
And when I gave her the slight Hints I knew
Relating to my Fortunes, she dissolved
In silent Tears: such soft Humanity
Sure never dwelt in any Breast but hers.
Nor did I think till now that I had Cause
Of Discontent; but since she wept my Fate,
I seem to find a Reason in her Grief,
And feel myself unhappy.

ALETES. Why unhappy?

ILYSSUS. I know not why; and yet to be confined
Thus to a single Spot; to draw in Air,
To take in Nourishment, to live, to die,
For this was Man designed? Ah, good Aletes,
Sure thou have taught me, Godlike Man was made
For nobler Purposes of general Good;
For Action, not for Rest. -- The Queen proposed
I should attend her to the Athenian State;
Would thou advise it? Do thou think, Aletes,
She meant I should attend her?

ALETES. Doubtless, Youth,
If she proposed, she meant it.

ILYSSUS. And would thou
Advise I should attend her?

ALETES. Wherefore not?

ILYSSUS. May I desert these Shades? or can I leave
Thee, thee, my good Aletes?

ALETES. O Ilyssus,
Strive not to hide thy Heart; from me thou can not;
I formed it, and I know it. Delphi's Shades
Have now no Peace for thee, thy Bosom feels
Ambition's active, unrelenting Fires.
Thou wishest, and thou hop'st, thou know not what.
It Is Glory thou would have: Go then, brave Youth,
Where Virtue calls thee: be the Means but noble
Thou can not soar too high.

ILYSSUS. My more than Father!
Thy Words inspire me, and I feel a Warmth
Unknown before. -- But then, my Birth --

ALETES. Thy Birth?
Did I not early teach thee to despise
A casual Good? Thou art thyself, Ilyssus.
Inform me, Youth, would thou be what thou art,
Thus fair, thus brave, thus sensibly alive
To Glory's finest Feel; or give up all,
To be descended from a Line of Kings,
The tenth perhaps from Jove? -- I see thy Cheek
Glows a repentant Blush. -- Our greatest Heroes,
Those Gods on Earth, those Friends of Human kind,
Whose great Examples I would set before thee,
Were once unknown like thee. And yet, if Birth
Concern thee, know, prophetic is my Speech,
Thy Fate is now at work, and a few Hours
May show thee what thou art. -- My Words alarm thee.

ILYSSUS. They do indeed. O tell me --

ALETES. It Is in vain
Thou would enquire from me, what Heaven conceals
Till its fit Time. Did thou not say, Ilyssus,
Thy Pythia would be here?

ILYSSUS. She comes.

ALETES. Retire
And leave us to ourselves.

ILYSSUS. I will. -- And yet
Might I not know --

ALETES. From me thou can know nothing.

ILYSSUS. A few Hours, said you?

ALETES. Hence, and beg of Heaven
To prosper the Event. Retire and leave us.

Exit Ilyssus. Enter PYTHIA. PYTHIA. Now good Aletes, if thy pregnant Mind,
Deep judging of Events, has ever framed
Such artful Truths as won believing Man
To think them born of Heaven, and made my Name
Renowned in Greece, O now exert thy Power.
No common Cause demands it. Kings and States
Are our Solicitors, and Athens' Fate
Hangs on my Lips.

ALETES. I know it well. And now
If, as thou say, my secret kind Advice,
And worn Experience in the Ways of Men,
Have gained thy Altars Credit, and with Gifts
Loaded thy Shrines, now, by one grateful Act
Thou may repay me all.

PYTHIA. What Act? O speak,
And gladly I obey.

ALETES. An Act, my PYTHIA,
Which though at first it may seem bold and dangerous,
Shall in the End add Luster to thy Shades,
And make even Kings Protectors of thy Fane.
-- O Pythia, 'twas the Hand of Heaven itself
Which brought these Royal Suppliants to thy Shrine.
I could unfold a Tale. -- But let it rest.
Thou shall ere Night know all, and bless with me
The indulgent Powers above. Only in this
Obey me blindly, Pythia.

PYTHIA. Say in what.

ALETES. Declare Ilyssus Heir to Athens' Crown.

PYTHIA. Ilyssus Heir? what mean thou? it is a Fraud
Too palpable.

ALETES. I knew 'twould startle thee.
But it is because thou know the Fraud, my Pythia,
That it alarms thee. Did thou really think
This Youth were Heir to the Athenian Crown,
Would thou not seize the happy Gift of Chance
And to the World proclaim it?

PYTHIA. True, I should;
And bless my Fate that in these sacred Shades
I had nursed up unknowingly a King
For my Protector. But what then might seem
The Consequence, now seems the Cause, Aletes;
Will they not say I made the King, to gain
The kind Protector?

ALETES. So to thee it seems;
But who will say it? the believing many
Will bow with Reverence and implicit Faith
To what thy Shrine ordains; and for the few
Who may suspect the Cheat, true Policy
Will keep them silent: should they dare detect
A Fraud like this, and spurn at Right divine,
Where were their Power? The many-headed Beast
Would feel the slackened Rein, and from his Back
Shake off the lordly Rider. Nay should Athens
Be blind to her own Good, the States of Greece,
Thou know it well, would arm in thy Defense,
And force her to receive the King thou gav'st her.
His Form, his unknown Birth, his winning Softness,
His Education here in Heaven's own Eye,
All plead in his behalf. And, as he tells me,
The Queen already with unusual Marks
Of Favor has beheld him. For the King,
A pious Awe and Reverence for the Gods
Is his distinguished Attribute. Thou seem
To weigh my Words. To clear thy Doubts at once,
Know many Days have past since first I knew
Of their Approach. Thou think I should have told thee,
It needed not. I have myself prepared
Each previous Circumstance, and found due means
To forward the Event. Thy Part is easy;
Behold the Oracle.

PYTHIA reads. "A banished Youth is Athens' Cause of Woe."
How know thou that?

Looking earnestly at him. ALETES. Demand not, but read on.

PYTHIA reads. "For that Youth banished, Athens must receive
"Another Youth; and on the young Unknown
"Who 'tends my Shrine, and whom I call my Son,
"Bestow the Imperial Wreath." The God declare^
"No more."

ALETES. Thou seem amazed.

PYTHIA. I am indeed,
To find thee thus instructed on a Theme
I came prepared to mention. The Queen's Passion,
Her Lover banished --

ALETES. What thou see I know
May tell thee I know more But say, from whence
Thou gained'st thy Intelligence?

PYTHIA. From one
Whose Zeal may thwart thy Schemes: a warm old Man,
And firm in Athens' Cause, who came today
Before the rest, and led by my Enquiries
Gave me those Hints on which I thought to build
Prophetic, doubtful Answers. But I find
My best Instructor here.

ALETES. Perhaps thou do.
Of this rest well assured, I never had asked
Of Pythia ought but what I knew with Safety
She might comply with.

PYTHIA. Tell me what thou know.

ALETES. Not yet; it is better thou remain in Ignorance
Till all be finished. But pronounce the Oracle,
And leave the rest to me. Do thou distrust me?

PYTHIA. I do not. -- Yet if on slight Hints alone
Thou form'st this weighty Fraud, consider well
What may or may not follow. -- By thy Looks
There should be something hid. -- Thy coming hither
Was much upon the Time we found this Child.
And since, with what almost paternal Care
Thou have instructed him. Though that indeed
Might spring from thy Benevolence of Heart,
Which I have known is boundless. Say, Aletes,
What should I think? Thou smil'st.

ALETES. Will thou obey me?

PYTHIA. I must; and yet if it is a Fraud, Aletes,
The warm old Man of whom I spoke detests
A Stranger King. Even Xuthus' self, whose Worth
He does acknowledge great, he views with Pain
Upon the Athenian Throne.

ALETES. I know him well;
It Is Phorbas. Do not wonder at my Words,
But find a Means that I may see the Queen
In secret, unobserved by prying Eyes,
And all that old Man's Fears, and Rage shall vanish.
He shall with Joy receive a Stranger King.
Will thou devise the Means?

PYTHIA. I now begin
To hope indeed. There is some Secret hid
Of most important Weight. But does the Queen --

ALETES. I will not answer thee; my Time's too precious.
Only devise some Means that I may see her
Quite unobserved by all.

PYTHIA. You cannot see her
Till all be past. Will that suffice?

ALETES. It will.

PYTHIA. Here in the Laurel Grove.

ALETES. No Place more fit.
But O be careful, Pythia, that the King
Observe us not; for it is of mighty Moment
He should believe this substituted Youth
Of Race Aeolian. To which End, my Pythia,
I have among the Priests these few Days past,
When they suspected not the Approach of Xuthus,
Dropped doubtful Hints as if I had discovered
Some antique Marks amid the Osier Twigs
Which formed Ilyssus' Cradle, that denote
He sprang from Aeolus: And at the Cave
Of great Trophonius have I taken due Care
Such Answers should be given as would induce
One of less Faith than Xuthus to expect
An Heir of his own Family.

PYTHIA. The Boy,
Knows he of thy Intentions?

ALETES. No, nor must
Till ripening Time permit. His Fate depends
Upon his Ignorance. -- Soft, who comes here?

PYTHIA. It is the warm old Man, and, as I think,
Some fair Attendant of the Queen. Retire.
I would know more, but -- Wherefore do thou gaze
So ardently upon them?

ALETES. Hence, away,
We must not now be seen.

Exeunt Pythia and Aletes. Enter LYCEA and PHORBAS. LYCEA. This Place seems
quite retired. Here if thou wait
I will inform the Queen, and her Impatience
Will bring her on the Instant. Surely, Phorbas,
Something mysterious lurks beneath her Tears;
Her strange Anxieties. Since thou were absent
This unknown Youth alone has filled her Thoughts,
Of him alone she talks, recounts his Words,
Describes his Looks, his Gestures; loves to dwell
On each Particular. Ere thou were gone
She wished and even expected thy Return;
Dispatched me often, though she knew 'twas vain,
To watch for thy Arrival. When the King
Approached, she smoothed her Brow, as if to hide
The Strugglings of her Mind; nay seemed afraid
He should suspect her Sorrows.

PHORBAS. Then to him
She mentioned not this Youth?

LYCEA. Her Conduct there
Was most mysterious. With a Voice of Fear,
She slightly dropped that she had seen a Youth
Whom she could wish to bear with her to Athens.
The King consented, and with Smiles proposed
They should adopt him.

PHORBAS. Ha! adopt him, said thou?

LYCEA. In Sport he spoke, but at his Words a Glow
Of sudden Joy spread over her Face, her Tongue
Forgot Restraint, and in his Praise grew lavish:
Then stopped again, and hesitating strove
To check its Zeal, as fearful to betray
Some hidden Transport.

PHORBAS. Whatsoever it be,
I soon shall damp her Joy. This Youth, Lycea,
Must not to Athens. -- But behold, the Queen.

LYCEA. O how impatient! ere I could return
To tell her thou were here, she comes herself,
Eager to learn thy Tidings.

Enter CREUSA. CREUSA. Now, my Phorbas,
Say what thou know at once. The King already
Consents he should attend us.

PHORBAS. Never, never
Shall Athens see that Youth.

CREUSA: What mean thou, Phorbas?

PHORBAS. Too much already of Aeolian Blood
Has hapless Athens known.

CREUSA. Aeolian Blood!

PHORBAS. The King consents! I doubt not his Consent.
-- Yes, 'twas my Word, great Queen, Aeolian Blood;
This Youth descends from Aeolus.

CREUSA. Be dumb,
Or bring me better Tidings.

PHORBAS, Worse I cannot,
But what I speak is Truth.

CREUSA. Peace, Monster, Peace!
Thou know not Truth. It Is thy affected Zeal
For Athens, for thy Country, that suggests
This horrid Falsehood; it is thy Hate of Xuthus.

PHORBAS. What means my Queen? or how have I deserved
Such harsh Expressions? Does my honest Love
For Athens, and Creusa, subject me
To such unkind Suspicions?

CREUSA. Gracious Gods!
It cannot be. -- Alas, forgive me, Phorbas,
I know not what I say, thy Words strike through me,
They pierce my very Soul. O I had hoped --
But tell me all, though I believe thee honest,
Thy Zeal for Athens, and for me, may make thee
Too hasty of Belief. Why art thou silent?

PHORBAS. Amazement stops my Tongue, these Starts of Passion,
This Violence of Grief, must have a Cause.

CREUSA. Perhaps they have, perhaps to thee, good Phorbas,
This bursting Heart may open all its Sorrows.
But tell me first, what are thy Proofs? from whence
Gain'dst thou this cursed Intelligence?

PHORBAS. O Queen,
Thy Looks, thy Words -- I know not how to answer.
Yet if there be Offense in what I speak,
My Ignorance offends, not I offend.
Know then, Creusa, from the Priests who 'tend
This Delphic Shrine, by your Command I learnt
My first Intelligence.

CREUSA. And did they say
This Youth was of Aeolian Race?

PHORBAS. They did.
At least their Words imported little less.
They judged me Xuthus' Friend, not Enemy,
As would thy Rage suggest, and as a Friend
Dropped Hints they thought would please me.

CREUSA. Then, perhaps,
It was not Truth they spoke, they but deceived
Thy Ear with well-judg'd Flattery.

PHORBAS. What followed
Confirmed it Truth. Has the King mentioned to thee
What Promises were given him at the Shrine
Of sage Trophonius?

CREUSA. General Promises
Of sure Success, no more.

PHORBAS. Know then, great Queen,
As I returned from Converse with the Priests,
I met his Friend and Bosom Favorite Lycon.
Joy sparkled in his Eyes, and his vain Tongue
O'erflow'd with Transport. I observed it well,
And gave the Torrent Passage, nay with Art
Even led it blindly forward. Till at length
He opened his whole Soul, and under Seal
Of firmest Secrecy told me the King
Would find an Heir at Delphi, such an Heir
As would rejoice the unapparent Shades
Of his great Ancestors. At that I started.
He found his Error then, and told me, glozing,
That great Trophonius had almost proclaimed,
Though not expressly, Xuthus here should find
An Heir of his own Race.

CREUSA. Of his own Race?

PHORBAS. So said he; whether great Trophonius spoke
This Oracle, I know not; but I know
Too well whose Oracle to me declared it.

CREUSA. Think thou this Youth --

PHORBAS. Grant it were only done
To try my Zeal, why should they try it now,
Unless some close Design required that Trial?
Yes, mighty Queen, I do believe this Youth
Is our intended King. But, by yon Heaven,
If it be he, or any other He
Of Xuthus' Race, he shall not reign in Athens.
This Poinard first shall drink his Blood.

CREUSA. Forbear!
That Thought distracts me. -- Though perhaps it is just.
-- O Phorbas, 'twas my Hope, my Wish, my Prayer
That Youth might reign in Athens. But thy Words
Strike deadly Damps like baleful Aconite,
And poison all within.

PHORBAS. What means my Queen?

CREUSA. O Phorbas, O Lycea -- but first swear
By Nemesis and the tremendous Powers
Who punish broken Faith, no Word, no Hint
Shall'scape your Lips of all your Queen declares.

BOTH. We swear!

CREUSA. Know then, O Pain to Memory!
I had a Son.

PHORBAS. A Son!

LYCEA. Good Heaven!

PHORBAS. A Son!

CREUSA. O my full Heart! Thy Mother, my Lycea,
Knew all the fatal Process of my Woes,
And was their only Solace. Phorbas, yes,
I had a Son, but witness every God
Whose genial Power presides over nuptial Leagues,
Nicander was my wedded Lord. That Night,
That fatal Night which drove him forth from Athens,
Forced from my swelling Womb, ere yet mature,
Its precious Burden. To thy Mother's Cares
I owed my Life. In secret she assuag'd
My piercing Pangs, and to Nicander's Arms
In secret she conveyed the wretched Infant.
What followed well thou know. Nicander fell,
And with him doubtless fell the dear, dear Charge,
Consigned to his Protection. Yet, good Phorbas,
When I beheld this Youth, his Looks, his Voice,
His Age, his unknown Birth, all, all conspired
To cheat me into Hopes. Alas, how fallen!
How blasted all!

PHORBAS. Great Queen, my Tears confess,
An old Man's Tears, which rarely fall, confess
How much I share your Anguish. Had I known
Nicander was your Lord, by Earth and Heaven,
I would have raised all Athens in his Cause,;
Nay, been a Rebel to the best of Masters,
Ere the dear Pledge of your unspotted Loves
Should thus have fallen untimely. Now, alas,
I have not even one flattering Hope to give thee.
Till now I often have wondered why so far
Their Rage pursued Nicander. It Is too plain,
They knew the precious Burden which he bore,
And for the hapless Child the Father died.

CREUSA. O God! I feel the Truth of what thou utter'st,
And my Heart dies within me. O Lycea,
Who, who would be a Mother!

PHORBAS. Be a Queen,
And turn thy Grief to Rage. Shall Aliens sport
With thy Misfortunes? Shall insulting Spoilers
Smile over the Ruins of thy hapless State,
While all the golden Harvest is their own?
Shall Xuthus triumph? shall his Race succeed?
While thine, I mean not to provoke thy Tears,
Thy tender Blossoms are torn rudely off
Almost or ere they bloom.

CREUSA. It shall not be,
No, ye immortal Powers! -- Yet let us wait
Till the dire Truth glare on us. One short Hour
And Doubt shall be no more. Then, Phorbas, then
Should he presume to place on Athens' Throne
His alien Race, nay though this beauteous Youth,
This dear Resemblance of my murdered Lord,
Should be the fatal Choice, by that dear Shade,
Which perished as it reached the Gates of Life,
I will, I think I will, assist thy Vengeance.
-- Soft, who comes here? It Is he! how innocent!
How winning soft he looks! Whatever it be,
He knows not the Deceit. Look on him, Phorbas;
Nay, thou shall question him.

PHORBAS. Not I. Great Queen,
Resume yourself, nor let this fond Persuasion
Betray you to a Weakness you should blush at.

CREUSA. If possible I will.

Enter ILYSSUS. ILYSSUS. Illustrious Queen,
The Altar stands prepared, and all Things wait
Your Royal Presence: From the King I come,
His Messenger.

CREUSA. We will attend his Pleasure.
Be near me, Phorbas; I may want thy Counsel.

ILYSSUS. She looks not on me sure as she was wont.
I Will speak to her. Permit me, gracious Queen,
To pay my humblest Thanks, for by your means
The King is kind as you are.

CREUSA. Rise, Ilyssus.
Perhaps you needed there no Advocate.
Phorbas, lead on. My Resolution melts,
And all my Sex returns. One Look from him
Outweighs a thousand Proofs. Phorbas, lead on,
Or I am lost in Weakness.

Exeunt Creusa and Phorbas. ILYSSUS, stopping Lycea. Gentle Maid,
Stay yet a Moment. Wherefore does the Queen
Look coldly on me? Know thou if in ought
I have offended?

LYCEA. Things of mightiest Import
At present fill her Mind, nor leave they room
For less Affairs. My Duty calls me hence.

Exit. ILYSSUS. I hope it is no more; yet each Appearance
Alarms me now. Aletes, thou have raised
Such Conflicts here, such Hopes, such Fears, such Doubts,
That Apprehension sinks beneath their Weight.
Well might thou say these solitary Shades
Have now no Peace for me. Yet once thou taught'st me,
That the pure Mind was its own Source of Peace.
But that Philosophy I find belongs
To private Life, for where Ambition enters
I feel it is not true.

Exit. The End of the Second ACT.
ACT III. The Vestibule of the Temple.
ALETES alone. WHY should I doubt? it will, it must succeed.
Yet I could wish that I had seen Creusa
Before 'twas undertaken, for perhaps --
It Is better as it is. Her Part had then
Been difficult to act; now what she does,
Assisting or opposing the Design,
Will all seem natural. -- The Pythia sure
Will act as I directed. -- Hark, the Rites
Should be ere this performed; why stay they then?
-- That Noise proclaims them finished, and the Crowd
Will soon be here. -- They come, I must not yet
Be seen; the Pythia in the Laurel Grove
May tell me what has passed.

Exit. CREUSA descends hastily from the Temple in great Disorder, LYCEA
following. LYCEA. Stay, mighty Queen,
You know not what you do; your Rage transports you;
You leave the Rites unfinished, and the Crowd
In wild Amazement gaze on your Departure.

CREUSA. I will not stay, nor will I tamely bear
My disappointed Hopes. O honest Phorbas,
O good old Man, thy penetrating Mind
Saw early their Designs. It Is to supply
Nicander's Loss (O never to be supplied!)
That we must call in Strangers to the Throne,
And yield our Scepters to Aeolian Hands.
-- Yes, ye great Shades of my Progenitors,
I hear ye call, ye shall, ye shall have Vengeance!

LYCEA. Whatever you design, conceal at least
This Transport of your Rage.

CREUSA. Why loiters Phorbas?
He saw my Anguish, wherefore comes he not
To its Relief? They fool me past Endurance.
Rely they on the Weakness of my Sex?
Lycea, they shall find this feeble Arm
In such a Cause can lay the Distaff by,
And grasp the unerring Thunderbolt of Jove.
O Phorbas, art thou come?

Enter PHORBAS from the Temple. PHORBAS. Now, mighty Queen,
Are my Suspicions just? is Phorbas honest?

CREUSA. As Light, as Truth itself. My Counselor,
My Bosom Friend!

PHORBAS. Now shall a casual Likeness,
If such there be, a semblant Cast of Features,
The Sport of Nature in a human Form,
Shall Trisles light as these weigh down Conviction?
O Queen, from first to last the apparent Scheme
Glares on us now. Why were we brought to Delphi,
But that this Youth has long been nurtured here
In secret from the World; perhaps the Son
Of Xuthus' self, placed here at first to hide
The Guilt and Shame of some dishonest Mother,
Though now applied to more pernicious Ends.

CREUSA. It may be so.

PHORBAS. And why, say why, today,
While Xuthus stays behind for Oracles
He wanted not, is young Ilyssus bid
To meet your Eyes, and win with artful Tales
Your easy Heart?

CREUSA. Bid! was he bid to do it?

PHORBAS. I saw the Priestess whisper something to him,
Then loud she bade him wait for thy Approach.
She must, forsooth, retire to sacred Glooms,
And wait for Inspiration. Xuthus' Gold
Was what inspired the Traitress. Yet, good Heaven,
When from the Shrine she gave the fraudful Words,
With what strange Art the holy Hypocrite
In mimic Trances died! -- "A banished Youth
"Is Athens' Cause of Woe." Too truly said,
Though for a wicked Purpose, to allure
Thy easy Faith, and lead thee to admit
The Fraud which followed.

CREUSA. Never, never, Phorbas,
Will I that Fraud admit. How readily
Did Xuthus, when my foolish Fondness asked it,
Consent to my Request! To Lycoa.
Thou heard'st him say
We should adopt this Youth; in seeming Sport
He spoke it, but even then the insulting Tyrant
Couched fatal Truths beneath the ambiguous Phrase.

PHORBAS. Why should a Youth designed for Solitude
Be taught the Arts of War? He saw himself
The Impropriety. Who is this Sage
That has instructed him? And why should Lycon
Overflow with sudden Joy, but that he found,
From thy apparent Fondness for the Boy,
Their Schemes grew practicable. Nay, today,
When to the Priestess' self my honest Love
For Athens, and Dislike of Stranger Kings,
Burst freely forth, she chid my hasty Zeal,
Commended Xuthus, talked of Piety
And Reverence to the Gods: 'Twas to their Priests
She meant, their meddling Priests, who dare presume
To sport with Thrones, to sell their Gods for Gold,
And stamp rank Falsehoods with the Seal of Heaven.

LYCEA. Forbear, you are too loud so near the Temple;
Xuthus himself will hear.

CREUSA. We would be heard.
Instruct me, Phorbas, by what means to crush
This impious Combination.

PHORBAS. Athens yet
Has honest Hearts. Yes, Phorbas yet has Friends
Who dare be Patriots, and prefer their Country
To Xuthus' kindest Smile. Some such are here
Even now at Delphi. But, illustrious Queen,
We must with Caution act. The Name of Heaven,
However usurped, adds Vigor to their Cause,
And weakens ours. We might in secret find
A sure Revenge.

CREUSA. What?

PHORBAS. Death.

CREUSA. Of Xuthus?

PHORBAS. His
Might follow, but the more immediate Cause
Should earliest be removed, the Boy.

CREUSA. The Boy!
Why should he die? Believe me, honest Phorbas,
He knows not of the Fraud. His every Look
Proclaims his Innocence. If impious Men
Make him their Instrument of evil Deeds,
Can he be blamed? Bred up in Shades, poor Youth,
He never knew the Arts of base Mankind,
Nor should he share their Punishment.

PHORBAS. O Queen,
They have too well succeeded. This fond Passion,
Which their insidious Cunning first inspired,
Clings close about your Heart, and may at last
Undo us all. -- But hark, that Noise declares
The finished Rites. Retire we to the Grove,
And there will I enforce --

CREUSA. No, let us stay.
I will confront this artful Politician,
And show him I am yet a Queen.

PHORBAS. Perhaps
'Twere better to retire till our full Scheme
Were ripe for Vengeance. -- * Aside. Yet if we remain,
High Words must rise, which will alarm her Pride
And fit her for my Purpose.

Enter XUTHUS, ILYSSUS, Priests, Virgins, Guards, etc. from the Temple. XUTHUS,
( coming up to Creusa) Thy Looks, Creusa, thy abrupt Departure
Affronting to the God himself, and these
His sacred Ministers, too plainly show
Irreverent Rage, resisting Heaven's high Will.
Nor do thou want I see, unthinking Woman,
Inflamers of thy Folly. -- But of this
Enough; behold the Youth whom Heaven designs
Thy Heir, and mine.

CREUSA. My Heir!

XUTHUS. Thy Heir, Creusa.
What means that haughty Look? Why with Contempt
Do thou behold him? Is he changed, Creusa?
Have a few Hours so totally transformed him?
Is all that winning Grace of which thou spak'st
Almost with Rapture, is that native Charm
Of Innocence all vanished? Hear him speak,
Hear if he talks less sensibly than when
Thy pleased Attention hung upon his Words,
And lent each Syllable an added Grace.
What have thou found, or thy grave Monitor
What has he found, which can so suddenly
Have wrought this wondrous Change? Is it because
The Gods have thought with thee that he deserves
A Crown? or is it that my Will consents?
And therefore thine, proud Queen, perversely strives
To combat thy Affections?

CREUSA. We methinks
Have changed Affections. The calm, steady Xuthus,
Whose equal Mind never knew the stormy Gusts
Of discomposing Passion, now can feel
Indecent Warmth when touched by pious Zeal.
Nay he, to whom the tend'rer Sentiments
Seemed but the Weakness of the human Frame,
Now wakes inspired with some unusual Softness.
Have Oracles the Power to raise at once
The kind Affections? or did he conceal
The smothered Flame, 'till authorized by Heaven
It might burst out unquestioned?

XUTHUS. Haughty Queen,
I understand thee well; thou think this Youth
A Substitute of mine, and dare affront
Yon awful Shrine, the Fountain of pure Truth.
But by that God who bears the vengeful Bow,
And whose large Eye -- Yet wherefore should I strive
By Oaths to undeceive thee; Breasts like mine
Can scorn the imputed Falsehood they detest.
Nor am I now to learn from what vile Source
Thy vain Suspicions rise. But know, proud Queen,
This Youth shall reign in Athens; and yet more
To punish thy vain Pride, since thou provok'st it,
I do believe him of Aeolian Race.

CREUSA. Thou do?

XUTHUS. I do. A Race as glorious, Queen,
As Cecrops' boasted lineage. For the Youth,
Were I to beg the choicest Boon of Heaven
From my own Loins to rise, I could not hope
A nobler Offspring.

PHORBAS. Aside to Creusa. Hear'st thou that?

CREUSA. I do,
And will revenge the Insult.

ILYSSUS. Kneeling. Gracious Queen!
What have I done which should estrange thee to me?
Am I the unhappy Cause of these Dissentions?

CREUSA. Kneel not to me, Ilyssus.

XUTHUS. Kneel not to her;
It Is I am thy Protector, and thy Friend,
Nay now thy Father.

ILYSSUS. Yet, O mighty King,
Permit me at her Royal Feet to pay
My humblest Duty. If I call thee Father,
She sure must be a Mother.

She turns away disordered. XUTHUS. Rise, Ilyssus,
Thou see she stands unmoved.

ILYSSUS. No, now she softens,
I see it in her Eyes.

CREUSA. I will, I will
Be Mistress of my Soul. -- Why kneel'st thou, Youth,
I blame not thee.

XUTHUS. Men then thou blam'st, Creusa.
I am the Object of thy Rage. It Is Xuthus
Thou think unworthy of the Athenian Throne.

CREUSA. Athens might well have spared a foreign Luster,
Secure of Fame, had Xuthus never been born.

XUTHUS. Ungrateful Queen, had Xuthus never been born
What now had Athens been?

CREUSA. Perhaps in Ruins,
And better so than to become the Prey
Of needy wandering Strangers.

XUTHUS. Earth, and Heaven!
This the Return? -- I knew thou never loved'st me,
Yet, witness Heaven, I ravished not thy Hand,
Thou gav'dst it sullenly, but yet thou gav'dst it;
And I well hoped thy Female Sense of Honor,
Of Duty to thy Lord, might have secured
At least my future Peace. Thy tend'rer Thoughts,
The Wife's best Ornament, I knew were buried
In a Plebeian Grave.

CREUSA. Plebeian Grave?

XUTHUS. Fool that I was, I flattered thy vain Sorrows,
Indulged their weak Excess, and raised, I find,
Imaginary Rivals in the Tomb.
But never more, Creusa, never more
Shall thou affront my ill-requited Fondness.
I will destroy that Pageant of thy Passion,
Tear from that Idol Shrine the insulting Wreaths,
And cancel thy mock Worship.

ILYSSUS. Gracious Queen,
Retire a while.

CREUSA. Be gone. -- Insulting Tyrant,
Touch but a Wreath that is sacred to Nicander,
And by pale Hecate's awful Rites I swear
Thy Life shall pay the Forfeit; nay the Lives
Of thy whole dastard Race. -- Plebeian Grave!
Had that Plebeian lived, Imperial Xuthus
Had crouch'd beneath his Feet.

XUTHUS. O would to Heaven
This sceptered Arm could raise him from the Earth,
That thou might see how infamous a Slave
Thou dare prefer to Xuthus. -- Come, Ilyssus,
We leave her to her Follies. Look not on her,
She merits not thy Tenderness. Away.
If Reason should again resume its Seat
We may expect her at the Banquet. Come,
All here must be our Guests.

Exeunt Xuthus, Ilyssus, etc. Creusa, Phorbas, and Lycea stay. PHORBAS. Curb
not thy Passion, give it Vent, great Queen,
And let it burst in Thunder on thy Foes.

CREUSA. It shall, by Heaven it shall. -- I thought till now
My Griefs were sacred, but this Monster dares
Insult even Misery itself. -- O Phorbas,
Forgive me if my Tears will force a Passage. --
Now, they are gone, and I will weep no more.
Come, faithful Counselor of Vengeance, come,
Instruct me how to act, steel all my Soul;
Let not Remorse or Pity's Coward Voice,
The Bane of noble Deeds, intrude to cross us.
Nicander's injured Ghost shall aid our Counsels.
Say, shall he die?

PHORBAS. Not yet, first be his Schemes
Abortive all, his politic Designs,
Then let him die despised.

CREUSA. Agreed; but how?

PHORBAS. Now at the Banquet may we crush at once
His full blown hopes. The fatal Cause removed,
The Effect of course must cease.

CREUSA. What Cause?

PHORBAS. The Boy.
I see thou shudder'st at it: but, great Queen,
Hear but the cogent Reasons I shall offer
And thou will think as I do. For the Boy
Heaven knows I wish to spare him, but no Means
No earthly Means but this can curse completely
This politic Designer. Doubtless long
This favorite Scheme to place on Athens' Throne
His hated Race, has labored in his Breast,
And all his Hours employed. On this alone
He builds the firm Foundation of his Peace,
His Happiness to come. His Death were nothing,
He knows his Friends, the Minions of his Fortune,
He knows all Greece, such is their Dread and Awe
Of Delphi's Shrine, will join in the Support
Of this deceitful Claim; and that firm Hope
Will make him triumph even in Death, and laugh
At our too shallow Vengeance.

CREUSA. Laugh he shall not.
No, I will punish home.

PHORBAS. You cannot punish
By any Means but this. And know, great Queen,
I have a Poison of such subtle Force,
(Why do thou start?) of such amazing Strength,
Yet so peculiar in its Operation,
That it shall seem the Surfeit of the Feast,
Not we have done the Deed. At least shall seem so
To all but Xuthus' self; for he methinks
Should know the Truth, at least suspect it strongly,
And yet not dare Revenge.

CREUSA. I cannot bear it;
However we fail in our Revenge; my Phorbas,
The Boy must live.

PHORBAS. Good Heaven! is this Creusa?
Is this the vengeful Queen who would not hear
Remorse or Pity's Voice? -- Farewell then Athens;
Yes, my poor Country, thou must sink enslaved
To foreign Tyrants. She who should defend
Thy Rights, thy Liberties, stands tamely by
And sees the Yoke imposed, nay smiles to see it:
Thy Queen, the last of her illustrious Line,
Consents to thy Destruction.

CREUSA. Never, Phorbas.
Do what thou will. With this last parting Pang
I give him to thy Rage. -- Yet oh, beware
I see him not again. One Look from him
Would baffle all thy Schemes.

PHORBAS. Now at the Banquet
Will we infuse the Draught, even in the Cup
Which the King's self presents to his young Heir
In Token of Election.

CREUSA. Stay, good Phorbas.

PHORBAS. Already have I for the just Design
Suborned a faithful Slave. Nay, should it fail,
I have a trusty Band, a chosen few,
Athenian Souls who scorn to bow the Knee
To any foreign Lord; these will I place
At the Pavilion Doors, if need require,
To second our Attempt.

CREUSA. Yet stay, good Pherbas.
How kindly did he seem to sympathize
With my Distress! nay almost chid the King,
When his loud Rage --

PHORBAS. He had been taught his Lesson.
'Twas all Design, all Artifice to work
Upon a Woman's Weakness.

CREUSA. Think thou so?

PHORBAS. I do. But, O my Queen, be more than Woman,
Conquer this Foible of thy Sex.

CREUSA. Heaven knows
How much it costs to do it. -- Go then, Phorbas,
I cannot bid thee prosper.

Exit Phorbas. O Lycea, Thou know not what I feel. -- Haste, call him back.
--
No, stay -- I think the Bitterness is past,
And I can bear it now. Lend me thy Arm,
I would retire, Lycea. -- Yet from what
Should I retire? I cannot from myself! --
O Boy, thou art revenged; whatever thou suffer'st
Is light, to what thy Murd'ress feels!

Exeunt. The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV. The Laurel Grove.
PHORBAS and Athenians. PHORBAS. THIS Way, my Friends; at the Pavilion Doors
Stand ready armed, that if we need your Aid
You may observe the Sign, and crush at once
These vile Usurpers on the Rights of Athens.
I hope we want ye not. -- I must be hid
A while, lest Xuthus should suspect my Presence.
The Queen too may repent, I Will therefore shun her Aside.
Till the Deed's done, irrevocably done. Aside.
-- But stir not till I come. -- What Noise is that?
Retire, my Friends, the Temple's Postern Door
Grates on its Hinge. -- Be secret, and we prosper.

Exeunt severally. Enter ALETES and PYTHIA. ALETES. This Quarrel was unlucky. A
slight Breach
Had lent my Purpose Strength; but wrought thus high
It may defeat our Hopes. She cannot now
With Ease recede from her too rash Resolves,
At least not unsuspected. Did she, say thou,
Reject thy Message?

PYTHIA. Scarcely did she pay
The decent Dues my sacred Office claims.
And when I pressed her more, with sullen Pride
She silently withdrew.

ALETES. See her I must.
Where went she?

PYTHIA. To the Shades which over-hang
The Aonian Fount.

ALETES. I will pursue her thither.

PYTHIA. It may not be, for now I know thy Secret
It Is my turn to be prudent, Know thou not
Thou should be cautious, nor expose thyself
To prying Eyes? I heard her, as she passed,
In broken Whispers bid Lycea haste
To Phorbas, and inform that trusty Friend
That she would wait him in the Laurel Grove.
Here then thou may surprise them both, and crown
At once thy whole Design.

ALETES. Thou counsell'st well,
And I will guide me by thy kind Advice.
O Pythia, how did every thing conspire
To give me hopes that I should place the Boy
Secure on Athens' Throne, unknown to all
But those whom Fate had made his firmest Friends.
The very Means I used to make it sure
Have been most adverse to the Cause I labored.
Had I relied on Xuthus' Piety,
Nor mentioned Aeolus, Success were mine.
And let me hope it still. What most I fear
Is the Queen's Warmth of Passion. To which end
I must proceed with Tenderness, and hide
For some short time Ilyssus from her Knowledge.
I have unnumber'd Cautions to premise
Which her overflowing Joy may happily ruin.
The Banquet, is it ready?

PYTHIA. It has long
In vain expected its illustrious Guests.
The King already has forgot his Rage,
And hopes returning Thought may move the Queen
To equal Amity: He therefore finds
Continual Causes to delay the Feast.

ALETES. Retire. Perhaps it is she; I hear the Steps
Of some who move this way.
Exit Pythia. What means he here?
Why art thou absent from the Banquet, Youth?

Enter ILYSSUS. ILYSSUS. It has no Joys for me. I fear, Aletes,
Thou and the Pythia have most foully played
For my Advancement.

ALETES. Ha!

ILYSSUS. Where are the Parents
Whom thou did promise to my Hopes? Alas
I find no Parents here, no kind Regards,
No inexpressive Fondness. Stern Debate,
And foul Dissension kindle here their Torch
To usher in my Greatness. Even Creusa,
Whose Tenderness I know not how alarmed
My throbbing Heart with Hopes, and Doubts, and Fears,
Unfelt before, even she has taught her Eyes
To look with Strangeness on me. The good King,
Who yet withdraws not his Protection from me,
Seems lost in anxious Thought. -- Unkind Aletes,
Art thou the Cause of this? Say, am I sprung
Of Race Aeolian? For by Heaven I swear,
By that pure Fountain of immortal Truth;
I will not brook Deceit. I will again,
However the glittering Mischief tempt my Youth,
Become that humble unknown Thing I was,
Rather than wear a Crown by Falsehood gained.
Speak then, and give me Ease.

ALETES. My dearest Boy --
His Virtue charms me, though it may prevent Aside.
His own Success. O happy, happy Athens, Aside.
To gain a King like him, whose honest Soul Aside.
Starts at imagined Fraud! Aside.

ILYSSUS. Speak on, Aletes,
And do not by that Look of Tenderness,
And murmuring to thyself, alarm me more.

ALETES. What should I speak? This very Morn, Ilyssus,
This very Morn I told thee a few Hours
Would show thee what thou were; but thy Impatience
Brooks not that short Delay. It seems Aletes
Has lost his usual Credit with Ilyssus,
Even with the Youth his anxious Care has formed.
Think thou the Man who taught thy feeling Heart
To start at Falsehood, would himself commit
The Fraud thou shudder'st at? What have I done,
Which should induce thee to a Thought so base?
Did ever my Precepts contradict my Heart?
Did I ever teach a Virtue I not practiced?
-- I see thou art confounded. Know then, Youth,
I blame not thy Impatience, nay I praise
That Modesty which can so soon resume
Its Seat, when all things round are big with Wonder.
Ere Night thou shall know all; till then, Ilyssus,
Behave as Athens' King.

ILYSSUS. O good Aletes,
Forgive my Rashness. Yes, I know thee honest
As Truth itself, and know the wondrous Debt
I owe thy Goodness. Yet, if thou confess
That I have Reason for these anxious Cares,
Thou will permit me still to question thee.
Nay look upon me whilst I speak to thee.
Perhaps thou have some secret Cause, Aletes,
For all that kind Attention thou have shown me,
From Infancy till now? Why do thou turn
Thy Eyes to Earth? It Is plain thou have a Cause:
Thou know from whom I spring; how can thou else
With Confidence assert, that yet ere Night
I shall know all? -- Say this at least, Aletes,
Shall the Queen's Anger cease?

ALETES. It shall, Ilyssus.
Even now I wait her here; on what Design
I must not yet inform thee. The next Time
Thou shall behold her thou will find a Change
Incredible indeed, from Rage to Fondness,
From cold Reserve to Tears of bursting Joy.

Ilyssus is going to speak eagerly. -- Ask me no more. -- Yet something did
thou say
Relating to the Cause which fixed me here
Thy Guardian, thy Instructor, and -- the Time
Will come, when thou shall know it all, Ilyssus,
And bless my Memory.

ILYSSUS. Thou weep'st, Aletes.
My Tears will mingle too.

ALETES. Forbear, and leave me.
Yet stay a while, for now perhaps we part
To meet no more.

ILYSSUS. No more! Thou will not leave me
When most I want thy Care! 'Twas my first Thought,
'Twas the first Boon I asked of the good King,
That thou might be my kind Instructor still.
He praised my Gratitude, and I had promised
To bring him to thy Cottage. He himself
Shall be a Suitor to thee.

ALETES. Thou have asked
Thou know not what: It cannot be, Ilyssus,
That Xuthus and Aletes ever should meet
On terms of Amity. The Smiles of Greatness
To me have lost their Value. For thy Love
I could do much, and to be severed from thee
Pulls at my Heart Strings. But resistless Fate
Has fixed its Seal, and we must part for ever,
How hard soever it seem. Thy Youth will soon,
Amidst the busy Scenes of active Greatness,
Forget its Monitor: But I must bear
In hopeless Solitude the Pangs of Absence
Till Thought shall be no more.

ILYSSUS. O heavenly Powers
Then there is something dreadful yet concealed.
I cannot part from thee in Ignorance.
Tell me, Aletes.

ALETES. Would I could! But now
It must not be. -- Haste to the Banquet, Youth,
Thy Duty calls thee thither.

ILYSSUS. Go I cannot,
Till thou assur'st me we shall meet again.

ALETES. If possible we will. If not, remember,
When thou shall know thyself, that on thyself
Thy Fate depends; that Virtue, Glory, Happiness,
Are close connected, and their sad Reverse
Is Vice, is Pain, is Infamy. -- Alas!
These were the Lessons of thy private Life,
This I have told thee often, but my fond Tongue
Runs over its former Precepts, and forgets
Thou now must mount a Throne; a larger Scene
Of Duty opens.

ILYSSUS. Yet the tender Friend,
Who should direct me, leaves me to myself.
Can thou abandon me?

ALETES. Would Fate permit
I would attend thee still. But oh, Ilyssus,
Whatever becomes of me, when thou shall reach
That envied Pinnacle of earthly Greatness,
Where faithful Monitors but rarely follow,
Even there, amidst the kindest Smiles of Fortune,
Forget not thou were once distressed and friendless.
Be strictly just; but yet, like Heaven, with Mercy
Temper thy Justice. From thy purged Ear
Banish base Flattery, and spurn the Wretch
Who would persuade thee thou art more than Man;
Weak, erring, selfish Man, endued with Power
To be the Minister of public Good.
If Conquest charm thee, and the Pride of War
Blaze on thy Sight, remember thou art placed
The Guardian of Mankind, nor build thy Fame
On Rapines, and on Murders. Should soft Peace
Invite to Luxury, the pleasing Bane
Of happy Kingdoms, know from thy Example
The Bliss or Woe of nameless Millions springs,
Their Virtue, or their Vice. Nor think by Laws
To curb licentious Man; those Laws alone
Can bend the headstrong Many to their Yoke,
Which make it present Interest to obey them.
O Boy! --

Enter PYTHIA hastily. PYTHIA. Ilyssus! wherefore art thou here?
The King expects thee, and the Banquet waits.

ILYSSUS. I cannot go.

ALETES. Thou must; thy Fate depends
Upon thy Absence now. The Queen approaches.
After the Banquet I again will see thee,
And thou shall know the whole. I will by Heaven.
Exit Ilyssus. Pythia away, and wait me in the Temple.
Exit Pythia. She saw them not; on her contracted Brow
Sits brooding Care. She speaks! My Heart beats thick,
And my Tongue trembles to perform its Office.
Now Fate attend, and perfect thine own Work!

Enter CREUSA. CREUSA. To what have I consented! -- Ha! who art thou
That thus intrud'st on sacred Privacy,
When the o'erburthen'd Mind unloads its Griefs,
Its hoarded Miseries.

ALETES. Thy better Genius!

CREUSA. That Voice is sure familiar to my Ear!
Who art thou, speak.

ALETES. One whom Adversity
Has taught to know himself. I bring thee tidings
Of an unhappy Man who wronged thee much,
But much repented of the Wrongs he did thee;
Of thy Nicander, Queen.

CREUSA. Nicander, say thou?
O then thou art indeed my better Genius.

ALETES. Now, arm thy Soul for Wonders yet to come!
Perhaps he lives.

CREUSA. He lives?

Looking on him with Amazement. ALETES. After great Irresolution and Struggles
with himself. Behold him here!
She faints. -- What has my Rashness done? -- The Blush of Life
Has left her Cheek, the Pulse forgets to move.
Where shall I turn? I cannot call for Aid,
Nor can I leave her thus. -- She breathes, she stirs!
-- Yes, yes, Creusa, thy Nicander lives,
And he will catch at least this dear Embrace
Though now thou art another's.

CREUSA. Gracious Gods!
It is, it is Nicander, it is my Lord!
O I am only thine, no Power on Earth
Shall ever divide us more.
-- It cannot be, my Senses all deceive me --
And yet it is. -- O let me gaze upon thee,
Recall each Trace which marks thee for my own,
And gives me back the Image of my Heart.
How Time and Grief have changed thee! But my Love
Can know no Change. My Lord, my Life, my Husband!
Where have thou wandered? how have thou been hid
From Love's all-piercing Sight? the bloody Ruffians,
How did thou 'scape their Rage? or did they wreak
Upon the helpless Innocent alone
Their impious Vengeance?

NICANDER. Nor on me, nor him
Did Vengeance fall.

CREUSA. Does he too live?

NICANDER. He does.

CREUSA. Aside. O honest Phorbas! Murder now is Virtue.

NICANDER. The fabled Murder was all Stratagem
Contrived for thy dear sake; no impious Ruffians
Pursued our Steps, I found that I had wronged thee
Beyond redress, nor knew another means
But by my Death to save thee from Dishonor.
Despair I thought might conquer Love, and thou
Once more be Athens' Pride. The precious Charge
Forbad a real Death, I therefore stained
With Blood my well-known Garments, which produced. --

CREUSA. A curst'd Effect. -- But I have nearer Fears.
How came thou hither? wherefore to these Shades?
The Boy, where is he?

NICANDER. Far from hence --

CREUSA. Thank Heaven!

NICANDER. He lives in Peace and Safety. -- What disturbs thee?

CREUSA. Nothing -- I dare not tell him what I feared,
His honest Breast might shudder at the Guilt,
Though now it be more needful. -- The dear Boy,
Say, is he brave?

NICANDER. As Woman could desire.

CREUSA. And formed like thee?

NICANDER. His Person far exceeds
What my most vigorous Youth could boast, Creusa.
And his firm Mind is Wisdom's aged Strength
With all Youth's Graces softened.

CREUSA. It Is too much.
O happy Mother! Call'st thou him Nicander?

NICANDER. No, Ion, 'twas the Name the Matron chose,
Who gave him to my Care.

CREUSA. Then Ion be it.
Ion shall reign in Athens. Know thou, Love,
The cursed Design which this Aeolian here,
And the vile Maid --

NICANDER. The Priestess, it should seem,
With Xuthus has conspired to fix his Race
On Athens' Throne.

CREUSA. But never shall his Race
That Scepter wield.

NICANDER. It never shall, Creusa.
I have a Means --

CREUSA. Aside. My Means, thank Heaven, is surer.

NICANDER. But I will tell thee all from first to last.
Hear then and weigh my Words, for Fate is in them.
Xuthus, the Athenian King --

CREUSA. I think not of him.

NICANDER. Beware of that. Whatever thou think, Creusa,
Xuthus must still reign on, thy Lord and Husband.

CREUSA. Xuthus my Lord! then what art thou, Nicander?
Do thou despise me for a Crime thyself
Have forced me to commit? My Soul was thine
Even when I gave my Hand, and still remains
Untainted, undefiled.

NICANDER. I know it well,
Thou dearest, best of Women. -- My torn Heart
Drops Blood while I propose it, yet we must,
We must for ever part. -- Forbear, Creusa,
That killing Look strikes through me. -- Think, O think,
What in this Age of Absence I have borne,
How combated each tender Thought, and lived
For thy dear Sake a Victim to Despair.
But now if thou consent'st, all, all is mine,
And I forgive my Fate. -- The dear, dear Boy,
I have a Means to place him on the Throne
Secure as we could wish.

CREUSA. Secure he shall be,
I will proclaim him to the World as mine,
And Athens shall with Joy receive its Sovereign;
The Tyrant Xuthus shall be taught to fear
A Master's Frown.

NICANDER. Thy Rashness, my Creusa,
May ruin all.

CREUSA. I will be rash, if this
Be Rashness, to declare to Earth, to Heaven,
A Mother's Heartfelt Joy, whose only Child
Snatched from the Grave unhop'd for comes to claim,
With every Grace and every Virtue crowned,
The Imperial Seat of his great Ancestors.
And shall we wait a Means?

NICANDER. We need not wait;
For by my Care the important Means is found
Already, and no human Power but thine
Can hinder our Success. I would have hid
The Secret from thee till thy wished Consent
Had given my Purpose Strength, but thou defeat'st
My utmost Caution, and wilt force me tell thee,
Ilyssus is young Ion! -- Ha! Creusa!
Thou art not mad! Good Heaven! how her Eye fixes!
What have I done? what said, which could attack
The Seats of Sense with this amazing Force?
My Wife, my Queen, O speak? --

CREUSA. Off, touch me not,
Thou can not bring Relief. -- O I am cursed
Beyond all Power of Aid. Thou too art cursed
And know it not. -- He dies, he dies, Nicander!

NICANDER. Amazement! who?

CREUSA. O had he not been mine,
His Youth, his Softness, each attracting Grace --
I should have staid whole Ages ere in Thought
I had consented to so damned a Deed.
Tears, Tears, why burst ye not? -- But what have I
To do with Tears? those are for tender Mothers.
The Tigress weeps not over her mangled Prey. --
He dies, he dies, Nicander.

NICANDER. Who? Ilyssus?
Speak, speak, Creusa.

CREUSA. Phorbas urged the Deed,
And I consented; at the Feast he dies
By Poison. -- O my Soul!

NICANDER. Fly then, this Instant
Perhaps thou may prevent it, as thou came
He parted hence. -- I knew not to his Death!

CREUSA. I go, I fly.

NICANDER. Yet stay, thy Rashness there,
If Fate has saved him, may undo us yet.
-- The Pythia! true, the Pythia shall rush in
To stop the fatal Banquet, and declare
The Feast unhallowed; at this lucky Moment
She waits me in the Temple. -- Stay, Creusa.

Exit Nicander. CREUSA. The Pythia, no; I will myself outstrip
The Lightning's Speed. Whatever be the Event,
It Is not too late to die.

Exit. The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V. The Laurel Grove.
PHORBAS and LYCEA. LYCEA. O Earth! O Heaven! O wretched, wretched Athens!

PHORBAS. Speak on, Lycea; wherefore art thou silent?
Why do thou lead me to this secret Shade?
What mean thy flowing Tears?

LYCEA. The Queen, the Queen!

PHORBAS. Say, what of her?

LYCEA. I know not, all to me
Is Terror and Confusion.

PHORBAS. What thou know
Relate.

LYCEA. She sent me forth to seek thee, Phorbas;
I found thee not, but met at my Return
Creusa's self. Despair was in her Eyes,
With hasty Steps she shot impatie^^ by me,
Nor listened when I spoke. I followed wondering,
And entered the Pavilion.

PHORBAS. The Pavilion?
Why, went she to the Banquet?

LYCEA. Eager went,
Despair and Anguish mixing on her Look.
But, O good Heaven, how changed was that Despair
To inexpressive Joy, when from the Crowd
She learnt Ilyssus had delayed the Feast,
And won the King once more to ask her Presence,
"Where is he? let me clasp him to my Breast,"
She cried; "I now no longer will resist
"Heaven's high command." Imperial Xuthus rose
With Transport to receive her, and loud Shouts
Proclaimed the People's Joy. When, Death to Sight!
Eternal Pain to Memory! the Slave
Presents the Goblets; Fill, she cried, a third,
I too will hail Ilyssus King of Athens.
But first all swear, swear by immortal Jove,
By the far-darting God who here presides,
And the chaste Guardian of our native Fanes,
Swear here, swear all, and binding be the Oath,
Ilyssus only shall be Athens' King.

PHORBAS. What could she mean?

LYCEA. Attentive Xuthus caught
With Joy the happy Omen, and all swore
Ilyssus only should be Athens' King.
This done, I saw her from Ilyssus' Hand
Snatch the dire Goblet, and to him resign
Her own untouched. The Slave who mixed the Draught
Turned oale and trembled, I with eager Zeal
Pressed forward, but in vain; she firmly grasped
The Bowl, and smiling drank it to the Dregs.

PHORBAS. The Poison, ha? -- I knew her foolish Fondness
Would start at Murder's Name. But wherefore die?
Why turn upon herself her impious Rage?
'Twas Madness all; or else some new Contrivance,
Some fresh Aeolian Fraud. -- I care not what.
I yet will blast their Schemes. -- Yes, let her die,
By her own Folly perish. Athens still
Survives, and shall survive. -- I must be sudden.
She doubtless will betray me to the King,
And cut off even this last Resource. Lycea,
Be secret, and thy Country shall be free.

LYCEA. Were it not better, Phorbas, first to see her.
Perhaps some Secret unreveal'd may lurk
Beneath this Show of unexampled Rashness.
She left the Banquet soon, and with the Pythia
Entered the Temple.

PHORBAS. With the Pythia, say thou?
Then there is Mischief toward.

LYCEA. Yet now alone
We may surprise her, for I saw the Maid
Quick from the Fane return with hasty Steps
As if dispatched on some important Message,
Perhaps to find thee out. Sure thou should see her.

PHORBAS. And perish, ha? -- No, no, my sacred Country,
Too much already have I been deceived;
I will not leave thee in a Woman's Power.
-- Yet hold, Lycea may inform her of them
And my Designs prove yet abortive. Maid,
Thy Presence may be needful.

LYCEA. Mine? Good Heaven,
In what? Creusa will require my Aid;
At least my Tears are due to my poor Queen
In her last Moments.

PHORBAS. Stay, she wants them not;
I know the Poison's Force too well, Lycea,
To fear a Death so sudden. This Way, Maid;
Nay, thou must go; I shall have Business for thee,
Some secret Message to the Queen, Lycea,
Which thou alone can bear.

Exeunt. Enter PYTHIA and NICANDER. PYTHIA. 'Twas he, I saw him and Lycea with
him.
Sure he should be informed? -- Thou hear'st me not.

NICANDER. This Action of the Queen sits near my Heart.

PYTHIA. She bade me tell thee. -- But why waste we Time,
Thou now may enter at the Postern Gate
Unseen by all.

NICANDER. Why did thou not rush in, and stop the Feast?
Thy speedy Presence there had saved us all.

PYTHIA. What could I do? The Queen was there already
And all seemed Peace and Joy; could I suspect
That Poison lurked beneath so fair a seeming?

NICANDER. She breaks through my Designs. -- Unhappy Woman!
My Soul bleeds for her, and Confusion hangs
On every rising Thought. -- The dear, dear Boy! --
Where is he, at the Banquet still?

PYTHIA. He is.

NICANDER. And where Creusa?

PYTHIA. I already told thee,
But thou regard'st not, in the Temple's Gloom
Retired she sits, expecting thy Approach.
We there may settle all.

NICANDER. I fear her much.
Thou see her Passions are too near concerned
To be of use to us; thy cooler Sense
Must here direct us. Does the Poison's Power
Affect her yet?

PYTHIA. Not yet; I would have tried
Some powerful Antidote to quell its Force;
But she refuses Life, and only begs
To see her Son and thee.

NICANDER. I will attend
Upon the Instant. But first hear me, Pythia;
Thou see on what a Precipice we stand,
It were in vain to hope we could conceal
The Truth from Xuthus, from the rest we may;
It Is thy task therefore --

PYTHIAS. What? to own the Fraud,
And publish to the King that Delphi's Shrine
Is not oracular. Ha!

NICANDER. To the King
'Twere better sure to publish the Deceit
Than to the World; and where is the Means but this
To hide it? By Creusa's Art thou say
He is already bound in solemn Oaths
To leave Ilyssus Heir to Athens' Throne.
Can thou not add still stronger Oaths, or ere
Thou do reveal the Secret of our Fate?
Then who shall dare to break them? shall the King?
Thou know his scrup'lous Piety extends
Almost to Weakness. What should tempt him to it?
Creusa dead can frame no Schemes against him;
The Boy to him alone must owe his Greatness;
And for Nicander, never more shall Greece
Hear his forgotten Name.

PYTHIA. It must be so;
And yet --

NICANDER. What yet? to Phorbas thou with ease
May own the Truth; he will not start at Fraud
In sacred things. -- But see, the Queen approaches
Impatient of our Stay. She changes not!
The Bloom of Health is still upon her Cheek!
Fain would I hope -- But Hopes, alas, are vain. --
What have thou done, Creusa?

CREUSA entering. Saved Ilyssus!

NICANDER. Thou might have lived with Honor.

CREUSA. Lived! good Heaven!
I start, I tremble at the Thoughts of Life.
Can thou reflect on what I had designed,
On what I am, on what, alas, I have been,
And not perceive Death was my only Refuge?
-- Am I not Xuthus' Wife, and what art thou?
O had thou seen the Torments of my Soul,
When in one hasty Moment it ran over
The Business of an Age, weighed all Events,
Saw Xuthus, Thee, Ilyssus, Athens bleed
In one promiscuous Carnage! -- Light at length
Burst through the Gloom, and Heaven's own Voice proclaimed
One Victim might suffice. --
For Xuthus Honor strove, and mightier Love
Assumed Nicander's Cause. Who then could fall?
Could Xuthus? could Nicander? -- no; Creusa.

NICANDER. Would thou had been less kind! -- But, O my Queen,
To blame thee now were vain. --

CREUSA. To blame? it is Praise,
It Is Triumph I demand. He lives! he reigns!
Young Ion lives! young Ion reigns in Athens!
O bring him, Pythia, bring him to my Arms;
Let me but pour a last sad Blessing over him,
And Death has lost its Terrors.
How now, Lycea?

Enter LYCEA hastily. LYCEA. Mighty Queen, I know not
If thy Command would authorize the Attempt,
But Phorbas with an armed Athenian Band
Now enters the Pavilion to destroy
The King and young Ilyssus.

NICANDER. Earth and Heaven!
What say thou, Maid?

CREUSA. O let me fly to save him,
Here shall their Poinards --

NICANDER. Rest thou there, Creusa,
Thy Embaffies today have proved too fatal.
My Life for his I save him from the Stroke,
And on the Instant send him to thy Arms.
Now, Fate, be doubly mine!

Exit. CREUSA. Off, let me go, I will not be restrained.
They tear him piecemeal!

PYTHIA. Patience, mighty Queen!
What Man can do Nicander will perform.

CREUSA. He is a Father only to my Child,
He cannot tell them what a Mother feels.
-- Phorbas was born the Curse of me and mine.
I might have known to what his impious Rage
Would urge him on, and should have first informed him.
-- Gods! must I never know sweet Peace again,
Not even in Death have Rest!

PYTHIA. Behold who comes
To bless thee ere thou die, and cease to murmur
At Heaven's high Will.

Enter ILYSSUS. CREUSA. It is, it is Ilyssus --
My Son, my Son!

ILYSSUS. Good Heavens! and do I live
To see a Parent melt in Fondness over me!
-- Aletes saved me from the Soldiers' Arms,
And bade me fly to find a Mother here.
Art thou indeed that Mother, mighty Queen!
And may I call thee so? Thou art, thy Looks
Thy Tears, thy kind Embrace, all, all proclaim
The Truth -- O let me thus, thus on my Knees --

CREUSA. Rise, rise, my Child; I am, I am thy Mother.

ILYSSUS. O sacred Sound, Ilyssus is no more
That outcast Youth. A Mother, and a Queen
He finds at once.

CREUSA. But art thou safe, my Child?
Have thou no Wound?

ILYSSUS. The old grey-headed Man,
Who brought this Morn the News of thy Arrival,
Had raised against my Breast his eager Sword,
Defenseless I; when good Aletes came
And snatched me from the Stroke. I would have staid,
Unarmed with him have staid, but his Command
Was absolute, that I should fly to find,
What I have found, a Mother!
Embracing her. Yet, O Queen,
Why am I thus encompassed round with Wonder?
May I not know this Riddle of my Fate?
Why first condemned to pass my Infant Days
In this obscure Retreat? If I am thine,
Thy Son, illustrious Queen, sure I was born
To Thrones, and Empires?

CREUSA. Thou art born to Thrones,
And shall in Athens reign.

ILYSSUS. As Xuthus' Heir.
Is Xuthus then my Sire? Forgive me, Queen,
I have a thousand, and a thousand Doubts.
Can Xuthus be my Sire?

PYTHIA. Forbear, Ilyssus, Nor press thy Fate too far. When Time permits
Thou shall know all.

CREUSA. Shall know it now, Ilyssus.
Not Xuthus is thy Sire, but that brave Man
Who but this Instant snatched thee from thy Fate,
And by that Act proclaimed himself a Father.

ILYSSUS. Aletes?

CREUSA. Not Aletes, but Nicander,
My wedded Lord, thy Sire! -- And see, he comes
To bless thee, and confirm the sacred Truth.
-- Good Heaven, he bleeds!

Enter NICANDER. NICANDER. To Death, to Death, Creusa.
Amid the Fray I met the Fate I sought for.
All else is safe, and Xuthus now pursues
A scattered Few, who fall beneath his Sword.
-- Where is my Boy? -- Ye Guards of Innocence!
How has he been beset, and how escaped!
-- Where is my Boy, for I may own him now,
And clasp him to my Breast, no more Aletes,
The sage Instructor of a Youth unknown,
But the dear Father weeping over his Child.

ILYSSUS. O Sir, what Gratitude before inspired
Let Duty pay.

NICANDER. I have no Time to waste
In Fondness now. Hear my last Words, Ilyssus,
And bind them to thy heart. Thou still must live
The Son of Xuthus. The good Pythia here
Will tell thee all the Story of thy Fate:
And may thou prosper as thou do obey
Her sacred Counsel. Xuthus too must know
The fatal Tale; but to the World beside
It must be hid in Darkness.

PYTHIA. Phorbas sure Should be informed.

NICANDER. Phorbas has breathed his last;
And the bribed Slave who mixed the poisonous Draught
Fell by this Hand. -- Ilyssus, O farewell.
I will not bid Adieu to thee, Creusa,
Thy Color changes, and the Lamp of Life
Fades in thy Eye; we soon shall meet again. --
Ilyssus, Oh! --

ILYSSUS. How hard he grasps my Hand!
My Lord, my Father! Have I learned so late,
To call thee by that Name, and must I lose,
For ever lose? -- Good Heaven, she grasps me too!
What means it, Pythia? the cold Damps of Death
Are on her.

CREUSA. O my Child, enquire no farther;
It Is fitting we should part. Lycea, Pythia,
Entreat of Xuthus -- yet I need not fear
His Goodness, though I wronged him, foully wronged him,
He yet will prove a Father to my Child,
And from the World conceal the fatal Truth.
O I am cold -- what Bolts of Ice shoot through me!
How my Limbs shiver! -- Nearer yet, my Child,
My Sight grows dim, and I could wish to gaze
For ever on thee. -- Oh, it will not be --
Even thou art lost, Ilyssus. -- Oh -- Farewell.

Dies. ILYSSUS. She dies, she dies. Was I then only mocked
With a vain Dream of Bliss to be plunged back
In deeper Misery? Did I but hear
The tender Name of Child breathed fondly over me
To make me feel what it is to lose that Name?
O I am ten times more an Orphan now,
Than when I knew no Parents.

Enter XUTHUS, etc. XUTHUS. Where is this Murd'ress, who with vile Deceit
Seemed to consent to ours, and Heaven's Designs,
Only to make us a more easy Prey
To her Assassins? -- Ha, Creusa dead?
And the brave Stranger who preserved us all?
Is he too dead? -- The Boy --

PYTHIA. Ilyssus lives. And thou have sworn, great King, that he shall reign
Supreme in Athens. Say, do thou confirm
That Oath?

XUTHUS. I do, by Heaven!

PYTHIA. Ask here no more.
The fatal Tale is for thy private Ear.
Retire, and learn it all. For poor Creusa,
She wronged not thee, upon herself alone
She drew Heaven's Vengeance. And too surely proves
That Murder but intentional, not wrought
To horrid Act, before the eternal Throne
Stands forth the first of Crimes. Who dare assume,
Unwarranted, Heaven's high Prerogative
Oe'r Life and Death, with double Force shall find
Turned on themselves the Mischiefs they designed.

The End of the Fifth ACT.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Miss HAUGHTON, who acted the PYTHIA. AT length I Am freed from
Tragical Parade,
No more a Pythian Priestess, -- though a Maid;
At once resigning, with my sacred Dwelling,
My Wreaths, my Wand, my Arts of Fortune-telling.
Yet superstitious Folks, no doubt, are here,
Who still regard me with a kind of Fear,
Lest to their secret Thoughts these prying Eyes
Should boldly pass, and take them by Surprise.
Nay, though I disavow the whole Deceit,
And fairly own my Science all a Cheat,
Should I declare, in spite of Ears and Eyes,
The Beaus were handsome, or the Critics wise,
They Would all believe it, and with dear Delight
Say to themselves at least,
"The Girl has Taste;" "the Woman's in the right."
Or, should I tell the Ladies, so disposed,
They Would get good Matches, ere the Season closed,
They Would smile, perhaps, with seeming Discontent,
And, sneering, wonder what the Creature meant;
But whisper to their Friends, with beating Heart.
"Suppose there should be something in her Art"
Grave Statesmen too would chuckle, should I say,
On such a Motion, and by such a Day,
They would be summoned from their own Affairs
To 'tend the Nation's more important Cares;
"Well, if I must -- however I dread the Load,
"I Will undergo it -- for my Country's Good.
All Men are Bubbles, in a skilful Hand,
The ruling Passion is the Conjurer's Wand.
Whether we praise, foretell, persuade, advise,
It Is that alone confirms us Fools or Wise.
The Devil without may spread the tempting Sin,
But the sure Conqueror is -- the Devil within.

A SECOND EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. PRITCHARD. STAY, Ladies -- Though I Am almost tired to Death
With this long Part -- and am so out of Breath --
Yet such a lucky Thought kind Heaven has sent,
That if I die for it, I must give it Vent.
The Men you know are gone. And now, suppose,
Before our Lords and Masters are rechose,
We take the Advantage of an empty Town,
And choose a House of Commons of our own.
What think ye, cannot we make Laws? -- and then
Cannot we too unmake them, like the Men?
O place us once in good St. Stephen's Pews,
We'll show them Women have their public Use.
Imprimis they shall marry; not a Man
Past twenty-five, but what shall wear the Chain.
Next, we'll in earnest set about Reclaming,
For, by my Life and Soul, we'll put down Gaming.
We'll spoil their deep destructive Midnight Play;
The Laws we make, we'll force them to obey;
Unless we let them, when their Spirits flag,
Piddle with us, ye know, at Quinze and Brag.
"I hope, my Dearest," says some well-bred Spouse,
"When such a Bill shall come before your House,
"That you will consider Men are Men -- at least
"That you will not Speak, my Dear." -- Not speak? -- The Beast!
What, would you wound my Honor? -- Wrongs like these --
For this, Sir, I shall bring you on your Knees.
-- Or, if we are quite good-natured, tell the Man
We'll do him all the Service that we can.
Then for ourselves, what Projects, what Designs?
We'll tax, and double tax their nasty Wines;
But Duty-free import our Blonds and Laces,
French Hoops, French Silks, French Cambricks, and -- French Faces.
In short, my Scheme is not completed quite,
But I may tell ye more another Night.
So come again, come all, and let us raise
Such glorious Trophies to our Country's Praise,
That all true Britons shall with one Consent
Cry out, "Long live the Female Parliament!

THE END.

