TRUTH and FALSEHOOD: A TALE.

Be thou as chaste as Ice, as pure as Snow,
Thou shall not escape Calumny.
HAMLET. LONDON: Printed for M. COOPER, in Paternoster Row.

M.DCC.LV.

[Price SIXPENCE.]

TRUTH and FALSEHOOD: A TALE.
IT chanced, one crowded levee day,
That TRUTH, who seldom loves to stray,
Wandered, so authors grave report,
Along the park, and strol'd to court.
That very day mal a propos,
But things sometimes will happen so,
Her rival FALSEHOOD thither came,
Who little thought to meet the dame;
Together there they pressed along,
And mingled in the motley throng,
There, as they never could agree,
They jostled for precedence;
Quarreled like other female foes,
While bitt'rest taunts alternate rose.
"Madam, quoth FALSEHOOD, why so rude*
"I wonder you will here intrude;
"It would be looked on full as well,
"If you would keep within your cell;
For surely a more awkward mien
"Or simpler look was never seen;
"Henceforth retire, unhappy maid,
"Thy influence lost, thy power decayed,
"Thy triumphs over, thy pride suppressed,
"Even thy religion grown a jest;
"Dispute not for precedence,
"But yield to fashion and to me.
THUS as she spoke they chanced to spy
The graceful B -- D passing by:
TRUTH viewed her favorite with delight;
She saw and kindled at the sight:
"Now slave (she cried) thy taunts forbear
"Behold my power, my influence there;
"Hear every tongue in her commend
"The sister, daughter, mistress, friend,
"The mother kind, the tender wife,
"All that can soften human life;
"Above thy poor delusive wiles,
"She scorns thy arts, and hates thy smiles.
"Prepare to conquer or to yield;
"For now I dare thee to the field.
"Try all thy shifts, thy subtle lies,
"All that thy malice can devise;
"If thou can taint her spotless fame,
"Or cast a shade over B -- D's name;
"Henceforth remember I agree
"To be thy slave and follow thee.
THUS spoke fair TRUTH, with conscious pride;
Indignant FALSEHOOD thus replied;
"THE danger's great, the task is hard,
"But conquest is my sure reward.
"If I can get my tale believed,
"And thou confess the world deceived,
"Henceforth, remember, thou agree
"To be my slave and follow me.
THIS said, away the goddess flew,
And summoned all the infernal crew;
ENVY, with looks of deadliest hate,
And RANCOUR eager for debate,
ILL NATURE cursed, SUSPICION sly,
And gaping fond CREDULITY,
And CALUMNY with iron lungs,
And SLANDER with a thousand tongues.
"Now, my illustrious friends, (she cried,)
"Your zeal and loyalty be tried;
"Now let your ardent love be seen,
"To serve your mistress and your queen;
"Forge me a bold and impious tale,
"Over truth and virtue to prevail;
"To please the mischief-loving mind,
"And sooth the malice of mankind;
"To show your all-subduing art,
"And leave a sting in B -- D's heart.
SHE spoke; and lo! at her command
The VICES all, a faithful band;
Each to his impious task assigned,
In dreadful amity combined.
B -- D is false, SUSPICION cried;
B -- D is false, the crowd replied;
Quick ran the tale in whispers round,
And babbling echo caught the sound;
The world was glad to be deceived,
And many doubted, more believed;
Pronounced the crime already known,
In hopes 'twou'd mitigate their own.
The sage PRUDERIA shook her head;
"'It Was strange! 'twas passing strange indeed!
"But we are women, women all,
"And like our grandam EVE must fall.
FLIRTILLA vowed "'it was something odd
"A truth so bold should steal abroad;
"She never loved those virtuous wives,
"Who lead such tame domestic lives;
"And always feared some darling sin,
"Some guilty passion lurked within.
Thus CALUMNY each tongue inspired;
THUS SLANDER every bosom fired;
Ingenious MALICE played her part,
The poison ran through every heart,
And sold to infamy and shame
The noblest and the fairest name.
FALSEHOOD triumphant left the town,
And pleased to W -- b -- n hasted down.
She met the vanquished goddess there
Retired to sooth the injur^d fair,
And with a smile insulting said;
"Now will thou yield, presumptuous maid?
"Thy conq'ror now, thy mistress see,
"Arise, my slave, and follow me.
"I come, (fair TRUTH with scorn replied)
"To damp thy hopes, and check thy pride,
"Go to that vile detested seat,
"Where malice, pride, and folly meet;
"But let no more thy rashness dare
"To blast the good, or wound the fair;
"For know, I mean to meet thee there.
"What will thy little arts avail,
"When TRUTH shall come to thwart thy tale?
"Soon will thy triumphs then be over,
"Thy vain delusions please no more;
"Brightened by thee her spotless mind,
"As the pure gold by fire refined,
"Shall with superior luster shine,
"And all her virtues more divine;
"B -- D shall press her to his arms,
"And smile at her exalted charms;
"Thy pious purpose shall commend,
"And thank thee as his warmest friend.
"BUT to be just, I own thy power,
"And from this great important hour
"My duty I shall better know,
"And learn instruction from a foe.
"Henceforth I Will borrow arms of thee,
"Thy zeal and active industry;
"Cautious thy steps I will attend,
"My injured vot'ries to defend;
"To bring a balm for virtue's aid,
"And heal the wounds which thou have made;
"To brush thy cobweb arts away,
"Dispel the cloud, and gild the day;
"I Will serve, to set my favorites free,
"And follow but to conquer thee.
FINIS.

