A NEW MUSICAL INTERLUDE, CALLED THE ELECTION. AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE
THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

LONDON: Printed for W. GRIFFIN, at Garrick's Head, No. 6, Catharine street,
Strand. M,DCC,LXXIV. [Price 6d.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Trifle is the Production of a hasty Hour; and though evidently
calculated to amuse at this Juncture, yet the Author flatters himself it
breathes throughout that Freedom and Indepency which is ever so grateful to us
all, tempered with that Loyalty and Harmony which is so necessary to promote
the general Happiness.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
JOHN, Mr. BANNISTER. RICHARD, Mr. VERNON. TRUSTY, Mr. DAVIES.
SALLY, Mrs. WRIGHTEN. WIFE, Mrs. LOVE.
THE ELECTION. A MUSICAL INTERLUDE.
SCENE. A Baker's Shop. Enter JOHN and his WIFE. JOHN. I Tell thee, Moll, this
canting will not do;
I Will sell my loaves, but not my conscience too.
Shall I be perjured, Wife, and damn my soul
To get a guinea for a penny roll?

RONDEAU. Honest John no bribe can charm,
His heart is like his oven, warm:
Though poor as Job,
He will not rob,
Nor sell his truth to fill his fob.
T^^^^ and hirelings, I Would black-ball 'em!
For to let such rascals set,
Is as bad as using alum,
Or as selling bread short weight.
Though I often am mealy-handed,
I am not mealy-mouthed likewise;
For a knave I Will not be branded,
But declare without disguise.
Honest John no bribe, etc.
What because my out-side's dusty,
Must my mind be dirty too?
They, perhaps, will find me crusty,
Who now think me soft as dough.
I nor mind their balls nor feasting,
Nor their specious promise heed;
What Is the bread without the yeast in?
What Is the word without the deed?

WIFE. Lord! Johnny now, why make you such a fuss?
What Is truth and conscience to such folk as us?
Nor one nor the other will, as I Am a sinner,
Ever give us credit for a Sunday's dinner.
Sir Courtly says, if you will but vote for him,
He Will fill our pockets to the very brim.

JOHN. I tell thee No; -- he is one of those, they say,
Who Is ever ready to talk any way;
Loud as a bull, or mute as any mouse,
A dial, or a larum, in the house:
All smiles and treachery, all bows and lies;
In fact, a complication of disguise.
'Squire Trusty is my man, who, just and true,
Butters his bread just as a man should do.

WIFE. He cannot say bo to a goose; -- don't vote for such.


JOHN. Better to say too little, than too much.
Our parson talks well, but experience teaches,
He seldom practices the good he preaches:
The 'Squire's an honest cock --

WIFE. And so are we,
And we may starve upon our honesty.
Sir Courtly'll get an act to bake on Sundays,
Then we may live genteel, and keep St. Mondays:
Besides, his friend young Richard loves our Sally;
Sure, for her sake, you will not stand shilly shally.
Who knows but we may hold our heads up soon;
Who knows when you --

JOHN. Who knows when you will have done!


WIFE. Why, hubby, all the world are mending now,
And live as grand as Lords.

JOHN. The Lord knows how.


WIFE. There Is Patch the glazier, who, they says no fool,
Sends both his daughters to the boarding-school;
And neighbor Squab, the sexton's wife, I see
Wears a silk gown, and drinks the best green tea.
This is the time to make us all for ever;
Grow rich at an election hub -- or never.

SONG.
If in life you desire to have credit and weight,
To be feared by the rich, and caressed by the great,
Your vote and your interest will raise you to note,
If for interest you tender your interest and vote.
Would you hang on the arm of my Lord, or his Grace,
And familiarly ask for a pension, or place,
To your interest he will promise his life to devote,
If you will promise him both your interest and vote.
This engages the minds of the great and the small,
Of our friendships and loves is the basis of all;
Each talent, each virtue, each gift he has got,
Who can boast Borough interest, and proffers his vote.

JOHN. Sad doctrine this, but be it mine to prove
We have not quite forgot our country's love:
To venal honors let me never aspire,
But in my station tend my humble fire;
On no vain schemes of false ambition bent,
My pride, Integrity -- my wealth, Content.

SONG.
Whilst happy in my native land,
I boast my counry's charter,
I Will never basely lend my hand
Her liberties to barter.
The noble mind is not at all
By poverty degraded;
It Is guilt alone can make us fall,
And well I am persuaded,
Each freeborn Briton's song should be,
" Or give me Death or Liberty!"
Though small the power which fortune grants,
And few the gifts she sends us,
The lordly hireling often wants
That freedom which defends us.
By law secured from lawless strife,
Our house is our castellum:
Thus blessed with all that is dear in life,
For lucre shall we sell 'em?
No; every Briton's song should be,
" Or give me Death or Liberty!"
[Exit.
Enter SALLY. Well, mother, say -- will Mr. Richard's friend
Succeed, and shall we gain our end?
If father would but for Sir Courtly vote,
He swore to marry me without a groat.

WIFE. Ah! child, your hopes and mine are wholly over,
I Have lost my fancied greatness, you your lover:
Spite of all I could say, your father's gone
To give his vote for Trusty -- we are undone!
Condemned, through life, to be the slave and sloven,
We must eat raspins still, and draw the oven.

SALLY. Ah! cruel fortune! must I then despair,
And lose the only youth that is worth my care!
Then all my dreams of happiness are flown;
Still must I wear this linsey-woolsey gown!
Still without curtains sleep upon the floor,
And rival the Miss Patches now no more.

SONG.
Adieu to silks and satins,
To love and peace adieu!
Each day in homely pattens,
I still must bake and brew.
Each morn at early rising,
Must twirl the hated mop,
And every thought disguising,
Attend my father's shop.
Adieu, etc.

WIFE. Here comes young Mr. Richard -- I Am afraid --
Heart-broken -- I shall die. --

SALLY. And I a maid --


RICHARD. Welcome my lovely Sally; -- why so sad?
Beauty and youth should be for ever glad.

WIFE. Yes, but our friends will one and all forsake us,
And now we have nothing left but this poor bake-house.
My husband voted wrong.

RICHARD. He acted right.
True to his Trust, his conduct seems more bright:
Unawed, unbiased, he preserves his fame,
Would every Englishman could say the same: --
Sir Courtly was my friend, to him I owe
The little fortune which I offer now,
To aid his cause with warmth, to take his part,
Duty and Gratitude impelled my heart;
But Gratitude nor Duty bid condemn
That Honor which so often springs from them.
Your father's merit sets him up to view,
And more enhances my esteem for you.

SONG.
Ah! let it never with truth be said,
That public Virtue droops her head;
That English Faith should luckless prove,
Or cross one English Virgin's love.
If in my Sally's youthful heart,
Her Richard ever may claim a part,
This happy hour shall smiling prove
That Honor firmly fixes Love.

Enter JOHN. Well friends, the poll is over -- all is done,
Sir Courtly has thrown up, and we have won.
( To Richard) I wish I could have granted your request,
But Conscience bade me vote as I thought best.

RICHARD. Pray no excuses -- we may yet be friends:
Give me your daughter, and our quarrel ends:
Happy to win the favor, if I can,
And boast the alliance of so just a man.

JOHN. Take her, she is freely yours, and may you find
For want of fortune, treasures in her mind. --
But other subjects claim the present hour;
When conquering Freedom tramples abject power;
Ever now the Sons of Liberty rejoice,
And cheerful hail the Hero of their choice.

QUARTETTO.
JOHN and CHORUS. Come, then, let us hasten all,
To greet the glorious festival.
JOHN solo. For what to a Briton so grateful can be,
As the triumph of Freedom and Virtue to see? --
CHORUS. Come, then, let us, etc.
WIFE. Since my daughter will be married,
What care I who has miscarried. --
CHORUS. Come, then, let us, etc.

DUET.
RICHARD and SALLY. With joy my freedom I resign,
To call my lovely Sally mine,
And she, through every scene of life,
Will prove the fond and faithful wife.

SONG and CHORUS. (A shouting, etc. is heard repeatedly.) Hark, hark, hark! --
the loud huzza!
Come, come, come, come come away:
Let each Briton now be gay,
This is Britain's holiday!
[Exeunt.
The Scene draws, and discovers the principal street of a market town crowded
with people of all denominations; the Member is chaired, and brought to the
Front of the Stage. CHORUS. Trusty for ever!
(TRUSTY bowing) I thank ye for your favor;
And it is my resolution,
To guard the Constitution.

CHORUS. Trusty for ever, etc.


TRUSTY. I thank ye for your favor,
To you I will resign,
Your pleasure shall be mine.

CHORUS. Trusty for ever, etc.


TRUSTY. I thank ye for your favor,
Through life I will support the interest of the nation,
Still bound by inclination,
To this noble Corporation.

CHORUS. Trusty for ever -- huzza! etc.


TRUSTY. I thank you for your favor -- huzza! etc.


FINIS.

