THE SCHOOL FOR RAKES: A COMEDY.

As it is Performed at the THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

LONDON.

Printed for T. BECKET and P. A. DE HONDT, in the Strand. MDCCLXIX.

[Price ONE SHILLING and SIX PENCE.]

TO DAVID GARRICK, Esquire
DEDICATIONS are generally meant to to do honor to the Patron, by revealing
their private virtues, or recording their public merits. But neither of these
subjects occasioned the present address; for while the undivided applause of a
nation, proclaims the latter, my small plaudit must be lost, in the general
voice; and while the friendship and esteem, of so many of the first personages
of the age, are, at once, the strongest testimony, and most pleasing reward, of
the former, my simple concurrence must be deemed superfluous.

To neither of these motives, then, is to be attributed my publicly placing
this play, under your patronage; but to a desire of acknowledging my gratitude,
for the great trouble you have taken with it, and of indulging a much higher
vanity, than that of being its author; by declaring to the world, that you are
my friend, and that I am,

Sir, Your much obliged, and most humble servant, The AUTHOR.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE hint of this comedy was taken from a much admired performance of Monsieur
Beaumarchais, styled Eugenie, which Mr. Garrick was so kind to put into my
hands, some time ago. I was immediately struck with the elegant simplicity of
language, and sentiment, which characterizes that work, and which, indeed,
should do the same, in all dramatic writings, where neither the persons, or
situations of the drama, are elevated above the common degrees of life.

I immediately adopted the plan, and set about adapting it to the English
Stage. But, as I proceeded in this work, I found I had great difficulties to
encounter; for, though Mons. Beaumarchais had laid the scene of his play, in
England, he had, unluckily, adopted Spanish manners. This circumstance appeared
an unsurmountable obslacle to me, and I should have immediately relinquished
all hopes from my project, if Mr Garrick had not, in the most friendly manner,
lent me his assistance, to overcome this otherwise insuperable difficulty.

How far I have succeeded, in rendering this piece worthy of the English stage,
must be left to the candor of the public. I shall only add, that the characters
of Frampton, Willis, Loyd, I may add Mrs. Winifred, also, are of English
growth. The character of Lord Eustace, too, has received some additions; and I
hope that his compunction, for the crime he had committed, will render him more
worthy the favor of a British audience, whose generous natures cannot brook
the representation of any vice, upon the stage, except in order to have it
punished, or reclaimed. As the situation of Harriet would not admit of any
change, I have not attempted to deviate from the gentle, and interesting
Eugenie, of Monsieur Beaumarchais.

I had written thus far, before I could have been informed of the very kind and
favorable reception, with which the public have honored this piece; and I
think myself extremely happy, at having this opportunity of assuring them, that
I shall ever retain the most grateful sense of their indulgence to me.

I am particularly bound to Mrs. Clive, on this occasion, who undertook the
study of a new part, at a time when she had determined to quit the stage, and
whose kindness to the author, and attention to the public, made her hazard her
health, by performing it -- I need not say how well -- when her physicians
would have confined her to her chamber.

I acknowledge myself also much obliged to the rest of the performers in my
play, for having acquitted themselves so much to the advantage of the piece,
and the approbation of the public; to whom I have the honor to be,

A much obliged, and Most obedient Servant, The AUTHOR.

PROLOGUE, Written by a FRIEND.
Spoken by Mr. KING.

THE scribbling gentry, ever frank, and free,
To sweep the stage with prologues, fix on Me.
A Female representative I come,
And with a prologue, which I call a broom,
To brush the critic cobwebs, from the room.
Critics, like spiders, into corners creep,
And at new plays their bloody revels keep;
With some small venom, close in ambush lie,
Ready to seize the poor dramatic Fly:
The weak and heedless soon become their prey;
But the strong Blue bottle will force its way,
Clean well its wings, and hum, another day.
Unknown to nature's laws, we have here one evil,
For Flies, turned Spiders, play the very devil!
But why choose me, to fill a woman's place?
Have I about me any female grace,
Sweetness of smile, or lily-dimpled face?
Whatever I have, I Will try my winning ways,
Lowering my voice, and rising from my stays;
Warm with anxiety, this hat my fan,
I Am now an Auth'ress, and no longer man.
The ladies, I am sure, my brat will spare,
For I Am not young, nor am I over fair;
Assemblies, balls, decked out, I never appear at,
My husband is the only man I leer at.
Ye Beaux, whose minds are flimzy as your shapes,
Who scorn all writing, as the fox the grapes;
Let not a woman's faults ill humors breed,
I own my failings -- I both write, and read.
(Cries.) Sit still, two hours, for one not fair, nor young!
You would not wait for Venus, half so long.
Could I please Pit.
You, and Gall*
YOU, more patient folks,
With some small nature, and some harmless jokes;
These Box
splendid rows would not their mite deny,
They will, as well as you, both laugh and sigh,
Sigh, when you laugh, and laugh, whenever you cry.
Ye Soldiers, Sailors, valiant as you're free,
O lend your aid, protect my babe, and me!
Cowards spare none; but you, the truly brave;
Women, and children, will for ever save!
Here ends my task -- and for our last expedient --
The auth'ress makes you this (Curtseys) -- and this (Bows)
Your most obedient.

Speedily will be published, (In FOUR VOLUMES Twelves) TWO NOVELS: The first
entitled, THE DELICATE DISTRESS; and the other, The GORDIAN KNOT.

By HENRY and FRANCES.

Printed for BECKET and Co. in the Strand.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Lord Eustace, Mr. CAUTHERLEY. Sir William Evans, Mr. HOLLAND. Colonel Evans,
Mr. PALMER. Mr. Frampton, Mr. REDDISH. Captain Loyd, Mr. KING. Willis, Valet to
Lord Eustace, Mr. DODD. Robert, Mr. BADDELEY.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Winifred, Mrs. CLIVE. Harriet, Mrs. BADDELEY. Betty, Servant to Harriet,
Mrs. SMITH.
THE SCHOOL FOR RAKES.
ACT I.
SCENE, an Apartment in Lord EUSTACE 's House. Enter Mr. FRAMPTON and WILLIS.
Fram. WELL, Willis, they are come!


Will. Yes, Sir, but I am quite of opinion, they will soon be gone again, at
least out of this house; for as I assisted in carrying in their trunks, and
band-boxes, merely to contemplate their countenances, I could perceive the
strongest marks of dissatisfaction, in Sir William's face; and when the
servants retired from the parlour, I overheard him, and his sister Winifred, in
high disputation -- Both their Welsh bloods were up, and a fine splutter there
was, between them; but, though you might have heard them into Hyde-Park, they
spoke so quick, that I could only pick up an odd word, here and there, as if
Sir William did not like this part of the town.


Fram. I wish they had staid in the country, with all my heart.


Will. I believe there are more people of that mind, than you, Sir. I fancy my
lord would give a good round sum, that they had remained fixed to the freehold,
at Langwillan. -- Though, to be sure, Miss Harriet is, by many degrees, the
handsomest girl, that ever his lordship was fond of.


Fram. You must not, Willis, talk of her, in that style -- She is a young
woman, both of character, and family.


Will. So much the better for her, Sir, if she has a good family of her own, for
I am pretty sure she never will belong to ours.


Fram. I must again desire you, Mr. Willis, not to speak so lightly, of this
affair -- the real friends of your lord, will not be much inclined to mirth, or
ridicule, upon this occasion, I can tell you.


Will. As we were both placed here, by my lord, to manage this matter for him, I
thought there could be no great harm, to argue, a little, upon it, Mr. Frampton.


Fram. I am not, at present, in a humor for conversation.


Will. O, Sir, another time will do, as well.


Fram. I would have you go, immediately, and acquaint lord Eustace with their
arrival -- Let him also know, that I shall wait upon the ladies, and make his
apology, for not being here to receive them.


Will. You have been very obliging to his lordship, upon many such occasions,
Mr. Frampton; but I fancy he never stood more in need of your assistance, and
mine, too, than he does, at present.


Fram. Though in the same cause, I believe our services will tend to different
purposes -- I shall not flatter his vices.


Will. Lord, Mr. Frampton, you are grown so prudish, of late!


Fram. You are grown too familiar, Mr. Willis. -- You Will oblige me, and obey
your lord's commands, at the same time, by going, directly, with the message I
desired you.


Will. I did not mean to offend you, Sir, by observing how useful your
friendship has been to my lord. -- Has your honor any farther commands?


Fram. None, but those I gave you.


Will. (Aside.) Here Is more to do, with these shabby, ruined, hangers-on, of my
lord's, than all the family, beside. -- I think myself as good a man as he, and
if he had not a little too much spirit for me, I would tell him as much.

[Exit, grumbling.
Fram. To what a state, have I reduced myself, when even such a wretch as that,
dares to upbraid me! What now remains, of all the scenes of mirth, and revelry,
which I have been partaker of, beneath this roof! A ruined fortune, a disturbed
mind, and a broken constitution, are the only mementos that are now left me --
Yet, I think I have fortitude sufficient, to bear all these -- but to be
obliged to minister to another man's vices, for a wretched subsistence, is to
degrade human nature, below the brutes. -- Thank heaven, however, I have
escaped being concerned in this iniquitous affair; and though my friendship for
lord Eustace, will not suffer me to desert him, in his present difficulties, I
am determined to proceed no farther, than is consistent with my honor, and my
peace. -- I have consented to see the lady, and excuse his absence. -- I must
wait for Sir William's going out, and then hasten to fulfill my promise.

[Exit. SCENE changes to another Apartment. (...) Sir WILLIAM, Mrs. WINIFRED,
(...) HARRIET, in traveling dresses -- trunks, (...) bags, etc. BETTY
attending.
Sir Wm. I tell you, again and again, sister Wini^^^^. I am not satisfied.


Mrs. Win. As to that matter, brother, you know you never are satisfied, with
what any person does, (...) yourself. I shall, therefore, make myself perfectly
ea^y, on that head.


Sir Wm. That Is more than I shall be, while I am ^n this house, I can tell you
-- I have very solid objections, to staying here -- A young, idle, rakish lord
--


Mrs. Win. What a vulgar objection! I declare, Sir William, if I were not
acquainted with your ancestry, I should suspect you to be descended from
mechanics. But I hope the family of Ap Evans, is known to be quite as ancient,
as --


Sir Wm. Adam, at least, sister -- But let me now inform you, that lord Eustace
is placed in a much higher rank, than any of your boasted ancestors have ever
been; and that I hate obligations, to persons above me; for the only
satisfaction I ever felt, in receiving favors, arose from the prospect of
repaying them.


Mrs. Win. Pride, absolute pride, brother!


Sir Wm. It is an honest one, at least, you must allow, that inclines persons
to discharge their debts of honor, as well as of law.


Mrs. Win. Pray, Sir William, give me leave to ask you, where is the mighty
matter, of interchanging civilities, between persons of a certain rank? -- Lord
Eustace spent, some months, at your house, in the country. --


Sir Wm. Not by my invitation, sister, but yours -- You know I was at my estate
in Devonshire, the greatest part of the time he spent at Langwillan -- I have,
therefore, neither right, nor inclination, to accept of his house -- Besides,
it is extremely inconvenient to me, as I have so much business to transact, in
Lincoln's Inn.


Mrs. Win. You should have written to your broker, then, to provide you
apartments, in some of the stoves, on the other side Temple Bar, Sir William; --
but, as to my niece and me, we don't choose to be suffocated, I must inform you.


Sir Wm. Why, this place, as you say, is airy, enough -- When I was last in
London, about twelve years ago, there was not a house, within a mile of it --
but all the fools in the nation, have now crowded up to the capital, and made
the head too large for the body; and this very place, where I used to send my
horses to graze, begins now, to look something like a street.


Mrs. Win. Like a street, Sir William!


Sir Wm. Let us have done with wrangling, sister; I give it up -- this air may
be better for my girl -- I shall stay here, therefore, for the short time I
remain in town, though I don't like it -- You are content, I hope -- But what
says my Harriet? Why so grave? I expected to have seen you as blithe, as one of
the kids, upon our mountains, at your arrival in London.


Har. I find myself a little fatigued, Sir.


Sir Wm. You were all life and spirit, during our journey -- the bad air of
this town, cannot have affected you, already, child. But tell me how you like
this house?


Har. I think it very retired, Sir.


Mrs. Win. Why, really, Miss Harriet, I don't believe my lord intended
following business, or opening shop, when he took it; but, surely, for persons
of distinction, it is the very spot one would desire. I am astonished at your
want of taste, child -- Sir William, I know loves noise. -- I think there is
nothing else left to wish for, here.


Har. (Aside.) Except the owner of the mansion.


Betty. Pray, madam, which is to be my young lady's appartment.


Mrs. Win. That, upon the right hand, child -- You had better go with her,
Harriet, and adjust your Dress. -- O Betty, bid 'em look in the coach for my
snuff box; they will find it on the seat, or in the pockets. [Exit Harriet, and
Betty. Don't you think you shall be full late, for your lawyers, Sir William?


Sir Wm. Yes, as I have so far to go to them -- Who is there?

Enter BETTY with the snuff box.
Betty. Here Is the box, madam.

(gives it to her, and exit.) Enter ROBERT. Send David for a Hackney-coach --
take this key, and bring me a parcel of papers, which you will find tied up, in
my strong box, Robert.


Rob. Yes, Sir.

[Exit Robert.
Mrs. Win. I hope, Sir William, you have your address written upon your cards,
and that you have ordered your letters to be directed to Lord Eustace's House.
As his Lordship honors me with his friendship, I think it necessary that our
Acquaintance should be informed, of his great politeness.


Sir Wm. (Aside.) His lordship honors me with his friendship! -- how well the
traffic is kept up, in that phrase, between vanity and vanity. I had ordered my
letters to Serle's Coffee-house, but since it is determined that I must stay
here, I shall direct them to be sent to me.


Mrs. Win. I must beg, Sir William, that you will order all the newspapers,
and magazines, to be sent here, also. My mental faculties are quite at a stand
-- I have not had the least political information, these four days.

Enter ROBERT.
Rob. Here are the papers, Sir.


Mrs. Win. Are they of this day, Robert?


Sir Wm. They are of much older date, sister, and will not, I fancy, afford you
much entertainment. -- Get me my hat and cane: do you know, Robert, where
captain Lloyd lodges?


Rob. In Craven-street, Sir; they told me at Trevallin.


Sir Wm. Direct the Coachman there.

[Exit Robert.
Mrs. Win. For Heaven's sake, Sir William, what do you loiter for? It will be
monstrous late, before you can return -- you will not be back, by dinner.


Sir Wm. You seem so very impatient, for my setting out, sister, that I cannot
imagine you should be very anxious for my coming back, again. I shall go first
to captain Lloyd's.


Mrs. Win. You are, doubtless, at liberty, to go where you please, Sir William
-- but I hope you will not think of incumbering us with his visits, here.


Sir Wm. You amaze me -- not receive the uncle of the man, who is to marry my
daughter?


Mrs. Win. That may be sooner said than done, I fancy, Sir William.


Sir Wm. You are mistaken -- I never yet have falsified my promise.


Mrs. Win. A pretty alliance, truly, for my niece, and your daughter. But let
me tell you, Sir, if Harriet had not a shilling, her family and her beauty
would entitle her to a much better match, than your colonel; who has nothing
but an old tottering castle, a scarlet coat, and a sword, to settle, by way of
jointure.


Sir Wm. Your absurdity distracts me. What has your family and beauty done for
you? And I dare say, you once rated them as high, as you do Harriet's.


Mrs. Win. You Will pardon me, brother, I understand genealogy better, than so --
though there is not a very great difference, between my niece's years, and mine,
she has one generation more, in her table, than I; which, let me tell you, is
of no small consequence, to those who know how to set a proper value, upon
family.


Sir Wm. Family! Nonsense! Let those who have no other merit to support them,
build on that; but, know, that I despise it; and to make an end of this
ridiculous altercation, for ever, I shall inform you, that eight years ago,
when Harriet was but a child, and the colonel was sent young abroad, to serve
his country, I liked him so well, that I promised his father, if the young
fellow returned, with life, and honor, my daughter should be his.


Mrs. Win. I have ever disapproved of that method, of affiancing young persons.
-- Have you no idea, that it is possible, the colonel may dislike your daughter?


Sir Wm. I am not very apprehensive, on that account.


Mrs. Win. Have you no fears, of her refusing him?


Sir Wm. None. -- Bred up in retirement, and innocence, she can have formed no
attachment; and her obedience to a fond father, will certainly incline her to
dispose of, both her hand and heart, where his prudence shall direct.

Enter ROBERT.
Rob. Sir, the coach is ready.


Sir Wm. (Looking at his watch.) It Is later than I thought it was -- Why, I
shall not be back to dinner -- I shall go nowhere, but to the captain's; if I
don't meet with him, I shall return, directly. Put up these papers, Robert.

[Exit Sir William.
Mrs. Win. Desire Miss Evans to come to me, and pray, good Robert, send out,
for the last Gazette, directly. There may be a thousand treaties, on foot, that
I am ignorant of. (Exit Robert.) What an absurd man, is my brother! His ideas
are dreadfully confined. -- His daughter's hand and heart will follow her
obedience! thank heaven, they are not, now, to be disposed of.

Enter HARRIET. What, not begun to dress, niece!


Har. My spirits are too much agitated, madam, to think of dress.


Mrs. Win. For heaven's sake, child, don't talk, in this doleful strain, to me
-- I can easily conceive that your father's presence may distress you, as he is
so totally ignorant of your good fortune -- but, with me, it appears ridiculous.


Har. I am, indeed, madam, infinitely distressed, by my father's ignorance of
my situation.


Mrs. Win. What a fuss, is here, about your father? You know he would never
have given his consent, to your marrying lord Eustace, if he had been asked --
he hates men of quality; and as my lord is not yet in possession of his
fortune, I doubt if he would even have thought it a good match.


Har. I wish he were acquainted with it, be it good, or bad.


Mrs. Win. I tell you, child, I lost two excellent matches, myself, by waiting
for advice, and, by that means, giving time to the parties, to consider of it;
so it came to nothing; -- but I now tell you, that by my prudence, your good
fortune does not admit of a doubt.


Har. Would to heaven it did not!


Mrs. Win. You are the very counterpart, of your father; never content with any
thing -- Are you not entitled to supporters, and coronets, upon your coach? And
when the Evans's arms are quartered with my lord's, and well emblazoned, there
will not be so handsome an equipage, in London.


Har. Yet the possessor may be wretched, madam!


Mrs. Win. Wretched, and a countess! I think that scarce possible. But what is
it you would have, child? Have I not, with the greatest address, imaginable,
managed matters, with my headstrong brother, and triumphed over his obstinacy?
Are you not, at this instant, lodged in your husband's house?


Har. What is his house, while he is absent from it? I hoped to have met him
here -- my letters must have informed him --


Mrs. Win. Perhaps, his, and your father, my lord Delville, Harriet, may have
claimed his lordship's attendance. It is only people of no consequence, who are
masters of themselves; and, therefore, pretend to dignify their insignificance,
with the title of independence. But persons of quality, my dear, never presume
to rebel against the laws of subordination -- But this is a political secret,
which you are yet ignorant of, child.


Har. He appeared to be perfect master of his own time, when we were first
acquainted; nor did his engagements seem to interfere with his inclinations,
till after you had commanded me to receive his hand.


Mrs. Win. 'Till after I commanded you! Really, Miss Evans, any person who was
to hear you talk, in this manner, might suppose that I had compelled you, to
marry lord Eustace; but, perhaps, miss, you had rather have been sacrificed to
your father's ridiculous attachment to colonel Loyd, and been buried alive, in
the old castle of Trevallin.


Har. Notwithstanding all your attention to my happiness, madam, if my lord no
longer loves me, I must be miserable.


Mrs. Win. Can he hinder your being a countess, simpleton? But, prithee, what
can have put all these melancholy thoughts, into your head? Did ever any man
appear to be more in love, than he?


Har. O no! he was all tenderness; he wept, at our parting; I wept too, yet
found a pleasing softness, in that grief he seemed to share. -- What a change!


Mrs. Win. Revolutions are common, in all states, child; and if you understood
politics, you would not be so much surprised at them.

Enter ROBERT.
Rob. Mr. Frampton, madam, desires to see my young lady.


Har. Mr. Frampton! I don't know such a person; do you know him, Robert?


Rob. I know nothing more of him, madam, than that he lives in this house, and
has a fine man to attend him. There are a power of people, coming and going,
but I cannot tell who they be.


Mrs. Win. (Aside to Harriet) He must certainly be a friend, or relation, of
your lord's -- I think we had better step into the parlour, to receive him,
lest your father's return should interrupt us. We will see the gentleman,
below, Robert, and wait on him, directly.

[Exeunt. SCENE changes to a Garden Parlour. Enter Mr. FRAMPTON.
Fram. I feel myself extremely shocked, at this affair, both for lord Eustace,
and the unhappy girl -- it is an infamous business, and I am certain it must
turn out ill.

Enter ROBERT.
Rob. The ladies will wait upon you, immediately, Sir*

[Exit Robert.
Fram. Would the interview were over. -- If she is but half so amiable, as lord
Eustace has described her, I fear I shall acquit myself, but indifferently, of
his commission. -- Beauty, that makes most men knaves, makes me honest; for I
hold it the lowest baseness, to be capable of admiring, and betraying, an
innocent creature, in the same moment.

Enter Mrs. WINIFRED and HARRIET.
Fram. I come, madam, from lord Eustace, to your ladyship. --


Mrs. Win. By acosting my niece, in that manner, Sir, I suppose you are one of
his lordship's particular friends; but, pray, be more guarded, Sir, and do not
call my niece ladyship; -- that time is not yet come.


Fram. I stand corrected, madam.


Har. How does lord Eustace, Sir? I hope he is well.


Fram. Perfectly so, madam, though extremely concerned, at having it not in his
power, to receive your ladyship --


Mrs. Win. Again, Sir!


Fram. -- The moment of your arrival; -- but his attendance, on his father, who
is, at present, ill, in Berkshire, prevented him that happiness.


Mrs. Win. Aye, I knew it -- Did not I tell you so, Miss Harriet?


Har. Pray, Sir, when may we expect to see lord Eustace? I hope his father's
illness is not dangerous.


Fram. No, madam, I hope not; though old men's lives are, certainly, precarious.
I am sure your lord will leave him, the first moment it is possible, as I well
know he burns with impatience, to throw himself at your feet.


Mrs. Win. I hope your mind is easy, now, child. -- She may be a countess,
sooner than I thought for; and if my lord can get into the ministry, I may be
of some consequence to my friends.

(Aside.)
Har. I am much obliged to you, Sir, for the trouble you have taken. -- I, by
no means, wish that lord Eustace should neglect his duty, to lord Delville, or
distress himself, in any other way, on my account; though I sincerely desire
the happiness of seeing him.


Fram. His inclinations, madam, I am satisfied, more than keep pace with yours;
and you may, with great probability, expect to see his lordship, either today,
or tomorrow morning.


Mrs Win. You alarm me, vastly, Sir; I would not have his lordship catch us, in
this deshabille, for any consideration. I beg, child, you will go to your
toilet -- Bless me, what figures we are!


Har. I shall attend you, madam. You have made me very happy, Sir -- but do you
think that he will come, to night?


Fram. I fear it is not in his power, madam.


Har. Come, when he will, I shall rejoice to see him.


Mrs. Win. Pray, niece, come away, now. Sir, your humble servant -- You don't
know but his lordship may be here, in a few minutes.

(To Harriet.) [Exit Mrs. Win. and Har.
Fram. I never lied, with a worse grace -- By heaven, that girl is an angel,
and lord Eustace, of course, a devil! What a delicate sensibility, in her
countenance! what softness, in her voice! The man, who could first injure, and
then forsake, such a woman, deserves to be marked as the most infamous, because
he must be the most cruel, of his sex -- I have some consolation, in thinking,
that lord Eustace, though ten years younger, is ten times a greater --

Enter Lord EUSTACE, behind.
Ld Eust. -- What, what, Frampton! -- I will lay ten thousand pounds, that is
impossible; though you did not finish the sentence -- Do you think I should lose,
Frampton?


Fram. I certainly do, my lord, though you were to determine the bet, yourself.
But this is no time for fooling. I am astonished, at your imprudence -- I
thought you had determined not to come, this night; what can have changed your
purpose?


Ld Eust. Have you seen Harriet, Frampton, and can you ask that question? My
mind, restless, distracted, and impatient, has impelled me, hither -- But, tell
me, have you seen her?


Fram. I have seen lady Eustace.


Ld Eust. You startle me; don't talk so loud -- are you sure that no one can
overhear us?


Fram. Not a creature -- Sir William is gone abroad; and the ladies are
retired, to dress.


Ld Eust. What said Harriet, to my absence?


Fram. The tears which seemed to have dimned her lovely eyes, reproached you,
silently; but not an angry word escaped her lips.


Ld Eust. Do not add to my distress, Frampton! By heaven, my heart bleeds, for
the unhappy Harriet! Had I, like you, been born a private man, and not at once
bound down, by the vile tramels of family, and dependence, the world should not
have bribed me, to forsake her.


Fram. The sense, you now seem to have, of your own situation, should have
operated, sooner, my lord, and prevented your involving an innocent young
woman, in certain ruin.


Ld Eust. No, Frampton! no! that was beyond my power; I loved her, to
distraction -- nay, I do love her, still -- but let us talk no more, upon this
subject; it softens me into weakness; and as I am dependent, on my father, I
must obey him -- I hope she has not heard, of my intended marriage.


Fram. No, no, the devil is too great a gainer, by your schemes, to blast them.


Ld Eust. Don't you think it is, rather, too late, in the day, for you to turn
methodist, Ned?


Fram. It is never too late, my lord, for a man to condemn, and forsake, his
follies; and young as you are, I heartily wish this was the time appointed, for
your doing so, likewise.


Ld Eust. These sentiments have, at least, the grace of novelty, to recommend
them, from you, Mr. Frampton.


Fram. My sentiments, my lord, are of little consequence to you; but the time
draws near, when you must justly suffer, in the opinion of one, who ought to be
dear to you. Miss Evans cannot be much longer deceived -- and when I reflect
upon the vile artifices, that were used, to draw her into a feigned marriage,
by heaven, I cannot help detesting you, and every one of the infernal agents,
who were any way concerned in it.


Ld Eust. O Frampton! my heart tells me that I deserve your detestation -- Why,
why were you not with me, to save me from the sad effects, of my wild, youthful
passions! -- The wretches, who were near me, but inflamed them.


Fram. The attachments, of mean persons, are always founded in self-interest,
my lord, nor was there ever yet a solid friendship formed in vice.


Ld Eust. Don't upbraid me with my miseries, Frampton, but think what a
situation is mine. Though I feel the errors of my conduct, and would repair them,
I am so much involved, in my own toils, that I find it impossible, to break
them. -- What would I not give, even to postpone this fatal marriage?


Fram. Postpone it! aye, for ever!


Ld Eust. Could I do that, I might yet be happy, Frampton; but matters are
gone, too far -- every thing was settled, between my father, and lady Anne's
guardians, before I came to town, and I am certain he never will be brought to
relinquish the great advantage, of her immense fottune.


Fram. And can you, my lord, be brought to consider those advantages, as an
equivalent, for your peace, and honor?


Ld Eust. What would you have me do?


Fram. Avow your situation, to lord Delville.


Ld Eust. Were it a common folly, I had committed, Frampton, I might hope for
his forgiveness; but the infamy, which must deservedly attend my conduct, in
this affair, would probably make him cast me from his heart, and fortune, for
ever.


Fram. You are certainly in very difficult circumstances, my lord, nor can I
discover any means of extricating you, from them.


Ld Eust. The only miserable hope, I have now left, is founded on the
gentleness of Harriet's nature, which may enable me to prevail on her, to
return into the country, before she hears of my intended marriage.


Fram. It is rather shameful, my lord, to erect a sanctuary for our vices, upon
the virtues of others.


Ld Eust. I acknowledge it, Frampton; but were Harriet removed from the
probability of hearing of this hateful marriage, my mind would be more at ease,
and I might then possibly think of some expedient, to break it off.


Fram. There is some merit, in that thought, my lord, and now let me know how I
can serve you.


Ld Eust. You shall hear -- That villain Langwood, my father's steward, who
persuaded me into this sham marriage, and personated the clergyman, on that
occasion, is now dying, and writes me word that he is distracted, with the
horrors of his conscience, and is determined to ask the young lady's
forgiveness -- a letter from him, to the family, would discover all.


Fram. That would, indeed, be fatal; but how can I prevent it?


Ld Eust. You must remain in this house, and take care that my servants prevent
their receiving any letters, without bringing them first to you. I will order
Willis to intercept them.


Fram. He is fit for the office; but this is a very odious affair, my lord.
However, I have promised to assist you, and if I can prevail upon myself, I
will go so far, as to prevent Langwood's hastening the catastrophe, which I
much fear will be a sad one.


Ld Eust. You know not how you torture me! But let me now indulge my fond
impatience, and see my lovely Harriet.


Fram. You must not think of it; I would advise you to retire, directly.


Ld Eust. It is impossible I should obey you! I long, yet dread, to see her,
Frampton.


Fram. It will require a good deal of courage, my lord, to support the
interview; for I really think, that an injured, innocent woman, is a very
formidable object. -- But though you may be brave enough, for the encounter, I
must prevent it, for the present, as I have but just now apologized for your
absence, by telling her you were in Berkshire, with your father; and the
inconsistency of your immediate appearance, might justly alarm her. -- I would,
therefore, have you withdraw, immediately, lest any of the family should see
you.


Ld Eust. You have a right to direct me, and at your desire, I will defer my
visit, for a little time, but I can have no rest, 'till I behold her.


Fram. I don't fancy your meeting will contribute much, to the quiet of your
mind.


Ld Eust. I do not hope it should -- But never yet was that mind so distressed,
since it had first the power of thinking.


Fram. Peace and guilt seldom cohabit, my lord.


Ld Eust. True, Frampton, true -- and if young men, like myself, would but
calculate the pains and difficulties, which are the natural consequences of
vice, and how much they over-balance its transitory joys, they would be shocked
at a traffic, where certain loss must be the reward of their industry.


Fram. The being sensible of our errors, is the first step to amendment; for no
man ever sets seriously about getting out of debt, 'till he is thoroughly
apprized of the vast sum he owes. -- But, come, my lord, let us retire,
immediately; I hear some of the family in motion -- this way, quickly.

[Exeunt.
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, a Drawing Room in Lord EUSTACE 's House. Enter Lord EUSTACE. Ld Eust. I
Feel the force of Frampton's sentiments, and tremble at the thoughts of seeing
Harriet; and yet, I cannot deny myself this last indulgence. If my father were
acquainted with my distress, perhaps -- O no! I must not think of that. --
Cursed ambition! -- detested pride of family! -- that makes us sink the man, to
aggrandize the peer.

Enter ROBERT.
Rob. The ladies will wait on your lordship, immediately.

[Exit.
Ld Eust. I am glad the aunt comes with her -- Her folly and impertinence will
help to interrupt, what I most dread, my Harriet's tenderness, and sensibility.
She comes -- I feel her superiority, and shrink to nothing.

Enter Miss HARRIET; she runs a few Steps toward Lord EUSTACE, then stops
suddenly, in Confusion.
Ld Eust. My Harriet's first motion was, surely, natural, why then does she
restrain the feelings of her heart? Have I been so unfortunate, as to deserve
this coldness?

Enter Mrs. WINIFRED.
Ld Eust. I hope, madam (to Mrs. Winifred) you will be so good as to excuse my
absence, at the time of your arrival, and that you have found every thing, in
this house, agreeable, and convenient to you.


Mrs. Win. Ceremony, my lord, is quite unnecessary, among persons of rank and
breeding; especially, where they have the honor of being so closely allied to
your lordship. And I have great reason to believe, that every thing in your
house, is like your lordship, perfectly complete.


Ld Eust. You are very polite, madam; and if my Harriet knew what I had
suffered --


Har. -- I might, then have been more concerned, than I am at present, and
that, my lord, is needless.


Mrs. Win. I hoped we should have had an end of your sighs, and your tears,
when you saw lord Eustace -- I declare, child, you are a perfect Niobe! -- One
would imagine that you were the most unhappy creature, in the world.


Ld Eust. You alarm me, extremely, madam -- Speak, my love, and tell me what
affects you?


Har. Your lordship may remember with what great reluctance, I consented to a
private marriage.


Ld Eust. My Harriet's scruples cost me too many sighs, ever to forget them.


Har. Yet your too powerful persuasions conquered them; and while you remained
in Wales, your presence silenced my reflections, nor suffered even a painful
thought to intrude into that heart, which was engrossed by you. What a delirium!


Ld Eust. May it last, for ever!


Har. It fled, with you, my lord -- Left to myself, the offense I had
committed, against an absent father -- the clandestine air, which accompanied
the awful ceremony --


Mrs. Win. Pray, niece, could that be avoided?


Har. -- The painful necessity of your absence --


Ld Eust. Let me, I entreat you, flatter myself, that my presence, now, may be
sufficient to remove the anxiety my absence caused -- What would I not do, to
make my Harriet happy! Command me; task my power. --


Har. I would entreat, but not command, my lord.


Ld Eust. Then name the soft request, and think it granted.


Har. Since you permit, I wish you to employ that dear pursuasive art, which
you possess, so amply, to reconcile my father to our marriage.


Ld Eust. My dearest Harriet --


Har. You, madam, sure will join us, and assist in bringing about an event,
which cannot longer be deferred, without injury to your honor, and my peace.


Mrs. Win. I am his lordship's guarantee, that this treaty shall be kept
secret, Harriet; and I shall preserve my promise, as inviolably, as if the
peace of Europe, were concerned. And to avoid the least infringement of the
articlcs, I will prevent Sir William's surprising you, in this state of
altercation, and give you notice, of the enemy's approach.

[Exit.
Har. If ever I was dear to you, my lord, this is the time to prove it: remove
the veil of mystery, which I blush to wear, and give that love, which is my
highest boast, a sanction to the world.


Ld Eust. Never was man so embarrass'd. -- (Aside) I will obey my Harriet, though
in opposition to my own judgment, which had determined me not to reveal the
important secret, to Sir William, till our return into the country; lest the
warmth of his resentment, for what he will style an act of disobedience, might
tempt him to discover our marriage, to my father.


Har. Must it be ever kept a secret, then? And must we always live thus
separated?


Ld Eust. By no means -- I can make a pretense to my father, of joining my
regiment, and then can I retrace those paths, that brought me first to
Langwillan; and the moment I arrive there, Sir William shall be made
acquainted, with my happiness.


Har. Do you mean to come there, soon, my lord?


Ld Eust. I should have been there, in a few days, if you had not come to town.


Har. Why did you not tell me so? the least hint of your design, would have
prevented my coming to London.


Ld Eust. Does my Harriet think I would delay my own happiness, by deferring an
interview, I so ardently desired, even for an hour?


Har. You can persuade me, to any thing. I acquiesce, in your determination. --
There is but one thing more, disturbs my mind; but that is a trifle.


Ld Eust. It cannot be so, in my estimation, if it affects you -- Let me know
it.


Har. Where there is much sensibility, the heart is easily alarmed -- It has
appeared extraordinary to me, that your lordship, in any of your letters to me,
has never honored me, with the title, of your wife.


Ld Eust. And can my Harriet blame me, for such a caution, meant to secure her
happiness? If my fortunes only, were at stake, I should now boast, what I so
much endeavor to conceal, nor fear the consequence of lord Delville's
resentment. The miscarriage, or interception, of a letter, signed your husband,
would precipitate the discovery of our marriage, and ruin me with my father. --


Har. I would not have you suffer, for my sake.


Ld Eust. It is only through you, that I can suffer -- Had my fortune been
independent, I should, at once, have asked you of Sir William. -- Nay, situated
as I am, I can forego all the advantages of wealth, without regret, and, blessed
with you, only lament its loss, for your dear sake. -- You weep, my Harriet!
Let me kiss off those tears.


Har. No, let them flow, my lord -- Joy has its tears, as well as grief, and
these are tears of joy.

[Embracing him.
Ld Eust. My lovely softness! -- How severely she distresses me!

(Aside.)
Har. I will not trust this simple heart, again, and blush to think it was so
easily alarmed.

Enter Mrs. WINIFRED, in a Hurry.
Mrs. Win. Softly, softly, here comes my brother -- have done with your
love-prate -- What, always a pouting, Harriet?

Enter Sir WILLIAM, speaking to ROBERT.
Sir Wm. Give the coachman half a crown -- and, do you hear, Robert, let there
be springs put to our coach -- every one has them, now -- Luxury! luxury! Every
alderman and apothecary skims over this newfangled pavement, without so much
as a jolt. -- One of these city sparks would be shook to death, if he were to
ride my Bay Bolton, a fox chase.


Mrs. Win. My brother is always his own herald, and proclaims himself, by the
noise he makes -- How detestably vulgar! how unlike a man of fashion! -- Here
is lord Eustace come to wait upon you, Sir William.


Sir Wm. I am glad to see your lordship, you have been a good while absent,
from quarters -- But you young men of quality, can have leave of absence, when
you please, I suppose; and all you have to do, is to appear handsomely on a
field day, or at a review. It was not so, in my time -- But discipline, of
every kind, is relaxed, nowadays.


Ld Eust. I have been a truant, Sir William, but I mean to make up for lost
time, and return, immediately, to my regiment; and then, look to your partridge.


Sir Wm. You shall be welcome to my manor, my lord. -- How does my Harriet? I
think you look pale. Don't you think her altered, my lord?


Ld Eust. Rather improved, Sir.


Sir Wm. She used to be remarkably lively; but as girls grow up, they affect
gravity, in order to appear women before their time. -- Her brother and she,
are all I have left; and when Harriet is married --


Mrs. Win. Lord, Sir William, are you entering into family-matters!


Sir Wm. Well, well, we will not talk of that, now; but since we are upon the
subject, I think I ought to congratulate your lordship.


Ld Eust. It must be, then, Sir William, upon the happiness, I, at present,
enjoy, in the company of these ladies.


Har. What does my father mean?

(Aside.)
Sir Wm. No, no, my lord, I meant to give you joy, of your approaching
marriage. --


Har. Surely, my ears deceive me!

(Aside.)
Ld Eust. You jest, Sir William!


Sir Wm. By no means, I assure you -- I have it, from undoubted authority.


Mrs. Win. Ridiculous!


Sir Wm. I tell you, sister, that it is in one of today's papers -- I know what
I read, sure. --


Mrs. Win. Did it mention how things go, in the Mediterranean? that is an
article, which concerns us more -- We shall not have a port left us, there,
soon. --


Sir Wm. I speak only of domestic news, and mind no other -- The paragraph, I
saw, ran thus -- We hear there is certainly a treaty of marriage, on foot,
between lord Eustace, and lady Anne Mountfort, which will be concluded, in a
few days -- and then, a great deal more, my lord, about both your
accomplishments, which I have forgot.


Mrs. Win. I never knew any thing come of a We hear, yet. -- But I wish you had
brought home the paper.


Ld Eust. Ha! ha! ha! -- And is that your undoubted authority, Sir William?
Why, at this season of the year, when occurrences are rare, the news writers
couple half the nobility, in England, to fill up their papers -- But, as there
are no other papers filled up, by the parties themselves -- your marriages, in
print, are not allowed good, in law.


Mrs. Win. How can you be so easily, disconcerted, child?

(Aside to Harriet.)
Sir Wm. I think it highly insolent in them, my lord, to take these liberties,
without authority, as such reports may sometimes happen to be prejudicial, to
one party, or the other.


Ld Eust. The freedom of the press, Sir William, though sometimes injurious to
individuals, must never be restrained, in this land of liberty. It Is the very
Magna Charta of freedom.


Mrs. Win. So it is, my lord.


Ld Eust. However, there have been some slight grounds, for the report you
mention.


Sir Wm. So I should imagine.


Ld Eust. Lady Anne's large fortune was rather a desirable object, to my father
-- he did, therefore, propose my paying my addresses to her; but, upon my
declaring, that love should be my first motive, in an engagement of that
nature; and that my heart had never given me the least hint of her ladyship, he
had the goodness to sacrifice his project, to my happiness. The affair had been
whispered, in our family, and even whispers have echoes, Sir William.


Sir Wm. Your lordship has taken more pains than was necessary, to explain this
matter to us. For, though you should not marry lady Anne, it is to be supposed
that you will soon marry a lady Betty, or a lady Mary, Somebody. -- Such an
accomplished young nobleman will not be suffered to remain long single. --


Mrs. Win. Lord, Sir William, how can you talk, so oddly? There are many
instances, of persons who have lived single, in spite of temptation, and
solicitation, too; and that, to your certain knowledge, I believe.


Sir Wm. You Will pardon me, sister; I am really not acquainted with any of these
coy, these sensitive plants.


Mrs. Win. You seem inclined to be witty, brother, and, therefore, I shall
retire.


Ld Eust. I should oppose the severity of that resolution, madam, but that an
engagement of business, calls me away, at this moment. May I hope for your
permission to wait upon you, frequently, while you stay in town?


Mrs. Win. Your lordship's visits must always be considered, by us, both as an
honor, and an obligation.


Ld Eust. My sweet Harriet! -- Ladies, your servant. -- I hope we shall often
meet, Sir William. (Bows to Harriet.) Nay, no ceremony.


Sir Wm. Your lordship must excuse me.

[Exit Ld Eust. and Sir Wm.
Mrs. Win. With what nice delicacy, and honor, has my nephew explained away
this idle report! But I am amazed, how you could be affected with it, child.


Har. Chide me, as you please, I own I deserve it, for doubting the most
amiable of men. Yet when my father hinted the subject, I should have fainted,
if the tenderness of my lord's looks, even more than his words, had not
convinced me of his love and truth. Our fears are proportioned to our treasure;
you cannot, therefore, condemn my apprehensions, without lessening his worth.


Mrs. Win. That I shall never do. Persons, of a certain rank in life, are
always worthy. -- But come, child, I am in a monstrous dilemma, at present.


Har. What Is the matter?


Mrs. Win. I want your assistance, to calculate the distance, from Persia to
America; for I have great apprehensions that the Sophy may join the Czarina,
sail down the Baltic, together, and strip us of all our settlements. --


Har. Dear madam, how can you trouble yourself, with things so foreign, either
to your knowledge, or interests?


Mrs. Win. I beg your pardon. Why, niece, now that you are married to my
satisfaction, I know nothing in the domestic way, worth being concerned for;
and one's affections, you know, child, cannot lie idle -- therefore, I beg you
will go, immediately, and search for Salmon's Geography, which, I believe, you
will find in my trunk, along with Collins's Peerage, which are books, I never
travel without; and which no person can pretend to keep company, without being
thoroughly conversant in.

[Exeunt. Enter Sir WILLIAM and ROBERT.
Sir Wm. Prithee, Robert, was that man in the hall, my lord's valet de chamber?
Of what use can he be to his master, here?


Rob. Of a great deal, I fancy, Sir. There are numbers of people come here,
after his lord. A fine lady, just now, wanted to gain admittance, but Mr.
Willis had dacity enough to make her disbelieve her own senses, and persuaded
her that his master was down at Bristol, though she said her eyes saw him come
into the house. O these Londoners are cunning folk!


Sir Wm. You told me of another person, that lives here, a gentleman, I think
--


Rob. Yes, poor fellow, I believe he may be an honest man, because Willis don't
seem much to like him. -- But it is hard to say, which is good, or bad, amongst
them.


Sir Wm. (Aside.) There is something very mysterious, in all this -- I desire,
Robert, that you will have as little communication, as possible, with his
lordship's servants, and that you will prevent the rest of my family, from
having any, also.


Rob. Your honor need not fear. -- They are not kindly to any of us.


Sir Wm. I am glad of it. -- Civility is the most dangerous mask of art.
(Aside.) [My sister's folly in forcing us into this house, can only be equaled
by my own, in submitting to come to it. But I will get out of it, as fast as I
can.] I hope, Robert, to finish my business, in a few days, and I shall not
remain in London, an hour after.


Rob. Your honor makes my heart glad.


Sir Wm. Do you know where Harriet is, Robert? I left her here, just now.


Rob. I saw her go up stairs, with madam Winifred, as we came hither, Sir. I
think, with submission, our young lady likes London, as little as either your
worship, or myself; she mopes mightily, to be in the country, again.


Sir Wm. She shall not mope long, for that, Robert, nor when she is there,
neither; for I intend to settle her soon, both to her happiness, and my own, by
marrying her to colonel Loyd, immediately. And when the wedding is over, and I
am once more sat down safe, at Langwillan, I shall think all my troubles are at
an end. -- I Will go to Harriet, directly, and talk the matter over with her.


Rob. And I Will go, and write the good news, to my friends in Wales.

[Exeunt. SCENE, Mr. Frampton's Apartment. Enter Mr. FRAMPTON and WILLIS.
Fram. To barricade the doors, and deny admitance to their friends!


Will. These were his lordship's orders, Sir. -- Willis, says he, with an arch
look, which I understand, pretty tolerably, you must be my Cerberus, and not
suffer the devil, himself, to get through the keyhole, for a few days. But as
soon as I am married, and gone off to the country, your care will be needless.
-- Yes, says I, to his lordship, I will then make my escape out of the gulf,
leave the doors open for all the devils to enter, and pursue your lordship to
the Elysian fields.


Fram. You are very poetical Mr. Willis. -- But I fancy his lordship is rather
over cautious, and that you will have no great employment, for your
extraordinary talents; for I don't think the family have any acquaintance, in
London.


Will. More is the pity, for the girl is devilish handsome, It would be a good
deed to bring her a little into life. -- I should like to have the introducing
her.


Fram. Stop your licentious tongue! -- I have already told you, that this is no
common affair. -- She is a young lady of unblemished character.


Will. This the old story, Mr. Frampton; I never knew a woman, in my life, who
had not an unblemished character -- till she lost it. -- This fellow is turned
puritan; he will preach, presently -- But I hope his canting will not be able to
corrupt my lord. -- This would be no place for me, then. I fancy he likes the
girl, himself.

(Aside.)
Fram. Believe me, Willis, lord Eustace will find it a very difficult matter,
to get clear of this unhappy adventure. -- Sir William is a man of sense, and
spirit, and the young lady has, besides, a brother, in the army, who is
esteemed a brave young man.


Will. As to Don Pedro, the father, I think my lord had better get commodore
Loyd, to take a short walk with him, upon the quarter deck; and, as to the
young Spaniard, his lordship cannot well refuse to take a bout of tilting with
him, if he should insist upon it -- But I have been pretty well used to things
of this sort, as you know, Mr. Frampton, and I never yet knew a wounded
reputation cured, by a sword, or pistol -- Perhaps they may think as I do, and
so let the matter rest in peace.


Fram. I should imagine their sentiments to be very different, from yours, upon
this occasion. -- But, pray, who is this captain Loyd, that you talk of, for
Sir William's antagonist?


Will. There I was out, a little -- I forgot his being a Welchman, and a
particular friend of the Ap Evans's.


Fram. But how came he connected with lord Eustace?


Will. They were acquainted, before the captain went to sea, and a jolly buck he
was. But he has now lost his ship; and to solicit another, he is as constant,
at lord Delville's levee, as an old maid at her parish church. -- The simile
holds farther too, for his head is cast in so peculiar a mould, that he
believes every thing he hears, and repeats it as matter of fact.


Fram. What an infinite deal of falsehood, must this honest man utter, in the
course of a summer's day!


Will. I will save his poor conscience, for this one day, at least, by keeping
him out of our fortress.


Fram. It will be more necessary for your purpose, to prevent telling his
truths, at present, I imagine.


Will. Your honor knows it is not to be spoken, at all times. He has told a
thousand, for my master, himself. (Aside.) [Knocking at the door.] I must fly
to my post, Sir.

[Exit.
Fram. A fit one, for such an office! It is such wretches, as these, that
corrupt us all; that clear the thorny paths of vice, and strew them over with
roses. -- These agents for perdition, can remove mountains that obstruct our
passage, till we are sunk in the abyss of guilt, and then their weight falls on
us! I would willingly persuade myself, that lord Eustace is not so far gone, in
baseness, as to conclude his marriage with lady Anne, and desert this amiable
unfortunate. Yet can I not, at present, foresee, how it may be possible for
him, to avoid it. There is some time, however, to think about it. I Will seek him
out, directly, and try how his heart beats, after his interview with Harriet.

[Exit. SCENE, Sir William's Apartment. Sir WILLIAM and HARRIET discovered.
Sir Wm. I am sorry to find you so cold, upon this subject, Harriet. But I
flatter myself when you come to know the colonel, you will have no objections
to him. Believe me, my child, he is the only man I know, deserving of an heart
like yours, untainted with the follies, or vices, of the world, and unsullied
with the image, of any other man.


Har. This is too much; I cannot bear it. (Aside.) -- Sir.

Enter ROBERT.
Rob. Captain Loyd is come to wait upon your honor.


Sir Wm. Desire him to walk in. -- And do ye hear, Robert?

(They walk aside.)
Har. To be obliged to compound with my duty! Ashamed to look my father in the
face! To blush at his confidence, and be humbled by his kindness! To feel the
irksomeness of receiving praise, which I am conscious I do not merit! What a
state, for an ingenuous mind!

[Exit Robert. Enter at opposite Doors, Mrs. WINIFRED, and Captain LOYD.
Mrs. Win. O heavens, that monster here! -- But it is impossible now to escape.

(Aside.)
Capi. Good morrow, my good friend. Fair ladies, your servant.


Sir Wm. I am extremely glad to see you, captain.


Capt. Why, so I thought you would be, baronet, or I should not have been here;
and yet it has not been without some difficulty, that we are met. I fancied,
just now, that I should have been obliged to tack about, without seeing you.


Sir Wm. I don't understand you, captain.


Capt. Why, to say truth, Sir William, I don't rightly comprehend it, myself;
but one of your lazy hall furniture -- the most obstinate puppy! I have seen
him, before, though I cannot now recollect where, took it into his head, to deny
me admittance; and if old Robert had not come to the door, and cleared deck of
this fellow, I should have sheer'd off, directly.


Sir Wm. What can this mean! Was it your orders, sister, that we should be
denied?


Mrs. Win. As our arrival in town, has not yet been annonced, to any one, I did
not expect visitors, so soon; and, therefore, gave no orders, about the matter
-- Though I wish to keep him, and all his family, out of the house.

(Aside.)
Sir Wm. There is something very extrordinary, in this proceeding.

(Aside.)
Capt. Since the wind sits so, I am glad I came aboard you; I should not choose
to run foul of a lady's orders, especially any that belong to you.


Sir Wm. You seem to have forgot these ladies, captain; this is my sister, and
this will, soon, be your niece, I hope.


Capt. They are both much altered, since I saw them; for one is grown a young
woman, and the other an old one.


Mrs. Win. You are not grown a brute, for you always was one.


Sir Wm. Have a care, captain, you are very near splitting on a rock.


Capt. Not at all -- Time brings every vessel into port, at last, that does not
founder -- But, faith, my nephew has had an excellent look out; I could almost
envy him such a station. A fine full sail, truly! -- Well, prosperous gales
attend their voyage! -- But where is Harry? I expected to have seen him, here.


Sir Wm. Whom do you speak of, captain?


Capt. Why, of your son, the young colonel. -- I met him, yesterday, in the
Park, not in his regimentals, though; for he told me he was a little incog, at
present, and had even changed his name, for fear, of being known. I think it
was Weston, he called himself, as he had quitted quarters, without leave of
absence, and at the hazard of losing his commission.


Sir Wm. And he deserves it -- What can have brought him, here?


Har. I rejoice at the thoughts of seeing him; does he look well, good captain?


Mrs. Win. Do you know where my nephew lodges, Sir?

(Aside.)
Capt. I should have as many tongues, as there are swivels on the quarter deck,
to answer such a broadside of questions; but one, at a time, I beseech you. --
As to you, madam, I answer no; and to you, fair lady, yes; and as to you, Sir
William, I think one need not have doubled the Cape, to be able to find out his
errand, hither. A fair woman, and a fair wind, certainly brought him from
Ireland.


Sir Wm. Rash, inconsiderate, boy!


Capt. That may not be quite the case, neither, Sir William. But I should not
have mentioned this matter to you, if I had not thought it had been all
above-board, between him and you, for Harry was never kept under hatches, I
know. -- But, never fear, man, keep a stout heart, and I warrant you he shall
weather it; he shall not lose his commission.


Mrs. Win. I fancy, Sir, it may require the interest, of a person of rather
more consequence, than you, to preserve it. But there are such, who are ready
to interest themselves, for any one who belongs to my family; the Ap Evans's
are neither unknown, nor unallied, to the nobility.


Capt. As to that, madam, I should think the Loyds --


Sir Wm. For shame! for shame! -- Can you, who are a man, be infected with this
folly?


Capt. Why it is not right, or becoming a man of war, to attack a frigate, to be
sure. -- But the Loyds, Sir, William --


Sir Wm. Pisha!


Mrs. Win. Pray, brother, let the gentleman value himself upon what he pleases;
but it is rather unlucky, that a person of his weight and importance, should not
be able to inform us where my nephew lodges, as that is the only thing, in
which the captain could be, any way, serviceable to us.


Capt. Not so fast, Miss Winifred, if you please; there are many people in this
town, who are apt to make offer of their services, without either will, or
power, to be of the least use to us. Now, if you will tell me, madam, who those
people are, that you reckon upon, I shall be better able to judge of your
interest with the great.


Mrs. Win. What do you think of lord Eustace? Did you ever hear of him, captain?


Capt. I suppose I may; why he is one of my most intimate friends, madam, and I
will speak to him about the business, directly.


Mrs. Win. Pray now, good captain, spare yourself that trouble, for he is one
of my most intimate friends, also. It is he who has been so obliging to lend us
this house, while we stay in London.


Capt. I do remember this place, now, as well as my own cabin -- But the
impertinence of that footman, whom I now recollect to be his, put it out of my
head. -- Yes, my lord, and I have had some jovial parties, here.


Sir Wm. What, in this identical house?


Capt. Why, aye -- This used to be the place of rendezvous -- But those days
must be all over with him, now that he is going to be married.


Mrs. Win. and Har. How! married!


Capt. Yes -- The ceremony is to be performed, immediately; he will soon be in
the bilboes. -- But you seem surpised. -- It Is odd enough, truly, that he has
not mentioned it to you, Miss Winifred, in particular, who are one of his most
intimate friends. -- When did you see him, pray?


Mrs. Win. What! again alarmed, at the same story?

(Aside to Harriet.)
Sir Wm. He was here, this morning; and I knew it was so then, though my sister
chose not to believe it.


Mrs. Win. Nor do I, now. -- But pray, Mr. intelligencer extraordinary, to whom
is lord Eustace to be married?


Capt. Why, really, madam, it is no extraordinary intelligence, that he is to
marry lady Anne Mounfort, for it is just as public, as the arrival of a king's
ship in the Downs, or an Indiaman at Blackwall. -- The newspapers tell these
things, and every one in London, knows them.


Har. Gracious heaven! Where shall I hide my head?

(Aside.)
Mrs. Win. We have heard this choice account, before, Sir; but though I have as
implicit a faith, in the veracity of the public prints, as any person can have,
I would, however, take my life on it, that this is a falsehood.


Capt. You are not serious, madam? But if you choose to deny the fact, I have
nothing further to say, about it.


Sir Wm. It is very odd, that lord Eustace should disown it to me, and yet,
it is certain, that he did so.


Capt. That may be possible; but I, who am, every day, at his father's, and
have seen the liveries, equipage, and jewels, brought home, for the wedding,
cannot easily be persuaded, that all this rigging should be prepared, before
there is a bottom on stocks, for it.


Har. It Is too true! Undone, unhappy Harriet!

(Aside to Mrs. Winifred.)
Sir Wm. What think you now, sister?


Mrs. Win. That the captain has dreamed all he has said, or may be, perhaps,
infected with a calenture; for I think I have very good reason to know, that
lord Eustace is otherways engaged.


Capt. Aye, aye, engaged, to be sure; say, rather, that he has taken another
frigate, in tow, to add to his squadron; I know the man, pretty well. I now
recollect my having heard, some time ago, that he had some attachment, to a
pretty country girl. He was a long time absent, from London.


Mrs. Win. A country girl, truly!


Sir Wm. Some poor simple creature, I suppose, who had youth and beauty,
enough, to attract his inclinations, but neither sense, or virtue, sufficient,
to preserve herself, or them.


Capt. This is, probably, the real truth of the matter.


Sir Wm. Though I lament the unhappy victims of their own folly, I cannot say
that I am sorry such adventures happen, sometimes, as these examples may,
possibly, have their effect, in abating the presumption of young women, who
are, often, too apt to fancy themselves much wiser, than their fathers and
mothers.


Har. I can no longer sustain the agonies I suffer!

(Aside. Faints.)
Sir Wm. My Harriet! my dear child! what is the matter?


Har. I am, suddenly, taken ill; I hope you will excuse me, Sir.


Mrs. Win. Was there ever any thing, so absurd? Let us retire, my dear, and
leave these wondermaking gentlemen to compose some other marvelous anecdotes.

[Exit Mrs. Win. and Har.
Sir Wm. I am extremely alarmed. (Aside.) -- You Will be so good as to excuse my
staying longer with you, captain, at present. Harriet's illness distresses me,
extremely.


Capt. Doubtless, Sir William. -- I will now go and give chase to the colonel,
and if I can hail him, shall pilot him, hither.


Sir Wm. I shall be much obliged to you.


Capt. But you must not play old square-toes, upon us, baronet. Remember you
were once as young, and I Will warrant as frolicksome, too, as any of us. Your
servant, your servant, Sir William.

[Exit.
Sir Wm. There is something, very singular, in this affair of lord Eustace. --
My sister's absurdity, in denying the fact, I can account for, from the
peculiar obstinacy of her character. But why should Harriet be affected with
it? Her aunt's folly may have operated there, also; perhaps persuaded her, that
his lordship's common address of galantry and politeness, was a professed
declaration of passion for her. But this marriage will soon put an end to such
illusion, and restore my child to her sense, and duty, again. I will,
therefore, go now, and sooth, not wound her mind, with my surmises. -- The
soibles of youth, should be rather counteracted, than opposed, lest, in
endeavoring to weed them out, we may destroy a kindred virtue.

[Exit.
END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, Frampton's Apartment. Enter FRAMPTON. Fram. IT was unlucky I could not
meet with lord Eustace. I perceive I am more anxious, about this affair, than
he appears to be. Youth and dissipation buoy him up, against those
consequences, which I cannot help foreseeing.

Enter WILLIS, with a Parcel of Letters.
Will. Here they are, Sir; and if you knew what pains and address, it cost me,
to get them into my hands, you would say, Willis, you deserve to be rewarded.


Fram. With a halter.

(Aside.)
Will. I was forced to swear to the fellow who brought them, that I was Sir
William's own servant; and as the devil would have it, he was a Monmouthshire
lad, waiter at Serles's Coffee-house, and had come, on purpose, to ask a
thousand impertinent questions, about Gillian, and John, James, and Mary
Lewellins, Ap Griffiths, Ap Owens, and the lord knows who. Then my terrors,
about Robert surprising us; but, luckily, he was out of the way, so I carried
the lad to a beer-house, killed one half of his kindred, and married the other,
without knowing one of the parties.


Fram. What an ingenious rascal! (Aside.) -- You have acquitted yourself of
your commission, very well. -- Leave the letters.


Will. I hope, Sir, your honor will be so kind, to let my lord know the pains,
I have taken, for his service, since you don't chu^e to take any notice of it,
yourself. -- Industry should be rewarded, Mr. Frampton. -- You used to be
generous, Sir; but --


Farm. How the fellow wounds me! (Aside.) -- Your services will be repaid; you
have no cause to doubt of your lord's generosity.


Will. No, really, Sir -- If you don't prevent it. (Aside.) -- I fancy, now, I
could guess, pretty nearly, to the contents of these epistles. I wish I could
keep them in my possession, 'till I gave them to my lord, and then I should be
sure of being paid the postage. (Aside.) -- Let Us see -- To Sir William Evans,
baronet; the post-mark, Monmouth; this, probably, comes from his steward, and
may, possibly, contain an account of a strayed sheep, or a cur hanged. -- This,
to the same, from Ireland; from his son, I presume, the young hero you talked
of, about fighting my master -- but I think we are pretty safe, while he is at
that distance.


Fram. I hope he may remain there, 'till this unhappy business is over.


Will. To Mrs. Winifred Evans; post-mark Hereford; it is Langwood's hand -- this
must be the letter of letters. -- Am I right, Sir?


Farm. Prithee, leave them, and your impertinence -- You have no right to pry
into their secrets.


Will. I ask pardon, Sir; I have been trusted with a great many secrets, before
now, and I believe your honor knows I never betrayed them. -- And, though I am
not a gentleman, Sir, I believe my lord will give me the character of being
faithful to him; he never had any cause to repent his confidence, in me --
Whatever he may -- (Aside.)


Fram. Leave the room, this moment, lest I should be tempted to forget myself,
and chastise your insolence, as it deserves.


Will. I wish I had the letters again, and the devil should have them, before
that sneaking puppy. (Aside.)

[Exit.
Fram. What a mean light, do I appear in, at this moment, to myself! Involved
in an infamous confidence, with an insolent footman! -- Let me keep clear of
the looking-glass, that I may not be shocked at my own features. -- And can I
persist, in an action, that the least remains of honor or conscience, must
revolt against? No, let beggary, rather than infamy, be my portion. -- My
indiscretions have deserved the first, but let not the baseness of my conduct,
ever set a seal to the last. -- I will go and deliver them, instantly, to Sir
William.

As he is going out, Enter Lord EUSTACE.
Ld Eust. Well, my dear Frampton, have you secured the letters?


Fram. Yes, my lord, for their rightful owners.


Ld Eust. As to the matter of property, Frampton, we will not dispute much about
that. -- Necessity, you know, may, sometimes, render a trespass excusable.


Fram. I am not casuist sufficient to answer you, upon that subject; but this I
know, that you have already trespassed, against the laws of hospitality, and
honor, in your conduct toward Sir William Evans, and his daughter. -- And as
your friend, and counselor, both, I would advise you to think seriously, of
repairing the injuries you have committed, and not increase your offense, by a
farther violation.


Ld Eust. It Is actually a pity you were not bred to the bar, Ned: but I have
only a moment to stay, and am all impatience to know, if there be a letter from
Langwood, and what he says.


Fram. I shall never be able to afford you the least information, upon that
subject, my lord.


Ld Eust. Surely, I don't understand you. -- You said you had secured the
letters -- Have you not read them?


Fram. You have a right, and none but you, to ask me such a question. -- My
weak compliance, with your first proposal, relative to these letters, warrants
your thinking, so meanly, of me. -- But know, my lord, that though my personal
affection for you, joined to my unhappy circumstances, may have betrayed me to
actions, unworthy of myself, I never can forget, that there is a barrier, fixed
before the extreme of baseness, which honor will not let me pass.


Ld Eust. You Will give me leave to tell you, Mr. Frampton, that where I lead, I
think you need not halt.


Fram. You Will pardon me, my lord; the consciousness, of another man's errors,
can never be a justification, for our own -- and poor, indeed, must that wretch
be, who can be satisfied, with the negative merit, of not being the worst man
he knows.


Ld Eust. If this discourse were uttered in a conventicle, it might have its
effect; by setting the congregation to sleep.


Fram. It is rather meant to rouse, than lull your lordship.


Ld Eust. No matter what it is meant for; give me the letters, Mr. Frampton.


Fram. Yet, excuse me -- By heaven, I could as soon think of arming a madman's
hand, against my own life, as suffer you to be guilty of a crime, that will,
for ever, wound your honor.


Ld Eust. I shall not come to you, to heal the wound: your medicines are too
rough and coarse, for me.


Fram. The soft poison of flattery, might, perhaps, please you better.


Ld Eust. Your conscience may, probably, have as much need of palliatives, as
mine, Mr. Frampton, as I am pretty well convinced, that your course of life,
has not been more regular, than my own.


Fram. With true contrition, my lord, I confess part of your sarcasm, to be
just. -- Pleasure was the object of my pursuit, and pleasure I obtained, at the
expense, both of health, and fortune -- but, yet, my lord, I broke not in upon
the peace of others; the laws of hospitality, I never violated; nor did I ever
seek to injure, or seduce, the wife, or daughter, of my friend.


Ld Eust. I care not what you did; give me the letters.


Fram. I have no right to keep, and therefore shall surrender, them, though with
the utmost reluctance; but, by our former friendship, I entreat you not to open
them.


Ld Eust. That you have forfeited.


Fram. Since it is not in my power to prevent your committing an error, which
you ought, for ever, to repent of, I will not be a witness of it -- There are
the letters. (Leaves them on the table.)


Ld Eust. You may, perhaps, have cause to repent your present conduct, Mr.
Frampton, as much as I do our past attachment.


Fram. Rather than hold your friendship, upon such terms, I resign it, for
ever. -- Farewell, my lord.

[Exit. Lord EUSTACE takes up the Letters, WILLIS appears at the Side of the
Scene.
Will. I am glad they have quarrelled, I shall have my lord all to myself, now.

(Aside.)
Ld Eust. I have been to blame -- but yet 'twas cruel in him, to distress me,
when he knows the difficulties of my situation -- he has shocked me, so
extremely, I find it impossible to touch the letters.


Will. Then we are all ruined, and I shall never be paid for the carriage.

(Aside.)
Ld Eust. Yet if Langwood's letter should fall into their hands, I must be
undone.


Will. In order to strengthen his lordship's conscience, I Will make my appearance.

(Aside.) WILLIS comes forward.
Will. I hope Mr. Frampton has given your lordship the letters, I took so much
pains to get for you -- there is one from Langwood, to Mrs. Winifred --

Re-enter Mr. FRAMPTON. -- The devil! he here again! there is no doing any
business, with these half gentlemen.

(Aside.)
Fram. My lord!


Ld Eust. Mr. Frampton! -- Leave us. Willis.


Will. So, I have lost my labor.

(Aside.) [Exit.
Fram. Ill treated as I have been, my lord, I find it impossible to leave you
surrounded by difficulties.


Ld Eust. That sentiment should have operated, sooner, Mr. Frampton --
recollection is seldom of use, to our friends, though it may, sometimes, be
serviceable, to ourselves.


Fram. Take advantage of your own expression, my lord, and recollect yourself
-- Born and educated as I have been, a gentleman, how have you injured, both
yourself and me, by admitting, and uniting, in the same confidence, your rascal
servant?


Ld Eust. The exigency of my situation, is a sufficient excuse, to myself, and
ought to have been so, to the man, who called himself my friend.


Fram. Have a care, my lord, of uttering the least doubt, upon that subject;
for could I think you once mean enough, to suspect the sincerity of my
attachment to you, it must vanish, at that instant.


Ld Eust. The proofs of your regard, have been rather painful, of late, Mr.
Frampton.


Fram. When I see my friend, upon the verge of a precipice, is that a time for
compliment? Shall I not rudely rush forward, and drag him from it? Just in that
state, you, are at present, and I will strive to save you. -- Virtue may
languish, in a noble heart, and suffer her rival, vice, to usurp her power; but
baseness must not enter, or she flies, for ever -- The man, who has forfeited
his own esteem, thinks all the world has the same consciousness, and,
therefore, is, what he deserves to be, a wretch.


Ld Eust. Oh, Frampton! you have lodged a dagger, in my heart.


Fram. No, my dear Eustace, I have saved you from one, from your own
reproaches, by preventing your being guilty of a meanness, which you could
never have forgiven yourself.


Ld Eust. Can you forgive me, and be still my friend?


Fram. As firmly as I have ever been, my lord.


Ld Eust. You are, indeed, my best, my truest friend (embracing him.) But yet,
I fear you will despise me, Frampton -- You never loved, to that excess, that I
do, and, therefore, cannot pardon the madness of that passion, which would
destroy its dearest object.


Fram. We must not judge of the strength of our passions, by the miseries they
bring on others, but, rather, by the means we use, to save them from distress
-- But let us, at present, hasten to get rid of the mean business, we are
engaged in, and forward the letters we have no right to detain.


Ld Eust. Here, take them; do what you will with them: I will be guided by you
-- Yet this affair, of Langwood's letter --


Fam. Will make dreadful confusion, my lord -- Let me think, a little -- I have
it -- Suppose we delay the delivery of it, for a few days; something may
happen, in that time, that may save the unhappy Harriet the pain of such a
discovery.


Ld Eust. Though I have little hopes, on that account, yet would I not
precipitate her wretchedness; it was to save her from it, Frampton, that first
induced me --


Fram. Talk no more of it, my lord -- Mr. Willis --

Enter WILLIS.
Will. So, they are friends, again, I see. (Aside.) -- Did your honor call, Mr.
Frampton?


Fram. Take these letters, and give them to Sir William's servant, to be
delivered, immediately.


Will. What, all of them, my lord?


Framp. No, this one must be kept back. Look it up, carefully, 'till I call for
it.


Ld Eust. Come, my dear Frampton, I have a thousand obligations to you, and a
thousand things to speak to you, about.

[Ex. Ld. Eust. and Framp.
Will. My dear Frampton! -- There Is a fellow for you, that, without half a crown
in his pocket, talks as much stuff, about honor, and such nonsense, as if he
were a duke -- They have not broke the seal, I find; that is Frampton's fault:
if he had not returned, the instant he did, I would have satisfied my lord's
curiosity, and my own -- Well, cannot I do so, now? A good servant should
prevent his master's wishes -- My lord, I am sure, would be glad to know the
contents; egad, and so should I, too -- but how shall I come at 'em? -- This
cursed seal (flirts it with his finger.) Zounds! what have I done? -- what an
accident! why, the letter's open? -- why, if it is, one may read it, without
offense -- So, by your leave, good Mrs. Winifred -- (reads) Madam, as I am
sensible the dreadful moment now approaches, when I must render an account of
all my actions -- A steward's account will be tolerably long, I suppose.
(Continues reading.) I wish, even by this late confession, to atone for the
crime I have been guilty of, in aiding lord Eustace to impose upon your niece,
by a feigned marriage. -- The devil! This is a confession, indeed! for which,
like all other mean-spirited, whimpering rascals, he deserves to be hanged. My
lord was in the right, to look sharp, after this business -- We must have been
blown up, if it had come to light. But as I hope to be well paid, for the
contents of this, I may let the others go free.

[Exit. SCENE changes to Sir William Evans's Apartment, HARRIET, seated on a
Couch, leaning on her Arm.
Har. I cannot pierce through the mystery, in which I am involved. I strive, in
vain, to recover my confidence in lord Eustace. These fatal reports unhinge my
very soul -- Yet nothing can abate my love. One false step has involved me, in
a thousand difficulties. I can endure my situation, no longer; and let the
consequence be what it may, I will reveal the secret, to my father. But then,
my lord's entreaties, and my aunt's commands -- why even they must be
sacrificed, to filial duty -- Wretch, that I am, how did I dare to break that
first of moral ties! -- Heavens! he is here!

Enter Sir WILLIAM, with a Letter in his Hand.
Sir Wm. I have just received a letter, from your brother, Harriet, which I
should have had, ten days ago, had I been at home.


Har. Does he assign a cause, for coming to London, Sir?


Sir Wm. Yes, yes, it is as Loyd guessed, an affair of galantry, but an
honorable business, though -- I long 'till ye are both married, that I may hear
no more of romances. I hope, when Harry has led the way, you will have no
objection to follow him.


Har. What shall I say to him?

(Aside.)
Sir Wm. I wish I knew who my future daughter-in-law is to be. Harry tells me
she has a great fortune; but that, I suppose, is a sweetener -- But if she has
worth and virtue, sufficient to make him happy, I shall be content. -- But
what is the matter, Harriet? I thought your illness was quit gone off -- you
look as if you had been weeping -- My sister, I suppose --


Har. No, Sir; indeed her goodness to me, as well as yours, is graved upon my
heart.


Sir Wm. She is a very odd woman -- She would fain persuade me, that I
distressed you, by jesting with captain Loyd, about lord Eustace's mistress --
I begin to think that she is in love with him, herself -- Of what consequence
are his galantries to her? I dare say he has had a hundred, of the same sort;
and that the lady, to whom he is now going to offer his hand, can have but a
very small remnant, of his heart.


Har. I have heard him say, Sir, they should never be divided.


Sir Wm. Fine talking, for a libertine, truly! -- However, I agree with you,
that it is not right, to make a jest, of those unfortunate women he may have
ruined -- And I commend your delicacy, upon this occcasion, as I well know it
is the result of the most amiable female virtues, modesty, and compassion.


Har. O, Sir!

(Rises.)
Sir Wm. What ails my child?


Har. (Falls at his feet.) My father!


Sir Wm. What is the matter? You amaze me, Harriet!


Har. I am --


Sir Wm. What?


Har. You see, before you, Sir --


Sir Wm. Don't distract me! Whom do I see?


Har. I am -- lord Eustace -- my father! --


Sir Wm. Speak; go on -- Lord Eustace! -- What of him?


Har. I am his wife --


Sir Wm. What -- lord Eustace's wife! -- Then you are a wretch, indeed!


Har. Yet pardon me, Sir!


Sir Wm. I cannot pardon you! Harriet, you have undone yourself.


Har. O do not say so, Sir, when it is in your power, to make me happy.


Sir Wm. I would it were -- but there is very little prospect of happiness, for
a virtuous woman, who is connected with a libertine.


Har. I hope, Sir, you have mistaken his character; and when you know him
better, I am sure you will be sorry --


Sir Wm. It is you, child, that I fear will have cause to be sorry, for having
mistaken his character -- young women are but bad judges, of their lovers
morals.


Har. My aunt, Sir --


Sir Wm. Aye, aye, she, I suppose, was privy to the match; he is a lord, and
that is enough for her. I might have expected such a stroke, from her
intolerable vanity -- But how have I been deceived, in my opinion, both of your
duty, and affection to me!


Har. My future conduct, Sir, shall prove them both.


Sir Wm. O Harriet! What a disappointment is mine? I hoped to have seen you
united to a man of sense, and worth, who would have respected, as well as loved
you -- Instead of that, you are now joined to one, who, from his too intimate
knowledge of the vicious part of your sex, is likely to despise them all.


Har. I flatter myself, Sir, that the goodness, both of his heart, and
understanding, will make him readily renounce any light errors, he may have
fallen into.


Sir Wm. I wish it, most sincerely -- but --


Har. Do not, Sir, injure him, by doubting it.


Sir Wm. I fear, my child, you flatter yourself, in vain, with any change in
your husband's conduct -- that last amor, which captain Loyd spoke of --


Har. How blessed am I, to be able to acquit my lord! -- Though blushing I avow it,
it was his mysterious attachment to his wife, that caused that vile report. --
O Sir! let me, again, upon my knees, entreat you to pardon what is past, and
give lord Eustace leave to prove the sincerity of his affection, to me, by his
respectful tenderness and gratitude, toward you.


Sir Wm. Rise, rise, my Harriet. Since it is so -- I forgive, and bless you.

(Embraces her.)
Har. You have made your daughter happy -- how will lord Eustace be transported!


Sir Wm. Would I could see occasion, for this joy! (Aside.) -- Retire, my
child; compose your spirits, and let me compose mine. -- I wish to be alone.


Har. It is almost impossible, Sir! -- I am too, too happy.

[Exit.
Sir Wm. Why was this marriage huddled in the dark? It shall not be kept secret
-- Mystery is the fit mask for vice; my daughter needs it not -- I am
impatient, 'till I see lord Eustace.

Enter ROBERT.
Rob. It is not long, Sir, since he went from hence.


Sir Wm. No matter; leave me, Robert.


Rob. If your honor would hear a few words, that I have to say. --


Sir Wm. I cannot hear you, now; my thoughts are all engaged. (To himself.) --
I must write to colonel Loyd, directly. -- I shall have a sad piece of work,
with the old gentleman at Trevallin -- he doats upon my girl, as if she were
his child. --


Rob. Aye, Sir, and so does every one, who knows her, except some of the folk
in this house. -- I wish, indeed I do, that we were fairly out of it.


Sir Wm. Well, we shall leave it, soon -- but, for the present, Robert --


Rob. Your honor little knows what is going forward, in it -- such quarrelling,
such high words! aye, and such fine words, too, as I never heard, before; though,
if I understand them right, they have but a black meaning.


Sir Wm. Robert, we'll talk of this, some other time. -- I say, again, I am not
at leisure, now. --


Rob. I cannot be easy, 'till I tell you, Sir; as I am sadly afraid there is
something a plotting, against your honor, or my young mistress. -- I have
heard that wicked Willis talking of her, to his fellow servant. -- O Sir, that
fellow knows all his lord's secrets; he is at the beginning, and ending, of all
mischief; and he says, as how Miss Harriet has been only imposed upon. (Sir Wm.
starts.) -- Yes, Sir, imposed upon -- and that his master will be married to a
fine lady, in less than a month's time. --


Sir Wm. How! imposed upon! what can this mean? lord Eustace dare not think of
any thing so base. -- I injure both myself and him, by the suspicion.


Rob. All I know of the matter, is, Sir, that the gentleman that lives here
(whom I believe to be a very honest man, though Willis calls him a poor rogue)
and my lord Eustace, had a sad quarrel, and they talked so loud, that I could
not help overhearing Mr. Frampton -- for I scorn to listen -- reproaching my
lord, with having behaved, very ill, both to you, and your daughter -- but they
were friends, afterward, and went out, together. -- But Willis said a great
deal more, to James, my lord's footman, to the same sense -- and whatever
mischief there is a brewing, I am sure he knows all about it.


Sir Wm. I cannot comprehend the meaning of all this. -- Imposed upon! -- I
will be satisfied -- His scoundrel servant talk of my daughter, and of his
marriage with another lady! -- I have not patience to wait the meeting with
lord Eustace -- Is that fellow in the house? -- That Willis, Robert?


Rob. Yes, Sir, James and he have been taking a hearty glass, I believe; he
looks pure and merry.


Sir Wm. Bid him come to me, directly.


Rob. I am afraid he will be too cunning, for your worship.


Sir Wm. Do, as I bid you.


Rob. I will, Sir.

[Exit Robert.
Sir. Wm. The happiness, or misery, of my child, seem now suspended, in an
equal balance. -- Let my impatience to turn the scale in her favor, excuse me,
to myself, for condescending to inquire into another's secrets, though they so
nearly concern me.

Enter WILLIS.
Will. Your valet de chamber told me, Sir, that you desired to speak with me.


Sir Wm. Our conversation will be but short, Mr. Willis.

(He shuts the door.)
Will. I am in a rare humor, to bam this Welsh Baronet.

(Aside.)
Sir Wm. I say our conversation will be but short, Mr. Willis; but I should
wish it to be sincere.


Will. There he has hit the mark. (Aside.) -- O, to be sure, Sir! I have been
remarkable, for truth and sincerity, all my life, Sir. My mother taught me,
from a child, never to tell a lie.


Sir Wm. Truth is, certainly, the foundation of every other virtue, and I hope
I may depend upon yours, to answer a few questions, that I shall ask you.


Will. O yes, you may depend upon me. -- What the devil is he about! He is
certainly going to hear me my catechism.

(Aside.)
Sir Wm. I shall think myself obliged to you, if you will acquaint me with what
you know, in relation to lord Eustace's marriage.


Will. Me, Sir! How is it possible I can tell? -- All Is out, I suppose -- O that
cursed Langwood!

(Aside.)
Sir Wm. No trifling with me, friend; I will be answered.


Will. Yes, to be sure, Sir, all servants ought to give civil answers to
gentlemen; but really, Sir, I cannot possibly tell you any thing about it.


Sir Wm. Since fair means will not prevail upon you, this shall extort the
truth.

(Draws his sword.)
Will. For heaven's sake, Sir, don't terrify an evidence, in this land of
liberty -- -- You will either frighten what I do know, out of my head, or make
me confess any thing, without knowing any thing, at all, of the matter.


Sir Wm. No prevarication, Sir -- Men, like you, who are bred up in vice and
idleness, are to be influenced by nothing, but their fears -- Therefore, tell
me, I say, again, what you know of this marriage?


Will. Yes, yes, they have had another letter, from Langwood; so I may as well
make a merit of giving up ours, since there can be none in keeping it from him.

(Aside.)
Sir Wm. What are you muttering, villain? Don't urge me farther; I have lost my
reason, and will not answer for the consequences.


Will. I will do any thing, Sir, if you will be pleased to drop the point of
that ugly piece of cold iron. -- What you have heard from Langwood, is most
certainly true. -- But a good servant, you know, Sir, ought to keep his
master's secrets, till his life is in danger.


Sir Wm. Langwood! -- Master's secrets! -- Explain yourself, this moment.


Will. Dear Sir, be patient -- What need you have the trouble of hearing it over
again, when you know it all, already?


Sir Wm. Dare you again insult me, with your trifling?


Will. Why, really, Sir, I cannot say it was a right thing of my lord, but none
of his servants were in fault, except Langwood; we must do what our masters bid
us; and he, poor devil, is sorry enough, as you know, Sir, and may see, Sir.

(Takes the letter out of his pocket, Sir William snatches it.)
Sir Wm. Langwood, again! -- Who is Langwood? And what has he to do, with your
lord's marriage? And what is this letter?


Will. It is for Mrs. Winifred, Sir; and as to Langwood, he was the mock-doctor,
the counterfeit parson, that married my lord; I was only the clerk, indeed,
Sir; and I hope your honor will be so good to forgive me, and not leave all
the sin, and the shame, too, upon my poor conscience.


Sir Wm. Why, villain! rascal! what is all this stuff? If your lord be married
to my daughter, how dare he think of any other wife?


Will. So, I have made a fine piece of work on it! -- I find he did not know it
was a sham marriage, till now. -- (Aside.) Why, really, Sir, you terrify me so,
that I don't rightly understand you; I thought you knew all about it, before I
opened my lips to you.


Sir Wm. I asked you, wretch, about your lord's intended marriage?


Will. O lord, Sir, it was very unlucky I did not understand you. I shall be
obliged to fly my country; my lord will never let me live in England, after
this. I shall lose an excellent place, Sir.


Sir Wm. Be gone, thou profligate! Fly from my sight, this moment.


Will. I am an undone scoundrel, that is the truth of it! -- But this comes of
muddling, in a morning -- Had I been sober, I should have been an over-match,
for his worship, or any justice of peace, in England. I Will even retire, till my
master, and this Welsh family, have so reconciled matters, between themselves,
that a gentleman may be able to live, with some satisfaction, amongst them.

(Aside.) [Exit. Sir William, reading the Letter.
Sir Wm. What am I now to think! My child is dishonored! Let me contain my
rage, a moment longer, and be yet more fully satisfied, from their own lips. --
Robert!

Enter ROBERT. Go, call my sister, and -- I cannot name her.


Rob. Miss Harriet, Sir.


Sir Wm. Aye, bid them come hither.


Rob. I never saw my master so disturbed, before.

(Aside.) [Exit Robert.
Sir Wm. Of what can they inform me? Do I not know my daughter is undone?

Enter Mrs. WINIFRED and HARRIET.
Mrs. Win. Pray, my lady, go first.


Sir Wm. Where are these wretched, these unhappy women, that have brought
shame, and sorrow, on themselves, and infamy on me?


Mrs. Win. Hey day! What Is the matter now? Harriet told me she had just lest
you in a heavenly temper; what can have happened, to discompose you, since? but
Much Ado about Nothing, is your play, from morning, 'till night.


Sir Wm. Read that --

(Gives her a letter.)
Mrs. Win. A broken seal! What can be the contents?


Har. Dear Sir, what is the matter?


Sir Wm. Do not talk to me, unhappy girl! Lord Eustace has deceived you -- you
are not his wife.


Har. All gracious heaven!

(Sinks upon a couch.)
Sir Wm. Rage and madness! O women, women, what have ye done!


Mrs. Win. Vastly well, I think.


Sir Wm. Do not provoke me.


Mrs. Win. You are enough to provoke a saint, yourself. -- What is all this
stuff, this letter, this forgery, this nonsense! He personate a parson! I think
I should know a clergyman, in any dress. I am not quite so easily imposed upon,
as you, Sir William.


Sir Wm. I will not answer you -- But thou, undutiful, unhappy girl! what
can thou say?


Mrs. Win. I wish you would hear reason, and spare your reproaches, Sir William.


Har. No -- give them vent -- I only fear to live, not die -- Let loose your
rage, upon me: I implore it; I will endure it all.


Sir Wm. You have deserved it. Your own deceit has fallen upon your head; you
are betrayed, dishonored, and abandoned, both by your villain husband, and
your wretched father.


Har. O Sir! have pity on my anguish and despair!


Sir Wm. I cannot bear your sight -- My being, life itself, is hateful to me.
-- (To Mrs. Win.) This is your pride, your rage for quality! -- You have undone
my child, and I renounce you both!

[Exit.
Har. Will you forsake me, also?


Mrs. Win. Forsake you! no, child; this is a perfect chimera of your father's.


Har. O let us go this moment, implore his goodness to forgive our fault, and
fly, for ever, from this hateful dwelling.


Mrs. Win. By no means; I don't approve of your quitting your husband's house.
I would have you write to him, immediately, and desire him to come to us, this
evening.


Har. I write to him! You make me shudder, at the thought.


Mrs. Win. It must be done, child -- I insist upon it -- This is some trick,
meant to impose upon us.


Har. I feel the imposition, here -- Lord Eustace has betrayed us.


Mrs. Win. I tell you, Harriet, it is impossible -- he is at least the ninth
peer of his family, in a direct line.


Har. Though honors may be -- honor is not hereditary, madam.


Mrs. Win. No matter; write to him, I say: you are, and must be lady Eustace,
at any rate, I tell you.


Har. And can you think me vile enough, after such perfidy, to receive his
hand? Can I vow to honor the man, whom I no longer esteem? Shall I go to the
altar with him, and swear to be faithful, to a perjured wretch? again repeat my
vows of everlasting love, for him who has abandoned, and undone me? No; I would
sooner die, a thousand, thousand deaths.


Mrs. Win. You are just as obstinate, as your father -- Now you have taken this
into your head, nothing can get it out again.


Har. Do you think my father could be so inhuman, without just grounds, to stab
me to the heart? It is, it is too true!


Mrs. Win. I will not believe a word of it. -- I never was mistaken, in my
life; my brother is ever in the wrong. -- I desire, Harriet, you will write to
lord Eustace, directly.


Har. Indeed, I will not.

[Exit.
Mrs. Win. Then, positively, I will -- I am determined to know the truth, from
him. I own I begin to be a little doubtful, about this matter, myself. This
letter may be forged -- but those eternal reports confound me -- It Is
impossible he should dare to deceive me -- but if he has, he shall find that
the Ap Evans's are not to be injured, with impunity.


END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE, The Park. Enter Capt. LOYD, and Col. EVANS. Col. MY father in London!
you surprise me, captain -- What can have brought him here?


Capt. Nay, as to the matter of surprise, my young hero, your father was quite
as much astonished, at hearing of your being in the same port, as you can be;
and as to your aunt Winifred, she started, with as much amazement, as the
sailors that spied the first Patagonian. Your sister, indeed, seemed more
pleased, than any of them, at the news, and inquired whether I had met you in
healthy condition, and if I knew your moorings.


Col. My gentle Harriet! -- I am impatient to see her.


Capt. Hoist sail, and away, then; I Will be your convoy, though I should like
better to drop anchor, and take in refreshment, for an hour or so, at the
Admiralty Coffee-house, where I have appointed captain Blast, of the Boreas,
and some other jolly lads, to meet me.


Col. I am much obliged to you, captain, but will, by no means, suffer you to
break your engagement. -- I have a little business to dispatch, before I can
see my father, and shall easily find out the house, without troubling you.


Capt. Why, that you may readily do, as it is enclosed by a very high wall, and
has a large handsome gate-way, with a bell at the door. -- Aye, aye, that bell
was not placed there, to call the crew to prayers, but to prevent the
neighbors from knowing who comes in and out, as they might do, if there was a
rapper only.


Col. I cannot see why that caution should be necessary.


Capt. It is of no great use, at present -- But time has been -- Harkee me,
Harry, there is a devilish storm brewing over your head; you may look for dirty
weather, I can tell you -- Your father is in a confounded passion, at your
having quitted the regiment, and is strongly persuaded that you will spring a
leak, my boy.


Col. I wrote to my father, some time ago, to acquaint him with my motives; I
have also written to my colonel, to account for my conduct.


Capt. Never fear, I Will take care of you, as I am sure you did not desert, from
cowardice -- But it was a silly trick, Harry. -- Some girl, I suppose, is in
the wind; they make fools of the wisest of us. -- I remember, when I was
station'd at Gibraltar, a Donna Isabella --


Col. Would you were there, now: I know not how to get rid of this tiresome man.

(Aside.)
Capt. A Spaniard, you may guess, by the name, had a devilish mind to come off
with me, as she said, to see foreign parts -- But I weighed anchor, slily, one
moonlight night, and left the poor signiora on shore -- But all men have not
the gift of discretion: though I was a younker, then, Harry, not much turned of
thirty, I Will assure you --


Col. I think it was rather cruel in you, to forsake the lady, captain.


Capt. Why, I did hear, afterward, that there was a ballad made about it,
entitled The Cruel Captain's Garland, and set to a very woeful tune -- I laugh
at these things, Harry; but I find you are a truer lover, and have come here,
in spite of wind and tide, in pursuit of your mistress -- You cannot expect,
however, that Sir William will be highly delighted, if you should happen to
make a losing voyage of it.


Col. I hope, Sir, it will be the most prosperous one of my life, and I shall
be able to give my father a satisfactory account, of my conduct.


Capt. Why, if your mistress be well freighted, a sixty thousand pounder, or
so, he will have no objection, I suppose. -- But come, my boy, tell me a little
about it: is she maid, or widow, Harry? I like to hear love-stories, mightily.


Col. She is a maiden, young, and beautiful, and of a rank and fortune, beyond
my expectation, captain. We have loved one another, long; her guardians are
upon the point of disposing of her, to another; she has desired me to free her
from their tyranny, and accept of her hand, as my reward -- Glorious
recompense! --


Capt. Why, Harry! this is running before the wind, with a vengeance -- Not so
fast, not so fast, my boy, you go at the rate of twelve knots, an hour -- This
story sounds a little romantic, though, and puts me in mind of the lady, that the
flying man comes to save from the monster. -- But it is odd enough, that I
should not know this lady; prithee, Harry, what is her name?


Col. You must excuse my not answering that question, captain, as you might
possibly become my rival.


Capt. Why, to be sure, if she had applied to me, she should have been far
enough from her guardians, by this, we'd have run gunnel to, all the way, my
boy, and left them, and you on the dry land, Harry.


Col. I shall tell her of your intended galantry, captain; and I hope you and
she will be better acquainted -- for the present, I must wish you a good
evening.


Capt. Nay, if you have a mind to sheer off, colonel, I wish you a fair gale.
-- I never grapple with any thing, but a pretty lass, or an enemy; and so, your
servant, your servant, colonel.

[Exit Capt.
Col. My meeting with this blundering sailor, was unlucky, as my father may,
perhaps, be displeased at my not waiting on him, the moment I knew of his being
in London. -- But I cannot break my engagement, with lady Anne -- every thing
must give way, to that charming woman -- I will fly to her, directly, and, if
possible, find time to pay my duty to my father, before I sleep.

[Exit. SCENE, Sir William's Apartment. Enter Mrs. WINIFRED, and ROBERT.
Mrs. Win. He will come, then; you have staid a great while, Robert.


Rob. My lord was not at home, madam; and as you desired I should bring an
answer, I was obliged to wait his coming -- Every thing seems in confusion, in
the family; his lordship, it seems, is to be married, in a few days; they are
all packing up, and the servants scarce knew where to find pen, ink, and paper.


Mrs. Win. This startles me -- It Is but too plain I have been deceived.
(Aside.) -- Hearken to me, Robert, and do, exactly, what I command you -- go
and place yourself by the private door, in the garden, and the moment you hear
a key turn in the lock, come and tell me.


Rob. I shall obey you, madam. -- I am sure all is not right. (Aside.)

[Exit.
Mrs. Win. I must, if possible, prevent Sir William's knowing of this interview
-- But here he comes --

Enter Sir WILLIAM. -- I hope you have vented all your rage, brother, and that
one may talk, a little calmly, to you, now?


Sir Wm. O yes! I have great reason to be calm.


Mrs. Win. I can tell you that a little more of your outrageous fury, would
have killed your daughter; nor do I know what fatal effect it might have had,
upon my own constitution.


Sir Wm. That is not very easily shocked, I believe.


Mrs. Win. That is more than you know, at least, brother; but a person so
entirely given up to their passions, never once reflects upon consequences.


Sir Wm. I wish you had reflected upon consequences; but those who have erred
themselves, are ever ready to reflect on others.


Mrs. Win. A truce with reflections, on all sides; and in case that there
should be any truth, in this infamous story, let us set about forming some
scheme, for redressing the affront, that he has dared offer to our family.


Sir Wm. I shall not stand in need of your assistance. I am determined how to
act.


Mrs. Win. Pray, Sir William, do not be headstrong, but, for once, be advised
by me. -- I have thought of a scheme, and I am sure it will answer.


Sir Wm. What is it?


Mrs. Win. It is happy for my family, that I have a little sense, brother, though
I do not boast of it.


Sir Wm. Your wisdom in this matter, has been conspicuous; but what new proofs
of it, are we to expect, at present?


Mrs. Win. Suppose we were to send for lord Eustace, and try what effect
Harriet's tears, and my reproaches, would have upon him -- He has always had
the greatest deference, for my opinion.


Sir Wm. Your opinion! -- Is this your boasted scheme? -- He will not come;
base as he is, it is impossible he could endure her sight.


Mrs. Win. Your affected sagacity is enough to set one mad -- You are mistaken,
as you always are.


Sir Wm. I know it cannot be; the consciousness of his vile treachery, will
keep him far from hence. -- He dare not see her.


Mrs. Win. I cannot bear this contradiction. (Aside.) -- For once let
conviction conquer your obstinacy: I wrote to him, myself, in Harriet's name; I
have had his answer; he will be here, this night.


Sir Wm. And shall my daughter sue to him, for justice? implore him to receive
the hand he has rejected, and the heart he has betrayed? Shall she be
sacrificed, to make his peace? I tell you, no -- I will have other vengeance.


Mrs. Win. I see these horrid punctilios will ruin all -- If we can make up
this matter quietly, what does it signify, whether he be a man of honor, or no?


Sir Wm. I never ^ust forget, that I am one.


Mrs. Win. I wish you would have a little patience, and hear me out -- If this
should fail, I have another project, in my head, which I am certain must
succeed -- My imagination has not been idle, and I think it full as active, as
your own.


Sir Wm. I believe it may be rather more so -- But I have no leisure, for
imaginary matters, now.

(Going.)
Mrs. Win. Pray, Sir William, don't be so positive -- you know lord Eustace has
a place, at court.


Sir Wm. What then?


Mrs. Win. I would, at least, let the king know what a servant he has about
him; and as I may reasonably suppose that his majesty may have heard of our
ancestors, though he knows nothing of you, Sir William, I would advise you to
throw yourself, at his feet -- He is himself a father.


Sir Wm. Blessed may he long be, in that honored title! though I am rendered
wretched, by the name -- But what can he do, for me?


Mrs. Win. Disgrace, and displace the man, who has wronged you, although he be a
lord.


Sir Wm. What is his title? has he not debased it -- But know, there is no
difference of rank, before the throne -- degrees of elevation, are only seen by
those, who look above them: kings must look down, and therefore see all equal;
and in our monarch's sight, the rights, even of the meanest subject, are
precious as his own -- But yet he cannot heal my wrongs.


Mrs. Win. Though I can never believe that a knight baronet is upon a par, with a
lord, Sir William.


Sir Wm. Absurd distinctions! I will hear no more -- The man who has the means
of justice, in his own hands, and seeks for it elsewhere, deserves to be the
sport of chance, and dupe of his own weakness -- Then let him come, this night
-- I Will meet him as I ought.


Mrs. Win. You are exactly in the same case, of the Dissidents, at Warsaw;
nothing, but force of arms, will content you; and like them, too, you may be
undone, by it -- Suppose you were to meet lord Eustace, and he should kill you.


Sir Wm. I shall not, then, outlive my honor.

[Exit.
Mrs. Win. This self-willed man distresses me, extremely -- he is, for ever,
disconcerting my schemes -- There never was such a race of idiots, as the
family of the Ap Evans's, myself excepted -- there is not a head, in this
house, but my own -- To be sure I have been a little over-reached, in this
affair of the wedding; but the greatest politicians are liable to mistakes -- I
hope to repair all, yet, and make my niece a woman of quality, one way, or
another.

Enter ROBERT.
Rob. Madam, I have just now heard the private door of the garden, unlock, and
ran to tell you.


Mrs. Win. Vanish! (Exit Rob.) I must not let my brother and lord Eustace meet,
'till every thing is settled.

[Exit. SCENE, Garden Parlour. Enter Lord EUSTACE and Col. EVANS, with their
Swords in their Hands, Lord EUSTACE lays his on a Chair.
Ld Eust. You are here in safety, Sir, and may put up your sword; this house is
mine, notwithstanding the mysterious manner of my entrance -- I hope you are
not wounded?


Col. Thanks to your courage, and generosity, Sir, I have escaped unhurt. I
thought our police was better conducted, than to suffer our lives to be
endangered, by footpads.


Ld Eust. These accidents are less frequent, in this country, than they used to
be; but no code of laws was ever yet framed, that could make all men honest. --
I am extremely happy, at having come so opportunely, to your assistance.


Col. I shall ever be grateful, for the obligation, Sir; but may I not know to
whom I am obliged?


Ld Eust. Do not mention the matter as a favor, I entreat you -- You would,
doubtless, have done the same for me; and had I happened to have come first, I
should have stood in need of your assistance -- I am called lord Eustace.


Col. I shall remain indebted to your lordship, and wish you a good night. --
What a rencontre!

(Aside.)
Ld Eust. I could wish you not to leave me, Sir; it is late, and therefore
unsafe for either of us, to return alone -- The fellows who attacked you, may
lie in wait for you -- I shall not stay here a quarter of an hour; and as I
wish to be better acquainted with you, I should be glad to know your address.


Col. I am extremely obliged to your lordship. I am called colonel Weston;
you will hear of me, at the hotel in Pall Mall.

(Going.)
Ld Eust. Let me entreat you not to leave me -- I am, at present, in a very
difficult, and disagreeable situation.


Col. Your lordship has a right to command me; but I hope you will not stay
longer than the time you have mentioned, as I have some business to transact,
this night.


Ld Eust. If that be the case, I will not trespass upon you; perhaps, there may
be something similar, in our circumstances; for your business, at this hour,
must, in all probability, be with a lady, and you may reasonably suppose, by my
being alone, and on foot, that I am come to meet one, here.


Col. Let me entreat your lordship not to lose such precious minutes, but fly
to the expecting fair one. -- This is an odd discovery.

(Aside.)
Ld Eust. The matter is not as you imagine, Sir.


Col. There is, perhaps, a jealous husband, or an old cross father, my lord --


Ld Eust. Neither, colonel. But matches, made for interest, only, too often
break the most delightful ties, the union of fond hearts -- The lady, who lives
here, is the most amiable of her sex, and I adore her; yet, am on the point of
marrying one, whom I can never love.


Col. This is a sad affair, indeed, my lord. -- I could save you a great deal
of trouble, if I were at liberty to tell you lady Anne's intentions.

(Aside.)
Ld Eust. I fear the unhappy girl has heard of my intended marriage, as she has
written to me to come here, this night -- I never was so embarras'd, or
distressed.


Col. Some girl you keep, I presume, my lord.


Ld Eust. By no means; she is a woman of family and character -- I am almost
distracted about her -- I will now step and see if the coast be clear, as there
are some of the family, that I should not choose to encounter, at this late
hour, and return to you, Sir, instantly -- You see what confidence you have
already inspired me with.

[Exit.
Col. A confidence, indeed! but of what use can it be to me, who am bound in
honor, not to betray it? (Looks at his watch.) Bless me, it is now past eleven
-- the time I spent with lady Anne, stole unperceived away. It will certainly
be too late, to go to my father's, tonight; I must defer my visit, 'till
tomorrow; and as lord Eustace don't seem in a great hurry to be married, I
shall have time enough to get lady Anne out of her guardian's power, and
prepare my father for her reception -- But here comes my new friend.

Re-enter Lord EUSTACE.
Ld Eust. All is quiet; I must therefore, take the opportunity of conveying you
safe out, again; and I hope to have the pleasure of being better known to you.


Col. Your lordship's inclination does me honor.

[Exeunt. SCENE, Another Apartment. Enter Mrs. WINIFRED, leading HARRIET.
Mrs. Win. Your obstinacy is enough to distract me -- I say you shall see him.

Enter Lord EUSTACE.
Har. Support me, gracious Heaven!


Ld Eust. My dearest Harriet, your billet has alarmed me, more than I can
express -- I have made the utmost dispatch that was possible, to fly to you;
and the moments that have passed, since I received your commands, have been the
most painful of my life.


Mrs. Win. Your lordship need not enter into a defense of your punctuality.


Ld Eust. Why is my Harriet's brow overcast? and her eyes quenched in tears?
Why is she silent?


Mrs. Win. Ask your own heart!


Ld Eust. Is it possible that the idle report of my marriage, can have
distressed her, thus?


Har. Horrid dissembler!

(Aside.)
Mrs. Win. Do not exhaust your spirits, my dear Harriet; give me leave to talk
to him (Aside to Harriet.) -- So then, my lord, what we have heard upon the
subject, is but an idle report, without the least foundation?


Ld Eust. If you will but recollect, what has passed between your niece and me,
madam, you must be fully convinced it can be nothing more.


Mrs. Win. And yet, my lord, you seem, confused.


Ld Eust. Why really, madam, the doubts you seem to entertain of my veracity,
are a little distressing -- But let me hope my Harriet will believe me, while I
swear --


Har. Away, my lord! I can believe no more -- Could I have thought that either
my wrongs, or my resentment, were capable of increase!


Ld Eust. Really, madam, I do not clearly understand the meaning of this
conversation -- and I must say, I think it rather severe, to be condemned,
unheard.


Mrs. Win. I can contain my rage, no longer; read that.

(Gives him Langwood's letter.)
Ld Eust. Langwood's letter! All is discovered, then!

(Aside.)
Mrs. Win. I perceive that even a man of quality, may be disconcerted -- Your
lordship did not use to be at a loss, for an answer.


Ld Eust. Have patience, madam; I confess that appearances are against me.


Mrs. Win. Aye, and realities, too, my lord.


Ld Eust. I do not mean to justify myself -- No, I plead guilty. The fear of
losing you, my Harriet, whom I loved more than life, and the apprehension of
disobliging my father, tempted me to make you mine, in an illegal manner -- But
here I swear, I will repair the injury.


Mrs. Win. I think it will do; matters are in a right train, now, if I can but
prevent Sir William from interrupting them.

(Aside.) [Exit.
Ld Eust. You are offended, Harriet, and have cause -- but let not your
resentment turn against yourself.


Har. Could I forgive myself, my lord, I then might pardon you; but while I
think my punishment severe, I own I have deserved it.


Ld Eust. You judge yourself, too hardly -- Has either your virtue, or your
delicacy, suffered, by my crime? Nay, even your reputation is still free from
stain; and if you will now condescend to accept my hand, my future life shall
be devoted to your happiness.


Har. And can you think I Will be again deceived?


Ld Eust. By heaven, you shall not! --


Har. Nay, I will not -- Your poor evasions have no weight with me -- Leave me,
for ever leave me -- I will not be united to you, by any ties.

(Going.)
Ld Eust. Yet hear me, Harriet.


Har. Would I had never heard you -- But though I were to listen to you, now, you
cannot shake my purpose. No -- I can die! --

[Exit.
Ld Eust. No, live, my Harriet! Live, to make me happy --

Sir WILLIAM within.
Sir Wm. Where is he? I must, and will, see him.


Ld Eust. Ah! Sir William! This is unlucky! I am not prepared, for this
encounter

(Aside.) Enter Sir WILLIAM.
Sir Wm. What! is it possible that you should dare to enter underneath this
roof?


Ld Eust. What should I fear, Sir William?


Sir Wm. Your own base heart, and my much injured honor; which calls upon you,
now, for justice.


Ld Eust. So then, I find the pride of injured virtue, was assumed -- Your
daughter would secure me, by compulsion -- But I despise assassins!


Sir Wm. Do not, my lord, insult my patience, farther; I did not know you were
without a sword: on that account, I put up mine; but know, young man, I shall
not rest, till it has done me justice.


Ld Eust. Sir William, though I cannot pretend to justify the injuries I have
done your daughter, I neither must, nor will be compelled, to make the
reparation; I should, indeed, be unworthy to become her husband, if fear could
make me so.


Sir Wm. At the first hour you saw her, Sir, I should have deemed you so --
It Is not your birth, young man, can varnish over vices, such as yours -- Your
rank renders them the more obnoxious.


Ld Eust. I readily allow myself to blame, Sir William.


Sir Wm. You cannot then be base enough, to refuse the sole atonement, which is
now within your power --


Ld Eust. I will confess I felt my heart fubdued, by Harriet's grief, and
tenderness -- they had more power, than armies -- She might have triumphed over
me, but --


Sir Wm. You surely do not think I mean to give my daughter to you! What! to
reward your vices, with a heart like hers -- to have my child become, a second
time, a sacrisice to that vain idol, Title! -- No, Sir, it is another kind of
reparation, I demand; and I will have it.


Ld Eust. A brave man, Sir William, never thinks meanly, of another's courage;
and as I know you to be so, I hope you will not think me otherwise, if I
decline your offer.


Sir Wm. On what pretense, my lord? Have you not wronged me?


Ld Eust. For that reason, only, I cannot, dare not, draw my sword against you.


Sir Wm. These are new rules of honor, formed on the principles of fear, my
lord.


Ld Eust. Fear, Sir William!


Sir Wm. Yes, my lord, I say it; none but a coward, ever will decline to meet
the man he has injured; and should you still persist in your refusal, I will
proclaim you one.


Ld Eust. This is too much -- But consider, Sir, you are -- my Harriet's father.


Sir Wm. That consideration would brace a nerveless arm -- But, look upon me,
Sir; I am not bent beneath the weight of years -- my mind and body both, are
firm as yours; and the first shock that ever reached my heart, except her
mother's loss, is the disgrace you have brought upon my child -- The stain must
be effaced, my lord.


Ld Eust. I know not how to act; should I declare my intention to marry
Harriet, he would despise me; and if I fight him, that renders it impossible.

(Aside.)
Sir Wm. Come, come, my lord, this is no time for musing -- You must determine,
instantly, to give me the satisfaction I require, or see your title posted up,
with the honorable addition, of coward, to it.


Ld Eust. Nay, then, Sir William, though with reluctance, I must accept your
offer -- Name your time, Sir.


Sir Wm. At eight, tomorrow morning --


Ld Eust. I Will call upon you, Sir, and bring a friend -- But let me once more
add, that you are the only man, on earth, that I should fear to meet, upon such
terms*

[Exit.
Sir Wm. I am glad my son is ignorant, of this affair -- Had he been here, he
must have fought lord Eustace -- He has, I hope, a long, and happy life, before
him; mine, though not quite worn out, is of less value; and if I lose it, in
defense of my child's honor, it is well disposed of.

Enter Mrs. WINIFRED.
Mrs. Win. So she was, or might have been, very well disposed of, but for your
intemperance -- You have managed your matters, very cleverly, to be sure -- You
have driven lord Eustace away, and the family of the Ap Evans's are disgraced
for ever.


Sir Wm. Thou weak, vain, woman! whose folly has undone me, and my child.


Mrs. Win. Not I truly, Sir William -- It is her own high-flown principles,
that have ruined her -- My lord offered to marry her, over and over again, it
seems, but she with her nonsensical, romantical notions, affected to despise
him, and refused to be his wife, on any terms.


Sir Wm. Has she? I rejoice, to hear it --


Mrs. Win. Rejoice; at what! at her being a mad woman? I think, in her
situation, she needed not have been so nice -- It would have been much better
for her, to have been lady Eustace, even against his will, than Miss Harriet
Evans's, against her own.


Sir Wm. How nearly pride, and meanness, are allied! You would obtrude your
niece, upon a man, who has abandoned, and dishonored her; then vainly think
she might receive distinction, from a title, which force, not choice, bestowed.


Mrs. Win. Brother, I neither understand logic, nor sophistry, but I am very
sorry matters are as they are. -- As to Harriet, I believe it will be of no
great consequence, to her; she will soon break her heart, I imagine -- But the
scandal of this affair, will rest upon the survivors. -- I don't think I shall
ever be able to show my face, at Monmouth, again.


Sir Wm. Away! The moments now are too precious, to be wasted. Where is Harriet?


Mrs. Win. In her chamber, like a distracted wretch, tearing herself to pieces.
I endeavored to comfort her, as much as I could, by telling her how wrong she
had acted, and that she might have lived to be a countess, if he had followed
my advice.


Sir Wm. Was this the consolation you offered to her grief? How could you be so
barbarous? The proper spirit she has shown, in refusing that worthless lord,
has replaced her in my heart -- I will go try to comfort her.

[Exit.
Mrs. Win. Aye, so you may; you are the fittest to go together. For my part, I
disclaim the mismanagment of this whole affair; and remember, I Will no longer be
accountable, for measures, that I am not suffered to guide.

[Exit.
END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE, Mr. Frampton's Apartment. Ld EUSTACE and Mr. FRAMPTON discovered. Lord
Eustace rises from a Table, as if writing. Fram. YOUR meeting with Sir William,
was extremely unfortunate.


Ld Eust. I most sincerely wish we had not met; but that is past --


Fram. Then I suppose you think the worst is over.


Ld Eust. No, Frampton, it is to come. -- Sir William has insisted upon my
meeting him, this morning.


Fram. Impossible, my lord! you must not fight him. Think on the consequences:
if you should be so unhappy, as to kill the father of the woman you have highly
injured, the world would certainly unite against you, and drive you from
society.


Ld Eust. In that case, I should be but ill qualified, for solitude, I confess.
-- Now, my dear Frampton, as I know you are my friend, and as I would not wish
any other person should be acquainted with this story, I must desire you will
be my second.


Fram. It is much beneath a man of honor, to make professions, either of his
friendship, or his courage; but, on this occasion, I must tell you, that I
would hazard my life, for your service, in any other cause; but I will not be
concerned, in this infamous affair; and, I say, again, you must not raise your
arm, against Sir William.


Ld Eust. You do not know how I am circumstanced. He has compelled me, to this
duel; said he would brand me, for a coward, if I declined it. -- What would you
have me do?


Fram. Marry his daughter.


Ld Eust. No -- Though I love her, with the truest fondness, I will not wed her,
upon such terms; nor suffer her to think so meanly of me, as to suppose I
poorly bartered a coward's hand, to save his worthless life.


Fram. Yet, consider, my lord, that let the consequences of this duel, be what
they may, nothing can acquit you of that justice, you owe, both to her, and
yourself.


Ld Eust. I own that I have greatly wronged her.


Fram. It is now within your power, to make reparation, by becoming her
husband; but should you deprive her of a father, she never can be united to the
man who killed him.


Ld Eust. I will not kill him, Frampton -- Urge me, no farther -- My mind is
torn to pieces.


Fram. Believe me, my lord, you are not in a right course, to heal it.


Ld Eust. No matter; you have refused to be a witness of my conduct, Mr.
Frampton.


Fram. And do so, still: I never had the least reason to doubt your bravery;
and as this is an affair, in which only principals can be concerned, I hope it
will be no imputation, upon mine, if I decline seeing your lordship engaged in
a strife, where I cannot wish you success.


Ld Eust. I shall not press you; but have yet a request to make.


Fram. Name it, my lord.


Ld Eust. If I should fall, deliver this letter, to my father; and -- if there
be any circumstance of my misconduct, left untold, which may do Harriet
justice, inform him of it, fully. -- I must now go seek, for a less cautious
friend, than Mr. Frampton.


Fram. Your lordship will scarcely ever find a sincerer. (Exit lord Eustace.)
Of what opposite qualities, is this young man compounded? What a mixture, of
good, and evil! But are we not all made of the same materials? The devil
himself cannot always mislead a man, that has principles; they will recur, in
spite of him, and make their owner act rightly, upon trying occasions. -- This
letter to his father, shows him to be a man of honor. -- Something must be
done, to preserve him. -- I cannot give him up. -- An experiment, though a
hazardous one, must be made, directly.

[Exit. SCENE, Sir William's Apartment. Enter HARRIET, and Mrs. WINIFRED.
Har. When shall my tortured mind find rest! Gracious heaven, preserve me from
distraction! Perhaps, in a few moments, my father's sword may pierce my
husband's heart. -- Why has that tender name escaped my lips? Resentment should
have stopped its passage to my tongue, and sighs opposed its utterance.


Mrs. Win. I don't see any harm, child, in your calling him your husband, though
to be sure he is not so, in law. -- But I would have you hope the best, Harriet.


Har. No, I will hope no more -- What should I hope? -- My pride, my reason
might have scorned him, living, but I will love him, and lament him, dead? --
Would I had died, the hour before I listened to your counsel, and set at
naught, the authority of my father. -- Your cruel kindness has undone me.


Mrs. Win. I should not have thought of meeting such a return, for that
kindness, from you, Miss Evans.


Har. Forgive, and pity my distraction, madam! It Is I that have brought ruin,
on ye all -- But if you ever loved me, think of some means, to find my brother
out: he may prevent this duel, and save me from the lowest depth of misery.


Mrs. Win. Really, child, you are extremely ignorant; you talk as if you were
at Mohmouth, where our family are known, and properly respected -- but in such
a place as London, it may possibly be as difficult, to find out an Ap Evans, as
any of those mushroom gentry, whose Table does not contain above three
generations.


Har. My dearest aunt, do not place bars before my only hope; let all our
servants be sent out to seek him.


Mrs. Win. Well, child, if it will make you easy, they shall go, directly; though
I am of opinion it will be but a fruitless inquiry. But the being too easily
prevailed upon, is my greatest foible -- I wish I had a little of Sir William's
obstinacy, about me.


Har. Consider, madam, I am on the rack; do not lose time, I beg of you.


Mrs. Win. Well, be composed, I will send them; they shall search all the
genteel coffee-houses, at the West end of the town -- it is impossible he
should be in the city. -- But don't let your father know, that I told you of
the duel: he thinks women are never to be trusted with any thing; and has no
more respect for the empress-queen, or the czarina that I have for a county
justice.

[Exit Mrs. Winifred.
Har. How can she be insensible, to griefs like mine!

Enter Sir WILLIAM.
Sir Wm. What, up so early, Harriet! Who has disturbed your rest?


Har. O Sir! where is that powerful opiate to be found, that can restore it?


Sir Wm. The consciousness of your own heart, and my forgiveness of your only
fault, should set your mind at peace.


Har.. What! while that fault endangers your dear life, and robs my brother of
the best of fathers? -- unworthy as I am to call you by that name.


Sir Wm. Her grief almost unmans me. (Aside.) -- Why are you agitated thus?


Har. O do not make my brother hate me, too! -- Will he not call me parricide?
-- or if --


Sir Wm. Who has acquainted you, with this affair? I did not think there was a
heart so brutal. -- But do not, Harriet, thus alarm yourself -- all may be yet
repaired.


Har. Never, Sir, never! for here I vow, that should lord Eustace arm his hand,
against your life, no power on earth, shall ever make me his.


Sir Wm. Harriet, the laws of honor must be satisfied; and when I was first
blessed, with the fond name of father, yours then became my most peculiar care;
nor life, nor aught on earth, is half so dear to me. -- Nay, Harriet, do not
weep! I blame you not; your youth, and innocence, have been deceived.


Har. You are too good, too gentle to me, Sir; I have deserved all the distress
I feel. -- Yet hear me, Sir -- If this must be -- might not my brother, Sir,
dear as he is to me --


Sir Wm. My determination cannot now be altered: retire, my child.

Enter ROBERT.
Rob. Captain Loyd, Sir, desires to see your honor.


Sir Wm. Show him up.

[Exit Robert.
Har. Oh, Sir!


Sir Wm. Leave me, my Harriet, leave me.

(Embraces her.)
Har. My father!

[Exit Harriet.
Sir Wm. My heart bleeds for her.

Enter Captain LOYD.
Capt. I have crowded all the sail I could make, to come up with you, baronet;
and now that I am here, I should be glad to know, in what soundings we are, and
whether we are to steer starboard, or larboard?


Sir Wm. My letter, I believe, captain, must have given you to understand the
reason, of my desiring to see you; at present, I am unhappily engaged, in a
duel, and the opinion I have, both of your bravery, and friendship, made me
look upon you as the properest person of my acquaintance, to be my second.


Capt. As to that matter, Sir William, I think, I have discharged as many
broadsides, as any gentleman in the navy -- though I never yet drew a trigger,
out of the line; but powder and ball, I suppose, do pretty much the same
execution, by land, as by sea; though standing fair to the windward, is,
sometimes, of great use to us, baronet.


Sir Wm. It is of little consequence, which way the wind sits, at present,
captain.


Capt. I cannot say much to that, Sir William. -- But I wish you had acquainted
me with this business, a day or two ago, I should have liked to have made a
little will -- But, it is no great matter, neither -- For if I should pop over,
you daughter's husband will be my heir.


Sir Wm. There is not the least occasion, for that precaution, captain, as your
life will not be endangered.


Capt. How so? When the ship is once engaged, must not every man aboard her,
fight? All but the chaplain, and he should be busy, in his way, too.


Sir Wm. In this case, my friend, you need be no farther concerned, than to see
that the laws of honor, are not violated.


Capt. Hold, hold, Sir William! this may do, for some of your fresh water
sparks, but Jerry Loyd will never lie to, when the signal's given for chase --
no lug-sail work, for me; I shall come pouring down upon them. -- But, pray,
who is your antagonist? And what is the cause of your quarrel? Was it a drunken
business? -- I was pretty jolly, myself, last night, but don't remember that I
had words, with any one, except the waiter.


Sir Wm. I should be ashamed, captain, were I weak enough to run into one vice,
from the consequences of another, or hazard my life, this day, for having been
guilty of excess, last night.


Capt. Well! if that is not the case, I don't know what it is. For I think you
are not quarrelsome, when you are sober. -- But have you breakfasted? Though you
may have no great appetite, my stomach has been ready for a mess, this half
hour, I can tell you.


Sir Wm. We shall find every thing prepared, in the next room.


Capt. Let us make to the store-room, directly; and while we are laying in our
provisions, you may tell me who is your man, and all about it.

[Exeunt. Enter Lord EUSTACE, Colonel EVANS, and a Servant.
Ld Eust. Let your master know, that I am here.


Col. This is the most romantic affair, my lord, that ever I heard of. To set
out determined to stand your enemy's fire, without returning it!


Ld Eust. The wrongs, I have done him, and his family, should be atoned, and
not increased, colonel; and were it now within my power, I would not take his
life, even to save my own.


Col. There I think you are right, my lord; but I cannot say I should carry-my
politeness, so far, as to make him a compliment, of mine.


Ld Eust. There is something much higher than politeness, in the question, at
present -- justice, colonel -- A man may dispense with the one, but not the
other.


Col. I am entirely of your opinion; but as your sentiments are so very
delicate, and that you really love the girl, why may not I, as your second,
step in, and save the explosion of gunpowder, and the lady's character, by
preventing the duel?


Ld Eust. I will not suffer it.


Col. As you intend to offer her your hand, when this business is over, I don't
see why you should run the hazard, of losing life or limb; and if the father be
a man of honor, as you say he is, I should think --

(Harriet, behind the Scenes.)
Har. I will not be restrained! No, I will rush between their cruel swords!

Enter, at the same Instant, at opposite Doors, Sir WILLIAM, and HARRIET.
Har. My brother, here! then heaven has heard my prayer.


Sir Wm. My son!


Col. My father!


Har. Will you not speak to me?

(To the Col. who turns from her.)
Ld Eust. Are you her brother?


Col. Yes, I have that dishonor -- Ill fated girl!


Sir Wm. What can this mean? Are you come hither, to abet the man, who has
disgraced your sister?


Col. My father cannot suppose it.


Sir Wm. Retire, this moment, then, and take her with you -- My lord, I am
ready to attend you, singly.


Har. You shall not go, for I will cling, for ever, here.

(Falls at Sir William's feet.)
Ld Eust. I cannot bear this sight -- Pray hear me, Sir.


Sir Wm. Take her away. (To the Col.) This is no time for expostulation --
Come, my lord --

(To Ld Eustace.)
Col. Nay then, Sir, I must interfere -- I cannot suffer you to turn assassin,
even for her -- Lord Eustace has not charged his pistols, nor does he mean to
raise his arm against you -- You cannot take his life, upon these terms.


Sir Wm. Does he despise me, then?


Har. A little gleam of hope, breaks in upon me.

(Aside.)
Ld Eust. Your son can answer that, Sir William.


Col. With truth, my lord, I say you do not -- Now, you must answer me.

(To lord Eustace.)
Ld Eust. Your being perfectly acquainted with my intentions, toward your
sister, before I knew that you were related to her, should, I think, be a
sufficient answer, to any demand you can possibly have to make.


Col. By no means, my lord; though your tenderness for the weakness you have
caused, may incline you to repair her lost honor, I must and will, be guardian
of my own; and nothing but your meeting me, on fair and equal terms, can heal
the wound you have given it.


Sir Wm. Now, Harry, you are my son.


Har. Inhuman brother! will nothing, but his life, content your rage? Let me
die for him.


Ld Eust. My angel Harriet! -- But since it must be so, I am ready, colonel.

(Aside.)
Col. I hope your lordship thinks I stand acquitted of my obligations to you,
by preventing your engaging, on such unequal terms, for that unworthy girl.


Ld Eust. You wrong her much; it is I alone am guilty.


Sir Wm. It is true, my son; Harriet is innocent.


Col. If that be true, I have a double right to vengeance!


Ld Eust. You have a right to choose your reparation, Sir, and I attend you.


Har. When shall my miseries end!

As Lord EUSTACE, and Col. EVANS, are going off, Enter Mr. FRAMPTON.
Framp. I hope, this moment, madam.


Sir Will. What can this mean?


Ld Eust. Frampton!


Framp. I have no sort of business, with your lordship, my commission is
directed to Sir William Evans, and lady Eustace.


Har. Do not insult me, Sir; I am not lady Eustace.


Sir Wm. Nor ever shall be.


Framp. That is a point, that will not, I think, admit of being contested.


Col. You are mistaken, Sir; but this is trifling.


Ld Eust. I am on the rack -- explain yourself, my friend.


Framp. You must give me leave to speak, then -- When I saw the distress, and
anxiety of your mind, I was fully satisfied of your honorable intentions,
toward this lady, from the letter you entrusted me with, which yet remains
unopened. -- I determined, if possible, to preserve both your life, and honor,
for her sake, by preventing your duel, with her father, and your marriage, with
lady Anne Mountfort.


Col. The first event, Sir, has been prevented, without your assistance, and I
will venture to promise, that the second shall never take place.


Framp. I am quite of your opinion, Sir. As I came, this moment from lord
Delville, to acknowledge this fair lady, as his son's wife -- but this letter
Sir William, will more fully explain his lordship's sentiments.


Ld Eust. My generous friend! my guardian angel!


Framp. My lord, I neither desire, nor deserve, your thanks. -- If I have been,
in any way, serviceable to you, attribute it to my real attachment, to your
truly amiable wife.


Col. I do not understand all this.

Enter Mrs. WINIFRED.
Mrs. Win. It Is as I guessed, exactly. -- All smoke, and no fire. -- My nephew,
here! Then something may be done -- I rejoice to see you, Harry.


Sir Wm. Lord Delville has behaved, like a man of honor; but yet I must inform
you, Sir, that the generosity of his conduct, cannot efface the baseness of his
son -- My daughter shall never be his wife -- He has disgraced her.

(To Frampton.)
Ld Eust. Never, Sir! Here is my witness -- this letter, which I now entreat my
Harriet to peruse, will fully prove, that had I fallen by your hand, her honor
would have been preserved.


Har. I will not read it.


Mrs. Win. I think that was behaving like a man of quality.


Fram. Let me entreat you, Sir William, to look it over, as I can, with truth
and honor, attest the sincerity of the writer.


Col. There need no farther vouchers. Let Harriet now determine, for herself.


Har. The struggle is too great. -- I cannot speak -- Leave me, my lord --


Ld Eust. Never, whilst I have life, will I forsake you.


Har. It cannot be, my lord -- Though I have the highest sense of gratitude, for
lord Delville's goodness to me, and though I believe you perfectly sincere, in
what you say, at present; yet the humiliating situation, into which you have
plunged me, the distress you have brought upon my family, your attachment to
another lady -- --


Ld Eust. With shame I must confess my trifling with a lady, whom I could not
have loved, even had my Harriet been unknown to me.


Col. I think I may venture to assure your lordship, that lady Anne Mountfort
will be very ready to forgive your want of passion for her, as her partiality
for me, might, perhaps, have been the cause of her blindness, to your superior
merits.


Ld Eust. I congratulate your good fortune, colonel; and am indebted to your
generosity, for removing every shadow of difficulty, on lady Anne's account.


Mrs. Win. Nephew, I wish you joy -- There will be one wom of quality, at
least, in the family.


Har. Weak as I am, my lord, you cannot shake my resolution


Ld Eust. I have no hope, but in your interposition, Sir: you are her father,
and have been most offended; yet you, perhaps, have the goodness to forgive!

(To Sir William.)
Sir Wm. Aye, and give, too, my lord; the man who sincerely repents of error,
is farther removed from vice, than one who has never been guilty -- This letter
is a sufficient, and convincing proof, of your contrition. Take her; she is,
and shall be yours.


Ld Eust. My wife!

(Embracing her.)
Har. The commands of a father, must not be resisted -- O! my lord, how
different are my present sensations, from those I sustained, when I ventured to
bestow this hand, without his sanction! -- But take it; it is yours, for ever,
now.


Ld Eust. Then every wish of my fond heart is accomplished.


Col. Joy to your lordship, and my dearest Harriet!


Fram. I sincerely wish your ladyship all the happiness, which I well know you
have deserved.


Ld Eust. And you, my friend, shall share it with us, who have steered my
course to this blessed harbor, through all the shoals and quicksands of my folly.
-- You shall be happy, too, if ought within my fortune, or my power, can render
you so.


Fram. Continue to preserve your present bliss, my lord, and I am over-paid.


Mrs. Win. I think I have a right to partake, in your ladyship's felicity, from
the principal share I have had, in bringing this event to pass. I hope that
lord Delville has been properly informed --

Enter Captain LOYD. -- That man is my perpetual torment.


Capt. Why, hey-day, Sir William! What wind's a blowing, now? You seem to have
cast anchor, when I thought you were putting out to sea. -- Here is the whole
crew assembled; Miss Winifred, and all. -- Do women fight duels? If I had them
on board the Dreadnought, I Would clap them all under hatches, before she engaged.
-- But come along, baronet, you don't mean to slack sail, now, I hope -- I
thought, by this time, we should have made a few eyelet holes, in the enemy's
rigging.


Sir Wm. I hope, my good friend, you will excuse my seeming inattention, to
your impatient bravery, when I tell you, that our contest has ended happily,
and that you may now wish all this company, as well as lord Eustace, joy.


Capt. He is to be married, then, it seems -- I hope, madam, you will believe me,
another time.

(To Mrs. Winifred.)
Mrs. Win. Yes, when you tell truth, captain -- But, at present, you happen to
be a little out, in your soundings, for the ship's name is not the lady Anne,
but the lovely Harriet -- The country girl, you talked of.


Capt. Well, well, all is one to me. -- So she is bound for the port of
matrimony, I am content -- and so I wish your lordship, your ladyship, and all
your ships, a prosperous voyage, to the island of happiness.


Sir William. They promise fair, to reach that wished for port:
For virtue, though of winds and waves the sport,
By passions shaken, and by danger crossed,
On life's great sea, is never wholly lost.
Some power divine conducts her swelling sails,
And, of her due reward, she seldom fails.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE, Written by the Author of the PROLOGUE, And Spoken by Mrs. CLIVE.
I LONG to know, dread Sirs, with due submission,
How you approve me, as a politician?
The thought was mine. -- I told the scrib'ling dame,
This part of Winifred, is much too tame;
Ask but the town, said I, they will all agree,
That a tame character, will not suit me:
I hate such lifeless, water gruel stuff;
Quicken her well, with politics, and snuff:
Small quantities of both, will be but teizing;
Give them enough, and set the town a sneezing.
Her scribbling vanity at this was stung;
Would have disputed -- Hold, says I, you're wrong,
Don't be so rash, to draw on me, your tongue;
I have a weapon, should I take the field,
A better, never did a woman wield;
You Will find, when once my passion is afloat,
The soul of Caesar, in a petticoat!
"Aye, but," says she, "in politics there is danger,
"To courts, and state affairs, I Am quite a stranger."
So much the better, thou most simple woman,
Blunders, in politics, are not uncommon.
When you mistake, the town will think you clever,
Think that you mean great folks, and clap, for ever;
Old England, like a boy, loves wicked fun,
Abuse your betters, and your work is done.
Small game the English spirit will not follow,
It Is at the nobler chase, you whoop, and hollow!
Over hedge, and ditch, you helter skelter fly.
Start but a statesman -- Yoax! the hounds full cry!
To pick up lesser game, you will not stay,
While the fox runs, the hare may steal away;
Our auth'ress is the hare -- who trembling sits,
'Till she escapes this dreadful pack of wits;
She hopes you will not hunt her, she is so small,
But hark to mercy, as the noblest call.
AN EPILOGUE, Written by HENRY JAMES PIE, Esquire
WELL! after much perplexity and rout,
At length the wished-for wedding's brought about.
A foolish girl! so near to throw away
Love, rank, and reputation, in a day.
And all for what? from prejudice, in truth,
Though christened delicacy, now, forsooth.
If (sentimental nonsense thrown aside)
To cards, and politics, she had applied,
For common cares, her soul had been too great,
And only felt an ardor, for the state;
Had glowed alone with freedom's glorious flame,
And next to PAM's, had honored PAOLI's name.
Twice in our annals, baffled France and Spain
Have wept the glories of a female reign:
With great success I think we now might try
The influence of a female ministry.
In private life how well we are used to sway,
More husbands know, than you will persuade to say;
And how finances properly to rule,
All ladies learn, who ever kept a pool.
Ye generous spirits, who approve my plan,
And wish at least an equal sway with man,
(And some malicious wits so bold we find,
To say this comprehends all womankind)
In favor of a female bard, tonight,
Boldly assert a Briton's dearest right;
From man, from haughty man's tyrannic laws,
To your decision she submits her cause;
Rests, on your candor, all her hopes and fears,
And only claims -- a Trial by her Peers.

