To the Right Worshipful the GRAND MASTER, Deputy GRAND MASTER, GRAND WARDENS,
And the rest of the Brethren of the Ancient and Honorable Society of FREE and
ACCEPTED MASONS, This OPERA Is Humbly Inscribed by

Your most Obedient, And Devoted Servant, The AUTHOR. A FREE-MASON.

Dramatis Personae.
Amurath, King of Tunis. Mirza, High-Admiral. Sebastian, an English Gentleman.
Zelmana, Queen of Tunis. Maria, an English Lady.
Sir Jasper Moody. Caelia, his Daughter. Cleremont, her Lover. Lettice, her
Maid. Davy, Cleremont's Man. Noodle, a simple Squire. Doodle, his Man.
Neptune, Tritons, Turks, etc.
THE Generous Free-Mason: OR, THE CONSTANT LADY. WITH THE HUMORS OF Squire
Noodle, and his Man Doodle. A TRAGI-COMI-FARCICAL BALLAD OPERA. IN THREE ACTS.

With the MUSIC prefixed to each SONG.

By the AUTHOR of the LOVER's OPERA.

LONDON: Printed for J. ROBERTS in Warwick Lane, and Sold by the Booksellers of
London and Westminster. MDCCXXXI. [Price One Shilling.]

THE GENEROUS FREE-MASON.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A Garden. Enter Maria weeping, followed by Jacinta. JACINTA. WHY do you sigh,
and thus give way to Grief?
And discontented wander up and down?
Disclose the Torments of your troubled Breast:
Sorrows revealed, the Burden lighter grows;
And if I bring no Balsam to your Wounds,
Your Trust but leaves you as you were before.

Mar. Thou have been ever faithful, just, and kind;
Therefore I will unload my secret Soul,
And tell the Troubles of my tortured Breast --
This Day, my cruel Father has resolved,
In Spite of all my Tears, and bitter Anguish,
To wed me to the Man I most abhor;
Though well he knows, Sebastian has my Heart.

Jac. If Fathers thus forget Paternal Love,
The Ties of Duty should no longer bind.

Mar. Sebastian (tortured with ten thousand Woes)
This Moment waits to know my last Resolve.
His Love has urged me to forsake this Place,
And fly with him to some more friendly Clime.

Jac. There is no other Way to shun your Fate.

Mar. The Tyrant Love too strongly takes his Part,
His Throne is fixed, and reigns within my Heart.
AIR I. As the Snow in Valleys lying.
^ If the dear, and faithful Lover,
Pleads, our Passion to discover;
Cupid then will take his Part:
Cupid then etc.
Reason holds the Reins no longer,
Powerful Love will prove the stronger,
And by Storm will seize the Heart.
And by Storm etc.

Enter Sebastian. Seb. Oh my Maria! must I live, or die?
This Moment is the Crisis of my Fate:
Pronounce my Doom, and give me Life, or Death!

Mar. What will the meddling World say of my Fame?
To leave my Father, Friends, and native Home,
And turn a willing Wanderer over the World.

Seb. Alas! my Fair, thy Virtue is a Proof
Against the Malice of censorious Tongues.
I Will be thy Lover, Father, Brother, All.
Trust in my Faith, that never shall deceive thee.

Mar. Too well thou know the Weakness of my Heart,
That smiling listens to the Charmer's Lure.
But oh Sebastian! will Love always last?
Our Morning's Sun may bring a Cloudy Noon,
Ill-featur'd Poverty may come upon us,
And drive the downy Thoughts of Love away.

Seb. I have a wealthy Uncle lives in Spain,
The Consul of the British Nation there,
(I am the Darling of his feeble Age!)
Thither we'll fly, and leave our Cares behind:
He will protect us from the Frowns of Fortune,
And make us happy in our virtuous Loves.

Mar. The Hand of Heaven, I hope, will point our Way,
And guide us by his never-erring Ray.

Seb. Oh! thou have raised me from the last Despair,
And thy Consenting cures my wounded Soul.
Let us be gone, and leave this Shore behind,
The Anchors weighing, and the Sails unfurled.
But yet one Pang I feel, through all my Joy
That from my noble Brethren I must part,
Those Men, whose Luster spreads from Pole to Pole,
Possessing every Virtue of the Soul.
But yet all Climes the Brotherhood adorn,
As smiling Phoebus gilds the Rosy Morn,
Let Love and Friendship then our Cares confound,
And Halcyon Days be one eternal Round.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II. A Hall in old Moody's House.
Enter Moody, Caelia, and Lettice. Mood. I tell you, Hussie! Squire Noodle's
the Man, He must be the Man, and he shall be the Man, or you shall die a Maid.


Let. Die a Maid! what! come into the World for nothing -- If she does die a
Maid, you're guilty of Murder, and ought to be hanged for it.


Mood. Guilty of Murder, you Slut! how am I guilty of Murder?


Let. Why in hindering the getting the Children my Lady might have -- It Is as
bad as building a fine House, and letting it stand empty -- Taxes must be paid,
you know.


Mood. Get out of my House, Hussie! or I Will break every Bone in your Skin.


Let. I will not go out of your House.


Mood. Blood and Fire! get out of my House! or I Will fetch my great Gun, and
pepper ye.


Let. Dear Sir, your Gun is good for nothing -- It may flash in the Pan, or
so, but there is no Danger of its going off.


Mood. Was there ever such a provoking Devil? Hold that damned Tongue of thine,
or I Will run you through, Hussie!


Let. Alack-a-day! your Point's too blunt, indeed Sir, your Weapon has not
been sit for Use these twenty Years.

AIR II. Come hither, good People, etc.
^ Your Weapon, good Sir, to your Scabbard's confined,
And though now to draw it, you may be inclined;
With Age and with Rust it is stubborn you will find,
With a down, down, down, down, down, down, derry, derry derry up and down up
and down a,
You only now wear it for Fashion, it is true,
As a Mark of a Gentleman that once could do,
But I think there is no Danger, you ever should run through,
With a down, etc.

Mood. Did ever any one hear such a provoking Minx -- 'sblood, get out my House
this Minute, or I Will --


Let. I tell you, I will not! do your worst! I fear you not.


Cael. Lettice, I command you hold your Peace.


Let. I Am all Obedience.


Mood. Remember once more, I tell you, 'Squire Noodle's the Man; therefore
prepare immediately for the Wedding. I Will go and send him to you, and give him
a favorable Reception, or think of the Fate of Jeptha's Daughter.

[Exit.
Cael. What shall I do, Lettice? I Would rather lead Apes than marry that Fool, and
that is a terrible hard Case you know.


Let. Ah! if I had been in your Lover Cleremont's Place, I Would have put it out of
your cross old Father's Power before now.


Cael. Why, what would your Wisdom have done, pray?


Let. I Will rell you, Madam.

AIR III. White Joak.
^ I Would mark the Goods with Hand and Seal,
That should in Time your Case reveal,
And drive all Purchasers away.
But Lovers now are grown such Fools,
They go to work without their Tools,
And only whine their Time away.
It Is best to come at -- Pish! nay Fie!
I vow and swear, I Will sooner die!
O Lord! good Sir! what is it you mean?
O Dear, I sear we shall be seen,
Ah! -- what will all my Kindred say!

Cael. Leave your Impertinence -- my Circumstances will not bear it.


Let. Dear Madam! you don't know how much your Circumstances will bear, till
you're put to it. -- But see, Madam! who is here.


Enter Cleremont and Davy. Cler. My dear Caelia! I saw your Father go out, and
flew on the Wings of Love to visit you.


Let. Wings of Love! if Cupid had not Darts as well as Wings, his Plumes would
signify nothing -- But talking Nonsense is the true Badge of a Lover -- But
Sir! the Tenement is Let -- Leases are drawn, and they intend to sign and seal
tonight -- Indeed, Sir, none of your Goods must be sent in here, I Will assure
you.


Cler. What do thou mean?


Let. To speak plain English, your Mistress is to marry 'Squire Noodle
immediately.


Cler. Death! and Fire! I Will cut the Rascal's Throat!


Let. Yes! and so dangle in a String at the Charge of the Sheriff.


Cler. Pr'ythee don't distract me! if my dear Caelia proves but constant, I
dare the utmost Malice of my Fate.


Let. There was a Whine!


AIR IV. Around the Plains.
^ Cler. If ever my Fair proves false to me,
Or weds that Wretch for sordid Gain,
It Is Death alone must set me free,
And rid me of my Pain.
O kindly then my Fears destroy,
Swear you ever will be true,
I Will every Hour of Life employ,
To show my Love to you.

AIR V. Muirland Willy.
^ Cael. Cease thy Fears, and sigh no more,
My Heart is truly yours alone;
I Would rather beg from Door to Door,
Than wed with such a Clown:
A Wretch whom Nature made for Mirth,
As Apes the vulgar Crowd will please;
A sordid Sot, a Clod of Earth,
I loath as a Disease.

Let. What Work's here! I believe your Rogue Davy and I must lay our Heads
together to assist you, for two such helpless Creatures did I never meet with
in my Life. -- In my Conscience, two Lovers are but a couple of Fools.


Cler. If thou can bring Matters to bear, I Will give thee the Indies.


Let. The Indies! Lard, Lard! Lovers and Poets in their Plays are plaguey
generous, they will give a Woman a Fortune of Fifty thousand Pound, though they
cannot pay their Tailor. I Would advise you to keep the Indies to your self; though if
I accepted 'em, I should find you out in your Geography, and look for my great
Fortune near Parnassus. -- No, no, Tickledown Farm will content me, at the
Skirt of your Estate in the Country.


Cler. There Is my Hand, thou shall have it.


Cael. And I Will give Davy a Hundred Pounds to stock it.


Let. Ay, this is Right! The Man should reward the Woman, and the Woman the
Man.


Cael. There, Davy, take my Purse.


Cler. And you mine, Lettice.


Davy. Ay, this is Encouragement indeed! Gold! thou Sovereign Cure for all
Evils! welcome.

AIR VI. Now comes on the glorious Year.
^ It Is this o'ercomes all Griess and Cares,
It buys a Peace, or War declares;
For This the Wretch, though perjured, swears;
It gains old Widows Spouses.
The Thief for Money may be freed;
It buys you Votes, if Votes you need;
In Law, makes void the strongest Deed,
And Fools makes Heads of Houses.

Cael. Oh! here comes my foolish Lover, with his wise Attendant.


Enter Noodle, and his Man Doodle. Nood. Come along, Doodle, and you shall hear
me court my Mistress; and if you can think of any thing, put me in, do you hear,
Doodle.


Dood. Ay, ay, Sir; I have several Compliments ready made.


Nood. Well, that is pure! Mind me, Doodle!
Oh! lovely Creature! fairer than the Goose,
That does upon my Father's Common graze;
Or shaped beyond the Greyhound when he is loose
To follow Puss through Sloughs, and cleanly Ways.

Dood. More fair than is the Duck that swims the Flood;
Or Sows, that gruntle in the slimy Mud;
Handsomer far, than Master's brindle Bitch;
Or our Old Joan, that cannot see to stitch.

Nood. Very well indeed, Doodle, only the Sow and Joan came in a little odly,
though.


Cael. Very fine, indeed, 'Squire! I suppose they are of your own composing.


Nood. Yes, Madam.


Cael. I protest you are a very great Poet.


Dood. Poet, Madam! why Master has wrote a fine Tragedum.


Nood. Yes, so I have, Doodle; and we'll have it played at our Wedding: and
Madam, You, and I, and Doodle will act Parts in it. -- Oh! I love Acting dearly.


Dood. Yes, my Master and I played two Fools in a Play once, and every Body
said my Master played finely.


Nood. Ay, so I did, to be sure.


Cael. And pray what do you call your Tragedy?


Dood. Oh sad! Oh sad! Or, The Bloody Butcher. With, The Merry Humors of the
Princess Trullibub. -- Doodle shall play, O sad! I Will play the Bloody Butcher,
and you, Madam, shall play the Princess Trullibub.


Cler. A fine Piece, I warrant it.


Nood. Why so it is! Pray what have you to say to it? -- O Lud! this is that
foolish Fellow my Rival. -- What, I warrant you think to get my Mistress from
me! -- Ha!


Cler. Pr'ythee don't be impertinent.


Nood. Impertinent! I Will bully the Dog! for he will hardly fight before my
Mistress. [Aside.] -- What Business have you here? will you be gone!


Dood. Ay! will you be gone?


Nood. The silly Dog is devilishly afraid! -- Will you be gone?


Dood. Ay, I say, will you be gone?

[ Cler. throws Snuff in Noodle's Face. Davy powders Doodle's, and Exeunt.
Nood. Oh! I Am blind!


Dood. And so am I too.


Nood. Will you be gone?


Dood. Ay, will you be gone? [They run against each other.] Why, Master, I an't
Will-you-be gone!


Nood. You Son of a Whore! you have knocked my Eyes out.


Dood. Yes, Sir, and you have beaten my Teeth down my Throat.


Nood. I Will be revenged, and see 'em hanged, if I can but recover my Eyesight
again.

AIR VII. You Will think ere many Days ensue.
^ Oh Doodle! what sad Rogues were these!
To put out both our Eyes.
Dood. We'll wipe our Faces, if you please,
For see, your Mistress cries.
Twang dang dillo dee.

Nood. Cry, does she! it is so like Laughing, that I hardly know one from
the other.


Enter Moody. Mood. Hey day! what is to be done here, tro! Have you been walking
up the Chimney, 'Squire?


Nood. Oh, Father-in-law! here has been that foolish Fellow my Rival, with my
Mistress, and he, with that Bitches Puppy his Man, has blinded us. -- I Will take
the Law of him. -- I Will ruin him in four Terms. -- I Will -- I Will -- what shall I
do to him, Doodle?


Dood. Do to him, Sir! Why, undo him -- Hang him up in Chancery for Seven
Years. -- Put him into the Crown once a Year. -- Indict him every Quarter for a
Rape, once a Week for a Riot, and every Day for a Trespass; and when his
Money's all gone, Transport him for a Thief for his Endeavor to steal other
Men's Goods.


Mood. Well, I shall soon put an end to his Impertinence -- for you shall marry
my Daughter immediately.


Dood. And then, Master, if you should take him napping, as Moss did his Mare!
Get a Jury of What-d'ye-callums, and you will recover a swinging Sum.


Nood. Ay, so I shall, Doodle.


Cael. What shall I do, Lettice? my Ruin now approaches.


Let. I have it -- we'll put him upon being made a Mason, and that may gain
Time.


Cael. The Society will never admit such a Fool among 'em.


Let. Well, but I hope Davy and his Comrades may make him a mock Mason, and
that will do every whit as well. Therefore smile upon him, seem to comply, and
leave the rest to me.


Mood. Well, Mrs. Disobedience! what are you and your Contriver plotting now!
-- But I shall watch your Waters, I warrant you.


Let. Why, I Will tell you our Plot, Sir -- I have been persuading my Mistress
to marry the Squire -- for since you went I have been informed that Mr.
Cleremont keeps three Mistresses, has seven Children by one, five by another,
and two by a Blackamoor -- and to all this, is one of the greatest Gamesters in
the Nation, has three Mortgages upon his Estate, has sold his Place in the
Government, spent the Money, and is going to be prosecuted for a Rape; and not
having Money enough to, to, to -- you know what, is in danger of a Halter. --
And though I must own I had a Friendship for him, yet I have more Love for my
Mistress than to see her undone, which she must be if she marries Cleremont,
and therefore she consents to marry the Squire.


Nood. O Lud! Doodle, that is pure!


Dood. Ay, by the Mackins is it!


Mood. And is this true, you little --


Cael. Yes, Sir. [Curtsying.


Let. Why do you think I would tell you a Lie?


Mood. Adad, I Will get Mopsa with Child for Joy.


Let. Dear Sir, never undertake a Work you cannot get through stitch with.


Mood. Ah, you're a Wag! Adad, I Am as overjoyed as a Country Curate at a
Wedding or a Christening -- and I Will sing you a Song.

AIR VIII. There was three Lads, etc.
^ There was a young Man and a Maid
Went to Church to wed, Sir,
But the Girl was sore afraid
To lose her Maidenhead, Sir.
But when the Rogue had done the Feat,
She found her Fears were vain, Sir;
She vowed and swore it was so sweet,
The Joy out-weigh'd the Pain, Sir.
Mood. Nood. Dood. She vowed and swore, etc.

Mood. Adad! I Am as overjoyed as -- as -- as a Parson when he is made a Bishop.
-- Well Squire, you will get your Tackle in Order, you find my Daughter is ready
for you, and I Will go fetch the Parson to give you a Stitch.

[Exit.
Let. Harkye Squire, there is one Bar still in the way.


Nood. O Lud! what is that?


Let. Your Mistress has made a Vow she will never marry any Man that is not a
Free-Mason, and that was the Reason she preferred Mr. Cleremont before you --
Therefore by all means get your self made one out of hand.


Nood. Ay, but which way must I go about it?


Let. Let me see -- now I think on it, my Brother is Master of a Lodge -- I Will
send him to wait on you presently.


Nood. Well, that will be pure! -- Doodle! I Am to be made a Mason, and I Will
make my Mistress a Mason, and we'll make you a Mason, Doodle, and then my
Mistress will have me.


Dood. Well, by the Mackins! that is brave -- But Master, don't you remember you
said you would Serenade your Mistress tonight? pray don't forget that.


Nood. Don't you fear that, Mr. Doodle. -- I Will Serenade my Mistress to be
sure, for my Barber told me 'twas the Fashion.

I Will sing so sweetly, she shall dance in Bed,
And make her long to lose her Maidenhead.
Come along, Doodle.

[Exeunt.
End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
The SEA. Enter Sebastian and Maria. SEBASTIAN. BEHOLD, my Love, the Land
appears in view,
I see the Billows breaking on the Shore,
Where all our Fears and Terrors will have End.
[Guns go off within. But ha! What means this sudden Voice of War?

Mar. My boding Heart foretells some Ill at hand.

Enter Captain. Capt. Oh cursed Misfortune! Fate is now at work!
We must prepare for ever-during Bonds,
Or search for Freedom in the Mouth of Death.
Mirza, the bravest Moor that ploughs the Sea,
Has stretched between us, and the Shores of Spain,
And sails, prepared to intercept our Course.

Mar. Oh my hard Fate! is this our hop'd-for Joy?

Capt. The Galley gains upon us every Moment;
Her bloody Sign of Battle is unfurled,
And waves with dreadful Terror in the Wind.

Seb. I Have that to guard, would give a Coward Valor.

Capt. 'Twill argue Rashness to resist the Foe.

Seb. We will for Battle instantly prepare.
A Briton and a Mason cannot fear.
AIR IX.
Composed by Mr. Henry Carey.
^ Though Dangers allarm me,
Their Force I Will oppose,
It Is Cupid will arm me
To combat our Foes:
Inspired by my Charmer,
Their Rage I Will defy,
Her Virtue's my Armor;
I Will conquer or die.
[Exeunt.
[Trumpets, Guns, and Drums within.] Enter Mirza, with Sebastian and Maria
Prisoners. Mirz. Droop not, brave Man, nor downward bend thy Eyes,
The Valiant do not always overcome.
Fortune's a fickle Goddess, ever blind,
And seldom to the Meritorious kind.
Yet Amurath, I hope (for Mirza's sake)
Your Slavery and Chains will easy make.

Seb. The greatest Slave has Freedom in his Breast;
Death breaks the Bonds, and gives eternal Rest.
[Exeunt.
Enter Noodle, Doodle, and a Fiddler. Nood. Come along, Doodle! -- Now for the
Serenade! -- Pray which is my Mistress's Window, Doodle?


Dood. That, Sir.


Nood. Doodle, ask the Man if he can play The three Children in the Wood. --


Dood. Yes Sir, he says he can.

[The Fiddler tunes his Fiddle.
Nood. Come, begin then -- Why the Devil don't you play? You're as long at
Twang, Twang, as a Quaker is Humming and Hawing before he holds forth.

[The Fiddler plays.
Dood. Indeed, Master Noodle, this is a sad merry Tune.


Nood. A sad merry Tune! that is because a sad Fellow plays it; you shall hear
me sing to it -- and you will find it quite another thing. -- Come, Mr. -- Play
again.

Oh stretch your Legs abroad, my Dear,
And see who stands below.

Dood. Master, would it not be better to say, stretch your Eyes abroad?


Nood. Why sure, Mr. Doodle! did I take you into my Service to teach me?
Stretch her Eyes! Yes, I warrant you! No, I say, Stretch her Legs; Do you think
she can come to the Window without stretching her Legs, Mr. Doodle?


Dood. It Is very true indeed, Master.


Nood. Yes, I think it is. -- Oh stretch your Eyes abroad, my Dear. Did you
ever see the like! -- This Bastardly Rogue, Doodle, has put me quite out.

AIR X. O ponder well, be not severe.
^ Oh stretch your Legs abroad, my Dear!
And see who stands below;
Upright and stiff as any Spear,
Beneath your bright Window.
Is not that very pretty, Doodle?


Dood. Beneath your bright Window! Very pretty indeed, Master.


Enter Lettice above in the Balcony. Let. What Boar-Cat caterwawls thus late
To break my Lady's Rest:
Or Hog that is grunting at the Gate,
When Winds blow hard from West.

Nood. Boar-Cat! you are a Bull-Bitch to call me Boar-Cat, you are so! od! if I
had you here, I Would give you a good Douse on the Chops, I would so. Boar-Cat!
Why, Doodle, do I look or sing like a Boar-Cat?


Dood. A Boar-Cat! no indeed, Master. But indeed Master -- O stretch your Legs
abroad, is a very dumpish Tune -- have you never a merrier in your Budget?


Nood. Well remembered efackins, Doodle -- yes, yes, I have another of my own
making to the Tune of the Black Joak -- You, Fiddler! can you play the Black
Joak?


Dood. Take care what you say, he is no Fiddler, he is a Master of Music.


Dood. Oh, I cry your Marcy, Mr. Master of Music -- will you be pleased to play
me the Black Joak -- I made this Song, Doodle, in Praise of my Mistress's
Beauty. I showed it to our Thrasher, and I can assure you he likes it. You
know, Doodle, he is a Poet himself, and Poets never flatter one another. -- Why
don't you play?


AIR XI. Black Joak.
^ Of all the Girls in our Town,
That with two Legs walk up and down,
There Is none with Caelia can compare.
For she has a Breast as soft as Silk,
To give our Children pure good Milk,
And all her Locks like Carrots fair.
Then she has a Mouth like any thing,
A Tongue within does sweetly sing,
And something else to please a Duke,
Oh that I might upon it look,
Oh Geminy! how I should stare.
There Doodle! is it not fine Poetry.


Dood. Oh! Geminy! how I should stare! very fine indeed, Master.


Nood. But why does not my Mistress come and thank me, Ha! Doodle.


Dood. Why, may be she is a-sleep still -- we must make a greater Noise to wake
her.


Nood. Ay! come then -- Dol, dol dorol.

[They sing and dance. [ Lettice throws Water upon 'em. Oh! Lud, Doodle! I Am
half drowned.


Dood. Yes, Sir, and I am the other half.


Enter Cleremont disguised. Cler. What Midnight Caterwawling Rascals are these
-- I Will teach 'em how to disturb a sleeping Neighborhood.

[Beats 'em, and Exit.
Nood. Oh, Doodle! I Am beaten like Eggs to a Pudding.


Dood. Yes, Sir, and one of 'em is Addle, for here is and odd sort of a Smell
between us.


Nood. O lud, Doodle! here he comes again! -- Let Us be gone! Murder! Fire!
Popery, and Sedition!

[Exeunt.
Re-enter Cleremont. Cler. They Will hardly come a Serenading again in Haste, I
believe. But I fear my dear Caelia is gone to Rest -- I Will try however.

AIR XII.
Composed by Mr. Henry Carey.
^ Oh! come to my Arms, my charming Fair!
Oh! fly to thy Lover's Arms;
We'll love all the Day,
And we'll revel and play,
And at Night I will guard thee from Harms.
[ Caelia and Lettice appear at the Window. Cael. Oh! had I but Wings, my only
Dear,
I then to thy Arms would fly;
But Fate is severe,
And my Father is near,
Who bars me from Liberty.

Cler. Oh that I had thee in my longing Arms! with eager Kisses, Caresses, and
Embraces, I Would never quit thee till thou were wholly mine.


Let. Lud! lud! what a Whining's here! Don't you remember the old Proverb,
Signior -- Faint Heart never -- you understand me.

AIR XIII. Would you court a young Virgin, etc.
^ When you court a young Virgin of sixteen Years,
You must banish your Sorrows, your Griefs and Cares:
Your whining and pining will never, never
Steer you to Harbor -- then cease your Fears,
Pleasure and Joy let your Face adorn,
Be lively and gay as a Summer's Morn,
Push home your Affairs, or you will ever, ever,
Justly deserve the Fair one's Scorn.
Ods me! I hear my old Master! away! away as fast as you can -- for if he sees
you we are undone for ever -- while we poor Souls go to Bed, hug our Pillows,
and dream of I know not what, and of Force be contented till something better
offers.


Cael. Cleremont, adieu! [Sighing]


Cler. May gentle Sleep those orient Lustres close, And peaceful Dreams attend
thy soft Repose.

[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
The King and Queen of Tunis discovered seated on a Throne. Priests, Singers,
Dancers, Guards and Attendants. King. Thus far our Civil Wars, and Troubles
cease,
And Africa slumbers in the Breast of Peace.

Queen. Your Arms a Cloud of Terrors spread around,
And Hydra Faction bites the bloody Ground.

King. Mirza, my Scourge of War, ploughs through the Main,
The Fear and Terror of proud neighboring Spain.
Yet, happy as I seem, I Have something here Aside.
Which speaks a boding Revolution near. Aside.
Let me have Music to compose my Breast,
And lull my Senses to a pleasing Rest.

SONG.
Sung by Priests. AIR XIV.
Set by Mr. Charke.
^ Great Amurath all Hearts obey,
Who rules the World with settled Sway,
And does with peaceful Homage meet:
His silver Crescents shine so bright,
They put out every other Light,
And Nations bow beneath his Feet.

[After the Song, a Dance of Moors.] Trumpets within. Enter Mirza, attended. He
Kneels. Mirz. Long live the mighty King and Queen of Tunis!
May Conquest ever on their Arms attend,
And living Laurels crown their Royal Brows!

King. My Mirza, rise; Supporter of my Crown,
And speak those noble Actions thou have done.

Mirza. Ranging the Sea by my great King's Command,
I spied a Ship which bore the Flag of Spain;
We gave her Chase, and soon began the Fight.
The noble Prize would have been cheaply bought,
But for one Man, that like a Lion fought.
Thrice he repulsed the Entrance of my Men,
Who thrice I rallied, and led on again:
He dealt his Blows so fatal, and so fast,
At every Stroke a Soldier breathed his last;
'Till like a Tiger, spreading Death around,
He fell overwhelmed and bleeding to the Ground.

King. Such brave Resistance from one single Arm
Raises my Admiration. -- But go on.

Mirza. Such Wonders were performed by this bold Man,
Inspired by Love of a young beauteous Maid,
That Roman Heroes cannot parallel.

King. Bring forth the noble Prize thy Arms have won.
Enter Sebastian and Maria, Prisoners. Now, by my Soul! a Miracle of Beauty!
Christian!
Thy Valor pleads so strong in the Defense
Of this bright Maid, this beauteous Innocence,
That if thy former Faith thou will forego,
And by Instruction our great Prophet know,
Honor and Fame submissively shall wait,
And I will place thee to look down on Fate.

Seb. Thy Prophet we despise, thy Arts are vain,
No Power on Earth shall ever our Bosoms stain.

King. Thou Rose of May! thou heavenly Excellence!
Whose lovely Features ravish every Sense!
No Chains but Love thy beauteous Hands shall bind,
Whose Eyes have Power to fetter all Mankind.

Queen. If to the Youth, my Sovereign, you are kind,
You may be gentle Usage work his Mind.
Call for the Mufti, his persuasive Art,
And weighty Arguments, may turn his Heart.

Seb. So strong my Inspiration's from Above,
Not all thy Empire can my Faith remove.
Thy Prophet I despise, thy Arts are vain,
No Power on Earth shall ever our Bosoms stain.

King. Do thou insult our holy Prophet's Law,
Whom Kings obey with reverential Awe!
Bear to the Den that stubborn impious Slave,
And let the Maws of Lions be his Grave.

Mar. Oh Mercy! Mercy! spare that God-like Youth!
The Pattern of Sincerity and Truth.
If he must fall, let me his Fate partake,
I Will welcome Death in Pains for his dear Sake.

King. For you, fair Maid, some Respite we will give,
And a few Moments suffer him to live.
[Exit.
Queen. Mirza, his Life be thy peculiar Care,
For if he bleeds, I must be all Despair.
[Aside to Mirza, and Exit.
Mirz. Why did I conquer, to be so unblest!
I grieve to find such Virtue so distressed.
Ha! What do I see? -- My Senses are deceived!
The Bliss is sure too great to be believed.

Seb. Come, my Maria, we shall yet be free,
For swift-wing'd Death will give us Liberty.
[Exeunt.
Enter Davy and another, disguised, meeting Noodle and Doodle. Dav. Is this the
worthy Person that has an Inclination to be made one of our Noble Society?


Nood. Yes, I am. -- But pray may not my Man Doodle be made one along with me?


Davy. Oh fie Sir! no, no; he must wait without 'till the Ceremony be over.


Nood. O Lud! what must not Doodle stay in the Room with me? -- I shall be
frighted out of my Wits!


Dav. I tell you, No! therefore be gone, Fellow! when we have done we'll call
you.


Dood. What adickens are they going to do? -- I hope they will not equip my Master
for an Opera-Singer! -- Adad, if they should they will spoil his Marriage.

[Exit.
Dav. Sit down in that Chair.


Nood. They seem to me to be mighty odd looking Fellows. I wish I get safe out
of their Hands.


Davy. Bind fast his Arms and Legs.


Nood. O Jemminy! What are you going to do?


Davy. Only to proceed in our Ceremony. -- When were you shaved last?


Nood. O Lud! shaved! I was never shaved in my Life.


Davy. Well then, Lathering shall serve turn.


Nood. I am glad of that, I did not know but they might have Shaved and Bled
all under one.


Davy. Pantagruel, fetch the Basin of Antiquity prefently. You must know, this
Basin was made out of half the Queen of Egypt's great Pearl, when she treated
Mark Antony in the Highlands of Scotland.


Nood. A Pearl! as I hope to saved, it looks like a common Basin that may be
bought for Threepence.


Davy. A-lack-aday! you will see with other Eyes when you have gone through this
Ceremony. -- This very Basin was given to our Honorable Society by Alexander
the Great, when he turned Protestant after conquering North Wales. [Blacks his
Face and picks his Pocket.] There, Sir, we have done with your Face; now lets
see your Nails. -- Fetch me the mysterious Penknife.


Nood. A Penknife, do you call it! adad it looks to me big enough for a Scythe.


Davy. A Scythe! why, this is the greatest Piece of Antiquity we have. -- This
Penknife was made of Eve's Spanish Needle that she sewed Adam's Fig Breeches
with -- when they were stripped by the Turks at the Siege of Namur.


Nood. Why then, Adam and Eve were a swinging Couple -- But I know that is a
Lie, for I have got their Pictures in our Nursery at Home. [Aside.


Davy. There, Sir! we have done with your Fingers.


Nood. Done with my Fingers -- yes! but what the Devil have you done with my
Rings? Ha!


Davy. O lud, lud! have but a little Patience -- and you will see 'em all turned
to Brilliants of the first Water -- your Eyesight cannot be cleared till you
are put in the Queen of Sheba's Petticoat. Pantagruel! fetch her Majesty's
Divining Petticoat -- Sir, when you are in this Petticoat -- you will see all
Things, past, present, and to come --


Nood. A Petticoat! why as I hope to be married, it looks like a Sack! a common
Sack!


Davy. A Lard help you! a Sack! though really now I must confess, when I was made
a Mason first, I had almost the same Notion of Things as you have, good Sir --
But you will see after another manner when once you're in this wonderful
Petticoat -- Why, Sir, this Petticoat was made of the Webs of the Feet of the
East-Indian Bird of Paradise -- and the Whalebone made of one of the Hairs of
King Brogdignagian's Beard, brought over by Captain Lemuel Gulliver.


Nood. O Lord, Sir! I do believe it -- a Lie. [Aside.


Davy. Come, Sir -- in with him -- when you are in -- you will see such strange
Things will amaze you.

[They put him in the Sack, and Exeunt.
Nood. See, quotha! od, it is as dark as a narrow Lane in a Winter's Night. But
hark, you -- Mr. -- Mr. -- Mr. -- a what the Devil is your Name -- Oh -- Mr.
Watergruell -- When shall I see these same fine Things -- Ha! why what the
Devil are you all dumb? -- Od! my Mind misgives -- Ha! O Lord! Murder! Fire!
Brimstone and Gunpowder -- Doodle -- where is Doodle?


Enter Doodle. Dood. Here, Master --

[Tumbles over him.
Nood. You Son of a Bitch, you have kicked my Nose off.


Dood. Kicked your Nose off -- why where are you, Master.


Nood. Here, here.

[ Doodle takes him out of the Sack.
Dood. Oh lud! Murder! Murder! this cannot be my Master?


Nood. Ha! what is the matter, Doodle?


Dood. The matter! why your Face is as black as a Cole-Miner's, or a
Chimney-Sweeper's.


Nood. O lud! I am undone! -- I Will have the Rogues hanged for Murder, for I am
sure I have Money enough to bribe a Jury, and Witnesses to swear they have
murdered me -- But now I am talking of Money, let me feel, if they have not
robbed me as well as murdered me. [Feels in his Pockets.] Oh lud, Doodle! They
have picked my Pocket of a hundred Pound, and stole my Rings off my Fingers --
They shall be hanged to be sure.

AIR XV. Sir Thomas, I cannot, etc.
^ I Will hang up these Rogues, I vow and I swear,
I ever I but live for to find 'em.
Dood. We'll search every Town at Market and Fair,
And if we can take 'em, we'll blind 'em.
Nood. We'll kill 'em, and eat 'em, and bake 'em in Pies,
Dood. Their Gilts shall make Puddings of several Size.
Nood. Their Bones shall make Hafts for our Forks and our Knives,
And if we can take 'em, we'll grind 'em, we'll grind 'em.
Both. And if we can take 'em, we'll grind 'em.
[Exeunt.
SCENE changes to a Prison. Enter Sebastian, and Maria, weeping. Seb. Dry up
the Fountain of thy flowing Tears:
Death, though he seizes all our little Joys,
Yet puts an End to all our Sorrows too.
When his pale Hand has closed our mournful Eyes,
We shall awake to all Eternity,
And live for ever in our spotless Loves.

Mar. It gives me Joy to share thy wretched Fate,
Though I could live an Age in black Despair,
If all my Torments could restore thy Peace.
AIR XVI. Fond Echo.
^ If Tears over our Fate could prevail,
My Eyes like a Torrent should flow:
But Terrors so fiercely assail,
Each Moment increases our Woe.
Yet Death! with his cold friendly Dart,
To free us from Sorrow, will fly;
His Arrow once fixed in the Heart,
Our Tears and our Anguish will die.

Enter the King and Mirza. King. Her Voice is more harmonious than the Lark,
Whose tuneful Notes awake the cheerful Spring,
Even Liberty would be enslaved to hear her.
How many Ways has Nature given to charm?
By Heaven, I Would give my Empire with my Crown,
If in Exchange I could possess her Heart.

Seb. Oh Torment to my Soul! must I hear this!

King. Oh Maid Divine! return my ardent Love,
Or I must languish in the last Despair.
If you consent, new Joys shall meet with Joys,
And mix their Streams in one eternal Round.

Mar. Alas! my Heart is in another's Breast,
And I would rather die ten thousand Deaths,
Than wrong that Darling of my Soul, Sebastian.

King. Since a vile Slave's the Bar to all my Love,
It Is thus I will the Obstacle remove.
[Goes to stab him.
Enter the Queen, offers to stab Maria. Queen. Strike home be sure! I Will copy
well thy Rage,
And in her Crimson Streams my Griefs assuage.

King. What do I see! hence Traitress! fly! be gone!

Queen. This is a Scene you shall not act alone.

King. The Captives, Mirza, to thy Care I give.

Queen. If he is safe, your Mistress, Sir, may live.

King. Tempest and Whirlinds in my Bosom move,
And I am tortured by Revenge and Love.
Away! be gone! my Vengeance shall have room,
And injured Honor shall pronounce thy Doom.
[Exe.
ACT III. SCENE I.
A Prison. Enter MIRZA, alone. MIRZA. NOW to fulfill the Longings of my Soul.
Christian come forth, for I am all Impatience
To be informed if any thing was meant
By what I saw thee Yesterday perform.
If thou art what I wish, thou know my Meaning.

Enter Sebastian. Seb. A rising Dawn of Hope enlights my Soul!
My gracious Lord, I will enfold myself.
Having the Honor for a Course of Years
To be distinguished by a glorious Badge,
Which none but Masons have a Right to wear,
Involved in Woe, I might have shown a Sign
In dear Remembrance of my noble Friends,
Without the Hope of being understood.

Mirz. Come to my Arms! thou unexpected Joy!
And find in me, a Brother, and a Friend.

Seb. Can it be possible! in this barbarous Clime,
Where Arts and Sciences are hardly known
Our ancient, noble, and most glorious Craft,
(Which even Kings and Heroes have adorned)
Should find Reception in a Moorish Breast.

Mirz. No, no, my Brother! so Divine an Art
Can not subsist but with Humanity.

Seb. O how shall I contain my rising Joy!
Yet one thing pains me to the very Soul:
I grieve to think my Friend has lost his Faith.

Mirz. Banish that Fear, my Faith is yet unstained:
I were unworthy of a Mason's Name
Should I in Error live, and wound my Soul.
Know then, my Brother, Britain gave me Birth.
My Father, some Years past, was Consul here,
Where Death o'ertook him in my Infancy.
The Father of this King seized me by Force,
And pressed me to forsake my Christian Faith:
But Heaven inspired me with that Fortitude,
That I resisted both his Frowns and Smiles.
The King being dead, the State was so consus'd,
That all my Persecution was forgot.
This present Monarch took me to his Favor,
And raised me to those Honors I possess.
My long abiding in this sultry Clime,
Has made this Afric as my Native Home.
Though I shall never forget my Countrymen.
From them (residing here some Years ago)
I first was entered your Society,
And made a Mason in most perfect Form.

Seb. What shall I say? My Soul is in such Transport,
I cannot utter half the Joy I feel.

Mirz. Go to the Fair, inform her what has past,
And raise her drooping melancholy Soul.
While I will to my Royal Master sly,
In hope to gain my Friends their Liberty.
[Exit.
Seb. Come forth, my Fair, my lovely weeping Mourner.
Come to my Arms, and shake of all thy Griefs.
Mirza, that gracious, generous, (...) Man,
Will put an End to all our killing Woes,
And give us Means of perfect Happiness.

Enter Maria. Mar. Alas! there is no Comfort left for me:
If there is Hope -- she will prove a Flatterer,
And plunge us deeper in the Sea of Woe.

Seb. Lean on my Arm, and cheer thy mourning Soul,
For Mirza's Friendship will our Fate control.
[Exeunt.
Enter Noodle. Nood. O sick, sick! I have sent Doodle for a Doctor, but I
believe the Devil's in him, and the Doctor too, for as I live, I shall be dead
before he comes, if they don't make haste -- Oh Pox take these Masons; if this
is being made a Mason, I Would rather ride Post upon a Broomstick, from Scotland to
Wales --

Enter Cleremont as a Doctor, and Doodle. Od so! here comes the Doctor at last:
Mighty Sir, your Servant.


Cler. Salva Domina.


Nood. Salve, Dam ye -- is that your Breeding -- I thought you Doctors never
cursed or swore -- Besides, Sir, I don't want any of your Salve -- mine is an
inward Distemper, do you think you can cure me?


Cler. Cure you, Sir! why I have cured five hundred incurable Diseases within
this Twelvemonth -- why I cured my Grandmother of the Toothache three Weeks
after she was dead.


Nood. Oh Jeminy! he is a pure Man, Doodle.


Dood. So he is indeed, Master.


Cler. There Is no Distemper comes amiss to me.

AIR XVII. As Tippling John.
^ I Have choice of Pills,
To cure all Ills,
And set the Body free.
The Gout, the Stone,
The broken Bone,
A Fool's Stupidity.
The Pains of Love
I can remove,
And make your Mistress kind.
I Will make you mild,
If you are wild,
And heal you though you're blind.
Let me feel your Pulse -- [Feels his Pulse.] Pray, Sir, how long have you to
go?


Nood. Oh lud! there is a Question, for a Man of your Parts -- To go! why these
sixty Years, I hope -- without I get Lappy, and then Doodle shall carry me.


Cler. It Is in vain to hide your Distemper from me -- you are with Child.


Nood. With Child! Oh lud, Doodle, what shall I do! this must be those plaguey
Rogues doing with their What-d'ye-Callum Petticoat -- I shall be disgraced for
ever -- to bring a Bastard into the Family -- why my Mistress will never have
me, if she hears I am with Child before Marriage.


Dood. It Is a very sad thing, Master -- But it is many an honest Body's Case
besides yours -- now I think on it, I Will tell you what you shall do.


Nood. What! good Doodle?


Dood. Even marry your Mistress tonight, swear she is the Father, and if you
should be both brought to Bed at the same Time, why one Lying-in may serve you
both.


Nood. Egad! and so I will! -- But this is a sad thing to be with Child, and
not know the Father, Doodle.


Dood. Why, Master, let the Parish father it: we'll drop it in a Basket at the
Church-Warden's Door, as I was, and then you know, he is obliged to take Care of
it.


Nood. What then, are you a Bastard, Doodle?


Dood. Truly, I cannot tell, for I don't remember the Day I was born, nor did I
ever hear that I had any Father or Mother; and to be sure those that never had
any Father or Mother, cannot be lawfully begot you know, Master.


Nood. Why that is very true, indeed, Doodle -- [Knocking without] See who is at
the Door, Doodle.


Cler. I can hardly keep my Countenance -- Their abominable Simplicity will
make me laugh in spite of my Teeth -- In my Conscience, one may persuade these
Fellows, the Moon's made of a Mince-Pye.


Dood. [Within] O lud! Murder! Murder!


Nood. O Jeminy! what is the matter, Doodle?


Enter Doodle. Dood. I Am almost choakt.


Nood. How so, Doodle?


Dood. Why, a Sow's Face Son of a Bitch clapped this Letter in my Hand, and when
he had done, lug'd the Knocker of the Door so hard with one Hand, and me by the
Ear with the other, that I thought verily the Edge of the Door would have
served me, as Judith did Holofernes, and have cut off my Head when he had
almost choakt me, the Rogue ran away -- There -- I wish, I had never seen the
Face on it.

[Gives Noodle the Letter.
Nood. To Nicodemus Noodle, Esquire [Reads]


It Is directed to me, I find. Thou poor insignificant Wretch!


Ha! why what the Dickens is the matter now? If thou do not drop all thy
Pretensions to my Mistress the divine Caelia, expect not to live a Day,


O Gemini for the first Time thou stirr'st abroad, I Will cut off thy Legs with a
Sword as broad as a Scythe -- Remember that, and tremble.

CLEREMONT.




O Lud! what shall I do -- od now I think on it, I Will have him taken up, and
hanged, for this is as bad as the House-firers Letters -- is it not, Mr. Doctor?


Cler. Why, it is a terrible Letter, I must own -- but you cannot prove any thing
against him -- you cannot swear that is his Hand.


Dood. Yes, but I can swear it.


Nood. Why did you ever see it, Doodle?


Dood. No, but I felt it at the Door, and my Ear will bear me Witness, and
we'll both swear, that Letter's the same Handwriting.


Cler. Indeed, Gentlemen, that will not (...) go a nearer way to work, and marry
the Lady immediately.


Nood. That Is fine Advice truly -- why (...) if I could, you may be sure.


Cler. Sir, if you will leave this Affair to me, I Will not only bring you your
Mistress, but a Parson to marry you.


Nood. Will you! ah dear Sir! [Kisses him] you are the best Friend I ever met
with in my Life.


Cler. I Will write a Letter to her Father, you shall copy it, and I Will carry it
myself, and I warrant we succeed.


Nood. Adod! and I Will make you amends -- I have a Cousin of mine Heir to a
great Estate, his Father wants a Physician -- you shall be recommended to him
-- you understand your Business -- and he will pay you well.


Cler. Sir, I thank you.


Nood. But I am sadly afraid my Mistress will not love me, when I am married to
her.


Dood. But Master, you know the old Saying, lying together makes Pigs love.


Nood. Ay, that is true, Doodle -- and now I remember a Song of my Father's
making.

AIR XVIII. Logan Water.
^ A Man though hated much at first,
Though by his Spouse is often cursed:
Yet when at Night his Rib he meets,
They Are reconciled between the Sheets.
Come into the next Room, and we'll finish the Matter.

[Exeunt.
Enter King, meeting Mirza. King. Well my kind Mirza, what is thy Success?

Mirz. As you could wish, her Love she does confess;
But yet in Secret would that Love possess.
She would not have the World reveal her Shame.
On this Condition (to preserve her Fame)
She Will give you full Possession of her Charms,
And in the dark will fill your longing Arms.

King. Oh! thou have given me greater Joys by far,
Than all thy great successful Deeds in War.

Mirz. Retire, my Lord, let Love be all your Care,
When Night comes on, I will conduct the Fair.

King. Farewell! -- ye lazy Minutes swiftly move,
That I may take Possession of my Love.
[Exit.
Enter Queen to Mirza. Queen. Mirza!
Thou have full often the furious Battle seen,
Yet (to disclose the Secrets of thy Queen)
No Storms, no Shipwreck, or the Face of War
Can form that Horror like the Soul's Despair.
Thy Captive, has thy Mistress Captive made,
And I shall languish to a silent Shade.
I know you will say my Passion's vile and foul,
But Love's the very Tyrant of the Soul;
Baffles our Reason, and disdains all Laws;
Pleads for himself, and ever gains the Cause.

Mirz. I have already thought to calm your Breast:
When all the Court are sunk in downy Rest,
In secret Silence I Will the Youth convey
To your Apartment, where by me betrayed,
He shall believe he clasps the British Maid.

Queen. Oh my kind Mirza! may thou happy prove,
If ever thy Heart is pierced by mighty Love.
[Exit.
Mirza. Heaven will, I hope, the pious Fraud approve,
Since all I act, is done for virtuous Love.
[Exit.
Enter Moody, Caelia, and Lettice, meeting Noodle and Doodle. Mood. Well,
Son-in-Law, is the Parson come? You see I have brought my Daughter, according
to your Desire in your Letter.


Nood. The Parson! yes, and the Parson's Wife, too.


Mood. The Parson's Wife! what a pize does she do here? Oh, I suppose she
smells a good Supper.


Nood. No, no; my new Friend the Doctor says she plays rarely upon the Pipe and
Tabor, so we shall have Music for nothing.


Let. She has other Business, which you shall know by and by. [Aside.


Mood. Well, Son in-Law, dispatch your Grace as fast as you can, and I Will go
hasten Supper. -- But don't fall too before I come.


Let. They will not perhaps make a Meal, Sir, but they may have a mind to pick a
Bit, or so.


Mood You Are a Wag-tail, Hussy. -- But I Will make haste. -- And when the
Wedding's over, Son, we'll think how to punish that Rogue Claremont.

[Exit.
Dood. Ay, pray Sir do, for the Thoughts of him may chance to spoil my Master's
Stomach tonight.


Nood. Ah, my little Goldfinch! have I caught you at last?


Let. You must throw some Salt upon her Tail first.


Nood. Yes, yes! I Will salt her, broil her, and eat her.


Cael. Bless me! you're a dangerous Man, Squire.


Let. Don't fear, Madam, his Fury will soon be over.


Nood. Come, my Dear, my Stomach's up, and I could seed heartily, if Grace was
said. -- Od! I fancy it is a pure thing to be married, for Old and Young, Rich
and Poor, are fond of the Noose. -- Besides, I was always afraid to lie alone.

AIR XIX. A Tenant of my own.
^ Sure Marriage is a Dish
That every one would taste,
With a fall, lal, la, etc.
Like Mackerel, at first
It gives fine Repast,
With a fall, etc.
But in a little Time
They are so common grown,
They Are cried about from Street to Street,
In Country and in Town.
With a fall, etc.
[Exeunt.
Enter Mirza, Sebastian, and Maria. Mirz. In vain I Have labored with the King
and Queen
To cease their ill-plac'd Love, and give you Freedom.
Therefore I Have plotted to deceive their Hopes:
Into each other's Arms they blindly run,
And revel in Imaginary Bliss.
All things conspire to bless our happy Flight;
The Court's dull Silence, and this gloomy Night.
Let us with secret Speed the Molo gain,
Once fafe on Board, we shall be free from Pain;
My Ship stands ready, and full fair's the Wind,
Let us imbark, and leave this Shore behind.

Seb. What Words can speak the Gratitude we owe!
But Words are poor, and ill our Hearts can show.

Mirz. I Am doubly paid if I can set you free,
We labor now for Love and Liberty.
[Exeunt.
Enter the King, leading the Queen. King. Come forth, my Love, reviving
Pleasures give,
And let me view those Eyes by which I live.

Queen. [Aside.] By Heaven! my Husband's Voice:
Oh cursed Fate!
Instead of him I love, I Have him I hate.

King. Furies and Hell! the Queen's dull sated Face!
Did I for Juno, this dark Cloud embrace!

Queen. [Aside.] Thinking I Have had a Mars to Venus kind,
I Have clasped a Vulcan in my Arms, I find.
[Exit.
King. Who waits within?
Enter an Attendant. Bring Mirza to me strait.
Pernicious Slave! I Will soon resolve his Fate.

At. My Royal Lord, Mirza is fled to Sea,
And to the Captives has given Liberty.

King. Ha! Haste to the Mole, and bid the Galleys arm;
I Will kill the Slaves, and break this fatal Charm.
Blow swift, ye Winds, and give my Vengeance way,
Nor Winds nor Waves shall my dire Fury stay.

Enter an Officer. Off. My Lord, I come by Mirza's strict Command
To give this Paper to your Royal Hand.

King. [Reads.] My Royal Lord,
PArdon the Deceit I have been guilty of; I had no other Motive than to assist
the Virtuous. -- If your Majesty will weigh this Action calmly in the Scales of
Reason, I am assured of my Forgiveness. -- Your Queen is innocent; call back
your Heart, and give it where Heaven designed it.

Your faithful Slave, MIRZA.





King. Such generous Sentiments I must approve,
Though I am lost for ever to my Love.
[Exeunt.
Enter Noode, Doodle, Jenny Masked, Davy and Lettice; meeting Moody. Nood. Ah,
Father-in-Law! egad I have don't at last, I have tickled her Toby for her.


Dood. Ay, ay, Master has tickled her --


Nood. Pray hold your Prating, Mr. Doodle -- You must not be so familiar with
me as you have been, now I am a married Man.


Jenn. [Unmasks.] No, my Dear, I Will take care your Servants shall not be
impertinent for the future.


Nood. Why, what the dickens have I got here! this is the Parson's Wife.


Jenn. No Sir, you are mistaken -- I passed for the Parson's Wife, to get into
the House indeed, but I Will assure you I am no Body's Wife but thine, Deary.


Nood. Deary, with a Pox! Pray who are you? Whence came you? Whither go you?
And who do you belong to?


Let. Why, in the first Place, She is my Sister.


Nood. Is she, is she?


Jen. And for the next Question of, Whence came you? I came from Keeping, from
one that has turned me off.


Let. And in answer to your Where are you going? She is going to be Mistress
of your Family.


Jen. Fourthly and Lastly, answers for it self, for I am now your Wife.


Let. Well, Jenny, I Am glad of thy good Fortune. -- You know I Am to have Five
hundred for making the Match, my Dear.


Jen. Depend on it, I Will never be worse than my Word, my Dear.


Nood. My Dear, and my Dear, with a Pox to ye -- I Will hang my self, be buried
alive, and walk.


AIR XX. Excuse me.
^ Jenny. If my Deary longs to swing,
And wants a good tough Haltar,
Your dear loving Bride
A Rope will provide,
For fear your Mind should alter.
Nood. Thanks, my pretty Dove,
Now I know thy Love,
I Will think no more of Hanging;
For if I should lead a wicked Lafe,
I Am sure to be saved by my virtuous Wife.
Dood. O Lud! good Sir, no more of Strife,
For fear you draw on a Banging.

Let. Well, I Will swear I think you are a happy Man, Squire.


Dood. Master, if you don't miscarry, lay the Child upon her, swear she is the
Father; and have her hanged for a Witch.


Nood. O Lud, Doodle! I have miscarried already, I think.


Mood. Oons! What is the meaning of this?


Let. Meaning, Sir! why the Meaning's plain -- This is my Sister, poor Girl,
who keeping Shop, and having nothing but stale Ware to deal with, besides
Losses by Fire, was almost ready to starve. So I contrived to marry her to this
Gentleman, that she may know where to eat, that is all.


Mood. Oons! my Mind misgives me; where is my Daughter, Hussy?


Let. Lawd, don't trouble your self about your Daughter, she is full of
Business. -- I Am afraid she will have Work to do all Night. -- But here she
comes, and your Son too.


Enter Cleremont and Caelia. Nood. Oh, here comes the Doctor! -- Did not you
tell me I should be married in half an Hour -- and here --


Let. Why, is the Devil in the Man! are you not married?


Nood. Yes, but I mean to Madam Caelia.


Cler. That could hardly be, for I was forced to marry her my self.


Nood. Was you so! you were devilishly hard put to it. Here, I Will give you my
Wife, and Forty Shillings to change, and she is a better bred Woman, I can
assure you, and can get her own Living if occasion be.


Cler. I must even be contented as I am.


Dood. Master, since you are so willing to part with her, give me the Money,
and I Will take her. And if I don't like her, you shall have her again -- for I
believe she will be Wife enough for us both.


Cler. Well said, Doodle!


Mood. Cleremont! let me come at the Dog; I Will murder him, a Dog, a cutthroat
Dog -- Draw, you Dog, and let me kill you.


Let. No, Sir, it is not his Time to draw yet. -- Come, Sir, I Will be his
Champion [Draws Cleremont's Sword.] and whip you through the Lungs immediately.
-- Why don't you make your Thrust? Oh I had forgot -- those Days are over with
you. -- Come, Sir, and Madam, kneel down [They kneel] Come, old Fellow, give
'em your Blessing, do you hear!


Mood. I bless 'em! Damn 'em.


Let. What, do you dispute? Zounds! do it, or I Will run my Sword through your
Midriff.


Mood. Why, the Devil's in her, sure. -- Well, since I cannot help it, Bless ye!
Bless ye!


Cler. Now, my Love, our Joys are completed.


Cael. Since my Father is reconciled, my Happiness cannot receive Addition.


Davy. Well, Lettice, since my Master and your Mistress have brought Matters to
bear -- I hope you will let me take Possession of your Tenement.


Let. You must be Tenant for Life then -- for I don't care to let Lodgings,
where People run away and pay no Rent. Yet I have known many an honest Woman
pick up a pretty Living by it -- and indeed if you cannot occupy the Tenement
your self, it would be unreasonable it should lie empty.

AIR XXI. Of all the simple things we do.
^ When once the Lease is drawn, my Love,
We'll manage as well as we may;
Davy. The House shall be well kept, my Dove,
For I Will guard it every Day.
Let. You must rise then and open the Door,
And shut it again every Night.
I Will sew, and stitch;
Davy. I Will hedge, and ditch,
Both. To keep our Children tight.

Davy. One thing I had like to have forgot. -- There Is your Money and Rings
again, Squire -- I did not intend to cheat you, and it was impossible to make a
Fool of you, for I think you were ready made to my Hands, and I am your most
humble Trout, Davy Dub-Fool.


Let. Lovers, lead on, the Grace you know is said, The Cloth is laid, but you
may Sup -- in Bed.


AIR XXII. Hunt the Squirrel.
^ Cler. Now our Fears are over;
Venus smiling,
Cares beguiling
Gives the faithful Lover
Hope of all his Joy.
Cael. Now I Am thine for ever;
Bliss increasing,
Never ceasing,
Naught but Death will sever
Love that will not cloy.
Davy. Since the Cloth is laid,
And the Grace is said,
Sure we may fall too;
I never was more inclined, my Dear,
To show thee what I can do.
Let. Since your Stomach's good,
You shall meet with Food,
Wholesome, clean, and neat;
And since thou have such a Mind, my Dear,
I pr'ythee fall to thy Meat.
[Exeunt.
SCENE
the Sea. Enter Mirza, Sebastian, and Maria. Mirz. Once more, my Friends, we
Taste of Liberty,
And are from Fears of Death and Dangers free;
With you I will explore my Native Land,
Where all my Fortunes wait on your Command.

Seb. Now, my Maria, let us jointly bless
The generous Author of our Happiness,
To whom, both Life and Liberty we owe,
The Friend, that drew us from a World of Woe.

Mirz. What I have done was in firm Virtue's Cause.
Thou art my Brother by the strictest Laws.
A Chain, unseen, fast binds thee to my Heart,
A Tie, that never can from Virtue part.
[Musick heard in the Air.] What Divine Harmony is this we hear!
It fills my Soul with Reverential Fear.

Neptune rises to a Symphony of soft Music, attended by Tritons. AIR XXIII.
Set by Mr. J. Sheeles.
^ Nept. Be still, you Monsters of the Deep,
Ye lowering Tempests cease to roar;
Within your Cells supinely sleep,
'Till these are safe on Albion's Shore.
Ye gentle-breathing Gales, arise;
(Old Ocean, thou my Will obey;)
Let no black Cloud obscure the Skies,
But chearing Rays gild over the Day.

AIR XXIV.
Set by Mr. J. Sheeles.
^ Chorus of Tritons Neptune from all Ills shall guard you,
Sleep secure in Peace and Joy,
Venus, smiling, will reward you,
Hymen shall your Griefs destroy.

AIR XXV.
Set by Mr. Hen. Carey.
^ Nept. By Masons Art the aspiring Dome
In various Columns shall arise:
All Climates are their Native Home,
Their God-like Actions reach the Skies.
Chorus. Heroes and Kings revere their Name,
And Poets sing their lasting Fame.
Nept. Great, generous, virtuous, good, and brave,
Are Titles they most justly claim;
Their Deeds shall live beyond the Grave,
And every Age their Fame proclaim.
Chorus. Time shall their glorious Acts inroll,
And Love, with Friendship, charm the Soul.

Mirz. The Power that formed the Earth, the Sea, and Air,
Makes constant Virtue his peculiar Care:
And though some bitter Moments they may find,
To try the Strength and Courage of the Mind!
Yet once the hard and fiery Trial past,
The glorious Recompense is found at last.

FINIS.
PROPOSALS
For PRINTING by SUBSCRIPTION,

The LIFE, MEMOIRS, VOYAGES, TRAVELS, and ADVENTURES, of WILLIAM OWEN GWIN
VAUGHAN, Esquire

Collected from his own original Papers. Intermixed with Variety of other
Memoirs.

The Book to consist of twenty eight Sheets, in Octavo, Printed with a handsome
Letter, on a superfine Genoa Paper.

The Price to SUBSCRIBERS Half-a-Guinea, to be paid down; and the Book to be
delivered to the SUBSCRIBERS in April next, handsomely Bound and Gilt.

The Names of the Subscribers to be Printed.

Subscriptions are taken by the Compiler, at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane.

Just Published, and Sold by J. Roberts in Warwick Lane,
BAYES's OPERA, in Three Acts, as Performed by His Majesty's Company of
Comedians, at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane. With a Preface concerning that
Way of Writing, by Mr. Odingsells. Price 1 s. 6 d. Likewise the Third Edition
of the Lover's Opera.

