THE MIRROR; OR, HARLEQUIN EVERYWHERE.

[Price ONE SHILLING.]

THE MIRROR; OR, HARLEQUIN EVERYWHERE. A PANTOMIMICAL BURLETTA, IN THREE
PARTS. As it is performed at the THEATER ROYAL IN COVENT GARDEN.

LONDON: Printed for G. KEARSLY, No. 46, Fleet Street. M.DCC.LXXIX.

CHARACTERS.
MEN.
Jupiter, Mr. ROBSON. Pluto, Mr. BAKER. Minos, Mr. L'ESTRANGE. Belphegor, Mr.
REINHOLD. Astorath, Mr. DOYLE. Crier of Minos' Court, Mr. THOMPSON. 1st Poor
Spirit, Mr. BRUNSDON. 1st, 2d, and 3d Antipodean, Mercury, Mr. J. WILSON.
Harlequin, Mr. W. BATES. Punch, Mr. EDWIN. Lieutenant, Mr. BOOTH. Sailors, etc.
Mr. FEARON.
WOMEN.
Ceres, Mrs. KENNEDY. Little Girl, Miss MORRIS. Prude, Mrs. POUSSIN. 1st
Sicilian, Mrs. WILLEMS. 2d Sicilian, Miss GREEN. Colombine, Miss CRANFIELD.
Those Passages marked with inverted Commas are omitted in the Representation.

THE MIRROR, OR, HARLEQUIN EVERY WHERE.
PART I.
SCENE I. A view of Tartarus, as described in the Pantheon.
Chorus of Infernals. Let sighs and groans
And heavy moans
Oh winds be hurled
To the other world,
'Till mortals hear,
Trembling for fear
They should be howling,
Grunting, growling,
Burning,
Turning,
Toasting,
Roasting,
In this infernal world as we are,
[ During the chorus Harlequin is dragged on by Belphegor.]
Har. Oh, what an infernal, diabolical concert is here! And pray, good Mr.
Devil, having lugged me through the sea like a drowning rat, precipitated me
like a bullet out of a culverin, from the Antipodes to the borders of Acheron,
to dry me; flown with me over the Styx, and introduced me to his infernal
majesty in the copper-coloured jacket! what is to be done next?


RECITATIVE.
Bell. You must be plunged, Sir, in this gulf here
Of bitumen and boiling sulphur.

Har. The devil, I must! what, like a potatoe in a tar kettle, I suppose? And
pray, what have I done to merit so much honor?


RECITATIVE.
Bell. You broke, which was not very civil,
Your sworn allegiance to the devil.

Har. Why, to be sure, I did make a sort of a foolish promise, that if his
diabolical highness would suffer me to leap and skip about, turn men into jack
asses, and rocks and trees into dancing devils, I would finish my career by
paying a visit to his gloomy majesty's hellish dominions, but I did not expect
to be sent for so soon, nor to be treated with so elegant an entertainment when
I arrived.


RECITATIVE.
Bell. Peace, and be with your lot contented,
Whilst to these gents. you are presented;
Who here so pampered, and so flush are,
By Belphegor Hell's Gem'men Usher.

Har. A very courteous introduction, upon my word; and pray, who compose this
happy assembly, among whom I am to have the felicity of sitting as a member?
That gemman, and his vulture, for instance.


AIR.
Bell. That gentleman whom there you see,
The vulture gnawing his liver;
A very wicked wight was he,
A Judge, and great lawgiver.
More orphans goods, than tongue can tell,
On earth devoured this limb;
And now for punishment in hell,
A vulture devours him.

Har. A good pleasant situation; why, if it was not for your tail, and your
hoofs, I should take you for the man describing the tombs in Westminster Abbey;
what, the old ones have been all relieved, I suppose at a limited time? [Bel
nods.] Ah, I understand you; I wish I was fairly out of your clutches; and
pray, who have we on that wheel in the place of Ixion?


II.
Bell. That figure on the wheel you see,
I Would have you to understand,
A noted minister was he,
And Lord of a certain land.
The nation who did cheat and trouble,
And roast to gain his pelf;
And, who, at last made his own bubble,
In roasting here himself.

Har. A judicious punishment enough, but I suppose sometimes attended with
inconvenience, for if you roast all who cheat their nation, you must very often
be damnably put to it for spits. Now for those in the place of Sysiphus and
Tantalus, a pleasant amusement that of rolling a stone up a hill, and never
reaching the top of it; or the other gentleman's entertainment of having so
many delicacies close to his hand, without being able to touch one of them.


III.
Bell. He who the Chemist's stone pursued,
Which makes such rout and pother;
Here rolls a stone which does elude
His search as did the other.
The Other who cash of Charities
Did gormandize and subtle
On dainties, feasts, but with his eyes,
The punishment is subtle.

Har. It is indeed! -- who but the devil could invent a punishment for an
Alderman equal to setting him to a delicious dinner, and conveying every thing
away before he had time to put the napkin under his chin. Now for a description
of the ladies at that labour-in-vain amusement of emptying a well with sieves,
and the gentleman under that tremendous rock, and I have done.


IV.
Bell. Those harmless ladies over their tea,
With scandal time did kill;
That well must empty as you see,
In sieves that never fill.
That miser, who the heart had never
To lay his ill-got gains out,
Now shrinking, trembling, quakes for fear,
That rock should knock his brains out.

Har. Another amusement in your style.


RECITATIVE.
Bell. And so, Sir, in politest fashion,
Having described hell's recreation;
To know your choice, I must request, Sir,
Is It boiled, or roasted, you like best, Sir.

Hor. Boiled or roasted? I'cod, I like either when the meat's tender.


RECITATIVE.
Bell. You have not, Sir, my meaning hit,
Here, here, Tisiphone, bring a spit,

Har. Nay, now, but zounds, you would not be so damned unmerciful, would ye? Ah!

[Astorath comes on.]
RECITATIVE.
Ast. Hold, Belphegor; Pluto ordains,
Hell shall today throw'off her chains;
For Proserpine arrived here is,
From visiting her mother Ceres;
Frolic, then devils, sport and play,
And celebrate hell's holiday.

Ast. My dear friend, how much I am obliged to you! if you had not come as you
did, Oh! I should have been skewer'd upon that damned spit like a trussed
rabbit.

[Whilst the infernals sing and form a dance, Harlequin retires, and seems
thoughtful; toward the end, be appears to have hit on something that pleases
him.]
Har. How devilish merry you are, all of you! you forget that your torments are
tomorrow to begin again. Oh that infernal spit! I shall never be able to bear
the fight of roast meat again: but come, it is no time to talk; we are
unchained, and unguarded, and let us seize this favorable opportunity to make
our escape.


RECITATIVE.
Tor. Spir. But how? At the door is placed, as curb over us,
A cursed three-headed dog -- one Cerberus,
Fair mercy's torch in blood who slakes,
To fatten his pestiferous snakes.

Har, Oh, Lord! I am no stranger to the tremendous race of Cerberus; we have a
tolerable number of them upon earth; yet I never heard but that the greatest
snarler of them all might be occasionally quieted with a sop; the question
therefore is, will you follow me, and escape; or stay here, and be roasted.


CHORUS.
Follow, we are by justice spurred;
Courage and liberty's the word!
Of mirth and pastime be profuse,
The devil's tricked and hell's broke loose.

SCENE, The entrance into Tartary and Elysium. The court of Minos concealed by
a curtain. A crowd of spirits are discovered.
1 st Spir. If it be true that hell's broke loose, how comes the court to sit?
It Is a general jail-delivery.


2 d Spir. Yes; but every spirit does not choose to take the benefit of the act.
For my part, I Have been a practitioner in the law; I know there is a flaw in my
indictment, and I shall appeal to the bench of Minos, Aeacus, and Rhadamanthus.


Crier. Stand by; make way.


1 st Spir. These are the prisoners; it is a full calendar. Pray, Sir, what
distemper sent you into this world?


3 d Spir. That Is more than I can tell you, friend; I left three physicians
disputing about it, while the breath slipped out of my body.


2 d Spir. Under favor, Sir, how came the world to be deprived of your good
company?


3 d Spir. Sir, I died of honor.


2 d Spir. Of honor!


3 d Spir. Yes, Sir. I had picked up about three thousand pounds at a certain
club, and was just making off with my booty, when a gentleman in company
detecting a die in my sleeve, called me out and killed me in a duel.


4 th Spir. I did, indeed, you scoundrel. And to see how partial these same
laws of honor are! the halter you ought to have been throttled with has sent
me out of the world after you.


Sailor. How now, messmate, is the court martial sitting?


1 st Spir. The judges are assembled.


Sailor. Be it so. Every man who founders upon death's lee-shore must be tried
for the loss of his vessel, though it is the fate of us all in our turns.

[The court is discovered.]
Crier. Stand by, Madam, why do you press to the bar in such haste?


Lady. Give me a hearing, friend, I shall be ungrateful.


Crier. Oh, Madam, no bribing here; the poor have precedence in this world, to
recompense them for their lot in the other.


Min. Call up that Negro man to the bar.


Neg. O deary me! O deary me! what shall Black say for himself when white man
sit in judgment?


Min. Fear nothing, tell your story.


Neg. O! Negar man tell no story; me do my possible for Massa; me hole his
canes; me fetch de bundle of grass every night for de mools; me work dam hard;
and yet, Massa, Heaven forgive him, strip, and whip, and cut, poor Negro man
all to piece.


Min. Horrible barbarity! advance that spirit to the pleasures of Elysium. What
have we hero, a whole ship's company! Clear the bar; who are you?


Lieu. British hearts, so please your Reverence, we died for the honor of old
England; we are brave ship's crew, served under a brave admiral, and met a
brave death.


Min. Sling a cot for these brave fellows in the finest citron grove in Elysium.


Lieu. Please your Worship to flow these honest lads alongside of me. I should
like to cuff a cann, and talk over matters with my messmates.


Min. Brother, are you content?


Aecus and Rad. We are content, let them pass.


Min. What man is that?


1 st Pour Man. I am a poor man, Sir, and I was hanged for stealing eighteen
pence; but I have done some good things, for I supported an aged parent, was a
very tender husband, a kind father, and ruined myself by being bail for a
friend.


Min. Pray, man, don't stand trumpeting forth your virtues in this manner; get
thee into Elysium. What strange gortesque figure have we here?


AIR.
Punch. Cannot you see by my hunch, Sir,
Faddledy, daddledy, dino,
I am master Punch, Sir?
Riberi, biberi, bino.
Fiddledy, diddledy, faddledy, daddledy,
Robbery, bobbery, ribery, bibery,
Faddledy, daddledy, dino,
Ribery, bibery, bino.
That merry fellow,
Punchinello,
Dancing here, you see, Sir,
Whose mirth not hell
Itself can quell
He Is ever in such glee, Sir.
Niddlety, noddlety, niddlety, noddlety, nine;
Then let me pass, old Grecian,
Faddledy, daddledy, dino.
To the fields Elysian,
Bibery, bibery, bino,
Fiddledy, diddledy, faddledy, daddledy,
Robery, bobery, ribery, bibery,
Faddledy, daddledy, dino,
Ribery, bibery, bino,
II.
My ranting, roaring Pluto,
Faddledy, daddledy, dino,
Just to a hair will suit Oh,
Bibery, bibery, bino.
Faddledy, etc.
Each jovial fellow,
At Punchinello,
Will, laughing over his cup roar,
I Will rant and revel,
And play the devil,
And set all hell in an uproar,
Niddlety, noddlety, nino.
Then let me pass, etc.

Min. Indeed, Mister Punch, I think the world would be too splenetic, if they
were deprived of you; I would therefore advise you to take a trip back again.
[The infernals here sing the Chorus behind] What noise is that?


Crier. The infernals are making merry.


Min. Od so! upon this joyful occasion, Proserpine has invited me to an elegant
fete-champetre in Elysium, and she will be angry to the last degree if I should
exceed my appointment; so, do you hear, all the rest may have leave to go back
again to earth guilty or not guilty.

[ The spirits go off, and the infernals who have broke out of Tartarus come
on, singing the Chorus, with Harlequin in triumph on their shoulders; when they
all pass the stage the scene changes.]
SCENE, The entrance into hell. A view of the Styx and the opposite shore, etc.
AIR.
Cer. Though rude my form, though I Am unbred,
Yet I am pampered high and fed;
On Ins I fawn, the Outs I spurn,
And thus am fawned on in my turn;
Who does not envy me's a novice,
For though a dog I am in office.
RECITATIVE.
But, hark! what a confounded noise,
Like thunder, winds, or mad schoolboys;
Or like fish-women over a dram,
Or dykes broke down at Amsterdam.

[ The infernals in attempting to get out are repulsed by Cerberus; Harlequin
endeavors to pass him, and at last jumps over his head; after which he drives
the others back again, and follows them. Harlequin finding himself escaped, is
running off, when he sees Punch, who comes on, hearing the noise, and who was
waiting for Charon 's return from the other side of the Styx to ferry him over
to earth. Har. Zounds, I have fought like a lion! Now, if I can but find any
method to coax over master Charon. Why, what; is it possible! Punch, art thou
here?


^un. Bibbity, wobbity, we, we, we,
It Is merry Punch himself you see;
With usual nonsense, noise and mirth,
From hell sent back to live on earth.

Har. My dear old friend, I Will be thy fellow traveller: but stay, I am afraid
here is somebody coming to stop our journey; follow me as hard as ever you can
drive.

[Belphegor comes on.]
RECITATIVE.
Bell. Harlequin, stop; where are you running?
We devils love a bit of cunning;
And Pluto, this same fine commence,
Pardons far wit of the offense.
Pun. Do, do, loddledy di.
Bell. And says,
To earth, you strait may go your ways,
If one condition you will agree on;
But it is a labor Herculean.

Har. Let us know what it is however; any thing is better than being spitted.


Bell. Within six months, his highness' will is,
You bring him here some lovely Phillis,
Sixteen years old; but take good heed,
She Is virgin in thought, word and deed.

Har. This is a respite only, and not a pardon. A girl of sixteen years old,
who has never even wished to be married; I would sooner undertake to find a
white crow.


Pun. Riddle, rummy, rins.
Bell. Well, sir,
Shall I conduct you back to hell, Sir.

Har. No, no -- no -- no -- I did not mean that. Zounds, you are too hasty: no,
damn it; six months are better than nothing. A virgin in thought, word and
deed! but how am I to find her out? for they are plenty enough, if you will take
their words for it.


AIR.
Bell. If she breathes on this glass,
No female can pass
False virtue for true.
Pun. Drololette.
Bell. For though close to her face,
Yet fair will its surface
Reflect, if she never.
Pun. Tiralette.
Tira, lira, trole, trole;
Dira, lira, drole, drole;
Tira, lira, lira, lira, let.
II.
Bell. But should chance to you bring,
If there is such a thing,
A lady unchaste.
Pun. Drololette.
Bell. A sort of black varnish
The surface will tarnish,
And prove she has often
Pun. Tiralette.
Tira, lira, etc.
RECITATIVE
Bell. A sword and charm, two good essentials,
Will now make up all your credentials.
Pun. Octy, octy, oh --
Zon, zon, zon, zon --
Har. Marchons, marchons
Pun. Je le veux bien, Hola, Charon.
[ Charon takes them off in his boat, and the scene closes.]
End of the FIRST PART.
PART II.
SCENE I. The Antipodes.
Harlequin and Punch. Har. At length, my dear friend Punch, we are arrived at
the antipodes. See what a number of strange figures are yonder.


1st Ant. Ereht seog ohu.
Pun. Tarrandum.
Har. What do they say?
Pun. I understand 'em,
In topsy-turvy lingo rare,
Then boldly cry aut, Who goes there?

Har. Well, we can give a good account of ourselves, that is one thing. Tell
them we are ambassadors from the devil, and ask them who they are, and what
they are about.


Pun. Terira, tira, wira, dira.
1st Ant. Dinina, hera, in hira cleara.
Pun. They Are some great persons of their nation,
Here dining on a cold collation.

Har. I am mighty curious to know something of their customs and manners; but
they are such a devilish way off there is hardly any hearing them; and if we go
head-foremost among them, we shall make a develish clatter among their bottles
and glasses; and in the mean time let us have some conversation with them. Ask
that gentleman in black who he is.


Pun. Quisitivimo?
2d Ant. Skipalurny.
Pun. His name is Probity, an attorney.

Har. You must certainly be mistaken in the name, Punch, or they have given it
him by way of burlesque. Ask him if he has fattened well lately upon the widow
and fatherless.


Pun. Havira, poorira, helplessira?
2d Ant. Nevira, mirira, professira.
Pun. He says be fights all orphans battles,
Preserving them their goods and chattels;
Of poor and helpless he is the guard,
And this for neither fee or reward.

Har. Yes, yes, this is the world turned upside down, sure enough. I wonder who
that thin gentleman is.


Pun. Quivo tuto?
3d Ant. Gli traditizens.
Pun. He Is one of many fellow citizens.
Who profits give of their vocation,
TO the king for the defense of the nation.

Har. I wish I could see the example imitated. Master Punch will you entreat
that lady to tell us who she is?


Pun. Madama, trama, wama, pama?
4th Ant. Vertita, rita, integrita.
Pun. She is a lady of great beauty,
Whose only pleasure is her duty;
Who loves nor revel, rout, nor riot,
Nor ought but her domestic quiet;
In marriage harness long time buckl'd,
Yet never heard the name of cuckold.

Har. Lord! Lord! what a monster such a kind of animal would appear in our
upper regions! But there is one thing I admire prodigiously; with two words they
express a whole sentence: but I suppose as they differ from us in every thing
else, so they do in that particular; and as we often say a great deal without
expressing any thing, so every thing they say or do is to the purpose. If one
could but import this secret, what a wonderful deal of unnecessary haranguing
it would save in some certain assemblies! Well, I long to be among them. But,
how the devil shall we get there, for I cannot walk upon my hands?

[They get behind a cloud and are taken up.]
SCENE, A rural prospect in the midst of Winter.
Harlequin, Punch, etc. etc. Har. Oh, Punch, how devilish cold it is! The
isicles hang on the trees like so many ropes of onions, and the ground is as
hoary as an old hermit. I would fain try this same glass, but it is such
perishing weather the females cannot venture out; but I am afraid when they do,
'twill be to little purpose, for even the antipodes could not furnish a girl of
sixteen years old who had never wished to he married. By the way, there is a
people for you, Punch.


AIR.
Pun. Oh the bibby, bobby fellows, topsy turvy,
Of manners rare,
Who live in air,
Carousing in jovial bands;
Who are never shabby, stingy, mean, nor scurvy;
Who no friends betray,
But who, happy and gay,
Neatly,
Featly,
Foot it away with their hands.
Their lawyers do no ill;
Their physicians never kill,
Their taverns make no bill;
Their wives are never shrill,
Their great are men of skill,
Their cockneys never swill,
Til, lil, deril, de ril.
Oh the bibby, bobby, etc.
They neither swear nor lie,
From their promise never fly,
To friends are never shy,
Never backbite, nor decry
Good friends this side the sky;
Do, pray, a little try
The antipodean fry
He to exemplify.
Turidem, tidem, tidem, tidem, ti.
Oh the bibby, bobby, etc.

Har. If it was not so immoderately cold, I should be ready to leap out of my
skin at the thoughts of being upon dear earth again. Suppose, by way of a
little frisk, we were not to change the scene, but the season; that is to say,
let it be this very same place in the midst of summer.


SCENE. Each object becomes as in the midst of summer.
Har. Ah, ha! this is something like; now my lit-mirror will go to work; I see
that; zounds! here they come in all their finery; summer, alone, can produce
butterflies ( to a female) Pray, my dear, did you ever wish to be married?


RECITATIVE.
1st Wom. A thousand times, you fool.
Pun. Tidere,
Har. That Is plain enough, Punch.
Pun. Frank and free.

H^^ ( To another) Should you like to be married, my (...)


RECITATIVE.
2d Wom. Married, be fettered, shackled, caged.
Pun. Trolly lum,
2d Wom. A slave to one engaged?
No, give me freedom, liberty and ease
To laugh and
Pun. Tiralee, Tiralee.
2d Wom. With whom I please.

Har. Heyday! our glass will be of no use to us at this rate. Will you do me
the favor to breathe on this glass, Madam, [she turns from him in scorn] nay,
Madam, don't be angry; it is a better thing for the complexion than Circassian
bloom, or milk of roses; [she turns back eagerly, and breathes on it] as black
as my face, by Jupiter.


Pun. Flon, di, ron, don.
3d Wom. What means the sot?
Pun. You Have lost; ton diron ton don, you know what.

Har. Here comes a demure one, some hopes now. Madam, I am afflicted with a
violent complaint; and the only possible cure for me is, for some kind-hearted
lady, out of affection to me, to breathe on this glass, which, by an electric
quality it has, will instantly restore me.


Prude. You scurvy fellow, I assure you,
Ask some fine forward minx to cure you;
My rigi^ virtue!
Pun. [who puts the glass to her mouth] Dodlety, do, do.

Prude. Is --


Pun. -- Marked here black as any crow.


Har. Well said, Madam Demure. Here Is one coming who seems innocence itself.
Will you breathe on this, glass love, for some sugar-plumbs?


RECITATIVE.
Litt. G. And thou, in jokes who so replete art,
Will thy glass give me a new sweetheart?

Har. This is a twig of a pretty forward growth; pray how old may you be?


RECITATIVE.
L. G. Sir, I shall soon be in my teens;
Pun. And pray, my best of little queens,
Could you love me?
L. G. O Lord, Sir, no.
Har. Nor me?
L. G. Still worse and worse.
Har. Why so?
L. G. (To Punch) To you their liberty who gi's up,
Must think they have married master Aesop;
And you, pray think me not uncivil,
They Have made a husband of the devil.

Har. A good intelligent young lady at twelve years old. And pray, my dear,
have you a mama? Oh, very well; how arch and significant; and, I suppose, you
hope to be, one day or other, as wise as she is?


AIR.
L. G. Whenever I Have seen her jeering,
Coquetting, ogling, leering,
In absence of papa;
In pleasure sweet confounded,
Oh, how my heart has bounded,
Thump, a thump, a thump,
To be wise as my mama.
II.
Or when, the captain's way in,
I have been sent out playing
In absence of papa;
While through the keyhole peeping,
Oh, how my heart was leaping,
Thump, a thump, a thump,
To be wise as my mama.
[She goes off.]
Har. Well, my love, don't despair; it will not be long first, I Will answer for
you. Come, Punch, let us beat the bushes a little about here.

[They go off.]
SCENE, The Gardens of Ceres, Columbine as a statue, Harlequin and Punch.
Har. Here we are it seems in the gardens of Ceres; It seems she has a whole
train of virgins; but the query is, whether they are not


Pun. " As wise as their mama." Tid de ritty tity ti.

Har. What Is this, Punch? a statue! Zounds, suppose, by way of a frolic, we
try the glass; for I am afraid we shall never get any thing flesh and blood to
answer our purpose. Pray, my pretty, dear, little delicate creature, are you
sixteen years old, and a maid in thought, word and deed? [Col. nods
graciously.] Hey! what the devil's this? the words I have uttered are certainly
some charm, that cunning, old thief, Pluto, has put in my mouth to animate this
statue. Give me the glass in a minute, Punch, for fear, having imbibed a few
particles of amorous air, she would have fallen in love with one of us. [He
holds the glass to Col. she breathes on it] Victoria, Victoria! it is as pure is
ever. My sweet creature, give me your hand [she jumps down] But, Punch, oh, oh,
oh, ( chuckling) it is a pity such a tid bit as this should be a bonne bouche
for old Pluto. I'cod, suppose I keep her to myself. What Is your name, my love?
[She shakes her head] Dumb! oh, what an excellent quality in a wife! Yes, yes,
I am determined to have her. Zounds, who comes here?

[Ceres comes on.]
AIR.
Ceres. ' My beehives are furnished with bees,
' Quickset hedges my fences adorn;
' My woods are all planted with trees,
' And my fields yellow over with corn.
' I seldom have found any tares,
' Of such use are my harrow and plough;
' In my orchards grow apples and pears;
' In my dairy there is milk from the cow.
II.
' Not an oak in my grove is there seen,
' But an ivy around it does creep;
' Not a yew tree's more rev'ren'd green,
' Whence a rev'ren'd owl does not peep.
' Not a blossom have I, or a bud,
' But in time, fruit or flower reveals;
' Not a river that is bottomed with mud,
' But produces me plenty of eels.
III.
' From the farm-yard, the stable, the pens,
' What strains drown the thresher's rude stroke!
' How sheep, ducks and geese, cocks and hens,
' Cackling love, parade dunghills that smoke!
' Other farms may, perhaps, be more clean,
' Outhouses and hovels more fine;
' Other owners more courtly be seen,
' But their profit's not equal to mine.
RECITATIVE.
Ceres. Hey! why and wherefore is this clatter?
Speak: what the devil is the matter?
Why, driv'ler, dolt, clown, fool, clod-pated,
How came this statue animated?

Har. This is Madam Ceres, I suppose. I beg ten thousand pardons, Madam; I
would not attempt to impose upon you for the world; and seeing you are a
mild-spoken gentlewoman, Ma'am, I Will tell you the whole truth, Madam. His
highness, your son-in-law, Mr. Pluto, great king of the devils, sent me to
earth upon a fool's errand, to look for a perfect virgin of sixteen, to keep
him company next time your daughter comes to visit you; so, Madam, thinks I, I
will not administer to any of his wicked pleasures, I Will go and tell good Madam
Ceres the whole story. Hey, Punch!


Pun. Doddledy didum do.


Har. And so, Madam, coming into your garden, where I have been looking in
every crick and corner to find you, chance directed me to this statue, and so
by way of a little foolery talking to it, as if it was alive, crack in a moment
down it jumped, as lissom, I warrant you, as you or I.


RECITATIVE.
Ceres. The charm is broke, then -- Oh, the villain!
I Would strangle him had he lives a million.
It was foretold at feasts estival,
This girl should be my daughter's rival;
I therefore fixed her here an image,
And to the oracle made pilgrimage;
It answered, " She shall be your charge in,
" Till one shall ask if she is a virgin,
" And should this one be Harlequino,
" He Will trick old nick and marry Colombino."

Har. Oh, dam'me! destiny itself is concerned in my affairs. Madam Ceres don't
make yourself uneasy; if the young gentlewoman's name is Colombine, she belongs
to me by all the laws pantomimical. And as to Master Pluto -- zounds, what is
come over me!

[Discordant Sounds are heard.]
Pun. Grumble rumble roo.
Ceres. Your power forsakes you!
Har. Oh, misericorde!
Ceres. And if he takes you!

Har. Oh, Madam! you need not tell me the consequence; spitting would not serve
his turn this bout. What shall I do? Why was I so damned brave all of a sudden?


RECITATIVE.
Ceres. Listen! I Will try if my power such is,
To keep you from the devil's clutches;
Mean time, get rid fear and chagrin of,
And hie to a town which I am queen of;
At whose gate shall victory stand portress,
Whilst against those thieves you raise a fortress;
Come on -- I Will now without more parley,
Burn something else than wheat or brley.
AIR.
When first the villain stole that lamb,
My daughter, from her mother's side,
I, meek and gentle as I am,
Vexed she should be the devil's bride,
In wild amaze,
Set every field,
And all the wheat-sheaves it did yield,
Just like a bonfire in a blaze.
But now, if justice I Am denied,
The sun I Will quench, the earth I'II fire;
Jove's heaven, Neptune's briny tide,
And hell shall feel my vengeful ire;
Even Chaos, as in furious passion
I lift my hand,
Shall frighted stand,
And dread lest the impending storm,
Should his unshapen'd mass deform,
And swallow in the conflagration.

SCENE, A sea view with a fortified town at a distance. Harlequin, Colombine,
and Punch.
Har. Come along, Punch, and you my sweet little Colombine; madam Ceres has
made me commander in chief of a whole fleet, up at the back of this rock we
embark.

[ They go off, and are seen after to pass on the water; Pluto's party then
come on, and after embarking, are seen to follow them; when they are all out of
sight, the scene closes.]
SCENE, A fortified Town.
[After a cannonading, enter several Townsmen.] 1 st T. Bless me, what a
thundering's here! what fire-spitting!


Irish. And how the cannon balls take the side of a house here, and a side of a
house there, and mend up the breach with a stack of old chimnies!


3 d T. I had the roof of my house taken fairly off by a shot from a cannon,
and another clapped in the place of it.


Irish. I believe, your cannon's a gun, my dear.


1 st T. What, you think he tells a lie! that is nothing: I have seen a steeple
taken clean off a church, and another placed in its stead, with twenty men
ringing the bells.


2 d T. 'Pshaw, what is that? I saw an old man's head placed on a young man's
shoulders.


3 d T. But, woe be to the potters! I saw a hand-grenade in one of their shops,
and the pots, pipkins, and glasses at fistycuffs with it at such a rate, you
would have sworn a whole legion of devils had been at football there.


Irish. The devil burn me, but I am afraid some of us will find ourselves
knocked in the head tomorrow morning when we wake.


1 st T. Ah! they have rid me of as good a wife as a man would desire to part
withal.


Irish. By my soul, I Would take the law of them.


2 d T. Why, do you think there is any law for those cannon bullets, then?


3 d T. No! Prithee, run to a grenade as it comes piping hot out of a
mortar-piece, and say you take the law of it.


1 st T. Neighbor, I can but think what lanes a chain shot would make in the
law; and how like an ass a judge would look with his head shot off.


Irish. Why to be sure, to have one's head shot off, would put any man out of
countenance.


1 st T. Madam Ceres has done very kindly by us indeed, to place us in a town
where we are besieged by the devil.


2 d T. What shall we do?


1 st T. Let us to her temple, and beg of her to compound for such limbs as we
want most in our callings. Let me see, thou art a fencer; thou shall give thy
legs to secure thy arms.


2 d T. Thau art a dancer, thou shall give thy head to secure thy legs.


3 d T. Thou art a cuckold, thou shall give thy horns to thy head.

[The cannonading begins again.]
Irish. Oh dear, I am killed.

[Drops.]
1 st T. What Is the matter?


Irish. Oh! I am killed; let me be carried off before I come to myself, for I
cannot bear to be shot to be dead, as I am a living man.

[ They go off, the canonnading increases, and the devils are upon the point of
becoming victorious, when Ceres appears.]
RECITATIVE.
Ceres. A truce, ye devils, take possession,
The town surrenders at discretion.
If on conditions fair and handsome
My friends I may have leave to ransom;
If not, and you come on pell-mell against us,
We'll drub you, though you raised all hell against us.

[ A retreat is sounded, and Ceres, after going off, comes on the stage with
Harlequin, Colombine, and Punch, the scene changing.] RECITATIVE.
Ceres. They Have beat us now; but all my trust is,
When I am heard in a court of justice,
Pluto to swallow will find too bitter,
The pill he is forced to take by Jupiter;
This note shall round my finger wind him,
Take it, good Harlequin, you will find him,
If through the air you will go on strait,
Listening to mortals who remonstrate;
Fly, fly; to make your journey momentary,
My chariot stays on yonder promontary.

SCENE, Jupiter sitting in the clouds, listening to the complaints of Mortals.
Jup. Cease, mortals, cease; as I Am a sinner,
I shall not get a bit of dinner.
Mort. Great Jupiter we all implore.
Jup. I will not hear a mortal more.
Merc. Oh, Jupiter! you will a lass adore,
From Ceres brought by an ambassador.
Jup. Dear Mercury let the girl appear,
And keep the rest without.
Merc. Theyr'e here.

Enter Harlequin, Colombine, and Punch. Har. I have the honor to present a
petition to your magnanimous, celestial, potent, and most fulminating highness,
from good dame Ceres, the goddess of plenty.


Jun. Already the fond thing obeyed is,
I love to take the part of the ladies.

Har. Why, yes, and please your highness's goodship's honor, you have had a
fine parcel of pleasant pranks to get at them, as a body may say.


Pun. Ods amoroso.


^up. Faith, thou art comical;
But truce, my gravity now home I call;
Old Pluto 's tricks I Will not connive at:
Of this you shall know more in private;
Mean time, I Will issue such a fiat,
As shall henceforward keep him quiet.

[Jupiter hands off Colombine; Harlequin and Mercury follow him; Punch finding
himself alone, regards about, and at last goes up to Jupiter 's seat, which he
had been examining several times in the course of the preceding scene.]
RECITATIVE.
Pun. That hole through the light so glistens,
Is where to mortals suits he listens;
Odds comicalimo! how they gabble!
Icod, I Will judge them! here you rabble,
To bully of judging is the marrow;
I say, you fellow, mortal, sirrah!
What Is that betwixt your teeth you mumble?
I Will teach you, villain, how to grumble.
AIR.
That man bababirobette,
You tell me, on a house did get,
High, high, high, diddlety do;
And fell with all the force he could,
On you as underneath you stood,
Low, low, low, bibbety bo.
I therefore will that birobette.
You strait upon a house do get,
High, high, high, diddlety do;
And fall with all the force you can,
Upon that very self-same man,
Low, low, low, bibity bo.
II.
You woman, tira flon down dai^e,
Of yonder charioteer complain,
Octy, octy, oh jehu, jeho;
That by his means you are undone,
For he drove over and killed your son,
Octy, octy, oh bibity bo.
I therefore, tira flon down dee,
Ordain, d' you mind me, Ma'am, that he,
Octy, octy, oh jehu, jeho;
Instant repair the ill he is done,
By getting you another son,
Octy, octy, oh bibity bo.
III.
You, Madam, trilly, lolly, lo,
In tears are come to let me know,
Sad, sad, sad, diddlety do,
Your friend, while envy lurked beneath,
Told all the world you had false teeth.
Bad, bad, bid, bibity bo.
I therefore, Madam, holty lum,
Give leave, whenever at rout or drum,
Mad, mad, mad, diddlety do;
You next shall meet her, just for gig,
You fairly may pull off her wig,
Glad, glad, glad, bibbity bo.
IV.
' Thou old miser, Boudrillum,
' Against you ragged man art come,
' Creep, creep, creep, diddlety do.
' For that he, from your hoard to day,
' Has a whole guinea stolen away,
' Weep, weep, weep, diddlety do.
' It Is shameful, faith, and boudrillee
' For thy revenge I here decree,
' Skip, skip, skip, diddlety do;
' Thou poor; whilst he, in wealth shall swim,
' Shall a whole guinea steal from him;
' Trip, trip, trip, bibity bo.

Enter Harlequin. Har. Why, where the devil is Punch got to? ha! ha! he! I
shall never recover myself; he is got into Jupiter's chair, hearing causes


RECITATIVE.
Pun. Ods, bobs, who called you into court?
I Have here been having precious sport;
For my degrees they have given me handsel here;
I Am made god Jupiter's lord chancellor.

Har. I beg ten thousand pardons for not giving you your title before, Mr. god
Jupiter's lord chancellor; but, at present, your profound wisdom and fathomless
penetration are wanted out of Jupiter's court of equity into his court of
Doctors Commons, where Pluto, summoned up to heaven on purpose, is just going
to be arraigned; and the affair has made so much noise, that all the
inhabitants, infernal, terrestrial, and celestial, are assembled at it; 'twill
be a fine day's work for us; Jupiter is as hot, at present, upon doing justice,
as he is sometimes upon committing depredations; he intends to make my dear
Colombine a constellation; you are to turn Momus out of his place; and I am to
be, Oh, dam'me, I don't know what I am to be; come along, Punch, we shall be
too late.


SCENE the last. A palace in the clouds; Jupiter on a throne; other gods and
goddesses seated round, as in acourt of justice, Pluto at the bar, and Ceres
opposite him as his accuser.
RECITATIVE.
Jup. Clerk, read again the indictment to us
" You, Pluto, alias Orcus; Februus,
" Alias Agelestus, alias Aades,
" Alias Sumanus, these here ladies
" Accuse you, for you did devise,
" No fear of wedlock before your eyes,
" By force of club, and stick, and staff."
Ceres. You are too tedious, friend, by half,
Here, in the face if all this royalty,
I do accuse him of disloyalty;
A doting fool! shall his chops water
For any other than my daughter?
Jup. Peace, dearest Madam, peace, for his are eyes
Too honest to conceal his miseries;
You Have laid upon his soul an unction
That irritates him to compunction.
Behold his tears, is that heart hardened?
He Would sin no more if he was pardoned.
[ They all rise; Jupiter leads Pluto to Proserpine and Ceres, who meet them in
the center of the stage.] Your feelings keep not, man, in narrow bounds,
But down at once, upon your marrowbones;
Plu. There then, and now, with due contrition,
To my wronged wife, I make submission.
Jup. So have I seen a watchman follow
A thief, with rattle, and with hollow,
'Till reinforced, like pig in pound-douce,
They Have laid him by the heels in the round-house;
Man's reason, thus, should hourly watch him,
At every little trip to catch him.
To quell vile passions that aspire in him.
Merc. What aro you doing, Friend?
Pun. Admiring him.
Jup. Yet one neglect we should be chided for,
( To Col.) These good folks must be well provided for;
And now in music do not scrimp us,
But let your catgut shake Olympus.
CHORUS.
Let heaven ard hell and earth this day,
Together sing a roundelay:
In treble shrill, let heaven begin;
Let bass express hell's growling din:
Let tenor speak earth's midway tones,
'Till all the worlds 'twixt both the zones,
T'admire the most, shall not tell whether,
Heaven, Hell, or earth, or all together.

THE END.

