THE SIEGE of GIBRALTAR: A MUSICAL FARCE, IN TWO ACTS As it is performed at the
THEATER ROYAL, IN COVENT GARDEN.

By F. PILON.

LONDON: Printed for G. KEARSLY, No. 46, Fleet Street. MDCCLXXX. (Price ONE
SHILLING.)

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE very favorite Song of, "How stands the glass around, my boys?" is so
peculiarly adapted to the situation in which it is introduced, that the Author
hopes he will not be censured for the sacrifice he has made of originality in
adopting it. It is moreover written in a spirit and taste which is much easier
to admire than equal. As to the rest of the songs, they are all his own; and he
fears he must trust more to the indulgence of the public in regard to them,
than to any thing he can say, or has written in their favor.

CHARACTERS.
MEN.
Major Bromfield, Mr. REINHOLD. Ben Hassan, Mr. QUICK. Beauclerc, Mr. MATTOCKS.
Sergeant OF Bradley, Mr. EGAN. Sergeant Trumbull, Mr. WILSON. Woolwich, Mr.
EDWIN. Lieutenant, Mr. WORDSWORTH. 1st Officer, Mr. BOOTH. 2d Officer. Mr.
FEARON. 3d Officer, Mr. ROBSON. Sailor, Mr. W. BATES. 1st Soldier, Mr. L'
ESTRANGE. 2d Soldier, Mr. THOMPSON. 3d Soldier, Mr. WEWITZER. 1st Mob Mr.
JONES. 2d Mob. Mr. LEDGER. 3d Mob. Mr. BRUNSDON. 4th Mob. Mr. BATES. 5th Mob.
Mr. STEVENS.
WOMEN.
Zayde, Mrs. MORTON. Jenny, Mrs. WILSON. Moll Trumpet, Mrs. WHITE.
THE SIEGE of GIBRALTAR.
ACT I.
SCENE I. An Officer's Mess-room, Major Bromfield, Ensign Beauclerc, and a
large Party of Officers -- Wine, etc. on the Table.
Major Bromfield. (Fills his glass.) COME, gentlemen, I Will give you the British
arms all over the world.


All. The British arms, etc.


(All drink.) Beauc. If the fleet have left England, the blockade by sea will
be soon over; for when our admirals are in earnest, they generally make quick
work on it.


1 st Officer. How soon do you think St. Rocque will open her batteries?


2 d Officer. Toward evening, I imagine.


M. Broom. Then here is a speedy demolition to them. (Fills.)


All. (Fill their glasses.) A speedy demolition, etc. --


(All drink.) Beauc. They can raise no batteries to make any impression; our
works are actually impregnable, and if the strength of this fortress be
considered, it may without fable be called one of the pillars of Hercules. --


M. Broom. It is a pillar of the British empire, and therefore should be
defended 'till made the monument of its protectors.


Enter 1st Soldier. 1 st Sold. A sergeant, gentlemen, is come with orders from
the Governor.


M. Broom. Tell him to come in.

(Exit soldier.) Enter Sergeant OF Bradley. What! OF Bradley, is it you? It Is a
wonder to see you sober just before an engagement!


OF Brad. Why in troth your honor, it was not for want of good will, but
there is no such thing as getting a drop for love or money.


M. Broom. Come, let us see your book, (OF Bradley gives the Book.) Give him
some wine -- We'll prime you, OF Bradley.


OF Brad. As your honor's hand's in, I wish to he Lord you would load me, and
you would see how fine I Would go off against the Spaniards.


3d Off. (Giving him wine.) Here, OF Bradley.


OF Brad. (Smelling to the wine.) Och! your honor, I wish you would change the
wine into brandy, for I am afraid the wine is too strong for me.


M. Broom. By all means; -- fill him some brandy.


3d Off. Here, OF Bradley; (Fills a glass of brandy) and now your toast.


OF Brad. A toast! by my soul, your honor, as I am a great way from it, I
don't think I can give you a better toast than my native country; and so here is
the land we live in. (OF Bradley drinks.)


All. Hh! ha! ha!


OF Brad. Faith, I thought you would laugh at me; for the last time I gave the
land we live in, I was at sea, and they sarved me in the same manner.


M. Broom. Why you live in Gibraltar: how the devil can you give that as your
native country?


OF Brad. I am sorry to contradict your honor, but I never think I live any
where but in England or Ireland.


M. Broom. Gentlemen, this is no time for continuing at the bottle; the
Governor expects us upon duty in less than two hours.


O'Brad. By the sweet smell of the shamrock, it is the joyfullest tidings I
have heard this twelvemonth: there is not a gun in the garrison but will thank
me when I carry the news to him: but I hope, your honor, there is no fear of a
disappointment.


3d Off. Why are you afraid we shant beat 'em?


OF Brad. Och hone! I am sure of that; I was only afraid that they would not
stay 'till we did them the favor.


M. Broom. Well we have no farther occasion for you, OF Bradley.


OF Brad. I hope your honor will not think me too bold if I ask a favor before I
go.


M. Broom. What is it?


OF Brad. Why if your honor pleases, I should have no objection to the second
part of the same tune.


M. Broom. The same tune! What tune do you mean?


OF Brad. (Printing archly at the table.) The tune, jewel, upon the musical
glasses.


M. Brom. O, you want another glass of brandy! Here; (Fills.) but take care so
much spirits don't get into your head.


OF Brad. What, is it the Brandy you mean? By my soul, there is no danger of
that: brandy's a French spirit, and that never got into an Englishman's head or
his heart either when he was going to battle; therefore as I am an Irishman,
there is no fear of me; so here goes, I am sure it will not choke me. (Drinks and
exit.)


All. Ha! ha! ha!


2d. Off. Before we go, one parting glass to England and victory.


AIR.
M. BROWN and BEAUCLERK. How stands the glass around?
For shame! you take no care, my boys:
How stands the glass around?
Let mirth and wine abound,
The trumpets sound;
The colors they are flying, boys,
To fight, kill or wound.
May we still be found
Content with our hard fate, my boys,
On the cold ground.
II.
Why, soldiers, why,
Should we be melancholy, boys?
Why, soldiers, why?
Whose business it is to die;
Hang sighing, fie!
Damm fear, drink on, be jolly, boys,
It Is he, you, or I.
Cold, hot, wet or dry,
We Are always bound to follow, boys,
And scorn to fly.
III.
It Is but in vain,
I mean not to upbraid ye, boys;
It Is but in vain
For soldiers to complain:
Should next campaign
Send us to him who made us, boys,
We Are free from pain,
But if we remain,
A bottle and kind landlady
Cure all again.

Exeunt all but Major and Ensign. Beauc. Dear Major, will you indulge me with a
moment's conversation?


M. Broom. What Is the matter, Frank?


Beauc. You were my father's friend; he put me under your care when I came into
the army, and I have ever looked up to you as to himself.


M. Broom. This is very true, but what does it preface?


Beauc. You know my passion for old Ben Hassan's daughter; indeed you approved
of it.


M. Brom. And is this a time to think of such sollies? just when you are going
to action! Recollect yourself, boy, you are a soldier, your father was one;
dishonor never changed his cheek, and don't you bring a blush there in his old
age.


Beauc. Your reproach stings me to the very soul; I have done with her, I Will
tear her from my heart for ever.


M. Broom. Your hand, Frank; now you are a man again.


Beauc. But give me leave to do away the very shadow of cause for this
degrading notion being entertained of my nature. I meant only to have told you,
that the lovely woman in whom my whole life and happiness are wrapped up, is
this very night to be conveyed privately to Barbary, in order to be married to
Solomon the Jew, whom you have often seen at her father's.


M. Broom. But are you sure of this?


Beauc. An Arabian slave, in whom she places great confidence, told me of it;
but it is no matter, you have convinced me of the impropriety of my passion,
and I resign her.


M. Broom. She Is a devilish fine woman, Frank.


Beauc. I have drove her from my thoughts, sir.


M. Broom. No, no, Frank, you shall not lose her neither, if in my power to
prevent it. Let me see; (looks at his watch) I Will give you an hour; go see her,
and learn the time, and in what manner she and her Hebrew partner set off.


Beauc. Dear sir, are you serious?


M. Brom. Unless we silence the Spanish batteries, the old Moor will hardly
venture his daughter out this night. If we should, you shall patrole the very
hour they are going off, and stop her.


Beauc. But, sir, can I be so long absent from my post, without injury to my
reputation?


M. Broom. Poh, poh! you are a blockhead; if the story was published all over
the garrison, it would not hurt you, for I never knew a brave fellow,
(notwithstanding what I said to you) who did not acknowledge that beauty
reigned by right divine, and that there was no resisting the supremacy of a
petticoat.


AIR.
BEAUCLERC. The moment I saw her, my heart took alarm;
I found that my freedom was gone:
With transport I gazed on each delicate charm,
Yet dared not to hope them my own.
But what did I feel when I told her my flame,
And she breathed with a sigh that here is was the same!
II.
In praise of my fair I could dwell with delight,
From blushing Aurora's first rise,
'Till Phoebus had yielded his scepter tonight,
And Venus reigned queen of the skies;
Then wake with the nightingale all the night long,
And pay with my sighs the musician's sweet song.

Exit Major and Beauclerc. SCENE II. Ben Hassan's House. Zayde and Jenny are
discovered.
Jenny. Dear madam, I am ready to faint with fright; I hear they are just going
to carbonade us.


Zayde. You are a great coward, Jenny.


Jenny. Lord, ma'am, how can I help it? this is the first time I was ever
besieged in my life.


Zayde. Is Muley returned?


Jenny. I don't know, indeed, your ladyship. O what would I give to be with my
poor mother in Turnagain-lane at Wapping!


Zayde. I wish, Jenny, I could inspire you with a little of my resolution.


AIR. (Omitted in the Representation.)
Zayde. Though war and danger threaten round,
No fear my thoughts molest;
For he who gives the deepest wound,
Has only made me blessed.
II.
Love fills my heart, but not one sigh
The little tyrant brings;
For when from him a dart did fly,
He lent my hopes his wings.

Jenny. O, ma'am, you make a perfect Nero of me.


Enter Muley behind -- ( He taps Jenny on the shoulder; she shricks.) Jenny. O
lord, ma'am, they are come!


Muley. O lord, ma'am, they are not come; pluck up your spirits; you will not be
shot -- perhaps these two hours.


Zayde. Have you seen him, Muley?


Muley. And expect his signal at the lattice every moment; but remember you
resign yourself entirely to my direction.


Zayde. It is strange my father should place so implicit a confidence in you.


Muley. Not at all; he purchased me at Cairo from an Arabian merchant when I
was but four years old. I never saw the father who begat me, nor the mother who
brought me into the world. He knows I have no brother, no sister, no tie of
kindred upon earth, to make my affections wander from this spot. He thinks I
look up to him as my only relation, but my attachment to my dear mistress,
united to the natural passion of man for liberty, which only with life leaves
us, makes me do a violence to my nature, and for the first time deceive him.


Zayde. He took uncommon pains with your education.


Muley. I am an Arabian, madam, and perhaps may thank my faculties more than my
preceptors.


Jenny. I vow, Mr. Muley, this is the first time I ever knew you was a
Barbarian.


Muley. And it is the first time I knew it myself.


Jenny. I thought you Barbarians had generally two heads at least.


Muley. Two heads, to be sure, would be a great ornament to a man, but with the
additions generally made by a fashionable wife, they are more, I am sure, than
any man could carry upon his shoulders -- but you will not forget your promise,
madam?


Zayde. I certainly will take you with me to England; with regard to your
freedom, I may be silent; the moment you set your foot on the island, you are
no longer a bondsman; the charter of England is Liberty; you cannot breath its
air and be a slave.


AIR.
ZAYDE. Generous Britain scorns to bind,
In servile chains, the freeborn mind:
Her sons art brave, her daughters fair,
And Freedom lives a phoenix there.
Generous Britain, good as brave,
Bestows that blessing on the slave.
II.
How slight are gems, how poor is gold,
In climes where man is bought and sold!
A brighter jewel Freedom shines,
Than ever glowed in Indian mines.
Generous Britain, good as brave,
Bestows that jewel on the slave.

A tap is heard at the window. Zayde. O heavens I here he is; let him in
immediately.


Muley. Go you, Jenny.


Exit Jenny. I must stand sentinel, to prevent your father's stealing a march
upon us.

Exit Muley. Re-enter Jenny, introducing Beauclerc. Beauc. At the risque of my
life, at the risque of my reputation, which I hold dearer, I am come to you;
when, my angel, are you to go off? in what disguise? let me know every
particular without delay; not a moment I am here but is big with danger.


Zayde. Fear and joy almost rob me of utterance! We are, if possible, to leave
this about twelve, dressed in coarse Moorish habits; a little red cross, the
emblem of your faith, I Will wear upon my breast to distinguish me.


Enter Muley. Muley. Your father, madam, is coming.


Beauc. Let me out instantly!


Muley. You must not go yet, sir; I was prepared for this: here, clap on this
turban and this habit -- (Beauclerc puts on the habit and turban) -- now don't
open your lips, but nod and make signs -- leave the rest to me.


Enter Ben Hassan. Ben. (Speaks at entering) Daughter Zayde.


Zayde. I attend your pleasure, sir.


Ben. By the tomb of Mahomet, she shall go this night -- ( Seeing Beauclerc) --
What, a stranger in my house! Who is this fellow, Muley?


Muley. Lord, sir, don't you know him?


Ben. Know him! how the devil should I know him! who is he?


Muley. That Is my brother, sir.


Ben. Your brother, you dog! you never saw one of your family in your life, and
how have you found out that this fellow is your brother?


Muley. By the meerest accident in the world: you must know, sir (for I never
knew it 'till my brother here told me of it) that I was stolen from my parents,
at two months old, by a Gypsey, who sold me, at Cairo, to the merchant of whom
you bought me; my father, who loved his children dearer than his life, had six
sons besides myself -- (looks at Beauclere) seven! I beg your pardon, my
father, sir, had seven sons beside myself.


Ben. Damn your father and his seven sons; rascal, who are you talking to?


Muley. My brother, sir; did not you see how angry he was at the mistake I made?


Ben. Why, the fellow has'nt opened his lips.


Muley. Dear sir, let me go on with my story, and you shall know all by-and-by:
my father, sir, who had seven sons besides myself, and loved his children
dearer than his life, left it, upon his death bed, that a third of the estate,
together with the family pictures --


Ben. Family pictures!


Muley. Yes, sir, (which were very valuable) should go to whoever found his
lost sheep; for you must know, sir, he used always to call me his lost sheep.


Ben. Your sleece, Mr. Lost Sheep, is in great danger of a good threshing, I
can tell you that.


Muley. Fortunately, sir, this brother, whose name is Sinbad, after numberless
perils and hardships, put up at the very inn at which you lodged at Cairo; the
landlord, who had heard of the misfortunes of my family, introduced him to the
merchant of whom you bought me; the merchant kindly introduced him to your
broker, and the good-natured broker never rested, night or day, 'till he
actually found out the identical ship and captain in which, sir, you sailed
with me from Cairo; on board this, sir, he embarked about a fortnight since;
and, after a short passage, arrived at Algiers in Barbary, from which place he
came, last night, with a fresh supply of cabbages, live oxen, and fat turkies.


Ben. Such a cargo of lies, I believe, never were jumbled together in so small
a compass: why, you dog, I Will have you impaled alive for bringing a male into
my house.


Muley. A male! dear sir, look at this upper lip.


Ben. Eh! why, he has got no mustachios.


Muley. Mustachios, sir, he was ten years in the seraglio at Constantinople.


Ben. Come, I Will ask the fellow some questions myself.


Muley. You may spare yourself the trouble, sir, for (poor fellow) he is dumb.


Ben. Dumb!


Muley. Dumb, sir.


Ben. Then how the devil could he have given you this circumstantial account of
your lost sheep, and your estate, and your family pictures, you dog!


Muley. By signs; -- do but look at him, sir, what do you think he is saying
now?


Ben. Why, nothing.


Muley. He says that, in his travels through the different parts of the globe,
he never met a gentleman of such a mild, humane and winning disposition, or one
in whose service he would be more willingly employed.


Ben. Why, truly, he is not an ill-looking fellow; but it is a great pity he is
dumb.


Muley. Sir, you will understand him, as well as I do, in less than a fortnight;
he was in great repute at the court of Persia, for several years, as a dumb
interpreter.


Ben. Well, take hi^ in, and give him some refreshment; I don't know but I may
employ him.


Muley. Look at him, do but look at him, sir; if you did but understand him,
you would be delighted with his gratitude.


Ben. Ay! what does he say?


Muley. Say, sir! it would keep me here this hour if I was to tell you all;
but, sir, in a word, he says his gratitude has struck him dumb.


Exit Muley and Beauclere. Ben. Truly, this is an odd adventure; come Hither,
Zayde; I hope, child, you are better reconciled to your duty than I found you
this morning?


Zayde. Sir, I am ready to obey your pleasure, and long for the night.


Ben. You transport me, my dear girl!


Jenny. And I Will go with her with a joyful, heart.


Ben. O, then you are reconciled, Mrs. Pert, to Visit Barbary.


Jenny. Barbary, sir! I Will go to the Antidotes with her.


Ben. And this morning you would go to the devil sooner than you would go to
Barbary; but I expect no more regularity from a woman than a weathercock.

AIR.
Like a weather cock's a woman's will,
With every blast it is veering still;
As the wind blows,
Around it goes,
No whirligig so quick;
Stop it if you can,
But no mortal man
Steady to a point could ever make it stick.
II.
You may think when a woman's a wife,
That she rusts to a point for life;
It Is no such thing,
She Will have her fling;
Like a weathercock still,
Round about she goes,
As the wind then blows,
And the devil to a point cannot fix her will.

SCENE III. The Inside of the Garrison.
Enter two Soldiers. 1 st Sold. A very strange command this; -- dam'me, I wish
I was governor.


2 d Sold. Then I should wish myself out of the garrison.


1 st Sold. But why should he let them raise their batteries?


2 d Sold. For the pleasure of knocking them down again.


1 st Sold. That is something to be sure; but, in the mean time, we are doing
nothing, and I hate to be idle.


2 d Sold. You know nothing of the matter; Touchwood, the governor, is a brave
fellow, and a fine officer; he knows the true English way of fighting; he wants
a mark to level at; they are raising their works now like children building
houses of cards; the moment they are finished, puff from the garrison -- and
they are down again.


Enter Woolwich, with several other Matrasses and Soldiers; some drawing on
Artillery, others loaded with Ammunition, etc. 3 d Sold. Come, pull away, my
hearty cocks, we'll be at them presently.


Wool. Stay one minute, my dear lads, 'till I take a little refreshment: I have
not wet my lips the Lord knows when. (Drinks out of his canteen.)


3 d Sold. Wet your lips! you have done nothing but drink all the morning --
and let me tell you, Woolwich, it is not the part of a good soldier to get drunk
when he is just going to engage an enemy.


Wool. It Is a damned lie, I am not drunk; I know my duty better than to get
drunk. If I was to drink the sea at a time like this, it would have no kind of
effect upon me: Come, will you taste? (Offers him his canteen.)


3 d Sold. Not I.


Wool. More fool you! for if you happen to be killed by and by, you will have
lost a taste of the finest Nantz ever was swallowed. (Drinks.)


Enter Moll Trumpet. Moll. Well, gemmen, Heaven be praised, we are going to be
at the villains at last.


Wool. Well said, Old Brandy Bottle; are you come to see the sport?


Moll. That I am: I am an English woman every inch of me.


3 d Sold. Come, pull away, my lads, we lose time.


Wool. Stay one minute 'till I take leave of an old acquaintance: this is Moll
Trumpet, gentlemen, a lady I have known for many years, and one who has lived
in great credit, considering her age and occupation.


Moll. Aye, that I have, Mr. Woolwich; I am an old standard in Gibraltar.


Wool. An old standard indeed, Moll; for your staff is almost worn out in the
service, and your banner here before you (Taking up her apron) is as venerably
ragged as any in St. Paul's jubilo.


Moll. Ah, Mr. Woolwich, it is hard times with me during a siege; I have not had
a gentleman in my house since it began, and yesterday morning the Governor
threatened to shut it up, only because a lady was seen going out of it a little
overtaken in liquor -- the best of houses may be ruined for want at customers.
(Crying.)


Wool. Don't cry, Polly; things must come round again: we shall see the
Eagle-and-Child flourish again in spite of France and Spain united. I remember
what you have done; I look upon you like an old mortar that had been in
Marlbro's wars, and would wish to see you after all your campaigns, laid up
snug in the warren. Come, one parting drop with your old friend, Tom Woolwich.
(Drinks.)


Moll. That I will with all my heart; here is a health to the garrison, and all
the gentlemen soldiers in it; and may we beat the Spaniards home again! --
Drinks.


Wool. Why, there is a loyal soul for you; but this is all owing to the Nantz
she has drank in her time; then, see what a fine complexion it has given her:
she is as rosy as the gills of a Barbary Cock.


Moll. Ah, good Nantz is an excellent cordial.


Wool. Come, tip us a stave, Moll.


Moll. Lord! Mr. Woolwich, I cannot sing; it is all over with me.


Wool. Cannot you? why, you used to have a fine pipe; it was clear as good
Holland's, and as strong as good brandy -- what! and all over? Well, if you
will not sing, I will.


AIR.
WOOLWICH. He can best,
Stand the test,
Who Is a good fellow;
Drink about,
See it out,
Drink until you are mellow.
II.
Then let us dance and sing, boys,
Whilst we are able;
Take a hearty fling, boys,
Death's but a fable.
III.
Strike up the fife and drum then,
With rub a dub sweet;
Never mind your heads like brave men,
But look to your feet.
IV.
I feel my blood,
Like any flood,
Mount up so, blood and thunder!
And grow so bold,
I scarce can hold,
My stormy valor under.
Then bravely on, my hearts of steel,
The haughty foe is vap'ring;
We'll teach the dogs an English reel,
And quickly set them capering.

(Firing heard at a distance.) 3 d Sold. What the devil! the enemy have opened
their batteries; let us be gone.


Wool. Pull away, my lads, pull away; that is my hearts of gold, pull away: oh,
we'll fight, dam'me! 'till we are not able to stand.


3 d Sold. You seem much in that state already, Woolwich; but pull away, my
lads. (More firing.)


Exeunt all but Woolwich. Wool. There they go, there they go, dam'me! this is
the soldier's music, and the Spaniards shall dance to some tune before we have
done playing it.


Exit. (Very loud alarms, cannonading, drums, trumpets, etc. are heard at
different distances behind the scenes; several soldiers, townsmen, women, etc.
cross the stage to and fro: after some time, the cannonade ceases; a general
shout is heard; then the Scene draws, and shows the batteries of Gibraltar and
of St. Rocque at a distance. The troops march down attended by a vast concourse
of people, all crouding to express their joy.) Trum. (To the crowd.) What the
de'el cannot ye stand back a we? there is nae sic a thing as ganging for ye.


1 st Mob. Ah, Master Sergeant, we are glad to see you come back safe.


OF Brad. By my soul, and so we are ourselves; not that I cared a trawneen how
things went; for if I had been killed in the action, the devil fire the word I
would ever have said about it afterward.


M. Broom. (To the soldiers.) Gentlemen and fellow soldiers, I thank you in the
name of my king and country, for your spirit, your zeal, and you bravery: the
Governor will transmit an immediate account to England, of the success which
has attended his Majesty's arms, in which every justice shall be done to the
conduct of the troops during the action.


Soldiers and Populace. Huzza! huzza! huzza!

AIR and CHORUS.
Major BROMFIELD. Let the music of war praclaim to the skies
The conflict our arms have with stood;
Where smoking in ruins St. Rocque yonder lies,
Our triumph's recorded in blood.
CHORUS.
Crowned with conquest, crowned with same,
Now the soldier boasts his feats:
Thus may foes retire with shame
From our armies and cur fleets.
II.
Old story relates what our fathers have done
When no hope of safety was near;
Undaunted as lions on death they have run,
And conquered, or died on the spear.
CHORUS. Crowned, etc. III.
May time as he rolls down his stream from its urn,
Proclaim that a Briton is free;
And Fame, with the voice of an angel, return,
He conquers by land and by sea.'
CHORUS. Crowned, etc.
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. The Inside of the Garrison.
Enter Sergeant O'Bradley and Sergeant Trumbull. Trum. HOOT awa, mon; though We
hae demolished St. Rocque, you dinna ken how long the siege may last.


OF Brad. It will last 'till it is over, to be sure, my jewel.


Trum. It may last sax months for aught ye can deveen; therefore it becomes you
to be frugal of your allooance.


OF Brad. Poh! what the devil would you have me starve myself!


Trum. Ye have nae kind of aiconomy, nae forecast; you dinna heed the proverb
-- clap your hand twice to your bonnet for once to your pouch; aw gangs oot,
naething gangs in.


OF Brad. Och that is true enough, for the devil a thing has gone into my mouth
this morning but a glass of brandy -- (Aside) -- I will not tell this Scotch thief
I have had two glasses, for may be he would be for having one of them.


Trum. Ye should nae ha da drank it.


OF Brad. What the devil, would you have me refuse it!


Trum. I would nae have ye refuse any thing that is guide; but ye should ha saved
part oot; a wise man will always save a part oot of his income, be it ever so
small; and if I had nae mair than a Scotch poond a day --


OF Brad. Arrah how much is a Scotch pound?


Trum. A Scotch poond is an English penny.


OF Brad. So you would have me live upon a penny a day!


Trum. I have mair alconomy, friend; I Would live upon hauf on it, upon a bawbee, and
save the residue for further exigencies.


AIR.
TRUMBULL. Ye silly loon, ye di'na wot
Haw care and sorrows wait:
The hapless chield whose purse is oot,
He then may gang his gait.
Na bonny lass will think him fair,
His vary friends will taunt him fare;
And when in wretched pickle,
Aw will agree
The smawest we
Will help to make a mickle.
II.
When the peure wight his hose are rent,
And honnet wore threadbare,
And naught within his wom is pent
But the thin collar air:
Then should he chance a friend to meet,
He Will have nae smile or mull sae sweet,
Adoon the tear will trickle;
And he will agree
The smawest we
Will help to make a mickle.

Noise without. What the deel's here to do?


Enter Woolwich.

Wool. (at entering) Come along, my boys, here is the stuff. Ah, Sergeant OF
Bradley! are you there? I have a great respect for you and for your country;
you are an Irishman, I think.


OF Brad. So they tell me, Mr. Woolwich; but it is so long since I was there
that I may be mistaken.


Wool. My dear lad, let nobody persuade you to the contrary; Saint Patrick
himself could not speak the language in greater purity;


A shout heard. Enter a Party if Soldiers, drawing on a Cask of Liquor with a
Cock in it. 1 st Sold. Huzza! long life to the General.


2 d Sold. He has given us something for demolishing St. Rocque. -- (They all
crowd about the cask.)


Wool. There, there, there, you see how eager they all are; these are brave
fellows, but they have no conduct; every soul of them would get drunk if I did
not prevent them.


OF Brad. And who the devil would blame them? Upon such a day as this, I Would
drink 'till I was not able to speak; and afterward give the British Arms in a
bumper.


Wool. Sergeant OF Bradley, I have a great respect for you and for your
country, damn me if I have not; but the worst of the Irish is, they are terribly
given to drinking.


Trum. (Aside) By the lord this is the pot slandering the kettle; I wish I had
the cawsk in my ain possession, and the de'el a drop either should hae.


Wool. I see you are all bent upon intoxication, but if possible I will prevent
your making beasts of yourselves. So here, my dear hearts, here, soberly,
soberly; place the cask here, place it here, I say.


Trum. What the de'el! have a care you do nae spill the liquor.


Wool. Spill the liquor! no, no, I Would spill my heart's blood first -- keep it
steady, steady, my dear hearts -- (gets astride the cask) -- now I have every
thing snug, under my own eye.


AIR.
WOOLWICH. Like tun-bellied Bacchus I sit,
A cask of good liquor astride;
For foot-service no longer fit,
I thought it most prudent to ride.
II.
A glass for my sword I will wield,
A bottle my carbine shall be;
So, dam'me, I Have taken the field,
And am armed, you will own, cap-a-pee,
III.
Fellow Soldiers, your valor I know,
When good liquor's the blood to be spilt;
Then come let us dart on the foe,
We'll fight, 'till the cask's on the tilt.
Chorus.
(During the time Woolwich sings his Song, the Liquor is given among the
Soldiers, who occasionally join in Chorus, congratulate each other, etc. Then
the Cask is rolled off, (Woolwich still sitting astride) the Soldiers all
follow, huzzaing. SCENE II. Ben Hassan's House.
Enter Jenny, meeting Muley. Jenny. Mr. Muley, Mr. Muley.


Muley. What Is the matter, my little English Rose?


Jenny. Did not my master say he would go with us?


Muley. Yes; a'n't you glad of it?


Jenny. Will Not it spoil all?


Muley. By no means; I wanted him to go with us.


Jenny. I wish to the lord I was once out of Gibraltar; though, indeed, Mr.
Muley, I don't like to go to Barbary; pray, what kind of a place is it? do the
people eat, and drink, and sleep as we do?


Muley. Eat and drink, and sleep as we do, Jenny! why, to be sure, there is
this observation I have made on the people of Barbary: they never eat when they
have got nothing to sit down to; as to drinking, it is much the same; and as to
sleeping, in the whole course of my travels through the country, I never met
with man, woman or child, able to get a wink of sleep, who was not extremely
drowzy.


Jenny. Dear me, dear me, what a terrible account do you give of them!


AIR.
JENNY. When first I came here, I was sure
That my fortune was made,
My place was so good, and all so pure,
I vow, as I Am a maid.
I thought that things would never alter;
Ah! why did I come to Gibraltar!
II.
'Twas told on the cards I must travel,
And two husbands should have;
But even six are of little avail,
If my life I cannot save.
I thought that things would never alter;
Ah! why did I come to Gibraltar!

Exeunt Muley and Jenny. SCENE III. A Moonlight View of the Straight and Part
of the Rock of Gibraltar; a dead Calm, a small Vessel in view at Anchor,
supposed to be waiting to carry Ben Hassan, Zayde, etc. to Barbary.
Enter Ensign Beauclerc, Sergeant OF Bradley, Sergeant Trumbull, and the
Patrole. Beauc. Station yourselves here; yonder is the vessel they mean to go
off in. Bring them to Major Bromfield directly; put the old man into the dark
room, and tell him it is a dungeon -- the young lady and her slave you must
conduct to me.


Trum. Guide sir, say nae mair; your orders shall be obeyed impleacitly.


Beauc. But don't think I expect your services for nothing; if you succeed, I
will reward you amply.


Exit Beauclerc. Trum. Do you hear that, friend O'Bradley? A mon loes a thing
with a guide heart, when there is a prospect of advantage. Ha! by my saul, here
they come; haud back awee and observe them.


Enter Ben Hassan, Muley, Zayde and Jenny, disguised in coarse Moorish Habits.
Jenny. When, ma'm, do you think we shall disembark?


Ben. Hold your cursed tongue, hussy; we shall alarm the patrole.


Muley. Ecod, sir, that is done already; I think I see 'em yonder; retire,
retire a little, while I reconnoitre them. -- ( He comes forward, meeting the
sergeants and the patrole. Ben Hassan, Zayde and Jenny retire.)


Trum. Stand! wha gangs there?


Muley. A friend.


Trum. We do no ken that; it is nae aw gold that glisters; call to mind the
proverb, friend; "a blawck hen may lay a white egg, and many a fair apple wi a
speckled bonny cheek, is unsound at the kernel."


OF Brad. Where did you come from?


Muley. I was born in Africa.


OF Brad. You blockhead, I don't ask where you was born, I only want to know
what countryman you are.


Muley. I am an Arabian.


OF Brad. An Arabian! oh, by my soul, I knew a great many of your countrymen at
the Curragh of Kildare, and at Newmarket likewise. What is your name?


Muley. Muley.


OF Brad. Muley! As sure as a gun, this fellow is half-brother to Gimcrack or
Sweepstakes.


Muley. I know no Gimcrack or Sweepstakes.


OF Brad. The more's the pity; but as it is a family known to be fine runners,
I Will secure you before you put in for the plate.


( Seizes Muley.) Trum. Yonder Is more of 'em, and I believe they are all
traitors, conveying intelligence to the enemy. -- (Ben Hassan, Zayde and Jenny
are seized and brought forward.)


Jenny. Oh dear gentlemen, I am no traitor, I am a poor little English girl,
and love my country better than all the world; I would not hurt a worm, if it
came from England.


Trum. It Is nae matter, ye mun gang before the Governor, to be examined; we
have certain information of your being spies.


Ben. Spies! oh lord, it is no such thing; I am a poor harmless old man, who
was going to Barbary with his daughter to avoid the danger of the siege.


OF Brad. To avoid danger! why, if there was nothing else against you, that is
enough to prove you a traitor. What right have you, you old Moorish Spalpeen,
to run away to save your life, when I and my comrades are obliged to stand to
have my brains knocked out fresh and fasting every morning?


Ben. I Will give you a thousand pistoles and let me ^o.


Trum. What, a bribe! there is more in this, friend OF Bradley, than we
deveen'd; it will be a bonny piece of work, my lads: bring them away; I Will show
no mercy to sic abominable traitors. (They are taken off.)


Enter Major Bromfield and Beauclerc. Brom. Zayde and her slave are to be
brought back immediately; I suppose you were particular in your order about the
room he is to be confined in; I hope it is dark enough.


Beauc. He shall not have a ray of light; though his own fears would cast gloom
enough about him.


Enter Zayde, Jenny and Muley. Oh, charming, lovely woman, I adore you for your
spirit as much as your beauty; how near was I losing you!

Zayde. My dear Beauclerc, use my father gently; he is terrified to death.


Muley. I Will go, sir, instantly, and conclude the business.


M. Brom. Not without me, friend; I am now Governor, and you must have my
passport to your prisoner.


Jenny. Then take me too, sir, I am sure I am no traitor.


Brom. With all my heart, my little countrywoman. Frank, "how sweet the
moonlight sleeps upon that bank!" "In such a night as this!" -- Ha! ha! ha!
Good night, Troilus and Cressida.


Exeunt Major, Muley and Jenny. Beauc. The success of my project, your beauty
and this charming night, give such a delicious movement to my spirits, as I
never felt before.


DUET. ZAYDE and BEAUCLERC.

Beau. How sweet the lover's meeting proves
When night and silence bold their reign;
When no soft warbler wakes the groves,
And modest Phoebe gilds the scene!

Zayde. Each word like music, sweet distills
Its silver magic on the ear;
Each word the heart with transport fills,
For night conceals the virgin's fear.

Duetto, How sweet, etc.

Exeunt. SCENE IV. A Room in Major Bromfield's House. The Stage dark -- Ben
Hassan discovered.
Ben. What a terrible condition has my rashness reduced me to! and because I
was a state prisoner, I must come here blind-solded. Here I am in a dungeon!
Lord knows how many feet deep in the rock of Gibraltar! How could they find me
out? sure that damned Jew has not betrayed me! It is very strange I was not put
in irons; and, what is more extraordinary in a dismal place like this, they have
left me a chair to sit on. I fain would examine the walls of my prison to try
if there is any hole left; but what if I tumble into some terrible cavern! I Will
grope my way as well as I can. (Gets up, and in groping about overturns a table
with china) -- Mercy on me, what a clash of chains was there! I wish I could
get to my chair again, I Would not budge from it 'till my keeper brought me my
bread and water. Oh, I have got it. (Sits down)


Enter Muley. Muley. Where is my dear master? O that I could glad my eyes with
a sight of him!


Ben. Oh! that I could glad my eyes with a sight of you, Muley! how long, poor
fellow, have you been here?


Muley. I am just come, sir; as it was known that I was an old faithful
servant, the Governor has granted me permission to take my leave of you.


Ben. What, am I so soon to die!


Muley. I cannot bear to answer you, sir, (affects crying.)


Ben. Ah, my poor Muley! and I suppose your fate is not far off?


Muley. No, sir, I was pardoned; the laws of England could not punish me
without a new act of parliament.


Ben. Eh! how was that?


Muley. Why, sir, the laws of England say no man is a slave; I was one, and
consequently out of their jurisdiction.


Ben. Then, my good lad, I Will till you how you can serve me.


Muley. I Will do it most cheerfully.


Ben. Why as you cannot be punished, suppose we change clothes, and let me
escape? my clothes are worth a great deal more than yours.


Muley. That would never do, sir; your imprisonment has set me free, and I am
now as liable to be hanged as any body else.


Ben. That Is a great pity, Muley.


Muley. Ah, sir, you had a number of friends upon your trial.


Ben. My trial! why zounds I have not been tried yet.


Muley. Consider you are a spy, and a spy is never tried like another criminal
-- the Governor was for breaking you upon the wheel immediately. Ah! thinks I,
this will remind my poor master of the broken bones he has often given me.


Ben. And was there nobody spoke for me?


Muley. Oh yes, sir; you had a staunch friend, a friend indeed, sir, one who
obtained a great favor for you, a favor seldom granted to state criminals --
that you should only --


Ben. What! what! what!


Muley. Be hanged, sir.


Ben. Only be hanged! and do you call that a favor, you dog?


Muley. I don't know what you think, sir; but, I am sure, your family will be
greatly rejoiced at it. But, sir, as you are now in your last moments, what am
I to say to your daughter?


Ben. O my poor child! she never came into my head.


Muley. I suppose, sir, you will leave her every thing?


Ben. Every pistole; I can take nothing with me. Remember her poor old father's
love to her.


Muley. Your love! there is something else should be remembered; I suppose you
would not have your strong box broke open, sir?


Ben. Break open my strong box, you rascal! who dare break open my strong box?


Muley. See what it is to love money! It goes to your heart to part with a
pistreen, though it can be of no longer use to you.


Ben. True, Muley, I can take nothing with me.


Muley. 'Sdeath, sir, you would make a man mad; the executioner will be here in a
few minutes, and if you don't give me the key, and let me know what it
contains, your daughter will be wronged of half her proparty.


Ben. Why will you disturb me in my dying moments? you know the key will be
found in my pocket when I am hanged.


Muley. In that case, every shilling will be consiscated for the use of
government.


Ben. That Is very true, and as I can take nothing with me, here it is -- (gives
him the key) -- give it into her own hand; the box contains eighteen thousand
pistoles, besides three brilliants of immense value, and a topal I purchased at
Genoa, that was stole from the Doge of Venice.


Muley. Ah, sir, you see no good comes of such things; but I have secured your
key; and so come in, come in, all is settled.


Enter Major Bromfield, Beauclerc, Zayde and Jenny. (Stage light.) Ben. What,
my daughter and Beauclerc to see me?


Muley. (Gives Zayde the key.) Here, madam, is the passport to your fortune,
and your father may rail as fast as he pleases.


Ben. (looking round with astonishment) Why I am in no dungeon, I find.


Muley. I Will tell you better news, sir; you have got a reprieve.


Ben. Ah, villain, I perceive how every thing is now; this is all a trick to
cheat me of my daughter; but though I am a Moor, and you call me Infidel, your
laws breathe a more humane spirit than your religion, and I will have recourse
to them.


M. Brom. Ben Hassan, you may thank the hour your daughter married this
gentleman; it has saved your life. I am at this moment in possession of secrets
would undo you; then take them home without a a murmur; act in future with
integrity to the state, and all shall be overlooked.


Ben. (aside.) All my correspondence with the Spaniards I find is discovered,
and I must make the best of it. (To the Major.) Dear Major, you are too hasty;
I protest to you I never was better pleased, never in my life; but consider I
have just escaped a gibbet, and you must allow a little for surprise.


Enter a Soldier. Sold. Sir, the Governor desires a party of men may be sent
instantly to keep the populace in order there is a mutiny in the garrison about
the fresh provisions just arrived.


M. Brom. My dear Beauclerc, we must be gone; but trust your mistress to her
father's care; I dare say we may depend upon him. Eh, Ben Hassan, you
understand me?


Ben. Perfectly! yes, yes, we are all come to a right understanding at last, --
but mum -- and so come along, Zayde: (sighs) and exit Ben Hassan, etc. etc.


SCENE V. The Inside of the Garrison. A tumultuous Noise heard.
Enter a Crowd of People. 1 st Mob. We will have fresh provisions.


2 d Mob. Why not as well as the governor?


3 d Mob. Finer turkies never came from Barbary.


4 th Mob. Finer turkies! ay, ay, my friend, but that is leather of too fine a
grain for our palates. Turkies! no, no; we must feast upon salted pork and
buffaloes, as dry and as tough as an old heel-tap; a man should have teeth like
an awl to mumble it.


5 th Mob. Nine tailors of us clubb'd for a goose, and could not purchase it.


1 st Mob. Let us all go to the governor's in a body, and force him to do us
and our families justice.


All. Ay, come along, come along. going off, they are met by Sergeant O'Bradley
and Trumbull.


Trum. Where the de'el are ye aw ganging in sic haste?


1 st Mob. We are going to the governor's, to demand our share of the fresh
provisions just come from Barbary; we can hold out no longer.


Trum. Ye are aw a parcel of feuls, and do no ken what you wauld be at.


1 st Mob. Ay, master Sergeant, you may talk; you have no cause to complain of
salt provisions; you have always a belly-full.


Trum. It Is a damned see; I scorn to think of my wem, when the honor of my
country is at stake.


1 st Mob. But why does not the governor divide all fair with the whole
garrison?


2 d Mob. We are all flesh and blood as well as he.


3 d Mob. Hav'n't we wives and children to maintain?


Trum. Why, ye mek sic a damned clatter, there is nae sic a thing as spearly a
we wi' you rationally; will you hear me?


All. Hear him, hear him.


Trum. In aw them ten years the famous toon of Troy was besieged, I do nae
believe there was sic a riot as the present.


1 st Mob. Ay, master Sergeant, but Troy, I suppose, is some town upon the
'Mericant continent, like Rhode Island, or the Gulf of Florida, or some of
those places.


Trum. Ah, friend, as the proverb gangs, whoever burns you for a witch, will
lose all his coals. Ye are nac geographer, friend, I find.


1 st Mob. Come, master Sergeant, don't call names; I am as good a man as
yourself, though I don't wear a red coat. The drum beats to arms with great
violence.


Trum. He! what the de'el's that for?


OF Brad. O, by my shoul, it is what I told you a little while ago, though I
did not mention it; the peppering bout is just going to begin; and if you are
so hungry, you may stay your stomachs with a bellyfull of fighting.


Enter a Soldier. Sold. Sergeants, for shame! away to arms; the Spanish flag is
flying in the harbor.


1 st Mob. What, are the Spaniards come! then, dam'me, we'll think no more of
fresh provisions.


2 d Mob. We'll fight, if you will give us arms.


3 d Mob. Ay, dam'me, 'till we die.


OF Brad. Why, there you spoke like a true Englishman! we'll all fight 'till we
die; and then there will be fresh provisions enough for every one of us.


Exit all, huzzaing, etc. SCENE the last. A View of the Rock and Straight of
Gibraltar; Rodney's Fleet in the Bay, after the Action; the Spanish Admiral
dismasted, etc. riding with national Colors; the Army all drawn out with
Artillery, etc. prepared for Action; a Boat is seen to come from one of the
Ships; a Lieutenant and several Sailors come on Shore afterward.
M. Brom. A Spanish admiral's flag flying, and all the rest English colors;
what can be the meaning?


1 st Off. It was done to deceive the garrison; it is an enemy; and, take my
word, the governor will repent his not firing at them.


M. Brom. We shall soon know that, for here comes the boat dispatched to us.
(the boat now comes up; the sailors cheer the garrison, and land.)


Sailor. What cheer! what cheer, my hearts of oak?


M. Brom. (To the Lieutenant.) How am I to receive you -- as a prisoner, sir?


Lieut. A prisoner! what do you mean?


M. Brom. Is not that the Spanish fleet yonder under English colors?


Sailor. The Spanish fleet! ay, to be sure it is.


M. Brom. I understand you; we lost the day.


Sailor. Why yes, we lost the day to be sure; but then we took 'em in the night
for all that.


M. Brom. Took 'em in the night! you deal in mysteries.


Sailor. Ay, master, and the Spaniards deal in miracles; so we are even with
them.


M. Brom. (To the Lieutenant.) As a soldier and an Englishman, you may suppose
me anxious for the honor of my country; answer me, sir, at once, if we are
victors, why does that Spanish ensign insult the flag of my country?


Sail. Why, if I may speak, your honor, before my superiors, it is a kind of
dulgence we showed them; for the Spanish Monsieurs fought damned well this
bout; and then you know a man has some pleasure in beating 'em.


Lieut. What this honest tar has told you, sir, is true; the fleet you see
yonder belongs to the King of England, and perhaps no fleet, for some
centuries, have won greater glory.


M. Brom. What is our advantage, sir?


Sailor. Vantage! why we have taken five, sunk two, and blown up one; that is
all. It Is a great pity there were not a few more to give a good account of.


M. Brom. I request, sir, you would go instantly with your dispatches to the
Governor: this is a piece of intelligence which once more dispels the gloom
from Gibraltar. Let the whole garrison salute the fleet, for the strength and
bulwark of England at all times has proved her navy.


OF Brad. By my shoul, your honor, if I may speak without offense, the devil a
word of lie in what you say; for the firmest ground an Englishman ever stood
upon is the ocean.


SONG, CHORUS, etc. FINALE.
Major BROMFIELD. Led by glory, Britons ever
Shall their well-earn'd laurels keep;
Bourbon's gordian still they will sever,
And reign rulers of the deep,

LIEUTENANT. At dead of night, and fire all round us,
St. Domingo blew in air;
Then first we found the Spaniards wound us;
Every Briton dropped a tear.

BEAUCLERC. When wise Eliza raised our glory,
Howard gained immortal fame; --
The subject now of modern story
Is great RODNEY's envied name.

Zayde. A name unboasted yet remains,
England's young, but future pride;
WILLIAM' s a name which fate ordains
To spread his country's glory wide.

THE END.

