A COLLECTION OF POEMS and TRANSLATIONS, In ENGLISH and LATIN.

By THOMAS HULL.

Agedum! pauca accipe --
Primum ego me illorum, dederim quibus esse Poetis,
Excerpam numero: neque enim concludere versum,
Dixeris esse satis; neque, si quis seribat, uti nos,
Sermoni propiora, putes hunc esse Poetam.
HOR. Sat. iv. Lib. 1. L. 38. -- For my own Part,
I claim no Portion of the Poet's Art;
It Is not enough to close the flowing Line,
And in ten Syllables your Sense confine,
Or write in mere prosaic Rhimes like me,
That can deserve the Name of Poetry.
FRANCIS's Transl. BATH: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR; AND SOLD BY HIM AT TUCKER'S
CHINA SHOP, IN THE CHURCHYARD; AND MR. LEAKE, AND MR. FREDERICK, BOOKSELLERS;
STEPHEN MARTIN, PRINTER: AND MR. PALMER, AND MR. WARD, BOOKSELLERS, IN BRISTOL.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE LORD BOYD.
MY LORD,
IT has been ever advanced by all who have understood the World, that a great
Man never distinguishes himself so much as in his Behavior and Countenance
shown to Inferiors; if so, Your LORDSHIP is certainly the most conspicuous
Instance of the Truth of this Maxim, in thinking me worthy YOUR least Notice.

THE very grateful Sense I have of the Honor done me herein, I can never be
able to express. Yet my utmost Pride, shall not influence me to run into the
general Style of Dedicators, in attemping an Encomium on YOUR LORDSHIP's
Virtues. YOUR public Goodness cannot but be injured by such a Pen as mine; and
YOUR private is surely sufficiently manifested, in condescending to smile on a
young Writer, unknown to Merit as to Fame.

THE Publication of my Productions can, I am very certain, boast no Value, but
what arises from YOUR LORDSHIP's having set YOUR Stamp on them; Yet whatever
Reception they meet from the Public, the utmost Poignancy of Censure I should
always think amply over-ballanced by the Pride and Pleasure of YOUR Permission,
to subscribe myself, with the utmost Respect,

MY LORD, Your LORDSHIP's Most obliged and obedient Servant, Thomas Hull.

THERE are two Kinds of Poetry to which no PREFACE is necessary; viz. extreme
good, and extreme bad. The first requires none, and the last deserves none: For
the latter Reason I must entreat my very patient Readers to take Notice that
this is an APOLOGY, which I think indispensibly necessary, to obviate two
Objections.

IN the first Place, to those who may ask why I wrote, (and to be sure the
Question is highly rational and palpable) I answer, to employ my leisure Hours
in an Exercise which gives me Pleasure, and does no one else any Injury. -- And
I might, no doubt, have found many Methods of Pastime, that would not have
amounted to so good a Purpose, as that of doing no Harm.

IN the second Place, to those who may ask why I published, (and, by the Bye,
this is a Question more rational and palpable than the former) I answer that I
had no other Means of convincing the World I ever employed my Time to any
Purpose at all.

I am very sensible there may, and, certainly, will be several Witticisms,
smart Strokes of Raillery, and Satirical Similies, on a raw, unfledged Poet;
which indeed I could here insert, but that I would, by no Means, be so
ill-manner'd to my Readers as to take the Words out of their Mouths, or prevent
their having their Laugh out.

HOWEVER, to be serious, I cannot in Gratitude conclude this Address to the
Public, without returning my best Thanks to my several Friends, who have so
kindly contributed to the Publication of the ensuing trifling Performance. I
have only to desire they will take Notice that the Paraphrase on the Tenth Ode
of Horace, the Card to Venus, and Ode to Cupid are the Product of much better
Pens than mine. My Reason for mentioning this is only to return their Authors
Thanks for the Honor they have done me; and not to point out a Distinction,
which must be so very obvious to every Capacity.

LIST OF THE SUBSCRIBERS.
A
FRANCIS Aylmer, Esquire of London Miss Atwood. Miss Molly Atwood. Mr. Axford. Mr.
John Awsiter. Mrs. Anna Maria Awsiter. Mr. Hugh Asgill. Mr. Adamson Mrs.
Austin. -- Adolph, Esquire Mr. Thomas Atkins, of Bristol
B
The Hon. Mrs Byrne H B, Esquire 2 Books Mrs. Butt Miss Mary Baker, a Books Mr.
Belk Mr. Brooks, Musician Mrs Brown Mr. Boddely, Printer, 2 Books Miss Barton
Mrs. Bishop Mr. Bawn, of Bristol, Mr. Bullman, ditto Mr. Best, ditto Mr. Berry
Mr. Lewis Bull Mr. John Brooks. Mr. J. Bowzey, of Bristol
C
Charles Chambers, Esquire Mrs. Curtis, 2 Books Mrs. Clifton Miss -- Miss Copley
Mr. Richard Castle Mr. Crowley Mr. Francis Cook Mr. Colleton Mr. Walter
Clagget Mr. Crook Mr. Robert Collings, of Bristol
D
Thomas Dawson, Esquire Mrs. Dodwell Miss Davis -- Douglass, Esquire Miss Desmaret Mr.
Donaldson Mr. Dalton Mrs. Duperre ^r. Dodd Mr. De Vic. Mr. T. Davis, of Bristol
Mr. William Davis, of ditto Mr. Francis Daniell, of ditto
E
-- Eusden, Esquire of London, Mrs. Ellison Mr. Este Miss Eyton Mrs. Elliott Mr.
Elderton Miss Edgcombe. Mrs. Air Master Emlyn.
F
George Forster, Esquire Mrs. Ferrers, of London, Mrs. Fludyer Mrs. Clementine Ford
Mr. Thomas Furnival Mr. Foul Mr. Thomas Fitzmaurice Mr. Isaac Fawkes Mr.
Frederick, Bookseller Miss Elizabeth Fisher. Mr. Edward Jacob, of Bristol Mr.
J. Jeffen, of ditto Mr. G. Jones, of ditto
G
-- Grignion, Esquire of London, -- Gwyn, Esquire ditto Mrs. Grant, 2 Books Mrs. Green
Mr. William Glass Mr. Gates Mr. Goldney Mr. William Gurden Mr. Glover Mr.
Thomas Girl, of Bristol Thomas Goy, Esquire Luke Grant, Esquire
H
Francis Hayman, Esquire of London Mr. James Hayward Mr. Hackett Mrs. Hopkins Miss
Hall, 3 Books Miss Elizabeth Hippisley Mr. Hutchinson, Apothecary Miss Henshaw.
I
Miss Susanna Maria Johnson Mr. Johnston, of Dublin Mr. Inglish Miss Sally
Ibbott, 2 Books Mr. Irwin Mrs. Joins.
K
The Rev. Mr. Knipe Mr. Kendall Mr. Thomas King, 12 Books Mr. Richard Knowles
Mr. William Keppel Mrs. Winnifred Kendall Mr. King, Coach-master
L
Honorable Mr. Lambert Miss Lascelles, of London Mrs. Lawson, Ditto Miss Low
Mrs. Lions Mr. Linley Master Lambert Mr. Little Mrs. Lloyd Miss Laurence Mr.
Leake, Bookseller
M
-- Macardell, Esquire of London -- Major, Esquire Ditto -- Moser, Esquire Ditto Mr.
Theodore Maurice, 6 Books Miss Anna Maria Morrison Mr. Miller Mr Moffatt, of
Bristol Mrs. Mozeen Mr. Martin, sen. 2 Books Mr. Martin, jun. P^inter, 12 Books
Mr. Mercy.
N
-- Neville, Esquire -- Newton, Esquire of London Mr. Norris, Ditto Mrs. Nugent Mrs.
Nicholls Mr. Nayler Miss Nicholson.
O
Garton Orme, Esquire Mrs. Oliver. Mr. Osborne Miss Ogilvie
P
-- Pain, Esquire of London Capt. Parker Mr. Palmer Mrs. Elizabeth Price Mr.
Philip Philips Mrs. Phillott Miss Phillott Master Joseph Phillott Master
Charles Phillott Mr. Thomas Pennington, jun. of Bristol Mrs. Perkins. Mr. James
Pardoe, of Bristol Mr. Benjamin Price, of ditto
Q
Mr. Quelch.
R
-- Reynolds, Esquire of London Mr. Roche Mrs. Richardson Mrs. Reynolds Mr.
Richards Mr. Reseck Mr. Rotten Mr. John Ross, of Bristol Mrs. Rowley Mr.
Racster, of Bristel Mr. Rawlinson, ditto.
S
-- Scott, Esquire of London Miss Simpson Mr. Daniel Sullivan Mr. James Stewart, of
Bradford Mr. Richard Stephens Mr. Samuel Stephens Miss Spry Mr. St. John Smith,
of Bristol Mr. Stephenson Mr. P. Shelberry, of Bristol Mr. Smith. Miss
Sainsbury
T
-- Toms, Esquire of London Miss Towers of ditto Mr. Edward Thornton Mr. Joseph
Terry Mr. Nicholas Tucker Mr. Thistlewait Mr. George Turton Mrs. Tailor. Mrs.
Elizabeth Tailor Mr. John Thorn, of Bristol
W
Patrick Wemys, Esquire The Hon. Mrs. Wemys -- Wale, Esquire of London John Wood, Esquire 6
Books Mr. Waker Mr. Thomas Walker Miss White Mr. Roger Watts, of Bristol Miss
West Mr. Wilkinson. Master William Willmore Mr. John Weeks, of Bristol
Y
-- Yew, Esquire of London Mr. Charles Young.
POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
ODE to EXPECTATION.
LET others curse thy heavy Sway,
Of dull Suspense, and cold Delay;
Complain of Absence' lingering Pain,
And Hope, for Years indulged in vain,
To me, as thou were wont, appear,
Tell me but that Amasia's near,
Fraught with the Prospect of that Blessing,
It Is not expecting -- but possessing.
COME, EXPECTATION! Haste to me,
Kind Parent of Credulity!
For ever put that Semblance on,
Appear like her, and her alone;
Before my Eyes her Image place,
Her Strength of Mind, her Bloom of Face:
Thine Aid will I for ay implore,
Thy Bounty bless, thy Power adore.
WHAT could I not, with Patience, bear,
With Pleasure, while I wait for her!
No Grief could feel while she were nigh,
And Laughter wantoned in her Eye;
Nor Pleasure know, estranged to Joys,
Whenever I hear Amasia's Sighs;
Nor any, any Danger fear,
So great -- as that of losing her.
YET it must be -- I Am doomed to part,
To tear her from my Eyes, my Heart;
My every Hope, each Wish resign,
And never, never call her mine.
-- But is there none, no secret Way,
My Vows to waft, my Duty pay?
Friendship! Esteem! Can none of these
Instruct an artless Swain to please?
Yet robbed of the sole Power t'impart
The honest Meaning of my Heart,
How can I half its Feelings prove,
How? When I dare not mention Love?
YET fly, Despair! Suspense, begone!
Your sullen Empire I disown;
With Transport still I bow to thee,
Kind Parent of Credulity!
Benign, as erst, do thou appear,
And Hope, and certain Joy is near.
Haste, EXPECTATION, loveliest Friend,
Thy softest, sweetest Influence lend:
The anxious, Heart-expanding Sigh,
That rises when Amasia's nigh,
Which kindles all my Soul, to prove
Her Beauty's Force, the Pride of Love!
To view, to hear, to clasp her once again,
Were cheaply purchased with an Age of Pain.
SONG.
LONG at thy Altar, God of Love,
I paid a double Duty;
A Slave to Celia's Voice and Wit,
To Chloe's Taste and Beauty.
Fain would I fix my restless Heart,
While they, with awkward Feature,
Disguise in Affectation's Masque
The bounteous Gifts of Nature.
Celia, affecting Beauty's Grace,
Destroys her Sense and Spirit,
And Chloe's Charms, through fancied Wit,
Lose all their wonted Merit.
While in their native Beauties decked,
I can love both, -- or either, --
But thus in borrowed Airs disguised,
I can be fond of neither.
Imitation of Part of the 3d Epode of Horace.
Horrida Tempestas Coelum contraxit, etc.
NOW wintry Blasts deform the Year -- the Rain
Descends -- fast falls the fleeting Snow;
Bleak through the Woods the North-Winds blow,
And Storms and Tempests vex the angry Main.
From these let us a Warning take,
And learn of Life the most to make,
While Youth, Health, Strength, and Jollity remain;
No more let sullen Thoughts over cast thy Brow,
But join, my Friend, the social Board,
Let Mirth fly round! Champagne's the Word!
When wrinkled Age appears, we'll sober grow.
SONG, to Miss K -- B -- in Dublin.
FAIRER than the opening Lillies,
Fresher than the Morning Rose,
Are the blooming Charms of Phyllis,
Richer Sweets does she disclose.
Long secure from Cupid's Power,
Soft Repose had lulled my Breast,
'Till, in one short, fatal Hour,
She deprived my Soul of Rest.
Child of Pleasure and Vexation,
Fly, my Verse, and paint my Flame;
Whisper soft that tender Passion,
Which I must not, cannot name!
Lovely Fair, remove my Anguish,
Give my Soul her wonted Ease;
Since you have taught me how to languish,
Teach, oh! teach me how to please.
To a Friend on his Marriage.
Felices ter, and amplius,
Quos irrupta tenet Copula!
HORAT.

WHEN Dignity and Titles wed,
Shall Flattery deck the bridal Bed?
When Hymen's Torch must blush for Shame,
That only Wealth inspires the Flame;
Or when the Muse on Beauty's power
Attends, to grace a venal Hour,
To such shall she her Honors pay,
Yet none be found to grace this Day?
Shall no applauding Verse be read,
When Honesty and Goodness wed?
BE it then mine, and mine alone,
For once the nuptial Rites to crown!
Stranger to Flattery, Lie, or Sneer,
My Commendation is sincere;
And sure the Verse you may commend,
Although the Poet be -- a FRIEND.
PURSUE, blessed Pair, the fond Regard,
Each other's Virtues to reward.
Eternal Joys shall on ye wait,
Unknown to Titles, Wealth, or State;
Now Titles, Wealth, and State shall bend,
Overcome by Husband, Consort, Friend!
Such are the Titles that reward
Unspotted Truth, and firm Regard.
Wealth too your Blessings shall approve;
Undying Peace, immortal Love!
Such Wealth as this to ye is lent;
And when shall Love's rich Store be spent?
State too -- the highest shall ye know,
VIRTUE -- our highest State below!
To crown your Happiness, the Muse
With Wish sincere the Verse pursues.
"May Faith, Affection, and Esteem,
"Be ever your delighted Theme!
"May Satisfaction be your Bed,
"Content, a Pillow for the Head!
"While in each others Arms ye lie,
"May Love close up the slumbering Eye!
"And may each new-revolving Sun
"Improve the Bliss, which this begun!"
ODE.
YOUNG Corydon for lovely Phyllis burned,
The generous Nymph his ardent Wailings mourned.
The nuptial Tie her warmer Thoughts confined;
Still some Emotions fluttered in her Mind;
The wily Youth had touched her tender Breast,
When smiling soft the Swain she thus addressed.
Cease, fond Youth, no Prayer shall move
My softened Soul to guilty Love:
Those passionate Complaints give over,
Comply -- or never behold me more.
My Rage yet Pity disapproves,
Some Power o'ersways, but it is not Love's;
Be Passion lost in Friendship's Flame!
Approach me with that sacred Name,
And every virtuous Blessing claim.
Such kind Expressions, such endearing Terms
Who dares misconstrue what dire Lust alarms!
-- The amorous Youth her Fondness misapplied:
Inflamed with fierce Desire! And warmly sighed,
Friendship, alas, in Breasts like mine
Dominion never can own:
Where rebel Love holds uncontrolled
A firm, unshaken Throne;
Come, let me fold thee in my Arms,
Secure from every Eye;
Pour forth my Soul in Rapture's Heat,
And on thy Bosom die!
THE virtuous Nymph in conscious Grief and Fear
Mourned silently, yet dropped a speaking Tear.
Struck with Remorse, he saw the piercing Sign
Of Heaven-born Innocence, and Truth divine.
Sorrow and Shame his erring Bosom stung,
And half-broke Accents faulter'd on his Tongue.
She saw with Pleasure his repentant Grief,
And thus bespoke, to give his Soul Relief.
How blessed I am, no Tongue can prove,
In such superior Force to move,
And heal thy frantic Breast!
Such Virtue, Tenderness, and Truth,
What Power could harm? (returned the Youth)
He looked, and sighed the rest.
Remorse and Wonder held them silent long;
Then Joy burst forth spontaneous in their Song.
Matchless the Youth, who, timely wise,
Can Passion's Faults retrieve!
Matchless the Fair, who kindly tries,
Those Errors to forgive!
Hence shall each meaner Bosom learn
How Virtue's Power can move,
How infelt Goodness awes the Soul,
And Friendship conquers Love.
SONG of VERTUMNUS imitated.
What beauteous Scenes inchant my Sight, etc.
PULCHRA quae coram video and venusta!
Brachia expandens generosa vitis
Ecce quam forti placidoque nexu
Jungitur ulmo!

Umbra non ulmus sterilis videtur,
Vitis ast uvis onerata circum;
Verreret terram, nisi opem tulisse^,
Vitis et ipsa.

Te, Chloe, hoc utinam moveat jugali
Conjugem fidum sociare vinc'lo!
Quid ferant vero seniumque curaeque
Inspice cauta.

Nota sors felix, tibi sit voluptas
Nota, te exardet Deus ipse veris;
Proteget saltus virides Deus, qui
Praesidet anno.

Dum flagrant flammis alii caducis,
Illius constans amor usque durat;
Illius fidum repares amorem
Mutuo amore.

Nulla sic brumae, nivis atque dirae
Vis ferox veris minuet decorem;
Arbor et nullis violata ventis
Quaeque vigebit.

A PARAPHRASE on PSALM 46.
I.
BE Thou, O LORD, my Refuge in Distress,
My Stay in Trouble, and Support in Pain:
So shall Adversity's Assaults be less,
And hostile Arrows spend their Force in vain.
II.
What though the Earth from her Foundations rise,
The Hills upturn'd be cast into the Sea:
And Mountains shake to hear the Tempest's Voice,
Unmoved I stand -- my Trust I place in Thee.
III.
Though Ocean rage, and foaming Billows roar,
Secure, O Lord, thy great Tribunal's placed;
For, at thy Nod, the Billows swell no more,
The Earth is firm, the Mountains are at rest.
IV.
Terror, avaunt! -- Danger is far from hence,
A guiltless Conscience forms it is own Reward;
The mighty Lord of Hosts is my Defense,
The God of Jacob my Retreat and Guard.
V.
Come, and behold the Wonders of his Hand,
Lo! now Destruction reigns, and Battle's Ire --
Now the War's hushed -- Spears break at his Command,
And Chariots crackle in consuming Fire.
VI.
Then free, my Soul, from Terror and Suspense,
Await with Patience the divine Award;
The mighty Lord of Hosts is thy Defense,
The God of Jacob thy Retreat and Guard.
PASTORAL.
I.
WHILE the clear Brook in prattling Murmurs played,
And Solitude adorned the pleasing Shade,
Blythe Corydon breathed forth his glowing Joy --
Ye Swains, attend -- thus sung the amorous Boy.
II.
No more to Fancy's. Dreams the Notes belong,
Nor weak Ideas feebly tune my Tongue;
No more Invention's Aid the Muse requires,
Or faint Conception's momentary Fires;
III.
It Is Gratitude inspires my ravished Heart,
And Virtue's Charms true Sentiments impart.
To my Amasia's Ear the Notes belong,
Sweet are the Strains, if she approve my Song.
IV.
How blessed am I, to see the Nymph I love
List to my Converse, and my Flame approve!
Who scorns the Trifler's Praise, the Flatt'rer's Art,
Humbly content to take an honest Heart.
V.
The painted Rose, that blooms on Beauty's Face,
The damask Lip, and every specious Grace;
What solid Joys, alas, can these impart,
If unattended with a spotless Heart?
VI.
Wherefore did Heaven the female Race supply
With each gay Luster that attracts the Eye,
Unless the fair Appearance was designed
The Habitation of a fairer Mind?
VII.
Is there, who doubts the Truth of what I say,
Who thinks all female Charms will soon decay? --
In sweet Amasia's Aspect let him see
What Beauty is, and Virtue ought to be.
VIII.
Behold the blooming Cheek! (O Joy to look!)
Has not the Rose her native Bed forsook?
-- Then read her Mind -- examine it with Care;
Say, is not every shining Virtue there?
IX.
Such are the Charms that in her Bosom shine,
Where Chastity and Truth, and Candor join;
Charms, that never fade -- but hourly will improve
Amasia's Charms -- and who can blame my Love?
The Tenth ODE of the second Book of HORACE, imitated.
Rectius vives, Licini, etc.
I.
DEAR Friend, thy steady Life must happiest prove,
If thou nor rashly tempt the angry Main;
Nor, when embarked, each rising Gale can move
Thy purposed Soul to make the Port again.
II.
Whoever the golden Medium wisely keeps,
And timely flies Ambition's giddy State;
Exempt from sordid Want securely sleeps,
Exempt from envied Trappings of the Great.
III.
The Cloud-capt Towers a wider Ruin spread,
The Pine full often the Tempest's Rage endures;
And dreadful Lightnings blast the Hill's high Head,
From which, Humility the Vale secures.
IV.
When fickle Fortune smiles, the steady Mind
Still fears each Hour an adverse Stroke may bring;
Hopes, when she frowns, some happier Lot behind,
The Power, who sends the Winter, sends the Spring.
V.
Though ruthless Fate reject our present Prayers,
It Is stern Decrees in Time may milder grow --
Phoebus often joins the Muses' sprightly Airs,
Nor always bends his pestilential Bow.
VI.
Boldly do thou, my Friend, with Heart prepared,
Stem the strong Current of Adversity:
But, when Prosperity's full Gales blow hard,
Reef, Reef betimes -- nor trust the Fallacy.
A CARD to VENUS.
In imitation of the Thirtieth ODE, of the first Book of HORACE.
O Venus, Regina Cnidi etc.
COME Venus, come, and make us blessed,
Mine, and my Chloe's welcome Guest!
What though thy Cyprus should repine,
While in our happy Seat you shine,
Our happy Seat shall grateful prove,
And Incense shall reward thy Love.
Haste, and bring thy amorous Boy,
And with him each attendant Joy,
Youth, and her thousand Charms, that lie
In dimpled Cheek, or laughing Eye;
Wit, whom the Power of Beauty moves,
And Beauty, which true Wit approves. --
W^^^l make, if with this Train you come,
O^ Ch^^^'s House the Graces' Home.
A TRANSLATION.
As Chloe on Flowers reclined o'or the Stream, etc.
I.
FLORIBUS inclinans Fluvii sub Margin pictis,
Plorabat lachrymans Thyrsida maesta Chloe;
Distribuere ^t^i Sertumque and ventus Odores,
Haud Requies Pectus Virginis ulla fovet.
II.
Cursu praecipiti fallax elabitur Amnis,
Et fluctus ripae vix tetigere torum;
Perfida blanditiis en! vafritreque decora,
Insidias referunt Flumina, Thyrsi, tuas.
III.
Qui leni nuper spirabat flamine Ventus,
Caecat nunc atris Imbribus, ecce, diem!
Leniter ut spirans, ut tempestate laborans,
Sic Thrysis placidus, sic rabieque tumens.
IV.
Floribus excerptis, gemmato Germine pictis,
Virginis ante pedes, heu! decus omne perit;
Thyrisida disjunctum referunt, cum perdita forma est,
Praesentemque refert Thyrsida forma recens.
V.
Expes, ecce, Chloe rabie jam concita surgit,
A pedibusque furens languida serta jacit;
Dimittit fluvio lachrymas, suspiria Ventis,
Et temere exclamat "perfide Thyrsi, vale!"
VI.
Ira tamen qualis! -- Thyrsis quando obvius ibat,
Dispulit en! nubes Solis Imago micans!
Dispulit en! Phoebus languorem floribus! -- iram,
Adveniens Thyrsis dispulit atque Chloes.
To AMASIA, With a FAN, whereon was represented CUPID with his Bow bent, and
APOLLO behind directing him where to shoot.
I.
THYRSIS, who never had felt Love's Smart,
Or Cupid's Power confessed,
Once to Apollo made his Court,
And thus his Prayer addressed.
II.
Bright Power, from thee, and only thee,
I Will deign to take my Doom;
Thy Wisdom must with Beauty join,
Ere I can be overcome.
III.
Beauty alone is but a Glass,
Wherein an Image shines,
Which pleases only when we are near,
But when we are gone, declines.
IV.
Give me the Nymph, whose Mind is bright,
And perfect as her Face:
Where Sense improves what Beauty gave,
And heightens every Grace.
V.
Such only merits my Regard,
And can my Passion move;
Show me this Fair, with Joy I Will own,
I Will feel the Force of Love.
VI.
"Such Worth, (replied the God) alone
" Amasia can impart;
"See Venus reigning in her Eyes,
" Apollo in her Heart!"
To the SAME.
WHILE thus in scorching Fires I burn,
Amasia doubts the ardent Flame;
What, though in silent Grief I mourn,
Each Heartfelt Sigh breathes forth her Name.
O could my Prayers inspire her Heart
To feel the Rapture she bestows! --
Yet how can I my Pains impart,
When Honor, Virtue are my Foes?
Yes -- so extravagant my Flame,
All Obstacles it can remove;
Honor and Virtue, cease your Claim,
What, what are ye, alas, to Love?
In vain do Sophists preach that Heaven,
Has Charms concealed from mortal View;
They know not what a Pledge was given;
They never, Amasia, gazed on you.
Then, in this Ecstasy of Pain,
Bid me not from your Sight retreat,
Let me one heavenly Smile obtain,
And breath my Ardors at your Feet.
May soft Compassion melt your Heart,
To ease the Agonies I feel! --
In vain I try their Force t'impart;
They Are more than Language can reveal.
O, then behold my dying Eyes,
This trickling Tear my Pains may prove;
Or read in these Heart-rending Sighs,
Silence is eloquent in Love.
Since, though your Cruelty can kill,
Your Tenderness can bid me live;
Then Mercy's soft Commands fulfill,
And if you cannot bless -- forgive.
By Nature to the Indian's shown,
An Antidote for poisonous Pains,
And who the Venom caused alone
Can chase it from the scorching Veins;
Thus, Fair-one, you are in Justice bound,
To ease the Anguish I endure;
Thou could alone inflict the Wound,
Thou can alone apply the Cure.
ODE to CUPID.
Sent to CLEORA, on New-Years-Day, with WALLER's Poems.
I.
AH! tell me, Cupid, lovely Boy,
To ease a Wound thy Arrow gave
Will thou for once thy Hand employ,
And serve a Youth, who lives thy Slave?
No more the Paphian Shrines shall show
They with unequaled Luster glow:
Thy Altars shall thy Mother's Pride o'erturn,
To thee shall far more grateful Incense burn;
Great God of Love, vouchsafe to smile,
And thus I Will rear a nobler Pile.
II.
The sacred Myrtle shall conspire,
To kindle youthful Hammond's Lyre:
Next, folded in a Laurel Shade,
I Will place the constant Nut-brown Maid --
Blooming in Verse, for ever young;
As Fancy drew when Prior sung.
Forsaken Sapho's Song divine,
With Willow bound, shall deck the Shrine --
With Roses wreathed I Will crown the Lays
That Granville sighed in Mira's Praise --
In Cypress vaild I Will add to these
The mournful Notes of Eloise --
And Cowley too, whose Lines impart
The plaintive Sorrows of his Heart,
His Swan-like Muse, that dying sung so well,
Shall grace again that Fane at which he fell.
III.
And, though such Offerings well require
A Torch of bright Promethean Fire,
To raise a far more brillant Flame,
I Will softly sigh Cleora's Name. --
Ah bear this Gift with rapid flight,
And place it in my Charmer's Sight;
Conceal my Name, but say I sought,
To find an Emblem of her Thought --
The lovely Image to obtain,
Tell her how long I sought in Vain,
'Till Waller showed his heavenly Strain.
IV.
Waller -- who tunes his matchless Song,
Soft as her Heart, and as her Reason strong.
Wherever she turns, each Gazer views
Her Motion graceful as his Muse.
Were'er she looks, what Heart denies,
His Fancy sparkles in her Eyes? --
O then convey with choicest Care
This faithful Mirror of my Fair,
And softly whisper in her Ear,
I sealed it with a Kiss sincere,
This Day, that leads the circling Year.
V.
Tell her that Time is jealous grown
I count my Life by her alone:
Her Absence dares invade his Power,
And turn a Minute to an Hour; --
For which, whenever she charms my Sight,
The hoary Tyrant's envious Spite
Makes Hours like Moments wing their flight.
VI.
This said -- Ah! generous God, be kind,
And search the Answer of her Mind.
If kind Reflection should suggest,
Who it is that feels what you expressed,
Wide spread thy Pinions, quickly fly,
And tell me that she thinks, it is I.
VI.
But if (each Thought of me overthrown)
My hapless Verse remains unknown:
Or if, by fickle Fortune fired,
She scorns to hear what you inspired,
On me alone thy Vengeance fall,
And let my Woes atone for all!
Dying, my Soul this Suit prefers,
Tear, tear, my Breast -- but pity here is!
PSALM 57, PARAPHRASED.
I.
BE merciful, O GOD, and save
My Soul; in Thee her Trust is placed;
Thy Wings for Shelter let me have,
Until this Tyranny be past.
II.
To Thee, who Help alone can lend,
Both late and early will I call:
Thou, from on high, shall me defend
Against him, who would my Feet entral.
III.
My Soul is in the Lion's Den,
(My Enemies are gathered Round:)
Beset with wicked Sons of Men,
Whose Tongues like Spears and Arrows wound.
VI.
LORD, to deliver me appear,
Above the Heaven thy Beauties raise,
Thy glorious Majesty uprear,
And over the Earth thy Brightness blaze.
V.
Maliciously their Snares they laid,
And to oppress me sorely sought
In vain -- the LORD flew to my Aid,
And in the Snare themselves are caught.
VI.
Oh! how shall I thy Goodness praise? --
The Heart, which Thou have saved, receive!
Awake, my Lute! thy Raptures raise!
To GOD eternal Honors give!
VII.
Among the Nations will I sing,
And with my Voice the Temple rend:
Thy Mercies reach to Heaven, Great King,
Thy Glories to the Clouds extend.
VIII.
In full Effulgence, LORD, appear,
Above the Heavens thy Beauties raise!
Thy Glorious Majesty uprear,
And over the Earth thy Brightness blaze!
The Circumstances of this Piece are founded on Facts, to which the Author was
privy; but he is obliged to conceal the real Names. The Lady, being unhappily
disappointed in her Passion, retired to a Convent, and to Heaven consecrated a
Heart, which elsewhere could receive no Ease. -- The Sentiments (except the
Epitaph) are taken from original Letters of her writing.
LAVINIA to AEGISTHUS.
SHUT from the World, and cloistered from the Sun,
Ere half my Race of early Life is run,
Betrayed by hapless Love to endless Care,
Condemned to deep Distress, and dark Despair,
Why do I thus recall my fatal Woes,
Why, why by Recollection kill Repose?
-- O Memory! Reviver of each Pain,
How long must I endure thy hated Reign?
Will thou for ever labor to renew
The pleasing Hours, which once, alas! I knew?
-- Hours no more pleasing -- the dear Youth is gone,
And with him every Happiness is flown. --
For ever must these Agonies remain,
Still must I wish for Ease, still wish in vain?
Why could not Love, that Tyrant of my Heart,
Cease his proud Reign, and with the Cause depart?
Why should his Pleasures but ideal be,
Yet all his Tortures prove -- Reality?
-- O come, thou first, thou best beloved of Men,
Compose my raging Thoughts, and guide my Pen.
Teach me, like thee, to scorn these Frowns of Fate,
To laugh at Love, and all his idle State;
His soothing Joys without his Pains to feel; --
To this torn Breast that happy Art reveal.
Or, for these Pangs, which I through thee endure,
(Thou, who alone could cause, alone can cure)
Teach me thy Loss no longer to regret;
O teach that harder Science -- to forget.
-- He hears not, or regardless hears my Moan, --
Must I endure these Pangs, and I alone?
It Is just I should -- my throbbing Sighs are vain;
I first indulged, and last should feel the Pain.
TRANSPORTED thus, I Have failed in my Design;
It Is Passion, and not Reason paints the Line.
I meant to speak the Virtues of his Youth,
His open Heart -- his Honesty and Truth.
He is too generous to augment my Care,
Or raise a Sorrow, which he would not share.
YE blooming Nymphs, who feel Love's tender Flame,
May worth like his the rising Transport claim!
Who dares each vicious Principle remove,
And scorns t'insult the Heart he cannot love.
Be such your Lot! -- but never like me to mourn
Or feel the Pains of Love without Return!
WHEN this poor Form shall in Oblivion lie,
When Hope, and Fear, and Joy neglected dye,
If ever in aftertimes ye chance to stray,
Where the tall Elms mark yonder gloomy Way,
The Inscription read, which that most loved of Men
Has deigned to dictate to my trembling Pen.
EPITAPH.
BENEATH (O late Enjoyment!) sleeps in Peace,
For the first Time, a young, unhappy Fair;
Blessed was the Moment, when she found this Ease,
Her first of Pleasure, and her last of Care.
To One ill-omen'd Hour, and fatal Youth,
The undesigning Author of her Woes,
She gave ('it was all she had) unspotted Truth,
And gained at length ('it was all she asked) Repose.
No farther search into her hapless Lot,
Nor blame the Failings of her guardless Bloom;
Since Love unsullied decks the hallowed Spot,
And stainless Virtue consecrates the Tomb.
To ASPASIA, A BIRTHDAY ODE.
Hic Dies vere mihi festus atras
Eximet Curas
HORAT. Lib. 3. Od. 14.
WHAT, no unusual splendid Ray?
No Blaze to usher in the Day?
No brighter Sun to tell the Earth
This Morning gave Aspasia Birth?
No Glories more than common given,
No Grace pecular from Heaven?
No choral Songs, no Lay sublime?
None, at this fair auspicious Time?
-- Imperfectly methought I said,
By Fancy's airy Visions led, --
When Venus to my dreaming Sense
Appears, and thus rebukes me -- 'Hence,
'Thou idle, weak Complainant! -- cease --
'Nor tire the Powers with Cries like these.
'What Blaze need usher in the Morn,
'When Truth and Probity was born?
'Aspasia wants no Ray divine --
'Once formed, she self-adorn'd does shine.
'No bounteous Godhead of the Sky
'Was absent, at her Birth, save I.
'Minerva gave her Store of Sense,
'And (to display it) Eloquence.
'Cupid bestowed a chosen Dart,
'And placed it very near her Heart,
'To fight, to conquer -- or to move
'The jocund Soul to laughing Love.
'Majestic Juno's Care supplied
'Her tender Breast with honest Pride;
'Such Pride as teaches to subdue
'Each sordid Art and gainful View;
'As bids us undisdaining see
'Misfortune's Garb, and Poverty.
'Some Power of inferior Station
'Gave Meekness, Patience, Resignation --
'Wistless to wrong, to pardon free,
'Heav'n's loveliest Child, Humanity;
'Stranger to Censure, or Caprice,
'Who into Virtue construes Vice;
'For ever diligent to trace
'The fairest Meaning of the Case;
'And decked with Tears still free to flow
'In pity to the Suff'rer's Woe. --
'Some wondrous Virtues all have given,
'Sacred, and Favorites of Heaven;
'That wear their Glories in their Name,
'And want no Blazon to proclaim.
'Then, Mortal, thy Complaints give over --
'Hear -- see -- be silent, and adore!'
YET deign, fair Goddess, I rejoined,
To solve one Doubt within my Mind.
Whence is it, that on so sweet, so fair
'Semblage of Qualities thus rare,
Thy beauteous Mark has not been set,
To make the Image quite complete?
'Mortal, had I my Power employed,
'And superadded Beauty's Pride,
'The Form would much too fair have been,
'Too beauteous for the Sons of Men;
'Too rich for mortal Shape to have guarded,
'Too good for Earth to have rewarded,
'Too great for future Bliss to have mended,
'And more than Woman was intended.'
SHE fled -- and instant fled away
My Vision. -- I returned to Day.
Then to Aspasia ran, to view
Whence Fancy's Pen her Picture drew;
Where wrapped I stood in Bliss extreme,
Surpised to find, 'twas not a Dream.
To the SAME. A NEW YEAR'S ODE.
I.
AS late in Fancy's Lap entranced I lay,
Dozing my softer Hours away:
(Fairer than Ida was the Mount she pressed,
In Nature's richest Verdure dressed,
The Earth with roseat Fragrance did abound,
And all methought was Paradise around;)
Arrayed in Summer's fairest Vest,
A Nymph with tripping Motion came;
In gentle Accents, smiling she addressed
My listening Sense -- and Fortune was her Name.
II.
'Long has the cens'ring World my Power despised,
'Of every Worth my Favor dispossessed,
'To prove me blind malicious Tales devised,
'And say, through me that Merit never is blessed.
Mortal, to thee, (nay cease to bend)
'My Suit I make, and thy Assistance crave --
'My Honors to retrieve thy Influence lend,
'And from malicious Slander save.
III.
'There is a Nymph (with Blushes I must own)
'To whom alas! too long I Have been unknown:
'Who can my Gifts behold with unregarding Eyes,
'And all my Power to harm defies.
'Some more than human Strength supports her Mind,
'Some Resolution not to Earth confined;
'Alike esteemed my Favor and my Frown.
IV.
'One Smile from her would soon destroy
'Malice and Envy's deadliest Rage;
'Would hebetate fell Satire's keen Annoy,
'And all my Cares assuage.
'No more should Men this partial Maxim mind,
'Fortune is fickle, false, and blind,
'But all should own with Joy sincere,
'Her Power is fixed, her Judgment clear,
'This Day that leads the circling Year.
V.
'Lo! what a Garland is before thee laid,
'Of Flowers cropped from Nature's richest Tree!
'Bestow them ALL on Honor's favorite Maid --
'Why do thou pause? -- Aspasia must be she.
'Behold this Branch of PLEASURE's gilded Plant,
'Whereon the Flower CONTENT does grow!
'And here is AFFECTION's Leaf, of Sweetness nothing scant,
'Whence PEACE of MIND it is gentle Bud shall blow,
VI.
'Lo! here a flaunting Branch of WEALTH I Have brought,
'Plant, that shall never cease to bloom!
'(For which from Age to Age whole Worlds in Toil have sought)
'With FRIENDSHIP's odorous Sprig to lend divine Perfume;
'And here of LOVE, to crown it all,
'This middle Branch expanding, fair, and tall,
'Stole from the Youth, whom most the Virgin loves.
VII.
'With awful Reverence, at her Virtue's shrine
'Lowly present the fragrant Wreath;
'More to commend it, let no Praise be mine,
'Say Fate, not Fortune does the Gift bequeath!
'Ah! should she kindly deign receive
'What I with more than duteous Pleasure give,
'My Power, my Honor shall for ay survive.
VIII.
'Mortal in thee I must confide,
'In this thy strictest Faith be tried! --
I bowed, in Token of my promised Care,
And looked Obedience -- ere I had expressed
My Thanks, thus honored with so fair Behest,
She vanished into Air.
IX.
The Garden, where I lay, now over and over
With curious Search I 'gan t'explore;
So rich a Chaplet to contain
A suited Cage to form all Art were vain.
Yet of the rarest Twigs, the Muse could find,
In artful, plyant Foldings twined,
A neat Receptacle (the best she could) she joined,
That no unhallowed Touch the Garland might profane.
X.
ESTEEM his nervous Stem provides
The Groundwork to compose;
HONOR and fairest TRUTH connect the sinuous Sides;
While here and there, between the Chains,
FRATERNAL LOVE, (like Ore through Nature's richest Veins)
It Is supple Sweetness shows.
XI.
MODESTY's tender Leaf o'ercover'd all,
Preserving from inclement Air. --
Thus, well-secur'd, the Muse shall lowly fall,
And reverentially present,
Regardful of the Goddess' great Intent,
With sacred Wishes, and right faithful Prayer.
XII.
O may this Chaplet heighten it is Perfume,
And Day by Day improve!
Each Flower contained each Moment richer
WEALTH, PLEASURE, FRIENDSHIP, LOVE!
Henceforth no Blast, no Damp come near,
But all in fresher Sweets enrob'd appear
Each Day that leads each circling Year!
AMELIA to EUCRATES, While on her Deathbed.
ERE these sad Lines arrive, which now I send
The fondest Husband and the truest Friend,
Those tender Titles will no longer prove
The living Tokens of our mutual Love; The Hint of this Piece is taken from a
Letter in the SPECTATOR, To Colonel R. S. in SPAIN. -- Which the Reader may
find in VOL. 3, No. 204.

No more furvive. -- For since that fatal Day,
When from my Bosom thou were torn away
The rigid Call of Honor to obey,
My Malady's increased; my End I see:
And Health, and Joy, and Life, all fled with thee.
THAT fond Regard, I owe the best of Men,
Alone enables me to use my Pen;
The Pain to write I scarce can undergo,
And my Tears trickle where the Ink should flow.
Yet the sole Terror Death presents to View,
Oh much-loved Consort, is, to part from you.
Else wherefore should I fear his sure Behest?
-- No unrepenting Folly loads my Breast;
No Guilt inexpiate I leave behind,
No vicious Love, that dares pollute my Mind.
But in reflecting on those tender Hours,
When Love, and Peace, and Happiness were ours,
I re-enjoy our every Pleasure past;
And sigh, to think they can no longer last.
-- Is this a Crime? to wish their lasting Stay,
And strive to put the Stroke of Death away?
No -- sure it is Piety's and Virtue's Task,
For such Enjoyments Length of Days to ask;
Those rapturous Moments once more to redeem,
When Love, and Love alone was all our Theme;
When social Tenderness approved the Flame,
And Friendship sanctified a Husbands Name.
SINCE it is not ours t'explore the Work of Fate,
But descant darkly on that future State,
Where Vice shall meet it is due proportioned Pain,
And Virtue lasting Happiness attain,
Why may we not (t'alleviate the Strife
'Twixt Hope and Fear, when we resign this Life,)
At least indulge a Wish, that we may know,
Each Stroke that is aimed at Mortals here below?
And be employed perhaps, to guide their Ways,
With whom in Life we passed our guiltless Days?
-- May I, over thee a Guardian Angel placed,
Unseen, allay the Conflicts in thy Breast!
No more, as now, a weak and fearful Mate,
To sigh, and wish away the Stroke of Fate;
But meet Misfortune with undaunted Eye,
Rush boldly on, and Death's worst Power defy!
Incapable of Wound thy Steps attend,
Thy lovely Face in Battle to defend!
To view each threatening Danger from afar,
And shield thee in the dreadful Hour of War!
OR, when a Fever rages through the Veins,
Torn, and inflamed with agonizing Pains,
Obsequious to tend the gloomy Bed,
And, in the drooping Moment, raise thy Head;
Infuse the Balm of Patience in thy Breast,
In Slumber close thine Eyes, and watch thy Rest!
No greater Happiness can I implore;
Be this my future Lot! -- I ask no more.
BY these Ideas to my Fate resigned,
I smile at Death, and cheer my languid Mind.
But Oh! your Torture, when you must deplore
Your lost Amelia -- yours alas! no more! --
Revives my Torment, tears my laboring Heart;
Now, now I feel what Anguish it is to part!
Your Woes alone too fatally declare
That Death has Terrors, and that I can fear!
BUT hold -- my Tenderness has raised a Pain,
Which in oblivion ever should remain.
Be dumb my Love! -- yet can I give relief,
Or waft one Comfort to assuage thy Grief!
No -- Consolation will in Vain be sent
By her whose Loss your generous Tears lament.
Cease then -- in Silence be my Pains expressed!
My Moments now are short -- Oh! guess the rest --
If I Am myself, my latest Breath shall flow
In Prayers for thee -- the least of what I owe.
No more thy much-loved Image shall I view;
No longer sigh, my Life, my Soul, Adieu!
The Name of a Gentleman's Seat in the County of KILKENNY in IRELAND.
BELVIDERE, (a POEM) addressed to ETHELINDA.
Fortunati ambo! si quid mea carmina possunt,
Nulla dies unquam memori vos eximet aevo.
VIRG. Aen. 2. 446.
A WHILE forego your darling Seat,
Hither from Henry's Breast retreat,
Candor, Humanity, and Friendship dear!
While, by your Aid, and in your Praise,
The grateful Note I strive to raise,
To Virtue, Love, Content, and Belvidere.
II.
Graces, that warm and glad the Heart,
To me your brightest Force impart,
The Worth I know ah! let me truly tell!
Well may ye deign my Prayer to hear,
Full well, I wot, ye all are near,
For where your Henry is, ye surely dwell.
III.
Henry, who bids my Heart to glow
With Pity, for the Suff'rer's Woe,
And to the Shivering Wretch Relief extend,
Shall I not joy to speak his Praise,
Who well might merit better Lays,
My Guardian, Guide, Philosopher, and Friend!
IV.
Not his the Pride of shining Spires,
(Uneasy Seat of high Desires)
Nor glittering Pomp of Equipage and Show!
But his, to feel the Stranger's Sigh,
To wipe the trickling aged Eye,
And from the grief-swoln Bosom banish Woe.
V.
The Spot which Nature's self did frame,
(Ere Art to her Assistance came,)
Blooming Hygea's best-belov'd Retreat,
Is, by his free unsparing Hand,
Become rich Bounty's favorite Land,
And Charity's thrice hospitable Seat.
VI.
While yet it rustles through the Trees,
Quick let me catch the Morning Breeze,
And, ere it flies, enjoy the wholesome Gale!
Prostrate thy Belvidere beside,
Applaud the Mountain's lofty Pride,
Or praise the humble Glories of the Vale!
VII.
Now, in the bright meridian Blaze,
Soft let me shun the scorching Rays,
With Henry's Worth domestic Hours employ!
Behold him, with delighted Gaze,
From Mis'ry's Gripe the Orphan raise,
And teach the Widow's Heart to sing for Joy.
VIII.
Or in the lengthening Shades of Night,
(The Landscape glimmering on the Sight)
Her palid Queen with Reverence let me greet!
While from above you azure Hills,
With solemn Joy my Soul she fills,
And the dank The Name of a River that runs through the County.
Nore slow murmurs at my Feet.
IX.
While yet the Infant Structure smiled,
Thus Henry every Care beguiled,
(Through Acts long past Poetic thought can rove,)
'Child of my Hopes, auspicious rise,
'Omen of many future Joys!
'And sacred Rest to Ethelinda's Love!'
X.
The Walls, which Virtue thus did raise,
Now vocal with their Maker's Praise,
Full sore, I ween, the Grief that dare intrude!
Yet the shak'd Head, and stifled sigh,
Withouten Words, the Approach descry
Of Care that swells the Heart, and Sorrow rude.
XI.
How little ah! would Care avail,
Or dire Misfortune's worst Assail,
Could Henry, Ethelinda's Grief remove!
On her is fixed the languid Eye,
For her up-rises every Sigh,
As all his Joys are centered in her Love.
XII.
While thus enwrapt in Thought I stray,
Methinks I hear a Spirit say,
'Here Virtue dwells, and will forever rest;
'But varies her unsettled Feet,
'Nor yet can fix her lasting Seat,
"Till with her Ethelinda's Presence blessed.
XIII.
'She Henry's Heart with Love can warm,
'With native Elegance can charm,
'And add to Beauty Graces more refined;
'With Converse sensible and gay.
'Can smile domestic Hours away,
'And calm the rising Tumults in his Mind.
XIV.
Though now those honest Joys denied,
Be Hope, my Fair, thy constant Guide!
The Time will come, to chase thy present Woes,
When Love so perfect, Truth so bright
As thine and Henry's must unite,
And dwell for aye, in undisturbed Repose.
XV.
The youngling Muse a Moment spare,
That now he drops a silent Tear,
And softly sighs his loved Amasia's Name --
Forgive -- o'erlook the tender Line,
That mingles other Praise with thine,
But my Heart swells to own her early Claim.
XVI.
Such, such as thine her blooming Youth,
Her Virtue, Tenderness, and Truth,
If Virtue such as thine be found on Earth;
Humanity and Honor joined
To form a great and humble Mind,
And Goodness' self was proud to speak her Worth.
XVII.
From Virtue such as here is to part,
While in the foldings of my Heart
She lived with Life, and far the dearer she,
How hard! -- yet robbed, by cruel Power,
Of Love's assuasive, softer Hour,
She lives (ah! cruel Stars!) no more for me.
XVIII.
O let me then admire in thee,
What my Amasia used to be,
With my Soul's Hope thy generous Wishes join!
May thy own Henry waft a Part
Of that vast Worth, which fills his Heart,
And be a second Ethelinda mine!
FINIS.
Subscribed since the List was completed Miss Bolly Loggan Thomas Newburgh, Esquire

ERRATUM.
Page 32, the last Line, for pecular, read peculiar.


