New Hay at the Old Market; AN OCCASIONAL DRAMA, IN ONE ACT: WRITTEN BY GEORGE
COLMAN, (THE YOUNGER,) ON OPENING THE Hay-Market Theater. On the 9th of JUNE,
1795.

LONDON: PRINTED BY W. WOODFALL. FOR T. CADELL, AND W. DAVIES, STRAND. 1795.
[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT may be necessary to inform the Reader, who has not seen the following
Sketch represented on the Stage, that the character of Apewell is meant merely
as a vehicle for Mr. Caulfield's Imitations: with which both the Mimick, and
the Author of the Piece, are convinced, the respectable persons imitated, have
too much good sense to be offended. They are given as Portraits, not as
Caricatures; and the Public has pronounced them to be strong, but
unexaggerated likenesses of originals, whom its discernment has long patronised
and admired.

Although the Author has been a litte free with his good friends the Winter
Managers, (who are a little free with his Season) he thinks it needless to
offer any apology to them. He is upon too good a footing with them to suppose
that they expect it. Friends and neighbors may joke with each other. Tap for
tap, and so part fair.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
FUSTIAN, Mr. SUETT. DAGGERWOOD, Mr. BANNISTER, Jun. APEWELL, Mr. CAULFIELD.
MANAGER's SERVANT, Mr. BLAND. PROMPTER, Mr. WALDRON. CARPENTER, Mr. BENSON.
WOMEN.
Mrs. BEEZOM, Mrs. HOPKINS. MOLLY BEEZOM, Mrs. GIBBS.
New Hay at the Old Market.
SCENE I. -- An Antichamber in the Manager's House; Fustian and Daggerwood
discovered. -- Fustian sitting in one chair, Daggerwood, asleep, in another.
The Clock strikes Eleven. FUSTIAN. EIGHT, nine, ten, eleven! -- Zounds! Eleven
o'clock; and here have I been waiting ever since Nine, for an interview with
the Manager.

A Servant crosses the Stage. Harkye, young man! Is your master visible yet?


SERVANT. Sir!


FUSTIAN. I say, can I see your master?


SERVANT. He has two gentlemen with him at present, Sir!


FUSTIAN. Aye -- the old answer. Who is this asleep here, in the corner?


SERVANT. Oh! that, Sir, is a gentleman who wants to come out.


FUSTIAN. Come out! Then wake him, and open the door. Gad, the great
difficulty, at this house, is to get in.


SERVANT. Ha, Ha! I mean he wants to appear on the Stage, Sir. It Is Mr,
Sylvester Daggerwood, of the Dunstable Company.


FUSTIAN. Oho! A country candidate for a London truncheon. A sucking Prince of
Denmark -- damme, he snores like a Tinker. Fatigued with his journey, I suppose.


SERVANT. No, Sir -- he has taken a nap in this room these five mornings -- but
hasn't been able to obtain an audience, here, yet.


FUSTIAN. No, nor at Dunstable neither, I take it.


SERVANT. I am so loath to disturb him, poor gentleman, that I never wake him
till a full half hour after my master is gone out.


FUSTIAN. Upon my soul, that is very obliging! I must keep watch, here, I find,
like a Lynx. Well, friend, you will let your master know Mr. Fustian is here,
when the two gentlemen have left him at leisure.


SERVANT. The moment, Sir, they make their Exit.


Exit Servant. FUSTIAN. Make their Exit! This fellow must have lived here some
time, by his language: and I Will warrant him, lies by rote, like a Parrot. sits
down and pulls out a manuscript If I could but nail this Manager for a minute,
I Would read him such a Tragedy!


DAGGERWOOD, dreaming "Nay, an thou wilt mouth, I Will rant as well as thee."


FUSTIAN. Eh? Damme, he is talking in his sleep! acting Hamlet before twelve
tallow candles in the country.


DAGGERWOOD. "To be, or not to be" --


FUSTIAN. Yes -- he is at it. -- Let me see turning over the leaves of his Play
I think there is no doubt of its running.


DAGGERWOOD. dreaming "That is the question." -- "Who would fardles bear."


FUSTIAN. Zouns! There Is no bearing you! -- His Grace's patronage will fill
half the side Boxes -- and I Will warrant we'll stuff the critics into the Pit.


DAGGERWOOD. dreaming "To groan, and sweat" --
"When he himself might his Quietus make" --

FUSTIAN. Quietus! I wish, with all my heart I could make yours. The Countess
of Crambo insists on the best places for the first night of performance. She Will
sit in the Stage Box.


DAGGERWOOD. still dreaming "With a bare bodkin."


FUSTIAN. O, the devil! There Is no enduring this! Sir, Sir! waking him Do you
intend to sleep any more?


DAGGERWOOD, waking Eh! What? -- When?
"Methought I heard a voice cry sleep no more."

FUSTIAN. Faith, Sir, you heard something very like it; and that voice was mine.


DAGGERWOOD. Sir, I Am your most respectful servant to command, Sylvester
Daggerwood -- whose benefit is fixed for the eleventh of June, by particular
desire of several persons of distinction. You Would make an excellent Macbeth, Sir.


FUSTIAN. Sir!


DAGGERWOOD. "Macbeth does murder sleep; the innocent sleep;"
"Balm of hurt minds; great nature's second course." --
faith, and very often the first course, too; when a dinner is unavoidably
deferred, by your humble servant to command, Sylvester Daggerwood.


FUSTIAN. I am sorry Sir, you should ever have occasion to postpone so pleasant
a performance.


DAGGERWOOD. Eating, Sir, is a most popular entertainment. An entertainment for
man and horse, as I may say. But I am apt to appear nice, Sir -- and, some how
or other, I never could manage to sit down to dinner in a bad Company.


FUSTIAN. Has your company been bad, then, of late, Sir?


DAGGERWOOD. Damned bad indeed, Sir -- The Dunstable Company: -- where I have
eight shillings a week, four bits of candle, one wife, three shirts, and nine
children.


FUSTIAN. A very numerous family.


DAGGERWOOD. A crowded house, to be sure, Sir; but not profitable. Mrs.
Daggerwood a fine figure, but unfortunately stutters; so, of no use in the
theatrieal line. Children too young to make a debut -- except my eldest, Master
Apollo Daggerwood; a youth of only eight years old; who has twice made his
appearance in Tom Thumb, to an overflowing and brilliant barn -- house, I mean
-- with unbounded and universal applause.


FUSTIAN. Have you been long upon the Stage Mr. Daggerwood?


DAGGERWOOD. Fifteen years since I first smelt the lamp, Sir. My father was an
eminent Button-maker, at Birmingham; and meant to marry me to Miss Molly Meter,
daughter to the rich Director of the Coal-works, at Wolverhampton: but I had a
soul above buttons, and abhorred the idea of a mercenary marriage. I panted for
a liberal profession -- so ran away from my father, and engaged with a
traveling company of Comedians. In my travels, I had soon the happiness of
forming a romantic attachment with the present Mrs. Daggerwood -- wife to
Sylvester Daggerwood, your humble servant to command, whose benefit is fixed
for the eleventh of June, by the particular desire of several persons of
distinction. So, you see, Sir, I have a taste.


FUSTIAN. Have you! Then sit down, and I Will read you my Tragedy. I am
determined somebody shall hear it before I go out of the house. sits down


DAGGERWOOD. A Tragedy! -- Sir, Ill be ready for you in a moment. Let me
prepare for woe. takes out a very ragged pocket-handkerchief.

"This handkerchief,
"Did an Egyptian to my mother give."

FUSTIAN. Faith, I should think so: -- and, to all appearance one of the
Norwood party.


DAGGERWOOD. Now, Sir, your title; and then for the Dram. Pers.


FUSTIAN. The title, I think will strike. The fashion of Plays, you know, now,
is to do away old prejudices; and to rescue certain characters from the
illiberal odium with which custom has marked them. Thus we have a generous
Israelite, an amiable Cynick, and so on. Now, Sir, I call my play -- The Humane
Footpad.


DAGGERWOOD. What!


FUSTIAN. There Is a title for you! Is Not it happy? -- eh? How do you like my
footpad?


DAGGERWOOD. Humph! -- Why I think he will strike -- but then he ought to be
properly executed.


FUSTIAN. Oh, Sir, let me alone for that. An exception to a general rule is,
now, the grand secret for dramatick composition. Mine is a freebooter of
benevolence, and plunders with sentiment.


DAGGERWOOD. There may be something in that: and for my part, I was always with
Shakespeare. "Who steals my purse steals trash." I never had any weighty
reasons, yet, for thinking otherwise. Now, Sir, as we say, please to "leave
your damnable faces, and begin."


FUSTIAN. My damnable faces!


DAGGERWOOD. Come -- "we'll to it like french faulconers."


FUSTIAN. reading Scene first: a dark wood: night.


DAGGERWOOD. A very awful beginning.


FUSTIAN. reading The moon behind a cloud.


DAGGERWOOD. That Is new. An audience never saw a moon behind a cloud before. --
but it will be devilish difficult to paint.


FUSTIAN. Don't interrupt. -- Where was I? -- Oh -- behind a cloud.


DAGGERWOOD. "The cloud capt towers, the gorgeous palaces -- "


FUSTIAN. Hey, the devil! what are you at?


DAGGERWOOD. Beg pardon: But that speech never comes into my head but it runs
away with me. Proceed.


FUSTIAN. Enter -- reading


DAGGERWOOD. "The solemn temples" --


FUSTIAN. Nay then, I Have done.


DAGGERWOOD. So have I. I Am dumb.


FUSTIAN. Enter Egbert, musing. reading


DAGGERWOOD. O, P?


FUSTIAN. Pshaw! what does that signify?


DAGGERWOOD. Not much. "The great Globe itself" --


FUSTIAN. reading Egbert musing. Clouded in night I come. --


DAGGERWOOD. starting up "The cloud capt towers, the gorgeous palaces,"
"The solemn temples," etc. etc. etc.

FUSTIAN gets up. Damme, he is mad! A bedlamite! raves like Lear, and foams out
a folio of Shakespeare withour drawing breath. I Am almost afraid to stay in the
room with him.

Enter SERVANT. Oh, I Am glad you are come, friend! Now I shall be delivered.
Your master would be glad to see me, I warrant.


SERVANT. My Master is just gone out, Sir.


FUSTIAN. Gone out!


DAGGERWOOD. "O, day and night, but this is wondrous strange!"


FUSTIAN. What without seeing me -- who have been waiting for him these three
hours!


DAGGERWOOD. Three hours! Pugh! -- I Have slept, here, for five mornings in his
old arm Chair.


SERVANT. He ordered me to tell you, Gentlemen, he was particularly sorry --
but he is obliged to hurry down to the Hay-Market. The Theater opens this
Evening -- and Mr. Bannister Jun. and Mr. Suett, are to meet him there, on
particular business.


FUSTIAN. They are? and what the devil, friend, have I to do with Mr. Bannister
Jun.? Damn Mr. Bannister Jun.


DAGGERWOOD. And damn Mr. Suett; what the devil have I to do with Mr. Suett?
Now he has shirk'd us, I Will lay an even bet he is gone to neither of 'em.


FUSTIAN. Pretty treatment! pretty treatment truly! to be kept here, half the
morning, kicking my heels in a Manager's anti-room, shut up with a mad
Dunstable actor.


DAGGERWOOD. Mad! Zounds! Sir I Would have you to know that "when the wind's
southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw."


FUSTIAN. Tell your master, friend, tell your master -- but no matter. -- He
done catch me here again that is all. Damme, I Will go home, turn my play into a
pageant, put a triumphal procession at the end on it, and bring it out at one of
the Winter Theaters. Exit


DAGGERWOOD to the Servant. Young man you know me. I shall come to the old arm
chair again, tomorrow -- but must go to Dunstable the day after, for a week, to
finish my engagement. Wish for an interview, -- inclination to tread the London
boards, and so on. You remember my name -- Mr. Sylvester Daggerwood; whose
benefit is fixed for the eleventh of June, by particular desire of several
persons of distinction.


SERVANT. I shall be sure to tell him, Sir.


DAGGERWOOD. "I find thee apt;
"And duller would thou be than the fat weed,
"That rots itself at ease on Lethe's wharf,
"Would thou not stir in this." -- Open the street door. "Go on! I Will follow
thee."

Exit after Servant* SCENE II. -- The inside of the Theater. Two women,
discovered sweeping the Stage. A pail and mop in the corner.
1st Woman. Come, bustle, child! Bustle, Molly Beezom, bustle! We sha'n't have
the stage ready against our gentlefolks come to rehearsal.


2d. There, mother, I have done.


1st. Have you? Well then, now, Molly, as we have a little leisure -- foh! how
it tires a body to scrub down these dusty boards, after a long winter! -- As we
have a little leisure, Molly, I Will just give you a bit of advice.


2d. Do, mother; -- for I be a fresh comer from the country. Yesterday was my
first sweeping day, you do know. I cod, it be pure fun to be among these
Actor-folks!


1st. Hold your tongue, hussy! Listen to me. I have swept the boards of a
Winter, and Summer House, these eighteen years; and am old enough to have some
experience.


2d. That you be, mother. -- Old enough in all conscience.


1st. Take care, then, of these Actors. I had you up from the country, after
begging this here place for you, with great entreaties and imprecations; so
mind you be mean yourself. Take care of these Actors, I say. It Is a ticklish
sitivation for a young girl. Don't let them palaver you over.


2d. Palaver me! Law, mother, what is that?


1st. Aye -- there it is now, to want experience. Why it is just as they served
me, when I was such a green goose as yourself.


2d. Why, sure, there be no harm in 'em: -- and they be main civil. One on 'em
chuck'd me under the chin, as good natured, -- and told me I was a pretty
little Dusdemony.


1st. Hussy, hussy! I must hear no more of these doings. You Will be devoured.


2d. La, mother! sure and sure, they wont eat me?


1st. Eat you! There Is no knowing what may happen.


2d. Ben't there indeed! -- Well, if I hant been told, in our village, that
your Actor men be hungry enough to eat any thing; and that the gentry sometimes
throws oranges to 'em, from the two-shilling gallery, out of compassion.


1st. Ha! Ha! -- Lord help your simple head! Oranges out of the gallery! -- The
thing is possible here, to be sure; but in the winter Houses -- why, child,
they would never reach half way to the stage. It Is as much as they can do to
see the actors, there. But no matter for that: -- take you care of yourself,
Molly -- you are raw, child, and unexperienced. I be uneasy enough about you, I
can tell you that.


2d. Don't you be in a santigue, mother, about I. Ise warant me, when I ha been
here awhile, Ise be as knowing as the best of 'em.


1st. Go up stairs, hussy, directly, and dust out the dressing-rooms.


2d. I does not like to go up alone, mother: I be afeard.


1st. Afeard! -- Of what, you goose-cap?


2d. Why, at the top of the -- the Flys be the name on it, I fancy -- where all
the clouds be -- just at the landing place, there be a huge man -- A Polly, I
do think the carpenters call him -- stuffed out wi' straw: they have squatted
him there to sit bolt upright: and, though he be dead, he looks so mortal
frightful, I does not care to go a near him.


1st. Simpleton! it is the stuffed Apollo, in Midas. Why you are n't afraid of a
straw figure, are you?


2d. No -- not in the country: -- but this be the ugliest scarecrow I ever put
my eyes upon. I be timbersome at a dead actor, mother, though I does not much mind
facing a live one.


1st. Come, come; take your broom, and follow me.


2d. Yes, mother -- but, as we have a little bit leisure, as you do say, there
be one thing I wish to ax you to do for me. But you wont be angry, now?


1st. Well, child, what is it?


2d. Why, if you would but go down, under this here stage -- there be such
mortal funny things -- do, now, mother, just go down, and screw I up a trap.


1st. I Will trap you, you idle minx! I will. Fine doings, truly! The girl will
be ruined. Screw you up a trap, indeed!


2d. La, mother, why not? Ise warrant me, now, if I was to ax the Carpenter, he
would not have any dejection.


PROMPTER. Behind the scenes. Any of the Performers come yet?


CARPENTER Behind the Scenes. No, Sir. It wants ten minutes of the time.


1st Woman. There! I Will be hanged if it is not Mr. Waldron, the Prompter, come
to rehearsal.


2d. Prompter! Oh! that be the gentleman as reads in a book; and do blow a
little whistle, to call the actor-folks about un.


1st. Come, run Molly, run! Take up your pail, and be off.


2d. I be a coming, mother. Takes up the pail. Dear, now! I should like hugely
to stay and see a bit of their May-games. Dear, dear! what pure sport it be to
live among these here shew-folks!


Exeunt women. Enter PROMPTER and CARPENTER. PROMPTER. It does not signifye
talking, master Carpenter: -- new scenes, and fly-flaps, when there is occasion,
to be sure: -- but no extravagance.


CARPENTER. Extravagance! -- Lord help you, Mr. Waldron! We only wont to keep
pace a bit with our neighbors. Look at 'em in the winter.


PROMPTER. Winter! and how are we to keep pace with them there, you ninny
hammer? They are too magnificent for us. They have a stud of Elephants at one
house, and a stable full of Bulls at the other. We are too humble to vie with
our neighbors in giving the public any thing to see.


CARPENTER. But you know they will expect some novelty, master Waldron.


PROMPTER. Well, then, we'll give 'em something to hear: -- that is a novelty,
now, you know. But come, to business. What do you want?


CARPENTER. Why, I want a new Moon.


PROMPTER. What Is become of the old one?


CARPENTER. Torn down.


PROMPTER. And pray, Sir, how came the Moon to be down?


CARPENTER. The man that worked it, run his hand through it, last year, when he
was snuffing the candle. He was discharged for negligence.


PROMPTER. Then, we want a new man in the Moon. Let me make a memorandum. Takes
out his book, and writes. "Moon in decrease -- new one wanted. -- Man in it."
-- Well?


CARPENTER. Five waves of the sea: -- split all to pieces in the last dry
weather. They must be made of deal.


PROMPTER, writing. Memorandum -- "The sea: -- Deal." What next?


CARPENTER. A scaffold for the Surrender of Calais. Mr. Bannister, jun. broke
it down, the last time he was going to be hanged.


PROMPTER, writes. "New scaffold -- Surrender of Calais." -- Ah! but where
shall we get such another Hangman? -- Poor fellow! Poor Parsons! The old cause,
of our mirth is, now, the cause of our melancholy. He, who so often made us
forget our cares, may well claim a sigh to his memory.


CARPENTER. He was one of the comicalest fellows I ever see!


PROMPTER. Aye, and one of the honestest, master Carpenter. When an individual
has combined private worth with public talent, he quits the bustling scene of
life with twofold applause, and we doubly deplore his exit. -- But come, we
have still, some favorites among our Hundred, who are ambitious to please; and
whose continued exertions, we doubt not, will be honored with the continued
patronage of our benefactors. -- Is there any thing more?


CARPENTER. Yes: -- New ropes for all the drop scenes. -- There Is great
difficulty, at present, in drawing up the curtain.


PROMPTER. That Is true enough; -- for it ought to have been drawn up a month
ago. Well, obviate the difficulty as soon as you can, and send in that item of
your bill to the Winter Managers.


CARPENTER. Besides this, there is a --


PROMPTER. Why, zounds! you will never have done! don't I tell you we must have
no extravagance -- nothing needless. What is it?


CARPENTER. Why, it is a new chair for the Prompter.


PROMPTER. Oh! that alters the case. Well, let it be handsome; do you mind?
Stud it with brass nails, and cover it with the best Morocco -- and tell the
Property-woman to put a good soft velvet cushion in it, dye hear?


CARPENTER. I Have a nice bit of old hard cherry-tree, that would come cheaper --
and suit you to a T. master Waldron.


PROMPTER. Cherry-tree! Why, you villain, have you no mercy on my bones? --
I Will cherry tree you, with a plague! --


Enter APEWELL. APEWELL, speaking as entering. Pooh, nonsense! If the Manager
is not here, I Will speak to the Prompter. -- Oh! your servant, Mr. Waldron. Can I
see the Manager?


Exit Carpenter. PROMPTER. He is not, yet, come to the Theater, Sir. But, if
you have any business to communicate, perhaps I may answer the purpose.


APEWELL. Well, then, we'll do the matter by deputy. My name's Apewell. I want
to appear on the stage.


PROMPTER. Your application is too late, Sir; our Company is full.


APEWELL. That Is unlucky: -- but, in case of illness, I may probably be of use
as a substitute.


PROMPTER. A substitute! -- for whom, pray, Sir?


APEWELL. Why, for any body. -- Tragedy, Comedy, any thing. Nay, upon
emergency, I may even supply the place of a Prompter.


PROMPTER. Ha! Ha! -- You don't know what you undertake; young gentleman. The
place of a Prompter requires some experience.


APEWELL. "True, gallant Raleigh!"
"I cannot but surmise,"
"Your State some danger apprehends."

PROMPTER. I begin to apprehend you are a wag, Mr. Apewell.


APEWELL. Faith, if I am, Sir; however my waggery may be taken, I mean it to be
perfectly harmless. There is no man without his peculiar manner -- and, in
studying the tones of others, I hope to improve my own, without giving offense
to much better Actors than myself.


PROMPTER. That Is handsomely said, however. Give me your hand: -- you seem to
have some fun and spirit about you; and we may be better acquainted.


APEWELL. I hope we shall. Who knows, if I become one of the Company, but we
may have a bowl of punch together, at the Blue Posts: -- or take a whet in a
walk over the fields to Bagnigge. -- "Fetch a walk this fine evening, Miss
Dolly? -- Eh, Miss Dolly?"


PROMPTER. You seem pretty conversant in the drama. Have you studied much?


APEWELL. A good deal. I Will give you a touch of blank verse, to begin with:

"Let me speak, Sir,
"(For Heaven now bids me) and the words I utter
"Let none think flattery, for they will find 'em "truth.
"This Royal infant (Heaven still move about "her)
"Though in her cradle, yet now promises
"Upon this land a thousand, thousand blessings,
"Which time shall bring to ripeness," etc.

PROMPTER. Upon my word that was very well. Respectably delivered, and much in
the manner of the original.


APEWELL. Oh, Sir, if it was like the original, it could not fail of being
respectable. -- But if you think from the specimen, I may be of service, Mrs.
Apewell and myself, will be willing to join you.


PROMPTER. Does Mrs. Apewell perform principal characters, Sir?


APEWELL. Why I cannot say much for her acting; but she is a devilish good wife."

"Go thy ways, Kate!"
"The man in the world who shall report he has
"A better wife, let him in naught be trusted,
"For speaking false in that. Thou art alone
"(If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,
"Thy meekness saint-like, wife-like government,
"Obeying in commanding, and thy parts
"Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee "out)
"The Queen of earthly Queens. She Is noble "born,
"And, like her true nobility, she has
"Carried herself toward me."

PROMPTER. You have Shakespeare at your fingers ends, Mr. Apewell.


APEWELL. Why yes -- But I am talking here by words of mouth, when I could say
it all in reading, as I have it by heart in my describing book. Now I desire
you will hold your tongue, for if you talk you will put me out -- These gardens
which are now the admiration of the larned and curish, etc. etc.


PROMPTER. Bravo, young Gentleman. Well played indeed.


APEWELL. Well played, Clifford! Good air and emphasis; and well suited to the
trick of the scene. -- Shall I go on?


PROMPTER. Oh, by all means.


APEWELL. He would do, now, if the practical part of deceit were as easy at his
age, as the discernment of it is at mine. etc. etc. -- Upon my soul, though,
this is very fatiguing!


PROMPTER. I wish I had any refreshment to offer you. But we are unprovided
here, you know.


APEWELL. Come, you know there is a cake in the house. Odsflesh, Robin, I Am
heartily glad to see you. Bring us the lamb.


PROMPTER. Egad, if you were at my lodgings, you should have that, and a bottle
of wine too.


APEWELL. "Come I like that." -- But can you give me an engagement?


PROMPTER. I cannot -- but I shall mention your talents this morning to the
Manager, and I make no doubt he will be ready to employ you.


APEWELL. Come, you had better close with me yourself, at once, while we are
about it.


PROMPTER. No; Sir I daren't venture that.


APEWELL. Lord, Sir, you are as queer as a quartern of soap, after a week's
wash. Your poor dear father wouldn't have used me in this way. He used to like
to hear me talk. Dicky Gossip, says he -- he always called me Dicky. Dicky
Gossip says he, you are my Barbatick -- Barbatick! -- Was Not that droll, Sir?
-- He used to call me his Barbatick!

Well I shall call in the evening to know the Manager's answer. You may tell
him what I am fit for.


PROMPTER. Faith you seem fit for any thing. But pray do you sing.


APEWELL. I Will give you a specimen and then leave you to think on it.

"It Was on Christmas day
"Father he did wed." etc. etc.

Exit. PROMPTER. Faith a young fellow, of talent.
Enter BANNISTER, Jun. Ah, Bannister!

BANNISTER. Waldron, how goes it? well here we are in the old little shop
again! Gad I feel like a giant, here, in Lilliput, after the huge Brobdignag
boards of old Drury. Where Is our little Manager?


PROMPTER. Not come yet.


BANNISTER. He must stir his stumps, I can tell him that, now he has set up for
himself. He gives a good round sum for the Property, they tell me. I hope he
may be reimbursed.


PROMPTER. There he trusts to the town.


BANNISTER. He cannot trust to any thing better. The public never fail to
encourage Industry, or to give ample reward to those who embark with zeal in
their service, and rely with confidence on their liberality. I shall be finely
worked for it, though, through the summer, I take it, Master Waldron.


PROMPTER. Well then, as you say, the public will encourage your industry,


BANNISTER. Oh, faith, you need not tell me that: -- I trust I have always been
found to work willingly -- and at present I have a double motive to activity,
in serving the town, and assisting an old friend, who ventures largely for its
amusement. So here is defiance to heat, and a fig for the Dog Days, old Waldron!


Enter CALL-BOY. CALL-BOY. The Ladies and Gentlemen are all ready in the
Green-Room, Sir.


PROMPTER. Then we'll attend them. Oh, Bannister, here is a song I am to give
you. It Is intended for our opening.


BANNISTER. Let me see it, um -- why zouns! there must be some mistake, it
seems meant for the winter -- for it begins with an eulogy upon grand
spectacles, spacious buildings, and large Theaters.


PROMPTER. Well, well -- hum it over, before we go into the Green-Room.


BANNISTER. Eh! -- and here come some of our Chorus who may bear a burden.
Enter Chorus Here goes then.


SONG.
Since the preference, we know,
Is for pageantry and show,
'Twere a pity the public to balk --
And when people appear
Quite unable to hear,
It Is undoubtedly needless to talk.
Let your Shakespeares and Jonsons go hang, go hang!
Let your Otways and Drydens go drown!
Give us but Elephants, and white Bulls enough,
And we'll take in all the town.
Brave boys!
II.
Or if, tardily, the sound
Travels all the house around,
'Twixt the action and words there is a breach:
And it seems as if Macbeth,
Half a minute after death,
On his back, made his last dying speech.
Let your Shakespeares, etc.
III.
When, on matters of State,
Stage Heroes debate,
Intelligence so slowly is got,
'Twere better they began
On the new-invented plan,
And with Telegraphs transmitted you the plot.
Let your Shakespeares, etc.
IV.
But our House here is so small
That there is no need to bawl,
And the summer will rapidly pass;
So we hope you will think fit
To hear the Actors a bit,
'Till the Elephants and Bulls come from grass.
Then let Shakespeare and Jonson go hang, go hang!
Let your Otways and Drydens go drown!
Give 'em but Elephants and white Bulls enough,
And they will take in all the town --
Brave Boys!
FINIS.

