THE END OF OPPRESSION; BEING A DIALOGUE BETWEEN AN OLD MECHANIC AND A YOUNG
ONE. Concerning the Establishment of THE RIGHTS OF MAN.

SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, AND SOLD BY T. SPENCE, NO. 8, LITTLE
TURNSTILE, HIGH HOLBORN; PATRIOTIC BOOKSELLER AND PUBLISHER OF PIOS' MEAT.

[(...)]

(PRICE ONE PENNY.)

PIGS' MEAT: THE HONEY OR ESSENCE OF POLITICS, IS now finished in Seventy-two
Penny Numbers, making Three Volumes; Price in Boards 2s. each.

This is the only Book that in a direct Manner teaches the real, honest, and
pure RIGHTS OF MAN: and that shows an easy and practicable way to enjoy them.

THE END OF OPPRESSION.
Young Man. I HEAR there is another RIGHTS OF MAN by Spence, that goes farther
than Paine's.


Old M. Yet it goes no farther than it ought.


Y. M. I understand it suffers no private Property in Land, but gives it all to
the Parishes.


O. M. In so doing it does right, the earth was not made for Individuals.


Y. M. But people of all conditions have been so accustomed to think that the
completion of all earthly felicity consists in the possession of Landed
Propriety, that it is not likely they will generally be brought to give up the
da^ling hopes of one time or other possessing a snug Estate.


O. M. It is true, if there were no injustice attending the state of a
Landlord, it is the most desirable and enviable state in the world, even
infinitely more so than that of a King, or any Placeman or Pensioner whatsoever.


Y. M. It is indeed. Every body knows that well. For the Landlord is entirely
supreme, independent, and arbitrary, in his own Domains, hence the title Lord,
and nothing binds him but his own Leases, which he for his own interest grants.
He is in no danger of losing his revenues, for he pays himself in a most
haughty and lordly manner, without process, and without hardly condescending to
ask. And when his rents are brought to him on the very hour they are due, his
Dignity will not permit him to be thankful.


O. M. Why, I find you are at least half a Spensonian: You understand something
of the nature of the enemy: and I dare say we shall not differ much in opinion.


Y. M. I have heard, read, and seen enough of their oppressions to make me wish
them at an end, if possible.


O. M. Whether it be possible we shall see by and by. But for the reasons
beforementioned, unless it be necessary that there should be in a State Freemen
and Slaves, lordly Men, and mean Men, Landlords cannot be suffered.


Y. M. But most people believe it would be unjust to deprive Landed Men of
their Property, as many of them have purchased their Estates.


O. M. Landed Property always was originally acquired, either by conquest or
encroachment on the common Property of Mankind. And as those public Robbers did
never show any degree of conscience or moderation in their usurpations, it
cannot be expected that the multitudes thus disinherited and enslaved for ages,
should in the day of reclamation, through an effeminate and foolish tenderness,
neglect the precious opportunity of recovering at once the whole of their
Rights.


Y. M. But I am speaking of the seeming hardships of depriving modern
Purchasers of their Property.


O. M. Those modern Purchasers are not ignorant of the manner in which Landed
Property was originally obtained, neither are they sorry for it, nor for any
other imposition by which they can get Revenue. And every one knows that buying
stolen Goods is as bad as stealing.


Y. M. You are entirely right. The conduct of our rich Men is not such as to
create much respect for their Property. The whole of their study is to create
Monopolies and to raise Rents and Revenues; and, like the Grave, their endless
cry is, Give! Give!


O. M. And what was originally obtained by the Sword, they determine to detain
by the Sword. Are not they and their Minions now in Arms under the name of
Yeomanry, Volunteers etc.? And what means the inveterate War commenced by the
Aristocracy of the World against France? They know that Mankind once
enlightened will not brook their lordliness, nor be content with their Rights
by piecemeal; therefore they exert every nerve to prevent light from
spreading, and the union of the People.


Y. M. Indeed there cannot be any thing said for them. They exhibit to us too
plainly all the properties and practices of Robbers. Plunder, spoil and
contributions they will at all events have though their ill-gotten Lands should
swim with blood; fully declaring themselves the true Heirs and Successors of
the ancient Nimrods from whom they hold.


O. M. Then let all Men say, Spence has done right in rooting up such a
combination of Spoilers, and setting the world free from all exactions,
imposts, and abuses, at once and for ever.


Y. M. It is amazing that Pain and the other Democrats should level all their
Artillery at Kings, without striking like Spence at this root of every abuse
and of every grievance.


O. M. The reason is evident: They have no chance of being Kings; but many of
them are already, and the rest foolishly and wickedly hope to be sometime or
other Landlords, lesser or greater.


Y. M. But do you think Mankind will ever enjoy any tolerable degree of Liberty
and Felicity, by having a Reform in Parliament, if Landlords be still suffered
to remain?


O. M. You should first ask if the Landed Interest will let you have a reform,
which they will take care to prevent. For a Convention or Parliament of the
People would be at eternal War with the Aristocracy. But granting they should
so far forget their interest, they would soon recollect their mistake, and set
about their true interest again, which is to counteract every species of public
good. And full well are they furnished with every requisite for the diabolical
Work. The perpetual influx of wealth by their Rents without toil or study,
leaves them at full Liberty and Leisure to plot, and supplies them also with
the means of fighting successfully against the interests of the working part of
the Community, and turn their labors to their own advantage.


Y. M. Yes, it is natural to expect that whether in the legislature or out of
it, their whole study will be, under every kind of Government, to increase the
prices of what their Estates produce, that their rents may rise. What shall we
then account such a body of People, whose interests are only their own, and so
opposite to all others, but a public Enemy, a Banditti that must always be
watched and sometimes resisted.


O. M. There you are wrong with your watching and resisting. Who is to watch
and resist? Must not all the rest of the world do something for their Bread?
And are they not disarmed by the Game Laws, awed by the Military, and by
Monopolies, State Tricks, Rents and Taxes reduced to continual Drudgery and
Starvation? How many days do you think such a brood of Beggars could maintain
themselves in a state of Insurrection against their Oppressors? They must away
to their work again. The cries of their famished Families break up their
Campaigns before they are well begun, and they must again return to the yoke,
like other starved animals, for mere subsistence.


Y. M. O hopeless state of Mankind!


O. M. No, it is not yet hopeless, though the enemy, like a numerous Army, be
garrisoned and quartered every where among us, and have all the strong Holds,
all the Arms, and every advantage that triumphant and cruel Invaders could wish
for, yet will a true and universal knowledge of Spence's plain and simple
System overturn them, and sweep all their Greatness and Lordliness away in one
Day, and leave the world in perpetual and perfect Peace:


Y. M. Some seem to apprehend the mismanagement of the Parish Revenues, and so
discourage People from thinking of that System.


O. M. That is the natural work of the Enemy, and must be expected. But it does
not become Democrats to doubt concerning it. For if Men cannot manage the
Revenues and affairs of a Parish, what must they do with a State? It is almost
as absurd to answer such quibbles as to make them. How strange that Men will
turn the world upside down to get the management of a Nation, and yet pretend
to despair concerning a Parish!!! It is too bad. The villainy is too barefaced,
I am weary with combatting the vile sophistry of Scoundrels that are
Oppressors, and of Scoundrels that would be Oppressors. But in Spence's Pigs'
Meat, you will find the Parish System represented in such a variety of ways,
and so plainly evidencing to every Reader, the easy and practicable transition
from this scene of Oppression and Woe, to perfect Freedom and Felicity, that I
must refer you to that incomparable Work for complete satisfaction on the
Subject.


Y. M. I thank you. I will take the first opportunity of perusing that
excellent Book. But in the mean time, for the sake of conversation, let us
suppose that a whole Nation no matter whether America, France, Holland, or any
other, but as to England, it is entirely out of the Question, were fully
convinced of the excellence of this System, and universally wishing its
establishment, I should be glad to know the most easy method of doing so, and
with least bloodshed.


O. M. In a Country so prepared, let us suppose a few Thousands of hearty
determined Fellows well armed and appointed with Officers, and having a
Committee of honest, from, and intelligent Men to act as a provisionary
Government, and to direct their Actions to the proper Object. If this Committee
published a Manifesto or Proclamation, directing the People in every Parish to
take, on receipt thereof, immediate possession of the whole Landed Property
within their district, appointing a Committee to take charge of the same, in
the name and for the use of the Inhabitants; and that every Landholder should
immediately, on pain of Confiscation and Imprisonment, deliver to the said
parochial Committee, all Writings and Documents relating to their Estates, that
they might immediately be burnt; and that they should likewise disgorge at the
same time into the Hands of the said Committee, the last payments received from
their tenants, in order to create a parochial Fund for immediate use, without
calling upon the exhausted People. If this Proclamation was generally attended
to, the business was settled at once; but if the Aristocracy arose to contend
the matter, let the People be firm and desperate, destroying them Root and
Branch, and strengthening their Hands by the rich Confiscations, Thus the War
would be carried on at the expense of the wealthy enemy; and the Soldiers of
Liberty beside the hope of sharing in he future felicity of the country, being
well paid, would be steady and bold. And wherever the Lands were taken
possession of by the People, (which by all means should be as early
accomplished as possible) the grand resource of the Aristocracy, the Rents,
would be cut off, which would soon reduce them to Reason, and they would become
as harmless as other men.


Y. M. If People could but thus become honest and wise enough to cut off at
once the resources of the enemy, they might soon get rid of Oppression. But it
is a pity they do not perceive the immediate and inexpressible blessings that
would infallably result from such a Revolution.


O. M. The good Effects of such a change, would be more exhilirating and
reviving to the hunger-bitten and despairing Children of Oppression, than a
benign and sudden Spring to the frost-bitten Earth, after a long and severe
Winter. Only think of the many millions of Rents that are now paid to those
self-created Nephews of God Almighty, the Landed Interest, which is literally
paid for nothing but to create Masters. -- I say only think of all this Money,
circulating among the People, and there promoting Industry and Happiness, and
all the arts and callings useful in Society; would not the change be
unspeakable? This would neither be a barren Revolution of mere unproductive
Rights, such as many contend for, nor yet a glut of sudden and temporary Wealth
as if acquired by conquest; but a continual flow of permanent Wealth
established by a System of Truth and Justice, and guaranteed by the interest of
every Man, Woman, and Child in the Nation. The Government also of such a People
could no longer be oppressive. The democratic Parishes would take care how they
suffered their Money to be lavished away upon State speculations. And their
Senators, who could not be Men of landed Property, would be found to be much
more honest and true to the services of their Constituents than our nowadays
so much boasted Gentlemen of independent Fortunes.

When a People create Landlords, they create a numerous host of hereditary
Tyrants and Oppressors, who not content with their Lordly Revenues of Rents,
seize also upon the Government, and parcel it out among themselves, and take as
enormous salaries for the Places they occupy therein, as if they were poor Men;
so that the Rents which the foolish People foolishly pay, they pay for nothing,
and the poor dull Ass the Public, become thus loaded, as it were, with two pair
of Panyers. So then, whoever will be so silly good-natured and over-generous as
to pay Rents to a set of Individuals, must not be surprised, if their Masters
by all ways and means and pretenses should keep them to it, and give Scope
sufficient to their liberal propensities.


FINIS.
A SONG, to be Sung at the End of Oppression, or the Commencement of the
political Milennium, when there shall be neither Lords nor Landlords, but God
and Man will be all in all.
FIRST PRINTED IN THE YEAR 1782.
Tune, "God save the King."
1.
HARK! how the Trumpet's sound See Leviticus, Chap, 25.

Proclaims the Land around
The Jubilee!
Tells all the poor oppressed,
No more they shall be cess'd,
Nor Landlords more molest
Their Property.
2.
Rents to ourselves now we pay,
Dreading no Quarter Day,
Fraught with distress.
Welcome that day draws near,
For then our Rents we share Though the Inhabitants in every* District or
Parish in the world (except in England) have an undoubted right to divide the
whole of the Rents equally among them, and suffer the State and all public
affairs to be supported by Taxes as usual; yet from the numerous evils and
restraints attending Revenue Laws, and the number of Collectors, Informers,
etc. appendant on the same, it is supposed, they would rather prefer, That
after the whole amount of the rents are collected in a Parish from every
person, according to the full value of the Premises which they occupy, so much
per Pound, according to Act of Parliament, should be set apart for support of
the State instead of all Taxes: that another sum should next be deducted for
support of the Parish establishment, instead of Tolls, Tithes, Rates, Cesses,
etc. and that after these important matters were provided for, the remainder of
the Money should be equally divided among all the settled Inhabitants, whether
Poor or Rich,

Earth's rightful Lords we are
Ordained for this.
3.
How has the oppressor ceased, Isaiah, Chap. 14.

And all the world released
From Misery!
The Fir-trees all rejoice,
And Cedars lift their voice,
Ceased now the ^E^^ERS'' noise,
Long raised by thee.
4.
The Scepter now is broke,
Which with continual stroke
The Nations smote!
Hell from beneath does rise,
To meet thy lofty Eyes,
From the most pompous size,
How brought to naught!
5.
Since then this Jubilee
Sets all at Liberty,
Let us be glad.
Behold each Man return
To his Right and his own,
No more like Doves to mourn
By Landlords sad!

