A SHORT TRACT CONCERNING THE DOCTRINE OF Nullum Tempus occurrit Regi: SHOWING
The particular Cases to which it is applicable; AND That it cannot, according
to LAW, be effectual FOR THE Recovery of Manors, Lands, or Tenements, Alienated
from the Crown.

LONDON: PRINTED IN THE YEAR M.DCC.LXXIX.

Extract of a Letter from the Author of the following Tract to --, dated the
6th of May, 1771, which is prefixed to the MS. Copy of the Tract in the Hands
of the Editor.
....................... As I have lately heard that it is now disputed, whether
or not you ought to be excluded from the benefit of the late Nullum tempus act
for quieting the possessions of the subject, I have taken the liberty to
enclose, for your -- perusal, a short tract on the general doctrine of Nullum
tempus. occurrit regi. How far the same may be applicable to the point in
contest between you and the treasury-board, I cannot pretend to judge, because
my information concerning that affair arises merely from common report, so
that, of course, I must profess myself a stranger to the particular
circumstances of the case. Nevertheless, as I happened, in the course of my
reading the other day, to light upon a passage in Bracton, which, to me, seemed
capable of affording a clear explanation of the Nullum tempus doctrine, I
thought it a duty incumbent on me, to send you my thoughts upon it. It may
indeed be said that Bracton is in the hands of every lawyer, and that I ought
to have known that the learned gentlemen of the law, employed by you, are
already apprized of the passage to which I refer, as they must certainly, at
some time or other, have read it; nevertheless, there is sufficient reason for
me to presume that they have entirely overlooked or forgot it in the present
case; and that even the whole legislature have also either forgot it, or else
are entirely ignorant of it, because the late act of parliament (which was made
expressly to guard against the mistaken doctrine of Nullum tempus) must
otherwise appear absurd and superfluous.

I think it necessary to presume thus much, --, by way of excuse for having
presumed to write to you about business which does not in the least concern me,
as it might otherwise be deemed impertinent in me, to suppose that you have not
already the most learned advice that can be procured. If the little tract
contains any hints that are thought capable of being enforced to your --
advantage, it will give me real pleasure; for indeed I have no greater
happiness than that of being serviceable (when it lies in my power) to any man
whatever, whether friend or stranger...................................

(Signed) "GRANVILLE SHARP."

PREFACE.
WHEN an author pretends to write a treatise on any particular subject, he
ought to have leisure sufficient to examine and thoroughly consider every thing
that has an intimate connection with it; but, as the Writer of this has no such
leisure, it is necessary for him to declare that he professes no other
knowledge of the subject, in question, than what has occurred to him
occasionally in consulting the law books on other points; and, therefore, he
offers this little Tract to his readers, not as a complete and regular system,
but rather as a groundwork for future enquiries upon the subject, by Writers
who are blessed with more leisure and abilities for such researches than
himself; and who may, perhaps, be hereby induced either to build upon the same
foundation, or to establish a better in its room.

A SHORT TRACT CONCERNING THE Doctrine of Nullum Tempus occurrit Regi, etc.
PART I.
THE doctrine of Nullum Tempus occurrit Regi, if admitted in an unlimited and
general sense, is capable of being wrested to the most arbitrary purposes, and
may seem to authorize the most dangerous and oppressive pretensions and claims
on the property of the subject.

As a general doctrine, therefore, it is unreasonable; and, consequently,
inconsistent with the fundamental principles of the common law; for which
reason I never could esteem the Nullum Tempus doctrine as a maxim of the common
law; and I have since found that my opinion of it was in some degree right, and
that the doctrine is so far from being a general maxim, that it ought never to
be mentioned without its peculiar exceptions, lest it should do injury, by
being applied to improper cases, and be mistaken for a maxim, to the perversion
of justice: for the true and proper maxims of the common law demand the utmost
deference when they are cited, their authority being unquestionable; because
Contra negantem principia (vel maxima) non est disputandum. (Co. Lit. 343.
Doctor and Student, etc. c. 8. p. 27.)

This maxim may indeed seem applicable to myself, for denying that the
authority and weight of a maxim is due to the doctrine of Nullum Tempus, etc.
But I hope to be able, in the course of this work, to obviate any such
imputation, and to prove that it really is not a general maxim. In order to set
this point in a clear light, it will be necessary first of all to take a short
view of those particular rights of the crown, which, in law, are justly
esteemed unalienable, and which I apprehend to be as follows.

The king is invested, by his office, with a kind of limited property in the
persons of all his free subjects, by which he is enabled, and, indeed, bound in
duty to claim, and free them whenever their persons are unlawfully seized,
imprisoned, or otherwise detained at home or abroad, under pretense of right of
service, whereby their persons are claimed as private property, acquired by
purchase, custom, or any other mode of acquisition Query. How far may this hold
good since the making of the Habeas Corpus act, which supposes that a man may
be transported against his will if he has signed a written contract? Sect. 13.
This section, however, gives no authority for such a forcible transportation;
it only informs us, that the act does NOT "extend to give benefit" in such
case; but the common law, we may presume, will or ought to "give benefit" in
this, as in every other case, of violence and wrong, because "Lex semper dabit
remedium:" and I have already shown that the right of the Crown is unalienable
in this kind of property, for the maintenance of freedom.
whatsoever. For no claims of this kind, upon a freeman, are to be favored in
law, or can possibly be accounted valid, because the maxim assures us that
"Liber homo" is "res quasi sacra," "which may not be sold:" Item quasi res
sacra ut liber homo qui vendi non potest, cum libertas non recipiat
aestimationem, etc. Bracton, lib. 2, p. 14.
so that there can be no just claim of property in the person of a freeman,
except the official right and claim of property vested in the king; and, as
this is limited by the laws for the benefit and freedom of the subject, it is,
for that very reason, unalienable from the crown.

Other unalienable rights of the Crown are those which form the public revenue,
and belong to the king's exchequer, all which are included by this author in
the term "Res fiscalis," Et est res quasi sacra, Res fiscalis, quae dari non
potest, nec vendi, nec ad alium transferri a principe vel a rege regnante --
and which he also esteems "res quasi sacra." To this rule, about Res fiscalis,
there are some necessary exceptions which will hereafter be mentioned.


There are also several other rights, which are inherent in the Crown, for the
public good, and cannot therefore be disposed of, or alienated, viz. such as
Peace, Justice, etc. -- et quae faciunt ipsam coronam, et communem utilitatem
recipient, sicut est Pax et Justitia, etc.

To all such things we may safely apply the doctrine of Nullum tempus occurrit
regi. -- The same is likewise applicable to a few other things, even of an
inferior or second class; I mean such as are nevertheless so far alienable,
that they may lawfully, without damage to the king or his subjects, be
transferred, for a time, to other persons. -- Sunt et aliae res quae pertinent
ad coronam propter privilegium regis, et ita communem non recipient
utilitatem, quin dari possunt et ad alium transferri, quia, si transferantur,
translatio nulli erit damnosa, nec ipsi regi sive principi, etc. -- The things,
ranked in this class of Royal Property, are, sea-wrecks, treasures found, great
fish, as whales, sturgeons, and other royal fish. And whosoever pretends to
have a right to enjoy the profits arising from these particular things, must be
able to produce a special warrant for that purpose; because prescription, even
of a very long time, is not sufficient to justify the pretension: Diuturnitas
enim temporis, in hoc casu, injuriam non minuit, sed auget, nec in primo casu,
NEC IN ISTO, CURRIT TEMPUS CONTRA REGEM, nec incumbit ei probatio quia ad ipsum
pertineant, cum constare debeat singulis, quod hujusmodi de jure gentium
pertineant ad coronam.

But, with respect to things of a third class, as crown-manors, lands,
tenements, etc. the case is widely different, for the doctrine of Nullum
tempus, etc. affects them not at all! And I am astonished that so many
gentlemen, learned in the law, whose attention has lately been employed upon
this point, should have thought it necessary to provide, by a special act of
parliament, against this doctrine, when the common law of England, that ought
always to be preferred, When common law and statute law concur, the common law
shall be preferred. 4. Co. 71.
has already sufficiently guarded us against the tyrannical construction of the
phrase, which, like a mere bugbear, is formidable only whilst misunderstood,
though it has raised an epidemical panic, of which the late act is a proof. --
Sunt etiam aliae res quae pertinent ad coronam, quae non sunt ita sacrae, quin
transferri possunt, sicut sunt, FUNDI, TERRAE, et TENEMENTA, et HUJUSMODI per
quos corona regis roboratur, et in quibus CURRIT TEMPUS CONTRA REGEM, sicut
contra quamlibet privatam personam.

Thus we are assured, by the authority of an ancient and unexceptionable
writer, that crown lands are exactly upon the same footing as private
freeholds, with respect to time or prescription, which is the very reverse of
the Nullum tempus doctrine, lately adopted by the Treasury.

Now, it is a maxim in law, that a quiet and uninterrupted possession for sixty
years creates a proper title. Possessio pacifica POUR ANNS 60 facit jus. (Prin.
Leg. et Aeq. p. 81. See also Jenk. cent. 26.) And, therefore, as we have before
shown, that Crown manors, lands, and tenements, are exactly upon the same
footing with respect to time or prescription as private freeholds, we must
necessarily conclude that the king entirely loses his title to alienated lands,
if there are better proofs of such a peaceable possession, on the one side,
than of a continued claim on the other; in which case the lands must become
wholly and entirely the property of the possessor. And, even when alienated
crown lands are claimed within any shorter term than sixty years, the king may
not seize, for it is a maxim, That the king can disseize no man, nor be
disseized; (Doctor and Student); Item pro maximo habetur in legibus Angliae,
quod nullus potest dominum regem disseisire, NEC DOMINUS REX ALIQUEM DISSEISIRE
POTERIT, ita quod liberum tenementum per talem disseisinam transferetur de rege
ad alium, NEC E CONTRA. Chap. 8.
and, even though the king cannot be disseized, yet this is not to be construed
so as to annul that interest, which private persons acquire, by time, in the
possession of alienated lands, for that is sufficiently established by an act
of 1 Edw. III. c. 12. which ordains, with respect to lands and tenements holden
of the king in chief, and ALIENED WITHOUT LICENSE -- that the king shall NOT
HOLD THEM AS FORFEIT in such case, but -- there shall be a reasonable fine
taken in Chancery by DUE PROCESS. Here is no limited time for possession, so
that the act is as efficacious for those who have been in possession only 3
years, as for those who have held 20 times 3 years as above. See also 9 Edw.
III. c. 2. 21 Jac. c. 25. 8. Hen. VI. c. 9. 7. and 31 Eliz. c. 11.

By the two last mentioned acts a peaceable and quiet possession for 3 years
creates a right that will justify " keeping possession WITH FORCE:" but as the
king is not expressly named, I conceive that so short a time does not bar his
title to any reasonable fines, not prohibited by 12 Char. II. c. 24. See sect.
1, 5, and 6, particularly the latter. -- Provided always and be it enacted,
that any thing herein contained shall not take away, nor be construed to take
away, any fines for alienation, due by particular customs of particular manors
and places, other than fines for alienations of lands or tenements holden
immediately of the king in capite.
because it is a maxim that the king is not bound by statute law, unless
expressly named.

What has hitherto been advanced, I hope, will be thought sufficient to
establish the absolute property of all persons, who shall be able to prove a
peaceable possession of alienated crown lands, unclaimed for 60 years, and also
that those persons who have held alienated crown lands for more than three
years unclaimed, have a right to continue in possession, on paying a reasonable
fine; and consequently that the doctrine of Nullum tempus, etc. is by no means
effectual for the recovery of manors, lands, or tenements, alienated from the
crown. And I trust that my candid readers will acknowledge and hold fast this
my opinion, until they see more authentic vouchers produced in support of the
contrary doctrine.

(Signed) GRANVILLE SHARP.

PART II. Concerning some Precautions and Conditions necessary to be observed
in the granting of Crown Lands, Tenements, etc.
THE crown is limited, as well in the mode of granting, as in the conditions to
be granted; insomuch that when any grant or lease is made contrary to the rules
prescribed by law, the same is thereby rendered null and void. I shall not
pretend to speak of all the particular precautions and conditions necessary to
be observed on these occasions, but only some few of the most essential, which,
I apprehend, have not been so much regarded of late as they ought.

The legislature has agreed, and laid it down as a rule, that all the ancient
and military tenures of lands, and even SOCCAGE IN CAPITE, of the king, and the
consequents upon the same, have been much more burdensome, grievous, and
PREJUDICIAL, to the kingdom, than they have been BENEFICIAL to the king. (See
Preamble to 12 Cha. II. cap. 24.) For this just reason, founded on experience,
the king has ever since been restrained by the law from granting any part of
his dominions upon such conditions.

I have, indeed, heard of a foreign island being granted to a noble lord upon
some such antiquated conditions, whereby he is said to be established as lord
paramount, with a peculiar unconstitutional authority; but this, I am willing
to presume, is merely report; and, even if it were true, the grant would be
innocent enough, because it is null and void in itself, as the king has had no
right since 12 Cha. II. to make a grant on any other tenure than that of free
and common soccage. Sect. 4. And be it farther enacted, etc. That all tenures
hereafter to be created by the king's majesty, his heirs, or successors, upon
any gifts or grants of any manors, lands, tenements, or hereditaments, of any
estate of inheritance, at the common law, shall be in free and common socage,
and shall be adjudged to be in free and common socage only, and not by knights
service, or in capite, and shall be discharged of all wardship, etc. any law,
statute, or reservation to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.
-- The king is also bound to have respect to former grants, because, even in
cases when the king has granted during pleasure, a second grant, not
mentioning the former, shall be void. (^ Hen. VIII. c. 15).

Now, in order to set forth more clearly some other circumstances wherein the
crown is limited in the mode of granting, and in the conditions to be granted,
I shall beg leave to suppose a case. -- Suppose a crafty and litigious person
makes interest with the lord-treasurer, or the commissioners of the treasury,
for a grant of alienated crown lands, on condition that he shall, at his own
expense, prove and establish the right of the crown, and recover the lands from
the present possessor.

Let us also suppose a lord-treasurer, or commissioners of the treasury, so
regardless of the necessary and legal precautions against abuses in granting
crown lands, that they approve the clandestine offer, and procure a grant from
their royal master agreeable to the wishes of the proposer.

But what will such an adventurer gain by his parchments, whilst the king's
courts are worthy to be esteemed courts of justice and law? Be pleased to
observe that my suppositions are now at a stand. They extend no farther than
the imaginary case already laid down. For I am not to suppose, or conceive,
that any learned persons, who preside in the king's courts, are subject to
venal time-serving, or the factious spirit of party influence, which is the
source of the most dangerous partiality; because partiality is entirely
inconsistent with the high character of judges, and must necessarily make
shipwreck of their souls!

For a partial judge cannot truly be said to "have the fear of God before his
eyes:" and, as this is the first principle which the common law of England
requires, and deems absolutely necessary in all ranks of the community, but
more particularly in judges, I am bound in Christian charity not to suspect
such a legal incapacity in any of them, until I am convinced, by experience, to
the contrary.

For this reason I have not attempted, by declamation and far-fetched
arguments, to establish my opinion; nor do I rely on the interest and number of
my friends to make it pass current; neither do I demand favor of my readers,
as being a friend to administration; but I have founded my opinion merely on
the authority of law; and, whilst our judges as well as juries are susceptible
of that just and indispensible fear before mentioned, and are in the least
mindful of the solemn account which they themselves must one day give, so long
shall I presume that our courts are impartial; and that they will carefully and
conscientiously weigh and determine every case that is laid before them
according to the known laws of the land; and, consequently, that they would
reject, with disdain, the claim of my supposed adventurer, if his pretensions
to the alienated lands in question had no better foundation than such a grant
as I have supposed. The Courts would inform the litigious adventurer that his
grant is of no signification, and cannot convey to him the least right in the
alienated lands, because the Crown is bound to prove and establish its own
right in all manors, lands, etc. before it can grant them to any person
whatever; for both the lord-chancellor and the lord-treasurer (and consequently
the commissioners of the treasury) are absolutely restrained, by an act of
parliament, (8 Hen. VI. c. 16. 8 Hen. VI. c. xvi. To eschew the dolours,
grievances, and disherisons, which daily do happen to many of the king's
liege-people, by the escheators, for that they take enquests, to inquire before
them, as well by virtue of the king's writs, as of their offices, favorably
and not duly, by people not impannelled, nor returned to them by the sheriffs
of the counties, and more often for their private gain, and for the disherison
of the king's liege-people, than for the profit of the same our lord the king,
and also, for that the lands and tenements of many of the king's liege-people
be seized into the king's hands upon such enquests, or let to ferm by the
chancellor or treasurer before such enquests be returned in the chancery: our
lord the king has ordained, etc. that no escheator or commissioner take in any
wise any enquest to enquire, but of people returned and impanelled by the
sheriff* in the county, within which he is escheator or commissioner. And if
any escheator or commissioner take enquests of people which be not impanelled,
etc. that he incur the penalty of 40 l. etc. And that no lands nor tenements,
seized into the hand of our lord the king, upon such enquests taken before the
escheators or commissioners, be not in any wise let nor granted to ferm by the
chancellor or treasurer of England, or any other the king's officer, until the
same enquests and verdicts be fully returned in the chancery, or in the
exchequer, but all such lands, etc. shall entirely and continually remain in
the hands of our lord the king until the said enquests and verdicts be
returned, etc. -- See also 36 Ed. III. c. 13. to which this act refers for the
form of letting.
) from letting or granting the king's lands to farm, until lawful enquests and
verdicts (that is from good towns, and of good people, 36 Ed. III. c. 13; or a
jury of twelve sufficient men, 1 Hen. VIII. c. 8.) have been taken thereupon,
and be fully returned in the Chancery, or in the Exchequer, but all such lands
and tenements shall entirely and continually remain in the hands of our lord
the king, until the said enquests and verdicts be returned, etc. -- And, when
the persons grieved by the same enquests, or putting out of their lands and
tenements, come into the Chancery, and proffer themselves to traverse the said
enquests, and then offer to take the same lands or tenements to ferm. And, if
they so do, that then the same lands, etc. be committed to them if they show
good evidence, etc. So that there is no possibility for the crown to make a
valid grant upon the conditions before described, viz. the establishing of the
Crown's right at the expense of the grantee.

And another act was made in the eighteenth year of the same reign, (cap. 6.)
expressly as a remedy to prevent such subtle and designing persons from suing
to obtain such gifts, and grants, and ferms, by the king's letters patents,
before any inquisition (as above) or title found for the king of the same,
pretending such gifts and grants not comprised and remedied by the said
statute, etc. And, if any letters patents be made to the contrary, they shall
BE VOID AND HOLDEN FOR NONE. -- So that our adventurer's claim, founded on a
grant made previous to these necessary steps, is absolutely null and void of
itself. And the very conditions of it (viz. that of establishing the right of
the crown at the grantee's own expense) would afford substantial proof, without
any farther examination, that the crown had neglected all these legal
precautions, which are absolutely necessary for the foundation and existence of
every grant: and, consequently, such a condition is, of itself, sufficient to
render any grant a mere nullity.

I must, likewise, observe that the crown, or its ministers, have no right to
grant lands on any other terms or conditions whatsoever, besides those which
are prescribed by law utterly void and of none effect, (says the 1st Stat. of
queen Anne, sect. 5.) unless such GRANT, LEASE, etc. be made for some term or
estate, not exceeding one and thirty years, or three lives, or for some term of
years determinable upon one, two, or three, lives; and, unless such grant, etc.
be made to commence from the date or making thereof; which is impossible in the
case that I have supposed, where the right is afterward to be established by a
contest at law. -- There are also other conditions which are absolutely
necessary: a reservation must be made of the ancient and most usual rent, or
more, or such rent as has been reserved, yielded, and paid, for the greater
part of twenty years, before the making of the grant; or a reserved rent, not
under the third part of the clear yearly value. And whatever grant is made
since the first of queen Anne, otherwise than according to the tenure and
meaning of the said act, is absolutely null and void. It would be in vain for a
Treasury-board to allege, in such a case, that they abated their legal
conditions in consideration of the grantee being bound to prosecute and
establish, at his own expense, the right of the crown: an impartial court (such
as I have described) would freely declare that the crown is not empowered to
change the above prescribed conditions, on any pretense whatsoever, being
absolutely limited and bound by this Statute of 1st Anne, which declares (sect.
7.) that all gifts, grants, etc. of manors, etc. or any part thereof, contrary
to the provisions of this act, or any of them, shall BE NULL AND VOID, without
any inquisition, scire facias, or other proceeding, to determine or make void
the same.

But the most material thing to be considered by a lord chancellor, a lord
treasurer, or a treasury-board, before they presume to reclaim alienated lands,
etc. is, what I first of all touched upon, viz. whether the present possessors
of lands, etc. have enjoyed a quiet possession of sixty years? because that
creates a good title; "FACIT JUS," as I have already proved; and such great
officers ought to be aware that Rescriptum principis contra JUS non valet; so
that they would betray the honor of their royal master, if they were to
endeavor to procure his assent to grants of land, etc. which, by time and
possession, are thus totally and irrecoverably alienated; for Donatio principis
intelligitur SINE PREJUDICIO TERTII. (Davis, 75.6.) And One should be JUST
before he is GENEROUS.

The points of law and opinions, which I have here laid down, may perhaps be
capable of perversion; for indeed the plainest truths may be wrested and
perverted by long, sophistical, and deceitful, arguments; -- but, let my
opponents submit their objections to writing, as I have done, and collate them
side by side with mine, and it will be impossible for the most subtle
prevarication to set aside so many plain and intelligible laws, which acquire a
collective force by being thus produced together: and, even if we could suppose
an inclination or partiality in any of the king's justices, to favor and
confirm every act of administration whatsoever, be it right or wrong; and,
among the rest, such AN ILLEGAL ACT OF THE TREASURY LORDS as I have here stated
in this supposed grant; yet, even the most partial of them would find
themselves exposed to great difficulty, shame, and danger, by attempting to
define away the true meaning of so many positive laws, in order to establish
such an injustice: for the private opinions of the king's justices ought to
have no weight, neither their will and inclination, except when clearly
supported by law; because they are not allowed an arbitrary or wilful
discretion, Also discretion, as it is well described, is scire per legem quid
sit justum. 10 Co. 140.
but merely a legal discretion, which is "discernere per legem quod sit
justum." -- For discretion is a science, or understanding, to discern between
falsity and truth, between right and wrong, between shadows and substance,
between equity and colorable glosses and pretenses; and not to do according to
their wills and private affections; for, as one faith, Talis discretio
discretionem confundit. 5 Co. 345. -- If these salutary laws and unalterable
maxims have been infringed by any great officer of the present times, through
misinformation, or for want of duly considering the point in question, let them
but acknowledge their error, together with a sincere intention to make what
reparation may lie in their power, and they will easily regain that public
confidence and esteem which they have forfeited by their mistakes; for, sure I
am, (with sir Edw. Cook,) that no wise or true-hearted Englishman, that has
been persuaded before he was instructed, will refuse to be instructed in the
truth, (which he may see with his own eyes,) lest he should be dissuaded from
error, wherewith blindfold he has been deceived; for miserable is his case,
and worthy of pity, that has been PERSUADED before he was INSTRUCTED, and now
will refuse to be INSTRUCTED because he will not be PERSUADED. But, howsoever
applicable the latter part of this quotation may be to any of his majesty's
late or present ministers, yet am I thoroughly persuaded that it will never be
justly said of himself.

As a man, he is indeed liable to be imposed on, and may perhaps be persuaded
to give his assent to some improper things, through the insinuation of mere
worldly politicians; that the same are absolutely NECESSARY; and that he must
submit to tread in the beaten tract of state policy (howsoever corrupt) to
avoid the danger of greater evils. The NECESSITY of doing evil to avoid a
greater evil is a doctrine too generally adopted by worldly politicians, and
perfectly accords with the ancient iniquitous proposition, "Let us do EVIL,
that GOOD may come." But the unhappy state of those wretched politicians, who
give such pernicious counsel, is immediately added, -- whose damnation is just!
Romans iii. 8.


If he ever has yielded to such fallacious and dangerous doctrines, (for no
doctrines are so productive of violence and iniquity, and consequently so
productive of certain ruin Our INIQUITIES, like the wind, have taken us away.
Isaiah lxiv. 6. Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees. Isaiah x. 1.
to states and kingdoms, as those which are built on pretended necessity,) I am
persuaded it was for want of conviction that he might safely and with propriety
avoid it, but the rectitude of his intentions, I am convinced, will never
justly be called in question.

That he is a good christian, and sincerely wishes to promote the general good
of his people, I have not the least doubt; and therefore if any man has been
injured by such an illegal grant as I have described, let him find some means
of stating the merits of his case in a proper and respectful manner to our
gracious sovereign, and I will FORFEIT MY LIFE, if he does not find redress. --
MY CONFIDENCE N. B. This tract is dated in May, 1771.
is not without foundation! I had the honor to stand in his royal presence,
when he called God and man to witness, in the most solemn and affecting manner
that can be described, that he would rule according to the laws.

From that time to this I have entertained the highest personal esteem and
respect for him, and have really more hopes of the re-establishment of public
peace and content, from the sincerity and good heart (as I conceive) of that
one man, than from the most earnest endeavors of all the other honest and
loyal people of England, who, of themselves, without their royal master at
their head, are by far too few and weak to resist the immense tide of venality
and corruption, which has almost totally overflowed this once happy island. --
Take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall be established
in righteousness. Prove. xxv. 5.

(Signed) GRANVILLE SHARP.

THE END.

