THE CASE OF THE APOTHECARIES.
TO prevent the Mischiefs arising from Ignorance, or Temerity in the
Administration of Medicines, King Henry the VIIIth, by his Charter established
the COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, excluding all Persons, who should not be lisenced by
them, from the Practice of Physic within London, and seven Miles thereof:
Which Charter was soon afterward confirmed by Parliament, and the said
Exclusion from Practice extended all over England.

And to prevent the like Mischiefs in the Preparation of Medicines, the said
College were by subsequent Acts directed to elect, yearly, Four of their
Fellows, who, after taking an Oath of Office, were empowered (with the
Assistance of the Wardens of the Company of Grocers and Apothecaries) to visit
all Apothecaries Houses within London only, and to destroy such Drugs and
Medicines as they should find defective; which Power of Visitation was
afterward, by a Charter of King James the Is It, extended to the Distance of
seven Miles round London.

BUT the Exercise of this last Power being limited to four Persons, the same
appeared to Sir Theodore De Mayerne, and Henry Atkins, Physicians to King James
the Is It (and who, being the then most illustrious Members of the College, may
be supposed to declare the Sense of the whole Body) so very insufficient for
suppressing the variety of Abuses intended to be remedied, that at their
Desire, and for the more effectually preventing those Abuses, the said King
very soon after, by another Charter, formed the Apothecaries of London into a
distinct Society, with the like Powers of Visitation, and expressly prohibited
all Persons from exercising the Business of an Apothecary within seven Miles of
London, unless first examined, approved, and licensed by the said Society.

TRUE it is that the Validity of the said Charter being doubtful, and the
Extent of the Powers thereby granted uncertain, and there being no Provision
for rectifying any Abuse of those Powers, the said Society have ever been very
cautious in the Exercise thereof, and of late Years especially, have kept up
the Form only of a Visitation: Whence it has happened, that several ignorant,
and illiterate Persons have been encouraged to enter upon the Business of an
Apothecary, whilst others, of perhaps a more regular Education, and better
Knowledge, have in order to engross the Trade, by under-selling the fair
Apothecary, ventured to compound their Medicines of damaged, stale, and
counterfeit Ingredients; so that upon the whole, great Quantities of pernicious
Medicines have been sold in the Neighborhood of London, and transmitted into
all Parts of the Kingdom.

THESE Practices being notorious, the College in 1722, procured the Act of
Parliament (now proposed to be revived) to establish their Power of Visitation
agreeable to their Charter. But a Clause having, upon their Attempt to obtain a
Bill for reviving the said Act in 1729, been added by a Committee of the House
of Commons [for granting an Appeal from the Judgment of the Censors to six
Physicians and six Apothecaries to be determined upon Oath, and in Case of
Equality of Voices, by the Opinion of the President or Vice President of the
College] the said Bill was dropped, and the College have not since thought
proper to apply for any Bill of that kind, notwithstanding the Continuance and
daily Increase of the bad Practices abovementioned.

AT length several Apothecaries, [whose Profession affords them but too
frequent Opportunities of observing the Extent and mischievous Effects of those
bad Practices,] thought it their Duty, as well in Regard to the Public, as
themselves, to represent the same to the LEGISLATURE.

IN Consequence of this Application, the House of Commons have been pleased to
order in a Bill, to revive, explain, and amend the said Act passed in 1722.
From which Order the said Petitioners conceive that honorable House was
satisfied of the Insufficiency of a mere Revival of the said Act, and therefore
they submit the following Amendments or Alterations, as what they humbly
apprehend will render the said Act most effectual on the one Hand, and prevent
any Abuse of the Powers thereby granted on the other, Viz.

I. THAT the Court of Assistants of the Apothecaries shall yearly elect ten
sufficiently skillful Persons to be called Examiners of Apothecaries, and
forty-eight (or any other competent Number) to be called Examiners of
Medicines, who shall all be sworn to the due Execution of their respective
Offices. II. THAT for the Future no Person (except the present Members of the
Society, who have been already examined) shall, within seven Miles of London,
exercise the Art of an Apothecary, unless first examined, and approved by
three, or more of the said Examiners of Apothecaries, and licensed to exercise
the same by Letters Testimonial, under the Seal of the said Society. III. THAT
any Person rejected by the said Examiners may have an Appeal to the President,
and Censors of the College, and if approved by them, shall be licenced by the
said Society. IV. THAT there shall be paid to the said Society for every
Examination and License (...) and no more; and that every such licensed Person
shall, during his Continuance in the Business, pay (as the Freemen of the said
Society do) the yearly Sum of six Shillings, to be appropriated to the
supporting the Botannical Garden at Chelsea, to which he, and his Apprentices
shall have Liberty to resort, for their Instruction in Botany. V. THAT (in lieu
of the said Censors) the said Examiners of Medicines, or any four of them,
shall have Power, whenever they shall think fit (and be obliged, as often as
the Court of Assistants shall think proper) to go upon the Visitation, and
thereupon to enter any House etc. of any Person within the Limits aforesaid,
who shall prepare, or keep for Sale, any compound Medicines, and to examine the
same, and destroy such as they shall adjudge bad. VI. THAT any Person shall
have Liberty to appeal from the Judgment of the said Examiners, to the said
President, or Vice President, and Censors, whose Determination shall be final,
the Medicine complained of to be, in the mean Time, conveyed to the College.
VII. THAT in all Cases of Appeal the said Examiners, as well as the Parties
appellant, may produce Witnesses to be examined upon Oath, either as to their
Knowledge, or Opinion of the Preparation in question. VIII. THAT every Person
convicted by the said Examiners (unless their Judgment is reversed within
(...)) of selling or keeping for Sale, any adulterated or pernicious Medicine
shall forfeit the Sum of (...) IX. THAT Persons obstructing the said Examiners
in the Execution of their Office shall forfeit the Sum of (...) X. THAT all
Penalties shall go, one half to any Person who will sue for the same, and the
other half to the Poor of the Parish where the Offender shall reside.
THESE Amendments, the Petitioners humbly conceive, will appear to be proper,
and neces^ary, for the following Reasons, viz.

THAT the four Censor^ who must be presumed to be, as the Law requires, the
best learned, ^^^est, and most (...) of their Profession, and consequently most
employed,) cannot spare sufficient Leisure to attend the Visitation, so
diligently, and frequently as they ought, without great Loss to themselves, and
to the Public, who may want their Assistance in another Way.

THAT their Number, even if they were to give their utmost Attention, and
dedicate their whole Time to this Duty, would not be sufficient to visit all
Apothecaries Shops within London, and seven Miles thereof, which upon a fair
Computation, will appear to be upwards of a Thousand.

THAT the original Jurisdiction, and the Determination on the Appeal ought not
to be in the same Body, the Members of which may be supposed tender of each
other's Reputation, and the general Character of their Community.

THAT neither the Censors in the (...) Instance, nor the President, and Fellows
upon the Appeal, are by the said Act put under the Restriction of any
particular Oath.

THAT by the said Act no Provision is made for preventing Persons from entering
upon the Business of Pharmacy who have not been properly instructed therein,
and who consequently require a much stricter and more frequent Visitation than
any reasonable Number of Visitors can possibly attend.

THAT the only Punishment provided by the said Act for keeping any adulterated,
or pernicious Medicine for Sale, is the destroying it, which in most Instances
(as Medicines are principally adulterated for the sake of saving the expensive
Ingredients) is a very trifling Punishment, by no Means adequate to the Offense.

THESE Alterations in the Act (it is humbly conceived) will answer all the
salutary Intentions of the honorable House of Commons, and yet preserve to the
Society of Apothecaries, the Privileges granted to them by their Charter;
Privileges! so far from being unreasonable in their own Nature, that Parliament
has thought proper to grant, or confirm the like to the College of Physicians,
and Company of Surgeons; and that, without any of those Guards against the
Abuse of Power, which the Petitioners propose, and desire may be provided in
their Case; nor can the said College, and Company but approve, in the Society
of Apothecaries, a Constitution which, in their own respective Bodies, they
have, by long Experience, found to be highly beneficial to the Public.

WITH respect to the College, it is true the Power of Visitation, which has
hitherto been exercised by their Censors, and the Wardens of the Society of
Apothecaries in Conjunction, is by these Alterations proposed to be wholly
vested in sworn Examiners of the said Society. But then in lieu thereof, the
said College are intended to be vested with a superior Jurisdiction, and
Control, which the Petitioners humbly conceive is more suitable, not only to
the Convenience, but Dignity of that learned Body; and from the abovementioned
Testimony of Sir Theodore de Mayerne and Dr. Atkins, as well as from the Nature
of the Thing itself, it appears that the Apothecaries are very properly
qualified for the Visitation hereby proposed to be entrusted with them.

As to the Persons who will be immediately affected by the Examination intended
by these Amendments, -- It is submitted whether it can be thought an Hardship
to oblige those who will engage in a Profession, of so much Consequence to the
Public, to give a Test of their Ability and Fitness for it; and as they will
become entitled to several of the Privileges, without being subject to the
many burdensome and expensive Offices of the said Society, it is but
reasonable that they should contribute something toward defraying the
additional Expenses which these new Duties will occasion.

THE Application of the yearly Sum of six Shillings (it is likewise hoped) will
be thought so very useful to the Public, that no Objection can be made to so
trifling a Demand.

THE said Society do (at an Expense too great for their present Circumstances)
endeavor to maintain a Botanical Garden, which the Munificence of that great
Patron of natural and useful Knowledge, Sir Hans Sloane, has enabled them to
establish: A Matter in several foreign Cities, thought worthy of the Public
Care. At this Garden, (at present furnished with as great a Number of Plants as
perhaps any in Europe) a Demonstrator is appointed by the Society, to instruct
their Members, and Pupils in this necessary Branch of Pharmacy, and to
superintend, at proper Times, Herborizations in the Neighborhood of London; of
all which Advantages the said Licentiates and their Apprentices will be
entitled to partake.

UPON the whole, the Petitioners humbly hope the Public will, by these
Proposals, be satisfied that they have no unreasonable Views of enriching the
Society, of which they are Members, or of procuring any particular Advantage to
themselves; their sole Intention, in offering to take this Burden upon them,
being that they may contribute as much as in them lies to the preventing Frauds
in their Profession. And as a Proof that they have no oppressive Views, they
decline no Appeal to any Jurisdiction the Legislature shall think proper, not
desiring to be trusted with a Power over others, which they would be sorry to
see granted to any, over themselves: neither do they wish for more than a
temporary Probation of their Scheme, that so, if it shall be found hurtful or
ineffectual, it may not be intailed upon Posterity.

THE CASE OF THE APOTHECARIES.


