PAINE'S ADDRESS TO THE REPUBLIC OF FRANCE; SEPTEMBER 25, 1792.

PAINE'S ADDRESS TO THE REPUBLIC OF FRANCE; SEPTEMBER 25, 1792.

LONDON: PUBLISHED BY W. HOLLAND, No 50, OXFORD STREET.

[PRICE SIXPENCE.]

OF WHOM MAY BE HAD PAINE's LETTER TO DUNDAS, On the Insult offered to him at
Dover; with an Account of his Reception at Calais.

LIKEWISE HIS ADDRESS TO THE ADDRESSERS, ON THE LATE PROCLAMATION.

PAINE's ADDRESS, etc.
"Paris, Sept. 25, 1792. "First Year of the Republic. "FELLOW CITIZENS,
I RECEIVE, with affectionate gratitude, the honor which the late National
Assembly has conferred upon me, by adopting me a Citizen of France; and the
additional honor of being elected by my Fellow Citizens a Member of the
National Convention. Happily impressed as I am, by those testimonies of respect
shown toward me as an individual, I feel my felicity increased by seeing the
barrier broke down that divided Patriotism by spots of earth, and limited
Citizenship to the soil, like vegetation.

Had those honors been conferred in an hour of national tranquillity, they
would have afforded no other means of showing my affection, than to have
accepted and enjoyed them; but they come accompanied with circumstances that
give me the honorable opportunity of commencing my Citizenship in the stormy
hour of difficulties. I come not to enjoy repose. Convinced that the cause of
France is the cause of all mankind, and that as Liberty cannot be purchased by
a wish, I gladly share with. you the dangers and honors necessary to success.

I am well aware, that the moment of any great change, such as that
accomplished on the, 10th of August, is unavoidably the moment of terror and
confusion. The mind, highly agitated by hope, suspicion, and apprehension,
continues without rest till the change be accomplished. But let us now look
calmly and confidentially forward, and success is certain. It is no longer the
paltry cause of Kings, or of this, or of that individual, that calls France and
her armies into action. It is the great cause of ALL. It is the establishment
of a new era, that shall, blot Despotism from the earth, and fix, on the
lasting principles of Peace and Citizenship, the great Republic of Man.

It has been my fate to have borne a share in the commencement and complete
establishment of one Revolution (I mean the Revolution of America). The success
and events of that Revolution are encouraging to us. The prosperity and
happiness that have since flowed to that country, have amply rewarded her for
all the hardships she endured, and for all the dangers she encountered.

The principles on which that Revolution began, have extended themselves to
Europe; and an overruling Providence is regenerating the Old World by the
principles of the New. The distance of America from all the other parts of the
globe, did not admit of her carrying those principles beyond her own situation.
It is to the peculiar honor of France, that she now raises the standard of
Liberty for all nations; and in fighting her own battles contends for the
rights of all mankind.

The same spirit of fortitude that insured success to America, will insure it
to France; for it is impossible to conquer a nation determined to be free! the
military circumstances that now unite themselves to France, are such as the
despots of the earth know nothing of, and can form no calculation upon. They
know not what it is to fight against a nation. They have only been accustomed
to make war upon each other; and they know from system and practice, how to
calculate the probable success of Despot against Despot; and here their
knowledge and experience end.

But in a contest like the present, a new and boundless variety of
circumstances arises, that deranges all such customary calculations. When a
whole nation acts as an army, the Despot knows not the extent of the power
against which he contends. New armies rise against him with the necessity of
the moment. It is then that the difficulties of an invading enemy multiply, as
in the former case they diminished; and he finds them at their height when he
expected them to end.

The only war that has any, similarity of circumstances with the present is the
late Revolution-war in America. On her part, as it now is in France, it was a
war of the whole nation. There it was, that the enemy, by beginning to conquer,
put himself in a condition of being conquered. His first victories prepared him
for defeat. He advanced till he could not retreat, and found himself in the
midst of a nation of armies.

Were it now to be proposed to the Austrians and Prussians, to escort them into
the middle of France, and there leave them to make the most of such a
situation, they would see too much into the, dangers of it, to accept the
offer; and the same dangers would attend them, could they arrive there by any
other means. Where, then, is the military policy of their attempting to obtain
by force, that which they would refuse by choice? But to reason with Despots is
throwing reason away. The best of arguments is a vigorous preparation.

Man is ever a stranger to the ways by which Providence regulates the order of
things. The interference of foreign Despots may serve to introduce into their
own enslaved countries the principles they come to oppose. Liberty and Equality
are blessings too great to be the inheritance of France alone. It is honor to
her to be the first champion; and she may now say to her enemies with a mighty
voice, "O! ye Austrians, ye Prussians! ye who now turn your bayonets against
us; it is for you; it is for all Europe; it is for all mankind, and not for
France alone, that she raises the standard of Liberty and Equality!"

The public cause has hitherto suffered from the contradictions contained in
the Constitution of the former Constituent Assembly. Those contradictions have
served to divide the opinions of individuals at home, and to obscure the great
principles of the revolution in other countries. But when those contradictions
shall be removed, and the Constitution be made conformable to the Declaration
of Rights; when the bagatelles of monarchy, royalty, regency, and hereditary
succession, shall be exposed with all their absurdities, a new ray of light
will be thrown over the world, and the Revolution will derive new strength by
being universally understood.

The scene that now opens itself to France extends far beyond the boundaries of
her own dominions. Every nation is becoming her colleague, and every Court is
become her enemy. It is now the cause of all Nations against the cause of all
Courts. The terrors that Despotism felt, clandestinely begot a confederation of
Despots; and their attack upon France is produced by their fears at home.

In entering on this great scene, greater than any nation has yet been called
to act in, let us say to the agitated mind -- be calm. -- Let us punish by
instructing, rather than revenge. Let us begin the new era by a greatness of
friendship, and hail the approach of union and success.

"Your Fellow Citizen. THOMAS PAIN."

CATALOGUE OF BOOKS, PAMPHLETS, and PRINTS, PUBLISHED BY W. HOLLAND, No. 50,
Oxford Street.
ELEMENTS of Bacchus; or, Toasts and Sentiments given by distinguished
Characters. Illustrated with Forty Portraits in Aquatinta. With a numerous
Collection of Anecdotes, and humorous Eccentricities. Price 1 l. 1 s. plain; or
1 l. 11 s. 6 d. with the Prints colored. A new Edition with Additions, of the
Festival of Anacreon, in Two Parts, including, with many others, the whole of
Captain Morris's Songs. Each Part, 3 s. 6 d. A Second Volume of the Festival of
Wit, by the Author of the First, George K --, Summer Resident at Windsor. 3 s.
Trial of Rose Dillon and Doctor Quirk, for Adultery, and poisoning Michael
Dillon, Esquire. 1 s. 6 d. Trial of General Gunning for Adultery. 2 s. Trial of the
Hon. Charles Wyndham for Adultery. 2 s. Trial of Captain Sykes for Adultery,
and of Lieutenant Kendillan for a Rape. 2 s. Wit and Mirth, or, Tom D'Urfey's
Pills to purge Melancholy, being a Selection of all his best Songs into One
Volume. 3 s. Nimrod's Songs of the Chase. 3 s. 6 d. The Economy of Love, Birth
of the Rose, Geranium, and Epithalamium from Secundus. 2 s. 6 d. Jordan's Cure
for the Spleen, being a Collection of all the Songs sung by Mrs. Jordan in
different Entertainments, with a Sketch of her Life. 2 s. 6 d. Wax-Work and
Monumental Records in Westminster Abbey, in the Year 1892, with five Prints. 6
s. Themidore and Rosette; or, Memoirs of a Parisian Counselor and Courtezan. 3
s. 6 d.
And the following CARICATURES:

The World as it Goes, a Caricature Procession, exhibiting above Two Hundred
Figures, among which the following are the most conspicuous: -- Bishops; Second
Order of the Clergy; Curates; Quack Doctor in his Chariot, with his
Merry-Andrew, etc. Resurrection Men and Skeleton Mounters; Doctors and
Apothecaries; Undertakers; Lawyers; Clients; Apollo, the Muses, and Sons of
Genius; a Corporation, including a Woman and Six Children, Constables,
Overseers, and Churchwardens, a Justice of the Peace and an old Woman, a Cook
with a live Turtle, Mace Bearer, Mayor, Band of Instruments, Aldermen, etc.
Bottle Conjuror; Grand Air Balloon; Magnetic Professors; the Learned Pig; the
Speaking Figure; Monstrous Craws; the Stone Eater; Wonders! Wonders! Earth
Bathing; Pugilistic Professors; Opera Singers; Opera Dancers; Old Batchelors
with their proper Emblems; Old Maids with their Regalia, etc. The whole of this
admirable Caricature bears appropriate Panners, Inscriptions, Mottos, etc. such
as may be expected to flow from the fountain of true Genius. Designed by G. M.
Woodward. Price 1 l. 1 s. colored, or 9 s. plain.

FIVE SCENES IN FRANCE,

From beautiful Drawings, by the late F. G. Byron, Esquire. will be shortly
published, price 12 s. each, colored in the manner of the Drawings. Those
Scenes represent, an Inn Yard at Calais -- changing Horses near Abbeville --
Breakfast at Breteuil -- Visit to the Convent at Amiens -- and a Party of the
Parisian Guards returning from the Review at the Champ de Mars, the Sunday
after the Federation, in the Year 1790.

The Drawings may be seen in HOLLAND'S Collection, together with many others by
the same excellent Genius, particularly his French Federation, in July, 1790,
which for sublimity of penciling, has not its equal in this Kingdom.

Some Booksellers having sold to many Ladies and Gentlemen the FESTIVAL OF
LOVE, which they, through interested Motives, declared to be the Second Volume
of the Festival of Wit, the Author and Compiler of both Volumes of that
entertaining and popular Production thinks it right to step forward and declare
the Second Volume was printed for, and published by WILLIAM HOLLAND, No. 50,
Oxford Street; and, like the First Volume, consists of original and fugitive
Flights of Wit, Humor, and Genius, not a Collection of Poems, like the
FESTIVAL OF LOVE.

This Day are published,
1 PATHETIC PARTICULARS of a POOR BOY sentenced to suffer Seven Years solitary
Imprisonment in Gloucester Jail; with a Portrait of the Boy and the Jailor.
Price 6 d. 2 MUSGRAVIANA; or, the Battle between Doctor FARMER and PETER
MUSGRAVE the Cambridge Tailor, with a Caricature of the Battle. 1 s. 6 d.
And the following Caricatures:

An Hobgoblin; Fairies; a Sprite; Laying a Ghost; Resurrection Men. 2 s. each.
Sturdy Beggars collecting for the French Clergy. 3 s. The Duke of Brunswick
attacking the Rear of the Sans-Culotte Army, 2 s. A Party of the Sans-Culotte
Army marching to the Frontiers, 2 s. 6 d. Affrighted Travelers; or, the
illuminated Turnep, 3 s. 6 d. The Haunted Cellar, 3 s. 6 d. One too many, 3 s.
6 d.


