THE CHARACTER OF KATHARINE, LATE Duchess of Buckinghamshire and Normanby.

By the late Mr. POPE.

LONDON: Printed for M. COOPER in Paternoster Row. M.DCC.XLVI.

THE CHARACTER OF KATHARINE, LATE Duches of Buckinghamshire, etc. etc.
SHE was the Daughter of James the Second, and of the Countess of Dorchester,
who inherited the Integrity and Virtue of her Father with happier Fortune. She
was married first to James Earl of Anglesey, and secondly to John Sheffield
Duke of Buckinghamshire and Normanby; with the former She exercised the Virtues
of Patience and Suffering, as long as there was any Hopes of doing Good by
either; with the latter all other Conjugal Virtues. The Man of finest Sense and
sharpest Discernment, She had the Happiness to please; and in that, found her
only Pleasure. When he died, it seemed as if his Spirit was only breathed into
her, to fulfill what he had begun, to perform what he had concerted, and to
preserve and watch over what he had left, his only Son; in the Care of whose
Health, the forming of whose Mind, and the Improvement of whose Fortune, She
acted with the Conduct and Sense of the Father, softened, but not overcome with
the Tenderness of the Mother. Her Understanding was such as must have made a
Figure, had it been in a Man; but the Modesty of her Sex threw a Veil over its
Luster, which nevertheless suppressed only the Expression, not the Exertion of
it; for her Sense was not superior to her Resolution, which, when once She was
in the Right, preserved her from making it only a Transition to the Wrong, the
frequent Weakness even of the best Women. She often followed wise Counsel, but
sometimes went before it, always with Success. She was possessed of a Spirit,
which assisted her to get the better of those Accidents which admitted of any
Redress, and enabled her to support outwardly with Decency and Dignity those
which admitted of none; yet melted inwardly through almost her whole Life, at a
Succession of melancholy and affecting Objects, the Loss of all her Children,
the Misfortunes of Relations and Friends, public and private, and the Death of
those who were dearest to her. Her Heart was as compassionate as it was great:
Her Affections warm even to Solicitude: Her Friendship not violent or jealous,
but rational and persevering: Her Gratitude equal and constant to the Living;
to the Dead boundless and heroical. What Person soever She found worthy of her
Esteem, She would not give up for any Power on Earth; and the greatest on Earth
whom She could not Esteem, obtained from her no farther Tribute than Decency.
Her Good Will was wholly directed by Merit, not by Accident; not measured by
the Regard they professed for her own Desert, but by her Idea of theirs: And as
there was no Merit which She was not able to imitate, there was none which She
could envy; therefore her Conversation was as free from Detraction, as her
Opinions from Prejudice or Prepossession. As her Thoughts were her own, so were
her Words; and She was as sincere in uttering her Judgment, as impartial in
forming it. She was a safe Companion, many were served, none ever suffered by
her Acquaintance: Inoffensive, when unprovoked; when provoked, not stupid: But
the Moment her Enemy ceased to be hurtful, She could cease to act as an Enemy.
She was therefore not a bitter but consistent Enemy: (though indeed, when forced
to be so, the more a finished One for having been long a making.) And her
Proceeding with ill People was more in a calm and steady Course, like Justice,
than in quick and passionate Onsets, like Revenge. As for those of whom She
only thought ill, She considered them not so much as once to wish them ill; of
such, her Contempt was great enough to put a Stop to all other Passions that
could hurt them. Her Love and Aversion, her Gratitude and Resentment, her
Esteem and Neglect were equally open and strong, and alterable only from the
Alteration of the Persons who created them. Her Mind was too noble to be
insincere, and her Heart too honest to stand in Need of it; so that She never
found Cause to repent her Conduct either to a Friend or an Enemy. There remains
only to speak of her Person, which was most amiably Majestic, the nicest Eye
could find no Fault in the Outward Lineaments of her Face or Proportion of her
Body; it was such, as pleased wherever she had a Desire it should; yet she
never envied that of any other, which might better please in general: In the
same Manner, as being content that her Merits were esteemed where She desired
they should, She never depreciated those of any other that were esteemed or
prefered elsewhere. For She aimed not at a general Love or a general Esteem
where She was not known; it was enough to be possessed of both wherever she
was. Having lived to the Age of Sixty-two Years; not courting Regard, but
receiving it from all who knew her; not loving Business, but discharging it
fully wheresoever Duty or Friendship engaged her in it; not following
Greatness, but not declining to pay Respect, as far as was due from
Independency and Disinterest; having honorably absolved all the Parts of Life;
She forsook this World, where She had left no Act of Duty or Virtue undone, for
that where alone such Acts are rewarded, on the 13th Day of March 1742-3. The
above Character was written by Mr. Pope some Years before Her Grace's Death.



