portrait of Jonathan Swift JONAT. SWIFT S.T.P. and (...)
Non Pareil



Mr. POPE's Literary Correspondence.

VOLUME the FIFTH.

With LETTERS of Lord BOLINGBROKE. Lord LANSDOWNE. Sir SAMUEL GARTH. Mrs. ELIZA
JUSTICE. WILLIAM BROMLEY, Esquire PIECES of Mr. WALSH.


LONDON: Printed for E. CURLL, at Pope's Head, in Rose-Street Covent Garden.
M.DCC.XXXVII.

TO MY SUBSCRIBERS encore.
GENTLEMEN,
HAving, as you All know, honestly Purchased the First Volume of Mr. POPE's
Literary Correspondence of his Agent the Reverend Mr. Smith; Published and paid
my Respects to my BENEFACTOR in the Second; Dispatched BROCADE and TIM LANCET
in the Third; and, Got rid of the SHIFTERS in the Fourth; I now come to give
you a just Account of the Contents of this Fifth Volume.

Beside, what is here presented to You, I have Several other very valuable
Originals in my Custody, which, with these, were Transmitted to me from
Ireland. And this Volume will be closed with whatever additional Letters Mr.
POPE shall think fit to insert in his WORKS in PROSE, now printing in Quarto,
Price a Guinea; but the Controversy between ME and Mr. POPE will never be ended
till the Eyes of one of Us are closed (I mean by Death, not by Dr. Tailor) if
Mine are open longest, to the last Volume of Literary Correspondence shall be
prefixed A faithful Account of Mr. POPE's Life and Writings, with a true Copy
of his Last Will and Testament, if he makes one.

I am, Gentlemen, Your obliged Humble Servant, E. CURLL.
5 Nov. 1736.
DOMIMINA NUSTIO ILLUMEA



ORIGINAL LETTERS.
Mr. POPE to Dean SWIFT. Written in the Year, 1723.

Dear Sir,
I Find a Rebuke in a late Letter of yours that both stings and pleases me
extremely. Your saying that I ought to have writ a Postscript to my Friend
GAY's, makes me not content to write less than a whole Letter; and your seeming
to take his kindly, gives me Hopes you will look upon this as a sincere Effect
of Friendship: Indeed, as I cannot but own the Laziness with which you tax me,
and with which I may equally charge you, for both of us have had (and one of us
has both had and given) a Surfeit of Writing, so I really thought you would
know yourself to be so certainly entitled to my Friendship, that it was a
Possession you could not imagine needed any farther Deeds or Writings to assure
you of it.

It is an honest Truth, there is no one living or dead of whom I think oftener
or better than yourself. I look upon you to be (as to me) in a State between
both; you have from me, all the Passions and good Wishes that can attend the
Living, and all that Respect and tender Sense of Loss that we feel for the
Dead. Whatever you seem to think of your withdrawn and separate State, at this
Distance, and in this Absence, Dean SWIFT lives still in England, in every
Place and Company where he would choose to live, and I find him in all the
Conversations I keep, and in all the Hearts, in which I would have any Share.

We have never met these many Years without mention of you; besides my old
Acquaintance, I have found that all my Friends of a later Date, are such as
were yours before. Lord OXFORD, Lord HARCOURT, and Lord HARLEY, may look upon
me as one intailed upon them by you. Lord BOLINGBROKE is now returned (as I
hope) to take me with all his other Hereditary-Rights; and, indeed, he seems
grown so much a Philosopher, as to set his Heart upon some of them as little,
as upon the Poet you gave him. It is sure my ill Fate, that all those I most
loved, and with whom I have most lived, must be Banished! after both of you
left England, my constant Host was the Bishop of ROCHESTER; sure this is a
Nation that is cursedly afraid of being overrun with too much Politeness, and
cannot regain one great Genius, but at the Expense of another: I tremble for my
Lord PETERBOROW (whom I now lodge with) he has too much Wit, as well as
Courage, to make a solid General; and if he escapes being Banished by others, I
fear he will Banish himself. This leads me to give you some Account of my
Manner of Life and Conversation, which has been infinitely more various and
dissipated, than when you knew me and cared for me; and among all Sexes,
Parties, and Professions, a Glut of Study and Retirement, in the first Part of
my Life, cast me into This; and This I begin to see will throw me again into
Study and Retirement.

The Civilities I have met with from opposite Sets of People, have hindered me
from being violent or sour to any Party; but at the same time the Observations
and Experiences I cannot but have collected, have made me less fond of, and
less surprised at, any; I am therefore the more afflicted and the more angry at
the Violences and Hardships I see practiced by either. The Merry Vein you knew
me in, is sunk into a Turn of Reflection, that has made the World pretty
indifferent to me, and yet I have acquired a Quietness of Mind which by Fits
improves into a certain degree of Cheerfulness, enough to make me just so good
humoured as to wish That World well: My Friendships are increased by new ones,
yet no part of the Warmth I felt for the old is diminished: Aversions I have
none but to Knaves (for Fools I have learned to bear with) and those I cannot
be commonly civil to, for I think those next to Knaves who converse with them;
the greatest Man in Power, of this Sort, shall hardly make me Bow to him,
unless I had a personal Obligation to him, and that I will take care not to
have. The top Pleasure of my Life is one I learned from you, both how to gain
and how to use the Freedoms of Friendship with Men much my Superiors. To have
pleased great Men, according to Horace, is a Praise; but not to have flattered
them, and yet not to have displeased, is a greater. I have carefully avoided
all Intercourse with Poets and Scriblers, unless where by chance I have found a
Modest one; by these Means I have had no Quarrels with any personally; and none
have been Enemies, but who were also Strangers to me; and as there is no great
need of an Ecclaircisment with such, whatever they writ or said I never
related, not only never seeming to know, but often really never knowing any
thing of the Matter: There are very few Things that give me the Anxiety of a
Wish; the strongest I have, would be to pass my Days with you; and a few such
as you: But Fate has dispersed them all about the World, and I find to wish it,
is as vain, as to wish to live to see the Millenium, and the Kingdom of the
Just upon Earth.

If I have sinned in my long Silence, consider there is one to whom you
yourself have been as great a Sinner; as often as you see his Hand you will
learn to do me Justice, and feel in your Heart, how long a Man may be silent to
those he truly loves and respects.

I am, dear Sir, Your ever faithful Servant, A. POPE.

Lord BOLINGBROKE TO Dean SWIFT. This seems to be written by way of Postscript
to Mr. Pope's Letter.

I Am not so lazy as POPE, and therefore you must not expect from me the same
indulgence to Laziness; in defending his own Cause he pleads yours; and becomes
your Advocate while he appeals to you as his Judge; you will do the same on
your Part; and I, and the rest of your common Friends, shall have great Justice
to expect from two such righteous Tribunals: You resemble perfectly the two
Alehouse-Keepers in Holland, who were at the portrait of Henry Lord Viscount
Bolingbroke HENRY Ld. Visct. BOLINGBROKE.
Murray Pinx. 1714. Parr Sculp

same time Burgomasters of the Town, and taxed one another's Bills alternately.
I declare before hand I will not stand to the Award; my Title to your
Friendship is good, and wants neither Deeds nor Writings to confirm it; but
Annual-Acknowledgments at least are necessary to preserve it; and I begin to
suspect by your defrauding me of them, that you hope in time to dispute it, and
to urge Prescription against me. I would not say one Word to you about myself
(since it is a Subject on which you appear to have no Curiosity) was it not to
try, how far the Contrast between POPE's Fortune and Manner of Life, and Mine
may be carried.

I have been then infinitely more uniform and less dissipated, than when you
knew me and cared for me; that Love which I used to scatter with some
Profusion, among the whole Female Kind, has been these many Years devoted to
One Object; a great many Misfortunes (for so they are called, though sometimes
very improperly) and a Retirement from the World, have made that just and nice
Discrimination between my Acquaintance and my Friends, which we have seldom
Sagacity enough to make for Ourselves; those Insects of various Hues, which
used to hum and buz about me while I stood in the Sunshine, have disappeared
since I lived in the Shade. No Man comes to a Hermitage but for the Sake of the
Hermit; a few Philosophical Friends come often to mine, and they are such as
you would be glad to live with, if a dull Climate and duller Company have not
altered you extremely from what you was nine Years ago.

The hoarse Voice of Party was never heard in this quiet Place DAWLEY.
; Gazettes and Pamphlets are banished from it, and if the Lucubrations of ISAAC
BICKERSTAFF are admitted, this Distinction is owing to some Strokes by which it
is judged that this illustrious Philosopher, had (like the Indian FOHU, the
Grecian PYTHAGORAS, the Persian ZOROASTER, and others his Precursors among the
Arabians, Magians, and the Egyptian SERES) both his Outward and his Inward
Doctrine, and that he was of no Side at the Bottom -- When I am there, I forget
I was ever of any Party myself; nay, I am often so happily absorbed by the
abstracted Reason of Things, that I am ready to imagine there never was any
such Monster as Party. Alas, I am soon awakened from that pleasing Dream by the
Greek and Roman Historians, by GUICCIARDIN, by MACHIAVEL, and by THUANUS; for I
have vowed to read no History of Our own Country, till that Body of it which
you promise to finish appears.

I am under no apprehensions that a Glut of Study and Retirement should cast me
back into the Hurry of the World; on the contrary, the single Regret which I
ever feel, is that I fell so late into this Course of Life: My Philosophy grows
confirmed by Habit, and if you and I meet again I will extort this Approbation
from you, I am consilio bonus, sed more eo productus, ut non tantum recte
facere possim, sed nil non recte facere non possim. The little Incivilities I
have met with from opposite Sets of People, have been so far from rendering me
violent or sour to any, that I think myself obliged to them all; some have
cured me of my Fears, by showing me how impotent the Malice of the World is;
others have cured me of my Hopes, by showing how precarious popular Friendships
are; all have cured me of Surprise; in driving me out of Party, they have
driven me out of cursed Company; and in stripping me of Titles, and Rank, and
Estate, and such Trinkets, which every Man that will may spare, they have given
me that which no Man can be happy without.

Reflection and Habit have rendered the World so indifferent to me, that I am
neither afflicted nor rejoiced, angry nor pleased at what happens in it, any
farther than personal Friendships interest me in the Affairs of it, and this
Principle extends my Cares but a little Way: Perfect Tranquillity is the general
Tenor of my Life; good Digestions, serene Weather, and some other mechanic
Springs, wind me above it now and then, but I never fall below it; I am
sometimes gay, but I am never sad; I have gained New Friends, and have lost
some Old ones; my Acquisitions of this kind give me a good deal of Pleasure,
because they have not been made lightly: I know no Vows so solemn as those of
Friendship, and therefore a pretty long noviciate of Acquaintance should
methinks precede them; my Losses of this kind give me but little Trouble, I
contributed nothing to them, and a Friend who breaks with me unjustly is not
worth preserving. As soon as I leave this Town (which will be in a few Days) I
shall fall back into that Course of Life, which keeps Knaves and Fools at a
great distance from me; I have an Aversion to them Both, but in the ordinary
Course of Life I think I can bear the sensible Knave better than the Fool: One
must indeed with the former be in some, or other, of the Attitudes of those
Wooden Men whom I have seen before a Sword-Cutler's Shop in Germany, but even
in these constrained Postures the witty Rascal will divert me; and he that
diverts me does me a great deal of good, and lays me under an Obligation to
him, which I am not obliged to pay him in another Coin: The Fool obliges me to
be almost as much upon my Guard as the Knave, and he makes me no amends; he
numbs me like the Torpor, or he teizes me like the Fly. This is the Picture of
an old Friend, and more like him than that will be which you once asked, and
which he will send you, if you continue still to desire it -- Adieu, dear SWIFT
with all thy Faults I love Thee entirely, make an Effort, and love me on with
all mine.

BOLINGBROKE.

ALMAHIDE.
AN ODE.
By HENRY SAINT-JOHN, Esquire An incorrect Copy of this Poem was published in the
Year 1701.
.
I.
LONG have I wandered from the Muse's Seat,
Where, ever present to the Poet's Eyes,
A thousand grateful Objects rise,
Where all is gay, and all is sweet.
Where, when past Images we find,
By Memory with these combined,
She from her Store of fading Sense can move,
And frame no Fancy but of Joy and Love.
Where every Muse, and every Grace resides,
The sacred Temple where Apollo hides,
From the profane and vulgar Eyes,
His aweful Mysteries.
This blooming Garden of the Delian God
Long since I left, new Paths to try;
On rough uneven Ground I trod,
And sought the gloomy dark Abode
Of Wisdom and Philosophy.
II.
From hence escaped with Joy to Thee I come;
Thee I revisit now, my native Home.
That Magic Land no more I Will tread,
Nor drink of those Lethargic Streams,
That with their Poison taint the Blood,
And stop the sprightly Purple Flood;
That upward to the sickly Head
Send lazy Vapors, idle Dreams.
Again I Will taste of the Prophetic Rill,
Which rises fast by the Picrian Hill.
Phoebus all other Nymphs forsook,
To chase Castalia, young and fair,
To bathe in her delightful Waves,
All other Waters now he leaves,
He loosens here his golden Hair,
And plunges in the lucid Brook.
Once the coy Maid refused the Grace,
And would not suffer his Divine Embrace.
Now wiser grown, no more she will fly,
But clasps the God, and hugs the naked Deity.
III.
As Mariners their Canvas Wings distend,
Leaving the Pole, to every Northern Blast;
Southward their Courses bend,
And the Artic Circle past,
The Temperate Zone with Pleasure meet;
With Pleasure feel the glowing Heat,
And as they nearer to him run,
Salute the long abandoned Sun.
Thus from the frozen Skies,
Where once benumbed she lay,
My Muse to milder Regions flies,
And to Parnassus wings her Way.
IV.
Methinks already in my Heart,
I feel a secret Warmth arise,
Which thence diffused to every vital Part,
Glows in my Face, and sparkles in my Eyes.
I see the Summit of the Hill,
With Spires of Glory crowned;
And nearer now I see the Mound,
Such was Apollo's Will,
Raised by the Muses to keep off the Crowd
Of thronging Poets, insolent and loud.
Wretches, whom though he daigns not to inspire,
Would yet be placed among the Golden Choir.
V.
Here Garth appears, to whom consigned
The double Charge of Health and Wit we find.
Apollo, grieved to see his Arts disgraced,
Physic and Poetry at once debased;
Their sacred Ends for public Good designed,
Perverted to destroy and plague Mankind,
To Garth the double Charge imparts,
Of living Verse, and healing Arts.
Him when the God resolved to send,
He bid Hygieia on his Steps attend.
Bid every Muse, and every Grace prepare,
To warm the Bard with all their Fires,
To join his Song with all their Lyres,
And make his matchless Poem The DISPENSARY.
all their Care.
VI.
But now arrived I mount the sacred Hill,
And Joy and Rapture all my Senses fill.
My melancholy Thoughts retire apace,
And fly like Demons from the Place.
I feel, I feel the God return,
He takes Possession of my Breast,
And I with all his Fury burn.
Again I feel the pleasing Smart;
Love fills his ancient Throne, my Heart;
A charming Tyrant, and a welcome Guest.
VII.
I know ye well, ye silent Groves,
Conscious of my secret Loves:
Tell me how often have I found,
Beneath your gentle Shade,
In pensive Act upon the Ground,
The mournful STREPHON George Granville, Esquire late Lord Lansdowne.
laid.
STREPHON, the Glory of our British Plains,
The Wish of all the Nymphs, and Envy of the Swains.
How often have I heard his charming Voice,
Through all the neighboring Hills resound,
And to repeat the Heavenly Notes rejoice.
With The Countess of Newburgh.
Myra he begins his Lays,
And ends 'em all in Myra's Praise;
Nothing but Myra dwells upon his Tongue,
Charm of his Heart, and Subject of his Song.
Her Beauty and the Verse alike succeed,
Nor can Oblivion fear;
For after Ages shall with Rapture read,
What we with Rapture hear.
The powerful Lute on which the Thracian played,
Was by the Muses to the Skies conveyed;
One more bright Star shall in the Field appear,
And Granville's Pen adorn the glittering Sphere.
VIII.
But soft, I hear
The sounding Lyre;
And see the God is near,
And all the tuneful Choir,
I Have reached the towering Height,
It Is here the Muses stay;
From hence I Will take my Flight,
And wing my airy Way.
Aloft my Muse and I will go,
She scorns to aim at little Things,
At Heroes or at Kings,
She cannot stoop so low.
To Almahide address thy Song,
It does of Right to her belong.
Soar like the Theban Swan on high,
Nor be afraid to venture nigh
The flaming Region of the Sky.
IX.
Go on, my Muse, go on;
Boldly approach the Sun;
And from his Chariot Wheel
Attempt to steal
The sacred Fire
That does the Gods inspire.
Then may thou in Immortal Lays
A more than Mortal Beauty praise.
Or should thy melting Pinions fail,
And I precipitate descend;
Should my unlucky Stars prevail,
And give my Days this fatal End;
Yet in the Monuments of Fame
I shall secure a lasting Name;
And to have dare'd a Thing so great,
Will place me far above the Power of Fate.
Then when I draw my latest Breath,
Should Almahide vouchsafe to smile,
That would compensate for my Death,
And more than pay me for my Toil.
X.
Stay, foolish Muse, thy Hurry stay,
Where will thy Madness run?
To Almahide direct thy Way,
And seek no other Sun.
It Is she supplies,
With brighter Eyes,
The Distance of the God of Day.
When they are shut, in Britain then it is Night,
And we eternal Darkness fear,
But when the radiant Balls appear,
We feel their Warmth, and bless the rising Light.
Thus shall my Theme my Song inspire,
And heat my Breast with double Fire;
And thus my humble Genius raise
High as the Beauty that I praise.
Thus be my Want of Strength supplied,
Thus may she grant what Nature has denied,
I ask no Inspiration but from Almahide.
XI.
In the World's early Days,
When first Religion did appear;
Religion, which has cost Mankind so dear;
When Men began to raise
Gods to themselves, and then those Gods to fear,
Chose various Lords, and tired of being free,
Of every Virtue framed a Deity:
Had Almahide been known,
Had she been born to shine,
They had adored no other Shrine,
All these Perfections are in Her combined,
The Fom of Venus and Diana's Mind.
Her Rays a Luster like the Sun's dispense,
And shed on all a bounteous Influence.
A cruel Glance from those fair Eyes,
A Word by her in Anger spoke,
Gives more Alarms,
Than Jove in Arms,
And swifter than his Lightning flies,
And surer than his Stroke.
Only below she could not dwell,
Or Hell would be no longer Hell.
At her Approach the Realms of Woe
Would change their horrid Face;
The burning Flood forget to flow,
And Furies fly the Place.
XII.
And see! the lovely Form appear,
Before my ravished Eyes!
Close to yon Crystal Stream the Charmer lies.
Behold her, Swains, behold her there;
Impending Branches shield the Fair,
And Beds of Camomile the beauteous Burden bear.
See, how reclining on the Grass,
In this clear Brook, her faithful Glass,
First she collects her scattered Hair,
Then in Tresses,
As she dresses,
Places every Flower that is gay,
Places all the Pride of May,
Not to adorn, but to compare.
In vain with Here Is their brightest Colors vie,
The blushing Rose
Its Weakness knows,
And vanquished Lillies own her Victory.
Nor raises she her Head, but downward bent,
Approves their Form, and smiling seems content.
Observe the Troops of Loves
That swarm about the Groves,
Lean on their Wings, and hanging in the Air,
Mistake the Nymph, and think their Mother there.
XIII.
Gently, sweet Zephyr, gently blow,
And make the injurious Mantle rise,
And wound our Hearts and please our Eyes.
Unveil the Nymph, dear Wind remove
Those Clouds that hide this World of Love,
And see the friendly Breeze obeys,
Saluting he betrays.
O! give her Slave to know,
That Sea of Milk, those Hills of Snow,
And all the blissful Vales of Joy below.
He would, but can no more disclose:
Resisting Robes oppose:
The thousand Folds of that invidious Vest,
Inshrine their Treasure, and our Sight arrest.
Corporeal Eyes no farther reach;
But Fancy is not thus confined;
Fancy can enter through the smallest Breach,
And through the subtle Plaits a Passage find.
Thus having pierced the Screen,
Fancy relates what she has seen,
And tires the Soul while she instructs the Mind.
XIV.
Thus we, fond Wretches, court our Fate,
And when the pointed Darts,
Increase the Pains we might abate,
And plunge 'em in our Hearts.
In vain we hope to find a Cure,
No Remedy is nigh;
Without Relief we must endure,
And without Pity die.
Fair Almahide gives Love to All,
All that dare look her Victims fall;
But she herself Receives from None,
Or what is the same to Me, from One;
One happy Man that dwells within those Arms,
Tastes all her Joys, and rifles all her Charms.
While dying Crowds of Lovers stand,
And look, and gaze, and wish to share;
But Virtue with her Magic Wand,
Encircles round the Happy Pair.
Thus when the Moon on Larian-Latmus lay The last Thought, and the last Line,
are taken from Lord Lansdowne. I think myself obliged to own the Debt, though I
am unable to pay it.
,
And rapt in Pleasure laughed her Hours away,
Her Beauty and her Light to all Mankind,
Without Distinction shined,
But to Endymion was her Love confined Alluding to the Story of Diana and
Endymion.
.
Dawley-FARM, THE RETIREMENT OF Lord BOLINGBROKE.
IT IS sung, that, exiled by Tyrannic Jove,
Apollo, from the starry Realms above,
To Sylvan Shades, to Grots and Streams retired,
And that new Scene and that new State admired;
Admired, but found (with Pleasure and Surprise)
Himself the same on Earth as in the Skies;
A simple Majesty, an easy Grace
Composed his Steps, and lightened in his Face;
The wondering Swains and Nymphs, wherever he trod,
At Distance gazed, and recognized the God;
Wherever he passed, the World, his Influence knew
And Learning, Arts, and Wisdom round him grew,
Still, though in silent Privacy, he gave,
His wonted Aid; inspired the Wise and Brave;
Taught Patriots Policy; taught Poets Sense;
And bade all live, or die, in LIBERTY's Defense.
Sure this is verified: What here we view
In BOLINGBROKE has made the Fiction true.
See! Emblem of Himself, his Villa stand!
Politely finished, regularly Grand!
Frugal of Ornament, but That the best,
And all with curious Negligence expressed.
No gaudy Colors stain the Rural Hall,
Blank Light and Shade descriminate the Wall;
Where through the whole we see his loved Design,
To please with Mildness, without Glaring shine;
Himself neglects what must all others charm,
And what he built a Palace calls a Farm.
Here the proud Trophies, and the Spoils of War
Yield to the Scythe, the Harrow and the Car;
To whatever Implement the Rustic wields,
Whatever manures the Gardens or the Fields.
Contrast of Scenes! Behold a worthless Tool,
A dubbed Plebeian, Fortune's Favorite Fool,
Laden with Public Plunder loll in State,
'Midst dazzling Gems, and Piles of Massy Plate,
'Midst Arms, and Kings, and Gods and Heroes quaff,
His Wit all ending in an Ideot-Laugh,
Whilst noble Saint-John in his sweet Recess,
(By those made greater who would make him less)
Sees, on the figured Wall, the Stacks of Corn
With Beauty more than theirs the Room adorn.
Young winged Cupids smiling guide the Plow,
And Peasants elegantly reap and sow,
The Mantuan Genius, thus, in rural Strains,
Adds Grace to Cots, and Dignity to Swains,
Makes Phaebus' self partake the Farmer's Toil,
And all the Muses cultivate the Soil.
While free of Heart, and eloquent of Tongue,
His Speech as tuneful as that Heavenly Song,
Suspends in Rapture each attentive Guest;
Words more delicious than his generous Feast;
Wit more inspiring than his flowing Bowl;
" The Feast of Reason, and the Flow of Soul."
O Britain! -- But it is past -- O lost to Fame!
The wondrous Man, thy Glory, and thy Shame,
Conversing with the mighty Minds of Old,
Names like his Own, in Time's bright List enrolled,
Here splendidly obscure, delighted lives,
And only for his wretched Country grieves.
While Thou, ingrate, infatuate, as thou art,
Of thy mad Conduct long shall feel the Smart,
Long mourn the Folly which thy Weal destroys,
And rue the blessed Retirement he enjoys.
LETTERS OF Doctor GARTH.
To Lady RANELAGH at Bath.
Madam,
I Hope the Waters agree very well with her Highness Princess ANNE of Denmark.
, and I wish they may answer all the Intents they are taken for; and that they
may not only confirm her Highness's Health, but that the whole Nation may be
blessed with the Fruits of it in contributing to the increase of the Royal-Line,
which will be of much more advantage to these Kingdoms, than extending our Line
in Flanders: For there, we may have sufficient Encouragement to look after
Ourselves, and not after the Security of Strangers. Here is nothing at all of
News, neither that Dunkirk is taken, nor Namure besieged. So that I suppose the
Army is in very good Health, for I hear nothing to the contrary, and
considering how great an Army we have, it is as much as can be expected that
they take care of their Healths. This is all the News from Abroad; and as for
the News at Home, the only is, that the Queen sent into the City to borrow
200,000 l. upon the Security of a Vote, the Parliament made, that if the
Poll-Bill did not arise to 1,200,000 l. they would make it up, some other way,
the next Session. I am very glad the City has that good Opinion of the House of
Commons, as to think they will not alter their Opinions. Another piece of News
is, that a young Lady hanged herself for Love, in Leicester-Fields. I suppose
she was really in Love; and, perhaps, the first that ever was so: I wish the
City had as good a Security for their Money, as she has given for her Love. I
am, Madam,

Yours, etc. S. GARTH.
LONDON, Sept. 6, 1692.
To Lady RANELAGH.
Madam,
I Am very sorry, that the Waters, that have workt Wonders, as they say, upon
all People, who have drank them this Year, should disagree with your Ladyship;
I could find in my Heart to send some People who are very sick thither; and
then, I am sure, I shall ruin their Reputation; or else send some sour,
consumptive Fanatic, that has a Constitution as stubborn and untoward as his
Principles; and if He should chance to miscarry, They will call them
Jacobite-Waters; and if they should once get that Name, it would clear you from
a great deal of troublesome Company, who have a Mind signally to distinguish
themselves from the rest: And the Truth of it is, it is but reasonable there
should be a Distinction made in a Place that is the Rendevous of all the
Leprous. We are here something surprised at the News that the Mayor of Bath was
ordered by my Lord Nottingham, not to wait upon the Princess to Chuch, because
he was the Queen's Officer. I am very glad her Highness does not bathe in the
Queen's Bath, for then, may be, the Secretary might have forbid that too. I do
not know what can be done next, without they disarm the Duke of Gloucester,
because he has got a Sword, and is huzzaed into the House. I am informed of a
great many Ladies that will not pay the respect that is due to her Highness,
and as they will pay no Visits, so it would have been much better, if they did
not receive Visits from others; I shall take care, for the future, to prescribe
them Husbands instead of Gallants, to go along with them. I hope my Lady A*****
has given you no reason to be jealous: I knew her before she married a Fool in
Oxfordshire, and her own Men Servants knew her there, to much better purpose;
only once their Service was a little too hot for them. I find that those who
are Jilts would be thought for the Government, and considering how we have been
jilted, they may well claim a Pretension to it; I wish they had behaved
themselves sincerely toward it; and then they need not have been unmannerly to
show their Affection to it. I am,

Madam, Your Ladyship's, etc. S. GARTH.
LONDON, Sept. 13, 1692.
The Honorable GEORGE GRANVILLE, Esquire TO Mr. BURNABY.
YOU enquire, my Friend, whether you should show your Comedy The LADY'S
VISITING-DAY. He has likewise wrote Three other Comedies, 1. Love Betrayed: or,
The Agreeable Disappointment. 2. The Modish Husband. 3. The Reformed Wife.
, to your Acquaintance before its Representation? I answer in the Negative;
which I shall confirm by the following Reasons.

The Reputation a Poet obtains from the public Applause, is not altogether
imaginary; for the Number of those who are not influenced by it, is so very
small, that he is out of fear of Danger from them. Nay, those very Men, who on
a private Perusal of some Plays, entertained but an indifferent Opinion of
them, fondly debauched by their Success, run their Approbation up to Bigotry;
never reflecting that as a Man's Name often subserves to his public Reception,
without regard to his Performance; so the Gracefulness of the Action, and the
Pomp of the Theater, joined to the injudicious Claps of the Audience, as often
give the greatest Applause to the worst Plays; and for a while preserve the
general Esteem of the Town. For when once a Play has got That on its Side, a
great many Men of Sense rather swim down than stem the Tide, or oppose the
Vogue at the Expense of the Imputation of Singularity. This is evident from
some late Plays (I had almost said Farces) against which the best Critics
declared in vain.

But before the Action, a moderate Character of a Play, from a Man of tolerable
Sense, shall by his parsimonious Praise, damn it, though ever so meritorious; for
the Judgment of the Audience being not yet past in its Favor, the Town is
ready to take the first Impressions from any Man, whose plausible Assurance has
got him the Reputation of a Critic; because People hope by falling in with his
Censure, to give a sufficient Proof of their Understandings. A Poet therefore
in submitting his Play, before Action, to a Perusal, runs as many hazards, as
he confides it to Men who want either Candor or Judgment; and among those that
the vulgar Voice has allowed Wits, a Man with such Qualifications is not very
easy to be found. One of these Wits always over-values himself; and believing
that he is Master of a great deal of Sense, when his Portion, perhaps, but just
seasons him from Fool; and so only finishes a Coxcomb, who thinks the only way
to establish himself a Wit, is by finding Fault. And the Town, which is not
over-nice, in distinguishing betwixt Merit and Pretense, is often imposed on by
the Coxcomb, it mistakes for a Man of Sense; and biased by the general Malice
of Mankind (that inclines most Men rather to believe Ill than Good of another)
it strikes in with his injudicious as well as unjust Censures.

There is another sort of Wits (though of somewhat a higher Class) whom a small
Stock of Learning, and the Flattery of some of their Acquaintance, has
confirmed in the Selfopinion of being good Critics, and with these the Poet yet
runs a greater Risque; for it is impossible to please them with any thing
Modern, except their Own. These Critics have a very contemptible Opinion of the
Age they live in, and think Fortune extremely severe in not casting them into
the Times of Euripides, Horace, or it may be Shakespeare; and they are angry
with Providence for planting them so far Northward, who might have made a
Figure in a more Southerly Clime, among the first-Rate Wits of old Greece and
Italy. They think so meanly of all they know, that they would sooner admire a
Scribler they never saw, than a Man of the best Sense of their own
Acquaintance. They censure the Wit by the Countenance; and the Man whose Face
they are disgusted with, must never hope to please them with his Understanding.
If ever they happen to think well of any Man's Wit for a while, (for their good
Opinion of any one is of a very short duration) it is when they meet with one
as ill-natured and vain as themselves; then their Spleen at the Merits of
others, being gratified with Railing, blinds them to a Momentary Satisfaction
in the Defamer; but that being over, their native Pride returns, and they look
down on him too; for all their Talent and Time is expended in speaking well of
themselves and their own Writings, and ill of every body else: But then theW
orld is often even with them, for they generally are pleased with themselves
without a Rival.

Indeed, there is often a Magisterial Pride and ill Nature in Men of a great
deal of Wit and Learning, which almost overthrows all their Merit, or at least
makes one angry to find things so valuable in such ill Hands; for when Praise,
or Success, has once debauched a Man's Judgment into Opiniatre, he is but a
Fool of his own making, ten times more intolerable than a Fool of God's making.

Again, there are some who are but lately established Wits by a lucky Hit, and
hope to keep up that Character by depressing others, or damning what they
write, with faint and affected Praise. These are for keeping Fame Chaste,
(though themselves are an Instance of her Prostitution) that is, for their own
use only; never reflecting, that she, like those of whose Sex she is painted,
is capable of satisfying more than One; nay, that like a pretty Woman, it is
almost impossible to keep her to one's self. These particularly avoid, for
their recent Success makes their Pride more lively, and their Apprehension of
any Rival more strong.

Mr. Wycherley's Couplet reaches abundance of our current Wits, or Critics.
Those who write ill, and those who never durst write,
Turn Critics out of mere Revenge and Spite.


Yet all these have it in their Power, to do a great deal of Mischief to a Poet
who is so bold, as to venture his Reputation in their Hands; because the
undiscerning Town never reflects, that as a Critic is the last Refuge of a
Pretender to Wit, so he that is full only of the Faults of an Author, is less
deserving, even of that Name, than he who sometimes rises up to a Taste of his
Excellencies. Nor does the Town consider, that a great many Men have no other
way of keeping within the Pale of Wit, but by excluding those who are only
capable of excluding them.

There are another sort of Men who pass for Wits with the Town, that are far
from being so; and these are your Laughers, merry Rogues, who have a mortal
Aversion to Thought; and as they laugh at every Thing, even what they say
themselves, it is not to be expected they should spare the most serious
Performance.

Lastly, The Judgment most Men make of Books, is generally very erroneous in
judging the Performance by the Author, not the Author by the Performance; if a
Man, through Inexperience, or any accidental Misfortune, have the ill luck not
to please in one thing, some will by no means allow him a Capacity of pleasing
at all. Though Mr. Dryden, Mr. Wycherley, Mr. Otway, and every eminent Poet,
have been Proofs of the contrary; while some, successful to a Wonder, in their
first Attempts, have mouldred away, and dwindled in a little time to less than
the Shadow of those mighty Men their first setting-out promised. And, indeed,
popular Applause is too common a Test of the Writer's Merit, of which the best
Poets have complained both in Greece and Rome. Petronius Arbiter, in the Person
of Eumolpus, gives it as an Observation in his Time.

Ego inquit Poeta sum, and ut spero non humillimi spiritus: Si modo coronis
aliquid credendum est, quas etiam ad Imperitos defer Gratia solet.

The Ignorant, as well as the Learned, share the Applauses of the Town; and
there has scarce appeared a Scribler so despicable in Reality, as not to have
been, some time or other, the Favorite of a Day.

These, and many more Hazards a Man runs, who has the Assurance to consult
those we generally call Friends, before the Representation; and the Fortune of
a Poem, and that of a Man meet with the same Measure. When a Poem, by the
public Reception, is past needing particular Approbations, the Wits are lavish
of their Praise; but when their Approbation might establish its public
Reception, they are very scrupulous of bestowing it. The Benefit therefore,
that you expect by it, being small and uncertain; the Damage so apparent, and
considerable; I think it safer to come to the Public with all one's Faults,
than by false Hope of mending them by Advice, have them turned to the ruin of
the whole Poem: and having given you my Judgment, you may, as Men generally do,
follow your own Fancy. It is enough I have endeavored to serve you, and to
prove that I am what I pretend,

Your faithful Friend, GEO. GRANVILLE.
WHITEHALL, 28 May, 1700. P.S. I send you our Old Friend's excellent Epigram,
In celeberrimum Joannem Dryden, CHAUCERI Sepulchro Intectum. SUaviter hic longo
dormi defuncte labor,
Dum jungit socios una Caverna sinus;
Dumque tuas canimus lauds, haec accipe blanda
Mente, minor Vatum quae tibi turba damus.
GALFRIDI exuvias quae prisci incluserat olim
Hospite laetetur Nobilis Urna novo:
DRYDENI cineres terra hac capiente repostos,
CHAUCERUS tumulo splendidiore jacet:
O par foelices! hac quis mercede recuset
Una vobiscum concubuisse, Mori?
BEVILL HIGGONS.





LETTERS TO Captain CONDUIT.
PETERSBURG, Jan. 14, 1734. SIR,
I Have now passed a Winter and a Summer here; the latter is much the best. I
was so contracted together in the Winter, that I was, in a manner, Dead with
Cold, and fit for nothing but to be Dissected. Often am I put in Mind of the
wide difference between Petersburg, and old England, not only on Account of its
Coldness, but Unpoliteness; for I well remember how my Dear Mamma used to give
Orders to our Servants to keep a thorough Silence in the House till I was awake
in a Morning, and when that News was brought her, with what an endearing
tenderness did she enquire after my Health? But here the Russian Bear-Brutes
with their Heels and their Tongues, make as loud a Din up and down Stairs,
before we are stirring, as there is at Drury Lane after the Play is over. Such
is the servile Politeness of Russia. However, I bless God I have my Health, and
am sensible it will be a secret Pleasure, to you to hear of my Welfare; and I
must declare that I am as happily situated as you could wish me, and am used
entirely to my own Satisfaction. For my part, under Misfortunes, I shall always
advise Traveling, it being pleasurable to attempt the most distant Part of the
Globe with a Resolution and Trust in the Divine Providence which never fails
those who rely on it. This I offer exclusive of Predestination and all Fanatic
Cant. When in our Voyage, the Captain told me we should that Night go through
the Gulf; methought he little knew how great a One I had shot, when I left
England to sail Three-thousand-miles with only a Splendid-Shilling in my
Pocket. I have without the least Anxiety, resigned All I ever had in this
World, except Friendship, and that I never will part with but with my Breath. I
shall therefore most gratefully acknowledge, that to you, it is, I owe my
present Happiness, and am your much obliged Friend, and humble Servant,

ELIZ. JUSTICE.

II.
PETERSBURG, Oct. 15, 1735. SIR,
BE pleased now, to take an Account of this Place from above fifteen Months
Experience.

The Gentleman and Lady Mrs. JUSTICE went over as a Governess to some young
Ladies; obliged thereto, by the dishonorable Practice of her Husband, lately
Transported for Robbing the Libraries at Cambridge. She was the Daughter of an
eminent Physician, in Yorkshire, and brought Mr. JUSTICE a very handsome
Fortune. He has had by Her Three Children, which are kept by his own Mother, a
worthy Gentlewoman, now living in the City of York.
I am with, have used me with the greatest Tenderness, Humanity and Politeness
that is possible. He is Just, Generous, and Obliging. She is Virtuous,
Charitable and Compassionate; and I do from my Heart say, They are the Persons
to whom I am, and wish to be obliged.

As to the Russian Climate it is extreme Cold, as you may imagine when Eighteen
Thousand Men were lately Reviewed upon the Ice. Carriages of all Sorts, laden
with Goods, are every Day drawn over it. But indulgent Heaven to make up this
Severity, has given plenty of Wood, and Furs, to fence against the Cold.

The People are very Strong, and can endure great Hardship. As to their Beauty,
I cannot say, in Painting, they would make very soft Pieces; for the Lines of
their Faces are very Strong. They are most of them of a good Height, but the
Men wear very long Beards. The Ladies are, or can be, just what you please.
For, only say, what Complexion you like, and they will instantly put it on;
being well versed in Painting.

As to their Conversation I will not say any thing of it, not understanding
their Language, but they Bow very much, and are Civil to Strangers. They can
dispense with more Dirt, and much more Food, than the English.

Their Churches are finely Adorned with what they call GODS. They go to Church
in the Night, and He who makes the lowest Bow is most Religious.

As to their Servants, they are the most ignorant Creatures living, and have
every thing which attends Ignorance, that is, Ingratitude, Dirt and Sauciness;
and are, in my Opinion, far inferior to a well taught Bear.

Their Buildings are very Magnificent, and their Houses are very Warm, having
an Oven in every Room, to which I creep close.

The Diversions of the Place are these; Twice a Week an Opera, and now and
then, a serious Game at Ombre for what will never hurt any Body, Love and
Friendship; and on a Moonlight Night, a Tour upon the Ice in a Sled.

As to Scandal, here is enough of it; but, the Gentlemen Rival the Ladies of
the Talent always allowed them, of a little Tittle-Tattle.

Here is no occasion for Sir Clement Cotterel, for they are much upon the Sans
Ceremony. There is one thing that I believe they exceed any Part of the World
in, Illuminations; which they make about Four or Five times a Year, and the
Expense is above Sixty sand Pounds a Year, and in my Opinion it is well worth
it.

As to Provisions, here is every thing very good, and in great Plenty. As to
Liquors, they are the same. As to Port Wine they wonder what it is; but French
Wine, as Chatteau-Margouz, Burgundy, Tocai, Arrack, we every Night drink to all
Friends in Old England.

In short, here is no want of any thing but agreeable Company; and, except the
Family I am in, there is not a Person that I should not think my Time as lost
with, if I conversed with them. The Rules I go by are These; I think no One my
Friend, and therefore cannot be deceived. I hear All, and say Little. I keep my
old Maxim of giving no Affront, nor will not tamely take one. I believe, from
this time, I shall always put into Lotteries; for I am apt to think my Luck is
turned, in happening to be so fortunate as to come into so worthy a Family.

I make no excuse for this long Letter, it is in Compliance of your Request,
and I desire your Acceptance of my Acknowledgments for all Favors conferred on,

SIR, Your, etc. ELIZ. JUSTICE.

III.
PETERSBURG, Dec. 24, 1735. SIR,
I Entreat your Acceptance of a Winter-Piece. The Scene of this Country is
quite changed. The agreeable River which ran by my Window, is now consolidated
into a fixed Substance of Ice. I daily see Numbers of Carriages riages covered
with Snow, and the Men's Beards look as if they were set with Diamonds by the
Isicles hanging about them. The Green Trees are become so White, that they put
me in mind of the Rosemary upon Cakes at Twelfth-Tide; and the Gentlemen and
Ladies, I think, are turned into different Creatures, of all Sorts, by their
Dress, being habited in Skins of diverse Beasts. Yet, notwithstanding the
Severity of the Frost, the Houses are kept warm by Ovens, as I observed in my
former; they give an equal Heat, but are not to me so agreeable as English
Fires, wherein, I think, is a kind of Cheerfulness that I prefer to this Method.

The Diet of Russia is excellently good, and, in my Opinion, this Place is very
fit for an Epicure; for in short, Eating and Drinking take up a third Part of
their Time.

Retirement is my Delight; and when my little Ladies and I are together, I want
no other Company nor Employment; when I have a leisure Hour to my Self, I spend
it in Reading.

All the News I can send you, is, that the English Resident gave a very elegant
Entertainment on the King's Birthday, which concluded with a Ball. I was not
at it, for my Dress is still Brown Camlet, and I think that best for
Retirement: I make up the Disappointment of Feasts, by attending a very polite
Entertainment, that is, in Reading the Spectator. For, I really think I am now
arrived to that Happiness he so agreeably represents of being least Alone, when
quite Alone; on which I put this Construction, that Books are the best
Companions. Pardon my Prolixity; but as I am of the Sex who seldom are Concise,
I entreat you to put on your Manly Generosity and forgive the Errors of your

Obliged humble Servant, ELIZ. JUSTICE.

IV.
PETERSBURG, 18 May, 1736. SIR,
THE Favors you have formerly bestowed on me are what I can never forget, I
therefore omit no Opportunity of acknowledging Them.

Was I not convinced of your real Merit I would not venture to write this, for
I believe I have now wrote Ten Letters and have had no Answer. My Friends are
equally unkind. I must own, that One Letter I have been favored with from you
affords me much Satisfaction, for I have the Vanity to believe you mean what
you say. I think I may be allowed to complain, when my Sister cannot find time
to write once a Year to unhappy me. But bad News never wants for carrying, for
there is a Gentleman in England who has wrote to his Correspondent here, that
Mr. JUSTICE is the Person who is under Confinement, and charged with the
Robbery of the Library at Cambridge: This News arrived about Four Months ago,
but my Master and Lady concealed it from me, as they do every thing that they
think will give me any uneasiness; yet notwithstanding their Care it came to my
Ear, and that in a very abrupt Manner. I was from the unwelcome News much
disordered and not willing to believe it true, but there was in Three News
Papers, immediately following, some Circumstances that agreed with it; now I
will leave you to judge what an Anxiety of Mind I must be in, not having any
one Friend so generous as to inform me of so important an Affair. I can compare
myself to nothing but a Person set Quick in the Ground, who sees many things
that would preserve him, but can procure none of them; my leaving England in
the Manner I did, and with a Resolution to go Abroad, I must say had something
in it of the Daughter of CATO. Were my Afflictions nicely considered by a
religious and honorable Man, I am sure he would allow that my Conduct was not
mean, when I was struggling with the rough Waves of a turbulent Sea: Now, as I
am willing, nay wish to be judged by the Just and Upright, I appeal to you
whether I do not deserve a Letter twice a Year from old England. This is the
last I shall write till I hear from you; I find so great a Decay of my Reason
that I am apprehensive I shall soon be deprived of my Senses, but while I
remain in them I shall with pleasure own I am,

Your obliged Friend and humble Servant, ELIZ. JUSTICE.

LETTERS Concerning the Manuscripts of WILLIAM WALSH, Esquire
To Mr. CURLL.
SIR,
MR. White, who I believe I have not the Honor to know, did very truly inform
you, when he told you that I had several Manuscripts of my Uncle WALSH's by me;
for, to tell you the Truth, I have a good many: But several of them, as I take
it, were written when he was very young; others at leisure Hours, I believe,
for Amusement only, and not with any design to publish them. Indeed most of
them are rather Sketches, or Outlines of some Design, than finished Pieces. I
dare not be instrumental in committing any of them to the Press without the
approbation, and perhaps correction of some very judicious Friend.

I have not yet seen any of the Volumes of Mr. POPE's Literary Correspondence,
they being published since I left the Town; but I am in no pain for any thing
of Mr. WALSH's that can come from that Quarter, being entirely satisfied that
Mr. POPE would not print any thing that he did not know worthy of the Memory of
his Friend, whose Character as a Critic, and a Man of Judgment, that Gentleman
has raised to a very high Pitch, by the honorable and kind Mention he has made
of him in his Essay on Criticism, and other his incomparable Works.

I am, Sir, Your most humble Servant, W. BROMLEY.
WORCESTER, Aug. 11, 1735.
II.
To Mr. CURLL.
SIR,
I have the Favor of yours of the 14th of August, and likewise one since of
the 30th, to acknowledge; but as I have been a good deal upon the Ramble for
these three Weeks last, I hope that will in some Measure plead my Excuse for
not having done it sooner.

Since I wrote to you last, I have been looking over some of the MSS. you
mention, and they really seem to be so very incorrect, that I cannot possibly
prevail with myself to have any of them published. The Sentiments in some of
them I believe are very well, and what he would not have been ashamed of, but
in other respects they are very deficient; and besides, they have been written
so long, and in so careless a manner, and with such bad Ink that a great many
of them are scarce legible.

I should be obliged to you if you would send me the Three Volumes of Mr.
POPE's Literary Correspondence A Fourth Volume is Published.
, and when I come to Town, which I believe will be in a short time, I will call
upon you and pay for them.

I am, Your humble Servant, W. BROMLEY.
WORCESTER Sept. 3. 1735.
N.B. Mr. White, mentioned in the first of these Letters, is a very worthy
Gentleman living in Worcestershire. It was he who gave me the Information where
I might hear of Mr. Walsh's MSS. and accordingly I wrote to Mr. Bromley
concerning them; but as he does not think any of them worthy his Uncle's
Memory, he is highly to be commended for suppressing them. I only hereby beg
leave to give Notice, that I have now reprinted a Correct and Beautiful Edition
of Mr. Walsh's Pieces in Prose and Verse, Published in his Life Time, which I
hope will prove Acceptable to the Public. I am obliged to a Lady for the
following Pieces.

SONNETS, etc.
BY WILLIAM WALSH, Esquire
I.
PHILLIS, we grieve not that Nature,
Forming Thee has done her Part;
And in every single Feature,
Shown the utmost of her Art.
II.
But in This, it is pretended,
That a mighty Grievance lies,
That thy Heart should be defended,
Though Thou wound'st Us with Thy Eyes.
III.
Love's a senseless Inclination,
Where no Mercy's to be found;
But is Just where kind Compassion
Gives Us Balm to heal the Wound.
IV.
Persians, paying solemn Duty,
To the rising Sun inclined,
Never would adore his Beauty,
But in hopes to make Him kind.
SONG.
I.
THOUGH Celia's born to be Adored,
And Strephon to Adore her born,
In vain Her Pity is implored,
Who kills him Twice, with Charms and Scorn.
II.
Fair Saint, to your blessed Orb repair,
And learn in Heaven a Heavenly Mind;
Thence hearken to a Sinner's Prayer,
And be less Beauteous or more Kind.
PHILLIS's Resolution.
I.
WHEN Slaves their Liberty require,
They hope no More to gain;
But You not only That desire,
But ask the Power to Reign.
II.
Think how unjust a Suit you make,
Then will you soon decline;
Your Freedom, when you please, pray take,
But Trespass not on Mine.
III.
No more in vain, Alcander crave,
I never will grant the Thing,
That He who once has been my Slave,
Should ever be my King.
To a LADY who had resolved against MARRIAGE.
I Cannot, Madam, but congratulate
Your Resolution for a Single-State:
Ladies who would live undisturbed and free,
Must never put on Hymen's-Livery.
Perhaps its Outside seems to promise fair,
Yet underneath is nothing else but Care.
If once you let the Gordian-Knot be tied,
Which turns the Name of Virgin into Bride,
That one fond Act your Life's best Scene foregoes,
And leads you into Labyrinths of Woes;
Whose strange Meanders you may search about,
But never find the Clue that leads you out.
The Married Life affords you little Ease,
The best of Husbands is so hard to please.
This, in Wives careful Faces you may spell,
Though they dissemble their Misfortunes well,
No Plague's so great as an ill-ruling Head,
But it is a Fate which few young Ladies dread:
For Love's insinuating Fire they fan,
With sweat Ideas of a God-like Man.
Cloe and Phillis gloried in their Swains,
And sung their Praises on the Neighboring Plains;
O! they were brave, accomplished, charming Men,
Angels 'till married, but mere Devils then.
Sure some resistless Power with Cupid sides,
Or we should have more Virgins, fewer Brides;
For Single-lives afford the most Content,
Secure and happy as they are Innocent:
Bright as Olympus crowned with endless Ease,
And calm as Neptune on the Halcyon-Seas.
Your Sleep is broke with no Domestic Cares;
No squalling Children to disturb your Prayers:
No Parting-Sorrows to extort your Tears,
No blustering Husband to renew your Fears!
Therefore, dear Madam, let a Friend advise,
Love, and its idle Deity despise:
Suppress Wild-Nature, if it durst rebel;
There Is no such Thing as leading Apes in Hell,
CLELTA to URANIA. An ODE.
I.
THE dismal Regions which no Sun beholds,
Whilst his Fires roll some distant World to cheer,
Which in dry Darkness, Frost, and chilling colds,
Spend one long Portion of the dragging Year,
At his returning Infl'ence never knew
More Joy, than Clelia, when she thinks of You.
II.
Those Zealots who adore the rising Sun
Would soon their daring Deity despise,
And with more warm, more true Devotion run,
To worship nobler Beams Urania's Eyes;
Had they beheld her lovely Form Divine,
Where Rays more glorious, more attracting, shine.
III.
But, Ah! frail Mortals, though you may admire
At a convenient distance all her Charms,
Approach Them, and you will feel a raging Fire,
Which scorches deep, and all your Power disarms;
Thus like the Arabian Bird, your Care proceeds
From the bright Object, which your Pleasure heeds.
Dean SWIFT TO Mr POPE.
Dublin, Sept. 20, 1723.
REturning from a summer expedition of four months on account of my health, I
found a letter from you, with an appendix longer than yours, from Lord
Bolingbroke. I believe there is not a more miserable malady than an
unwillingness to write letters to our best friends, and a man might be
philosopher enough in finding out reasons for it; one thing is clear, that it
shows a mighty difference betwixt Friendship and Love, for a lover (as I have
heard) is always scribbling to his mistress. If I could permit my self to
believe what your civility makes you say, that I am still remembered by my
friends in England, I am in the right to keep my self here -- Non sum qualis
eram. I left you in a period of life when one year does more execution than
three at yours, to which if you add the dullness of the air, and of the people,
it will make a terrible sum. I have no very strong faith in you pretenders to
Retirement, you are not of an age for it, nor have gone through either good or
bad fortune enough, to go into a corner, and form conclusions de contemptu
mundi and fuga saeculi, unless a Poet grows weary of too much applause, as
Ministers do of too much weight of business.

Your Happiness is greater than your merit, in choosing your Favorites so
indifferently among either Party; this you owe partly to your Education; and
partly to your Genius employing you in an Art in which Faction has nothing to
do, for I suppose Virgil and Horace are equally read by Whigs and Tories. You
have no more to do with the Constitution of Church and State, than a Christian
at Constantinople; and you are so much the wiser and the happier, because both
Parties will approve your Poetry as long as you are known to be of neither.

Your notions of Friendship are new to me, I believe every man is born with his
quantum, and he cannot give to one without robbing another. I very well know to
whom I would give the first place in my Friendship, but they are not in the
way: I am condemned to another scene, and therefore I distribute it in
Penny-worths to those about me, and who displease me least; and should do the
same to my fellowprisoners if I were condemned to a jayl. I can likewise
tolerate Knaves much better than Fools, because their knavery does me no hurt
in the commerce I have with them, which however I own is more dangerous, though
not so troublesome, as that of fools. I have often endeavored to establish a
friendship among all Men of Genius, and would fain have it done: they are
seldom above three or four Cotemporaries, and if they could be united, would
drive the World before them. I think it was so among the Poets in the time of
Augustus; but Envy, and Party, and Pride, have hindered it among us. I do not
include the Subalterns, of which you are seldom without a large Tribe: Under
the name of Poets and Scriblers, I suppose you mean the Fools you are content
to see sometimes, when they happen to be modest; which was not frequent among
them while I was in the World.

I would describe to you my way of living, if any method could be called so in
this Country. I choose my companions among those of least consequence and most
compliance: I read the most trifling Books I can find, and whenever I write, it
is upon the most trifling subjects: But riding, walking, and sleeping take up
eighteen of the twenty four hours. I procrastinate more than I did twenty years
ago, and have several things to finish which I put off to twenty years hence;
Haec est vita Solutorum, etc. I send you the compliments of a friend of yours,
who has passed four months this summer with two grave acquaintance at his
country house without ever once going to Dublin, which is but eight Miles
distant; yet when he returns to London, I will engage you shall find him as
deep in the Court of Requests, the Park, the Opera and the Coffee-house, as any
man there. I am now with him for a few days.

You must remember me with great affection to Dr Arbuthnot, Mr Congreve, and
Gay -- I think there are no more eodem tertio's between you and me, except Mr.
Jervas to whose house I address this, for want of knowing where you live; for
it was not clear from your last whether you lodge with Lord Peterborow, or he
with you? I am ever,

Your, etc.

Mr POPE to Dr SWIFT.
December 10, 1725.
I Find my self the better acquainted with you for a long Absence, as men are
with themselves for a long Affliction: Absence does but hold off a Friend to
make one see him the more truly. I am infinitely more pleased to hear you are
coming near us, than at any thing you seem to think in my favor; an opinion
which perhaps has been aggrandiz'd by the distance or dullness of Ireland (as
objects look larger through a medium of Foggs), and yet I am infinitely pleased
with that too. I am much the happier for finding (a better thing than our wits)
our judgments jump, in the notion that all Scriblers should be past by in
silence. To vindicate one's self against such nasty slander; is much as wise as
it was in your countryman, when the people imputed a stink to him, to prove the
contrary by showing his backside. So let Gildon and Philips rest in peace! What
Virgil had to do with Maevius, that he should wear him upon his sleeve to all
eternity, I don't know. I Have been the longer upon this, that I may prepare you
for the reception both you and your works may possibly meet in England. We your
true acquaintance will look upon you as a good man, and love you; others will
look upon you as a Wit, and hate you. So you know the worst; unless you are as
vindicative as Virgil, or the aforesaid Hibernian.

I wish as warmly as you for an Hospital in which to lodge the Despisers of the
world; only I fear it would be filled wholly like Chelsea, with maimed
Soldiers, and such as had been disabled in it is service. I would rather have
those, that out of such generous principles, as you and I, despise it, fly in
it is face, than retire from it. Not that I have much anger against the Great;
my spleen is at the Little rogues of it: It would vex one more to be knocked on
the head with a Piss-pot, than by a Thunderbolt. As to great Oppressors, they
are like Kites or Eagles, one expects mischief from them, but to be squirted to
death (as poor Wycherley said to me on his deathbed) by Apothecaries
Apprentices, by the understrappers of under-secretaries to secretaries who were
no secretaries -- this would provoke as dull a dog as Philips himself.

So much for enemies, now for friends. Mr L -- thinks all this indiscreet: the
Doctor not so: he loves mischief the best of any good natured man in England.
Lord B. is above trifling: when he writes of any thing in this world, he is
more than mortal; If ever he trifles, it must be when he turns a Divine. Gay is
writing Tales for Prince William: I suppose Mr Philips will take this very ill,
for two reasons; one that he thinks all childish things belong to him; and the
other, because he will take it ill to be taught that one may write things to a
child without being childish. What have I more to add? but that Lord Oxford
desires earnestly to see you: and that many others whom you do not think the
worst of will be gratified by it; none more (be assured) than yours, etc.

To Dr ARBUTHNOT.
July 26, 1734.
I Thank you for your letter, which has all those genuine marks of a good mind
by which I have ever distinguished yours, and for which I have so long loved
you. Our friendship has been constant; because it was grounded on good
principles, and therefore not only uninterrupted by any Distrust, by any
Vanity, much less any Interest.

What you recommend to me with the solemnity of a Last Request, shall have it is
due weight with me. That disdain and indignation against Vice, is (I thank God)
the only disdain and indignation I have: It is sincere, and it will be a
lasting one. But sure it is as impossible to have a just abhorrence of Vice,
without hating the Vicious, as to bear a true love for Virtue, without loving
the Good. To reform and not to chastise, I am afraid is impossible, and that
the best Precepts, as well as the best Laws, would prove of small use, if there
were no Examples to enforce them. To attack Vices in the abstract, without
touching Persons, may be safe fighting indeed, but it is fighting with Shadows.
General propositions are obscure, misty, and uncertain, compared with plain,
full, and home examples: Precepts only apply to our Reason, which in most men
is but weak: Examples are pictures, and strike the Senses, nay raise the
Passions, and call in those (the strongest and most general of all motives) to
the aid of reformation. Every vicious man makes the case his own; and that is
the only way by which such men can be affected, much less deterred. So that to
chastise is to reform. The only sign by which I found my writings ever did any
good, or had any weight, has been that they raised the anger of bad men. And my
greatest comfort, and encouragement to proceed, has been to see, that those who
have no shame, and no fear, of any thing else, have appeared touched by my
Satires.

As to your kind concern for my Safety, I can guess what occasions it at this
time. Some Characters I have drawn are such, that if there be any who deserve
'em, it is evidently a service to mankind to point those men out: yet such as if
all the world gave them, none I think will own, they take to themselves. But if
they should, those of whom all the world think in such a manner, must be men I
cannot fear. Such in particular as have the meanness to do mischiefs in the
dark, have seldom the courage to justify them in the face of day; the talents
that make a Cheat or a Whisperer, are not the same that qualify a man for an
Insulter; and as to private Villainy, it is not so safe to join in an
Assassination, as in a Libel. I will consult my safety to far as I think
becomes a prudent man; but not so far as to omit any thing which I think
becomes an honest one. As to personal attacks beyond the law, every man is
liable to them; as for danger within the law, I am not guilty enough to fear
any. For the good opinion of all the world, I know it is not to be had: for
that of worthy men, I hope I shall not forfeit it; for that of the Great, or
those in power, I may wish I had it, but if through misrepresentations (too
common about persons in that station) I have it not, I shall be sorry, but not
miserable in the want of it.

It is certain, much freer Satyrists than I, have enjoyed the encouragement and
protection of the Princes under whom they lived. Augustus and Maecenas made
Horace their companion, though he had been in arms on the side of Brutus; and
allow me to remark it was out of the suffering Party too, that they favored
and distinguished Virgil. You will not suspect me of comparing my self with
Virgil and Horace, nay even with another Court-favourite, Boileau: I have
always been too modest to imagine my Panegyrics were Incense worthy of a Court;
and that I hope will be thought the true reason why I have never offered any. I
would only have observed, that it was under the greatest Princes and best
Ministers, that moral Satyrists were most encouraged; and that then Poets
exercised the same jurisdiction over the Follies, as Historians did over the
Vices of men. It may also be worth considering, whether Augustus himself makes
the greater figure, in the writings of the former, or of the latter? and
whether Nero and Domitian do not appear as ridiculous for their false Taste and
Affectation, in Persius and Juvenal, as odious for their bad Government in
Tacitus and Suetonius? In the first of these reigns it was, that Horace was
protected and caressed; and in the latter that Lucan was put to death, and
Juvenal banished.

I would not have said so much, but to show you my whole heart on this subject;
and to convince you, I am deliberately bent to perform that Request which you
make your last to me, and to perform it with Temper, Justice, and Resolution.
As your Approbation (being the testimony of a sound head and an honest heart)
does greatly confirm me herein, I wish you may live to see the effect it may
hereafter have upon me, in something more deserving of that approbation. But if
it be the Will of God (which I know will also be yours) that we must separate,
I hope it will be better for You than it can be for me. You are fitter to live,
or to die, than any man I know. Adieu my dear friend! and may God preserve your
life easy, or make your death happy.

LETTERS TO, and FROM Bishop ATTERBURY.
December. 1716.
I Return your Preface Mr POPE's General Preface to his POEMS, Vol. I. printed
1717.
, which I have read twice with pleasure. The modesty and good sense there is in
it, must please every one who reads it: And since there is nothing that can
offend, I see not why you should balance a moment about printing it -- always
provided, that there is nothing said there, which you may have occasion to
unsay hereafter: of which you your self are the best and the only Judge. This
is my sincere Opinion, which I give because you ask it: and which I would not
give, though asked, but to a man I value as much as I do you; being sensible how
improper it is on many accounts, for me to interpose in things of this nature;
which I never understood well, and now understand somewhat less than ever I
did. But I can deny you nothing; especially since you have had the goodness
often, and patiently, to hear what I have said against rhyme, and in behalf of
blank verse; with little discretion perhaps, but I am sure without the least
prejudice: being my self equally incapable of writing well in either of those
ways, and leaning therefore to neither side of the question, but as the
appearance of reason inclines me. Forgive me this error if it be one; an error
of above thirty years standing, and which therefore I shall be very loath to
part with. In other matters which relate to polite writing, I shall seldom
differ from you: or if I do, shall I hope have the prudence to conceal my
opinion. I am, as much as I ought to be, that is as much as any man can be,

Yours, etc.

The Bishop of ROCHESTER to Mr. POPE.
Bromley, Nov. 8, 1717.
I Have nothing to say to you on that melancholy subject, with an account of
which the printed papers have furnished me, but what you have already said to
your self.

When you have paid the debt of tenderness you owe to the memory of a Father, I
doubt not but you will turn your thoughts toward improving that accident to
your own Ease and Happiness. You have it now in your power, to pursue that
method of thinking and living which you like best. Give me leave, (if I am not
a little too early in my applications of this kind) to congratulate you upon
it; and to assure you, that there is no man living, who wishes you better, or
would be more pleased to contribute any way to your satisfaction or service.

I return you your Milton, which upon collation, I find to be revised, and
augmented in several places, as the title page of my third The THIRD Edition,
of MILTON's Paradise Lost, was Revised and Augmented by the Author, and printed
1678, though all the Writers of his Life make him die 1674.
edition pretends it to be. When I see you next, I will show you the several
passages altered and added by the author, beside what you mentioned to me.

I protest to you, this last perusal of him has given me such new degrees, I
will not say of pleasure, but of admiration and astonishment, that I look upon
the sublimity of Homer and the majesty of Virgil with somewhat less reverence
than I used to do. I challenge you, with all your partiality, to show me, in
the first of these, any thing equal to the Allegory of Sin and Death, either as
to the greatness, and justness of the invention, or the height and beauty of
the coloring. What I looked upon as a rant of Barrow's, I now begin to think a
serious truth, and could almost venture to set my hand to it, Haec quicunque
legit, tantum cecinisse putabit
Maeoniden Ranas, Virgilium Culices.
But more of this when we meet. When I left the town, the D. of Buckingham
continued so ill that he received no messages; oblige me so far as to let me
know how he does; at the same time I shall know how you do, and that will be a
double satisfaction to your, etc.

The Answer.
Nov. 20, 1717. My Lord,
I Am truly obliged by your kind condolance on my Father's death, and the
desire you express that I should improve this accident to my advantage. I know
your Lordship's friendship to me is so extensive, that you include in that wish
both my Spiritual and my Temporal advantage; and it is what I owe to that
friendship, to open my mind unreservedly to you on this head. It is true, I
have lost a Parent for whom no gains I could make would be any equivalent: But
that was not my only tie; I thank God another still remains (and long may it
remain) of the same tender nature: Genitrix est mihi -- and excuse me if I say
with Euryalus, -- nequeam lacrymas perferre parentis.
A rigid Divine may call it a carnal tie, but sure it is a virtuous one. At
least I am more certain that it is a Duty of Nature to preserve a good parent's
life and happiness, than I am of any Speculative point whatever. -- ignaram
hujus quodcunque pericli
Hanc ego, nunc, linquam?
For she, my Lord, would think this Separation more grievous than any other;
and I, for my part, know as little as poor Euryalus did of the success of such
an Adventure, (for an Adventure it is, and no small one, in spite of the most
positive Divinity.) Whether the change would be to my spiritual advantage, God
only knows: this I know, I mean as well in the Religion I now profess, as I can
possibly ever do in any other. Can a man who thinks so, justify a change, even
if he thought both equally good? To such an one, the part of Joining with any
one body of Christians might perhaps be easy, but I think it would not be so to
Renounce the other.

Your Lordship has formerly advised me to read the best Books of Controversies
between the Churches. Shall I tell you a secret? I did so at fourteen years
old: for I loved reading, and my father had no other books. There was a
collection of all that had been written on both sides in the reign of King
James the second: I warmed my head with them, and the consequence was, that I
found my self a Papist and a Protestant by turns, according to the last book I
read, I am afraid most Seekers are in the same case, and when they stop, they
are not so properly converted, as outwitted. You see how little glory you
would gain by my conversion. And after all, I verily believe your Lordship and
I are both of the same religion, if we were thoroughly understood by one
another; and that all honest and reasonable Christians would be so, if they did
but talk enough together every day; and had nothing to do together, but to
serve God and live in peace with their Neighbor.

As to the temporal side of the question, I can have no dispute with you. It is
certain, all the beneficial circumstances of life, and all the shining ones,
lie on the part you would invite me to. But if I could bring myself to fancy,
what I think you do but fancy; that I have any talents for Active life, I want
health for it; and besides it is a real truth, I have less Inclination (if
possible) than Ability. Contemplative life is not only my scene, but it is my
habit too. I begun my life where most people end theirs, with a disrelish of
all that the world calls Ambition: I don't know why it is called so, for to me
it always seemed to be rather stooping than climbing, I Will tell you my politic
and religious sentiments in a few words. In my Politics, I think no farther
than how to preserve the peace of my life in any Government under which I live;
nor in my Religion, than to preserve the peace of my conscience in any Church
with which I communicate. I hope all Churches and all Governments are so far of
God, as they are rightly understood, and rightly administered: and where they
are, or may be wrong, I leave it to God alone to mend or reform them; which
whenever he does, it must be by greater Instruments than I am. I am not a
Papist, for I renounce the temporal invasions of the Papal power, and detest
their arrogated authority over Princes or States. I am a Catholic, in the
strictest sense of the word. If I was born under an absolute Prince, I would be
a quiet subject; but I thank God I was not: I have a due sense of the
excellence of the British constitution. In a word, the things I have always
wished to see, are not a Roman Catholic, or a French Catholic, or a Spanish
Catholic, but a true Catholic: and not a King of Whigs, or a King of Tories,
but a King of England. Which God of his mercy grant his present Majesty may be,
and all future Majesty's! You see my Lord, I end like a preacher: but this is
Sermo ad Clerum, not ad Populum. Believe me, with infinite obligation and
sincere thanks, ever

Your, etc.

Mr POPE to the Bishop of ROCHESTER.
Sept. 23, 1720.
I Hope you have some time ago received the Sulphur, and the two volumes of Mr
Gay, as instances (how small ones soever) that I wish you both health, and
diversion. What I now send for your perusal, I shall say nothing of; not to
forestall by a single word what you promised to say upon that subject. Your
Lordship may criticize from Virgil to these Tales, as Solomon wrote of every
thing from the cedar to the hysop. I have some cause, since I last waited on
you at Bromley, to look upon you as a Prophet in that retreat, from whom
oracles are to be had were mankind wise enough to go thither to consult you.
The fate of the South Sea Scheme has, sooner than I expected, verified what you
told me. Most people thought the time would come, but no man prepared for it,
no man considered it would come like a Thief in the night, exactly as it
happens in the case of our death. Methinks God has punished the Avaritious as
he often punishes sinners, in their own way, in the very sin itself: the thirst
of gain was their crime, that thirst continued, became their punishment and
ruin. As for the few who have the good fortune to remain with half of what they
imagined they had, (among whom is your humble servant) I would have them
sensible of their felicity; and convinced of the truth of old Hesiod's maxim,
who after half his estate was swallowed up by the Directors of those days,
resolved, that half to be more than the whole.

Does not the fate of these people put you in mind of two passages, one in Job,
the other from the Psalmist.

Men shall groan out of the CITY, and hiss them out of their PLACE.

They have dreamed out their dream, and awaking have found nothing in their
hands.

Indeed the universal Poverty, which is the consequence of universal Avarice,
and which will fall hardest upon the guiltless and industrious part of mankind,
is truly lamentable. The Universal deluge of the South Sea, contrary to the old
deluge, has drowned all except a few unrighteous men. But it is some comfort to
me that I am not one of them, even though I were to survive and rule the world by
it. I am much pleased with a thought of Dr Arbuthnot's: he says the Government
and South Sea company have only locked up the money of the people upon
conviction of their Lunacy (as is usual in case of Lunatics), and intend to
restore 'em as much as may be fit for such people as fast as they shall see 'em
return to their senses.

The latter part of your letter does me so much honor, and shows me so much
kindness, that I must both be proud and pleased in a great degree; but I assure
you, my Lord, much more the last than the first. For I certainly know and feel
in my own heart, which truly respects you, that there may be a ground for your
partiality one way; but I find not the least symptoms in my head, of any
foundation for the other. In a word, the best reason I know for my being
pleased, is that you continue your favor toward me: the best I know for being
proud, would be that you might cure me of it; for I have found you to be such a
Physician as does not only repair but improve. I am with the sincerest esteem
and-acknowledgment, Your, etc.

From the Bishop of ROCHESTER.
THE Arabian Tales and Mr Gay's books I received not till Monday night,
together with your letter, for which I thank you. I have had a fit of the gout
upon me ever since I returned hither from Westminster on saturday night last;
it has found it is way into my hands as well as legs, so that I have been
utterly incapable of writing: This is the first letter that I have ventured
upon, which will be written I fear vaccilantibus literis, as Tully says Tyro's
Letters were after his recovery from an illness. What I said to you in mine
about the Monument, was intended only to quicken, not to alarm you: it is not
worth your while to know what I meant by it: but when I see you, you shall. I
hope you may be at the Deanery toward the end of October, by which time I
think of settling there for the winter. What do you think of some such short
inscription as this in Latin, which may in a few words say all that is to be
said of Dryden, and yet nothing more than he deserves. JOHANNI DRYDENO.
Cui Poesis Anglicana
Vim suam, ac Veneres debet;
Et siqua in posterum augebitur laud,
Est adhuc debitura:
Honoris ergo P. etc.


To show you that I am as much in earnest in the affair as you your self,
something I will send you too of this kind in English. If your design holds of
fixing Dryden's Name only below, and his Busto above, may not lines like these
be engraved just under the name? This Sheffield raised, to Dryden's ashes just,
Here fixed his Name, and there his laureled Bust.
What else the Muse in Marble might express,
Is known already; Praise would make him less.
Or thus -- More needs not; where acknowledged Merits reign,
Praise is Impertinent; and Censure vain.
This you will take as a proof of my zeal at least, though it be none of my talent
in Poetry. When you have read it over, I Will forgive you if you should not once
in your life time again think of it.

And now, Sir, for your Arabian Tales. Ill as I have been, almost ever since
they came to hand, I have read as much of them as ever I shall read while I
live. Indeed they do not please my taste: they are writ with so Romantic an
air, and allowing for the difference of Eastern manners, are, yet upon any
supposition that can be made, of so wild and absurd a contrivance, (at least to
my northern understanding) that I have not only no pleasure, but no patience,
in perusing them. They are to me like the odd paintings on Indian screens,
which at first glance may surprise and please a little; but when you fix your
eye intently upon them they appear so extravagant, disproportioned, and
monstrous, that they give a judicious eye pain, and make him seek for relief
from some other object. They may furnish the mind with some new images; but I
think the purchase is made at too great an expense: for to read those two
volumes through, liking them as little as I do, would be a terrible penance:
and to read them with pleasure would be dangerous on the other side, because of
the infection. I will never believe, that you have any keen relish of them,
till I find you write worse than you do, which I dare say, I never shall. Who
that Petit de la Croise is, the pretended author of them, I cannot tell: but
observing how full they are in the descriptions of Dress, Furniture, etc. I
cannot help thinking them the product of some Woman's imagination: and believe
me, I would do any thing but break with you, rather than be bound to read 'em
over with attention.

I am sorry that I was so true a Prophet in respect of the South Sea, sorry I
mean as far as your loss is concerned: for in the general I ever was and still
am of opinion, that had the project taken root and flourished, it would by
degrees have overturned our constitution. Three or four hundred millions was
such a weight, that whichsoever way it had leaned, it must have borne down all
before it -- But of the dead we must speak gently: and therefore as Mr Dryden
says somewhere, Peace be to it is Manes!

Let me add one reflection, to make you easy in your ill luck. Had you got all
that you have lost beyond what you ventured, consider that your superfluous
gains would have sprung from the ruin of several families that now want
necessaries! a thought, under which a good, and a good natured man that grew
rich by such means, could not (I persuade my self) be perfectly easy. Adieu and
believe me ever Your, etc.

From the Bishop of ROCHESTER.
March 26.
YOU are not your self gladder you are well than I am; especially since I can
please my self with the thought that when you had lost your health elsewhere,
you recovered it here. May these lodgings never treat you worse, nor you at any
time have less reason to be fond of them!

I thank you for the sight of your Epitaph on Mr Harcourt.
Verses, and with the freedom of an honest, though perhaps injudicious friend,
must tell you, that though I could like some of them, if they were any body's but
yours, yet as they are yours and to be owned as such, I can scarce like any of
them. Not but that the four first lines are good, especially the second
couplet: and might, if followed by four others as good, give reputation to a
writer of a less established fame: but from you I expect something of a more
perfect kind, and which the oft'ner it is read, the more it will be admired.
When you barely exceed other writers, you fall much beneath your self: it is
your misfortune now to write without a rival, and you may be tempted by that
means to be more careless, than you would otherwise be in your composures.

Thus much I could not forbear saying, though I have a motion of consequence in
the House of Lords to day, and must prepare for it. I am even with you for your
ill paper; for I write upon worse having no other at hand. I wish you the
continuance of your health most heartily, and am ever

Yours, etc.
I have sent Dr Arbuthnot the Latin MS. Of Huetius, left after his Death.
which I could not find when you left me; and am so angry at the writer for his
design, and his manner of executing it, that I could hardly forbear sending him
a line of Virgil along with it. The chief Reasoner of that philosophic farce is
a Gallo-Ligur, as he is called -- what that means in English or French, I cannot
say -- but all he says is in so loose and slippery and trickish a way of
reasoning, that I could not forbear applying the passage of Virgil to him, Vane
Ligur, frustraque animis elate superbis?
Nequicquam patrias tentasti lubricus arts.


To be serious, I hate to see a book gravely written, and in all the forms of
argumentation, which proves nothing, and which says nothing; and endeavors
only to put us into a way of distrusting our own faculties, and doubting
whether the marks of Truth and Falsehood can in any case be distinguished from
each other? Could that blessed point be made out (as it is a contradiction in
terms to say it can,) we should then be in the most uncomfortable and wretched
state in the world; and I would in that case be glad to exchange my reason,
with a dog for his instinct to morrow.



Lord Chancellor HARCOURT to Mr POPE.
December. 6, 1717.
I Cannot but suspect my self of being very unreasonable in begging you once
more to review the enclosed. Your friendship draws this trouble on you. I may
freely own to you that my tenderness makes me exceeding hard to be satisfied
with any thing which can be said on such an unhappy subject. I caused the Latin
Epitaph to be as often altered before I could approve it.

When once your Epitaph is set up, there can be no alteration of it; it will
remain a perpetual monument of your friendship, and I assure myself you will so
settle it, that it shall be worthy of you. I doubt whether the word, denied, in
the third line, will justly admit of that construction which it ought to bear
(viz.) renounced, deserted, etc. denied is capable in my opinion of having an
ill sense put upon it, as too great easiness, or more good nature than a wise
man ought to have. I very well remember you told me you could scarce mend those
two lines, and therefore I can scarce expect your forgiveness for my desiring
you to reconsider them. Harcourt stands dumb, and Pope is forced to speak.
I cannot perfectly, at least without farther discoursing you, reconcile my self
to the first part of that line; and the word forced (which was my own, and I
persuade my self for that reason only submitted to by you,) seems to carry too
doubtful a construction for an Epitaph, which as I apprehend, ought as easily
to be understood as read. I shall acknowledge it as a very particular favor,
if at your best leisure you will peruse the enclosed and vary it, if you think
it capable of being amended, and let me see you any morning next week.

I am, etc.
EPITAPH as it was erected 1720.
To this sad shrine, whoever thou art draw near,
Here lies the Friend most loved, the Son most dear:
Who never knew Joy but Friendship might divide,
Or gave his Father Grief but when he died.
How vain is Reason, Eloquence how weak!
If Pope must tell what Harcourt cannot speak.
O! let thy once loved Friend inscribe thy Stone,
And with a Father's sorrow mix his own!


The Bishop of ROCHESTER to Mr POPE.
Sept. 27, 1721.
I Am now confined to my bedchamber, and to the matted-room, wherein I am
writing, seldom venturing to be carried down even into the parlour to dinner,
unless when company to whom I cannot excuse my self, comes, which I am not ill
pleased to find is now very seldom. This is my case in the sunny part of the
year: what must I expect, when -- inversum contristat Aquarius annum?


"If these things be done in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry."
Excuse me for employing a sentence of scripture on this occasion; I apply it
very seriously. One thing relieves me a little under the ill prospect I have of
spending my time at the Deanery this winter; that I shall have the opportunity
of seeing you oft'ner; though I am afraid you will have little pleasure in seeing
me there. So much for my ill state of health, which I had not touched on, had
not your friendly letter been so full of it. One civil thing that you say in
it, made me think you had been reading Mr Waller; and possessed of that image
at the end of his copy, a la Malade, had you not bestowed it on one who has no
right to the least part of the character. If you have not read the verses
lately, I am sure you remember 'em, because you forget nothing. With such a
grace you entertain,
And look with such contempt on pain, etc.


I mention them not on the account of that couplet, but one that follows; which
ends with the very same rhimes and words [appear and clear] that the couplet
but one after that does -- and therefore in my Waller there is a various
reading of the first of these couplets; for there it runs thus, So Lightenings
in a stormy Air,
Scorch more than when the Sky is fair.


You will say that I am not very much in pain, nor very busy, when I can relish
these amusements, and you will say true: for at present, I am in both these
respects very easy.

I had not strength enough to attend Mr Prior to his grave, else I would have
done it to have showed his friends that I had forgot and forgiven what he wrote
on me Alluding to this Epigram on his Burying the Duke of Buckinghamshire. I
have no hopes -- the Duke he says and dies;
In sure and certain Hopes -- the Prelate cries:
Of these two learned Peers, I prithee say Man,
Who is the lying Knave, the Priest or Layman?
The Duke he stands an Infidel confessed,
He Is our dear Brother -- quoth the Lordly Priest,
The Duke, though Knave, still Brother Dear he cries,
And who can say the Reverend Prelate lies?

. He is buried, as he desired, at the feet of Spenser, and I will take care to
make good in every respect what I said to him when living; particularly as to
the Triplet To me 'twas given to die: to thee it is given
To live: Alas one Moment sets us even,
Mark! Low impartial is the will of Heaven.

he wrote for his own Epitaph; which while we were in good terms, I promised
him should never appear on his tomb while I was Dean of Westminster.

I am pleased to find you have so much pleasure, and (which is the foundation
of it) so much health at Lord Bathurst's: may both continue till I see you! may
my Lord have as much satisfaction in building the house in the wood, and using
it when built, as you have in designing it! I cannot send a wish after him that
means him more happiness, and yet I am sure I wish him as much as he wishes
himself.

I am, etc.

From the same.
Bromley, Oct. 15, 1721.
NOtwithstanding I write this on Sunday evening to acknowledge the receipt of
yours this morning, yet I foresee it will not reach you till Wednesday morning:
and before set of sun that day I hope to reach my winter quarters at the
Deanery. I hope, did I say? I recall that word, for it implies desire; and God
knows that is far from being the case. For I never part from this place but
with regret, though I generally keep here what Mr Cowley calls the worst of
company in the world, my own; and see either none beside, or what is worse than
none, some of the Arrii of Sebosi of my neighborhood: Characters, which Tully
paints so well in one of his Epistles, and complains of the too civil, but
impertinent, interruption they gave him in his retirement. Since I have named
those gentlemen, and the book is not far from me, I will turn to the place, and
by pointing it out to you, give you the pleasure of perusing the epistle, which
is a very agreeable one if my memory does not fail me.

I am surpised to find that my Lord Bathurst and you are parted so soon; he
has been sick I know of some late transactions, but should that sickness
continue still in some measure, I prophecy it will be quite off by the
beginning of November: a letter or two from his London-friends, and a surfeit
of solitude will soon make him change his resolution and his quarters. I vow to
you, I could live here with pleasure all the winter, and be contented with
hearing no more news than the London-journal, or some such trifling paper,
affords me, did not the duty of my place require, absolutely require, my
attendance at Westminster; where I hope the Prophet will now and then remember
he has a bed and a candlestic. In short I long to see you, and hope you will
come, if not a day, yet at least an hour sooner to town than you intended, in
order to afford me that satisfaction. I am now I thank God as well as ever I
was in my life, except that I can walk scarce at all without crutches: And I
would willingly compound the matter with the gout, to be no better, could I
hope to be no worse, but that is a vain thought, I expect a new attack long
before Christmas. Let me see you therefore while I am in a condition to relish
you, before the days (and the nights) come, when I shall (and must) say, I have
no pleasure in them.

I will bring your small volume of Pastorals along with me, that you may not be
discouraged from lending me books, when you find me so punctual in returning
them. Shakespeare shall bear it company, and be put into your hands as clear
and as fair as it came out of them, though you I think have been dabling here and
there with the text: I have had more reverence for the writer and the printer,
and left every thing standing just as I found it. However I thank you for the
pleasure you have given me in putting me upon reading him once more before I
die.

I believe I shall scarce repeat that pleaany more, having other work to do,
and other things to think of, but none that will interfere with the offices of
friendship, in the exchange of which with you, Sir, I hope to live and die.

Yours, etc.
P.S. Mr Addison's Works came to my hands yesterday. I cannot but think it a
very odd set of incidents, that the book should be dedicated by Mr Addison.
a dead man Mr Crsggs.
to a dead man; and even that the new Lord Warwick.
patron to whom Mr Tickell chose to inscribe his verses, should be dead also
before they were published. Had I been in the Editor's place I should have been
a little apprehensive for my self, under a thought that every one who had any
hand in that work was to die before the publication of it. You see when I am
conversing with you I know not how to give over, till the very bottom of the
paper admonishes me once more to bid you adieu!



From the Bishop of ROCHESTER.
Feb. 26, 1721-2.
PErmit me, dear Sir, to break into your retirement, and to desire of you a
complete copy of those verses on Mr Addison An imperfect Copy was got out, very
much to the Author's surprise, who never would give any.
; send me also your last resolution which shall punctually be observed in
relation to my giving out any copy of it; for I am again solicited by another
Lord, to whom I have given the same answer as formerly. No small piece of your
writing has been ever sought after so much: it has pleased every man without
exception, to whom it has been read. Since you now therefore know where your
real strength lies, I hope you will not suffer that talent to lie unemploy'd.
For my part I should be so glad to see you finish something of that kind, that
I could be content to be a little sneer'd at in a line or so for the sake of
the pleasure I should have in reading the rest. I have talked my sense of this
matter to you once or twice, and now I put it under my hand, that you may see
it is my deliberate opinion. What weight that may have with you I cannot say:
but it pleases me to have an opportunity of showing you how well I wish you,
and how true a friend I am to your fame, which I desire may grow every day, and
in every kind of writing to which you shall please to turn your pen. Not but
that I have some little interest in the proposal, as I shall be known to have
been acquainted with a man that was capable of excelling in such different
manners, and did such honor to his country and language; and yet was not
displeased sometimes to read what was written by his humble Servant.

Mr POPE to Bishop ATTERBURY.
March 14, 1721-2.
I Was disappointed (much more than those who commonly use that phrase on such
occasions) in missing you at the Deanery, where I lay solitary two nights.
Indeed I truly partake in any degree of concern that affects you, and I wish
every thing may succeed as you desire in your own family, and in that which I
think you no less account your own, and is no less your family, the whole
world: for I take you to be one of the true Friends of it, and to your power
it is protector. Though the noise and daily bustle for the public be now over, I
dare say a good man is still tendering it is welfare; as the Sun in the winter,
when seeming to retire from the world, is preparing benedictions and warmth for
a better season. No man wishes your Lordship more quiet, more tranquillity than
I, who know you should understand the value of it: but I don't wish you a jot
less concerned or less active than you are, in all sincere, and therefore warm
desires for public good.

I beg the kindness (and it is for that chiefly I trouble you with this letter)
to favor me with notice as soon as you return to London, that I may come and
make you a proper visit of a day or two: for hitherto I have not been your
Visiter, but your Lodger, and I accuse my self of it. I have now no earthly
thing to oblige my being in town (a point of no small satisfaction to me) but
the best reason, the seeing a friend: As long, my Lord, as you will let me call
you so, (and I dare say you will, till I forfeit what I think I never shall, my
veracity and integrity) I shall esteem my self fortunate, in spite of the
Southsea, Poetry, Popery, and Poverty.

I cannot tell you how sorry I am, you should be troubled anew by any sort of
people. I heartily wish, quod superest, ut tibi vivas -- that you may teach me
how to do the same: who, without any real impediment to acting and living
rightly, do act and live as foolishly as if I were a Great man.

I am, etc.

From the Bishop of ROCHESTER.
March 16, 1721-2.
AS a visitant, a lodger, a friend (or under what other denomination soever),
you are always welcome to me; and will be more so I hope every day that we
live: for to tell you the truth I like you as I like my self, best, when we
have both of us least business. It has been my fate to be engaged in it much
and often, by the stations in which I was placed: but God, that knows my heart,
knows I never loved it: and am still less in love with it than ever, as I find
less temptation to act with any hope of success. If I am good for any thing,
it is in Angulo cum Libello; and yet a good part of my time has been spent, and
perhaps must still be spent, far otherwise. For I will never, while I have
health, be wanting to my duty in any post or in any respect, how little soever
I may like my employment, and how hopeless soever I may be in the discharge of
it.

In the mean time the judicious world is pleased to think that I delight in
work which I am obliged to undergo, and aim at things which I from my heart
despise. Let them think as they will, so I might be at liberty to act as I
will, and spend my time in such a manner as is most agreeable to me. I cannot
say I do so now, for I am here without any books, and if I had them, could not
use them to my satisfaction, while my mind is taken up in a more melancholy In
his Lady's last sickness.
manner; and how long, or how little a while it may be so taken up God only
knows, and to his will I implicitly resign myself in every thing.

I am, etc.

Mr POPE to the Bishop of ROCHESTER.
March 19, 1721-2.
I Am extremely sensible of the repeated favor of your kind letters, and your
thoughts of me in absence, even among thoughts of much nearer concern to
youself on the one hand, and of much more importance to the world on the other,
which cannot but engage you at this juncture. I am very certain of your good
will, and of the warmth which is, in you, inseparable from it.

Your remembrance of Twitenham is a fresh instance of that partiality. I hope
the advance of the fine season will set you upon your legs, enough to enable
you to get into my garden, where I will carry you up a mount, to show you in a
point of view the glory of my little kingdom. If you approve it, I shall be in
danger to boast like Nebuchadnezzar of the things I have made, and to be turned
to converse, not with the beasts of the field, but with the birds of the grove,
which I shall take to be no great punishment. For indeed I heartily despise the
ways of the world, and most of the great ones of it. O keep me innoceut, make
others great!
And you may judge how comfortably I am strengthened in this opinion, when such
as your Lordship bear testimony to it is vanity and-emptiness. Tinnit, inane
est, with the picture of one ringing on the globe with his finger, is the best
thing I have the luck to remember in that great Poet Quarles, (not that I
forget the Devil at bowls; which I know to be your Lordship's favorite cut, as
well as favorite diversion).

The situation here is pleasant, and the view rural enough, to humor the most
retired, and agree with the most contemplative. Good air, solitary groves, and
sparing diet, sufficient to make you fancy your self (what you are in
temperance, though elevated into a greater figure by your station) one of the
Fathers of the Desert. Here you may think (to use an author's words, whom you
so justly prefer to all his followers that you will receive them kindly though
taken from his worst work) That in Elijah's banquet you partake,
Or sit a guest with Daniel, at his Pulse.


I am sincerely free with you, as you desire I should, and approve of your not
having your coach here, for if you would see Lord C Carteret.
or any body else, I have another chariot, besides that little one you laughed
at when you compared me to Homer in a nut-shell. But if you would be entirely
private, no body shall know any thing of the matter. Believe me, my Lord, no
man is with more perfect acquiescence, nay, with more willing acquiescence,
(not even any of your own Sons of the Church)

Your obedient, etc.

From the Bishop of ROCHESTER.
April 6, 1722.
UNder all the leisure in the world, I have no leisure, no stomach to write to
you; the gradual approaches of death are before my eyes. I am convinced, that
it must be so; and yet make a shift to flatter my self sometimes with the
thought, that it may possibly be otherwise. And that very thought, though it is
directly contrary to my reason, does for a few moments make me easy -- however
not easy enough in good earnest to think of any thing but the melancholy object
that employs them. Therefore wonder not that I do not answer your kind letter:
I shall answer it too soon, I fear, by accepting your friendly invitation. When
I do so, no conveniences will be wanting: for I Will see no body but you and
your mother, and the servants. Visits to Statesmen always were to me (and are
now more than ever) insipid things; let the men that expect, that wish to
thrive by them, pay them that homage; I am free. When I want them, they shall
hear of me at their doors: and when they want me, I shall be sure to hear of
them at mine. But probably they will despise me so much, and I shall court them
so little, that we shall both of us keep our distance.

When I come to you, it is in order to be with you only: A President of the
council, or a Star and Garter will make no more impression upon my mind, at
such a time, than the hearing of a bag-pipe, or the sight of a Puppet-show. I
have said to Greatness sometime ago -- Tuas tibi res habeto, egomet curabo
meas. The Time is not far off when we shall all be upon the level: and I am
resolved for my part to anticipate that time, and be upon the level with them
now: for he is so, that neither seeks nor wants them. Let them have more Virtue
and less Pride: and then I Will court them as much as any body: but till they
resolve to distinguish themselves some way else than by their outward
Trappings, I am determined (and I think I have a right) to be as proud as they
are: though I trust in God, my pride is neither of so odious a nature as theirs,
nor of so mischievous a consequence.

I know not how I have fallen into this train of thinking -- when I sat down to
write I intended only to excuse my self for not writing, and to tell you that
the time drew nearer and nearer when I must dislodge. I am preparing for it:
For I am at this moment building a Vault in the Abbey for me and mine. 'Twas to
be in the Abbey, because of my relation to the place; but it is at the west door
of it; as far from Kings and Caesar's as the space will admit of.

I know not but I may step to town tomorrow, to see how the work goes forward;
but if I do, I shall return hither in the evening. I would not have given you
the trouble of this letter but that they tell me it will cost you nothing, and
that our privilege of Franking (one of the most valuable we have left) is again
allowed us.

Yours, etc.

From the Bishop of ROCHESTER.
Bromley, May 25, 1722.
I Had much ado to get hither last night, the water being so rough that the
ferry-men were unwilling to venture. The first thing I saw this morning after
my eyes were open, was your letter, for the freedom and kindness of which I
thank you. Let all compliments be laid aside between us for the future; and
depend upon me as your faithful friend in all things within my power, as one
that truly values you, and wishes you all manner of happiness. I thank you and
Mrs Pope for my kind reception, which has left a pleasing impression upon me
that will not soon be effaced.

Lord Bolingbroke.
has pressed me terribly to see him at Dawley.
and told me in a manner betwixt kindness and resentment, that it is but a few
miles beyond Twitenham.

I have but a little time left, and a great deal to do in it; and must expect
that ill health will render a good share of it useless and therefore what is
likely to be left at the foot of the account, ought by me to be cherished, and
not thrown away in compliments. You know the motto of my sundial, Vivite, ait,
fugio. I will as far as I am able, follow it is advice, and cut off all
unnecessary avocations and amusements. There are those that intend to employ me
this winter in a way I do not like: if they persist in their intentions, I must
apply my self to the work they cut out for me, as well as I can. But withal,
that shall not hinder me from employing myself also in a way which they do not
like. The givers of trouble one way shall have their share of it another; that
at last they may be induced to let me be quiet, and live to my self, with the
few (the very few) friends I like: For that is the point, the single point, I
now aim at; though I know, the generality of the world who are unacquainted with
my intentions and views, think the very reverse of this character belongs to
me. I don't know how I have rambled into this account of my self; when I sat
down to write I had no thought of making that any part of my letter.

You might have been sure without my telling you, that my right hand is at
ease; else I should not have overflowed at this rate. And yet I have not done,
for there is a kind intimation at the end of yours, which I understood, because
it seems to tend toward employing me in something that is agreeable to you.
Pray explain your self, and believe that you have not an acquaintance in the
world that would be more in earnest on such an occasion than I; for I love you,
as well as esteem you.

All the while I have been writing, Pain, and a fine Thrush have been severally
endeavoring to call off my attention; but both in vain: Nor should I yet part
with you, but that the turning over a new leaf frights me a little, and makes
me resolve to break through a new temptation, before it has taken too fast hold
on me.

I am, etc.

From the same.
June 15, 1722.
YOU have generally written first, after our parting; I will now be beforehand
with you in my enquiries, how you got home and how you do, and whether you met
with Lord *, and delivered my civil reproach to him, in the manner I desired? I
suppose you did not, because I have heard nothing either from you, or from him
on that head: as I suppose I might have done if you had found him.

I am sick of these Men of quality: and the more so, the oftener I have any
business to transact with them. They look upon it as one of their
distinguishing privileges, not to be punctual in any business, of how great
importance soever; nor to set other people at ease, with the loss of the least
part of their own. This conduct of his vexes me; but to what purpose? or how
can I alter it?

I long to see the original MS. of Milton: but don't know how to come at it,
without your repeated assistance.

I hope you will not utterly forget what passed in the coach about Sampson
Agonistes. I shall not press you as to time, but sometime or other, I wish you
would review, and polish that piece. If upon a new perusal of it (which I
desire you to make) you think as I do, that it is written in the very spirit of
the Ancients; it deserves your care, and is capable of being improved, with
little trouble, into a perfect model and standard of Tragic poetry -- always
allowing for it is being a story taken out of the Bible, which is an objection,
that at this time of day, I know is not to be got over.

I am, etc.

Mr POPE to the Bishop of ROCHESTER.
July, 27.
I Have been as constantly at Twitenham, as your Lordship has at Bromley, ever
since you saw Lord Bathurst. At the time of the Duke of Marlborough's funeral,
I intend to lie at the Deanery, and moralize one evening with you on the Vanity
of human Glory. --

The Duchess's letter concerns me nearly, and you know it, who know all my
thoughts without disguise. I must keep clear of Flattery; I will: and as this
is an honest resolution, I dare hope your Lordship will not be so unconcerned
for my keeping it, as not to assist me in so doing. I beg therefore you would
represent thus much at least to her Grace, that as to the fear she seems
touched with, [That the Duke's memory should have no advantage but what he must
give himself, without being beholden to any one Friend] Your Lordship may
certainly, and agreeably to your character, both of rigid honor and christian
plainness, tell her that no man can have any other advantage: and that all
offerings of Friends in such a case pass for nothing. Be but so good as to
confirm what I Have represented to her, that an Inscription in the ancient way,
plain, pompous, and yet modest, will be the most uncommon, and therefore the
most distinguishing manner of doing it: And so I hope she will be satisfied,
the Duke's Honor be preserved, and my Integrity also: which is too sacred a
thing to be forfeited, in consideration of any little (or what people of
quality may call great) Honor or Distinction whatever, which those of their
rank can bestow on one of mine; and which indeed they are apt to over-rate, but
never so much as when they imagine us under any obligation to say one untrue
word in their favor.

I can only thank you, my Lord, for the kind transition you make, from common
business to that which is the only real business of every reasonable creature:
Indeed I think more of it than you imagine, though not so much as I ought. I am
pleased with those latin verses extremely, which are so very good that I
thought 'em yours, till you called 'em an Horatian Cento, and then I
recollected the disjecti membra poetae. I will not pretend I am so totally in
those sentiments which you compliment me with, as I yet hope to be: You tell me
I have them, as the civillest method to put me in mind how much it fits me to
have 'em. I ought, first, to prepare my mind by a better knowledge even of good
profane writers, especially the Moralists, etc. before I can be worthy of
tasting that supreme of books, and sublime of all writings. In which, as in all
the intermediate ones, you may (if your friendship and charity toward me
continue so far) be the best guide to,

Your, etc.

From the Bishop of ROCHESTER.
July 30, 1722.
I Have written to the Duchess just as you desired, and referred her to our
meeting in town for a further account of it. I have done it the rather, because
your opinion in the case is sincerely mine: and if it had not been so, you your
self should not have induced me to give it. Whether, and how far she will
acquiesce in it, I cannot say: especially in a case where she thinks the Duke's
honor concerned, but should she seem to persist a little at present, her good
sense (which I depend upon) will afterward satisfy her that we are in the
right.

I go to morrow to the Deanery, and I believe I shall stay there, till I have
said Dust to dust, and shut up that This was the funeral of the Duke of
Marlborough, at which the Bishop officiated as Dean of Westminster, in Aug.
1722.
last scene of pompous vanity.

It Is a great while for me to stay there at this time of the year; and I know I
shall often say to my self, while I am expecting the funeral, O Rus, quanda ego
te aspiciam! quandoque licebit
Ducere sollocitae jucunda oblivia vitae!


In that case I shall fancy I hear the ghost of the dead, thus entreating me,
At tu sacratae ne parce malignus arenae
Ossibus and capiti in-humato
Particulam dare --
Quanquam festinas, non est mora longa; licebit
Injecto ter pulvere, curras.
There is an answer for me some where in Hamlet to this request, which you
remember though I don't -- Poor Ghost thou shall be satisfied! -- or something
like it. However that be, take care you do not fail in your appointment, that
the company of the living may make me some amends for my attendance on the dead.

I know you will be glad to hear that I am well. I should always, could I
always be here -- -- Sed me
Imperiosa trahit Proserpina: vive, valeque.


You are the first man I sent to this morning, and the last man I desire to
converse with this evening, though at twenty miles distance from you, Te veniente
die, Te decedente, requiro.


From the Bishop of ROCHESTER.
The Tower, April 10, 1723. Dear Sir,
I Thank you for all instances of your friendship, both before, and since my
misfortunes. A little time will complete them, and separate you and me for
ever. But in what part of the world soever I am, I will live mindful of your
sincere kindness to me; and will please my self with the thought, that I still
live in your esteem and affection, as much as ever I did; and that no accidents
of life, no distance of time or place, will alter you in that respect. It never
can me; who have loved and valued you ever since I knew you, and shall not fail
to do it when I am not allowed to tell you so: as the case will soon be. Give
my faithful services to Dr Arbuthnot, and thanks for what he sent me: which was
much to the purpose, in a case that is already determined. Let him know my
Defense will be such, that neither my friends need blush for me, nor will my
enemies have great occasion of Triumph, though sure of the Victory. I shall want
his advice before I go abroad in many things. But I question whether I shall be
permitted to see him, or any body, but such as are absolutely necessary toward
the dispatch of my private affairs. If so, God bless you both! and may no part
of the ill fortune that attends me ever pursue either of you! I know not but I
may call upon you at my hearing, to say somewhat about my way of spending my
time at the Deanery, which did not seem calculated toward managing Plots and
conspiracies. But of that I shall consider -- You and I have spent many hours
together upon much pleasanter subjects; and that I may preserve the old custom,
I shall not part with you now till I have closed this letter with three lines
of Milton, which you will (I know) readily, and not without some degree of
concern, apply to your ever affectionate, etc. Some natural tears he dropped, but
wiped them soon:
The World was all before him where to choose
His place of rest, and Providence his guide.


The Answer.
April 20, 1723.
IT is not possible to express what I think, and what I feel; only this, that I
have thought and felt for nothing but you, for some time past: and shall think
of nothing so long for the time to come. The greatest comfort I had was an
intention (which I would have made practicable) to have attended you in your
journey; to which I had brought that person to consent, who only could have
hindered me, by a tie, which, though it may be more tender, I do not think more
strong than that of friendship. But I fear there will be no way left me to tell
you this great truth, that I remember you, that I love you, that I am grateful
to you, that I entirely esteem and value you: no way but that one, which needs
no open warrant to authorize it, or secret conveyance to secure it; which no
bills can preclude, and no Kings prevent; a way that can reach to any part of
the world where you may be, where the very whisper, or even the wish of a
friend, must not be heard, or even suspected: by this way, I dare to tell my
esteem and affection for you, to your enemies in the gates; and you, and they,
and their sons, may hear of it.

You prove your self, my Lord, to know me for the friend I am; in judging that
the manner of your Defense, and your Reputation by it, is a point of the
highest concern to me: and assuring me it shall be such, that none of your
friends shall blush for you. Let me further prompt you to do your self the best
and most lasting justice. The instruments of your fame to posterity will be in
your own hands. May it not be, that providence has appointed you to some great
and useful work, and calls you to it this severe way? You may more eminently
and more effectually serve the public even now, than in the stations you have
so honorably filled. Think of Tully, Bacon, and Clarendon: is it not the
latter, the disgraced part of their lives, which you most envy, and which you
would choose to have lived.

I am tenderly sensible of the wish you express, that no part of your
misfortune may pursue me. But God knows I am every day less and less fond of my
native country (so torn as it is by Party-rage) and begin to consider a friend
in exile as a friend in death; one gone before, where I am not unwilling nor
unprepared to follow after; and where (however various or uncertain the roads
and voyages of another world may be) I cannot but entertain a pleasing hope,
that we may meet again.

I faithfully assure you, that in the mean time there is no one living or dead,
of whom I shall think oftener or better than of you. I shall look upon you as in
a state between both, in which you will have from me all the passions and warm
wishes that can attend the living, and all the respect and tender sense of
loss, that we feel for the dead. And I shall ever depend upon your constant
friendship, kind memory, and good offices, though I were never to see or hear
the effects of them: like the trust we have in benevolent Spirits, who, though we
never see or hear them, we think are constantly serving us, and praying for us.

Whenever I am wishing to write to you, I shall conclude you are intentionally
doing so to me: and every time that I think of you, I believe you are thinking
of me. I never shall suffer to be forgotten (nay to be but faintly remembered)
the honor, the pleasure, the pride I must ever have, in reflecting how
frequently you have delighted me, how kindly you have distinguished me, how
cordially you have advised me! In conversation, in study, I shall always want
you, and wish for you. In my most lively, and in my most thoughtful hours, I
shall equally bear about me, the impressions of you: And perhaps it will not be
in This life only, that I shall have cause to remember and acknowledge the
Friendship of the Bishop of ROCHESTER.

I am, etc.

To the same.
May 2, 1725.
ONce more I write to you as I promised, and this once I fear will be the last!
the Curtain will soon be drawn between my friend and me, and nothing left but
to wish you a long good night. May you enjoy a state of repose in this life,
not unlike that Sleep of the soul which some have believed is to succeed it,
where we lie utterly forgetful of that world from which we are gone, and
ripening for that to which we are to go. If you retain any memory of the past,
let it only image to you what has pleased you best; sometimes present a dream
of an absent friend, or bring you back an agreeable conversation. But upon the
whole, I hope you will think less of the time past than of the future; as the
former has been less kind to you than the latter infallibly will be. Do not
envy the world your Studies; they will tend to the benefit of men against whom
you can have no complaint, I mean of all Posterity: and perhaps at your time of
life, nothing else is worth your care. What is every year of a wise man's life
but a censure or critique on the past? Those whose date is the shortest, live
long enough to laugh at one half of it: the boy despises the infant, the man
the boy, the philosoper both, and the christian all. You may now begin to think
your manhood was too much a puerility: and you will never suffer your age to be
but a second infancy. The toys and baubles of your childhood are hardly now
more below you, than those toys of our riper and of our declining years, the
drums and rattles of Ambition, and the dirt and bubbles of Avarice. At this
time, when you are cut off from a little society, and made a citizen of the
world at large, you should bend your talents not to serve a Party, or a few,
but all Mankind. Your Genius should mount above that mist in which it is
participation and neighborhood with earth long involved it: To shine abroad
and to heaven, ought to be the business and the glory of your present
situation. Remember it was at such a time, that the greatest lights of
antiquity dazzled and blazed the most; in their retreat, in their exile, or in
their death: but why do I talk of dazzling or blazing? it was then that they did
good, that they gave light, and that they became Guides to mankind.

Those aims alone are worthy of spirits truly great, and such I therefore hope
will be yours. Resentment indeed may remain, perhaps cannot be quite
extinguished, in the noblest minds; but revenge will never harbor there:
higher principles than those of the first, and better principles than those of
the latter, will infallibly influence men whose thoughts and whose minds are
enlarged, and cause them to prefer the Whole to any part of mankind, especially
to so small a part as one's single self.

Believe me, my Lord, I look upon you as a Spirit entered into another life, as
one just upon the edge of immortality, where the Passions and Affections are
much more exalted, and where you ought to despise all little views, and all
mean Retrospects. Nothing is worth your looking back; therefore fore look
forward, and make (as you can) the world look after you: But take care, that it
be not with Pity, but with Esteem and Admiration.

I am with the greatest sincerity, and passion for your Fame as well as
Happiness,

Your, etc.
The Bishop of Rochester went into Exile the month following, and continued in
it till his death, which happened at Paris on the fifteenth day of February, in
the year 1732.



The Duke of BUCKINGHAM to Mr POPE.
YOU desire my opinion as to the late dispute in France concerning Homer: And I
think it excusable (at an age alas of not much pleasure) to amuse my self a
little in taking notice of a controversy, than which nothing is at present more
remarkable (even in a nation who value themselves so much upon the Belles
Lettres) both on account of the illustrious subject of it, and of the two
persons engaged in the quarrel.

The one is extraordinary in all the Lyric kind of Poetry even in the opinion
of his very adversary. The other a Lady (and of more value for being so) not
only of great Learning, but with a Genius admirably turned to that sort of it
which most becomes her Sex, for softness, genteelness, and promoting of virtue:
and such as (one would think) is not so liable as other parts of scholarship,
to rough disputes, or violent animosity.

Yet it has so happened, that no writers, even about Divinity it self, have
been more outrageous or uncharitable than these two polite authors; by
suffering their judgments to be a little warped (if I may use that expression)
by the heat of their eager inclinations, to attack or defend so great an Author
under debate: I wish for the sake of the public, which is now so well
entertained by their quarrel, it may not end at last in their agreeing to blame
a third man who is so presumptuous as to censure both, if they should chance to
hear of it.

To begin with matter of fact. Madam Dacier has well judged, that the best of
all Poets certainly deserved a better translation, at least into French prose,
because to see it done in verse was despaired of: I believe indeed from a
defect in that language, incapable of mounting to any degree of excellence
suitable to so very great an undertaking.

She has not only performed this task as well as prose can do it, (which is
indeed but as the wrong side of Tapestry is able to represent present the
right) but she has added to it also many learned and useful annotations. With
all which she most obligingly delighted not only her own sex, but most of ours,
ignorant of the Greek, and consequently her adversary himself, who frankly
acknowledges that ignorance.

It Is no wonder therefore, if in doing this, she is grown so enamored of that
unspeakably-charming Author, as to have a kind of horror at the least mention
of a man bold enough to blame him.

Now as to M. de la Motte, he being already deservedly famous for all sorts of
Lyric poetry, was so far introduced by her into those beauties of the Epic
kind, (though but in that way of translation) as not to resist the pleasure and
hope of reputation by attempting that in verse, which had been applauded so
much for the difficulty of doing it even in prose; knowing how this, well
executed, must extremely transcend the other.

But, as great Poets are a little apt to think they have an ancient right of
being excused for Vanity on all occasions; he was not content to outdo Madam
Dacier, but endeavored to outdo Homer himself, and all that ever in any age
or nation went before him in the same enterprise; by leaving out, altering, or
adding whatever he thought best.

Against this presumptuous attempt, Homer has been in all times so well
defended, as not to need my small assistance; yet I must needs say his
excellencies are such, that for their sake he deserves a much gentler touch for
his seeming errors. These if M. de la Motte had translated as well as the rest,
with an apology for having retained 'em only out of mere veneration; his
judgment in my opinion would have appeared much greater than by the best of his
alterations, though I admit them to be written very finely. I join with M. de
la Motte in wondering at some odd things in Homer, but it is chiefly because of
his sublime ones, I was about to say his divine ones, which almost surprise me
at finding him any where in the fallible condition of humane nature.

And now we are wondering, I am in a difficulty to guess, what can be the
reason of these exceptions against Homer. from one who has himself translated
him, contrary to the general custom of translators. Is there not a little of
that in it? I mean to be singular in getting above the title of a Translator,
though sufficiently honorable in this case. For such an ambition no body has
less occasion, than one who is so fine a Poet in other kinds; and who must have
too much wit to believe, any alteration of another can entitle him to the
denomination of an Epic Poet himself: though no man in this age seems more
capable of being a good one, if the French tongue would bear it. Yet in his
translation he has done too well, to leave any doubt (with all his faults) that
here is can be ever paralleled with it.

Besides he could not be ignorant, that finding faults is the most easy and
vulgar part of a critic; whereas nothing shows so much skill and taste both, as
the being thoroughly sensible of the sublimest excellencies.

What can we say in excuse of all this? Humanum est errare: Since as good a
Poet as I believe the French language is capable of, and as sharp a Critic as
any nation can produce, has by too much censuring Homer, subjected a
translation to censure, that would have otherwise stood the test of the
severest adversary.

But since he would needs choose that wrong way of criticism, I wonder he missed
a stone so easy to be thrown against Homer, for his filling the Iliad with so
muchslaughter, (for that is to be excused, since a War is not capable of being
described without it) but with so many various particulars of wounds and
horror, as show the writer (I am afraid) so delighted that way himself, as not
the least to doubt his reader being so also. Like Spainoletta, whose dismal
pictures are the more disagreeable for being always so very movingly painted.
Even Hector's last parting from his son and Andromache, hardly makes us amends
for his body's being dragged thrice round the town. M. de la Motte in his
strongest objection about that dismal combat, has sufficient cause to blame his
enraged adversary; who here gives an instance that it is impossible to be
violent without committing some mistake; her passion for Homer blinding her too
much to perceive the very grossest of his failings. By which warning I am
become a little more capable of impartiality, though in a dispute about that
very Poet for whom I have the greatest veneration.

Madam Dacier might have considered a little, that whatever were the motives of
M. de la Motte to so bold a proceeding, it could not darken that fame which I
am sure she thinks shines securely even after the vain attempts of Plato
himself against it: caused only perhaps by a like reason with that of Madam
Dacier's anger against M. de la Motte, namely, the finding that in prose his
genius (great as it was) could not be capable of the sublime heights of poetry,
which therefore he banished out of his commonwealth.

Nor were these objections to Homer any more lessening of her merit in
translating him, as well as that way is capable of, viz. fully, plainly, and
elegantly, than the most admirable verses can be any disparagement to an
excellent prose.

The best excuse for all this violence is, it is being in a Cause which gives a
kind of reputation even to suffering by never so ill a management of it.

The worst of defending even Homer in such a passionate manner, is it is being
more a proof of her weakness, than of his being liable to none. For what is it
can excuse Homer any more than Hector, for flying at the first sight of
Achilles? whose terrible aspect sure needed not such an inexcusable fright to
set it off; and methinks all that account of Minerva's restoring his dart to
Achilles, comes a little too late, for excusing Hector's so terrible
apprehension at the very first.

To the Duke of BUCKINGHAM.
Sept. 1, 1718.
I Am much honored by your Grace's compliance with my request, in giving me
your opinion of the French dispute concerning Homer. And I shall keep my word,
in fairly telling wherein I disagree from you. It is but in two or three very
small points, not so much of the dispute, as of the parties concerned in it. I
cannot think quite so highly of the Lady's learning, though I respect it very
much. It is great complaisance in that polite nation, to allow her to be a
Critic of equal rank with her husband. To instance no further, his remarks on
Horace show more good Sense, Penetration, and a better Taste of his author, and
those upon Aristotle's art of poetry more Skill and Science, than any of hers
on any author whatever. In truth, they are much more slight, dwell more in
generals, and are besides for the most part less her own, of which her remarks
upon Homer are an example; where Eustathius is transcribed ten times for once
that he is quoted. Nor is there at all more depth or learning in those upon
Terence, Plautus, (or where they were most wanted) upon Aristophanes, only the
Greek Scholia upon the latter are some of the best extant.

Your Grace will believe me, that I did not search to find defects in a Lady;
my employment upon the Iliad forced me to see them: yet I had so much French
complaisance as to conceal her thefts; for wherever I have found her notes to
be wholly another, (which is the case in some hundreds) I have barely quoted
the true Proprietor without observing upon it. If Madam Dacier has ever seen my
observations, she will be sensible of this conduct, but what effect it may have
upon a Lady, I will not answer for.

In the next place, as to Mr. de la Motte, I think your Grace hardly does him
right, in supposing he could have no idea of the beauties of Homer's Epic
Poetry but what he learned from Madam Dacier's Prose-translation. There had
been a very elegant Prose-tanslation before by Monsieur de la Valtaire, lo
elegant, that the style of it was evidently the original and model of the
famous Telemaque. Your Grace very justly animadverts against the too great
disposition of finding faults, in the one, and of confessing none, in the
other: But doubtless, as to Violence, the Lady has infinitely the better of the
Gentleman. Nothing can be more polite, dispassionate or sensible, than Mr de la
Motte's manner of managing the dispute: and so much as I see your Grace admires
the beauty of his verse (in which you have the suffrage too of the Archbishop
of Cambray) I will venture to say, his prose is full as good. I think therefore
when you say, no disputants even in Divinity could be more outrageous and
uncharitable than these two authors, you are a little too hard upon M. de la
Motte. Not but that (with your Grace) I doubt as little of the zeal of
Commentators as of the zeal of Divines, and am as ready to believe of the
passions and pride of mankind in general, that (did but the same interests go
along with them) they would carry the learned world to as violent extremes,
animosities, and even persecutions, about variety of opinions in Criticism, as
ever they did about Religion: and that in defect of Scripture to quarrel upon,
we should have French, Italian, and Dutch Commentators ready to burn one
another about Homer, Virgil, Terence and Horace.

I do not wonder your Grace is shocked at the flight of Hector upon the first
appearance of Achilles in the twenty-second Iliad. However (to show my self a
true Commentator, if not a true Critic) I will endeavor to excuse, if not to
defend it, in my notes on that Book. And to save my self what trouble I can,
instead of doing it in this letter, I will draw up the substance of what I have
to say for it in a separate paper which I Will show your Grace when next we meet.
I will only desire you to allow me, that Hector was in an absolute certainty of
death, and depressed over and above with the conscience of being in an ill
cause. If your heart be so great, as not to grant the first of these will sink
the spirit of a Hero, you will at least be so good, as to allow the second may:
But I can tell your Grace, no less a Hero than my Lord Peterborow, when a
person complimented him for never being afraid, made this answer; "Sir, show me
a danger that I think an imminent and real one, and I promise you I Will be as
much afraid as any of you."

I am your Grace's, etc.

Madam DACIER's Reflections on Mr POPE's Account of HOMER in his Preface to the
ILIAD.
UPON the finishing of the second Edition of my translation of Homer, a
particular friend sent me a translation of part of Mr Pope's preface to his
version of the ILIAD. As I do not understand English, I cannot form any
judgment of his performance, though I have heard much of it. I am indeed willing
to believe, that the praises it has met with are not unmerited, because
whatever Work is approved by the English nation, cannot be bad; but yet I hope
I may be permitted to judge of that part of the Preface which has been
transmitted to me, and I here take the liberty of giving my sentiments thereon.
I must freely acknowledge, that Mr Pope's invention is very lively, though he
seems to have been guilty of the same fault into which he owns we are often
precipitated by our invention, when we depend too much upon the strength of it:
As magnanimity, says he, may run up to profusion and extravagance, so may a
great invention to redundancy or wildness.

This has been the very case of Mr Pope himself; nothing is more overstrained
or more false than the Images in which his fancy has represented HOMER:
Sometimes he tells us, that the ILIAD is a " wild Paradise, where, if we cannot
see all the Beauties, as in an ordered garden, it is only because the number of
them is infinitely greater." Sometimes he compares him to " a copious nursery,
which contains the seeds and first productions of every kind"; and lastly, he
represents him under the notion of a " mighty tree, which rises from the most
vigorous seed, is improved with industry, flourishes and produces the finest
fruit, but bears too many branches, which might be lopped into form, to give it
a more regular appearance".

What! Is Homer's Poem then, according to Mr Pope, a confused heap of Beauties,
without order or symmetry; a plat whereon nothing but seeds, nor nothing
perfect or formed is to be found; and a production loaded with many
unprofitable things, which ought to be retrenched, and which choke or disfigure
those which ought to be preserved?

The most inveterate enemies to Homer, never said any thing more injurious, or
more unjust, against that Poet.

As I have defended him, with pretty good success, against the cavils of so
many ignorant Censors, who have condemned him because they did not understand
him. I find my self again obliged to defend him against the reproaches of one
of greater penetration, and may therefore do him more injury in the minds of
unlearned readers, though at the same time he pretends to have a great Veneration
for him.

Mr Pope will pardon me then, if I here oppose these three comparisons, which
to me appear very false, and entirely contrary to what the greatest, ancient,
and modern critics ever thought.

To the point then, the ILIAD is so far from being a wild paradise, that it is
the most regular garden, and laid out with more symmetry than any ever was.
Monsieur le Nostre Gardener to Lewis XIV. He laid out the Gardens of
Versailles, Marli, etc.
, who was the first man of the world in his art, never observed in his gardens
a more perfect or more admirable symmetry, than Homer has observed in his
poems. Every thing therein, is not only in the place it ought to have, but
every thing is made for the place it has. He presents you at first with that
which ought to be first seen, he places in the middle what ought to be in the
middle, and what would improperly be, at the beginning or end; and he removes
what ought to be at a greater distance, to create the more agreeable surprise;
and, to use a comparison drawn from painting, he places that in the greatest
light which cannot be too visible, and sinks, in the obscurity of the shade,
what does not require a full view: so that it may be said, that Homer is the
painter who best knew how to employ the shades and lights, and it was this
wonderfully beauteous order which Horace admired in his poems, and on which he
founded his rules for the perfecting of the Art of Poetry.

The second comparison is as unjust: How could Mr Pope say, that one can only
discover, " Seeds and the first productions of every kind in the ILIAD?" Every
beauty is therein to so great a perfection, that the following ages could add
nothing to those of any kind; and the ancients have always proposed Homer as
the most perfect model in all kinds of poetry.

The third comparison is composed of the errors of the two former; Homer had
certainly an incomparable fertility of invention, but his fertility is always
checked by that just sense, which made him reject every superfluous thing which
his vast imagination could offer him, to retain only what was useful or
necessary. Judgment guided the hand of this admirable gardener, and was the
pruning-hook he employed to lop off every useless Branch; he has done what
Horace directs. Inutilesque falce ramos amputans feliciores inserit.


Mr Pope had done us a great piece of service, if he had pointed out the
useless Branches that ought to be lopped from this tree. The symmetry which
ought to be given to that wild garden to render it more regular and the
perfection which is wanting to the several beauties, he says Homer has only
sketched out; it would be very happy for the present age, and glorious to
England, to have produced so perfect a critic.

Now I have defended Homer, I must also defend myself against a criticism he
has made upon a part of my Preface; where speaking of the manners of Homer's
Heroes, so like those of the Patriarchs, I have said, I find these ancient
times so much the finer, as they the less resemble our own. Upon this Mr Pope
exclaims, Who can be so prejudiced in their favor, as to magnify their
felicity, when a spirit of revenge and cruelty reigned through the world, when
no mercy was shown but for the sake of lucre, when the greatest Princes were
put to the sword, and their wives and daughters made slaves and concubines? Mr
Pope sure mistook me!

When I said so, could I mean that the manners of these heroical times were
perfect and without fault! Were they so in more happy times! Were there no
tokens then of cruelty or revenge! Were there no captives made! Were there no
kings put to the sword! Were there no concubines seen among them! And since the
christian religion has taught a more perfect morality, was there never a spirit
of revenge and cruelty seen amongst Christians! Do they not make no more
prisoners of War! and do not they redeem them! Was there never a concubine, or
something worse, seen among them! Did all these vices, which Mr Pope blames
those ancient times for, hinder nature from being then very plain, far from the
luxury, pomp, and effeminacy which have corrupted the following ages! Are not
these manners of Homer's Heroes very like those of the Patriarchs, and very
unlike these of our own time! I might then say, that those times and manners
seemed so much the more excellent to me, as they less resemble those of our
own. Durst Mr Pope himself prefer the manners of the present age to those of
the ancient times! no, without doubt; for six lines after he embraces my
opinion, which he had blamed: I find, says he, a pleasure in observing the
simplicity of that age, in opposition to the pomp and luxury of the following
ages. One may then, according to his own sense, prefer those ages of natural
simplicity to these that are corrupted with pomp and luxury.

I own I did not expect to find my self attacked by Mr Pope, in a Preface
wherein I might have expected some small token of acknowledgment, or at least
some slight approbation; for having been so happy as to think on several things
in the way he himself does, especially in the manners of the ancients, after I
had said in my Preface, " That Princes tended their flocks. That Princesses
drew water at the spring," and brought examples to prove this from the holy
scriptures, and the Roman history itself, I conclude with these words: I love
to see Juno dressing herself without the trinkets of a toilet, or the
assistance of a waiting woman; it is the same with the Heroes as with the Gods,
one sees neither Footmen, nor Valets de Chamber, nor Guards about ACHILLES,
AGAMEMNON, etc. HERCULES and THESEUS had none of these. Mr POPE says the same
thing, There is a pleasure in beholding Monarchs without their guards, Princes
tending their flocks, and Princesses drawing water from the springs.

I am overjoyed to find that Mr Pope is as much in love with the simplicity of
the ancient times as I am; it is a token that he abhors the pomp and luxury of
our own, and gives me reason to hope, that a little reflection will induce him
to approve what I have said, and he has so unjustly condemned.

I could remark upon several other things in his Preface This Preface of Madam
DACIER was written long before Mr POPE wrote his, and I think the lady is very
modest when he uses her own words, to say that she was happy in having thought
as he did; though it is plain that he borrowed this Thought from her: And the
Approbation of Mr Fraguier, who certainly was a good Judge, gives her an
Encomium, that shows she is both an excellent. Translatress and Critic, as all
the world indeed owns her to be, except the Illiterati, who presume to run her
down, that the public may not perceive how they enrich themselves with her
spoils. I shall here insert the Approbation abovementioned verbatim.

I have, by Order of my Lord Chancellor, read the ILIAD of Homer, translated
into French, with Remarks by Madam DACIER, and I think that this Translation,
(wherein the Beauties of the Original are so perfectly found) will be both an
Honor to our Nation, and the present Age. Given at Paris this 1st Day of
December, 1710. Signed FRAGUIER.


, but I have not the leisure at present that this would require; however, I
cannot conclude without correcting two considerable errors Mr Pope is fallen
into; The first, when speaking of the FABLE, he says, HOMER created a moving
world for himself in the Invention of the fable, or words to that effect. What
does he mean by this! when PLATO tells us, that when GOD created time, he
created a moving image of Eternity. I understand that Language, it presents an
idea to my mind, which I conceive, and find to be just and fine; but to create
a moving world in the intention of the Fable, is a confused idea, which I can
neither unravel nor understand; besides, there is not the least shadow of
truth, to affirm that HOMER invented the FABLE; it is much antienter, was
invented long before his time, and he found the use of it wholly established,
as I have shown in my Preface to the ODYSSEY; for HOMER's Fable is not at all
different from the Fables of Aesop, as those are not all different from such as
were in use a long time before him. All that HOMER has done, is, that he has
built his Epic Fable on that first Fable, and extending it by his Episodes,
gave it a Grandeur proportionable to his own views and designs; it is for this
reason that ARISTOTLE calls the Fable, the Composition of things, and says,
very justly, that it is the Soul of the Poem.

The second Error, which is not less material, is when speaking of poetical
manners, Mr POPE says, As there is more variety of Characters in the ILIAD, so
there is of Speeches, than in any other Poem. Every thing in it has Manners (as
Aristotle expresses it) that is, every thing is acted or spoken. Nothing can be
more repugnant to the Doctrine of that Philosopher, he never said that any one
Thing has Manners, that is, that it is either acted or spoken. He says, on the
contrary, that there are Discourses without Manners, and that in his Time there
were many Tragedies without Manners, and yet there were both Action and
Discourse in these Dramas: this is a sure Sign that Manners are neither Actions
nor Discourses, since Discourses and Actions may be without Manners. What are
Manners then, according to ARISTOTLE? Manners, says he, are what discover the
Inelination of the Person who speaks, and the side he will take upon any
accident wherein it would not be easy to find him out: therefore all Discourses
that do not let you at first discover what he that speaks will resolve himself
to do, are without Manners. It is astonishing that Mr POPE has not understood a
thing which is so clearly explained in ARISTOTLE's Art of Poetry, and in my
Preface to the ODYSSEY. I refer that learned Man to these two Works, wherein he
may satisfy himself concerning this Point.

The Faults I blame him for, are so trivial, that they ought not to hinder the
English Nation from expecting from this new Poet the great advantages which are
to be hoped for, from a Reformer of HOMER. So bright a Man will not confine
himself to perfect only the Art of Epic Poesy, that would be a trifling matter:
No; he will perfect the Art of Politics! much more valuable and more important
than that of Epic Poesy. A man capable to correct HOMER, will be able to form
the Manners of Men; ALCIBIADES was of this opinion, for a Grammarian having
made his brags before him, that he had in his closet an HOMER corrected with
his own hand, What! Friend, said he, art thou capable to correct HOMER? and
do thou waste thy time in teaching Children? why do thou not apply thy self
to form the Manners of Men.

Of what infinite consequence then, will Mr POPE be to a State, since he can
reform HOMER!

Anne le Fevre Dacier.

LETTERS OF Mr BLOUNT to Mr POPE.
IT is with a great deal of pleasure I see your letter, dear Sir, written in a
style that shows you full of health, and in the midst of diversions: I think
those two things necessary to a man who has such undertakings in hand as yours.
All lovers of Homer are indebted to you for taking so much pains about the
situation of his Hero's kingdoms; it will not only be of great use with regard
to his works, but to all that read any of the Greek Historians; who generally
are ill understood through the difference of the maps as to the places they treat
of, which makes one think one author contradicts another. You are going to set
us right; and it is an advantage every body will gladly see you engross the
glory of.

You can draw rules to be free and easy, from formal pedants; and teach men to
be short and pertinent, from tedious commentators. However, I congratulate your
happy deliverance from such authors, as you (with all your humanity) cannot
wish alive again to converse with. Critics will quarrel with you, if you dare
to please without their leave; and Zealots will shrug up their shoulders at a
man, that pretends to get to Heaven out of their form, dress, and diet. I would
no more make a judgment of an author's genius from a damning critic, than I
would of a man's religion from an unsaving zealot.

I could take great delight in affording you the new glory of making a
Barceloniad (if I may venture to coin such a word) I fancy you would find a
juster parallel than it seems at first sight; for the Trojans too had a great
mixture of folly with their bravery: and I am out of countenance for them when
I read the wife result of their council, where after a warm debate between
Antenor and Paris about restoring Helen, Priam sagely determines that they
shall go to supper. And as for the Greeks, what can equal their superstition in
sacrificing an innocent lady? Tantum Religio potuit, etc.


I have a good opinion of my politics, since they agree with a man who always
thinks so justly as you. I wish it were in our power to persuade all the nation
into as calm and steady a disposition of mind.

We have received the late melancholy news, with the usual ceremony of
condoling in one breath for the loss of a gracious Queen, and in another
rejoicing for an illustrious King. My views carry me no farther, than to wish
the peace and welfare of my country; and my morals and politics, teach me to
leave all that to be adjusted by our representatives above, and to divine
providence. It is much at one to you and me who sit at the helm, provided they
will permit us to sail quietly in the great ship. Ambition is a vice that is
timely mortified in us poor Papists; we ought in recompense to cultivate as
many virtues in our selves as we can, that we may be truly great. Among my
Ambitions, that of being a sincere friend is one of the chief; yet I will
confess that I have a secret pleasure to have some of my descendants know, that
their Ancestor was great with Mr Pope.

I am, etc.

From the same.
Nov. 11, 1715.
IT is an agreement of long date between you and me, that you should do with my
letters just as you pleased, and answer them at your leisure, and that is as
soon as I shall think you ought. I have so true a taste of the substantial part
of your friendship, that I wave all ceremonials; and am sure to make you as
many visits as I can, and leave you to return them whenever you please,
assuring you they shall at all times be heartily welcome to me.

The many alarms we have from your parts, have no effect upon the genius that
reigns in our country, which is happily turned to preserve peace and quiet
among us. What a dismal scene has there been opened in the North? what ruin
have those unfortunate rash gentlemen drawn upon themselves and their miserable
followers, and perchance upon many others too, who upon no account would be
their followers? However, it may look ungenerous to reproach people in
distress. I don't remember you and I ever used to trouble our selves about
politics, but when any matter happened to fall into our discourse, we used to
condemn all undertakings that tended toward the disturbing the peace and quiet
of our country, as contrary to the notions we had of morality and religion,
which oblige us on no pretense whatsoever to violate the laws of charity: how
many lives have there been lost in hot blood, and how many more are there like
to be taken off in cold? If the broils of the nation affect you, come down to
me, and though we are farmers, you know Eumeus made his friends welcome. You
shall here worship the Echo at your ease; indeed we are forced to do so,
because we cannot hear the first report, and therefore are obliged to listen to
the second; which for security sake, I do not always believe neither.

It Is a great many years since I fell in love with the character of Pomponius
Atticus: I longed to imitate him a little, and have contrived hitherto, to be
like him engaged in no party, but to be a faithful friend to some in both: I
find my self very well in this way hitherto, and live in a certain peace of
mind by it, which I am persuaded brings a man more content than all the
perquisites of wild ambition. I with pleasure join with you in wishing, nay I
am not ashamed to say, in praying for the welfare temporal and eternal of all
mankind. How much more affectionately then shall I do so for you, since I am in
a most particular manner and with all sincerity,

Your, etc.

Mr BLOUNT died at London, 1726.

LETTERS OF Mr DIGBY to Mr POPE.
Coleshill. Apr. 17, 1718.
I Have read your letter over and over with delight. By your description of the
town, I imagine it to lie under some great enchantment, and am very much
concerned for you and all my friends in it. I am the more afraid, imagining
since you do not fly those horrible monsters, rapine, dissimulation, and
luxury, that a magic circle is drawn about you, and you cannot escape. We are
here in the country in quite another world, surrounded with blessings and
pleasures, without any occasion of exercising our irascible faculties; indeed
we cannot boast of good-breeding and the art of life, but yet we don't live
unpleasantly in primitive simplicity and good humor. The fashions of the town
affect us but just like a raree-show, we have a curiosity to peep at 'em and
nothing more. What you call pride, prodigality, and vainglory, we cannot find
in pomp and splendor at this distance; it appears to us a fine glittering
scene, which if we don't envy you, we think you happier than we are in enjoying
it. Whatever you may think to persuade us of the humility of virtue, and her
appearing in rags amongst you, we can never believe; our uninform'd minds
represent her so noble to us, that we necessarily annex splendor to her; and
we could as soon imagine the order of things inverted, and that there is no man
in the moon, as believe the contrary. I cannot forbear telling you we indeed
read the spoils of Rapine as boys do the English rogue, and hug our selves full
as much over it; yet our roses are not without thorns. Pray give me the
pleasure of hearing (when you are at leisure) how soon I may expect to see the
next volume of Homer.

I am, etc.

Mr DIGBY to Mr POPE.
May 21, 1270.
YOUR letter which I had two posts ago was very medicinal to me; and I heartily
thank you for the relief it gave me. I was sick of the thoughts of my not
having in all this time given you any testimony of the affection I owe you, and
which I as constantly indeed feel as I think of you. This indeed was a
troublesome ill to me, 'till after reading your letter I found it was a most
idle weak imagination to think I could so offend you: Of all the impressions
you have made upon me, I never received any with greater joy than this of your
abundant goodnature, which bids me be assured of some share of your affections.

I had many other pleasures from your letter; that your mother remembers me is
a very sincere joy to me; I cannot but reflect how alike you are; from the time
you do any one a favor, you think yourselves obliged as those that have
received one. This is indeed an old-fashioned respect, hardly to be found out
of your house. I have great hopes however to see many old-fashioned virtues
revive, since you have made our age in love with Homer; I heartily wish you,
who are as good a citizen as a poet, the joy of seeing a reformation from your
works. I am in doubt whether I should congratulate your having finished Homer,
while the two Essays you mention are not completed; but if you expect no great
trouble from finishing these, I heartily rejoice with you.

I have some faint notion of the beauties of Twickenham from what I here see
round me. The verdure of showers is poured upon every tree and field about us;
the gardens unfold variety of colors to the eye every morning; the hedges
breath is beyond all perfume; and the song of birds we hear as well as you. But
though I hear and see all this, yet I think they would delight me more if you was
here. I found the want of these at Twickenham while I was there with you, by
which I guess what an increase of charms it must now have. How kind is it in
you to wish me there, and how unfortunate are my circumstances that allow me
not to visit you? if I see you I must leave my father alone, and this uneasy
thought would disappoint all my proposed pleasures; the same circumstance will
prevent my project of many happy hours with you in Lord Bathurst's wood, and (I
fear) of seeing you till winter, unless Lady Scudamore comes to Sherburne, in
which case I shall press you to see Dorsetshire as you proposed. May you have a
long enjoyment of your new favorite Portico.

Your, etc.

Mr DIGBY to Mr POPE.
Sherburne, July 9, 1720.
THE London language and conversation is I find quite changed since I left it,
though it is not above three or four months ago. No violent change in the natural
world ever astonished a Philosopher so much as this does me. I hope this will
calm all Partyrage, and introduce more humanity than has of late obtained in
conversation. All scandal will sure be laid aside, for there can be no such
disease any more as spleen in this new golden age. I am pleased with the
thoughts of seeing nothing but a general good humor when I come up to town; I
rejoice in the universal riches I hear of, in the thought of their having this
effect. They tell me you was soon content; and that you eared not for such an
increase as others wished you. By this account I judge you the richest man in
the South Sea, and congratulate you accordingly. I can wish you only an
increase of health, for of riches and fame you have enough.

Your, etc.

Mr DIGBY to Mr POPE.
Sherburne, July 30.
I Congratulate you, dear Sir, on the return of the Golden Age, for sure this
must be such, in which money is shower'd down in such abundance upon us. I hope
this overflowing will produce great and good fruits, and bring back the
figurative moral golden-age to us. I have some omens to induce me to believe it
may; for when the Muses delight to be near a Court, when I find you frequently
with a First-minister, I cannot but expect from such an intimacy an
encouragement and revival of the polite arts, I know you desire to bring them
into honor, above the golden Image which is set up and worshipped, and if you
cannot effect it, adieu to all such hopes. You seem to intimate in yours
another face of things from this Inundation of wealth, as if beauty, wit, and
valor, would no more engage our passions in the pleasurable pursuit of them,
though assisted by this increase: if so, and if monsters only as various as those
of Nile arise from this abundance, who that has any Spleen about him will not
haste to town to laugh? What will become of the playhouse? who will go thither
while there is such entertainment in the streets? I hope we shall neither want
good Satire nor Comedy; if we do, the age may well be thought barren of
genius's, for none has ever produced better subjects.

Your, etc.

Mr DIGBY to Mr POPE.
Coleshill, Nov. 12, 1720.
I Find in my heart that I have a taint of the corrupt age we live in. I want
the public Spirit so much admired in old Rome, of sacrificing every thing that
is dear to us to the commonwealth. I even feel a more intimate concern for my
friends who have suffered in the South Sea, than for the public, which is said
to be undone by it. But I hope the reason is, that I do not see so evidently
the ruin of the public to be a consequence of it, as I do the loss of my
friends. I fear there are few besides yourself that will be persuaded by old
Hesiod, that half is more than the whole. I know not whether I do not rejoice
in your Sufferings; since they have shown me your mind is principled with such
a sentiment. I assure you I expect from it a performance greater still than
Homer. I have an extreme joy from your communicating to me this affection of
your mind; Quid voveat dulci Nutricula majus alumno?
Believe me, dear Sir, no equipage could show you to my eye in so much
splendour. I would not indulge this fit of philosophy so far as to be tedious to
you, else I could prosecute it with pleasure.

I long to see you, your Mother, and your Villa; 'till then I will say nothing
of Lord Bathurst's wood, which I saw in my return hither. Soon after Christmas
I design for London, where I shall miss Lady Scudamore very much, who intends
to stay in the country all winter. I am angry with her as I am like to suffer
by this resolution, and would fain blame her, but cannot find a cause. The man
is cursed that has a longer letter than this to write with as bad a pen, yet I
can use it with pleasure to send my services to your good mother, and to write
myself your, etc.

Mr DIGBY to Mr POPE.
Sherburne, Aug. 14, 1723.
I Cannot return from so agreeable an entertainment as yours in the country
without acknowledging it. I thank you heartily for the new Idea of life you
there gave me; it will remain long with me, for it is very strongly impressed
upon my imagination. I repeat the memory of it often, and shall value that
faculty of the mind now more than ever, for the power it gives me of being
entertained in your villa, when absent from it. As you are possessed of all the
pleasures of the country, and as I think of a right mind. what can I wish you
but health to enjoy them? This I so heartily do, that I should be even glad to
hear your good old mother might lose all her present pleasures in her unwearied
care of you, by your better health convincing her it is unnecessary.

I am troubled and shall be so, till I hear you have received this letter: for
you gave me the greatest pleasure imaginable in yours, and I am impatient to
acknowledge it. If I any ways deserve that friendly warmth and affection with
which you write, it is, that I have a heart full of love and esteem for you. So
truly, that I should lose the greatest pleasure of my life if I lost your good
opinion. It rejoices me very much to be reckoned by you in the class of honest
men; for though I am not troubled overmuch about the opinion most may have of me,
yet I own it would grieve me not to be thought well of, by you and some few
others. I will not doubt my own strength, yet I have this further security to
maintain my integrity, that I cannot part with that, without forfeiting your
esteem with it.

Perpetual disorder and ill health has for some years so disguised me, that I
sometimes fear I do not to my best friends enough appear what I really am.
Sickness is a great oppressor; it does great injury to a zealous heart,
stifling it is warmth, and not suffering it to break out in action. But I hope I
shall not make this complaint much longer. I have other hopes that please me
too, though not so well grounded; these are, that you may yet make a journey
westward with Lord Bathurst; but of the probability of this I do not venture to
reason, because I would not part with the pleasure of that belief. It grieves
me to think how far I am removed from you, and from that excellent Lord, whom I
love! indeed I remember him as one that has made sickness easy to me, by
bearing with my infirmities in the same manner that you have always done. I
often too consider him in other lights that make him valuable to me. With him,
I know not by what connection, you never fail to come into my mind, as if you
were inseparable. I have as you guess, many philosophical reveries in the
shades of Sir Walter Raleigh, of which you are a great part. You generally
enter there with me, and like a good Genius applaud and strengthen all my
sentiments that have Honor in them. This good office which you have often done
me unknowingly, I must acknowledge now; that my own breast may not reproach me
with ingratitude, and disquiet me when I would muse again in that solemn scene.
I have not room left to ask you many questions I intended about the Odyssey. I
beg I may know how far you have carried Ulysses on his journey, and how you
have been entertained with him on the way? I desire I may hear of your health,
of Mrs Pope's, and of every thing else that belongs to you.

How thrive your garden plants? how look the trees? how spring the Broculi and
the Fenochio? hard names to spell! how did the poppies bloom? and how is the
great room approved? what parties have you had of pleasure? what in the grotto?
what upon the Thames? I would know how all your hours pass, all you say, and
all you do; of which I should question you yet farther, but my paper is full
and spares you. My brother Ned is wholly yours, so my father desires to be, and
every soul here whose name is Digby. My sister will be yours in particular.
What can I add more?

I am, etc.

To the Hon. EDWARD DIGBY.
April 29, 1726.
I Have a great inclination to write to you, though I cannot by writing, any more
than I could by words express what part I bear in your suffering. Nature and
esteem in you are joined to aggravate your affliction: the latter I have in a
degree equal even to yours, and a tie of friendship approaches near to the
tenderness of nature: yet God knows, no man living is less fit to comfort you,
as no man is more deeply sensible than my self of the greatness of the loss.
That very virtue, which secures his present state from all the sorrows incident
to ours, does but aggrandise our sensation of it is being removed from our
sight, from our affection and from our imitation. The friendship and society of
good men does but complete their felicity before our own, who probably are not
yet arrived to their degree of perfection which merits an immediate reward.
That your dear brother and my dear friend was so, I take his very removal to be
a proof; providence would certainly lend virtuous men to a world that so much
wants them as long as in it is justice to them it could spare them to us. May my
soul be with those who have meant well and have acted well to that meaning; and
I doubt not, if this prayer be granted, I shall be with him. Let us preserve
his memory in the way he would best like, by recollecting what his behavior
would have been in every incident of our lives to come, and doing in each, just
as we think he would have done: so we shall have him always before our eyes,
and in our minds, and more in our lives and manners. I hope when we shall meet
him next we shall be more of a piece with him, and consequently not to be ever
more separated from him. I will add but one word (that relates to what remains
of your self and me since so valued a part of us is gone) it is to beg you to
accept as yours by inheritance, of the vacancy he has left in a heart which
(while he could fill it with such hopes, wishes and affections for him as
suited a mortal creature) was truly and warmly ly his and shall (I assure you
in the sincerity of sorrow for my own loss) be faithfully at your service while
I continue to love his memory, that is while I continue to be

A.P.

The honorable Robert Digby died in the year 1726, and is buried in the church
of Sherburne in Dorsetshire, with the following Epitaph written by the Author.
Go! fair Example of untainted Youth,
Of modest Wisdom, and pacific Truth:
Composed in Sufferings, and in Joy sedate,
Good without noise, without Pretension great.
Just of thy Word; in every Wish sincere;
Who knew no Wish but what the World might hear:
Of softest Manners, unaffected Mind,
Lover of Peace, and Friend of human Kind:
Go live! for Heaven's eternal Year is thine;
Go, and exalt thy Moral to Divine.


LETTERS TO HUGH BETHEL, Esquire etc.
From 1723 to 1735.
July 12, 1723.
I Assure you unfeignedly, any memorial of your goodnature and friendliness is
most welcome to me, who know those tenders of affection from you, are not like
the common traffic of compliments and professions, which most people only give
that they may receive; and is at best a commerce of Vanity, if not of
Falsehood. I am happy in not immediately wanting the sort of good offices you
offer: but if I did want 'em, I should not think my self unhappy in receiving
'em at your hands: this really is some compliment, for I would rather most men
did me a small injury, than a kindness. I know your humanity, and allow me to
say, I love and value you for it: It Is a much better ground of love and value,
than all the qualities I see the world so fond of: They generally admire in the
wrong place, and generally most admire the things they don't comprehend, or the
things they can never be the better for. Very few can receive pleasure or
advantage from wit which they seldom taste, or learning which they seldom
understand: much less from the quality, high birth, or shining circumstances of
those to whom they profess esteem, and who will always remember how much they
are their Inferiors. But Humanity and sociable virtues are what every creature
wants every day, and still wants more the longer he lives, and most the very
moment he dies. It is ill traveling either in a Ditch or on a Terras; we
should walk in the common way, where others are continually passing on the same
level, to make the journey of life supportable by bearing one another company
in the same circumstances. -- Let me know how I may convey over the Odysses for
your amusement in your journey, that you many compare your own travels with
those of Ulysses: I am sure yours are undertaken upon a more disinterested, and
therefore a more heroic motive. Far be the omen from you, of returning as he
did, alone, without saving a friend.

There is lately printed a book Mr WOLLASTON's Religion of Nature delineated.
wherein all human virtue is reduced to one test, that of Truth, and branched
out in every instance of our duty to God and man. If you have not seen it, you
must, and I will send it together with the Odyssey. The very women read it, and
pretend to be charmed with that beauty which they generally think the least of.
They make as much ado about Truth, since this book appeared, as they did about
Health when Dr Cheyne's came out; and will doubtless be as constant in the
pursuit of one, as of the other. Adieu.

Aug. 9, 1726.
I Never am unmindful of those I think so well of as yourself; their number is
not so great as to confound one's memory. Nor ought you to decline writing to
me, upon an imagination that I am much employed by other people. For though my
house is like the house of a Patriarch of old, standing by the highway side
and receiving all travelers, nevertheless I seldom go to bed without the
reflection, that one's chief business is to be really at home: and I agree with
you in your opinion of company, amusements, and all the silly things which
mankind would fain make pleasures of, when in truth they are labor and sorrow.

I condole with you on the death of your Relation, the E. of C. The Earl of
Cadogan, who died July 17, 1726.
as on the fate of a mortal man: Esteem I never had for him, but concern and
humanity I had: the latter was due to the infirmity of his last period, though
the former was not due to the triumphant and vain part of his course. He
certainly knew himself best at last, and knew best the little value of others,
whose neglect of him whom they so grossly followed and flattered in the former
scene of his life, showed them as worthless as they could imagine him to be,
were he all that his worst enemies believed of him. For my own part, I am sorry
for his death, and wish he had lived long enough to see so much of the
faithlesness of the world, as to have been above the mad ambition of governing
such wretches as he must have found it to be composed of.

Though you could have no great value for this Great Man, yet acquaintance
itself, the custom of seeing the face, or entering under the roof, of one that
walks along with us in the common way of the world, is enough to create a wish
at least for his being above ground, and a degree of uneasiness at his removal.
It Is the loss of an object familiar to us: I should hardly care to have an old
post pulled up, that I remembered ever since I was a child. And add to this the
reflection (in the case of such as were not the best of their Species) what
their condition in another life may be, it is yet a more important motive for
our concern and compassion. To say the truth, either in the case of death or
life, almost every body and every thing is a cause or object for humanity, even
prosperity itself, and health itself, so many weak pitiful incidentals attend
on them.

I am sorry any relation of yours is ill, whoever it be, for you don't name the
person. But I conclude it is one of those to whose houses you tell me you are
going, for I know no invitation with you is so strong as when any one is in
distress, or in want of your assistance: The strongest proof in the world of
this, was your attendance on the late Earl.

I have been very melancholy for the loss of Mr Blount. Whoever has any portion
of good nature will suffer on these occasions, but a good mind rewards it is own
sufferings. I hope to trouble you as little as possible, if it be my fate to go
before you. I am of old Ennius's mind, Nemo me docoret lachrymis -- I am but a
Lodger here: this is not an abiding City. I am only to stay out my lease, for
what has Perpetuity and mortal man to do with each other? But I could be glad
you would take up with an Inn at Twitenham, as long as I am Host of it: if not,
I would take up freely with any Inn of yours. -- Adieu, dear Sir: Let us while
away this life; and (if we can) meet in another.

June 24, 1727.
YOU are too humane and considerate, (things few People can be charged with.)
Do not say you will not expect letters from me; upon my word I can no more
forbear writing sometimes to you, than thinking often of you. I know the world
too well, not to value you; who are an example of acting, living and thinking,
above it, and contrary to it.

I thank God for my Mother's unexpected recovery, though my hope can rise no
higher than from reprieve to reprieve, the small addition of a few days to the
many she has already seen. Yet so short and transitory as this Light is, it is
all I have to warm or shine upon me; and when it is out, there is nothing else
that will live for me, or consume itself in my service. But I would have you
think this is not the chief motive of my concern about her: Gratitude is a
cheap virtue, one may pay it very punctually, for it costs us nothing, but our
memory of the good done. And I owe her more good, than ever I can pay or she at
this age receive, if I could. I do not think the tranquillity of the mind ought
to be disturbed for many things in this world; but those offices that are
necessary duties either to our friends or our selves, will hardly prove any
breach of it; and as much as they take away from our indolence and ease of
body, will contribute to our peace and quiet of mind by the content they give.
They often afford the highest pleasure; and those who do not feel that, will
hardly ever find another to match it, let them love themselves ever so dearly.
At the same time it must be owned, one meets with cruel disappointments in
seeing so often the best endeavors ineffectual to make others happy, and very
often (what is most cruel of all) through their own means. But still I affirm,
those very disappointments of a virtuous man are greater pleasures, than the
utmost gratifications and successes of a mere self-lover.

The great and sudden event King George I. died June 10, 1727.
which has just now happened, puts the whole world (I mean this whole world)
into a new state: The only use I have, shall, or wish to make of it, is to
observe the Disparity of men from themselves in a weeks time: the desultory
leaping and catching of new motions, new modes, new measures: and that strange
spirit and life, with which men broken and disappointed resume their hopes,
their solicitations, their ambitions! It would be worth your while, as a
Philosopher, to be busy in these observations, and to come hither to see the
fury and bustle of the Bees this hot season, without coming so near as to be
stung by them.

Yours, etc.

June 17, 1728.
AFTER the publishing of my Boyish Letters to Mr Cromwell, you will not wonder
if I should forswear writing a letter again while I live; since I do not
correspond with a friend upon the terms of any other free subject of this
kingdom. But to you I can never be silent, or reserved; and I am sure my
opinion of your heart is such, that I could open mine to you in no manner which
I could fear the whole world should know. I could publish my own heart too, I
will venture to say, for any mischief or malice there is in it; but a little too
much folly or weakness might (I fear) appear to make such a spectacle either
instuctive or agreeable to others.

I am reduced to beg of all my acquaintance to secure me from the like usage
for the future, by returning me any Letters of mine which they may have
preserved; that I may not be hurt after my death by that which was the
happiness of my life, their partiality and affection to me.

I have nothing of my self to tell you, only that I have had but indifferent
health. I have not made a visit to London: Curiosity and the love of
dissipation dye apace in me. I am not glad nor sorry for it, but I am very
sorry for those who have nothing else to live on.

I have read much, but writ no more. I have small hopes of doing good, no
vanity in writing, and little ambition to please a world not very candid or
deserving. If I can preserve the good opinion of a few friends, it is all I can
expect, considering how little good I can do even them to merit it. Few people
have your candor, or are so willing to think well of another from whom they
receive no benefit, and gratify no vanity. But of all the soft sensations, the
greatest pleasure is to give and receive mutual Trust. It is by Belief and firm
Hope, that men are made happy in this life, as well as in the other. My
confidence dence in your good opinion, and dependence upon that of one or two
more, is the chief cordial drop I taste, amidst the Insipid, the Disagreeable,
the Cloying, or the Deadsweet, which are the common draughts of life. Some
pleasures are too pert, as well as others too flat, to be relished long: and
vivacity in some cases is worse than dullness. Therefore indeed for many years I
have not chosen my companions for any of the qualities in fashion, but almost
entirely for that which is the most out-of-fashion, sincerity. Before I am
aware of it, I am making your panegyric, and perhaps my own too, for next to
possessing the best of qualities is the esteeming and distinguishing those who
possess it. I truly love and value you, and so I stop short.

Aug. 9, 1733.
YOU might well think me negligent or forgetful of you, if true friendship and
sincere Esteem were to be measured by common forms and compliments. The truth
is, I could not write then, without saying something of my own Condition, and
of my loss of so old and so deserving a parent Mrs Pope died the seventh of
June, 1733, aged 93.
, which really would have troubled you; or I must have kept a silence upon that
head, which would not have suited that freedom and sincere opening of the heart
which is due to you from me. I am now pretty well; but my home is uneasy to me
still, and I am therefore wandering about all this summer. I was but four days
at Twitenham since the occasion that made it so melancholy. I have been a
fortnight in Essex, and am now at Dawley (whose master is your servant) and
going to Cirencester to Lord Bathurst. I shall also see Southampton with Lord
Peterborow. The Court and Twit'nam I shall forsake together. I wish I did not
leave our friend, who deserves more quiet and more health and happiness, than
can be found in such a family. The rest of my acquaintance are tolerably happy
in their various ways of life, whether court, country, or town; and Mr Cleland
is as well in the Park, as if he were in Paradise. I heartily hope Yorkshire is
the same to you; and that no evil, moral and physical, may come near you.

I have now but too much melancholy leisure, and no other care but to finish my
Essay on Man: There will be in it one line Shall burning Aetna, if a Sage
requires,
Forget to thunder, and recall her Fires!
On Air or Sea new motions be impressed,
O blameless Bethel! to relieve thy breast?

that may offend you, (I fear) and yet I will not alter or omit it, unless you
come to town and prevent me before I print it, which will be in a fortnight in
all probability. In plain truth, I will not deny my self the greatest pleasure
I am capable of receiving, because another may have the modesty not to share
it. It is all a poor Poet can do, to bear testimony to the virtue he cannot
reach; besides, that in this age, I have too few good examples not to lay hold
on any I can find. You see what an interested man I am.

Adieu.

To Mr FENTON.
May 5, 1717.
I Had not omitted answering years of the 18th of last month, but out of a
desire to give you some certain and satisfactory account, which way, and at
what time, you might take your journey. I am now commissioned to tell you, that
Mr Craggs will expect you on the rising of the Parliament, which will be as
soon as he can receive a man de Belles Lettres, that is, in tranquillity and
full leisure. I dare say your way of life (which in my taste will be the best
in the world, and with one of the best men in the world) must prove highly to
your contentment. And I must add, it will be still the more a joy to me, as I
shall reap a peculiar advantage from the good I shall have done in bringing you
together, by seeing it in my own neighborhood. Mr Craggs has taken a house
close by mine, whither he proposes to come in three weeks: In the mean time I
heartily invite you to live with me; where a frugal and philosophical diet for
a time, may give you a higher relish of that elegant way of life you will enter
into after. I desire to know by the first post how soon I may hope for you?

I am a little scandalized at your complaint that your time lies heavy on your
hands, when the muses have put so many good materials into your head to employ
them. As to your question, what I am doing? I answer, just what I have been
doing some years, my duty: secondly, relieving my self with necessary
amusements, or exercises, which shall serve me instead of physic as long as
they can; thirdly, reading till I am tired; and lastly, writing when I have no
other thing in the world to do, or no friend to entertain in company. My mother
is, I thank God, the easier if not the better, for my cares; and I am the
happier in that regard, as well as in the consciousness of doing my best. My
next felicity is in retaining the good opinion of honest men, who think me not
quite undeserving of it; and in finding no injuries from others hurt me, as
long as I know my self. I will add the sincerity with which I act toward
ingenious and undesigning men, and which makes me always (even by a natural
bond) their friend; therefore believe me very affectionately your, etc.

A. POPE.

Epitaph on Mr Elijah Fenton, at Esthampstead in Berks, 1730 See Crashaw's
Epitaph on Mr Ashton, p. 122 of his Poems, to whom Mr POPE forgot to
acknowledge his Obligation for this Compliment paid Mr Fenton. On Mr ASHTON, a
conformable Citizen.
The modest Front of this small Floor,
Believe me Reader, can say more:
Than many a braver Marble can
Here lies a truly honest Man.
One whose Conscience was a Thing
That troubled neither Church nor King.
Peace, which he loved in Life, did lend
Her Hand to bring him to his End:
When Age and Death called for the Score
No Surfeits were to reckon for.
Death tore not, therefore, but sans Strife
Gently untwin'd his Thread of Life.
R. CRASHAW.



This modest Stone, what few vain Marbles can,
May truly say, Here lies an honest Man.
A Poet, blessed beyond the Poet's Fate,
Whom Heaven kept sacred from the Proud and Great:
Foe to loud Praise, and Friend to learned Ease,
Content with Science in the Vale of Peace.
Calmly he looked on either Life, and Here
Saw nothing to regret, or There to fear;
From Nature's temperate Feast rose satisfied,
Thanked Heaven that he had Lived, and that he Died.
A. POPE.

To JABEZ HUGHES, Esquire
SIR,
I Have read over again your brother's play The Siege of Damascus, written by
John Hughes, Esquire who died Feb. 17, 1719, the first Night of it is Representation.
, with more concern and sorrow than I ever felt in the reading any Tragedy.

The real loss of a good man may be called a distress to the world, and ought
to affect us more than any feigned or ancient distress, how finely drawn soever.

I am glad of an Occasion to give you, under my Hand, this testimony, both how
excellent I think this work to be, and how excellent I thought the Author,

I am, etc. A. POPE.

To Mr Fortescue ( or Murray, Utrum horum, etc.) on the Circuit.
--
Sept. 17.
THE gayety of your letter proves you not so studious of Wealth as many of your
profession are, since you can derive matter of mirth from want of business. You
are none of those Lawyers who deserve the motto of the Devil, Circuit quaerens
quem devoret. But your Circuit will at least procure you one of the greatest of
temporal blessings, Health. What an advantageous circumstance is it, for one
that loves rambling so well, to be a grave and reputable rambler? while (like
your fellow Circuiteer, the Sun) you travel the round of the earth and behold
all the iniquities under the heavens? You are much a superior genius to me in
rambling; you like a Pigeon (to which I would sooner compare a Lawyer than to a
Hawk) can fly some hundred leagues at a pitch; I, like a poor Squirrel, am
continually in motion indeed, but it is about a cage of three foot: my little
excursions are but like those of a shopkeeper, who walks every day a mile or
two before his own door, but minds his business all the while, Your letter of
the Cause lately before you, I could not but communicate to some ladies of your
acquaintance. I am of opinion if you continued a correspondence of the same
sort during a whole Circuit, it could not fail to please the sex, better than
half the novels they read; there would be in them what they love above all
things, a most happy union of Truth and Scandal. I assure you the Bath affords
nothing equal to it: It is on the contrary full of grave and sad men, Mr Baron
S. Lord Chief Justice A. Judge P. and Counselor B. who has a large pimple on
the tip of his nose, but thinks it inconsistent with his gravity to wear a
patch, notwithstanding the precedent of an eminent Judge.

Yours, etc.

To the Duke of BUCKINGHAM.
[In answer to a Letter, in which he enclosed the Description of
Buckingham-house written by him to the D. of Shrewsbury.]
PLINY was one of those few authors who had a warm house over his head, nay,
two houses; as appears by two of his epistles. I believe if any of his
cotemporary authors durst have informed the public where they lodged, we should
have found the garrets of Rome as well inhabited as those of Fleetstreet; but
it is dangerous to let creditors into such a secret, therefore we may presume
that then as well as nowadays, no body knew where they lived but their
booksellers.

It seems, that when Virgil came to Rome, he had no lodgings at all: he first
introduced himself to Augustus by an epigram, beginning Noctle pluit tota -- an
observation which probably he had not made, unless he had lain all night in the
street.

Where Juvenal lived we cannot affirm, but in one of his satires he complains
of the excessive price of lodgings; neither do I think he would have talked so
feelingly of the shortness of Codrus's bed, if there had been room for a
bedfellow in it.

I believe, with all the ostentation of Pliny, he would have been glad to have
changed both his Houses for your Grace's one; which is a country house in the
summer, and a townhouse in the winter; and must be owned to be the properest
habitation for a wise man, who sees all the world change every season without
ever changing himself.

I have been reading the description of Pliny's house with an eye to yours, but
finding they will bear no comparison, will try if it can be matched by the
large country seat I inhabit at present, and see what figure it may make, by
the help of a florid description.

You must expect nothing regular in my description, any more than in the house;
the whole vast edifice is so disjointed, and the several parts of it so
detached one from the other, and yet so joining again, one cannot tell how,
that in one of my poetical fits I imagined it had been a village in Amphion's
time, where the cottages, having taken a country dance together, had been all
out, and stood stone still with amazement ever since.

You must excuse me if I say nothing of the Front, indeed I don't know which it
is? A stranger would be grievously disappointed who endeavored to get into
this house the right way. One would reasonably expect, after the entry through
the Porch, to be let into the Hall; alas nothing less! you find your self in
the house of office. From the parlour you think to step into the drawingroom,
but upon opening the iron-nail'd door, you are convinced by a flight of birds
about your ears and a cloud of dust in your eyes, that it is the Pigeon-house.
If you come into the chapel, you find it is altars like those of the Ancients,
continually smoking, but it is with the steams of the adjoining kitchen.

The great hall within is high and spacious, flanked on one side with a very
long table, atrue image of ancient hospitality: The walls are all over
ornamented with monstrous horns of animals, about twenty broken pikes, ten or a
dozen blunderbusses, and a rusty match-lock musket or two, which we were
informed had served in the civil wars. Here is a vast arched window beautifully
darkened with diverse scutchions of painted glass: one shining pane in
particular bears date 1286, which alone preserves the memory of a Knight whose
iron armor is long since perished with rust, and whose alabaster nose is
moulder'd from his monument. The face of dame Eleanor in another piece, owes
more to that single pane than to all the glasses she ever consulted in her
life. After this, who can say glass is frail, when it is not half so frail as
human beauty, or glory! and yet I cannot but sigh to think, that the most
authentic record of so ancient a Family should lie at the mercy of every boy
that flings a stone. In former days, there have dined in this hall garter'd
Knights, and courtly Dames, attended by Ushers, Sewers, and Senechals; and yet
it was but last night, that an Owl flew hither and mistook it for a barn.

This hall lets you (up and down) over a very high threshold into the great
parlour. It Is contents are a broken-belly'd virginal, a couple of cripled
velvet chairs, with two or three mil-dew'd pictures of moldy ancestors, who
look as dismally, as if they came fresh from hell with all their brimstone
about them. These are carefully set at the farther corner; for the windows
being every where broken, make it so convenient a place to dry poppies and
mustard seed, that the room is appropriated to that use.

Next this parlour, as I said before, lies the pigeon-house, by the side of
which runs an entry, which lets you on one hand or other into a bedchamber, a
buttery, and a small hole called the chaplain's study; then follow a brewhouse,
a little green and gilt parlour, and the great stairs, under which is the
dairy; a little farther on the right the servants hall, and by the side of it,
up six steps, the old Lady's closet for her private devotions, which has a
lettice into the hall; that at the same time she prayed, she might have an eye
on the men and maids. There are upon the ground-floor in all twenty six
apartments, among which I must not forget a chamber which has in it a large
antiquity of timber, that seems to have been either a bedstead or a cyder-press.

The Kitchen is built in form of a Rotunda, being one vast Vault to the top of
the roof; where the same aperture serves to let out the smoke and let in the
light. By the blackness of the walls, the circular fires, vast cauldrons,
yawning mouths of ovens and furnaces, you would think it either the forge of
Vulcan, the cave of Polypheme, or the temple of Moloch. The horror of this
place has made such an impression on the country people, that they believe the
Witches keep their Sabbath here, and that once a year the Devil treats them
with infernal venison, a roasted Tiger stuffed with ten-penny nails.

Above stairs we have a number of rooms, you never pass out of one into another
but by the ascent or descent of two or three stairs. Our best room is very long
and low, of the exact proportion of a Band-box. In most of these there are
hangings of the finest work in the world, that is to say, those which Arachne
spins from her own bowels: Were it not for this only furniture, the whole would
be a miserable scene of naked walls, flaw'd cielings, broken windows, and rusty
locks. The roof is so decayed, that after a favorable shower we may expect a
crop of mushrooms between the chinks of our floors. All the doors are as little
and low as those to the cabbins of packet boats. These rooms have for many
years had no other inhabitants than certain Rats whose very age renders them
worthy of this seat, for the very Rats of this venerable house are gray: since
these have not yet quitted it, we hope at least that this ancient mansion may
not fall during the small remnant the poor animals have to live, who are now
too infirm to remove to another. There is yet a small subsistence left them, in
the few remaining books of the library.

We had never seen half what I have described, but for a starched grey-headed
Steward, who is as much an antiquity as any in this place, and looks like an
old family picture walked out of it is frame. He entertained us as we passed
from room to room with several relations of the family; but his observations
were particularly curious when we came to the Cellar. He informed us where
stood the triple rows of buts of sack, and where were ranged the bottles of
tent, for toasts in a morning; he pointed to the stands that supported the
iron-hoop'd hogsheads of strong beer; then stepping to a corner, he lugg'd out
the tattered fragments of an unframed picture; "This (says he, with tears) was
poor Sir Thomas! once master of all this drink! He had two sons, poor young
masters! who never arrived to the age of his beer; they both fell ill in this
very room, and never went out on their own legs." He could not pass by a heap
of broken bottles without taking up a piece, to show us the Arms of the family
upon it. He then led us up the Tower by dark winding stone-steps, which landed
us into several little rooms one above another. One of these was nailed up, and
our guide whispered to us as a secret the occasion of it: It seems the course
of this noble blood was a little interrupted about two centuries ago, by a
freak of the lady Frances, who was here taken in the fact with a neighboring
Prior, ever since which the room has been nailed up, and branded with the name
of the Adultery-chamber. The ghost of lady Frances is supposed to walk there,
and some prying maids of the family report that they have seen a lady in a
fardingale through the keyhole; but this matter is hushed up, and the servants
are forbid to talk of it.

I must needs have tired you by this long description: but what engaged me in
it was a generous principle, to preserve the memory of that, which it self must
soon fall into dust, nay, perhaps part of it before this letter reaches your
hands.

Indeed we owe this old house the same kind of gratitude that we do to an old
friend, who harbors us in his declining condition, nay, even in his last
extremities. How fit is this retreat for uninterrupted study, where no one that
passes by can dream there is an inhabitant? and even those who would dine with
us dare not stay under our roof? Any one who sees it will own I could not have
chosen a more likely place to converse with the Dead. I had been to blame
indeed if I had left your Grace for any one but Homer. But when I return to the
living, I shall have the sense to endeavor to converse with some of the best
of 'em, and shall therefore as soon as possible tell you in person how much,

I am, etc.

To the Earl of OXFORD.
Oct. 21, 1721.
YOur Lordship may be surpised at the liberty I take in writing to you; though
you will allow me always to remember, that you once permitted me that honor,
in conjunction with some others who better dedeserv'd it. I hope you will not
wonder if I am still desirous to have you think me your grateful and faithful
servant; but I own I have an ambition yet farther to have others think me so,
which is the occasion I give your Lordship the trouble of this. Poor Parnell,
before he died, left me the charge of publishing these few remains of his: I
have a strong desire to make them, their author, and their publisher, more
considerable, by addressing and dedicating 'em all to you. There is a pleasure
in bearing testimony to Truth, and a vanity perhaps, which at least is as
excusable as any vanity can be. I beg you, my Lord, to allow me to gratify it,
in prefixing this paper of honest verses to the book. I send the book it self,
which I dare say you will receive more satisfaction in perusing, than you can
from any thing written upon the subject of your self. Therefore I am a good
deal in doubt, whether you will care for such an addition to it? All I shall
say for it is, that it is the only Dedication I ever writ, and shall be the only
one, whither you accept of it or not: for I will not bow the knee to a less man
than my Lord Oxford, and I expect to see no greater in my time.

After all, if your Lordship will tell my Lord Harley that I must not do this,
you may depend upon a suppression of these verses (the only copy whereof I send
you) but you never shall suppress that great, sincere, and entire respect, with
which I am always, my Lord,

Your, etc.

The Earl of OXFORD to Mr POPE.
Bramton Castle, Nov. 6, 1721.
I Received your packet, which could not but give me great pleasure, to see you
preserve an old friend in your memory; for it must needs be very agreeable to
be remembered by those we highly value. But then how much shame did it cause
me, when I read your very fine verses enclosed? My mind reproached me how far
short I came of what your great friendship and delicate pen would partially
describe me. You ask my consent to publish it: to what streights does this
reduce me? I look back indeed to those evenings I have usefully and pleasantly
spent, with Mr Pope, Mr Parnel, Dean Swift, the Doctor, etc. I should be glad
the world knew You admitted me to your friendship: And since your affection is
too hard for your judgment, I am contented to let the world know how well Mr
Pope can write upon a barren subject. I return you an exact Copy of the verses,
that I may keep the Original, as a testimony of the only Error you have been
guilty of. I hope very speedily to embrace you in London, and to assure you of
the particular esteem and friendship wherewith I am,

Your, etc. Oxford.

LETTERS OF Mr GAY and Mr POPE.
To Mr Fortescue.
F***.
Stanton Harcourt, Aug. 9, 1718.
THE only news you can expect to have from me here, is news from heaven, for I
am quite out of the world, and there is scarce any thing can reach me except
the noise of thunder, which undoubtedly you have heard too. We have read in old
authors, of high towers levelled by it to the ground, while the humble valleys
have escaped: the only thing that is proof against it is the Laurel, which
however I take to be no great security to the brains of modern authors. But to
let you see that the contrary to this often happens, I must acquaint you that
the highest and most extravagant heap of towers in the universe, which is in
this neighborhood, stands still undefac'd, while a cock of barley in our next
field has been consumed to ashes. Would to God that this heap of harley had
been all that had perished! for unhappily beneath this little shelter sat two
much more constant Lovers than ever were found in Romance under the shade of a
beech-tree. John Hewet was a well-set man of about five and twenty; Sarah Drew
might be rather called comely than beautiful, and was about the same age: They
had passed through the various labors of the year together with the greatest
satisfaction; if she milk'd, 'twas his morning and evening care to bring the
cows to her hand; it was but last fair that he bought her a present of green
silk for her straw hat, and the posie on her silver ring was of his choosing.
Their love was the talk of the whole neighborhood; for scandal never affirmed
that they had any other views than the lawful possession of each other in
marriage. It was that very morning that he had obtained the consent of her
parents, and it was but till the next week that they were to wait to be happy.
Perhaps in the intervals of their work they were now talking of the wedding
clothes, and John was suiting several sorts of poppy's and field flowers to her
complexion, to choose her a knot for the wedding day. While they were thus
busied, (it was on the last of July between two or three in the afternoon) the
clouds grew black, and such a storm of lightning and thunder ensued, that all
the laborers made the best of their way to what shelter the trees and hedges
afforded. Sarah was frightened, and fell down in a swoon on a heap of barley.
John, who never separated from her, sat down by her side, having raked
together two or three heaps the better to secure her from the storm.
Immediately there was heard so loud a crack, as if heaven had split asunder;
every one was solicitous for the safety of his neighbor, and called to one
another throughout the field. No answer being returned to those who called to
our Lovers, they stepped to the place where they lay; they perceived the barley
all in a smoke, and then spied this faithful pair; John with one arm about
Sarah's neck, and the other held over her, as to skreen her from the lightning.
They were both struck dead in this tender posture. Sarah's left eye-brow was
singed, and there appeared a black spot on her breast; her Lover was all over
black, but not the least signs of life were found in either. Attended by their
melancholy companions, they were conveyed to the town, and the next day
interred in Stanton-Harcourt Churchyard. My Lord Harcourt, at Mr Pope's and my
request, has caused a stone to be placed over them, upon condition that we
should furnish the Epitaph, which is as follows; When Eastern lovers feed the
funeral fire,
On the same pile the faithful fair expire;
Here pitying heaven that virtue mutual found,
And blasted both, that it might neither wound.
Hearts so sincere the Almighty saw well pleased.
Sent his own lightning, and the Victims seized.


But my Lord is apprehensive the country people will not understand this, and
Mr Pope says he will make one with something of Scripture in it, and with as
little poetry as Hopkins and Sternhold. See the Epitaph which is erected to
their Memory in Literary Correspondence, Vol. II. page 147.


Yours, etc.

Mr GAY to Mr POPE.
Aug. 2, 1728.
'TWAS two or three weeks ago that I writ you a letter: I might indeed have
done it sooner; I thought of you every post-day upon that account, and every
other day upon some account or other. I must beg you to give Mrs Blount my
sincere thanks for her kind way of thinking of me, which I have heard of more
than once from our friend at court, who seemed in the letter she writ to be in
high health and spirits. Considering the multiplicity of pleasures and delights
that one is overrun with in those places, I wonder how any body has health
and spirits enough to support 'em: I am heartily glad she has, and whenever I
hear so, I find it contributes to mine. You see I am not free from Dependence,
though I have less Attendance than I had formerly; for a great deal of my own
welfare still depends upon hers. Is the widow's house to be disposed of yet? I
have not given up my pretensions to the Dean; if it was to be parted with, I
wish one of us had it: I hope you wish so too, and that Mrs Blount and Mrs
Howard wish the same, and for the very same reason that I wish it. All I could
hear of you of late has been by advertisements in newspapers, by which one
would think the race of Curls was multiplied; and by the indignation such
fellows show against you, that you have more merit than any body alive could
have. Homer himself has not been worse used by the French. I am to tell you
that the Duchess makes you her compliments, and is always inclined to like any
thing you do; that Mr Congreve admires with me your fortitude; and loves, not
envies your performances, for we are not Dunces. Adieu.

Mr POPE to Mr GAY.
Oct. 1730.
IT is true that I write to you very seldom, and have no pretense of writing
which satisfies me, because I have nothing to say that can give you much
pleasure: only that I am in being, which in truth is of little consequence to
one from whose conversation I am cut off, by such accidents or engagements as
separate us. I continue, and ever shall, to wish you all good and happiness. I
wish that some lucky event might set you in a state of ease and independency
all at once, and that I might live to see you as happy, as this silly world and
fortune can make any one. Are we never to live together more, as once we did? I
find my life ebbing apace, and my affections strengthening as my Age increases:
not that I am worse, but better, in my health than last winter: but my mind
finds no amendment, nor improvement, nor support to lean upon from those about
me: and so I feel my self leaving the world, as fast as it leaves me.
Companions I have enough, friends few, but those too warm in the concerns of
the world for me to keep pace with; or else so divided from me, that they are
but like the dead whose remembrance I hold in honor. Nature, temper, and
habit, from my youth made me have but one strong desire; all other Ambitions,
my person, education, constitution, religion, etc. conspired to remove far from
me: That desire was to fix and preserve a few lasting, dependable friendships:
and the accidents which have disappointed me in it, have put a period to all my
aims. So I am sunk into an idleness, which makes me neither care nor labor to
be notic'd by the rest of mankind. I propose no rewards to my self, and why
should I take any sort of pains? here I sit and sleep, and probably here I
shall sleep till I sleep for ever, like the old man of Verona. I hear of what
passes in the busy world with so little attention, that I forget it the next
day: and as to the learned world, there is nothing passes in it. I have no more
to add, but that I am with the same truth as ever,

Yours, etc.

To the same.
Oct. 23, 1730.
YOur letter is a very kind one, but I cannot say so pleasing to me as many of
yours have been, through the account you give of the dejection of your spirits. I
wish the too constant use of water does not contribute to it; I find Dr
Arbuthnot and another very knowing physician of that opinion. I also wish you
were not so totally immersed in the country. I hope your return to Town will be
a prevalent remedy against the evil of too much recollection. I wish it partly
for my own sake: We have lived little together of late, and we want to be
physicians to one another. It was a remedy that agreed very well with us both,
for many years, and I fancy our constitutions would mend upon the old medicine
of Studiorum similitudo, etc. I believe we both of us want whetting; there are
several here who will do you that good office, merely for the love of wit,
which seems to be bidding the town a long and last adieu. I can tell you of no
one thing worth reading, or seeing; the whole age seems resolved to justify the
Dunciad, and it may stand for a public Epitapth or monumental Inscription, like
that at Thermopylae, on a whole people perished! There may indeed be a Wooden
image or two of Poetry set up, to preserve the memory that there once were
Bards in Britain; and (like the Giants at Guildhall) show the bulk and bad
taste of our ancestors: At present the poet Laureat and Stephen Duck serve for
this purpose; a drunken sot of a Parson holds forth the emblem of Inspiration,
and an honest industrious Thresher not unaptly represents Pains and Labor. I
hope this Phenomenon of Wiltshire has appeared at Amesbury, or the Duchess
will be thought insensible to all bright qualities and exalted genius's, in
Court and Country alike. But he is a harmless man, and therefore I am glad.

This is all the news talked of at court, but it will please you better to hear
that Mrs Howard talks of you, though not in the same breath with the Thresher, as
they do of me. By the way, have you seen or conversed with Mr Chubb, who is a
wonderful Phenomenon of Wiltshire? I have read through his whole volume with
admiration of the writer: though not always with approbation of the doctrine. I
have past just three days in London in four months, two at Windsor, half an one
at Richmond, and have not taken one excursion into any other country. Judge now
whether I can live in my library? adieu. Live mindful of one of your first
friends, who will be so to the last. Mrs Blount deserves your remembrance, for
she never forgets you, and wants nothing of being a friend.

I beg the Duke's and her Grace's acceptance of my services: the contentment
you express in their company pleases me, though it be the bar to my own, in
dividing you from us. I am ever very truly,

Your, etc.

To the same.
Oct. 2, 1732.
SIR Clem. Cottrell tells me you will shortly come to town. We begin to want
comfort, in a few friends about us, while the winds whistle, and the waters
roar. The sun gives us a parting look, but it is but a cold one; we are ready to
change those distant favors of a lofty beauty, for a gross material fire that
warms and comforts more. I wish you could be here 'till your family come to
town: you will live more innocently, and kill fewer harmless creatures; nay none,
except by your proper deputy, the butcher. It is fit for conscience sake, that
you should come to town, and that the Duchess should stay in the country, where
no innocents of another species may suffer by her. I hope she never goes to
church: the Duke should lock you both up, and less harm would be done. I advise
you to make Man your game, hunt and beat about here for coxcombs, and truss up
Rogues in Satire: I fancy they will turn to a good account, if you can produce
them fresh, or make them keep: and their Relations will come, and buy their
bodies of you.

The death of Wilks leaves Cibber without a colleague, absolute and perpetual
Dictator of the stage; though indeed while he lived, he was but as Bibulus to
Caesar. However Ambition finds something to be gratified with, in a mere name;
or else, God have mercy upon poor Ambition! Here is a dead vacation at present,
no politics at court, no trade in town, nothing stirring but poetry. Every man,
and every boy, is writing verses on the Royal Hermitage: I hear the Queen is at
a loss which to prefer, but for my own part, I like none so well as Mr Poyntz's
in Latin. You would oblige my Lady Suffolk if you tried your muse on this
occasion: I am sure I would do as much for the Duchess of Queensberry, if she
desired it. Several of your friends assure me it is expected from you: one
should not bear in mind all one's life, any little indignity received from a
Court; and therefore I Am in hopes neither her Grace will hinder you, nor you
decline it.

The volume of Swift and Pope's Miscellanies, Vol. IV.
Miscellanies is just published, which concludes all our fooleries of that
kind. All your friends remember you, and I assure you no one more than,

Yours, etc.

Mr GAY to Mr POPE.
Oct. 7, 1732.
I Am at last returned from my Somersetshire expedition, but since my return I
cannot so much boast of my health as before I went, for I am frequently out of
order with my colical complaints, so as to make me uneasy and dispirited,
though not to any violent degree. The reception we met with, and the little
excursions we made were every way agreeable. I think the country abounds with
beautiful prospects. Sir William Wyndham is at present amusing himself with
some real improvements, and a great many visionary castles. We were often
entertained with sea views and sea fish, and were at some places in the
neighborhood, among which I was mightily pleased with Dunster Castle near
Minehead: It stands upon a great eminence, and has a prospect of that town,
with an extensive view of the Bristol Channel; in which are seen two small
Islands, called the steep Holms and flat Holms, and on the other side we could
plainly distinguish the divisions of fields on the Welsh coast. All this
journey I performed on horseback, and I am very much disappointed that at
present I feel my self so little the better for it. I have indeed followed
riding and exercise for three months successively, and really think I was as
well without it: so that I begin to fear the illness I have so long and so
often complained of is inherent in my constitution, and that I have nothing for
it but patience.

As to your advice about writing Panegyric, it is what I have not frequently
done. I have indeed done it sometimes against my judgment and inclination, and
I heartily repent of it. And at present as I have no desire of reward, and see
no just reason of praise, I think I had better let it alone. There are
flatterers good enough to be found, and I would not interfere in any
Gentleman's profession. I have seen no verses upon these sublime occasions, so
that I have no emulation. Let the Patrons enjoy the Authors and the Authors
their Patrons, for I know my self unworthy.

I am, etc.

Mr POPE to Mr GAY.
Cirencester.
IT is a true saying that misfortunes alone prove one's friendships, they show
us not only other peoples for us, but our own for them. We hardly know our
selves any otherwise. I feel my being forced to this Bath-journey as a
misfortune; and to follow my own welfare preferably to those I love, is indeed
a new thing to me: my health has not usually got the better of my tendernesses
and affections. I set out with a heavy heart, wishing I had done this thing the
last season; for every day I defer it, the more I am in danger of that accident
which I dread the most, my Mother's death (especially should it happen while I
am away.) And another Reflection pains me, that I have never since I knew you
been so long separated from you, as I now must be. Methinks we live to be more
and more strangers, and every year teaches you to live without me: This absence
may, I fear, make my return less welcome and less wanted to you, than once it
seemed, even after but a fortnight. Time ought not in reason to diminish
friendship, when it confirms the truth of it by experience.

The journey has a good deal disordered me, notwithstanding my resting place at
Lord Bathurst's. My Lord is too much for me, he walks and is in spirits all day
long: I rejoice to see him so. It is a right distinction, that I am happier in
seeing my friends so many degrees above me, be it fortune, health, or
pleasures, than I can be in sharing either with them: for in these sort of
enjoyments I cannot keep pace with 'em: any more than I can walk with a
stronger man. I wonder to find I am a companion for none but old men, and
forget that I am not a young fellow my self. The worst is, that reading and
writing which I have still the greatest relish for, are growing painful to my
eyes. But if I can preserve the good opinion of one or two friends, to such a
degree, as to have their indulgence to my weaknesses, I will not complain of
life: And if I could live to see you consult your ease and quiet, by becoming
independent on those who will never help you to either, I doubt not of finding
the latter part of my life pleasanter than the former, or present. My
uneasinesses of mind is in your regard. You have a temper that would make you
easy and beloved, (which is all the happiness one needs to wish in this world)
and content with moderate things. All your point is not to lose that Temper by
sacrificing your self to others, out of a mistaken tenderness which hurts you,
and profits not them. And this you must do soon, or it will be too late: Habit
will make it as hard for you to live independent, as for L -- to live out of a
Court.

You must excuse me for observing what I think any defect in you: You grow too
indolent, and give things up too easily: which would be otherwise, when you
found and felt your self your own: Spirits would come in, as ill-usage went
out. While you live under a kind of perpetual dejection and oppression, nothing
at all belongs to you, not your own Humor, nor your own Sense.

You cannot conceive how much you would find resolution rise, and cheerfulness
grow upon you, if you would once try to live independent for two or three months. I
never think tenderly of you but this comes across me, and therefore excuse my
repeating it, for whenever I do not, I dissemble half that I think of you:
Adieu, pray write, and be particular about your health.

To --
YOur letter dated at nine a clock on Tuesday (night as I suppose) has sunk me
quite. Yesterday I hoped; and yesterday I sent you a line or two for our poor
friend Gay, enclosed in a few words to you; about twelve or one a clock you
should have had it. I am troubled about that, though the present cause of our
trouble be so much greater. Mr Gay died 1732, aged 46.
Indeed I want a friend, to help me to bear it better. We want each other. I
bear a hearty share with Mrs Howard, who has lost a man of a most honest heart:
so honest an one, that I wish her Master had none less honest about him. The
world after all is a little pitiful thing; not performing any one promise it
makes us, for the future, and every day taking away and annulling the joys of
the past. Let us comfort one another, and, if possible, study to add as much
more friendship to each other, as death has deprived us of in him: I promise
you more and more of mine, which will be the way to deserve more and more of
yours.

I purposely avoid saying more. The subject is beyond writing upon, beyond cure
or ease by reason or reflection, beyond all but one thought, that it is the
will of God.

So will the death of my Mother be! which now I tremble at, now resign to, now
bring close to me, now set farther off: Every day alters, turns me about, and
confuses my whole frame of mind. Her dangerous distemper is again returned, her
fever coming onward again, though less in pain; for which last however I thank
God.

I am unfeignedly tired of the world, and receive nothing to be called a
pleasure in it, equivalent to countervail either the death of one I have so
long lived with, or the loss of one I have so long lived for. I have nothing
left but to turn my thoughts to one comfort; the last we usually think of, though
the only one we should in wisdom depend upon, in such a disappointing place as
this. I sit in her room, and she is always present before me, but when I sleep.
I wonder I am so well: I have shed many tears, but now I weep at nothing. I
would above all things see you, and think it would comfort you to see me so
equal-temper'd and so quiet. But pray dine here: you may, and she know nothing
of it; for she dozes much, and we tell her of no earthly thing lest it run in
her mind, which often trifles have done. If Mr Bethel had time, I wish he were
your companion hither. Be as much as you can with each other: Be assured I love
you both, and be farther assured, that friendship will increase as I live on.

LETTERS Between the EARL of PETERBOROW, Mr POPE, Dean SWIFT, etc.
Aug. 24, 1728. My Lord,
I Presume you may before this time be returned from the contemplation of many
Beauties animal and vegetable in Gardens; and possibly some rational in Ladies;
to the better enjoyment of your own at Bevis-Mount. I hope, and believe, all
you have seen will only contribute to it. I am not so fond of making
compliments to Ladies as I was twenty years ago, or I would say there are some
very reasonable, and one in particular there. I think you happy, my Lord, in
being at least half the year almost as much your own master as I am mine the
whole year: and with all the disadvantageous encumbrance of quality, parts, and
honor, as mere a gardener, loyterer, and labourer, as he who never had Titles,
or from whom they are taken. I have an eye in the last of these glorious
appellations to the style of a Lord Bolingbroke.
degraded or attainted: methinks they give him a better title than they deprive
him of, in calling him Labourer: Agricultura, says Tully, proxima Sapientiae,
which is more than can be said by most modern Nobility of Grace or Right
Honorable, which are often proxima Stultitiae. The great Turk, you know, is
often a Gardener, or of a meaner trade: and are there not (my Lord) some
circumstances in which you would resemble the great Turk? The two Paradises are
not ill connected, of Gardens and Gallantry; and some there are (not to name my
Lord Bolingbroke) who pretend they are both to be had, even in this life,
without turning Musselmen.

We have as little politics here within a few miles of the Court (nay perhaps
at the Court) as you at Southampton; and our Ministers I dare say have less to
do. Our weekly histories are only full of feasts given to the Queen and Royal
Family by their servants, and the long and laborious walks her majesty takes
every morning. Yet if the graver Historians hereafter shall be silent of this
year's events, the amorous and anecdotical may make posterity some amends, by
being furnished with the gallantries of the Great at home; and it is some
comfort, that if the Men of the next age do not read of us, the Women may.

From the time you have been absent, I Have not been to wait on a certain great
man, through modesty, through idleness, and through respect. But for my comfort I
fancy, that any great man will as soon forget one that does him no harm, as he
can one that has done him any good. Believe me my Lord,

Yours, etc. A. POPE.

From the Earl of PETERBOROW.
I Must confess that in going to Lord Cobham's, I was not led by curiosity. I
went thither to see what I had seen, and what I was sure to like.

I had the idea of those gardens so fixed in my imagination by many
descriptions, that nothing surprised me; Immensiy, and Van Brugh appear in the
whole, and in every part. Your joining in your letter animal and vegetable
beauty, makes me use this expression, I confess the stately Sacharissa at Stow,
but am content with my little Amoret.

I thought you indeed more knowing upon the subject, and wonder at your
mistake: why will you imagine women insensible to Praise, much less to yours? I
have seen them more than once turn from their Lover to their Flatterer. I am
sure the Farmeress at Bevis in her highest mortifications, in the middle of her
Lent, would feel emotions of vanity, if she knew you gave her the character of
a reasonabe woman.

You have been guilty again of another mistake which hindered me showing your
letter to a friend: when you join two ladies in the same compliment, though you
gave to both the beauty of Venus and the wit of Minerva, you would please
neither.

If you had put me into the Dunciad, I could not have been more disposed to
criticize your letter. What, Sir, do you bring it in as a reproach, or as a
thing uncommon to a Court, to be without politics? With politics indeed the
Richlieu's and such folks have brought about great things in former days: but
what are they, Sir, who without policy in our times can make ten treaties in a
year, and secure everlasting Peace?

I can no longer disagree with you, though in jest. O how heartily I join with
you in your contempt for Excellency and Grace, and in your Esteem of that most
noble title, Loiterer: If I were a man of many plums A modern Cant Term for a
100,000 l. Man.
, and a good heathen, I would dedicate a Temple to Laziness; No man sure could
blame my choice of such a Deity, who considers, that when I have been fool
enough to take pains, I always met with some wise man able to undo my labors.

Yours, etc.

Mr POPE to the Earl of PETERBOROW.
YOU were in a very Polemic humor when you did me the honor to answer my
last. I always understood, like a true controvertist, that to answer is only to
cavil and quarrel: however I forgive you; you did it (as all Polemics do) to
show your parts. Else was it not very vexatious, to deny me to commend two
women at a time? It is true my Lord, you know women, as well as men: but since
you certainly love them better, why are you so uncharitable in your opinion of
them? surely one lady may allow another to have the thing she herself least
values, Reason, when Beauty is uncontested? Venus her self could allow Minerva
to be Goddess of Wit, when Paris gave her the apple (as the fool her self
thought) on a better account. I do say, that Lady P* is a reasonable woman; and
I think she will not take it amiss, if I should insist upon Esteeming her,
instead of Toasting her like a silly thing I could name, who is the Venus of
these days. I see you had forgot my letter, or would not let her know how much
I thought of her in this reasonable way: but I have been kinder to you, and
have shown your letter to one who would take it heartily.

But for God's sake, what have you said about Politicians? you made me a great
compliment in the trust you reposed in my prudence, or what mischief might not
I have done you with some that affect that denomination? Your Lordship might as
safely have spoken of Heroes. What a bluster would the God of the winds have
made, had one that we know puffed against Aeolus, or, (like Xerxes) whipped the
seas? They had dialogued it in the language of the Rehearsal, I Will give him
flash for flash --
I Will give him dash for dash --
But all now is safe; the Poets are preparing songs of joy, and Halcyon-days
are the word.

I hope my Lord, it will not be long before your dutiful affection brings you
to town. I fear it will a little raise your envy to find all the Muses employed
in celebrating a Royal work, which your own partiality will think inferior to
Bevis-Mount. But if you have any inclination to be even with them, you need but
put three or four Wits into any hole in your Garden, and they will out-rhyme
all Eaton and Westminster. I think Swift, Gay, and I, could undertake it, if
you don't think our Heads too expensive: but the same hand that did the others,
will do them as cheap. If all else should fail, you are sure at least of the
head, hand, and heart of your servant.

Why should you fear any disagreeable news to reach us at Mount Bevis? Do as I
do, even within ten miles of London, let no news whatever come near you. As to
public affairs we never knew a deader season: it is all silent, deep
tranquillity. Indeed they say it is sometimes so just before an Earthquake. But
whatever happens, cannot we observe the wise neutrality of the Dutch, and let
all about us fall by the ears. Or if you, my Lord, should be pricked on by any
old-fashioned notions of Honor and Romance, and think it necessary for the
General of the Marines to be in action, when our Fleets are in motion; meet
them at Spit-head, and take me along with you I decline no danger where the
glory of Great Britain is concerned; and will contribute to empty the largest
bowl of punch that shall be rigged out on such an occasion. Adieu, my Lord, and
may as many Years attend you as may be happy and honorable!

From the Earl of PETERBOROW.
YOU must receive my letters with a just impartiality, and give grains of
allowance for a gloomy or rainy day; I sink grievously with the weather-glass,
and am quite spiritless when oppressed with the thoughts of a Birthday or a
Return.

Dutiful affection was bringing me to town, but undutiful laziness, and being
much out of order, keep me in the country; however if alive, I must make my
appearance at the Birthday. Where you showed one letter you may show the
other; she that never was wanting in any good office in her power, will make a
proper excuse, where a sin of Omission, I fear, is not reckoned as a venial sin.

I consent you shall call me Polemic, or associate me to any Sect or
Corporation, provided you do not join me to the Charitable Rogues, or to the
Pacific Politicians of the present age. I have read over Barkley's Apology for
the Quakers.
Barclay in vain, and find, after a stroke given on the left, I cannot offer
the right cheek for another blow: all I can bring my self to, is to bear
mortification from the Fair sex with patience.

You seem to think it vexatious that I should allow you but one woman at a
time, either to praise, or love. If I dispute with you upon this point, I doubt
every jury will give a verdict against me: so Sir, with a Mohammedan indulgence,
I allow you Pluralities, the favorite privilege of our church.

I find you do not mend upon correction; again I tell you, you must not think
of women in a reasonable way: You know we always make Goddesses of those we
adore upon earth, and do not all the good men tell us, we must lay aside Reason
in what relates to the Deity.

It Is well the Poets are preparing songs of joy, it is well to lay in antidotes
of soft rhyme, against the rough prose they may chance to meet with at
Westminster. I should have been glad of any thing of Swift's, pray when you
write to him next, tell him I expect him with impatience, in a place as odd,
and as much out of the way, as himself,

Yours, etc.

From the same.
WHenever you apply as a good Papist to your female Mediatrix, you are sure of
success; but there is not a full assurance of your entire submission to
Motherchurch, and that abates a little of your authority. However if you will
accept of country letters, she will correspond from the haycock, and I will
write to you upon the side of my wheelbarrow: surely such letters might escape
examination!

Your Idea of the golden Age is, that every shepherd might pipe where he
pleased. As I have lived longer, I am more moderate in my wishes, and would be
content with the liberty of not piping where I am not pleased.

O how I wish, to my self and my friends, a freedom which Fate seldom allows,
and which we often refuse our selves! why is our Shepherdess in voluntary
slavery? why must our Dean submit to the Color of his coat, and live absent
from us? and why are you confined to what you cannot relieve?

I seldom venture to give accounts of my journeys beforehand, because I take
resolutions of going to London, and keep them no better than quarrelling lovers
do theirs. But the devil will drive me thither about the middle of next month,
and I will call upon You, to be sprinkled with holy water, before I enter the
place of Corruption,

Your, etc.

From the same.
1732.
I Am under the greatest impatience to see Dr Swift at Bevis-Mount, and must
signify my mind to him by another hand, it not being permitted me to hold
correspondence with the said Dean, for no letter of mine can come to his hands.

And whereas it is apparent, in this protestant land most especially under the
care of divine providence, that nothing can succeed or come to a happy issue
but by Bribery; therefore let me know what he expects to comply with my
desires, and it shall be remitted unto him.

For though I would not corrupt any man for the whole world, yet a benevolence
may be given without any offense to conscience; every one must confess that
gratification and corruption are two distinct terms; nay, at worst many good
men hold, that for a good end some very naughty measures may be made use of.

But Sir, I must give you some good news in relation to my self, because I know
you wish me well; I am cured of some diseases in my old age, which tormented me
very much in my youth,

I was possessed with violent and uneasy passions, such as a peevish concern for
Truth, and a saucy love for my Country.

When a Christian Priest preached against the Spirit of the Gospel, when an
English Judge determined against Magna Charta, when the Minister acted against
common-Sense, I used to fret.

Now Sir, let what will happen, I keep my self in temper: As I have no
flattering hopes, so I banish all useless fears: but as things of this world, I
find my self in a condition beyond expectation; it being evident from a late
Parliamentary enquiry, that I have as much ready money, as much in the funds,
and as great a personal estate, as Sir Robert S-tt-n.

If the Translator of Homer find fault with this unheroic disposition, or what
I more fear, if the Draper of Ireland accuse the Englishman of want of spirit;
I silence you both with one line out of your own Horace, Quid te exempta juvat
spinis e pluribus una? For I take the whole to be so corrupted, that a cure in
any part would be of little avail.

Yours, etc.

From Dean SWIFT to the Earl of PETERBOROW.
My Lord,
I Never knew or heard of any person so volatile and so fixed as your Lordship:
You, while your imagination is carrying you through every corner of the world
where you have, or have not been, can at the same time remember to do offices
of favor and kindness to the meanest of your friends; and in all the scenes
you have passed, have not been able to attain that one quality peculiar to a
great man, of forgetting every thing but injuries. Of this I am a living
witness against you, for being the most insignificant of all your old humble
servants, you were so cruel as never to give me time to ask a favor, but
prevented me in doing whatever you thought I desired, or could be for my credit
or advantage.

I have often admired at the capriciousness of fortune, in regard to your
Lordship. She has forced Courts to act against their oldest, and most constant
maxims; to make you a General, because you had courage and conduct; an
Ambassador, because you had wisdom and knowledge in the interests of Europe;
and an Admiral, on account of your skill in maritime affairs, whereas according
to the usual method of Court proceedings, I should have been at the head of the
Army, and you of the church, or rather a Curate under the Dean of St Patrick's.

The Archbishop of Dublin laments that he did not see your Lordship till he
was just upon the point of leaving the Bath; I pray God you may have found
success in that journey, else I shall continue to think there is a fatality in
all your Lordship's undertakings, which only terminate in your own honor, and
the good of the public, without the least advantage to your health or fortune.

I remember Lord Oxford's Ministry used to tell me, that not knowing where to
write to you, they were forced to write at you. It is so with me, for you are
in one thing an Evangelical man, that you know not where to lay your head, and
I think you have no house. Pray my Lord write to me, that I may have the
pleasure in this scoundrel-country, of going about, and showing my depending
Parsons a letter from the Earl of Peterborow,

I am, etc.

To Lord BATHURST.
Sept. 23.
I Believe you are by this time immersed in your vast Wood; and one may address
to you as to a very abstracted person, like Alexander Selkirk, or the The Title
of an Arabic Treatise of the Life of Hai Ebn Yocktan.
Self-taught Philosopher. I should be very curious to know what sort of
contemplations employ you? I remember the latter of those I mentioned, gave
himself up to a devout exercise of making his head giddy with various
circumrotations, to imitate the motions of the celestial bodies. I don't think
it at all impossible that Mr L* may be far advanced in that exercise, by
frequent turns toward the several aspects of the heavens, to which you may have
been pleased to direct him in search of prospects and new avenues. He will be
tractable in time as birds are tamed by being whirled about; and doubtless come
not to despise the meanest shrubs or coppice-wood, (though naturally he seems
more inclined to admire God in his greater works, the tall timber: for as
Virgil has it, Non omnes arbusta juvant, humilesque myricae.) I wish my self
with you both, whether you are in peace or at war, in violent argumentation or
smooth consent, over Gazettes in the morning, or over Plans in the evening. In
that last article, I am of opinion your Lordship has a loss of me; for
generally after the debate of a whole day, we acquiesc'd at night in the best
conclusion of which human reason seems capable in all great matters, to fall
fast asleep! And so we ended, unless immediate Revelation (which ever must
overcome human reason) suggested some new lights to us, in a Vision in Bed. But
laying aside Theory, I am told you are going directly to Practice. Alas, what a
Fall will that be? A new Building is like a new Church, when once it is set up,
you must maintain it in all the forms, and with all the inconveniences; then
cease the pleasant luminous days of inspiration, and there is an end of miracles
at once.

That this Letter may be all of a piece, I Will fill the rest with an account of
a consultation lately held in my neighborhood, about designing a princely
garden. The Royal Gardens at Richmond.
Several Critics were of several opinions: One declared he would not have too
much Art in it; for my notion (said he) of gardening is, that it is only
sweeping Nature: Another told them that Gravel walks were not of a good taste,
for all the finest abroad were of loose sand: A third advised peremptorily
there should not be one Lyme-tree in the whole plantation; a fourth made the
same exclusive clause extend to Horse-chesnuts, which he affirmed not to be
Trees, but Weeds; Dutch Elms were condemned by a fifth; and thus about half the
Trees were proscribed, contrary to the Paradise of God's own planting, which is
expressly said to be planted with all trees. There were some who could not bear
Ever-greens, and called them Never-greens; some, who were angry at them only
when cut into Shapes, and gave the modern Gardeners the name of Ever-green
Tailors; some who had no dislike to Cones and Cubes, but would have 'em cut in
Forest-trees; and some, who were in a passion against any thing in shape, even
against clipped Hedges, which they called Green Walls. These (my Lord) are our
Men of Taste, who pretend to prove it by tasting little or nothing: Sure such a
Taste is like such a Stomach, not a good one, but a weak one. We have the same
sort of Critics in Poetry; one is fond of nothing but Heroics, another cannot
relish Tragedies, another hates Pastorals, all little Wits delight in Epigrams.
Will you give me leave to add, we have the same in Divinity; where many leading
Critics are for rooting up more than they plant, and would leave the Lord's
vineyard either very thinly furnished, or very oddly trimmed.

I have lately been with my Lord Alludes to the Letter the Duke of Chandos
wrote to Mr Pope on this Occasion.
who is a zealous, yet charitable Planter, and has so bad a Taste, as to like
all that is good. He has a disposition to wait on you in his way to the Bath,
and if he can go and return to London in eight or ten days, I am not without a
hope of seeing your Lordship with the delight I always see you. Every where I
think of you, and every where I wish for you,

I am, etc.

LETTERS TO and FROM SEVERAL PERSONS.
Sir WILLIAM TRUMBULL to Mr POPE.
Oct. 19, 1705.
I Return you the book you were pleased to lend me, and with it your obliging
letter, which deserves my particular acknowledgments; for next, to the pleasure
of enjoying the company of so good a friend, the welcomest thing to me is to
hear from him. I expected to find, what I have met with, an admirable genius in
those poems, not only because they were Milton's LYCIDAS. L'Allegro. II
Penseroso. The Masque of COMUS, 1634.
, or were approved by Sir Henry Wotton, but because you had commended them; and
give me leave to tell you, that I know no body so like to equal him, even at
the age he wrote most of them, as your self. Only do not afford more cause of
complaints against you, that you suffer nothing of yours to come abroad; which
in this age, wherein wit and true sense is more scarce than money, is a piece
of such cruelty as your friends can hardly pardon. I hope you will repent and
amend; I could offer many reasons to this purpose, and such as you cannot
answer with any sincerity; but that I dare not enlarge, for fear of engaging in
a style of compliment, which has been so abused by fools and knaves, that it is
become almost scandalous. I conclude therefore with an assurance which shall
never vary,

Of my being ever, etc. W. TRUMBULL.

Sir WILLIAM TRUMBULL, died at Easthampstead in Berkshire, 1716, where he has
erected the following Epitaph to his Memory.
A Pleasing Form; a firm, yet cautious Mind,
Sincere, though prudent, constant, yet resigned;
Honor unchanged, a Principle professed,
Fixed to one side, but moderate to the rest:
An honest Courtier, yet a Patriot too,
Just to his Prince, and to his Country true.
Filled with the Sense of Age, the Fire of Youth,
A scorn of wrangling, yet a Zeal for Truth,
A generous Faith, from Superstition free;
A Love to Peace, and hate of Tyranny;
Such this Man was; who now from Earth removed,
At length enjoys that Liberty he loved.
An Imitation of MARTIAL's Epigram on ANTONIUS PRIMUS (referred to in a Letter
from Sir WILLIAM TRUMBULL, Jan. 19, 1715-6) Literary Corresp. VOL. I. Octavo,
page 110.
Jam numerat placido felix ANTONIUS avo, etc.

AT length my Friend (while Time with still career
Wafts on his gentle wing his Eightieth year)
Sees his past Days safe out of Fortune's Power,
Nor dreads approaching Fate's uncertain hour;
Reviews his Life, and in the strict Survey
Finds not one Moment he could wish away;
Pleased with the Series of each happy Day.
Such, such a Man extends his Life's short space
And from the Goal again reviews the Race:
For he lives twice, who can at once employ,
The present well, and even the past enjoy.
An Additional passage to a Letter, to Mr BLOUNT, Sept. 8, 1717, Literary
Corresp. VOL. I. Octavo, page 168.
"I have been lately reading Jeffery of Monmouth, in the translation of a
Clergyman in my neighborhood. He wanted my help to versify the Prayer of
BRUTUS, made when he was much in our circumstances As Papists.
, inquiring in what land to set up his Seat, and worship like his Fathers."

GOddess of Woods, tremendous in the Chase,
To Mountain Wolves and all the savage Race,
Wide over th'aerial Vault extend thy sway,
And over the infernal Regions void of Day,
On thy Third Reign look down; disclose our Fate,
In what new Nation shall we fix our Seat?
When shall we next thy hallowed Altars raise,
And Choirs of Virgins celebrate thy Praise?
N.B. In this Letter Mr Pope has omitted one of the late Earl of OXFORD's
Political Apophthegms.

To a LADY Abroad.
Madam,
I Can never have too many of your letters. I am angry at every scrap of paper
lost, and though it is but an odd compliment to compare a fine Lady to a Sybil,
your leaves methinks like hers are too good to be committed to the winds, though
I have no other way of receiving them but by those unfaithful messengers. I
have had but three, and I reckon that short one from D -- --, which was rather
a dying ejaculation than a letter.

You contrived to say in your last the two things most pleasing to me: The
first, that whatever be the fate of your letters, you will continue to write in
the discharge of your conscience: The other is, the justice you do me, in
taking what I write to you in the serious manner it was meant. It is the point
upon which I can bear no suspicion, and in which above all I desire to be
thought serious: It would be vexatious indeed, if you should pretend to take
that for wit, which is no more than the natural overflowing of a heart improved
by an esteem for you: but since you tell me you believe me, I fancy my
expressions have not been entirely unfaithful to my thoughts.

May your faith be increased in all truths, that are as great as this, and
depend upon it to whatever degree it may extend, you can never be a bigot.

If you could see the heart I talk of, you would really think it a foolish good
kind of thing, with some qualities, as well deserving to be half-laughed at and
half esteemed, as most hearts in the world.

It Is grand foible in regard to you, is the most like reason of any foible in
nature. Upon my word this heart is not like a great warehouse, stored only with
my own goods, or with empty spaces, to be supplied as fast as Interest or
Ambition can fill them: but is every inch of it let out into lodgings for it is
friends, and shall never want a corner where your idea will always lie as warm,
and as close, as any idea in Christendom.

If this distance (as you are so kind to say) enlarges your belief of my
friendship, I assure you it has so extended my notion of your value, that I
begin to be impious upon that account, and to wish that even slaughter, ruin,
and desolation may interpose between you and the place you design for; and that
you were restored to us at the expense of a whole people.

Is there no expedient to return you in peace to the bosom of your country? I
hear you are come as far as -- do you only look back to die twice? is Eurydice
once more snatched to the shade? If ever mortal had reason to hate the King, it
is I, whose particular misfortune it is, to be almost the only innocent person
he has made to suffer; both by his Government at home, and his Negotiations
abroad.

If you must go from us, I wish at least you might pass to your banishment by
the most pleasant way; that all the road might be roses and myrtles, and a
thousand objects rise round you, agreeable enough to make England less
desirable to you. It is not now my interest to wish England agreeable: It is
highly probable it may use me ill enough to drive me from it. Can I think that
place my country, where I cannot now call a foot of paternal Earth my own? Yet
it may seem some alleviation, that when the wisest thing I can do is to leave
my country, what was most agreeable in it should first be snatched away from it.

I could overtake you with pleasure in -- and make that tour in your company.
Every reasonable entertainment and beautiful view would be doubly engaging when
you partook of it. I should at least attend you to the sea coasts, and cast a
last look after the sails that transported you. But perhaps I might care as
little to stay behind you; and be full as uneasy to live in a country where I
saw others persecuted by the rogues of my own religion, as where I was
persecuted my self by the rogues of yours. And it is not impossible I might run
into Asia in search of liberty; for who would not rather live a freeman among a
nation of slaves, than a slave among a nation of freemen?

In good earnest if I knew your motions, and your exact time; I verily think I
should be once more happy in a sight of you next spring.

I Will conclude with a wish, God send you with us, or me with you.

To Mrs BLOUNT.
1715. Madam,
THE weather is too fine for any one that loves the country to leave it at this
season; when every smile of the sun, like the smile of a coy lady, is as dear
as it is uncommon: and I am so much in the taste of rural pleasures, I had
rather see the sun than any thing he can show me, except yourself. I despise
every fine thing in town, not excepting your new gown, till I see you dressed
in it (which by the way I don't like the better for the red; the leaves I think
are very pretty.) I am growing fit, I hope, for a better world, of which the
light of the sun is but a shadow: for I doubt not but Gods works here, are what
comes nearest to his works there; and that a true relish of the beauties of
nature is the most easy preparation and gentlest transition to an enjoyment of
those of heaven; as on the contrary a true town life of hurry, confusion,
noise, slander, and dissension, is a sort of apprenticeship to hell and it is
furies. I Am endeavoring to put my mind into as quiet a situation as I can, to
be ready to receive that stroke which I believe is coming upon me, and have
fully resigned my self to yield to it. The separation of my soul and body is
what I could think of with less pain; for I am very sure he that made it will
take care of it, and in whatever state he pleases it shall be, that state must
be right: But I cannot think without tears of being separated from my friends,
when their condition is so doubtful, that they may want even such assistance as
mine. Sure it is more merciful to take from us after death all memory of what
we loved or pursued here: for else what a torment would it be to a spirit,
still to love those creatures it is quite divided from? Unless we suppose, that
in a more exalted life, all that we esteemed in this imperfect state will
affect us no more, than what we loved in our infancy concerns us now.

This is an odd way of writing to a lady, and I Am sensible would throw me under
a great deal of ridicule, were you to show this letter among your acquaintance.
But perhaps you may not your self be quite a stranger to this way of thinking.
I heartily wish your life may be so long and so happy, as never to let you
think quite so far, as I am now led to do; but to think a little toward it, is
what will make you the happier and the easier at all times.

There are no pleasures, or amusements, that I don't wish you, and therefore
it is no small grief to me that I shall for the future be less able to partake
with you in them. But let Fortune do her worst, whatever she makes us lose, as
long as she never makes us lose our honesty and our independence; I despise
from my heart whoever parts with the first, and I pity from my soul whoever
quits the latter.

I am grieved at Mr GAY's condition in this last respect of dependence. He has
Merit, good Nature, and Integrity, three qualities that I fear are too often
lost upon great men; or at least are not all three a match for that one which
is opposed to them, Flattery. I wish it may not soon or late displace him from
the favor he now possesses, and seems to like.

I am, etc.

To a LADY, on SINCERE Letters.
Madam,
I Am not at all concerned to think that this letter may be less entertaining
than some I have sent: I know you are a friend that will think a kind letter as
good as a diverting one. He who gives you his mirth makes a much less present
than he who gives you his heart; and true friends would rather see such
thoughts as they communicate only to one another, than what they squander about
to all the world. They who can set a right value upon any thing, will prize one
tender, well-meant word, above all that ever made them laugh in their lives. If
I did not think so of you, I should never have taken much pains to endeavor to
please you, by writing, or any thing else. Wit, I am sure I want; at least in
the degree that I see others have it, who would at all seasons alike be
entertaining; but I would willingly have some qualities that may be (at some
seasons) of more comfort to my self, and of more service to my friends. I would
cut off my own head, if it had nothing better than wit in it; and tear out my
own heart, if it had no better dispositions than to love only my self, and
laugh at all my neighbors.

I know you will think it an agreeable thing to hear that I have done a great
deal of Homer. If it be tolerable, the world may thank you for it: for if I
could have seen you every day, and imagined my company could have every day
pleased you, I should scarce have thought it worth my while to please the
world. How many verses could I gladly have left unfinished, and turned into it,
for people to say what they would of, had I been permitted to pass all those
hours more pleasingly? Whatever some may think, Fame is a thing I am much less
covetous of, than your Friendship; for that I hope will last all my life, the
other I cannot answer for. What if they should both grow greater after my
death? alas! they would both be of no advantage to me! Therefore think upon it,
and love me as well as ever you can, while I live.

To the Hon. Mrs **. On the same Subject.
ALL the pleasure or use of familiar letters, is to give us the assurance of a
friend's welfare; at least it is all I know, who am a mortal enemy and despiser
of what they call fine letters. In this view I promise you, it will always be a
satisfaction to me to write letters and to receive them from you; because I
unfeignedly have your good at my heart, and am that thing, which many people
make only a subject to display their fine sentiments upon, a Friend: which is a
character that admits of little to be said, 'till something may be done. Now
let me fairly tell you, I don't like your style: it is very pretty, therefore I
don't like it; and if you writ as well as Voiture, I would not give a farthing
for such letters, unless I were to sell 'em to be printed. Methinks I have lost
the Mrs L * I formerly knew, who writ and talked like other people, (and
sometimes better.) You must allow me to say, you have not said a sensible word
in all your letter, except where you speak of showing kindness and expecting it
in return: but the addition you make about your being but two and twenty, is
again in the style of wit an abomination. To show you how very unsatisfactorily
you write, in all your letters you have never told me how you did? Indeed I see
'twas absolutely necessary for me to write to you, before you continued to take
more notice of me, for I ought to tell you what you are to expect; that is to
say, Kindness, which I never failed (I hope) to return; and not Wit, which if I
want, I am not much concerned, because judgment is a better thing; and if I
had, I would make use of it rather to play upon those I despised, than to
trifle with those I loved. You see in short, after what manner you may most
agreeably write to me: tell me you are my friend, and you can be no more at a
loss about that article. As I have opened my mind upon this to you, it may also
serve for Mr H * who will see by it what manner of letters he must expect if he
corresponds with me. As I am too seriously yours and his servant to put turns
upon you instead of good wishes, so in return I should have nothing but honest
plain how d'ye's and pray remember me's; which not being fit to be shown to any
body for wit, may be a proof we correspond only for our selves, in mere
friendliness; as does, God is my witness,

Your very, etc.

From Dr. ARBUTHNOT.
London, Sept. 7, 1714.
I Am extremely obliged to you for taking notice of a poor old distressed
courtier, commonly the most despiseable thing in the world. This blow has so
roused Scriblerus that he has recovered his senses, and thinks and talks like
other men. From being frolicksome and gay he is turned grave and morose. His
lucubrations lie neglected amongst old newspapers, cases, petitions, and
abundance of unanswerable letters. I wish to God they had been amongst the
papers of a noble Lord Earl of Sunderland.
sealed up. Then might Scriblerus have passed for the Pretender, and it would
have been a most excellent and laborious work for the Flying Post or sum such
author, to have allegoriz'd all his adventures into a plot, and found out
mysteries somewhat like the Key to the Lock. Martin's Office is now the second
door on the left hand in Dover-street, where he will be glad to see Dr Parnel,
Mr Pope, and his old friends, to whom he can still afford a half pint of
claret. It is with some pleasure that he contemplates the world still busy, and
all mankind at work for him. I have seen a letter from Dean Swift; he keeps up
his noble spirit, and though like a man knocked down, you may behold him still
with a stern countenance, and aiming a blow at his adversaries. I will add no
more, being in haste, only that I will never forgive you if you don't use my
foresaid house in Dover-street with the same freedom as you did that in St.
James's; for as our friendship was not begun upon the relation of a courtier,
so I hope it will not end with it. I will always be proud to be reckoned
amongst the number of your friends and humble servants.

To Mr C****.
Sept. 2, 1732.
I Assure you I am glad of your letter, and have long wanted nothing but the
permission you now give me, to be plain and unreserved upon this head. I wrote
to you concerning it long since; but a friend of yours and mine was of opinion,
it was taking too much upon me, and more than I could be entitled to by the
mere merit of long acquaintance, and good will. I have not a thing in my heart
relating to any friend, which I would not, in my own nature, declare to all
mankind. The truth is what you guess; I could not esteem your conduct, to an
object of misery so near you as Mrs -- and I have often hinted it to your self:
The truth is, I cannot yet esteem it for any reason I am able to see. But this
I promise, I acquit you as far as your own mind acquits you. I have now no
farther cause of complaint for the unhappy lady gives me now no farther pain;
she is no longer an object either of yours, or my compassion; the hardships
done her, are lodged in the hands of God, nor has any man more to do in them,
except the persons concerned in occasioning them.

As for the interruption of our Correspondence, I am sorry you seem to put the
Test of my friendship upon that, because it is what I am disqualify'd from
toward my other acquaintance, with whom I cannot hold any frequent Commerce.
I Will name you the obstacles which I cannot surmount: want of health, want of
time, want of good eyes; and one yet stronger than all, I write not upon the
terms of other men. For however glad I might be, of expressiug my respect,
opening my mind, or venting my concerns to my private friends; I hardly dare,
while there are Curlls Which in all Probability may be as long as there are
POPES.
in the World. If you please to reflect either on the impertinence of weak
admirers, the malice of low enemies, the avarice of mercenary Booksellers, or
the silly curiosity of people in general; you will confess I have small reason to
indulge correspondencies: in which too I want materials, as I live altogether
out of town, and have abstracted my mind (I hope) to better things than common
news. I wish my friends would send me back those forfeitures of my discretion,
commit to my justice what I trusted only to their indulgence, and return me at
the years End those trifling letters which can be to them but a days amusement,
but to me may prove a discredit as lasting and extensive, as the aforesaid weak
admirers, mean enemies, mercenary scriblers, or curious simpletons, can make it.

I come now to a particular you complain of, my not answering your question
about some Party Papers, and their Authors. This indeed I could not tell you,
because I never was, or will be privy to such Papers: And if by accident through
my acquaintance with any of the writers, I had known a thing they concealed; I
should certainly never be the Reporter of it.

For my waiting on you at your country house, I have often wished it; it was my
compliance to a superior duty that hindered me, and one which you are too good
a christian to wish I should have broken, having never ventured to leave my
mother (at her great age) for more than a week, which is too little for such a
journey.

Upon the whole, I must acquit myself of any act or thought in prejudice to the
regard I owe you, as so long and obliging an acquaintance and correspondent. I
am sure I have all the good wishes for yourself and your family, that become a
friend: There is no accident that can happen to your advantage, and no action
that can redound to your credit, which I should not be ready to extol, or to
rejoice in. And therefore I beg you to be assured, I am in disposition and
will, though not so much as I would be in testimonies or writings,

Yours, etc.

To Mr JERVAS.
Twickenham, June 10, 1733.
AS I know, you and I mutually desire to see one another, I hoped that this day
our wishes would have met, and brought you hither. And this for the very reason
which possibly might hinder your coming, that my poor Mother is dead. I thank
God her death was as easy, as her life was innocent; and as it cost her not a
groan, or even a sigh, there is yet upon her countenance such an expression of
Tranquillity, nay almost of pleasure, that far from horrid, it is even amiable
to behold it. It would afford the finest Image of a Saint expired, that ever
Painting drew; and it would be the greatest obligation which even That obliging
Art could ever bestow on a friend, if you could come and sketch it for me. I am
sure, if there be no very prevalent obstacle, you will leave any common
business to do this: and I hope to see you this evening as late as you will, or
to morrow morning as early, before this Winterflower is faded. I will defer her
interment till to morrow night. I know you love me, or I could not have written
this -- I could not (at this time) have written at all. -- Adieu! May you dye
as happily!

Your, etc.

To **** From Lord BATHURST's Seat.

Sept. 7, 1733.
YOU cannot think how melancholy this place makes me: every part of this Wood
puts into my mind poor Mr Gay with whom I past once a great deal of pleasant
time in it, and another friend who is near dead, and quite lost to us, Dr
Swift. I really can find no enjoyment in the place: the same sort of uneasiness
as I find at Twitnam, whenever I pass near my Mother's room.

I Have not yet writ to Mrs G. I think I should, but have nothing to say that
will answer the character they consider me in, as a Wit: besides, my eyes grow
very bad, (whatever is the cause of it) I Will put 'em out for no body but a
friend: and I protest it brings tears into them almost to write to you, when I
think of your state and mine. I long to write to Swift, but cannot. The
greatest pain I know is to say things so very short of one's meaning, when the
heart is full.

I feel the goings out of life fast enough, to have little appetite left to
make compliments, at best useless, and for the most part unfelt, speeches. It Is
but in a very narrow circle that friendship walks in this world, and I care not
to tread out of it more than I needs must; knowing well it is but to two or
three (if quite so many) that any man's welfare, or memory, can be of
consequence: The rest I believe I may forget, and be pretty certain they are
already even, if not beforehand with me.

Life, after the first warm heats are over, is all down-hill; and one almost
wishes the journey's end, provided we were sure but to lie down easy whenever
the night shall overtake us.

I dreamed all last night of -- she has dwelt (a little more than perhaps is
right) upon my spirits: I saw a very deserving Gentleman in my travels, who has
formerly, I have heard, had much the same misfortune; and (with all his good
breeding and sense) still bears a cloud and melancholy cast that never can
quite clear up, in all his behavior and conversation. I know another who I
believe could promise and easily keep his word, never to laugh in his life. But
one must do one's best, not to be used by the world as that poor lady was by
her sister; and not seem too good, for fear of being thought affected, or
whimsical.

It is a real truth, that to the last of my moments, he thought of you, and the
best of my wishes for you, will attend you, told or untold: I could wish you
had once the constancy and resolution to act for your self, whether before or
after I leave you (the only way I ever shall leave you) you must determine: but
reflect, that the first would make me, as well as your self, happier; the
latter could only make you so.

ADIEU.

PARODIE on the Imitation of the Second Epistle of the Second Book of HORACE.
PLeasingly, Sir, you Horace still pursue;
And I as pleasingly still follow you.
Dear Mr Pope your Own, not Country's Friend,
You rapture us with every Verse you send;
But turn your Frenchman and his Boy adrift,
And with one Shirt let Man and Master shift;
Let 'em at Blois their Services record,
Such Raggamuffins ill befit a Lord.
The Town still judge you in a proper light,
Whether Lampoons or Letters you indite;
Sober Advice from Horace you have given,
Yet disavow it in the face of Heaven.
To this and other Points your quite excentric,
Till you put in the Claim, then All Is Authentic.
The Case being stated thus 'twixt you, and I,
You Have here the Instance, now let me apply.
Two Years ago, by Jesuitic-Arts,
I was, poor Culprit, Game for Men of Parts;
But whether I have been the Hunt or not,
I Will frankly leave to Wilcox and to Motte,
Your New Associates, Brothers of the Quill,
Who pushed the Fate of your Depending Bill,
The One was Typographically bred,
The Other to any Craft can turn his Head.
But what have Tonson, Lintot, Lawton Gilliver.
, done,
That you to Brindley, Corbet, Dodsley run?
It Is kind indeed a Liv'ry Muse to aid,
Who scribbles Farces to augment his Trade.
Where You and Spence Stephen Duck's Biographer, and Editor of Gorboduc.
, and Glover drive the Nail
The Devil's in it if the Plot should fail.
From you to ask a Verse can be no Crime,
The only thing you're good for is to Rhyme.
The Story you of Anna's Days have told,
Of a Pot-Valiant Soldier poor and old.
May serve at Chelsea-College for Chit-Chat,
Each Invalid there knows what you would be at.
And if such pretty Stories you will rehearse,
A Jest-book will sell very well in Verse.
It was for Lintot's Gold that you begun
To rhyme from Greek the wrath of Peleus' Son.
Rest to your Father's Soul: who from a Lad,
Taught you the Art to know the Good from Bad.
All Laws by Those who smart are thought unjust,
Thieves only swing poor Souls for Breach of Trust.
The Pious hopes of Papists still will fail,
Whilst Brunswick Rules and Hardwick holds the Scale.
Through Life you may enjoy true Peace of Mind,
Poet's-Convict, are neither Taxed nor Fined.
With what your Muse brings in per Annum clear,
No Prince or Peer alive, will interfere.
Repose, or scribble, be assured that Time,
Will part even you and me, and snatch your Rhyme.
And every Wheel of the Satyric Mill
That turns your daily Libels must stand still.
You never can Relapse, for want of Grace,
Is stamped upon your Soul wherever the Place.
Before the Lords whenever your Cause comes on,
If Pop'ry be the Theme you will be undone.
And much you will suffer, if you don't in Bounds.
Keep in your spleenetic, ill-manner'd Sounds.
Let me with Arbuthnot your Friend advise,
Study to mend Mankind but not chastise,
Much you can flatter when the Whim does bite,
This All your Patrons know to whom you write.
This Maxim's true, all Mankind will reject,
Malevolence, not treat it with respect.
There lived in primo Georgij they record,
Several Large-Paper-Dupes, and each a Lord;
Who in the Senate House, and in their own,
Thought you an Homer, Milton but a Drone.
However it is granted that in bounds to roll,
You can make Thoughts, keep Measure with the Soul.
Thus, for your Sake Sir, I have played the Fool,
As Boys make random Verses when at School,
And when you offer any thing that is New
Wagging must be my Quill, and so Adieu.
E. CURLL.

THE WORKS OF William Walsh, Esquire In PROSE and VERSE.

Ex Pede HERCULEM. LONDON: Printed for E. CURLL at Pope's Head, in Rose-stre^
Covent Garden, 1736. Price 4s.

TO William Bromley, Esquire THE Very worthy HEIR AND NEPHEW OF William Walsh, Esquire
THIS EDITION of his WORKS Revised and Corrected by Himself, in the Year 1706,
Is most humbly Inscribed by The EDITOR.

THE CONTENTS.
A DIALOGUE concerning WOMEN, being a DEFENSE of the SEX. Written to EUGENIA.
AESCULAPIUS: Or, the HOSPITAL of FOOLS. A DIALOGUE after the Manner of LUCIAN.
LETTERS and POEMS, Amorous and Gallant, viz. Prefatory Essay on the Nature of
Letter-Writing, Pastorals, etc.
A LETTER to TWO MASKS. Page 1 -- TO ONE of the FORMER. 3, 4, 5 -- TO the
FAIR Unbeliever. 7, 9, 10 -- TO a LADY who had spoken against HIM. 11 -- TO a
Masqued Lady 13 -- TO a GENTLEMAN, his Friend. 15 -- TO a LADY in the Country,
who was going to be Married. 17 -- TO a LADY who asked him for his HEART. 19,
22, 24, 26, 27, 28 -- TO a GENTLEMAN in Town. Written from the Country. 29 --
TO the SAME. Written from LONDON. 30
ELEGIES.
The unrewarded Lover 33 The Power of Verse. 34 To his MISTRESS. 36, 38, 39
EPIGRAMS.
Written in a LADY's Table Book 41 LYCE: Or, a Bawd's Advice. Ibid. To his
False MISTRESS. 42 Love and JEALOUSY. Ibid. CLOE. Ibid. CORNUS 43 THRASO and
GRIPE, and SHIFTER. Ibid. On JEALOUSY. 44 The CURE of JEALOUSY. 48 DEATH. A
Sonnet. 49 The ANTIDOTE. 50 Upon a FAVOR offered. 51 DIALOGUE between a LOVER
and his FRIEND. 52 The FAIR Mourner. 54 To his MISTRESS against MARRIAGE. 55 To
CELIA, upon some ALTERATIONS in her FACE. 58 The RETIREMENT. Ibid.
FOUR Pastoral Eclogues.
First, DAPHNE and DAMON. 61 Second, GALATEA. 64 Third, DAMON. 67 Fourth, The
GOLDEN AGE Restored. 71 HORACE, Ode III. Book III. Imitated. 76
ELOGIUM OF Mr. WALSH.
TO him the Wit of Greece and Rome was known;
And every Author's Merit but his Own.
Such late was Walsh -- the Muse's Judge and Friend,
Who justly knew to Blame, or to Commend;
To Failings mild, but zealous for Desert;
The clearest Head, and the sincerest Heart;
This humble Praise, lamented Shade receive,
This Praise least, a grateful Muse may give!
The Muse, whose early Voice you taught to Sing,
Prescribed her Heights, and pruned her tender Wing,
(Her Guide now lost) no more attempts to Rise,
But in low Numbers short Excursions tries. --
A. POPE.
1708.
LETTERS AND POEMS, AMOROUS AND GALLANT, By WILLIAM WALSH, Esquire

PREFACE.
IT has been so usual among modern Authors to write Prefaces, that a Man is
thought rude to his Reader, who does not give him some Account before hand of
what he is to expect in the Book. That which may make somewhat of this kind
more necessary in my Case, than others is, That a great part of this Collection
consists of Familiar Letters, which sort of Writing some Learned Persons among
us have thought unfit to be published. It must be confessed indeed, that a
great Beauty of Letters does often consist in little Passages of private
Conversation, and References to particular Matters, that can be understood by
none but those to whom they are written: But to draw a general Conclusion from
thence, That familiar Letters can please none, but those very Persons, is to
conclude against the common Experience of all the World; since besides the
great Applauses have been given the Letters of Cicero and Pliny among the
Romans, we see no Book has been better received among the Spaniards, than the
Letters of Guevare; or, among the French, than those of Voiture and Balsac: Not
to mention the Italians, among whom there has been hardly any considerable Man,
who has not published Letters with good Success. What may have contributed very
much to the kind Reception these things have met, is, that there is no sort of
Writing so necessary for People to understand as this: A Man may have a great
deal of Wit, without being able to write Verses, or make Harangues; and may
live in very good Repute, without having occasion of doing either. But a Man
can hardly live in the World, without being able to write Letters. There is no
State of Life in which a Faculty of that kind is not requisite; and there are
few Days pass, in which a Man has not occasion to make use of it.

The Style of Letters ought to be free, easy and natural: As near approaching
to Familiar Conversation as possible. The two best Qualities in Conversation,
are good Humor and good Breeding; those Letters are therefore certainly the
best that show the most of those two Qualities. There are some Men so surly, so
ill-natured, and so ill-bred, that though we can hardly deny them to have Wit,
yet we can say, at least, that we are sorry they have it. And indeed, as their
Wit is troublesome to other People, so I can hardly imagine of what great Use
it can be to themselves. For if the End of Wit be not to render one's self
agreeable, I shall scarce envy them any other Use they can make of it.

The Second Part of this Collection consists of Amorous Verses. Those who are
conversant with the Writings of the Ancients, will observe a great Difference
between what they and the Moderns have published upon this Subject. The
Occasions upon which the Poems of the former are written, are such as happen to
every Man almost that is in Love; and the Thoughts such as are natural for
every Man in Love to think. The Moderns, on the other hand, have sought out for
Occasions, that none meet with but themselves; and fill their Verses with
Thoughts that are surprising and glittering, but not tender, passionate, or
natural, to a Man in Love.

To judge which of these two are in the right, we ought to consider the End
that People propose in writing Love-Verses: And that I take not to be the
getting Fame or Admiration from the World, but the obtaining the Love of their
Mistress; and the best Way I conceive to make her love you, is to convince her
that you love her. Now this certainly is not to be done by forced Conceits, far
fetched Similes, and shining Points; but by a true and lively Representation of
the Pains and Thoughts attending such a Passion. Si vis me flere, dolendum est
Primum ipsi tibi, tunc tua me infortunia laedent.


I would as soon believe a Widow in great Grief for her Husband, because I saw
her dance a Corant about his Coffin, as believe a Man in Love with his Mistress
for his writing such Verses, as some great Modern Wits have done upon theirs.

I am satisfied that Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, and Ovid, were in love
with their Mistresses, while they upbraid them, quarrel with them, threaten
them, and forswear them; but I confess I cannot believe Petrarch in Love with
his, when he writes Conceits upon her Name, her Gloves, and the Place of her
Birth. I know it is natural for a Lover in Transports of Jealousy to treat his
Mistress with all the Violence imaginable; but I cannot think it natural for a
Man, who is much in Love, to amuse himself with such Trifles as the other. I am
pleased with Tibullus, when he says, he could live in a Desert with his
Mistress, where never any Human Footsteps appeared; because I doubt not but he
really thinks what he says; but I confess I can hardly forbear laughing when
Petrarch tells us, he could live without any other Sustenance than his
Mistress's Looks. I can very easily believe a Man may love a Woman so well, as
to desire no Company but hers; but I can never believe a Man can love a Woman
so well, as to have no need of Meat and Drink, if he may look upon her. The
first is a Thought so natural for a Lover, that there is no Man really in Love,
but thinks the same thing; the other is not the Thought of a Man in Love, but
of a Man who would impose upon us with a pretended Love (and that indeed very
grossly too) while he had really none at all.

It would be endless to pursue this Point; and any Man, who will but give
himself the Trouble to compare what the Ancients and Moderns have said upon the
same Occasions, will soon perceive the Advantage the former have over the
others. I have chosen to mention Petrarch only, as being, by much, the most
famous of all the Moderns who have written Love-Verses: And it is, indeed, the
great Reputation which he has gotten, that has given Encouragement to this
false sort of Wit in the World: For People seeing the great Credit he had, and
has, indeed, to this Day, not only in Italy, but over all Europe, have
satisfied themselves with the Imitation of him, never enquiring whether the Way
he took was the right or not.

There are no Modern Writers perhaps who have succeeded better in Love-Verses
than the English; and it is indeed just, that the fairest Ladies should inspire
the best Poets. Never was there a more copious Fancy, or greater reach of Wit,
than what appears in Dr. Done; nothing can be more gallant or genteel than the
Poems of Mr. Waller; nothing more gay or sprightly than those of Sir John
Suckling; and nothing fuller of Variety and Learning than Mr. Cowley's.
However, it may be observed, that among all these, that Softness, Tenderness,
and Violence of Passion, which the Ancients thought most proper for
Love-Verses, is wanting; and at the same time that we must allow Dr. Done to
have been a very great Wit; Mr. Waller a very gallant Writer; Sir John Suckling
a very gay one, and Mr. Cowley a great Genius; yet methinks I can hardly fancy
any one of them to have been a very great Lover. And it grieves me that the
Ancients, who could never have handsomer Women, than we have, should
nevertheless be so much more in Love than we are. But it is probable, the great
Reason of this may be the Cruelty of our Ladies; for a Man must be imprudent
indeed to let his Passion take very deep root, when he has no Reason to expect
any sort of Return to it. And if it be so, there ought to be a Petition made to
the Fair, that they would be pleased sometimes to abate a little of their
Rigor for the Propagation of good Verse. I do not mean, that they should
confer their Favors upon none but Men of Wit: That would be too great a
Confinement indeed: But that they would admit them upon the same Foot with
other People; and if they please now and then to make the Experiment, I fancy
they will find Entertainment enough from the very Variety of it.

There are three sorts of Poems that are proper for Love: Pastorals, Elegies,
and Lyric Verses, under which last I comprehend all Songs, Odes, Sonnets,
Madrigals and Stanzas. Of all these, Pastoral is the lowest, and upon that
account perhaps most proper for Love; since it is the Nature of that Passion to
render the Soul soft and humble. These three sorts of Poems ought to differ,
not only in their Numbers, but in the Designs, and in every Thought of them.
Though we have no Difference between the Verses of Pastoral and Elegy in the
Modern Languages, yet the Numbers of the first ought to be looser, and not so
sonorous, as the other; the Thoughts more simple, more easy, and more humble.
The Design ought to be the representing the Life of a Shepherd, not only by
talking of Sheep and Fields, but by showing us the Truth, Sincerity and
Innocence that accompanies that sort of Life. For though I know our Masters,
Theocritus and Virgil, have not always conformed in this Point of Innocence;
Theocritus in his Daphnis, having made his Love too wanton, and Virgil in his
Alexis, placed his Passion upon a Boy; yet (if we may be allowed to censure
those whom we must always reverence) I take both those things to be Faults in
their Poems, and should have been better pleased with the Alexis, if it had
been made to a Woman; and with the Daphnis, if he had made his Shepherds more
modest. When I give Humility and Modesty as the Character of Pastoral, it is
not, however, but that a Shepherd may be allowed to boast of his Pipe, his
Songs, his Flocks, and to show a Contempt of his Rival, as we see both
Theocritus and Virgil do. But this must be still in such a manner, as if the
Occasion offered itself, and was not sought, and proceeded rather from the
Violence of the Shepherd's Passion, than any natural Pride or Maliee in him.

There ought to be the same Difference observed between Pastorals and Eligies,
as between the Life of the Country and the Court. In the first, Love ought to
be represented as among Shepherds, in the other as among Gentlemen. They ought
to be smooth, clear, tender and passionate. The Thoughts may be bold, more gay,
and more elevated than in Pastoral. The Passions they represent, either more
Gallant or more Violent, and less innocent than the others. The Subjects of
them, Prayers, Praises, Expostulations, Quarrels, Reconcilements, Threatenings,
Jealousies, and, in fine, all the natural Effects of Love.

Lyrics may be allowed to handle all the same Subjects with Elegy; but to do it
however in a different manner. An Elegy ought to be so entirely one thing, and
every Verse ought so to depend upon the other, that they should not be able to
subsist alone: Or, to make use of the Words of a My Lord Mulgrave.
great Modern Critic, there must be -- a just Coherence made
Between each Thought, and the whole Model laid
So right, that every Step may higher rise,
Like goodly Mountains, till they reach the Skies.
Lyrics, on the other hand, though they ought to make one Body as well as Elegy,
yet may consist of Parts that are entire of themselves. It being a Rule in
Modern Languages, that every Stanza ought to make up a complete Sense, without
running into the other. Frequent Sentences, which are accounted Faults in
Elegies, are Beauties here. Besides this, Malherb, and the French Poets after
him, have made it a Rule in the Scanzas of Six Lines, to make a Pause at the
third; and in those of Ten Lines, at the Third and the Seventh. And it must be
confessed, that this Exactness renders them much more Musisical and Harmonious;
though they have not always been so Religious in observing the latter Rule as the
former.

But I am engaged in a very vain, or a very foolish Design: Those who are
Critics, it would be a Presumption in me to pretend I could instruct, those
who are not, at the same time I write myself, is (if I may be allowed to apply
another Man's Simile) like selling Arms to an Enemy in time of War. Though
there ought, perhaps, to be more Indulgence shown to things of Love and
Gallantry, than any others; because they are generally written when People are
young, and intended for Ladies who are not supposed to be very old; and all
young People, especially of the Fair Sex, are more taken with the Liveliness of
Fancy, than the Correctness of Judgment. It may be also observed, that to write
of Love well, a Man must be really in Love; and to correct his Writings well,
he must be out of Love again. I am well enough satisfied, I may be in
Circumstances of writing of Love; but I am almost in Despair of ever being in
Circumstances of correcting it. This I hope may be a Reason for the Fair and
the Young, to pass over some of the Faults; and as for the Grave and Wise, all
the Favor I shall beg of them is, that they would not read them; Things of
this Nature are calculated only for the former. If Love-Verses work upon the
Ladies, a Man will not trouble himself with what the Critics say of them; and
if they do not, all the Commendations the Critics can give him, will make but
very little amends. All I shall say for these Trifles is, That I pretend not to
vie with any Man whatsoever. I doubt not but there are several now living, who
are able to write better upon all Subjects, than I am upon any one: But I will
take the Boldness to say, That there is no One Man among them All who shall be
readier to acknowledge his Own Faults, or to do Justice to the Merits of Other
People,

St. James's 1692.
LETTERS Amorous and Gallant.
LETTER I.
To TWO Masks.
THOUGH I cannot boast much of Particularity to the Person I love, yet as to the
Love it self, I may safely say, It is one of the most particular under the Sun.
Others think it enough to fall in Love with a Lady after having seen her. I am
in Love with two, without having ever seen either: Not that I would willingly
admit two Tyrants into my Heart; but though one of you may perhaps be Monarch
there, yet neither you nor I knowing which it is, the Matter must rest in doubt
till another Opportunity. For he who condemned Paris as too bold a Man, in
daring to judge of the three Goddesses Beauties, when he saw them naked, would
have thought me a bold one indeed, if I should pretend to make a Judgment
between two Ladies in Masks. Consider a little under what Difficulty you make
me labor: If I should commend the Color of your Hair, and it was all the
while deep red; the Smoothness and Delicacy of your Skins, when they were rough
and tawney; the Fineness of your Shapes, while you were stuck up within Iron
Bodice; the Brightness of your Eyes, and they should prove bleared and
squinting: Do but imagine when I had done this, what sort of an Effect it would
have upon you. Whatever Inconveniences of this Nature happen, it is your own
Faults; for my part I leave this encountering with Helmets over their Faces, to
Sir Amadis Alluding to a very old French Romance called AMADIS de Gaul.
and his Knights Errant; the way of Duelling is altered, People do not only
encounter barefaced, but strip when they go to it. As for this Way, I can
assure you, I find it not in the least fair; and had rather be in Love with the
most hard-hearted Beauty living, than continue in this uncertain State, and
neither know what I love, why I love, nor whether I love, or no. Take pity,
Ladies, upon a Lover in Distress; clear the Business to me, and let me know if
I am in good earnest, when I profess mysel

Your most passionate Admirer.

LETTER II.
To ONE of the FORMER.
IT is by Faith alone that I fancy you the most Charming, but I find by
Experience you are one of the most unreasonable Ladies under the Sun. I
concluded I had done the boldest Action in the World, to declare a Passion to
two Masks; but you, Madam, set up a Title of your own, and are not satisfied
without Particularity, and Constancy. Your Charms, I confess, Madam, as far as
I saw of them, are very great: The Masque was very good Genoa Velvet; the
Gloves very good Blois Gloves, and the Hackney-Coach, for aught I know, lined
with very good green Plush. Now, Madam, though so far I do steadfastly believe,
yet to fall constantly and particularly in Love with Masks, Gloves, or
Hackney-Coaches, is what I do not find a Precedent for, in any of the French
Romances; and being naturally diffident of myself, I should be loath to begin a
new sort of Gallantry, without knowing how it would take. Consider, Madam, a
little better upon the Reasonableness of your Request; for Particularity and
Constancy are very hardly to be answered for, at our Years The Author's Age
about 32.
. It is, I doubt not, Madam, in your Power to blow my Love up to that Height
whenever you please; and to confess a Truth to you, I have a very great Stock
of Particularity and Constancy lying upon my Hands at this Time, and know not
how to apply it. I have all the Reason in the World to imagine it is kept for
you; but however, Madam, it would be necessary to have one View of you, before
I can be positive in that Point. I am satisfied in my Conscience that I have
done all my Duty in the Thing; let it lie at your Door if the Humor break off;
for my part I cannot imagine how you will be able to answer it to all the
World, if you should, for want of discovering yourself, lose the most constant
and most faithful Lover under the Sun.

LETTER III.
To the SAME.
COnstancy and Fidelity are, without doubt, great Virtues, though not always
great Charms in a Mistress; but as to your Invisibility, it is a Quality that
does not please me at all. I grant you, Madam, it is a pretty Aereal sort of
Beauty, and may do very well for Spiritual Lovers; but for me, Madam, who am a
little embarrassed with Matter, and who generally carry a Body of Six Foot long
about with me, it would be convenient to have some more Corporeal
Accomplishents. Descend, Madam, in this Case, to your Lover's Capacity, and
make use of his Senses to represent you as Charming, as without doubt you are,
to his Imagination. For though I must confess Fancy has been very kind to you in
this Point, yet it would be convenient to call in the Help of the Eyes to
strengthen the Evidence: I expect therefore from your next Letter, an
Appointment where I may meet you in a visible manner. These are the only Terms
upon which I can treat any farther with you; for though you write the most
agreeably in the World, yet you must certainly own, that after having been
monstrously in Love for a whole Week together, it is very reasonable a Man
should know at last with whom it is.

LETTER IV.
To the same.
YES really, Madam, I think you are in the right of it; Hanging and Drowning
are such vulgar Ways of dying, that for my part I would rather live a thousand
Years, than make use of either. Then, Madam, they are the most inconvenient
Methods in the World; Drowning will spoil your Clothes, and Hanging your
Complexion; besides several other things that might be said to dissuade you
from it, but that I know a Word to the Wise is enough. I am of Opinion you had
better defer all sort of dying till another Opportunity, though you are
positive in it; I would rather recommend Mr. Boyle's Air-Pump as a newer
Invention; or being poisoned in Perfumes, is somewhat that looks pleasant
enough. But to be less serious, Madam, make no doubt of your own Perfections,
and reckon that in having me, you have the most reasonable Lover, of an
unreasonable Lover, in the World. I confess, were I to form a Beauty to myself,
-- she should be -- let me consider a little upon it; she should be -- I
protest, Madam, I know not what she should be: Monstrously in Love with me,
that is certain; for the rest, I should trust the Stars. I think I may say,
without Flattery, I love my self so well, that I can love any body else that
does so too; and should prefer that single Beauty, of an immoderate Passion for
me in a Mistress, to all the other Charms in the World, as Bays does the
single beating of Armies in his Hero, to all the Moral Virtues put together.
If you can answer for the Charm, Madam, take no Care for any other; he must be
unreasonable indeed, who is not satisfied with That, in a Lady of Sixteen.

LETTER V.
To the Fair Unbeliever.
ST. Jerome says, (St. Jerome, I must confess, is a verv odd Beginning of a
Billet doux) That a Man who can with Patience suffer himself to be called
Heretic, ought not to be esteemed a good Christian: And in common Account you
see, one who is called Coward, if he does not resent the Affront, shall always
be thought such. As my Provocations are much greater than either of these, so
if my Indignation were answerable to them, you could not expect to be forgiven
by me, even in the Article of Death: For after all People can say of Heretics
and Cowards, they will allow them to be Men; but by your Reflections upon me,
you would degrade me from that Rank, without allowing me any Place among the
inferior Creatures. Had you called me Brute or Beast, I had not been so
zealous in my own Justification: Daily Experience convinces us, That Men who
have no more Understanding than Horses, or Mules, provided they have all the
other Qualifications of those noble Animals, may be acceptable enough to some
or other of the Fair Sex; but want of Virility is an Imputation that will cut a
Man off from all sort of Communication with them. Had the Husbands or Old Women
had this Opinion of me, I should not have been so violent in my own Defense.
Scandals, as well as Oaths, ought to be taken in the Sense of those that impose
them: I should not be angry at a Turk, or a Jew, for thinking me of their
Religion; because, whatever I thought, it was what made them like me the
better; but this would be no Reason to make me forgive a Christian for calling
me so. In like manner, Madam, though I could have pardoned the Husbands and Old
Women for saying such a Thing of me, yet I can very hardly pardon you for it.
It were in vain to call Witnesses in this Case, or turn you over to another
Hand for Satisfaction in that Point, which can only properly be resolved by my
self; and it were as vain to think to clear myself by Words from an Imputatian
that ought to be done by Actions; I shall therefore only challenge you to meet
me at your own Place and Time; where I doubt not to give you full Satisfaction
in this Point, and convince you that I am not the Man (or rather indeed the
no-Man) that you take me to be. In the mean time I shall remain your most
Humble, (a Curse on that Humble) but I mean,

Madam, Your most affectionate and passionate Lover and Servant.

LETTER VI.
To the same.
I Have been waiting these three Months to tell you a thing that may be said in
three Words; it is, I love you. I will grant you, Madam, that this is no
necessary Reason why you should love me again; but you must grant me in
Recompense, That it is a very sufficient Reason why I should tell you of it. I
do not expect you should write me a Letter in return to this, and therefore
venture it without a Name: It is from your Eyes alone, I shall attend my
Answer. But, Madam, that we may not mistake one another in this Point, and that
I may not take for an Encouragement of my Passion, what you intend for a
Discouragement of it; I must tell you, That if you do not look upon me after
this, I shall believe you are in Love, and that makes you bashful: If you look
angrily, I shall think it is to give me occasion to come and justify my self;
and if you look negligently, I shall conclude it is Management to disguise the
Amor from the World: In fine, Madam, I shall take nothing for a Refusal of my
Heart, but looking very kindly upon me. But that you may not be mistaken in the
Person who sends this, and imagine it to come from some Lord which a Blue
Garter, or White Staff, it comes from a Commoner without either: I will
describe my self so, as you may know me well enough to encourage my Passion, if
you like it, but not so as to make a Trophy of me, if you do not. My Stature is
somewhat above the ordinary; my Body neither very large, nor very small; my
Hair light; my Eyes dark; and Love has not as yet made me either very lean, or
very pale: My Humor is the most commodious for a Lover in the World, not so
much inclined to Hanging or Drowning, perhaps, as some others; but for Passion
and Constancy, no Man goes beyond me. If you will accept of a Heart with all
these Qualifications, I offer you mine; if not, send it me back by the
Penny-Post, if you know me by any other Title than that of

Your most humble Servant.

LETTER VII.
To the same.
I Grant you, Madam, there are others who will love you as much as I; but are
there any who will love you as little? Yes, Madam, I understand very well what
I say, will they Love you as little; for that is the only Difficulty you have
to apprehend. There is no Question, but a Man who is possessed of the most
charming Creature in the Universe, will be constant to her as long as she
pleases; but it is a great Question, if he will part with her as soon as she
pleases. This is the Rock upon which those Ladies split, who will admit of none
but constant Lovers; not considering that the Women are as changeable as the
Men can be for the Lives of them; and consider, pray, into what pretty
Circumstances a Lady brings herself, who is plagued with an obstinate Old
Lover, when she is passionately in Love with a New one. I know not what those
Crimes are, the Lady you tell me lays to my Charge, but I fancy an importunate
Perseverance in Love of the same Woman, is not one of the Number: And whenever
you please to make the Experiment, as the least Sign in the World is sufficient
after these Preliminaries, to make me a most passionate Lover; so the least
Sign you give me afterward of any New Amor, shall make me lay aside that
Title, for the less ambitious one of

Your most humble Servant.

LETTER VIII.
To a Lady who had spoken against him.
THERE may have been other Men, perhaps, besides my self, who have fallen in
Love with a Woman they did not know; but for a Man to do it for no other reason
than her declaring against him, is, I believe, an Honor that has been reserved
for your humble Servant. They tell me, Madam, you are so far from liking me
your self, that you will not believe any body else can: That you find nothing
agreeable in my Person, from the Crown of my Head, to the Sole of my Foot: That
for my Wit, (for every body, Madam, carries somewhat about them which they call
Wit) it is all Affectation: That I am an Abstract of Vanity: That I am so much
in Love with my self, that it is impossible for me to be so with any body else.
These things, Madam, that might have put some People into Anger, have put me
into Love: For as those who are naturally peevish, will be angry at People, let
them endeavor ever so much to please them; so we, who are naturally Amorous,
cannot avoid being in Love with a Lady, let her take ever so much Pains to
anger us. And indeed, Madam, did People ground their Passion upon Reason, you
have given me one of the most reasonable Causes to love you in the World: For
as there is no Man of Wit but knows himself to be a Fool, so he ought to have
an Opinion of their Judgments, who find it out as well as himself. It is
reported as an Instance of the Bravery of the Amazons, That they would never
Marry a Man, till they had fought with him first; and if he beat them very
much, he might expect to be loved very much by them. Now I, Madam, who profess
as great a Veneration for Wit, as the Amazons had for Courage, cannot have so
good a Reason for Love, as your having exercised your Wit upon me: Tho it is
possible you may attribute my Passion to another Cause, and as you think, I
love nothing besides my self, may have some kindness for you, because you are
never like to be my Rival: However, assure your self, Madam, it is no such
thing, but knowing the worst you can say of me to be true, and having a natural
Affection for Truth, Wit, and Women, (you will think a Man a very general
Lover, that can love Truth, Wit, and Women, at the same time) I must needs be
infinitely in Love with you, in whom I find them all together. Be not however
deluded into a better Opinion of me, by what any Body can say; for as it is
only your Hating me that makes me Love you, as soon as that ceases, I am afraid
my Love will do so too. As you therefore value my Kindness, take heed of having
any for me; and satisfy your self, That as long as you continue to think me a
silly, idle, conceited Fop, I shall continue to be, with all the Passion
imaginable,

MADAM, Yours, etc.

LETTER IX.
To a Masqu'd Lady.
THO I doubt not, Madam, but you have made the most considerable Conquests
under the Sun, yet give me leave to say, You never made any so extraordinary as
this before: You have subdued, without the Conqueror's common Vanity, of making
your self known, and have gained the most absolute Victory in the World,
without so much as unsheathing your Face. I, who never knew a Woman could
overcome me, am now overcome by I know not who: And can both boast of the
greatest Passion, and greatest Faith in Nature together: The Seeing you, which
is the Reason of other People's Love, might, for aught I know, destroy mine;
for I have raised Ideas of you, to which it is very difficult for any thing in
Nature to arrive. I imagine you the most charming Creature in the Universe; and
at the same time fancy you to be somewhat more than I imagine. I have dressed
you up in all the different Shapes of Nature. In whatever you appear, it has
been always the most amiable: And after having supposed you Maid, Wife, and
Widow by turns, I find I can love you infinitely, be you any One of them. Did I
know in which State you were, I would certainly make Love to all of it, till I
arrived at you; and for want of that, I am forced to confine myself to
Womankind. I leave it to your own Conscience, Madam, whether you can leave the
most constant Lover in Nature, in this Condition; though if it feel no Remorse
for the last Disappointment, I shall very hardly ever trust it more: Yet
however extravagant my Passion is, do not apprehend that I should make any
malicious Reflections on you to the World; let my other Virtues be what they
will, my Fidelity is unquestionable: And assure yourself, there is no Man
breathing less apt to tell a Secret that he does not know, than,

MADAM, Yours, etc.

LETTER X.
To a Friend.
SIR,
FOR Friend I can hardly call you, since under that Disguise you have done me
one of the greatest Injuries in the World; and it is vain for me to guard my
Territories against the malicious Designs of Enemies and Rivals; when you, whom
I never took for either, have more prejudiced me in an Amor, than they could
with all their Forces together. But that I may not condemn you without a Cause,
nor conclude you guilty till I hear what you can say in your own Justification,
I will give you a plain Account of the Business. Meeting one of the Ladies last
Night, with whom I am in Love, she began a Discourse of Lovers, wherein she
showed the many Inconveniences that attend the having a Man of Wit in that
Capacity. I, who do naturally love to dispute with a fair Lady (especially in a
Cause where I thought my self no more concerned than if she had talked of Jews
or Mahometans) agreed with her in all she said; when she turned briskly upon
me, and told me, For that Reason a Woman must have a care of having any thing
to do with me. I told her that was acting after the manner of some late Judges;
Call a thing Treason without Law, and then Hang a Man for it without Proof.
This just Remark alludes to the Severities used in onmouth's Rebellion.
That I appealed to all the World for my Innocence in the Matter, and defied my
greatest Enemies to bring any Evidence of my Guilt. She told me she had it from
such a one, who had it from another; and that, in fine, the original Author of
this Calumny was your self. Now tho I grant you that some People might have
said such a thing as this, out of Inadvertency; yet I can hardly believe a Man
of your Prudence to have done it upon that Account. You, who very well know,
That to commend a Man for a Wit to the Women, is like commending him for a good
Protestant to the Fathers of the Inquisition; and he that reported me an Eunuch
among them, could not do it upon a more malicious Account. They love a tame,
easy, governable Fool, and fancy all Wits ill-natured and proud: Have not you
often told me so? And after that to put me upon them for one! Well, Sir, I am a
Gentleman, nor shall I pass by such a thing as this, without Satisfaction. I
expect therefore you should either give it under your Hand, That you never said
any such thing of me; or if you really said it, That you should go immediately
to the Person to whom you did it; and assure them you were misinformed in the
thing, and that to your Knowledge, Ireland it self never bred a more tame,
easy, Fool than I am: For here lies the greatest Danger; I have gotten a Rival
of that Country, and you know how difficult it is to succeed in a Contest with
one of them, when want of Wit to give is the Preference. After all, methinks if
you would be hearty in the thing, you may bring me out of these Difficulties: I
know you have Wit enough to convince them that I have none; and if the worst
come to the worst, it is but carrying you to them, to show the Difference. In
that hopes, I resume the Title of

Yours, etc.

LETTER XI.
To a Lady, in the Country, who was going to be Married.
AFTER having written you a Letter upon your first going down, I have never
dared to venture one since, lest I should be mistaken in my Address; and for
aught I know, to write to you now by the Title of Mrs. *****, may be as uncivil
as to treat the King with the Title of Prince of Orange. However, Madam, blame
not me for it, since we are here in perfect Ignorance of the Matter. We had
very positive News one while of your being Married; and as positive after, that
it was not yet done; which some here took, I can assure you, for a great Act of
Mercy. Half a Dozen Sparks of your Acquaintance have provided themselves either
with Love-Songs, or Epithalamiums, to send you, as occasion shall require,
without being yet able to know which would be most proper: And here are half a
Dozen more, who have had Halters about their Necks, ever since the Report of
your going to be Married; for they are resolved to be ready upon the first
Notice, That the same Post which brings the News of your Wedding, may carry
back that of their Deaths. It is true, Madam, I took the Boldness to advise
them not to be overhasty in the Affair, since they might do it afterward at
their own Convenience; and Experiments of this Nature were difficult enough to
correct, when they were once ill done. But all I could say, was in vain; they
are positive in the Matter, and half a Dozen of the handsomest Trees in the
Park are marked out for the Execution. I must confess, I endeavored to divert
them as much as I could from choosing that Place, for the Benefit of the Company
who Walk there; I told them it was contrary to all Precedent, to make use of
Elms, or Lime-Trees, since the Willow had, Time out of Mind, been reserved for
that use; and that a Lover who did not hang himself according to Form, had as
good never hang himself at all. They answered me very surlily, (tho very truly
too I must own) That it was not my Business: That it was a very hard Case
People might not hang themselves without asking my Leave; and as they would not
hinder Me whenever I was going about such a thing, so they took it very ill
that I should pretend to hinder Them. I must confess, Madam, I could say very
little in the Case; and you may believe I had no great Mind to enter upon a
Quarrel with People in their Circumstances; but I thought the acquainting you
with it, was a Duty that became

Yours, etc.

LETTER XII.
To a Lady who asked him for his Heart.
THO to tell a Man that you will dispose of his Heart to one who shall use it
ill, is but a very small Encouragement for him to part with it; yet since you
say you have a particular Fancy for mine, I cannot refuse you such a Trifle as
that, upon whatever Terms you demand it. I have enclosed it therefore in this
Letter, and trusted it to the Penny-Post, lest your Generosity should have made
you give a Messenger more for the bringing it, than the thing it self is really
worth. I wish, Madam, it were better for your sake; and can assure you, That
were it the most modish one in the World, it should be at your Service. As it
is, Madam, I am afraid you will think it very old-fashioned, and too much given
to those antiquated Qualities, Constancy and Fidelity. It is probable the Lady
for whom you intend it, may despise those Things, and think a Heart of that
sort as ridiculous as a Lover in a short Cloak, slash Sleeves, pinck'd Doublet,
and trunk Hose. But let her not be prejudiced against things for their first
Appearances; I have seen a very awkard Beginner, come to dance very well at
last; and it is not impossible but by good Management the Heart may be brought
quite off those disagreeable Qualities. You may please to tell her, That it
having been bred up very tenderly till now, it would be convenient to treat it
a little kindlier than ordinary at first, lest it should be apt to run away:
She should encourage his Sighs now and then with a kind of Whisper; and when
she sees the Fire grow a little faint, let her give but one or two kind Looks,
and it will blaze out afresh. Having been troubled with an extraordinary Fever,
since it was in the Presence of a certain Lady, it ought not to be exposed to
the open Air, for fear of catching Cold; she may conveniently enough confine it
to her Bedchamber, where it may be of great Use rightly managed, and wake her
in a Morning with half a Dozen deepfetch'd Sighs, better than any Larum-Clock.
You see, Madam, what Confidence I have in your Conduct, since I trust you to
dispose of a Heart for me, that I have never been able to dispose of my self.
You will think, perhaps, it is but making a Virtue of Necessity, and
surrendering up a Fort which I am not able to hold out against You. However,
Madam, the fiercest Conquerors are kind to Garrisons that yield upon the first
Summons; and as I know your Power to be greater than any of theirs; so I doubt
not but your Virtues are answerable to them. All the Favor I shall beg for my
Heart, is, That it may be treated as a Prisoner of War, and that I may have the
Liberty of keeping a Correspondence with it, during its Confinement. To show
you I intend nothing but what is fair, I am satisfied you should read all the
Letters I write; and that none should come to me, but by your Approbation. And
indeed you need not fear this making any Escape; for if I can guess at all at
his Humor, he will prefer such a Captivity to all the Liberty in the World;
and will not be so proud of the Titles of Prince, or Conqueror, as that of your
Prisoner and Slave.

LETTER XIII.
To the same.
If streaming Blood my fatal Letter stain,
Imagine, ever you read, the Writer slain:
One Hand the Sword, and One the Pen employs,
And in my Lap the ready Paper lies.
Ovid's Epist.
I Have been these six Hours in debate, Whether I should stab my self, or write
to you first: At last, Madam, I have determined on the latter: For I consider,
that if you should hear a Fellow mounted upon a Cricket, singing some doleful
Ballad of my Death, you would be at a loss to know the Cause of so sad an
Accident; and, in an Age so inquisitive as ours, would take it much better to
have a Relation of the thing from the first Hand, than to be put to the Trouble
of stopping to enquire of it in the Street, or trusting it to the Fidelity of a
Grub-street Historian. The Business then, in short, Madam, is this: Coming home
about Twelve a Clock at Night, I found a Letter, to tell me; That I should meet
you in ******* at Five a Clock in the Afternoon. Now, Madam, I am really so
sensible of my Guilt of disappointing you in this Manner, that after having
arraigned, judged, and condemned my self for it, I am just now upon the point
of Execution; I must confess, some People have advised me to the contrary, and
tell me you cannot take it ill that I did not meet you, when you know how late
it was before I received the Letter. But I told them, That after having written
to you, I ought never to have stirred from home, but staid in Expectation of an
Answer. For though it was urged in my Defense, that I had some great Business
which called me out; and that I had little hopes you should have granted me the
Honor of meeting you so soon; yet this Excuse does not satisfy me in the
least: For why a Devil should a Man pretend to make Love, when he has great
Business, and little Hope? This Consideration has absolutely determined me for
a sudden Execution; and whatever you may think upon the first sight of this
Letter, yet before you can have read it out, you may assure your self I shall
be no more

Yours, etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
I have a thing just now come into my Head, that may possibly make me defer my
Execution, till I hear farther from you. Different People having different
Tastes; and there being as many Ways of killing Lovers, as there are of
dressing Eggs, it would anger me very much if I should stab my self for your
sake, when you would rather have me hanged or drowned.



LETTER XIV.
To the same.
IT is well, Madam, you prepared me for a Disappointment in your Letter;
otherwise, I confess, I am very impatient under those Circumstances. I hope it
was not in Revenge for my missing the other Assignation; if it be, I reckon we
are upon the square now. You will certainly grant, you have all the Reason in
the World to make me amends for this; and it is with a great deal of Impatience
I expect a more favorable Opportunity. In Recompense, you shall dispose of me,
in whatever manner you please; and I am sure you must allow, That if I am not
the most passionate Lover in the World, I am at least the most convenient: For
whenever you have a mind to give Sir *****, or Mr. ***** Opportunities of
saying soft Things, you shall see that I will manage the other Party to your
Advantage, as naturally as can be. Then, Madam, if after this, you have any
Occasion to make them jealous again, there is no Man in the World fitter for
such an Employment than my self. You may make use of me, Madam, in any of these
Capacities, (but still make use of me) and you will not only oblige your self,
but

Yours, etc.

LETTER XV.
To the same.
CErtainly the Lady who accused me of Indifference last Night, has the least
Reason in the Word to do so. Is it Indifference to be always following her up
and down? Is it Indifference to shun all Company for hers? Is it Indifference
to gaze upon her with all the Tenderness in Nature? These are but the outward
Signs; but, O! could she look within, and accuse of Indifference a Heart that
burns with the most violent Passion that ever was! It is true, Madam, the rest
of the World may, with Justice enough, tax me with it: For as there is but one
Person living, who can make me otherwise; Prudence obliges me to manage Things
so, as to disguise my Passion from all the World beside. And is there no Return
due to this, but a Resolution to deceive me? Well, Madam* it is some Comfort to
me, however, That if you can but for one half Hour delude me into an Opinion
that I am beloved by You, that short Cheat will be a greater Satisfaction, than
all Womankind can grant me beside.

LETTER XVI.
To the same.
I See I am destined to Destruction! Why, O Heaven! did I ever see her? Or
since I did, why did any Body else? Had I never, I could never have been happy;
and by having seen you, I am the most miserable Wretch breathing. These will
appear Mysteries, perhaps, to you; and if you think me distracted when I write
this, you will think right: Love, Rage, Jealousy, and Despair, are tearing my
Soul in Pieces. If you have any Compassion for a Man whom you have rendered the
most miserable in the World, give me an Opportunity of meeting you to Day,
though it be but for one half Hour. I would not have you come to the Walks i.e.
Gray's-Inn Walks.
after this Rain, for fear you should catch cold; and a meeting at Shops or
India-Houses, may make People suspicious. Though I die if I see you not, yet I
would rather do so, than bring your Health or Reputation in any Danger. Think,
O! think upon some Way of satisfying my Request, and do not apprehend that this
Distraction which I show you, should appear to any body else, to your
Prejudice. I wish every one was as careful of you as I am; yet I lie, I do not
wish it; for to be so, they must love you at the same Rate; and I had rather
allow them all the Favors you can grant, than That. Adieu -- I am -- alas, I
know not what I am, but that -- I am miserable, and that -- I am

Yours.

LETTER XVII.
To the same.
I Think I have taken all the Ways imaginable to convince you that I love you
above the World; however, Madam, you shall see I will do more, which is, never
to see you again. It is true, Mrs. **** told me, I might come to you to Day;
but she told me at the same Time, That you thought it improper for me to come
so often. Had you any Kindness for me, you could not have have refused my
Visits upon so cold a Reason as their being improper; and if you have not, you
cannot be pleased that I make them at all. You shall see therefore, Madam, how
much I value your Quiet above my own, since I engage my Word to you (and I am
sure, Madam, neither you nor any Woman in the World, can say I have ever broken
my Word with them) that I will never make you another Visit, or come into any
Place where you are, except you give me very good Assurance that my Company
will be more acceptable to you, than I have Reason to believe it has been of
late.

LETTER XVIII.
To the same.
THAT this Parting has not been sought of my Side, Heaven can be my Witness;
and how little Satisfaction I take in it, every Vein in my Heart can testify.
No; I tremble, I am all Confusion, and I die when I think upon it; and it is
only in Complaisance to you, that I have resolved it. I see you are picking
little Occasions of quarrelling with me; I see you are uneasy when I am with
you, and I see you do not make a Return that is suitable to a Passion so
violent and so sincere as mine is. Heavens! Madam, what would you have me do!
Should I come to put you out of Humor? Or would you have me appear as a
Spectacle of your Rigor to your more-favoured Servants? No, Madam, I have too
much Tenderness for you, to give you any Disturbance; and give me leave to say,
I have not so mean a Spirit, as to follow any Woman, when I have Reason to
believe she thinks me troublesome, how difficult soever it may be to quit her.

Since you command it, I shall not fail of waiting upon once more, before we
part for ever.

LETTER XIX.
To a Friend.
Written from the Country.
THE Dialogues of Plato, with your last Letter, have quite turned my Head. What
Delicacy of Invention! What Sublimity of Thought! I talk no more of Women of
Gallantry; I think of nothing but Philosophy and Seraphic-Love. O! Vanity of
Pomp, of Glory, of Trifles, falsely called Pleasures! They appear beautiful to
the Sight, but once tasted, they leave nothing but Shame, Sorrow, and
Repentance. Let us give others leave to play the Fool, while we enjoy the
Sweetness of Philosophy. O charming Quiet! O dear Repose! O Life truly
celestial! Mounted upon the lofty Tops of Philosophy, we regard at our Ease the
Vanity, the Folly, the Madness of the World: The greatest Cities appear nothing
but great Herds of Madmen; so many Men, so many Follies. Suave, mari magno
turbantibus aequora ventis,
E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem.
Sed nil dulcius est been quam munita tenere
Edita doctrina sapientum templa serena;
Dispicere, unde queas alios, passimque videre
Errare, atque vias palantes quaerere vitae. LUCRETIUS.

The Soul of Man, according to Plato, has two Wings; the one Celestial, with
which she flies up to the Empyreal Heaven, the other Terrestrial, which pulls
her down to the Earth again. It is the first of these that raises you to those
lofty Divine Paths, reached by none but the greatest Wits, the noblest Souls;
the other brings Men down to the things of this World; to Vanity, to Sin, to
Marriage! Poor Husbands! you have truly observed how soon Beauty flies away;
but, alas! Love flies away much sooner: Uncomplaisant Companion that he is,
who, tho he comes with Beauty, will not stay with it. Great Politicians without
doubt these Husbands! who suffer an eternal Slavery for a Thing of so little
Duration. But what signifies that to us? Let us leave them in Peace (if there
be any such thing as Peace in Marriage) and love me as I love you.

LETTER XX.
To the same, written from London.
IT is so long since I wrote to you, that I am almost ashamed of doing it now:
But, to say the Truth, I have too just an Excuse for my Neglect, being relapsed
into a former Malady, and notwithstanding all the Assistance of Philosophy,
fallen in Love ten times more than ever. I am ashamed to tell you how long I
have been so; but I am ten times more ashamed to tell you, I do not yet find
the least decay in my Passion, tho I have reason enough to believe the Lady did
not care if she saw me hanging up at her Gate. Well; we may put as good a Face
upon the Matter as we will; but first or last I see Constancy comes upon us
all. In the Humor I am at present, I had a good Mind to forswear ever being in
Love again. And yet upon better Thoughts, I think I had as good try it once
more: For of Three Amors I have had in my Lifetime, (as for Amourettes, those
are not worth mentioning) I valued the One Mistress after I left loving her; I
loved Another, after I left valuing her; I love and value the Third, after
having lost all Hopes of her: So that, methinks, according to the Course of my
Passions, I ought to love and value the next, after having obtained her.
However, from this time forward, upon what Follies soever you fall, be pleased
for my sake to spare those of Love; being very well satisfied, there is not one
Folly of that kind (except Marriage) which I have not already committed. I have
been, without Raillery, in Love with the Beauty of a Woman whom I have never
seen; with the Wit of one whom I have never heard speak, nor seen any thing
that she has written; and with the Heroic-Virtues of a Woman, without knowing
any one Action of her Life, that could make me think she had any. Considering
how very common these Qualities are, I suppose you will not ask me if I have
ever been mistaken. I know not what you think in the Country; but, for my Part,
I am of Opinion a Man must resolve to abandon Women or Philosophy entirely, for
they will never agree well together. After an Absence of five or six Months
from Town, I find the Ladies still the same; that is to say, still various.
Those who were in Love when I went from Hence, are in Love still; but they are
in Love with other Men. They are constant to Love, but inconstant to the
Lovers: And in this Point, to speak the Truth among Friends, I think Here is no
great Difference between the two Sexes. The Men complain of the Women's
Inconstancy, and the Women of the Men's; for my Part, being unwilling to
disoblige either, I am very apt to agree with Both. But Cupid will have it so;
and what can weak Mortals do against so potent a God? Adieu; live pleasantly,
that is, philosophically; and guard your Heart from the Pains of Love.

POEMS ON Several Occasions.
ELEGIES.
The unrewarded LOVER.
LET the dull Merchant curse his angry Fate,
And from the Wind and Waves his Fortune wait:
Let the loud Lawyer break his Brains, and be
A Slave to wrangling Coxcombs for a Fee:
Let the rough Soldier fight his Prince's Foes,
And for a Livelihood his Life expose:
I Wage no war, I plead no Cause but Love's,
I fear no Storms, but what CELINDA moves.
And what grave Censor can my Choice despise?
But here, fair Charmer, here the Difference lies.
The Merchant, after all his Hazards past,
Enjoys the Fruit of his long Toils at last.
The Soldier high in his King's Favor stands,
And after having long obeyed, Commands.
The Lawyer, to reward his tedious Care,
Roars on the Bench, that babled at the Bar.
While I take Pains to meet a Fate more hard,
And reap no Fruit, no Favor, no Reward.
The POWER Of VERSE.
To his MISTRESS.
WHile those bright Eyes subdue wherever you will,
And, as you please, can either save, or kill;
What Youth so bold the Conquest to design?
What Wealth so great to purchase Hearts like thine?
None but the Muse that Privilege can claim,
And what you give in Love, return in Fame.
Riches and Titles with your Life must end;
Nay, cannot even in Life your Fame defend:
Verse can give Fame, can fading Beauties save,
And, after Death, redeem them from the Grave;
Embalmed in Verse, through distant Times they come,
Preserved, like Bees, within an Amber Tomb.
Poets, (like Monarchs, on an Eastern Throne,
Restrained by nothing but their Will alone)
Here can cry up, and there as boldly blame,
And, as they please, give Infamy or Fame.
In vain the DIDO.
Tyrian Queen resigns her Life,
For the bright Glory of a spotless Wife.
If lying Bards may false Amors rehearse,
And blast her Name with Arbitrary Verse.
While PENELOPE.
One, who all the Absence of her Lord,
Had her wide Courts with pressing Lovers stored;
Yet by a Poet graced, in deathless Rimes,
Stands a chaste Pattern to succeeding Times.
With Pity then the Muses Friends survey,
Nor think your Favors there, are thrown away,
Wisely like Seed on fruitful Soil they are thrown,
To bring large Crops of Glory and Renown.
For, as the Sun that in the Marshes breeds
Nothing but nauseous and unwholesome Weeds;
With the same Rays on rich and pregnant Earth,
To pleasant Flowers, and useful Fruits gives Birth:
So Favors cast on Fools, get only Shame;
On Poets shed, produce eternal Fame:
Their generous Breasts warm with a genial Fire,
And more than all the Muses can Inspire.
To his MISTRESS.
CELIA, your Tricks will now no longer pass,
And I Am no more the Fool that once I was.
I know my happier Rival does obtain
All the vast Bliss for which I sigh in vain.
Him, him you love; to me you use your Art;
I had your Looks, another had your Heart.
To me you're sick, to me of Spies afraid:
He finds your Sickness gone, your Spies betrayed.
I sigh beneath your Window all the Night;
He in your Arms possesses the Delight.
I know you treat me thus, false Fair, I do;
And, O! what plagues me worse, he knows it too:
To him my Sighs are told, my Letters shown;
And all my Pains are his Diversion grown.
Yet since you could such horrid Treasons act,
I Am pleased you choose out him to do the Fact:
His Vanity does for my Wrongs atone;
And it is by that I have your Falsehood known.
What shall I do? for treated at this rate,
I must not love; and yet I cannot hate.
I hate the Actions, but I love the Face;
O! were thy Virtue more, or Beauty less;
I Am all Confusion, and my Soul's on Fire,
Torn by contending Reason and Desire:
This bids me love, that bids me Love give over;
One, counsels best, the other pleases more.
I know I ought to hate you for your Fault;
But, O! I cannot do the thing I ought.
Can thou, mean Wretch! can thou contented prove,
With the cold Relics of a Rival's Love?
Why did I see that Face to charm my Breast?
Or having seen, why did I know the rest?
Gods! if I have obeyed your just Commands,
If I Have deserved some Favor from your Hands,
Make me that tame, that easy Fool again,
And rid me of my Knowledge, and my Pain.
And you, false Fair! for whom so often I Have grieved,
Pity a Wretch that begs to be deceived;
Forswear yourself for one who dies for you,
Vow not a Word of the whole Charge was true;
But Scandals all, and Forgeries devised
By a vain Wretch, neglected and despised.
I too will help to forward the Deceit,
And, to my Power, contribute to the Cheat.
And thou, bold Man, who think to Rival me,
For thy Presumption I could pardon thee;
I could forgive thy lying in her Arms,
I could forgive thy rifling all her Charms;
But, O! I never can forgive the Tongue,
That boasts her Favors, and proclaims my Wrong.
Upon the same Occasion.
WHAT Fury does disturb my Rest?
What Hell is this within my Breast?
Now I abhor, and now I love;
And each an equal Torment prove.
I see CELINDA's Cruelty,
I see she loves all Men but me;
I see her Falsehood, see her Pride,
I see ten thousand Faults beside;
I see she sticks at naught that is ill;
Yet, O ye Powers! I love her still.
Others on Precipices run,
Which, blind with Love, they cannot shun.
I see my Danger, see my Ruin,
Yet seek, yet court my own undoing:
And each new Reason I explore
To hate her, makes me love her more.
The PETITION.
An Imitation of CATULLUS.
IS there a pious Pleasure, that proceeds
From Contemplation of our virtuous Deeds?
That all mean, sordid Actions we despise,
And scorn to gain a Throne by Cheats and Lies?
Thyrsis, thou sure have Blessings laid in Store,
From thy just dealing in this cursed Amor.
What Honor can in Words or Deeds be shown,
Which to the Fair thou have not said and done?
On her false Heart they all are thrown away;
She only swears, more ear'ly to betray.
Ye Powers! that know the many Vows she broke,
Free my Just Soul from this unequal Yoke!
My Love boils up, and, like a raging Flood,
Runs through my Veins, and taints my vital Blood.
I do not vainly beg she may grow chaste,
Or with an equal Passion burn at last;
The one she cannot practice, though she would,
And I contemn the other, though she should,
Nor ask I Vengeance on the perjured Jilt;
It Is Punishment enough to have her Guilt.
I beg but Balsam for my bleeding Breast,
Cure for my Wounds, and from my labors Rest.
Upon quitting his MISTRESS.
I Know, CELINDA, I have borne too long,
And by forgiving, have increased my Wrong;
Yet if there be a Power in Verse to slack
Thy Course in Vice, or bring fled Virtue back,
I Will undertake the Task; however so hard,
A generous Action is its own Reward.
O! were thy Virtues equal to thy Charms,
I Would fly from Crowns to live within those Arms:
But who, O! who, can ever believe thee just,
When such known Falsehoods have destroyed all Trust?
Farewell, false Fair! nor shall I longer stay;
Since we must part, why should we thus delay?
Your Love alone, was what my Soul could prize,
And missing that, can all the rest despise.
Yet should I not repent my Follies past,
Could you take up, and grow reserved at last;
'Twould please me, parted from your fatal Charms,
To see you happy in another's Arms.
Whatever Threat'nings Fury might extort,
O! fear not I should ever do you hurt;
For tho my former Passion is removed,
I would not injure one I once had loved.
Adieu! while thus I waste my Time in vain,
Sure there are Maids I might entirely gain:
I Will search for such, and to the first that is true,
Resign the Heart so hardly freed from you.
EPIGRAMS.
Written in a LADY's Table Book.
WITH what strange Raptures would my Soul be Blessed,
Were but her Book an Emblem of her Breast?
As I from That all former Marks efface,
And, uncontrolled, put new ones in their Place;
So might I chase all others from her Heart,
And my own Image in the stead impart.
But, ah! how short the Bliss would prove, if he,
Who seized it next, might do the same by me.
LYCE.
GO, said Old Lyce, senseless Lover, go,
And with soft Verses court the Fair; but know,
With all thy Verses thou can get no more
Than Fools without one Verse have had before.
Moved at this, upon the Bawd I flew;
But that which most enraged me was, 'twas true,
To his false MISTRESS.
THOU said that I alone thy Heart could move,
And that for me thou would abandon Jove.
I loved thee then, not with a Love defiled,
But as a Father loves his only Child.
I know thee now, and tho I fiercelier burn,
Thou art become the Object of my Scorn.
See what thy Falsehood gets; I must confess
I love thee more, but I esteem thee less.
LOVE and JEALOUSY.
HOW much are they deceived, who vainly strive,
By jealous Fears, to keep our Flames alive?
Love's like a Torch, which, if secured from Blasts,
Will faintlier burn; but then it longer lasts.
Exposed to Storms of Jealousy and Doubt,
The Blaze grows greater, but it is sooner out.
CLOE.
CLOE new-married looks on Men no more;
Why then it is plain for What she looked before.
CORNUS.
CORNUS proclaims aloud, his Wife's a Whore;
Alas, good CORNUS, what can we do more?
Were thou no Cuckold, we might make thee one;
But being one, we cannot make thee none.
THRASO.
THraso picks Quarrels when he is drunk at Night;
When sober in the Morning, dares not fight.
Thraso, to shun those Ills that may ensue,
Drink not at Night, or drink at Morning too.
GRIPE and SHIFTER.
RICH Gripe does all his Thoughts and Cunning bend,
To Increase that Wealth he wants the Soul to spend.
Poor Shifter does his whole Contrivance set
To spend that Wealth, he wants the Sense to get.
How happy would appear to each his Fate,
Had Gripe his Humor, or he Gripe's Estate.
Kind Fate and Fortune, blend 'em if you can,
And of Two Wretches, make One happy Man.
JEALOUSY.
I.
WHO could more happy, who more blessed could live,
Than they whom kind, whom amorous Passions move?
What Crowns, what Empires greater Joys could give,
Than the soft Chains, the Slavery of Love?
Were not the Bliss too often crossed,
By that unhappy, vile Distrust;
That gnawing Doubt, thatanx'ous Fear, thatdang'rous Malady,
That terrible tormenting Rage, that Madness Jealousy.
II.
In vain CELINDA boasts she has been true;
In vain she swears she keeps untouched her Charms;
Dire Jealousy does all my Pains renew,
And represents her in my Rivals Arms.
His Sighs I hear, his Looks I view,
I see her damned Advances too;
I see her smile, I see her kiss; and, O! methinks I see
Her give up all those Joys to Him, she should reserve for Me.
III.
Ungrateful fair One, can thou hear my Groans?
Can thou behold these Tears that fill my Eyes?
And yet unmoved by all my Pains, my Moans,
Into another's Arms resign my Prize?
If Merit could not gain your Love,
My Sufferings might your Pity move:
Might hinder you from adding thus, by jealous Frenzies, more
New Pangs, to One whom hopeless-Love had plagued too much before.
IV.
Think not, false Nymph, my Fury to out-storm,
I scorn your Anger, and despise your Frown:
Dress up your Rage in its most hideous Form,
It will not move my Heart when Love is flown;
No, tho you from my Kindness fly,
My Vengeance you shall satisfy;
The Muse that would have sung your Praise, shall now aloud proclaim
To the malicious, spiteful World, your Infamy and Shame.
V.
Ye Gods! she weeps; behold that falling Shower!
See how her Eyes are quite dissolved in Tears!
Can she in vain that precious Torrent pour?
O! no, it bears away my Doubts and Fears.
'Twas Pity sure that made it flow;
For the same Pity stop it now:
For every charming, heavenly Drop, that from those Eyes does part,
Is paid with Streams of Blood that gush, from my overflowing Heart.
VI.
Yes, I will love; I will believe you true,
And raise my Passions up as high as ever;
Nay, I Will believe you false, yet love you too,
Let the least Sign of Penitence appear.
I Will frame Excuses for your Fault,
Think you surpised, or meanly caught;
Nay, in the Fury, in the Height, of that abhorred Embrace,
Believe you thought, believe at least, you wished me in the Place.
VII.
O! let me lie whole Ages in those Arms,
And on that Bosom lull asleep my Cares:
Forgive those foolish Fears of fancied Harms,
That stab my Soul, while they but move thy Tears:
And think, unless I loved thee still,
I had not treated thee so ill;
For these rude Pangs of Jealousy, are much more certain Signs
Of Love, than all the tender Words, an amorous Fancy Coins.
VIII.
Torment me with this horrid Rage no more;
O! Smile, and grant one reconciling Kiss!
Ye Gods, she is kind, I Am Ecstasy all over!
My Soul's too narrow to contain the Bliss.
Thou pleasing Torture of my Breast,
Sure thou were framed to plague my Rest,
Since both the Ill and Good you do, alike my Peace destroy*
That kills me with Excess of Grief, This with Excess of Joy.
The CURE of JEALOUSY.
I.
WHAT Tortures can there be in Hell,
Compared to what fond Lovers feel,
When doting on some fair One's Charms,
They think she yields 'em to their Rivals Arms?
II.
As Lions though they once were tame,
Yet if sharp Wounds their Rage inflame,
Lift up their stormy Voices, roar,
And tear the Keepers they obeyed before:
III.
So fares the Lover, when his Breast,
By jealous Frenzy is possessed,
Forswears the Nymph for whom he burns;
Yet strait to her, whom he forswears, returns.
IV.
But when the Fair resolves his Doubt,
The Love comes in, the Fear goes out;
The Cloud of Jealousy's dispelled,
And the bright Sun of Innocence revealed.
V.
With what strange Raptures is he blessed!
Raptures too great to be expressed.
Though hard the Torment's to endure,
Who would not have the Sickness, for the Cure?
A SONNET.
DEATH.
I.
WHAT has this Bugbear Death that is worth our Care?
After a Life in Pain in Sorrow past,
After deluding Hope and dire Despair,
Death only gives us Quiet at the last.
II.
How strangely are our Love and Hate misplaced*
Freedom we seek, and yet from Freedom flee;
Courting those Tyrant-Sins that chain us fast,
And shunning Death, that only sets us free.
III.
It Is not a foolish Fear of future Pains,
(Why should they fear who keep their Souls from Stains?)
That makes me dread thy Terrors, Death, to see:
It Is not the Loss of Riches, or of Fame,
Or the vain Toys the Vulgar Pleasures name;
It Is nothing, CELIA, but the losing thee.
The ANTIDOTE.
I.
WHEN I see the bright Nymph who my Heart does inthral,
When I view her soft Eyes, and her languishing Air,
Her Merit so Great, my own Merit so Small,
It makes me Adore, and it makes me Despair.
II.
But when I consider that she squanders on Fools
All those Treasures of Beauty with which she is stored;
My Fancy it damps, and my Passion it cools,
And it makes me despise what before I adored.
III.
Thus, sometimes I despair, and sometimes I despise;
I love, and I hate, but I never esteem,
The Passion grows up, when I view her bright Eyes,
Which my Rivals destroy, when I look upon them.
IV.
How wisely does Nature Things so different unite!
In such odd Compositions our Safety is found;
As the Blood of the Scorpion is a Cure for the Bite;
So her Folly makes Whole, Whom her Beauty does Wound.
Upon a FAVOR offered.
CELIA, too late you would repent:
The offering all your Store,
Is now but like a Pardon sent
To One that is dead before.
While at the first you cruel proved,
And grant the Bliss too late;
You hindered me of One I loved,
To give me One I hate.
I thought you innocent, as fair,
When first my Court I made;
But when your Falsehoods plain appear,
My Love no longer stayed.
Your Bounty of those Favors shown,
Whose Worth your first deface;
Is melting valued Medals down,
And giving us the Brass.
O! since the thing we beg's a Toy,
That Is prized by Love alone,
Why cannot Women grant the Joy,
Before our Love is gone?
The RECONCILEMENT.
BE gone, ye Sighs! be gone, ye Tears!
Be gone, ye Jealousies and Fears.
Celinda swears she never loved,
Celinda swears none ever moved
Her Heart, but I; if this be true,
Shall I keep Company with you;
What! though a senseless Rival swore,
She said as much to him before?
What though I saw him in her Bed?
I Will trust not what I saw, but what she said.
Curse on the Prudent and the Wise,
Who never believe such pleasing Lies:
I grant she only does deceive;
I grant it is Folly to believe;
But by this Folly I vast Pleasures gain,
While You with all your Wisdom live in Pain.
DIALOGUE,
Between a LOVER and his FRIEND*
Irregular VERSES.
FRIEND. VAlue thy self, fond Youth, no more
On Favors Mulus had before:
He had her first, her Virgin-Flame;
You like a bold Intruder came
To the cold Relics of a Feast,
When he at first had seized the best.

LOVER. When he, dull Sot, had seized the worse,
I came in at the Second Course;
It Is Chance that first makes People love,
Judgment their riper Fancies move.
Mulus, you say, first charmed her Eyes;
First, she loved Babies and Dirt-Pies;
But she grew wiser, and in time
Found out the Folly of those Toys, and Him.

FRIEND. If Wisdom Change in Love begets,
Women, no doubt, are wondrous Wits.
But Wisdom that now makes Her Change to You,
In time will make Her Change to Others too.

LOVER. I grant you no Man can foresee his Doom:
But shall I grieve because an Ill may come;
Yet I Will allow her Change, when she can see
A Man deserves her more than Me,
As much as I deserve her more than He.

FRIEND. Did they with our own Eyes see our Desert,
No Woman ever could from her Lover part.
But O! they see not with their own,
All things to them are through false Optics shown.
Love at the first does all your Charms increase,
When the Tube's turned, Hate represents them less.

LOVER. Whatever may come, I will not grieve,
For Dangers that I cannot believe.
She Will never cease loving me; or if she do,
It Is ten to One I cease to Love her too.

The Fair MOURNER.
IN what sad Pomp the mournful Charmer lies!
Does she lament the Victim of her Eyes?
Or would she Hearts with soft Compassion move,
To make them take the deeper Stamp of Love?
What Youth so wise, so wary to escape,
When Rigor comes dressed up in Pity's Shape?
Let not in vain those precious Tears be shed,
Pity the dying fair One, not the Dead;
While you unjustly of the Fates complain,
I grieve as much for You, as much in vain.
Each to relentless Judges make their Moan,
Blame not Death's Cruelty, but cease your own.
While raging Passion both our Souls does wound,
A Sovereign Balm might sure for Both be found;
Would you but wipe your fruitless Tears away,
And with a just Compassion mine survey.
To his MISTRESS.
Against MARRIAGE.
I.
YES, all the World must sure agree,
He who is secured of having Thee,
Will be entirely blessed;
But 'twere in me too great a Wrong,
To make one who has been so long
My Queen, my Slave at last.
II.
Nor ought those Things to be confined,
That were for public Good designed;
Could we in foolish Pride,
Make the Sun always with us stay,
It Would burn our Corn and Grass away,
To starve the World Beside.
III.
Let not the Thoughts of Parting fright,
Two Souls which Passion does unite;
For while our Love does last,
Neither will strive to go away;
And why the Devil should we stay,
When once that Love is past?
To CELIA.
Upon some ALTERATIONS in her FACE.
I.
AH, Celia! where are now the Charms,
That did such wondrous Passions move:
Time, cruel Time, those Eyes disarms,
And blunts the feeble Darts of Love,
II.
What Malice does the Tyrant bear
To Women's Interest, and to Ours?
Beauties in which the Public share,
The greedy Villain first devours.
III.
Who, without Tears, can see a Prince,
That Trains of fawning Courtiers had,
Abandoned, left without Defense?
Nor is thy helpless Fate less sad.
IV.
Thou who so many Fools have known,
And all the Fools would hardly do,
Should now confine thyself to One!
And He, alas! a Husband too.
V.
See the ungrateful Slaves, how fast
They from thy setting Glories run;
And in what mighty Crowds they haste,
To worship Flavia's rising Sun!
VI.
In vain are all the practiced Wiles,
In vain those Eyes would Love impart;
Not all the Advances, all the Smiles,
Can move one unrelenting Heart.
VII.
While Flavia, charming Flavia still,
By Cruelty, her Cause maintains;
And scarce vouchsafes a careless Smile
To the poor Slaves that wear her Chains.
VIII.
Well, Celia, let them waste their Tears,
But sure they will in time Repine,
That thou have not a Face like Hers,
Or she has not a Heart like Thine.
The RETIREMENT.
I.
ALL hail, ye Fields, where constant Peace attends!
All hail, ye sacred, solitary Groves!
All hail, ye Books, my true, my real Friends,
Whose Conversation pleases, and improves!
II.
Could one who studied your sublimer Rules,
Become so mad to search for Joys abroad?
To run to Towns, to herd with Knaves and Fools,
And undistinguished pass among the Crowd?
III.
One to ambitious Fancies made a Prey,
Thinks Happiness in great Preferment lies;
Nor fears for that his Country to betray,
Cursed by the Fools, and laughed at by the Wise.
IV.
Others whom avaricious Thoughts bewitch,
Consume their Time, to multiply their Gains;
And fancying Wretched, all who are not Rich,
Neglect the End of Life to get the Means.
V.
Others the Name of Pleasure does invite,
All their dull Time in sensual Joys they live;
And hope to gain that solid firm Delight
By Vice, which Innocence alone can give.
VI.
But how perplexed, alas! is Human Fate?
I whom nor Avarice, nor Pleasures move;
Who view with Scorn the Trophies of the Great,
Yet must my self be made a Slave to Love.
VII.
If this dire Passion never will be gone,
If Beauty always must my Heart inthral;
O! rather let me be confined to One,
Than madly thus be made a Prey to All!
VIII.
One who has early known the Pomps of State;
(For things unknown it is Ignorance to condemn)
And after having viewed the gaudy Bait,
Can boldly say, the Trifle I contemn.
IX.
In her blessed Arms contented could I live,
Contented could I die: But, O! my Mind
I feed with Fancies, and my Thoughts deceive,
With hope of things impossible to find.
X.
In Women how should Sense and Beauty meet?
The wisest Men their Youth in Follies spend;
The best is He who earliest finds the Cheat,
And sees his Errors while there is time to mend.
FOUR PASTORAL ECLOGUES.
I.
DAPHNE and DAMON.
SIcilian Muse, my humble Voice inspire
To sing of Daphne's Charms and Damon's Fire.
Long had the faithful Swain suppressed his Grief,
And since he durst not Hope, never asked Relief.
But at the Arrival of the fatal Day
That took the Nymph and all his Joys away;
With dying Looks he gazed upon the Fair,
And what his Tongue could not, his Eyes declare:
'Till with deep Sighs, as if his Heart Strings broke,
Pressing her Hand, these tender Things he spoke:

DAMON. Ah lovely Nymph! behold your Lover burn,
And view the Passion which you will not return.
As no Nymph's Charms did ever equal thine;
So no Swain's Love did ever equal mine.
How happy, Fair, how happy should I be,
Might I but sacrifice my self for Thee?
Could I but please thee with my dying Verse,
And make thee shed one Tear upon my Hearse?

DAPHNE. Too free an Offer of that Love you make,
Which now, alas, I have not Power to take:
Your Wounds I cannot, though I would, relieve:
Phaon has all the Love that I can give.
Had you, among the rest, at first assailed
My Heart, when free, you had perhaps prevailed.
Now if you blame, O! blame not me, but Fate,
That never brought you till 'twas grown too late.

DAMON. Had the Fates brought me then, too charming Fair,
I could not hope, and now I must despair.
Ruled by your Friends, you quit the Lover's Flame,
For Flocks, for Pastures, for an empty Name.
Yet though the blessed Possession Fate denies;
O! let me gaze for ever on those Eyes.
So just, so true, so innocent's my Flame,
That Phaon, did he see it, could not blame.

DAPHNE. Such generous Ends I know you still pursue,
What I can do, be sure I wish for You.
If on Esteem, or Pity you can live,
Or Hopes of more, if I had more to give;
Those you may have, but cannot have my Heart:
And since we now, perhaps, for ever part;
Such noble Thoughts through all your Life express,
May make the Value more, the Pity less.

DAMON. Can you then go? Can you for ever part
(Ye Gods! what shivering Pains surround my Heart!)
And have one Thought to make your Pity less?
Ah Daphne, could I half my Pangs express,
You could not think, though hard as Rocks you were,
Your Pity ever could too great appear.
I never shall be one Moment free from Pain,
'Till I behold those charming Eyes again.
When gay Diversions do your Thoughts employ,
I would not come to interrupt the Joy:
But when from them you some spare Moment find,
Think then, O think, on whom you leave behind!
Think with what Heart I shall behold the Green,
Where I so often those charming Eyes have seen!
Think with what Grief I walk the Groves alone,
When you, the Glory of them all, are gone!
Yet, O! that little Time you have to stay,
Let me still speak, and gaze my Soul away!
But see, my Passion that small Aid denies;
Grief stops my Tongue, and Tears overflow my Eyes.

II.
GALATEA.
THyrsis, the gayest one of all the Swains,
Who fed their Flocks upon the Arcadian Plains;
While Love's mad Passion quite devoured his Heart,
And the coy Nymph that caused, neglects his Smart;
Strives in low Numbers, such as Shepherds use,
If not to move her Breast, his own t'amuse.
You, Chloris, who with Scorn refuse to see
The mighty Wounds that you have made on me;
Yet cannot sure with equal Pride disdain,
To hear an humble Hind of his complain.
Now while the Flocks and Herds to Shades retire,
While the fierce Sun sets all the World on Fire;
Through burning Fields, through rugged Brakes I rove,
And to the Hills and Woods declare my Love.
How small's the Heat? how easy is the Pain
I feel Without, to that I feel Within?
Yet scornful Galatea will not hear,
But from my Songs and Pipe still turns her Ear.
Not so the sage Corisca, nor the fair
Climena, nor rich Aegon's only Care:
From them my Songs a just Compassion drew,
And they shall have them, since contemned by You.
Why name I them, when even chaste Cynthia stays,
And Pan himself, to listen to my Lays?
Pan, whose sweet Pipe has been admired so long,
Has not disdained sometimes to hear my Song.
Yet Galatea scorns whatever I say;
And Galatea's wiser sure than they.
Relentless Nymph! can nothing move your Mind?
Must you be deaf, because you are unkind?
Though you dislike the Subject of my Lays,
Yet sure the Sweetness of my Voice might please.
It is not thus that you dull Mopsus use,
His Songs divert you, though you mine refuse.
Yet I could tell you, fair One, if I would,
(And since you treat me thus, methinks I should)
What the wise Lycon said, when in yon Plain,
He saw him Court in hope, and me in vain;
Forbear, fond Youth, to chase a heedless Fair,
Nor think with well-tuned Verse to please her Ear;
Seek out some other Nymph, nor ever repine,
That One who likes His Songs, should fly from Thine.
Ah, Lycon! ah! your Rage false Danger forms;
It Is not his Songs, but it is his Fortune Charms:
Yet, scornful Maid, in time you will find those Toys
Can yield no real, no substantial Joys;
In vain his Wealth, his Titles, gain Esteem,
If for all that, You are ashamed of Him.
Ah, Galatea, would thou turn those Eyes;
Would thou but once vouchsafe to hear my Cries:
In such soft Notes I would my Pains impart,
As could not fail to move thy rocky Heart;
With such sweet Songs I would thy Fame make known,
As Pan himself might not disdain to own.
O! could thou, fair One, but contented be
To tend the Sheep, and chase the Hares with me:
To have thy Praises echoed through the Groves,
And pass thy Days with One who truly Loves;
Nor let those gaudy Toys thy Heart surprise,
Which the Fools envy, and the Sage despise.
But Galatea scorns my humble Flame,
And neither asks my Fortune, nor my Name.
Of the best Cheese my well-stor'd Dairy's full,
And my soft Sheep produce the finest Wool;
The richest Wines of Greece my Vineyards yield,
And smiling Crops of Grain adorn my Field.
Ah, foolish Youth! in vain thou boast'st thy Store,
Have what thou will, if Mopsus still has more.
See whilst thou sing'st, behold Her haughty Pride,
With what Disdain she turns her Head aside!
O! why would Nature, to our Ruin, place
A Tyger's Heart, with such an Angel's Face?
Cease, Shepherd, cease, at last thy fruitless Moan;
Nor hope to gain a Heart already gone.
While Rocks and Caves thy tuneful Notes resound,
See how thy Corn lies withered on the Ground!
The hungry Wolves devour thy fatten'd Lambs;
And bleating for the Young, makes lean the Dams.
Take, Shepherd, take thy Hook, thy Flocks pursue,
And when one Nymph proves cruel, find a New.
III.
DAMON.
Taken from the Eighth Eclogue of Virgil.
ARise, O Phosphorus! and bring the Day,
While I in Sighs and Tears consume away;
Deceived with flattering Hopes of Nisa's Love;
And to the Gods my vain Petitions move:
Though they have done nothing to prevent my Death,
I Will yet invoke them with my dying Breath.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
Arcadia's famous for its spacious Plains,
Its whistling Pine-Trees, and its shady Groves,
And often hears the Swains lament their Loves.
Great Pan upon its Mountains feeds his Goats,
Who first taught Reeds to warble rural Notes.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
Mopsus weds Nisa! O! well-suited Pair!
When He succeeds, what Lover can despair?
After this Match let Mares and Griffins breed;
And Hounds with Hares in friendly Concert feed.
Go, Mopsus, go; provide the Bridal Cake;
And to thy Bed the blooming Virgin take:
In Her soft Arms Thou shall securely rest.
Behold, the Evening comes to make Thee blessed!
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
O! Nisa, happy in a lovely Choice!
While you with Scorn neglect my Pipe and Voice;
While you despise my humble Songs, my Herd,
My shaggy Eyebrows, and my rugged Beard;
While through the Plains disdainfully you move,
And think no Shepherd can deserve your Love;
Mopsus alone can the nice Virgin win,
With charming Person, and with graceful Mien.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
When first I saw you on those fatal Plains,
I reached you Fruit, your Mother too was there;
Scarce had you seen the Thirteenth Spring appear:
Yet Beauty's Buds were opening in your Face;
I gazed, and Blushes did your Charms increase.
It Is Love, thought I, that is rising in her Breast,
Alas, Your Passion, by my Own, I guest;
Then upon Trust I fed the raging Pains.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
O! Love! I know Thee now; Thou ow'st Thy Birth
To Rocks; some craggy Mountain brought thee forth:
Nor is it Human Blood that fills thy Veins.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
Relentless Love, to bold Medaea showed,
To stain her Hands in her own Children's Blood.
Was she more cruel, or more wicked he?
A wicked Counselor he was; a cruel Mother she.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
Now let the Screech Owls vie with warbling Swans;
Upon hard Oaks let blushing Peaches grow,
And from the Brambles, liquid Amber flow.
The harmless Wolves, the ravenous Sheep shall shun;
And valiant Deer, at fearful Greyhounds run:
Let the Sea rise, and overflow the Plains.
Begin, my Muse, begin the Arcadian Strains.
Adieu, ye Flocks, no more shall I pursue!
Adieu, ye Groves, a long, a long Adieu!
And you, coy Nymph, who all my Vows disdain,
Take this last Present from a dying Swain.
Since you dislike whatever in Life I said,
You may be pleased, perhaps, to hear I Am dead:
This Leap shall put an end to all my Pains.
Now cease, my Muse, now cease the Arcadian Strains.
Thus Damon sung while on the Cliff he stood,
Then headlong plunged into the raging Flood.
All with united Grief the Loss bemoan,
Except the Authress of his Fate alone,
Who hears it with an unrelenting Breast;
Ah, cruel Nymph! forbear your Scorns at least.
How much soever you may the Love despise,
It Is barbarous to insult on One that dies.
IV.
The GOLDEN AGE Restored, 1703.
An Imitation of the Fourth ECLOGUE of VIRGIL. Supposed to have been taken from
a Sybilline-Prophecy.
-- Paulo majora Canamus.

SICILIAN Muse begin a loftier Flight,
Not all in Trees and lowly Shrubs delight:
Or if your Rural Shades you still pursue,
Make your Shades fit for able Statesmens view.
The time is come, by ancient Bards foretold,
Restoring the Saturnian Age of Gold:
The Vile, Degenerate, Whiggish Offspring ends,
A High-Church Progeny from Heaven descends.
O Learned Oxford, spare no Sacred Pains
To Nurse the glorious Breed, now thy own Bromley reigns.
And thou Great Scarsdale, Darling of this Land,
Do foremost in that famed Commission stand;
Whose deep Remarks the listening World admires,
By whose auspicious Care old Ranelagh expires.
Your mighty Genius no strict Rules can bind;
You punish Men for Crimes, which you want time to find.
Senates shall now like Holy Synods be,
And Holy Synods Senate-like agree.
Monmouth and Mostyn here instruct the Youth,
There Binckes and Kimberley maintain the Sacred Truth.
Powis and Hamlin here with equal Claim,
Through wide West Saxon Realms extend their Fame;
There Birch and Hooper Right Divine convey,
Nor treat their Bishops in a Human way.
Now all our Factions, all our Fears shall cease,
And Tories rule the promised Land in Peace.
Malice shall die, and noxious Poisons fail,
Harley shall cease to trick, and Seymour cease to rail:
The Lambs shall with the Lions walk unhurt,
And Halifax and How meet civilly at Court.
Viceroys, like Providence, with distant Care,
Shall govern Kingdoms where they never appear:
Pacifick Admirals, to save the Fleet,
Shall fly from Conquest, and shall Conquest meet:
Commanders shall be praised at William's Cost,
And Honor be retrieved before it is lost.
Brereton and Burnaby the Court shall grace,
And How shall not disdain to share a Place.
Forgotten Molineux and Mason now
Revive and shine again in Fox and How.
But as they stronger grow and mend their Strain,
By choice Examples of King Charles's Reign;
Bold Bellasis and Patriot D'Av'nant then,
One shall employ the Sword, and one the Pen:
Troops shall be led to plunder, not to fight,
The Tool of Faction shall to Peace invite,
And Foes to Union be employed the Kingdoms to Unite.
Yet still some Whigs among the Peers are found,
Like Brambles flourishing in barren Ground.
Summers maliciously imploys his Care
To make the Lords the Legislature share.
Burnet declares how French Dragooning rose,
And Bishops Persecuting Bills oppose:
Till Rochester's Bishop Sprat.
cool Temper shall be fired,
And North's and Nottingham's strong Reasonings be admired.
But when due Time their Counsels shall mature,
And fresh Removes have made the Game secure;
When Somerset and Devonshire give Place
To Wyndham's Bradford, and to Richmond's Grace,
Both Converts great; when Justice is refined,
And Corporations garbled to their Mind,
Then Passive Doctrines shall with Glory rise,
Before them hated Moderation flies,
And Antichristian Toleration dies.
Granville shall seize the long expected Chair,
Godolphin to some Country-Seat repair;
Pembroke from all Employments be debarred,
And Marlborow, for ancient Crimes, receive his just Reward.
France, that this happy Change so wisely has begun,
Shall bless the great Design, and bid it smoothly run.
Come on, young James's Friends, this is the Time, come on;
Receive just Honors, and surround the Throne.
Boldly your Loyal Principles maintain,
Hedges now rules the State, and Rooke the Main.
Grimes is at Hand the Members to Reward,
And Troops are trusted to your own Gerhard.
The faithful Club assembles at the Vine,
And French Intrigues are broached over English Wine.
Freely the Senate the Design proclaims,
Affronting Wyndham, and applauding James.
Good ancient Members with a solemn Face,
Propose that Safety give to Order place;
And what they dare not openly dissuade,
Is by Expedients ineffectual made.
Even Finch and Mulgrave, whom the Court caress,
Exalt its Praises, but its Power depress;
And that Impartial Justice may be seen,
Confirm to Friends what they refused the Queen.
Bishops who most advanced Good James's Cause
In Church and State, now reap deserved Applause:
While those who rather made the Tower their Choice,
Are styled Unchristian by the Nation's Voice.
Avow'dly now St. David's Cause they own,
And James's Votes for Simony atone.
Archbishop Ken shall from Long-Leat be drawn,
While firm Nonjurors from behind stand crouding for the Lawn.
And thou, Great Weymouth, to reward thy Charge,
Shall Sail to Lambeth in his Grace's Barge.
See by base Rebels James the Just betrayed,
See his Three Realms by vile Usurpers swayed;
Then see with Joy his lawful Heir restored,
And erring Nations own their injured Lord.
O would kind Heaven so long my Life maintain,
Inspiring Raptures worthy such a Reign!
Not Thracian-Saint-John should with me contend,
Nor my sweet Lays harmonious Hammond mend:
Not though young D'Av'nant, Saint John should protect,
Or the shrewd Doctor, Hammond's Lines correct.
Nay, should Tredenham in St. Mawes compare his Songs to mine;
Tredenham, though St. Mawes were Judge, his Laurel should resign.
Prepare, Auspicious Youth, thy Friends to meet;
Sir George Rooke was Admiral, 17.
already has prepared the Fleet.
Should Rival Neptune (who with envious Mind
In times of Danger still this Chief confined)
Now send the Gout, the Hero to disgrace,
Honest George Churchill may supply his Place.
HORACE, Ode III. Book III. Imitated, 1705.
I.
THE Man that is resolute and just,
Firm to his Principles and Trust,
Nor Hopes nor Fears can blind;
No Passions his Designs control,
Not Love, that Tyrant of the Soul,
Can shake his steady Mind.
II.
Not Parties for Revenge engaged,
Nor Threat'nings of a Court enraged,
Nor Storms where Fleets despair:
Not Thunder pointed at his Head;
The shattered World may strike him dead,
Not touch his Soul with Fear.
III.
From this the Grecian Glory rose,
By this the Romans awed their Foes:
Of this their Poets sing.
These were the Paths their Heroes trod,
These Acts made Hercules a God;
And Great Nassau a King.
IV.
Firm on the rolling Deck He stood,
Unmoved, beheld the breaking Flood,
With black'ning Storms combined:
Virtue, he cried, will force its Way;
The Wind may for a while delay,
Not alter our Design.
V.
The Men whom Selfish Hopes inflame,
Or Vanity allures to Fame,
May be to Fears betrayed:
But here a Church for Succor flies,
Insulted Law expiring lies,
And loudly calls for Aid.
VI.
Yes, Britons, yes, with ardent Zeal,
I come, the wounded Heart to heal,
The wounded Hand to bind:
See Tools of Arbitrary Sway,
And Priests, like Locusts, scout away
Before the Western Wind.
VII.
Law shall again her Force resume;
Religion, cleared from Clouds of Rome,
With brighter Rays advance.
The British Fleet shall rule the Deep,
The British Youth, as roused from Sleep,
Strike Terror into France.
VIII.
Nor shall these Promises of Fate
Be limited to my short Date:
When I from Cares withdraw,
Still shall the British Scepter stand,
Still flourish in a Female Hand,
And to Mankind give Law.
IX.
She shall Domestic Foes unite,
Monarchs beneath her Flags shall fight,
Whole Armies drag her Chain:
She shall lost Italy restore,
Shall make the Imperial Eagle soar,
And give a King to Spain.
X.
But know, these Promises are given,
These great Rewards Impartial Heaven
Does on these Terms decree;
That strictly punishing Men's Faults,
You let their Consciences and Thoughts
Rest absolutely free.
XI.
Let no false Politics confine,
In narrow Bounds, your vast Design
To make Mankind unite;
Nor think it a sufficient Cause
To punish Man by penal Laws,
For not Believing right.
XII.
Rome, whose blind Zeal destroys Mankind;
Rome 's Sons shall your Compassion find,
Who never Compassion knew.
By nobler Actions theirs condemn:
For what has been Reproached in them,
Can never be Praised in you.
XIII.
These Subjects suit not with the Lyre;
Muse! To what Height do thou aspire?
Pretending to rehearse
The Thoughts of Gods, and God-like Kings.
Cease, cease to lessen lofty Things
By mean ignoble Verse.
DELIA
A PASTORAL ECLOGUE. This Elegy laments the Beautiful Mrs. Tempest, who died in
the Night of the Great Storm, ( November 26. 1703.) a Lady for whom Mr. Walsh
had the highest Esteem. She was also, at his Request, celebrated by Mr. Pope,
who has consecrated his Fourth-Pastoral to her Memory.

YE, gentle Swains who pass your Days and Nights
In Love's sincere and innocent Delights!
Ye, tender Virgins, who with Pride display
Your Beauty's Splendour, and extend your Sway!
Lament with me! with me your Sorrows join!
And mingle your united Tears with mine!
DELIA, the Queen of Love, let All deplore!
DELIA, the Queen of Beauty, now no more!
Begin, my Muse! begin your mournful Strains!
Tell the sad Tale through all the Hills and Plains!
Tell it through every Lawn and every Grove!
Where Flocks can wander, or where Shepherds rove!
Bid neighboring Rivers tell the distant Sea,
And Winds from Pole to Pole the News convey!
DELIA, the Queen of Love, let All deplore!
DELIA, the Queen of Beauty, now no more!
It Is done, and All obey the mournful Muse!
See, Hills, and Plains, and Winds have heard the News!
The foaming Sea o'erwhelms the frightened Shore,
The Valleys tremble and the Mountains roar.
See lofty Oaks from firm Foundations torn,
And stately Towers in Heaps of Ruin mourn!
The gentle Thames, that rarely Passion knows,
Swells with this Sorrow, and her Banks overflows:
What Shrieks are heard? what Groans? what dying Cries?
Even Nature's self in dire Convulsions lies!
DELIA, the Queen of Love, they All deplore!
DELIA, the Queen of Beauty, now no more!
O! why did I survive the fatal Day,
That snatched the Joys of all my Life away?
Why was not I beneath some Ruin lost?
Sunk in the Seas, or Shipwrecked on the Coast?
Why did the Fates spare this devoted Head?
Why did I live to hear that Thou were dead?
By Thee my Griefs were calmed, my Torments eased;
Nor knew I Pleasure but as Thou were pleased.
Where shall I wander now, distressed, alone?
What Use have I of Life, now Thou art gone?
I have no Use, alas! but to deplore
DELIA, the Pride of Beauty, now no more!
What living Nymph is blessed with equal Grace?
All may dispute, but who can fill thy Place?
What Lover in his Mistress hopes to find
A Form so lovely, with so bright a Mind?
DORIS may boast a Face divinely Fair,
But wants thy Shape, thy Motions, and thy Air.
LUCINDA has thy Shape, but not those Eyes,
That while they did the admiring World surprise,
Disclosed the secret Luster of thy Mind,
And seemed each Lover's inmost Thoughts to find.
Others, whose Beauty yielding Swains confess,
By Indiscretion make their Conquest less,
And want thy Conduct and obliging Wit
To fix those Slaves who to their Chains submit.
As some Rich Tyrant hoards an useless Store,
That would, well placed, enrich a Thousand more:
So did thou keep a Crowd of Charms retired
Would make a Thousand other Nymphs admired.
Gay, Modest, Artless, Beautiful and Young,
Slow to Resolve; in Resolution Strong;
To All obliging; yet reserved to All;
None could Himself the favored Lover call:
That which alone could make his Hopes endure,
Was, that he saw no other Swain secure.
Whither, ah! whither are those Graces fled?
Down to the Dark, the Melancholy Shade?
Now, Shepherds, now lament! and now deplore!
DELIA is Dead, and Beauty is no more!
For Thee each tuneful Swain prepared his Lays,
His Fame exalting while He sung Thy Praise.
THYRSIS, in gay and easy Measures, Strove
To charm thy Ears and tune thy Soul to Love:
MENALCAS, in his Numbers more Sublime
Extolled thy Virtues in Immortal Rhyme.
GLYCON whose Satire kept the World in Awe,
Softened his Strain, when first thy Charms he saw,
Confessed the Goddess who new-form'd his Mind,
Proclaimed thy Beauties and forgot Mankind.
Cease, Shepherds, cease; the Charms you sung are fled,
The Glory of our blasted Isle is Dead.
Now join your Griefs with mine! and now deplore
DELIA, The Pride of Beauty, now no more!
Behold where now she lies, deprived of Breath!
Charming though Pale, and beautiful in Death!
A Troop of weeping Virgins by her Side;
With all the Pomp of Woe and Sorrows Pride!
O, early lost! O, fitter to be led
In cheerful Splendour to the Bridal-Bed!
Than thus conducted to the untimely Tomb,
A Spotless Virgin in her Beauty's Bloom!
Whatever hopes superior Merit gave,
Let me, at least, embrace Thee in the Grave;
On thy cold Lips imprint a Dying Kiss:
O that thy Coyness could refuse me This!
Such melting Tears upon thy Limbs I Will pour,
Shall thaw their Numbness, and thy Warmth restore,
Claspt to my glowing Breast, Thou may revive;
I Will breathe such tender Sighs shall make Thee live.
Or if severer Fates that Aid deny,
If thou can not Revive, yet I may Die.
In one cold Grave together may be laid,
The truest LOVER, and the Loveliest MAID.
Then shall I cease to Grieve, and not before;
Then shall I cease fair DELIA to deplore.
But see, those dreadful Objects disappear!
The Sun shines out, and all the Heavens are clear:
The warring Winds are hushed, the Sea serene;
And Nature softened, shifts her angry scene.
What means this sudden Change? methinks I hear,
Melodious Music from the Heavenly Sphere!
Listen, ye Shepherds, and devour the sound!
Listen, the Saint, the Lovely Saint, is Crowned!
While we, mistaken in our Joy and Grief,
Bewail her Fate, who wants not our Relief:
From the pleased Orbs she views us here below,
And with kind Pity wonders at our Woe.
Ah, Charming Saint! since Thou art blessed Above,
Indulge Thy Lovers and forgive their Love.
Forgive their Tears, who pressed with Grief and Care,
Feel not Thy Joys, but feel Their Own Despair.
FINIS.

