MACBETH RECONSIDERED; AN ESSAY.

[Price One Shilling.]

MACBETH RECONSIDERED; AN ESSAY: INTENDED AS AN ANSWER TO PART OF THE REMARKS
ON SOME OF THE CHARACTERS OF SHAKSPEARE.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. AND J. EGERTON, WHITEHALL.

MDCCLXXXVI.

TO EDMUND MALONE, THIS ESSAY IS INSCRIBED BY HIS OBEDIENT, AND OBLIGED SERVANT,

THE AUTHOR.

Advertisement to the Reader.
THE Passages printed in Italics are quotations from Mr. Wheatley's Remarks;
and the references correspond with the edition of Shakspeare given by Johnson
and Stevens 1778.

MACBETH RECONSIDERED.
PLAYS are designed, by the joint powers of precept and example, to have a good
influence on the lives of men. Enquiries into the conduct of fable in the drama
were useless to this end: the regular, or irregular, disposition of parts in a
play is an artificial praise, or blame, that can contribute nothing to the
improvement, or depravation, of the mind; for the cause of morality is promoted
only, when, by a catastrophe resulting from principles natural to the agents,
who produce it, we are taught to love virtue, and abhorvice.

Neglect of unity is the obvious fault of Shakspeare's pieces, truth of manners
their unrivalled excellence.

This Essay does not profess to observe upon any inconsistency in the conduct
of the tragedy of Macbeth, it concerns itself only with the sentiments of the
hero of it, presuming they will more effectually serve ethics, if, in
analyzing his character, it shows that there is no distinction between him and
king Richard, in the quality of personal courage. If Macbeth be what Mr.
Wheatley describes him, we must forego our virtuous satisfaction in his
repugnance to guilt, for it arises from mere cowardice; and can gain no
instruction from his remorse, for it is only the effect of imbecility; we
despise him; we cannot feel for him; and shall never be amended by a wretch,
who is uniformly the object of our contempt.

The writer of these pages does not consider, that his position will never be
established, till Mr. Wheatley's be overthrown, without perceiving how
difficult, and apparently invidious, a task he undertakes; he relies, however,
upon Shakspeare to clear Macbeth from the imputation laid on his nature; and
can truly say, the argument is not taken up in a spirit of controversy, but out
of a love for, what is believed to be, just criticism.

Having given many judicious proofs of the difference, there certainly is, in
the characters of Macbeth and Richard, Mr. Wheatley proceeds to the article of
courage, and says, In Richard it is intrepidity, and in Macbeth no more than
resolution: in him [Macbeth] it proceeds from exertion, not from nature; in
enterprise he betrays a degree of fear, though he is able, when occasion
requires, to stifle and subdue it.

The attempt to controvert this doctrine naturally resolves itself into three
heads; namely, a repetition of the simple character of Macbeth, as it stands
before any change is effected in it by the supernatural soliciting of the weird
sisters; a consideration of his conduct toward Banquo, and Macduff; and a
review of his deportment, as opposed to Richard's in the "Remarks." This order
will involve an inquiry into Mr. Wheatley's interpretation of the poet's text;
into the appositeness of the facts adduced in support of hi opinion; and into
his philosophy of the pec^liar passion of characters, when, facts not supplying
testimony, he can substantiate his hypothesis only on the evidence of
appropriated sentiment.

An appeal for judgment on the nature of Macbeth's courage lies to the
tribunal of Shakspeare himself. The circumscribed nature of a drama renders it
generally impracticable for the principal personages in it gradually to unfold
themselves; it is, therefore, an allowed artifice with dramatic authors (and of
which they commonly avail themselves) by an impressive description of their
heroes to bring us, in a great measure, acquainted with them, before they are
actually engaged in scenes, where, for want of such previous intelligence,
their proceedings might appear, at best, confused, and generally, perhaps,
inexplicable. We are bound, then, to receive the introductory portrait our
author has drawn of Macbeth as a true resemblance; for a creature of the poet's
arbitrary creation may be assimilated only to those features, which he has
thought fit to give him. Here is the picture.

-- The merciless Macdonel
--
-- from the western isles
Of kernes and gallow-glasses is supplied;
And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,
Showed like a rebel's whore: but all is too weak:
For brave Macbeth, (well he deserves that name)
Disdaining fortune, with his brandished steel,
Which smoked with bloody execution,
Like valor's minion, carved out his passage,
'Till he faced the slave:
And never shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
'Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chops.
(P. 446. v. 4.) Could Shakspeare call a man brave, and insist upon his well
deserving that appellation; could he grace a man with the title of valor's
minion, and deem him, as he does in a subsequent passage, worthy to be matched
even with the goddess of war; -- could he do this, and not design to impress a
full idea of the dignity of his courage? Macbeth's great heart pants to meet
the merciless leader of the rebels; his executing sword, all dyed in reeking
gore, hews out a passage to him; he maintains the combat, 'till the death of
his antagonist crowns his persistive valor with the victory he burned for.

It is said, Macbeth has resolution, not intrepidity. What is the soldier's
intrepidity, but disdaining fortune?

It is objected, though with some qualification, that Macbeth's courage
proceeds from exertion, not from nature; and that in enterprise he betrays a
deal of fear. Let us turn to the portrait once more.

Cap. No sooner justice had, with valor armed,
Compelled these skipping kernes to trust their heels;
But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
With furbish'd arms, and new supplies of men,
Began a fresh assault.

King. Dismayed not this
Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?

Cap. Yes;
As sparrows, eagles; or the hare, the lion.

(P. 449. v. 4.) The Thane of Rosse takes up the narrative; -- Norway himself,
with terrible numbers,
--
-- began a dismal conflict;
'Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapt in proof,
Confronted him with self-comparisons,
Point against point rebellious, arm against arm,
Curbing his lavish spirit: and to conclude,
The victory fell on us. --
P. 452. v. 4.

Is it to betray fear in enterprise, already worn with the fatigues of a
hard-fought field, to rush, at disadvantage, on fresh supplies and terrible
numbers, unconcerned as eagles, when they swoop on sparrows, and lions, when
they strike a hare? It cannot be the labored effect of exertion, it is the
spontaneous impulse of a dauntless nature, that again hurries Bellona's
bridegroom, through all the horrors of a dismal conflict, to single out and
hold the royal invader point against point, till his resistless arm has curbed
his lavish spirit, and raised on his discomfiture the trophies of a second
conquest.

Macbeth now enters in the scene, and a deputation from the sovereign meets
him, with these gracious acknowledgements to his triumphant valor.

The king has happily received, Macbeth,
The news of thy success: and when he reads
Thy personal venture in the rebel's ^ight,
His wonder and his praises do contend,
Which should be thine, or his: silenced with that
In viewing over the rest of the self-same day,
He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
Nothing afraid of what thyself did make,
Strange images of death. As thick as tale,
Came post with post; and every one did bear
Thy praises in his kingdom's great defense
--
-- For an earnest of a greater honor,
He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor.
(P. 464. v. 4.) The king congratulates Macbeth on his success; and professes,
that the praise, due to his personal venture in the first battle, is lost in
silent wonder at the sublimity of his daring. How inexpressible, then, are
Duncan's feelings, when he finds him once more engaged, the self-same day, in
the stout Norweyan ranks, careless of meeting that death, which he was so
terribly dealing on the squadrons that surrounded him! The king confers the
forfeited honors of the disloyal Cawdor upon his general, only as a token of
those higher dignities, which all conspire to think his achievements in the
kingdom's great defense have justly merited.

Such is the character Shakspeare attributes to Macbeth, while yet the pureness
of his conscience is uncontaminated by guilt. The impetuosity of Glamis is the
decision of intrepidity; the feats of his own hand assure to him the renown of
gallantry; and the whole tenor of his conduct, throughout this perilous
adventure, unequivocally displays a soul, that, with Othello's, may -- agnize
A natural and prompt alacrity
It finds in hardness. --
(P. 465. v. 10.)

We come now to the second part of this question. The "Remarks" affirm, that
Macbeth is personally afraid of Banquo, and that his fear is founded on the
superior courage of the other.

The evidence, which is given in, of Banquo's superior courage may, perhaps, on
examination, seem but of little weight. Whence are the proofs of Macbeth's
cowardice to be brought? Not from his behavior in battle. It does not appear,
that, upon the first meeting of the witches, Macbeth is agitated much more than
Banquo; Banquo's description of their figures, and his several pertinent
questions to them (amounting, though, to no more than two) are not expressive
of mere curiosity, but of the surprise, with which himself and his partner are
equally affected, on their unexpectedly encountering three objects of so
grotesque an appearance, -- What are these,
So withered, and so wild in their attire;
That look not like the inhabitants of the earth,
And yet are on it? -- Live you? or are you ought
That man may question? --
(P. 406. v. 4.) If Macbeth only repeats the same inquiry, it is not from
timidity, but from a wish for the same information; and when he does it
shortly, he indicates his impatience for an answer.

Why should the speeches of Macbeth and Banquo, in this scene, appear to be
injudiciously distributed? And how will the difference in their characters
account for such a distribution? Banquo addresses the witches first: Banquo is
made to see them first; not in token of superiority, but merely, perhaps, that
their ceremonious silence to him, -- each at once her choppy finger laying
Upon her skinny lips, --
(P. 406. v. 4.) may heighten the solemnity of the prophetic greeting, with
which they are about to hail Macbeth. Yet, the distribution of the parts is of
so little moment, that it might have happened fortuitously: to have done,
however, with conjecture, the context evinces, that it is not produced for the
purpose of showing Banquo's superiority, in being perfectly calm under an
occurrence, that has ruffled Macbeth.

If Macbeth is amazed, when he sees the witches are vanished, and likens their
disappearance to the melting of breath into the wind; Banquo is struck too, and
compares them, in their sudden evanescence, to the bursting bubbles of the
water. -- (P. 464. v.4.)

Banquo cannot be said to treat the witches with contempt; he adjures them, --
IN the name of truth; -- (P. 462. v. 4.) and, with Macbeth, gives them, in some
sort, credit for More than mortal knowledge.
If you can look into the seeds of time,
And say, which grain will grow, and which will not;
Speak then to me, who neither beg, nor fear,
Your favors, nor your hate. --
(P. 462. v. 4.)

This is the language of manly firmness, not of contempt. He does not mean to
ridicule their prophecy by answering to Macbeth's question, Went it not so?
To the self-same tune, and words. --
(P. 464. v.4.) This is a grave, and precise, reply to a particular, and
interesting, demand. It has been observed, from the highest critical authority,
that Malcolm confirms the serious import of the speech in question, when he
calls the effusions of Macduff's grief and rage a manly "tune." -- P. 586. v.
4.) It is plain, that Banquo's exclamation --, What, can the devil speak true?
-- (P. 465. v. 4.) on hearing part of the prophecy fulfilled, is dictated by
wonder, not disregard; for, when Macbeth takes occasion, from that very event,
to question him on the hope, he now might reasonably entertain, of his family's
advancement, he solemnly replies, -- It Is strange;
And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,
The instruments of darkness tell us truths;
Win us with honest trifles, to betray us
In deepest consequence. --
(P. 466. v. 4.) Now let us advert to the subsequent effect, which the
declarations of the sisters have upon Banquo's mind: he prays to be delivered
from their temptations; -- Merciful powers!
Restrain in me the cursed thoughts, that nature
Gives way to in repose! --
(P.492. v. 4.)

Mr. Stevens, to whom every admirer of Shakspeare must feel himself under high
obligations, observes upon this passage, it is apparent from what Banquo says
afterward -- [to Macbeth, "I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters,"]
-- that he had been solicited in a dream to attempt something, in consequence
of the prophecy of the witches, that his waking senses were shocked at. -- (P.
492. v. 4.) -- These horrible emotions could never have been caused in him by
declarations, which he had contemned, ridiculed, or disregarded. The adventure
on the heath, therefore, does not prove Banquo's spirit greater than Macbeth's.

The "Remarks" proceed thus, in proof of Macbeth's personal fear of Banquo; his
principal object is the death of the father; and the securing of his crown
against Banquo's issue, who alone were pointed out to his jealousy by the
witches, is no more than a secondary consideration.

Macbeth, when he confesses to Lady Macbeth, that his mind is full of
scorpions, shows Banquo not to be the sole cause of his uneasiness, by adding,
"Thou know, that Banquo, and his Fleance, lives:" Moreover; directing the
assassins, he tells them, the son's absence is "no less material" to him, than
the father's; he urges the death of Fleance on a motive distinct from
cowardice; for, allowing, one moment, that he personally feared Banquo, it is
impossible to conceive he could have felt the same dread of a boy: again; had
his fears been personal they must have ended with the removal of the object of
them; but finding the son has not fallen with the father, he is again involved
in all his former apprehensions. Fleance is 'scap'd.
Then comes my fit again. --
(P. 538. v. 4.) The witches, it is true, only point out Banquo's issue to
Macbeth's jealousy; but acual is not possible progeny, and the loss of one
child does not prevent a man from begetting others: thus, the securing of his
crown against Banquo's issue is so far from being a secondary, that it is the
tyrant's only, instigation to this double murder.

The original idea of Macbeth's personally fearing Banquo seems founded on
these words; -- our fears in Banquo
Stick deep; --
and, -- There is none, but he,
Whose being I do fear, --
(P. 522. v, 4.)

It will be essentially necessary, toward explaining the sense of these strong
lines, to follow the train of reasoning through the context of the speech, from
which they are taken.

To be thus, is nothing;
But to be safely thus: -- Our fears in Banquo
Stick deep; and in his royalty of nature
Reigns that, which would be feared: It Is much he dares;
And, to that dauntless temper of his mind,
He has a wisdom, that does guide his valor
To act in safety. There is none, but he,
Whose being I do fear: and, under him,
My genius is rebuked; as, it is said,
Mark Anthony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters,
When first they put the name of king upon me,
And bade them speak to him; then, prophet-like,
They hailed him father to a line of kings:
Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown,
And put a barren scepter in my gripe,
Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand,
No son of mine succeeding. If it be so,
For Banquo's issue have I filled my mind;
For them the gracious Duncan have I murdered;
Put rancours in the vessel of my peace
Only for them; and mine eternal jewel
Given to the common enemy of man,
To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings!
Rather than so, come, fate, into the list,
And champion me to the utterance! --
(ibid.) In this soliloquy the usurper reflects, that, after all he has done to
obtain the crown, he is in great danger of losing it; weighs the causes of that
danger; and resolves, by removing them, to take effectual measures for the
firmly establishing of his supremacy. In other words; --

I have possessed myself of the sovereignty; but to what avail, when, in a
moment, it may be wrested from me? Banquo's eye is fixed upon it; and there
reigns in his very nature a royalty, that seems to realize his expectations: he
is not only a soldier of uncommon bravery, but so consummate a politician,
that, should he revolt against my government, he would infallibly carry his
designs successfully into execution. He is the only man alive, whose attempts I
dread: and he holds as high an ascendant over my good genius, as, it is said,
Caesar did over Mark Antony's. His hopes are not only strengthened by his
natural endowments, but emboldened too by the assurances of prophecy: hearing
me saluted king by the sisters, he bade them speak to him; they obeyed; and
hailed him father to a line of kings; they placed a crown upon my head, and put
a scepter in my hand, not to be transmitted to my own, but to be wrench'd away
by the unlineal inheritance of his, children. If so, I shall have perpetrated
such crimes, as must embitter every moment of my life in this world, and forbid
every hope of happiness in the world to come, only to make the seed of Banquo
kings! It must not be -- I here oppose myself to the prediction, and resolve by
extirpating his family, to elude the decrees of fate itself.

The usurper, then, does not plunge into fresh crimes to get rid of personal
fear -- ambition impels him to the murder of Duncan; and the same ambition
urges him on the destruction of Banquo and Fleance, who seem destined to
degrade him and his house from the splendors of monarchy to the obscurity of
vassalage.

The "Remarks" find additional proofs of Macbeth's cowardice in his conduct
toward Macduff -- " The same motives of personal fear, and those unmixed with
any other, impel him to seek the destruction of Macduff."

Macbeth is not wrought by personal fear, to destroy Macduff, but by the
knowledge of his disaffection, How say thou, that Macduff denies his person,
At our great bidding? --
(P. 546. v. 4.)

The discontented Thane of Fife is a man, whose parts and popularity are not to
be despised; he is described, -- Noble, wise, judicious, -- (P. 567. v. 4.) And
Rosse, speaking of the misfortune that had befallen him in the loss of his wife
and children, says, No mind, that is honest,
But in it shares some woe. --
(P. 584. v. 4.)

If Macbeth thanks the apparition, that had "harped his fears aright," -- it is
because, its caution justifying his suspicions, he shall now provide more
strenuously against the machinations of his enemy.

If, when told that, -- none of women born
Shall harm him, --
he says, Then live, Macduff; -- yet, repressing the feelings of confidence,
instantly adds, -- Thou shall not live;
That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies; --
the quality of that fear is decided, when (being assured, that he -- shall
never vanquished be, until
Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill
Shall come against him, --)
he exclaims, -- Our high-plac'd Macbeth
Shall live the lease of nature. --
(P. 562. v. 4.)

When the Thane of Fife encounters Macbeth in battle, the tyrant does not use
the power upon his life, which he believes himself possessed of, as instantly
he would, had he feared him; but, yielding to compunction for the inhuman
wrongs he had done him, wishes to avoid the necessity of adding Macduff's blood
to that, already spilt in the slaughter of his dearest connections. -- Get thee
back, my soul is too much charged
With blood of thine already.

Macd. I have no words,
My voice is in my sword; thou bloodier villain
Than terms can give thee out! -- ( Fight.)

Match. Thou losest labor:
As easy may thou the intrenchant air
With thy keen sword impress, as make me bleed:
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests;
I bear a charmed life, which must not yield
To one of woman born. --

(P. 606. v. 4.) Unmoved by Macduff's taunts and furious attack, Macbeth
advises him to employ his valor where success may follow it, and generously
warns him against persisting to urge an unequal combat with one, whom destiny
had, pronounced invincible. --

The "Remarks" would now condemn Macbeth from his own confession of the truth
of the accusations brought against him -- That apprehension was his reason for
these murders, he intimates himself; when meditating on that of Banquo, he
observes, that, Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill. -- (P. 535. a.
3. s. 2.) And when that of Macduff is in contemplation, he says, -- I am in
blood
Stepped in so far, that, should I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go over. --
(P. 546. v. 4.)

The comment on these passages, which Cibber puts into the mouth of king
Richard, is remarkable, and justly explains their meaning.

Crowns got with blood must be with blood maintained. (Act 3.) and, When I look
back, it is terrible retreating;
I cannot bear the thought, nor dare repent. --
(Act 5.)

In a word, Macbeth does not meditate the deaths of Banquo and Macduff through
personal fear of them; but because his ambition renders the former obnoxious to
his envy, and the latter to his hatred.

It must now be shown, that the proofs of Richard's superior courage are not
conclusive against Macbeth. Equal firmness in equal trials will invalidate some
of them; some are to be refuted by showing that what is objected to Macbeth as
timidity will as strongly affect Richard himself; and some may, perhaps, be
founded on misappreheasion of fact, or sentiment.

If it is a mark of resolution in Richard that, when Tyrrel informs him the
princes are dispatched, though certain of the event, he is solicitous to hear
at leisure in what manner it was conducted -- Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after
supper,
When thou shall tell the process of their death; --
(P. 115. v. 7.)

Macbeth must be allowed to display precisely the same quality, when he says to
the murderer, who has related to him the process of Banquo's death, -- Get thee
gone; tomorrow
We'll hear, ourselves again.
(P. 558. v. 4)

The "Remarks" proceed -- Macbeth's suspicions extend to all his great lords --
There is not a one of them, but in his house
I keep a servant fee'd; --
(p. 546. v. 4.) and, " he tells the physician," -- The Thanes fly from me. --
(P. 596. v. 4.) Does not Richard betray as much suspicion when he dares not
trust Stanley, till he has taken the young lord Strange as a surety for his
fidelity? -- and is he not as anxious from a mere doubt of his followers, as
Macbeth is on finding himself really deserted? K. Rich. O Ratcliff, I have
dreamed a fearful dream! --
What think thou? -- Will our friends prove all true? --

Rat. No doubt, my Lord.

K. Rich. I fear, I fear.
--
--
-- Come, go with me Under our tents; I Will play the eaves-dropper,
To hear, if any mean to shrink from me.

(P. 156. v. 7.)

Mr. W. says, His going round the camp, just before the battle, to listen if
any meant to shrink from him, is proper on that particular occasion -- Agreed
-- But why think the same action proper conduct in Richard, and cowardice in.
Macbeth? --

The "Remarks," bent upon exalting Richard at Macbeth's expense, say, The same
determined spirit carries him through the bloody business of murdering his
nephews: and when Buckingham shows a reluctance to be concerned in it, he
immediately looks out for another -- Had Macbeth been thus disappointed in the
person to whom he had opened himself, it would have disconcerted any design he
had formed.

It appears, however, that the persons Macbeth opened himself to, were not
wrought to his purpose on their first interview; yet it does not disconcert his
designs; he sends for them again, repeats his former conversation, and prevails
with them by strong arguments, and large promises, to undertake a murder, the
execution whereof he steadily persists in. P. 325. v. 4.

Again, All the crimes Richard commits are for his advancement, not for his
security.

Richard removes Clarence and Hastings, as Macbeth does Duncan, for his
advancement; but he murders his nephews and his wife, as Macbeth does Banquo,
to secure himself in that advancement.

Why should it be supposed Macbeth catches the terrors he sees expressed in the
countenance of the messenger, who informs him of numbers of the enemy? Ser.
There is ten thousand --

Match. Geese, villain?

Ser. Soldiers, Sir.

Match. Go, prick thy face, and over-red thy fear,
Thou lily-liver'd boy. What soldiers, Patch?
Death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine
Are counselors to fear. --

(P. 593. v.4.) --

From the contemptuous manner in which he treats the intelligence, he seems
rather to imagine what effect such looks might have upon the garrison, than to
acknowledge any they have produced upon himself -- What is Richard's composure
in a similar situation? The information he receives of insurrections in
Devonshire and Kent being followed by news of Buckingham's army, striking the
messenger, he exclaims, Out on ye owls! -- nothing but songs of death?
There, take thou that. --
(P. 137. v.7.)

Macbeth's courage is impeached, because he calls for his armor,
notwithstanding Seyton's remonstrance, that It is not needed yet -- persists in
putting it on; calls for it again eagerly afterward; bids. the person who is
assisting him Dispatch -- then, the moment it is on, pulls it off again, and
directs his attendants to, Bring it after. -- (P. 597. v. 4.)

Is there more confusion and inconsistency in this, than in the following,
scene? Rat. Most mighty sovereign, on the western coast
Rides a puissant navy; to the shore
Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,
Unarmed and unresolved, to beat them back:
It Is thought, that Richmond is their admiral;
And there they hull, expecting but the aid
Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.

K. Rich. Some light-foot friend post to the duke of Norfolk; --
Ratcliff, thyself, -- or Catesby; -- where is he?

Cates. Here, my good lord.

K. Rich. Catesby, fly to the duke --

Cates. I will, my lord, with all convenient haste.

K. Rich. Ratcliffe, come hither: post to Salisbury;
When thou come thither -- Dull, unmindful villain,
(To Catesby.) Why stay'st thou here, and go not to the duke?

Cates. First, mighty liege, tell me your highness' pleasure,
What from your grace I shall deliver to him.

K. Rich. O, true, good Catesby; -- Bid him levy straight
The greatest strength and power he can make,
And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.

Cates. I go.

Rat. What, may it please you, shall I do at Salisbury?

K. Rich. Why, what would thou do there before I go?

Rat. Your highness told me, I should post before.

K. Rich. My mind is changed. --

' (P. 134. v. 7.)

Arguing principally from the recited instances of it, the "Remarks" say, These
are all symptoms of timidity, which he confesses to have been natural to him,
when he owns that The time has been my senses would have cooled To hear a
night-shriek, and my fell of hair Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir, As
life were in it. -- I have supt full of horrors; Direness, familiar to my
slaught'rous thoughts, Cannot once start me. -- (P. 599. v. 4.)

Here Mr. W. refutes his own position; for, if his interpretation of these
lines be admitted, he must allow that Macbeth, whatever his former feelings
were, has no timidity in his disposition now. But the passage refers neither to
fear or courage -- it is a pathetic reflection on the dreadful change produced
in his humane habits, during a seventeen years usurpation, the records whereof
are crowded with practices so oppressive and bloody, as have hardened his once
easily yielding temper against all impressions of sensibility, and the
charities of nature.

P. 76. When Richard " asks" My lord of Surry, why look you so sad? -- (P. 144.
v. 7.) and afterward " enquires," Saw thou the melancholy lord
Northumberland? (P. 147. v. 7.) he is not satisfied upon being told, that he
and Surry were busied in Chearing up the foldiers. -- He would, indeed, fain
persuade himself to be satisfied; but, in reality, he is far from being at
ease. I am satisfied -- Give me a bowl of wine:
I have not the alacrity of spirit,
Nor cheer of mind, that I was will not to have. --
(P. 148. v. 7.) The nature of Richard's question on Surry's sadness, and
observation of Northumberland's melancholy, may be exemplified from Mr. W's
judicious reflection on Macbeth's interrogatories to the physician -- Can
thou not minister to a mind diseased; Pluck from the memory, etc. etc. -- (P.
596. v. 4.) Though it is the disorder of Lady Macbeth that gives occasion to
these questions, yet, -- in his own mind, he is all the while making
application to himself. Richard represents the enemy as a troop of banditti; A
sort of vagabonds, rascals, and run-aways, A scum of Britains, and base lackey
peasants, etc. (P. 165. v. 7.)

This harangue to his army should not have been quoted as an instance of
Richard's intrepidity; for it does not contain his real sentiments of
Richmond's friends: the inferiority of the foe is a topic which generals, to
encourage their own troops, have commonly affected; and Richard never could
have seriously held in contempt such enemies as Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned
soldier;
Sir Gilbert Talbot, and Sir William Stanley;
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,
And Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant crew;
And many others of great name and worth. --
(P. 139. v. 7.)

When lady Macbeth, finding her husband will proceed no further in the bloody
business of his sovereign's death, reproaches him thus; -- Would thou have
that,
Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life,
And live a coward in thine own esteem;
Letting I dare not wait upon I would --? --
(P. 488. v. 4.) his reply, I dare do all that may become a man -- is so far
being an assertion of mere manliness of character, in Mr. W's sense, that it
sublimely expresses an entire contempt of danger, and reverence for virtue.

To compare Macbeth and Richard under the influence of visions -- Macbeth
addresses Banquo thus, Why, what care I? If thou can nod, speak too. If
charnel-houses, and our graves, must send Those that we bury, back; our
monuments Shall be the maws of kites. -- (P. 541. v. 6.)

Again What man dare, I dare:
Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
The armed rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger,
Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble: Or, be alive again,
And dare me to the desert with thy sword;
If trembling I inhabit, then protest me
The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!
Unreal mockery, hence! --
(P. 543. v. 4.) Notwithstanding the firmness of this defiance, it cannot be
supposed but Macbeth is as much terrified while he utters it, as Richard is,
when, starting out of a dream in which the souls of those he had murdered had
appeared to him, he cries, Have mercy, Jesu! -- soft; I did but dream. --
O coward conscience, how do thou afflict me!
The lights burn blue. -- Is it not dead midnight?
Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh, etc.
(P. 154. v. 7.)

Superstition may be a sign of timidity -- Macbeth's superstition is founded on
the strong assurances of preternatural agents, whose first promises to him had
been made good -- Richard condescends to be affected by omens, Richmond! --
when I was last at Exeter,
The mayor in courtsy showed me the castle,
And called it Rouge-m^nt: at which name I started;
Because a bard of Ireland told me once,
I should not live long after I saw Richmond. --
(P. 112. v. 7.) Again; The sun will not be seen today;
The sky does frown and lour upon our army.
I would these dewy tears were from the ground! --
(P. 159. v. 7.) It will be said, and it will be granted, that Richard
presently stifles these emotions: it is only asserted that he feels them, like
Macbeth; and that Macbeth, like him, can overcome them. -- The wood of Birnam
moves toward Dunsinane -- The tyrant Doubts the equivocation of the fiend. --
and, believing the laws of nature invented to his ruin, Pulls in resolution. --
Instantly, however, he shakes off this momentary dismay, -- Blow, wind! come,
wrack!
At least we'll die with our harness on our back. --
(P. 604. v. 4.) He rushes upon the enemy -- encounters Macduff -- The sisters
have palter'd with him; he has done with belief in the juggling fiends, and can
rely upon himself -- Though Birnam wood be come to Dunfinane,
And thou opposed, being of no woman born,
Yet I will try thy last: before my body
I throw my warlike shield: lay on, Macduff;
And damned be him that first cries, hold, enough.
(P. 608. v. 4.) This conduct in Macbeth is stigmatized with the name of
despair. -- It certainly is of the same nature with Richard's determination: --
I have set my life upon a cast,
And I will stand the hazard of the die. --
(P. 164. v. 7.) The resolution of both tyrants in the battles, that decided
their fate, is that mixed effusion of grief, shame, and pride, which cannot be
denominated less than the despair of innate bravery.

If Macbeth's behavior is to be called cowardly, when, overpowered by the
completion of the prophecies, he, for a moment, declines the combat with
Macduff; so must Richard's, when he flies with Hastings before Warwick and
Somerset, leaving Edward to the mercy of the Lancastrians. -- P. 52^. v. 6.

From the review of the characters of the usurpers, it appears not to be true
of Richard, that upon no occasion, however tremendous, end at no moment of his
life, however unguarded, does he betray the least symptom of fear; -- or of
Macbeth, that he is always shaken upon great, and frequently upon trivial
occasions.

Macbeth and Richard are each of them as intrepid as man can be: yet, it may be
said of each, without any derogation from that character, that he is, at times,
agitated with apprehensions. The Earl of Peterborough has left it upon record,
that intrepidity and sense of danger are by no means incompatible.

Having endeavored to prove, that Macbeth has a just right to the reputation
of intrepidity; that he feels no personal dread of Banquo and Macduff; and that
he meets equal, not to say superior, trials, as boldly as Richard; it may be
expected this essay should attempt to show in what the essential difference
between these great bad men consists.

Ambition is the impulse that governs every action of Richard's life; he
attains the crown by dissimulation, that owns no respect for virtue; and by
cruelty, which entails no remorse on the va^our, that would maintain his
ill-acquir'd dignity. Ambition is the predominant vice of Macbeth's nature; but
he gratifies it by hypocrisy, that reveres virtue too highly to be perfectly
itself; and by murders, the recollection whereof, at times, renders his valor,
useless by depriving him of all fense, but that of his enormous wickedness.
Richard's character is simple, Macbeth's mixed. Richard is only intrepid,
Macbeth intrepid, and feeling. Richard's mind not being diverted by reflection
from the exigencies of his situation, he is always at full leisure to display
his valor; Macbeth, distracted by remorse, loses all apprehension of danger in
the contemplation of his guilt; and never recurs to his valor for support,
till the enemy's approach rouzes his whole soul, and conscience is repelled by
the necessity for exertion.

The writer of the above pages cannot conclude without saying, he read the
Remarks on some of Shakspeare's Characters with so much general pleasure and
conviction, that he wishes his approbation were considerable enough to increase
the celebrity which Mr. Wheatley's memory has acquired from a work, so usefully
intended, and so elegantly performed.

FINIS.

