OF THE CHARACTERS of WOMEN: AN EPISTLE to a LADY, By Mr. POPE.

(Price One Shilling.)

OF THE CHARACTERS of WOMEN: AN EPISTLE TO A LADY.

By Mr. POPE.

LONDON: Printed by J. Wright, for LAWTON GILLIVER at Homer's Head against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, MDCCXXXV. (Price One Shilling.)

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author being very sensible how particular a Tenderness is due to the
FEMALE SEX, and at the same time how little they generally show to each other;
declares, upon his Honor, that no one Character is drawn from the Life, in
this Epistle. It would otherwise be most improperly inscribed to a Lady, who,
of all the Women he knows, is the last that would be entertained at the Expense
of Another.

OF THE CHARACTERS of WOMEN: AN EPISTLE To a LADY.
NOTHING so true as what you once let fall,
Most Women have no Characters at all.
Matter too soft a lasting mark to bear,
And best distinguished by black, brown, or fair.
How many Pictures of one Nymph we view,
All how unlike each other, all how true!
Arcadia's Countess, here, in ermin'd pride,
There, Pastorella by a Fountain side:
Here Fannia leering on her own good man,
And there a naked Leda with a Swan.
Let then the Fair-one beautifully cry
In Magdalen's loose hair and lifted eye,
Or dressed in smiles of sweet Cecilia shine,
With simp'ring Angels, Palms, and Harps divine;
Whether the Charmer sinner it, or saint it,
When Folly grows romantic, we must paint it.
Come then, the Colors and the ground prepare!
Dip in the Rainbow, trick her off in Air,
Choose a firm Cloud before it falls, and in it
Catch, e're she change, the Cynthia of this minute.
Rufa, whose eye quick-glancing over the Park,
Attracts each light gay Meteor of a Spark,
Agrees as ill with Rufa studying Lock,
As Flavia's diamonds with her dirty smock,
Or Flavia's self in glue (her rising task)
And issuing flagrant to an evening Mask:
So morning Insects that in Muck begun,
Shine, buzz, and fly-blow, in the setting-sun.
How soft is Silia! fearful to offend,
The frail one's Advocate, and weak one's Friend:
To her, Calista proved her Conduct nice,
And good Simplicius asks of her Advice.
Sudden, she storms! she raves! You tip the wink,
But spare your censure; Silia does not drink.
All eyes may see from what the change arose,
All eyes may see -- a Pimple on her nose.
Papillia, wedded to her amorous Spark,
Sighs for the Shades -- "How charming is a Park!
A Park is purchased, but the Fair he sees
All bathed in tears -- "Oh odious, odious Trees!
Ladies like variegated Tulips show,
It Is to their Changes half their Charms we owe;
Such happy Spots the nice Admirer take,
Fine by defect, and delicately weak.
'Twas thus Calypso once our hearts alarmed,
Awed without Virtue, without Beauty charmed;
Her Tongue bewitched as odly as her Eyes,
Less Wit than Mimic, more a Wit than wise:
Strange Graces still, and stranger Flights she had,
Was just not ugly, and was just not mad;
Yet never so sure our passion to create,
As when she touched the brink of all we hate.
Narcissa's nature, tolerably mild,
To make a Wash would hardly stew a Child;
Has even been proved to grant a Lover's prayer,
And paid a Tradesman once to make him stare;
Gave alms at Easter, in a christian trim,
And made a Widow happy, for a whim.
Why then declare Goodnature is her scorn,
When it is by that alone she can be born?
Why pique all mortals, yet affect a name?
A Fool to Pleasure, yet a Slave to Fame!
Now deep in Tailor and the Book of Martyrs,
Now drinking Citron with his Grace and Ch**:
Now Conscience chills her, and now Passion burns,
And Atheism and Religion take their turns;
A very Heathen in the carnal part,
Yet still a sad, good Christian at her heart.
Flavia's a Wit, has too much sense to pray,
To toast our wants and wishes, is her way;
Nor asks of God but of her Stars to give
The mighty blessing, "while we live, to live."
Then all for Death, that Opiate of the Soul!
Lucretia's Dagger, Rosamonda's Bowl.
Say, what can cause such impotence of mind?
A Spark too fickle, or a Spouse too kind.
Wise Wretch! of Pleasures too refined to please,
With too much Spirit to be ever at Ease,
With too much Quickness ever to be taught,
With too much Thinking to have common Thought:
You purchase Pain with all that Joy can give,
And die of nothing but a Rage to live.
Turn then from Wits; and look on Simo's Mate,
No Ass so meek, no Ass so obstinate:
Or her, that owns her Faults, but never mends
Because she is honest, and the best of Friends:
Or her, whose Life the Church and Scandal share,
For ever in a Passion, or a Prayer:
Or who in sweet Vicissitude appears
Of Mirth and Opium, Ratafie and Tears,
The daily Anodyne, and nightly Draught,
To kill those Foes to Fair ones, Time and Thought.
Woman and Fool are two hard Things to hit,
For true No-meaning puzzles more than Wit.
Pictures like these, (dear Madam) to design,
Asks no firm hand, and no unerring line;
Some wandering Touches, some reflected Light,
Some flying Stroke, alone can hit them right:
For how should equal Colors do the knack,
Camelions who can paint in White and Black?
IN public Stations Men sometimes are shown,
A Woman's seen in Private life alone:
Our bolder Talents in full view displayed,
Your Virtues open fairest in the Shade.
Bred to disguise, in Public it is you hide;
Where none distinguish 'twixt your Shame and Pride,
Weakness or Delicacy; all so nice,
Each is a sort of Virtue, and of Vice.
In several Men we several Passions find,
In Women, two almost divide the Kind,
Those only fixed, they first or last obey;
The Love of Pleasures, and the Love of Sway.
That, Nature gives; and where the Lesson taught
Is but to please, can Pleasure seem a fault?
Experience, This; by Man's Oppression cursed,
They seek the second not to lose the first.
Men, some to Business, some to Pleasure take,
But every Woman is, at heart, a Rake:
Men, some to Quiet, some to public Strife,
But every Lady would be Queen for life.
Yet mark the fate of a whole Sex of Queens!
Power all their end, but Beauty all the means.
In Youth they conquer with so wild a rage,
As leaves them scarce a Subject in their Age:
For foreign Glory, foreign Joy, they roam;
No thought of Peace or Happiness at home.
But Wisdom's Triumph is well-tim'd Retreat,
As hard a Science to the Fair as Great!
Beauties like Tyrants, old and friendless grown,
Yet hate Repose, and dread to be Alone,
Worn out in public, weary every eye,
Nor leave one sigh behind them when they di^.
Pleasures the Sex, as Children birds, pursue,
Still out of reach, yet never out of view,
Sure, if they catch, to spoil the Toy at most,
To covet flying, and regret when lost:
At last, to Follies Youth could scarce defend
It grows their Age's prudence to pretend;
Ashamed to own they gave delight before,
Reduced to feign it, when they give no more.
As Hags hold Sabbaths, less for joy than spite,
So these their merry, miserable Night;
Still round and round the Ghosts of Beauty glide,
And haunt the Places where their Honor died.
See how the World its Veterans rewards!
A Youth of Frolicks, an old Age of Cards,
Fair to no purpose, artful to no end,
Young without Lovers, old without a Friend,
A Fop their Passion, but their Prize a Sot,
Alive, ridiculous, and dead, forgot!
Ah Friend! to dazzle let the Vain design,
To raise the Thought and touch the Heart, be thine!
That Charm shall grow, while what fatigues the Ring
Flaunts and goes down, an unregarded thing.
So when the Sun's broad beam has tired the sight,
All mild ascends the Moon's more sober light,
Serene in Virgin Modesty she shines,
And unobserved the glaring Orb declines.
Oh blessed with Temper! whose unclouded ray
Can make to morrow cheerful as to day;
That pleased can see a younger charm, or hear
Sighs for a Sister with unwounded ear;
That never shall answer till a Husband cool,
Or, if you rule him, never show you rule;
Please by receiving, by submitting sway,
Yet have your humor most, when you obey;
Let Fops or Fortune fly which way they will;
Despise all loss of Tickets or Codille;
Spleen, Vapors, or Smallpox, above them all,
And Mistress of youtself, though China fall.
And yet believe me, good as well as ill,
Woman's at best a Contradiction still.
Heaven, when it strives to polish all it can
Its last, best work, but forms a softer Man;
Picks from each Sex, to make the Favorite blessed,
Your love of Pleasure, our desire of Rest,
Blends, in exception to all general rules,
Your Taste of Follies, with our Scorn of Fools,
Reserve with Frankness, Art with Truth allied,
Courage with Softness, Modesty with Pride,
Fixed Principles, with Fancy ever new;
Shakes all together, and produces -- You.
Even such is Woman's Fame: With this un-blest,
Toasts live a scorn, and Queens may die a jest.
This Phoebus promised, I forget the Year,
When those blue eyes first opened on the Sphere;
Ascendant Phoebus watched that hour with care,
Averted half your Parents simple Prayer,
And gave you Beauty, but denied the Pelf
That buys your Sex a Tyrant over itself:
That generous God, who Wit and Gold refines,
And ripens Spirits as he ripens Mines,
Kept Dross for Duchesses, the world shall know it,
To you gave Sense, Good Humor, and a Poet.
Speedily will be Published,

Beautifully printed in QUARTO and FOLIO, of the same Sizes with Mr. POPE's
HOMER, etc.

THE WORKS of Mr. ALEXANDER POPE, Vol. II. which compleats all his Works,
containing I. The Essay on Man, or, the first Book of Ethick Epistles, to H.
St. John, L. Bolingbroke. II. Epistles to several Persons, Of the Knowledge and
Characters of Men, to the Lord Viscount Cobham. Of the Characters of Women, to
a Lady. Of the Use of Riches, to the Lord Bathurst. Of False Taste, to the Earl
of Burlington. Of Himself and his Writings, to Dr. Arbuthnot, with some other
Epistles. SATIRES of Horace, Imitated. SATIRES of Dr. Done, Versify'd.
III. The DUNCIAD, with Notes and Prolegomena: and some additional Pieces.
The Whole to be had together, or Parts singly, to complete former Setts.

This Week will also be published An ESSAY on REASON.


All Printed for LAWTON GILLIVER at Homer's Head against St. Dunstan's Church
in Fleetstreet.


