THE TEMPLE OF FAME.

Price One Shilling.

The Temple of Fame.
L (...) Cheron inv.

Saml. Gribelin Junr. Sculp.



THE TEMPLE OF FAME: A VISION.

By Mr. POPE.

THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for BERNARD LINTOTT between the two Temple-Gates in
Fleetstreet. 1715.

Advertisement.
THE Hint of the following Piece was taken from Chaucer's House of Fame. The
Design is in a manner entirely altered, the Descriptions and most of the
particular Thoughts my own: Yet I could not suffer it to be printed without
this Acknowledgment, or think a Concealment of this Nature the less unfair for
being common. The Reader who would compare this with Chaucer, may begin with
his Third Book of Fame, there being nothing in the Two first Books that answers
to their Title.

THE TEMPLE OF FAME.
IN that soft Season when descending Showers
Call forth the Greens, and wake the rising Flowers;
When opening Buds salute the welcome Day,
And Earth relenting feels the Genial Ray;
As balmy Sleep had charmed my Cares to Rest,
And Love it self was banished from my Breast,
(What Time the Morn mysterious Visions brings,
While purer Slumber spread their golden Wings)
A Train of Phantoms in wild Order rose,
And, joined, this Intellectual Scene compose.
I stood, methought, betwixt Earth, Seas, and Skies;
The whole Creation open to my Eyes:
In Air self-balanc'd hung the Globe below,
Where Mountains rise, and circling Oceans flow;
Here naked Rocks and empty Wastes were seen,
There tow'ry Cities, and the Forests green:
Here sailing Ships delight the wandering Eyes;
There Trees, and intermingl'd Temples rise:
Now a clear Sun the shining Scene displays,
The transient Landscape now in Clouds decays.
Over the wide Prospect as I gazed around,
Sudden I heard a wild promiscuous Sound,
Like broken Thunders that at distance roar,
Or Billows murmuring on the hollow Shore:
Then gazing up, a glorious Pile beheld,
Whose towering Summit ambient Clouds concealed.
High on a Rock of Ice the Structure lay,
Steep its Ascent, and slippery was the Way;
The wondrous Rock like Parian Marble shone,
And seemed to distant Sight of solid Stone.
Inscriptions here of various Names I viewed,
The greater Part by hostile Time subdued;
Yet wide was spread their Fame in Ages past,
And Poets once had promised they should last.
Some fresh engraved appeared of Wits renowned;
I looked again, nor could their Trace be found.
Critics I saw, that others Names deface,
And fix their own with Labor in their place:
Their own like others soon their Place resigned,
Or disappeared, and left the first behind.
Nor was the Work impaired by Storms alone,
But felt the Approaches of too warm a Sun:
For Fame, impatient of Extremes, decays
Not more by Envy than Excess of Praise.
Yet Part no Injuries of Heaven could feel,
Like Crystal faithful to the graving Steel:
The Rock's high Summit, in the Temple's Shade,
Nor Heat could melt, nor beating Storm invade.
There Names inscribed unnumber'd Ages past
From Time's first Birth, with Time it self shall last;
These ever new, nor subject to Decays,
Spread, and grow brighter with the Length of Days.
So Zembla's Rocks (the beauteous Work of Frost)
Rise white in Air, and glitter over the Coast;
Pale Suns, unfelt, at distance roll away,
And on the impassive Ice the Lightnings play:
Eternal Snows the growing Mass supply,
Till the bright Mountains prop the incumbent Sky:
As Atlas fixed, each hoary Pile appears,
The gathered Winter of a thousand Years.
On this Foundation Fame's high Temple stands;
Stupendous Pile! not reared by mortal Hands.
Whatever proud Rome, or artful Greece beheld,
Or elder Babylon, its Frame excelled.
Four Faces had the Dome, and every Face
Of various Structure, but of equal Grace:
Four brazen Gates, on Columns lifted high,
Salute the different Quarters of the Sky.
Here fabled Chiefs in darker Ages born,
Or Worthies old, whom Arms or Arts adorn,
Who Cities raised, or tamed a monstrous Race;
The fourfold Walls in breathing Statues grace:
Heroes in animated Marble frown,
And Legislators seem to think in Stone.
Westward, a sumptuous Frontispiece appeared,
On Dorick Pillars of white Marble reared,
Crowned with an Architrave of antique Mold,
And Sculpture rising on the roughen'd Gold.
In shaggy Spoils here Theseus was beheld,
And Perseus dreadful with Minerva's Shield:
There great Alcides stooping with his Toil,
Rests on his Club, and holds the Hesperian Spoil.
Here Orpheus sings; Trees moving to the Sound
Start from their Roots, and form a Shade around:
Amphion there the loud creating Lyre
Strikes, and beholds a sudden Thebes aspire;
Cythaeron's Echoes answered to his Call,
And half the Mountain rolled into a Wall:
There might you see the lengthening Spires ascend,
The Domes swell up, the widening Arches bend,
The growing Towers like Exhalations rise,
And the huge Columns heave into the Skies.
The Eastern Front was glorious to behold,
With Diamond flaming, and Barbarick Gold.
There Ninus shone, who spread the Assyrian Fame,
And the great Founder of the Persian Name:
There in long Robes the Royal Magi stand,
Grave Zoroaster waves the circling Wand:
The sage Chaldaeans robbed in White appeared,
And Brachmans deep in desert Woods revered.
These stopped the Moon, and called the unbody'd Shades
To Midnight Banquets in the glimmering Glades;
Made visionary Fabrics round them rise,
And airy Specter skim before their Eyes;
Of Talismans and Sigils knew the Power,
And careful watched the Planetary Hour.
Superior, and alone, Confucius stood,
Who taught that useful Science, to be good.
But on the South a long Majestic Race
Of Aegypt's Priests the gilded Niches grace,
Who measured Earth, described the starry Spheres,
And traced the long Records of Lunar Years.
High on his Car Sesostris struck my View,
Whom sceptered Slaves in golden Harness drew:
His Hands a Bow and pointed Javelin hold,
His Giant Limbs are armed in Scales of Gold.
Between the Statues Obelisks were placed,
And the learned Walls with Hieroglyphics graced.
Of Gothic Structure was the Northern Side,
O'erwrought with Ornaments of barbarous Pride.
There huge Colosses rose, with Trophies crowned,
And Runick Characters were engraved around:
There sat Zamolxis with erected Eyes,
And Odin here in mimick Trances dies.
There, on rude Iron Columns smeared with Blood,
The horrid Forms of Scythian Heroes stood,
Druids and Bards (their once loud Harps unstrung)
And Youths that died to be by Poets sung.
These and a thousand more of doubtful Fame,
To whom old Fables gave a lasting Name,
In Ranks adorned the Temple's outward Face;
The Wall in Luster and Effect like Glass,
Which over each Object casting various Dies,
Enlarges some, and others multiplies.
Nor void of Emblem was the mystic Wall,
For thus Romantic Fame increases all.
The Temple shakes, the sounding Gates unfold,
Wide Vaults appear, and Roofs of fretted Gold,
Raised on a thousand Pillars, wreathed around
With Lawrel-Foliage, and with Eagles crowned:
Of bright, transparent Beryl were the Walls,
The Freezes Gold, and Gold the Capitals:
As Heaven with Stars, the Roof with Jewels glows,
And ever living Lamps depend in Rows.
Full in the Passage of each spacious Gate
The sage Historians in white Garments wait;
Engraved over their Seats the Form of Time was found,
His Scythe reversed, and both his Pinions bound.
Within, stood Heroes who through loud Alarms
In bloody Fields pursued Renown in Arms.
High on a Throne with Trophies charged, I viewed
The Youth that all things but himself subdued;
His Feet on Sceptres and Tiara's trod,
And his horned Head expressed the Libyan God.
There Caesar, graced with both Minerva's, shone;
Caesar, the World's great Master, and his own;
Unmoved, superior still in every State;
And scarce detested in his Country's Fate.
But chief were those who not for Empire fought,
But with their Toils their People's Safety bought:
High over the rest Epaminondas stood;
Timoleon, glorious in his Brother's Blood;
And Scipio, Savior of the Roman State,
Great in his Triumphs, in Retirement great.
Here too the Wise and Good their Honors claim,
Much-suff'ring Heroes, of less noisy Fame,
Fair Virtue's silent Train: Supreme of these
Here ever shines the Godlike Socrates.
Here triumphs He whom Athens did expel,
In all things Just, but when he signed the Shell.
Here his Abode the martyred Phocion claims,
With Agis, not the last of Spartan Names:
Unconquered Cato shows the Wound he tore,
And Brutus his ill Genius meets no more.
But in the Center of the hallowed Quire
Six pompous Column's over the rest aspire;
Around the Shrine it self of Fame they stand,
Hold the chief Honors, and the Fane command.
High on the first, the mighty Homer shone;
Eternal Adamant composed his Throne;
Father of Verse! in holy Fillets dressed,
His Silver Beard waved gently over his Breast;
Though blind, a Boldness in his Looks appears,
In Years he seemed, but not impaired by Years.
The Wars of Troy were round the Pillar seen:
Here fierce Tydides wounds the Cyprian Queen:
Here Hector glorious from Patroclus Fall,
Here dragged in Triumph round the Trojan Wall,
Motion and Life did every Part inspire,
Bold was the Work, and proved the Master's Fire;
A strong Expression most he seemed t'affect,
And here and there disclosed a brave Neglect.
A Golden Column next in Rank appeared,
On which a Shrine of purest Gold was reared;
Finished the whole, and labored every Part,
With patient Touches of unwearied Art:
The Mantuan there in sober Triumph sat,
Composed his Posture, and his Look sedate;
On Homer still he fixed a reverend Eye,
Great without Pride, in modest Majesty.
In living Sculpture on the Sides were spread
The Latian Wars, and haughty Turnus dead;
Eliza stretched upon the funeral Pyre,
Aeneas bending with his aged Sire:
Troy flamed in burnished Gold, and over the Throne
Arms and the Man in Golden Ciphers shone.
Four Swans sustain a Carr of Silver bright,
With Heads advanced, and Pinions stretched for Flight:
Here, like some furious Prophet, Pindar rode,
And seemed to labor with the inspiring God.
Across the Harp a careless Hand he flings,
And boldly sinks into the sounding Strings.
The figured Games of Greece the Column grace,
Neptune and Jove survey the rapid Race:
The Youth's hang over their Chariots as they run
The fiery Steeds seem starting from the Stone;
The Champions in distorted Postures threat,
And all appeared Irregularly great.
Here happy Horace tuned the Ausonian Lyre
To sweeter Sounds, and tempered Pindar's Fire:
Pleased with Alcaeus manly Rage t'infuse
The softer Spirit of the Sapphick Muse.
The polished Pillar different Sculptures grace;
A Work outlasting Monumental Brass.
Here smiling Loves and Bacchanals appear,
The Julian Star and Great Augustus here.
The Doves that round the Infant Poet spread
Myrtles and Bays, hung hovering over his Head.
Here in a Shrine that cast a dazzling Light,
Sat fixed in Thought the mighty Stagyrite;
His Sacred Head a radiant Zodiac crowned,
And various Animals his Sides surround;
His piercing Eyes, erect, appear to view
Superior Worlds, and look all Nature through.
With equal Rays immortal Tully shone,
The Roman Rostra decked the Consul's Throne:
Gathering his flowing Robe, he seemed to stand,
In Act to speak, and graceful, stretched his Hand:
Behind, Rome's Genius waits with Civick Crowns,
And the Great Father of his Country owns.
These massy Columns in a Circle rise,
Over which a pompous Dome invades the Skies:
Scarce to the Top I stretched my aching Sight,
So large it spread, and swelled to such a Height.
Full in the midst, proud Fame's Imperial Seat
With Jewels blazed, magnificently great;
The vivid Em'ralds there revive the Eye;
The flaming Rubies show their sanguine Dye;
Bright azure Rays from lively Saphirs stream,
And lucid Amber casts a Golden Gleam.
With various-colour'd Lights the Pavement shone,
And all on fire appeared the glowing Throne;
The Dome's high Arch reflects the mingled Blaze,
And forms a Rainbow of alternate Rays.
When on the Goddess first I cast my Sight,
Scarce seemed her Stature of a Cubit's height,
But swelled to larger Size, the more I gazed,
Till to the Roof her towering Front she raised.
With her, the Temple every Moment grew,
And ampler Vista's opened to my View,
Upward the Columns shoot, the Roofs ascend,
And Arches widen, and long Isles extend.
Such was her Form, as ancient Bards have told,
Wings raise her Arms, and Wings her Feet infold;
A Thousand busy Tongues the Goddess bears,
And Thousand open Eyes, and Thousand listening Ears.
Beneath, in Order ranged, the tuneful Nine
(Her Virgin Handmaids) still attend the Shrine:
With Eyes on Fame for ever fixed, they sing;
For Fame they raise the Voice, and tune the String.
With Time's first Birth began the Heavenly Lays,
And last Eternal through the Length of Days.
Around these Wonders as I cast a Look,
The Trumpet sounded, and the Temple shook,
And all the Nations, summoned at the Call,
From different Quarters fill the crowded Hall:
Of various Tongues the mingled Sounds were heard;
In various Garbs promiscuous Throngs appeared;
Thick as the Bees, that with the Spring renew
Their flowery Toils, and sip the fragrant Dew,
When the winged Colonies first tempt the Sky,
Over dusky Fields and shaded Waters fly,
Or settling, seize the Sweets the Blossoms yield,
And a low Murmur runs along the Field.
Millions of suppliant Crowds the Shrine attend,
And all Degrees before the Goddess bend;
The Poor, the Rich, the Valiant, and the Sage,
And boasting Youth, and Narrative old Age.
Their Pleas were different, their Request the same,
For Good and Bad alike are fond of Fame.
Some she disgraced, and some with Honors crowned;
Unlike Successes equal Merits found.
Thus her blind Sister, fickle Fortune reigns,
And undiscerning, scatters Crowns and Chains.
First at the Shrine the Learned World appear,
And to the Goddess thus prefer their Prayer:
Long have we sought t'instruct and please Mankind,
With Studies pale, with Midnight Vigils blind;
But thanked by few, rewarded yet by none,
We here appeal to thy superior Throne:
On Wit and Learning the just Prize bestow,
For Fame is all we must expect below.
The Goddess heard, and bade the Muses raise
The Golden Trumpet of eternal Praise:
From Pole to Pole the Winds diffuse the Sound,
That fills the Circuit of the World around;
Not all at once, as Thunder breaks the Cloud;
The Notes at first were rather sweet than loud:
By just degrees they every moment rise,
Fill the wide Earth, and gain upon the Skies.
At every Breath were balmy Odours shed,
Which still grew sweeter as they wider spread:
Less fragrant Scents the unfolding Rose exhales,
Or Spices breathing in Arabian Gales.
Next these the Good and Just, an awful Train,
Thus on their Knees addressed the sacred Fane.
Since living Virtue is with Envy cursed,
And the best Men are treated like the worst,
Do thou, just Goddess, call our Merits forth,
And give each Deed the exact intrinsic Worth.
Not with bare Justice shall your Act be crowned,
(Said Fame) but high above Desert renowned:
Let fuller Notes the applauding World amaze,
And the loud Clarion labor in your Praise.
This Band dismissed, behold another Crowd
Preferred the same Request, and lowly bowed,
The constant Tenor of whose well spent Days
No less deserved a just Return of Praise.
But strait the direful Trump of Slander sounds,
Through the big Dome the doubling Thunder bounds:
Loud as the Burst of Cannon rends the Skies,
The dire Report through every Region flies:
In every Ear incessant Rumors rung,
And gathering Scandals grew on every Tongue.
From the black Trumpet's rusty Concave broke
Sulphurous Flames, and Clouds of rolling Smoke:
The poisonous Vapor blots the purple Skies,
And withers all before it as it flies.
A Troop came next, who Crowns and Armor wore,
And proud Defiance in their Looks they bore:
For thee (they cried) amidst Alarms and Strife,
We sailed in Tempests down the Stream of Life;
For thee whole Nations filled with Flames and Blood,
And swam to Empire through the purple Flood.
Those Ills we dared thy Inspiration own,
And all that Virtue seemed was done for thee alone.
Ambitious Fools! (the Queen replied, and frowned)
Be all your Acts in dark Oblivion crowned;
There sleep forgot, with mighty Tyrants gone,
Your Statues moulder'd, and your Names unknown.
A sudden Cloud strait snatched them from my Sight,
And each Majestic Phantom sunk in Night.
Then came the smallest Tribe I yet had seen,
Plain was their Dress, and modest was their Mein.
Great Idol of Mankind! we neither claim
The Praise of Merit, nor aspire to Fame;
But safe in Deserts from the Applause of Men,
Would die unheard of, as we lived unseen.
It Is all we beg thee, to conceal from Sight
Those Acts of Goodness, which themselves requite.
O let us still the secret Joy partake,
To follow Virtue even for Virtue's sake.
And live there Men who slight immortal Fame?
Who then with Incense shall adore our Name?
But, Mortals know, it is still our greatest Pride,
To blaze those Virtues which the Good would hide.
Rise! Muses, rise! add all your tuneful Breath,
These must not sleep in Darkness and in Death.
She said: in Air the trembling Music floats,
And up the Winds triumphant swell the Notes;
So soft, though high, so loud, and yet so clear,
Even listening Angels leaned from Heaven to hear:
To farthest Shores the Ambrosial Spirit flies,
Sweet to the World, and grateful to the Skies.
Next these a youthful Train their Vows expressed,
With Feathers crowned, with gay Embroid'ry dressed:
Hither, they cried, direct your Eyes, and see
The Men of Pleasure, Dress, and Gallantry:
Ours is the Place at Banquets, Balls and Plays;
Sprightly our Nights, polite are all our Days;
Courts we frequent, where it is our pleasing Care
To pay due Visits, and address the Fair:
In fact, it is true, no Nymph we could persuade,
But still in Fancy vanquished every Maid;
Of unknown Dutchesses lewd Tales we tell,
Yet would the World believe us, all were well.
The Joy let others have, and we the Name,
And what we want in Pleasure, grant in Fame.
The Queen assents, the Trumpet rends the Skies,
And at each Blast a Lady's Honor dies.
Pleased with the strange Success, vast Numbers pressed
Around the Shrine, and made the same Request:
What you (she cried) unlearned in Arts to please,
Slaves to your selves, and even fatigued with Ease,
Who lose a Length of undeserving Days;
Would you usurp the Lover's dear-bought Praise?
To just Contempt, ye vain Pretenders, fall,
The Peoples Fable, and the Scorn of all.
Strait the black Clarion sends a horrid Sound,
Loud Laughs burst out, and bitter Scoffs fly round,
Whispers were heard, with Taunts reviling loud,
And scornful Hisses ran through all the Crowd.
Last, those who boast of mighty Mischiefs done,
Enslave their Country, or usurp a Throne;
Or who their Glory's dire Foundation laid,
On Sovereigns ruined, or on Friends betrayed,
Calm, thinking Villains, whom no Faith can fix,
Of crooked Counsels and dark Politics;
Of these a gloomy Tribe surround the Throne,
And beg to make the immortal Treasons known.
The Trumpet roars, long flaky Flames expire,
With Sparks, that seemed to set the World on fire.
At the dread Sound, pale Mortals stood aghast,
And startled Nature trembled with the Blast.
This having heard and seen, some Power unknown
Strait changed the Scene, and snatched me from the Throne.
Before my View appeared a Structure fair,
Its Site uncertain, if in Earth or Air;
With rapid Motion turned the Mansion round;
With ceaseless Noise the ringing Walls resound:
Not less in Number were the spacious Doors,
Than Leaves on Trees, or Sands upon the Shores;
Which still unfolded stand, by Night, by Day,
Pervious to Winds, and open every way.
As Flames by Nature to the Skies ascend,
As weighty Bodies to the Center tend,
As to the Sea returning Rivers roll,
And the touched Needle trembles to the Pole:
Hither, as to their proper Place, arise
All various Sounds from Earth, and Seas, and Skies.
Or spoke aloud, or whispered in the Ear;
Nor ever Silence, Rest or Peace is here.
As on the smooth Expanse of Crystal Lakes,
The sinking Stone at first a Circle makes;
The trembling Surface, by the Motion stirred,
Spreads in a second Circle, then a third;
Wide, and more wide, the floating Rings advance,
Fill all the watery Plain, and to the Margin dance.
Thus every Voice and Sound, when first they break,
On neighboring Air a soft Impression make;
Another ambient Circle then they move.
That, in its turn, impels the next above;
Through undulating Air the Sounds are sent,
And spread over all the fluid Element.
There various News I heard, of Love and Strife,
Of Peace and War, Health, Sickness, Death, and Life;
Of Loss and Gain, of Famine and of Store,
Of Storms at Sea, and Travels on the Shore,
Of Prodigies, and Portents seen in Air,
Of Fires and Plagues, and Stars with blazing Hair,
Of Turns of Fortune, Changes in the State,
The Falls of Favorites, Projects of the Great,
Of old Mismanagements, Taxations new; --
All neither wholly false, nor wholly true.
Above, below, without, within, around,
Confused, unnumber'd Multitudes are found,
Who pass, repass, advance, and glide away;
Hosts raised by Fear, and Phantoms of a Day.
Astrologers, that future Fates foreshew,
Projectors, Quacks, and Lawyers not a few;
And Priests and Party-Zealots, numerous Bands
With home-born Lies, or Tales from foreign Lands;
Each talked aloud, or in some secret Place,
And wild Impatience star'd in every Face:
The flying Rumors gathered as they rolled,
Scarce any Tale was sooner heard than told;
And all who told it, added something new,
And all who heard it, made Enlargements too,
In every Ear it spread, on every Tongue it grew.
Thus flying East and West, and North and South,
News traveled with Increase from Mouth to Mouth;
So from a Spark, that kindled first by Chance,
With gathering Force the quickening Flames advance;
Till to the Clouds their curling Heads aspire,
And Towers and Temples sink in Floods of Fire.
When thus ripe Lies are to perfection sprung,
Full grown, and fit to grace a mortal Tongue,
Through thousand Vents, impatient forth they flow,
And rush in Millions on the World below.
Fame sits aloft, and points them out their Course,
Their Date determines, and prescribes their Force:
Some to remain, and some to perish soon,
Or wane and wax alternate like the Moon.
Around a thousand winged Wonders fly,
Born by the Trumpet's Blast, and scattered through the Sky.
There, at one Passage, often you might survey
A Lie and Truth contending for the way;
And long 'twas doubtful, both so closely pent,
Which first should issue through the narrow Vent:
At last agreed, together out they fly,
Inseparable now, the Truth and Lie;
The strict Companions are for ever joined,
And this or that unmixed, no Mortal ever shall find.
While thus I stood, intent to see and hear,
One came, methought, and whispered in my Ear;
What could thus high thy rash Ambition raise?
Art thou, fond Youth, a Candidate for Praise?
It Is true, said I, not void of Hopes I came,
For who so fond as youthful Bards of Fame?
But few, alas! the casual Blessing boast,
So hard to gain, so easy to be lost:
How vain that second Life in others Breath,
The Estate which Wits inherit after Death!
Ease, Health, and Life, for this we must resign,
(Unsure the Tenure, but how vast the Fine!)
The Great Man's Curse without the Gains endure,
Be envied, wretched, and be flattered poor;
All luckless Wits our Enemies professed,
And all successful, jealous Friends at best.
Nor Fame I slight, nor for her Favors call;
She comes unlooked for, if she comes at all:
But if the Purchase costs so dear a Price,
As soothing Folly, or exalting Vice:
Oh! if the Muse must flatter lawless Sway,
And follow still where Fortune leads the way;
Or if no Basis bear my rising Name,
But the fallen Ruins of Another's Fame:
Then teach me, Heaven! to scorn the guilty Bays;
Drive from my Breast that wretched Lust of Praise;
Unblemished let me live, or die unknown,
Oh grant an honest Fame, or grant me none!
NOTES.
SOME modern Critics, from a pretended Refinement of Taste, have declared
themselves unable to relish allegorical Poems. It Is not easy to penetrate into
the meaning of this Criticism; for if Fable be allowed one of the chief
Beauties, or as Aristotle calls it, the very Soul of Poetry, it is hard to
comprehend how that Fable should be the less valuable for having a Moral. The
Ancients constantly made use of Allegories: My Lord Bacon has composed an
express Treatise in proof of this, entitled, The Wisdom of the Ancients; where
the Reader may see several particular Fictions exemplified and explained with
great Clearness, Judgment and Learning. The Incidents indeed, by which the
Allegory is conveyed, must be varied, according to the different Genius or
Manners of different Times: and they should never be spun too long, or too much
clogged with trivial Circumstances, or little Particularities. We find an
uncommon Charm in Truth, when it is conveyed by this Side-way to our
Understanding; and it is observable, that even in the most ignorant Ages this
way of Writing has found Reception. Almost all the Poems in the old Provencal
had this Turn; and from these it was that Petrarch took the Idea of his Poetry.
We have his Trionfi in this kind; and Boccace pursued in the same Track. Soon
after Chaucer introduced it here, whose Romaunt of the Rose, Court of Love,
Flower and the Leaf, House of Fame, and some others of his Writings are
Masterpieces of this sort. In Epick Poetry, it is true, too nice and exact a
Pursuit of the Allegory is justly esteemed a Fault; and Chaucer had the
Discernment to avoid it in his Knight's Tale, which was an Attempt toward an
Epick Poem. Ariosto, with less judgment, gave entirely into it in his Orlando;
which though carried to an Excess, had yet so much Reputation in Italy, that
Tasso (who reduced Heroic Poetry to the juster Standard of the Ancients) was
forced to prefix to his Work a scrupulous Explanation of the Allegory of it, to
which the Fable itself could scarce have directed his Readers. Our Countryman
Spencer followed, whose Poem is almost entirely allegorical, and imitates the
manner of Ariosto rather than that of Tasso. Upon the whole, one may observe
this sort of Writing (however discontinu'd of late) was in all Times so far
from being rejected by the best Poets, that some of them have rather erred by
insisting in it too closely, and carrying it too far: And that to infer from
thence that the Allegory it self is vicious, is a presumptuous Contradiction to
the Judgment and Practice of the greatest Genius's, both ancient and modern.

Page II. ver. 3. So Zembla's Rocks, etc.

Though a short Verisimilitude be not required in the Descriptions of this
visionary and allegorical kind of Poetry, which admits of every wild Object
that Fancy may present in a Dream, and where it is sufficient if the moral
Meaning atone for the Improbability: Yet Men are naturally so desirous of
Truth, that a Reader is generally pleased, in such a Case, with some Excuse or
Allusion that seems to reconcile the Description to Probability and Nature. The
Simile here is of that sort, and renders it not wholly unlikely that a Rock of
Ice should remain for ever, by mentioning something like it in the Northern
Regions, agreeing with the Accounts of our modern Travelers.

P. 12. ver. 1. Four Faces had the Dome, etc.

The Temple is described to be square, the four Fronts with open Gates facing
the different Quarters of the World, as an Intimation that all Nations of the
Earth may alike be received into it. The Western Front is of Grecian
Architecture: the Dorick Order was peculiarly sacred to Heroes and Warriors.
Those whose Statues are here mentioned, were the first Names of old Greece in
Arms and Arts.

Page 13. ver. 3. There great Alcides, etc.

This Figure of Hercules is drawn with an eye to the Position of the famous
Statue of Farnese.

Page 14. ver. 4. And the great Founder of the Persian Name.

Cyrus was the Beginner of the Persian, as Nihus was of the Assyrian Monarchy.
The Magi and Chaldeans (the chief of whom was Zoroaster) employed their Studies
upon Magic and Astrology, which was in a manner almost all the Learning of the
ancient Asian People. We have scarce any Account of a moral Philosopher except
Confucius, the great Lawgiver of the Chinese, who lived about two thousand
Years ago.

Page 15. ver. 2. Egypt's Priests, etc.

The Learning of the old Egyptian Priests consisted for the most part in
Geometry and Astronomy: They also preserved the History of their Nation. Their
greatest Hero upon Record is Sesostris, whose Actions and Conquests may be seen
at large in Diodorus, etc. He is said to have caused the Kings he vanquished to
draw him in his Chariot. The Posture of his Statue, in these Verses, is
correspondent to the Description which Herodotus gives of one of this Prince's
Statues remaining in his own time.

Page 15. ver. 11. Of Gothic Structure was the Northern Side.

The Architecture is agreeable to that part of the World. The Learning of the
Northern Nations lay more obscure than that of the rest. Zamolxis was the
Disciple of Pythagoras, who taught the Immortality of the Soul to the
Scythians. Odin, or Woden, was the great Legislator and Hero of the Goths. They
tell us of him that being subject to Fits, he persuaded his Followers, that
during those Trances he received Inspirations from whence he dictated his Laws.
He is said to have been the Inventor of the Runic Characters.

Page 16. ver. 5. Druids and Bards, etc.

These were the Priests and Poets of those People, so celebrated for their
savage Virtue. Those heroic Barbarians accounted it a Dishonor to die in
their Beds, and rushed on to certain Death in the Prospect of an After-Life,
and for the Glory of a Song from their Bards in Praise of their Actions.

Page 17. ver. ult. The Youth that all things but himself subdued.

Alexander the Great: The Tiara was the Crown peculiar to the Asian Princes:
His Desire to be thought the Son of Jupiter Ammon caused him to wear the Horns
of that God, and to represent the same upon his Coins, which was continued by
several of his Successors.

Page 18. ver. 10. Timoleon glorious in his Brother's Blood.

Timoleon had saved the Life of his Brother Timophanes in the Battle between
the Argives and Corinthians; but afterward killed him when he affected the
Tyranny, preferring his Duty to his Country to all the Obligations of Blood.

Page 19. ver. 3. -- He whom Athens did expel,
In all things just, but when he signed the Shell.

Aristides, who for his great Integrity was distinguished by the Appellation of
the Just. When his Countrymen would have banished him by the Ostracism, where
it was the Custom for every Man to sign the Name of the Person he voted to
Exile in an Oyster-Shell; a Peasant, who could not write, came to Aristides to
do it for him, who readily signed his own Name. Vide Plutarch. See the same
Author of Phocion, Agis, etc.

Page 19. ver. 9. But in the Center of the hallowed Quire, etc.

In the midst of the Temple, nearest the Throne of Fame, are placed the
greatest Names in Learning of all Antiquity. These are described in such
Attitudes as express their different Characters. The Columns on which they are
raised are adorned with Sculptures, taken from the most striking Subjects of
their Works; which are so executed, as that the Sculpture bears a Resemblance
in its Manner and Character, to the Manner and Character of their Writings.

Page 21. ver. 13. Four Swans sustain, etc.

Pindar being seated in a Chariot, alludes to the Chariot-races he celebrated
in the Grecian Games. The Swans are the Emblems of the Ode, as their soaring
Posture intimates the Sublimity and Activity of his Genius. Neptune presided
over the Isthmian, and Jupiter over the Olympian Games.

Page 22. ver. 13. Pleased with Alcaeus Manly Rage to infuse
The softer Spirit of the Sapphick Muse.

This expresses the mixed Character of the Odes of Horace. The second of these
Verses alludes to that Line of his: Spiritum Graiae tenuem Camoenae.
As another which follows, to that, Exegi Monumentum aere perennius.
The Action of the Doves hints at a Passage in the 4th Ode of his third Book.
Me fabulosae Vulture in Appulo,
Altricis extra limen Apuliae,
Ludo fatigatumque somno,
Fronde nova puerum Palumbes
Texere; mirum quod foret omnibus --
Ut tuto ab atris corpore viperis
Dormirem and ursis: ut permerer sacra
Lauroque, collataque myrto,
Non sine Dis animosus infans.
Which may be thus Englished; While yet a Child, I chanced to stray,
And in a Desert sleeping lay;
The savage Race withdrew, nor dared
To touch the Muses future Bard:
But Cytheraea's gentle Dove
Myrtles and Bays around me spread,
And crowned your Infant Poet's Head,
Sacred to Music and to Love.


FINIS.
BOOKS printed for Bernard Lintott.
Miscellanies. Translation of the Iliad of Homer. A The first Book of Statius
Thebais Translated. The Fable of Vertumnus and Pomona from the 14th Book of
Ovid's Metamorphosis. To a Young Lady with the Works of Voiture. On Silence. To
the Author of a Poem Entitled Succession. An Ode for Music on St. Cecilia's
Day. Windsor Forest. An Essay on Criticism.
All these written by Mr. Pope. The Tragedies of Jane Shore and the Lady Jane
Gray. By N. Row Esquire Poet Laureat. Callipaedia, Or the Art of getting pretty
Children. Translated by Mr. Oldisworth Art of Cooke^ in Imitation of Horace's
Art of Poetry by Dr. King. 2d. Edition. The Art of Love in Imitation of Ovid De
Art Amandi. By Dr. King. The Iliad of Homer, translated from the Greek into
Blank Verse, by Mr. Ozel, Mr Broom, and Mr. Oldisworth. To which are added, a
Preface, the Life of Homer, and Notes by Madam Dacier; illustrated with 26 Cuts
copied by the best Gravers from the Paris Plates designed by Coypel, in 5 Vol.
120. The second Edition. Price 15 s. The Odes, Epodes, and Carmen Seculare of
Horace in Latin and English, with a Translation of Dr. Bently's Notes. To which
are added, Notes upon Notes: By several Hands. Price 10 s. The Works of Virgil,
translated by the Right Honorable the Earl of Lauderdale. Printed in 2 Vol.
with a new Elzevir Letter, Price 6 s. Praelectiones Poeticae in Schola
naturalis Philosophiae Oxon. habitae, Authore Josepho Trapp. A.M. Price 2 s. 6
d. N.B. The second Vol. is now Published. A second Edition of an Historical
Account of the Heathen Gods and Heroes; necessary for the understanding of the
ancient Poets. Being an Improvement of whatever has been hitherto written by
the Greek, Latin, French and English Authors upon that Subject. By Dr. King.
For the Use of Westminster and all other Schools. Illustrated with Variety of
Copper Plates. Price 2 s. Quintus Curtius's History of the Wars of Alexander,
with a large Map of the Countries he conquered, and an Index. Printed in 120 on
a fine Paper and new Elzevir Letter, in 2 Vol. Price 6 s. The Tragedies of
Ajax, Electra and OEdipus, translated from the Greek of Sophocles into Blank
Verse. In 120. Price 12 d. each. The celebrated Works of Monsieur de Moliere,
containing all his Comedies, Interludes, etc. with a large Account of his Life
and remarkable Death; who, as he was acting the Part of Death in one of his
Plays, was taken ill, and dyed a few Hours after. To which are added, Extracts
out of diverse Authors, concerning several Circumstances relating to the Life of
Moliere; as likewise Judgment upon some of his Pieces: Also his Effigies
engraved on Copper from an Original by Mr. Virtue. Printed in 6 Vol. 120 on a
fine Paper and Elzevir Letter. Price 15 s. The Lives of illustrious Men done
into English from the original Latin of C. Nepos. Non pluribus impar. Price 2
s. 6 d. The third Edition of the Clergyman's Recreation, showing the Pleasure
and Profit of the Art of Gardening. By John Laurence, A.M. Rector of Yelvertoft
in Northamptonshire. Price 1 s. A Critical Discourse upon the Iliad of Homer,
translated from the French of Mr. de la Motte, a Member of the French Academy.
By Mr Theobald. Price 1 s. The Works of Mr. Edmund Smith, late of
Christ-Church, Oxford; Containing, I. Phaedra and Hippolytus. II. A Poem on the
Death of Mr. John Philips. III. Bodleian Speech. IV. Pocockius, etc. To which
is prefixed his Character by Mr. Oldisworth; and his Epitaph by the Reverend
Mr. Adams of Christ Church, Price 1 s. 6 d. The Works of Mr. Thomas Southern,
in 2 Vol. 120. The First Vol. containing The Loyal Brother, or The Persian
Prince. The Disappointment, or The Mother in Fashion. Sir Anthony Love, or The
Rambling Lady. The Wives Excuse, or Cuckolds make themselves. The second Volume
containing, The Maids last Prayer, or Any rather than fail. The Fatal Marriage,
or The Innocent Adultery. Oroonoko. The Fate of Capua. Pr. 5 s. PLAYS by the
Right Honorable the Lord Landsdown, ( viz.) The She Gallants, a Comedy:
Heroic Love, a Tragedy, and The Jew of Venice, a Comedy. A Treatise upon the
Modes, or a Farewell to French Kicks. Est Modus in Rebus. The Modes depend upon
the Sense. Of which the chief Heads are as follows. I. The Influence of Valor
and Beauty upon the Modes. II. The Genius of the French as to Epick Poetry,
Eloquence, and Medals. III. Taste of the French for Music, Painting, and their
Pleas for dictating their Modes to the British Nation, and their Civility. IV.
Maxims for such as Travel in France, and a Speech proper for Travelers. V. The
great Cheapness of French Workmanship, with a Story of Cornelius Agrippa. VI.
An Essay of Perukes, and of Poetry, and of French Education. VII. Advice to the
Painters, with the History of the Feather. VIII. A Story of an Ambassador that
came into England a thousand Years ago. IX. Skill in Optics necessary for a
Head-dresser. X. An account of the Dutch Gentry, and of Military Exercises. XI.
Parallel between Dress and Music. XII. Apology to the French Refugees, Pr. 1
s. The Works of Mr. George Farquhar, containing all his Letters, Poems, Essays
and Comedies published in his Life Time, viz. Love and a Bottle, The Constant
Couple, or a Trip to the Jubilee. Sir Harry Wild Air. Inconstant, or The Way to
Win him. The Twin Rivals, The Recruiting Officer, and The Beaux Stratagem, with
Cuts prefixed to each Comedy. Pr. 6 s. The diverting History of the Count de
Gabalis; Containing, I. An Account of the Rosicrucian Doctrine of Spirits, viz.
Sylphs, Salamanders, Gnomes, and Demons; showing their various influence upon
human Bodies. II. The Nature and Advantages of Studying the Occult Sciences.
III. The Carnal Knowledge of Women to be renounced. IV. Adam's Fall not
occasioned by eating the Apple, but by his carnal Knowledge of Eve. V. The
Rise, Progress and Decay of Oracles. VI. A Parallel between Ancient and Modern
Priestcraft. To which is prefixed Monsieur Bayle's Account of this Work, and of
the Sect of the Rosicrucians. The 2d Edition, Pr. 1 s. 6 d. The Works of the
celebrated and ancient English Poet Geoffrey Chaucer; carefully compared not
only with former Editions of Value, but with many rare and ancient Manuscripts:
from the collating of which the Text is in a great measure restored and
perfected; many Errors and Corruptions that have crept in and continued in all
the Editions hitherto printed, are amended; and many whole Lines omitted in all
the printed Editions are inserted in their proper places. Three entire new
Tales of this Author in Manuscript (never yet printed) have been recovered, and
will be added to this Edition. By which Alterations, Additions and Amendments,
this Work is in a manner become new. A most useful and copious Glossary for the
better understanding of this Poet than has yet been printed, will be added at
the End. Begun by John Urry late Student of Christ-Church, and completed by
the Care of the Students of Christ-Church. Proposals are now Printed, and
Subscriptions taken in for the Benefit of the Executor, and for the carrying on
the Building of Peckwater Quadrangle; by the Undertaker Bernard Lintott.
BOOKS preparing for the Press,
A Complete Body of Divinity, under the Title of Theologia Speculativa and
Practica. In Two Volumes, Folio: In the First Volume will be explained the
Principles, in the Second the Duties of Natural and Revealed Religion. The
First Volume will be formed upon these General Heads. I. The Existence and
Attributes of God. II. Creation and Providence. III. Divine Revelation and the
Holy Scriptures. IV. The Articles of the Christian Faith, as contained in the
Apostles Creed. V. The Articles of the Church of England, so far as they may
admit of a distinct Consideration from those of the Creed. VI. The Rewards and
Punishments proposed in the Old and New Testament. The General Heads of the
Second Volume will be I. The moral and immutable Distinction of Good and Evil.
II. The positive Commands of God. III. The Ten Commandments. IV. Our Savior's
Sermon on the Mount. V. The Relative Duties. VI. The Evangelical Precepts which
have not fallen directly under the foregoing Heads. VII. The Reasonableness,
Necessity, and Measures of Evangelical Obedience. By the Reverend RICHARD
FIDDES, B.D. Rector of Halsham in Holderness in the County of York. The Second
Edition of a compendious History of the Church from the Beginningof the World
to this Time. To which is added a complete chronological Table, and large
Indexes to each Volume. Written in French: By Lewis Ellis Du Pin, Doctor of the
Sorbonne, and Regius Professor of Divinity at Paris. In Four Volumes 120.
Printed on a new Elzevir Letter. A practical Exposition of the Beatitudes, in
the first Part of our Savior's Sermon on the Mount. By James Gardener, M.A.
Sub-Dean of Lincoln. Price 3 s. 6 d. A practical Exposition of the latter Part
of our Savior's Sermon on the Mount, from the Beatitudes, to the End of the
Sermon. By James Gardener, M.A. Sub-Dean of Lincoln. Price 4 s. 6 d. Four
Offices of Prayer and Devotion, answering four of the most important Occasions
of a Christian Life. I. An Office of Preparation for Death, to be used often in
the Days of Health. II. A Penitential Office for Times of Humiliation and
Confession; more especially for Fasting Days. III. An Office commemorative of
our blessed Savior's Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, etc. for the Redemption
of the World. IV. An Office of Preparation for the holy Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper. All these carefully compiled out of the holy Scriptures, the Church
Liturgy, and many of the best and most approved Books of Devotion, both of the
former and present Age. By William Tilly, D.D. Price 2 s. 6 d. Six Sermons on
several Occasions, ( viz.) I. The Difference between the Revolution and the
Rebellion, preached Jan. 30. II. The Restoration of the King, the Act of God,
May 29. III. The Necessity of Praying both for Church and State, March 7. IV.
The Duty of fearing God and the King, April 10. 1715. V. Obedience to the King
enforced from the Benefits and Advantages of a wise and just Administration,
June 19. VI. Liberty and the Gospel against Popery and Slavery, July 24. By the
Reverend T. Goddard, M.A. Canon of Windsor. Price 1 s.

