THE FIRST EPISTLE OF THE SECOND BOOK OF HORACE, IMITATED.

Ne Rubeam, pingui donatus Munere!
HOR. LONDON: Printed for T. COOPER, at the Globe in Paternoster Row.
M.DCC.XXXVII. ( Price One Shilling.)

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Reflections of Horace, and the Judgments past in this Epistle to Augustus,
seemed so seasonable to the present Times, that I could not help applying them
to the use of my own Country. The Author thought them considerable enough to
address them to His Prince; whom he paints with all the great and good
Qualities of a Monarch, upon whom the Romans depended for the Increase of an
Absolute Empire. But to make the Poem entirely English, I was willing to add
one or two such, as contribute to the Happiness of a Free People, and are more
consistent with the Welfare of our Neighbors.

This Epistle will show the learned World to have fallen into two mistakes;
one, that Augustus was a Patron of Poets in general; whereas he not only
prohibited all but the Best Writers to name him, but recommended that Care even
to the Civil Magistrate: Admonebat Praetores, ne paterentur Nomen suum
obsolefieri, etc. The other to imagine this Piece to be a general Discourse of
Poetry; whereas it is an Apology for the Poets, in order to render Augustus
more their Patron. Horace here pleads the Cause of his Cotemporaries, first
against the Taste of the Town, whose humor it was to magnify the Authors of
the preceding Age; secondly against the Court and Nobility, who encouraged only
the Writers for the Theater; and lastly against the Emperor himself, who had
conceived them of little use to the Government. He shows (by a view of the
Progress of Learning, and the Change of Taste among the Romans) that the
Introduction of the Polite Arts of Greece had given the Writers of his Time
great advantages over their Predecessors, that their Morals were much improved,
and the License of those ancient Poets restrained: that Satire and Comedy were
become more just and useful; that whatever extravagancies were left on the
Stage, were owing to the Ill Taste of the Nobility; that Poets, under due
Regulations, were in many respects useful to the State; and concludes, that it
was upon them the Emperor himself must depend, for his Fame with Posterity.

We may farther learn from this Epistle, that Horace made his Court to this
Great Prince, by writing with a decent Freedom toward him, with a just Contempt
of his low Flatterers, and with a manly Regard to his own Character.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF THE SECOND BOOK OF HORACE.
Cum tot sustineas, etc.
WHile You, great Patron of Mankind, sustain
The balanced World, and open all the Main;
Your Country, chief, in Arms abroad defend,
At home, with Morals, Arts, and Laws amend;
How shall the Muse, from such a Monarch, steal
An hour, and not defraud the Public Weal?
Romulus, et Liber pater, etc.
Edward and Henry, now the Boast of Fame,
And virtuous Alfred, a more sacred Name,
After a Life of generous Toils endured,
The Gaul subdued, or Property secured,
Ambition humbled, mighty Cities stormed,
Or Laws established, and the World reformed;
Closed their long Glories with a sigh, to find
The unwilling Gratitude of base mankind!
All human Virtue to its latest breath
Finds Envy never conquered, but by Death.
The great Alcides, every Labor past,
Had still this Monster to subdue at last.
Sure fate of all, beneath whose rising ray
Each Star of meaner merit fades away;
Oppressed we feel the Beam directly beat,
Those Suns of Glory please not till they set.
Praesenti tibi, etc.
To Thee, the World its present homage pays,
The Harvest early, but mature the Praise:
Great Friend of LIBERTY! in Kings a Name
Above all Greek, above all Roman Fame:
Whose Word is Truth, as sacred and revered,
As Heaven's own Oracles from Altars heard.
Wonder of Kings! like whom, to mortal eyes
None ever has risen, and none ever shall rise.
Sed tuus hoc populus, etc.
Just in one instance, be it yet confessed
Your People, Sir, are partial in the rest.
Foes to all living worth except your own,
And Advocates for Folly dead and gone.
Authors, like Coins, grow dear as they grow old;
It is the rust we value, not the gold.
Chaucer's worst ribaldry is learned by rote,
And beastly Skeleton, Poet Laureat to Hen. 8. a Volume of whose Verses has been
lately reprinted, consisting almost wholly of Ribaldry, Obscenity, and
Billingsgate Language.
Skeleton Heads of Houses quote:
One likes no language but the Faery Queen;
A Scot will fight for Christ's Kirk of the Green, a Ballad made by a King of
Scotland.
Christ's Kirk of the Green;
And each true Briton is to Ben so civil,
He swears the Muses met him at the The Devil Tavern, where Ben. Johnson held
his Poetical Club.
Devil.
Si, quia Graecorum sunt, etc.
Though justly Greece her eldest sons admires,
Why should not we be wiser than our Sires?
In every public Virtue we excel,
We build, we paint, we sing, we dance as well,
And learned Athens to our Art must stoop,
Could she behold us tumbling through a hoop.
Si meliora dies, ut vina, etc.
If Time improve our Wit as well as Wine,
Say at what age a Poet grows divine?
Shall we, or shall we not, account him so,
Who died, perhaps, an hundred years ago?
End all dispute; and fix the year precise
When British bards begin t'Immortalize?
" Who lasts a Century can have no flaw,
" I hold that Wit a Classick, good in law.
Quid? qui deperiit minor, etc.
Suppose he wants a year, will you compound?
And shall we deem him Ancient, right and sound,
Or damn to all Eternity at once,
At ninety nine, a Modern, and a Dunce?
" We shall not quarrel for a year or two;
" By Courtesy of England, he may do.
Utor permisso, caudaeque, etc.
Then, by the rule that made the Horse-tail bare,
I pluck out year by year, as hair by hair,
And melt down Ancients like a heap of snow:
While you, to measure merits, look in Stowe,
And estimating Authors by the year,
Bestow a Garland only on a Bier.
Ennius, ( and sapiens, and fortis, etc.
Shakespeare Shakespeare and Ben. Johnson may truly be said not much to have
thought of Immortal Fame, the one in many pieces composed in haste for the
Stage; the other in his Latter works in general, which Dryden calls his Dotages.
, (whom you and every Playhouse bill
Style the divine, the matchless, what you will)
For gain, not glory, winged his roving flight,
And grew Immortal in his own despite.
Ben, old and poor, as little seemed to heed
The Life to come, in every Poet's Creed.
Who now reads Cowley? if he pleases yet,
His moral pleases, not his pointed wit;
Forgot his Epic, nay -- Pindaric art, which has much more merit than his Epic:
but very unlike the Character, as well as Numbers, of Pindar.
Pindaric Art,
But still I love the language of his Heart.
" Adeo sanctum est, etc.
Yet surely, surely, these were famous men!
" What Boy but hears the sayings of old Ben?
" In all debates where Critics bear a part,
" Not one but nods, and talks of Johnson's Art,
" Of Shakespeare's Nature, and of Cowley's Wit;
" How Beaumont's Judgment checked what Fletcher writ;
" How Shadwell Shadwell hasty, Wycherly was slow.] Nothing was less true than
this particular: But this Paragraph has a mixture of Irony, and must not
altogether be taken for Horace's own Judgment, only the common Chatt of the
pretenders to Criticism; in some things right, in others wrong: as he tells us
in his answer, Interdum vulgus rectum videt, est ubi peccat.

hasty, Wycherly was slow;
" But, for the Passions, Southern sure and Row.
" These, only these, support the crowded stage,
" From eldest Heywood down to Cibber's age.
Interdum vulgus, etc.
All this may be; the People's Voice is odd,
It is, and it is not, the voice of God.
To Gammer Gurton, a piece of very low humor, one of the first printed Plays
in English, and therefore much valued by some Antiquaries.
Gammer Gurton if it give the bays,
And yet deny the Careless Husband praise,
Or say our fathers never broke a rule;
Why then I say, the Public is a fool.
But let them own, that greater faults than we
They had, and greater Virtues, I Will agree.
Spenser himself affects the Spenser too much affects the obsolete.]
Particularly in the Shepherd's Calendar, where he imitates the unequal
Measures, as well as the Language, of Chaucer.
obsolete,
And Sydney's verse halts ill on Roman feet:
Milton's strong pinion now not Heaven can bound,
Now serpent-like, in prose he sweeps the ground,
In Quibbles, Angel and Archangel join,
And God the Father turns a School-Divine.
Not that I Would lop the Beauties from his book,
Like slashing Bentley with his desperate Hook;
Or damn all Shakespeare, like the affected fool
At Court, who hates whatever he read at School.
-- Sed emendata videri, etc.
But for the Wits of either Charles's days,
The Mob of Gentlemen who wrote with Ease;
Sprat, Carew, Sedsey, and a hundred more,
(Like twinkling Stars the Miscellanies over)
One Simile, that solitary shines
In the dry Desert of a thousand lines,
Or lengthened Thought that gleams through many a page,
Has sanctified whole Poems for an age.
Indignor quidquam reprehendi, etc.
I lose my patience, and I own it too,
When works are censured, not as bad, but new;
While if our Elders break all Reason's laws,
These fools demand not Pardon, but Applause.
Recti necne crocum, etc.
On Avon's bank, where flowers eternal blow,
If I but ask, if any weed can grow?
One Tragic sentence if I dare deride
Which Betterton's grave Action dignified,
Or well-mouth'd Booth with emphasis proclaims,
(Though but, perhaps, A muster-roll of Names.] An absurd Custom of several
Actors, to pronounce with Emphasis the mere Proper Names of Greeks or Romans,
which (as they call it) fill the mouth of the Player.
a muster-roll of Names)
How will our Fathers rise up in a rage,
And swear, all shame is lost in George's Age!
You Would think no Fools disgraced the former Reign,
Did not some grave Examples yet remain,
Who scorn a Lad should teach his Father skill,
And, having once been wrong, will be so still.
Jam Saliare Numae carmen, etc.
He, who to seem more deep than you or I,
Extols old Bards, or Merlin's Prophecy,
Mistake him not; he envies, not admires,
And to debase the Sons, exalts the Sires.
Had ancient Times conspired to dis-allow
What then was new, what had been ancient now?
Or what remained, so worthy to be read
By learned Critics, of the mighty Dead?
Ut primum positis nugari, etc.
In Days of Ease, when now the weary Sword
Was sheathed, and Luxury with Charles restored;
In every Taste of foreign Courts improved,
A Verse of the Lord Lansdown.
" All, by the King's Example, lived and loved."
Then Peers grew proud in -- In Horsemanship t'excell. And every flowery
Courtier writ Romance.] The Duke of Newcastle's Book of Horsemanship: the
Romance of Parthenissa, by the Earl of Orrery, and all the French Romances
translated by Persons of Quality.
Horsemanship to excel,
New-market's Glory rose, as Britain's fell;
The Soldier breathed the Gallantries of France,
And every flowery Courtier writ Romance.
Then Marble softened into life grew warm,
And yielding Metal flowed to human form:
Lely on animated Canvas stole
The sleepy Eye, that spoke the melting soul.
No wonder then, when all was Love and Sport,
The willing Muses were debauched at Court;
On each enervate string, etc.] The Siege of Rhodes by Sir William Davenant,
the first Opera sung in England.
On each enervate string they taught the Note
To pant, or tremble through an Eunuch's throat.
Sub nutrice puella velut, etc.
But Britain, changeful as a Child at play,
Now calls in Princes, and now turns away.
Now Whig, now Tory, what we loved we hate;
Now all for Pleasure, now for Church and State;
Now for Prerogative, and now for Laws;
Effects unhappy! from a Noble Cause.
Romae dulce diu fuit, etc.
Time was, a sober Englishman would knock
His servants up, and rise by five a clock,
Instruct his Family in every rule,
And send his Wife to Church, his Son to school.
To worship like his Fathers was his care;
To teach their frugal Virtues to his Heir;
To prove, that Luxury could never hold;
And place, on good Security, his Gold.
Mutavit mentem populus levis, etc.
Now Times are changed, and one Poetic Itch
Has seized the Court and City, Poor and Rich:
Sons, Sires, and Grandsires, all will wear the Bays,
Our Wives read Milton, and our Daughters Plays,
To Theaters, and to Rehearsals throng,
And all our Grace at Table is a Song.
I, who so often renounce the Muses, lie,
Not ^'s self ever tells more Fibs than I;
When, sick of Muse, our follies we deplore,
And promise our best Friends to ryme no more;
We wake next morning in a raging Fit,
And call for Pen and Ink to show our Wit.
Navem agere ignarus navis timet, etc.
He served a 'Prenticeship, who sets up shop;
Ward.] A famous Empirick, whose Pill and Drop had several surprising effects,
and were one of the principal subjects of Writing and Conversation at this time.
Ward tried on Puppies, and the Poor, his Drop;
Even Radcliff's Doctors travel first to France,
Nor dare to practice till they have learned to dance.
Who builds a Bridge that never drove a pyle?
(Should Ripley venture, all the World would smile)
But those who cannot write, and those who can,
All ryme, and scrawl, and scribble, to a man.
Hic error tamen et levis, etc.
Yet Sir, reflect, the mischief is not great;
These Madmen never hurt the Church or State:
Sometimes the Folly benefits mankind;
And rarely Avarice taints the tuneful mind.
Allow him but his Play-thing of a Pen,
He never rebels, or plots, like other men:
Flight of Cashiers, or Fires, he will never mind;
And knows no losses while the Muse is kind.
To cheat a Friend, or Ward, he leaves to Peter;
The good man heaps up nothing but mere meter,
Enjoys his Garden and his Book in quiet;
And then -- a perfect Hermit in his Diet.
Militiae quanquam piger and malus, etc.
Of little use the Man you may suppose,
Who says in verse what others say in prose;
Yet let me show, a Poet's of some weight,
And ( And though no Soldier.] Horace had not acquitted himself much to his
credit in this capacity; ( non been relicta parmula,) in the battle of
Philippi. It is manifest he alludes to himself in this whole account of a
Poet's character; but with an intermixrure of Irony: Vivit siliquis and pane
secundo has a relation to his Epicurism; Os tenerum pueri, is ridicule: The
nobler office of a Poet follows, Torquet ab obscoenis -- Mox etiam pectus --
Recte fact a refert, etc. which the Imitator has applied where he thinks it
more due than to himself. He hopes to be pardoned, if, as he is sincerely
inclined to praise what deserves to be praised, he arraigns what deserves to be
arraigned, in the 210, 211, and 212th Verses.
though no Soldier) useful to the State.
What will a Child learn sooner than a song?
What better teach a Foreigner the tongue?
What Is long or short, each accent where to place,
And speak in public with some sort of grace.
I scarce can think him such a worthless thing,
Unless he praise some monster of a King,
Or Virtue, or Religion turn to sport,
To please a lewd, or un-believing Court.
Unhappy Dryden! -- In all Charles's days,
Roscommon only boasts unspotted Bays;
And in our own (excuse some Courtly strains)
No whiter page than Addison remains.
Torquet ab obscoenis, etc.
He, from the taste obscene reclaims our Youth,
And sets the Passions on the side of Truth;
Forms the soft bosom with the gentlest art,
And pours each human Virtue in the heart.
Let Ireland tell, how Wit upheld her cause,
Her Trade supported, and supplied her Laws;
And leave on SWIFT this grateful verse ingrav'd,
The Rights a Court attacked, a Poet saved.
Behold the hand that wrought a Nation's cure,
Stretched to relieve the Idiot and the Poor A Foundation for the maintenance
of Idiots, and a Fund for assisting the Poor, by lending small sums of Money on
demand.
,
Proud Vice to brand, or injured Worth adorn,
And stretch the Ray to Ages yet unborn.
Not but there are, who merit other palms;
Hopkins and Sternhold glad the heart with Psalms;
Disceret unde preces, etc.
The Boys and Girls whom Charity maintains,
Implore your help in these pathetic strains:
How could Devotion touch the country pews,
Unless the Gods bestowed a proper Muse?
Verse chears their leisure, Verse assists their work,
Verse prays for Peace, or sings down Pope and Turk.
The silenced Preacher yields to potent strain,
And feels that grace his prayer besought in vain,
The blessing thrills through all the laboring throng,
And Heaven is won by violence of Song.
Agricolae prisci, fortes, etc.
Our rural Ancestors, with little blessed,
Patient of labor when the end was rest,
Indulged the day that housed their annual grain,
With feasts, and offerings, and a thankful strain:
The joy their wives, their sons, and servants share,
Ease of their toil, and part'ners of their care:
The laugh, the jest, attendants on the bowl,
Smoothed every brow, and opened every soul:
Fescennina per hunc inventa, etc.
With growing years the pleasing License grew,
And Taunts alternate innocently flew.
But Times corrupt, and Nature, ill-inclin'd,
Produced the point that left a sting behind;
Till friend with friend, and families at strife,
Triumphant Malice raged through private life.
Who felt the wrong, or feared it, took the alarm,
Appealed to Law, and Justice lent her arm.
At length, by wholesome dread of statutes bound,
The Poets learned to please, and not to wound:
Most warped to Flatt'ry's side; but some, more nice,
Preserved the freedom, and forbore the vice.
Hence Satire rose, that just the medium hit,
And heals with Morals what it hurts with Wit.
Graecia capta, serum victorem, etc.
We conquered France, but felt our captive's charms;
Her Arts victorious triumphed over our Arms:
Britain to soft refinements less a foe,
Wit grew polite, and Numbers learned to flow.
Mr. Waller about this time, with the E. of Dorset, Mr. Godolphin, and others,
translated the Pompey of Corneille; and the more correct French Poets began to
be in reputation.
Waller was smooth; but Dryden taught to join
The varying verse, the full resounding line,
The long majestic march, and energy divine.
Though still some traces of our rustic vein
And splay-foot verse, remained, and will remain.
Late, very late, correctness grew our care,
When the tired nation breathed from civil war.
Quid Sophocles, and Thespis, etc.
Exact Racine, and Corneille's noble fire
Showed us that France had something to admire.
Not but the Tragic spirit was our own,
And full in Shakespeare, fair in Otway shone:
But Otway failed to polish or refine,
And fluent Shakespeare scarce effaced a line.
Even copious Dryden, wanted, or forgot,
The last and greatest Art, the Art to blot.
Creditur, ex medio, etc.
Some doubt, if equal pains or equal fire
The humbler Muse of Comedy require?
But in known Images of life I guess
The labor greater, as the Indulgence less.
Observe how seldom even the best succeed:
Tell me if Congreve's Fools are Fools indeed?
What pert low Dialogue has Farqu'ar writ!
How Van wants grace, who never wanted wit!
The stage how loosely does Afra Belin, Authoress of several obscene Plays, etc.
Astraea tread,
Who fairly puts all Characters to bed:
And idle Cibber, how he breaks the laws,
To make poor Pinky eat with vast applause!
But fill their purse, our Poet's work is done,
Alike to them, by Pathos or by Pun.
Quem tulit ad scenam, etc.
O you! whom Vanity's light bark conveys
On Fame's mad voyage by the wind of Praise;
With what a shifting gale your course you ply;
For ever sunk too low, or born too high!
Who pants for glory finds but short repose,
A breath revives him, or a breath o'erthrows!
Farewell the stage! if just as thrives the Play,
The silly bard grows fat, or falls away.
Saepe etiam audacem fugat, etc.
There still remains to mortify a Wit,
The many-headed Monster of the Pit:
A sense-less, worth-less, and unhonour'd crowd;
Who to disturb their betters mighty proud,
Clatt'ring their sticks, before ten lines are spoke,
Call for the Farce, the Bear, or the Black-joke.
For Farce the people true delight affords,
Farce, long the taste of Mobs, but now of Lords;
(Taste, that eternal wanderer, which flies
From heads to ears, and now from ears to eyes.)
The Play stands still; damn action and discourse,
Back fly the scenes, and enter foot and horse;
Pageants on pageants, in long order drawn,
Peers, Heralds, Bishops, Ermin, Gold, and Lawn;
The Champion too! and, to complete the jest,
The Coronation of Henry the Eighth and Queen Anne Boleyn, in which the
Playhouses tried with each other to represent all the pomp of a Coronation. In
this noble contention, the Armor of one of the Kings of England was borrowed
from the Tower, to dress the Champion.
Old Edward's Armor beams on Cibber's breast!
Si foret in terris, etc.
With laughter sure Democritus had died,
Had he beheld an Audience gape so wide.
Let Bear or Elephant be ever so white,
The people, sure, the people are the sight!
Ah luckless Poet! stretch thy lungs and roar,
That Bear or Elephant shall heed thee more;
While all its throats the Gallery extends,
And all the Thunder of the Pit ascends!
Loud as the Wolves on Orcas' stormy steep.] The furthest Northern Promontory
of Scotland, opposite to the Orcades.
Orcas' stormy steep,
Howl to the roarings of the Northern deep.
Such is the shout, the long-applauding note,
At Quin's high plume, or Oldfield's petticoat,
Or when from Court a birthday suit bestowed
Sinks the lost Actor in the tawdry load.
Booth enters -- hark! the Universal Peal!
" But has he spoken?" Not a syllable.
" What shook the stage, and made the people stare?
Cato's long Wig, flowr'd gown, and lacquer'd chair.
Ac ne forte putes, me, etc.
Yet lest you think I railly more than teach,
Or praise malignly Arts I cannot reach,
Let me for once presume t'instruct the times,
To know the Poet from the Man of Rymes:
It Is He, who gives my breast a thousand pains,
Can make me feel each Passion that he feigns,
Inrage, compose, with more than magic Art,
With Pity, and with Terror, tear my heart;
And snatch me, over the earth, or through the air,
To Thebes, to Athens, when he will, and where.
Verum age, and his, etc.
But not this part of the poetic state
Alone, deserves the favor of the Great:
Think of those Authors, Sir, who would rely
More on a Reader's sense, than Gazer's eye.
Or who shall wander where the Muses sing?
Who climb their Mountain, or who taste their spring?
How shall we fill Munus Apolline dignum.] The Palatine Library then building
by Augustus.
a Library with Wit,
When Merlin's Cave.] A Building in the Royal Gardens of Richmond, where is a
small, but choice Collection of Books.
Merlin's Cave is half unfurnished yet?
Multa quidem nobis, etc.
My Liege! why Writers little claim your thought,
I guess; and, with their leave, will tell the fault:
We Poets are (upon a Poet's word)
Of all mankind, the creatures most absurd:
The season, when to come, and when to go,
To sing, or cease to sing, we never know;
And if we will recite nine hours in ten,
You lose your patience, just like other men.
Then too we hurt our selves, when to defend
A single verse, we quarrel with a friend;
Repeat unasked; lament, the Wit's too fine
For vulgar eyes, and point out every line.
But most, when straining with too weak a wing,
We needs will write Epistles to the King;
And from the moment we oblige the town,
Expect a Place, or Pension from the Crown;
Or dubbed Historians by express command,
TO enroll your triumphs over the seas and land;
Be called to Court, to plan some work divine,
As once for LOUIS, Boileau and Racine.
Sed tamen est operae pretium, etc.
Yet think, great Sir! (so many Virtues shown)
Ah think, what Poet best may make them known?
Or choose at least some Minister of Grace,
Fit to bestow the Laureat's weighty place.
Gratus Alexandro regi Magno, etc.
Charles, to late times to be transmitted fair,
Assigned his figure to Bernini's care;
And great Nassau to Kneller's hand decreed
To fix him graceful on the bounding Steed:
So well in paint and stone they judged of merit:
But Kings in Wit may want discerning spirit.
The Hero William, and the Martyr Charles,
One knighted Blackmore, and one pension'd Quarles;
Which made old Ben, and surly Dennis swear,
" No Lord's anointed, but a Russian Bear."
Nec magis expressi vultus, etc.
Not with such Majesty, such bold relief,
The Forms august of King, or conquering Chief,
Ever swelled on Marble; as in Verse have shined
(In polished Verse) the Manners and the Mind.
Oh! could I mount on the Maeonian wing,
Your Arms, your Actions, your Repose to sing!
What seas you traversed! and what fields you fought!
Your Country's Peace, how often, how dearly bought!
How barbarous rage subsided at your word,
And Nations wondered while they dropped the sword!
How, when you nodded, over the land and deep,
Peace stole her wing, and wrapped the world in sleep;
Till Earth's extremes your mediation own,
And Asia's Tyrants tremble at your Throne --
But Verse alas! your Majesty disdains;
And I Am not used to Panegyric strains:
The Zeal of Fools offends at any time,
But most of all, the Zeal of Fools in ryme.
Besides, a fate attends on all I write,
That when I aim at praise, they say I bite.
Nil moror officium quod me gravat, etc.
A vile Encomium doubly ridicules;
There Is nothing blackens like the ink of fools;
If true, a woeful likeness, and if lies,
" Praise undeserved is scandal in disguise:"
Well may he blush, who gives it, or receives;
And when I flatter, let my dirty leaves
(Like Journals, Odes, and such forgotten things
As Eusden, Philips, Settle, writ of Kings)
Cloth spice, line trunks, or fluttering in a row,
Befringe the rails of Bedlam and Sohoe.
FINIS.

