THE DUNCIAD.
P. and R. Arthur (...) Dennis's Works (...) Cibber's Plays


DUBLIN; Printed; LONDON; Reprinted for A. Dodd



THE DUNCIAD. AN Heroic Poem.

IN THREE BOOKS.

DUBLIN, Printed, LONDON Reprinted for A. DODD. 1728.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
IT will be found a true observation, though somewhat surprising, that when any
scandal is vented against a man of the highest distinction and character either
in the State or in Literature, the public in general afford it a most quiet
reception, and the larger part accept it as favorably as if it were some
kindness done to themselves: Whereas if a known scoundrel or blockhead chance
to be but touched upon, a whole legion is up in Arms, and it becomes the common
Cause of all Scriblers, Booksellers, and Printers whatsoever.

Not to search too deeply into the reason hereof, I will only observe as a
Fact, that every week for these two Months past, the town has been persecuted
with Pamphlets, Advertisements, Letters, and weekly Essays, not only against
the Wit and Writings, but against the Character and Person, of Mr. Pope. And
that of all those men who have received pleasure from his Writings (which by
modest computation may be about a hundred thousand in these Kingdoms of England
and Ireland, not to mention Jerscy, Guernsey, the Orcades, those in the New
world, and Foreigners who have translated him into their languages) of all this
number, not a man has stood up to say one word in his defense.

The only exception is the Author of the following Poem, who doubtless had
either a better insight into the grounds of this clamor, or a better opinion
of Mr. Pope's integrity, joined with a greater personal love for him, than any
other of his numerous friends and admirers.

Further, that he was in his peculiar intimacy, appears from the knowledge he
manifests of the most private Authors of all the anonymous pieces against him,
and from his having in this Poem attacked no man living, who had not before
printed and published against this particular Gentleman.

How I became possessed of it, is of no concern to the Reader; but it would have
been a wrong to him, had I detained this publication: since those Names which
are its chief ornaments, die off daily so fast, as must render it too soon
unintelligible. If it provoke the Author to give us a more perfect edition, I
have my end.

Who he is, I cannot say, and (which is great pity) there is certainly nothing
in his style and manner of writing, which can distinguish, or discover him. For
if it bears any resemblance to that of Mr. P. it is not improbable but it might
be done on purpose, with a view to have it pass for his. But by the frequency
of his allusions to Virgil, and a labored, (not to say affected, shortness, in
imitation of him, I should think him more an admirer of the Roman Poet than of
the Grecian, and in that, not of the same taste with his Friend.

I have been well informed, that this work was the labor of full six years of
his life, and that he retired himself entirely from all the avocations and
pleasures of the world, to attend diligently to its correction and perfection;
and six years more he intended to bestow upon it, as it should seem by this
verse of Statius, which was cited at the head of his manuscript. Oh mihi
bissenos multum vigilata per annos,
Duncia! --


Hence also we learn the true Title of the Poem; which with the same certainty
as we call that of Homer the Iliad, of Virgil the Aeneid, of Camoens the
Lusiad, of Voltaire the Henriad, we may pronounce could have been, and can be
no other, than THE DUNCIAD.

It is styled Heroic, as being doubly so; not only with respect to its nature,
which according to the best Rules of the Ancients and strictest ideas of the
Moderns, is critically such; but also with regard to the Heroical disposition
and high courage of the Writer, who dared to stir up such a formidable,
irritable, and implacable race of mortals.

The time and date of the Action is evidently in the last reign, when the
office of City Poet expired upon the death of Elkanah Settle, and he has fixed
it to the Mayoralty of Sir Geo. Tho^ld. But there may arise some obscurity in
Chronology from the Names in the Poem, by the inevitable removal of some
Authors, and Insertion of others, in their Niches. For whoever will consider
the unity of the whole design, will be sensible, that the Poem was not made for
these Authors, but these Authors for the Poem. And I should judge they were
clapped in as they rose, fresh and fresh, and changed from day to day, in like
manner as when the old boughs wither, we thrust new ones into a chimney.

I would not have the reader too much troubled or anxious, if he cannot
decypher them; since when he shall have found them out, he will probably know
no more of the Persons than before.

Yet we judged it better to preserve them as they are, than to change them for
fictitious names, by which the Satyr would only be multiplied; and applied to
many instead of one. Had the Hero, for instance, been called Codrus, how many
would have affirmed him to be Mr. W^ Mr. D^ Sir R^ B^, etc. but now, all that
unjust scandal is saved, by calling him Theobald, which by good luck happens to
be the name of a real person.

I am indeed aware, that this name may to some appear too mean, for the Hero of
an Epic Poem? But it is hoped, they will alter that opinion, when they find,
that an Author no less eminent than la Bruyere, has thought him worthy a place
in his Characters. Voudriez vous, THEOBALDE, que je crusse que vous etes
baisse? que vous n'etes plus Poet, ni bell esprit? que vous etes presentement
aussi Mauvais juge de tout genre d'Ouvrage, que Mechant Auteur? Votre air libre
and presumptueux me rassure, and me persuade tout le contraire. etc.
Characteres, Vol. I. de la Societe and de la Conversation, page 176. Edit.
Amst. 1720.



THE DUNCIAD IN THREE BOOKS.

THE DUNCIAD.
BOOK the FIRST.
BOOKS and the man I sing, the first who brings
The Smithfield muses to the ears of kings.
Say great Patricians! (since yourselves inspire
These wondrous works; so Jove and fate require!)
Say from what cause, in vain decry'd and cursed,
Still Dryd.
Dunce the second reigns like Dunce the first?
In eldest time, ever mortals writ or read,
Ever Pallas issued from the Thund'rer's head,
Dullness over all possessed her ancient right,
Daughter of Chaos and eternal Night:
Fate in their dotage this fair idiot gave,
Gross as her, sire, and as her mother grave,
Laborious, heavy, busy, bold, and blind,
She ruled, in native anarchy, the mind.
Still her old empire to confirm, she tries,
For born a Goddess, Dullness never dies.
Where wave the tattered ensigns of Rag-Fair,
A yawning ruin hangs and nods in air;
Keen, hollow winds howl through the bleak recess,
Emblem of music caused by emptiness:
Here in one bed two shivering sisters lie,
The cave of Poverty and Poetry.
This, the Great Mother dearer held than all
The clubs of Quidnunc's, or her own Guild Hall:
Here stood her Opium, here she nursed her Owls,
And destined here the imperial seat of fools.
Hence springs each weekly muse, the living boast
Of C^l's chaste press, and L^t's rubric post;
Hence hymning Tyburn's elegiac lay,
Hence the soft sing-song on Cecilia's day,
Sepulchral lies our holy walls to grace,
And New-year-Odes, and all the Grubstreet race.
'Twas here in clouded majesty she shone;
Four guardian Virtues, round, support her throne;
Fierce champion Fortitude, that knows no fears
Of hisses, blows, or want, or loss of ears:
Calm Temperance, whose blessings those partake
Who hunger, and who thirst for scribbling sake:
Prudence, whose glass presents the approaching jayl;
Poetic Justice, with her lifted scale;
Where in nice balance, truth with gold she weighs,
And solid pudding against empty praise.
Here she beholds the Chaos dark and deep,
Where nameless somethings in their causes sleep,
'Till genial Jacob, or a warm third-day
Calls forth each mass, a poem or a play.
How hints, like spawn, scarce quick in embryo lie;
How newborn nonsense first is taught to cry;
Maggots half-form'd, in rhyme exactly meet,
And learn to crawl upon poetic feet.
Here one poor Word a hundred clenches makes,
And ductile dullness new meanders takes;
There motley Images her fancy strike,
Figures ill-pair'd, and Similes unlike.
She sees a mob of Metaphors advance,
Pleased with the madness of the mazy dance:
How Tragedy and Comedy embrace;
How Farce and Epic get a jumbled race;
How Time himself stands still at her command,
Realms shift their place, and Ocean turns to land.
Here gay Description Egypt glads with showers,
Or gives to Zembla fruits, to Barca flowers;
Glittering with ice here hoary hills are seen,
Fast by, fair valleys of eternal green,
On cold December fragrant chaplets blow,
And heavy harvests nod beneath the snow.
All these and more, the cloud-compelling Queen
Beholds through fogs, that magnify the scene;
She, tinfel'd over in robes of varying hues,
With self-applause her wild creation views,
Sees momentary monsters rise and fall,
And with her own fools-colours gilds them all.
'Twas on the day, when Sir Geo. Tho^
Tho^d, rich and grave,
Like Cimon the famous Athenian general, who obtained a victory by sea, and
another by land, on the same day, over the Persians and Barbarians.
Cimon triumphed both on land and wave,
(Pomps without guilt, of bloodless swords and maces,
Glad chains, warm furs, broad banners, and broadfaces)
Now night descending, the proud scene was over,
Yet lived, in Settle's numbers, one day more.
Now May'rs and Shrieves in pleasing flumbers lay,
And eat in dreams the custard of the day:
But pensive poets painful vigils keep;
Sleepless themselves, to give their readers sleep.
Much to her mind the solemn feast recalls,
What city- Swans once sung within the walls,
Much she revolves their arts, their ancient praise,
And sure succession down from John Heywood, whose Enterludes were printed in
Hen. ViIIth's time.
Heywood's days.
She saw with joy the line immortal run,
Each sire impressed and glaring in his son;
So watchful Bruin forms with plastic care
Each growing lump, and brings it to a Bear.
She saw in N^n all his father shine,
And E^n eke out Bl^'s endless line;
She saw slow P^s creep like T^te's poor page,
And furious D^n foam in Wh^'s rage.
In each, she marks her image full expressed,
But chief, in Tibbald's monster-breeding breast,
Sees Gods with Demons in strange league engage,
And This, I presume, alludes to the extravagancies of the Farces of this
author. See book III. verse. 170, etc.
earth, and heaven, and hell, her battles wage!
She eyed the Bard where supperless he fate,
And pined, unconscious of his rising fate;
Studious he sat, with all his books around,
Sinking from thought to thought, a vast profound?
Plunged for his sense, but found no bottom there:
Then writ, and flounder'd on, in mere despair.
He rolled his eyes that witnessed huge dismay,
Where yet unpawn'd, much learned lumber lay,
Volumes, whose size the space exactly filled;
Or which fond authors were so good to gild;
Or where, by Sculpture made for ever known,
The page admires new beauties, not its own.
Here swells the shelf with Ogleby the great,
There, stamped with arms, Newcastle shines complete,
Here all his suffering brotherhood retire,
And 'scape the martyrdom of jakes and fire;
A Gothic Vatican! of Greece and Rome
Well-purg'd, and worthy W^y, Was, and Bl^
But high above, more solid Learning shone,
The Classicks of an age that heard of none;
There Caxton slept, with Wynkin at his side,
One clasped in wood, and one in strong cow-hide:
There saved by spice, like mummies, many a year,
Old Bodies of philosophy appear:
De Lyra there a dreadful front extends,
And there, the groaning Shelves Philemon bends.
Of these twelve volumes, twelve of amplest size,
Redeemed from tapers and defrauded pyes,
Inspired he seizes: These an altar raise:
An hecatomb of pure, unsullied lays
That altar crowns; a folio Commonplace
Founds the whole pyle, of all his works the base:
Quarto's, octavo's, shape the lessening pyre,
And last, a In duodecimo, translated from Sophocles.
little Ajax tips the spire.
Then he* Great Tamer of all human art!
First in my care, and nearest at my heart!
Dullness! whose good old cause I yet defend,
With whom my muse began, with whom shall end!
Oh thou! of business the directing soul,
To human heads like bias to the bowl,
Which as more ponderous makes their aim more true,
Obliquely wadling to the mark in view.
O ever gracious to perplexed mankind!
Who spread a healing mist before the mind,
And, lest we err by wit's wild, dancing light,
Secure us kindly in our native night.
Ah! still over Britain stretch that peaceful wand,
Which lulls the Helvetian and Batavian land,
Where against thy throne if rebel Science rise,
She does but show her coward face and dies:
There, thy good scholiasts with unwearied pains
Make Horace flat, and humble Maro's strains;
Here studious I unlucky Moderns save,
Nor sleeps one error in its father's grave,
Old puns restore, lost blunders nicely seek,
And crucify poor Shakespeare once a week.
For thee I dim these eyes, and stuff this head,
With all such reading as was never read;
For thee supplying, in the worst of days,
Notes to dull books, and Prologues to dull plays;
For thee explain a thing 'till all men doubt it,
And write about it, Goddess, and about it;
So spins the silkworm small its slender store,
And labors, 'till it clouds itself all over.
Not that my pen to critics was confined,
My verse gave ampler lessons to mankind;
So written precepts may successless prove,
But sad examples never fail to move.
As forced from wind-guns, lead it self can fly,
And ponderous slugs cut swiftly through the sky;
As clocks to weight their nimble motion owe,
The wheels above urged by the load below;
Me, Emptiness and Dullness could inspire,
And were my Elasticity, and Fire.
Had heaven decreed such works a longer date,
Heaven had decreed to spare the Grubstreet-state.
But see This was the last year of Elkanah Settle's life. He was poet to the
city of London, whose business was to compose yearly panegyricks on the Lord
Mayor, and verses for the Pageants; but since the abolition of that part of the
shows, the employment ceased, so that Settle had no successor to that place.
great Settle to the dust descend,
And all thy cause and empire at an end!
Could Troy be saved by any single hand,
His gray-goose-weapon must have made her stand.
But what can I^ my Flaccus cast aside,
Take up the Attorney's (once my better) guide?
Or rob the Roman geese of all their glories,
And save the state by cackling to the Tories?
Yes, to my country I my pen consign,
Yes, from this moment, mighty Mist! am thine,
And rival, Curtius! of thy fame and zeal,
Over head and ears plunge for the public weal.
Adieu my children! better thus expire
Un-stall'd, unsold; thus glorious mount in fire
Fair without spot; than greased by grocer's hands,
Or shipped with W^ to ape and monkey lands,
Or wafting ginger, round the streets to go,
And visit alehouse where ye first did grow.
With that, he lifted thrice the sparkling brand,
And thrice he dropped it from his quivering hand:
Then lights the structure, with averted eyes;
The rolling smokes involve the sacrifice.
The opening clouds disclose each work by turns,
Now flames old Plays and Farces of T^d.
Memnon, now Rodrigo burns,
In one quick slash see Proserpine expire,
And last, his own cold Aeschylus took fire.
Then gushed the tears, as from the Trojan's eyes
When the last blaze sent Ilion to the skies.
Rowz'd by the light, old Dullness heaved the head,
Then snatched a sheet of Thule from her Bed,
Sudden she flies, and whelms it over the pyre;
Down sink the flames, and with a hiss expire.
Her ample presence fills up all the place;
A veil of fogs dilates her awful face,
Great in her charms! as when on Shrieves and May'rs
She looks, and breathes herself into their airs.
She bids him wait her to the sacred Dome;
Well-pleased he entered, and confessed his home:
So spirits, ending their terrestrial race,
Ascend, and recognize their native place:
Raptured, he gazes round the dear retreat,
And He writ a poem called the Cave of Poverty, printed in 1715.
in sweet numbers celebrates the seat.
Here to her Chosen all her works she shows;
Prose swelled to verse, Verse loitring into prose:
How random thoughts now meaning chance to find,
Now leave all memory of sense behind;
How Prologues into Prefaces decay,
And those to Notes are fritter'd quite away:
How Index-learning turns no student pale,
Yet holds the eel of science by the Tail:
How, with less reading than makes felons 'scape;
Less human genius than God gives an ape,
Small thanks to France, and none to Rome or Greece,
A past, vamp'd, future, old, revived, new piece,
'Twixt Plautus, Fletcher, Congreve, and Corneille,
Can make a C^r, Jo^n, or O^ll.
The Goddess then, over his anointed head,
With mystic words the sacred Opium shed;
And lo! her Bird (a monster of a fowl!
Something betwixt a H^ and Owl)
Perched on his crown. All hail! and hail again
My son! the promised land expects thy reign.
Know Settle, cloyed with custard and with praise,
Is gathered to the Dull of ancient days,
Safe, where no critics damn, no duns molest,
Where G^n, B^, and highborn H^ rest!
I see a King! who leads my chosen sons
To lands that flow with clenches and with puns:
'Till each famed theater my empire own,
Till Albion, as Hibernia, bless my throne.
I see! I see! -- Then rapt, she spoke no more.
God save King Tibbald! Grubstreet alleys roar.
So when Jove's block descended from on high,
(As sings thy great fore-father, Ogilby,)
Hoarse thunder to its bottom shook the bog,
And the loud nation croak'd, God save King Log!
End of the first Book.
THE DUNCIAD.
Book the SECOND.
THE sons of Dullness meet: an endless band
Pours forth, and leaves unpeopled half the land,
A motley mixture! in long wigs, in bags,
In silks, in crapes, in garters, and in rags;
From drawing rooms, from colleges, from garrets,
On horse, on foot, in hacks, and gilded chariots,
All who true Dunces in her cause appeared,
And all who knew those Dunces to reward.
Now herald hawker's rusty voice proclaims
Heroic prizes, and adventurous Games;
In that wide space the Goddess took her stand
Where the tall May Pole once o'erlook'd the Strand;
But now (so ANNE and Piety ordain)
A Church collects the saints of Drury Lane.
With authors, stationers obeyed the call;
The field of glory is a field for all;
Glory, and gain, the industrious tribe provoke,
And gentle Dullness ever loves a joke.
A Poet's Form she sets before their eyes,
And bids the nimblest racer seize the prize;
No meagre, muse-rid mope, adust and thin,
In a dun nightgown of his own loose skin;
But such a bulk as no twelve bards could raise,
Twelve starving bards of these degenerate days.
All as a partridge plump, full-fed, and fair,
She formed this image of well-bodied air,
With pert flat eyes she window'd well its head,
A brain of feathers, and a heart of lead,
And empty words she gave, and sounding strain;
But senseless, lifeless! Idol void and vain!
Never was dashed out, at one lucky hit,
A fool, so just a copy of a wit;
So like, that critics said and courtiers swore,
A wit it was, and called the phantom, M^.
All gaze with ardour: some, a Poet's name,
Others, a sword-knot and laced suit inflame:
But lofty Let in the circle rose;
"This prize is mine; who tempt it, are my foes:
"With me began this genius, and shall end:
He spoke, and who with Let shall contend?
Fear held them mute. Alone, untaught to fear,
Stood dauntless C^l. "Behold that rival here!
"The race by vigor, not by vaunts is won;
"So take the hindmost Hell. -- He said, and run.
Swift as a bard the bailiff leaves behind,
He left huge Let, and out-stript the wind.
As when a dab-chick waddles through the copse,
On legs and wings, and flies, and wades, and hops;
So laboring on, with shoulders, hands, and head,
Wide as a windmill all his figure spread,
With steps unequal Let urged the race,
And seemed to emulate great Jacob's pace.
Full in the middle way there stood a lake,
Which C^l's Corinna chanced that morn to make,
(Such was her wont, at early dawn to drop
Her evening cates before his neighbor's shop,)
Here fortuned C^l to slide: loud shout the band,
And Let, Let, rings through all the Strand.
Obscene with filth the varlet lies bewrayed,
Fallen in the plash his wickedness had laid:
Then first (if Poets ought of truth declare)
The caitiff Vaticide conceived a prayer.
Hear Jove! whose name my bards and I adore,
As much at least as any Gods, or more;
And him and his, if more devotion warms,
Down with the The Bible C^l's (...).
Bible, up with the The Cross-keys L^t's.
Pope's Arms.
See Lucian' s Icaro-Menippus.
A place there is, betwixt earth, air and seas,
Where from Ambrosia, Jove retires for ease.
There in his seat two spacious Vents appear,
On this he sits, to that he leans his ear,
There hears the various vows of fond mankind,
Some beg an eastern, some a western wind:
All vain petitions, sent by winds on high,
With reams abundant this abode supply;
Amused he reads, and then returns the bills
Signed with that Ichor which from Gods distills.
In office here fair Cloacina stands,
And ministers to Jove with purest hands;
Forth from the heap she picked her vot'ry's prayer,
And placed it next him, a distinction rare!
Often, as he fished her nether realms for wit,
The Goddess favored him, and favors yet.
Renewed by ordure's sympathetic force,
As oil'd with magic juices for the course,
Vigorous he rises; from the effluvia strong
Imbibes new life, and scours and stinks along,
Re-passes Let, vindicates the race,
Nor heeds the brown dishonours of his face.
And now the victor stretched his eager hand,
Where the tall Nothing stood, or seemed to stand;
A shapeless shade, it melted from his sight,
Like forms in clouds, or visions of the night!
Baffled, yet present even amidst despair,
To seize his papers, C^l, was next thy care;
His papers all, the sportive winds up-lift,
And whisk 'em back to G^, to Y^, to S^.
The embroidered suit, at least, he deemed his prey;
That suit, an unpay'd Tailor snatched away!
No rag, no scrap, of all the beau, or wit,
That once so fluttered, and that once so writ.
Heaven rings with laughter: Of the laughter vain,
Dullness, good Queen, repeats the jest again.
Three wicked imps of her own Grubstreet Choir
She decked like Congreve, Addison, and Prior;
Mears, Warner, Wilkins run: Delusive thought!
(...), (...), and (...), the wretches caught.
C^l stretches after Gay, but Gay is gone,
He grasps an empty Joseph Gay, a fictitious name put by C^l before several
Pamphlets.
Joseph for a John.
So Proteus, hunted in a nobler shape,
Became, when seized, a Puppy or an Ape.
To him the Goddess. Son, thy grief lay down;
And turn this whole illusion on the town.
As the sage dame experienced in her trade,
By names of Toasts retails each battered jade,
(Whence hapless Monsieur much complains at Paris.
Of wrongs from Duchesses and Lady Marys)
Be thine, my stationer! this magic gift;
C^ shall be Prior, and C^n, Swift;
So shall each hostile name become our own,
And we too boast our Garth and Addison.
With that the Goddess (piteous of his case,
Yet smiling at his ruful length of face)
Gives him a covering, worthy to be spread
On Codrus' old, or (...)'s modern bed;
Instructive work! whose wry-mouthed portraiture
Displayed the fates her confessors endure.
Ear-less on high, stood pillory'd D^
And T^ flagrant from the lash, below:
There kicked and cudgel'd R^ might ye view,
The very worstead still looked black and blue:
Himself among the storied chiefs he spies,
As from the blanket high in air he flies,
And oh! (he cried) what street, what lane but knows
Our purgings, pumpings, blanketings and blows?
In every loom our labors shall be seen,
And the fresh vomit run for ever green!
See in the circle next, Eliza placed;
Two babes of love close clinging to her waste;
Fair as before her works she stands confessed,
In flow'r'd brocade by bounteous Kirkall dressed,
Pearls on her neck, and roses in her hair,
And her fore-buttocks to the navel bare.
The Goddess then: "Who best can send on high
"The salient spout, fair-streaming to the sky;
"His be yon Juno of majestic size,
"With cow-like udders, and with ox-like eyes.
"This China-Jordan, let the chief overcome
"Replenish, not ingloriously, at home.
Ch^d and C^l accept this glorious strife,
(Though one his Son dissuades, and one his Wife)
This on his manly confidence relies,
That on his vigor and superior size.
First C^d leaned against his lettered post;
It rose, and labored to a curve at most:
So Jove's bright bow displays its watery round,
(Sure sign, that no spectator shall be drowned)
A second effort brought but new disgrace,
For straining more, it flies in his own face;
Thus the small jett which hasty hands unlock,
Spirits in the gardeners eyes who turns the cock.
Not so from shameless C^l: Impetuous spread
The stream, and smoking, flourished over his head.
So, (famed like thee for turbulence and horns,)
Eridanus his humble fountain scorns,
Through half the heavens he pours the exalted urn;
His rapid waters in their passage burn.
Swift as it mounts, all follow with their eyes;
Still happy, Impudence obtains the prize.
Thou triumph'st, Victor of the high-wrought day,
And the pleased dame soft-smiling leads away.
Ch^d, through perfect modesty overcome,
Crowned with the Jordan, walks contented home.
But now for Authors nobler palms remain:
Room for my Lord! three Jockeys in his train;
Six huntsmen with a shout precede his chair;
He grins, and looks broad nonsense with a stare.
His honored meaning, Dullness thus expressed.
"He wins this Patron who can tickle best."
He chinks his purse, and takes his seat of state,
With ready quills the Dedicators wait,
Now at his head the dext'rous task commence,
And instant, fancy feels the imputed sense;
Now gentle touches wanton over his face,
He struts Adonis, and affects grimace:
R^ the feather to his ear conveys,
Then his nice taste directs our Operas:
(...) his mouth with Classic flattery opes,
And the puffed Orator bursts out in tropes.
But O^ the Poet's healing balm
Strives to extract from his soft, giving palm;
Unlucky O^! thy lordly master
The more thou ticklest, gripes his fist the faster.
While thus each hand promotes the pleasing pain,
And quick sensations skip from vein to vein,
A youth unknown to Phoebus, in despair,
Puts his last refuge all in Heaven in Prayer.
What force have pious vows? the Queen of Love
His Sister sends, her vot'ress, from above.
As taught by Venus, Paris learnt the art
To touch Achilles' only tender part,
Secure, through her, the noble prize to carry,
He marches off, his Grace's Secretary.
Now turn to different sports (the Goddess cries)
And learn, my sons, the wondrous power of Noise.
To move, to raise, to ravish every heart,
With Shakespeare's nature, or with Johnson's art,
Let others aim: It Is yours to shake the soul
With Thunder rumbling from the mustard-bowl,
With horns and trumpets now to madness swell,
Now sink in sorrows with a tolling Bell.
Such happy arts attention can command,
When fancy flags, and sense is at a stand:
Improve we these. Three Cat-calls be the bribe
Of him, whose chatt'ring shames the Monkey tribe;
And his this Drum, whose hoarse heroic base
Drowns the loud Clarion of the braying Ass.
Now thousand tongues are heard in one loud din,
The Monkey-mimicks rush discordant in;
'Twas chatt'ring, grinning, mouthing, jabb'ring all,
And R^, and railing, Brangling, and B^,
D^s and Dissonance; And captious art,
And snip-snap short, and interruption smart.
Hold (cried the Queen) ye all alike shall win,
Equal your merits, equal is your din;
But that this well-disputed game may end,
Sound forth my Brayers, and the welkin rend.
As when the long-ear'd, milky mothers wait
At some sick miser's triple-bolted gate,
For their defrauded, absent foals they make
A moan so loud, that all the Guild awake:
So sighs Sir G^t, starting at the bray
From dreams of millions, and three groats to pay.
So swells each Windpipe; Ass intones to Ass,
Harmonic twang! of leather, horn, and brass:
Such as from laboring lungs the Enthusiast blows,
High sounds, attempted to the vocal nose.
But far over all sonorous Bl^'s strain,
Walls, steeples, skies, bray back to him again:
In Tot'nham fields, the brethren with amaze
Prick all their ears up, and forget to graze;
Long Chanc'ry-lane retentive rolls the sound,
And courts to courts return it round and round;
Thames wafts it thence to Rufus' roaring hall,
And H^d re-ecchoes, bawl for bawl.
All hail him victor in both gifts of Song,
Who sings so loudly, and who sings so long.
This labor past, by Bridewell all descend,
(As morning prayer and flagellation end.)
To where Fleetditch with disemboguing streams
Rolls the large tribute of dead dogs to Thames,
The King of Dykes! than whom, no sluice of mud
With deeper sable blots the silver flood.
'Here strip my children! here at once leap in!
'Here prove who best can dash through thick and thin,
'And who the most in love of dirt excel,
'Or dark dexterity of groping well.
'Who flings most mud, and wide pollutes around
'The stream, be his the (...) Journals, bound.
'A pig of lead to him who dives the best;
'A peck of coals a-piece shall glad the rest.
In naked majesty great D^ stands,
And, Milo-like, surveys his arms and hands:
Then sighing, thus, "And am I now threescore?
"Ah why, ye Gods! should two and two make four?
He said, and climbed a stranded Lighter's height,
Shot to the black abyss, and plunged downright.
The senior's judgment all the crowd admire,
Who but to sink the deeper, rose the higher.
Next E^ dived; slow circles dimpled over
The quaking mud, that closed and ope'd no more:
All look, all sigh, and call on E^ lost;
E^ in vain resounds through all the coast.
H^ tried the next, but hardly snatched from sight,
Instant buoys up, and rises into light;
He bears no token of the sabler streams,
And mounts far off, among the swans of Thames.
Far worse unhappy D^r succeeds,
He searched for coral, but he gathered weeds.
True to the bottom, (...) and (...) creep,
Long-winded both, as natives of the deep,
This only merit pleading for the prize,
Nor everlasting Bl^ this denies.
But nimbler W^d reaches at the ground,
Circles in mud, and darkness all around,
No crab more active, in the dirty dance,
Downward to climb, and backward to advance;
He brings up half the bottom on his head,
And boldly claims the Journals and the Lead.
Sudden, a burst of thunder shook the flood,
Lo E^ rose, tremendous all in mud!
Shaking the horrors of his fable brows,
And each ferocious feature grim with ooze.
Greater he looks, and more than mortal stares;
Then thus the wonders of the deep declares,
First he relates, how smking to the chin,
Smit with his mien, the Mudnymphs sucked him in,
How young Lutetia softer than the down,
Nigrina black, and Merdamante brown,
Vy'd for his love in jetty bowers below;
As Hylas fair was ravished long ago.
Then sung how, shown him by the nutbrown maids
A branch of Styx here rises from the Shades,
That tinctured as it runs with Lethe's streams,
And wafting vapors from the Land of Dreams,
(As under seas Alphaeus' sacred sluice
Bears Pisa's offerings to his Arethuse)
Pours into Thames: Each City-bowl is full
Of the mixed wave, and all who drink grow dull.
How to the banks where bards departed doze,
They led him soft; how all the bards arose;
Tailor, sweet bird of Thames, majestic bows,
And She nods the poppy on his brows;
While M^n there, deputed by the rest,
Gave him the cassock, surcingle, and vest;
And "Take (he said) these robes which once were mine,
"Dullness is sacred in a sound Divine.
He ceased, and showed the robe; the crowd confess
The reverend Flamen in his lengthened dress.
Slow moved the Goddess from the silver flood,
(Her Priest preceding) through the gates of Lud.
Her Critics there she summons, and proclaims
A gentler exercise to close the games.
Hear you! in whose grave heads, as equal scales,
I weigh what author's heaviness prevails,
Which most conduce to sooth the soul in slumbers,
My H^'s periods, or my Bl^'s numbers?
Attend the trial we propose to make:
If there be man who over such works can wake,
Sleep's all-subduing power who dares defy,
And boasts Ulysses' ear with Argus' eye;
To him we grant our amplest powers to fit
Judge of all present, past, and future wit,
To cavil, censure, dictate, right or wrong,
Full, and eternal privilege of tongue.
Three Cambridge Sophs and three pert Templars came,
The same their talents, and their tastes the same;
Each prompt to query, answer, and debate,
And smit with love of poesy and prate.
The ponderous books two gentle Readers bring;
The heroes sit; the vulgar form a ring.
The clamorous crowd is hushed with mugs of Mum,
'Till all tuned equal, send a general hum.
Then mount the Clerks; and in one lazy tone,
Through the long, heavy, painful page, drawl on,
Soft creeping words on words the sense compose,
At e'vry line, they stretch, they yawn, they doze.
As to soft gales top-heavy pines bow low
Their heads, and lift them as they cease to blow,
Thus often they rear, and often the head decline,
As breathe, or pause, by fits, the airs divine.
And now to this side, now to that, they nod,
As verse, or prose, infuse the drowzy God.
Thrice B^l aimed to speak, but thrice suppressed
By potent Arthur, knocked his chin and breast.
C^s and T^d, prompt at Priests to jeer,
Yet silent bowed to Christ's no kingdom here.
Who sat the nearest, by the word's overcome
Slept first, the distant nodded to the hum.
Then down are rolled the books; stretched over 'emlies
Each gentle clerk, and mutt'ring seals his eyes.
As what a Dutchman plumps into the lakes,
One circle first, and then a second makes,
What dullness dropped among her sons impressed
Like motion, from one circle to the rest;
So from the mid-most the nutation spreads
Round, and more round, over all the sea of heads.
At last C^re felt her voice to fail,
And (...) himself unfinished left his Tale.
T^s and T^ the church and state gave over,
Nor (...) talked, nor S^ whispered more.
Even N^n, gifted with his mother's tongue,
Though born at Wapping, and from Daniel sprung,
Ceased his loud bawling breath, and dropped the head;
And all was hushed, as Folly's self lay dead.
Thus the soft gifts of Sleep conclude the day,
And stretched on bulks, as usual, Poets lay.
Why should I sing what bards the Nightly Muse
Did slumbring visit, and convey to stews?
Or prouder marched, with magistrates in state,
To some famed round-house, ever open gate!
How E^ lay inspired beside a sink,
And to mere mortals seemed a Priest in drink?
All others timely, to the neighboring Fleet
(Haunt of the Muses) made their safe retreat.
End of the Second Book.
THE DUNCIAD.
Book the THIRD.
BUT in her Temple's last recess enclosed,
On Dulness' lap the Anointed head reposed.
Him close she curtain'd round with vapors blue,
And soft besprinkled with Cimmerian dew.
Then Raptures high the seat of sense overflow,
Which only heads refined from reason know:
Hence from the straw where Bedlam's Prophet nods,
He hears loud Oracles, and talks with Gods;
Hence the Fool's paradise, the Statesman's scheme,
The air-built Castle, and the golden Dream,
The Maids romantic wish, the Chemists flame,
And Poets vision of eternal fame.
And now, on Fancy's easy wing conveyed,
The King descended to the Elyzian shade.
There in a dusky vale where Lethe rolls,
Old Bavius sits, to dip poetic souls,
And blunt the sense, and fit it for a skull
Of solid proof, impenetrably dull.
Instant when dipped, away they wing their flight,
Where Booksellers.
Brown and Mears unbar the gates of Light,
Demand new bodies, and in Calf's array
Rush to the world, impatient for the day.
Millions and millions on these banks he views,
Thick as the Stars of night, or morning dews,
As thick as bees over vernal blossoms fly,
As thick as eggs at W^d in pillory.
Wondering he gazed: When lo! a Sage appears,
By his broad shoulders known, and length of ears,
Known by the band and suit which Settle wore,
(His only suit) for twice three years before.
All as the Vest, appeared the wearers frame,
Old in new state, another, yet the same.
Bland and familiar as in life, begun
Thus the great Father to the greater Son.
Oh! born to see what none can see awake!
Behold the wonders of the Oblivious Lake.
Thou, yet unborn, have touched this sacred shore,
The hand of Bavius drenched thee over and over.
But blind to former, as to future, Fate,
What mortal knows his pre-existent state?
Who knows how long, thy transmigrating soul
Did from Boeotian to Boeotian roll?
How many Dutchmen she vouchsafed to third?
How many stages through old Monks she rid?
And all who since, in mild benighted days,
Mixed the Owl's ivy with the Poet's bays?
As Man's maeanders to the vital spring
Roll all their tides, then back their circles bring;
Or whirligigs, twirl'd round by skilful swain,
Suck the thread in, then yield it out again:
All nonsense thus, of old or modern date,
Shall in thee center, from thee circulate.
For this, our Queen unfolds to vision true
Thy mental eye, for thou have much to view:
Old scenes of glory, times long cast behind,
Shall first recalled, rush forward to thy mind;
Then stretch thy sight over all her rising reign,
And let the past and future fire thy brain.
Ascend this Heavens!
hill, whose cloudy point commands
Her boundless Empire over seas and lands.
See round the Poles where keener spangles shine,
Where spices smoke beneath the burning Line,
(Earths wide extremes) her fable flag displayed;
And all the nations covered in her shade!
Far Eastward cast thy eye, from whence the Sun
And orient Science at a birth begun.
One man immortal all that pride confounds.
He, whose long Wall the wandering Tartar bounds.
Ho-am-ti. Emperor of China, the same who built the great wall between China
and Tartary, destroyed all the books and learned men of that empire.
Heavens! what a pyle? whole ages perish there:
And one bright blaze turns Learning into air.
Thence to the South as far extend thy eyes;
There rival flames with equal glory rise,
From shelves to shelves The Caliph, Omar I. having conquered Egypt, caused
his General to burn the Ptolomaean library, on the gates of which was this
inscription, Medicine Anintae.
see greedy Vulcan roll,
And lick up all their Physic of the Soul.
How little, see! that portion of the ball,
Where faint at best the beams of science fall!
Against her throne, from Hyperborean skies,
In dullness strong, the avenging Vandals rise;
Lo where Moeotis sleeps, and hardly flows
The freezing Tanais through a waste of snows,
The North by myriads pours her mighty sons,
Great nurse of Goths, of Alans, and of Huns.
See Alaric's stern port, the martial frame
Of Genseric, and Attila's dread name!
See! the bold Ostrogoths on Latium fall;
See! the fierce Visigoths on Spain and Gaul.
See! where the morning gilds the palmy shore,
(The soil that arts and infant letters bore)
His conquering tribes the Arabian prophet draws.
And saving Ignorance enthrones by Laws.
See Christians, Jews, one heavy sabbath keep;
And all the Western World believe and sleep.
Lo Rome herself, proud mistress now no more
Of arts, but thundering against Heathen lore;
Her gray-hair'd Synods damning books unread,
And Bacon trembling for his brazen Head.
Lo statues, temples, theaters o'erturn'd,
Oh glorious ruin! and (...) burned.
See thou an Isle, by Palmers, Pilgrims trod,
Men bearded, bald, cowl'd, uncowl'd, shod, unshod,
Peeled, patched, and pieball'd, linsey-woolsey brothers
Grave mummers, sleeveless some, and shirtless others.
That once was Britain -- Happy! had she seen
No fiercer sons, had Wars in England anciently, about the right time of
celebrating Easter.
Easter never been.
In peace, great Goddess! ever be adored;
How keen the war, if dullness draw the sword?
Thus visit not thy own! on this blessed age
Oh spread thy Influence, but restrain thy Rage!
And see my son, the hour is on its way
That lifts our Goddess to imperial sway:
This favorite Isle, long severed from her reign,
Dove-like, she gathers to her wings again.
Now look through Fate! behold the scene she draws!
What aids, what armies, to assert her cause!
See all her progeny, illustrious sight!
Behold, and count them as they rise to light.
As Berecynthia, while her offspring vye
In homage, to the mother of the sky,
Surveys around her in the blessed abode
A hundred sons, and every son a God:
Not with less glory mighty Dullness crowned,
Shall take through Grubstreet her triumphant round,
And all Parnassus glancing over at once,
Behold a hundred sons, and each a dunce.
Mark first the youth who takes the foremost place
And-thrusts his person full into your face.
With all thy Father's virtues blessed, be born!
And a new C^r shall the stage adorn.
See yet a younger, by his blushes known,
And modest as the maid who sips alone.
From the strong fate of drams if thou get free,
Another Durfey, (...) shall sing in thee.
For thee each Alehouse, and each Gill-house mourn,
And answ'ring Gin-shops sowrer sighs return.
Behold yon pair, in strict embraces joined;
How like their manners, and how like their mind!
Famed for good nature, B^ and for truth,
D^ for pious passion to the youth.
Equal in wit, and equally polite,
Shall this a Pasquin, that a Grumbler write;
Like are their merits, like rewards they share,
That shines a Consul, this Commissioner.
Ah D^, G^ ah! what ill-starr'd rage
Divides a friendship long confirmed by age?
Blockheads with reason wicked wits abhor,
But fool with fool is barbarous, civil war.
Embrace, embrace my Sons! be foes no more!
Nor glad vile Poets with true Critics gore.
See next two slip-shod Muses traipse along,
In lofty madness meditating song,
With tresses staring from poetic dreams,
And never washed, but in Castalia's streams.
H^ and T^, glories of their race!
Lo H^ck's fierce, and M^'s rueful face!
W^n, the scourge of Scripture, mark with awe!
And mighty J^b Blunderbus of Law!
Lo thousand thousand, every nameless name,
All crowd, who foremost shall be damned to fame;
How proud! how pale! how earnest all appear!
How rhymes eternal gingle in their ear!
Pass these to nobler sights: Lo H^ stands
Tuning his voice, and balancing his hands,
How honey'd nonsense trickles from his tongue!
How sweet the periods, neither said nor sung!
Still break the benches, H^ with thy strain,
While K^, Br^, W^ preach in vain
Round him, each Science by its modern type
Stands known; Divinity with box and pipe,
And proud Philosophy with breeches tore,
And English Music with a dismal score:
While happier History with her comrade Ale,
Sooths the sad series of her tedious tale.
Fast by, in darkness palpable inshrin'd
Was, B^r, M^n, all the poring kind,
A lumberhouse of Books in every head,
Are ever reading, and are never read.
But who is he, in closet close y-pent,
With visage from his shelves with dust besprent?
Right well mine eyes arede that myster wight,
That wonnes in haulkes and hernes, and H^ he hight.
To future ages may thy dullness last,
As thou preserv'st the dullness of the past!
But oh! what scenes, what miracles behind?
Now stretch thy view, and open all thy mind.
He looked, and saw a sable * seer arise,
Swift to whose hand a winged volume flies.
All sudden, gorgons hiss, and dragons glare,
And ten horned fiends, and giants, threaten war.
Hell rises, heaven descends, to dance on earth:
Gods, monsters, furies, music, rage and mirth;
A fire, a jig, a battle, and a ball,
'Till one wide conflagration swallows all.
Then a new world to nature's laws unknown,
Refulgent rises, with a heaven its own:
Another Cynthia her new journey runs,
And other planets circle other suns:
The forests dance, the rivers upward rise,
Whales sport in woods, and dolphins in the skies;
And last, to give the whole creation grace,
Lo! one vast Egg produces human race.
Silent the monarch gazed; yet asked in thought
What God or Demon all these wonders wrought?
To whom the Sire: In yonder cloud, behold,
Whose sarcenet skirts are edged with flamy gold,
A godlike youth: See Jove's own bolts he flings,
Rolls the loud thunder, and the lightning wings!
Angel of Dullness, sent to scatter round
Her magic charms on all unclassic ground:
Yon stars, yon suns, he rears at pleasure higher,
Illumes their light, and sets their flames on fire.
Immortal R^ch! how calm he sits at ease,
Mid snows of paper, and fierce hail of pease?
And proud his mistress' orders to perform,
Rides in the whirlwind, and directs the storm.
But lo! to dark encounter in mid air
New wizards rise: here B^th, and C^r there.
B^th in his cloudy tabernacle shrin'd,
On grinning dragons C^r mounts the wind:
Dire is the conflict, dismal is the din,
Here shouts all Drury, there all Lincoln's End;
Contending Theaters our empire raise,
Alike their labors, and alike their praise.
And are these wonders, Son, to thee unknown?
Unknown to thee? These wonders are thy own.
These Fate reserved to grace thy reign divine,
Foreseen by me, but ah! withheld from mine.
In Lud's old walls though long I ruled renowned,
Far as loud Bow's stupendous bells resound;
Though my own Aldermen conferred my bays,
To me committing their eternal praise,
Their full-fed Heroes, their pacific May'rs,
Their annual trophies, and their monthly wars:
Though Settle was once famous for party papers, but very uncertain in his
political principles. He was employed to hold the pen in the Character of a
popish successor, but afterward printed his Narrative on the contrary side.

He managed the ceremony and pageants at the burning of a famous Pope, and was
at length employed in making the machinery at Bartholomew fair, where, in his
old age he acted in a dragon of leather of his own invention.


long my Party built on me their hopes,
For writing Pamphlets, and for roasting Popes
(Different our parties, but with equal grace
Our Goddess smiles on Whig and Tory race,
It Is the same rope at several ends they twist,
To Dullness, Ridpath is as dear as Mist.)
Yet lo! in me what Authors have to brag on!
Reduced at last to hiss in my own dragon.
Avert it, heaven! that thou or C^r ever
Should wag two serpent tails in Smithfield sair.
Like the vile straw that is blown about the streets,
The needy Poet sticks to all he meets,
Coach'd, carted, trod upon, now loose, now fast,
In the Dog's tail his progress ends at last.
Happier thy fortunes! like a rolling stone
Thy giddy dullness still shall lumber on,
Safe in its heaviness, can never stray,
And licks up every blockhead in the way.
Thy dragons (...) and (...) shall taste,
And from each show rise duller than the last:
'Till raised from Booths to Theater, to Court,
Her seat imperial Dullness shall transport.
(Already, Opera prepares the way,
The sure forerunner of her gentle sway.)
To aid her cause, if heaven thou can not bend,
Hell thou shall move; for Faustus is thy friend:
Pluto with Cato thou for her shall join,
And link the Mourning-Bride to Proserpine.
Grubstreet! thy fall should men and Gods conspire,
Thy stage shall stand, ensure it but from Fire.
Another Aeschylus appears! prepare
For new It is reported of Aeschylus that when his Tragedy of the Eumenides was
acted, the audience were so terrified that the children fell into fits, and the
bigbelly'd women miscarried. T^d is translating this Author.
Abortions, all ye pregnant fair!
In flames like Semeles be brought to bed,
While opening Hell spouts wildfire at your head.
Now Bavius take the poppy from thy brow,
And place it here! here all ye Heroes bow!
This, this is He, foretold by ancient rhymes,
The Augustus, born to bring Saturnian times!
Beneath his reign, shall E^n wear the bays,
C^r preside, Lord Chancellor of Plays,
B^ sole judge of Architecture sit,
And A^e P^s be preferred for Wit!
I see the unfinished Dormitory wall!
I see the Savoy totter to her fall!
The sons of Isis reel! the towns-mens sport;
And Alma Matter all dissolved in Port!
Then, when these signs declare the mighty Year,
When the dull Stars roll round, and re-appear;
Let there be darkness! (the dread power shall say)
All shall be darkness, as it never were Day;
To their first Chaos Wit's vain works shall fall,
And universal Dullness cover all!
No more the Monarch could such raptures bear*
He waked, and all the Vision mixed with air.
FINIS.
Speedily will be Published The PROGRESS Of DULLNESS, AN Historical POEM. By an
Eminent Hand. Price 1 s. 6 d.


