Eloisa to Abelard. (...)



ELOISA TO ABELARD.

Written by Mr. POPE.

The SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for BERNARD LINTOT, at the Cross-Keys between the Temple-Gates
in Fleet Street. MDCCXX.

The ARGUMENT.
ABelard and Eloisa flourished in the twelsth Century; they were two of the
most dislinguish'd persons of their age in learning and beauty, but for nothing
more famous than for their unfortunate passon. After a long course of
calamities, they retired each to a several Convent, and consecrated the
remainder of their days to religion. It was many years after this separation,
that a letter of Abelard's to a friend, which contained the history of his
misfortunes, fell into the hands of Eloisa. This awakening all her tenderness,
occasioned those celebrated letters (out of which the following is partly
extracted) which give so lively a picture of the struggles of grace and nature,
virtue and passion.

ELOISA TO ABELARD.
IN these deep solitudes and awful cells,
Where heavenly pensive, contemplation dwells,
And ever-musing melancholy reigns;
What means this tumult in a Vestal's veins?
Why rove my thoughts beyond this last retreat?
Vhy feels my heart its long-forgotten heat?
Yet, yet I love! -- From Abelard it came,
And Eloisa yet must kiss the name.
Dear fatal name! rest ever unreveal'd,
Nor pass these lips in holy silence sealed.
Hide it, my heart, within that close disguise,
Where, mixed with God's, his loved Idea lies.
Oh write it not, my hand -- The name appears
Already written -- wash it out, my tears!
In vain lost Eloisa weeps and prays,
Her heart still dictates, and her hand obeys.
Relentless walls! whose darksom round contains
Repentant sighs, and voluntary pains:
Ye rugged rocks! which holy knees have worn;
Ye grots and caverns shagg'd with horrid thorn:
Shrines! where their vigils pale-ey'd virgins keep,
And pitying saints, whose statues learn to weep!
Though cold like you, unmoved, and silent grown,
I have not yet forgot my self to stone.
Heaven claims me all in vain, while he has part,
Still rebel nature holds out half my heart;
Nor prayers nor fasts its stubborn pulse restrain,
Nor tears, for ages, taught to flow in vain.
Soon as thy letters trembling I unclose,
That well-known name awakens all my woes.
O name for ever sad! for ever dear!
Still breathed in sighs, still ushered with a tear.
I tremble too wherever my own I find,
Some dire misfortune follows close behind.
Line after line my gushing eyes overflow,
Led through a sad variety of woe:
Now warm in love, now withering in thy bloom,
Lost in a convent's solitary gloom!
There stern religion quenched the unwilling flame,
There died the best of passions, Love and Fame.
Yet write, oh write me all, that I may join
Griefs to thy griess, and echo sighs to thine.
Nor foes nor fortune take this power away:
And is my Abelard less kind than they?
Tears still are mine, and those I need not spare,
Love but demands what else were shed in prayer;
No happier task these faded eyes pursue,
To read and weep is all they now can do.
Then share thy pain, allow that sad relief;
Ah more than share it! give me all thy grief.
Heaven first taught letters for some wretches aid,
Some banished lover, or some captive maid;
They live, they speak, they breathe what love inspires,
Warm from the soul, and faithful to its fires,
The virgins wish without her fears impart,
Excuse the blush, and pour out all the heart,
Speed the soft intercourse from soul to soul,
And waft a sigh from Indus to the Pole.
Thou know how guiltless first I met thy flame,
When Love approached me under Friendfhip's name;
My fancy formed thee of Angelick kind,
Some emanation of the all-beauteous Mind.
Those smiling eyes, attemp'ring every ray,
Shone sweetly lambent with celestial day:
Guiltless I gazed; heaven listened while you sung;
And truths He was her Preceptor in Philosophy and Divinity.
divine came mended from that tongue.
From lips like those what precept failed to move?
Too soon they taught me 'twas no sin to love.
Back through the paths of pleasing sense I ran,
Nor wished an Angel whom I loved a Man.
Dim and remote the joys of saints I fee,
Nor envy them, that heaven I lose for thee.
How often, when pressed to marriage, have I said,
Curse on all laws but those which love has made?
Love, free as air, at sight of human ties,
Spreads his light wings, and in a moment flies.
Let wealth, let honor, wait the wedded dame,
August her deed, and sacred be her fame;
Before true passion all thofe views remove,
Fame, wealth, and honor! what are you to Love?
The jealous God, when we profane his fires,
Those restless passions in revenge inspires;
And bids them make mistaken mortals groan,
Who seek in love for ought but love alone.
Should at my feet the world's great master fall,
Himself, his throne, his world, I Would scorn 'em all:
Not Caesar's empress would I deign to prove;
No, make me mistress to the man I love:
If there be yet another name more free,
More fond than mistress, make me that to thee!
O happy state! when souls each other draw,
When love is liberty, and nature law:
All then is full, possessing, and possessed,
No craving Void left aching in the breast:
Even thought meets thought ever from the lips it part,
And each warm wish springs mutual from the heart.
This sure is bliss (if bliss on earth there be)
And once the lot of Abelard and me.
Alas how changed! what sudden horrors rise?
A naked Lover bound and bleeding lies!
Where, where was Eloise? her voice, her hand,
Her poniard had opposed the dire command.
Barbarian stay! that bloody hand restrain;
The crime was common, common be the pain.
I can no more; by shame, by rage suppressed,
Let tears, and burning blushes speak the rest.
Can thou forget that sad, that solcmn day,
When victims at yon' altar's foot we lay?
Can thou forget what tears that moment fell,
When, warm in youth, I bade the world farewell?
As with cold lips I kissed the sacred veil,
The shrines all trembled, and the lamps grew pale:
Heaven scarce believed the conquest it surveyed,
And Saints with wonder heard the vows I made.
Yet then, to those dread altars as I drew,
Not on the Cross my eyes were fixed, but you;
Not grace, or zeal, love only was my call,
And if I lose thy love, I lose my all.
Come! with thy looks, thy words, relieve my woe;
Those still at least are left thee to bestow.
Still on that breast enamored let me lie,
Still drink delicious poison from thy eye,
Pant on thy lip, and to thy heart be pressed;
Give all thou can -- and let me dream the rest.
Ah no! instruct me other joys to prize,
With other beauties charm my partial eyes,
Full in my view set all the bright abode,
And make my soul quit Abelard for God.
Ah think at least thy flock deserve thy care,
Plants of thy hand, and children of thy prayer.
From the false world in early youth they fled,
By thee to mountains, wilds, and deserts led.
You He founded the Monastery.
raised these hallowed walls; the desert smiled,
And Paradise was opened in the Wild.
No weeping orphan saw his father's stores
Our shrines irradiate, or emblaze the floors;
No silver saints, by dying misers given,
Here bribed the rage of ill-requited heaven:
But such plain roofs as piety could raise,
And only vocal with the Maker's praise.
In these lone walls (their days eternal bound)
These moss-grown domes with spiry turrets crowned,
Where awful arches make a noonday night,
And the dim windows shed a solemn light;
Thy eyes diffused a reconciling ray,
And gleams of glory brightened all the day.
But now no face divine contentment wears,
It Is all blank fadness, or continual tears.
See how the force of others prayers I try,
(Oh pious fraud of amorous charity!)
But why should I on others prayers depend?
Come thou, my father, brother, husband, friend!
Ah let thy handmaid, sister, daughter move,
And, all those tender names in one, thy love!
The darksom pines that over yon' rocks reclined
Wave high, and murmur to the hollow wind,
The wandering streams that shine between the hills,
The grots that echo to the tinkling rills,
The dying gales that pant upon the trees,
The lakes that quiver to the curling breeze;
No more these scenes my meditation aid,
Or lull to rest the visionary maid:
But over the twilight groves, and dusky caves,
Long-founding isles, and intermingled graves,
Black Melancholy sits, and round her throws
A death-like silence, and a dread repose:
Her gloomy presence saddens all the scene,
Shades every flower, and darkens every green,
Deepens the murmur of the falling floods,
And breathes a browner horror on the woods.
Yet here for ever, ever must I stay;
Sad proof how well a lover can obey!
Death, only death, can break the lasting chain;
And here even then, shall my cold dust remain,
Here all its frailties, all its flames resign,
And wait, 'till it is no sin to mix with thine.
Ah wretch! believed the spouse of God in vain,
Confessed within the slave of love and man.
Assist me heaven! but whence arose that prayer?
Sprung it from piety, or from despair?
Even here, where frozen chastity retires,
Love finds an altar for forbidden fires.
I ought to grieve, but cannot what I ought;
I mourn the lover, not lament the fault;
I view my crime, but kindle at the view,
Repent old pleasures, and solicit new:
Now turned to heaven, I weep my past offense,
Now think of thee, and curse my innocence.
Of all, affliction taught a lover yet,
It Is sure the hardesl science to forget!
How shall I lose the sin, yet keep the sense,
And love the offender, yet detest the offense?
How the dear object from the crime remove,
Or how distinguish penitence from love?
Unequal task! a passion to resign,
For hearts so touched, so pierced, so lost as mine.
Ever such a soul regains its peaceful state,
How often must it love, how often hate!
How often hope, despair, resent, regret,
Conceal, disdain -- do all things but forget.
But let heaven seize it, all at once it is fired,
Not touched, but rapt; not wakened, but inspired!
Oh come! oh teach me nature to subdue,
Renounce my love, my life, my self -- and you.
Fill my fond heart with God alone, for he
Alone can rival, can succeed to thee,
How happy is the blameless Vestal's lot?
The world forgetting, by the world forgot.
Eternal sunshine of the spotless mind!
Each prayer accepted, and each wish resigned;
Labor and rest, that equal periods keep;
' Obedient slumbers that can wake and weep;
Desires composed, affections ever even,
Tears that delight, and sighs that waft to heaven.
Grace shines around her with serenest beams,
And whispering Angels prompt her golden dreams.
For her the Spouse prepares the bridal ring,
For her white virgins Hymenaeals sing;
For her the unfading Rose of Eden blooms,
And wings of Seraphs shed divine perfumes;
To founds of heavenly harps, she dies away,
and melts in visions of eternal day.
Far other dreams my erring soul employ,
Far other raptures, of unholy joy:
When at the close of each sad, sorrowing day,
Fancy restores what vengeance snatched away,
Then conscience sleeps, and leaving nature free,
All my loose soul unbounded springs to thee.
O cursed, dear horrors of all-conscious night!
How glowing guilt exalts the keen delight!
Provoking Demons all restraint remove,
And stir within me every source of love.
I hear thee, view thee, gaze over all thy charms,
And round thy phantom glue my clasping arms.
I wake -- no more I hear, no more I view,
The phantom flies me, as unkind as you.
I call aloud; it hears not what I say;
I stretch my empty arms; it glides away:
To dream once more I close my willing eyes;
Ye soft illusions, dear deceits, arise!
Alas no more! -- methinks we wandering go
Through dreary wastes, and weep each other's woe;
Where round some mouldering tower pale ivy creeps,
And low-brow'd rocks hang nodding over the deeps.
Sudden you mount! you becken from the skies;
Clouds interpose, waves roar, and winds arise.
I shriek, start up, the same sad prospect find,
And wake to all the griefs I left behind.
For thee the fates, severely kind, ordain
A cool suspense from pleasure and from pain;
Thy life a long, dead calm of fixed repose;
No pulse that riots, and no blood that glows.
Still as the sea, ever winds were taught to blow,
Or moving Spirit bade the waters flow;
Soft as the slumbers of a saint forgiven,
And mild as opening gleams of promised heaven.
Come Abelard! for what have thou to dread?
The torch of Venus burns not for the dead;
Cut from the root my perished joys I see,
And love's warm tide for ever stopped in thee.
Nature stands checked; Religion disapproves;
Even thou art cold -- yet Eloisa loves.
Ah hopeless, lasting flames! like those that burn
To light the dead, and warm the unfruitful urn.
What scenes appear wherever I turn my view,
The dear Ideas, where I fly pursue,
Rise in the grove, before the altar rise,
Stain all my soul, and wanton in my eyes!
I waste the Matin lamp in sighs for thee,
Thy image steals between my God and me,
Thy voice I seem in every hymn to hear,
With ev'rv bead I drop too soft a tear.
When from the Censer clouds of flagrance roll,
And swelling organs lift the rising soul;
One thought of thee puts all the pomp to flight,
Priestis, Tapers, Temples, swim before my fight:
In seas of flame my plunging soul is drowned,
While Altars blaze, and Angels tremble round.
While prostrate here in humble grief I lie,
Kind, virtuous drops just gathering in my eye,
While praying, trembling, in the dust I roll,
And dawning grace is opening on my soul.
Come, if thou dare, all charming as thou art!
Oppose thy self to heaven; dispute my heart;
Come, with one glance of those deluding eyes,
Blot out each bright Idea of the skies.
Take back that grace, those sorrows, and those tears,
Take back my fruitless penitence and prayers,
Snatch me, just mounting, from the blessed abode,
Assit the Fiends, and tear me from my God!
No, fly me, fly me! far as Pole from Pole;
Rise Alps between us! and whole oceans roll!
Ah come not, write not, think not once of me,
Nor share one pang of all I felt for thee.
Thy oaths I quit, thy memory resign,
Forget, renounce me, hate whatever was mine.
Fair eyes, and tempting looks (which yet I view!)
Long loved, adored ideas! all adieu!
O grace serene! oh virtue heavenly fair!
Divine oblivion of low-thoughted care!
Fresh blooming hope, gay daughter of the sky?
And faith, our early immortality!
Enter each mild, each amicable guest;
Receive, and wrap me in eternal rest!
See in her Cell sad Eloisa spread,
Propt in some tomb, a neighbor of the dead!
In each low wind methinks a spirit calls,
And more than echoes talk along the walls.
Here, as I watched the dying lamps around,
From yonder shrine I heard a hollow sound.
Come, sister come! (it said, or seemed to say)
Thy place is here, sad sister come away!
Once like thy self, I trembled, wept, and prayed,
Love's victim then, though now a sainted maid:
But all is calm in this eternal sleep;
Here grief forgets to groan, and love to weep,
Even superstition loses every fear:
For God, not man, absolves our frailties here.
I come, ye ghosts! prepare your roseate bowers,
Celestial palms, and ever blooming flowers,
Thither, where sinners may have rest, I go,
Where flames refined in breasts seraphic glow.
Thou, Abelard! the last sad office pay,
And smooth my passage to the realms of day:
See my lips tremble, and my eye balls roll,
Suck my last breath, and catch the flying soul!
Ah no -- in sacred vestments may thou stand,
The hallowed taper trembling in thy hand,
Present the Cross before my lifted eye,
Teach me at once, and learn of me to die.
Ah then, thy once-lov'd Eloisa see!
It will be then no crime to gaze on me.
See from my cheek the transient roses fly!
See the last sparkle languish in my eye!
Till every motion, pulse, and breath, be over;
And even my Abelard beloved no more.
O death all-eloquent! you only prove
What dust we dote on, when it is man we love.
Then too, when fate shall thy fair frame destroy,
(That cause of all my guilt, and all my joy)
In trance ecstatic may thy pangs be drowned,
Bright clouds descend, and Angels watch thee round,
From opening skies may streaming glories shine,
And Saints embrace thee with a love like mine.
May Abelard and Eloisa were interred in the same grave, or in Monuments
adjoining, in the Monastery of the Paraclete: He died in the year 1142, she in
1163.
one kind grave unite each hapless name,
And graft my love immortal on thy same.
Then ages hence, when all my woes are over,
When this rebellious heart shall beat no more;
If ever chance two wandering lovers brings
To Paraclete's white walls, and silver springs,
Over the pale marble shall they join their heads,
And drink the falling tears each other sheds,
Then sadly say, with mutual pity moved,
Oh may we never love as these have loved!
From the full quire when loud Hosanna's rise,
And swell the pomp of dreadful sacrifice,
Amid that scene, if some relenting eye
Glance on the stone where our cold relics lie,
Devotion's self shall steal a thought from heaven,
One human tear shall drop, and be forgiven.
And sure if fate some future Bard shall join
In sad similitude of griefs to mine,
Condemned whole years in absence to deplore,
And image charms he must behold no more;
Such if there be, who loves so long, so well,
Let him our sad, our tender story tell;
The well-sung woes shall sooth my pensive ghost;
He best can paint 'em, who shall feel 'em most.
VERSES TO THE MEMORY OF AN UNFORTUNATE LADY.
VERSES TO THE MEMORY OF AN UNFORTUNATE LADY.
WHAT beck'ning ghost, along the moonlight shade
Invites my steps, and points to yonder glade?
It Is she! -- but why that bleeding bosom gored,
Why dimly gleams the visionary sword?
Oh ever beauteous, ever friendly! tell,
Is it, in heaven, a crime to love too well?
To bear too tender, or too firm a heart,
To act a Lover's or a Roman's part?
Is there no bright reversion in the sky,
For those who greatly think, or bravely die?
Why bade ye else, ye Powers! her soul aspire
Above the vulgar flight of low desire?
Ambition first sprung from your blessed abodes;
The glorious fault of Angels and of Gods:
Thence to their Images on earth it flows,
And in the breasts of Kings and Heroes glows
Most souls, it is true, but peep out once an age,
Dull sullen prisoners in the body's cage:
Dim lights of life that burn a length of years,
Useless, unseen, as lamps in sepulchers;
Like Eastern Kings a lazy state they keep,
And close confined in their own palace sleep.
From these perhaps (ever nature bade her die)
Fate snatched her early to the pitying sky.
As into air the purer spirits flow,
And separate from their kindred dregs below;
So flew the soul to its congenial place,
Nor left one virtue to redeem her Race.
But thou, false guardian of a charge too good,
Thou, mean deserter of thy brother's blood!
See on these ruby lips the trembling breath,
These cheeks, now fading at the blast of death:
Cold is that breast which warmed the world before,
And those love-darting Eyes must roll no more.
Thus, if eternal justice rules the ball,
Thus shall your wives, and thus your children fall:
On all the line a sudden vengeance waits,
And frequent herses shall besiege your gates.
There passengers shall stand, and pointing say,
(While the long fun'rals blacken all the way)
Lo these were they, whose souls the Furies steeled,
And cursed with hearts unknowing how to yield.
Thus unlamented pass the proud away,
The gaze of fools, and pageant of a day!
So perish all, whose breast never learned to glow
For others good, or melt at others woe.
What can atone (oh ever-injur'd shade!)
Thy fate unpitied, and thy rites unpaid?
No friend's complaint, no kind domnestic tear
Pleased thy pale ghost, or graced thy mournful bier;
By foreign hands thy dying eyes were closed,
By foreign hands thy decent limbs composed,
By foreign hands thy humble grave adorned,
By strangers honored, and by strangers mourned!
What though no friends in sable weeds appear,
Grieve for an hour, perhaps, then mourn a year,
And bear about the mockery of woe
To midnight dances, and the public show?
What though no weeping Loves thy ashes grace,
Nor polished marble emulate thy face?
What though no sacred earth allow the room,
Nor hallowed dirge be uttered over thy tomb?
Yet shall thy grave with rising flowers be dressed,
And the green turf lie lightly on thy breast:
There shall the morn her earliest tears bestow,
There the first roses of the year shall blow;
While Angels with their silver wings o'ershade
The ground, now sacred by thy relics made.
So peaceful rests, without a stone, a name,
What once had beauty, titles, wealth, and fame.
How loved, how honored once, avails thee not,
To whom related, or by whom begot;
A heap of dust alone remains of thee;
It Is all thou art, and all the proud shall be!
Poets themselves must fall, like those they sung;
Deaf the praised ear, and mute the tuneful tongue.
Even he, whose soul now melts in mournful lays,
Shall shortly want the generous tear he pays;
Then from his closing eyes thy form shall part,
And the last pang shall tear thee from his heart,
Life's idle business at one gasp be over,
The Muse forgot, and thou beloved no more!
FLORELIO. A PASTORAL.
Lamenting the Death of the late Marquis of BLANDFORD.
By Mr. FENTON.
ASK not the cause why all the tuneful swains,
Who used to fill the vales with tender Strains,
In deep despair neglect the warb'ling reed,
And all their bleating flocks refuse to feed.
Ask not why greens and flowers so late appear
To cloth the glebe, and deck the springing year;
Why sounds the lawn with loud laments and cries,
And swollen with tears to floods the Riv'lets rise:
The fair Florelio now has left the plain,
And is the grief, who was the grace, of every British swain.
For thee, loved youth! on every vale and lawn,
The nymphs, and all thy fellow-shepherds moan.
The little birds now cease to sing and love,
Silent they sit, and droop on every grove;
No mounting lark now warbles on the wing,
Nor Linnets chirp to cheer the sullen spring:
Only the melancholy Turtles coo,
And Philomel by night repeats her woe.
O, charmer of the shades! the tale prolong,
Nor let the morning interrupt thy song:
Or softly tune thy tender notes to mine,
Forgetting Tereus, make my sorrows thine.
Now the dear youth has left the lonely plain,
And is the grief, who was the grace, of every British swain.
Say, all ye shades, where late he used to rest,
If ever your beds with lovelier swain were pressed;
Say, all ye silver streams, if ever ye bore
The image of so fair a face before.
But now, ye streams, assist me whilst I mourn,
For never must the lovely swain return;
And, as these flowing tears increase your tide,
O, murmur for the shepherd as ye glide!
Be sure, ye rocks, while I my grief disclose,
Let your sad echo's lengthen out my woes:
Ye breezes, bear the plaintive accents on,
And whispering tell the woods Florelio's gone.
For ever gone, and left the lonely plain,
And is the grief, who was the grace, of every British swain.
Ripe straw-berries for thee, and peaches grew,
Sweet to the taste, and tempting red to view.
For thee the rose put sweeter purple on,
Preventing, by her haste, the summer-sun.
But now the flowers all pale and blighted lie,
And in cold sweats of sickly mildew die:
Nor can the bees suck from the shrivel'd blooms
Aetherial sweets, to store their golden combs.
Ort' on thy lips they would their labors leave,
And sweeter odours from thy mouth receive:
Sweet as the breath of Flora, when she lies
In jesmin shades, and for young Zephyr sighs:
But now those lips are cold, relentless death
Has chilled their Charms, and stopped thy balmy breath.
Those eyes, where Cupid tipp'd his darts with fire,
And kindled in the coldest nymphs desire,
Robbed of their beams, in everlasting night
Are closed, and give us woe as once delight:
And thou, dear youth, have left the lonely plain,
And art the grief, who were the grace, of every British swain.
As in his bower the dying shepherd lay,
The shepherd yet so young, and once so gay!
The nymphs that swim the stream, and range the wood
And haunt the flowery meads, around him stood:
There tears down each fair cheek unbounded fell,
And as he gasp'd, they gave a sad farewell.
Softly (they cried) as sleeping flowers (...)
By night, be thy dear eyes by (...)
A gentle fall may thy young beauties have,
And golden slumbers wait thee in thy grave:
Yearly thy hearse with garlands we'll adorn,
And teach young nightingales for thee to mourn;
Bees love the blooms, the flocks the bladed grain,
Nor less were thou beloved by every swain.
Come, shepherds, come, perform the funeral due,
For he was ever good and kind to you:
On every smoothest beech, in every grove,
In weeping characters record your love.
And as in memory of Adoms slain,
When for the youth the Syrian maids complain,
His river, to record the guilty day,
With freshly bleeding purple stains the sea:
So thou, dear Came, contribute to our woe,
And bid thy stream in plaintive murmurs flow:
Thy head with thy own willow boughs adorn,
And with thy tears supply the frugal urn.
The swains their sheep, the nymphs shall leave the lawn,
And yearly on their banks renew their moan:
His mother, while they there lament, shall be
The queen of love, the loved Adonis he:
On her, like Venus, all the Graces wait,
And he too like Adonis in his fate!
For fresh in fragrant youth he left the plain,
And is the grief, who was the grace, of every British swain.
No more the nymphs, that over the brooks preside,
Dress their gay beauties by the crystal tide;
Nor fly the wintry winds, nor scorching sun,
Now he, for whom they strove to charm, is gone.
Often they beneath their reedy coverts sighed,
And looked, and longed, and for Florelio died.
Of him they sang, and with soft ditties strove
To sooth the pleasing agonies of love.
But now they roam, distracted with despair,
And cypress, twined with mournful willows, wear.
Thus, hand in hand, around his grave they go,
And saffion buds, and fading lillies strew,
With sprigs of myrtle mixed, and scattering cry,
So sweet and soft the shepherd was! so soon decreed to die!
There fresh, in dear remembrance of their woes,
His name the young Anemonies disclose:
Nor strange they should a double grief avow,
Then Venus wept, and Pastorella now.
Breathe soft, ye winds! long let them paint the plain,
Unhurt, untouched by every passing swain.
And when, ye nymphs, to make the garlands gay,
With which ye crown the mistress of the May.
Ye shall these flowers to bind her temples take,
O pluck them gently for Florelio's sake!
And when through Woodstock's green retreats ye stray,
Or Altrop's flowery vales invite to play;
Over which young Pastorella's beauties bring
Elyzium early, and improve the spring:
When evening gales attentive silence keep,
And heaven its balmy dew begins to weep,
By the soft fall of every warbling stream,
Sigh your said airs, and bless the shepherd's name:
There to the tender lute attune your woe,
While hyacinths, and myrtles round you grow.
So may Sylvanus ever 'tend your bowers!
And Zephyr brush the mildew from the flowers!
Bid all the swans from Came and Isis haste,
In the melodious quire to breath their last.
O Colin, Colin, could I there complain
Like thee, when young Philisides was slain!
Thou sweet frequenter of the muse's stream!
Why have I not thy voice, or thou my theme?
Though weak my voice, though lowly be my lays,
They shall be sacred to the shepherd's praise:
To him my voice, to him my lays belong,
And bright Myrtilla now must live unsung.
Even she whose artless beauty blessed me more,
Than ever swain was blessed by nymph before;
While every tender sigh to seal our bliss,
Brought a kind vow, and every vow a kiss:
Fair, chaste, and kind, yet now no more can move,
So much my grief is stronger than my love:
Now the dear youth has left the lonely plain,
And is the grief, who was the grace, of every British swain.
As when some cruel hind has born away
The turtle's nest, and made the yuung his prey.
Sad in her native grove she sits alone,
There hangs her wings, and murmurs out her moan.
So the bright shepherdess who bore the boy,
Beneath a baleful yew does weeping lie;
Nor can the fair the weighty woe sustain,
But bends, like roses crushed with falling rain:
Nor from the silent earth her eyes removes,
That weeping, languish like a dying dove's.
Not such her look (severe reverse of fate!)
When little loves in every dimple sat;
And all the smiles delighted to resort
On the calm heaven of her soft cheeks to sport:
Soft as the clouds mild April-ev'nings wear,
Which drop fresh flourets on the youthful year.
The fountain's fall cannot lull her wakeful woes,
Nor poppy-garlands give the nymph repose:
Through prickly brakes, and unfrequented groves,
Over hills and dales, and craggy cliffs she roves.
And when she spies, beneath some silent shade,
The daisies pressed, where late his limbs were laid,
To the cold print there close she joins her face,
And all with gushing tears bedews the grass.
There with loud plaints she wounds the pitying skies,
And oh! return, my lovely youth, she cries;
Return, Florelio, with thy wonted charms
Fill the soft circles of my longing arms. --
Cease, fair affliction, cease! the lovely boy
In death's cold arms must pale and breathless lie.
The fates can never change their first decree,
Or sure they would have changed this one for thee.
Pan for his Syrinx makes eternal moan,
Ceres her daughter lost, and thou thy son.
The son for ever now has left the plain,
And is the grief, who was the grace, of every British swain.
Adieu, ye mossy caves, and shady groves,
Once happy scenes of our successful loves:
Ye hungry herds, and bleating flocks adieu,
Flints be your beds, and browze the bitter yew.
Two lambs alone shall be my charge to feed,
For yearly on his grave two lambs shall bleed.
This pledge of lasting love, dear shade, receive,
It Is all, alas, a shepherd's love can give!
But grief from its own power will set me free,
Will send me soon a willing ghost to thee:
Cropped in the flowery spring of youth, I Will go
With hasty joy to wait thy shade below:
In ever-fragrant meads, and jesmin-bow'rs
We'll dwell, and all Elyzium shall be ours.
Where citron groves aetherial odours breath,
And streams of flowing crystal purl beneath:
Where all are ever-young, and heavenly fair,
As here above thy sister- graces are.
UPON THE DEATH OF HER HUSBAND.
By Mrs. ELIZABETH SINGER.
IN what soft language shall my thoughts get free,
My dear Alexis! when I talk of thee?
Ye muses, graces, all ye gentle train
Of weeping loves assist the pensive strain.
But why should I implore your moving art?
It Is but to speak the dictates of my heart:
And all that knew the charming youth will join
Their friendly sighs, and pious tears to mine.
For all that knew his merit must confess
In grief for him there can be no excess;
His soul was formed to act each glorious part
Of life, unstained with vanity or art;
No thought within his generous mind had birth,
But what he might have owned to heaven and earth:
Practiced by him each virtue grew more bright,
And shone with more than its own native light.
Whatever noble warmth could recommend
The just, the active, and the constant friend,
Was all his own; but oh! a dearer name,
And softer ties, my endless sorrow claim.
Lost in despair, distracted and forlorn,
The lover I, and tender husband mourn.
Whatever to such superior worth was due,
Whatever excess the fondest passion knew,
I felt, for thee, dear youth; my joys, my care,
My prayers themselves were thine, and only where
Thou wast concerned, my virtue was sincere.
Whenever I begged for blessings on thy head,
Nothing was cold or formal that I said.
My warmest vows to heaven were made for thee,
And love still mingled with my piety.
Oh! thou wast all my glory, all my pride;
Through life's uncertain paths my constant guide.
Regardless of the world, to gain thy praise
Was all that could my just ambition raise.
Why has my heart this fond engagement known
Or why has heaven dissolved the tie so soon?
Why was the charming youth so formed to move?
Or why was all my soul so turned for love?
But virtue here a vain defense had made,
Where so much worth and eloquence could plead.
For he could talk -- 'twas ecstasy to hear,
'Twas joy, 'twas harmony to every ear:
Eternal music dwelt upon his tongue,
Sost and transporting as the muses song.
Listening to him, my cares were charmed to rest,
And love and silent rapture filled my breast;
Unheeded, the gay moments took their flight,
And time was only measured by delight.
I hear the loved, the melting accent still,
And still the warm, the tender transport feel:
Again I see the sprightly passions rise,
And life and pleasure kindle in his eyes.
My fancy paints him now with every grace,
But ah! the dear resemblance mocks my fond embrace.
The flattering vision takes its hasty flight,
And scenes of horror swim before my sight.
Grief and despair in all their terrors rise;
A dying lover pale and gasping lies.
Each dismal circumstance appears in view,
The fatal object is for ever new;
His anguish with the quickest sense I feel,
And hear this sad, this moving language still.
My dearest wife! my last, my fondest care!
Sure heaven for thee will hear a dying prayer:
Be thou the charge of sacred providence,
When I am gone, be that thy kind defense;
Ten thousand smiling blessings crown thy head,
When I am cold and numbered with the dead:
Think on thy vows; be to my memory just,
My future fame and honor are thy trust.
From all engagements here I now am free,
But that which keeps my lingering soul with thee.
How much I love, thy bleeding heart can tell
Which does, like mine, the pangs of parting feel.
But haste to meet me on the happy plains,
Where mighty love in endless triumph reigns.
He ceased, then gently yielded up his breath,
And fell a blooming sacrifice to death.
But oh! what words, what numbers can express,
What thought conceive, the height of my distress.
Why did they tear me from thy breathless clay?
I should have stayed and wept my life away.
Yet, gentle shade! whether thou now do rove,
Through some blessed vale, or ever verdant grove,
One moment listen to my grief, and take
The softest vows that ever love can make.
For thee, all thoughts of pleasure I forego,
For thee, my tears shall never cease to flow;
For thee at once I from the world retire,
To feed in silent shades a hopeless fire.
My bosom all thy image shall retain,
The full impression there shall still remain:
As thou have taught my tender heart to prove
The noblest height, and elegance of love;
That sacred passion I to thee confine,
My spotless faith shall be for ever thine.
A Ballad, by Mr. GAY.
I.
'TWAS when the seas were roaring
With hollow blasts of wind;
A damsel lay deploring,
All on a rock reclined.
Wide over the rolling billows
She cast a wistful look;
Her head was crowned with willows,
That tremble over the brook.
II.
Twelve months are gone and over,
And nine long tedious days.
Why did thou, venurous lover,
Why did thou trust the seas?
Cease, cease, thou cruel ocean,
And let my lover rest;
Ah! what is thy troubled motion
To that within my breast?
III.
The merchant robbed of pleasure,
Sees tempests in despair;
But what is the loss of treasure
To losing of my dear?
Should you some coast be laid on
Where gold and di'monds grow,
You Would find a richer maiden,
But none that loves you so.
IV.
How can they say that nature
Has nothing made in vain?
Why then beneath the water
Should hideous rocks remain?
No eyes the rocks discover,
That lurk beneath the deep,
To wreck the wandering lover,
And leave the maid to weep.
V.
All melancholy lying;
Thus wail'd she for her dear;
Repaid each blast with sighing,
Each billow with a tear;
When over the white wave stooping
His floating corpse she spied;
Then like a lilly drooping,
She bowed her head, and died.
RICHY and SANDY, A PASTORAL On the DEATH of Mr. Joseph Addison.
By ALLAN RAMSAY.
RICHY. WHAT gars thee look sae dowf? dear Sandy say;
Cheer up dull fallow, take thy reed and play,
My Apron Deary, -- or some wanton tune,
Be merry lad, and keep thy heart aboon.

SANDY. Na, na! it winna do! leave me to mane,
This aught days twice over tell'd I Will whistle nane.

RICHY. Wow man, that is unco'sad, -- is that ye'r Jo
Has taken the strunt? -- Or has some bogle-bo
Glowrin frae 'mang auld waws gi'en ye a fleg?
Or has some dawted wedder broke his leg?

SANDY. Naithing like that, sic troubles eith were born!
What Is bogles, -- wedders, -- or what is Mausy's scorn?
Our loss is meikle mair, and past remeed,
Edie that played and sang sae sweet is dead.

RICHY. Dead say thou, oh! had up my heart o Pan!
Ye Gods! what laids ye lay on feckless Man!
Alake therefore, I canna wit y'er wae,
I Will bear ye company for year and day.
A better lad never leaned out over a kent,
Or hound a coly over the mossy bent.
Blyth at the bought how aft ha we three been,
Hartsome on hills, and gay upon the green!

SANDY. That Is true indeed; but now thae days are gane,
And with him a' that is pleasant on the plain.
A summer day I never thought it lang
To hear him make a roundel or a sang.
How sweet he sung where vines and myrtles grow,
And wimpling waters which in Latium flow.
Titry, the Mantuan herd, wha lang sinsyne
Best sung on aeten reed the lover's pine,
Had he been to the fore now in our days,
Wi Edie he had frankly dealt his bays:
As lang's the world shall Amaryllis ken,
His Rosamond shall echo through the glen;
While on burn banks the yellow gowan grows,
Or wandering lambs rin bleeting after ews,
His fame shall last. Last shall his sang of weirs,
While British bairns brag of their bauld forbears.
We'll mickle miss his blyth and witty jest
At spaining time, or at our Lambmass feast.
O Richy! but it is hard that death ay reaves
Away the best fouck, and the ill anes leaves.
Hing down ye'r heads ye hills, greet out ye'r springs,
Upon ye'r edge na mair the shepherd sings.

RICHY. Than he had ay a good advice to gi'e,
And kend my thoughts amaist as well as me;
Had I been thowless, vexed, or oughtlins sow'r,
He wad have made me blyth in haff an hour.
Had Rosy taken the dorts, -- or had the tod
Worried my lamb, -- or were my feet ill shod,
Kindly he would laugh when sae he saw me dwine,
And taulk of happiness like a divine.
Of ilka thing he had an unco' skill,
He kend be moonlight how tides ebb and fill.
He kend, what kend he no? Even to a hair
He Would tell o'er-night gin niest day wad be fair.
Blind John, ye mind, wha sang in kittle phrase,
How the ill sp'rit did the first mischief raise;
Money a time beneath the auld birk-tree
What Is bonny in that sang he loot me see.
The Lasses aft flang down their rakes and pales,
And held their tongues, o strange! to hear his tales.

SANDY. Sound be his sleep, and saft his wak'ning be,
He Is in a better case than thee or me;
He was over good for us, the Gods hae taken
Their ain but back, -- he was a borrow'd-len.
Let us be good, gin virtue be our drift,
Then may we yet forgether 'boon the lift.
But see the sheep are wysing to the cleugh;
Thomas has loosed his ousen frae the pleugh;
Maggy be this has beuk the supper scones,
And nuckle ky stand rowting on the lones;
Come Richy let us truse and hame over bend,
And make the best of what we canna mend.

FINIS.
AN EXPLANATION OF RICHY and SANDY.
By Mr. BURCHET.
RICHY. WHAT makes thee look so sad? dear Sandy say;
Rouse up dull fellow, take thy reed and play
A merry jigg, or try some other art,
To raise thy spirits, and cheer up thy heart.

SANDY. No, no, it will not do; leave me to moan;
Till twice eight days are past I Will whistle none.

RICHY. That Is strange indeed! has Jenny made thee sad?
Or, tell me, has some horrid spectre, lad,
(Glaring from ruins old, in silent night)
Surpised, and put thee in a panic fright?
Or ails that wether ought, thy favorite?

SANDY. Such troubles might with much more ease be born:
What Is goblins, wethers, or what is woman's scorn?
Our loss is greater far; for Addy's dead;
Addy, who sang so sweetly on the mead.

RICHY. Dead is he, say thou? guard my heart, oh Pan!
What burdens, Gods, ye lay on feeble man!
Alack I cannot blame thee for thy grief;
Nor hope I, more than thou, to find relief.
A better lad never leaned on shepherd's crook,
Nor after game halloo'd his dog to look.
How glad where ews give milk have we three been;
Merry on hills, and gay upon the green!

SANDY. That Is true, indeed; but now, alas! in vain
We seek for pleasure on the rural plain:
I never thought a summer's-day too long
To hear his couplets, or his tuneful song.
How sweet he sang where vines and myrtles grow,
And winding streams which in old Latium flows!
Titry, the Mantuan herd, who long ago
Sang best on oaten reed the lover's woe,
Did he, famed bard, but live in these our days,
He would with Addy freely share his bays.
As long as shepherd's Amaryllis hear,
So long his Rosamond shall please the ear.
While spangled daisie near the riv'let grows,
And tender lambs seek after bleating ews,
His fame shall last. Last shall his song of wars,
While British youngsters boast of ancestors.
Much shall we miss his merry witty jests
At weaning-times, and at our Lambmass feasts.
Oh Richy! Richy! death has been unkind
To take the good, and leave the ill behind.
Bow down your heads, ye hills, weep dry ye springs,
For on your banks no more the shepherd sings.

RICHY. Then he had always good advice to give,
And could my thoughts, like as my self, conceive.
When I Have been drooping, vexed, or in the spleen,
In one half hour with him I Have merry been.
Had Jenny froward been, or Raynard bold,
Worried my lamb, or were my shoes grown old,
Kindly he would smile, when he observed me grieve,
And by his talk divine my breast relieve.
Addy did all things to perfection know;
Saw by the moon how tides would ebb or flow.
He knew, what knew he not? Even to a hair
He Would tell o'er-night if next day would be fair.
The famed blind bard sang in mysterious phrase
How envious Satan did first mischief raise;
But often beneath the well-spread birchen-tree
The beauties of that song he made me see.
The lasses often flung down their rakes and pails,
And held their tongues, oh strange! to hear his tales.

SANDY. Sound be his sleep, and soft his waking be;
More happy is he far than thee or me:
Too good he was for us; the Gods but lent
Him here below, when hither he was sent.
Let us be good, if virtue be our aim,
Then we may meet above the skies again.
But see how toward the glade the fatlings go;
Thomas has taken the oxen from the plough;
Joan has prepared the supper against we come,
And late calf'd cows stand lowing near their home;
Then let us have done, and to our rest repair,
And what we cannot help, with patience bear.

FINIS.
To Mr. Allan Ramsey, on his Richy and Sandy.
By Mr. BURCHET.
WELL fare thee, Allan, who, in mother tongue,
So sweetly has of breathless Addy sung.
His endless fame thy natural genius fired,
And thou have written as if he inspired.
Richy and Sandy, who do him survive,
Long as thy rural Stanzas last shall live.
The grateful swains thou'st made, in tuneful verse,
Mourn sadly over their late -- lost patron's hearse,
Nor would the Mantuan bard, if living, blame
Thy pious zeal, or think thou'st hurt his fame,
Since Addison's inimitable lays
Give him an equal title to the bays.
When he of armies sang, in lofty strains,
It seemed as if he in the hostile plains
Had present been. His pen has to the life
Traced every action in the sanguine strife.
In council now sedate the chief appears,
Then loudly thunders in Bavarian ears;
And still pursuing the destructive theme,
He pushes them into the rapid stream.
Thus beaten out of Blenheim's neighboring fields,
The Gallic general to the victor yields,
Who, as Britannia's Virgil has observed,
From threatened fate all Europe then preserved.
Nor do thou, Ramsey, sightless Milton wrong
By ought contained in thy melodious song;
For none but Addy could his thoughts sublime
So well unriddle, or his mystic rhyme.
And when he deigned to let his fancy rove
Where sunburned shepherds to the nymphs make love,
No one ever told in softer notes the tales
Of rural pleasures in the spangled vales.
So much, oh Allan! I thy lines revere,
Such veneration to his memory bear,
That I no longer could my thanks refrain
For what thou'st sung of the lamented swain.

