ONE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND THIRTY EIGHT.

ONE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND THIRTY EIGHT.

A DIALOGUE Something like HORACE.

By Mr. POPE.

LONDON: Printed for T. COOPER at the Globe in Paternoster-row. (Price One
Shilling.)

ONE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND THIRTY EIGHT.
DIALOGUE.
A. NOT twice a twelvemonth you appear in Print,
And when it comes, the Court see nothing in it.
You grow correct that once with Rapture writ,
And are, besides, too Moral for a Wit.
Decay of Parts, alas! we all must feel --
Why now, this moment, don't I see you steal?
It Is all from Horace: did not Horace say
"Lord Fanny spun a thousand lines a day?
And long before you, in much better meter,
"Laugh at those Fools who put their trust in Peter?
But Horace, Sir, was delicate, was nice;
Bubo observes, he lashed no sort of Vice:
Horace would say, Sir Billy served the Crown,
Blunt could do Business, H -- ggins knew the Town,
Sir George of some slight Gallantries suspect,
In reverend S -- n note a small Neglect,
And own, the Spaniard did a waggish thing,
Who cropped our Ears, and sent them to the King.
His sly, polite, insinuating style
Could please at Court, and made AUGUSTUS smile:
An artful Manager, that crept between
His Friends and Shame, and was a kind of Screen. Omne vafer vitium ridenti
Flaccus amico
Tangit, and admissus circum praecordia ludit.


But 'faith your very Friends will soon be sore;
Patriots there are, who wish you would jest no more --
And where is the Glory? 'twill be only thought
The Great man never offered you a Groat.
Go see Sir ROBERT --

B. See Sir ROBERT! -- hum --
And never laugh -- for all my life to come?
Seen him I have, but in his happier hour
Of Social Pleasure, ill-exchang'd for Power.
Would he oblige me? let me only find,
He thinks one Poet of no venal kind.
Come, come, at all I laugh He laughs, no doubt,
The only difference is, I dare laugh out.

A. Why yes: with Scripture still you may be free;
A Horse-laugh, if you please, at Honesty;
A Joke on JEKYL, or some odd Old Whig,
Who never changed his Principle, or Wig:
A Patriot is a Fool in every age,
Whom all Lord Chamberlains allow the Stage:
These nothing hurts; they keep their Fashion still,
And wear their strange old Virtue as they will.
If any ask you, "Who Is the Man, so near
"His Prince, that writes in Verse, and has his Ear?
Why answer LYTTELTON, and I Will engage
The worthy Youth shall never be in a rage:
But were his Verses vile, his Whisper base,
You Would quickly find him in Lord Fanny's case.
Aegysthus, Verres, hurt not honest FLEURY,
But well may put some Statesmen in a fury.
Laugh then at any, but at Fools or Foes;
These you but anger, and you mend not those:
Laugh at your Friends, and if your Friends are sore,
So much the better, you may laugh the more.
To Vice and Folly to confine the jest,
Sets half the World, God knows, against the rest;
Did not the Sneer of more impartial men
At Sense and Virtue, balance all again.
Judicious Wits spread wide the Ridicule,
And charitably comfort Knave and Fool.

B. Dear Sir, forgive the Prejudice of Youth:
Adieu Distinction, Satire, Warmth, and Truth!
Come harmless Characters that no one hit,
Come Henley's Oratory, Osborn's Wit!
The Honey dropping from Ty -- l's tongue,
The Flowers of Bub -- ton, the Flow of Y -- ng!
The gracious Dew of Pulpit Eloquence;
And all the well-whipt Cream of Courtly Sense,
That first was H -- vy's, F -- 's next, and then
The S -- te's, and then H -- vy's once again.
O come, that easy Ciceronian style,
So Latin, yet so English all the while,
As, though the Pride of Middleton and Bland,
All Boys may read, and Girls may understand!
Then might I sing without the least Offense,
And all I sung should be the Nation's Sense.
So -- Satire is no more -- I feel it die --
No Gazeteer more innocent than I!
And let, a God's-name, every Fool and Knave
Be graced through Life, and flattered in his Grave.

A. Why so? if Satire know its Time and Place,
You still may lash the Greatest -- in Disgrace:
For Merit will by turns forsake them all;
Would you know when? exactly when they fall.
But let all Satire in all Changes spare
Immortal S -- k, and grave De -- re!
Silent and soft, as Saints remove to Heaven,
All Ties dissolved, and every Sin forgiven,
These, may some gentle, ministerial Wing
Receive, and place for ever near a King!
There, where no Passion, Pride, or Shame transport,
Lulled with the sweet Nepenthe of a Court;
There, where no Father's, Brother's, Friend's Disgrace
Once break their Rest, or stir them from their Place;
But past the Sense of human Miseries,
All Tears are wiped for ever from all Eyes;
No Cheek is known to blush, no Heart to throb,
Save when they lose a Question, or a Job.

B. Good Heaven forbid, that I should blast their Glory,
Who know how like Whig-Ministers to Tory,
And when three Sov'reigns died, could scarce be vexed,
Consid'ring what a Gracious Prince was next.
Have I in silent wonder seen such things
As Pride in Slaves, and Avarice in Kings,
And at a Peer, or Peeress shall I fret,
Who starves a Mother, or forswears a Debt?
Virtue, I grant you, is an empty boast;
But shall the Dignity of Vice be lost?
Ye Gods! shall Cibber's Son, without rebuke
Swear like a Lord? or Rich out-whore a Duke?
A Fav'rite's Porter with his Master vie,
Be bribed as often, and as often lie?
Is it for W -- rd or Peter (paltry Things!)
To pay their Debts or keep their Faith like Kings?
If Author of a Book entitled, The Oracles of Re^on.
Blount destroyed himself, he played the man,
And so may Thou, Illustrious Passeran!
But shall a Printer, weary of his life,
Learn from their Books to hang himself and Wife?
This, this, my friend, I cannot, will not bear;
Vice thus abused, demands a Nation's care;
This calls the Church to deprecate our Sin,
And hurls the Thunder of the Laws on Gin.
Let humble Foster, if he will, excel
Ten Metropolitans in preaching well;
A simple Quaker, or a Quaker's Wife,
Outdo L -- d -- ffe, in Doctrine -- yea, in Life;
Let low-born ALLEN, with an awkward Shame,
Do good by stealth, and blush to find it Fame.
Virtue may choose the high or low Degree,
It Is just alike to Virtue, and to me;
Dwell in a Monk, or light upon a King,
She Is still the same, beloved, contented thing.
Vice is undone, if she forgets her Birth,
And stoops from Angels to the Dregs of Earth:
But it is the Fall degrades her to a Whore;
Let Greatness own her, and she is mean no more:
Her Birth, her Beauty, Crowds and Courts confess,
Chaste Matrons praise her, and grave Bishops bless:
In golden Chains the willing World she draws,
And hers the Gospel is, and hers the Laws:
Mounts the Tribunal, lifts her scarlet head,
And sees pale Virtue carted in her stead!
Lo! at the Wheels of her Triumphal Car,
Old England's Genius rough with many a Scar,
Dragged in the Dust! his Arms hang idly round,
His Flag inverted trails along the ground!
Our Youth, all liv'ry'd over with foreign Gold,
Before her dance; behind her crawl the Old!
See thronging Millions to the Pagod run,
And offer Country, Parent, Wife, or Son!
Hear her black Trumpet through the Land proclaim,
That "Not to be corrupted is the Shame."
In Soldier, Churchman, Patriot, Man in Power,
It Is Avarice all, Ambition is no more!
See, all our Nobles begging to be Slaves!
See, all our Fools aspiring to be Knaves!
The Wit of Cheats, the Courage of a Whore,
Are what ten thousand envy and adore.
All, all look up, with reverential Awe,
On Crimes that escape, or triumph over the Law:
While Truth, Worth, Wisdom, daily we decry --
"Nothing is Sacred now but Villainy."
Yet may this Verse (if such a Verse remain)
Show there was one who held it in disdain.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed for T. COOPER.
1. The First Satire of the Second Book of Horace, In Dialogue between
Alexander Pope of Twickenham in Com. Midd. Esquire; on the one Part, and his
Learned Council on the Other.

2. Sober Advice from Horace, as delivered in his second Sermon, Imitated in
the manner of Mr. Pope. Textum Recensuit Ric. Bentleius, with Notes.

3. Horace his Epistle to AUGUSTUS, Imitated by Mr. Pope.

4. The First Epistle of the First Book of Horace imitated.

5. The Sixth Epistle of the First Book of Horace imitated.

6. The Works of Alexander Pope, Esquire Vol. 2. containing his Epistles and
Satires.


