SOBER ADVICE FROM HORACE, TO THE Young GENTLEMEN about Town.

As delivered in his SECOND SERMON.

Imitated in the Manner of Mr. POPE.

Together with the ORIGINAL TEXT, as (...) by the Revd. R. BENTLEY, Doctor of
Divinity. And some Remarks on the VERSION.

LONDON: Printed for T. Boreman, at the Cock on Ludgate Hill; and sold by the
Booksellers of London and Westminster. [Price One Shilling.]

TO ALEXANDER POPE, Esquire
SIR,
I Have so great a Trust in your Indulgence toward me, as to believe you cannot
but Patronize this Imitation, so much in your own Manner, and whose Birth I may
truly say is owing to you. In that Confidence, I would not suppress the
Criticisms made upon it by the Reverend Doctor, the rather, since he has
promised to mend the Faults in the next Edition, with the same Goodness he has
practiced to Milton. I hope you will believe that while I express my Regard for
you, it is only out of Modesty I conceal my Name; since, though perhaps, I may
not profess myself your Admirer so much as some others, I cannot but be, with
as much inward Respect, Good Will, and Zeal as any Man,

Dear Sir, Your most Affectionate AND Faithful Servant.

Q. HORATII FLACCI
SERMO II. L. I.
TEXTUM Recensuit V. R. RICARDUS BENTLEIUS, S.T.P. [NOTAE BENTLEIANAE.]
Imitated. Why Imitated? Why not translated? Odi Imitatores! A Metaphrast had
not turned Tigellius, and Fusidius, Malchinus and Gargonius (for I say
Malchinus, not Malthinus, and Gargonius, not Gorgonius) into so many LADIES.
Benignus, hic, hunc, etc. all of the Masculine Gender: Every Schoolboy knows
more than our Imitator.

AMbubajarum collegia, pharmacopolae,
Mendici, mimae, balatrones; hoc genus omne
Maestum ac sollicitum est cantoris morte Tigelli:
Quippe Benignus erat --
-- Contra hic, ne prodigus esse
Dicatur, metuens, inopi dare nolit amico,
Frigus quo duramque famem depellere possit.
Hunc si perconteris, avi cur atque parentis
Praeclaram ingrata seringat malus ingluvie rem,
Omnia conductis coemens obsonia nummis:
"Sordidus, atque animi quod parvi nolit haberi,"
Respondet. laudatur ab his, culpatur ab illis.
Fufidius vappae famam timet ac nebulonis,
Dives agris, dives positis in fenore nummis.
Quinas hic capiti mercedes exsecat; atque
Quanto perditior quisque est, tanto acrius urguet.
Nomina sectatur, modo sumta vest virili
Sub patribus duris, tironum. Maxim, quis non,
Juppiter, exclamat, simul atque audivit? "At in se
"Pro quaestu sumtum facit hic". Vix credere possis
Quam sibi non sit amicus: ita ut Pater ille, Terenti
Fabula quem miserum gnato vixisse fugato
Inducit, non se pejus cruciaverit atque hic.
Si quis nunc quaerat, Quo res haec pertinet? Illuc:
Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt.
Malchinus tunicis demissis ambulat: est qui
Inguen ad obscaenum subductis usque facetus:
Pastillos Rufillus olet, Gargonius hircum.
Nil medium est. sunt qui nolint tetigisse, nisi illas,
Quarum subsuta talos tegat instita vest:
Contra alius nullam, nisi olente in fornice stantem.
Quidam notus homo cum exiret fornice; "Macte
"Virtute esto, inquit sententia dia Catonis,
"Nam simul ac venas inflavit tetra libido,
"Huc juvenes aequum est descendere, non alienas
"Permolere uxores. --
-- Nolim laudarier, inquit,
Sic me, mirator CUNNI CUPIENNIUS ALBI CUNNI CUPIENNIUS ALBI, Hoary Shrine.
Here the Imitator grievously errs, Cunnus albus by no means signifying a white
or gray Thing, but a Thing under a white or gray Garment, which thing may be
either black, brown, red, or parti-colored. BENT.

Audire est operae pretium, procedere recte
Qui moechos non voltis, ut omni part laborent;
Utque illis multo corrupta dolor voluptas,
Atque haec rara, cadat dura inter saepe pericla.
Hic se praecipitem tecto dedit: ille flagellis
Ad mortem caesus: fugiens hic decidet acrem
Praedonum in turbam: dedit hic pro corpore nummos:
Hunc perminxerunt calones; quin etiam illud
Accidit, ut -- TESTIS CAUDAMQUE SALACEM Demeterent serro (for so I say, and
not Demeteret ferrum) Bleeds in Person. Silly! was he let Blood by a Surgeon?
how short is this of the Amputation of the Testes and Cauda salax? What
Ignorance also of Ancient Learning appears in his shallow Translation of
Perminxerunt, totally missing the Mark, and not entering into the deep Meaning
of the Author.
cuidam TESTIS, CAUDAMQUE SALACEM
Demeterent ferro. jure omnes. Galba negabat.
Tutior at quanto merx est in class secunda!
Libertinarum dico: Sallustius in qua
Non minus insanit, quam qui moechatur. at hic si,
Qua res, qua ratio suaderet, quaque modeste
Munifico esse licet, vellet bonus atque benignus
Esse; daret quantum satis esset, nec sibi damno
Dedecorique foret. verum hoc se amplectitur uno,
Hoc amat and laudat: Matronam nullam ego tango.
Ut quondam Marsaeus amator Originis, ille
Qui patrium mimae donat fundumque laremque,
Nilfuerit mi, inquit, cum uxoribus umquam alienis.
Verum est cum mimis, est cum meretricibus: unde
Fama malum gravius, quam res, trahit. an tibi abunde
Personam satis est, non illud, quicquid ubique
Officit, evitare? bonam deperdere famam,
Rem patris oblimare, malum est ubicumque. quid inter
Est in matrona, ancilla, peccesne togata?
Villius in Fausta Sullae gener, hoc miser uno
Nomine deceptus, poenas dedit usque, superque
Quam satis est; pugnis caesus, ferroque petitus,
Exclusus fore, cum Longarenus foret intus.
Huic si, mutonis verbis, mala tanta videnti
Diceret haec animus: Quid vis tibi? numquid ego a te
Magno prognatum deposco consule Magno prognatum deposco consule Cunnum.
A Thing descended from the Conqueror.
A Thing descended -- why Thing? the Poet has it Cunnum; which, therefore,
boldly place here. BENT.


CUNNUM,
Velatumque stola, mea cum conferbuit ira?
Quid responderet? Magno patre nata puella est.
At quanto meliora monet, pugnantiaque istis
Dives opis natura suae! ut si modo recte
Dispensare velis, ac non fugienda petendis
Inmiscere.
-- Tuo vitio, rerumne labores,
Nil refer putas? quare, ne poeniteat te,
Desine matronas sectarier: unde laboris
Plus haurire mali est, quam ex re decerpere fructus.
Nec magis huic, inter niveos viridisque lapillos
Sit licet, o Cerinthe, tuo tenerum est femur, aut crus
Rectius: atque etiam melius persaepe togatae est.
Add huc, quod mercem sine fucis gestat; aperte
Quod venale habet, ostendit; neque si quid honesti est
Jactat habetque palam, quaerit quo turpia celet.
Regibus hic mos est, ubi equos mercantur; opertos
Inspiciunt: ne si facies, ut saepe, decora
Molli fulta pede est; emtorem ducat hiantem,
Quod pulchrae clunes, breve quod caput, ardua cervix.
Hoc illi recte. Tu corporis optima Lyncei
Contemplare occulis; Hypsaea caecior, illa
Quae mala sunt, spectas. O crus, o brachia! verum
Depugis, nasuta, brevi latere, ac pede longo est.
Matronae, praeter faciem, nil cernere possis;
Caetera, ni Catia est, demissia vest tegentis.
Si interdicta petes, vallo circumdata, (nam te
Hoc facit insanum) multae tibi tum officient res;
Custodes, lectica, ciniflones, parasitae;
Ad talos stola demissa, and circumdata palla:
Plurima, quae invideant pure adparere tibi rem.
Altera nil obstat: Cois tibi pene videre est
Ut nudam; ne crure malo, ne sit pede turpi:
Metiri possis oculo latus. an tibi mavis
Insidias fieri, pretiumque avellier, ante
Quam mercem ostendi?
-- LEPOREM venator ut alta
In nive sectetur, positum sic tangere nolit:
Cantat, and adponit, MEUS est amor huic similis: nam
Transvolar in medio posita, and fugientia captat.
Hiscine versiculis speras tibi posse dolores,
Atque aestus, curasque gravis e pectore tolli?
Nonne, cupidinibus statuat natura modum quem,
Quid latura, sibi quid sit dolitura negatum,
Quacrere plus prodest; and inane abscindere soldo?
Number, tibi cum faucis urit sitis, aurea quaeris
Pocula? number esuriens fastidis omnia praeter
PAVONEM, Pea-Chicks] Not ill-render'd, meaning a young or soft Piece, Angli^e
a Tid-bit: such as that Delicate Youth Cerinthus, whose Flesh, our Horace
expressly says, was as tender as a Lady's, and our Imitator turned Such Nicety,
as Lady or Lord F^
not amiss truly; it agrees with My own Reading of tuo femore, instead of tuum
femur, and savours of the true Taste of Antiquity. BENT.
Pavonem, rhombumque? tument tibi cum inguina, number, si
Ancilla aut verna est praesto puer, impetus in quem
Continuo fiat, malis tentigine rumpi?
Non ego: namque parabilem amo venerem, facilemque.
ILLAM, Post paullo, Sed pluris, Si exierit vir,
Gallis: Hanc, Philodemus ait sibi, quae neque magno
Stet pretio; nec cunctetur, cum est jussa venire.
Candida rectaque sit; munda hactenus, ut neque longa,
Nec magis alba velit, quam det natura, videri.
Haec, ubi supposuit dextro corpus mihi laevum,
Ilia and Egeria est: do nomen quodlibet illi.
Nec vereor, ne, dum futuo, vir rure recurrat;
Janua frangatur; latret canis; undique magno
Pulsa domus strepitu resonet: ne pallida lecto
Desiliat mulier; miseram se conscia clamet;
Cruribus haec metuat, doti haec deprensa, egomet mi.
Discincta tunica fugienda est, ac pede nudo;
Ne nummi pereant, aut puga, aut denique fama.
Deprendi miserum est: Fabio vel judice vincam.
SOBER ADVICE From HORACE.
Imitated from his SECOND SERMON.
THE Tribe of Templars, Play'rs, Apothecaries,
Pimps, Poets, Wits, Lord Fanny's, Lady Mary's,
And all the Court in Tears, and half the Town,
Lament dear charming O^f^ld, dead and gone!
Engaging O^f^ld! who, with Grace and Ease,
Could join the Arts, to ruin, and to please.
Not so, who of Ten Thousand gulled her Knight,
Then asked Ten Thousand for a second Night:
The Gallant too, to whom she paid it down;
Lived to refuse that Mistress half a Crown.
Con. Ph-l-ps cries, "A sneaking Dog I hate."
That Is all three Lovers have for their Estate!
"Treat on, treat on," is her eternal Note,
And Lands and Tenements go down her Throat.
Some damn the Jade, and some the Cullies blame,
But not Sir H^t, for he does the same.
With all a Woman's Virtues but the P^x,
Fufidia thrives in Money, Land, and Stocks:
For Interest, ten per Cent. her constant Rate is;
Her Body? hopeful Heirs may have it gratis.
She turns her very Sister to a Job,
And, in the Happy Minute, picks your Fob:
Yet starves herself, so little her own Friend,
And thirsts and hungers only at one End:
A Self-Tormentor, worse than (in the Sea My Terence, Heautontimorumenos: There
is nothing in Dr. Hare's. BENT.
Play)
The Wretch, whose Avarice drove his Son away.
But why all this? Beloved, it is my Theme:
"Women and Fools are always in Extreme.
Rufa's at either end a Common-Shoar,
Sweet Moll and Jack are Civet-Cat and Boar:
Nothing in Nature is so lewd as Peg,
Yet, for the World, she would not show her Leg!
While bashful Jenny, even at Morning-Prayer,
A Verse taken from Mr. Pope.
Spreads her Fore-Buttocks to the Navel bare.
But different Taste in different Men prevails,
And one is fired by Heads, and one by Tails;
Some feel no Flames but at the Court or Ball,
And others hunt white Aprons in the Mall.
My Lord of Lo^n, chancing to remark
A noted Dean much busied in the Park,
"Proceed (he cried) proceed, my Reverend Brother,
"'It Is Fornicatio simplex, and no other:
"Better than lust for Boys, with Pope and Turk,
"Or others Spouses, like Others read Lord Mayor.
my Lord of (...)
May no such Praise (cries J^s) ever be mine!
J^s, who bows at Hi^sb^w's hoary Shrine.
All you, who think the City never can thrive,
Till every Cuckold-maker's flayed alive;
Attend, while I their Miseries explain,
And pity Men of Pleasure still in Pain!
Survey the Pangs they bear, the Risques they run,
Where the most lucky are but last undone.
See wretched Monsieur flies to save his Throat,
And quits his Mistress, Money, Ring, and Note!
K^ of his Footman's borrowed Livery stripped,
By worthier Footmen pist upon and whipped!
Plundered by Thieves, or Lawyers which is worse,
One bleeds in Person, and one bleeds in Purse;
This meets a Blanket, and that meets a Cudgel --
And all applaud the Justice -- All, but A Gentleman as celebrated for his
Gallantries as his Politics; an Entertaining History of which may be
published, without the least Scandal on the Ladies. E. CURL.
B^l.
How much more safe, dear Countrymen! his State,
Who trades in Frigates of the second Rate?
And yet some Care of S^st should be had,
Nothing so mean for which he cannot run mad;
His Wit confirms him but a Slave the more,
And makes a Princess whom he found a Whore.
The Youth might save much Trouble and Expense,
Were he a Dupe of only common Sense.
But here is his point; A Wench (he cries) for me!
"I never touch a Dame of Quality.
To P^l^r's Bed no Actress comes amiss,
He courts the whole Personae Dramatis:
He too can say, "With Wives I never sin."
But Singing-Girls and Mimicks draw him in.
Sure, worthy Sir, the Difference is not great,
With whom you lose your Credit and Estate?
This, or that Person, what avails to shun?
What Is wrong is wrong, wherever it be done:
The Ease, Support, and Luster of your Life,
Destroyed alike with Strumpet, Maid, or Wife.
What pushed poor E^s on the Imperial Whore?
'Twas but to be where CHARLES had been before.
The fatal Steel unjustly was applied,
When not his Lust offended, but his Pride:
Too hard a Penance for defeated Sin,
Himself shut out, and Jacob Hall let in.
Suppose that honest Part that rules us all,
Should rise, and say -- "Sir Robert! or Sir Paul!
"Did I demand, in my most vigorous hour,
"A Thing descended from the Conqueror?
"Or when my pulse beat highest, ask for any
"Such Nicety, as Lady or Lord Fanny? --
What would you answer? Could you have the Face,
When the poor Suff'rer humbly mourned his Case,
To cry, "You weep the Favors of her Spoken not of one particular Duchess,
but of diverse Dutchesses.
GRACE?
Has not indulgent Nature spread a Feast,
The original Manuscript has it, -- Spread a Feast
Of -- enough for Man, enough for Beast:
but we prefer the present, as the purer Diction.
And given enough for Man, enough for Beast?
But Man corrupt, perverse in all his ways,
In search of Vanities from Nature strays:
Yea, though the Blessing's more than he can use,
Shuns the permitted, the forbid pursues!
Weigh well the Cause from whence these Evils spring,
It Is in thyself, and not in God's good Thing:
Then, lest Repentance punish such a Life,
Never, ah, never! kiss thy Neighbor's Wife.
First, Silks and Diamonds veil no finer Shape,
Or plumper Thigh, than lurk in humble Crape:
And secondly, how innocent a Belle
Is she who shows what Ware she has to sell;
Not Lady-like, displays a milk-white Breast,
And hides in sacred Sluttishness the rest.
Our ancient Kings (and sure those Kings were wise,
Who judged themselves, and saw with their own Eyes)
A War-horse never for the Service chose,
But eyed him round, and stripped off all the Clothes;
For well they knew, proud Trappings serve to hide
A heavy Chest, thick Neck, or heaving Side.
But Fools are ready Chaps, agog to buy,
Let but a comely Fore-hand strike the Eye:
No Eagle sharper, every Charm to find,
To all defects, Ty^y not so blind:
Goose-rump'd, Hawk-nos'd, Swan-footed, is my Dear?
They Will praise her Elbow, Heel, or Tip of the Ear.
A Lady's Face is all you see undressed;
(For none but Lady M^ showed the Rest)
But if to Charms more latent you pretend,
What Lines encompass, and what Works defend!
Dangers on Dangers! obstacles by dozens!
Spies, Guardians, Guests, old Women, Aunts, and Cozens!
Could you directly to her Person go,
Stays will obstruct above, and Hoops below,
And if the Dame says yes, the Dress says no.
Not thus at N^dh^m's; your judicious Eye
May measure there the Breast, the Hip, the Thigh!
And will you run to Perils, Sword, and Law,
All for a Thing you never so much as saw?
"The Hare once seized, the Hunter heeds no more
"The little Scut he so pursued before,
"Love follows flying Game (as Sucklyn sings)
"And it is for that the wanton Boy has Wings."
Why let him Sing -- but when you're in the Wrong,
Think you to cure the Mischief with a Song?
Has Nature set no bounds to wild Desire?
No Sense to guide, no Reason to enquire,
What solid Happiness, what empty Pride?
And what is best indulged, or best denied?
If neither Gems adorn, nor Silver tip
The flowing Bowl, will you not wet your Lip?
When sharp with Hunger, scorn you to be fed,
Except on Pea-Chicks, at the Bedford-head?
Or, when a tight, neat Girl, will serve the Turn,
In errant Pride continue stiff, and burn?
I Am a plain Man, whose Maxim is professed,
"The Thing at hand is of all Things the best.
But Her who will, and then will not comply,
Whose Word is If, Perhaps, and By-and-by,
Z^ds! let some Eunuch or Platonic take --
So B^t cries, Philosopher and Rake!
Who asks no more (right reasonable Peer)
Than not to wait too long, nor pay too dear.
Give me a willing Nymph! it is all I care,
Extremely clean, and tolerably fair,
Her Shape her own, whatever Shape she have,
And just that White and Red which Nature gave.
Her I transported touch, transported view,
And call her Angel! Goddess! M^ue!
No furious Husband thunders at the Door;
No barking Dog, no Household in a Roar;
From gleaming Swords no shrieking Women run;
No wretched Wife cries out, Undone! Undone!
Seized in the Fact, and in her Cuckold's Power,
She kneels, she weeps, and worse! resigns her Dower.
Me, naked me, to Posts, to Pumps they draw,
To Shame eternal, or eternal Law.
Oh Love! be deep Tranquillity my Luck! Here the Imitator errs. The Latin has it
dum futuo, a most necessary Circumstance! which ought to be restored; and may,
by the change of a single Word, be the same with that of the Author, and one
which would marvelousty agree with the Ladies in the second Line. BENT.

No Mistress H^ysh^m near, no Lady B^ck!
For, to be taken, is the Dev'll in Hell;
This Truth, let L^l, J^ys, O^w tell.
FINIS.

