

THE RAPE of the LOCK. AN HEROI-COMICAL POEM. In FIVE CANTO'S.

Written by Mr. POPE.

-- A tonso est hoc nomen adepta capillo.

OVID. LONDON: Printed for BERNARD LINTOTT, at the Cross-Keys in Fleetstreet.
1714.

TO Mrs. ARABELLA FERMOR.
MADAM,
IT will be in vain to deny that I have some Value for this Piece, since I
Dedicate it to You. Yet You may bear me Witness, it was intended only to divert
a few young Ladies, who have good Sense and good Humor enough, to laugh not
only at their Sex's little unguarded Follies, but at their own. But as it was
communicated with the Air of a Secret, it soon found its Way into the World. An
imperfect Copy having been offered to a Bookseller, You had the Goodnature for
my Sake to consent to the Publication of one more correct: This I was forced to
before I had executed half my Design, for the Machinery was entirely wanting to
complete it.

The Machinery, Madam, is a Term invented by the Critics, to signify that Part
which the Deities, Angels, or Demons, are made to act in a Poem: For the
ancient Poets are in one respect like many modern Ladies; Let an Action be
never so trivial in it self, they always make it appear of the utmost
Importance. These Machines I determined to raise on a very new and odd
Foundation, the Rosicrucian Doctrine of Spirits.

I know how disagreeable it is to make use of hard Words before a Lady; but
it is so much the Concern of a Poet to have his Works understood, and
particularly by your Sex, that You must give me leave to explain two or three
difficult Terms.

The Rosicrucians are a People I must bring You acquainted with. The best
Account I know of them is in a French Book called Le Comte de Gabalis, which
both in its Title and Size is so like a Novel, that many of the Fair Sex have
read it for one by Mistake. According to these Gentlemen, the four Elements are
inhabited by Spirits, which they call Sylphs, Gnomes, Nymphs, and Salamanders.
The Gnomes, or Demons of Earth, delight in Mischief; but the Sylphs, whose
Habitation is Air, are the best-condition'd Creatures imaginable. For they say,
any Mortals may enjoy the most intimate Familiarities with these gentle
Spirits, upon a Condition very easy to all true Adepts, an inviolate
Preservation of Chastity.

As to the following Canto's, all the Passages of them are as Fabulous, as the
Vision at the Beginning, or the Transformation at the End; (except the Loss of
your Hair, which I always name with Reverence.) The Human Persons are as
Fictitious as the Airy ones; and the Character of Belinda, as it is now
managed, resembles You in nothing but in Beauty.

If this Poem had as many Graces as there are in Your Person, or in Your Mind,
yet I could never hope it should pass through the World half so Uncensured as You
have done. But let its Fortune be what it will, mine is happy enough, to have
given me this Occasion of assuring You that I am, with the truest Esteem,

Madam, Your Most Obedient Humble Servant. A. POPE.



THE RAPE of the LOCK. CANTO I.
WHAT dire Offense from amorous Causes springs,
What mighty Quarrels rise from trivial Things,
I sing -- This Verse to C -- l, Muse! is due;
This, even Belinda may vouchsafe to view:
Slight is the Subject, but not so the Praise,
If She inspire, and He approve my Lays.
Say what strange Motive, Goddess! could compel
A well-bred Lord t'assault a gentle Belle?
Oh say what stranger Cause, yet unexplor'd,
Could make a gentle Belle reject a Lord?
And dwells such Rage in softest Bosoms then?
And lodge such daring Souls in Little Men?
Sol through white Curtains did his Beams display,
And opened those Eyes which brighter shine than they;
Now Shock had given himself the rowzing Shake,
And Nymphs prepared their Chocolate to take;
Thrice the wrought Slipper knocked against the Ground,
And striking Watches the tenth Hour resound.
Belinda still her downy Pillow pressed,
Her Guardian Sylph prolonged the balmy Rest.
'Twas he had summoned to her silent Bed
The Morning Dream that hovered over her Head.
A Youth more glittering than a Birth-night Beau,
(That even in Slumber caused her Cheek to glow)
Seemed to her Ear his winning Lips to lay,
And thus in Whispers said, or seemed to say.
Fairest of Mortals, thou distinguished Care
Of thousand bright Inhabitants of Air!
If ever one Vision touched thy infant Thought,
Of all the Nurse and all the Priest have taught,
Of airy Elves by Moonlight Shadows seen,
The silver Token, and the circled Green,
Or Virgins visited by Angel-Pow'rs,
With Golden Crowns and Wreaths of heavenly Flowers,
Hear and believe! thy own Importance know,
Nor bound thy narrow Views to Things below.
Some secret Truths from Learned Pride concealed,
To Maids alone and Children are revealed:
What though no Credit doubting Wits may give?
The Fair and Innocent shall still believe.
Know then, unnumber'd Spirits round thee fly,
The light Militia of the lower Sky;
These, though unseen, are ever on the Wing,
Hang over the Box, and hover round the Ring.
Think what an Equipage thou have in Air,
And view with scorn Two Pages and a Chair.
As now your own, our Beings were of old,
And once enclosed in Woman's beauteous Mold;
Thence, by a soft Transition, we repair
From earthly Vehicles to these of Air.
Think not, when Woman's transient Breath is fled,
That all her Vanities at once are dead:
Succeeding Vanities she still regards,
And though she plays no more, o'erlooks the Cards.
Her Joy in gilded Chariots, when alive,
And Love of Ombre, after Death survive.
For when the Fair in all their Pride expire,
To their first Elements the Souls retire:
The Sprights of fiery Termagants in Flame
Mount up, and take a Salamander's Name.
Soft yielding Minds to Water glide away,
And sip with Nymphs, their Elemental Tea.
The graver Prude sinks downward to a Gnome,
In search of Mischief still on Earth to roam.
The light Coquettes in Sylphs aloft repair,
And sport and flutter in the Fields of Air.
Know farther yet; Whoever fair and chaste
Rejects Mankind, is by some Sylph embraced:
For Spirits, freed from mortal Laws, with ease
Assume what Sexes and what Shapes they please.
What guards the Purity of melting Maids,
In Courtly Balls, and Midnight Masquerades,
Safe from the treacherous Friend, and daring Spark,
The Glance by Day, the Whisper in the Dark;
When kind Occasion prompts their warm Desires,
When Music softens, and when Dancing fires?
It Is but their Sylph, the wise Celestials know,
Though Honor is the Word with Men below.
Some Nymphs there are, too conscious of their Face,
For Life predestined to the Gnomes Embrace.
Who swell their Prospects and exalt their Pride,
When Offers are disdained, and Love denied.
Then gay Ideas crowd the vacant Brain;
While Peers and Dukes, and all their sweeping Train,
And Garters, Stars, and Coronets appear,
And in soft Sounds, Your Grace salutes their Ear.
It Is these that early taint the Female Soul,
Instruct the Eyes of young Coquettes to roll,
Teach Infants Cheeks a bidden Blush to know,
And little Hearts to flutter at a Beau.
Often when the World imagine Women stray,
The Sylphs through mystic Mazes guide their Way,
Through all the giddy Circle they pursue,
And old Impertinence expel by new.
What tender Maid but must a Victim fall
To one Man's Treat, but for another's Ball?
When Florio speaks, what Virgin could withstand,
If gentle Damon did not squeeze her Hand?
With varying Vanities, from every Part,
They shift the moving Toyshop of their Heart;
Where Wigs with Wigs, with Sword-knots Sword-knots strive,
Beaus banish Beaus, and Coaches Coaches drive.
This erring Mortals Levity may call,
Oh blind to Truth! the Sylphs contrive it all.
Of these am I, who thy Protection claim,
A watchful Sprite, and Ariel is my Name.
Late, as I ranged the Crystal Wilds of Air,
In the clear Mirror of thy ruling Star
I saw, alas! some dread Event impend,
E're to the Main this Morning's Sun descend.
But Heaven reveals not what, or how, or where:
Warned by thy Sylph, oh Pious Maid beware!
This to disclose is all thy Guardian can.
Beware of all, but most beware of Man!
He said; when Shock, who thought she slept too long,
Leapt up, and waked his Mistress with his Tongue.
'Twas then Belinda! if Report say true,
Thy Eyes first opened on a Billet-doux;
Wounds, Charms, and Ardors, were no sooner read,
But all the Vision vanished from thy Head.
And now, unveiled, the Toilet stands displayed,
Each Silver Vase in mystic Order laid.
First, robbed in White, the Nymph intent adores
With Head uncovered, the Cosmetic Powers.
A heavenly Image in the Glass appears,
To that she bends, to that her Eyes she rears;
The inferior Priestess, at her Altar's side,
Trembling, begins the sacred Rites of Pride.
Unnumber'd Treasures open at once, and here
The various Offerings of the World appear;
From each she nicely culls with curious Toil,
And decks the Goddess with the glittering Spoil.
This Casket India's glowing Gems unlocks,
And all Arabia breaths from yonder Box.
The Tortoise here and Elephant unite,
Transformed to Combs, the speckled and the white.
Here Files of Pins extend their shining Rows,
Puffs, Powders, Patches, Bibles, Billet-doux.
Now awful Beauty puts on all its Arms;
The Fair each moment rises in her Charms,
Repairs her Smiles, awakens every Grace,
And calls forth all the Wonders of her Face;
Sees by Degrees a purer Blush arise,
And keener Lightnings quicken in her Eyes.
The busy Sylphs surround their darling Care;
These set the Head, and those divide the Hair,
Some fold the Sleeve, while others plait the Gown;
And Betty's praised for Labors not her own.
THE RAPE of the LOCK. CANTO II.
NOT with more Glories, in the Etherial Plain,
The Sun first rises over the purpled Main,
Than issuing forth, the Rival of his Beams
Lanch'd on the Bosom of the Silver Thames.
Fair Nymphs, and well-drest Youths around her shone,
But every Eye was fixed on her alone.
On her white Breast a sparkling Cross she wore,
Which Jews might kiss, and Infidels adore.

Her lively Looks a sprightly Mind disclose,
Quick as her Eyes, and as unfix'd as those:
Favors to none, to all she Smiles extends,
Often she rejects, but never once offends.
Bright as the Sun, her Eyes the Gazers strike,
And, like the Sun, they shine on all alike.
Yet graceful Ease, and Sweetness void of Pride,
Might hide her Faults, if Belles had Faults to hide:
If to her share some Female Errors fall,
Look on her Face, and you will forget 'em all.
This Nymph, to the Destruction of Mankind,
Nourished two Locks, which graceful hung behind
In equal Curls, and well conspired to deck
With shining Ringlets her smooth Ivory Neck.
Love in these Labyrinths his Slaves detains,
And mighty Hearts are held in slender Chains.
With hairy Sprindges we the Birds betray,
Slight Lines of Hair surprise the Finny Prey,
Fair Tresses Man's Imperial Race ensnare,
And Beauty draws us with a single Hair.
The Adventrous Baron the bright Locks admired,
He saw, he wished, and to the Prize aspired:
Resolved to win, he meditates the way,
By Force to ravish, or by Fraud betray;
For when Success a Lover's Toil attends,
Few ask, if Fraud or Force attained his Ends.
For this, e're Phoebus rose, he had implored
Propitious Heaven, and every Power adored,
But chiefly Love -- to Love an Altar built,
Of twelve vast French Romances, neatly gilt.
There lay the Sword-knot Sylvia's Hands had sown,
With Flavia's Busk that often had rapp'd his own:
A Fan, a Garter, half a Pair of Gloves;
And all the Trophies of his former Loves.
With tender Billet-doux he lights the Pyre,
And breaths three amorous Sighs to raise the Fire.
Then prostrate falls, and begs with ardent Eyes
Soon to obtain, and long possess the Prize:
The Powers gave Ear, and granted half his Prayer,
The rest, the Winds dispersed in empty Air.
But now secure the painted Vessel glides,
The Sunbeams trembling on the floating Tides,
While melting Music steals upon the Sky,
And softened Sounds along the Waters die.
Smooth flow the Waves, the Zephyrs gently play,
Belinda smiled, and all the World was gay.
All but the Sylph -- With careful Thoughts oppressed,
The impending Woe sat heavy on his Breast.
He summons strait his Denizens of Air;
The lucid Squadrons round the Sails repair:
Soft over the Shrouds Aerial Whispers breath,
That seemed but Zephyrs to the Train beneath.
Some to the Sun their Insect-Wings unfold,
Waft on the Breeze, or sink in Clouds of Gold.
Transparent Forms, too fine for mortal Sight,
Their fluid Bodies half dissolved in Light.
Loose to the Wind their airy Garments flew,
Thin glittering Textures of the filmy Dew;
Dipped in the richest Tincture of the Skies,
Where Light disports in ever-mingling Dies,
While every Beam new transient Colors flings,
Colors that change whenever they wave their Wings.
Amid the Circle, on the gilded Mast,
Superior by the Head, was Ariel placed;
His Purple Pinions opening to the Sun,
He raised his Azure Wand, and thus begun.
Ye Sylphs and Sylphids, to your Chief give Ear,
Fays, Fairies, Genii, Elves, and Demons hear!
Ye know the Spheres and various Tasks assigned,
By Laws Eternal, to the Aerial Kind.
Some in the Fields of purest Ether play,
And bask and whiten in the Blaze of Day.
Some guide the Course of wandering Orbs on high,
Or roll the Planets through the boundless Sky.
Some less refined, beneath the Moon's pale Light
Hover, and catch the shooting Stars by Night;
Or suck the Mists in grosser Air below,
Or dip their Pinions in the painted Bow,
Or brew fierce Tempests on the wintry Main,
Or on the Glebe distill the kindly Rain.
Others on Earth over human Race preside,
Watch all their Ways, and all their Actions guide:
Of these the Chief the Care of Nations own,
And guard with Arms Divine the British Throne.
Our humbler Province is to tend the Fair,
Not a less pleasing, though less glorious Care.
To save the Powder from too rude a Gale,
Nor let the imprisoned Essences exhale,
To draw fresh Colors from the vernal Flowers,
To steal from Rainbows ere they drop in Showers
A brighter Wash; to curl their waving Hairs,
Assist their Blushes, and inspire their Airs;
Nay often, in Dreams, Invention we bestow,
To change a Flounce, or add a Furbelo.
This Day, black Omens threat the brightest Fair
That ever deserved a watchful Spirit's Care;
Some dire Disaster, or by Force, or Slight,
But what, or where, the Fates have wrapped in Night.
Whether the Nymph shall break Diana's Law,
Or some frail China Jar receive a Flaw,
Or stain her Honor, or her new Brocade,
Forget her Prayers, or miss a Masquerade,
Or lose her Heart, or Necklace, at a Ball;
Or whether Heaven has doomed that Shock must fall.
Haste then ye Spirits! to your Charge repair;
The fluttering Fan be Zephyretta's Care;
The Drops to thee, Brillante, we consign;
And Momentilla, let the Watch be thine;
Do thou, Crispissa, tend her favorite Lock;
Ariel himself shall be the Guard of Shock.
To Fifty chosen Sylphs, of special Note,
We trust the important Charge, the Petticoat:
Often have we known that sev'nfold Fence to fail,
Though stiff with Hoops, and armed with Ribs of Whale.
Form a strong Line about the Silver Bound,
And guard the wide Circumference around.
Whatever Spirit, careless of his Charge,
His Post neglects, or leaves the Fair at large,
Shall feel sharp Vengeance soon overtake his Sins,
Be stopped in Vials, or transfixt with Pins;
Or plunged in Lakes of bitter Washes lie,
Or wedged whole Ages in a Bodkin's Eye:
Gums and Pomatums shall his Flight restrain,
While clogged he beats his silken Wings in vain;
Or Alom- Stypticks with contracting Power
Shrink his thin Essence like a rivell'd Flower.
(...) Ixion fixed, the Wretch shall feel
(...) giddy Motion of the whirling Mill,
(...) Fumes of burning Chocolate shall glow,
(...) tremble at the Sea that froaths below!
He spoke; the Spirits from the Sails descend;
(...), Orb in Orb, around the Nymph extend,
(...) third the mazy Ringlets of her Hair,
(...) hang upon the Pendants of her Ear;
With beating Hearts the dire Event they wait,
Anxious, and trembling for the Birth of Fate.


THE RAPE of the LOCK. CANTO III.
CLOSE by those Meads for ever crowned with Flowers,
Where Thames with Pride surveys his rising Towers,
There stands a Structure of Majestic Frame,
Which from the neighboring Hampton takes its Name.
Here Britain's Statesmen often the Fall foredoom
Of Foreign Tyrants, and of Nymphs at home;
Here Thou, great Anna! whom three Realms obey,
Do sometimes Counsel take -- and sometimes Tea.
Hither the Heroes and the Nymphs resort,
To taste awhile the Pleasures of a Court;
In various Talk the instructive hours they past,
Who gave a Ball, or paid the Visit last:
One speaks the Glory of the British Queen,
And one describes a charming Indian Screen;
A third interprets Motions, Looks, and Eyes;
At every Word a Reputation dies.
Snuff, or the Fan, supply each Pause of Chat,
With singing, laughing, ogling, and all that.
Mean while declining from the Noon of Day,
The Sun obliquely shoots his burning Ray;
The hungry Judges soon the Sentence sign,
And Wretches hang that Jurymen may Dine;
The Merchant from the Exchange returns in Peace,
And the long Labors of the Toilette cease --
Belinda now, whom Thirst of Fame invites,
Burns to encounter two adventrous Knights,
At Ombre singly to decide their Doom;
And swells her Breast with Conquests yet to come.
Strait the three Bands prepare in Arms to join,
Each Band the number of the Sacred Nine.
Soon as she spreads her Hand, the Aerial Guard
Descend, and sit on each important Card:
First Ariel perched upon a Matadore,
Then each, according to the Rank they bore;
For Sylphs, yet mindful of their ancient Race,
Are, as when Women, wondrous fond of Place.
Behold, four Kings in Majesty revered,
With hoary Whiskers and a forky Beard;
And four fair Queens whose hands sustain a Flower,
The expressive Emblem of their softer Power;
Four Knaves in Garbs succinct, a trusty Band,
Caps on their heads, and Halberds in their hand;
And Part Colored Troops, a shining Train,
Draw forth to Combat on the Velvet Plain.
The skilful Nymph reviews her Force with Care;
Let Spades be Trumps, she said, and Trumps they were.
Now move to War her Sable Matadores,
In Show like Leaders of the swarthy Moors.
Spadillio first, unconquerable Lord!
Led off two captive Trumps, and swept the Board.
As many more Manillio forced to yield,
And marched a Victor from the verdant Field.
Him Basto followed, but his Fate more hard
Gained but one Trump and one Plebeian Card.
With his broad Sabre next, a Chief in Years,
The hoary Majesty of Spades appears;
Puts forth one manly Leg, to sight revealed;
The rest his many-colour'd Robe concealed.
The Rebel- Knave, that dares his Prince engage,
Proves the just Victim of his Royal Rage.
Even mighty Pam that Kings and Queens o'erthrew,
And mowed down Armies in the Fights of Lu,
Sad Chance of War! now, destitute of Aid,
Falls undistinguished by the Victor Spade!
Thus far both Armies to Belinda yield;
Now to the Baron Fate inclines the Field.
His warlike Amazon her Host invades,
The Imperial Consort of the Crown of Spades.
The Club's black Tyrant first her Victim died,
Spite of his haughty Mien, and barbarous Pride:
What boots the Regal Circle on his Head,
His Giant Limbs in State unwieldy spread?
That long behind he trails his pompous Robe,
And of all Monarchs only grasps the Globe?
The Baron now his Diamonds pours apace;
The embroidered King who shows but half his Face,
And his refulgent Queen, with Powers combined*
Of broken Troops an easy Conquest find.
Clubs, Diamonds, Hearts, in wild Disorder seen,
With Throngs promiscuous strew the level (...)
Thus when dispersed a routed Army runs,
Of Asia's Troops, and Africk's Sable Sons,
With like Confusion different Nations fly,
In various Habits and of various Dye,
The pierced Battalions dis-united fall,
In Heaps on Heaps; one Fate o'erwhelms them all.
The Knave of Diamonds now exerts his Arts,
And wins (oh shameful Chance!) the Queen of Hearts.
At this, the Blood the Virgin's Cheek forsook,
A livid Paleness spreads over all her Look;
She sees, and trembles at the approaching Ill,
Just in the Jaws of Ruin, and Codille.
And now, (as often in some distempered State)
On one nice Trick depends the general Fate,
An Ace of Hearts steps forth: The King unseen
Lurked in her Hand, and mourned his captive Queen.
He springs to Vengeance with an eager pace,
And falls like Thunder on the prostrate Ace.
The Nymph exulting fills with Shouts the Sky,
The Walls, the Woods, and long Canals reply.
Oh thoughtless Mortals! ever blind to Fate,
Too soon dejected, and too soon elate!
Sudden these Honors shall be snatched away,
And cursed for ever this Victorious Day.
For lo! the Board with Cups and Spoons is crowned,
The Berries crackle, and the Mill turns round.
On shining Altars of Japan they raise
The silver Lamp, and fiery Spirits blaze.
From silver Spouts the grateful Liquors glide,
And China's Earth receives the smoking Tide.
At once they gratify their Scent and Taste,
While frequent Cups prolong the rich Repast.
Strait hover round the Fair her Airy Band;
Some, as she sip'd, the fuming Liquor fanned,
Some over her Lap their careful Plumes displayed,
Trembling, and conscious of the rich Brocade.
Coffee, (which makes the Politician wise,
And see through all things with his half shut Eyes)
Sent up in Vapors to the Baron's Brain
New Stratagems, the radiant Lock to gain.
Ah cease rash Youth! desist ever it is too late,
Fear the just Gods, and think of Vide Ovid. Metam. 8:
Scylla's Fate!
Changed to a Bird, and sent to flit in Air,
She dearly pays for Nisus' injured Hair!
But when to Mischief Mortals bend their Mind,
How soon fit Instruments of Ill they find?
Just then, Clarissa drew with tempting Grace
A two-edged Weapon from her shining Case;
So Ladies in Romance assist their Knight,
Present the Spear, and arm him for the Fight.
He takes the Gift with reverence, and extends
The little Engine on his Finger's Ends,
This just behind Belinda's Neck he spread,
As over the fragrant Steams she bends her Head:
Swift to the Lock a thousand Sprights repair,
A thousand Wings, by turns, blow back the Hair,
And thrice they twitch'd the Diamond in her Ear,
Thrice she looked back, and thrice the Foe drew near.
Just in that instant, anxious Ariel sought
The close Recesses of the Virgin's Thought;
As on the Nosegay in her Breast reclined,
He watched the Ideas rising in her Mind,
Sudden he viewed, in spite of all her Art,
An Earthly Lover lurking at her Heart.
Amazed, confused, he found his Power expired,
Resigned to Fate, and with a Sigh retired.
The Peer now spreads the glittering Forfex wide,
T'inclose the Lock; now joins it, to divide.
Even then, before the fatal Engine closed,
A wretched Sylph too fondly interposed;
Fate urged the Sheers, and cut the Sylph in twain,
( See Milton, lib. 6.
But Airy Substance soon unites again)
The meeting Points the sacred Hair dissever
From the fair Head, for ever and for ever!
Then flashed the living Lightnings from her Eyes,
And Screams of Horror rend the affrighted Skies.
Not louder Shrieks by Dames to Heaven are cast,
When Husbands or when Monkeys breath their last,
Or when rich China Vessels, fallen from high,
In glittring Dust and painted Fragments lie!
Let Wreaths of Triumph now my Temples twine,
(The Victor cried) the glorious Prize is mine!
While Fish in Streams, or Birds delight in Air,
Or in a Coach and Six the British Fair,
As long as Atalantis shall be read,
Or the small Pillow grace a Lady's Bed,
While Visits shall be paid on solemn Days,
When numerous Wax-lights in bright Order blaze,
While Nymphs take Treats, or Assignations give,
So long my Honor, Name, and Praise shall live!
What Time would spare, from Steel receives its date,
And Monuments, like Men, submit to Fate!
Steel did the Labor of the Gods destroy,
And strike to Dust the Imperial Towers of Troy;
Steel could the Works of mortal Pride confound,
And hew Triumphal Arches to the Ground.
What Wonder then, fair Nymph! thy Hairs should feel
The conquering Force of unresisted Steel?
THE RAPE of the LOCK. CANTO IV.
BUT anxious Cares the pensive Nymph oppressed,
And secret Passions labored in her Breast.
Not youthful Kings in Battle seized alive,
Not scornful Virgins who their Charms survive,
Not ardent Lovers robbed of all their Bliss,
Not ancient Ladies when refused a Kiss,
Not Tyrants fierce that unrepenting die,
Not Cynthia when her Manteau's pinned awry,

Ever felt such Rage, Resentment and Despair,
As Thou, sad Virgin! for thy ravished Hair.
For, that sad moment, when the Sylphs withdrew,
And Ariel weeping from Belinda flew,
Umbriel, a dusky melancholy Spright,
As ever sullied the fair face of Light,
Down to the Central Earth, his proper Scene,
Repairs to search the gloomy Cave of Spleen.
Swift on his sooty Pinions flitts the Gnome,
And in a Vapor reached the dismal Dome.
No cheerful Breeze this sullen Region knows,
The dreaded East is all the Wind that blows.
Here, in a Grotto, sheltred close from Air,
And screen'd in Shades from Day's detested Glare,
She sighs for ever on her pensive Bed,
Pain at her side, and Languor at her Head.
Two Handmaids wait the Throne: Alike in Place,
But differing far in Figure and in Face.
Here stood Ill Nature like an ancient Maid,
Her wrinkled Form in Black and White arrayed;
With store of Prayers, for Mornings, Nights, and Noons.
Her Hand is filled; her Bosom with Lampoons.
There Affectation with a sickly Mien
Shows in her Cheek the Roses of Eighteen,
Practiced to Lisp, and hang the Head aside,
Faints into Airs, and languishes with Pride;
On the rich Quilt sinks with becoming Woe,
Wrapped in a Gown, for Sickness, and for Show.
The Fair ones feel such Maladies as these,
When each new Night-Dress gives a new Disease.
A constant Vapor over the Palace flies;
Strange Phantoms rising as the Mists arise;
Dreadful, as Hermit's Dreams in haunted Shades,
Or bright as Visions of expiring Maids.
Now glaring Fiends, and Snakes on rolling Spires,
Pale Specter, gaping Tombs, and Purple Fires:
Now Lakes of liquid Gold, Elysian Scenes,
And Crystal Domes, and Angels in Machines.
Unnumber'd Throngs on every side are seen
Of Bodies changed to various Forms by Spleen.
Here living Teapots stand, one Arm held out,
One bent; the Handle this, and that the Spout:
A Pipkin there like Homer's Tripod walks;
Here sighs a Jar, and there a Goose-pye talks;
Men prove with Child, as powerful Fancy works,
And Maids turned Bottels, call aloud for Corks.
Safe past the Gnome through this fantastic Band,
A Branch of healing Spleenwort in his hand.
Then thus addressed the Power -- Hail wayward Queen;
Who rule the Sex to Fifty from Fifteen,
Parent of Vapors and of Female Wit,
Who give the Hysteric or Poetic Fit,
On various Tempers act by various ways,
Make some take Physic, others scribble Plays;
Who cause the Proud their Visits to delay,
And send the Godly in a Pett, to pray.
A Nymph there is, that all thy Power disdains,
And thousands more in equal Mirth maintains.
But oh! if ever thy Gnome could spoil a Grace,
Or raise a Pimple on a beauteous Face,
Like Citron-Waters Matron's Cheeks inflame,
Or change Complexions at a losing Game;
If ever with airy Horns I planted Heads,
Or rumpled Petticoats, or tumbled Beds,
Or caused Suspicion when no Soul was rude,
Or discomposed the Head-dress of a Prude,
Or ever to costive Lap-Dog gave Disease,
Which not the Tears of brightest Eyes could ease:
Hear me, and touch Belinda with Chagrin;
That single Act gives half the World the Spleen.
The Goddess with a discontented Air
Seems to reject him, though she grants his Prayer.
A wondrous Bag with both her Hands she binds,
Like that where once Ulysses held the Winds;
There she collects the Force of Female Lungs,
Sighs, Sobs, and Passions, and the War of Tongues.
A Vial next she fills with fainting Fears,
Soft Sorrows, melting Griefs, and flowing Tears.
The Gnome rejoicing bears her Gift away,
Spreads his black Wings, and slowly mounts to Day.
Sunk in Thalestris' Arms the Nymph he found,
Her Eyes dejected and her Hair unbound.
Full over their Heads the swelling Bag he rent,
And all the Furies issued at the Vent.
Belinda burns with more than mortal Ire,
And fierce Thalestris fans the rising Fire.
O wretched Maid! she spread her hands, and cried,
(While Hampton's Ecchos, wretched Maid replied)
Was it for this you took such constant Care
The Bodkin; Comb, and Essence to prepare;
For this your Locks in Paper-Durance bound,
For this with torturing Irons wreathed around?
For this with Fillets strained your tender Head,
And bravely bore the double Loads of Lead?
Gods! shall the Ravisher display your Hair,
While the Fops envy, and the Ladies stare!
Honor forbid! at whose unrivaled Shrine
Ease, Pleasure, Virtue, All, our Sex resign.
Methinks already I your Tears survey,
Already hear the horrid things they say,
Already see you a degraded Toast,
And all your Honor in a Whisper lost!
How shall I, then, your helpless Fame defend?
'Twill then be Infamy to seem your Friend!
And shall this Prize, the inestimable Prize,
Exposed through Crystal to the gazing Eyes,
And heightened by the Diamond's circling Rays,
On that Rapacious Hand for ever blaze?
Sooner shall Grass in Hide-Park Circus grow,
And Wits take Lodgings in the Sound of Bow;
Sooner let Earth, Air, Sea, to Chaos fall,
Men, Monkies, Lap-dogs, Parrots, perish all!
She said; then raging to Sir Plume repairs,
And bids her Beau demand the precious Hairs:
( Sir Plume, of Amber Snuff Box justly vain,
And the nice Conduct of a clouded Cane)
With earnest Eyes, and round unthinking Face,
He first the Snuff Box opened, then the Case,
And thus broke out -- "My Lord, why, what the Devil?
"Z -- ds! damn the Lock! before Gad, you must be civil!
"Plague on it! it is past a Jest -- nay prithee, Pox!
"Give her the Hair -- he spoke, and rapp'd his Box.
It grieves me much (replied the Peer again)
Who speaks so well should ever speak in vain.
But In allusion to Achilles 's Oath in Homer. Il. 1.
by this Lock, this sacred Lock I swear.
(Which never more shall join its parted Hair,
Which never more its Honors shall renew,
Clipped from the lovely Head where once it grew)
That while my Nostrils draw the vital Air,
This Hand, which won it, shall for ever wear.
He spoke, and speaking in proud Triumph spread
The long-contended Honors of her Head.
But Umbriel, hateful Gnome! forbears not so;
He breaks the Vial whence the Sorrows flow.
Then see! the Nymph in beauteous Grief appears,
Her Eyes half languishing, half drowned in Tears;
On her heaved Bosom hung her drooping Head,
Which, with a Sigh, she raised; and thus she said.
For ever cursed be this detested Day,
Which snatched my best, my favorite Curl away!
Happy! ah ten times happy, had I been,
If Hampton Court these Eyes had never seen!
Yet am not I the first mistaken Maid,
By Love of Courts to numerous Ills betrayed.
Oh had I rather un-admir'd remained
In some lone Isle, or distant Northern Land;
Where the gilt Chariot never marked the way,
Where none learn Ombre, none ever taste Bohea!
There kept my Charms concealed from mortal Eye,
Like Roses that in Deserts bloom and die.
What moved my Mind with youthful Lords to rome?
O had I stayed, and said my Prayers at home!
'Twas this, the Morning Omens did foretell;
Thrice from my trembling hand the Patch-box fell;
The tottering China shook without a Wind,
Nay, Poll sat mute, and Shock was most Unkind!
A Sylph too warned me of the Threats of Fate,
In mystic Visions, now believed too late!
See the poor Remnants of this slighted Hair!
My hands shall rend what even thy own did spare.
This, in two sable Ringlets taught to break,
Once gave new Beauties to the snowie Neck.
The Sister-Lock now sits uncouth, alone,
And in its Fellow's Fate foresees its own;
Uncurl'd it hangs, the fatal Sheers demands;
And tempts once more thy sacrilegious Hands.
Oh had thou, Cruel! been content to seize
Hairs less in sight, or any Hairs but these!


THE RAPE of the LOCK. CANTO V.
SHE said: the pitying Audience melt in Tears,
But Fate and Jove had stopped the Baron's Ears.
In vain Thalestris with Reproach assails,
For who can move when fair Belinda fails?
Not half so fixed the Trojan could remain,
While Anna begged and Dido raged in vain.
To Arms, to Arms! the bold Thalestris cries,
And swift as Lightning to the Combat flies.
All side in Parties, and begin the Attack;
Fans clap, Silks russle, and tough Whalebones crack;
Heroes and Heroins Shouts confusedly rise,
And base, and treble Voices strike the Skies.
No common Weapons in their Hands are found,
Like Gods they fight, nor dread a mortal Wound.
Homer. Il. 20.
So when bold Homer makes the Gods engage,
And heavenly Breasts with human Passions rage;
Against Pallas, Mars; Latona, Hermes, Arms;
And all Olympus rings with loud Alarms.
Jove's Thunder roars, Heaven trembles all around;
Blue Neptune storms, the bellowing Deeps resound;
Earth shakes her nodding Towers, the Ground gives way;
And the pale Ghosts start at the Flash of Day!
Triumphant Umbriel on a Sconce's Height
Clapped his glad Wings, and sat to view the Fight,
Propt on their Bodkin Spears the Sprights survey
The growing Combat, or assist the Fray.
While through the Press enraged Thalestris flies,
And scatters Deaths around from both her Eyes,
A Beau and Witling perished in the Throng,
One died in Metaphor, and one in Song.
O cruel Nymph! a living Death I bear,
Cried Dapperwit, and sunk beside his Chair.
A mournful Glance Sir Fopling upwards cast,
A Song in the Opera of Camilla.
Those Eyes are made so killing -- was his last:
Thus on Meander's flowery Margin lies*
The expiring Swan, and as he sings he dies.
As bold Sir Plume had drawn Clarissa down,
Chloe stepped in, and killed him with a Frown;
She smiled to see the doughty Hero slain,
But at her Smile, the Beau revived again.
Vid. Homer Il. 22. and Virg. Aen. 12.
Now Jove suspends his golden Scales in Air,
Weighs the Men's Wits against the Lady's Hair;
The doubtful Beam long nods from side to side;
At length the Wits mount up, the Hairs subside.
See fierce Belinda on the Baron flies,
With more than usual Lightning in her Eyes;
Nor feared the Chief the unequal Fight to try,
Who sought no more than on his Foe to die.
But this bold Lord, with manly Strength indu'd,
She with one Finger and a Thumb subdued:
Just where the Breath of Life his Nostrils drew,
A Charge of Snuff the wily Virgin threw;
The Gnomes direct, to every Atome just,
The pungent Grains of titillating Dust.
Sudden, with starting Tears each Eye overflows,
And the high Dome re-ecchoes to his Nose.
Now meet thy Fate, the incensed Virago cried,
And drew a deadly Bodkin from her Side.
( In Imitation of the Progress of Agamemnon 's Scepter in Homer, Il. 2.
The same, his ancient Personage to deck,
Her great great Grandsire wore about his Neck
In three Seal-Rings; which after melted down,
Formed a vast Buckle for his Widow's Gown:
Her infant Grandame's Whistle next it grew,
The Bells she gingled, and the Whistle blew;
Then in a Bodkin graced her Mother's Hairs,
Which long she wore, and now Belinda wears.)
Boast not my Fall (he cried) insulting Foe!
Thou by some other shall be laid as low.
Nor think, to die dejects my lofty Mind;
All that I dread, is leaving you behind!
Rather than so, ah let me still survive,
And burn in Cupid's Flames, -- but burn alive.
Restore the Lock! she cries; and all around
Restore the Lock! the vaulted Roofs rebound.
Not fierce Othello in so loud a Strain
Roared for the Handkerchief that caused his Pain.
But see how often Ambitious Aims are crossed,
And Chiefs contend 'till all the Prize is lost!
The Lock, obtained with Guilt, and kept with Pain,
In every place is sought, but sought in vain:
With such a Prize no Mortal must be blessed,
So Heaven decrees! with Heaven who can contest?
Some thought it mounted to the Lunar Sphere,
Vid. Ariosto. Canto 34.
Since all things lost on Earth, are treasured there.
There Hero's Wits are kept in pondrous Vases,
And Beau's in Snuff-boxes and Tweezer-Cases.
There broken Vows, and Deathbed Alms are found,
And Lovers Hearts with Ends of Riband bound;
The Courtiers Promises, and Sick Man's Prayers,
The Smiles of Harlots, and the Tears of Heirs,
Cages for Gnats, and Chains to Yoke a Flea;
Dried Butterflies, and Tomes of Casuistry.
But trust the Muse -- she saw it upward rise,
Though marked by none but quick Poetic Eyes:
(So Rome's great Founder to the Heavens withdrew,
To Proculus alone confessed in view.)
A sudden Star, it shot through liquid Air,
And drew behind a radiant Trail of Hair.
Not Berenice's Locks first rose so bright,
The Skies bespangling with disheveled Light.
The Sylphs behold it kindling as it flies,
And pleased pursue its Progress through the Skies.
This the Beau-monde shall from the Mall survey,
And hail with Music its propitious Ray.
This, the blessed Lover shall for Venus take,
And send up Vows from Rosamonda's Lake.
This Partridge soon shall view in cloudless Skies,
When next he looks through Galilaeo's Eyes;
And hence the Egregious Wizard shall foredoom
The Fate of Louis, and the Fall of Rome.
Then cease, bright Nymph! to mourn the ravished Hair
Which adds new Glory to the shining Sphere!
Not all the Tresses that fair Head can boast
Shall draw such Envy as the Lock you lost.
For, after all the Murders of your Eye,
When, after Millions slain, your self shall die;
When those fair Suns shall set, as set they must,
And all those Tresses shall be laid in Dust;
This Lock, the Muse shall consecrate to Fame,
And midst the Stars inscribe Belinda's Name!
FINIS.

