OF THE USE of RICHES,

AN EPISTLE To the Right Honorable ALLEN Lord BATHURST.

By Mr. POPE.

LONDON: Printed by J. Wright, for LAWTON GILLIVER at Homer's Head against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, 1732. Price 1. s.

AN EPISTLE To the Right Honorable ALLEN Lord BATHURST.
WHO shall decide, when Doctors dis-agree,
And soundest Casuists doubt, like you and me?
You hold the word from Jove to Momus given,
That Man was made the standing Jest of Heaven,
And Gold but sent to keep the Fools in play,
For half to heap, and half to throw away.
But I, who think more highly of our Kind,
(And surely Heaven and I are of a mind)
Opine, that Nature, as in duty bound,
Deep hid the shining Mischief under ground:
But when, by Man's audacious Labor won,
Flamed forth this Rival to its Sire the Sun,
Then, in plain prose, were made two sorts of men,
To squander some, and some to hide again.
Like Doctors thus, when much Dispute has past,
We find our Tenets just the same at last:
Both fairly owning Riches in effect
No Grace of Heaven, or Token of the Elect;
Given to the Fool, the Mad, the Vain, the Evil,
To W^rd, to W^t^rs, Ch^rs, and the Devil.
What Nature wants, commodious Gold bestows,
It Is thus we eat the bread another sows:
But how unequal it bestows, observe,
It Is thus we riot, while who sow it, starve.
What Nature wants (a phrase I much distrust)
Extends to Luxury, extends to Lust;
And if we count among the Needs of life
Another's Toil, why not another's Wife?
Useful, we grant, it serves what life requires,
But dreadful too, the dark Assassin hires:
Trade it may help, Society extend;
But lures the Pyrate, and corrupts the Friend:
It raises Armies in a nation's aid,
But bribes a Senate, and the Land's betrayed.
Oh! that such Bulky bribes as all might see
Still, as of old, encumbered Villainy!
In vain may Heroes fight, and Patriots rave,
If secret Gold saps on from knave to knave.
Could France or Rome divert our brave designs,
With all their brandies, or with all their wines?
What could they more than knights and squires confound,
Or water all the Quorum ten miles round?
A statesman's slumbers how this speech would spoil,
" Sir, Spain has sent a thousand jars of oil;
" Huge bales of British cloth blockade the door;
" A hundred Oxen at your levee roar.
Poor Avarice one torment more would find,
Nor could Profusion squander all, in kind.
Astride his Cheese Sir Morgan might we meet,
And Worldly crying Coals from street to street,
Whom with a Wig so wild, and Mien so mazed,
Pity mistakes for some poor Tradesman crazed.
Had H^wl^y's fortune layn in Hops and Hogs,
Scarce H^wl^y's self had sent it to the dogs.
His Grace will game: to White's a Bull be led,
With spurning heels and with a butting head;
To White's be carried, as to ancient Games,
Fair Coursers, Vases, and alluring Dames.
Shall then Uxorio, if the stakes he sweep,
Bear home six Whores, and make his Lady weep?
Or soft Adonis, so perfumed and fine,
Drive to St. James's a whole herd of Swine?
Oh filthy Check on all industrious skill,
To spoil the Nation's last great Trade, Quadrille!
Once, we confess, beneath the Patriot's cloak, Beneath the Patriot's Cloak.]
This is a true Story, which happened in the Reign of King William, to an
eminent unsuspected old Patriot; who coming out at the Backdoor from having
been closeted by the King, where he had received a large Bag or Guineas, the
Bursting of the Bag discovered his Business there.

From the cracked bagg the dropping Guinea spoke,
And gingling down the back-stairs, told the Crew,
" Old Cato is as great a Rogue as you."
Blessed Paper-credit! that advanced so high,
Shall lend Corruption lighter wings to fly!
Gold, imp'd with this, may compass hardest things,
May pocket States, or fetch or carry Kings;
A single Leaf may waft an Army over,
Or ship off Senates to some distant shore;
A Leaf like Sybil's, scatter to and fro
Our Fates and Fortunes, as the winds shall blow.
Well then, since with the world we stand or fall,
Come take it as we find it, Gold and all.
What Riches give us, let us first enquire:
Meat, fire, and clothes; what more? Meat, clothes, and fire.
Is this too little? would you more than live?
Alas it is more than Tu * * r finds they give.
Alas it is more than (all his Visions past.)
Unhappy Wh * * n waking found at last!
What can they give? to dying A Citizen whose Rapacity obtained him the Name of
Vultur. He died worth three hundred thousand Pounds, and left it to no Person
living, but to the first Son that should be born of the first Daughter of his
next Relation. Being told by his Lawyer, that it would probably be thirty Years
before his Money could be inherited, and it must all that time lie at Interest,
he answered, He liked it the better, and so died.
H * p * s, Heirs?
To Chartres, Vigor? Japhet, Nose and Ears? Japhet, Nose and Ears.] Japhet
Crook alias Sir Peter Stranger, was punished with the Loss of those Parts, for
having forged a Conveyance of an Estate to himself, upon which he took up
several Thousand Pounds. He was at the same time sued in Chancery on suggestion
of having fraudulently obtained a Will, by which he possessed another very
considerable Estate, in wrong of the Brother of the Deceased.

Can they in Gems bid pallid Hippia glow?
In Fulvia's Buckle ease the Throbs below?
Or heal, old Narses, thy obscener ail,
With all the Embroid'ry plastered at thy Tail?
They might, (were Harpax not too wise to spend)
Give Harpax self the Blessing of a Friend;
Or find some Doctor, that would save the Life
Of wretched Shylock, spite of Shylock's Wife.
But thousands die, without or this, or that,
Die, and endow a College, or a A famous Duchess in her last Will left
considerable Annuities and Legacies to her Cats.
Cat:
To some indeed Heaven grants the happier Fate
To Enrich a Bastard, or a Son they hate.
Perhaps you think the Poor might have their part?
B*nd damns the Poor, and hates them from his heart:
The grave Sir G * * t holds it for a Rule,
That every Man in want is Knave or Fool:
" God cannot love, (says Bl * t, with lifted eyes)
" The Wretch he starves" -- and piously denies:
But Reverend S * * n with a softer Air,
Admits, and leaves them, Providence's Care.
Yet, to be just to these poor Men of Pelf,
Each does but hate his Neighbor as himself:
Damned to the Mines, an equal Fate betides
The Slave that digs it, and the Slave that hides.
Who suffer thus, mere Charity should own
Must act on Reasons powerful though unknown:
Some War, some Plague, some Famine they foresee,
Some Revelation, hid from you and me.
Why S^l^k wants a Meal, the cause is found,
He thinks a Loaf will rise to fifty pound.
What made Directors cheat in South Sea year?
To live on Ven'son when it sold so dear. In the Extravagance and Luxury of the
South Sea Year, the Price of a Haunch of Venison was from three to five pounds.

Ask you why Phryne the whole Auction buys?
Phryne foresees a General Excise.
Why she and Lesbia raise that monstrous Sum?
Alas! they fear a Man will cost a Plum.
Wise Peter sees the World's respect for Gold,
And therefore hopes this Nation may be sold:
Glorious Ambition! Peter, swell thy store,
And be what Rome's great A Roman Lawyer, so rich as to purchase the Empire,
when it was set to Sale by the Praetorian Bands on the Death of Pertinax.
Didius was before.
The Crown of Poland venal twice an Age
To just three Millions stinted modest (...)
But nobler Scenes Maria's Dreams unfold,
Hereditary Realms, and Worlds of Gold.
Congenial Souls! whose Life one Avarice joins,
And one Fate buries in the Two persons of distinction, each of whom in the
time of the Mississipi despised to realize above three hundred thousand pound;
the Gentleman with a view to the Crown of Poland, the Lady on a Vision of the
like nature. They since retired together into Spain, where they are still in
search of Gold in the Mines of the Asturies.
Asturian Mines.
Much-injur'd Bl^t! why bears he Britain's hate?
A Wizard told him in these words our fate.
" At length Corruption, like a general Flood,
" (So long by watchful Ministers withstood)
" Shall deluge all; and Avarice creeping on,
" Spread like a low-born Mist, and blot the Sun;
" Statesman and Patriot ply alike the Stocks,
" Peeress and Butler share alike the Box,
" The Judge shall job, the Bishop bite the Town,
" And mighty Dukes pack Cards for half a crown.
" See Britain sunk in Lucre's sordid charms,
" And France revenged of Anne's and Edward's Arms!
No poor Court-Badge, great Scriv'ner! fired thy brain,
No Lordly Luxury, no City Gain:
But 'twas thy righteous End, ashamed to see
Senates degenerate, Patriots disagree,
And nobly wishing Party Rage to cease,
To buy both Sides, and give thy Country Peace.
" All this is madness, cries a sober Sage,
But who, my Friend, has Reason in his Rage?
The ruling Passion, be it what it will,
The ruling Passion conquers Reason still.
Less mad the wildest Whimsey we can frame,
Than even that Passion, if it has no Aim;
For though such Motives Folly you may call,
The Folly's greater to have none at all.
Hear then the truth: It Is Heaven each Passion sends,
And different Men directs to different Ends.
" Extremes in Nature equal Good produce,
" Extremes in Man concur to general Use.
Ask we what makes one keep, and one bestow?
That Power who bids the Ocean ebb and flow;
Bids Seed-time, Harvest, equal course maintain,
Through reconciled Extremes of Drought and Rain;
Builds Life on Death; on Change Duration founds,
And gives the eternal Wheels to know their rounds.
Riches, like Insects, when concealed they lie,
Wait but for Wings, and in their Season, fly.
Who sees pale Mammon pine amidst his Store,
Sees but a backward Steward for the Poor;
This Year a Reservoir, to keep and spare,
The next, a Fountain spouting through his Heir,
In lavish Streams to quench a Country's thirst,
And Men, and Dogs, shall drink him till they burst.
Old Cotta shamed his fortune, and his birth,
Yet was not Cotta void of wit or worth:
What though (the use of barbarous Spits forgot)
His Kitchen vy'd in coolness with his Grot;
His Court with Nettles, Moat with Cresses stored,
With Soups unbought, and Sallads, blessed his board.
If Cotta lived on Pulse, it was no more
Than Bramins, Saints, and Sages did before;
To cram the Rich, was prodigal expense,
And who would take the Poor from Providence?
Like some lone Chartreuse stands the good old Hall,
Silence without, and Fasts within the wall;
No rafter'd Roofs with Dance and Tabor sound,
No Noontide-bell invites the Country round;
Tenants with sighs the smoakless Towers survey,
And turn the unwilling Steeds another way,
Benighted wanderers, the Forest over,
Curse the saved Candle, and unopening Door:
While the gaunt Mastiff, growling at the Gate,
Affrights the Beggar whom he longs to eat.
Not so his Son, he marked this oversight,
And then mistook reverse of wrong for right:
For what to shun will no great knowledge need,
But what to follow is a task indeed.
What slaughtered Hecatombs, what floods of wine,
Fill the capacious Squire and deep Divine!
Yet no mean motive this profusion draws,
His Oxen perish in his Country's cause.
It Is the dear Prince (Sir John) that crowns thy cup,
And Zeal for his great House that eats thee up.
The woods recede around the naked seat,
The sylvans groan -- no matter -- "for the Fleet."
Next goes his wool -- "to clothe our valiant bands:"
Last, for his country's love, he sells his lands.
Bankrupt, at Court in vain he pleads his cause,
His thankless Country leaves him to her Laws.
The Sense to value Riches, with the Art
To Enjoy them, and the Virtue to impart,
Not meanly, nor ambitiously persu'd,
Not sunk by sloth, nor raised by servitude;
To balance Fortune by a just expense,
Join with Economy, Magnificence;
With Splendour Charity, with Plenty Health;
Oh teach us, BATHURST yet unspoil'd by wealth!
That secret rare, between the extremes to move
Of mad Good nature, and of mean Self-love.
To want or worth, well-weigh'd, be bounty given,
And ease, or emulate, the care of Heaven.
Whose measure full, overflows on human race,
Mends Fortune's fault, and justifies her grace.
Wealth in the gross is Death, but Life diffused;
As Poison heals, in just proportion used:
In heaps, like Ambergrise, a stink it lies,
But well dispersed, is Incense to the skies.
Who starves by Nobles, or with Nobles eats?
The wretch that trusts them, and the rogue that cheats.
Is there a Lord, who knows a cheerful noon
Without a Fiddler, Flatt'rer, or Buffoon?
Whose Table, Wit, or modest Merit share,
Un-elbow'd by a Gamester, Pimp, or Play'r?
Who copies Yours or OXFORD's better part,
To ease the oppressed, and raise the sinking heart?
Wherever he shines, oh Fortune gild the scene,
And Angels guard him in the golden Mean!
There English Bounty yet a while may stand,
And Honor linger, e're it leaves the Land.
But all our praises why should Lords engross?
Rise honest Muse! and sing the Man of Ross:
Pleased Vaga echoes through her winding bounds,
And rapid Severn hoarse applause resounds.
Who hung with woods ^^on mountains sultry brow?
From the dry rock who bade the waters flow?
Not to the skies in useless columns tossed,
Or in proud falls magnificently lost,
But clear and artless, pouring through the plain
Health to the sick, and solace to the swain.
Whose Cause-way parts the vale with shady rows?
Whose Seats the weary Traveller repose?
Who feeds yon Almshouse, neat, but void of state,
Where Age and Want sit smiling at the gate?
Who taught that heav'n-directed Spire to rise?
The Man of Ross, each lisping babe replies.
Behold the marketplace with poor overspread!
The Man of Ross divides the weekly bread:
Him portion'd maids, apprentic'd orphans blessed,
The young who labor, and the old who rest.
Is any sick? the Man of Ross relieves;
Prescribes, attends, the medicine makes, and gives.
Is there a variance? enter but his door,
Balk'd are the courts, and contest is no more.
Despairing Quacks with curses fled the place,
And vile Attorneys, now an useless race.
" Thrice happy man! enabled to pursue
" What all so wish, but want the power to do.
" Oh say, what sums that generous hand supply?
" What mines to swell that boundless Charity?
Of debts and taxes, wife and children clear,
This man possessed -- five hundred pounds a year. This Person, who with no
greater Estate, performed all these good Works, and whose true Name was almost
lost (partly by having the Title of the Man of R^ given him by way of Eminence,
and partly by being buried without any Inscription) was called Mr. John Kyrle:
He died in the Year 1724, aged near 90, and lies buried in the Chancel of the
Church of Ross in Herefordshire.

Blush Grandeur, blush! proud Courts withdraw your blaze.
Ye little Stars! hide your diminished rays.
" And what? no Monument, Inscription, Stone?
" His Race, his Form, his Name almost unknown?
Who builds a Church to God, and not to Fame,
Will never mark the marble with his name.
Go search it there The Parish-Register.
, where to be born and die,
Of Rich and Poor makes all the history:
Enough that Virtue filled the space between;
Proved, by the Ends of Being, to have been.
When H * p * s dies, a thousand Lights attend
The Wretch, who living saved a Candle's end:
Should'ring God's altar a vile Image stands,
Belies his features, nay extends his hands;
That live-long Wig which Gorgon's self might own,
Eternal buckle takes in Parian stone.
Behold! what blessings Wealth to Life can lend,
And see, what comfort it affords our End!
In the worst Inn's worst room, with matt half-hung,
The floors of plaster, and the walls of dung,
On once a flockbed, but repaired with straw,
With tape-ty'd curtains, never meant to draw,
The George and Garter dangling from that bed
Where tawdry yellow strove with dirty red,
Great Villers lies -- alas! how changed from him,
That Life of Pleasure, and that Soul of Whym,
Gallant and gay, in Cliveden's proud alcove
The Bower of wanton Sh * * * y and Love;
Or just as gay, at Council, in a ring
Of mimick'd Statesmen and the merry King.
No Wit to flatter, left of all his store!
No Fool to laugh at, which he valued more.
There, Victor of his health, of fortune, friends,
And fame, this Lord of useless thousands ends!
His Grace's fate sage Cutler could foresee,
And well (he thought) advised him, "Live like me."
As well his Grace replied, "Like you, Sir John?
" That I can do, when all I have is gone."
Resolve me Reason, which of these is worse?
Want with a full, or with an empty purse:
Thy Life more wretched, Cutler, was confessed;
Arise, and tell me, was thy Death more blessed?
Cutler saw Tenants break, and houses fall,
For very want; he could not build a wall.
His only Daughter in a Stranger's Power,
For very want; he could not pay a Dower.
A few gray hairs his reverend temples crowned,
'Twas very want that sold them for two pound.
What even denied a cordial at his end,
Banished the Doctor, and expelled the friend?
What but a want, which you perhaps think mad,
Yet numbers feel; the want of what he had.
Cutler and Brutus, dying both exclaim,
" Virtue! and Wealth! what are ye but a Name?"
Say, for such worth are other worlds prepared?
Or are they both, in this, their own reward?
That knotty point, my Lord, shall I discuss,
Or tell a Tale? -- A Tale -- it follows thus.
Where The Monument built in Memory of the Fire of London, with an Inscription
importing that City to have been burned by the Papists.
London's Column pointing at the skies
Like a tall ^ Bully, lifts the head, and lies:
There dwelt a Citizen of sober fame,
A plain good man, and Balaam was his name.
Religious, punctual, frugal, and so forth --
His word would pass for more than he was worth.
One solid dish his weekday meal affords,
An added pudding solemnized the Lord's.
Constant at Church, and Change; his gains were sure,
His givings rare, save farthings to the poor.
The Devilish was piqu'd, such saintship to behold,
And longed to tempt him like good Job of old:
But Satan now is wiser than of yore,
And tempts by making rich, not making poor.
Roused by the Prince of Air, the whirlwinds sweep
The surge, and plunge his Father in the deep;
Then full against his Cornish lands they roar,
And two rich Ship-wrecks bless the lucky shore.
Sir Balaam now, he lives like other folks,
He takes his chirping pint, he cracks his jokes:
" Live like your self," was soon my Lady's word;
And lo! two puddings smok'd upon the board.
Asleep and naked as an Indian lay,
An honest Factor stole a Gem away:
He pledged it to the Knight; the Knight had wit,
So kept the Diamond, and the Rogue was bit:
Some Scruple rose, but thus he eased his thought,
" I Will now give sixpence where I gave a groat,
" Where once I went to church, I Will now go twice,
" And am so clear too, of all other Vice."
The Tempter saw his time; the work he plied,
Stocks and Subscriptions pour on every side;
And all the Demon makes his full descent,
In one abundant Shower of Cent. per Cent.
Sinks deep within him and possesses whole,
Then dubs Director and secures his Soul.
Behold Sir Balaam now a man of spirit,
Ascribes his gettings to his parts and merit,
What late he called a Blessing, now was Wit,
And God's good providence, a lucky Hit.
Things change their titles as our manners turn,
His Compting-house employed the Sunday-morn;
Seldom at church, ('it was such a busy life)
But duly sent his family and wife.
There (so the Devilish ordained) one Christmas-tide,
My good old Lady caught a cold, and died.
A Nymph of Quality admires our Knight;
He marries, bows at Court, and grows polite:
Leaves the dull Cits, and joins (to please the fair)
The well-bred Cuckolds in St. James's air:
First, for his son a gay commission buys,
Who drinks, whores, fights, and in a duel dies.
His daughter flaunts a Viscount's tawdry wife,
She bears a Coronet and P^x for life.
In Britain's Senate he a seat obtains,
And one more Pensioner St. Stephen gains.
My Lady falls to Play: so bad her chance,
He must repair it; takes a bribe from France;
The House impeach him; Co * *. by harangues,
The Court forsakes him, and Sir Balaam hangs:
Wife, son, and daughter, Satan! are thy prize,
And sad Sir Balaam curses God and dies.
P. 13. Ver. 13. for ypon read yon.


