THE FIRST SATIRE OF THE SECOND BOOK OF HORACE,

Imitated in a DIALOGUE between ALEXANDER POPE of Twickenham in Com. Midd. Esquire
on the one Part, and his LEARNED COUNCIL on the other.

Scilicet Uni Aequus Virtuti, atque ejus Amicis. HORAT. LONDON: Printed by L.
G. and sold by A. DODD, near Temple Bar; E. NUTT, at the Royal Exchange; and by
the Booksellers of London and Westminster. M.DCC.XXXIII.

Q. HORATII FLACCI SERMONUM LIBRI SECUNDI SATIRA PRIMA.

QUINTI HORATII FLACCI SERMONUM LIBER SECUNDUS.
SATIRA PRIMA.
HORATIUS. TREBATIUS. HOR. SUNT quibus in Satyra videar nimis acer, and ultra
Legem tendere opus;
Composui pars esse putat, similesque meorum
Mill die versus deduci posse.
Quid faciam? Praescribe.

TREB. Quiescas.

HOR. Ne faciam inquis,
Omnino versus?

TREB. Aio.

HOR. Peream male si non
Optimum erat:

TREB.
Transnanto Tiberim, somno quibus est opus alto,
Irriguumve mero sub noctem corpus habento.

CAESARIS invicti res dicere,
Praemia laturus.

HOR. Cupidum, pater optime! vires
Deficiunt: horrentia pilis
Agmina, nec fracta pereuntes cuspide Gallos,
Aut labentis equo describat vulnera Parthi.

TREB.
Scipiadam ut sapiens Lucilius.

HOR. Haud mihi deero,
Cum res ipsa feret. dextro tempore Flacci
Verba per attentam non ibunt Caesaris aurem;
Cui male si palpere, recalcitrat undique tutus.

TREB.
Pantolabum Scurram, Nomentanumve nepotem?


HOR.
Accessit fervor capiti numerusque lucernis.
ovo prognatus eodem
Pugnis: quot capitum vivunt, totidem studiorum
Millia:
Lucili ritu, nostrum melioris utroque.
Ille, velut fidis arcana sodalibus olim
Credebat libris; neque si male gesserat, usquam
Decurrens alio, neque si been: quo fit ut omnis
Votiva pateat veluti descripta tabella
Vita senis. Sequor hunc,
[Nam Venusinus arat finem sub utrumque colonus,
Missus ad hoc pulsis (vetus est ut fama) Sabellis;
Quo ne per vacuum Romano incurreret hostis,

Incuteret violenta.]

Quenquam animantem; and me veluti custodiet ensis
Vagina tectus, quem cur distringere coner,

Jupiter! ut pereat positum rubigine telum,
Nec quisquam noceat
Qui me eommorit (melius non tangere clamo)


Canidia Albuti, quibus est inimica, Venenum;
Grande malum Turius, si quid se judice certes;

Imperet hoc natura potens; sic collige mecum.
Dente lupus, cornu taurus petit; unde nisi intus
Monstratum?
Matrem: nil faciet sceleris pia dextra (mirum
Ut neque calce lupus quenquam, neque dente petit bos)
Sed mala tollet anum vitiato melle cicuta.
Ne longum faciam; seu me tranquilla senectus
Expectat, seu mors atris circumvolat alis;
Dives, inops, Romae seu sors ita jusserit, exul,


TREB.
Vitalis, metuo; and majorum ne quis amicus
Frigore te feriat.

HOR.
Primus in hunc operis componere carmina morem,
qua quisque per ora
Cederet, introrsum turpis; number Laelius, and qui
Duxit ab oppressa meritum Carthagine nomen,
Ingenio ofsensi? aut laeso doluere Metello,
Famosisque Lupo cooperto versibus? Atqui
Primores populi arripuit, populumque tributim;
Scilicet

Vulgo and Scena, in Secreta remorant
Virtus Scipiadae, and mitis Sapientia Laeli;
Nugari cum illo, and discincti ludere, donec
Decoqueretur olus, soliti.
-- Quicquid sum ego, quamvis
Infra Lucili censum, ingeniumque, tamen me
vixisse invita fatebitur usque
Invidia, and fragili quaerens illidere dentem,
Offendet solido; --
-- docte Trebati,
Dissentis.
TREB.
Sed tamen ut monitus caveas, ne forte negoti
Incutiat tibi quid sanctarum inscitia legum.


HOR. Esto, siquis mala; sed bona siquis
Judice condiderit laudatur CAESARE: siquis
Opprobrijs dignum laceraverit, integer ipse,


FINIS.
THE FIRST SATIRE OF THE SECOND BOOK OF HORACE.
P. THERE are (I scarce can think it, but am told)

Scarce to wise Peter complaisant enough,
And something said of Chartres much too rough.

Lord Fanny spins a thousand such a Day.
Timorous by Nature, of the Rich in awe,

You Will give me, like a Friend both sage and free,
Advice; and (as you use) without a Fee.

L.

P. Not write? but then I think,

I nod in Company, I wake at Night,
Fools rush into my Head, and so I write.

L. You could not do a worse thing for your Life.
Why, if the Nights seem tedious -- take a Wife;

Lettuce and Cowslip Wine; Probatum est.
But talk with Celsus, Celsus may advise
Hartshorn, or something that shall close your Eyes.

Knighthood, or the Bays.

P. What? like Sir Richard, rumbling, rough and fierce,
With ARMS and GEORGE, and BRUNSWICK crowd the Verse?
Or nobly wild, with Budgell's Fire and Force,
Paint Angels trembling round his falling Horse?

L.
Let Carolina smooth the tuneful Lay,
Lull with Amelia's liquid Name the Nine,
And sweetly flow through all the Royal Line.

P.
They scarce can bear their Laureate twice a Year:
And justly CAESAR scorns the Poet's Lays,
It is to History he trusts for Praise.

L. Cibber, I Will maintain it still,
Than ridicule all Taste, blaspheme Quadrille,
Abuse the City's best good Men in Meter,
And laugh at Peers that put their Trust in Peter.


P. What should ail 'em?

L. A hundred smart in Timon and in Balaam:
The fewer still you name, you wound the more;
B -- nd is but one, but Harpax is a Score.

P.
Sc -- le his Bottle, D -- ty his Ham-Pye;
Ridotta sips and dances, till she see
The doubling Lustres dance as well as she;
Senate, Hockley-Hole his Brother,
Like in all else, as one Egg to another.

As downright Shippen, or as old Montagne.
In them, as certain to be loved as seen,
The Soul stood forth, nor kept a Thought within;
In me what Spots (for Spots I have) appear,
Will prove at least the Medium must be clear.
In this impartial Glass, my Muse intends
Fair to expose myself, my Foes, my Friends;
Publish the present Age, but where my Text
Is Vice too high, reserve it for the next:
My Foes shall wish my Life a longer date,
And every Friend the less lament my Fate.
My Head and Heart thus flowing through my Quill,

Papist or Protestant, or both between,
Like good Erasinus in an honest Mean,
In Moderation placing all my Glory,
While Tories call me Whig, and Whigs a Tory.

To run a Muck, and tilt at all I meet;

Thieves, Supercargoes, Sharpers, and Directors.
Army! and let Jove incrust
Swords, Pikes, and Guns, with everlasting Rust!
Peace is my dear Delight -- not Fleury's more:
But touch me, and no Minister so sore.
Who-e'er offends, at some unlucky Time

Sacred to Ridicule! his whole Life long,
And the sad Burden of some merry Song.
Delia's Rage,
Hard Words or Hanging, if your J -- ge be --
From furious Sappho yet a sadder Fate,
P -- x'd by her Love, or libelled by her Hate:

Bulls aim their horns, and Asses lift their heels,
It Is a Bear's Talent not to kick, but hug,
And no man wonders he is not stung by Pug:
W -- t -- rs, or with Ch -- t -- rs eat,
They Will never poison you, they will only cheat.

What-e'er my Fate, or well or ill at Court,
Whether old Age, with faint, but cheerful Ray,
Attends to gild the Evening of my Day,
Or Death's black Wing already be displayed
To wrap me in the Universal Shade;
Whether the darkened Room to muse invite,
Or whitened Wall provoke the Skew'r to write,
In Durance, Exile, Bedlam, or the Mint,
Lee or B -- ll, I will Rhyme and Print.

L.
In Flower of Age you perish for a Song!
Plums, and Directors, Shylock and his Wife,
Will club their Testers, now, to take your Life!

P. Virtue when I point the Pen,
Brand the bold Front of shameless, guilty Men,
Dash the proud Gamester in his gilded Car,
Bare the mean Heart that lurks beneath a Star;
Can there be wanting to defend Her Cause,
Lights of the Church, or Guardians of the Laws?
Could pension'd Boileau lash in honest Strain
Flatt'rers and Bigots even in Louis' Reign?
Could Laureate Dryden Pimp and Fry'r engage,
Yet neither Charles nor James be in a Rage?
And I not
Un-plac'd, un-pension'd, no Man's Heir, or Slave?
I will, or perish in the generous Cause.
Hear this, and tremble! you, who 'scape the Laws.

The World beside may murmur, or commend.
Know, all the distant Din that World can keep
Rolls over my Grotto, and but sooths my Sleep.

Chiefs, out of War, and Statesmen, out of Place.
There St. John mingles with my friendly Bowl,
The Feast of Reason and the Flow of Soul:
And He, whose Lightning pierced the Iberian Lines,
Now, forms my Quincunx, and now ranks my Vines,
Or tames the Genius of the stubborn Plain,
Almost as quickly, as he conquered Spain.
Envy must own, I live among the Great,
No Pimp of Pleasure, and no Spy of State,
With Eyes that pry not, Tongue that never repeats,
Fond to spread Friendships, but to cover Heats,
To help who want, to forward who excel;
This, all who know me, know; who love me, tell;
And who unknown defame me, let them be
Scriblers or Peers, alike are Mob to me.
This is my Plea, on this I rest my Cause --


L.
Laws are explained by Men -- so have a care.
It stands on record, that in ancient Times
A Man was hanged for very honest Rhymes.
quart. I think it is,
Edwardi Sext. or prim. and quint. Eliz:
See Libels, Satires -- there you have it -- read.

P. Libels and Satires! lawless Things indeed!
But grave Epistles, bringing Vice to light,
Such as a King might read, a Bishop write,
Such as Sir Robert would approve --

L. Indeed?
The Case is altered -- you may then proceed.

My Lords the Judges laugh, and you're dismissed.

FINIS.

