THE SECOND SATIRE OF THE SECOND BOOK OF HORACE PRAPRHASED.

By the Author of the FIRST.

LONDON: Printed by J. Wright for LAWTON GILLIVER at Homer's Head against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, M.DCC.XXXV. Price 1 s.

THE SECOND SATIRE OF THE SECOND BOOK OF HORACE PARAPHRASED.

SATIRE II.da.

(Nec meus hic Sermo, sed quem praecepit Ofellus
Rusticus, sapiens, crassaueq Minerva)
Discite mensasque nitenteis,
Cum stupet insanis acies fulgoribus, and cum
Acclinis falsis animus meliora recusat;
impransi mecum disquirite. Cur hoc?
Dicam si potero --
--
Cum labor extuderit fastidia, siccus, inanis,
Sperne cibum vilem. --
Defendens pisces hyemat mare: cum sale panis
Latrantem stomachum been leniet: unde? putas, aut
Quo partum? Non in caro nidore voluptas
Summa, sed in teipso est ***
pavone, velis quin
Hoc potius quam gallina, tergere palatum --
Tanquam ad rem attineat quidquam. Number vesceris ista
Quam laudas, pluma? -- trilibrem
Mullum, in singula quem minuas pulmenta necesse est.
Ducit te species video. Quo pertinet ergo
Proceros odisse lupos? quia scilicet illis
Majorem natura modum dedit, his breve pondus.

Vellem (ait Harpyiis gula digna rapacibus) at vos
Praesentes Austri! coquite horum opsonia: Quamvis
Putet aper, rhombusque recens, mala copia quando
Aegrum sollicitat stomachum, cum rapula plenus
Atque acidas mavult inulus, omnis abacta
Pauperies epulis regum: nam vilibus ovis
Nigrisque est oleis hodie locus. --
ciconia nido,
Donec vos auctor docuit Pretorius.
Siquis nunc mergos suaves edixerit assos,
Parebit pravi docilis Romana Juventus.

Judice: nam frustra vitium vitaveris istud,
Si te alio pravum detorseris. Avidienus
Canis ex vero ductum cognomen adhaeret)
Quinquennes oleas est, and sylvestria corna.
mutatum parcit defundere vinum, and
Cujus odorem olei nequeas perferre (licebit
Ille repotia, natales, aliosque dierum
Festus albatus celebret) cornu ipse bilibri
Caulibus instillat;
Quali igitur victu sapiens utetur, and horum
Utrum imitabitur? hac urget lupus, hac canis, aiunt.

In neutram partem cultus miser. servis
Albuti senis exemplo, dum munia didit,
Saevus erit: nec sic ut simplex unctam
Convivis praebebit aquam: vitium hoc quoque magnum.

Afferat.
Ut noceant homini credas, memor illius escae
Quae simplex olim tibi sederat; at simul assis
Miscueris elixa, simul conchylia turdis,
Dulcia se in bilem vertunt, stomachoque tumultum
Lenta feret pituita.
Caena desurgat dubia? quin corpus onustum
Hesternis vitiis, animum quoque praegravat una,
Atque affigit humo divinae particulam aurae.

Membra dedit, vegetus praescripta ad munia surgit.

Sive diem festum rediens advexerit annus,
Seu recreare volet tenuatum corpus: ubique
Accedent anni, and tractari mollius aetas
Imbecilla volet.
Quam puer and validus prae-sumis mollitiem, seu
Dura valetudo inciderit, seu tarda senectus?
Rancidum aprum antiqui laudabant, non quia nasus
Illis nullus erat, sed (credo) hac mente, quod hospes
Tardius adveniens, vitiatum commodius, quam
Integrum edax dominus consumeret.
Heroas natum tellus me prima tulisset!
Famae? (quae carmine gratior aurem
Occupat humanam.) Grandes rhombi, patinaeque
Grande ferent una damno dedecus. Add

Et frustra mortis cupidum, cum deerit egenti
laquei pretium. --
--
Jurgatur verbis; ego vectigalia magna
Divitiasque habeo tribus amplas regibus.
Quod superat, non est melius quo insumere possis?
Cur eget indignus quisquam te divite? quare
Templa ruunt antiqua Deum? cur improbe! carae
Non aliquid patriae tanto emetiris acervo?
Uni nimirum tibi recte semper erunt res?


Pluribus assuerit mentem corpusque superbum?
An qui contentus parvo, metuensque futuri,
In pace, ut sapiens, aptarit idonea bello?
Ofellum
Integris opibus novi non latius usum,
Quam nunc accisis. Videas, metato in agello,
Non ego, narrantem, temere edi luce profesta
Quidquam praeter olus, fumosae cum pede pernae.
At mihi cum longum post tempus venerit hospes,
Sive operum vacuo, etc. -- been erit, non piscibus urbe petitis,
Sed pullo atque haedo; tum --
-- secundas
Et nux ornabit mensas, cum duplice ficu.
Posthac ludus erit
Ac venerata Ceres, ut culmo surgeret alto,
Explicuit vino contractae seria frontis.
Saeviat atque novas moveat Fortuna tumultus!
Quantum hinc imminuit? quanto aut ego parcius, aut vos
O pueri nituistis, ut huc novus Incola venit?
propriae telluris herum natura neque illum
Nec me, aut quemquam statuit; nos expulit ille,
Illum aut Nequities, aut vafri inscitia juris,
Postremo expellit certe vivacior haeres,
Nunc ager Umbreni sub nomine, nuper Ofelli
Dictus, erit nulli proprius, sed cedet in usum
Nunc mihi, nunc alii.
Fortiaque adversis opponite pectora rebus.
SATIRE II.

To live on little with a cheerful heart,

Lets talk, my friends, but talk

'Turns you from sound Philosophy aside;
Not when from Plate to Plate your eyeballs roll,
And the brain dances to the mantling bowl.
Hear Bethel's Sermon, one not versed in schools,


Then scorn a homely dinner if you can.

Or kept from fish, (the River yet un-thaw'd)
If then plain bread and milk will do the feat,
The pleasure lies in you, not in the meat.

Will choose a Pheasant still before a Hen;
Yet Hens of Guinea full as good I hold,
Except you eat the feathers green and gold.

(Though cut in pieces ever my Lord can eat)
Yet for small Turbots such esteem profess?
Because God made these large, the other less.

Cries, "send me, Gods! a whole Hog A West-Indian Term of Gluttony, a Hog
roasted whole, stuffed with Spice, and basted with Madera Wine.
barbecu'd!"
Oh blast it,
Rank as the ripeness of a Rabbit's tail.
By what Criterion do ye eat, do you think,
If this is prized for sweetness, that for stink?
When the tired Glutton labors through a Treat,
He Will find no relish in the sweetest Meat,
He calls for something bitter, something sour,
And the rich feast concludes extremely poor:

Thus much is left of old Simplicity!
Robin-red-breast till of late had rest,
And children sacred held a Martin's nest,
Till Becca-ficos sold so devilish dear,
To one that was, or would have been a Peer.
Cat on Oysters fed,
I Will have a Party at the Bedford Head,
Or even to crack live Crawfish recommend,
I Would never doubt at Court to make a friend.

About one vice, and fall into the other:
Between Excess and Famine lies a mean,
Plain, but not sordid, though not splendid, clean.
Avidien or his Wife (no matter which,
For him you will call a
Sell their presented Partridges, and Fruits,
And humbly live on rabbits and on roots:

And is at once their vinegar and wine.
But on some
A lost Bank-bill, or heard their Son was drowned)
At such a feast,
Is what two souls so generous cannot bear,
Oil, though it stink, they drop by drop impart,
But sowse the Cabbage with a bounteous heart.

And neither leans on this side, or on that:
Nor
Swears, like Albutius, a good Cook away;
Nor lets, like
The musty wine, foul cloth, or greasy glass,

(Thus said our Friend, and what he said I sing)
First Health:
A Tomb of boiled, and roast, and flesh, and fish,
When Bile, and wind, and phlegm, and acid jar,
And all the Man is one intestine war)
Remembers often
The temperate fleeps, and spirits light as air.

Rise from a Clergy, or a City, feast!
What life in all that ample Body, say,
What heavenly Particle inspires the clay?
The Soul subsides, and wickedly inclines
To seem but mortal, even in sound Divines.

That leaves the load of yesterday behind?
How easy every labor it pursues?
How coming to the Poet every Muse?

Or tired in search of Truth, or search of Rhyme;
Ill Health some just indulgence may engage,
And more, the Sickness of long Life, Old Age;

If our intemp'rate Youth the Vessel drains?

Perhaps, young men! our Fathers had no nose?
Not so: a Buck was then a week's repast,
And 'twas their point, I ween, to make it last:
Better to keep it till their friends could come,
Than eat the sweetest by themselves at home.

E're Coxcomb-pyes or Coxcombs were on earth?
Unworthy He, the voice of Fame to hear,
(
For 'faith Lord Fanny! you are in the wrong,
The World's good word is better than a Song)
Who has not learned,
Are no rewards for Want, and Infamy!
When Luxury has licked up all thy pelf,
Cursed by thy
To friends, to fortune, to mankind a shame,
Think how Posterity will treat thy name;
And
Thou have at least bestowed one penny well.

"To have a Taste, is Insolence indeed:
"In me it is noble, suits my birth and state,
"My wealth unwieldy, and my heap too great."
Then, like the Sun, let
And shine that Superfluity away.
Oh Impudence of wealth! with all thy store,
How dare thou let one worthy man be poor?
Shall half the
Make Keys, build Bridges, or repair White Hall:
Or to thy Country let that heap be lent,
As M ** o's was, but not at five per Cent.

Prepares a dreadful Jest for all mankind!
And
That spreads and swells in puffed Prosperity,
Or blessed with little, whose preventing care
In Peace provides fit arms against a War?

And always thinks the very thing he ought:
His equal mind I copy what I can,
And as I love, would imitate the Man.
In South Sea days not happier, when surmis'd
The Lord of thousands, than even now Excis'd;
In Forests planted by a Father's hand,
Than in five acres now of rented land.
Content with little, I can piddle here
On
But
That touch my Bell, I cannot turn away.
It Is true, no
But gudgeons, flounders, what my Thames affords:
To Hounslow-heath I point, and Bansted-down,
Thence comes your mutton, and these chicks my own:

And grapes, long-lingring on my only wall,
And figs, from standard and Espalier join:
The devilish is in you if you cannot dine.
Then
And, what is more rare, a Poet shall say Grace.
Fortune not much of humbling me can boast;
Though double-tax'd, how little have I lost?
My Life's amusements have been just the same,
Before, and after
My lands are sold, my Father's house is gone;
I Will hire another's: is not that my own,
And yours, my friends? through whose free-opening gate
None comes too early, none departs too late;
(For I, who hold sage Homer's rule the best,
Welcome the coming, speed the going guest.)
"Pray heaven it last! (cries Swift) as you go on;
"I wish to God this house had been your own:
"Pity! to build, without a son or wife:
"Why, you will enjoy it only all your life." --
Well, if the Use be mine, can it concern one,
Whether the Name belong to Pope or Vernon?
What Is Property? dear Swift! you see it alter
From you to me, from me to
Or, in a mortgage, prove the Lawyer's share,
Or, in a jointure, vanish from the Heir,
Or in pure
The Chanc'ry takes your rents for twenty year:
At best, it falls to some
That cries, my father's damned, and all is my own.

Are now the portion of a booby Lord;
And Hemsley, once proud Villers Duke of Buckingham.
Buckingham's delight,
Slides to a Scriv'ner or a City Knight.

Let Us be fixed, and our own Masters still

