PAINE's THOUGHTS ON THE PEACE, etc.

[Price Sixpence.]

THOUGHTS ON THE PEACE, AND THE PROBABLE ADVANTAGES THEREOF TO THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.

By THOMAS PAIN, M. A. Of the University of PENNSYLVANIA, and Author of the
Pamphlet entitled, "COMMON SENSE," and of A LETTER addressed to the Abbe RAYNAL
on the AFFAIRS of NORTH AMERICA, etc. as also of A LETTER to the EARL of
SHELBURNE, on his SPEECH respecting the ACKNOWLEDGMENT of AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

PHILADELPHIA PRINTED: LONDON REPRINTED. For J. STOCKDALE, in Piccadilly.
MDCCLXXXIII.

THOUGHTS, etc.
"THE times that tried men's souls "These are the times that try men's souls."
Crisis, No. 1, published December 19, 1776.
" are over -- and the greatest and compleatest Revolution the world ever knew,
is gloriously and happily accomplished.

BUT to pass from the extremes of danger to safety -- from the tumult of war to
the tranquillity of peace, though sweet in contemplation, requires a gradual
composure of the senses to receive it. Even calmness has the power of stunning
when it opens too instantly upon us. The long and raging hurricane that should
cease in a moment, would leave us in a state rather of wonder than enjoyment;
and some moments of recollection must pass before we could be capable of
tasting the full felicity of repose. There are but few instances in which the
mind is fitted for sudden transitions: it takes in its pleasures by reflection
and comparison, and those must have time to act, before the relish for new
scenes is complete.

IN the present case -- the mighty magnitude of the object -- the various
uncertainties of fate it has undergone -- the numerous and complicated dangers
we have suffered or escaped -- the eminence we now stand on, and the vast
prospect before us, must all conspire to impress us with contemplation.

To see it in our power to make a world happy -- to teach mankind the art of
being so -- to exhibit on the theater of the universe a character hitherto
unknown -- and to have, as it were, a new creation entrusted to our hands, are
honors that command reflection, and can neither be too highly estimated, nor
too gratefully received.

IN this pause then of recollection -- while the storm is ceasing, and the
long-agitated mind vibrating to a rest, let us look back on the scenes we have
passed, and learn from experience what is yet to be done.

NEVER, I say, had a country so many openings to happiness as this. Her setting
out into life, like the rising of a fair morning, was unclouded and promising.
Her cause was good; her principles just and liberal; her temper serene and
firm; her conduct regulated by the nicest steps of order; and every thing about
her wore the mark of honor.

IT is not every country (perhaps there is not another in the world) that can
boast so fair an origin. Even the first settlement of America corresponds with
the character of the Revolution. Rome, once the proud mistress of the universe,
was originally a band of ruffians. Plunder and rapine made her rich, and her
oppression of millions made her great. But America needs never be ashamed to
tell her birth, nor relate the stages by which she rose to empire.

THE remembrance, then, of what is past, if it operates rightly, must inspire
her with the most laudable of all ambition, that of adding to the fair fame she
began with. The world has seen her great in adversity; struggling, without a
thought of yielding, beneath accumulated difficulties; bravely, nay proudly,
encountering distress, and rising in resolution as the storm increased. All
this is justly due to her, for her fortitude has merited the character. Let,
then, the world see that she can bear prosperity; and that her honest virtue in
time of peace, is equal to the bravest virtue in time of war.

SHE is now descending to the scenes of quiet and domestic life; not beneath
the cypress shade of disappointment, but to enjoy in her own land, and under
her own vine, the sweets of her labors, and the reward of her toil. In this
situation, may she never forget, that a fair national reputation is of as much
importance as independence: that it possesses a charm which wins upon the
world, and makes even enemies civil: that it gives a dignity which is often
superior to power, and commands a reverence where pomp and splendour fail.

IT would be a circumstance ever to be lamented, and never to be forgotten,
were a single blot, from any cause whatever, suffered to fall on a Revolution,
which to the end of time must be an honor to the age that accomplished it; and
which has contributed more to enlighten the world, and diffuse a spirit of
freedom and liberality among mankind, than any human event (if this can be
called one) that never preceded it.

IT is not among the least of the calamities of a long-continued war, that it
unhinges the mind from those nice sensations which at other times appear so
amiable. The continual spectacle of woe blunts the finer feelings, and the
necessity of bearing with the sight renders it familiar. In like manner are
many of the moral obligations of society weakened, till the custom of acting by
necessity, becomes an apology where it is truly a crime. Yet let but a nation
conceive rightly of its character, and it will be chastely just in protecting
it. None ever began with a fairer than America, and none can be under a greater
obligation to preserve it.

THE Debt which America has contracted, compared with the Cause she has gained,
and the advantages to flow from it, ought scarcely to be mentioned. She has it
in her choice to do, and to live, as happily as she pleases. The world is in
her hands. She has now no Foreign Power to monopolize her Commerce, perplex her
Legislation, or control her Prosperity. The struggle is over which must one
day have happened, and, perhaps, never could have have happened at a better
time That the Revolution began at the exact period of time best fitted to the
purpose is sufficiently proved by the event. -- But the great hinge on which
the whole machine turned is the Union of the States; and this Union was
naturally produced by the inability of any one State to support itself against
a foreign enemy without the assistance of the rest. Had the States severally
been less able than they were when the war began, their united strength would
not have been equal to the undertaking, and they must, in all human
probability, have failed. -- And on the other hand, had they severally been
more able, they might not have seen, or, what is more, might not have felt the
necessity of uniting; and either by attempting to stand alone, or in small
confederacies, would have been separately conquered.

Now, as we cannot see a time (and many years must pass away before it can
arrive) when the strength of any one State, or of several united, can be equal
to the whole of the present United States; and as we have seen the extreme
difficulty of collectively prosecuting the war to a successful issue, and
preserving our national importance in the world; therefore, from the experience
we have had, and the knowledge we have gained, we must, unless we make a waste
of wisdom, be strongly impressed with the advantage, as well as the necessity,
of strengthening that happy Union which has been our salvation, and without
which we should have been a ruined people.

While I was writing this note, I cast my eye on the pamphlet Common Sense,
from which I shall make an extract, as it applies exactly to the case. It is as
follows:

I have never met with a man, either in England or America, who has not
confessed his opinion, that a separation between the countries would take place
one time or other: and there is no instance in which we have shown less
judgment than endeavoring to describe, what we call, the ripeness or fitness
of the Continent for Independence.

As all men allow the measure, and differ only in their opinion of the time,
let us, in order to remove mistakes, take a general survey of things, and
endeavor, if possible, to find out the very time. But we need not go far; the
enquiry ceases at once, for the time has found us. The general concurrence,
the glorious Union of all things prove the fact.

It is not in numbers, but in an Union, that our great strength lies. The
Continent is just arrived at that pitch of strength, in which no single Colony
is able to support itself, and the whole, when united, can accomplish the
matter: and either more or less than this, might be fatal in its effects.

Pamphlet Common Sense.
; and instead of a domineering Master, she has gained an Ally, whose exemplary
greatness, and universal liberality, have extorted a confession even from her
enemies.

WITH the blessings of Peace, Independence, and an universal Commerce, the
States, individually and collectively, will have leisure and opportunity to
regulate and establish their domestic concerns, and to put it beyond the power
of calumny to throw the least reflection on their honor. Character is much
easier kept than recovered; and that man, if any such there be, who, from any
sinister views, or littleness of soul, lends unseen his hand to injure it,
contrives a wound it will never be in his power to heal.

As we have established an Inheritance for Posterity, let that Inheritance
descend with every mark of an honorable conveyance. The little it will cost,
compared with the worth of the States, the greatness of the object, and the
value of national character, will be a profitable exchange.

BUT that which must more forcibly strike a thoughtful penetrating mind, and
which includes and renders easy all inferior concerns, is the Union of the
States. On this our great national character depends. It is this which must
give us importance abroad and security at home. It is through this only that we
are, or can be nationally known in the world. It is the flag of the United
States which renders our ships and commerce safe on the seas, or in a foreign
port. Our Mediterranean passes must be obtained under the same style. All our
treaties, whether of alliance, peace, or commerce, are formed under the
Sovereignty of the United States, and Europe knows us by no other name or title.

THE division of the Empire into States is for our own convenience, but abroad
this distinction ceases. The affairs of each State are local. They can go no
farther than to itself; and were the whole worth of even the richest of them
expended in revenue, it would not be sufficient to support Sovereignty against
a foreign attack. In short, we have no other national sovereignty than as
United States. It would even be fatal for us if we had -- too expensive to be
maintained, and impossible to be supported. Individuals or individual States
may call themselves what they please; but the world, and especially the world
of enemies, is not to be held in a awe by the whistling of a name. Sovereignty
must have power to protect all the parts which compose and constitute it: and
as United States we are equal to the importance of the title, but otherwise we
are not. Our Union, well and wisely regulated and cemented, is the cheapest way
of being great -- the easiest way of being powerful -- and the happiest
invention in government which the circumstances of America can admit of;
because it collects from each State, that which, by being inadequate, can be of
no use to it, and forms an aggregate that serves for all.

THE States of Holland are an unfortunate instance of the effects of individual
sovereignty. Their disjointed condition exposes them to numerous intrigues,
losses, calamities, and enemies, and the almost impossibility of bringing their
measures to a decision; and that decision into execution, is to them, and would
be to us, a source of endless misfortune.

IT is with confederate States as with individuals in society: something must
be yielded up to make the whole secure. In this view of things we gain by what
we give, and draw an annual interest greater than the capital. I ever feel
myself hurt when I hear the Union, that great palladium of our liberty and
safety, the least irreverently spoken of. It is the most sacred thing in the
constitution of America, and that which every man should be the most proud and
tender of. Our citizenship in the United States is our national character: our
citizenship in any particular State is only our local distinction. By the
latter we are known at home; by the former to the world. Our great title is
Americans; our inferior one varies with the place.

So far as my endeavors could go, they have all been directed to conciliate
the affections, unite the interests, and draw and keep the mind of the country
together; and the better to assist in this foundation-work of the Revolution, I
have avoided all places of profit or office, either in the State I live in or
in the United States; kept myself at a distance from all parties and party
connections, and even disregarded all private and inferior concerns: and when
we take into view the great work we have gone through, and feel, as we ought to
feel, the just importance of it, we shall then see, that the little wranglings
and indecent contentions of personal party, are as dishonorable to our
characters, as they are injurious to our repose.

It was the cause of America that made me an author. The force with which it
struck my mind, and the dangerous condition the country appeared to me in, by
courting an impossible and unnatural reconciliation with those who were
determined to reduce her, instead of striking out into the only line that could
cement and save her, A Declaration of Independence -- made it impossible for
me, feeling as I did, to be silent: and if, in the course of more than seven
years, I have rendered her any service, I have likewise added something to the
reputation of literature, by freely and disinterestedly employing it in the
great cause of mankind, and showing there may be genius without prostitution.

INDEPENDENCE always appeared to me practicable and probable, provided the
sentiment of the country could be formed and held to the object: and there is
no instance in the world, where a people so extended, and wedded to former
habits of thinking, and under such a variety of circumstances, were so
instantly and effectually pervaded, by a turn in politics, as in the case of
Independence, and who supported their opinion, undiminished, through such a
succession of good and ill fortune, till they crowned it with success.

BUT as the scenes of war are closed, and every man preparing for home and
happier times, I therefore take my leave of the subject. I have most sincerely
followed it from beginning to end, and through all its turns and windings: and
whatever country I may hereafter be in, I shall always feel an honest pride at
the part I have taken and acted, and a gratitude to Nature and Providence for
putting it in my power to be of some use to mankind.

Philadelphia, April 19, 1783.
FINIS.
NEW BOOKS printed for J. STOCKDALE.
Corrected to May 6, 1783,

STOCKDALE's NEW COMPANION to the LONDON CALENDAR, and COURT and CITY REGISTER,
for the Year 1783; being a List of all the CHANGES in ADMINISTRATION, from the
Accession of the present King, in October 1760, to the present Time. To which
is prefixed, a List of the late and present HOUSE of COMMONS, showing the
Changes made in the Members of Parliament by the General Election in September
1780, with the Names of the Candidates where the Elections were contested, the
Numbers polled, and the Decisions since made by the Select Committees. Also the
Dates when each City and Borough first sent Representatives to Parliament, the
Right of Election in each Place, and the supposed Number of Voters. To which is
added, a complete INDEX of NAMES. Price 1 s.

* Be careful to ask for STOCKDALE'S NEW COMPANION, which may be had separate,
or bound with the London Calendar.

Corrected to May 6, 1783,

THE LONDON CALENDAR, or COURT and CITY REGISTER, for 1783; including all the
new Peers lately created; new Members; Alterations in all the different
Departments under Government, in Great Britain, Ireland, and America; with a
complete List of the Sovereigns of Europe; the Presidents of the Congress, from
1774; Presidents and Governors of the American States; and a Number of other
new Lists; not to be found in any other Publication. Containing complete Lists
of British and Irish Houses of Parliament; Establishments of England, Scotland,
Ireland, America, etc. correct Lists of the Peeresses, Baronets, Universities,
Seminaries, Hospitals, Charities, Governors, Public Offices; Army, Navy,
Collectors at the different Ports, etc.

This London Calendar is upon a Plan much more extensive and useful than any
other Book of the Kind yet published. Price 2 s.

* Be careful to ask for THE LONDON CALENDAR, printed for J. STOCKDALE, etc.
which may be had bound in the three following different Ways.

I. With The New Companion to the London Calendar; II. With the Arms of all the
Peers of England, Scotland, and Ireland; III. With Rider's Sheet Almanac or
Book Almanac.
A DIALOGUE ON THE ACTUAL STATE OF PARLIAMENT. Price 1 s.

The Propriety of Retaining GIBRALTAR, impartially considered. Price 1 s.

NEW PAMPHLETS printed for J. STOCKDALE. A LETTER TO THE EARL of SHELBURNE, ON
HIS SPEECH, JULY 10, 1782, RESPECTING THE ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE.

By THOMAS PAIN, M.A.

Of the University of PENNSYLVANIA, and Author of the Pamphlet entitled,
"COMMON SENSE;" and of "A LETTER addressed to the Abbe RAYNAL on the Affairs of
North America," etc. Price 1 s.

A LETTER addressed to the Abbe RAYNAL on the Affairs of North America. In
which the Mistakes in the Abbe's Account of the Revolution of America are
corrected and cleared up. BY THOMAS PAIN. M. A. of the University of
Pennsylvania, and Author of the Pamphlet, and other Publications, entitled,
"Common Sense." 3d Edition, Price 1s. 6 d.

Be careful to ask for that printed for STOCKDALE.

The CONSTITUTIONS of the several INDEPENDENT STATES of AMERICA; the
Declaration of Independence; and the Articles of Confederation between the said
States. To which are now added, the Declaration of Rights; the Non-Importation
Agreement; and the Petition of Congress to the King delivered by Mr. PENN.

WITH AN

APPENDIX, containing the Treaties between his Most Christian Majesty and the
United States of America; and (never before published) an Authentic Copy of the
Treaty concluded between their High Mightinesses the States General and the
United States of America. The whole arranged, with a PREFAC^ and DEDICATION, by
the Rev. WILLIAM JACKSON. Nearly printed in One Large Volume in Octavo. Price
6s. in Boards.

REFLECTIONS upon the Present State of England, and the Independence of
America. By THOMAS DAY, Esquire With Additions, Price 2s. 6 d.


