A LETTER TO Mr. ROW Concerning the NON-JUROR.

(Price Sixpence.)

A CLUE To the COMEDY of the Non-Juror.

WITH SOME Hints of Consequence Relating to that PLAY.

IN A LETTER TO N. ROW, Esquire Poet Laureat to His Majesty.

Quo Musa tendis? desine pervicax
Refer Sermones Deorum --
Hor. LONDON: Printed for E. Curll, in Fleet Street. 1718.

A CLUE to the COMEDY OF THE NON-JUROR, With some Hints of Consequence relating
to that PLAY.
Dear Mr. Row,
I Entirely agree with you, That there has not of late appeared in Public, a
more exquisite Piece of Satire, than the Comedy called the Non-juror; or that
better deserved the Distinction that was shown it, not only by your Self, as
His Majesty's Laureat, but by all the Loyal Party in general. I also agree with
you, that perhaps there never was a Piece of fine Drama-Theological Satire, the
true Scope of which has been less understood. I am at a Loss which to admire
most, the noble, free Spirit of our Friend the Author; the insensibility of
those whom the Satire is really Aimed at, or the ignorant Rage of those
dissaffected Jacobite Wretches who cry out when they are not hurt. You were
pleased to desire me, when we met last, to put upon Paper the few Hints I dropped
to you in Conversation upon this Subject, and which, I doubt not, are
sufficient to make any unprejudiced Re^ader of your and my Opinion; namely,

That Dissaffection to the Government is the smallest Immorality which is
pointed at by this Play; and which indeed is only introduced to hide a far
deeper Design, and far more useful Satire.

In order to set this in it is true Light, I will but barely point at the
several Figures of the Comedy, and make some short Remarks upon their
Attitudes, without the Ill-manners of naming any particular Person, but leaving
the free and impartial Reader to draw his own Inferences. Two general
Observations only, are necessary to be premised, because every common Judge is
not so sensible of them, as we who have been Writers all our Lives.

The First is, That when we Rebuke our Superiors, the Fable ought to be so
coucn'd, as to make the Criminal give Judgment against himself before he is
aware: (an Art as ancient at least as the Days of Nathan) But if the Scene of
Action be laid in a Subject not only quite foreign, but seemingly opposite to
the principal Aim of the Satire, the Address will be still the more refined;
because by this Method the Author introduces Facts and Personages which the
guilty will be sure to Condemn; not only from natural Equity, but natural
Aversion. Thus, for Example, To engage a Tory to condemn a Piece of Iniquity in
the Abstract, one need only lay the Scene among Whigs, and so on the contrary.
And Secondly, I would put the Reader in mind that in Fables of this Nature, it
is usual to represent whole Parties of Men by single Personages.

This premised, let us observe the principal Figure thar presents it self to
our View; I mean Dr. Wolf; whose Character answers to Moliere's Tartuffe, who
is known to have represented a certain puritanical Bishop in France.

We next are to take Notice, That Wolf in the Style of Ecclesiastical Allegory
constantly signifies the Presbyterian Party: You know it is thus in the Hind
and Panther, and most other Pieces of Controversial Divinity or Poetry. So Dr.
Wolf is a Presbyterian.

Dr. Wolf expects for his Services in Betraying the Church, great
Ecclesiastical Preferment, (as Sir John expresses it) Nonjuror, page 18.
an Office for Life, which, on whatsoever Pretense of Misbehaviour, no Civil
Government can deprive him of. This is Ironically represented afterward by the Sea of Thetford. So, in short, Dr. Wolf is a Bishop.

This Presbyterian Bishop has wrote something about the Case of Schism; and the
Colonel tells his Father, That he page 3.
has read enough of him in the Daily Courant. What Bishop has published in the
Daily Courant, is lippis et tonsoribus notum.

This Bishop protests great Zeal for the Church, at the same Time that he is
betraying it: On which the Colonel tells Sir John, Though page 3.
I have always honored your Concern for the Church, I little thought it was
for a Church that is Established no where. (i. e.) No visible Church.

This Bishop is marked with another strong Characteristick, managing a Dispute
with Heartly about the Nature of Prayer. That it ought not to be Tedious; page
13.
outward Expression not so absolutely necessary, since Heaven knew the true
Intention of the Heart. page 12.
And then he talks of his own Manual of Devotions.

This Bishop also pretends a mighty Regard to tender Consciences. He tell's
Heartly, That we page 13.
ought to allure them to what is Good by the gentlest, easiest Means we can,
nor give the least color of Offense to tender Consciences.

The Colonel here urges the Constitution against him, and the force of the
Laws; and desires him to explain himself; to which this Bishop Answers page 13
Sir, I shall not explain my Self: But make your best of what I Have said -- But
Power perhaps may change it is Hands, and you e're long as little dare to speak
your mind, as I do; viz. That there may come a Time when this Constitution you
talk so much of, may be overturned.

Sir John is fully satisfied that the Doctor is all this while a page 18.
true stanch Member of the English Catholic Church; mark, that is, such a
Church as comprehends all Sects and Parties whatsoever.

But lest these Lines should not be strong enough, the Author gives the
finishing Stroke.

This Bishop is at last discovered to be a Jesuit in Disguise, By whom? By one
of his Schoolboys in whom he had distilled. some of his Jesuitical Principles
And most remarkable it is what the Colonel says on this Occasion. That page 47.
Charles begs he will not insist upon the Discovery, 'till his Circumstances
will allow it: Almost in the very Style of some Letters that passed, upon a
parallel Occasion, between a Master of a School, and a Reverend Doctor.

At last Substantial Affadavits are produced, to prove Dr. Wolf to have been
Educated a Jesuit; by which (as it is usual in Allegorical Writers) the close
Conjunction of a Reverend Prelate and a certain Jesuit, is most injuriously and
scandalously insinuated.

So here is a Prelate and a Jesuit and his Gang, got into the Family of Sir
John! Let us next see what they are to do there. Why, they contrive the Ruin of
his Family, and the disinheriting and expulsion of his Children with so great
an Assurance of Success, that the Doctor talks of Sir John in this manner: page
68.
Poor Man! he knows not his own Weakness; he is molded into any Shape, if you
but gently stroke his Humor. I intend to Morrow, to persuade him it is for the
Interest of our Cause it should be so; and then I have him sure. Poor Sir John
indeed!

I must here put you in mind of my second Observation, that by the single
Person of Dr. Wolf, without any forced Construction, may be understood a whole
Set or Party of Men. To proceed then,

The Play Opens with a Dispute between Sir John and his Daughter, about the
Formality of Christening, and Sir John is at it again, (page 63) being extremely
rejoiced that Heartly is Christ'ned according to the Right Form. There is also
mention made of Searching the Register, etc.

Next we see Dr. Wolf insulting Sir John' s Son and Daughter; he breaks into
the Daughter's Bedchamber before she is quite Up; and when she resents it, he
tell's her page 15.
Compose your Transport, Madam: I came by your Father's Desire; for what I have
done, Madam, I had your Father's Authority, and shall leave him to answer you.
The Daughter replies, Ibid.
It is false, he gave you no Authority to insult me: What is it you presume
upon? your Function! does that exempt you from the Manners of a Gentleman?

At last his foul Behavior provokes the Son to that degree, that he call's him
page 14.
Villain, and Rascal.

Sir John is nettled at this; he tells his Son and Daughter, page 44.
I see your Aim: Your Malice on your own vile Head: To me it but the more
endears him: Either submit and ask his Pardon for this Wrong, -- or this
Instant leave my Sight, my House, my Family for ever.

The Son answers, page 45.
Though I would hazard Life to save you from the Ruin he misleads you to, could
Die to Reconcile my Duty to your Favor; yet on the Terms that Villain offers,
it is Merit to refuse it. I Glory in the Disgrace your Errors give me.

In short, Sir John's Attachment to Dr. Wolf was so great, that there appeared
but small Hopes of ever opening Sir John's Eyes: And remarkable is the
Lamentation of the Son upon that Occasion; page 16.
What horrid Hands is this poor Family fallen into? How little is my Father
like himself, by Nature Open, Just, and Generous? but this vile Hypocrite
drives his weak Passions like the Wind; and I foresee, at last, will dash him
on his Ruin.

When Dr. Wolf had wrought up the Passion of Sir John to this degree, as to
turn his Children out of Doors; then he interposeth his good Offices, and
proposes a Reconciliation.

I beg the Reader to observe the Terms of it. That his Child should be at the
sole Disposal of Dr. Wolf, and do nothing without his Consent.

It must here be observed that the Daughter had a Fortune of her own,
independent on the Father, upon which she seems to value her Self. page 5.
Have not I 5000l. in my own hands? have not I had the full Swing of my own
Airs and humors these four years? Mark the precise time But she is put in mind
by the Son, that though the Father could not deprive her of her Fortune, he might
abridge her Equipage; in these words Ibid.
however a Father's Consent might have clapped a pair of horses more to your
Coach.

But at last he applauds her resolution, and tells her she speaks with the
Spirit of a freeborn Englishman.

Mark now the modesty of Dr. Wolf; he proposes, as the Lowest and last
condition, that she should resign the half of this independent fortune page 54.
Is not two thousand pounds worth two Thousand pounds? Is not half better than
nothing?

Observe next, (good Mr. Row) how Dr. Wolf endeavors to debauch Lady
Woodvill, and make her Subservient to his Villainous designs: This Lady is
described as having a great Ascendant over Sir John's Spirit that She keeps no
Assemblys; that she had been Poor and Beautiful, while Sir John was Rich and
Amourous. This Lady proves honest and trusty; and contributes, in the
conclusion, to the discovery of the wicked purposes of Dr. Wolf.

Pray take notice too of a very odd Episode that seem to contribute very little
to the main Action. That is Dr. Wolf's endeavoring to Bring Sir John into a
Scheme of Church Comprehension; Referring again to his Case of Schism, he tells
Sir John that page 25
differences are not so material as some would represent them. Ah! could we be
brought to a Temper, a great many seeming Contradictions might be reconciled. I
allow this is a Comprehension of a different kind; but I beg leave to remind
you and my Readers of my first observation, that the Circumstances of a Fable
do not determine the Satire. But you, Sir, who are intimate with Mr. Cibber may
examine and know the Truth of this.

Nothing is so plain as the Catastrophe; when Dr. Wolf thought himself sure of
his Blow, and had brought Sir John to believe that his page 24.
hot brained Son (as he calls him) had a Design to get his Estate; he instantly
makes Sir John resolve to repay it in kind by disinheriting him.

But at last, there arises a misfortune from a Corner where the Doctor least
suspected it. Some of his own Party, whom he thought inviolably attached to his
interests, discover his wicked purposes. This Set of Men is represented by
Charles an ingenious Gentleman, a Servant of Sir John's, a man of Business, a
good Greek and Latin Scholar etc. This Charles (it seems) highly obliged by the
Generous treatment of the Son and enamored of the good Qualities of the
Daughter, both reveals, and prevents the whole mystery of Iniquity: Upon which
Dr. Wolf seeing his project dissappointed vents his Rage upon this honest
Gentleman; and attempts his Life.

Lastly, Mr. Cibber (to obviate all possibility of mistaking his meaning) upon
the winding up of the whole design, breaks on a sudden into an open discourse
of Politics; talks of embroiling the Nation, and ending Public disputes and
calls upon King George, with abundance more good Morality very well worth
observing.

Thus, Sir, according to your desire, I have given a short Sketch of the Fable
and Characters of this Play; just enough to enable some person of greater
Sagacity to find out who are meant by every particular Personage of the Drama.
I am sure I would not presume so much as to guess.

But one Thing I must observe, which I remember we both took particular notice
of: It is, that the Author though questionless a great master of Style puts bad
English into the mouths of most of his Personages: So that indeed scarce any of
them talk at all like English Folks; but perpetually make use of an uncorrect,
Foreign, Jargon. What his drift is in this I cannot imagine; but the Instances
of it are obvious to every Reader; and numerous in every Page.

I am, Dear Mr. Row, Your, etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
Part of an EPILOGUE, Written by N. Row, Esas;q to a Play called, The Cruel
Gift: Or, The Royal Resentment; a TRAGEDY. Printed for E. Curll. Price 1 s.


THE former Part of this EPILOGUE turns upon the Plot of the Play, the latter
Part is as follows, viz,

How many Worthy Gentlemen of (late,

Swore to be true to Mother Church and State;

When their False Hearts were secretly maintaining

You trim King PEPIN at Avignon Reigning?

Shame on the canting Crew of Soul Insurers,

That Tyburn-Tribe of Speech-Making Non-Jurors.

Who in new fangled Terms, old Truths explaining,

Teach honest Englishmen, damned Double Meaning.

The great Loyalty expressed in these Lines, is so apparent, as not to stand in
need of the least Comment.

The Conclusion of this Epilogue being the Character of an illustrious
PERSONAGE, I re^er the Reader to the Play abovementioned for the Satisfaction
of his Curiosity.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed for E. CURL.
1. THE Resurrection. A Poem. Written by the Right Honorable Mr. Secretary
Addison. Pr. 6 d.

II. Mr. Addison's Travels through Italy. Extracted, with Observations by
Monsieur Le Clerc. Pr. 1 s.

III. The Knowledge of Medals: Or, Instructions for those who apply themselves
to the Study of Medals both Ancient and Modern. With an Essay concerning the
Error in Distributing Modern Medals. By Mr. Addison. Pr. 2 s. 6 d.

IV. The Artful Wife, a new Comedy Pr. 1 s.

V. The Poetical Works of Nicholas Row, Esas;q Pr. 4 s.

VI. Esther Queen of Persia. A Poem in Four Books. By Mr. Henley. Pr. 1 s 6 d.

VII. Boileau's Lutrin: and his Art of Poetry. Adorned with Cuts. Pr. 2 s. 6 d.

VIII. The Poetical Works of the late Earl of Halifax. To which is prefixed his
Lordship's Life, including the History of his Times, and a Character of his
Writings, by Mr. Addison. Pr. 2 s. 6 d.

IX. Letters, Poems, and Tales, Amorous, Satirical and Gallant, which passed
between Dr. Swift, Mrs. Long, the Lady Mary Chambers, Lady Betty Cromwell, Sir
William Wyvil, Col. Codrington, and other Persons of Distinction. Pr. 2 s.

X. Mr. Dennis's Remarks upon Mr. Pope's Translation of Homer. Pr. 1 s. 6 d.

XI. The Confederates. A Farce. By Mr. Joseph Gay. Pr. 1 s.

XII. The Hoop-Petticoat: An Heroi-Comical Poem. By Mr. Joseph Gay, Pr. 1 s.

XIII. The Art of Dress. An Heroi-Comical Poem. Pr. 1 s.

XIV. The Rape of the Smock. An Heroi-Comical Poem.

XV. Mr. Pomsret's Poems Pr. 2 s.

XVI. Mr. Young's Poem on the Last Day. The Third Edition corrected throughout,
and very much improved Adorned with three curious Cuts. 120. Pr. 1 s.

XVII. The History of the Lady Jane Gray. A Poem in two Books. By Mr. Young.
Adorned with Cuts. 8o. Pr. 1 s.

XVIII. Mac-Dermot: Or, The Irish Fortune-Hunter. A Poem in Six Cantos. Pr. 1 s.

XIX. Pope's Miscellany, etc. in Two Parts, Complete. Pr. 1 s.

XX. The Rape of the Bucket: An Heroi Comical Poem 8o. Pr. 1 s. 6 d.

XXI. A Second Collection of Poems. By Matthew Prior, Esas;q 8o. Pr. 1 s.

XXII. Mr. Philip's Poems. Pr. 1 s.

XXIII. Mr. Reynardson's Poems. Pr. 1 s.

XXIV. Mr. Sewell's Poems. Pr. 1 s. 6 d.

Just Published,
Eunuchism displayed. Describing all the different Sorts of Eunuchs; the Esteem
they have met with in the World, and how they came to be made so. Wherein
principally is examined, Whether they are capable of Marriage, and if they
ought to be suffered to enter into that State. The whole confirmed by the
Authority of Civil, Canon, and Common Law, and illustrated with many remarkable
Cases by way of Precedent. Also Comparison between Signi^r Nicolini and the
Three celebrated Eunuchs now at Rome, viz. P^squa^ini, Pau^^c^io, and (...) (or
(...)): With several Observations on Modern Eunuchs. Occasioned by a young
Lady's falling in Love with Nicolini, who sung in the O^^ra at the (...), and
to whom she had like to have been varried. Written by a Person of Honor. Price
3 s.

The Cases of Impotency and Divote, containing I. The late famous Trial at
Paris between the M^^quis de (...) and his Lady, Mademoiselle de Mesiran^y; who
after three Years Marriage commenced a Sui^ against him for Impotency. The
Pleading at large on both sides. The Interrogatories concerning the Co^j^gal
Secrets during their C^habitation, and the Reports of the King's Physicians and
Surgeons appointed to search them. II. That remarkable Trial between the Earl
of ^ssex and (...) Lady Howard, who after eight Years marriage, comm^n^ed a
Suit against (...) for Impotency; The Intrigue between her and the E^rl of
Somerset, who after the Divorce married her. III The Case of John Bury Esquity,
who was divorced for want of Testicles, IV. The Earl of C^stlehav^n's Trial
before his Pee^^, for Sodomy and a Rape V. The whole Proceedings before the
House of Lords, between the Duke of N^rfolk and his Duchess, with a Detection
of the whole Intrigue between her Grace and Sir J^hn German, with the learned
Speeche^s made upon this Oc^asi^n by S. Thomas Powys^ Sir Nathan Wright. Sir
Edward (...) Sir Samurl D^dd, Dr. Oldys Dr. Pi^f^ld, etc. VI (...) of
Northampton's C^se VII The Earl of Macclesfield, Case VIII. The Lord Ross's
C^se. IX.. The Case of the Duchess of Cl^viland, and B^au Fielding, with the
whole Proceedings between them in Doctors Commons, and Sir John Cook's
DefinitIve Sentence at large (...) this remarkable Trial; also, Memoirs of Mr.
Fielding's (...), a Collection of his Love Letters, a full Account of his
(...), for Fifty Years, Characters of his Mistresses, and a true Co^y of his
last Will and Testaments, with h^s ^ffigies when he (...) the prime of his
Beauty, curiously engraven (...). Sir Godfrey (...) Original Painting. X. The
Case of J^h^ D^rmer? Esquire, (...) a Copy of the Declaration against T^m: Jones
his Footman, and the proceedings thereon. XI The case of Sir George Down^ng,
and Mrs. Eorr^fler, who, in Fourteen Years time never consuma^^^ their
Marriage; the Resolution of the Lords on there joins Petition, and a plea,
offered in their Behalf. With many (...) Precedents of the like Nature, all in
Five neat Pocket Volume^ Price 12 ^. 6 d


