PHILANDER.

A DRAMATIC PASTORAL.

By the AUTHOR of the FEMALE QUIXOTE.

LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, in the Strand. MDCCLVIII.

[Price ONE SHILLING.]

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD VISCOUNT CHARLEMONT.
MY LORD,
IT is generally expected that there should be some relation between the
character of the patron and the nature of the work, for which protection is
solicited.

BUT this law, like many others, is broken when it opposes the gratification of
passions too strong for the restraints of regularity. Ambition, which often
overpowers the judgment in questions of more importance, has made me forget the
disproportion between Your Lordship's name, and a Dramatic Pastoral; and I have
ventured to lay before You a composition of little dignity in the design, and
perhaps of little elegance in the execution.

YET for whatever we resolve, we labor to find reasons, till in time we forget
its impropriety; I begin to hope, that by offering to Your Lordship a
performance of an airy and luxuriant kind, which can at best hope only for
excuse, I expose myself less to the imputation of arrogance, than if I had
prefixed Your name to a piece more grave and oftentatious, which might have
been suspected of pretending to approbation.

I am, my Lord, far from imagining that any of my ideas can be new to Your
extensive knowledge, or that I have attained any beauties of style or sentiment
adequate to Your delicacy of taste. The merit of this Poem is but small in my
own opinion, and yet, of the little praise which it may receive, I must resign
a part, by confessing that the first hint was taken from the PASTOR FIDO, and
that the two songs marked with asterisks See page 11, and 24.
, were written by another hand.

WHATEVER praise this confession may detract from my abilities, it will add to
my sincerity; and I should discover little knowledge of Your Lordship, if I
should endeavor to recommend myself, rather by elevation of genius than by
purity of manners.

I am, with great respect, MY LORD, Your Lordship's Most obliged Humble
servant, CHARLOTTE LENNOX.
LONDON, Nov. 20, 1757.
PERSONS of the DRAMA.
MONTANO, Priest of Apollo. PHILANDER, his son, in love with Sylvia. THIRSIS,
his friend. SATYR. SYLVIA, a huntress, betrothed to Philander. NERINA, her
friend. NYMPHS and SATYRS.
SCENE, ARCADIA.

PHILANDER.
ACT I.
SCENE, An open plain, with the prospect of a wood at a distance. Enter SYLVIA.
NERINA following. NERINA. YOU shun me then, my Sylvia?


SYLVIA. No, my friend,
Not you, it is the fond voice of love, I shun;
Choose any other theme, and I will listen
Still as the night, when not a zephyr stirs
The trembling leaves.

NERINA. And why not talk of love?
While that soft bloom glows on thy beauteous cheek,
While thy eyes dart their undiminish'd rays,
And every feature smiles with rosy youth.
Youth, the fit season for delight and joy.
Ah! trifler, waste not thus the fleeting hours,
The spring of life knows no return; and age,
The ceaseless winter of the human frame,
Steals silent on, to blast thy flowery prime.
SONG.
Ah! waste not thus thy flowery prime,
The vernal season of delight;
Youth flies upon the wings of time,
And age and winter are in sight.

SYLVIA. Then let me seize each minute as it flies,
Consume in varied sports the blissful day,
Rise with the dawn, and join the virgin train,
Bound over the dewy vale, dislodge the deer,
Pursue with flying pace the nimble do,
And with the savage wage a distant war.

NERINA. Ah! foolish nymph, begin the war at home:
Within thy charming breast the savage lies,
Covert too sweet for such a dangerous foe.
SONG.
Would thou a greater monster quell,
Than all our teeming woods ever bore:
Subdue thy pride, that foe repel,
And yield to love's persuasive lore.

SYLVIA. Thee, chaste Diana, all my wishes claim;
By choice thy vot'ry, my whole life is thine.
SONG.
Oh! goddess of the Sylvan reign
Where peace, where innocence abide;
My freedom is to wear thy chain,
In serving thee my noblest pride.

NERINA. Thy infant-vows, to young Philander given,
Thou stand'st excluded from the virgin choir.

SYLVIA. Philander was my parent's choice, not mine.
My heart subscribed not to the unhallowed vow
That passed my infant lips; urge it no more.

NERINA. Montano's heir, Montano Phoebus' priest,
Dear to his patron-god, and blessed with wealth:
Where could your choice have fixed, had it been free
But on your destined spouse? Arcadia's boast,
The secret wish of every blooming maid.

SYLVIA. Take him who will, this all-accomplish'd youth:
My part in him I quit, and, sweet exchange!
Be freedom mine; mine the enchanting joys
These woods and forests yield, this well-strung bow,
This sounding quiver, pure delights supply.
Be but my arrows fleet, and just their aim,
And I have all my wish.

NERINA. Take heed, fond maid!
For love has arrows fleeter far; and oh!
More deadly too, if pointed with despair.
SONG.
Think what the hapless virgin proves,
Who loves in vain, yet fondly loves;
While modesty and female pride,
The slighted passion seek to hide.
For oh! in vain the sigh's represt
That struggling heaves her anxious breast.
In vain the falling tear's withheld,
The conscious wish in vain repelled.
Her faded cheek, and air forlorn,
Coarse jests invite, and cruel scorn.
To hopeless love she falls a prey,
And wastes in silent grief away.

SYLVIA. With her own coldness Cynthia guards my breast;
And the soft god can find no entrance there.
SONG.
Ye gently-breathing zephyrs say,
If as your airy course yon fly,
Did you ever meet with one so gay,
So happy, or so free, as I.
Ye softly-murm'ring streams declare,
If on your banks you ever knew
A maid who owned so little care,
A heart to liberty so true.

NERINA. Yet dread the anger of avenging gods,
For broken vows and violated faith.

SYLVIA. The gods are just: they formed me what I am,
Cold and disdainful of the nuptial tie;
They will not punish faults themselves have caused.
But while forgetful of the promised chase,
With thee the moments idly thus I waste,
A bevy of bright nymphs, already met
In yonder grove of oaks, expect my coming.
This day we hunt the stag.
SONG.
Celestial huntress, deign to grace
Our sports, and bless the morning chase.
The goddess comes, she comes, and lo!
I see her silver-beaming bow.
I hear her rattling quiver sound,
Her nymphs with cheerful shoutings fill the place,
And the glad echos from the hills rebound.

[Going.] PHILANDER meets her. PHILANDER. One moment stay.

SYLVIA. Detain me not, the morning wears apace.
The nymphs expect me to the promised chase.

PHILANDER. Ah! quit the Sylvan war, the hunter's toils,
Love, nobler trophies yields, and sweeter spoils.
Beauty like yours should these rough sports despise,
Nor with your arrows conquer, but your eyes.

SYLVIA. Beauty's short conquests soon to bondage turn,
The vanquished triumph, and the victors mourn.
With haughty sway his empire Love maintains,
And all are vassals, where a tyrant reigns.

PHILANDER. Yet his soft power, even gods themselves confess,
It Is his to conquer, but it is his to bless.
Then yield thee, beauteous nymph, and thou shall prove
How faint all joys compared to mutual love.

SYLVIA. Away, presumptuous! taint not my chaste car
With sounds Diana's handmaid must not hear.
Hate ever be my part, be thine despair,
Away, presumptuous! and thy suit forbear.

PHILANDER. SONG.
Yes, cruel maid, I go to prove
The last sad effort of despair:
One death shall this lost wretch remove,
And thousands from thy scorn shall spare.
Yet shall thy image bless my closing eye,
And my last breath thy still loved name shall sigh.

Exeunt. NERINA. Oh! cruelty extreme! ungrateful maid,
Thus, is it thus, that faithful love is paid?

SYLVIA. Cease chiding now, my savage lover comes,
The rude, rough Satyr -- ah! he is here already.
Enter the SATYR. Ah! Sylvia, whither, whither, do thou fly?
Turn, cruel maid, too lovely Sylvia turn.
Oh! fairer than the fairest lillies thou,
Erect and tall as alders; thy soft skin
More sleek than orient shells; and whiter far
Than falling snows; turn, turn thy starry eyes,
And bless thy lover with their beauteous rays.

SYLVIA. Great terror of these woods; ah! why on me,
This lavish praise? know thy own worth, and woo
Some nymph, if such there be, whose wondrous form
Is lovely as thy own. --

SATYR. Insulting maid!
This form despised by thee wants not its charms,
If in the liquid mirror of the sea
I view myself aright, this face of mine
A sanguine color boasts; these shaggy limbs
For strength and swiftness formed, and manly grace.

SYLVIA. If charms like these want power to gain my love,
Blame my dull eyes, and my still duller mind.

SATYR. To charm those eyes the aid of art I Will try,
To move that mind the force of gifts I Will prove,
A pair of turtles callow from the nest,
Court the soft soothings of thy lilly-hand;
Oh! learn of them to love, and pay my pains.
SONG.
Doves are Venus' birds, and bear
Her chariot through the yielding air;
Cupid, with their feathers, wings
Those darts the unerring archer flings.
Yet his soft rage the wantons prove,
And all their little life, is love.

SYLVIA. Melodious strains, indeed! your music, Satyr,
Naught equals, but your verse.

SATYR. Do my songs please thee? stay then and behold
A vintage measure, and my skill applaud
As in the harmonious maze I lightly move.
Here on the verdant turf recline, while I
Summon my fellows to the antic round.
Enter SATYRS. Ye dear companions of my rural joys,
This paragon of nymphs, this conquering fair
Deigns to behold our sports; begin and show
That Satyrs have their graces, and can tread
With Bacchanalian skill the sprightly dance.
Begin, I say.

SYLVIA. This lawless rout with terror chills my heart:
Seize the first happy moment, to retire.

[ To NERINA.] DANCE of the SATYRS. Sylvia and Nerina steal off when it is
almost ended. SATYR. Ha, gone! break off the dance:
She is not here whose eyes I sought to charm.
Ah! cruel nymph, inexorable fair,
Harder than tigers to be broke; than rocks
More fixed in thy disdain; more haughty far
Than the vain peacock in its plumy pride.
Why seek I thee with song and dance to move?
Colder than fountains; like the sliding streams
Impossible to hold: but here I swear
By Pan, great author of our race, I swear,
Since song, nor dance, nor gifts, nor prayers can move
Thy stubborn soul, by force I Will crown my love.

END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT the SECOND.
SCENE continues. Enter SYLVIA and NYMPHS, as from hunting, with bows and
arrows. First NYMPH. GRace of our woods! sure Dian's self directs
Thy still unerring dart.

SYLVIA. Be here is the praise.
Oh! virgin huntress, to thy favoring smile
Alone I owe, that foremost in the chase
My shaft transfixes first the trembling prey.
Thou speed'st the whistling arrow to its mark:
Winged with thy swiftness over the plain I fly,
And all my honors are derived from thee.
SONG.
Cynthia, queen of rural pleasures,
Pleasures which no guilt destroys,
Thine are all health's choicest treasures,
Thine are virtue's solid joys.

[Here the Satyr appears listening.] SYLVIA. Now while the sun darts fierce the
noontide blaze,
Haste to the neighboring grove, fair nymphs, and shun
His fervid ray; mean time, in yonder vale
Where pines and cedars mingling grateful shade,
And from the stream which slowly glides beneath
Excludes the light; there will I bathe, then taste
A short repose upon its flowery border.

First NYMPH. Soft be thy slumbers, gentle maid, farewell!

Exeunt. The SATYR comes forward. SATYR. So my coy Nymph! I think I hold thee
now
Safe in my toils; go on, securely go
To thy well-chosen privacy; by Pan,
It fits my purpose well: yes, stubborn maid!
There shall thou find an unexpected guest,
An injured lover bent on great revenge.
SONG.
I hate your sighing, fawning, lying,
To cry each moment one is dying,
In some sick puppy's tone.
No: while her pride looks most demurely,
Let me, invading, clasp securely
What force has made my own.

Exeunt Satyr. Enter PHILANDER in a melancholy posture. PHILANDER. SONG.
In vain I strive to fly
This soul-consuming care;
My sorrow's always nigh,
And present every where.
In vain I seek the grove,
There no repose I find,
What shades can shut out love?
Or cool the fever'd mind?
That sweetly-dashing stream,
Those gales that whisper round,
Increase the fatal flame,
Enlarge the bleeding wound.
The silent gloom of night
Adds horror to my grief;
The gay return of light
To me brings no relief.
Why do I wander thus in woods alone?
Why vent to senseless trees my mournful plaints;
Sigh to the fleeting wind; with tears deface
The dimpled stream? Oh! Sylvia, cruel maid!
Thy pride a savage sacrifice demands,
Nor will be satisfied with less than life.

Enter THIRSIS. THIRSIS. I sought thee, dear Philander!

PHILANDER. Oh! my Thirsis!
Why seek a wretch who cannot find himself?
Lost to each joy, to fierce despair a prey?
Fain would I shun all commerce with mankind:
In these dark shades wear out the sad remains
Of hated life.

THIRSIS. Oh love! thou tyrant of the human breast,
Fierce and remorseless as the prowling wolf
That nightly makes the helpless flock his prey:
Falsely they call thee god of pleasing pains,
Of gentle wishes and refined delights:
Doubts, fears, and jealousies, surround thy throne;
Eternal sighs fan thy destructive fires,
And broken hearts are thy sad sacrifice.

PHILANDER. Such is, indeed, the fate of hopeless love;
And such is mine.

THIRSIS. You make yourself your fate;
Love should be paid with love, and hate with hate.

PHILANDER. SONG.
In vain my passion you reprove,
This heart, alas! was formed for love,
His pains, if not his joys, to feel:
Here the soft god has fixed his throne,
But oh! 'midst sighs, and tears alone,
Nor deigns the wounds he makes to heal.

THIRSIS. Oh! bend not thus thy drooping head to earth,
Like tender plants beneath the beating storm;
This day thy father, by thy griefs impelled,
With grateful offerings seeks his patron god;
Prostrate before his altar now he lies,
And all his pious prayers ascend for thee.

PHILANDER. To mine, alas! no pitying powers inclined,
Unheard, and mingled with the vagrant wind.

THIRSIS. Hope better now, for see thy fire appears,
A solemn joy upon his brow he wears:
Some pleasing news he brings.

PHILANDER. Be still, my heart! --
Oh! throb not thus, can hope be painful too?

Enter MONTANO. MONTANO. Oh! thou to fierce despair a wretched prey,
Much-loved, lamented youth.

PHILANDER. Ill-omen'd pity!
Alas! my father mourns my fate; it is past,
Hope is no more.

MONTANO. I bring thee more than hope,
My vows are heard, thy wishes all are crowned,
No more the haughty maid shall fly thy love.

PHILANDER. Oh! sounds which might arrest the stroke of death,
Call back the soul to her abandoned seat,
And give it more than life, give immortality.

MONTANO. With awful reverence hear the god's decree,
At whose dread altars I so long have served;
Sylvia, by plighted vows, thy lawful claim
Must either yield this day to be thy bride,
Or by her death --

PHILANDER. Oh! love! almighty love!
What do I hear?

MONTANO. Or, by her death atone
For violated faith. Thus dooms Apollo.

PHILANDER. Is this to crown my wishes? oh! my father*

MONTANO. Rash youth, repine not at the god's decree,
But to the haughty fair reveal her sentence,
This day to be a victim, or a bride,
Is all her fate allows.

PHILANDER. SONG.
Oh! stop that death-denouncing sound,
Nor mix it with the passing air,
Lest by some ruder zephyr found,
It Is wasted to the trembling fair.
His own soft cause love best can plead,
Or let me die, or let me thus succeed.

[Exit.] THIRSIS. Despair is in his eyes, oh! sage Montano!
Should the proud nymph persist in her denial,
Her sentence urged would aggravate his woe;
And, but forgive my sad foreboding fears,
Perhaps involve him in her wretched fate.

MONTANO. Dismiss thy fears, thy unexperienced youth
Reads not the secret heart of varying woman;
Formed to ensnare, and practiced to delude,
She flies, but flying, hopes to be pursued,
With doubling arts long keeps the doubtful field,
And yields, or seems to force alone to yield.

END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT the THIRD.
SCENE, A Grove. SYLVIA discovered sleeping at a distance; PHILANDER enters and
gazes on her. PHILANDER. SHE sleeps, and I may gaze securely now,
Nor fear the lightning of her angry eyes;
So looks the goddess of the silver bow!
When by Eurota's lucid wave she lies.
SONG.
On those fair eyelids, gentle sleep,
Thy softest influence shed,
Still in thy downy fetters keep
The lovely, cruel maid.
Ye sighing gales, ye murmuring streams,
Ye tenants of the grove,
Oh! lengthen out her pleasing dreams,
And tune her soul to love.
Concealed I Will guard thy slumbers, lovely maid,
Lest some rude swain the sweet recess invade,
Those charms a lover views with chasten'd fires,
In vulgar breasts may kindle loose desires.

Enter the SATYR looking about him. SATYR. Low murmuring sounds I heard, yet
none are here;
'Twas but the whispers of the amorous breeze
That plays among the boughs.

SYLVIA awaking. What do I see?
The brutal Satyr! guard me, chaste Diana.

SATYR. Aye, you may call your goddess to your aid,
She hears you not; the music of her hounds
And beagle-horn will drown your feeble cries.

SYLVIA. Ah! whither would thou drag me, cruel Sylvan?
Help, help, some pitying power!

Enter PHILANDER. PHILANDER. Vile monster! hence.

The SATYR runs off. PHILANDER approaches SYLVIA, who turns from him.
PHILANDER. Oh! steadfast hate, yet hear me, cruel maid,
If to have saved thee from the brutal rage
Of that fierce Sylvan, claims one kind regard,
Turn, turn, and listen to my ardent vows.

SYLVIA. Why will you still this hated theme pursue?
Must I another Satyr find in you?
Both persecutors in a different way,
My honor he, you would my heart betray.
SONG.
Love, over the abject breast may reign,
With all his light fantastic train
Of wishes, cares, and fond desires,
Fears and hopes, and jealous fires,
Be mine from the soft folly free;
Love has no charms like liberty.

PHILANDER. Yet, yet, relent! yield to a lover's prayer.

SYLVIA. Away, or this detested theme forbear.

PHILANDER. What shall I say, her stubborn mind to move?
Declare her sentence: no, forbid it love!
[To her] Yet hear me, Sylvia, ever it be too late,
Speak one kind word, for oh! thy breath is fate.

SYLVIA. Mark then my firm resolves, and oh! be thou,
Celestial maid, propitious to my vow;
With thee an humble vot'ry to remain,
Though last and meanest of thy virgin train.
If cold and temperate as thy own mild ray,
Thy shades I haunt, and thy commands obey,
Still, goddess, thy protection let me prove,
And guard me from the sly seducer, love.

[Exit.] PHILANDER. Stay, Sylvia, stay, and from these trembling lips
Hear the stern god's decree -- Alas! she flies
Swift as the trackless winds, to death she flies,
Death less abhorred than me.

Enter NERINA. NERINA. Here Sylvia should be found; but sure I heard
The plaintive voice of sorrow -- it is Philander,
Alas! poor youth, he weeps, I will observe him.

PHILANDER. Why wears
The face of nature such a cheerful smile?
Why this soft verdure? why this gaudy bloom?
Fall horrors, fall, and make this beauteous scene
Dark as my gloomy soul -- oh Sylvia! Sylvia!

NERINA. Would she were here, and heard thee.

PHILANDER. Cold shadowy queen, who laugh'st at lover's woes,
Thy self unloving, unbelov'd, now save
From the sad doom incurred, thy beauteous vot'ry.

NERINA (approaching him) Alas! what doom? speak thou of Sylvia, shepherd?

PHILANDER. Ha! sure the goddess' self inspires the thought.
Haste, haste Nerina, seek thy cruel friend,
Tell her -- oh heaven! tell her that Phoebus claims
Her forfeit life for violated faith:
Fly, bid her seek Diana's sacred fane,
And claim protection there.

NERINA. Oh generous youth! oh my unhappy friend!

[Exit running.] Enter THIRSIS. THIRSIS. He Is here: how shall I speak the
dreadful news?

PHILANDER. Why art thou thus alarmed? say, dearest Thirsis.
Alas! it is the sad privilege of despair
To fear no worse.

THIRSIS. She has refused you then. --

PHILANDER. She has, and oh! with such a fixed disdain!
Ungrateful maid, then when my timely aid
Had saved her from a brutal Satyr's lust,
Then to reject my humble suffering love,
And, in despite of former ties, renew
Her vows to the rough goddess of the woods.

THIRSIS. Horrid ingratitude! would thou could hate her.

PHILANDER. Hate her! yes, friend, I Will tear her from my breast.
Oh! may she feel, like me, the pangs of love,
Like me unpitied mourn, and sigh in vain.

THIRSIS. The righteous gods, to noblervengeance doom
The perjured maid.

PHILANDER. Oh! Thirsis, there I Am lost.

THIRSIS. Arcadia groans beneath Apollo's frown,
In thee his priest is scorned; the wrathful god
Bends his dread bow over our devoted plains,
And claims his victim.

PHILANDER. Sylvia then must die!

THIRSIS. She must, my friend, even now with mild entreaty
Thy father urged her to perform her vow,
Scornful she heard, nor shook at the sad sentence
Which he with tears pronounced.

PHILANDER. Yet hold my heart, --
Where is she now?

THRISIS. I saw her, guarded by the attending priests
In sad procession, led toward the temple:
Her grieved companions rend the air with cries,
And beat their snowy breasts in wild despair.
But she with haughty mien, erect and firm
As the stern deity by her obeyed,
Welcomes her fate; nor can the approach of death
Banish the color from her cheeks; or rage
And fierce disdain plant fresher roses there.

PHILANDER. Oh! Sylvia, must thou die?

THIRSIS. Alas! my friend,
You tremble, you look pale; think on your wrongs,
Think on her scorn, and the impending curse
That threats Arcadia, till the god's appeased.

SOLEMN MUSIC at a distance. PHILANDER. By all the pangs that rend this
tortured breast,
The sad solemnity is now begun:
Ah! friend, farewell! farewell my dearest Thirsis.

[Embracing him.] THIRSIS. Ha! whither now? what mean thou, dear Philander?

PHILANDER. Oh Thirsis! I must see her once again.

THIRSIS. You must not go, forgive my friendly zeal.

[Holding him.] PHILANDER. Off! or by heaven this moment is my last.
See, fate is in my power.

[Shewing a poniard.] THIRSIS. Desperate youth!

[ Exit PHILANDER. THIRSIS following.] SCENE changes to the temple of Apollo,
an altar, priests attending: solemn music plays; then the procession appears;
four priests walk two and two, Montano next with the sacred knife in his hand;
after him Sylvia in white, led by two priests, her head bound with the sacred
fillets; a train of virgins following weeping: they advance to the altar: the
HYMN to Apollo is sung. HYMN to APOLLO.
HAIL Phoebus, son of Jove,
Great patron of the moving lyre,
Whose sounds, soft peace and smiling joy inspire,
And give new pleasures to the blessed above.
To thee our noblest lays belong,
Thine is the poet, thine the song,
Eternal source of light, of music, and of love.
Hail! mighty Paean, hail!
Asserter of thy father's throne,
Thy force the rebel giants own,
Who vainly hoped against him to prevail:
Thy name redeemed Thessalia sings,
And all her noblest offerings brings
To thee, by whose dread arm the monster Python fell.
Who can thy frown sustain?
Or bear impure, thy piercing ray?
Thou, on the guilty bosom pour'st the day,
And all the wretch's crimes are seen:
Lo! perjured beauty justly dies,
Accept this awful sacrifice,
And bless, oh! bless Arcadia with thy smiles again.
MONTANO. Ill-fated maid! whose soul no prayers could move,
No sorrows soften, and no vows could bind;
Though by thy fierce disdain, my hapless son
In anguish wastes his days: though over Arcadia
Apollo bends his fatal bow, and claims
Thy forfeit life, yet still this aged hand
Shrinks to perform its office.

SYLVIA. You may spare
Your ill-timed pity, priest, I need it not.
O Cynthia! guardian-goddess of my youth,
To whom my virgin vows have still been paid;
I die thy votary, and this pure blood
Shed in thy cause, seals me for ever thine.

MONTANO to the PRIESTS. Lead her to the altar.

Enter PHILANDER. PHILANDER. I charge you hold.

MONTANO. Rash youth retire, nor with your useless grief
Profane the solemn rites.

PHILANDER. Oh! give me way. --
I swear the awful power shall be appeased,
He shall, my father; only suffer me
To kneel before that dear devoted maid,
And groan for pardon, since she dies my victim.

SYLVIA to PHILANDER, who kneels. Hence, from my sight, and let me die in peace.

PHILANDER rising. Oh, cruel even in death! yet hold, my heart,
Break not, ever thy sad purpose is completed,
Lest heaven reject th'imperfect sacrifice.

SYLVIA. What mean thou?

PHILANDER. Mighty love!
This is thy triumph, Sylvia thou art free,
Oh! hate not life, because it is my gift;
Thus I appease the god, and die to save thee.

Kneels before the altar, and as he raises his arm to stab himself, Thirsis
enters and holds him. THIRSIS. Help! save him, help!

MONTANO. My son! my dear Philander!

SYLVIA. Oh! wondrous proof of unexampled love!

MONTANO. Eternal night shroud my unhappy eyes.

THIRSIS. Why this excess of grief? your son is safe.

MONTANO. No power on earth
Can save him now, our sacred law forbids
A second victim; well he knew it is force,
And hence this dire resolve.

SYLVIA. Ah me! unhappy --

MONTANO. Do thou weep, proud maid?
Inhuman tears! such the hyena sheds
Over her helpless prey.

PHILANDER. Oh! sacred drops,
To me more grateful than the morning dew
On dying plants; then do thou pity me?

SYLVIA. Pity! yet sure there is a softer name
For what I feel this moment -- oh Philander!

PHILANDER. Why do thou pause? why do thou turn away?
Speak, speak again, and bless my ravished eyes
With one look more, then let them close for ever.

SYLVIA. For me thou shall not die.

PHILANDER. For thee I will,
And oh! be witness, love!
With what extatic joy I meet my fate.

MONTANO. Ungrateful to a father's tender cares,
A faithful lover, but a son unkind!
Yet let me fold thee to my aching breast
Before we part for ever, -- now farewell!
Receive your victim, priests, but spare my eyes
The dreadful sight! -- I go to weep and die.

SYLVIA. Stay, holy sire.

MONTANO. What would thou?

SYLVIA. O! behold
The only lawful victim, save your son,
And strike this hardened breast.

MONTANO. Away, fond maid!
Your pity comes too late -- oh, my Philander!

[Going.] SYLVIA. Oh! youth, too little known, beloved too late,
Thou shall not conquer in this noble strife:
I cannot change, but I will share thy fate,
And death shall give what I denied in life.

[Snatches a dart from one of the nymphs.] PHILANDER ( catching hold of her.)
Oh! hold thy hand, or hate me once again:
Live, beauteous maid, nor let me die in vain.

Thunder; a bright cloud appears; Apollo is discovered seated in his chariot;
soft music as he descends. MONTANO. He comes, the awful god himself appears!
Kneel, and confess the present deity. [All kneel.]

APOLLO. Returning virtue's contrite sighs,
Are heaven's most pleasing sacrifice;
Through the wide space of yielding air,
The winds the grateful incense bear,
And waft it to the skies.
Blessed shepherd! who such truth could prove,
Blessed maid! whom truth at last could move;
On you the immortal powers bestow
Their best, their fairest gifts below,
Peace, innocence, and love.

MONTANO. Oh! power by me adored, with awful love,
With duteous reverence served, gracious, accept
A happy father's thanks.

PHILANDER. Oh! son of Jove,
Immortal Phoebus, light-dispensing god,
And theme of verse perpetual, be thy praise
For ever sung by me.

SYLVIA. Oh! power benign!
Favorite of gods and men, my grateful heart
To thee its purest vows shall ever pay.

PHILANDER to SYLVIA. Restored to life, to hope, to love, and thee,
Now let me gaze upon thy beauteous eyes,
And read my bliss confirmed, or else in vain
A god pronounced me happy.

SYLVIA. Dearest and best
Of all thy sex; oh! if thou read'st not there
The softest, truest passion, that ever warmed
A virgin-breast, they injure what I feel.

PHILANDER (taking her hand) Oh! sweet reward of suffering love; oh! bliss
Unutterable.

MONTANO. Still may your joys increase, a virtuous flame
Knows no decay, and burns through life the same;
Like noontide sun it glows in youth's short day,
And milder friendship is its setting ray.

FINIS.

