HONORIA: OR THE DAY OF ALL SOULS, A POEM, WITH OTHER POETICAL PIECES.

LONDON: PRINTED for J. ROBSON, BOOKSELLER, IN NEW BOND STREET. M DCC LXXXII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Scene of the following little Poem is supposed to be in the great church
of St. Ambrose at Milan the second of November, on which day the most solemn
office is performed for the repose of the Dead.

HONORIA.
'YE hallowed bells, whose voices through the air
'The awful summons of affliction bear:
'Ye slowly-waving banners of the dead,
'That over yon altar your dark horrors spread:
'Ye curtain'd lamps, whose mitigated ray
'Casts round the fane, a pale, reluctant day:
'Ye walls, ye shrines, by melancholy dressed,
'Well do ye suit the fashion of my breast!
'Have I not lost what language cannot unfold,
'The form of valor cast in beauty's mould!
'Th' intrepid youth the path of battle tried,
'And foremost in the hour of peril died.
'Nor was I present to bewail his fate,
'With pity's lenient voice to soothe his state,
'To watch his looks, to read while death stood by,
'The last expression of his parting eye.
'But other duties, other cares impend,
'Cares that beyond the mournful grave extend:
'Now, now I view convened the pious train,
'Whose bosom sorrows at another's pain,
'While recollection pleasingly severe
'Wakes for the awful dead the silent tear,
And pictures (as to each her sway extends)
'The sacred forms of lovers, parents, friends.
'Now Charity a fiery seraph stands
'Beside yon altar with uplifted hands.
'Yet, can this high solemnity of grief
'Yield to the youth I love the wished relief?
'These rites of death -- Ah! what can they avail?
'Honorius died beyond the hallowed pale:
'Plung'd in the gulf of fear -- distressful state!
'My anxious mind dares not enquire his fate:
'Yet why despond? could one slight error roll
'A flood of poison over the healthful soul?
'Had not thy virtues full sufficing power
'To clear thee in the dread recording hour?
'Did they before the judge abashed remain?
'Did they, weak advocates, all plead in vain?
'By love, by piety, by reason taught,
'My soul revolts at the blaspheming thought:
'Sure in the breast to pure religion true,
'Where virtue's templed, God is templed too.
'Then while the august procession moves along,
'Midst swelling organs, and the pomp of song;
'While the dread chaunt, still true to Nature's laws,
'Is deepen'd by the terrour-breathing pause;
'While 'midst encircling clouds of incense lost
'The trembling priest upholds the sacred host;
'Amid these scenes shall I forget my suit?
'Amid these scenes shall I alone be mute?
'Nor to the footsteps of the throne above
'Breathe the warm requiem to the youth I love?
'Now silence reigns along the gloomy fane,
'And wraps in dread repose the pausing strain:
'When next it bursts my humble voice I Will join,
'Disclose my trembling wish at mercy's shrine,
'Unveil my anguish to the throne above,
'And sigh the requiem to the youth I love.
' -- Does fancy mock me with a false delight,
'Or does some hallowed vision cheer my sight?
'Methinks, emerging from the gloom below,
'Th' immortal spirits leave the house of woe!
'Inshrin'd in glory's beams they reach the sky,
'While choral songs of triumph burst from high!
'See, at the voice of my accorded prayer,
'The radiant youth ascend the fields of air!
'Behold! -- He mounts unutterably bright,
'Cloath'd in the sun-robe of unfading light!
'Applauding seraphs hail him on his way,
'And lead him to the gates of everlasting day.'
THE SOLDIER's FAREWELL ON THE EVE OF A BATTLE.
NIGHT, expecting the dread morrow
Hovered over the martial train,
Beauteous Alice, led by sorrow.
Hurried to the silent plain:
'Give the watchword, the guard uttered
'Loudly from his destined place;
'Lo! it is I, fair Alice muttered,
'Hast'ning to his fond embrace.
'Ever beauteous, faithful ever,
'Quick the gallant youth rejoined,
'Cruel death can only sever
'Hearts in love's strong links entwined:
'Soon shall we be torn asunder,
'Therefore welcome art thou come;
'Till morn wakes the battle's thunder
'Rest thee on that broken drum:'
She sat down, in mind reviewing
Ills the morning might behold,
Tears still other tears pursuing,
Down her cheek in silence rolled:
Thoughts to other thoughts succeeding
Over her mind incessant flow;
She, like meekness inly-bleeding,
Broods in stillness over her woe:
'Wherefore, Alice, do thou ponder
'Evils that are fancy's brood;
'Sure our parting might be fonder
'Than beseems this silent mood?
'Yet continue still to ponder
'Things thy voice wants power to say,
'Thy dumb grief to me seems fonder,
'Than words decked in bright array.'
She replied (her tears still gushing)
'What avails it to be brave?
'Thou, amidst the battle rushing,
'Here perchance may meet a grave:
'Shou'd'st thou perish in the action,
'Where's the peace to soothe my care?
'All my life would be distraction,
'Madness, wailing, and despair.
'Still thou were of gentlest carriage,
'Still affectionately true,
'And a lover still in marriage,
'And a friend and parent too.
'Cheer thee, cheer thee, best of women,
'Trust to the great Power above;
'When I rush amidst the foemen,
'Heav'n may think on her I love:
'Saving is the miser's pleasure,
'Spending is the soldier's thrift,
'Take this guinea, all my treasure,
'Take it as a parting gift.
'Here end we this mournful meeting,
'Catch from my lips this fond sigh;
'If this be our last, last greeting,
'Know, that I was born to die.
'See! the dayspring gilds the streamers
'Waving over the martial train;
'Now the hoarse drum wakes the dreamers,
'Ne'er perchance to dream again:
'Hark, I hear the trumpet's clangor
'Bid the British youth excel;
'Now, now glows the battle's anger,
'Lovely Alice, fare thee well.'
TO THE MEMORY OF A YOUNG LADY.
ENDOWED with all that Fortune could bestow;
With brilliancy of wit and beauty's glow,
Francisca, rising to her fifteenth year,
Stood mid the virgin train without a peer:
Her conscious bosom throbb'd to virtue warm,
While diffidence still heightened every charm:
But Heaven's decree forbad this beauty's queen
To act her part through beauty's short-lived scene:
A gradual illness on her figure preyed,
And slowly, slowly sunk the fading maid:
Torn from each wish to which her youth aspired,
Unfearing -- uncomplaining -- she expired:
Thus some faint lily to its mother-ground
In silence falls -- while spring is blooming round.
INSCRIPTION INTENDED FOR AN OLD THATCHED CHURCH.
FAR from the splendor of a costly fane,
My low roof canopies the humble train:
Deep in my vaults divorced from human woes,
The life-worn, weary villagers repose:
When at my altar kneels the hamlet fair,
And to her God unveils her bosomed care!
Or does the herdsman bend with grief distressed,
Kind comfort steals upon their lightened breast:
Here too Religion weaves with viewless hand,
For spotless village hearts, the nuptial band,
And twines with many a charm the holy braid
That joins the lab'rer and the nut-brown maid.
ON THE DEATH of TWO FAVORITE BIRDS.
INVOLVED in flame and suffocating breath
A hapless bird was doomed to sudden death;
The female, touched at his uncommon fate,
Surveyed the form of her disfigured mate;
With drooping head, and shivering wings she stood
In all the agony of widowhood!
At length, to grief's severest power a prey,
She dropped -- and sighed her little soul away.
Ye wedded birds, though rigid be your doom,
Yet Anna Miss Ann Beauclerk.
watches at your early tomb;
For you her flowing pity bursts restraint,
Your dirge is uttered in her soft complaint,
Your elegy, without the poet's art,
Is writ by sorrow on the purest heart.
THE OAK.
MARK well yon tree, that shades the neighboring plain,
And looks the ancestor of this domain!
Beneath the slowly-waving branches hoar,
(Meet temple for a vow) this morn I swore,
To rear solicitous bright Friendship's flower,
And fence it from bleak Time's destructive power:
To guard with holy care the tender frame,
And on the fragrant leaves inscribe his name,
Whose presence gilds with smiles this mild retreat,
Within whose breast the virtues love to meet:
Who woos coy science to frequent his scene,
And bids good nature gambol over the green:
I spoke the word -- The solemn branches bowed,
As conscious of the sacred deed I vowed.
SENSIBILITY.
CELESTIAL spring! to Nature's favorites given,
Fed by the dews that bathe the flowers of heaven:
From the pure crystal of thy fountain flow
The tears that trickle over another's woe;
The silent drop that calms our own distress;
The gush of rapture at a friend's success;
Thine the soft showers down beauty's breast that steal
To soothe the heart-wounds they can never heal:
Thine too the tears of ecstasy that roll,
When genius whispers to the listening soul;
And thine the hallowed flood that drowns the eye,
When warm Religion lifts the thought on high.
MAY the 9th, 1779, MISS BOYLE's BIRTH DAY.
OH, shade of Hanb'ry Sir Charles Hanbury Williams.
, from thy seat bestow
One transient aspect on this scene below:
This youngest flow'ret of thy bower survey,
Who meekly rears her head to welcome May,
And looks the lily of the primros'd dale,
Just breaking through its green o'ermantling veil.
Behold the Mother The Honorable Mrs. Walsingham.
prompt (with skill refined)
To watch the dawning of a Daughter's mind:
With those clear rays which her bright noon adorn,
She streaks and beautifies her pupil's morn:
Foe to the enameled rules of Stanhope's art,
With Nature's sentiments she feeds the heart;
Whose strong ascendant in due time displayed
Shall as a buckler shield the tender maid,
When called to enter on her fate's career,
Through life's uncertain voyage she shall steer.
Methinks I now behold that future day,
When the light galley shall the fair convey:
I see this artless Cleopatra glide,
Hope at her helm, and Virtue at her side,
Firm (as her Father to repel the foe)
To meet when Heaven ordains the assailing woe.
Ah! new adventurer on the sea of life,
May thou never meet the waves' insulting strife;
Never may thy bark amidst the whirlwind's roar
Dash its young bosom on the bulging shore:
May halcyon stillness brood along the deep,
And treacherous Sirens in some cavern sleep:
Allured by smiling skies, may playful gales
Toy round thy mast, and flutter in the sails.
Enough -- To merriment the hours devote,
Each accent tune to laughing pleasure's note.
For thee the darling of these humble lays,
Whose early merit wakes the voice of praise,
From the bright date of this recorded day
Thou shall be styled the Little Queen of May.
THE END.
LATELY PUBLISHED, THE ANCIENT ENGLISH WAKE, Price One Shilling and Sixpence.

Also in One Volume Octavo, Price Three Shillings, POEMS BY MR. JERNINGHAM. THE
FIFTH EDITION.


