THE FALL OF MEXICO, A POEM.

BY MR. JERNINGHAM.

LONDON: PRINTED BY SCOTT, FOR J. ROBSON, BOOKSELLER, NEW BOND STREET.

MDCCLXXV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
GUATIMOZINO, the last emperor of MEXICO, having opposed the SPANIARDS with
great bravery, in various engagements, was at length defeated and taken
prisoner. In order to extort from him a discovery of the principal mines, he
was laid on burning coals: The second in command was also condemned to the same
torture, and amidst his sufferings called upon his royal master to be released
from the vow of secrecy, which drew from GUATIMOZINO these memorable words: Am
I on a Bed of Roses?

DRYDEN has put these words into the mouth of MONTEZUMA contrary to the
testimony of the historians.

THE FALL OF MEXICO.
THE Sun now glittered in the front of day,
And wide-diffusing his resplendent ray,
Looked willing to adorn the glorious meed,
The realm! -- To GUATIMOZINO decreed!
Whom for his valor tried and virtue known,
His country's voice invited to the throne.
Now, through the applauding clamor of the throng,
The august procession slowly moved along,
While in the rear of this progressive scence,
Endearing sight! the chosen Youth was seen,
Raised on a lofty seat of burnished gold,
Which twelve illustrious MEXICANS uphold.
The law ordained a signal to display
The function, mode, and color of the day:
A splendid streamer playing to the view,
(Inwrought with plumage of celestial blue)
Marked from the summit of a lofty tower,
Of Joy's great festival the leading hour:
This master-sign the distant flag obeyed,
And prompt alike the glad report conveyed,
Which posting on the rapid wings of sight,
To every city urged its speedy flight,
Till MEXICO throughout her vast extent
Burst into joy with one declared assent!
Behold the solemn slow-advancing train
Approach the precincts of the sacred fane;
A venerable, rude, majestic pile,
Of time remote, which claimed the stubborn toil:
By gloomy Fancy on the portal planned,
Bold from the sculptor's all-creative hand,
Full many a wild terrific image sprung:
There angry serpents intertwining hung:
There the God's agent, Terror! fond to dwell,
Breathed all around his awe-diffusing spell.
See now the train the spacious dome receive,
Where clouds of fragrance circling altars heave!
Four golden columns with bright jasper crowned,
The hallowed image of the God surround.
Now from his seat the chosen Youth descends,
And to that image prompt his footsteps bends,
Where ANDALUSIA, formed in Beauty's mould,
And high on Virtue's sacred list enrolled,
With fear, with love, with bashful youth impressed,
Expecting stood the bride of his request.
"Deign to partake, the illustrious chieftan said,
"The growing honors that around me spread;
"Consent the glory of a throne to share,
"Be thine the pleasure, and be mine the care."
Lo at their side the priest TALEPO stands.
And joins, in wedlock's tie, their willing hands:
Then rearing to the view the imperial crown,
The pontiff said: "Thou favorite of renown,
"Warm in whose breast each kindred virtue lives,
"Behold the glorious meed thy country gives!
"The trembling hand which late to thine I joined,
"Is as the pledge of her love-glowing mind,
"So is this crown the thronging votes impart,
"The sacred token of thy country's heart.
"The radiant wisdom to thy birth allied,
"Thy valor in the field of danger tried,
"Thy sympathy that wakes at Sorrow's sigh,
"These are the charms that glitter in her eye!
"Thy valor rushing as the impetuous stream,
"(Ah let me linger on the enchanting theme)
"Impelled thee to resist the foreign host,
"That pour their numbers on our wondering coast,
"And hurled, like Gods, destructive thunders round!
"Alarmed, astounded at the unusual sound,
"Our archers hurried from the unequal fight,
"And urged precipitate their trembling flight;
"While female shrieks, and children's piercing cries,
"With mixed discordance, issued to the skies.
"'It Was then, amid this universal fear,
"That thou, undaunted, did thy valor rear,
"And as the rock that checks the torrent's roll,
"Even so did thou the flying throng control,
"And on each archer's breast, to terror prone,
"Did pour the warm effusions of thy own:
"Charmed by the spell of thy enlivening word,
"They face the daring foe with one accord;
"With thee the terrors of the combat brave,
"And make the extensive coast one SPANISH grave.
"For this thy country decks thee with renown,
"And fixes on thy brow this splendid crown."
He ceased -- while through the wide extending fane
The voice of Gladness pours her plausive strain,
Lo! now, and herald comes with speedy pace,
His thought expanding over the expressive face:
Festivity resigns her short-lived charms,
While loud he cries -- "To arms -- To arms -- To arms!
"Proud of their daring, an alarming host
"Of warring SPANIARDS darken all the coast:
"High-rais'd on beings of superior force,
"They urge resistless their destructive course:
"Their chieftan's voice these monsters well obey,
"Fierce they pursue where he directs the way!
"Babes, mothers, men, are in one carnage trod,
"By these new engines of that demi-God!"
"Hail to the event, the new-crown'd youth returns,
"To meet these foes my panting bosom burns:"
Then to the beauteous bride, overwhelmed with grief,
With plaintive voice applied the royal chief:
"The joy expectancy had painted high,
"And bathed in all the colors of the sky,
"Flies like the bird who decked with every hue,
"Wings gayly by, and shoots beyond the view:
"Now to the House of Sorrow urge thy way, ANTONIO DE SOLIS mentions in his
history the House of Mourning, which was frequented in the season of calamity.

"Whose darksome round forbids the laughing day:
"As there thou shall revolve the future scenes,
"While Fancy lifts the veil that intervenes,
"Let Hope celestial inmate of the heart,
"Her half-expanding prospects still impart:
"Think through the perils that encircling rear,
"I shall securely urge my bold career,
"And at the closing of the embattled strife,
"Return perchance with fame-ennobled life,
"And fondly hanging on thy neck, recite
"The toil, the havoc of the daring fight.
The fair returned (with deep affliction fraught)
"When Gratitude first waked my infant thought,
"And bade me raise it to the august abode,
"In thanks for every gift the God bestowed,
"In glowing thanks did I pour out my mind,
"That thou best gift was to my wish assigned:
"Still with the fond expectancy elate
"Often would my heart forerun the lingering date:
"Now as the Sun the splendid hour ascends,
"Misfortune over the scene her cloud extends:
"Ah, GUATIMOZINO, what voice can tell
"The various ills that darken this farewell!
"Exposed to peril, that enchanting form
"The thunder of the stranger may deform:
"Methinks I view thee in that blasted state,
"Dread spectacle -- what horrors round thee wait?
"In vain these anxious eyes attempt to trace
"Even the last lingering melancholy grace
"That death bestows!" -- Her voice now fails to flow,
Cursed with the dire presagement of her woe.
Behold, encircled by her virgin train,
The sorrow-wedded fair forsakes the fane:
The parting fair the hero's eyes pursue,
While glisten'd his young cheek with Pity's dew.
Lo, now commence the military rites,
While love of fame each panting breast excites.
Two youths, whom friendship and whom glory warms,
Come to demand the privilege of arms:
Beside the statue of the God they stand,
And rev'rent kiss the darts that grace his hand:
These sacred darts the power above bestowed,
A spirit bore them from the bright abode,
And in his passage to the sphere below,
He dipped their plumage in the vernal bow.
See now at GUATIMOZINO'S command,
To tuneful measures move the warlike band!
The square encircling an extensive plain,
Receives the patriot military train:
To them approached with speedy march the foe,
While on each bosom valor poured a glow.
But chiefly GUATIMOZINO confessed
The hero's feelings laboring in his breast:
There youthful Valor waked his ardent flame,
There breathed contempt of death and love of fame,
There Intrepidity that scorns to stoop,
And soft-ey'd Clemency -- enchanting group!
Over these as Fancy stretched her brooding wing,
Prescient she saw, from this assortment, spring
Some great, she knew not what, excelling deed,
That should from Glory's hand obtain a meed.
Even thus the bard who sleeps near Avon's wave,
To whom the Muse her unsunn'd treasures gave,
When Genius smote him with his fiercest beam,
And roused his bosom to some lofty theme,
His heart confessed the something yet unknown,
Which should (to vigour's full perfection grown)
Rise on the field of Poetry sublime,
And brave invincible the scythe of Time.
Now from the bows the pointed weapons fly,
While from the foe the thundering tubes reply:
OF CORTEZ rushing on a fiery steed
The new-crown'd chieftain dares the course impede;
His eye illum'd with Valor's sparkling glance
Deep in the courser's chest he roots his lance;
But not his valor does the foe appall,
Still bleeding warriors round their hero fall.
Now to the lofty fane his troops repair,
Whose high ascending towers are lost in air,
From whence the MEXICANS with speedy art
Shower on the foe the death-inflicting dart:
Yet then by CORTEZ led, still undismayed,
The SPANIARD host the lofty fane invade.
The two illustrious youths (whom Friendship's hand,
Had joined with her indissoluble band)
Beheld indignant, smit with patriot grief,
The great achievements of the hostile chief:
And now JANELLAN thus accosts his friend:
"Firm to no purpose, active to no end,
"See from our gallant men yon hallowed tower*
"Already ravished by the invading power:
"Must this, committed to our mutual care,
"The same defeat, the same dishonor share?
"If so -- the victor shall not long survive --
"A thought that bids my fading hope revive:
"A thought -- that like the thunder-flash of night
"Darts on my darkened mind a radiant light --
"But ere my veiled designment I unfold,
"Declare, however rash, however bold,
"Thou Wilt not o'ershade with Caution's chill control,
"The splendid purpose of my ardent soul."
VENZULA to his breast his hand applied,
And thus beyond the power of words replied.
The youth resumed -- "From this aerial height,
"Bid thy bold vision take its deepest flight,
"Down to yon rock, far stretching over the shore,
"'Against which the raging waves incessant roar,
"Whose clashing voices into stillness fade,
"Ere this tremendous distance they pervade:
"If Fortune bless what my proud counsels urge,
"Yon waves shall murmur soon the victor's dirge!
"My secret project I will now unveil:
"Should CORTEZ over this valiant band prevail,
"Should through controlment, and through stubborn force,
"Pour like a torrent his destructive course,
"When on this summit first he shall appear,
"I will advance, with well-dissembled fear,
"And, suppliant as I kneel to win his grace,
"I Will dauntless lock him in a stern embrace,
"Bear him reluctant to yon giddy steep,
"Where yawns a dreadful opening to the deep,
"And thence -- self-ruin'd for my country's good,
"Plunge with her foe into the whelming flood!"
VENZULA answered -- "Yes, I much admire
"What now thy matchless virtue dares inspire:
"But will thou, with an avarice of fame,
"The meed of Glory all exclusive claim?
"Will thou to perils close to Death adjoin'd
"Advance, and leave thy faithful friend behind?
"In infancy we shared the glittering toys,
"And in one circle played our harmless joys:
"And when we quitted childhood's lowly vale,
"Where springing flowerets scent the playful gale,
"Still hand in hand we climbed youth's arduous height,
"Whence greater scenes expanded on the sight,
"Still our pursuits consenting to one plan,
"Like wedded streams our lives united ran:
"And will thou now oppose the sacred tide,
"And bid the friendly waves disparting glide?"
JANELLAN spoke -- "Endearing youth forgive:
"The conq'ror of some future CORTEZ live!
"Nor mark my fall with Grief's dejected brow,
"View from my death the bright effects that flow:
"Behold the tomb that Gratitude shall raise,
"Illustrious signal of my country's praise."
To this the brave VENZULA made reply,
And as he spoke, tears started from his eye:
"What though Felicity thy gift shall stream
"Sunlike over MEXICO with brightest beam,
"Not all the splendor that her rays impart,
"Will ever illumine my benighted heart,
"When destitute of thee, its only ray,
"Without the hope of kind returning day."
"Thou best of friends, JANELLAN said, suppress
"Of thy bright amity this warm excess,
"Lest shrinking as it scorches I dissolve,
"Unfram'd, unequal to my great resolve!"
"Yet lend thine ear, VENZULA then rejoined,
"Sublimer motives urge my steady mind:
"Recall, recall that joy-diffusing hour,
"When gay Prosperity adorned my bower,
"As thy fair sister, half-afraid to speak,
"With down-cast look, and blush-embellish'd cheek,
"At Love's request assented to be mine:
"Of fleeting bliss vain momentary shine;
"For she, in flower of Youth and Virtue's bloom,
"Was swept untimely to the ravenous tomb:
"As sorrow-wounded over her couch I hung,
"To catch the tones that faded as they sprung,
" The God, she said, now summons me away,
" Far from the confines of the endearing day:
" Thou of the life I lose the dearest part,
" Thou chosen spouse! thou sunbeam of my heart
" Say, by Affection's glowing hand impressed,
" Shall I not live in thy recording breast!
" If sacred be the suff'rer's last desires,
" Revere what now my parting soul requires:
" I leave a brother, by bright Honor reared,
" By all approved, and much to me endeared:
" Be, for the sister's love, the brother's friend;
" Nor from his side depart when storms descend:
" The palm of Glory waving in your sight,
"In council, peril, enterprise unite."
"Shall I, when danger calls, consign to air
"The last bequeathing wishes of the fair?
"Perdition catch the base unmanly thought!
"By Love's subliming purest dictates taught
"Amid the perils that around thee wait,
"View me resolved to share the impending fate:
"Now to this spot the foe impels the war,
"Discordance screams, opposing lances jar:
"The steep ascent lo CORTEZ now has gained,
"Ah, mark his spear with streaming gore distained.
The illustrious youths now act their dread design,
See at the victor's knee they low incline!
Now clasp with circling force the incautious foe,
And close adhering to his figure grow:
Their deadly aim his better fate controlled,
With matchless power he bursts their stubborn hold:
The heroes, blasted in their bold intent,
Approached (Death hovering near) the dire descent:
Then, in each other's circling arms compressed,
The last and dear farewell in sighs expressed:
'Twas Friendship burning with meridian flame,
One cause -- one thought -- one ruin -- and one flame --
Tremendous moment! See, they fall from light,
And dauntless rush to never ending night!
Ye self-devoted patriot victims, hail!
Oblivion's gulf shall never entomb your tale:
While History to Time's extremest goal
Her stream majestic shall thro'ages roll,
Like two fair flowerets on one stem that blow
Ye on her margin shall for ever glow. This sublime instance of heroic
Friendship is recorded by ANTONIO DE SOLIS.

The royal youth, who saw the aspiring foe
The faint-opposing MEXICANS o'erthrow,
Felt (as he saw proud SPAIN'S victorious scene)
The wound of Shame, the pointed shaft unseen
That stings the heart: yet then to valor true,
The palm of Victory his thoughts pursue:
"Oh, youth of MEXICO, once valiant train,
"Raze from your radiant life this dark'ning stain:
"Say, shall the breasts where Valor's flame should burn,
"Your lifeless hearts as sepulchers inurn?
"Thou western Sun retard thy closing race,
"Nor to the Godhead witness our disgrace:
"Our souls returning, a new contest claim,
"Still thy last ray shall on our honor flame."
The daring chief, with these exalting words,
Each slackened heart to Valor's tone accords:
And as a cloud by adverse winds repelled,
Returns full often with double force impelled,
Then sailing pregnant with destructive storms,
Diffuses darkness, and the day deforms,
Till now descending with terrific roar,
Bursts from its womb the dire engendered store:
So, vengeance-stor'd, the fierce returning train
Impetuous rush upon the sons of SPAIN;
Who ill the fierce destructive impulse meet,
While terror whispers to their souls -- retreat:
That ignominious counsel they obey,
And urge precipitate their speedy way.
The warm pursuit the MEXICANS release,
Night spreads her starry veil, and all is peace:
When sudden from the tow'r's aspiring height
The clarion The MEXICAN Historian takes notice of the sacred Trumpet. It was
not permitted to any but the priests to sound it; and that only when they
animated the people on the part of their Gods.
pierced the drowsy ear of night;
That sacred instrument! whose voice renowned
Yields rarely to the world its tone profound:
TALEPO breathing through its brazen throat,
Diffused around a deep-inspiring note,
While on each youthful valour-heaving breast
Religion her warm energy impressed:
Now tenfold rage impels the martial train,
While leaps the pulse through every ardent vein:
Fierce they pursue the fleeting SPANIARD host,
Who from the neighboring lake's projected coast,
Rush down (as on their prey the Falcons dart)
And trust to safety from their buoyant art:
Vain hope! see at the royal chief's command
Of dauntless MEXICANS a chosen band,
Prompt as the quickness of the lightning's gleam,
Plunge with their leader in the roaring strem:
With one bold arm through clamorous waves they steer,
With one they raise aloft the threatening spear:
Thus vehement they urge the hostile train,
Inflicting vengeance on the sons of SPAIN,
Even till the wide-diffusing drops of blood
Spread like a scarlet mantle over the flood.
Of MEXICO the Genius now descends,
And near the angry waters as he bends,
The crystal goblet that his hand sustain,
He plunges thrice into the tinctured main!
Then soars, and on the neighboring mountain's height,
The radiant power arrests his rapid flight,
Where in full conclave a terrific band,
The spirits of illustrious chieftains stand! --
Not with the patriot does his passion die,
It breathes -- it is Immortality's ally:
Still from the tomb the warm affections flow
Even as the sunset-sky retains a glow.
"Mark, mark, the Genius said, this precious vase,
"Here pleased affix, here feast your raptured gaze:
"The vast canal near MEXICO that flows,
"Assumes the color that this crystal shows:
"Its swelling surges dash the sounding shore,
"Inflamed and crimsoned with the hostile gore."
Touched at the welcome tidings they rejoice,
And to the gale commit their feeble voice:
Lo, now disburden'd of their pressing care,
They tower aloft, and vanish into air.
Though Victory her sun-bright glory shed
Full and unsullied round the hero's head,
At Nature's voice he checks the smile of Joy,
And funeral duties now his thoughts employ:
The death-ground opening its capacious womb
Receives the dread deposite in its gloom.
Now, with uneven, but persuasive strains,
To wake the bosom, Harmony complains,
While Joy, obedient to the magic lay,
Dissolves like snow before the melting ray:
Now fades the expiring sweetly plaintive sound,
While still as midnight, Silence reigns around:
Chained is each voice, while over the awe-struck sense
Distill the sober horrors of suspense:
At length the chief the expecting silence broke,
While pointing to the patriot tomb, he spoke:
"Hail, sepulcher, which every coward shuns!
"Thou glorious hecatomb of Valor's sons!
"On thee, oh sacred altar of renown,
"The eternal being looks propitious down!
"They, they are dear to that all-seeing eye,
"Who greatly daring act, or bravely die.
"Let this suggestion soothe the bleeding heart,
"In which despair has lodged his poisoned dart:
"To you I speak, ye fair afflicted train,
"Who weep for brothers, friends, and lovers slain:
"To you I speak, ye widows plunged in care;
"And you whose sons stern fate refused to spare.
As thus he said -- deep from some breast unknown,
Burst unsubdued: Affliction's piercing moan,
Now intermitting, now returning loud --
At length, advancing through the wondering crowd,
A matron-form the attentive hero viewed,
Her robe neglected, and her tresses rude,
With hurried step the royal youth she sought,
Her wild eye speaking the inexpressive thought:
Close at her side a lovely boy appears --
Now through opposing grief her voice she rears:
"Give, give to me, the virtue that repels,
"The whelming surge of Sorrow at it swells:
"Two valiant sons, in age my comfort's store,
"My loved, my duteous children, are no more:
"This morn, this direful morn, a prey to fears,
"I bathed our parting with presaging tears:
"That they expired on Honor's sacred bed,
"That their souls mingle with the illustrious dead,
"Well do I know -- and glory in the thought:
"Bright Virtue's flame, perchance, from me they caught,
"From me the instructive lesson first they claimed,
"This bosom nurtured, and this voice inflamed.
"Yet ill with this vain pomp of splendid words,
"My drooping, loaded, sinking heart accords:
"Ah, still to Glory's thought despair succeeds,
"And the agonizing mother inly bleed.
"This orphan babe to you I now bequeathe,
"With Honor's brightest flowers his mind inwreathe."
The child, half-conscious of the mother's grief,
As if attempting to dispense relief,
Stretched forth his little arms, and playful smiled.
In vain the boy her scorpion thoughts beguiled,
Inclining at his call her anguish'd face,
Death-struck she perished in the wished embrace.
'Twas then the hero thus his thoughts expressed:
"Fly, wounded spirit, to the realms of rest!
"This orphan child committed to my care,
"This tender object of thy closing prayer,
"The blood that warms his breast, his helpless years,
"But most thy last request, to me endears.
The hero added -- "Shall the captive train
"Partake the fate the rigid laws ordain?
"As erring friends it is virtuous to forgive,
"'It Is godlike to decree the foe to live!
"Ah then, while Pity does her thoughts suggest,
"We feel the glowing God within our breast.
"Amid the captives one superior moves,
"Whose generous deeds humanity approves,
"One whose pure bosom all the Virtues claim,
"Respectful man! LAS CASAS is his name;
"He for Religion's sake Religion wooed,
"Warm at her shrine the priest enamored stood:
"When cruel Havoc bade the war increase,
"Still over the plain he strewn the flowers of Peace:
"To soothe the prostrate foe his wisdom planned,
"While hovered over the wound his healing hand:
"Yet not to these endearing acts confined,
"He poured the balm of comfort on the mind:
"Let then the sacred priest your friendship share,
"And at his voice the death-doom'd captives spare."
He said -- and to the God of war ordained
A spotless rite by human gore unstained. See the character of this SPANISH
Bishop, so celebrated for his humanity, as it is drawn by the masterly hand of
the Abbe RAYNAL in the third volume of his Histoire philosophique et politic.

Now, see the hero with the wedded fair,
(While sportive Fancy runs before) repair,
By Truth conducted to the dim alcove,
Where Pleasure rears the rosy couch of Love.
TALEPO now the Christian priest addressed:
"While Silence lulls the drooping world to rest,
"Let us enjoy the conf'rence of an hour
"Within the bosom of this seret bower:
"Say, 'mid the spoilers of this peaceful land,
"That rude unfeeling, bold destructive band,
"Who their base hands in guiltless blood imbrue,
"Oh, priest of meekness, what had thou to do?
"Say, of your country thus inured to fight,
"Do all in strife and massacres delight?
"Say, to what rigid Deity ye bend,
"If through our woes your prayers approved ascend?
LAS CASAS spoke -- "Compelled to join the host,
"Reluctantly I sought your peaceful coast:
"Nor of my country, with inhuman joy,
"Do all uplift their weapons to destroy:
"Nor is the Deity to whom we bow,
"Such as your vague bewild'ring thoughts avow:
"Indignant He beheld the martial train,
"With bloody purpose rushing over the main:
"Ill we deserve the blessings he bestowed:
"For us he quitted the divine abode --
"As on the humble earth with man He trod
"Through all her works awed Nature owned her God.
"The palsied suff'rer left his weary bed,
"While on his cheek Health's brightest color bled:
"And stranger still -- the tenant of the tomb,
"Who long had dwelt in Death's relentless womb,
"Upborn abruptly from the yawning ground,
"Amazement-smitten cast his eyes around!"
"Ah, highly favored race, TALEPO cried,
"Say, wherefore was your bliss to us denied?
"God of the Christians, speak the crime unknown
"For which an host of Virtues cannot atone!
"For which proscribed, disgraced, this hapless coast
"Is ravished of those gifts your children boast!
"Ah now, LAS CASAS, hasten to relate,
"The bright effects of your exalted state,
"The fruits that ripen from celestial seeds!
"Heroic thoughts! and burst of glorious deeds!
"You pause -- what means that sorrow-shaded eye?
"That fixed reluctance, that betraying sigh?
"Forbear, the priest returned, thy vain request,
"Nor call the truth from this unwilling breast:
"Though many godlike deeds our faith endear,
"The Christian story blasts the expecting ear.
"The Godhead spoke -- Let Meekness as a dove
" Brood in man's heart the sacred acts of Love.
"But mark the strange result -- in hostile bands
"The Christians hurry to remoter lands,
"To Death consigning, deaf to Pity's claim,
"The realms unknowing of their founder's name.
"From these dire acts they roused to new alarms,
"And on each other turned their reeking arms.
"The general Faith received Destruction's shock,
"And as a vessel dashed against a rock,
"Was split into a thousand jarring creeds,
"Each breathing rage and sanguinary deeds.
"Then Persecution waked the Martyr's pile,
"And hailed the sparkles with a greedy smile."
TALEPO said -- "The creed of distant tribes,
"From your high-favour'd realm remote, imbibes
"No knowledge of your God. -- Ah, tell me true,
"Bright Virtue's path do we in vain pursue?
"Say, do we nurse with ineffectual care
"The hope which soothes the pain that all must bear,
"Who speaks of bliss beyond this lower sphere,
"And whispers comfort to the dying ear?"
"Thrice virtuous sage, the feeling priest rejoined,
"Ah let not doubt o'ershade thy spotless mind:
"The different tenets that each nation claims --
"To heavenly power affixed the various names --
"Are as the rays projecting from the sun!
"Are but the titles of the Eternal One!
"The many modes of worship, as they tend
"To one refining pure celestial end,
"Even from that, diverse homage may aspire
"A grateful offering to the immortal Sire,
"As from the flowers of variegated dies
"Exhales a blended incense to the skies.
"On us with energy the Godhead beams,
"And on thy valiant clime but faintly gleams,
"Yet be not thou disturbed, nor fear to stray
"In quest of Virtue far from Virtue's way:
"As round his little path, though gloom'd by night,
"The radiant insect throws a guiding light;
"So all unerring see to act their part,
"Taught by the glittering glowworm of the heart."
TALEPO now, to bright conviction won,
Exclaimed, enchanted, "Oh thou better Sun!
"Thy words like dayspring on the breast of night,
"Pour on my darkened soul the endearing light --
"But partial light, for still within the mind
"Full many a painful doubt remains behind.
"What is that power we Chance or Fortune call,
"Who holds her veering ministry over all,
"Resembling still that spirit of the sky,
"Whose secret form eludes the human eye;
"Who now unmindful of its matchless power
"Indulgent whispers to the vernal flower,
"Plays with her leaves, and hovering over her bloom
"From her young breast allures the enclosed perfume:
"And now envelop'd in a sullen mood,
"Tempestuous rushes on the groaning wood,
"Armed with destructive energy, invades,
"Despoils, devasts the consecrated shades.
"Still with the cloud of Ignorance oppressed,
"Enlightened priest, unfold to my request,
"Of dire Necessity the hidden cause,
"Who seems on Freedom's ground to fix her laws,
"And combats and distracts the human will,
"As the wild storm confounds the pilot's skill.
"Tell, if thou can, what power impels the mind,
"When, loath in narrow bounds to be confined,
"She breaks disdainful from her native sphere,
"And soars exulting in a new career:
"And in her progress sends a daring glance
"Along Futurity's opaque expanse,
"That dread depository, veiled abode,
"Where breathe the secret counsels of the God!
"Still in my soul perplexing doubts remain,
"All knowing sage, that radiant power explain,
"Who when the world with lowering clouds is hung,
"Darts like the sun from his high orbit flung,
"And winged with swiftness, wild distracted flies,
"Dispersing terror through the conscious skies:
"Then the tremendous voice that speaks on high,
"As if some angry God bade Nature die,"
Thus through their converse stole with magic power
All unobserved, the slow nocturnal hour;
Till, as the shades forsook the morning sky,
The God of day disclosed his radiant eye,
Which dropping luster on the conscious main,
Showed to the deep-desponding sons of SPAIN,
A kindred fleet by urging zephyrs fanned,
Triumphant sailing to the impatient strand.
Rich tablature! by Expectation glazed,
By Hope high-colour'd, and by Joy emblaz'd.
See CORTEZ now, emerging from despair,
For all the butchery of war prepare;
Revenge and massacre, the saints that crown
The bloody altar of his base renown,
Now goad him on to snatch the wealthy prize,
Whose golden treasures glitter in his eyes.
Meanwhile Despondence (like approaching night)
Of INDIAN valor dims the splendid light;
Over MEXICANS her fenny pinions spreads,
And on their bosoms chilling fear-drops sheds.
To raise their drooping soul the chief compels
The magic seers to quit their lonely cells:
Three awful forms appear -- in white arrayed,
Whose reverend temples silver tresses shade.
To them TALEPO -- "If your hallowed mind,
"As Fame reports by Wisdom's ray refined,
"Can glance into Futurity's contents,
"And wander forth to meet the great events
"At distance sailing through their long career,
"To take their station in this lower sphere!
"Then speak our fate -- does Ruin hover near?
"And do we vainly grasp the hostile spear?"
DRACONO spoke -- "Thy wondering vision raise,
"And mark yon angry comet's threatening blaze!
"Have thou not heard loud howlings of despair,
"And shrieks of horror vex the midnight air?
"The dreaded power, who from his baleful breath
"Sends pains, sends pestilence, and sudden death,
"Amid the terrors of the conscious night,
"That God malignant rushed upon my sight:
" Advert to MEXICO 's distressful state,
" Behold the future picture of her fate.
He said -- when lo a lowering cloud overspread
"And mantled MEXICO's imperial head:
"Tall columns of dun smoke encircling joined,
"Which wreaths of flame like angry snakes entwined."
"Peace, terrour-spreading priest, the chief replied,
"Think not my people in your voice confide:
"Well I recall, how, in my early youth,
"Your dark predictions wandered far from truth:
"The midday sun recoiled, involved in night,
"While thou, the pander to the general fright,
"Did dastard-like thy voice prophetic rear,
"And loud assert -- The death of Time was near,
" That at her floodgates stood Destruction's power
"To deluge Nature in a fiery shower."
"The trembling world the chain of Silence bound,
"While dreadful Expectation hovered round:
"When from his cloud emerg'd the God of day,
"And nature burst into a grateful lay:
"So from the lowering cloud of our distress
"May dart the glorious sunbeams of Success.
"To war, to war let us again resort,
"And Victory by deeds of valor court."
He added not -- but hastening to the shore,
He bade his warriors grasp the guiding oar,
Determined on the bosom of the main
To dare the proud augmented power of SPAIN,
Whose stately brigantines, with spreading sail,
Approach obedient to the sullen gale,
Which like a mischief-urging spirit guides
The hostile vessels over the rolling tides:
With ruin fraught the vast progressive scene
Disparting -- leaves a dreadful space between.
To this dread space to war the stronger foe,
The daring chief directs his light canoe:
So mariners have seen the Sword-fish sail
With bold intent to wound the giant Whale.
NOW SPANISH art unlocks her deathful store,
While on the galleys bursts Destruction's roar.
Dark over the scene impends a veil of smoke,
By frequent flashes of the cannon broke.
'Twas then Fatality, mysterious queen,
Who reigns despotic over this lower scene,
Unquestioned guides the rise and fall of realms,
An empire now exalts, and now o'erwhelms,
Beheld her priestess, Revolution, stand!
Prompt on the mystic wheel to lay her hand:
"Urge, urge thy task, the fatal Goddess said,
"For MEXICO must bend her regal head."
The mystic wheel performs the appointed round,
And mark the chief in chains disgraceful bound:
Ah, see the youth approach the crowded shore,
While from the foe ascends the applauding roar.
Now to the royal dome his steps he bends,
So lately peopled with his valiant friends:
There, there, oh fight accursed, in evil hour
He views proud CORTEZ on the seat of power:
Who meanly vain, thus loud insulting said,
"Is all thy courage and resistance dead?
"The loyal troops that tread thy subject plains,
"Do they consent to view their king in chains?
"Audacious MEXICAN, behold how vain
"To war against the uplifted arm of SPAIN!
"Beneath yon plains, in some sequestered scene,
"Well do I know that Nature works unseen,
"Forms with creative hand the buried ore,
"To you an useless and unheeded store:
"Does strong desire still prompt thy heart to live,
"Then give to my impatient sight, oh give!
"The cunning artist at her secret toil,
"And glut my wishes with the glittering spoil!"
The captive hero gave these words to flow
(While his eye flashed defiance on the foe)
"These chains but only reach the exterior form,
"The bulwark of the mind thou can not storm:
"Misjudging man! think not thy proud control,
"Though all around your boasted thunders roll,
"Can ever invade the temple of the Soul;
"There lives the secret that thou would devour,
"And laughs at thy vain impotence of power."
"Still shall thy haughtiness be taught to crouch,
"The victor said -- Prepare the fiery couch,
"Pile glowing torches on the extended frame,
"And clothe it with a robe of raging flame."
Yet unappall'd the godlike youth rejoined:
"If through the night of thine umbrageous mind,
"Could radiant mercy dart a cheering ray,
"And melt to softness thy tyrannic sway,
"To thy distinction would I then confide
"That youthful captive, to my blood allied:
"Ah, on that venerable grief-struck sage
"Look down, and smooth the rugged path of age.
"But most relenting to this mourner bend,
"And over her days thy guardian care extend."
He ceased -- and turning to the drooping fair,
Who stood a monument of dumb Despair;
While Sorrow's iron hand her bosom wrung,
He on her neck in mournful silence hung.
Now from the chains that frame this fond delay,
Victorious over himself he breaks away,
And now advances, by rude ruffians led,
With step undaunted, to the torturing bed:
Alarmed to meet his kindred warrior there --
"Oh thou, he said, who did the battle share,
"Must thou, unhappy youth, endure with me
"This last severe result of SPAIN'S decree?
"Then raise thy heart superior to the task,
"Nor fear beneath those transient flames to bask;
"Even ere they fade the immortal Soul shall rise,
"And take its seat of bliss in yonder skies,
"Where to thy wondering vision shall expand,
"Adorned with heroes, a refulgent land,
"Where valiant MEXICANS, secure from woe,
"Look down contemptuous on the SPANISH foe."
He said -- and to his rigid doom resigned,
Along the flaming couch his form reclined:
The partner of his fate submissive bends,
And over the torturing bed his frame extends;
Yet then unequal to the conquering pain,
He spoke his suffering in lamenting strain:
"O, royal master, give me to disclose
"Where in the mine the golden treasure glows --
"I shrink, I faint, inferior to my part,
"And this frail frame betrays my daring heart."
Amidst the raging flames that round him blazed
The royal chief his martyred figure raised,
Cast on the youth a calm-reproaching eye,
And spoke -- oh eloquent, sublime reply!
Oh heaven! oh earth! attend
"Do I REPOSE
"ALL ON THE SILKEN FOLIAGE OF THE ROSE?"
He ceased -- and deep within his soul retired,
To honor firm, triumphant he expired.
Thy arduous task, brave youth, thou'st well performed,
Though perils, threats, and tortures round thee stormed:
Over thy last scene admiring angels hung,
And at thy exit lound applauding sung:
Thy spirit glowing with celestial fire,
To Heaven is wafted by the angelic quire:
The gorgeous spectacle ascending high,
Sails through the portal of the parting sky,
And at the living throne arrests its flight,
Over which is spread a brilliant flood of light;
There the dread presence dwells in deep recess,
Encompassed round with Glory's rich excess.
Now, through the veil of bright redundant beams,
A voice is heard -- "'From me Creation streams --
"'I am the Power -- I from the entombing Earth
"'Exalt the virtuous to a second Birth;
"'To them delighted I disclose the ray
"'Of Immortality's long Summer Day."'
But see TALEPO, venerable seer;
Approach the scene, impressed with busy fear,
When first the inhuman deed appalled his sight
Even as the cedar shrunk in sudden blight
He stood -- while at the dire appearance thrilled,
Each function of the soul stiff Horror chilled:
At length relenting into conscious grief,
He loud exclaimed -- " Oh loved, oh hapless chief!
"The ashes still that feed yon lingering flame,
"Do they of all thou art the existence claim?
"Long schooled in pale Adversity's rude porch,
"Where Hope's gay domes are burnt by Havock's torch,
"For me, with grief adjoin'd to age oppressed,
"Remained but this to cleave my care-worn breast.
"In early youth to me thou wast consigned
"I watched the dawn of thy celestial mind,
"I saw, by Nature waked, thy talents rise,
"And Virtue mark them with her brightest dies.
"Ah what avail these fruitless tears I shed?
"Though thou art gone -- yet Vengeance is not dead:
"The pregnant womb of Time" -- He added not --
While from his eye a radiant meaning shot.
His bosom heaved with a prophetic throe,
Till language gave his struggling thoughts to flow.
"Methinks Futurity, celestial maid,
"Through distant Time's dim lengthening isle displayed,
"Pours on my favored vision days unborn,
"That pant impatient for the lingering morn:
"Smooth as the clear expanse of vernal skies,
"A world of water claims my wondering eyes,
"See on its wavy breast, in splendid pride,
"Innum'rous brigantines triumphant ride: The SPANISH Armada sailed in 1588,
disposed in the form of a crescent, and stretching the distance of seven miles
from the extremity of one division to that of the other. HUME

"Mark how the gorgeous mass advancing ploughs
"The groaning main with high aspiring prows:
"Secure in all the haughtiness of strength,
"It moves a crescent of tremendous length,
"And big with thunders and destructive force,
"To BRITAIN'S coast directs its threatening course.
"Often has LAS CASAS, in applauding strain,
"To me revealed that sea-encircled plain.
"Thou Glory of the West! enchanted isle,
"Where beauteous maids on godlike heroes smile:
"By Nature's hand with Nature's chaplet crowned
"In arts, in commerce, and in arms renowned;
"August, magnificent, exalted Dame,
"As with a garment robbed in Freedom's flame!
"Arise, arise -- forestall the intended blow,
"See to thy portal sails the audacious foe.
"Another scenery is now displayed
"No more the main assembled vessels shade,
"A beggared remnant (of the splendid throng
"That swept in conscious majesty along)
"With prows disfigured, and dishonored masts,
"While through the rent sails mourn the hollow blasts,
"In shattered, mean, dismantled rude array,
"Steal over the waves their ignominious way.
"Oh of thy brilliant and extensive train
"Do these, ARMADA, these alone remain?
"Who has overthrown the honors of thy helm?
The voice of Fame replies -- ELIZA's realm!
"Where lurk thy galleons that surprised the deep?
"Loud Fame replies -- in Ocean's tomb they sleep!
"And of HISPANIA once the bright renown,
"Now glows an added gem to BRITAIN'S crown.
"Enough -- enough, submissive to my fate
"I now return to my distressful state:
"Thanks to the God, whose kind revealing power
"Gilds with a cheerful ray my closing hour."
THE VENETIAN MARRIAGE, BY THE SAME.
THE VENETIAN MARRIAGE.
THE western sun's expiring ray*
To VENICE gave a milder day;
Till by degrees the lingering light
Hung trembling on the verge of night.
CAMILLA then, with fearful soul,
To the Adriatic margin stole,
Where in a bark, at Love's command,
PLACENTIO took his faithful stand.
Possessing now his future bride,
He bade the bark securely glide,
Which far unlike that gally showed
That down the silver Cydnus rowed,
Beneath whose purple sails were seen,
Proud Ostentation's gaudy Queen,
Who sure of conquest, vain of mind,
All languishingly lay reclined!
Here Beauty undefiled by art,
Whose bosom owned a tender heart,
Beneath the sails from home removed,
And trusted to the man she loved.
A vernal calmness lulled the deep,
And hushed each wavy surge to sleep:
The air along the sultry day,
Scorched by the Summer's fervent ray,
Was freshen'd by a recent shower,
While Silence solemnized the hour.
The still solemnity impressed
With awful thought's CAMILLA'S breast,
For now by prompting Love impelled,
Now by Timidity witheld,
The words which to pronounce she tried,
Recoiled, and unaccented died.
PLACENTO too alike subdued,
They sailed along in silent mood,
And stillness reigned from shore to shore,
Unbroke -- but by the dashing oar.
At length the fair dissolved the charm --
"Ah, wonder not I feel alarm!
"Confiding in thy love I came,
"And risk'd for thee my virgin fame:
"Ah tell me to what place we sail,
"For in my bosom fears prevail:
"Yet answer not this idle fear,
"Wherever thou art bright honor's there."
"The plan I form, the youth replied,
"To Innocence is close allied,
"And fearful of thy virgin fame
"As of her babe the tender dame.
"These waves that wander to the sea,
"Wash in their pilgrimage a tree,
"Which spreads its lowly branches wide,
"And dips them in the passing tide:
"There, in a shade composed of reeds,
"An aged hermit tells his beads:
"He, generous sage, will join our hands
"In wedlock's unremitting bands.
"Then to VALCLUSA we'll repair*
"Where LAURA'S soul informs the air:
"Where PETRARCH'S spirit hovers round,
"The guardian of the sacred ground,
"Forbidding still that fiend of art,
"That shrewd perverter of the heart,
"The snake, Inconstancy, to rove
"Within the paradise of Love.
"As when chill Winter quits the land,
"The snow-drop does her leaves expand,
"So may chill fears your breast release,
"Till gently it expands to peace,
"Mild as these twilight breezes blow,
"Soft as the waves on which we flow."
"Ye walls where first I drew the air,
"Returned (assured) the beauteous fair;
"Ye turrets which but dimly seen
"Increase the terror of the scene!
"Ye stately towers! and rising spires!
"From you CAMILLA now retires.
"Thou tomb whose pious urn contains
"My sacred parents' cold remains!
"Ye partners of my tender years,
"Whom youthful sympathy endears:
"Ye joys that crown my native coast,
"Well for PLACENTIO all are lost."
She ceased -- and on her pensive soul
Again an awful musing stole,
Such as the twilight scene excites,
Such as the feeling heart delights;
For as the coy nocturnal flower
No more its sweets at eve witholds,
So the meek heart at the evening hour
Its sensibility unfolds.
See now they reach the sacred cell
Where Wisdom, Peace, and Virtue dwell:
There, bent beneath the weight of age,
They find prepared the expecting sage
He hailed them in a friendly tone,
And bade them call his cell their own:
Where rose an altar formed of moss,
Crowned with a simple wooden cross!
There too a taper, mildly bright,
Supplied a pompous glare of light*
No holy relick rich-enchas'd
This unambitious altar graced:
Here Flora, Nature's priestess, stood,
And round her fragrant offerings strewn.
The hermit spoke -- "Hail, virtuous pair,
"May your misfortunes perish here:
"Though youth be yours, yet well I know
"You Have tasted deep of human woe!
"Control, and art, and baseness joined,
"To cancel what your hearts designed:
"But now Misfortune's reign is over,
"And Pleasure opens all her store."
He paused -- and now the youthful pair
The irrevocable vow prefer:
And now the hermit closed their hands
In willing and unvenal bands,
Unspotted bands! which mutual Love,
And Confidence and Virtue wove.
FINIS.

