REFLECTIONS Concerning the VIRTUES OF TAR WATER.

WHEREIN Is proved by EXPERIENCE, that its present PREPARATION is not founded
upon PHILOSOPHICAL PRINCIPLES; and that, as now Prepared, it may probably
occasion more DISEASES than it can possibly cure.

WITH HINTS for its IMPROVEMENT, so as to make it a most efficacious and
pleasant Medicine.

By H. JACKSON, Chemist.

Homines ad Deos nulla Re propius accedunt, quam Salutem Hominibus dando. TULL.
LONDON: Printed for J. ROBINSON, at the Golden Lion in Ludgate Street. 1744.
(Price Four Pence.)

REFLECTIONS Concerning the VIRTUES OF TAR WATER, etc.
TAR WATER, as it is lately ordered by the Bishop of Cloyne, being at present
almost as universal in its Use as it is proved to be in its Properties, by this
learned Author; I hope it will not be thought presumptuous in me to undertake
to prove why, and in what Manner, it may be improved in its excellent
Qualifications, by a particular Management in its Preparation, since nothing
but the general Good of Mankind is hereby aimed at. And though the learned Bishop
has given Directions to prepare it in a very simple Manner, probably with the
Intention that it might be equally serviceable to the Poor and Rich, yet I
think few Reasons can be assigned, why the Rich may not be supplied with a mose
neat and certainly a more efficacious Remedy; especially, since the Price, even
then, will not much exceed the present Rate, as I shall endeavor to prove.

Norway Tar, as it is now imported, is unquestionably the best for this most
noble Medicine, as being endowed with the most fragrant and subtle Parts,
beyond other Tars, which is evident by its Smell, and by its Taste, as being
least acrimonious; and it has been proved by several ingenious Chemists, that
it partakes least of that heating sulphurous Property, which abounds in all
these Balsams, either more or less.

Common Tar, or Tar from hot Climates, is not so well Saturated with this fine
volatile aromatic Flavor. This, perhaps, in some Measure, may be owing to the
Influence of the Sun, which exhales all the finest Parts, except those that are
closely connected, and suppressed by the viscid Juices of the Trees; whereas in
colder Regions, the Pores of the Trees are more close and compact, and by that
means these subtle Parts are more detained and locked up in their proper
Cells, from whence proceeds the siner Flavor. But notwithstanding this, the
best Norway Tar, as it is now imported, is so loaded with heterogeneous Matter,
such as Sticks, Straws, Flies, Sand, and various other Bodies which cannot be
defined, and which cannot subside in the Barrel by Reason of its Consistence or
Thickness, (it being defign'd more for the Use of Ships than Medicine) that a
Method ought to be considered which Way to refine it, like other natural
Balsams, without damaging its natural Properties. This none but the chemic Art
can well effect, so that it is needless to deliver the Process, since none but
Chemists can perform it with Success; and that they can do at a trifling
Expense. By this Method it is so contrived, that the pungent Taste of the Water
is greatly lessened, and it is not so apt to regurgitate upon weak Stomachs;
which frequently happens to the fair Sex, and renders them incapable of
retaining it, for whose particular Maladies it is peculiarly excellent, as is
unquestionably proved by the Author of Siris, Sect. 51, 99, 101, and 118.

The next Thing I shall take notice of is the Water. Our Author has not
expressly informed us what Sort to make use of; so that we might use any Sort
indifferently, was it not that our own Reason is sufficient to convince us what
Sort to prefer; but lest the injudicious Part of Mankind may not comprehend
what is meant, I shall endeavor to prove what Water ought to be preferred in
compounding this most valuable Medicine.

Our Author tells us in Sect. 110 of his Siris, that Tar Water ought to be
taken for some considerable Time in chronic Cases, such as the Gravel, Gout,
Scurvy, etc. And that he has known very great Advantages procured thereby,
which did not begin to appear till it had been taken two or three Months; which
Circumstance in all Alteratives ought to be, but seldom is, regarded: now, as
such a long Time must be allowed to complete the Cure of a chronic Distemper,
it follows, that a large Quantity of Water must be drank during this Time,
perhaps the Quantity of twenty or thirty Gallons, or it may be three Times as
much, before it be entirely forborne. But admit, that in painful Distempers, as
the Gout and Rheumatism, it should only procure Ease, during the taking it, and
a Relapse should ensue upon omitting it, as it may justly be suspected
sometimes to fall short of a perfect Cure in the Gout or Scurvy; then it
naturally follows, that a Patient would continue taking it, perhaps for Years,
or, so long as he perceived any good Effect by its Use. Now as there is thus
sometimes a Necessity for drinking so great a Quantity of Water, it may justly
be disputed whether the Cure might not be of worse Consequence to the Patient
than the Disease; I mean, by employing an improper Water in making the
Medicine: For most Waters are widely different in their Properties, according
to the various Sources from whence they arise; as for Instance, Well-Waters
chiefly are impregnated with mineral or metalline Particles, and River-Waters,
which I suppose are chiefly used in London for this Medicine, abound with
diverse heterogeneous Particles, according to the various Soils they glide upon;
and there is no Water at all so pure, but is loaded either more or less, with
something foreign to itself: If any one disputes the Truth of this, let him but
inspect the Infide of one of the Lady's Tea-kettles, and that will certainly
convince him, or look into one of the leaden Pipes which conveys this Water for
Kitchen Use, even if it has been laid but for three Months, and he will find
the Inside lined with a stony Concrete: Then, without any cavilling or entering
into any abstruse Mathematical Demonstration in this Point, I shall leave every
one to judge what must be the Consequence of drinking so much of this crude
Water, which must be done in the common Method of making Tar Water.

But that I may not be thought singular in my Opinion, I shall just beg leave
to subjoin some Quotations from Authors of established Reputation for Learning
and Genius, to confirm what I have already advanced, and then propose a Method
how to avoid this Evil at a small Expense.

Most Naturalists tell us of surprising Instances of some Waters, which are of
such a petrifying Nature, that in Rivulets wherein Water-mills have been fixed,
the Periphery which catches the Water in small Boxes has been petrified to such
a Degree, that the Owners have been obliged to clear it frequently with proper
Instruments, in order to facilitate the Motion of the Wheel: such an Instance
as this I have seen, and whoever inspects the Waterworks of London Bridge,
will find something to the same Purpose.

Dr. Mead has furnished us with some Hints of this Kind, in his last Essay on
Poisons. At Paris, it has been remarked, that the River Seine is so full of
stony Corpuscles, that the Inhabitants there are more subject to the Stone and
Gravel, than at other Places.

Now let us suppose, what is very possible, that Waters may be impregnated with
Metallic Particles of some Ore or other; then these, according to their various
Gravitations, the Capacities of the Canals or Vessels, and such like
Circumstances, (when they come to circulate in the human Body) must attract and
be attracted by other Particles, which are already deposited either in the
Kidneys, Bladder, or other secretory Passages, and cannot but form, and, as it
were, cement a stony Substance, which, it is greatly to be feared, will defeat
all the Efforts and sovereign dissolving Properties of Tar Water itself; nay,
much stronger Medicines; of which the once famed Mrs. Stephens's are an
Instance.

The Consideration of what has been said, and the Idea, which may be conceived
of the infinite Number of small Ducts or secretory Vessels, through which this
Liquor must be strained, ought to give us convincing Demonstrations, why it is
as likely to procure Obstructions, as to remove them, and, consequently, lay
the very Foundation for all Chronic Deseases, which, in my Opinion, must and do
proceed from one and the same Cause.

Dr. Lister observes, that Waters which pass through a clayish Bottom, must
partake of metallic Particles, because Clay is a mineral Glebe; and that these
Particles are not to be mastered, that is, they cannot be digested in the human
Body; and therefore he concludes, they cannot but cause calculous Concretions
in the Kidneys, Bladder, and Joints. If this be the Case, we need not wonder
why insensible Perspiration is obstructed by them; and thus says the great
Sanctorius in Sect. 2. Aphor. 2. that heavy Water converts the Matter of
Transpiration into an Ichor, which being retained, inchuces a Cachexy, which
the learned Author of Tar Water says, ( Sect. 93.) is of the same Kind with the
Scurvy, proceeds from the same Causes, and is attended with like Symptoms;
which are so manifold and various, that the Scurvy may be looked on as a
general Cachexy infecting the whole Habit, and vitiating all the Digestions.

From hence proceed Pains in the Limbs, livid Pustules and Ulcers in the Body,
with great Inflammation from the Acrimony of the obstructed Ichor, or
perspirable Matter. Hysterical Maladies are occasioned by the same Means; for
the said Sanctorius observes, in Sect, 3. Aphor. 13. that the Wind, so
inseparable from those Cases, is nothing else than the Fluid of Perspiration
crude and unfinished: And a late very learned Author gives us the History of a
Lady, his Relation, who was very much afflicted with frequent Returns of
violent Cholic Pains, till she was advised by the noble Van Helmont, not to
drink, as she then did, Beer brewed with Wellwater, and soon after her Health
was so far owing to that Management, that an Error in it, was unavoidably
followed with the usual Complaint.

It may be objected, that all Persons are not alike subject to the Stone and
Gravel, and that when Water is mixed with the oily and acid Particles of the
Ballam, it may, in some measure, relax the Vessels, and by that means give
Liberty to the obstructed Matter to recover its Circulation or Secretion; but
it must be considered that most Constitutions are more or less subject to
Gravel, as appears upon Dissections, and by a sandy Sediment deposited in the
Urine at various Times; it must be considered too, whether the attractive Force
of these stony Particles, or the relaxing or attenuating Properties of Tar
Water predominate; which I should imagine (considering the Narrowness of the
Vessels or Ducts, etc. through which it must pass, whereby consequently the
Particles are brought more within the Sphere of one another Attraction) must
be yielded to the former; especially since it is a known Law in Mechanics, that
in all Bodies or Particles of Matter, the attractive Force is as their
Solidities, and Points in Contact, and that the attractive Force is infinitely
greater at the Point of Contact, or extremely near it, than at any determined
Distance. Besides, it is allowed that this Balsam contains an Acid, which
incorporates with Water; and there must be a Sulphur because there is an Acid,
for Homberg says, the Acid is always joined to Sulphur, Vide Siris, Sect. 129,
and Sir Isaac Newton says, that whatever attracts and is attracted strongly, is
an Acid, ib. Sect. 130. The last Author has also proved, that Acids which lay
suppressed in sulphurous Bodies, attract earthy ones more strongly than their
own; from whence he accounts for Fermentation, etc. which may be seen fully
explained, as it is printed in the second Volume of Dr. Harris's Lexicon
Technicum. From hence it follows, that when these acid Particles meet with
earthy ones, which abound in Water, they cannot but attract them; and when
these Particles so attracted, do, by any Motion or Impulse meet with other
Particles of a homogeneal Nature with themselves, which they cannot fail to do,
either in the Bladder, Kidneys, or other Vessels in the Body, then it is that
they attract each other most strongly, and so form Obstructions in this or that
Vessel or Duct, which makes least Resistance, in spite of all the
Intermediation of the Oil in Tar Water, which bears but a small Proportion to
the acid or attractive Force.

But to return to our Subject, Water is of so constant a Service in preparing
our Diet as well as Medicine, that it may be justly said to be the Vehicle of
all our Nourishment, so that we cannot be too inquisitive into its Nature and
Difference, nor too nice in our Choice of it; and as it is the only Menstruum
of so noble a Medicine as Tar Water, it cannot be amiss to try and prove, if by
our Art we can divest it of all its noxious Qualities, since we can find none
without, and by that Means make it approach nearer to a Principle; when it will
be fittest to join and cohere with the most subtle Parts of that excellent
Balsam called Tar.

This must be resolved into the noble Art of Chemistry, the experimental Part
of which can only convince us, that Waters may be purified so as to partake
little, or, perhaps, nothing, of that noxious Quality so obvious in them; and I
have been convinced of this, by frequent Repetitions of various Processes
performed with various Glasses within these two Months past, which would take
up too much Room to insert in this Place. What is here said may occasion
various Objections, especially from those at present concerned in the common
Preparation of Tar Water; but I dare venture to affim, if the Question was put
to any Chemist, nay to those who have only acquired a superficial Knowledge in
Physic, it would not be disputed, but Waters may be purified by various Means
to a great Degree, though they might still fall short of that Perfection which
cannot be performed effectually, without the Addition of a second Principle,
which has been successfully discovered after a tedious Course of Experiments:
For Distillation of Water alone, will not answer the Purpose; since after it
has been distilled two or three Times, it will still continue to form a stony
Concrete in the Inside of any Vessel it is boiled or even simmered in; and it
is very easy to imagine what Consequences a continued Quantity may produce,
when strained through the fine capillary Vessels in a human Body; which, as our
great Author observes in Sect. 54, of his Siris, are said to be so small, that
one Grain of Sand would cover the Mouths of more than a hundred Thousand.

It was observed before, and it may be justly repeated, that none but a Chemist
can so dexterously prepare this Water, so as to free it from what is foreign to
itself, consequently no Person can better prognosticate what Effects may
proceed from its Use; for as our learned Bishop observes from Socrates, Sect.
253, You and the Cook may judge of a Dish on the Table equally well, but while
the Dish is making, the Cook can better foretell what will ensue from this or
that Manner of composing it; consequently the Chemist can judge best what will
ensue from this or that manner of making a Medicine. People addicted to
censure, may give out that self Interest is the only Motive that has induced me
to publish this Pamphlet, because the Method of refining the two Principles is
not recited; to which I answer, that the Chemic Province is too much invaded
already by Empiries and Impostors, and those who are dissatisfied in this
Point, are left to their own Option, either to continue drinking common Tar
Water, or else apply to a Chemist for the other, since it is, at the same Time
with this Book, published, where the genuine may be had at an easy Expense.

And though the Preference of this Medicine may be imagined from the Reasons
already given, yet I am far from disparaging, or assuming the least Merit due
to, our original and illustrious Author the Bishop of Cloyne; his excellent
Treatise certainly deserves the greatest Applause and Homage from every Rank,
and from Persons of Genius; and it would be folly in me to think him in the
least ignorant, either of theoretical or experimental Part of Chemistry; what
he has done may be more plausibly accounted for, from the Satisfaction he
enjoyed in discovering a Medicine so universal, and easy in its Purchase to
Rich and Poor; yet no Reasons can be assigned why we may not exercise our
Faculties in meliorating that Medicine, and prove it more universal both by
Reason and practical Experience.

I shall now conclude with making some Remarks upon the Manner of preparing
this most noble Medicine, which when rightly managed, will justly deserve all
the Encomiums conferred upon it. Its present Preparation is the most improper
that can be, which, in some measure, the Bishop himself has proved by his own
Philosophy, in several Parts of his Treatise; for by his ordering it to be
stirred with a Ladle, or flat Stick, one may suspect that he and most others
hitherto have prepared it in an open Vessel, which must be inconsistent with
all manner of Philosophy. He lays great stress upon its Volatility, its subtle
Oil or Acid, and its oily volatile vegetable Salt, which he says are the very
Flower of its specific Qualities; this makes it appear more strange, that a
Medicine endowed with such fine volatile Parts, should be made in an open
Vessel, unless we intended to evaporate, o^ rob it of this Volatility: For he
has taught us, in Sect. 46. that all the finest and purest Parts of any
Volatile very easily ascend first: Where then must all these fine volatile,
oily, and subtle acid Parts, as he calls them, go to, in a Vessel uncovered?
It ought to be our chiefest Care to preserve them. What is the Worth of the
once greatly fancied Spirits of Scurvigrass, after they have stood forty eight
Hours in an open Vessel? Sal Ammoniac and Salts of Tartar, perhaps, have less
Volatility, than either Tar or Water, when single, yet upon the least mixing
them one with the other, there immediately arises a Volatility, which affects
the Nose so strongly, as not to be endured. But though this will greatly admit of
a Comparison, ^et it does not exactly solve the present Problem: For, Tar being
impregnated with such subtle Parts, which are suppressed from flying off by
Reason of the Viscidity of its component Parts, yet when it comes to be
divided, and, as it were, fluxed with such a Fluid as Water, then all its
volatile Parts are disengaged, and set loose from their Imprisonment, and
cannot fail to escape according to their different Degrees of Purity;
especially if the Water be refined, for it is then rendered much fitter for
Infusion, because its Parts, which before were gross and heavy, being now made
small, and, as it were, volatile, it is fitted to inlinuate itself into the
most remote Abscesses, and there adjoin itself to the most subtle parts of the
Subject, which before were so closely shut up in these narrow Cells, as to
debar the Entrance of more crude aqueous Particles: Much in the Manner as
Spirits of Wine will dissolve a resinous Substance sooner than Water; for the
spirituous Particles being more subtle and exceedingly smaller than those of
Water, they can more readily enter into the Interstices of the Resin, and
easily disjoin its Parts, which are too closely united for the gross Corpuscles
of Water to enter.

Hence it is manifest, that purified Water is not only incomparably better
adapted to enter into the Stage of Circulation in human Bodies, but likewise
more appropriated to extract a Tincture from Vegetables or their Balsams; which
is the sole Aim of our present Business.

FINIS.

