AN INQUIRY INTO THE NATURE, CAUSE, and CURE OF THE CROUP.
By FRANCIS HOME, M. D. His Majesty's Physician, and Fellow of the Royal
College of Physicians in Edinburgh.

EDINBURGH: Printed for A. KINCAID and J. BELL, MDCC,LXV.

[Price One Shilling.]

AN INQUIRY INTO THE NATURE, CAUSE, and CURE OF THE CROUP.
THE Science of Medicine has been, gradually, advancing for these two thousand
years by past; and is now brought to a great degree of improvement; perhaps to
as great a degree, every circumstance considered, as the difficulty of the art,
the limitation of the human faculties, and the continual attempts to further
refinement, too often conducted merely by fancy, will admit of.

ONE used to consider the progress of the different arts, their gradual
advancement to perfection, and their subsequent decay, may be apt to
contemplate, with some alarm, the present situation of physic. More attention
is paid to the classing of diseases, as if they were natural and permanent
entities, than to the complete history of each particular one; more to the
sub-division and splitting of them into separate species, from some slight
difference in the symptoms, than to the general turn and complexion of the
whole disease; more to the novelty and change of application, than to the
improvement of what is already discovered and in use. These, a speculative mind
will be apt to consider as proofs of too great refinement, and distant marks of
a future change.

IT is by a close attention to the history of particular diseases, that the
science has made such great advances. The accuracy of ancient and modern
authors has left few diseases untouched. By describing every circumstance
belonging to them, and the appearances, which occurred, on inspecting the
bodies after death, they have ascertained most diseases, and laid a foundation
for arriving at as certain a knowledge of the rest, as the narrow limits of our
powers will allow. For cases in medicine are the experiments of this branch of
Natural Philosophy.

THERE is one disease, however, which had entirely escaped all regular
examination; and concerning which, there was little to be learned by inquiry,
and still less from books; I mean the CROUP. I never have seen any thing
written on this subject, except a Thesis, where the author gives us no facts;
and classes it amongst the spasmodic distempers, to which it has no
resemblance, either in its progress or cure. The Catarrhus suffocativus of
Etmuller, though it resembles the Croup in many particulars, yet appears to be a
very different disease in some symptoms, in the cure, and appearances after
deaths.

DR Russel, in his Economy of Nature, describes, in a few lines, a disease
very similar to this, in most of its symptoms: But it seems not exactly the
same, as it was attended with ulcers about the larynx, and terminated often in
a sphacelus of the lungs. Besides, had it been the same disease with our Croup,
the same appearances must have occurred, upon dissection, to him as to us.

I SHALL, therefore, treat this disease as entirely unknown as to its nature,
cause, effects, and cure; and try how far our facts will carry us toward a
discovery of these.

How so singular and dangerous a disease has been totally neglected, while such
attention has been paid to most others, is not the least surprising
circumstance belonging to it. Its external features ought to have been
sufficient to have roused an inquisitive searcher into diseases; its internal
appearances, if but once seen, must have raised, from their singularity, the
strongest desire to investigate its nature. But these seem to have been more
than counterbalanced by its local situation; the unfrequency of its appearance;
the subjects which it attacked, these being generally children, and unable to
give a distinct account of their complaints; the rapidity of its course; the
apparent easiness of its symptoms; and their similitude to other catarrhal or
peripneumoniac distempers. These seem to be sufficient reasons for its being so
long undistinguished and undescribed, without laying us under any necessity of
looking on it as a new disease. Probably it has existed more or less in all
ages; for the same productive causes must have operated formerly, as they do at
present.

THIS disease happens, or at least is observed, so seldom in this city, that
very few cases must occur to any particular person, during the course of a
whole lifetime. To have the power of seeing more, one must put himself in the
way of intelligence, especially at places situated on the coast. By that means,
I have had an opportunity of attending more cases, than otherwise would have
fallen to the share of any one. The danger of the symptoms under such apparent
ease, and the singularity of its appearances after death, in the first
examination, excited my curiosity. The subsequent cases were sufficient to show
me its nature, though perhaps not to point out a certain cure. That is not always
allowed to mortals. To be able, however, to distinguish it from other diseases;
to discover the nature of it; to point out when it is cureable, and when not;
perhaps to lay a foundation for improvement in its most desperate state; that
is the design of the following pages.

To be the first author in treating a disease; to have no assistance from
preceding experience, is a situation a little uncommon in these modern times.
To this cause, and to the rarity of the disease, must be imputed my not
bringing it to that degree of improvement, that I could wish; and that has
happened in other diseases. If this can serve for a foundation to excite others
to inquire, to preserve, and to communicate facts observed by them, my labor
will be well bestowed.

THIS disease appears to belong peculiarly to children; and the younger they
are, after they are weaned, the more liable they seem to it. On the breast,
they appear less subject to it; or, which is as probable, as they cannot tell
their complaints, it is taken for some other disease. I never saw, or heard of
one, above twelve years of age, affected by it. After this the body gains a
strength capable of resisting the cause, or of expelling it when received.
About this time, or a little after, very great changes happen in the human
frame.

It seems, likewise, in a great measure, to have a local situation; and to be
very seldom found at any great distance from the seashore. It appears much
less in Edinburgh than in Leith, or Musselburgh. It is often seen along the
coast of Fife; and is very common, I am told, along the coast of Airshire and
Galloway. Though I never heard of it in the neighboring coast of England, yet
probably it is to be found there too. The same causes, that kept it from being
so long attended to here, may still make it neglected there. Very wet and
marshy situations, sometimes, produce it.

IN the first history of a disease, it becomes absolutely necessary, to set
down the cases and the facts, as they really happened. In diseases, that have
already been described, it is sufficient to enumerate the symptoms, as they
generally appeared, by which the difference betwixt that species, and any of
the former, may be observed. But in a new disease, as little ought to be left
to the fancy or judgment of the historian as possible; for, from the natural
appearance of the symptoms, all our reasoning and conclusions must take their
rise. As cases are analogous to the experiments of Natural Philosophy, they
ought to be described as circumstantially. Hipporates, that great historian of
diseases, treats his epidemics, as they were new distempers, in this way.

CASE I.
MARCH 15th. Was called to Miss****, aged fifteen months, of an inflammatory
constitution, and living within a quarter of a mile of the seashore. The day
before, she had appeared duller and hotter than usual. This morning she was
attacked with a difficulty of breathing. Her pulse was strong, and about 135 in
a minute; five ounces of blood was immediately taken from her. After which, she
was seized with the sharp stridolous voice, which I can resemble to nothing
more nearly than the crowing of a cock; and which is the true diagnostic sign
of this disease. She had a quick and high breathing, and unusual heat in her
forehead, and palms of her hands. Her feet and hands were swelled, and had an
aedematous appearance. As her pulse was still strong, five ounces of blood was
again taken from her, which seemed to ease her greatly. The steams of warm
water and vinegar made her spit up, and did her service. Her belly was kept
constantly loose with magnesia alba; and that night a blister was applied round
her neck. On the third day, she was a little easier; but the voice still
remained shrill, the breathing high, and pulse strong. At night four leeches
were applied to her throat; and the orifices, constantly fomented with warm
water, continued blooding for four hours. Next morning all the symptoms went
off. In this case, the repeated bloodings, especially the local one, with
internal and external fomentation, did most remarkable service. I was not so
certain about the effects of the blister.

CASE II.
MISS ******, aged eighteen months, healthful, living near a great loch, and
about a mile distant from the sea, was seized, March 30th, with the Croup. She
had immediately lost five ounces of blood by leeches, and had got a vomit. Next
morning, she had taken a second vomit, after which I first saw her. Her voice
had the characteristical shrillness, only, when she raised it, or coughed. Her
breathing was quick. Pulse about 130. and rather weak. Dry, rough, short cough.
She had no pain in swallowing, but showed uneasiness when she turned about her
head. Urine clear, and without sediment. The steams of warm water and vinegar,
and a blister round the neck, were ordered. In the evening she was better, and
her lungs appeared somewhat moister. That night she rested pretty well; and on
the third day her voice was natural, except when she coughed. She had a running
at the nose, and there was a cloud in the urine. The vomit repeated. On the
fourth day, the voice was still somewhat unnatural. The urine now deposited a
light sediment, which lasted for three or four days, during which she gradually
recovered. She had the same disease again six months after, but in a slighter
manner.

CASE III.
A CHILD two years old, who had had the small pox six weeks before, had been
seized, August 8th, with the croupy voice. Leeches had been applied, and
blisters behind the ears, and to the throat: On the 12th, I saw him, and sound
his breathing bad, great stuffing, shrill voice, and a swelling externally on
the superior part of the trachea. Pulse 140. Every thing looked ill. Steams,
external fomentation, poultices, and several leeches were applied to the
throat. 13th, the child greatly relieved, more cheerful, and voice more
natural. 14th, pulse much better, and the peculiarity of voice and the swelling
almost gone.

I NEED not relate more cases of this kind, as such like commonly occur, and as
they are sufficient to prove its nature in this situation. The only remark that
I shall make is, that the symptoms of these three patients, and their cure,
show plainly the Croup, in this state, to be a disease of an inflammatory
nature, attacking the organs of voice and respiration, particularly the
superior parts of the trachea, and that the local inflammation often ends by
resolution. This disease appears to be confined chiefly to the trachea, as the
patients have no pain in deglutition; as they generally complain, when they are
of an age to speak, of a dull pain in the upper part of it; as sometimes an
external swelling is seen there; and as the fauces are at most but a little
redder.

LET us now see what light other situations of the disease, and inspection into
the morbid body, will give us.

CASE IV.
SEPTEMBER 29th, 1760, was called to a boy of seven years of age, who had been
some days sick. He lived on Leith bridge, had been ill of the chin-cough the
preceding winter, and had recovered of the measles about six weeks before
this. He had been frequently purged, and had been tolerably well, excepting a
slight cough, till he was seized, four days before I saw him, with fever, heat,
thirst, and the shrill croupy voice. When I saw him, his pulse was quick, with
a little degree of hardness, but not strong. He swallowed easily; but
complained of a pain in the trachea, when he spoke, or when I pressed it with
my fingers. His face had been swelled. Great drought. Breathing high, but not
very quick. He sometimes expectorated, and had often frothy saliva upon his
lips. The urine had a white ouzy sediment. His senses and his head were quite
clear and distinct. He was immediately blooded, and at night had leeches
applied to his throat, and a blister round it. The next day his pulse was
weaker, and beat 175 in a minute. Breathing quicker, and often altered.
Distinct in all his senses. Died that night.

ON laying open the parts, there was no appearance of any inflammation on the
fauces. But, to my great surprise, the whole superior internal surface of the
trachea was covered with a white soft thick preternatural coat or membrane,
easily separable from it, and generally lying loose upon it, and purulent
matter lodged below, and around it. The subjacent parts were red; but no great
degree of inflammation. As we searched downwards, the same appearances
continued through the ramifications of the aspera arteria, though the membrane
seemed here softer, thinder, and to become of a more purulent nature. All the
branches of the windpipe and bronchiae were filled with purulent matter; and we
could easily squeeze it out, in great plenty, from all these pipes. The
substance of the lungs was quite sound, and in a natural state.

THESE circumstances appeared, at that time, so new and surprising to me, that
I looked on them as accidental, and not the natural effects of the disease. But
I was soon convinced of the contrary.

CASE V.
OCTOBER 5th. I WAS called-to the last boy's sister, aged five years, who had
been observed, only the day before, to complain of a dull pain in the throat.
She had been immediately blooded, and had got a mixture of spt. minder. and
theriac, with a blister to the neck. She had been in a constant sweat since she
began to take the mixture. When I saw her she had the dry shrill voice, and
difficult breathing, with great motion of the ribs and scapulae. Her face was a
little swelled and red; deglutition easy. Her pulse was quick, and of a proper
degree of strength. What she expectorated seemed to be of a purulent nature.
Her senses were all in the natural state. Leeches were immediately applied to
her neck, and afterward a warm fomentation, and the steams of warm water and
vinegar: these appeared to give her some ease. At night she seemed worse, and
could not ly long in one posture. She was vomited with the sir. scillit. and
threw up a great deal of gross ropy defluxion. I tried her with a mixture of
camphire and nitre. The next day her pulse was 152, and weaker. The amygdalae
appeared a little swelled, and covered with mucus. She had a little difficulty
of deglutition. Frequent reachings. She called often for drink, but drunk
little at a time. Tongue white and furred. Breathing rather quicker today, and
often altered. Eat some spoonfuls of panada and wine. She was ordered an
emollient injection, and garlic cataplasms to her feet. In the afternoon, all
the symptoms were worse. The injection had operated thrice. Breathing difficult
and quicker. Great restlessness and anxiety. Pulse weaker and intermitted. She
died in the evening, all her senses being distinct, and having eat somewhat
just before. What she spit up appeared thin; but what came up, with the short
stiffled cough, was always thick and yellow, like matter.

WHEN she was opened by Mr Gibson Surgeon, we perceived the glands at the root
of the tongue turgid, covered with mucus, and their excretories open. The
amygdalae were larger than usual; but neither they, nor the neighboring parts,
were inflamed. All about the glottis was covered with a tough viscid mucus.
When the trachea was opened no inflammation appeared; but all its superior
internal surface, particularly the back part, next the oesophagus, was covered
with a soft half-dissolved-like-membrahe, detached from the subjacent parts,
lying loose like the blankets of a bed that has been lain in, and matter like
pus on each side of it, and betwixt it and the membrane of the trachea. Some of
the small glands about the glottis were turgid. The farther down we searched,
the more purulent matter we found; but no membrane appeared here. When we came
to where the trachea enters the lungs, by squeezing them, we could force out
through it a great deal of whitish glutinous liquid. The same matter appeared in
all the ramifications of the lungs, and they seemed to be entirely full of it,
as we could squeeze it our, mixed with a little blood, from the smallest
divisions of that canal. The substance of the lungs appeared quite sound. The
internal coat of the stomach seemed, likewise, very soft, and covered with a
great quantity of mucus.

CASE VI.
JUANUARY 3d. I was called to a boy of seven years of age, at Musselburgh, who
had gone about till this morning, but had complained for four days of a great
difficulty in his breathing, and of a constant dull pain about the head of the
trachea, attended with a shrill voice. As his pulse was quick, and his
breathing difficult, the Surgeon had that morning taken twelve ounces of blood
from him, and given him Gum. Ammon. Sal. C. C. gr. iv. When I saw him, at
night, his pulse was very frequent and weak, his breathing quick; still a
little pain about the head of the trachea; no inflammation to be seen in the
fauces, and his urine deposited an ouzy sediment. His voice was feeble, and the
shrillness had gone off. As I saw he would soon die, I desired the Surgeon to
open him, and to be particularly attentive to every circumstance in the whole
course of the trachea, as some unusual appearances, there, had occurred to me
in this disease.

HE told me, afterward, that the lungs were not in the least inflamed; that he
found, a little below the aperture of the glotttis a quantity of what appeared
to him pure matter; but had not observed whether or not there was any membrane,
nor whether the ramifications of the trachea were filled with the matter. This,
however, must certainly have been the case, as matter was actually found in the
superior parts of the trachea, as his lungs appeared otherwise sound, and could
not be the cause of his death; and as he had the same purulent sediment in his
urine, which I had observed in the former cases, and which attends all
collections of matter, in whatever part of the body they are contained. To our
purpose, it is sufficient, that matter of a purulent kind, was found in the
trachea.

CASE VII.
A BOOKBINDER'S child, four years old, in this town, was seized with a cough
and quick breathing, Saturday October 5th, 1763. As it appeared of the croupy
kind, he was blooded with leeches that day, and blistered next day. After this
he seemed better, and went coughing through the house that week. Sunday 13th, I
first saw the child. The voice was rather more hoarse than usual in the croup;
the pulse very quick, and the breathing very laborious, with a little pain in
the throat in swallowing. Dry short cough. I suspected that there was a
considerable mixture of the angina with the croup here. Leeches were applied to
the neck, with fomentation and steams. 14th, Breathing much better, and all the
symptoms easier. 15th, All the symptoms worse. Pulse and breathing very quick.
Died the 16th.

The trachea, when opened by Mr Wood surgeon, was covered, for half an inch
from the glottis downwards, with a firm white thick membrane, from which, for
an inch further down, was a soft yellowish purulent-like matter, not yet
hardened. All the membranes of the trachea were entire under these, but much
inflamed and red. In some parts of the lungs, the vesicles contained the same
kind of matter, but in no great quantity.

CASE VIII.
OCTOBER 20th, 1763. A girl, aged four years, coughed a little, was out the day
following, and, at night, the cough increased with hoarseness. On the 22d, Mr
Wood, the family-surgeon, by accident, saw her playing, and observing her
breathing laborious, and her pulse quick, though she was otherwise well, he
blooded her. 23d, She was worse, and had a blister applied to her throat and
back, and got an injection. 24th, I saw her first; her breathing quick, and
hoarse; pulse 180; urine with an ouzy sediment; and was told, that she had
coughed up, what seemed to the family, pure matter. By her breathing, more of
the same kind still seemed to be left behind. She eat and drank without any
pain. To expel the matter, if possible, she got a vomit of squills; but nothing
came away. 25th, She was much in the same way; and I observed some matter mixed
with the saliva, that she had coughed up. Breathing exceeding quick, and
laborious. Ordered the steams of warm vinegar to be drawn into the lungs, on
purpose to produce a fit of coughing; but it had no such effect, and she died
in the evening.

WHEN the trachea was opened, by Mr Wood, the whole internal surface was
covered with a membrane for three inches downwards from the glottis. This
membrane was complete all around, did not adhere to the trachea, and came off
in the shape of a hollow tube. The natural coats of the trachea seemed entire,
and not ulcered. The substance of the lungs was quite sound; but the vesicles
of the left lobe were filled with yellow thick pus, which sunk in water. The
new formed membrane had some degree of tenacity; and, when steeped in milk-warm
water for two days, did not dissolve, but preserved some degree of cohesion. Mo
fibers could be observed in it.

THE preceding facts excited the curiosity of some gentlemen, and have been
confirmed from similar observations made by them, and which they lately
transmitted to my hands.

CASE IX.
MR Wardrobe Surgeon related to me the the following case. A boy, eight years
of age, and healthful, had been ill two days. His breathing was difficult; his
voice was croupy; he was feverish, and had all the other symptoms of the
disease. He was blooded, blistered, etc. but all to no purpose; and died the
fourth day.

THE whole trachea, externally, appeared swelled, and rather oedematous than
inflammatory. When he opened it, the whole inside was covered with a soft,
thick, pale-coloured membrane, which easily separated from the parts below;
those had a slight degree of inflammation. When he pursued the ramifications of
the trachea through the lungs, there was found, there, a considerable quantity of
real pus, which seemed to fill all those pipes. The lungs themselves were
sound. Nothing can be liker the former cases than this; and as Mr Wardrobe had
no occasion of ever seeing it again, he had concluded, as I had done before, in
similar circumstances, that it was an anomalous case. It now appears to be the
common course of nature, in that disease, when mortal.

CASE X.
THE following case, in confirmation of the preceding, was communicated to me
by Mr Balfour Surgeon, and which I shall deliver in his own words. November 1st
1763, I was desired to visit a child, between two and three years old, living
at the Canonmills. His face was flushed; his breathing laborious; his cough of
the hard croupy kind; his pulse was frequent; his tongue clean; with little
drought, and no pain. I was informed by the parents, that the child had been
very healthful; but for eight days past had been troubled with a cough, which
did not put on the present appearance till the night before I was called; and
that the child had, till that time, gone about, and eat his meat heartily. They
had then applied leeches to his neck, which bled a great deal, and had with
difficulty been stopped. I immediately took away, from the jugular vein, two
cupfulls of blood more, which was sizy; and being informed, that he sometimes
reached, I ordered a vomit of tinct. ipecacuanh. with an addition of acet.
scillit. which was given about an hour after he was blooded, and brought up a
great deal of tenacious mucus. That night, he got a blister to his back, and
the saline mixture every two hours. Nov. 2d, His Pulse was as frequent, but not
so firm. All the other symptoms rather worse. He was ordered a decoction of the
bark; the oily saline mixture, to be taken internally; and the camphorated
volatile oil, to be applied externally. The child took two or three doses of
the decoction and mixture; but toward the evening, the symptoms growing worse,
the medicines were discontinued. The child died next morning.

WHEN the trachea was laid open, I thought that a suppuration had happened;
but, upon nearer inspection, found, that it was only the mucus which had
acquired a purulent color; and that it was formed into a membranous crust,
which every where lined the internal membrane of the trachea, from the larynx,
to its entrance into the thorax. This preternatural membrane appeared thickest
about the middle of the trachea; and, there, seemed almost to fill up the
passage. It was so firm, that a considerable portion separateed, at once,
leaving the natural membrane of the trachea bare and sound, and with the
appearance of a slight inflammation. I put a considerable portion of the
preternatural membrane into water; and, after that, it still retained a degree
of tenacity, but had too little firmness to be preserved.

CASE XI.
MR Wood Surgeon gave me the following. A child, about sixteen months old, was
seized with the Croup, and died the seventh day. On opening the body, there was
found in the lower part of the larynx, and beginning of the trachea, a
substance of a membranous appearance, adhering slightly around the inside of
these parts. When it was removed, the membranes of the trachea were found
entire, and somewhat redder than usual. Along the trachea and bronchial
branches, there was a considerable quantity of mucus. It was frothy, and
somewhat tenacious. This mucus extended as far as the membranous appearance,
and downwards into the minutest branches of the bronchiae, in which it had a
yellowish purulent appearance. The surface of the lungs was somewhat reddish.

CASE XII.
THE following case, which was communicated to me by --, I think worth
relating; as it shows the disease in a different situation from all the
preceding; indeed, under such circumstances, as I never had an opportunity to
see, and must appear very seldom in, for it is the only one of its kind that I
have heard of.

MISS ******, about nine years old, was seized with a slight cough, on the 25th
of October, owing to rainy weather, and wet feet. On the 26th, when I saw her
first, the scarcely had any heat, thirst, or sickness, and no pain of any kind,
except when she coughed, or was fretted, which bringing on a quick inspiration,
she then felt some slight pain in the windpipe, a little below the rima
glottidis. Her voice was shrill, like that of a young cock. She was blooded;
got a gentle vomit; emolient cataplasms to her feet; and a blister to her back.
27th, Symptoms no better. No difficulty of deglutition, and no redness to be
seen in the throat. She never expectorated any thing like pus or phlegm, during
the whole course of the disease. Steams of warm water were tried. 28th, Her
cough was incessant for some hours, during which, she coughed up a piece of a
membrane. This I believed to be a part of what lines the trachea, as it had a
mortified appearance, and was like black shagg silk. She died soon after this.

UPON opening the body, the disease seemed seated, solely, in the head of the
trachea, as its membrane appeared to me mortified two inches downwards. Below
that, the trachea, and its branches, seemed quite sound.

IT was very natural for one, who had never any opportunity of seeing this
disease in its natural situation, to think, that a mortification had seized on
the coats of the trachea. But to one who has been accustomed to inspect bodies,
in this disease, it must appear probable, that it was only the preternatural
and morbid membrane become black, which gave the trachea the appearance of
being mortified. No wonder that the coats of the trachea were thought to be in
a gangrenous state, when I imagined they had suppurated in the first case, that
I met with. The coughing up a piece of the membrane, shows that it was this
loosely adhering one, and none of the natural ones, which are so firmly
attached; and which, having no fleshy parts below, could not have been so
easily separated. This, then, appears to differ in no other point from the
others, but only that here the morbid membrane had dried and turned black;
whereas, in all the former, it was moist and white.

THESE are all the cases, that I have kept an account of, or received from
others. Though few, they are leading ones, and sufficient to establish many
material facts and circumstances, that have hitherto been unknown, with regard
to this disease. We will now draw, from them, some conclusions; which, as we
have proceeded so cautiously, will be the more certain. If we add any
reasoning, to set these conclusions in a clearer light, we shall keep as close
as possible to settled experiment; and shall give it only as probable
conjecture, finding fault with no person who may reason differently.

COROLLARY I. It seems easy, in general, to distinguish the Croup from all
other diseases hitherto described. A peculiar sharp shrill voice, not easily
described; a remarkable freedom from all complaints, when in imminent danger,
so that they will eat a minute before they expire; a quick laborious breathing;
a frequent pulse, sometimes strong at first, but always soft and weak toward
the end; scarce any difficulty of deglutition, or remarkable inflammation in
the fauces; a dull pain, often, and sometimes an external swelling in the upper
part of the trachea; senses quite distinct to the last; and all the symptoms
most rapid in their progress, characterise sufficiently this disease. I have
not mentioned a cough, as that symptom is sometimes absent; and when it attends
the Croup, it is not of the common kind, but more short and stiffled, and less
convulsive, with little or no expectoration.

THE other symptoms, that often attend it, such as a red swelled face,
oedematous feet, drought, urine sometimes with, and, at other times, without a
sediment, reachings, etc. are not so constant as the former; and therefore, are
not so characteristical.

THOSE not conversant in this disease, often mistake peripneumoniacal
complaints, and severe colds, for it; and, as they frequently cure these, they
are apt to look on it as not so dangerous. But we have seen, that the lungs are
totally free from any inflammation, and are not the seat of the disease. The
Catarrhus suffocativus of Etmuller seems, likewise, to have been a
peripneumony. And, as he describes no peculiarity in the voice; as the symptoms
seem to have been, apparently, severer; and as it returned, at stated and
regular periods, we must consider them as different diseases, though similar in
many points.

As this disease has different vulgar names, for I am told, that on the west
coast, they call it the Chock, or Stuffing, a technical one becomes absolutely
necessary. A name is best given from the apparent symptoms, which are always
conspicuous, while the cause is generally hidden, and often doubtful. The
leading symptoms here, are, the shrill voice, and difficult breathing. It,
therefore, may properly be called Suffocatio stridula.

COROL. II. As it appears peculiar to a certain age, and local, in a great
measure, as to its situation, so it seems to attend certain seasons of the
year. All the preceding cases showed themselves during the course of the
winter, from the month of October to the month of March, except one in August,
which was probably owing to the antecedent smallpox; for long catarrhs from
the small pox, measles, or chin-cough, are strong predisponent causes to this
disease. The moist and cold weather in winter, seems to have great power in
producing this disease.

COROL. III. Very different have been the opinions, with regard to the seat of
the Suffocatio stridula. Some placing it in the glottis and its muscles; some
in the coats of the trachea; while others have fixed its seat in the lungs
themselves. None of all these opinions appear to be true. The glottis is never
found contracted or inflamed; the lungs are quite sound; and the coats of the
tracked seem to suffer only by second hand.

THE seat of this distemper appears to be the cavity of the windpipe. The
place first, and most particularly, affected, is the upper part of the trachea,
about an inch below the glottis; for in that part they complain of a dull pain;
the external swelling has been observed there; and the morbid membrane we have
found stretching from that place downwards. The back part of the trachea, where
there are no cartilages, seems, from the inspection spection of those that die
of this disease, to be its first and principal seat, as this morbid membrane is
often found there, when it is in no other part.

No wonder that the morbid appearances are chiefly found there; for, there, are
lodged the greatest number of glands, designed for the secretion of mucus. This
fluid is separated from glandular bodies, deposited betwixt the different
membranes, which are perforated by an infinite number of almost imperceptible
small holes, that give a passage to the excretory ducts of these glands. The
largest of these lie on the outer, and posterior surface of that membrane,
which serves, on the back part, to make up the deficiency of the cartilages, as
they are not complete circles.

IN some of the former cases, the whole glands, at the root of the tongue, and
the amygdalae were turgid, and the parts covered with mucus. In the mucous
glands, in general, this distemper ought to be considered, as originally
seated; but, from particular causes, more directed to those of the trachea;
where, from the nature of the part, it becomes visible in a different shape.

COROL. IV. Various have been the theoretical opinions of people, who never had
the opportunity, or gave themselves the trouble, to search into the real cause
of this distemper. Some have attributed it to spasms of the muscles, that
contract the glottis. That it was not occasioned by spasms of the muscles, that
contract the larynx, might have appeared from the symptoms themselves. Had this
been of the class of spasmodic nervous diseases, it would have come in
paroxysms, with remission and exacerbation; the urine would always have been
pale; convulsions would have come on before death; and antispasmodics, instead
of evacuants, would have been the remedies.

HAD these muscles, or any of the coats of the trachea, been inflamed or
mortified, as others have thought, the pain would have been greater than it is,
before the mortification; and the pulse would have been stronger, than it
generally is, as the parts are membranous.

IF, according to the opinion of many, the lungs had been inflamed and
suppurated; the cough would have been more incessant and violent; the pulse
full and soft; with a sensation of weight in the breast, sizy blood, dry
tongue, and delirium.

BUT all these fanciful erroneous opinions fall to the ground, when we once
inspect the morbid body. From that true source of knowledge, we learn, that the
cause of this disease is a preternatural white, tough, thick membranous crust,
covering, often for many inches, the inside of the trachea. This membrane is of
so tenacious a consistence, that it can remain soaking in warm water, for many
days, without dissolving. It is not attached to the parts below, but is easily
separable from them, as there is always matter behind it. When it ends, the
trachea is covered with good pus, or purulent mucus; as are, generally, the
ramifications of the bronchiae and vesicles, which, in some cases, were quite
filled with it. To account how this matter, as there is no ulceration; and how
this membrane are formed, we must trace things from their source.

THE blood consists of three principal parts, the crassamentum, serum, and
lymph; the last of which is a diaphanous liquor, full of gelatinous and
nutritious particles. This liquor very similar to the white of an egg, is
coagulable by heat, alkohol, acids, and by every method which attracts or
evaporates the watery particles. This coagulable part, probably, is the
nutritious part of our blood.

THIS gelatinous lymph abounds more in young animals, than in those come to
maturity. Geoffroy le Cadet, in the Mem. Acad. des Sciences, for the year 1730,
by many experiments shows us this fact; and makes it appear, that there is
twice as much nutritive jelly in veal, as in beef. The final reason for this is
self-evident; for young creatures, on account of their growing, require a
greater supply of nourishment. Children must, therefore, abound more with it
than men.

The mucus separated from glands, in different parts of the body, viz. nose,
fauces, oesophagus, stomach, guts, trachea, and bronchiae, appears to be very
analogous to this lymph. The former differs from the latter, only, in its
greater spissitude; and this alteration is brought about after its secretion,
the more watery parts being volatilized and dissipated, while the more heavy
and viscous remain behind. This mucus is extremely disposed to inspissation, as
appears from experiments. Even the admission of cold air into the trachea
thickens this mucus, often, to such a degree, that it stagnates in the glands,
and all secretion is entirely stopped.

IN children, as well as in old people, this secretion is plentiful, owing to
the great quantity of it they contain, and to the laxity of their vessels. This
evacuation is particularly increased during the cold and moist weather of
winter, when the perspiration is diminished, and the glandular secretions
increased.

THIS evacuation is promoted by all stimulants, operating on the trachea and
lungs, as we observe from the effects of snuff, and the smoke of tobacco. The
maritime air supplies a stimulus, calculated to increase the secretion from the
mucus glands of the trachea and lungs. Along with the moisture, sweeped from
the sea by the winds, is carried likewise, a great quantity of sea salt; as
every thing, at some distance from the shore, tastes salt. This inspired into
the lungs, stimulates the orifices of the tracheal glands, and increases the
mucous secretion. This effect will happen more particularly in children, as
their nerves are more irritable, than those of people advanced in years. Hence
we find, that, in moist winter weather, particularly along the seashore*
children should have an unusual secretion of mucus, from the glands of the
windpipe. Diseases, such as the smallpox, measles, chin-cough, etc. and other
natural causes, have the same effect in increasing this discharge. When these
are combined, there exists the greatest predisposition to this disease.

WHEN there happens a very great secretion of this coagulate fluid from the
glands of the trachea in children, they are either not sufficiently attentive,
or often too young, to spit it up. The thinner parts are carried off during
expiration, while the remainder is thickened and compressed, by the
obstruction, that the narrowness of the glottis must make to the exit of the
air from a larger canal. Every circumstance encourages its concretion into a
solid firm membrane, while the more internal parts of the mucus, continuing
still fluid, and the continual secretion of more, keep it separated from the
parts below.

BUT how happens it that we find pure matter, which sinks in water, behind the
membrane, and in the different ramifications of the trachea, when there is no
ulceration? Matter does not seem to be formed, as was generally thought, by the
vessels of the ulcer; but to exist in the blood, particularly in the serous and
lymphatic liquors, nearly in the fame state; and to be, probably, the true
nutrititious, nay, perhaps, the coagulable part of our fluids. Dr Pringle, in
his ingenious, useful, and accurate experiments, upon septic and antiseptic
substances, found, that the serum, when stagnating, and exposed to heat, let
fall a white substance like pus; and, from thence, justly, concludes, that the
pus of ulcers is formed, in the same way, by the evaporation of the more watery
particles, and the subsiding and inspissation of this part. This fluid shows a
great tendency to become solid, by restoring quickly all loss of substance.

THERE cannot be a fitter situation, for the formation of pus from the mucous
secretion, than the trachea and lungs. There the same secretion, evaporation,
stagnation, and heat exists, as in an ulcer; and, therefore, the same
consequence should, and does, happen. We often see real pus spit up in the end
of a cold. Perhaps this change from mucus to pus, happens before the membrane
is formed, as pus shows such a tendency to assume a solid form, and is designed
by Nature to repair all deficiencies in the solids.

THIS disease now appears of a very singular nature, and unlike any other that
we know. Du Haen has, indeed, lately told us, that he has sometimes found, in
dissection, the viscera covered, externally, with a white tough crust. I wish
he had given us the history of some of these patients. He imagines, that it was
formed from the inflammatory crust in the blood; but, here, these never is
found any.

I HAVE lately met with a description in the Philosophical Transactions
abridged, Vol. 3d, page 68th, of a membrane formed in the inside of the
trachea." "A boy five years old, died of a consumption. A year before his
death, he was troubled with a dry cough, which continued ever after, spitting,
now and then, a little quantity of blood. Ten or twelve days before he died,
his nurse took notice of some thick skins he spit up. His Physcian, having
examined one of them, sound, it had the shape and consistence of a vessel,
which made him think it might perhaps be some vessel of the lungs. The child
being dead, I opened the body. In the left side of the lungs, I found a little
purulent sanies. The inside of the trachea was incrustated with a slimy
membrane, which I took off from the trachea, and the branches in the lungs,
insomuch that that pellicula made a perfect vessel, from the larynx to the very
extremities of the bronchiae, from which it came off very easily, without
breaking either the trunk, or the branches. It adhered to the inward coat of
the trachea, only by some small filaments, which were so tender, that they
broke off easily; and made me think, the production of that extraordinary
vessel was nothing but the mucilaginous humor, continually discharged by the
glands of the trachea, grown more clammy by the distemper, and so dry that it
could not be spit out; this incrusting the inside of the trachea and bronchiae,
and growing thicker, was at last shaven off by the violent fit of coughing the
child was sometimes taken with, and then was renewed again by the succeeding
mucus. This new vessel would not dissolve in hot water. The vessels of the
lungs, that is the trachea and bronchiae, the pulmonary arteries and veins,
were as whole as could be."

IT appears, by the dissection, that there was no imposthume formed in the
lungs; and that the child died from this preternatural membrane. Perhaps, many
of the polypus's, thrown up from the bronchial vessels of grown up people,
might have the same origin. These cases show, how apt the mucus is to acquire a
solid form.

WE have an account, in the Philosophical Transactions abridged, vol. 2d, of a
disease in Cornwall, called the morbus strangulatorius, which, from the
pustles, petechiae; and putrid disposition of the fluids, appears more nearly
allied to the malignant sore throat, although it sometimes attacked the aspera
arteria. A case is, there, related, where a hollow membranous coat, of the
shape of the trachea and its branches, was coughed up, and supposed to be the
natural membrane of these parts. Another similar to the former came up
afterward. The patient lived about a day after this.

COROL. V. There appears, from the preceding facts, two very different
situations of the Suffocatio stridula; the former more inflammatory, and less
dangerous; the latter less inflammatory, and highly dangerous. In the former,
the pulse is generally strong; the face red; drought great; and they agree with
evacuations: In the latter, the pulse is very quick, and soft; great weakness;
tongue moist; less drought; great anxiety; and evacuations hasten death. The
former may be called the inflammatory; and the latter, the purulent state.

THESE are two very different stages of the distemper, and must be carefully
distinguished by the practitioner, that he may know how to direct his
applications; or, at least, how to form a just prognosis; as he is, generally,
not called till the patient is in the latter stage. If this disease comes on
with an old habitual cough, or by slow degrees, the inflammatory stage will
scarcely be perceivable.

IF the pulse is very soft and feeble, especially after being strong; or any
purulent matter comes up with spitting, vomiting, or coughing, which happened
in some of the former cases, we have a proof that the purulent state is,
already, formed. Experience has taught me another mark, by which I can
distinguish these different states. I have observed, that the urine, which,
during the inflammatory state, is thin, had always, after the purulent state
came on, a light ouzy purulent sediment, such as people have from matter
collected any where, that has no vent outward.

NO wonder, that the matter is speedily absorbed, in this situation, as it is
contained in the bronchiae and vesicles, and of course imbibed by the whole
internal surface of the lungs and trachea; a surface infinitely greater than
any imposthume can have. Hence the blood will be suddenly filled with it; and
the urine have that white purulent sediment, which arises from absorption of
matter.

IN the latter stage, we find the membrane completely formed. Is it so in the
former? I suspect that it has not yet got a firm consistency; otherwise
evacuations would not have so sudden and salutary an effect, as they produce in
this stage. Perhaps, the turgid and inflamed glands are but yet expelling the
thick mucus, which is circulating through the vessels in too great a quantity,
and in too inspissated a state. This is strongly confirmed by the great
quantity of mucus, sound in the stomach, and the swelling of the mucous glands
at the root of the tongue. Even after death we perceive some degree of
inflammation in the coais of the trachea, which probably has been greater at
the beginning, when the flux of humor commeneed, and the irritation was
stronger.

COROL. VI. It seems to be no very difficult matter to account, from the cause,
for all the symptoms of this disease. A straitening of the trachea, and dryness
of the parts, will mechanically alter the voice, and make it more shrill; for
we find in all wind instruments, the notes are acute in proportion to the
smallness of the bore. Mr Balfour surgeon told me, that he attended a child in
a disease, which, from the similarity of voice, appeared to him the Croup. The
child died. When opened, a piece of shell, which the child had sucked in with
it is breath, was lying across the trachea, about an inch below the glottis, and
the membrane was inflamed and dry. Here was an artificial Croup raised, from
which we may evidently perceive how the voice is altered in the natural disease.

WHEN there appears to be a great quantity of mucus circulating in the vessels;
when there is, often, so much mucus or pus in all the pipes of the lungs; when
there is a preternatural membrane formed in the trachea; no wonder that Nature
excites a fever, her general and constant resource, when she is violently
attacked and in danger.

CONSIDERING the acuteness of the fever; considering the obstruction in the
trachea, bronchiae, and vesicles; with what difficulty the air must gain
admission to distend them; and what hindrance that must give the blood
circulating through the lungs; a laborious breathing must, necessarily, attend
the other symptoms.

AS the blood passes with some difficulty through the lungs, an unusual weakness
must certainly come on, the face become swelled, and the extremities appear
oedematous.

TO account for that total want of pain, or so slight a one that they don't
attend to it, unless when asked, is a matter of some difficulty. That the
membrane of the windpipe, in general so very irritable from every slight cause,
should calmly bear the presence of such a quantity of matter, and of so thick a
membrane, is not the least surprising circumstance of this uncommon distemper.
The mucus being a humor natural to these parts; its slow and gradual
collection and inspissation; fresh mucus constantly separated, which hinder the
membrane from hurting the trachea, unless in motions of the neck; these reasons
may account, in part, for the diminution of that natural irritability, which
resides in these places. But they do not satisfy me altogether. We cannot
expect to have all our doubts removed.

COROL. VII. This disease appears, in general, to be a very dangerous one, and
the more so, as it is silent in its progress, and gives no visible alarm, till
death is near at hand. The first stage of this distemper, often, passes
unobserved; and, before we see it, is beyond all remedy. As it happens,
frequently, to young children, who are unable to speak or describe their
feelings, we have double reason to be afraid.

IF we be not called till the third or fourth day; if the breathing appears
much affected, the pulse quick and weak, the face red, great anx^ety, and
frequent tossing, the danger is great and pressing. But if we see the patient
the first or second day of the attack; if the breathing is not very bad; the
pulse, though frequent, strong, and firm; and more especially, if the voice is
only altered, in its stronger exertions of crying or coughing, but more natural
in its common state, we may entertain hopes of a recovery. The first sign
commonly of safety, is the cough becoming stronger and less dry, with that
peculiar sound which attends moistened lungs; for this shows that the membrane
is not formed, or is already dissolved, and that the inflammatory state is
abated.

THE case seems very desperate, when the membrane is once formed, and the lungs
filled with matter. In the latter case, the patient is soon suffocated, as
effectually, though more slowly, as if he was immersed over the head in it.

IT appears, from the preceding cases, that the membrane, alone, is sufficient
to kill, as there was but little matter found in the lungs of some of them.

DESPERATE as the case is, the patient's recovery is, perhaps, not altogether
impossible. Nature, by the means of a critical cough, may eject the membrane
and matter; though, indeed, the sensation of these parts, by which it must
effectuate this, seems almost altogether destroyed. If that happened, the
patient would recover, as the lungs are quite sound.

IN one of the former cases, part of the membrane was thrown up, but the
patient died. I was told by Mr Gibson surgeon, that a patient of his escaped,
after throwing up a great quantity of matter, and coughing up large pieces of a
membrane.

THE following curious case was communicated to me, lately, by Mr Rae surgeon.
A boy betwixt five and six years of age, was seized, August 5th, 1764, with a
slight cold and hoarseness. On the 8th, had a difficulty of breathing, the
shrill voice, and a little fever. As the boy was in a natural sweat, he ordered
a mixture with Spt. Minder. 9th, Pulse quicker, and no expectoration. Was
blooded, got an injection, and had a blister applied to his throat. 11th, This
morning he was told, that, after a severe fit of coughing, a membrane-like
substance, about two inches long, pretty tough, and resembling a piece of thin
white leather, had been thrown out. In the evening, some pus was observable in
the phlegm expectorated up, and easily distinguishable from it. The boy did not
recover his voice for three months.

ART, though not in the way of internal medicine, may attempt effectuating the
same end.

COROL. VIII. We have had occasion to see, in the preceding cases, great
variety of different applications, and their good or bad success. Let us deduce
some general rules with regard to practice. In the inflammatory state, bleeding
appears to have been attended with immediate good effects, and to be a powerful
remedy in this situation. This ought to be done expeditiously and plentifully,
while the pulse will allow it. It is best to take blood at first, with the
lancet, so that a sufficient quantity may soon b^ drawn off; and, afterward,
by leeches, applied to the upper and fore part of the throat. Their orifices,
when kept open by the application of warm wet-cloths, will allow the blood to
onze from them for many hours.

IT seems necessary to keep the patient's belly constantly loose, by such
medicines as children will take; for we ought to be very attentive not to set
them a-crying, as that may suddenly suffocate the child. For this purpose, I
generally use tablets of magnesia alba, made palatable with sugar. Some of the
cooling resolvent salts, such as the chrystalised sal polychrest, dissolved in
whey, will be of service, provided the patient will peaceably take them.

BLISTERS; applied round the neck, after the vessels are well emptied, do great
service. They seem to do none, when applied before this time; nay, if the state
is very inflammatory, must do much hurt, from their violent stimulus on the
vessels. Emollient fomentations and cataplasms, applied round the neck, are of
considerable use, and keep up a local evacuation.

THESE evacuations operate in several different ways, viz. by thinning the
dense mucus, while yet circulating in the blood; by diverting its flux from the
parts affected, as there is a great communication and consent betwixt the
different mucous glands through the body; but, particularly, by increasing the
absorbent power of the vessels on emptying them; by which means the purulent
matter will be sucked in from the lungs. It was found in the urine of one of
the foregoing convalescent patients.

THE resolvent and gently stimulating steams of warm water and vinegar, drawn
in with the breath, seemed always to have an immediate good effect. Is it from
dissolving the thick mucus, and so opposing its concretion? That is probably
the case, as the patient always spits a great deal after it, and the lungs
appear moister.

VOMITS are, frequently, given in this stage of the disease. They are,
generally, thought to be of use; but I never saw any advantage arising from
them. I rather suspect that they must be often pernicious, as they increase the
secretion of mucus in the lungs, without expelling it, which is the very
circumstance that, if possible, we ought, to guard against. The evacuation that
they make otherways is but small.

GENTLE sudorifics may be of service, as they divert the flux from the more
internal parts to the external. Others think that these are of use; and
prescribe the Vin. emet. in small quantities. I cannot say that I ever saw any
great advantage from them.

BUT when the membrane is once formed, or the purulent matter, in great
quantity, collected in the lungs, evacuations can be no longer of any use; they
rather hurt, as the pulse is then weak. Hence the reason, why people differ
about the effects of evacuations in this disease; some deeming them the only
certain remedy, while others hold them to be destructive. Both have built their
opinion on fa^ts and observation. But as their applications were made in
different stages of the distemper, the effects behoved to be different. What
was the only remedy in the inflammatory state, must appear hurtful in the
purulent.

IN this state of purulency we plainly see, that nothing can do service, but
what brings up the matter from the lungs, and that speedily too. And pray what
medicines can do this? Vomits only evacuate, immediately, the stomach; but by
means of the sympathy of the nerves, they often bring on a coughing, during
their action. They might be of service, if they had this salutary effect; but I
never saw them answer this purpose, though often given with that design. The
nerves are, indeed, so unactive, that we can entertain no reasonable hopes from
this quarter.

SHALL we endeavor to excite a cough, by the means of effluvia, or steams
inspired into the lungs? That has been tried, to no purpose; for the membrane
which covers the trachea, and the mucus or matter which covers the lungs,
render these parts insensible to any external irritation.

To effectuate a solution of the morbid membrane, after it is once completely
formed and consolidated, seems to me impossible by any internal or external
medicine that I know. To effectuate its expulsion appears equally impossible.
We have, then, no method remaining to save the patient's life, but that of
extraction. That cannot be done through the glottis. When the case is desperate,
may we not try bronchotomy? I can see no weighty objection to that operation,
as the membrane can be so easily got at, and is very loose. Many a more
hazardous operation is daily performed. I would propose, however, that it
should be first tried on a dead subject, that we may proceed with all manner of
caution and assistance. But something ought to be tried in this dangerous
situation.

WE have now brought our Inquiry to a conclusion. The facts, we hope, will
appear curious, exact, and sufficiently numerous for our purpose; the method
such as as is used in mathematics and natural philosophy, for discovering
unknown truths; and the conclusions new, surprising, and naturally arising from
the facts. If we have not brought this Inquiry to that degree of perfection, in
every point, that we could have wished, we have the satisfaction, at least, to
think, that, so far as we go, our discoveries are certain, as they are built on
the foundation of Nature. Shunning, with all imaginable care, fruitless and
deceitful speculations, however entertaining, we have constantly kept our facts
and experiments in view, as the only road to the improvement of medicine, and
the good of mankind.

FINIS.

