PATRIOTISM, A MOCK-HEROIC. IN FIVE CANTOS.

Behold thy Gods, O Israel! 1 KINGS. LONDON: Printed for M. HINXMAN, in
Paternoster Row. 1763. [Price Two Shillings and Sixpence.]

PATRIOTISM, A MOCK-HEROIC.
CANTO I.
'TWAS Night; the Voice of Jollity was hushed,
Doz'd all her Vot'ries, reasonably flushed;
Song, Argument, Invention, Laughter, Jest,
Wit, Bawdry, Criticism, sunk to rest:
Scandal had emptied all his Tub on BUTE,
Abuse of Royalty itself was mute.
Sleep in his pleasing Bands had all things tied,
All but the Eyes of disappointed PRIDE.
She lay revolving in her anxious mind,
How Resignation had too much resigned;
That Places were dispensed as others willed,
Made vacant some, and Vacancies were filled;
New Statesmen at the Helm usurped her Trade,
And glibly sailed the Ship without her Aid.
Seeking Repose from Side to Side she flings,
No Change of Posture Pause of Anguish brings.
Each grinding Thought Alleviation scorns,
And sharpens all the Goose-down into Thorns.
Forth from the loathed Bed in haste she flew,
And round her wearied Limbs her Vestments threw.
Enwrought with Gold, in Lelac Purple died,
The Velvet cased her endless Length of Side.
Two calveless Bags of Silk then stretched to see
If they could reach from Heel to distant Knee.
Next Splay-foot Shoes she to her Insteps girt,
Shoes which disdained, yet still were doomed to Dirt;
Her Thigh sustained a Sword unknown to War,
And beamed upon her Breast a Silver Star,
Whose Rays with magic Influence could warm
Almost to Consequence the languid Form.
Accoutred thus, forth of her Doors she went,
And her dark Visit was to FACTION bent;
Resolved, like Heav'n-rejected Saul, to try
What Counsel the other Party might supply.
Onward she strides, impatient of Delay,
Flound'ring through every Kennel in her Way;
Save that at Charing Cross she slack'd her Tread,
And thought she saw poor Charles without his Head.
Re-hast'ning on through the long Strand she came,
Then passed the Temple, and adored its Name;
Now reached St. Paul's, and blessed the Lord that there
Though He was praised, 'twas with unwilling Prayer.
Next in a grateful Rapture stretched to Bow,
And heard the unmuffled Tongue of Night strike Two.
Acknowledging the Omen, she advanced,
While sudden Vigor through each Sinew danced.
High on a hundred Columns, whose dead Weight
Presses the rustic Base in awkward State,
Where hardly they sustain, their Shafts unbent,
The Load of Cornice, and of Pediment
Which rough with Sculpture in strong Emblem clad,
Tells us, That Riches make a City mad;
The ponderous Mansion House of FACTION stands,
Raised by o'er-reaching Heads and griping Hands.
Before the Gate, a Giant fierce and fell,
Stalked Opposition, dreadful Sentinel!
And Who goes there, he cried, yourself explain;
A Friend, she said, to Denmark, not the Dane.
Her well-known Voice he recollected strait,
Quick every Bolt shoots backward on the Gate,
Bolts to endure which never owned the Power,
But only made to serve the present Hour,
And yet the very best, for Strength and Size,
The Blacksmith's Place and Pension could devise.
Of cankered Brass and rusty Ir'n each Door,
Stood massive, spirtled thick with human Gore,
Which Popularity for ever draws
From Fools, in Patriot-Rebellion's Cause.
Open they burst, with desperate Recoil,
The jarring Hinges scream for want of Oil,
Loud and discordant, as when Civil Rage
Incites two kindred Armies to engage.
Near Aylesbury first caught the horrid Sound,
And echoed all its Terrors with rebound,
Concord at distant Stowe perceived the Yell,
While down her ill-adapted Vizor fell;
Extremest Exeter rocked to the Noise,
And aided its hoarse Thunder with her Voice:
At once her Cyders sour, and all around
Her Apple-blossoms strew the blushing Ground.
And now, where yawn'd the Portal rude and vast,
To FACTION'S Residence the Goddess past.
Close to the Door, in the first Vestibule,
Sat Clamor, Riot, Insult, and Misrule,
Stern Menace, License grown to dangerous size,
Reproach, and an Insinitude of Lies.
A thousand Voices bellow through the Room,
A thousand Echoes clatter against the Dome;
Copious, but unconnected Eloquence,
Words of fierce Import, but of little Sense;
Not meant to mean, and therefore to appear
More irritative to the vulgar Ear.
There might be heard, 'midst other piercing Cries,
Liberty! Property! and no Excise!
Of Magna Charta the more dreadful Roar;
Prerogative, and arbitrary Power --:
There Habeas-corpus howled, from Jail broke loose,
Slavery, and Privilege, and wooden Shoes --
Corruption, Favorites, and no Address --
And uncontrolled the License of the Press:
Sounds that all Sense of Order could erase,
But get the Man, who breaks through all, a Place.
Stunned with the deaf'ning Peal she passed along,
(Yet passing would caress the friendly Throng)
Through vast Saloons which spoke May'r-royal State,
Rich without Taste, and without Grandeur, great.
Yet here the Chissel and the Pencil strove
Best to record the Objects of Mob-love.
Tribunes, and Ephori, and Demagogues,
By Men called Patriots, but by Gods plain Rogues;
Such as, provided they themselves grew great,
Had no Objection to subvert a State.
Nor wanted here each dirty, dreadful Job,
That Faction perpetrates to please the Mob.
To please the Mob, here mighty Strafford bled,
And Laud laid down his venerable head.
To please the Mob, Byng stains the blushing Deep,
And Blakeney earns a Peerage in his Sleep.
To please the Mob, our Fleets their Canvas strain,
And Expeditions hide the wondering Main,
The Main more wondering wafts us back, alas!
Thin'd from the Wars of Rochfort and St. Cas:
What matter? since Defeat our Joy inspires,
And Cassel lost can light a thousand Fires.
By having pleased the Mob, here Cromwell stood,
And showed how private thrives by public Good;
And might have shown us Gulls, if Gulls could see,
That Slavery tracks the Abuse of Liberty.
Confessed at length the Patriot-Tyrant reigned,
And snapt that Freedom Charles had only strained.
Hampden was here, in his Eidolon here,
A would-be Tutor to the Royal Heir,
But he himself dwells in the Fields of Fame,
Wedded to Liberty's immortal Name.
And here in Tints more recent might be viewed,
Instructive Picture of Court Gratitude!
How round their Sovereign his great Servants stand,
While fierce Rebellion gores the bleeding Land;
Faith, Honor, Duty, Loyalty, the Laws,
Urge them, no doubt, to perish in his Cause?
No, but to serve with Granville they refuse;
So great a Crime in Monarchs it is, to choose!
A hundred other equal Deeds appear,
Nay, half the English History was here.
While, over all the rest, conspicuous shines
Old Sarah's Legacy in Golden Lines.
Around in less Compartments were bestowed
Of underling Incendiaries a Crowd,
Such as employed the Pulpit or the Press,
TO enforce the Doctrines of Licentiousness;
Here Party canonized such Denizens,
Whose Ears had paid the Forfeit of their Pens;
And while in all her glaring Daub she paints,
Villains grow Heroes, Scoundrels turn to Saints.
Our Goddess midst the rest herself descried,
Mixed with the Leaders of the other Side;
"And, ah! she said, the very Walls can trace,
"How often we change Principles for Place."
END OF CANTO I.
PATRIOTISM, A MOCK-HEROIC.
CANTO II.
IN the Recess of something like a Tomb,
Which Architecture, (sick of Greece and Rome,
And copying what never was at all,)
Is pleased to christen an Egyptian Hall;
Our Goddess, whom She sought, at length surveyed,
In anti-kingly Majesty arrayed.
Busy she found Him in this solemn place,
At solemn Sacrifice, with solemn Face.
He but to Commerce scorned to pour a Prayer,
No other Deity employed his Care;
All other Altars stood inconsecrate,
For here is no Offering was too pure or great.
Of solid Gold, and of enormous size,
Yet not so big her Belly as her Eyes,
She stood; and seemed as she would hide the Globe
Beneath the Drap'ry of her flowing Robe.
Fast by, with full Extent of Gullet graced,
Her Attribute, the Cormorant, was placed.
The Victims He had taken Care to cull,
All without Blemish, all of blackest Wool,
All newly bought, all newly flayed alive,
A Decatomb, of Negro Slaves twice five.
He on their reeking Muscles, red and blue,
Sharp Vinegar, with Salt and Pepper, threw;
They writh with Pain convolv'd. As when to cram
Some Citizen's unfathomable Wem,
The Turtle, riven with his Mail, poor Fish!
Perceives himself begin to grow a Dish;
Convulsed, each undulating Fiber plays
In Waves of Agony a thousand ways.
So fixed the inextinguishable Soul,
That dressed, perhaps he feels thy teeth, K * *.
The Goddess, no Confusion to create,
Impatient as she was, thought fit to wait:
Civilities are never so duly paid
To any Folks, as when we want their Aid.
The Ceremony, with Observance meek
She 'tended, and when done, began to speak.
"O Thou! for whom and from whom I was formed,
"Whose Counsel molded, and whose Spirit warmed,
"To whom originally it is I owe
"These purple Honors, which around me glow,
"To Thee I come my Sorrows to impart;
"Rest shuns these Eyes, and Care corrodes this Heart:
"Do thou assist, in this Conjunction nice,
"Me and the Party with thy sage Advice.
"Thus far, indeed, Success has crowned our Arms,
"BUTE quits; nor shaken with our fierce Alarms,
"For who our Roar and Riot would regard,
"That in his Conscience seeks for his Reward?
"But that the honest Fool had fixed before
"To make his favorite Peace, and throw up Power.
"When he like Phineas in the Gap had stood,
"To save the People, and had staunch'd their Blood,
"He knew how incompatible must prove,
"To serve them, yet retain their fickle Love.
"While we played safe, Dupe of Benevolence!
"He stopped the Plague, and at his own Expense,
"For public Quiet, yielding up that Rein
"We quitted, only to resume again.
"But what are we the better than before?
"Our empty Niches know us all no more;
"Still the State Truncheon flys our eager Grasp,
"And Calumny is at its latest Gasp.
"What to do next! Insult can do no more,
"Higher than Forty-five it cannot soar,
"Where, to full Pitch of sturdy Vigor grown,
"It fairly gives the Lie home to the T -- e:
"Nothing remains which farther we can drive,
"Or Forty-eight comes next to Forty-five.
"Then shall we idly sit, hand-cuff'd and dumb,
"And let Truth work, and purge away the Scum
"We have fermented? let the Dross deject,
"Till its clear Bosom shall all Heaven reflect?
"Forbid it Fate! forbid it every Boast
"We Have made to ruin, or to rule the Roast!
"We must and will have All; but how to seize,
"To spill the Cider, or cut down the Trees,
"More Suits at Law commence, more Papers write,
"To give more Dinners, and more Guests invite,
"Or the deep, fatal Train to touch with Flame,
"And fire all Aylesbury and Buckingham,
"I come to ask; thy Counsel be my Guide."
She said, and FACTION to her thus replied.
"To raise the Mob by Master-Strokes of Art,
"Inflame the Passions, and mislead the Heart,
"Make happy Subjects surfeit on their Ease,
"Repine at Blessings, and grow sick of Peace, --
"To pour the Multitude which way we list,
"And ere they are injured, set them to resist,
"Halloo them on, to roar with frantic Zeal,
"Against Oppressions which no Soul can feel,
"Till they desire to spill their desperate Lives,
"For Printers' 'Prentices' Prerogatives; --
"To bid a little River flow along
"The sole Criterion to know Right from Wrong,
"With every Lash of Infamy impel
"The farther Side, because it will not rebel, --
"On all who dare imply we do amiss,
"Point ready Obloquy's insulting Hiss;
"Hold up, in whomsoe'er we disapprove,
"(And that means all who share their Master's Love)
"Virtue or Genius, like the Athenian Owl,
"To the blunt Peck of every other Fowl;
"All the Humanity of BUTE to blot,
"And all thy Candor, MANSFIELD, sink in Scot; --
"Recast the Royal Virtues, which before
"The Nation worshipped, and cry down the Ore,
"To teach the People this indulgent Reign,
"With every Charge of Tyranny to stain,
"To swallow any Contradiction down,
"In Antonine's mild Look fear Nero's Frown,
"Wrest his Intention, and distort each Fact,
"And lend them Treason till they long to act --
"The Prince against his Counselors to move,
"And while we only seem to beg, reprove,
"In Terms of Duty wrap each boisterous Deed,
"Kneel while we stab, and libel while we plead,
"FACTION has Power; nay, has already done,
"And yet but little of our Course we have run,
"Much still remains; and we must tug and strive
"Ere the great Days of Anarchy revive:
"A watchful Eye is over all our Game,
"And while it seems to wink, but takes its Aim.
"Oh! had but Fate to HALIFAX decreed
"His Seat of Birth on the other Side the Tweed!
"Had some bleak Shire, of Penury the Reign,
"More starved than Famine's Prophecy can feign,
"But given him Title, in the general Ban,
"We with the Country, had overwhelmed the Man;
"There like Enceladus he would lain oppressed,
"With half an Island bearing on his Breast.
"But now, upon so high a Basis placed,
"We Are forced to leave his Merit undefac'd;
"Out of our Reach, and mocking of our Aim,
"The perfect Statue rests without a Maim.
"But could we hope his Virtues to decry,
"And show them blighted to the People's Eye;
"Would not Ierne all their Bloom renew,
"And call the blushing Honors fresh in View?
"Recount, how Lenity to Prudence joined
"Shone the Reflection of his Sender's Mind;
"How formed to win by every honest Art,
"Blessed by each Voice, and Lord of every Heart;
"Yet, when a Nation pressed him to receive
"All that a Nation's Gratitude could give,
"The strong Allure of Interest he withstood,
"Above Reward, and paid by, doing good?
"Here then we stick; but still of Hope a Gleam
"Points through the dusky Thought its trembling Beam,
"The Deities, from Heaven self-exil'd, meet
"At a grand Council, and a grander Treat,
"Tomorrow. Such AMBITION'S high Behest,
"And FOLLY does the Honors of the Feast.
"Be there, the best Advice sure to receive,
"If Multitude of Counselors can give:
"Till then beneath this Roof remain my Guest,
"'It Is Break of Day, and Time to go to rest.
So saying, her Attendants she bid spread
For her great Visitant the lofty Bed.
And first the Fox's Skin began the Pile,
Next of the Bear was spread the shaggy Spoil,
And over that the Lion's tawny Hide
Finished the whole for disappointed PRIDE.
There every Pore, as she extended laid,
Imbibed Instruction from the mystic Bed.
END OF CANTO II.
PATRIOTISM, A MOCK-HEROIC.
CANTO III.
OH for the warning Voice of Him who saw
What Ruin continental Measures draw,
What Time by perjurable Styx he swore
To waste on them nor Man nor Guinea more;
That yet the People, made in Time aware,
Might happily 'scape Sedition's dangerous Snare!
For now the rolling Hours brought on, too soon!
The Day, whose Morn as usual rose at Noon,
Wherein the Arch-Enemy to Peace began
To meet in deep Consult her dark Divan:
The Sun concealed in Fogs his sullen Ray,
And dreadful Omens ushered in the Day.
Forth from his G -- ge-S -- t Airy upwards springs
The fierce North-Briton on audacious Wings;
The encumbered Air could scarce sustain this Fowl,
Which dares an Eagle, though it See HOGARTH.
looks an Owl.
Undazzled he beholds the towering Height,
And to Olympus lifts his desperate Flight.
Next him uprose, and of as bad Portent,
On Wings, ah Pity! by the Muses lent,
A Blackbird erst in sober Liv'ry dressed,
Now Party-colored Plumage stains his Breast;
Passion had changed his old Appearance meek,
And armed his Talons, and hooked down his Beak:
His Pinion strong, if Dirt depressed it not,
And sweet his Throat would it cry aught but Scot --
Neglected soon we let the Parrot roar,
Whose Dictionary knows but Rogue and Whore.
Of lower Flight, scarce hovering from the Ground,
The Monitor his lesser Circle wound;
The Vultur he, of old whom Jove severe,
(That Jove who would direct this nether Sphere,)
Ordained through H -- d's Sides to bore his Way,
And on his growing Vitals weekly prey.
And these behind, with boding, croaking Cry,
The Contrast seemed to flutter, not to fly.
While hopp'd on either Side, pert, noisy, light,
The Magpye Gazetteer, half black, half white.
Around, on every Part, whole Flocks arose
Of Rooks and Ravens, Chronicles and Crows;
Fanned by innumerable Pens, the Sky
Of Printer's Ink assumed the sable Dye.
Now prone from his Meridian, when the Sun
Had more than half his Evening Journey run,
And FOLLY'S Board, loaded almost to break,
Had well nigh cooled her sav'ry Steam; to speak
Thrice PRIDE essayed; but from her Elbow Chair
As often AMBITION nodded to forbear:
She stopped, so wont to obey. And now each Guest
Perceived that Nature wanted to digest.
Just then a hundred Servants crowd the Space,
Who never saw Wages but in Shape of Place,
And up they pile the vast Desert in Air;
(The Plate of Gold by Rule of Court was there)
Where Robinson had played his Master Part,
And in one Job exhausted all the Art.
High in the midst of the whole Fabric raised,
A Barley-sugar Minister was placed,
His Comfit Promises who round him throws
On Dresden-China Courtiers ranged in Rows.
So just the Artist did his Skill display,
Even in the Gift they seemed to melt away.
Close at his Side, and wondering she was sweet,
Justice no longer stern, possessed her Seat:
The Master had her Likeness hit so pat,
You Would swear she was the Sister of J -- e P -- t.
Beneath in Sugar, as in Crime, combined,
Were HALIFAX and EGREMONT designed:
The noble Robbers stood in flagrant Act,
A stolen Brass Candlestick confessed the* Fact.
And opposite in Naples Biscuit rose,
Whose Moat in Green and Silver Tissue flows,
The guilty Tower of Julius; all around
In Orange-peel its dreadful Warders frowned,
And seemed to tread, Sight horrid and unmeet!
A Wafer MAGNA-CHARTA under Feet.
There round a Chariot, through the parted Throng,
In Bronze the threatening Bruisers marched along;
The decent Mob, such Fear within them dwelt,
Retire to Distance, and forbear to pelt.
Here, in the Front, was formed a sumptuous Feast,
And seemed both great and amiable the Guest;
Given to whose Name the outward Form appeared,
But the sly Honors at another leer'd.
The immense Pile stood complete; the whole to shape,
Quite round the ruddy Apple mourned in Crape.
All praised the Hand, and the Design admired,
Warmed as they gazed, but when they tasted, fired.
Now Loyalty begins the sacred Health,
On which Sedition only creeps by Stealth:
The Toasts, still as they wander from their Source,
Show more evanid its diluted Force.
As when, all-graceful MARLBOROUGH, your Dress
Tell us that Ranelagh you mean to bless,
While down your perfect Form in Rainbow Rows,
The Lutestring Stripe with gay Confusion flows;
The Point insensible, (the Difference seen)
Where Purple steals to Yellow, or to Green:
We find, deluded through the varying Silks,
That what commenced with G -- concludes with W --
I trust that Heaven the Thracian did destroy,
Pervertor first of Toasting, born to Joy,
Who mingled Interest with the Flow of Soul,
And dashed with Party, Friendship's smiling Bowl.
Menace and fell Revenge lurk to be quaff'd
In the foul Bottom of the dangerous Draught*
At FOLLY'S Board no Mischief stalked behind,
For People out of Place are of one Mind,
Jointly they hunt; but Difference and Debate
Come when they share the Bear's-skin of the State.
And now in general Discourse they join,
So tipsy with the Healths, not with the Wine,
That Custom, Reason, Fact, are changed and chopp'd,
To all that Modern Patriots adopt.
All spoke, and all advised a thousand Things,
To buoy up Citizens and weigh down Kings;
And some direct the Matter how to mince,
And mean by evil Counselors, the Prince,
How turn Militia to a Counter-Guard,
And while disbanded Valor they reward,
(Humanity can never be a Crime,)
They keep it ready till a proper Time.
Some mourn the Injuries They groan beneath,
Who owe to Courts the very Air they breathe,
Who, one small Boon denied, those Courts resist,
And but for that, that only, are dismissed:
As to past Favors -- staunch State-Atheists say,
Duty, the Soul, dies with its Body, Pay.
Some tell the ready way on Mobs to impose,
Whose Sight extends no farther than their Nose.
To whom Conviction never found its Way,
They still believe the P -- y of the Day.
Others advance how Squabbles make us great,
And cutting Throats adds Sinews to a State*
What Profits burgeon from domestic Jars,
And all the Blessings show'r'd on Civil Wars:
The Song was partial, yet it took the Ear
Of all who sought their Thousand Pounds a Year.
When FOLLY, to give Order to Debate,
Stood up a mighty Driveller of State,
Ridiculously grand, her Cap and Bells
Important Insignificance conceals.
A Petticoated Nestor she appears,
Bending beneath unvenerable Years.
A shrivelled Evidence how very small
A Share of Reason goes to rule this Ball;
Two Reigns she would blunder'd through still uppermost,
Quitted the third, nor gave the fourth for lost.
With Manna still her Tongue run over replete,
Thick, clammy, mawkish, purgatively sweet,
And fell her Words like Hail in Summer Day,
As hard, as cold, as apt to melt away.
The Lingua-Franca Sediment of School
Where She missed Science marked her still more Fool;
Which, with six Latin Shreds, conn'd over with Pain,
Wove the loose Texture of her flimsy Brain.
Now her No-meaning to express she strives,
With all that Confidence which Nonsense gives.
"My Voice shall be for open War, oh Peers!
"It suits so well my Temper and my Years.
"Which unimpair'd preserve their wonted Fire,
"Demand Employ, and scorn the Word RETIRE;
"Nor from my Shoulders think their Burden great,
"Years do not press from Number but from Weight.
"Oh were I but as young, high in Renown,
"As when one H -- r apparent to the C -- n,
"I at a royal Christ'ning dared provoke,
"Deserved his Menace, though I 'scap'd its Stroke;
"Or when, though somewhat doubled then with Age,
"The next to him I gloried to engage!
"Witness ye Banks of Came, that overthrow,
"When thy dull Stream had Doubts which Way to flow,
"'Till I triumphant won the laurell'd Day,
"And the disputed Title bore away!
"Forgive the Boasts, Me, since they serve to show,
"To Insult, nor to Opposition new.
"That glorious Monarch, (so we call Him now,
"Whom when alive we treated God knows how,
"Whom even the City now reveres, yet then
"Would not so much as hear of Dettinghen)
"Saw, when his Scepter trembled in his Hand,
"Me foremost in the Files of Quitters stand.
"Nor think I single list in your Design,
"The Men who laugh at me, for me resign,
"Themselves from what they have in Hand seclude,
"While Hope of more appears like Gratitude;
"These all increase your Bands with ready Aid,
"Forces the Court against itself has paid.
"Lead on, I follow, glad to have arraigned,
"Whatever Measures my whole Life maintained:
"Convictive Contradictions come about,
"Seen in the different Lights of in and out.
"Did I its general Extent allow?
"I see the Excise in all its Horrors now.
"Against the Craftsman did my Writ prevail,
"And send poor Franklyn over and over to Jail?
"Now, perished Liberty! I mourn aloud,
"Thy Fall by Forms, which then the Law avowed!
"Made I, of Heads like mine with Numbers more,
"Such War and Peace as never were made before?
"The present Peace with Energy I hate,
"And kneel before the Word INADEQUATE.
"Or was my Judgment formerly inclined,
"To think Addresses spoke the People's Mind?
"Instructed, now I see their full Import,
"Against they do, but never for, a Court:
"And yet it hurts me that It is addressed,
"But when by Cambridge, more than all the rest" --
The o'erwhelming Thought she could no longer bear,
But sputt'ring still to speak, sunk to her Chair.
END OF CANTO III.
PATRIOTISM, A MOCK-HEROIC.
CANTO IV.
IN studied Dignity of Action slow,
Bespeaking Favor with a winning Bow,
AMBITION next arose. Her powerful Lore,
Credulity preventive stepped before:
For Eloquence, the Cheat, had brought her up
To all the Slight-hand of the Ball and Cup;
Taught her to twist, and turn, and show, and hide,
And make the worse appear the better Side;
Showed her, to clash how Contradictions ceased,
While Fact and Reason took what Shape she pleased.
As the bright Stream, which Nature loves to pour
Irriguous through the Vale, had nursed each Flower,
Had charmed the Ear and Eye through opening Glades,
With untaught Murmurs from unforced Cascades;
But when compressed through Pipes, as Whim prevails,
Squirts into Fans, and Suns, and Peacocks Tails:
The glittering Baubles who with Wonder spies,
Receives the Spout at last in his own Eyes.
And thus she said: "O Thou, who do preside
"Over Britain's Isle, and all her Measures guide,
"Whose Doctrine Heaven's own Precept far out-goes,
"Bids us love, better than ourselves, our Foes;
"O Janus-Party! now incline to hear
"Thy double Face and thy quadruple Ear.
"And ye, now present, to my Nod devote,
"Lords, and Lords Betters, Aldermen! take note
"That FOLLY to my Bosom here I bend,
"Her, my Contempt till now, but now my Friend:
"Linked in the common Cause she shall remain
"My firm Confed'rate, till I rule again.
"'Twere needless here to tell, what yet you see
"Draws its concealed, dim, Origin from me --
"The Rage of Faction, when each Nerve it moves,
"He who does not disclaim, be sure approves.
"Behold! the Cloud, I said, would threat the Land,
"That Cloud shall rise in Likeness of this Hand,
"Pour all its Storms, directed as I please,
"And wash away the hateful Works of Peace:
"Works, which myself I dared not bring about,
"I knew them right, but knew they would throw me out.
"Another ventured, foolish, or secure
"In his own Soul, and above Lust of Power,
"Sealed the great Deed to which his Wish aspired,
"And unrewarded, but by That, retired.
"And could he think, of Peace the Foe professed
"Title and Pension had inclined to Rest?
"That on AMBITION'S Eye Repose would creep,
"Lulled by those medicated Sops to sleep?
"She who twined Unanimity, and showed
"The wondering World how firm Britannia stood,
"Can the reverted Wheel as quick incite,
"Till all the splitting Fibers disunite.
"She who fell Party's tortuous Folds could break,
"And set her Foot upon that Dragon's Neck,
"The deadly Teeth, which from those Jaws she drew,
"Can plant, and they can pullulate anew.
"Those Grains of Discord given to fertile Land
"Sprout rank, and faithful to the Sower's Hand.
"Yes, in ripe Harvest see them nod again,
"A threatening Crop of discontented Men;
"Which Way to wave they from my Breath expect,
"Blame as I point, and hate as I direct.
"It grieves me FOLLY, nay it gives me Fears, --
"This foul Defection of your black Hussars,
"Whose wavering Duty, truant from its String,
"Transfers itself from C -- r to K -- g.
"Now by the Laurels of Belleisle, my Boast,
"And the unnumber'd Millions which they cost,
"Shoul'd ever my B -- h for addressing move,
"And honest A -- n dare the Peace approve,
"In such Contempt the Rebels I should hold,
"I Would toss them back their dirty Box of Gold!
"But ere the Infection spreads, haste we to use
"The Sp'rit we have been so happy to infuse;
"The English Oak-boy as you bid him cries,
"And to roar louder firmly shuts his Eyes:
"He Is yours at Pleasure closed while they remain,
"All Is over if he opens them again.
"Employ him while, all Enemies overcome,
"He longs for new ones in his Friends at home,
"The proper Catch-words Party shall provide,
"To range the Fools on either foolish Side;
"No previous Injury need rouse their Force,
"Match but the Broughtons, and they hate of Course.
"Oh, if we seize with Skill the coming Hour,
"And re-invest us with the Robe of Power,
"Rule while we live! Let future Days transmute
"To every Merit all we have charged on BUTE;
"Let late Posterity receive his Name,
"And swell its Sails with every Breath of Fame;
"Downward, as far as Time shall roll his Tide,
"With every Pennant flying, let it glide,
"And Truth, emerging from the Clouds we raise,
"Gild all their Orient Colors with her Blaze.
"Let his loved Arts, attendant on his Way,
"Their wanton Trophies to the Gale display;
"While each dispassionate, each honest Pen
"(Deterred by Clamor, nor allured by Gain,
"Bard or Historian) shall from either Shore
"Hail its Approach, and its great Course explore;
"Faithful to Probity, and Virtue's Cause,
"Pursue its Progress, and direct the Applause:
"Glad Gratulation shall with Shouts approve,
"And own him worthy of his Sov'reign's Love."
She had proceeded, but the mingled Sound
Of arguing Voices spread the Table round,
Some affirmed positive, some asked perplexed,
And some launched out in Notes upon the Text;
Till one more audible than all the rest,
With strong Exertion thus himself expressed:
"Why sit we here projecting some new Blow,
"Since FATE determins all Events below?
"On that Tribunal let our Envoy wait,
"And who so fit as FOLLY upon FATE?"
The Advice was grateful to the general Ear,
All begged that great Commission she would bear,
Which, bowing low, she said should be achieved,
Though trembling at the Honor she received;
The Point thus settled, from the Board they move,
Dispersed as Pleasure led, or Business drove.
But FOLLY sought her Library with Speed,
For one she had for Show, but not to read,
There jumbling in her Head what she thought, Thought,
How best to find the trackless Road she sought,
She chose to essay the Force of her own Prate,
Remembering to how many once 'twas Fate.
And now the mystic Gibberish she tried,
Something that neither promised nor denied,
But drew one on to hope, "it wished so well --
"And though it doubted, yet -- it could not tell --
"O! my dear What's-your-Name, of me be sure,
"I would a Member had not asked before --
"You Will let me see you soon, by then I Will try" --
Then seemed to squeeze a Hand, and said, Good-by.
Strange Force of Charms! By this the solid Ground
Grew mortal sick with the unmeaning Sound,
In strong Convulsions rocked; at length it cleft,
And a wide Opening toward the Center left,
To Regions unexplor'd, which, dark and great,
Are the Domain of MYSTERY-OF-STATE.
Pond'ring a while she stood, and wished to know
The Calais-Passage to these Realms below,
'Till Curiosity her Fears expunged,
And she intrepid on her Errand plunged.
Now, as she journey'd, faded on her Sight
The feeble Glimmerings of distant Light,
Faint and more faint the intercepted Ray
Withdrew itself, and died upon her Way.
And now, through Darkness, palpable, abhorred,
Her groping Hands the doubtful Path explored,
'Till nigh the Confines, where the lower Sphere
Joins to our World, but yet is never the near,
Thin Streaks of budding Day salute her Eye
With the first Dawnings of the nether Sky;
For other Suns they have and Stars than we,
By which no Mortal but themselves can see.
Now the receding Gloom her Sight renewed,
And clothed with Form each bright'ning Object stood.
The opening Scene with Wonder she surveys,
Not knowing that she traveled her own Ways,
Here for the upper Surface she discerned,
How Flattery lay to bubling Lather churn'd,
Whose Bottom formed a thicker Sediment
Of coarse and clumsy Clergy Compliment.
This happy Compost with its supple Oil
Invigorates and opes the fertile Soil,
Calls forth each Seed of Dirt to bud and flower,
And trick itself in all the Hues of Power;
While from her Urn Partiality supplies
The Stream, to Blood and Merit, she denies.
Hence blooms the unlearned Divine in all the Glow
His double-petall'd Mitre can bestow,
Hence spreads the Under Clerk his ample shoot,
And strikes in the Revenue deep his Root,
Hence high his flourished Head the Valet rears,
And hence Attorneys blossom into Peers.
Still lower, in their different Strata spread,
As Levity thought fit to range, were laid
Close in their Shells involved, yet innocent,
The unhatch'd Vermin of a Government.
Here Grubs and Maggots Favour's Sunshine wait,
To get new Shapes, and wing the World in State,
Or more industrious, snug, and warm as Milk,
Spin their soft Nests, and wrap themselves in Silk.
Here Snails of Office through their slimy Tracks
Crawl off at last with Houses on their Backs.
Hence Worms and Earwigs in new Figures sport,
And tinge themselves in every Dye of Court,
'Till pinched with Cold, another Form they try,
And dip their varying Films in LIBERTY.
Here yet unfang'd, wriggle the Viper Race,
Which fond Administration broods in Place,
'Till fatten'd on herself, and fit for Strife,
They through her Bowels gnaw their way to Life.
Here public Zeal, the Alligator, hides
Her selfish Eggs, and for their Birth provides,
Of Incubation in no Need they stand,
But hatch in Popularity's hot Sand;
To prey with open Mouths away they scour,
Yet seem to mourn the Country they devour.
Now lower as she went the hoary Deep
Discovers where the Seeds of Metals sleep.
She saw, and liked to see, the plodding Head
Do the World's Business, yet be only Lead;
That Impudence, its Copper Birth forgot,
Grows Brass, and is important on the Spot;
That Talk and Pertness still succeed by Din,
And shine and tinkle in the Shape of Tin;
That Ignorance and Meanness raised to Power,
Their low Materials quickly silver over;
That Whig and Tory Principles unfold
Their like Constituence, and turn to Gold.
But Wit, the Quicksilver, escaped her View,
Or seeing what it was she little knew,
Last saw, where Party-Gems their Rays refine,
How Patriotism inflames the blazing Mine.
She now perceived, from this instructive Sight,
A kind of Reminiscence, all was right.
The Soul is never taught, but recollects
The Traces of its prior Intellects,
Acknowleges the State she held before,
And owns the beaming Shield at Troy she bore.
END OF CANTO IV.
PATRIOTISM, A MOCK-HEROIC.
CANTO V.
OF perfect Diamond a solid Rock,
Far from the Tempest's Beat and Earthquake's Shock,
Its massive Spurs down to the Center shoots,
Where endless Permanency binds the Roots;
Upon its Summit awefully elate
Immoveably is fixed the Throne of FATE:
The wondrous Pile no Mark of Structure shows,
Unhewn, unbuilt, the living Quarry grows.
Up the steep Height an Iron Causeway tends,
And at the Footstool of the Monarch ends;
Here FOLLY passed, and as she climbed the Mound,
Hollow and loud her shuffling Steps resound.
Raised on his Seat the hoary Sire appeared,
And spread profuse his ample Flow of Beard;
No Condescension his firm Looks avow,
Inexorable Sternness knits his Brow.
Around him bawl, but clamorous to no End,
The fond Addresses which we Mortals send;
He to their Purport turns a deafen'd Ear,
Or answers traversly the wasted Prayer;
To Spenthrift Sons eternal Fathers gives,
And Health untaintable to modern Wives;
The Maiden's pious Vows are still repaid
With Husbands bad at Board, and worse abed;
To Britain (every Plume of Glory won)
Sends Newspapers, and all the Work's undone:
Or, just as Party thinks to crown her Pains,
Gives Resolution, and the Prince still reigns.
Before his Feet was placed, Slave of his Sway,
NECESSITY whom Men and Gods obey,
Her strong Right Hand a ponderous Hammer held,
Her left with Adamantine Nails was filled,
Close to her Side, of Steel an Anvil rose,
(The sounding Anvil never feels Repose)
With these on this, as fast as FATE assents,
She rivets Actions down to their Events.
Millions of Second-causes claim in vain
Their Seat usurped, and urge their Right to reign;
She holds Possession still; while they pursue,
For ever, their rejected Suit anew.
On every Side, and scattered every Way,
Her finished Labors in wild Parcels lay
Unrang'd by their Importance, equal here
The Loss of Battles, or at Whist appear;
A Statesman changed, or Lodging newly let,
Empires transferred, or Fashions out of Date.
The Joys, the Woes, the Extinction of Man's Race
Serve but to make the Litter of the Place.
Here, trebly clench'd the dire Injunction lay
For War to extend his yet too narrow Sway;
Hunger or Lust the Contest first began,
Ambition soon improved upon the Plan;
Religion next inflamed the fell Debate,
And steeled our Hearts, and edged our Swords with Hate;
Last, Commerce for an endless Quarrel stood,
And all before seemed Penury of Blood.
There, was ordained, Law should untie her Noose,
And slip the Dogs of License and Abuse;
To their own Kennels' Stench familiar grown,
But pois'ning every Nose except their own;
They with full Cry the dubious Scent explore,
And trail wherever Scandal touched before:
Still, oh the Shame! still the loud Yelp proceeds,
And the first Head of all the Forest bleeds.
Here, in like Volume, the Decree of FATE
Forbids that Madmen should divide the State;
They with absurd, illib'ral, desperate Push,
To shame even Party, and make Faction blush,
Strive, but in vain, to alienate the Hearts
Of a whole People great in Arms and Arts;
To us, by Nature, Reason, Interest, Blood,
Conjoined, and union'd by the circling Flood.
Through these as FOLLY passed with tottering Gait,
From thinking Hurry gave an Air of State,
And tripping at the last unlucky Law,
(As Witches stumble over a Cross of Straw)
She chanced to kick one Bundle, light it rolled
Into Existence; in it was foretold
A Mock-heroic should employ the Pains
Of venal Quills, and Party-heated Brains.
She, on her Knees, with Hands devoutly closed,
At once her Message and herself, exposed;
To whom in answer FATE: "Thus far to come,
"Swell all its Rage, and lash itself to foam,
"Over every Mound of Decency to ride,
"Has been allowed to Riot's Moon-drawn Tide;
"Here its proud Waves shall stop, the boisterous Flood
"On which ye hull'd desert you in the Mud.
"The Mists that veil the Morning of this Reign,
"The Breath of Order shall disperse again,
"Broke they shall scud before the piercing Ray,
"And add new Glories to its Burst of Day.
"See the glad Prospect shine! a Briton born,
"Whom Virtues, more than you could wish, adorn,
"Gives Luster to the Throne; whose Deeds confess
"No Thirst of Power, except the Power to bless;
"Who from the Scepter no Exemption draws,
"And is but the first Subject of the Laws;
"Even Monarch reckons in his moral Plan,
"But second Title to the HONEST MAN.
"Him, did the World deserve, Heaven had designed
"The Sovereign, as the Friend of all Mankind,
"Placed as it is gentle Delegate he would stood,
"And won them by Example to be good;
"Taught them the social Duties how to blend,
"The Son, the Brother, Husband, Father, Friend. --
"Roused from their Dream, the Honest and the Wise
"Shall view Confusion with abhorrent Eyes;
"Nay, the misled shall say, while drops the Tear,
"How could our Love be scribbled into Fear?"
"Go, tell your Senders to revere their K -- g. --
"And in your private Ear, this only thing
"Of which it can be capable, receive;
"Folks of your Age have never long to live."
Nor more: -- And FOLLY backward on her Way
Sullen and silent turned her Steps, toward Day.
And, oh fair Decency! to whom we owe
That Peace and Order are Things known below,
That Man was taught, with better Aim, to push
Beyond his Acorn Feast and Bed of Rush,
The rugged Cavern's Shelter to disown,
And seek Convenience in the peopled Town,
There to distinguish, in Subjection mild,
'Tween reasonably free and staring wild;
Do thou forgive, if stung with honest Pain,
Too far over Satire's far too open Plain
I urge the sportive Steed, while I pursue
Through his own Paths, the blatant Beast in view. --
Do thou forgive, if ever I, unexact,
Of his own Dirt some little Specks contract;
Hard were the Task to third so foul a Way,
And yet no plashing of the Soil betray.
But if provoked to vindicate thy Laws,
I dip my Pen in Truth and Virtue's Cause,
If I, when Scandal shoots her Load of Shame,
Restore it honestly to whence it came;
If my sole Aim is License to restrain,
And laugh thy Rebels home to thee again;
If, undesirous of the Wreath of Bays,
Nor over ticklish to the Straw of Praise, --
Unasked, unpromis'd, if these Lines I pour,
Conviction-drawn, but from my Soul abhor
The Name of Satirist, who to his Share
Needs but an Ear to rhyme, and Front to dare,
To hide his splendid Bile in moral Mask,
And set himself at once about his Task; --
As a rough Water-Dog, New-England's Breed,
Fresh plastered from some Pond with Mud and Weed,
Round from his Fleece the dirty Puddle shakes
Rejoicing in the Spatter that he makes: --
If These my Motives, not alone forgive,
But bid this JUST RETALIATION, live;
While Libels, when they have flourished for a spirt,
Fall like their Brother Leaves, and rot to Dirt.
FINIS.

