A SHORT TREATISE ON THE ENGLISH TONGUE.

A SHORT TREATISE ON THE ENGLISH TONGUE.

Being an Attempt to render the Reading and Pronunciation OF THE SAME More EASY
to FOREIGNERS.

LONDON: Printed for R. HORSFIELD in Ludgate Street, and I. ALLIX in Glanville
Street, Rathbone Place.

MDCCLXVII.

INTRODUCTION.
IT is generally allowed, that the most easy method of attaining any living
language is to associate and converse with those who speak it. Nevertheless,
when a foreigner has by this means so far acquired the English tongue, that he
shall be able to speak it, and understand it when spoken, tolerably well, he
will yet find himself greatly at a loss, when he attempts to read: because the
manner of expressing sounds by letters in his own language is so very different
from ours, that many English words, which he is well acquainted with by ear,
will not appear to him to be the same when he sees them in writing. -- For not
only various sounds are expressed in the English language by the same vowels;
but also, in many particular words, a kind of arbitrary pronunciation is used,
which cannot easily be reduced to rule, and is therefore most commonly taught
merely by ear, or imitation.

This latter difficulty, I am afraid, cannot be removed; but, I think, it may
be relieved in some degree, by separating all such words from those which are
capable of being taught by rule. This I have attempted, and have accordingly
collected all, or the greatest part of such kind of words, under their proper
heads, as exceptions to the several rules given in the following pages,
together with a short explanation of their sound. -- By this means a learner
may have his task before him, and may easily refer to any particular word, as
he shall have occasion; which will greatly relieve his memory.

I have not taken notice of all the derivatives and compounds which properly
belong to the several exceptions, but for the most part of primitive words
only, for the sake of brevity; which I hope will be thought sufficient, the
others being naturally comprehended therein. Many words indeed are varied
according to the different position of the accent, which not only shortens the
articulation of the succeeding syllables, but in some words causes them to be
so indistinctly pronounced, that it is sometimes difficult to determine what
vowels are sounded therein: yet if the learner is but careful to give the
accented syllable its proper pronunciation according to the following rules, he
will naturally fall into the customary utterance of the other syllables, which,
as they are pronounced quick, need not be studied so particularly.

The rules treat only of the general power of the vowels and diphthongs,
because in these consist the most material differences between the English
pronunciation and that of foreigners; but I have added thereto, by way of
appendix, a short treatise (drawn up and communicated by a friend) for the
explanation of such particularities also of the other letters as are peculiar
to the English tongue.

All which together (I flatter myself) will be sufficient to enable a foreigner
to read and pronounce any English words with ease and certainty, when the
syllables of the same are properly divided according to the learned Dr. Lowth's
excellent rule for spelling, given in the 7th page of his English grammar, viz.
The best and only sure rule for dividing the syllables in spelling, is to
divide them as they are naturally divided in a right pronunciation; without
regard to the derivation of words, or the possible combination of consonants at
the beginning of a syllable.

Mr. John Gignoux likewise particularly recommends and explains this method, in
the preface to his spelling-book, entitled, The Child's best Instructor in
Spelling and Reading. A title which it seems well to deserve, on account of the
division of the several syllables according to the manner abovementioned, by
which it is rendered (in my opinion at least) the most useful book of the sort
that has hitherto been published.

I must however observe, that the author, in his Table of Words written very
different from their Pronunciation, at page 82, has too much followed the
common London pronunciation; which, though perhaps in general the best, yet has
some very exceptionable particularities. Among which are, Potticary for
Apothecary, Athist for Atheist, Awkurd for Awkward, Riccolas for Auricolas,
Belcony for Balcony, Carrin for Carrion, Sirket for Circuit, Crowner for
Coroner, Gorjus for Gorgeous, Hankerchur for Handkerchief, I'urn for Iron, Ilan
for Island, Spanel for Spaniel, Stummuch for Stomach, Sound for Swoon, Thusty
for Thirsty, Vawt for Vault, Venzun for Venison, Verdit for Verdict, etc.

Also in page 57 he signifies that the terminations -tial, -cial, -cian,
-tious, -cious, -tient, and cient, make each of them but one sound or syllable.
But however common such pronunciation may be, it ought not by any means to be
taught, or laid down as a rule; because the English language loses much of its
elegance, when it is expressed in so careless a manner, that any of the
abovementioned terminations shall seem but one syllable.

The i in all these terminations has the sound of the English e; and though it
is pronounced quick, yet it ought to be distinctly expressed, as in Parti-al,
Soci-al, Greci-an, Capti-ous, Graci-ous, Quoti-ent, Anci-ent, etc. There fore I
hope that the author, in his next edition of that useful book, will make some
alteration in his explanation of these particulars.

Others, besides Mr. Gignoux, have been misled by the indistinct manner in
which some particular syllables are sometimes uttered even by good speakers.
Mr. James Buchanan in particular has given himself much unnecessary trouble,
and has carried his refinements a great deal too far concerning syllables of
this kind, which, in quick pronunciation, have seemed to him to partake of an
articulation different from the real spelling. This has, unfortunately, not
only added great difficulty to his An Essay toward establishing a Standard for
an elegant and uniform Pronunciation of the English Language, as practiced by
the most learned and polite Speakers.
performance, but rendered it almost incapable of answering the good purposes
intended by it. For he has frequently substituted an imaginary articulation of
one vowel for the inarticulation, or rather the short and indistinct sound, of
another; not considering that the expressing of an accented syllable in many
particular words does almost unavoidably cause the succeeding syllable or
syllables to be so indistinctly pronounced, that it is sometimes difficult to
determine what vowels are sounded therein, as I have before observed.

But when words are so pronounced, that instead of the short or indistinct
sound of one vowel, a manifest articulation of another different vowel may be
distinguished; it then becomes a fault in speech, which (howsoever common it
may be) ought by no means to be imitated, much less taught; because the
generality of people are naturally too liable of themselves to acquire it,
without being led thereto by written instructions.

The following examples taken from Mr. Buchanan's book will illustrate what has
been said; viz. He has substituted -l for the terminations -al, -ial, and -el,
as Naivl, Neutrl, Komk^l, Joodeshl, Spshl, Quarl, etc. for Naval, Neutral,
Comical, Judicial, Special, Quarrel, etc. Mr. Peyton's "New Vocabulary or
Grammar of the true pronunciation of the English" is not less liable to
censure, for the same words are there rendered Nai-vel, Ni^u^trel,
djou-d-chiel, Spe-chiel, Couar-ril, etc.
-in for -an, as Heumin, Orgn, etc. for Human, Organ, etc. -nss for -ance and
-ence; and -nt for -ant and -ent, as Abundinss, Rvrinss, Contentmnt,
Commandmint, etc. instead of Abundance, Reverence, Contentment, Commandment,
etc. -fool for -full as Faithfool, etc. iss for ess, as Heedlss, Happnss, and a
great abundance of such other syllables, equally distant from the true
pronunciation.

As I have no other motive for giving my opinion so freely concerning this
gentleman's performance, than the desire of removing all unnecessary difficulty
from the learning of English, I hope he will excuse me; even though my remarks
should not have sufficient weight to convince him.

He may likewise assure himself, that, though I think an uniformity of
pronunciation throughout the British dominions is more to be wished than hoped
for; yet I should have as much real satisfaction as himself in the completion
of that "great moral end," which (as he supposes in his preface) would be
promoted thereby, viz. the removal of national prejudice; an effect equally to
be desired by all lovers of their country, whether South or North Britons!

It would be much to the advantage of all those who learn the English tongue,
if the syllables in all future editions of English dictionaries were divided
according to the A very useful little dictionary on this plan was printed in
1764, for J. Nourse and S. Hooper in the Strand, entitled, "the Complete
English Spelling Dictionary upon an entire new Plan;" the author, Mr. J. Carter.
method recommended by Dr. Lowth and Mr. Gignoux before mentioned: and likewise
if the words, which are not properly English, were distinguished by an
asterisk, or some other particular mark placed before them; that foreigners may
not conceive our language to be unnecessarily copious and difficult.

The coining of new words from other languages to express any thing, which
might as concisely and elegantly be explained in proper English words, is a
kind of pedantry, which all writers should endeavor to avoid: unless we be
allowed to except those who treat of natural philosophy, medicine, surgery, or
such other subjects as are supposed to be read by none but those who are
acquainted with other languages, or at least have some knowledge of the Latin
tongue. For it ought to be the study of every writer to make his meaning as
plain and intelligible in the proper language in which he writes, as he
possibly can. Yet so many of our most eminent writers have occasionally been
guilty of the fault above mentioned, that the ingenious Mr. Johnson has thought
himself obliged to insert a great abundance of such coined words into his
excellent English dictionary; and the reverend Mr. Entick likewise into his
very useful new pocket dictionary. But I cannot suppose that such kind of words
were admitted by these gentlemen as proper English words; but merely that they
might explain them to English readers; who without the knowledge of other
languages cannot otherwise possibly understand them: which is a sufficient
proof that they are not at all entitled to the name of English words.

For how should an English reader (I mean a reader merely of English) be
supposed to understand that Ablepsy signifies blindness? Acetosity sourness?
Anhelation panting? Arcanum a secret? Obesity fatness? Papilio a butterfly?
Neoterick, modern? Paranymph a bride-man? Rugose wrinkled? Squalor nastiness?
Terreous earthy? Tenebricose dark; Tripudiation dancing? Tumefy to swell? Turm
a troop? and a thousand other such words, which are found in both dictionaries?

It is much to be wished that all such new coined words, which have only been
used by a few authors, were distinguished by some mark from the common and
proper English words (as I have hinted above) in all future editions of these
useful dictionaries: lest so many uncouth and pedantick expressions should be
adopted into the English tongue by dictionary authority. Because when a person
sees them ranged with other words in an English dictionary, he may be induced
to make use of them as proper English words in his writing and discourse, which
would, at first, cause no small impediment to the understanding of his ordinary
readers and hearers.

The accents used in these dictionaries are particularly useful for keeping up
an uniformity in pronunciation; and it would be well if the double accents were
also added to some particular words, as in Mr. Gignoux's spelling book for the
purpose mentioned in page 7 of his preface, viz. To denote, that the consonant
that begins the next syllable must be also sounded at the end of the syllable
where the double accent is; as a-tone-ment; man-gle; in-tan-gle; which words
must be sounded as if written at-tone-ment; mang-gle; intang-gle; so in
con-quer-or; con-cu-bine; etc. The same would also be particularly useful in
words, wherein g and c are softened by the vowels e and i following them in the
next syllable as in neg-lig-ent; vo-racity, etc.


In my search for such words as are independent of the following rules, I made
use of the Rev. Mr. Entick's new spelling dictionary; and though I examined the
same so carefully, that I believe I have not made many omissions, yet the whole
number of particular exceptions (exclusive of their compounds and derivatives)
amount to no more than There are indeed 54 foreign words besides; (see page 15)
which are not included in this number, because, as they still retain their
original pronunciation (or nearly so) they cannot properly be accounted
exceptions to English rules.
340 -- which number bears a very small proportion to the number of words in
that dictionary; which I compute to be upwards of 23,000. This, I think, ought
to prove that the English pronunciation is not so very irregular as it is
generally thought to be; which a careful examination of the following pages
will more particularly show.

A SHORT TREATISE ON THE ENGLISH TONGUE.
THE English vowels, a, e, i, o and u, have each of them The vowels may indeed
be said to have more sounds than 2, because a different pronunciation from the
2 sounds here spoken of, is given to each of the vowels in a few particular
cases, which are hereafter noted; but at present I am only speaking of their
general power.
2 sounds, commonly called long and short.

The sounds of the three first vowels a, e, and i, when long, seem to be
peculiar at present to this nation, wherefore they may properly be called the
English sounds.

And the short sounds of these three vowels may, for the sake of distinction,
be called the foreign sounds; because they are uttered with scarcely any
difference (except that a and i, are pronounced short) from the French
articulation of the same vowels; which shall be more fully explained by See the
examples to the 2d rule.
examples hereafter.

I think it necessary to observe in this place that the English sound of the
following vowels, diphthongs and terminations cannot easily be expressed in
foreign letters, and should therefore be learned by ear, viz.

i long There are 2 ways of sounding the long i and y (though both long) the
one a little different from the other, and requiring a little more extension of
the mouth, as may be seen by comparing the following words, viz. I and Aye,
High and High-ho; By It (or by it) and Bite; Sighed and Side; Strive and Strife,
etc. but this difference being so nice, is not to be attained but by much
practice, neither is it very material.
, as in Bi-ble, Mi-tre, Nitre, Pirate, etc.

o and u short, before a consonant in the same syllable as in Odd, Nod, Lord,
etc. and in Mud, Strut, Stun, Urn, etc.

oi and oy, which have both the same sound, as in Oil, Boil, Coil, Boy, Coy,
Hoy, etc.

ou and ow (not like the French ou, in the pronunciation of which the lips are
almost closed, but) with an open articulation as in Pound, Our, Gown, Pow-er,
etc.

Also the following Terminations, viz. -ire -tion -cious -tious
as in Dire, Fire, Salvation, Delicious, Fictitious, etc.

The English (or long) sound is given to the vowels a, e, Rule I.
and i (and the other vowels are also sounded long) when they are alone, or
when there is not a consonant following them in the same syllable (also before
silent e in the end of a word; see the 3d rule) Examples
a like the French e in Beat, as in Ca-ble, Fa-ble, Sa-ble, etc. e like the
French i in Mill, as in Be, He, E-vil, Be-ver, Le-gal, etc. i like the Greek
At quoties litera i longa est plerumque effertur ut Graecorum (...). See
Wallis's Grammatica Linguae Anglicanae.
(...) or something like the French i long before n in Divin, Prince, Enfin,
etc. as in Bi-ble; Di-al; Fi-nal; Gi-ant, etc. o like the French o or au, as in
Go; So; Lo-cal; Mo-ment, etc. u like ew in Few, Pew, etc. as in Du-ty, Fu-ry,
Hu-man, etc. y (when a vowel) like the English i; as in the monosyllables Buy
and Guy, (wherein u is mute) Dry, Fry, My, Dye, etc. in the dissyllables, Ally,
Com-ply, De-ny, De-scry, De-fy, Es-py, Im-ply, Re-ly, and Re-ply, which are
accented on the ultimate syllable; and in all words compounded with the Latin
word Fio; as De-ify, Magnify, Specify, Rarify, etc.


(Particular Exceptions concerning a, at the End of a Syllable)
Except, 1st,
a in Wa-ter, wherein it is commonly pronounced like the French a, or English
diphthong aw; in Fa-ther, and the last syllable of Pa-pa, Mam-ma, wherein it
has a medium sound between aw and the English a; and in a-ny, and ma-ny,
wherein it sounds like a short e.

(Particular Exceptions concerning i)
2dly,
i in ac-qui-esce, Bi-er, Pi-er, and Tier, wherein it sounds like the English e.

(General Exceptions concerning i)
3dly,
i is pronounced short before another vowel in the termination of all words of
more than 2 syllables, when it is not radical; as in Am-able, De-mo-n-ack,
Car-r-age, So-c-al, Wil-l-am, Styg -- an, Dal-l-ance, Val -- ant, Span -- ard,
A-p-ary, So-c-ate, In-sid-iator, Al-le-v ation, Mar-r-ed, A-l-en, Con-sc-ence,
Am-b-ent, Gla-z-er, Spe-c-es, Se-rag-l-o, Ax-i-om, Pos-te-r-or, War-r-our,
Con-sc-ous, Id -- ot, Pre-m-um, etc. But in the proper names Ma-r-ia and
So-ph-ia, when given to English women, it is pronounced according to rule.
Also, in Affi-ance, and the derivatives from the dissyllables ending in y,
which are mentioned in the example: as Al-li-ance, Com-pli-ance, De-ni-al,
De-fi-ance, and Re-li-ance, wherein the i When i is substituted for y in the
terminations of derivatives, it retains the sound of the y in the original
word, whether long or short; therefore i in Ca^r-r-er, Ca^r-r-ed, and Ca^r-res,
is short; and in Al-li^-ance, De-ni^-al, Dig-ni fi^-ed, Im-pli^es, etc. is
pronounced long like the y in the primitive words before specified.
retains the sound of the y in the original words, and is accented accordingly.

Particular Exceptions concerning o.
Except, 4thly,
o in Do (and its compounds) To, and Who, which is commonly pronounced like oo;
though the latter (Who) is pronounced according to the rule in the northern
parts of England.

5thly,
u, in the first syllable of Cu-cumber, which is commonly pronounced like the
English ou hereafter explained.

General Exception concerning y.
6thly,
y, at the end of all words of two or more syllables (except those mentioned in
the example) is pronounced like a short i, as in Carry, Envy, Commissary, etc.
the accent being laid on one of the former syllables.

Of vowels in syllables ending with a consonant.
^ule II.
The vowels are pronounced short in all syllables ending with a consonant
(except in the particular cases hereafter noted) and the three first vowels
have the foreign articulation, without any other material difference, except
that of being pronounced short.

EXAMPLES.
a has a short articulation of the English aw, or rather of the Italian a, as
in Add, Bad, Lad, Mad, etc. e has exactly the sound of the Italos ego, uti
nostros etiam recte eam (literam e) proferre censeo in vocibus, ascendo,
ventus, etc. (Dr. Middleton, fol. 446.)
Italian or French e, as in Bed, Fed, Led, Red, etc. i has a short articulation
of the I vocalis, quoties brevis est, sonatur plerumque (ut apud Gallos
aliosque) exili sono, Wallis, fo. 47.
French i, or English e, as in Bid, Did, Hid, Kid, etc. The short sound of the
two other vowels (viz. o and u) must be acquired by ear, as I have before
observed (see examples of these vowels in p. 3. of this treatse.)


Particular Exceptions concerning a before a consonant.
Except, 1st,
a in An-gel, Bass, Cam-brick, Cam-bridge, Dan-ger, and Man-ger, is commonly
sounded like the French diphthong ai; in han't (for have not) Mas-ter, and
Plas-ter, it has a medium sound between aw and the English a; and in Hal-ser
(wherein l is mute) False, and Palsy, it is commonly pronounced like aw.

General Exceptions concerning a before a consonant.
2dly,
a has the sound of aw likewise before ld and lt, as in Bald, Cal-dron, Altar,
etc.; in all primitive monosyllables ending in ll (except shall and Mall, which
are pronounced according to rule) as in All, Gall, Fall, etc.; and before lk
(wherein l is mute) as Balk, Stalk, Walk, Talk, etc.: but before lf, lm, lve,
and before nd in words derived from the Latin word Mando, it is sounded like
the Italian a, only somewhat longer, as in Half, Calm, Salve, Command, Demand,
etc.

Particular Exceptions concerning c before a consonant.
Except, 3dly,
e in England, Pretty, Yes, and Yet, wherein it is pronounced like a short, and
in Yellow like a short a.

General Exception concerning e before s.
4thly,
e is pronounced long before S final in these cases is always pronounced like z.
s in the ultimate of plural nouns, and third persons singular of verbs when
preceded by c, s, z, or g, as in Fa-ces, Hor-ses, As-si-zes, Ra-ges, etc.; but
in all other terminations with silent e (except in Latin words) the es may be
sounded in the same syllable, as Bride Brides, Ride Rides, Name Names, etc.

Particular Exceptions concerning i before a consonant.
5thly,
i in Blithe, Endict, and Indict (wherein c is mute) Mild, Pint, and Wild,
retains its English, or long sound; also in Child and Christ, but not in their
Derivatives, Children, Christen, and Christian.

General Exceptions concerning i before a consonant.
6thly,
i is likewise sounded long in all primitive words (and their compounds and
derivatives) ending in nd; as Bind, Rind, Wind, etc.; though in Wind, the
substantive, and its compounds, it is sometimes pronounced short.

It is also sounded long before gh, as in High, Nigh, Light, etc. in which gh
is mute, having no other use than that of lengthening the i.

It is long also before gn at the end of a word (and the g is mute) as in
Benign, Sign, and its compounds Consign, Design, etc. and their Derivatives in
-er, -ed, -edly, and -meant, but no others; for in Re-sig-na-tion,
Con-sig-na-tion, Sig-nif-i-ed, etc. the i is short according to rule, and the g
is pronounced.

General Exceptions concerning o before consonants.
Except, 7thly,
o in all words ending in ld and lt, as Behold, Bold, Cold, Bolt, Colt, etc. and
all their compounds and derivatives, retains its long sound.

Particular Exceptions of o before a consonant.
8thly,
o is also pronounced long in Boll, Bolster, Comb (wherein b is mute) Control,
Droll, Folk (wherein l is mute) Force, Fort, Ghost, Gross, Holster, Host, Most,
Only, Post, Poll, Pat-roll, Port, Roll, Scroll, Sloth, Sport, and Sword
(wherein w is mute) Stroll, Toll, and Troll, and in their compounds, etc. But
in Count and its compounds, Ac-compt, etc. it sounds like the English diphthong
ou, as if spelt Count, Ac-count, etc.

It has the sound of a short u In the dialects of Lancashire, and some other
places, the o is pronounced according to rule, in many of these words.
in Af-front, At-tor-ney, Bomb, Bor-age, Bor-ough, Broth-er, Col-our, Com-fits,
Com-fort, Com-pany, Com-pass, Con-duit, Con-ey, Con-sta-ble, Coz-en,
Cov-e-nant, Cov-er, Cov-et, Cov-ey, Dis-com-fit, Doz-en, Gov-ern, Hon-ey,
Lon-don, Mon-day, Mon-ey, Monk, Mon-key, Mon-ger, Mon-grel, Month, Moth-er,
On-ion, Oth-er, Ov-en, Pom-mel, Poth-er, Rom-age, Ront, Son, Shov-el, Slov-en,
Smoth-er, Ton, Thor-ough-ly, Won, Won-der, Word, World, Work, Worm, Wor-sted,
Worth, Wom-an (in the singular only, the plural being pronounced as if spelt
Wimmen) Wor-ry, Wort, Wor-ship, and their compounds, etc. except Dis-cov-er and
Re-cov-er, which are pronounced according to rule.

It is most commonly sounded like oo in Tomb and Womb (wherein b is silent)
Lo-ser, Gold, Whom, and Whose In the northern parts of England the words Gold,
Who, Whom, and whose, are pronounced properly as they are spelt.
: and is mute in Jeop-ar-dy, Leop-ard, and People, which are pronounced as if
written Jep-par-dy, Lep-pard, and Pee-ple.

Particular Exceptions of u before a consonant.
Except, 9thly,
u in Bu-sy, and its compounds, etc. which is commonly pronounced like a short
i, and the s like z.

Of Vowels in Syllables ending with silent e.
Rule III.
But when e or ue follow a consonant in the same syllable, the preceding vowel
retains its original open or long sound.

EXAMPLES. Ace, Face, Recede, Dice, Vote, Con-fute, Vague, Vogue, Col-legue,
etc. Also, Ad-vice, De-vice, En-tice, Suf-fice, Sac-rif-ice, Alive, Con-nive,
Con-trive, De-prive, Derive, Re-vive, and Sur-vive, which are accented on the
last syllable.

The vowel a is sounded long even before two consonants, when they are followed
by e in the same syllable (except before -nce) as n Ache, Haste, Waste, Change,
Grange, Range, etc. and their compounds and derivatives; but the other four
vowels are sounded short in the like case, as in Fringe, Revenge, Solve, Serve,
Tinge, Sludge, Grudge, etc.

Note,
That derivatives from words ending in e for the most part retain their original
sound, even when the e is omitted, as Sparing, -ed, from Spare; Wast-er, -ing,
ed, from Waste; Rang-er, -ing, ed, from Range, etc.

General Exception.
Except, 1st,
Words having the accent on the penultima or antepenultima: in all which the
last syllable, being short, is pronounced as if the e and ue final were absent,
as in Cal-a-mine, Cath-er-ine, Cat-a-logue, Dec-a-logue, De-pos-ite, Des-tine,
De-ter-mine, Dis-fran-chise, Doc-trine, En-gine, Ep-il-ogue, Ex-quis-ite,
Gran-ite, Har-angue, Fi-nite, and its compounds, Mar-it-ime, Med-ic-ine,
Min-ute (not the adjective for small) Mor-tise, Ped-a-gogue, Prac-tise (verb)
Prol-ogue, Prom-ise, Sap-phire, Syn-a-gogue, Trea-tise, and U-rine.

Particular Exceptions.
2dly,
The following monosyllables are likewise exceptions to this rule, viz. Dare
(the verb) Give, Gone, Have, Live, and One One is pronounced as if spelt Won.
; all which are pronounced as if e final was absent. Except, 3dly,


There, Were, and Where, which are commonly pronounced as if spelt with the
diphthong ai, Their, Wair, and Whair; but in all other words (except what are
mentioned above) the vowels a, e, i, or y, when they come before When a
consonant comes before re and le final, the e is never sounded last, but always
before the last consonant of the word, as in A-cre, Mi-tre, humble, etc. which
are sounded A-ker, Mi-ter, humbel, etc.
-re final, are sounded long according to the third rule, as in Are, Care,
Here, Mere, Desire, Fire, Lyre, etc. as if spelt Air, Cair, Here, Mere, Desire,
etc.

Particular Exceptions concerning i in syllables ending with silent e.
Except, 4thly,
i in Writhe and O-blige, wherein it is commonly sounded like ee (though in the
northern parts of England the latter is sounded according to rule).

General Exceptions concerning i in syllables ending with silent e.
5thly,
i in all adjectives of more than one syllable ending in -i will, and in all words
(except those mentioned in the above example) ending in ice and ive, is
pronounced short, as in Ser-vile, Ju-ven-ile, Cap-rice, Mal-ice, En-dive,
Pos-it-ive, etc.

Particular Exceptions concerning o in syllables ending with silent e.
6thly,
o in A-bove, Come, Come-ly, Done, Dove, Glove, Love, Pore-blind, Some, Shove,
Sponge, Tongue, and Worse, wherein it is sounded like a short u; and in Lose,
Move, Prove, and Rome, wherein it is commonly pronounced like oo.

Of Proper Diphthongs.
Proper Diphthongs have sounds of their own, different from the long and short
sounds of the English vowels.

Rule IV
au aw
are pronounced like the French a in Ame.

Examples.
Maul, Paul, Sprawl, Law, Saw etc.

Particular Exceptions.
Except,
Auf (more commonly spelt Oaf) and Hautboy, wherein au is pronounced like a
long o; Cauliflower, where it is pronounced like a short o; and Gauge, wherein
it is commonly sounded like the English a long.

Rule V.
oi oy
The proper articulation of these diphthongs is that which is given them in the
English words Oil, Boil, Coy, Hoy, etc.

( See List of Vowels, Diphthongs, etc. which cannot be expressed in foreign
Letters, page 3.)

Except,
Tor-toise, wherein oi is commonly sounded like short u.

Rule VI
oo is pronounced like the French ou in Bout.

Examp'
Boot, Broom, Loop, Moor, Poor, etc.

Except,
Blood, Flood, Foot, Good, Hood, Stood, Soot, Wood, and Wool, wherein oo is not
pronounced so full, but partakes a little of the sound of a short u. Except
also Door and Floor are pronounced by the vulgar in the northern parts of
England as they are spelt; for they give the oor, in these words, the same
sound that it has in Boor, Moor, Poor, etc.
Door and Floor, wherein oo has the sound of o long.

Rule VII.
ou ow
The proper pronunciation of these diphthongs is that which is given them in
the English words Bound, Found, Crown, Cow, Flow-er, Sow (noun), Coward, etc. A
more particular account of this sound is given in page 3.

Particular Exceptions concerning ou.
Except, 1st,
ou in Bouge, Boug-et (commonly written Budge and Budget) Bor-ough, Coun-try,
Cou-ple, Cour-age, Cous-in, Dou-ble, Doub-let, Jour-nal, Jour-ney, Mounch,
Nour-ish, Thor-ough-ly, Thor-ough-fare, Trou-ble, Touch, Ou in Scourge is
sometimes like o long.
Scourge, Shoud, Coud, and Would, wherein it is pronounced like a short u; also
in Enough, Rough, Slough (when it signifies the part which separates from a
sore) and Tough; in all which the gh final sounds like f; but in Cough, Lough
(or Lake) and Trough, it is pronounced like a short o, as if spelt Coff, Loff,
and Troff. Except also in Coul-ter, Course, (and its compounds Discourse, etc.)
Court, Dough, Four, Fur-lough, Gourd, Mourn, Mould, Moult, Poult, Poul-try,
Poul-terer, Poul-tice, Shoul-der, Soul, Though, wherein ou is sounded like o
long; and like oo in Bouse, Ca-rouse, Gouge, Through, and Un-couth.

General Exceptions concerning ou.
^^cept, ^dly,
ou before ght, which has a medium sound between aw and o long, as in Ought,
Bought, Thought, etc. and in the termination of words of more than one
syllable, in -our and -ous, wherein it sounds like a short u, as in Ho-nour,
Sa-viour, Pi-ous, Righ-teous, etc.

Particular Exceptions concerning ow.
^^cept, ^dly,
ow in Bow when it signifies a weapon, or segment of a circle; but in the word
Bow it is pronounced according to rule; in Bowl (or Basin, not in Bowl the
verb, nor its derivatives, etc.) Blow, Crow, Flow, Flown (from Fly) Glow, Grow,
Know, Low, Mow, Owe, Own, Prow, Prowl, Row, Sow (the verb) Show, Slow, Snow,
Strew, Stow, Tow (noun and verb) Trow, and Throw, and their derivatives, etc.
wherein it sounds like o long.

General Exception concerning ow.
Except, 4thly,
ow final in words of more than one syllable, which is sounded like a short o,
the w being mute; as in Bar-row, Bellow, Fol-low, etc. Three words are
independent of this exception, viz. Al-low, wherein ow is pronounced according
to the rule, and Be-low and Bestow, wherein it sounds like o long.

Note,
Many of the words contained in the above exceptions are pronounced in the broad
dialects of the northern parts of England as they are spelt; that is, ou and ow
are pronounced according to the VIIth rule, as in Bound, Cow, etc. viz. Trough
(making gh silent) Four, Mould, Moult, Poultry, Poultice, Shoulder, Bowl (or
Basin) Glow, Grow, Mow, Owe, Own, Strew, Trow, Ought, Bought, etc.

Of Improper Diphthongs.
Improper Diphthongs take the sound of but one of their vowels, the other being
mute.

Rule VIII.
ai ay ey
are pronounced like the French ai, or English a long.

Examples.
Dainty, Bail, Gain, Day, May, Gray, Prey, Convey, Obey, Survey, Bey, Dey, etc.

Particular Exceptions concerning ai.
Except, 1st,
ai in Vil-lain and Mur-rain, and sometimes in Said, is pronounced like a short
e.

General Exception concerning ai.
Except, 2dly,
ai when alone or at the end of a syllable, as in A-chai-a, and the Hebrew names
Ben-ai-ah, Is-ai-ah, Mi-cai-ah, Cai-a-phas, etc: wherein it is pronounced like
the Greek (...) or English i long.

Particular Exceptions concerning ey.
Except, 3dly,
ey in Hey! and Hey-day! wherein it is sounded like the English i, and in
Ceylon, Key, and Sey-mour, wherein it is pronounced like the English e or
French i.

General Exception concerning ey.
Except, 4thly,
ey at the end of words of more than one syllable (when the accent is placed on
a former syllable, as in Al-ley, At-tor-ney, Bar-ley, Gal-ley, Hon-ey, etc.) is
pronounced like a short i.

Rule IX.
ae ea ee ei ie oe
are pronounced like the French i in Fille, or the English e long.

Examples.
Demon (or Demon) Beat, Dear, Lead, and Read (verbs) Meet, Feet, Re-ceipt,
De-ceit, De-ceive, Ceil-ing, Seign-iory, Seize, Shield, Re-prieve, Grief,
Foetus, Sub-poena, etc.

Particular Exceptions concerning ea.
Except, 1st,
ea is pronounced like the French e in Bread, Breakfast, Breast, Breath (noun
only) Cleanly, and Cleanse (not in Clean) Dead, Deaf, Death, Dread,
En-deav-our, Feather, Head, Heav-en, Heav-y, Jeal-ous, Leav-en, Lead (metal)
Leath-er, Measure, Mis-teach, Peas-ant, Pheas-ant, Pleasant, Pleas-ure,
Peas-cod, Read-y, Realm, Read (only in preter tense and participle passive)
Stead-y, In-stead, Spread, Sweat, Teat, Thread, Threat-en, Treach-ery, Tread,
Treas-ure, Weath-er, Weap-on, Wreak, Zeal-ous, Zeal-ot (not in Zeal) Yeast, and
their compounds and derivatives not already excepted. But in Bear In the
northern parts of England, Break and Great are pronounced according to rule.
, Break, Great, Swear, Tear (the verb) Wear, Wheal, and Weal (the mark of a
stripe, but not in Weal for prosperity) it is commonly sounded like the French
diphthong ai; and like a short a in Hear-ken, Hearth, and Heart.

Except, 2dly,
General Exceptions concerning ea.
But in all other words before r, when another consonant follows in the same
syllable, it is sounded like er or ir, as in Dearth, Earl, Earn, Earn-est,
Earl-y, Earth, Hearse, Heard, Learn, etc.

ea before three consonants in the same syllable is pronounced like the French
e, as in Health, Breadth, Wealth, etc.

Except, 3dly,
Particular Exceptions concerning ee.
ee in Breech (noun and verb) Breechings, and Breeches, which are pronounced
like a short i.

Except, 4thly,
Particular Exceptions concerning ei.
ei in Slight (Artifice) in which it is pronounced like the long English i;
but it is like a short i in For-feit and Sur-feit; like a short e in For-eign,
and Hei-fer; and like the diphthong ai in Hein-ous, Heir, Leisure (though
sometimes like a short e in Leis-ure) Skein, Their, Veil, and Vein.

Except, 5thly,
General Exceptions concerning ei.
ei is pronounced like the long English i when it is not followed by a
consonant in the same syllable; as in Plei-a-des, Hei-delberg; Hei-den-heym,
Rei-gate, etc. but in ei-ther and nei-ther it is sometimes pronounced like the
English a long, and sometimes according to rule, like the English e long.

It has the sound of the English a in all words wherein it precedes -gh, gn,
and -nt in the same syllable, as Weigh, Freight, Deign, Feign, etc. (in all
which g is mute) Feint, Teint, etc. except in three words mentioned above, viz.
Slight, Seignory, and Foreign.

Except, 6thly,
Particular Exceptions concerning ie.
ie in Friend, wherein it sounds like a short e; and Sieve, wherein it sounds
like a short i.

General Exceptions concerning ie and oe.
7thly,
ie oe
at the end of a word are always pronounced like the first vowel in each
diphthong, viz. ie like i long, and oe like o long, as in Die, Foe, etc. except
in two words, Shoe and Can-oe, wherein oe is commonly pronounced like oo.

Note,
The same is to be observed of the diphthongs ue and ye, at the end of a word;
the former being pronounced like a long u, and the latter like a long i; as in
Due, Pie, etc. the same likewise when s is added to make the plural of nouns,
or third person singular of verbs, as Dies, Foes, Dues, Pyes, etc. and the s so
added is pronounced like z. Rule X.
-eu -ew -jew
are sounded like a single u long.

Examples. Europe, Eu-nuch, Brew, Dew, View, etc.

Except Eau in Beauty (and its derivatives) has likewise the same sound.
,
ew in Sew, which is commonly sounded like a long o.

Rule XI
oa is pronounced like o long.

Examples. Boat, Coat, Groan, Moan, etc. in Broad, Except,
A-broad, and Groat, wherein it partakes a little of the sound of aw; and in
Goal (when it signifies a prison) it sounds like ai, and the G is pronounced
soft, as if spelt Jail.

Rule XII.
ue ui
before a consonant in the same syllable have the short sound of the last vowel
in each diphthong; viz. ue like a short e as in Guess, Guest, etc.; and ui like
a short i, as in Build, Guild, Conduit, etc. But in words ending with silent e,
the diphthong ui is pronounced like the English i long, according to the third
rule, as in Guide, Guile, Disguise, etc.

Except, 1st,
Particular Exceptions.
The following words, wherein the u alone is pronounced, viz. Bruise, Cruise,
Fruit, Juice, Nui-sance, Pur-suit, Recruit, Sluice, Suit, and Suit-or, which
are sounded as if spelt Bruze, Cruze, Nuisance, etc.

Note,
When ua, ue, ui, and uo follow Q in the same syllable, the u has the power of
w, which power cannot more easily be explained to foreigners, than by comparing
it to the sound of u in the French word Quoi! or Quoy! as in Quar-rel, Quack,
Question, Quick, Quite, Quit, Quote, etc.

A TABLE of Words which are independent of the foregoing Rules and Exceptions,
with the common Pronunciation of each expressed in Italicks.
BUOY Boey, Victuals Vittles, Colonel Curnel, George Jorge, Lieutenant
Leuftenant, Quay Kee, Two Too, Yacht Yot, Yeoman Yewman, Yelk or Yolk (of an
egg) Yoke.

A TABLE of Foreign Words which still retain their original Pronunciation (or
nearly so) notwithstanding that they are in a manner adopted, by frequent Use,
into the English Language.
ACcoutre, Antique, Archives, Arriere, Banditti, Beau, Bureau, Caviare,
Cartouch, Connoisseur, Courier, Croup, Cuirass, Environ, Escritoire, Fascine,
Groupe, Intrigue, Lieu, Machine, Magazine, Marine, Palanquin, Pas, Piquant,
Pique, Piquet, Police, Poltron, Ponton, Prame, Profile, Rendezvous, Roquelaure,
Rouge, Scout, Sophi, Soup, Tete-a-tete, Tornado, Toupee, Tour, Transmarine,
Vermicelli, Violoncello, Jonquil, Adieu.

FINIS.
A TABLE or INDEX of the Words, which (with their several Compounds and
Derivatives) are Exceptions to the foregoing Rules; viz.
A Vowels. Sounded like Rule. Exception. Page. A-Bove Au-dessus o u 3 6 17
A-broad Dehors oa aw 11 1 28 Ac-qui-esce Acquiescer i e^ 1 3 5 Af-front Affront
o u 2 8 12 An-gel Ange a A^ 2 1 8 A-ny Aucun a 2 1 5 At-tor-ney Procureur o u 2
8 12 Auf Sol au o 4 1 18 B Bass Basse a a 2 1 8 Bear (noun and verb) Ours et
Supporter ea ai 9 1 25 Be-low En-bas ow o 7 4 22 Be-stow Donner ow Bi-er Une
Biere i e^ 1 2 5 Blithe Joyeux i i^ 2 5 10 Blood Sang oo u 6 1 19 Blow Coup,
Souffler ow o 7 3 21 Boll Tige o o 2 8 12 Bol-ster Chevet o o 2 8 12 Bomb Bombe
o u 2 8 12 Bor-age Bourache o u 2 8 12 Bor-ough Bourg o u 2 8 13 7 1 20 Bouge
Senfler ou u 7 1 20 Boug-et Bougette ou u 7 1 20 Bouse Boire avec exces ou oo 7
1 21 Bow (noun) Arc ow o 7 3 21 Bowl (or Basin) Bassin Bread Pain ea 9 1 24
Break Rompre ea a 9 1 25 Breakfast Dejeune ea 9 1 24 Beast Poitrine ea Breath
(noun) Haleine ea Breech, -es, -ings Fesses, Culotte ee 9 3 26 Broad Large oa
aw 11 1 28 Broth-er Friar o u 2 8 13 Bruise Contusion ui u 12 1 29 Busy Occupe
u 2 9 14 C Cam-brick Batiste a a 2 1 8 Cam-bridge Cambridge a a 2 1 8 Can-oe
Canoe oe oo 9 7 27 Car-ouse Fair la debauche ou oo 7 1 21 Cau-lif-lower
Choux-fleur au o 4 1 18 Cey-lon Ceylon ey e^ 8 3 23 Child but not their
derivatives. Enfant i i^ 2 5 10 Christ but not their derivatives Christ
Clean-ly not in clean Propre ea 9 1 24 Cleanse not in clean Nettoyer Col-our
Couleur o u 2 8 13 Comb Peigne o o 2 8 12 Come Venir o u 3 6 17 Come-ly (De
bonne grace) o u Comfits Confitures o u 2 8 13 Com-fort Consolation o u 2 8 13
Com-pany Compagnie o u 2 8 13 Com-pass Contour o u 2 8 13 Count Compte o ou 2 8
12 Con-duit Conduit o u 2 8 13 Con-ey Lapin o u 2 8 13 Con-sta-ble (Commissaire
de quartier) o u 2 8 13 Con-trol Controller (last syl.) o o 2 8 12 Coud (Verb)
ou u 7 1 20 Cov-en-ant Accord o u 2 8 13 Cov-er Couverture Cov-et Convoiter
Cov-ey Volee d oiseaux Cough Toux ou o 7 1 20 Coul-ter (Soc de charrue) ou o 7
1 20 Coun-try Pays ou u 7 1 20 Cou-ple Couple Cour-age Courage Course
(Discourse, etc.) Course ou o 7 1 20 Court Cour Cous-in Cousin ou u 7 1 20
Coz-en (verb) Duper o u 2 8 13 Crow Corneille ow o 7 3 21 Cruise Croiser ui u
12 1 29 Cu-cum-ber Concombre (1st syll.) u ou 1 5 7 D Dan-ger Danger a a 2 1 8
Dare Oser a a 3 2 16 Dead Mort ea 9 1 24 Deaf Sourd ea 9 1 24 Death La mort ea
9 1 24 Discomfit Defaire o u 2 8 13 Do Fair o oo 1 4 6 Done Fait o u 3 6 17
Door Port oo o 6 1 19 Dove Colombe o u 3 6 17 Dou-ble Doubler ou u 7 1 20
Doub-let Doublet Dough Pate ou o 7 1 20 Doz-en Douzaine o u 2 8 13 Dread
Crainte ea 9 1 24 Droll Comique o o 2 8 12 E En-deav-our Effort ea 9 1 25
En-dict and Indict Stiler i i^ 2 5 10 Eng-land Angleterre e 2 3 9 En-ough Assez
ou u 7 1 20 F False Faux a au 2 1 9 Fa-ther Pere a aw 1 1 5 Fea-ther Plume ea 9
1 25 Flood Deluge oo u 6 1 19 Floor Plancher oo o 6 1 19 Flow Color ow o 7 3
21 Flown (from Fly) Echape ow o 7 3 21 Folk Gens o o 2 8 12 Foot Pied oo u 6 1
19 Force Force o o 2 8 12 Fort Fort o o 2 8 12 For-eign Etranger ei 9 4 26 9 5
27 For-feit Amend ei i^ 9 4 26 Four Quatre ou o 7 1 20 Friend Ami ie 9 6 27
Fruit Fruit ui u 12 1 29 Fur-lough Conge ou o 7 1 20 G Gauge Jauge au a 4 1 18
Ghost Esprit o o 2 8 12 Give Donner i 3 2 16 Glove Gand o u 3 6 17 Glow (Etre
allume) ow o 7 3 21 Goal Prison (G soft) oa a 11 1 28 Gold Or o oo 2 8 13 Gone
All o o 3 2 16 Good Bon oo u 6 1 16 Gov-ern Gouverner o u 2 8 13 Gouge Gouge
ou oo 7 1 21 Gourd Citrouille ou o 7 1 20 Great Grand ea a 9 1 25 Groat ( Piece
de 4 sols) oa aw 11 1 28 Gross Gros o o 2 8 12 Grow Croitre ou o 7 3 21 H
Hal-ser Hausiere (l mute) a aw 2 1 9 Hant ( for have not) (Verb) a aw 2 1 8
Have Avoir a a 3 2 16 Haut-boy Hautbois (t mute) au o 4 1 18 Head Tete ea 9 1
25 Hear-ken Ecouter ea a 9 1 25 Heart Coeur ea a 9 1 25 Hearth Foyer ea a 9 1
25 Heav-en Le ciel ea 9 1 25 Heav-y Pesant ea 9 1 25 Heif-er Genisse ei 9 4 26
Hein-ous Odieux ei a 9 4 26 Heir Heritier (h mute) ei a 9 4 26 Hey! Hey-day!
Ouais! ey i^ 8 3 23 Hol-ster (Fourreau de pistolet o o 2 8 12 Hon-ey Miel o u 2
8 13 Hood Coiffe oo u 6 1 19 Host Hot o o 2 8 12 I Jeal-ous Jaloux ea 9 1 25
Jeop-ard-y Peril eo 2 8 13 In-stead Au lieu ea 9 1 25 Journal Journal ou u 7 1
20 Jour-ney Voyage Juice Jus ui u 12 1 29 K Key Clef ey ee 8 3 23 Know Scavoir
ow o 7 3 21 L Lead (noun) Plomb ea 9 1 25 Leath-er Cuir ea 9 1 25 Leav-en
Levain ea 9 1 25 Leis-ure Loisir ei a and sometimes 9 4 26 Leo-pard Leopard eo
2 8 13 Live Vivre i 3 2 16 Lon-don Londres o u 2 8 13 Lose,-er Perdant o oo 3 6
17 2 8 13 Love Amor o u 3 6 17 Lough (or Lake) Lac o o 7 1 20 Low Bas ow o 7 3
21 M Ma-ma Maman a aw 1 1 5 Man-ger Mangeoire a a 2 1 8 Ma-ny Plusieurs a 1 1 5
Mas-ter Maitre a aw 2 1 8 Meas-ure Mesure ea 9 1 25 Mild Doux i i^ 2 5 10
Mis-teach Enseigner mal ea 9 1 25 Mon-day Lundi o u 2 8 13 Mon-ey Largent o u 2
8 13 -Mon-ger Vendeur o u 2 8 13 Mon-grel Metif o u 2 8 13 Monk Moine o u 2 8
13 Mon-key Singe o u 2 8 13 Month Mois o u 2 8 13 Most Le plus, la plus, etc. o
o 2 8 12 Moth-er Mere o u 2 8 13 Move Mouvoir o oo 3 6 17 Mould Moule ou o 7 1
20 Moult Muer ou o 7 1 20 Mounch Manger ou u 7 1 20 Mourn Deplorer ou o 7 1 20
Mow Faucher ow o 7 3 21 Mur-rain Mortalite parmi les betes ai 8 1 23 N Nou-rish
Nourrir ou u 7 1 20 Nuis-ance Incommodite ui u 12 1 29 O O-blige Obliger
(sometimes) i ee 3 4 16 One Un, une o o 3 2 16 On-ion Oignon (1st syll.) o u 2
8 13 On-ly Seul (sometimes) o o 2 8 12 Oth-er Autre o u 2 8 13 Ov-en Four o u 2
8 13 Owe, Own Devoir, confesser ow o 7 3 21 P Pal-sey Paralysie a aw 2 1 9
Pa-pa Papa a aw 1 1 5 Pa-trol Patrouille o o 2 8 12 Peas-ant Paysan ea 9 1 25
Peas-cod (Cosse de pois) Peo-ple Peuple eo e^ 2 8 13 Pheas-ant Faisand ea 9 1
25 Pi-er Jettee i e^ 1 2 5 Pint Chopine i i^ 2 5 10 Plas-ter Emplatre a aw 2 1
8 Pleas-ant Agreeable ea 9 1 25 Pleas-ure Plaisir Poll Tete o o 2 8 12 Port Port
Post Post Pom-mel Pommeau o u 2 8 13 Poth-er Embarras o u 2 8 13 Pore-blind
(qui a lavue court) o u 3 6 17 Poult Coup de main ou o 7 1 20 Poul-try,
Poul-ter-er Volaille, Poulailler Poul-tice Cataplame ou o 7 1 20 Pret-ty Joli e
2 3 9 Prove Prouver o oo 3 6 17 Prow Prove ow o 7 3 21 Prowl Roder ow o 7 3 21
Pur-suit Poursuite ui u 12 1 29 R Read (perfect tense; participle passive) Lu
ea 9 1 25 Read-y Pret ea 9 1 25 Realm Royaume ea 9 1 25 Re-cruit Recrue ui u 12
1 29 Roll Un rouleau o o 2 8 12 Rom-age Perquisition o u 2 8 13 Rome Rome o oo
3 6 17 Ront Animal nain o u 2 8 13 Rough Rude ou u 7 1 20 Row, noun and verb
Rang, ramer ow o 7 3 21 S Said Dit ai 8 1 23 Scourge Fleau ou u and o 7 1 20
Scroll Une band o o 2 8 12 Sew Coudre ew o 10 1 28 Sey-mour Sey-mour (nom) ey
e^ 8 3 23 Shoe Un soulier oe oo 9 7 27 Shoud (Verb) ou u 7 1 20 Shove Pousser
o u 3 6 17 Shov-el Une pele o u 2 8 13 Shoul-der Epaule ou o 7 1 20 Show
Montrer ow o 7 3 21 Sieve Crible ie 9 6 27 Skein Echeveau ei al 9 4 26 Slight
(Artifice) Artifice ei i^ 9 4 26 9 5 27 Sloth Paresse o o 2 8 12 Slough
(Suppuration from a sore) Matiere qui sort dune play ou u 7 1 20 Slov-en
Mal-propre o u 2 8 13 Slow Lent ow o 7 3 21 Sluice Ecluse ui u 12 1 29 Smoth-er
Etouffer o u 2 8 13 Snow Neige ow o 7 3 21 Some Quelque o u 3 6 17 Son Fills o u
2 8 13 Soot Suie oo u 6 1 19 Soul Ame ou o 7 1 20 Sow (verb) Semer ow o 7 1 20
Sponge Eponge o u 3 6 17 Sport Jeu o o 2 8 12 Spread Etendre ea 9 1 25 Stead-y
Ferme ea 9 1 25 Stood (Pret. de s arreter) oo u 6 1 19 Stow Arranger ow o 7 3
21 Stroll Roder o o 2 8 12 Strew Parsemer ow o 7 3 21 Suit Process ui u 12 1 29
Suit-or Plaideur ui u 12 1 29 Sur-feit Indigestion ei 9 4 26 Swear Jurer ea ai
9 1 25 Sweat Suer ea 9 1 25 Sword Epee o o 2 8 12 T Tear (verb) Dechirer ea ai
1 9 25 Teat Mammelle ea 1 9 25 Ti-er Rang i e^ 1 2 5 Their Leur ei ai 9 4 26
There La e ai 3 3 16 Though Quoique ou o 7 1 20 Thor-ough-fare, Thorough-ly
Passage, parfaitement o u 2 8 13 ou u 7 1 20 Thread Fill ea 9 1 25 Threat-en
Menacer ea 9 1 25 Through a travers ou oo 7 1 21 Throw Jetter ow o 7 3 21 To a
o u 1 4 6 Toll Peage o o 2 8 12 Tomb Tombeau o oo 2 8 13 Ton Tonneau o u 2 8 13
Tongue Langue o u 3 6 17 Tor-toise Tortue oi u 5 1 19 Touch Toucher ou u 7 1 20
Tough Dur ou u 7 1 20 Tow, noun and verb Etoupes, remorquer ow o 7 3 21
Treach-er-y Perfidie ea 9 1 25 Tread Marcher ea 9 1 25 Treas-ure Tresor ea 9 1
25 Troll Roder o o 2 8 12 Trou-ble Peine ou u 7 1 20 Trough Auge ou o 7 1 20
Trow Croire ow o 7 3 21 V Veil Voile ei ai 9 4 26 Vein Vein ei ai 9 4 26
Vil-lain Coquin ai 8 1 23 Un-couth Grossier ou o 7 1 W Wa-ter Leau a aw 1 1 5
Weal (mark of a stripe Marque de coup ea ai 9 1 25 Weap-on Arm ea 9 1 25
Weath-er Le tems ea 9 1 25 Wear User ea ai 9 1 25 Were (Etre) e ai 3 3 16 Wheal
(a stripe) Marque de coup ea ai 9 1 25 Where Ou e ai 3 3 16 Who Qui, lequelle,
laquelle o sometimes oo 1 4 6 Whom Lequelle, laquelle o Do 2 8 13 Whose Don't
Wild Sauvage i i^ 2 5 10 Womb Matrice o oo 2 8 13 Woman, women Femme, -s o u 2
8 13 Won Gagne o u 2 8 13 Won-der Surprise o u 2 8 13 Wood Bois oo u 6 1 19
Wool Lain Word Mot o u 2 8 13 World Monde Work Ouvrage o u 2 8 13 Worm Ver
Wors-ted Etame Wor-ry Dechirer o u 2 8 13 Wor-ship Adoration Wort Mout Worth
Prix Worse Pire o u 2 8 13 Would (Verb) ou u 7 1 20 Wreak Assouvir sa vengece
ea 9 1 25 Writhe Guirlande, tordre i ee 3 4 16 Y Yeast Levure ea 9 1 25 Yel-low
Jaune e a 2 3 9 Yes Oui e 2 3 9 Yet Encore Z Zeal ous, Zealot Zele, zelateur ea
9 1 25

AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING A Brief ACCOUNT of the chief Peculiarities of the
ENGLISH CONSONANTS.
1. B is mute before t, or after m, in the same syllable, as Debt, Lamb, etc.

2. C sounds soft, like s, when followed by e, i, or an apostrophe (denoting
the absence of e) as Cedar, City, Dancd, etc.

C sounds like sh, when followed by ea, ia, ie, or io, making different
syllables, as Ocean, Ancient, Precious, Social, etc. except Society.

CC when followed by e or i, sounds like x, as Accept, Accident, etc.

C is mute in Indict, Victuals, Scene, Scent, Science, Sciatica, Scissors,
Scission, Scymiter, Scythe, and the proper names Scyros, Scylla, and Scythia.

In all other cases C sounds hard like k.

3. Ch, when properly English, has the same sound with the Italian c, before e
or i. Examp. Child, Chain, etc.

It sounds also like sh, in words derived from the French, as Chaise,
Champaigne, etc. and like k in words of Greek extraction, as Christ, School,
Stomach, Archangel, etc. pronounced Ark-angel. But if Arch comes before a
consonant, ch has then its proper English sound, as in Archbishop.

Ch in Loch sounds like f.

Ch is mute in Dram, Schedule, and Schism.

4. D is mute before ge, as in Judge, Bridge, etc. also in Soldier.

5. F in Of sounds like v.

6. G sounds soft like j before e, i, or an apostrophe, and hard (like the
Greek y) in all other cases.

Examp. Angel, Rage, Ragd, Giant, Ginger, etc.

Exceptions to Gs sounding soft.

1. In the participles passive of words ending in g hard (and also wherever g
is doubled) it continues hard, notwithstanding the vowels e or i, or an
apostrophe, as in Draggd, Begging, Digging, etc.

2. In the termination ger, wherever it makes a distinct syllable, g sounds
hard, as in An-ger, Finger, Longer, Stronger, etc. in which kind of words it
may be observed that the g sounds double, so as to belong to both syllables.

3. Derivatives in er, ed, or ing from primitives in ng, retain the g hard, as
Singing, Sing-er, from Sing; Hang-ing, Hang-er, from Hang; Winged or Wingd from
Wing, etc. In which kind of words it may be observed, that g sounds single, and
belongs to the first syllable only.

4. In the following words G is hard, notwithstanding it comes before e or i;
viz. Geese, Gewgaw, Geld, Gelt, Gertrude, Get (with its compounds) Gibberish,
Gibbous, Giddy, Gift, Gig, Giggle, Gild, Girl, Give, Forgive, Gilt, Gimblet,
Gimp, Gird, Girt, Girdle, Begin, Gizzard, Gideon, Gibbons, Gilbert, and Gilpin.

G is mute before n in the same syllable, as Gnash, Sign, Sovereign, etc. also
in Phlegm, Seraglio, and Bagnio.

7. Gh sounds like G hard in Ghost, and like ff in Cough, Lough, Laugh,
Laughter, Rough, Slough, Tough, Trough, and Enough. In other words it is mute.

8. H is mute in Hour, Honor, Honest, Heir, Herb, Humor, Hostler, Thyme,
John, Thomas, Thomasin, and Thames. Also in Greek words, when preceded by R, as
Rheum, Rhyme, Rhetoric, Myrrh, etc. and lastly at the end of words, as ah, hah,
Isaiah, Sarah, etc.

9. K is mute before n in the same syllable, as Knave, Know, Knight, etc.

10. L is mute in Balk, Talk, Walk, Stalk, Balm, Calm, Calf, Calves, Falcon,
Half, Halves, Holme (an island) and Holmes (a surname) Psalm, Qualm, Salmon,
Could, Should, and Would.

11. N is mute after m in the same syllable, as Hymn, Autumn, Solemn, etc.

12. P is mute before s, and between m and t, as Psalm, Tempt, etc.

13. Ph is always sounded like f, except in Stephen, Nephew, and Phial, where
it sounds like v.

Ph is mute in Phthisic, and is pronounced Tizzic.

14. Q is always followed by u, and, when it begins a syllable, sounds like cw,
by which (as Mr. Johnson observes) our Saxon ancestors well expressed it. But
in terminations from the Latin -quus, and also in words of French extraction,
it sounds like k. Examp. Oblique, Antique, Quoif, Conquer, Risque, Traffic,
etc. some of which words are now more commonly spelt with c or k, as Coif,
Risk, Traffic, etc.

15. S sounds like z.

1st, In the third persons singular of all verbs, and the plural number of all
nouns, as in Has, Was, Tries, Bees, Times, etc.

2dly, In pronouns possessive, as His, Hers, Theirs, and also when preceded by
the comma denoting possession, as Fathers, Mothers, Toms, Wills, etc. (also in
the particle as.)

Exception to the two last Sections.

S has its proper sound when preceded by c, k, ck, f, p, q, or t, which admit
not the sound of z so easily after them, as Speaks, Beats, Rocks, Jacks, Dicks,
Gilberts, Cocks-spur, Cats-paw, etc.

3dly, S sounds like z preceded by a liquid in the same syllable, as Dam-sel,
Crimson, Thames, Jer-sey, Guern-sey, etc. And also,

4thly, S between two vowels most commonly sounds like z, as Daisy, Reprisal,
Peasant, Please, Rosin, etc.

Except House, Mouse, Louse, Goose, Geese, Sausage, Purchase, Promise, Case,
Mason, Basin, Basis, Phasis, and Thesis. Except also substantives in use,
derived from Latin verbs, as Use, Abuse, Disuse, Refuse, Excuse, etc. and
adjectives derived from the participles passive of some Latin verbs, as
Recluse, Profuse, Abstruse, etc.

Lastly, Except also the words contained in the next section but one, where s
sounds like zh.

S and ss sound like sh in Sure (with its compounds) Issue, Tissue, Fissure,
Pressure, Russian, etc. also in the terminations -assion, -ession, -ission,
-ussion, as in Passion, Impression, Mission, Concussion, etc.

S, when preceded by a vowel and followed by ion or ian, sounds like zh, as
Invasion, Ephesian, Vision, Delusion, etc. But if it be preceded by a
consonant, it sounds like sh, as in Conversion, Persian, etc.

S sounds also like zh before -ier, as Osier, Hosier, Glasier, Brasier, etc.
and in the words Leisure, Measure, Pleasure, and Treasure.

S is mute in Isle, Lisle, Carlisle, Island, Viscount, and Demesne.

16. T before io or ia (making part of the same syllable with i) sounds like
sh, as Na-tion, Cau-tious, Egyp-tian, Sa-ti-ate, etc. But if t belong to the
former syllable, it retains its proper Sound, as Quest-ion, Fustian,
Combust-ion, etc.

T is mute in words ending with -stle, as Castle, Thistle, Bristle, etc.

17. Th has two sounds, the one soft, as in Thy, the other hard (like the Greek
(...)) as in Thigh.

I. Th sounds soft,

1st, In Thence, There (with their compounds) Then, That, The, Thee, These,
This, Those, Thus, Thou, Thy, Thine, Their, Theirs, Them, Though, Although,
Beneath, Bequeath, Betroth, Mouths, Tithe, Scythe, Wreath, Booth, and in the
verbs Bathe, Mouth, Sees, Loathe, Soothe, and Breathe.

2dly, Wherever it occurs between two vowels, as Father, Mother, etc. Except
words of Greek extraction, and also derivatives from words ending with th hard,
as Earthen from Earth, etc.

3dly, Th sounds soft when placed between r and a vowel, as Burden, Murder,
etc. though in such words d is often written and pronounced instead of th, as
Murder, Burden. In other cases th sounds hard.

Th is mute in Asthma, with its derivatives.

8. W is mute before r in the same syllable, as Write, Wrath, etc. also in
Sword, Swoon, and Answer, with their compounds and derivatives.

The other consonants have the same powers as in other languages.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Preface, p. xiv. for 340, read 342. -- Note, for 54 r. 47. -- for page 15, r.
page 30. Page 21, for word, r. verb.

