THE MAN WITH TWO WIVES; Or, WIGS FOR EVER! A DRAMATICK FABLE; BY F. G. WALDRON.

SET TO MUSIC BY MR. SANDERSON.

AND FIRST PERFORMED AT THE ROYALTY THEATER, SATURDAY, MARCH 24th. 1798.

Love in these labyrinths his slaves detains,
And mighty hearts are held in slender chains.
With hairy springes we the birds betray,
Slight lines of hair surprise the finny prey,
Fair tresses man's imperial race ensnare,
And beauty draws us with a single hair.
POPE'S Rape of the Lock. LONDON: Printed for the Author, and sold by him at
No. 4, Cross-Court, Bow-Street, Covent Garden (where may be had all his other
publications); at the Royalty Theater; and by H. D. Symonds, Paternoster-Row.

1798.

PRICE SIXPENCE. Entered at Stationers' Hall.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Husband, Mr. WALLACK. Old Wife, Mrs JEFFERIES, Young Wife, Mrs. HARLOWE.
The Man with Two Wives; Or, Wigs for Ever! A DRAMATICK FABLE.
Enter Husband. SONG. Husb. WAS ever man so plagued as I!
It almost makes me sob and cry;
Two wives I have, and cannot please either,
With black and gray hairs can please neither:
One wishes that my hair were black;
Whilst the other, but I fear, alack!
It Is but pretense, prefers the gray:
To please both 'would I knew the way!
If I had only one wife, old;
Though she, perchance, might be a scold:
My gray hairs could not, sure, displease her;
Nor my infirmities much teaze her.
Or, had I but one wife, though young;
And pert, and flippant were her tongue:
She, surely, would not find, good-lack!
Fault with my hairs for being black.
Was ever man etc.
To please both 'would I knew the way!

Enter Old Wife RECITATIVE Accompanied. Old Wife. Where is my husband? -- mine
and Bett's --
That he is half here is, oft-times sorely frets;
But I Am his first wife, and the elder:
Though younger Ma'am has Hans in Kelder.
Oh! here he is, and now I Will try
To make him throw his black hairs by.

DUETT. Husb. Ah ha! my old spousy! yet not the less dear;
How little I thought you to me were so near:
What news, my dear chuck! from the market or bath?
I must go there myself; I Am as thin as a lath!

Old Wife. To the bath you may go, but 'twill do you no good,
While that bush of black hair remains under your hood;
For health's sake let me that deformity crop;
You never will be well till that lumber you lop!

Husb. Well, do as you please, my old spousy! pray do!
Your will is a law, that I still buckle to.

Old Wife. Come into next room then; and, if I have luck,
Each black from the gray hairs I Will presently pluck.

Both Come into etc.

Husb. And if you -- you will etc.

Exeunt. Enter Young Wife. RECITATIVE ACCOMPANIED. Yg. Wife What can have
become of my husband, I wonder?
With his old wife, I guess; were he young -- lightning! thunder! --
How I Would rattle his ears; nay his joints: all his senses!
But, since of a husband nought's left but pretenses,
I Will cheer myself some way; be it only to teaze him:
For who can expect I should ever wish to please him!
Not a gray hair I Will suffer upon his old pate,
But pluck them all out; or no more be his mate.

SONG. What folly, I wonder! induced me to wed
A grey-beard, who scarcely can crawl to his bed!
And I, young, gay, lively, and sightly!
Alas! silly I!
I almost could cry!
Sure I merit a husband more sprightly!
And yet, on reflection, it near makes me laugh;
Of him, though so old, I have only one half:
That Is, sure, being stinted too tightly!
Conceited, dull log!
You mere household clog!
Two wives are not managed so lightly!
Enter Husband. SONG. Husb. Well, now I think I look as should
Each man that is past Life's middle;
For, black hairs, sure, no wise man would,
That cannot dance to a fiddle.
Now I and my old spouse well match,
For she is gray as a badger;
But hold, should young Ma'am now me catch,
New plucked, how should I fadge her!

RECITATIVE ACCOMPANIED. Yg. Wife. Oh, here is the old boy! well, now for some
fun;
My humor I Will follow, thus briskly begun.
Why, goodness! what is here? you lately were pye-bald;
But, your black hairs are gone; and now you are nigh-bald!

Hush. Dear, young wife, be gentle! I Have lost all my black hairs,
I dare not tell how; and now I much lack hairs:
Have pity, then, Darling! upon poor old gray;
And to him of comfort a word or two say.

Yg. Wife To comfort my husband, as should every wife,
I always am ready, each hour of my life;
But, sure, my dear Hubby will do what he can
To prove himself loving, as though a young man:
Consign these gray hairs, then, unto my direction;
And, if you will but, patient, endure the dissection;
In less than five minutes, I vow and declare,
Upon your smooth pate shall not be seen a gray hair!

SONG. With a snip of my scissars,
Each white hair I Will mow;
Or a twitch of my tweezers,
No more shall they grow:
For who would be linked to a grey-head?
As well in the grave one might lay head!
Not I, on my life!
I Will no longer be wife
To one who sepate's covered with snow;
Then quick let me mow it,
And no longer show it,
It shames me wherever I go:
Oh, who would be linked to a grey-head!
DUETT. Husb. What ever you please, love! so you be but happy;
I do as she wills, though I think I am sappy.

Young Wife. Do just as I please, love! and you will be happy:
To thwart a young wife would, you know, be quite sappy.

Both. Do just as I please, love! etc.
What ever you please, love! etc.

Exeunt. Enter, at the opposite side, the Old Wife. SONG. Old Wife. Well, now
I Am contented; my husband and I
Look like one another, as pigs in a sty;
His gray hairs and mine now exactly agree,
And no more he will prefer young Eliza to me:
Take example, ye old wives, and all of ye pull
Each black hair ye my find on your spouse's pied scull.
A pretty condition before I was in!
Why did I not sooner this practice begin?
Our heads the fame liv'ry now properly wear,
For on his white cranium there is not a black hair.
Take example, ye old wives, and all of ye pull
Each black hair ye may find on your spouse's pied scull.

Enter Husband and Young Wife. RECITATIVE, Accompanied. Husb. Oh, dear! oh,
dear! how cold's my head!
My nightcap fetch, I Will go to bed.

Old Wife. Why, how now, husband! what is the matter?

Young Wife. Why, how now, ma'am! why all this clatter?
Of all his black hairs you first stripped him;
I only of his gray bereft him:
So between both, bald, meek, and mild,
He proves, "an old man's twice a child!"

Husb. Cease your taunting each at other;
Or at me; pray cease this pother!
And say how I may quick escape
The shame of this my bald-pate rape?

AIR. Young Wife. To Britain strait send, if you hence would look big,
For one of their scull-caps, I think, called a wig.

Old Wife. To Britain pray send, if you hence would look big,
For one of their scull-caps, she says, called a wig.

Husb. To Britain I Will send, that I hence may look big,
For one of their scull-caps, I know, called a wig.

SONG. Husb The men only wore wigs; but now, with the ladies,
I Have heard that the best of the wig-maker's trade is;
The red-hair'd turn black, and the grizzle grow flaxen:
The color they change as they please of their caxon:
All ranks now appear in the new-fashion'd rig, there;
And no female's a beauty, who wears not a wig, there!
Then I Will think it no shame to conceal my bald pate, dears!
With curls that hung over some Blouzalind's great ears;
Since damsels of fifteen throw off, as they scorned 'em,
The beautiful locks with which Nature adorned 'em,
And frizzled wigs wear, as in public they dash on;
Pray, why should not old men, too, follow the fashion?
And, since in the valley of years I Am declining,
At what cannot be helped, in the stead of repining,
I Will sport each new whimsy; in pantaloons strut too;
To my throat a huge poultice I Will presently put too:
Whilst, with two such kind wives, if I Have any luck, dears!
I think, when new wigg'd, I shall be quite a buck, dears!

FINALE. Old Wife When your hand shall be in, my dear husband, pray send
For a wig, for me also; 'twill serve this good end:
That I shall no more be thought aged, alack!
And, instead of gray hairs, a wig get me coal-black.

Young Wife. Same trouble will serve for three wigs as for two;
Let me, though I want it not, have a wig too:
My hair is quite flaxen; to what shall it change?
Why, a lovely brunette! which will not be so strange.

Husb. Agreed, my dear wives! we will all three be wigg'd;
And in the new fashion completely soon rigged:
No color of hair shall our union dissever;
And, in harmony, henceforth, we'll sing Wigs for Ever!
CHORUS. No color of hair shall our union dissever;
And, in harmony, henceforth, we'll sing Wigs for Ever

EPILOGUE-SONG,
By Mrs. HARLOWE. The Poet Spenser sweetly sang
Of Rosalinda's charms;
Her diamond eyes, her ruby lips,
Her white and taper arms:
When he described fly Cupid's web,
Wove with her golden hair;
All other Aethiops seemed to Rose,
She fairest of the fair!
When Shakspeare drew the maid he loved,
In rustic Phoebe veiled;
Her bugle eye balls, cheek of cream,
Anne Hathaway concealed:
Arch Cupid's net in her was framed
Of glossy, black silk hair;
To him brunette was bright as gold,
She fairest of the fair!
But, had they all existed now,
The males had felt sad shocks,
Had Rosalinda's golden curls,
Anne Hathaway's black locks,
As 'twere by magic, sudden changed;
Gold, black! -- black, golden hair! --
Would they have thought them monsters, or
Each fairest of the fair?
Mere monsters, doubtless, would have seemed
The changelings in their eyes;
Nor, black or yellow turned the skin,
Have caused more grieved surprise!
Be warned then, females! when you dress,
Whatever your toil or care,
Forsake not stature! she will show
You fairest of the fair!

FINIS.
N. B. The Epilogue being too long for performance, the third and fourth
stanzas were compressed into the following one.

But, had they all existed now,
And Anna's Anna. The reader who has any curiosity about this maiden's
christian name, whether Anne or Anna, is referred to Malone's "INQUIRY," 1796,
p. 142 seq. Chalmers' "APOLOGY," 1797, p. 174 seq. and Waldron's "FREE
REFLECTIONS", 1796, p. 10.
jetty locks
With Rosa's golden tresses changed,
The men had felt sad shocks!
Be warned then, females! -- when you dress,
Whatever your toil or care,
Forsake not Nature! she will show
You fairest of the fair!

