TEN CASES Of PERSONS who have taken Mrs. Stephens's MEDICINES FOR THE STONE.
WITH AN ABSTRACT OF SOME EXPERIMENTS, TENDING TO Illustrate these CASES.

LONDON: Printed for S. HARDING, at the Bible and Anchor, on the Pavement, in
St. Martin's Lane; And J. ROBERTS, in Warwick Lane. 1738.

TEN CASES Of PERSONS who have taken Mrs. Stephens's MEDICINES FOR THE STONE.
I. The Case of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of BATH and WELLS.
ABOUT Five Years ago he felt a Soreness in his Left Side, after having rode
Four Days together, and made Water, which was first coffee-colour'd, and then
bloody. These Complaints went off in a short time; however, he became, after
this, subject to make bloody Water upon Riding: He felt once a most violent
Pain along the Region of the Right Ureter; it lasted only for a Moment, and
happened during a Fit of Cholic, occasioned by eating Strawberries. About Two
Years ago he was obliged to forbear riding, and could hardly walk without
making bloody Water; had Pain in making Water, and a Forcing to go to Stool at
the same time, but no Stoppage: He began Mrs. Stephens's Medicines in April
last; they increased the Pain in making Water for some time; his Water became
turbid at the time of making, had ropy fetid Matter in it, deposited a thick
heavy Sediment, and many small Flakes and Fragments of Stones were voided with
it in a soft State: In Five or Six Weeks he grew much better, and was able to
go over the Stones in his Coach: His general Health was also much improved. In
the Beginning of July he had a Return of the Pain in making Water, with a
sudden Stoppage now and then: Upon this he voided several Pieces of Stone in a
soft State, with one pretty large Piece, Part of which was soft and white, Part
brown and hard, and it gave a little Pain in passing: After this the Pain and
Stoppage in making Water went off entirely. In September he went into the
Country, where he often rides a trotting Horse without any Inconvenience; and
is free from all Complaints, excepting that he has now and then some uneasy
Sensations in the Region of the Kidneys: He has continued the Medicines till a
little while ago; but his Water has been in general perfectly clear, during the
Use of them; whereas it has twice been turbid upon discontinuing them, and
deposits a red Sediment, which dries into a stony Substance.

Feb. 11, 1737-8. J. Bath and Wells.

II. The Case of Mr. Binford, at Mr. Cameray 's, in Tokenhouse-yard,
Throgmorton-street.
HE had a Stone taken out of his Bladder by the Operation, when about Ten Years
old; has had the Symptoms of a Stone in the Bladder now again, for about Six
Years. A Surgeon at Exeter examined him twice by the Finger in the Anus, and
found both times in the most evident manner a Stone in the Bladder, which he
imagined to be as big as an Egg. Mr. Binford perceived the Motions of this
Stone during the Examinations, and made bloody Water after one of them. He
began Mrs. Stephens's Medicines about the middle of last August, and in a short
time after voided many white Scales, and much brown Grit in a soft and rotten
State: Since this he has voided many irregular Shells of Stone, of a
considerable Size, and of such a Thickness, as to consist of several Coats,
from Two to Six in Number: Many of these, when voided, are covered with a
Whiteness, which being rubbed off, the Shell appears to be brown. On the 30th
of January he had a Suppression of Urine; Mr. Hawkins passed the Catheter then,
and found a Stone in the Bladder, which he told Mr. Binford he believed to be
very small, though he would not presume to be certain. Mr. Binford has voided
many more Pieces of Stone since this, and Mrs. Stephens is in daily Expectation
of his being perfectly well.

Feb. 19, 1737-8. Tho. Binford.

III. The Case of Mr. Bolton, at the Sun and Dolphin in Cheapside, contained in
a Letter directed to me.
Sir,
TOWARD the latter Part of my Life, when in my Fiftieth Year, about 1720, I
was sore pained with the Stone, until I voided a large one; at several times
since about a Dozen; Part came away after a little riding, and then I made
Water like Coffee: But I imagine, one of the largest might stay behind; for in
1735 I began to be greatly afflicted; could not endure to ride, or bear a
Coach: When I have been making Water, it often stopped on a sudden, causing
much Pain; and no Person in the Country could give Relief, though I took a many
odd Things. Reading the Papers, I observed, some Specificks for the Stone were
advertized, one a Powder, the other a Liquid: I got 'em, and tried each; but
was not able to go through with either of 'em; being of a forcing Nature,
increased my Pain: Then was advised to smooth palliating Medicines, yet Pain
still continued, and excessive; made me begin to think of coming up to London
to be cut, if it might be safely done at my Age: At that time the News informed
us, that the Bishop of Bath and Wells and others were cured by taking Mrs.
Stephens's Medicines: I was then more inclinable to come: When I set out, my
Thoughts were to undergo the manual Operation, and had wrote to Mr. Cheselden
about it: When I arrived in London, and consulted with some Friends, it was
thought, as I was in my 68th Year, the safest way to take Mrs. Stephens's
Medicines; and accordingly on the 18th of July, 1737, I began with 'em, taking
Three Powders, and Three half Pints of Liquid every Day: What Effect, and how
they did operate, you will see by the following Diary, which I kept as exactly
as I could, considering the Pain I had by times; which yet prompted me to keep
strictly to the Medicines, believing, that by so doing, I should the sooner be
made easy, and took the Liquid Four times a Day for some Weeks.

A DIARY, as I took the Medicines.
1737.

Jul. 18. Began to take Three Powders, Three half Pints of a Liquid, Three
times a Day. Jul. 19. The same. Jul. 20. The same. Brought away a slimy mucous
Matter into the Pot; much Pain. Jul. 21. Continued to bring such Stuff away;
great Pain. Jul. 22. The same. I was in great Pain all this time. Jul. 23. The
same. I was in great Pain all this time. Jul. 24. The same. I was in great Pain
all this time. Jul. 25. Foul Water. I was in great Pain all this time. Jul. 26.
Thick Water. I was in great Pain all this time. Jul. 27. Foul Water. I was in
great Pain all this time. Jul. 28. The same. I was in great Pain all this time.
Jul. 29. The same. I was in great Pain all this time. Jul. 30. The same. I was
in great Pain all this time. Jul. 31. Water clearer, I was in great Pain all
this time. which made me send to Mrs. Stephens, who answered, I must have
Patience, and begin to try Four half Pints a Day. I was in great Pain all this
time. Aug. 1. Water not so foul. I began with Four half Pints, continuing the
Three Powders. All this time easier than before. Aug. 2. same. All this time
easier than before. Aug. 3. Water clearer. All this time easier than before.
Aug. 4. Made much Water, and clear. All this time easier than before. Aug. 5.
The same. All this time easier than before. Aug. 6. Less Water, and slimy
Matter. All this time easier than before. Aug. 7. Less Water, and slimy Matter.
All this time easier than before. Aug. 8. Water a little foul. All this time
easier than before. Aug. 9. The same. All this time easier than before. Aug.
10. Water foul and whitish; much Pain. Aug. 11. Water whitish, and very great
Pain when I made Water. Aug. 12. Water not clear, and great Pain. Aug. 13.
Water slimy, with a white Sediment, very great Pain. Aug. 14. Clearer, with a
little Sediment, but grievous Pain. Above are Twenty-eight Days, in which time
the Medicines took little Effect, and much Pain almost every Day. Aug. 15.
Water a little foul, some Sediment; very grievous Pain. Aug. 16. Water clearer,
some white Sediment; most cruel Pain. Aug. 17. Water foul, a slimy Sediment;
very great Pain. Aug. 18. Water the same; very great Pain. Aug. 19. Water the
same; great Pain. Aug. 20. Water slimy, with Sediment; sore Pain. Aug. 21.
Water the same; very grievous Pain. It was so intolerable, I sent for Mrs.
Stephens, to acquaint her, I was not able to endure: She said, I must have
Patience, I should in a little time be easier; and I might take an Opiate to
make me rest in the Night, and forbear to take the Fourth half Pint, supposing
it might be too hard upon me. Aug. 22. Water foul, with a slimy Sediment; great
and grievous Pain: I began to filter it. Aug. 23. Water foul, as Yesterday;
this Night violent Pain. Aug. 24. Water, as Yesterday, with great Pain. Aug.
25. Something foul, a little Sediment; very cruel Pain all this Night. Aug. 26.
High-colored, little Sediment; great Pain. Aug. 27. A Stoppage sometimes, high
colored; great Pain. Aug. 28. A Difficulty to urine, a little Sediment; very
great Pain. Aug. 29. A Stoppage, little Sediment; great Pain in making Water.
Aug. 30. As Yesterday. Aug. 31. A Stoppage, great Pain when I made Water, and
continued. Sept. 1. Thick Water, high-colored; excesfive Pain this Night.
Sept. 2. Thick Water, a Stoppage; great Pain. Sept. 3. High-colored, a
Sediment, and much Pain. Sept. 4. The same, with great Pain. Sept. 5. A
Stoppage sometimes, high-colored; great Pain at making Water. Sept. 6.
High-colored, a Sediment, with very great Pain. Sept. 7. Made little Water,
but with Pain; an easier Night. Sept. 8. Made little Water, Pain in making, but
easier Today than a great while before. Sept. 9. Water clear, no Sediment,
Pain much abated. Sept. 10. Made more Water, and clear, pretty easy this Day
and Night. Sept. 11. Made much Water, and clear, pretty easy, little Pain. This
Night made a larger Quantity of Water, little Pain. Sept. 12. Clear Water, no
Sediment, not much Pain. Night the same. Sept. 13. Water a little foul, and
some Pain. Night the same. Sept. 14. Water more foul, a Sediment, with more
Pain. Night a Stoppage, little Water, and foul with a Sediment. Sept. 15. Came
foul, and a Sediment, with some Pain. Night the same. Sept. 16. Was a little
foul, no Sediment, but some Pain. I took the Elixir for sleeping. Night made
much Water, and clear, but little Pain. Sept. 17. The same. Sept. 18. The same.
Night the same. Sept. 19. The same. Night made much Water, no Sediment, some
Pain. Sept. 20. Water clear, not so much as Yesterday, little Pain. Night the
same. Sept. 21. Clear Water, with more Pain than Yesterday. Night not so much
Water, but clear, and greater Pain. Sept. 22. The same, with more Pain. Night
much Water, and clear, with great Pain. Sept. 23. The same. Night the same,
clear Water, but with more Pain. Having for above a Week past made clear Water,
and with much Pain, and nothing comeing away, made me begin to think of leaving
off the Medicines; yet I was sure the Cure was not finished, and having a
Doctor, who happened to be here, then advised me to take 'em a Fortnight
longer, so I continued to go on. Sept. 24. Made clear Water, moderate Quantity,
with sore Pain. Night was foul Water, little in Quantity; some Pain. Sept. 25.
Water foul, not much; in which Two little Bits of the Stone; with a little
Pain. Night but little Water and foul; Pain easier. Sept. 26. The same. Night
the same; but often Pain. Sept. 27. Much the same; with some Pain. Night little
Water, foul; Pain easier. Sept. 28. Still but little Water, and foul; not much
Pain. Night the same. Sept. 29. The same; with Pain when I made Water. Night
the same. Sept. 30. But little Water, not very foul: This Day and the Night
following a great many Bits of Stone came away, being the Eleventh Week; more
has come away this Week, than in any one Week before. Oct. 1. Moderate Water,
and clearer; several Bits came away, pretty easy. Night a few Bits came away;
not much Water, clearer. Oct. 2. Water began to be clearer; fewer Bits; some
Uneasiness. Night Water almost clear; and few Bits, with a little Pain. Oct. 3.
Water clear; Pain sometimes; no Bits. Night but little Pain; no Bits. Oct. 4.
The same. Night the same. Oct. 5. Much Water, and clear; seldom Pain; no Bits.
Night not much Water, clear; no Bits; nor Pain. Oct. 6. Water clear; few Bits;
no Pain. Night Two or Three Bits; no Pain. Oct. 7. Water very clear; with Pain
when made it; no Bits. Night clear Water, with a Stoppage, that I could scarce
make any; and with Pain. Oct. 8. Clear Water, with some Pain; Two or Three
Bits. Night Water very clear; sharp Pain sometimes; Two Bits. Oct. 9. The same;
some little Bits. Night the same; no Bits worth Notice. Oct. 10. The same, with
frequent sharp Pain; no Bits material. Night foul Water, with Pain; no Bits.
Oct. 11. Clear Water, with some Pain; Three or Four Bits. Water clear, a little
Pain; some Bits. Oct. 12. A Pain when I make Water; a few Bits. Clear Water;
some little Bits. Oct. 13. Clear Water; no Bits. Night a Stoppage and Dribling;
very few Bits; small Particles. Oct. 14. Clear Water; no Pain but when at Pot;
a few small Bits. Night the same; some of the smallest Bits. Oct. 15. Clear
Water; Pain at making; few small Particles. Night a Stoppage and Dribling;
little Pain; some small Bits. Oct. 16. Clear Water, what I made, but had a
Stoppage of Urine; with great Pain when I made Water; which was but a few Drops
at a time; but several Bits came away. In the Night I rose often to make Water,
but could not, which caused very great Pain; but toward Morning making a
little, several Bits came away. Oct. 17. Water clear, with Pain; but several
large and little Bits came out, one the largest yet. Night a Stoppage often,
with great Pain; Two large and several lesser Bits came away. Oct. 18. A
Stoppage, and Pain; but several Bits, one larger came away. Night little Water,
often a Stoppage; not so clear; some Bits. Oct. 19. Clear Water; a Stoppage
with Pain; no Bits worth Notice. Night a little Water, being a Stoppage; a few
little Bits. Oct. 20. Clear Water, little Pain; some Bits. Clear Water, a
Stoppage, and Pain in Pene: Two large Bits sticking came out next Day. Oct. 21.
In the Morning made me easy, and urine more freely; a few small Bits came away.
Night clear Water, pretty easy; some few small Bits came away. Oct. 22. The
same; only a few Bits came away. Night the same; Two pretty large Bits came
away. Oct. 23. Water clear, uneasy when I made it; some little Bits came away.
Night much Water, clear, easy, Two Bits came. Oct. 24. The same; Two or Three
small Bits. Night clear Water; Two larger Bits; some sticking caused Pain. Oct.
25. Water clear; no Pain but at making Water; no Bits. Night a Stoppage; made
Water with Difficulty; no Bits. Oct. 26. Clear Water; some Pain in Pene; no
Bits this Day. Night Water foul, with Pain Pene; a Stoppage; Three or Four
large Bits came out in the Morning. Oct. 27. Clear Water; Pain by Stoppage; no
Bits. Night Water not clear; a Stoppage, with Pain Pene; several Bits found in
the Pot in the Morning, more than any Night before. Oct. 28. Clear Water; no
Pain, nor any Bits. Night the very same. Oct. 29. The same. Night the same; no
Pain, nor Bits. Oct. 30. Water clear; a little Pain at making; no Bits. Night
clear Water, sometimes a Stoppage, with Pain; no Bits. Oct. 31. The same. Night
much Water and clear, did not come freely; a few little Bits. Nov. 1. Water
clear; no Pain; no Bits. Night the same; a dribbling Stoppage; no Bits. Nov. 2.
Clear Water; very few Bits. Night the same, with a dribbling Stoppage; no Bits.
Nov. 3. Water clear; no Pain, nor Bits. Night much Water and clear; a Stoppage;
no Bits. Nov. 4. Clear Water; no Pain, nor Bits. Night a Stoppage; little
Water, and a few Bits. Nov. 5. Water clear, some Pain at making; no Bits. The
same at Night; a small Bit, and some Pain. Nov. 6. Clear Water; a Stoppage,
with a Pain Pene; Bits sticking. Night foul Water; a Stoppage, with great Pain;
Bits sticking, but in the Morning several large Bits were in the Pot. Nov. 7.
Clear Water; a few small Bits, with a little Pain. Night the same; a Stoppage,
with some Pain; a few Bits. Nov. 8. The same; I began to take less Medicines,
to Three times, Pain being abated. Night Water fouler; a Stoppage; some few
Bits. Nov. 9. Water clear; no Pain; very few small Bits. Night Water a little
foul; no Pain, nor Bits. Nov. 10. Clear Water, some Pain; few Bits. Night clear
Water, a little Stoppage; 2 Bits, and Mucus. Nov. 11. Water not clear; no Pain;
no Bits. Night clear Water, a little Stoppage; no Bits. Nov. 12. The same.
Night Water not clear, a Stoppage, with Pain Pene; no Bits. Nov. 13. The same.
Night clear Water, Pain and Stoppage; Two or Three Bits. Nov. 14. Clear Water,
some Pain; no Bits. Night Water foul, with a Stoppage and Pain; no Bits. Nov.
15. Foul Water, a Stoppage sometimes; no Bits. Night Water foul, frequent
Stoppage, with Pain; One Bit. Nov. 16. Foul Water, a Stoppage by times; in the
Evening a large Bit came, the biggest that came yet. Night foul Water; a little
Pain, but no Bits. Nov. 17. Foul high-colored Water, a Stoppage with Pain; no
Bits. Night white foul Water, a Stoppage sometimes; no Bits. Nov. 18. Water not
clear, a little Stoppage; a pretty large Bit of hard Stone came away. Night
foul white Water, pretty easy; no Bits. Nov. 19. Water the same, Stoppage and
Pain; This Evening the largest Stone came away. Night Water foul, some
Stoppage, easy as to Pain; no Bits. Nov. 20. Water not so foul; no Pain nor
Bits. Night Water foul and white, some Stoppage, little Pain; no Bits. Nov. 21.
Clear Water, pretty easy; no Bits. Night the same. Nov. 22. The same. Night the
Water a little foul, Stoppage sometimes; no Bits. Nov. 23. Clear Water; no
Pain, nor Bits. Night foul Water, a Stoppage without Pain; no Bits. Nov. 24.
Water sometimes clear, sometimes foul; no Pain; no Bits. Night Water foul and
high-colored; easy, no Bits. Nov. 25. Clear Water, Pain Pene; a little Bit.
Night Water clear; a Pain by Stone sticking Pene; Two large Pieces came away in
the Morning, where the last had stuck in the Passage a Day and Night. Nov. 26.
Water clear; a little Pain Pene, by reason of the sticking of the Two last
Pieces. Much Water and clear this Night, a little uneasy; no Bits. Nov. 27.
Water the same, easy from any Pain; no Bits. This Day, the last of Twenty
Weeks, I began to forbear the Medicine; I only took Two Bottles after this Day.
Nov. 28. I walked abroad as far as the Custom-house, having confined myself for
Twenty Weeks, taking the Medicines regularly, without stirring out of Doors.
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
YOU may please to observe, I have had great Pain from the Stone, and the
Medicine's Operation, but now being entirely free from any, may be compared to
a Woman in Travail; is forgotten, and do believe myself now to be cured of the
Stone, having no Symptoms of that Kind. Thanks to Friends for Advice, and Laus
Deo.

Dec. 31. 1737. I am, Sir, Your most obliged, humble Servant. Fran. Bolton.
From Newcastle super Tinam.



IV. The Case of the Honorable Mr. Carteret, Postmaster General.
HAVING been very much afflicted with the Stone and Gravel, and having by the
best means I could, endeavored to get Relief, at length, in the utmost of my
Extremity, I was recommended to Mrs. Stephens; and soon after taking her
Medicines, I began to bring away in my Urine a whitish Powder, which, when dry,
appeared to be what came from a Stone. This continued for some time, and in
about Two or Three Months I found myself freed from a Pain, I had felt at times
for several Years, on the Right Side of the Bladder. And I am well assured, it
was a Stone or calculous Matter, which stuck to the Bladder. Besides this, I
had a loose Stone in the Bladder, which for several Months after gave me
extreme Pain, by its forcing when I made Water; which at length came away in
Pieces, almost every time I made Water, for about Nine Weeks following; until
at last it came all away, as appeared by my being freed from all manner of
Pain. The Kernel of the Stone itself having come away, I thought myself then
entirely well, though afterward, upon a Journey to London, some Stones fell from
my Kidneys, which came away to the Number of Seven at one time, which made me
presume too far in discontinuing the Medicines in great Part, having little or
no Pain; when a Stone, which had stuck in the Ureters, came down, and stopped
the Passage of the Urine, which occasioned a Suppression of it, and out of Fear
of its not passing, I had the Assistance of Mr. Cheselden; and, I thank God, I
am now free of any Pain, and have been so ever since.

Ed. Carteret.

V. The Case of Mr. Daubuz, in Throgmorton-street.
HE has been subject to void Gravel for a long time, and had the following
Complaints for about Ten Months. Pain along the Urethra, and at the Neck of the
Bladder, especially upon walking much, or going in a Coach. Violent Pain and
Difficulty in making Water: A sudden Stoppage very often: Forcing to go to
Stool: Bloody Water upon much Motion. He began Mrs. Stephens's Medicines the
first Week of last August: Upon this his Water became turbid at the time of
making, and he voided a good deal of red Gravel. He was much better in a Month,
free from all Complaints in Six Weeks, and his Water ceased to be turbid at the
time of making, though he still continued the Use of the Medicines. He left them
off in October, having voided Three small Stones, Two flat, and One round, a
little before this; and has been perfectly well ever since.

Feb. 16, 1737-8. Step. Daubuz.

VI. The Case of Mr. Holland, Warder of the Tower.
HAS had Pains in the Region of the Kidneys, with the voiding of small Stones,
ever since the Year 1721. In August 1734, had a very bad Fit, but voided no
Stone after it. In the October following found, that he could neither bear a
Coach, ride, nor walk, without a great deal of Pain, and often making bloody
Water. Had frequent Provocations to make Water, and made very little at a time.
He began Mrs. Stephens's Medicines on the Third of last October: Upon this his
Water became white, and had small white Gravel in it, like Scrapings of Chalk.
He was in great Pain for the first Month after he began the Medicines. November
the Fourth he was examined by the Catheter, and a Stone was found in the
Bladder. Since this he has voided several Scales like Egg-shells, white on one
Side, and brown on the other, with many white rotten Bits of Stone. He is at
present very easy, can walk very well, and continues the Use of the Medicines.

Witness my Hand to the Truth of this.

Feb. 19, 1737-8. Thomas Holland.

VII. The Case of Mr. Neau, in Comptonstreet, near St. Ann 's Church.
HAS had the Symptoms of a Stone in the Bladder for about Six Years: Was
examined soon after the Appearance of these Symptoms by the Catheter, and a
Stone found in the Bladder. Had great Pain and Difficulty in making Water; a
sudden Stoppage often; Forcings to go to Stool; And made bloody Water upon
Motion. He began Mrs. Stephens's Medicines upon the Fifteenth of last
September. He was examined by the Catheter on the Twenty-seventh of October,
and a Stone was found in the Bladder. Upon taking the Medicines his Water
became turbid at the time of making, and he has voided several white Shells in
so soft a State, as to crumble easily, with one large irregular Stone. He
voided a large Stone and several Shells before he took the Medicines, but they
were all brown, and very hard. He has now very few Complaints, is able to go
over the Stones in a Coach, without Inconvenience, and continues the Use of the
Medicines.

Feb. 16, 1737-8. Henry Neau.

VIII. The Case of Mr. Snape, in Panton-street, near the Hay-Market.
ABOUT Three Years ago he began to have a Pain in making Water, made little at
a time, and had a Provocation to it every Quarter of an Hour. Had violent
Forceings to go to Stool at the same time: Made bloody Water upon much Motion.
In the End of the Year 1735, after having taken some lenitive Electuary, he
voided many small Stones in a hard State, but received no Relief thereby. In
April 1736 he began Mrs. Stephens's Medicines: Upon the Use of these he grew
much easier, his Water became turbid at the time of making, and he voided a
great Number of small Stones in a soft State, which by their Corners seemed to
have been Pieces of larger. He took the Medicines for about a Year, and has
been perfectly well ever since he left them off.

Feb. 18, 1737-8. John Snape.

IX. The Case of the Rev. Dr. Sykes, in Great Marlborough-street.
HE has been subject to Pains in his Back, with Vomitings, and the voiding of
small Stones, for many Years. About Four or Five Years ago, after a Jolt in a
Coach, he had a Pain in making Water, which continued about Three Weeks. In
November 1736, after another Jolt, he had a Return of the same sort of Pain in
making Water: This became very violent after some time, was often attended with
a sudden Stoppage, and he had great Provocation to make Water, especially upon
Motion: Made bloody Water after much Motion in the Chariot; had an uneasy
Sensation in the Region of the Bladder, upon turning in Bed, as if something
moved within him. These Disorders continued about Fourteen Months, at the End
of which, viz. in February last, he began to take Mrs. Stephens's Medicines.
They increased his Pain in making Water very much for some Days; his Water
deposited a white heavy Sediment, and he voided many Flakes of Stone in a soft
State, and some Fragments in a hard one. He grew easy and free from all
Complaints in about Two Months, excepting that he had now and then some small
Pains in the Region of the Ureters. However, he continued the Use of the
Medicines till the End of August, his Water depositing a white heavy Sediment,
till the last Ten Days or Fortnight of taking. He has continued perfectly well
ever since, and can ride a trotting Horse, or go over the Stones in a Coach,
without any Inconvenience.

Feb. 1, 1737-8. Arthur-Ashley Sykes.

X. The Case of Mr. Thomas.
HE had the usual Symptoms of a Stone in the Bladder, and began Mrs. Stephens's
Medicines in September last, being about 75 Years old. October the Eighth Mr.
Hawkins examined him, and found a Stone in the Bladder, which he told Mr.
Thomas, he believed to be a large one: Upon first taking the Medicines Mr.
Thomas's Water deposited much heavy Sediment, which dried into a stony
Substance: Some time after he voided soft white Scales in great Quantities with
Grit and Slime, which I saw. His Pains were great at this time: They continued,
he lost his Appetite, grew feverish, and died Jan. 20. His Body was opened, and
a Stone taken out of the Bladder. This Stone Dr. Shaw and Mr. Hawkins saw Jan.
30. I saw Dr. Shaw that Evening, and took down from his Mouth the following
Words, relating to the Appearance of the Stone.

The Stone was light, white on the Outside, a great Part of it covered with a
cretaceous Coat, which broke off in Flakes with great Ease, perfectly like to
those before voided, as appeared by comparing them. The Stone would to any
indifferent Person plainly appear as if acted upon by a Solvent, so as to have
greatly diminished its Bulk. The inner Part of the Stone was reddish, and
harder than the external, when tried by a Knife. There were Two Bulgings, which
rose pretty high above the Stone, and which appeared to be less acted upon by
the Solvent than the other Parts. The Stone was not covered equably with the
same Coat, but what covered one Part appeared to have been taken off in others.
The next Day I saw Mr. Hawkins, and took down from his Mouth the following
Words relating to the Appearance of the Stone: He saw a Stone weighing nearly
Two Ounces, as Mrs. Thomas said. The Surface was of a whitish Color, and in
Part covered with a Matter that had all the Appearance of the soft Shells that
had before come away in Mr. Thomas's Water. This Matter was very soft, and
ready to fall off and crumble upon the least Touch. By these Appearances he
says, that he should imagine that the Stone had been larger, and that this soft
Matter seemed to he ready to fall off in a little time. The Part of the Stone
not covered with this scaly Matter, appeared, when scraped with a Knife, of a
rusty Iron Color, and considerably hard.

ANY Person who is disposed to inquire more particularly into the Effects of
these Medicines, may have a List of those that take them, at Mr. Winter 's, in
Richbell-Court, Red-Lyon-street, from whence they are given out: However, I
hope, these Ten Cases will be sufficient to engage the Attention of all
Well-Wishers to Mankind; and I have been determined in my Choice of them,
rather by the Eminence of the Persons, by their living in Town, or by the
strong Presumption of at least a partial Dissolution of a Stone, than by the
Greatness of the Benefit received. Some of these are indeed complete Cures, as
far as one can judge; but there are several others as complete among Persons of
less Note, or who live at a Distance from London; and that, with all the
probable Circumstances of the gradual wasting and crumbling of Stones. There
are also a great Number of unfinished Cases, which add much Light and Evidence
to these Ten. Neither are these Medicines prejudicial to the Body; but, on the
contrary, have plainly improved the general Health of many, that have taken
them. I still go on with my Inquiries in the most impartial manner I can; and
should be extremely sorry, not only to deceive myself, but to be any Occasion
of imposing upon others.

AN ABSTRACT OF SOME EXPERIMENTS, Tending to ILLUSTRATE the Foregoing Cases.
I. SINCE I have taken Mrs. Stephens's Medicines, my Urine has been of a more
urinous Smell than usual; turbid at the time of making, and alkaline, that is,
it turns Syrup of Violets green, and ferments with the following acid Liquors,
Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Vitriol, Oil of Sulphur, Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of
Sea Salt, Vinegar, and Lemon-Juice. And as far as I can judge, the Case is the
same with all who take these Medicines. This I thought very remarkable when I
first observed it, and began to hope, that Urine, which was so different from
common Urine, might have different Effects upon Stones in the Kidneys and
Bladder. And I have lately been informed, that even common Urine, when it
putrifies, that is, turns alkaline by being kept, will dissolve and take up the
calculous Incrustations, upon the Sides and Bottoms of Chamber-pots.

II. In order to satisfy myself the better in this Affair, I thought it not
amiss to try what Effects my Urine, thus rendered alkaline by the Medicines,
would have upon Stones taken from a human Body, by digesting them in it with a
gentle Heat. For this Purpose I took the Stones A and B, and sawed each of them
into Four Pieces, of nearly the same Shape and Size. A was a white hard Stone
of an uniform Substance throughout. It consisted of Coats indeed, but these
were all, as far as one could judge, perfectly alike. B was a brown Stone; it is
Shell was hard and knotted, but the internal Parts were much softer. I called
the several Pieces A 1, B 1; A 2, B 2; A 3, B 3; A 4, B 4; in order to denote
thereby the several Liquors in which each was digested; 1 standing for New
River Water; 2 for a Mixture of Mrs. Stephens's Powder and New River Water; 3
for common Urine; and 4 for my own Alkaline Urine. I then digested all these
Pieces of Stone for a Week in their respective Liquors, with a gentle Heat.
This Heat was intended to have been the same as that of Urine in the Bladder;
but my Contrivances not being good, it was, at different Times, both
considerably greater, and considerably less. I examined them pretty often, and
recruited the Liquors as they wasted, with others of the same Kind. Two or
three Days after they were put into Digestion, I observed that A 4 had some
white Scales lying upon its Surface in several Parts, which fell off upon being
pressed with my Nail. After a Week's Digestion, I took them out, and rubbed
them all with a Cloth. They were then laid in a Window till they became
perfectly dry. And the following Table shows the Effects which the several
Liquors had upon them.

Weights when put in. Weights when dry. Loss. Proportional Loss. A 1 Grains 308
304 4 0,012. A 2 276 273 3 0,010. A 3 219 220 Gain 1 0,004. A 4 213 191 22
0,105. B 1 257 243 14 0,054. B 2 227 217 10 0,044. B 3 222 223 Gain 1 0,006. B
4 212 190 22 0,105.

III. By this Table it appears, that the Pieces A 4, B 4 in my alkaline Urine,
had lost more than any of the others; A 1, B 1, in New River Water, more than A
2, B 2 in the Mixture of Mrs. Stephens's Powder and New River Water; and that A
3, B 3 in common Urine had received a small Addition. That my alkaline Urine
should occasion the greatest Loss, is a Presumption in favor of Mrs.
Stephens's Medicines; that the New River Water should have a greater Effect,
than the Mixture of Mrs. Stephens's Powder and New River Water, was owing, I
believe, to the Powder's adhering closely to the Stones in several Parts; which
both kept the Water from coming freely in Contact with the Stones, and also
added to their Weight; and the Increase of Weight in A 3, B 3, is an Appearance
of the same Kind with the Growth of Stones in the Body. And upon examining A 3
accurately, I perceived that it had got an exceeding thin Coat in several
Parts, which separated easily, and which I supposed to be an Accretion from the
stony Particles of the common Urine, in which it had been digested.

IV. After this I washed the several Pieces of the Stone A, and rubbed them
well with a Brush, so as to take off all loose Parts; I took out the soft
internal Parts of the Pieces of B, reserving proper Portions of each of the
hard Shells; I sawed the Stones C, D, and E into Four Pieces each, of nearly
the same Shape and Size, and F into Two; I took Two Pieces of the white Shell
G, Two of the brown Nucleus H, and gave them all Names as in the following
Table, in which 1 denotes New River Water, as before; 2 Mrs. Stephens's Liquid;
3 common Urine, as before; and 4 my own alkaline Urine, as before. These Pieces
were digested for a Week, in the Manner abovementioned, excepting that the
Liquors were now changed every Morning, and all the Pieces rubbed at the same
Time with a wet Sponge. They were rubbed also when taken out as clean as could
be without Violence, and then laid in a Window till they were perfectly dry.
And the following Table shows the Effects which the several Liquors had upon
them.

Weights when put in. Weights when dry. Loss. Proportional Loss. A 1 Grains 304
288 16 0,052. A 2 272 228 44 0,163. A 3 219 216 2 0,011. A 4 190 151 39 0,204.
B 1 71 61 10 0,139. B 2 68 50 18 0,270. B 3 63 62 1 0,023. B 4 63 45 18 0,285.
C 1 162 150 12 0,073. C 2 155 132 23 0,148. C 3 132 130 1 0,011. C 4 122 109 13
0,106. D 1 47 36 11 0,234. D 2 42 36 6 0,141. D 3 42 42 D 4 29 27 1 0,054. E 1
50 44 5 0,110. E 2 36 27 9 0,250. E 3 36 36 E 4 32 26 6 0,184. F 3 30 30 F 4 23
18 5 0,212. G 3 9 9 G 4 6 6 H 3 3 3 H 4 2 1 and a little more.

V. By this Table it appears, that the Stones had lost much more in general by
this Week's Digestion, than by the former; which without doubt was owing in
great measure to my having rubbed them every Morning with a wet Sponge; and it
was also upon this account, I suppose, that some of the Pieces in common Urine
had lost a little. However, the great Difference of Loss in the several Pieces
of the same Stone could not arise from this Cause; and the rubbing them gave me
an Opportunity of observing the Manner in which the several Liquors acted upon
the Stones. This was, in general, giving a Whiteness to the Surface of the
Stones, which, when it was rubbed off, left the Stone of its former Color; but
in those which were most affected, soft white Scales fell off upon being
rubbed, and some of them were corroded, and honey-combed. Thus the Pieces in
New River Water had a Whiteness upon their Surface, and the Water itself became
milky; A 2, A 4, C 2, C 4, F 4, and H 4 had all lost white Scales; B 2, E 2 and
E 4 were all pretty much corroded; D 2 a little corroded; B 4 was corroded
within, and at the same time its knotted external Surface rendered smooth; D 4
had its brown Surface turned white, but G 4 seemed not to have been affected at
all.

VI. In order to satisfy myself still farther, I took all the foregoing Stones,
H 3 and H 4 excepted, which were lost by reason of their Smallness; and
digested them again in their respective Liquors, having now got a Contrivance,
by which they were kept in a Heat, not differing materially from that of Urine
in the Bladder. I got also Two small round Stones from the Reverend Dr. Hales,
which were both taken out of the Bladder of the same Person, and which the
Doctor judged to be very hard ones, and called them I 3 and I 4. I 3 weighed
Twenty-five Grains and an half, and was put into common Urine; I 4 weighed
Twenty-one Grains and an half, and was put into my own alkaline Urine. I began
the Digestion July 26. The Liquors were changed every Day during the whole
Digestion, and the Stones all rubbed with a wet Sponge every Day for the first
Ten Days; then once in Three or Four Days till Sept. 3, but after that not at
all. And the following Table shows the Day on which each Stone was either so
far wasted as not to be found, or reduced to such a Size, as to be in Danger of
being confounded with the small Pieces, which fell from the rest.

E 2 Aug. 24. D 1 27. B 2 30. D 2 Sept. 8. B 1 9. B 4 9. D 4 12. F 4 24. G 4
24. C 2 Sept. 27. E 4 27. I 4 Oct. 11. C 1 15. E 1 15. A 2 15. A 1 31. A 4 Nov.
5.

I omitted to set down the Day, on which C 4 was judged to be wasted; but I
remember, that it was not till toward the latter End of the Digestion.

VII. All this time the several Pieces in common Urine continued entire, and
even had Incrustations upon them. I took them out Nov. 5. and having weighed
them Nov. 15. when they were perfectly dry, found that they had all received an
Increase of Weight, as in the following Table:

Grains. A 3 had gained 17. B 3 16. C 3 18. D 3 7. E 3 4. F 3 4. G 3 2. I 3 2.

VIII. The Manner in which the other Pieces wasted, was in general the same as
that which is described above in the 6th Paragraph, excepting that those in New
River Water became after some time as much honeycombed as the rest, and wasted
as fast; that D 4 and G 4 remained unaltered to Appearance for a long time, and
then grew quite rotten in a few Days; and that I 4, the small hard Stone given
me by Dr. Hales, had several Cracks in it, after about a Month's Digestion.

IX. Besides these I made several other Experiments, the Result of which it may
not be improper just to mention.

X. I digested different Pieces of the same Stones in my own alkaline Urine,
with different Heats; the one, that of Urine in the Bladder, the other so
great, that I could not bear my Hand at rest in it; and I found, that the less
Heat had the greater Effect.

XI. I boiled different Pieces of the same Stones in common Water, my own
alkaline Urine, and common Urine, for Five Hours each. Those in Water and my
Urine wasted considerably, and the Surface of the last was turned white and
soft; but those in common Urine had little Effect produced upon them.

XII. I digested different Pieces of the same Stones in common Water, the
distilled Water of Water-Pepper, the Juice and the Decoction of it; and found
that common Water had a greater Effect than any of these. The Heat in this and
all the following Experiments did not differ materially from that of Urine in
the Bladder.

XIII. I digested Pieces of Stones taken from the human Bladder, from the
Bladders of Dogs, and the Stomachs of Horses, in Thames Water, and in Pump
Water, and found, that both the Waters dissolved all the human Stones entirely,
and wasted the others very much; but the Thames Water had the quickest Effect.
The Waters were changed every Morning, at which time I observed, that the Pump
Water poured on the Day before, had always some Bubbles upon it. Some of the
human Stones were cracked during the Dissolution.

XIV. I digested Pieces of the same Dogs and Horses Stones in common Urine, and
my own alkaline Urine; but did not observe any Effect, except that one of the
Dog's Stones seemed a little softened by my Urine.

XV. I digested a large Kidney-stone, Two Pieces that had been boiled in my
alkaline Urine, and a round hard Stone in common Urine, which was a Mixture of
different Urines. The Kidney-stone and the Two Pieces lost something of their
Weight. The round hard Stone grew black at first, but whether it was wasted or
not, I cannot determine from its Appearance, and I had not weighed it. The
Surface of the Kidney-stone was rendered so brittle, that large Scales broke
off with very little Force, but they were neither white nor soft.

XVI. I digested a large Kidney-stone of the same Shape, Size and Texture, with
the foregoing, and taken out of the other Kidney of the same Person, with
Twelve different Stones, or Pieces of Stones, in the alkaline Urine of a
Gentleman, who took Mrs. Stephens's Medicines. They all wasted very fast,
excepting one Piece, which received a small Addition. It was iron-coloured, and
exceedingly hard, as I found by sawing it. It appeared to me, that this
Gentleman's Urine had in general a quicker Effect than my own. The Stones
mentioned in this, the 10th, 13th, 14th and 15th Paragraphs, were none of them
rubbed.

XVII. There are some Appearances mentioned in this Abstract, which I cannot
account for; but if the Experiments were repeated with more Accuracy, and other
new ones tried, it is probable, that many useful Discoveries would arise. And
thus much I think one may venture to conclude, even from these Experiments,
that the Dissolutions by the several Sorts of common Water prove against the
absolute Necessity of an acrimonious Liquid for this Purpose, and that those by
the Two alkaline Urines are strong Presumptions in Favor of Mrs. Stephens's
Medicines, especially when compared with the foregoing Cases. I shall be much
obliged to any Gentleman, who will furnish me with Stones, for the farther
Prosecution of this Matter.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE the Date of Mr. Binford 's Case, No 2. he has voided a few more Pieces
of Stone, and is become free from all Complaints, having been able to go over
the Stones in a Coach, without any Inconvenience, for a Week past.

March 7, 1737-8. Tho. Binford.


