PERCY, A TRAGEDY.

AS IT IS ACTED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN COVENT GARDEN.

LONDON: PRINTED for T. CADELL, in the Strand. MDCCLXXVIII.

[Price One Shiliing and Sixpence.]

TO EARL PERCY: This TRAGEDY, AS A SMALL TRIBUTE TO HIS ILLUSTRIOUS CHARACTER,
IS VERY RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED: By His LORDSHIP'S Most obedient AND Most humble
Servant,

THE AUTHOR.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
PERCY, Earl of Northumberland. Mr.LEWIS. EARL DOUGLAS, Mr. WROUGHTON. EARL
RABY, Elwina's Father, Mr. AICKIN. EDRIC, Friend to Douglas, Mr. WHITEFIELD.
HARCOURT, Friend to Percy, Mr. ROBSON. SIR HUBERT, a Knight, Mr. HULL.
WOMEN.
ELWINA, Mrs. BARRY. BIRTHA, Mrs. JACKSON.
KNIGHTS, GUARDS, ATTENDANTS, etc.

SCENE, Raby Castle, in Durham.

The Reader desired to excuse and correct the following Errata.

In page 11, line 13, Elwina's Speech should be printed thus,

ELWINA. My misery, not my crime -- Long since the battle, etc.


In page 14, the two first speeches should be divided thus,

ELWINA. What disturbs my lord?


DOUGLAS. Nothing. -- Disturb? I never was, etc.


In page 33, line 13, the speeches should be thus divided,

BIRTHA. Elwina --


DOUGLAS. Speak --


BIRTHA. Her grief, wrought up to frenzy, She has, etc.


PROLOGUE.
Written by Mr. GARRICK.
Spoken by Mrs. Bulkely. THOUGH I Am a female, and the rule is ever,
For us, in Epilogue, to beg your favor,
Yet now I take the lead -- and, leaving art
And envy to the men -- with a warm heart,
A woman here I come -- to take a woman's part.
No little jealousies my mind perplex,
I come, the friend and champion of my sex;
I Will prove, ye fair, that let us have our swing,
We can, as well as men, do any thing;
Nay, better too, perhaps -- for now and then,
These times produce some bungling among men,
In spite of lordly wits -- with force and ease,
Cannot we write plays, or damn 'em, if we please?
The men, who grant not much, allow us charms --
Are eyes, shapes, dimples, then, our only arms?
To rule this man our sex dame Nature teaches;
Mount the high horse we can, and make long speeches;
Nay, and with dignity, some wear the breeches;
And why not wear' em? -- We shall have your votes,
While some of to other sex wear petticoats.
Did not a Lady Knight, late Chevalier,
A brave, smart soldier to your eyes appear?
Hey'presto! pass! his sword becomes a fan,
A comely woman rising from the man.
The French their Amazonian maid invite --
She goes -- a like well skilled to talk or Write,
Dance, ride, negociate, scold, coqet, or fight.
If she should set her heart upon a rover,
And be prove false, she would kick her faithless lover.
The Greeks and Romans own our boundless claim --
The Muses, Graces, Virtues, Fortune, Fame.
wisdom and Nature too, they women call;
With this sweet flattery -- yet they mix some gall --
'Twill out -- the Furies too are females all.
The powers of Riches, Physic, War, and Wine,
Sleep, Death, and Devils too -- are masculine.
Are we unfit to rule? -- a poor suggestion!
Austria and Russia answer well that question.
If joy from sense and matchless grace arise,
With your own treasure, Britons, bless your eyes.
If such there are -- sure, in an humbler way,
The sex, without much guilt, may write a play:
That they have done nobler things, there is no denial;
With all your judgment, then, prepare for trial --
Summon your critic powers, your manhood 'summon,
A brave man will protect, not hurt a woman;
Let us wish modestly to share with men,
If not the force, the feather of the pen.

EPILOGUE.
Written by Mr. GARRICK.
Spoken by Mr. Lee Jews. I Must, will speak -- I hope my dress and air
Announce the man of fashion, and no player;
Though gentlemen are now forbid the scenes,
Yet have I rushed through heroes, kings, and queens;
Resolved, in pity to this polished age,
To drive these ballad-heroes from the stage --
"To drive the deer with hound and horn,
"Earl Percy took his way;
"The child may rue, that is unborn,
"The hunting of that day."
A pretty basis, truly, for a modern play!
What! shall a scribbling, senseless woman dare
To your refinements offer such coarse fare?
Is Douglas, or is Percy fired wtth passion?
Ready for love or glory, death to dash on,
Fit company for modern still-life men of fashion?
Such madness will our hearts but slightly graze,
We Have no such frantic nobles now adays.
Heart Strings, like fiddlestrings, vibrate no tone,
Unless they are tuned in perfect unison;
And youths of yore, with ours can never agree --
They Are in too sharp, ours in too flat a key.
Could we believe old stories, those strange fellows
Married for love -- could of their wives be jealous --
Nay, constant to 'em too -- and, what is worse,
The vulgar souls thought cuckoldom a curse.
Most wedded pairs had then site purse, one mind,
One bed too -- so preposterously kind --
From such barbarity (thank heaven) we are mu'ch refined.
Old songs their happiness at home record,
From home they separate carriages abhorred --
One horse served both -- my lady rode behind my lord.
'Twas death alone could snap their bonds asunder --
Now tacked so slightly, not to snap's the wonder.
Nay, death itself could not their hearts divide,
They mixed their love with monumental pride,
For, cut in stone, they still lie side by side,
But why these gothic ancestors produce?
Why scour their rusty armour's? What Is the use?
'Twould not your nicer optics much regale,
To see us beaux bend under coats of mail;
Should we our limbs with iron doublets bruise,
Good heaven! how much court-plaister we should use;
We wear no armor now -- but en our shoes.
Let not with barbarism true taste be blended,
Old vulgar virtues cannot be defended,
Let the dead rest -- we living cannot be mended.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The French Drama, founded on the famous old Story of Raoul de Coucy, suggested
to the Author foam Circumstances in the former Part of this Tragedy.

PERCY, A TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE, A Gothic Hall. Enter EDRIC and BIRTHA. BIRTHA. What may this mean? Earl
Douglas has enjoined thee To meet him here in private?


EDRIC. Yes, my sister, And this injunction I have often received; But when he
comes, big with some painful secret, He starts, looks wild, then drops
ambiguous hints, Frowns, hesitates, turns pale; and says' it was nothing; Then
feigns to smile, and by his anxious care. To prove himself at ease, betrays his
pain


BIRTHA. Since my short sojourn here, I Have marked this Earl,
And though the ties of blood unite us closely,
I shudder at his haughtiness of temper,
Which not his gentle wife, the bright Elwina,
Can charm to rest. Ill are their spirits paired,
His is the seat of frenzy, here is of softness,
His love is transport, here is, is trembling duty,
Rage in his soul is as the whirlwind fierce,
While here is never felt the power of that rude passion,

EDRIC. Perhaps the mighty soul of Douglas mourns,
Because inglorious love detains him here,
While our bold knights, beneath the Christian standard,
Press to the bulwarks of Jerusalem,

BIRTHA. Though every various charm adorns Elwina,
And though the noble Douglas doats to madness,
Yet some dark mystery involves their fate:
The canker grief devours Elwina's bloom,
And on her brow meek resignation sits,
Hopeless, yet uncomplaining.

EDRIC. It Is most strange.

BIRTHA. Once, not long since, she thought herself alone;
It Was then the pent-up anguish burst its bounds;
With broken voice, clasped hands, and streaming eyes,
She called upon her father, called him cruel,
And said her duty claimed far other recompense.

EDRIC Perhaps the absence of the good Lord Raby,
Who, at her nuptials, quitted this fair castle,
Resigning it to her, may thus afflict her.
Have thou ever, questioned her, good Birtha?

BIRTHA. Often; But hitherto in vain, and yet she shows me Th'endearing
kindness of a sister's love; But if I speak of Douglas --


EDRIC. See! he comes.
It would offend him should he find you here.
Enter Douglas. How! Edric and his sister in close conference?
Do they not seem alarmed at my approach?
And see, how suddenly they part! Now, Edric,
Exit Birtha. Was this well done? or was it like a friend,
When I desired to meet thee here alone,
With all the warmth of trusting confidence,
To lay my bosom naked to thy view,
And show thee all its weakness, was it well
To call thy sister here, to let her witness
Thy friend's infirmity? -- perhaps to tell her --

EDRIC. My lord, I nothing know; I came to learn.


DOUGLAS. Nay then thou do suspect there is something wrong!


EDRIC. If we were bred from infancy, together,
If I partook in all thy youthful griefs,
And every joy thou knew'st was doubly mine;
Then tell me all the secret of thy soul:
"Or have these few short months of separation,
"The only absence we have ever known,
"Have these so rent the bands of love asunder,
"That Douglas should distrust his Edric's truth?"

DOUGLAS. My friend, I know thee faithful as you are brave,
And I will trust she -- but not now, good Edric,
It Is past, it is gone, it is not worth the telling,
'Twas wrong to cherish what disturbed my peace;
I Will think of it no more.

EDRIC. Transportihg news!. I feared some hidden trouble vexed your quiet. In
secret I have watched --


DOUGLAS. Ha! watched in secret?
A spy? employed, perhaps, to note my actions?
What have I said? Forgive me, thou art noble:
yet do not press me to disclose my grief,
For when thou know it, I perhaps shall hate thee
As much, my Edric, as I hate, myself
For my suspicions, I am ill at ease.

EDRIC. How will the fair Elwina grieve to hear it!


DOUGLAS. Hold, Edric, hold -- thou have touched the fatal string
That wakes me into madness. Hear me then,
But let the deadly secret be secured
With bars of adamant in thy close breast.
Think of the curse which waits on broken oaths;
A knight is bound by more than vulgar ties,
And perjury in thee were doubly damned,
Well then, the king of England --

EDRIC. Is expected From distant Palestine.


DOUGLAS. Forbid it, heaven, For with him comes --


EDRIC. Ah! who?


DOUGLAS. Peace, peace, For see Elwina's here. Retire, my Edric; When next we
meet thou shall know all. Farewell.

Exit Edric. Now to conceal with care my bosom's anguish, And let her beauty
chase away my sorrows!

Yes, I would meet her with a face of smiles -- But 'twill not be.


Enter ELWINA. ELWINA. Alas, it is ever thus! Thus ever clouded is his angry
brow. (aside.


DOUGLAS. I were too blessed, Elwina, could I hope You met me here by choice, or
that your bosom Shared the warm transports mine must ever feel. At your
approach.


ELWINA. My lord, if I intrude,
The cause which brings me claims at least forgiveness:
I sear you are not well, and come, unbidden,
Except by faithful duty, to enquire,
If happily in my power, my little power,
I have the means to minister relief
To your affliction?

DOUGLAS. What unwonted goodness!
O I were blessed above the lot of man,
if tenderness, not duty, brought Elwina;
Cold, ceremonious, and unfeeling duty,
That wretched substitute for love: But know,
The heart demands a heart; nor will be paid
With less than what it gives. Even now, Elwina,
The glistening tear stands trembling in your eyes,
Which casttheir mournful sweetnesson the ground,
As if they feared to raise their beams to mine,
And read the language of reproachful love.

ELWINA. My lord, I hoped the thousand daily proofs Of my obedience --


DOUGLAS. Death to all my hopes!
Heart rending word! obedience? what is obedience?
It Is fear, it is hate, it is terror, it is aversion,
It Is the cold debt of ostentatious duty,
Paid with insulting caution, to remind me
How much you tremble to offend a tyrant
So terrible as Douglas. -- "O Elwina --
"While duty measures the regard it owes,
"With scrupulous precision, and nice justice,
"Love never reasons, but profusely gives,
"Gives like a thoughtless prodigal its all,
"And trembles then, left it has done too little."

ELWIHA. Indeed I Am most unhappy that my cares, And my solicitude to please,
offend.


DOUGLAS. True tenderness is less solicitous,
Less prudent and more fond; th'enamour'd heart
Conscious it loves; and blessed in being loved,
Reposes on the object it adores,
And trusts the passion it inspires and feels, --
Thou have not learnt how terrible it is
To feed a hopeless flame. -- But hear, Elwina,
Thou most obdurate hear me. --

ELWINA. Say, mylord, For your own lips shall vindicate my ^ame,
Since at the altar I became your wife;
Can malice charge me with an act, a word,
I ought to blush at? Have I not still lived
As open to the eye of observation,
As fearless innocence should ever live?
I call attesting angels to be witness,
If in my open deed, or secret thought,
My conduct, or my heart, they have ought discerned
Which did not emulate their purity,

DOUGLAS. This vindication ever you were accused,
"This warm defense, repelling all attacks
Ever they are made, and construing casual words
To formal accusations, trust me, Madam,"
Shows rather an alarmed and vigilant spirit,
For ever on the watch to guard its secret,
Than the sweet calm of fearless innocence.
Who talked of guilt? Who testified suspicion?

ELWINA. Learn, Sir, that virtue, while'tis free from blame,
Is modest, lowly, meek, and unassuming;
Not apt, like fearful vice, to shield its weakness,
Beneath the studied pomp of boastful phrase,
Which swells to hide the poverty it shelters;
But when this virtue feels itself suspected,
Insulted, set at naught, its whiteness stained,
It then grows proud, forgets its humble worth,
And rates: itself above its real value,

DOUGLAS. I did not mean to chide! But think, O think,
What pangs must rend this fearful, doting heart,
To see you sink impatient of the grave,
To feel, distracting thought, to feel you hate me!

ELWINA. What if the slender thread by which I hold
This poor precarious being soon must break;
Is it Elwina's crime, or heaven's decree?
Yet I shall meet, I trust, the king of terrors,
Submissive and resigned, without one pang,
One fond regret at leaving this gay world.

DOUGLAS. Yet, Madam, there is one, one man adored, For whom your sighs will
heave, your tears will flow, For whom this hated world will still be dear, For
whom you still would live --


ELWINA. Hold, hold, my lord, What may this mean?


DOUGLAS. Ah! I have gone too far. What have I said? -- Your father, sure, your
father, The good Lord Raby may. at least expect One tender sigh.


ELWINA. Alas, my lord, I thought The precious incense of a daughter's sighs
Might rise to heaven, and not offend its ruler.


DOUGLAS. It Is true; yet Raby is no more beloved
Since he bestowed his daughter's hand on Douglas:
That was a crime the dutiful Elwina
Can never pardon; and believe me, Madam,
My love's so nice, so delicate my honor,
I am ashamed to owe my happiness
To ties which make you wretched.
Exit Douglas.
ELWINA. Ah! how is this?
Though I have ever found him fierce and rash,
Full of obscure surmises, and dark hints,
Till now he never ventured to accuse me.
Yet there is one, one man beloved, adored,
For whom your tears will flow -- these were his words --
And then the wretched subterfuge of Raby --
How poor the evasion! -- But my Birtha comes.
Enter BIRTHA.
BIRTHA. Crossing the Portico I met Lord Douglas,
Disordered were his looks, his eyes shot fire;
He called upon your name with such distraction,
I seared some sudden evil had befallen you.

ELWINA. Not sudden; no; long has the storm been gathering,.
Which threatens speedily to burst in ruin,
On this devoted head.

BIRTHA. I never beheld
Your gentle soul so ruffled, yet I Have marked you,
While others thought you happiest of the happy,
Blessed with whatever the world calls great, or good,
With all that nature, all that fortune gives,
I Have marked you beuding with a weight of sorrow.

ELWINA. O I will tell thee all! thou could not find
An hour, a moment in Elwina's life,
When her full heart so longed to ease its burden,
And pour its sorrows in thy friendly bosom:
Hear then with pity, hear my tale of woe.
And, O forgive, kind nature, filial piety,
If my presumptuous lips arraign a father!
Yes, Birtha, that beloved, that cruel father,
Has doomed me to a life of hopeless anguish,
To die of grief ever half my days are numbered,
Doomed me to give my trembling hand to Douglas,
'Twas all I had to give, my heart was -- Percy's.

BIRTHA. What do I hear?


ELWINA. My misery, not my crime.


ELWINA. Long since the battle 'twixt the rival houses,
Of Douglas and of Percy, for whose hate
This mighty globe's too small a Theater,
One summer's morn my father chased the Deer
On Cheviot Hills, Northumbria's fair domain. --

BIRTHA. On that famed spot where first the seuds commenced
Between the Earls?

ELWINA. The same. During the chase,
Some of my father's knights received an insult
From the Lord Percy's herdsmen, churlish foresters,
Unworthy of the gentle blood they served,
My father, proud and jealous of his honor,
(Thou know the fiery temper of our Barons)
Swore that Northumberland had been concerned
In this rude outrage, nor would hear of peace,
Or reconcilement which the Percy offered;
But bade me hate, renounce, and banish him.
O! 'twas a task too hard for all my duty,
I strove, and wept, I strove -- but still I loved.

BIRTHA. Indeed 'twas most unjust; but say what followed?


ELWINA. Why should I dwell on the disastrous tale?
Forbid to see me, Percy soon embarked,
With our great king against the Saracen.
Soon as the jarring kingdoms were at peace,
Earl Douglas, whom till then I never had seen,
Came to this castle; 'twas my hapless fate
To please him. -- Birtha! thou can tell what followed:
But who shall tell the agonies I felt?
My barbarous father forced me to dissolve
The tender vows himself had bid me form --
He dragged me trembling, dying, to the altar,
I sighed, I struggled, fainted, and -- complied.

BIRTHA. Did Douglas know a marriage had been once Fropos'd 'twixt you and
Percy?


ELWINA. If he did, He thought, like you, it was a match of policy, Nor knew
our love surpassed our father's prudence.


BIRTHA. Should he now find he was the instrument Of the Lord Raby's vengeance?


ELWINA. 'Twere most dreadful!
My father locked this motive in his breast,
And feigned to have forgot the Chase of Cheviot.
Some moons have now completed their slow course
Since my sad marriage. -- Percy still is absent.

BIRTHA. Nor will return before his sovereign comes.


ELWINA. Talk not of his return! this coward heart Can know no thought of peace
but in his absence. How, Douglas here again? some fresh alarm!

Enter Douglas, agitated, with letters in his hand.
DOUGLAS. Madam, your pardon --


ELWINA. What disturbs my lord?
Nothing. -- Disturb? I never was more at ease.
These letters from your father give us notice
He will be here tonight; -- He further adds
The king's each hour expected.

ELWINA. How? the king? Said you the king?


DOUGLAS. And it is Lord Raby's pleasure
That you among the foremost bid him welcome
You must attend the court.

ELWINA. Must I, my lord?


DOUGLAS. Now to observe how she receives the news! Aside.


ELWINA. I must not, -- cannot -- By all the tender love
You have so often prosess'd for poor Elwina,
Indulge this one request -- O let me stay!

DOUGLAS. Enchanting; sounds! she does not wish to go -- Aside.


ELWINA. The bustling world, the pomp which waits on greatness,
Ill suits my humble, unambitious soul; --
Then leave me here, to tread the safer path
Of private life, here, where my peaceful course
Shall be as silent as the shades around me;
Nor shall one vagrant wish be ever allowed
To stray beyond the bounds of Raby Castle.

DOUGLAS. O music to my ears! Aside. Can you resolve
To hide those wondrous beauties in the shade,
Which rival kings would cheaply buy with empire?
Can you renounce the pleasures of a court,
Whole roofs refound with minstrelsy and mirth?

ELWINA. My lord, retirement is a wife's best duty,
And virtue's safest station is retreat.

DOUGLAS. My soul 's in transports! Aside. -- But can you forego'
What wins the soul of woman -- admiration?
A world, where charms inferior far to yours,
Only presume to shine when you are absent?
Will you not long to meet the public gaze?
Long to eclipse the fair, and charm the brave?

ELWINA. These are delights in which the mind partakes not.


DOUGLAS. I Will try her farther. Aside

(Takes her hand, and looks steadfastly at her as he speaks.) But reflect once
more;
When yon shall hear that England's gallant peers,
Fresh from the fields of war, and gay with glory,
All vain with conquest, and elate with same,
When you shall hear these princely youths contend,
In many a tournament for beauty's prize;
When you shall hear of revelry, and masking,
Of mimic combats, and of festive halls,
Of lances shivered in the cause of love,
Will you not then repent, then wish your fate,
Your happier fate had till that hour reserved you
For some plumed conqueror?

ELWINA. My fate, my lord, Is now bound up with yours.


DOUGLAS. Here let me kneel --
Yes, I will kneel, and gaze, and weep, and wonder;
Thou paragon of goodness! -- pardon, pardon,
(Kisses her hand.) I am convine'd -- I can no longer doubt,
Nor talk, nor hear, nor reason, nor reflect.
-- I must retire, and give a loose to joy.
Exit Douglas.
BIRTHA. The king returns.


ELWINA. And with him Percy comes!


BIRTHA. You needs must go.


ELWINA. Shall I folicit ruin,
And pull destruction on me ere its time?
I, who have held it criminal to name him?
I will not go -- I disobey thee, Douglas,
But disobey thee to preserve thy honor.

End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE, The Hall. DOUGLAS, speaking as be enters. SEE that the traitor
instantly be feiz'd,
And strictly watched: let none have access to him.
O jealousy, thou aggregate of woes!
Were there no hell, thy torments would create one.
But yet she may be guiltless -- may? she must.
How beautiful she looked! pernicious beauty!
Yet innocent, as bright, seemed the sweet blush
That mantled on her cheek. But not for me,
But not for me those breathing roses blow!
And then she wept -- what! can I bear her tears?
Well -- let her weep -- her tears are for another;
O did they fall for me, to dry their streams,
I Would drain the choicest blood that feeds this heart,
Nor think the drops I shed were half so precious.
(He stands in a musing posture.)
Enter Lord RABY. RABY. Sure I mistake -- Am I in Raby Castle?
Impossible! that was the seat of smiles;
And Cheerfulness, and Joy, were household gods.
I used to scatter pleasures when Icame,
And every servant shared his lord's delight.
But now Suspicion and Distrust dwell here,
And Discontent maintains a sullen sway.
Where is the smile unfeigned, the jovial welcome,
Which cheered the sad, beguiled the pilgrim's pain,
And made dependency forget its bonds?
Where is the ancient, hospitable hall,
Whose vaultedroof once rung with harmless mirth?
Where every passing stranger was a guest,
And every guest a friend. I fear me much,
If once our nobles scorn their rural seats,
Their rural greatness, and their vassal's love,
Freedom, and English grandeur, are no more.

DOUGLAS. (advancing.) My lord, you are welcome.

RABY. Sir, I trust I am;
But yet, methinks, I shall not feel I Am welcome,
Till my Elwina bless me with her smiles:
She was not wont with lingering step to meet me,
Or greet my coming with a cold embrace;
Now, I extend my longing arms in vain,
My child, my darling, does not come to fill them.
O they were happy days when she would fly
To meet me from the camp, or from the chase,
And with her fondness overpay my toils!
How eager would her tender hands unbrace
The ponderous armor from my war-worn limbs,
And pluck the helmet which opposed her kiss!

DOUGLAS. O sweet delights that never must be mine!

RABY. What do I hear?

DOUGLAS. Nothing: enquire no farther.

RABY. My lord, if you respect an old man's peace,
If ever you doated on my much-loved child,
As it is most sure you made me think you did,
Then, by the pangs which you may one day feel,
When you, like me, shall be a fond, fond father,
And tremble for the treasure of your age,
Tell me, what this alarming silence means?
You sigh, yet do not speak, nay more, you hear not?
Your laboring soul turns inward on itself,
As there were nothing but your own sad thoughts
Deserved regard. Does my child live?

DOUGLAS. She does.

RABY. To bless her father!

DOUGLAS. And to curse her husband!

RABY. Ah! have a care, my lord, I am not so old --

DOUGLAS. Nor I so base that I should tamely bear it;
Nor am I so inured to infamy,
That I can say without a burning blush,
She lives to be my curse.

RABY. How Is this?

DOUGLAS. I thought
The lily opening to the heaven's soft dews,
Was not so fragrant, and was not so chaste.

RABY. Has she proved otherwise? I Will not believe it.
Who has traduced my sweet, my innocent child?
Yet she is too good to 'scape calumnious tongues.
I know that Slander loves a lofty mark:
It saw her soar a flight above her fellows,
And hurled its arrow to her glorious height,
To reach her heart, and bring her to the ground.

DOUGLAS. Had the rash tongue of Slander so prefum'd,
My vengeance had not been of that slow sort,
To need a prompter; nor should any arm,
No, not a father's, dare dispute with mine,
The privilege to die in her defense,
None dares accuse Elwina, but --

RABY. But who?

DOUGLAS. But Douglas.

RABY. (puts his hand to his sword.) You? -- O spare my age's weakness!
You do not know what it is to be a father,
You do not know, or you would pity me;
The thousand tender throbs, the nameless feelings,
The dread to ask, and yet the wish to know,
When we adore and fear; but wherefore fear?
Does not the blood of Raby fill her veins?

DOUGLAS. Percy! -- know thou that name?

RABY. How? what of Percy?

DOUGLAS. He loves Elwina, and my curses on him, He is beloved again.

RABY. I Am on the rack!

DOUGLAS. Not the two Theban brothers bore each other
Such deep, such deadly hate, as I and Percy.

RABY. But tell me of my child.

DOUGLAS (no' minding him.) As I and Percy!
When at the marriage rites, O rites accursed!
I seized her trembling hand, she started back,
Cold horror thrilled her veins, her tears flowed fast.
Fool that I was, I thought 'twas maiden fear,
Dull, doting ignorance! beneath those terrors,
Hatred for me, and love for Percy lurked.

RABY. What proof of guilt is this?

DOUGLAS. Ever since our marriage.
Our days have still been cold and joyless all;
"Painful restraint, and hatred ill disguised,
"Her sole return for all my waste of fondness."
This very morn I told her 'twas your will
She should repair to court; with all those graces,
Which first subdued my soul, and still enslave it,
She begged to stay behind in Raby Castle,
For courts, and cities had no charms for her.
Curse my blind love! I was again ensnared,
And doated on the sweetness which deceived me.
Just at the hour she thought I should be absent,
(For chance could never have timed their guilt so well,)
Arrived young Harcourt, one of Percy's knights,
Strictly enjoined to speak to none but her,
I seized the miscreant; hitherto he is silent,
But tortures soon shall force him to confess.

RABY. Percy is absent -- They have never met.

DOUGLAS. At what a feeble hold you grasp for succor!
Will it content me that her person's pure?
No, if her alien heart doats on another,
She is unchaste were not that other Percy.
Let vulgar spirits basely wait for proof,
She loves another -- it is enough for Douglas.

RABY. Be patient.

DOUGLAS. Be a tame convenient husband?
And meanly wait for circumstantial guilt?
No -- I am nice as the first Caesar was,
And start at bare suspicion.
going
RABY (holding him.) Douglas, hear me;
Thou have named a Roman husband; if she is false,
I mean to prove myself a Roman father.
Exit Douglas. This marriage was my work, and thus I Am punished!

Enter ELWINA. ELWINA. Where is my father? let me fly to meet him,
O let me clasp his venerable knees,
And die of joy in his beloved embrace.

RABY (avoiding her embrace.) Elwina!

ELWINA. And is that all? so cold?

RABY (sternly.) Elwina!

ELWINA. Then I Am Undone indeed! How stern his looks!
I will not be repulsed, I am your child,
The child of that dear mother you adored;
You shall not throw me off, I will grow here,
And, like the patriarch, wrestle for a blessing.

RABY (holding her from him.) Before I take thee in these aged arms,
Press thee with transport to this beating heart,
And give a loose to all a parent's fondness,
Answer, and see thou answer me as truly
As if the dread enquiry came from heaven: --
Does no interior sense of guilt confound thee?
Can thou lay all thy naked soul before me?
Can thy unconscious eye encounter mine?
Can thou endure the probe, and never shrink?
Can thy firm hand meet mine and never tremble?
Art thou prepared to meet the rigid judge?
Or to embrace the fond, the melting father?

ELWINA. Mysterious heaven! to what am I reserved?

RABY. Should some rash man, regardless of thy same,
And in defiance of thy marriage vows,
Presume to plead a guilty passion for thee,
What would thou do?

ELWINA. What honor bids me do.

RABY. Come to my arms!
they embrace.
ELWINA. My father!

RABY. Yes, Elwina,
Thou art my child -- thy mother's perfect image.

ELWINA. Forgive these tears of mingled joy and doubt;
For why that question? who should seek to please
The desolate Elwina?

RABY. But if any
Should so presume, can thou resolve to hate him,
Whatever his name, whatever his pride of blood,
Whatever his former arrogant pretensions?

ELWINA. Ha!

RABY. Do thou falter? Have a care, Elwina.

ELWINA. Sir, do not fear me; am I not your daughter?

RABY. Thou have a higher claim upon thy honor;
Thou art Earl Douglas' Wife.

ELWINA (weeps.) I am indeed!

RABY. Unhappy Douglas!

ELWINA. Has he then complained?
Has he presumed to sully my white fame?

RABY. He knows that Percy --

ELWINA. Was my destined husband;
By your own promise mine, a father's promise,
And by a tie more strong, more sacred still,
Mine, by the fast firm bond of mutual love.

RABY. Now, by my fears, thy husband told me truth.

ELWINA. If he has told thee that thy only child
Was forced, a helpless victim to the altar,
Torn from his arms, who had her virgin heart,
And forced to make false vows to one she hated,
Then, I confess, that he has told thee truth.

RABY. Her words are barbed arrows in my heart.
But it is too late. (aside) Thou have appointed Harcourt
To see thee here by stealth in Douglas' absence.

ELWINA. No, by my life, nor knew I till this moment
That Harcourt was returned. Was it for this
I taught my heart to struggle with its feelings?
Was it for this I bore my wrongs in silence?
When the fond ties of early love were broken,
Did my weak soul break out in fond complaints?
Did I reproach thee? Did I call thee cruel?
No -- I endured it all; and wearied heaven
To bless the father who destroyed my peace.

Enter MESSENGER. MESSENGER. My lord, a knight, Sir Hubert as I think,
But newly landed from the holy wars,
Entreats admittance,

RABY. Let the warrior enter.
Exit Messenger. All private interests sink at his approach;
All selfish cares be for a moment banished!
I Have now no child, no kindred but my country.

ELWINA. Weak heart be still, for what have thou to fear?

Enter Sir HUBERT. RABY. Welcome; thou gallant knight, Sir Hubert,
welcome!
Welcome to Raby Castle! -- In one word,
Is the king safe? Is Palestine subdued?

Sir HUBERT. HUBERT. The king is safe, and Palestine subdued.

RABY. Blessed be the god of armies! Now, Sir Hubert,
By all the saints you are a right noble knight!
O why was I too old for this crusade?
I think it would have made me young again,
Could I, like thee, have seen the hated Crescent,
Yield to the Christian cross. -- How now, Elwina!
What! cold at news which might awake the dead!
If there is a drop in thy degenerate veins
That glows not now, thou art not Raby's daughter.
It is religion's cause, the cause of heaven!

ELWINA. When policy assumes religion's name,
And wears the sanctimonious garb of faith,
Only to color fraud, and license murder,
War then is tenfold guilt.

RABY. Blaspheming girl!

ELWINA. It Is not the crosier, nor the pontiff's robe,
The saintly look, nor elevated eye,
Nor Palestine destroyed, nor Jordan's banks
Deluged with blood of slaughtered infidels,
No, nor the extinction of the Eastern world,
Nor all the mad, pernicious, bigot rage
Of your crusades, can bribe that power, who sees
The motive with the act. O blind to think
That cruel war can please the prince of peace!
He who erects his altar in the heart,
Abhors the sacrifice of human blood,
And all the false devotion of that zeal,
Which massacres the world he died to save.

RABY. O impious rage! If thou would shun my curse
No more, I charge thee. -- Tell me, good Sir Hubert,
Say, have our arms achieved this glorious deed,
(I fear to ask,) without much Christian bloodshed?

ELWINA. Now heaven support me!
aside.
Sir HUBERT. HUBERT My good lord of Raby,
Imperfect is the sum of human glory!
Would I could tell thee that the field was won,
Without the death of such illustrious knights,
As make the high flushed cheek of victory pale.

ELWINA. Why should I tremble thus?
aside.
RABY. Who have we lost?

Sir HUBERT. HUBERT. The noble Clifford, Walsingham, and Gray,
Sir Harry Hastings, and the valiant Pembroke.
All men of choicest note.

RABY. O that my name
Had been enrolled in such a list of heroes!
If I was too infirm to serve my country,
I might have proved my love by dying for her.

ELWINA. Were there no more?

Sir HUBERT. But few of noble blood.
But the brave youth who gained the palm of glory,
The flower of Knighthood, and the plume of war,
Who bore his banner foremost in the field,
Yet conquered more by mercy than the sword,
Was Percy.

ELWINA. Then he lives!
aside.
RABY. Did he? Did Percy?
O gallant boy, then I Am thy foe no more;
Who conquers for my country is my friend!
His same shall add new glories to a house,
Where never maid was false, nor knight disloyal.

Sir HUBERT. You do embalm him, lady, with your tears:
They grace the grave of glory where he lies.
He died the death of honor.

ELWINA. Said thou -- died?

Sir HUBERT. Beneath the towers of Solyma he fell.

ELWINA. Oh!

Sir HUBERT. Look to the lady.
(Elwina faints in her father's arms.)
RABY. Gentle knight retire --
It Is an infirmity of nature in her,
She ever mourns at any tale of blood,
She will be well anon -- mean time, Sir Hubert,
You Will grace our castle with your friendly sojourn.

Sir HUBERT. I must return with speed -- health to the lady.
Exit Hubert.
RABY. Look up Elwina. Should her husband come!
Yet she revives not.

Enter DOUGLAS. DOUGLAS. Ha -- Elwina fainting?
My lord, I fear you have too harshly chid her.
Her gentle nature could not brook your sternness.
She wakes, she stirs, she feels returning life.
My love!
(He takes her hand.)
ELWINA. O Percy!

DOUGLAS. (Starts.) Do my senses fail me?

ELWINA. My Percy, it is Elwina calls.

DOUGLAS. Hell, hell!

RABY. Retire awhile my daughter.

ELWINA. Douglas here?
My father and my husband! -- O for pity.
Exit Elwina, casting a look of anguish on both.
DOUGLAS. Now, now confess she well deserves my vengeance!
Before my face to call upon, my foe!

RABY. Upon a foe who has no power to hurt thee.
Earl Percy's slain.

ELWINA. Now heaven support me:
aside
Sir HUBERT. My good lord of Raby,
Imperfect is the sum of human glory!
Would I could tell thee that the field was won,
Without the death of such illustrious knights,
As make the high flushed cheek of victory pale.

ELWINA. Why should I tremble thus?
aside.
RABY. Who have we lost?

Sir HUBERT. The noble Clifford, Walsingham, and Gray,
^
But the brave youth who gain^d the pa^^^ of glory,
The flower of knighthood, and the plume of war,
Who bore his banner foremost in the field,
Yet conquered more by mercy than the sword;
Was Percy.

ELWINA. Then he lives!
aside.
RABY. Did he? Did Percy?
O gallant boy, then I Am thy foe no more;
Who conquers for my country is my friend!
His fame shall add new glories to a house,
Where never maid was false, nor knight disloyal.

Sir HUBERT. You do embalm him, lady, with your tears:
They grace the grave of glory where he lies.
He died the death of honor.

DOUGLAS. I live again. -- But hold --
Did she not weep? she did, and wept for Percy.
If she laments him, he is my rival still,
And not the grave can bary my resentment.

RABY. The truly brave are still the truly generous;
Now, Douglas, is the time to prove thee both.
If it be true that she did once love Percy,
Thou have no more to fear, since he is dead.
Release young Harcourt, let him see Elwina,
'Twill serve a double purpose, 'twill at once
Prove Percy's death, and thy unchanged affection.
Be gentle to my child, and win her heart,
By confidence, and unreproaching love.

DOUGLAS. By heaven thou counsel'st well: it shall be done.
Go get him free, and let him have admittance
To my Elwina's presence.

RABY. Farewell, Douglas.
Show thou believ'st her faithful and she will prove so.
Exit Raby.
DOUGLAS. Northumberland is dead -- that thought is peace!
Her heart may yet be mine, transporting hope!
Percy was gentle, even a foe avows it,
And I Will be milder than a summer's breeze.
Yes, thou most lovely, most adored of women,
I Will copy every virtue, every grace,
Of my blessed rival, happier even in death.
To be thus loved, than living to be scorned.

End of Act the Second.
ACT III.
SCENE, A Garden at Raby Castle, with a Bower. Enter PERCY and Sir HUBERT. Sir
HUBERT. THAT Percy lives, and is returned in safety,
More joys my soul, than all the mighty conquests
That sun beheld, which rose on Syria's ruin.

PERCY. I Have told thee, good Sir Hubert, by what wonder
I was preserved, though numbered with the slain.

Sir HUBERT. 'Twas strange indeed!

PERCY. 'Twas heavens immediate work!
But let me now indulge a dearer joy,
Talk of a richer gift of Mercy's hand;
A gift so precious to my doting heart,
That life preserved is but a second blessing.
O Hubert, let my soul indulge its softness!
The hour, the spot is sacred to Elwina.
This was her favorite walk; I well remember,
(For who forgets that loves as I have loved?)
'Twas in that very bower she gave this scarf,
Wrought by the hand of love; she bound it on,
And, smiling, cried, Whatever befall us, Percy,
Be this the sacred pledge of faith between us.
I knelt, and swore, called every power to witness,
No time, nor circumstance, should force it from me!
But I would lose my life and that together.
Here I repeat my vow.

Sir HUBERT. Is this the man
Beneath whose single arm an host was crushed?
He, at whose name the Saracen turned pale?
And when he fell, victorious armies wept,
And mourned a conquest they had bought so dear?
How has he changed the trumpet's martial note,
And all the stirring clangor of the war,
For the soft melting of the lover's lute!
Why are thine eyes still bent upon the bower?

PERCY. O Hubert, Hubert, to a soul enamored,
There is a sort of local sympathy,
Which, when we view the seenes of early passion,
Paints the bright image of the object loved,
In stronger colors, than remoter scenes
Could ever pant it, realizes shade,
Dresses it up in all the charms it wore,
Talks to it nearer, frames its answers kinder,
Gives form to fancy, and embodies thought.

Sir HUBERT. I should not be believed in Percy's camp,
If I should tell them that their gallant leader,
The thunder of the war, the bold Northumberland,
Renouncing Mars, dissolved in amorous wishes,
Loiter'd in shades, and pined in rosy bowers,
To catch a transient glance of two bright eyes.

PERCY. Enough of conquest, and enough of war!
Ambition's cloyed -- the heart resumes its rights.
When England's king, and England's good required,
This arm not idly the keen falchion brandished:
Enough -- for vaunting misbecomes a soldier.
I live, I am returned -- am near Elwina!
See thou those turrets? Yes, that castle holds her.
But wherefore tell thee this? for thou have seen her.
How looked, what said she? Did she hear the tale
Of my imagined death without emotion?

Sir HUBERT. Percy, thou have seen the musk-rose newly blown,
Disclose its bashful beauties to the sun,
Till an unfriendly, chilling storm descended,
Crushed all its blushing glories in their prime,
Bowed its fair head, and blasted all its sweetness.
So drooped the maid, beneath the cruel weight
Of my sad tale.

PERCY. So tender, and so true!

Sir HUBERT. I left her fainting in her father's arms,
The dying flower yet hanging on the tree.
Even Raby melted at the news I brought,
And envied thee thy glory.

PERCY. Then I am blessed!
His hate subdued, I Have nothing more to fear.

Sir HUBERT. My embassy dispatched, I left the castle,
Nor spoke to any of Lord Raby's household,
For fear the king should chide the tardiness
Of my return. My joy to find you living,
You have already heard.

PERCY. But where is Harcourt?
Ever this he should have seen her, told her all,
How I survived, returned, and how I love!
I tremble at the near approach of bliss,
And scarcely can sustain the joy which waits me.

Sir HUBERT. Grant heaven the fair-one prove but half so true!

PERCY. O she is truth itself!

Sir HUBERT. She may be changed,
Spite of her tears, her fainting, and alarms.
I know the sex, know them as nature made 'em,
Not such as lovers; wish, and poets feign.

PERCY. To doubt her virtue were suspecting heaven,
'Twere little less than infidelity!
And yet I tremble. Why does terror; shake
These firm-strung nerves? But 'twill be ever thus,
When fate prepares us more than mortal bliss,
And gives us only human strength to bear it.

Sir HUBERT. What beam of brightness breaks through yonder gloom?

PERCY. Hubert -- she comes! By all my hopes she comes!
It Is she -- the blissful, vision is Elwina!
But ah! what mean those tears? -- She weeps for me!
O transport! -- go. -- I Will listen unobserved, --
And for a moment taste the precious joy,
The banquet of a tear which falls for love.
Exit Sir Hubert.
Percy goes into the Bower. Enter ELWINA. ELWINA. Shall I not weep, and have I
then no cause?
If I could break the eternal bands of death,
And wrench the scepter from his iron grasp;
If I could bid the yawning sepulcher
Restore to life its long committed dust;
If I could teach the slaught'ring hand of war,
To give me back, my dear, my murdered Percy,
Then I indeed might once more cease to weep.

[Percy comes out of the Bower.] PERCY. Then cease, for Percy lives.

ELWINA. Protest me heaven!

PERCY. O joy unspeakable! My life, my love!
End of my toils, and crown of all my cares!
Kind as consenting peace, as conquest bright,
Dearer than arms, and lovelier than renown!

ELWINA. It is his voice -- it is, it is my Percy!
And do thou live?

PERCY. I never lived till now.

ELWINA. And did, my sighs, and did my sorrows reach thee?
And art thou come at last to dry my tears?
How did thou escape the fury of the foe?

PERCY. Thy guardian genius hovered over the field;
And turned the hostile spear from Percy's breast,
Left thy fair image should be wounded there.
But Harcourt should have told thee all my fate.
How I survived --

ELWINA. Alas! I have not seen him.
Oh! I have suffered much.

PERCY. Of that no more;
For every minute of our future lives.
Shall be so bless d, that we will learn to wonder,
How we could ever think we were unhappy.

ELWINA. Percy -- I cannot speak.

PERCY. Those tears how eloquent!
I would not change this motlionless, mute joy
For the sweet strains of angels: I look down,
With pity on the rest of human kind,
However great may be their same of happiness,
And think their niggard fate has given them nothing.
Not giving thee; or granting some small blessing,
Denies them my capacity to feel it.

ELWINA. Alas! what mean you?

PERCY. Can I speak my meaning?
It Is of such magnitude that words would wrong it;
But surely my Elwina's faithful bosom,
Should beat in kind responses of delight,
And feel, but never question what I mean.

ELWINA. Hold, hold, my heart, thou have much more to suffer!

PERCY. Let the slow form, and tedious ceremony
Wait on the splendid victims of ambition.
Love stays for none of these. Thy father's softened,
He will forget the fatal Cheviot Chase;
Raby is brave, and I have served my country;
I would not boast, it was for thee I conquered.
Then come, my love.

ELWINA. O never, never, never.

PERCY. Am I awake? Is that Elwina's voice?

ELWINA. Percy, thou most adored -- and most deceived!
If ever fortitude sustained thy soul,
When vulgar minds hare sunk beneath the stroke,
Let thy imperial spirit now support thee. --
If thou can be so wondrous merciful,
Do not, O do not curse me! -- but thou will,
Thou must -- for I have done a fearful deed,
A deed of wild despair, a deed of horror.
I am, I am --

PERCY. Speak, say, what art thou?

ELWINA. Married.

PERCY. Oh!

ELWINA. Percy, I think I begged thee not to curse me;
But now I do revoke the fond petition.
Speak! ease thy bursting soul; reproach, upbraid,
Overwhelm me with thy wrongs -- I Will bear it all.

PERCY. Open, thou earth, and hide me from her sight!
Did thou not bid me curse thee?

ELWINA. Mercy! mercy!

PERCY. And have I 'scap'd the Saracen's fell sword,
Only to perish by Elwina's guilt?
I would have barred my bosom to the foe,
I would have died, had I but known you wished it.

ELWINA. Percy, I loved thee most when most I wronged thee:
Yes, by these tears I did.

PERCY. Married! just heaven!
Married? to whom? Yet wherefore should I know?
It cannot add fresh horrors to thy crime,
Or my destruction.

ELWINA. Oh! 'twill add to both.
How shall I tell? Prepare for something dreadful.
Have thou not heard of -- Douglas?

PERCY. Why it is well!
Thou awful power why waste thy wrath on me?
Why arm omnipotence to crush a worm?
I could have fallen without this waste of ruin.
Married to Douglas! By my wrongs I like it,
It Is perfidy complete, it is finished falsehood,
It Is adding fresh perdition to the sin,
And filling up the measure of offense!

ELWINA. Oh! 'twas my father's deed! he made his child
An instrument of vengeance on thy head.
He wept and threatened, soothed me, and commanded.

PERCY. And you complied, most duteously complied!

ELWINA. I could withstand his fury; but his tears,
Ah, they undid me! Percy, do thou know
The cruel tyranny of tenderness?
Have thou ever felt a father's warm embrace?
Have thou ever seen a father's flowing tears,
And known that thou could wipe those tears away?
If thou have felt, and have resisted these,
Then thou may curse my weakness; but if not,
Thou can not pity, for thou can not judge.

PERCY. Let me not hear the music of thy voice,
Or I shall love thee still; I shall forget
Thy fatal marriage, and my savage wrongs.

ELWINA. Do thou not hate me, Percy?

PERCY. Hate thee? Yes,
As dying martyrs hate the righteous cause
Of that blessed Power for whom they bleed -- I hate thee.
They look at each other in silent agony.
Enter HARCOURT. HARCOURT Forgive, my lord, your faithful knight --

PERCY. Come, Harcourt,
Come and behold the wretch who once was Percy.

HARCOURT. With grief I Have learned the whole unhappy tale.
Earl Douglas, whose suspicion never sleeps --

PERCY. What, is the tyrant jealous?

ELWINA. Hear him, Percy.

PERCY. I will command my rage -- Go on.

HARCOURT. Earl Douglas
Knew by my arms, and my accoutrements,
That I belonged to you; he questioned much,
And much he menaced me, but both alike
In vain, he then arrested and confined me.

PERCY. Arrest my knight? The Scot shall answer it.

ELWINA. How came you now released?

HARCOURT. Your noble father
Obtained my freedom, having learned from Hubert
The news of Percy's death. The good old Lord,
Hearing the king's return, has left the Castle
To do him homage.
To Percy. Sir, you had best retire;
Your safety is endangered by your stay.
I fear should Douglas know --

PERCY. Should Douglas know?
Why what new magic's in the name of Douglas,
That it should strike Northumberland with fear?
Go, seek the haughty Scot, and tell him -- no --
Conduct me to his presence.

ELWINA. Percy, hold;
Think not it is Douglas -- it is --

PERCY. I know it well,
Thou mean to tell me it is Elwina's husband;
But that inflames me to superior madness.
This happy husband, this triumphant Douglas,
Shall not insult my misery with his bliss.
I Will blast the golden promise of his joys.
Conduct me to him -- nay, I will have way --
Come, let us seek this husband.

ELWINA. Percy, hear me.
When I was robbed of all my peace of mind,
My cruel fortune left me still one blessing,
One solitary blessing, to console me;
It was my fame. -- It Is a rich jewel, Percy,
And I must keep it spotless, and unsoil'd:
But thou would plunder what even Douglas spared,
And rob this single gem of all its brightness.

PERCY. Go -- thou wast born to rule the fate of Percy.
Thou art my conqueror still.

ELWINA. What noise is that?
Harcourt goes to the side of the Stage.
PERCY. Why art thou thus alarmed?

ELWINA. Alas! I feel
The cowardice and terrors of the wicked.
Without their sense of guilt.

HARCOURT. My lord, it is Douglas.

ELWINA. Fly, Percy, and for ever?

PERCY. Fly from Douglas?

ELWINA. Then stay, barbarian, and at once destroy My life and fame.

PERCY. That thought is death. I go.
My honor to thy dearer honor yields.

ELWINA Yet, yet thou art not gone!

PERCY Farewell, farewell!
Exit Percy.
ELWINA. I dare not meet the searching eye of Douglas.
I must conceal my terrors;

Douglas at the Side with his sword drawn, Edric holds him DOUGLAS. Give me way.

EDRIC. Thou shall not enter.

DOUGLAS struggling with Edric: If there were no hell,
It would defraud my vengeance of it is edge,
And he should live.
(Breaks from Edric and comes forward.) Cursed chance! he is not here;

ELWINA. Let us retire, my friend, the storm is up;
dare not meet its fury.

DOUGLAS. See she flies
With every mark of guilt. -- Go search the Bower,
Aside to Edric. He shall not thus escape. Madam, return.
Aloud. Now honest Douglas learn of her to feign.
Aside. Alone, Elwina? who just parted hence?
With affected composure.
ELWINA. My lord, 'twas Harcourt; sure you must have met him.

DOUGLAS. O exquisite dissembler! No one else?

ELWINA. My lord!

DOUGLAS. How I enjoy her criminal confusion!
You tremble, Madam.

ELWINA. Wherefore should I tremble?
By your permission Harcourt was admitted;
'Twas no mysterious, secret introduction.

DOUGLAS. And yet you seem alarmed. If Harcourt's presence
Thus agitates each nerve, makes every pulse
Thus wildly throb, and the warm tides of blood,
Mount in quick rushing tumults to your cheek;
If friendihip can excite such strong emotions,
What tremors had a lover's presence caused?

ELWINA. Ungenerous man!

DOUGLAS. I feast upon her terrors.
Aside. The story of his death was well contrived,
to her. But it affects not me; I have a wife,
Compared with whom cold Dian was unchaste.
Takes her hand. But mark me well -- though it concerns not you --
If there is a sin more deeply black than others,
Distinguished from the list of common crimes,
A legion in itself, and doubly dear
To the dark prince of hell, it is -- hypocrisy.
Throws her from him and Exit.
ELWINA. Yes, I will bear his fearful indignation!
Thou melting heart be firm as adamant;
Ye shattered nerves be strung with manly force,
That I may conquer all my sex's weakness,
Nor let this bleeding bosom lodge one thought,
Cherish one wish, or harbor one desire,
That angels may not hear, and Douglas know.

End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE, The Hall. Enter DOUGLAS, his sword drawn and bloody in one hand, in the
other a letter. HARCOURT wounded. DOUGLAS. TRAITOR no more. This letter shows
thy office.
Twice have thou robbed me of my dear revenge.
I took thee for thy leader. -- Thy base blood
Would stain the noble temper of my sword,
But as the pander to thy master's lust,
Thou justly fall'st by a wronged husband's hand.

HARCOURT. Thy wife is innocent.

DOUGLAS. Take him away.

HARCOURT. Percy, revenge my fall!
Guards bear Harcourt in.
DOUGLAS. Now for the letter!
Het begs once more to see her. -- so it is plain
They have already met! -- but to the rest --
Reads, "In vain you wish me to restore the scarf,
Dear pledge of love, while I have life I Will wear it,
It Is next my heart; no power shall force it thence.
Whenever you see it in another's hand
Conclude me dead." -- My curses on them both!
How tamely I peruse my shame! But thus,
Thus, let me tear the guilty chtacters
Which register my infamy. And thus,
Thus would I scatter to the winds of heaven,
The vile complotters of my soul dishonor.
Tears the letter in the utmost agitation.
Enter EDRIC. EDRIC. My lord --

DOUGLAS. (in the utmost fury, not seeing Edric) The scarf!

EDRIC. Lord Douglas.

DOUGLAS (still not hearing him) Yes, the scarf!
Percy, I thank thee for the glorious thought!
I Will cherish it; 'twill sweeten all my pangs,
And add a higher relish to revenge!

EDRIC. My lord!

DOUGLAS. How, Edric here?

EDRIC. What new distress?

DOUGLAS. Do thou expect I should recount my shame?
Dwell on each circumstance of my disgrace,
And swell my infamy into a tale?
Rage will not let me -- But -- my wife is false.

EDRIC. Art thou convinced?

DOUGLAS. The chronicles of hell
Cannot produce a falser. -- But what news
Of her cursed paramour?

EDRIC. He has escaped.

DOUGLAS. Have thou examined every avenue?
Each spot? The grove? the bower, her favorite haunt?

EDRIC. I Have scarch'd them all.

DOUGLAS. He shall be yet pursued.
Set guards at every gate -- Let none depart,
Or gain admittance here without my knowledge,

EDRIC. What can their purpose be?

DOUGLAS. Is it not clear?
Harcourt has raised his arm against my life?
He failed; the blow is now reserved for Percy;
Then with his sword fresh reeking from my heart,
He Will revel with that wanton over my tomb;
Nor will he bring her ought she will hold so dear,
As the cursed hand with which he slew her husband.
But he shall die! I Will drown my rage in blood,
Which I will offer as a rich libation,
On thy infernal altar, black Revenge!
Exeunt.
SCENE changes to the Garden. Enter ELWINA. ELWINA. Each avenue is so beset
with guards,
And lynx-ey'd Jealousy so broad awake,
He cannot pass unseen. Protect him heaven!
Enter Birtha. My Birtha, is he safe? Has he escaped?

BIRTHA. I know not. I dispatched young Harcourt to him
To bid him quit the Castle, as you ordered,
Restore the scarf, and never see you more.
But how the hard injunction was received,
Or what has happened since, I Am yet to learn,

ELWINA. O when shall I be eased of all my cares,
And in the quiet bosom of the grave
Lay down this weary head? -- I Am sick at heart
Should. Douglas intercept his flight?

BIRTHA. Be calm;
Douglas this very moment left the Castle,
With seeming peace.

ELWINA. Ah, then indeed there is danger!
Birtha, whenever Suspicion seigns to sleep,
It Is but to make its careless prey secure.

BIRTHA. Should Percy once again entreat to see thee;
'Twere best admit him; from thy lips alone,
He will submit to hear his final doom
Of everlasting exile,

ELWINA. Birtha, no:
If honor would allow the wife of Douglas
To meet his rival, yet I durst not do it.
Percy! too much this rebel heart is thine:
Too deeply should I feel each pang I gave;
I cannot hate -- but I will banish thee.
Inexorable duty, O forgive,
If I can do no more!

BIRTHA. If he remains,
As I suspect, within the castle walls,
'Twere best I sought him out.

ELWINA. Then tell him, Birtha,
But Oh! with gentleness, with mercy tell him,
'That we must never, never meet again.
The purport of thy tale must be severe,
But let thy tenderness embalm the wound
My virtue gives. O soften his despair;
But say -- we meet no more.
Enter Percy. Rash man, he is here!
(She attempts to go, he seizes her hand.)
PERCY. I will be heard; nay, fly not; I will speak;
Lost as I am, I will not be denied
The mournful consolation to complain.

ELWINA. Percy, I charge thee, leave me.

PERCY. Tyrant, no:
I blush at my obedience, blush to think
I left thee here alone, to brave the danger
I now return to share.

ELWINA. That danger's past:
Douglas was soon appeased; he nothing knows.
Then leave me I conjure thee, nor again
Endanger my repose. Yet, ever thou go,
Restore the scarf.

PERCY. Unkind Elwina, never.
It Is all that is left me of my buried, joys,
All, which' reminds me that I once was happy.
My letter told thee! would never restore it.

ELWINA. Letter? what letter?

PERCY. That I sent by Harcourt.

ELWINA. Which I have never received. Douglas, perhaps -- Who knows?

BIRTHA. Harcourt, to elude his watchfulness,
Might prudently retire.

ELWINA. Grant heaven it prove so!

(Elwina going, Percy holds her.) PERCY. Hear me, Elwina, the most savage honor
Forbids not that poor grace.

ELWINA. It bids me fly thee,

PERCY. Then ever thou go, if we indeed must part,
To sooth the horrors of eternal exile,
Say but -- thou pity'st me!

ELWINA. (weeps.) O Percy -- pity thee!
Imperious honor! -- surely I may pity him.
Yet, wherefore pity? no, I envy thee:
For thou have still the liberty to weep,
in thee 'twill be no crime; thy tears are guiltless,
For they infringe no duty, stain no honor,
And blot no vow: But mine are criminal,
Are drops of shame which wash the cheek of guilt,
And every tear I shed dishonours Douglas.

PERCY. I swear my jealous love even grudges thee
Thy sad pre-eminence in wretchedness.

ELWINA. Rouse, rouse, my slumbering virtue! Percy, hear me.
Heaven, when it gives such high-wrought souls as thine,
Still gives as great occasions to exert them.
If thou wast formed so noble, great, and generous,
'Twas to surmount the passions which enslave
The gross of humankind. -- Then think, O think,
She, whom thou once did love, is now another's.

PERCY. Go on -- and tell me that that other's Douglas.

ELWINA. Whatever his name, he claims respect from me:
His honor's in my keeping, and I hold
The trust so pure, its sanctity is hurt,
Even by thy presence.

PERCY. Thou again have conquered.
Celestial Virtue, like the angel-spirit,
Whose flaming sword defended Paradise,
Stands guard on every charm. -- Elwina, yes,
To triumph over Douglas, we'll be virtuous.

ELWINA. It Is not enough to be, -- we must appear so:
Great souls disdain the shadow of offense,
Nor must their whiteness wear the stain of guilt.

PERCY. I shall retract -- I dare not gaze upon thee;
My feeble virtue staggers, and again
The fiends of jealousy torment and haunt me.
They tear my heart strings. -- Oh!

ELWINA. No more;
But spare my injured honor the affront
To vindicate, itself.

PERCY. But love!

ELWINA. But glory!

PERCY. Enough! a ray of thy sublimer spirit,
Has wann'd my dying honor to a flame!
One effort, and it is done. The world shall say,
When they shall speak of my disastrous love,
Percy deserved Elwina though he lost her.
Fond tears blind me not yet! a little longer,
Let my sad eyes a little longer gaze,
And leave their last beams here.

ELWINA. turns from him. I do not weep.

PERCY. Not weep? Then why those eyes avoiding mine?
And why that broken voice? those trembling accents?
That sigh which rends my soul?

ELWINA. No more, no more.

PERCY. That pang decides it. Come -- I Will die at once;
Thou power supreme! take all the length of days,
And all the blessings kept in store for me,
And add to her account; -- Yet turn once more.
One little look, one last, short glimpse of day,
And then a long, dark night. -- Hold, hold my heart.
O break not yet, while I behold her sweetness;
For after this dear, mournful, tender moment,
I shall have nothing more to do with life,

ELWINA. I do conjure thee go.

PERCY. It Is terrible to nature?
With pangs like these the soul and body part!
And thus, but Oh, with far less agony,
The poor departing wretch still grasps at being,
Thus clings to life, thus dreads the dark unknown,
Thus struggles to the last to keep his hold;
And when the dire convulsive groan of death
Dislodges the sad spirit -- thus it stays,
And fondly hovers over the form it loved.
Once, and no more -- farewell, farewell!

ELWINA. For ever!
They look at each other for some time, then Exit Percy. After a pause, It Is
past -- the conflict's past! retire, my Birtha,
I would address me to the throne of grace.

BIRTHA. May heaven restore that peace thy bosom wants?
Exit Birtha.
ELWINA. kneels. Look, down, thou awful, heart-inspecting judge,
Look down, with mercy, on thy erring creature,
And teach my soul the lowliness it needs!
And if some sad remains of human weakness,
Should sometimes mingle with my best resolves,
O breathe thy spirit on this wayward heart,
And teach me to repent the intruding sin,
In its first birth of thought!
(Noise without) What noise is that?
The clash of swords! Should Douglas be returned?

Enter Douglas and Percy fighting. DOUGLAS. Yield, villain, yield.

PERCY. Not till this good right arm
Shall fail its master.

DOUGLAS. This to thy heart then.

PERCY. Defend thy own.
(They fight. Percy disarms Douglas.)
DOUGLAS. Confusion, death, and hell!

EDRIC. (Without.) This way I heard the noise.
(Enter Edric and many Knights and Guards from every part of the Stage.)
PERCY. Cursed treachery!
But dearly will I sell my life.

DOUGLAS. Seize on him.

PERCY. I Am taken in the toils.
Percy is surrounded by Guards, who take his sword.
DOUGLAS. In the cursed snare
Thou laid'st for me, traitor, thyself art caught.

ELWINA. He never sought thy life.

DOUGLAS. Adulteress, peace.
The villain Harcourt too -- but he is at rest.

PERCY. Douglas, I Am in thy power; but do not triumph,
Percy's betrayed, not conquered. Come, dispatch me.

ELWINA. (to Douglas.) O do not, do not kill him!

PERCY. Madam, forbear;
For by the glorious shades of my great fathers,
Their godlike spirit is not so extinct,
That I should owe my life to that vile Scot.
Though dangers close me round on every side,
And death besets me -- I am Percy still.

DOUGLAS. Sorceress, I Will disappoint thee -- he shall die;
Thy minion shall expire before thy face,
That I may feast my hatred with your pangs,
And make his dying groans, and thy fond tears,
A banquet for my vengeance.

ELWINA. Savage tyrant!
I would have fallen a silent sacrifice,
So thou had spared my fame. I never wronged thee,

PERCY. She knew not of my coming; I alone,
Have been to blame -- spite of her interdiction,
I hither came. She Is pure as spotless saints.

ELWINA. I will not be excused by Percy's crime;
So white my innocence, it does not ask
The shade of others' faults to set it off;
Nor shall he need to fully his fair fame,
To throw a brighter luster round my virtue.

PERCY. Enough of words. Thou know. I hate thee, Douglas;
It Is steadfast, fixed, hereditary hate,
As thine for me; our fathers did bequeath it,
As part of our unalienable birthright,
Which naught but death can end. -- Come, end it here.

ELWINA. (kneels.) Hold, Douglas, hold! -- not for myself I kneel,
I do not plead for Percy, but for thee:
Arm not thy hand against thy future peace,
Spare thy brave breast the tortures of remorse, --
Stain not a life of unpolluted, honor,
For oh! as surely as thou strik'st at Percy,
Thou will for ever stab the same of Douglas.

PERCY. Finish the bloody work.

DOUGLAS. Then take thy wish.

PERCY. Why do thou start?
Percy bares his bosom, Douglas advances to stab him, and discovers the Scarf.
DOUGLAS. Her scarf upon his breast!
The blasting sight converts me into stone;
Withers my powers like cowardice, or age,
Curdles the blood within my shivering veins,
And palsies my bold arm.

PERCY. (ironically to the Knights.) Hear you, his friends!
Bear witness to the glorious, great exploit,
Record it in the annals of his race,
That Douglas the renowned -- the valiant Douglas.
Fenced round with guards, and safe in his own castle,
Surprised a knight unarmed, and bravely slew him.

DOUGLAS. (throwing away his dagger.) It Is true -- I am the very stain of
knighthood.
How is my glory dimmed!

ELWINA. It blazes brighter!
Douglas was only brave -- he now is generous!

PERCY. This action has restored thee to thy rank,
And makes thee worthy to contend with Percy.

DOUGLAS. Thy joy will be as short, as it is insulting.
(to Elwina.) And thou, imperious boy, restrain thy boasting.
Thou have saved my honor, not removed my hate,
For my soul loathes thee for the obligation.
Give him his sword.

PERCY. Now you are a noble foe,
And in the field of honor I will meet thee,
As knight encountering knight.

ELWINA. Stay, Percy, stay,
Strike at the wretched cause of all, strike here,
Here sheathe thy thirsty sword, but spare my husband.

DOUGLAS. Turn, Madam, and address those vows to me,
To spare the precious life of him you love.
Even now you triumph in the death of Douglas,
Now your loose fancy kindles at the thought,
And wildly rioting in lawless hope,
Indulges the adultery of the mind.
But I Will defeat that wish. -- Guards bear her in.
Nay, do not struggle.
She is borne in.
PERCY. Let our death's suffice,
And reverence virtue in that form inshrin'd,

DOUGLAS. Provoke my rage no farther. -- I have kindled
The burning torch of never-dying vengeance
At Love's expiring lamp. -- But mark me, friends,
If Percy's happier genius should prevail,
And I should fall, give him safe conduct hence,
Be all observance paid him. -- Go -- I follow thee.
Aside to Edric. Within I Have something for thy private ear.

PERCY. Now shall this mutual fury be appeased!
These eager hands shall soon be drenched in slaughter!
Yes -- like two famished vultures snuffing blood,
And panting to destroy, we'll rush to combat;
Yet I Have the deepest, deadliest cause of hate,
I Am but Percy, you are -- Elwina's husband.

End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE, Elwina's Apartment. ELWINA. THOU who in judgment still remember'st
mercy,
Look, down upon my woes, preserve. my husband,
Preserve my husband! Ah, I dare not ask it;
If Douglas should survive, what then becomes
Of -- him -- I dare not name? And if he conquers
I have no husband. Agonizing state!
When I can neither hope, nor think, nor pray,
But guilt involves me. Sure to know the worst,
Cannot exceed the torture of suspense,
When each event is big with equal horror.
Looks out. What no one yet? This solitude is dreadful!
My horrors multiply!
Enter Birtha. Thou messenger of woe!

BIRTHA. Of woe indeed!

ELWINA. How, is my husband dead?
Oh speak.

BIRTHA. Your husband lives.

ELWINA. Then farewell Percy!
He was the tenderes;t, truest! -- Bless him heaven,
With crowns of glory, and immortal joys!

BIRTHA. Still are you wrong; the combat is not over.
Stay flowing tears, and give me leave to speak.

ELWINA. Thou say that Percy and my husband live;
Then why this sorrow?

BIRTHA. What a talk is mine?

ELWINA. Thou talk as if I were a child in grief,
And scarce acquainted with calamity.
Speak out, unfold thy tale whatever it be,
For I am so familiar with affliction,
It cannot come in any shape will shock me.

BIRTHA. How shall I speak? Thy husband --

ELWINA. What of Douglas?

BIRTHA. When all was ready for the fatal combat,
He called his chosen knights, then drew his sword,
And on it made them swear a solemn oath,
Confirmed by every rite religion bids,
That they would see performed his last request,
Be it whatever it would. Alas! they swore.

ELWINA. What did the dreadful preparation mean?

BIRTHA. Then to their hands he gave a poisoned cup,
Compounded of the deadliest herbs, and drugs;
Take this, said he, it is a husband's legacy;
Percy may conquer -- and -- I have a wife!
If Douglas falls, Elwina must not live.

ELWINA. Spirit of Herod! Why 'twas greatly thought!
'Twas worthy of the bosom which conceived it!
Yet 'twas too merciful to be his own.
Yes, Douglas, yes, my husband, I Will obey thee,
And bless thy genius which has found the means
To reconcile thy vengeance with my peace,
The deadly means to make obedience pleasant.

BIRTHA. O spare, for pity spare my bleeding heart:
Inhuman to the last. Unnatural! poison!

ELWINA. My gentle friend, what is there in a name?
The means are little where the end is kind.
If it disturb thee do not call it poison;
Call it the sweet oblivion of my cares,
My balm of woe, my cordial of affliction,
The drop of mercy to my fainting soul,
My kind dismission from a world of sorrow,
My cup of bliss, my passport to the skies,

BIRTHA. Hark! what alarm is that?

ELWINA. The combat's over!
Birtha goes out. (Elwina stands in a fixed attituide, her hands clasped.) Now
gracious heaven sustain me in the trial,
And bow my spirit to thy great decrees!

Re-enter BIRTHA. (Elwina looks steadfastly at her without speaking.) BIRTHA.
Douglas is fallen.

ELWINA. Bring me the poison.

BIRTHA. Never.

ELWINA. Where are the knights? I summon you -- approach!
Draw near ye awful ministers of fate,
Dire instruments of posthumous revenge!
Come -- I am ready; but your tardy justice
Defrauds the injured dead. -- Go, haste, my friend,
Sec that the castle be securely guarded,
Let every gate be barred -- prevent his entrance.

BIRTHA. Whose entrance?

ELWINA. His -- the murderer of my husband.

BIRTHA. He Is single, we have hosts of friends.

ELWINA. No matter;
Who knows what love and madness may attempt?
But here I swear by all that binds the good,
Never to see him more. -- Unhappy Douglas!
O if thy troubled spirit still is conscious
Of our past woes, look down and hear me swear,
That when the legacy thy rage bequeathed me,
Works at my heart, and conquers struggling nature,
Even in that agony I Will still be faithful.
She who could never love, shall yet obey thee,
Weep thy hard fate, and die to prove her truth.

BIRTHA. O unexampled virtue!
a noise without.
ELWINA. Heard you nothing?
By all my fears the insulting conqueror comes.
O save me, shield me!
Enter DOUGLAS. Heaven and earth, my husband!

DOUGLAS. Yes --
To blast thee with the sight of him thou hat'st,
Of him thou have wronged, Adulteress, it is thy husband.

ELWINA. (kneels.) Blessed be the fountain of eternal mercy,
This load of guilt is spared me! Douglas lives!
Perhaps both live! (to Birtha) Could I be sure of that,
The poison were superfluous, joy would kill me.

DOUGLAS. Be honest now; for once, and curse thy stars;
Curse thy detested fate which brings thee back
A hated husband, when thy guilty soul
Revell'd in fond, imaginary joys
With my too happy rival; when thou slew'st,
To gratify, impatient, boundless passion,
And join adulterous lust to bloody murder;
Then to reverse the scene! polluted woman!
Mine is the transport now, and thine the pang.

ELWINA. Whence sprung the false report that thou had fallen?

DOUGLAS. To give thy guilty breast a deeper wound,
To add a deadlier sting to disappointment,
I raised it -- I contrived -- I sent it thee.

ELWINA. Thou see me bold but bold in conscious virtue.
-- That my sad soul may not be stained with blood,
That I may spend my few short hours in peace,
And die in holy hope of heaven's forgiveness,
Relieve the terrors of my laboring breast,
Say I am clear of murder -- say he lives.
Say but that little word that Percy lives,
And Alps, and Oceans shall divide us ever,
As far as universal space can part us.

DOUGLAS. Can thou renounce him?

ELWINA. Tell me that he lives,
And thou shall be the ruler of my fate,
For ever hide me in a convent's gloom,
From cheerful daylight, and the haunts of men;
Where sad austerity, and ceaseless prayer,
Shall share my uncomplaining day between them.

DOUGLAS. O hypocrite! now vengeance to thy office.
I had forgot -- Percy commends him to thee,
And by my hand --

ELWINA. How -- by thy hand?

DOUGLAS. Has sent thee,
This precious pledge of love.
(He gives her Percy's Scarf.)
ELWINA. Then Percy's dead!

DOUGLAS. He is. -- O great revenge, thou now art mine!
See how convulsive sorrow rends her frame!
This, this is transport! -- injured honor, now,
Receives its vast, its ample retribution.
She sheds no tears, her grief's too highly wrought;
It Is speechless agony. -- She must not faint --
She shall not 'scape her portion of the pain.
No! she, shall feel the fullness of distress,
And wake to keen perception of her loss.

BIRTHA. Monster! Barbarian! leave her to her sorrows.

ELWINA. (In a low broken voice.) Douglas -- think not I faint, because thou
see
The pale, and bloodless cheek of wan despair.
Fail me not yet, my spirits; thou cold heart,
Cherish thy freezing current one short moment,
And bear thy mighty load a little longer.

DOUGLAS. Percy, I must avow it, bravely sought; --
Died as a hero should; -- but, as he fell,
Hear it, fond wanton, called upon thy name,
And his lastly guilty breath. sighed out -- Elwina!
Come -- give a loose to rage, and feed my soul
With wild complaints, and womanish upbraidings.

ELWINA. (In a low solemn voice.) No:
The sorrow's weak that wastes itself in words.
Mine is substantial anguish -- deep, not loud;
I do not rave. -- Resentment's the return
Of common souls for common injuries.
Light grief is proud of state, and courts compassion;
But there is a dignity in cureless sorrow,
A sullen grandeur which disdains complaint.
Rage is for little wrongs -- Despair is dumb.
Exeunt Elwina and Birtha.
DOUGLAS. Why this is well! -- her sense of woe is strong!
The sharp, keen tooth of gnawing Grief devours her, --
Feeds on her heart, and pays me back my pangs.
Since I must perish, 'twill be glorious ruin:
I fall not singly; but, like some proud tower,
I Will crush surrounding objects in the wreck,
And make the devastation wide and dreadful.

Enter RABY. RABY. O whither shall a wretched father turn?
Where fly for comfort? Douglas, art thou here?
I do not ask for comfort at thy hands.
I Would but one little casket where I lodged
My precious hoard of wealth, and, like an idiot,
I gave my treasure to another's keeping,
Who threw away the gem, nor knew its value,
But left the plundered owner quite a beggar.

DOUGLAS. What! art thou come to see thy race dishonored,
And thy bright sun of glory set in blood?
I would have spared thy virtues, and thy age,
The knowledge of her infamy.

RABY. It Is false.
Had she been base, this sword had drank her blood.

DOUGLAS. Ha! do thou vindicate the wanton?

RABY. Wanton?
Thou have defamed a noble lady's honor --
My spotless child -- in me behold her champion:
The strength of Hercules will nerve this arm,
When lifted in defense of innocence.
The daughter's virtue for the father's shield,
Will make old Raby still invincible.
Offers to draw.
DOUGLAS. Forbear.

RABY. Thou do disdain my feeble arm,
And scorn my age.

DOUGLAS. There will be blood enough;
Nor need thy withered veins, old lord, be drained,
To swell the copious stream.

RABY. Thou will not kill her?

DOUGLAS. Oh, it is a day of horror!

Enter EDRIC and BIRTHA. EDRIC. Where is Douglas?
I come to save him from the deadliest crime
Revenge did ever meditate.

DOUGLAS. What mean thou?

EDRIC. This insant fly, and save thy guiltless wife.

DOUGLAS. Save that persidious --?

EDRIC. That much injured woman.

BIRTHA. Unfortunate indeed, but O most innocent!

EDRIC. In the last solemn article of death,
That truth-compelling state, when even bad 'men
Fear to speak falsely, Percy cleared her fame.

DOUGLAS. I heard him. -- 'Twas the guilty fraud of love.
The scarf, the scarf! that proof of mutual passion,
Given but this day, to ratify their crimes!

BIRTHA. What means my lord? Alas! that fatal scarf,
Was given long since, a toy of childish friendship;
Long ever your marriage, ever you knew Elwina.

RABY. It Is I am guilty.

DOUGLAS. Ha!

RABY. I, -- I alone.
Confusion, honor, pride, parental fondness
Distract my soul. -- Percy was not to blame,
He was -- the destined husband of Elwina!
He loved her -- was beloved, -- and I approved.
The tale is long. -- I changed my purpose since,
Forbad their marriage.

DOUGLAS. And confirmed my misery!
Twice did they meet today -- my wife and Percy.

RABY. I know it.

DOUGLAS. Ha! thou knew'st of my dishonor?
Thou wast a witness, an approving witness,
At least a tame one!

RABY. Percy came, it is true,
A constant, tender, but a guiltless lover.

DOUGLAS. I shall grow mad indeed! a guiltless lover!
Percy, the guiltless lover of my wife!

RABY. He knew, not she was married.

DOUGLAS. How? is it possible?

RABY. Douglas, it is true; both, both were innocent:
He, of her marriage; she, of his return.

BIRTHA. But now, when we believed thee dead, she vowed
Never to see thy rival. Instantly,
Not in a start of momentary passion,
But with a martyr's dignity and calmness,
She bade me bring the poison.

DOUGLAS. Had thou done it,
Despair had been my portion! Fly good Birtha,
Find out the suffering saint -- describe my penitence,
And paint my vast extravagance of fondness,
Tell her I love, as never mortal loved --
Tell her I know her virtues, and adore them --
Tell her I come, but dare not seek here presence,
Till she pronounce my pardon.

BIRTHA. I obey.
Exit Birtha.
RABY. My child is innocent! ye choirs of saints,
Catch the blessed sounds -- my child is innocent!

DOUGLAS. O I will kneel, and sue for her forgiveness,
And thou shall help me plead the cause of love,
And thou shall weep -- she cannot sure refuse,
A kneeling husband, and a weeping father.
Thy venerable cheek is wet already.

RABY. Douglas! it is the dew of grateful joy!
My child is innocent! I now would die,
Lest fortune should grow weary of her kindness
And grudge me this short transport.

DOUGLAS. Where, where is she?
My fond impatience brooks not her delay;
Quick let me find her, hush her troubled soul,
And sooth her into peace! -- She comes, she comes,
To crown my pardon and reward my love!

Enter Birtha. BIRTHA. O horror; horror, horror!

DOUGLAS. Ah what mean thou?

BIRTHA. Elwina -- Douglas speak --
Her grief wrought up to frenzy,
She has, in her delirium swallowed poison.

RABY. Frenzy and poison!

DOUGLAS. Both a husband's gift;
But thus I do her justice.

As Douglas goes to stab himself enter Elwina distracted, her hair dishevelled,
Percy's Scarf in her hand. ELWINA. (goes up to Douglas.) What blood again? We
cannot kill him twice
Soft, soft -- no violence -- he is dead already; --
I did it -- Yes -- I drowned him with my tears;
But hide the cruel deed! I Will scratch him out
A shallow grave, and lay the green Sod on it;
Aye -- and I Will bind the wild briar over the turf,
And plant a Willow there, a weeping Willow --
She sits on the ground. But look you tell not Douglas, he will disturb him,
He Will pluck the willow up -- and plant a thorn,
He will not let me sit upon his grave,
And sing all day, and weep, and pray all night.

RABY. Do thou not know me?

ELWINA. Yes -- I do remember
You had a harmless lamb.

RABY. I had indeed!

ELWINA. From all the flock you chose her out a Mate,
In sooth a fair one, you bid her love it,
But while the Shepherd slept, the Wolf devoured it.

RABY. My heart will break. This is too much, too much.

ELWINA. (smiling.) O 'twas a cordial draught -- I drank it all.

RABY. What means my child?

DOUGLAS. The poison -- Oh the poison!
Thou dear wronged innocence --

ELWINA. Off -- murderer, off!
Do not defile me with those crimson hands.
(Shows the Scarf.) This is his winding Sheet -- I Will wrap him in it --
I wrought for my love -- there -- now see I Have dressed him.
How brave he looks! my father will forgive him,
He dearly loved him once -- but that is over.
See where he comes -- beware my gallant Percy,
Ah! come not here, this is the cave of Death,
And there is the dark, dark Palace of Revenge!
See, the pale king sits on his blood-stained throne!
He points to me -- I come, I come, I come.
(She faints, they run to her, Douglas takes up his Sword, and stabs himself.


DOUGLAS. Thus, thus I follow thee.

EDRIC. Hold thy rash hand.

DOUGLAS. It is too late. No remedy but this,
Could medicine a disease so desperate.

RABY. Ah she revives!

DOUGLAS. (raising himself.) She lives? bear, bear me to her!
We shall be happy yet.
He struggles to get to her, but sinks down. It will not be --
O for a last embrace -- Alas I faint --
She lives -- Now death is terrible indeed --
Fair Spirit how I loved thee -- O -- Elwina!
Dies.
ELWINA. Where have I been? The damps of death are on me.

RABY. Look up, my child; O do not leave me thus;
Pity the anguish of thy aged father.
Have thou forgot me?

ELWINA. No -- You are my father?
O you are kindly come to close my eyes,
And take the kiss of death from my cold lips.

RABY. Do we meet thus?

ELWINA. We soon shall meet in peace.
I Have but a faint remembrance of the past --
But something tells me -- O those painful struggles!
Raise me a little -- there --
She sees the body of Douglas. What sight is that?
A sword, and bloody? Ah! and Douglas murdered?

EDRIC. Convinced too late of your unequaled virtues,
And wrung with deep compunction for your wrongs,
By his own hand the wretched Douglas fell.

ELWINA. This adds another, sharper pang to death.
O thou Eternal! take him to thy mercy,
Nor let this sin be on his head, or mine!

RABY. I have undone you all -- the crime is mine!
O thou poor injured saint, forgive thy father,
He kneels to his wronged child.

ELWINA. Now you are cruel.
Come near, my father, nearer -- I would see you,
But mists and darkness cloud my failing sight.
O Death! suspend thy rights for one short moment,
'Till I have taken a father's last embrace --
A father's blessing. -- Once -- and now it is over.
Receive me to thy mercy -- gracious heaven.

She dies. RABY. She Is gone! for ever gone! Cold, dead and cold,
Am I a father? Fathers love their children --
I murder mine! With impious pride I snatched
The bolt of vengeance from the hand of heaven.
My punishment is great -- but Oh! it is just.
My soul submissive bows. A righteous god
Has made my crime become my chastisement!

End of the Fifth ACT.
Lately Published by the same AUTHOR.
1. SIR ELDRED of the BOWER and THE BLEEDING ROCK, Legendary Tales. A New
Edition. Price 1s. 6d. 2. The SEARCH after HAPPINESS. A Pastoral Drama. The
Sixth Edition. Price 1s. 6d. 3. ESSAYS on VARIOUS SUBJECTS, principally
designed for YOUNG LADIES. Price 3s. sewed. 4. An ODE to DRAGON.
Prited for T. CADELL, in the Strand.


