THE BEAUTIES OF STERN: INCLUDING ALL HIS PATHETIC TALES, AND MOST
DISTINGUISHED OBSERVATIONS ON LIFE. SELECTED FOR THE HEART OF SENSIBILITY.

Dear SENSIBILITY! source inexhausted of all that is precious in our joys, or
costly in our sorrows! thou chainest thy martyr down upon his bed of straw! --
and it is thou who lifts him up to HEAVEN! -- Eternal fountain of our feelings!
it is here I trace thee. SEN. JOURNEY, P. 226. A NEW EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. DAVIES, RUSSEL STREET, COVENT GARDEN; J. RIDLEY, ST.
JAMES'S-STREET; W. FLEXNEY, HOLBORN: J. SEWEL, CORNHILL; AND G. KEARSLEY,
FLEET STREET. -- 1782.

TO HIS IMPERIAL MAJESTY, JOSEPH THE SECOND, EMPEROR OF GERMANY.
SIR,
WHEN I compiled this little volume from the writings of one of the first
ornaments of Britain, and of human genius, I did not look out long for a
protector for the inestimable treasure. To whom, said all the powers of
Feeling, kindling within me -- to whom should these pages that breathe the
spirit of humanity in such a supereminent degree be addressed, but to that
illustrious Monarch whose benignity and unparalelled philanthropy has given a
charm to every enlightened quarter of the universe!

When your Majesty retires from the busy scenes of Royalty, to commune with
nature and her eminent works, of which study your distinguished actions speak
you an admirable proficient, this volume will prove itself an entertaining and
excellent companion.

I rejoice in this opportunity of testifying my respect for such transcendent
goodness! and believe me to be with the most profound zeal,

Sir, Your Majesty's most Obedient, and most Devoted, Humble Servant, W. H.
London, Feb. 13, 1782.
PREFACE.
A SELECTION of the Beauties of Stern is what has been looked for by a number
of his admirers for some time; well knowing they would form such a Volume as
perhaps this, nor any other language, could equal. Indeed it was highly
necessary on a particular score to make this selection: the chaste lovers of
literature were not only deprived themselves of the pleasure and instruction so
conspicuous in this magnificent assemblage of Genius, but their rising
offspring, whose minds it would polish to the highest perfection were prevented
from tasting the enjoyment likewise. The chaste part of the world complained so
loudly of the obscenity which taints the writings of Stern, (and, indeed, with
some reason), that those readers under their immediate inspection were not
suffered to penetrate beyond the title page of his Tristram Shandy; -- his
Sentimental Journey, in some degree, escaped the general censure; though that
is not entirely free of the fault complained of.

To accommodate those who are strangers to the first of these works, I have, (I
hope with some degree of judgment), extracted the most distinguished passages
on which the sun of Genius shines so resplendent, that all his competitors, in
his manner of writing, are lost in an eclipse of affectation and unnatural
rhapsody. I intended to have arranged them alphabetically, till I found the
stories of Le Fever, the Monk, and Maria, would be too closely connected for
the feeling reader, and would wound the bosom of sensibility too deeply: I
therefore placed them at a proper distance from each other. -- I need not
explain my motive for introducing the Sermon on the abuses of Conscience, with
the effusions of humanity throughout it; every parent and governor, I believe,
(unless a bigoted Papist), will thank me. -- I wish I could insuse the
pleasure that attended me in compiling this little work, into the breast of the
reader, yet unacquainted with Stern -- as it is, I promise him, the hours he
may devote to this great master of nature and the passions, will be marked with
more felicity, than any, since genius led him to the love of letters.

The Author's opinion of many parts of the sacred writings may with truth be
applied to a great part of his own, that there is to be found in them, "Sublime
and noble passages, which, by the rules of sound criticism and reason, may be
demonstrated to be truly eloquent and beautiful."

"There is something in them so thoroughly affecting, and so noble and sublime
withal, that one might challenge the writings of the most celebrated orators of
antiquity to produce any thing like them."

Before I conclude, I cannot help observing with an excellent writer, that,
"there are minds upon which the rays of fancy may be pointed without effect,
and which no fire of sentiment can agitate, or exalt." -- May such minds never
violate the Beanties of Stern; but let them be, while the virtues find
sanctuary in the hearts of the amiable -- their amusement only.

W. H.

CONTENTS.
A.
THE Ass, Page. 39 The dead Ass, Page. 131 Humouring immoral Appetites, Page.
134 Tribute of Affection, Page. 175
B.
Remainder of the Story of Trim's Brother, Page. 73 The Beguine, Page. 79
Beauty, Page. 214
C.
Compassion, Page. 123 Consolation, Page. 144 The Captive, Page. 147 Charity,
Page. 153 Compassion, Page. 170 A Subject for Compassion, Page. 167 Crosses in
Life, Page. 176 The Contrast, Page. 177 Trim's Explanation of the Fifth
Commandment, Page. 187 Covetousness, Page. 208 Contentment, Page. 217
D.
The Dwarf, Page. 149 Reflections on Death, Page. 157 Difference in Men, Page.
141 Defamation, Page. 201 Dissatisfaction, Page. 205 Distress, Page. 216
Corporal Trim's Reflections on Death, Page. 223
E.
Ejaculation, Page. 185 Eloquence, Page. 203 Evils, Page. 218
F.
Fellow-Feeling, Page. 120 Frailty, Page. 129 Feeling and Beneficence, Page.
160 Fatality, Page. 185 Friendship, Page. 189 Flattery, Page. 190 Forgiveness,
Page. 192 Favors, Page. 193 Rustic Felicity, Page. 190
G.
The Grace, Page. 104 Yorick's Opinion of Gravity, Page. 182 Ostentatious
Generosity, Page. 200 Generosity, Page. 203
H.
Cottage Happiness, Page. 106 Happiness, Page. 171 Conjugal Happiness, Page.
186 Health, Page. 188 Affected Honesty, Page. 198 Humility, Page. 210 Humility
contrasted with Pride, Page. 211 Hunger, Page. 216
I.
Illusion, Page. 106 Insensibility, Page. 130 Indolence, Page. 143 Power of
slight Incidents, Page. 176 Imposture, Page. 217
J.
Captain Shandy's Justification of his own Principles and Conduct, in wishing
to continue the War, Page. 137
L.
The Story of Le Fever, Page. 3 Le Dimanche, Page. 108 Life, Page. 187 Love,
Page. 188
M.
Maria, Page. 89 The Monk, Page. 112 House of Mourning, Page. 125 The
Unmerciful Man, Page. 122 Mercy, Page. 141 Effects of Misfortune, Page. 181
Reflection upon Man, Page. 183
O.
Opposition, Page. 136 Pleasures of Observation and Study, Page. 159 Oppression
Vanquished, Page. 164 Opinion, Page. 200 Rooted Opinion not easily Eradicated,
Page. 206 Oppression, Page. 219 Against Hasty Opinions, Page. 196
P.
The Preceptor, Page. 1 The Pulse, Page. 23 The Pie-Man, Page. 32 Pity, Page.
123 Perfection, Page. 191 Affected Piety, Page. 198 Patience and Contentment,
Page. 110 Pride, Page. 213
R.
Revenge, Page. 184 Religion, Page. 202 Mr. Shandy's Resignation for the Loss
of his Son, Page. 230
S.
The Sword, Page. 36 The Sermon, Page. 43 Sensibility, Page. 100 The Supper,
Page. 101 Slander, Page. 124 The Starling, Page. 144 Slavery, Page. 163
Selfishness and Meanness, Page. 180 Solitude, Page. 189 Solitude, Page. 190
Affected Sanctity, Page. 144 Society, Page. 203 Sorrow and Heaviness of Heart,
Page. 205 Sin, Page. 220 Sincerity, Page. 221
T.
Tribulation, Page. 189 Tyranny, Page. 202
U.
Uncertainty, Page. 130 Unity, Page. 135
V.
Vice not without Use, Page. 181 Vanity, Page. 197 Virtue and Vice, Page. 220
W.
Wisdom, Page. 221 Ditto, Page. 215
ADVERTISEMENT.
IT is necessary to acquaint the Reader, that the references in this volume are
marked from the last elegant London edition of Mr. Sterne's works in ten
volumes. Price two Guineas.

THE BEAUTIES OF STERN.
THE PRECEPTOR.
YOU see it is high time, said my father, addressing himself equally to my uncle
Toby and Yorick, to take this young creature out of these womens' hands, and
put him into those of a private governor.

Now as I consider the person who is to be about my son, as the mirror in which
he is to view himself from morning to night, and by which he is to adjust his
looks, his carriage, and perhaps the inmost sentiments of his heart; -- I would
have one, Yorick, if possible, polished at all points, fit for my child to look
into.

There is, continued my father, a certain mien and motion of the body and all
its parts, both in acting and speaking, which argues a man well within. There
are a thousand unnoticed openings, continued my father, which let a penetrating
eye at once into a man's soul; and I maintain it, added he, that a man of sense
does not lay down his hat in coming into a room, -- or take it up in going out
of it, but something escapes, which discovers him.

I will have him, continued my father, cheerful, facete, jovial; at the same
time, prudent, attentive to business, vigilant, acute, argute, inventive, quick
in resolving doubts and speculative questions; -- he shall be wise and
judicious, and learned: -- And why not humble, and moderate, and gentle
tempered, and good? said Yorick; -- And why not, cried my uncle Toby, free, and
generous, and bountiful, and brave? -- He shall, my dear Toby, replied my
father, getting up and shaking him by his hand. -- Then, brother Shandy,
answered my uncle Toby, raising himself off the chair, and laying down his pipe
to take hold of my father's other hand, -- I humbly beg I may recommend poor Le
Fever's son to you; -- a tear of joy of the first water sparkled in my uncle
Toby's eye, -- and another, the fellow to it, in the Coporal's, as the
proposition was made; -- you will see why when you read Le Fever's story.

THE STORY OF LE FEVER.
IT was some time in the summer of that year in which Dendermond was taken by
the allies; when my uncle Toby was one evening getting his supper, with Trim
sitting behind him at a small sideboard, -- I say sitting -- for in
consideration of the Corporal's lame knee (which sometimes gave him exquisite
pain) -- when my uncle Toby dined or supped alone he would never suffer the
Corporal to stand; and the poor fellow's veneration for his master was such,
that with a proper artillery, my uncle Toby could have taken Dendermond itself,
with less trouble than he was able to gain this point over him; for many a time
when my uncle Toby supposed the Corporal's leg was at rest, he would look back,
and detect him standing behind him with the most dutiful respect: this bred
more little squabbles betwixt them, than all other causes for five-and-twenty
years together -- But this is neither here nor there -- why do I mention it? --
Ask my pen, -- it governs me, -- I govern not it.

He was one evening sitting thus at his supper, when the landlord of a little
inn in the village came into the parlour with an empty phial in his hand, to
beg a glass or two of sack; It Is for a poor gentleman, -- I think of the army,
said the landlord, who has been taken ill at my house four days ago, and has
never held up his head since, or had a desire to taste any thing, till just
now, that he has a fancy for a glass of sack and a thin toast, -- " I think,"
says he, taking his hand from his forehead, " it would comfort me." --

-- If I could neither beg, borrow, or buy such a thing, -- added the landlord,
-- I would almost steal it for the poor gentleman, he is so ill. -- I hope in
God he will still mend, continued he, -- we are all of us concerned for him.

Thou art a good-natured soul, I will answer for thee, cried my uncle Toby; and
thou shall drink the poor gentleman's health in a glass of sack thyself, -- and
take a couple of bottles with my service, and tell him he is heartily welcome
to them, and to a dozen more if they will do him good.

Though I am persuaded, said my uncle Toby, as the landlord shut the door, he
is a very compassionate fellow -- Trim, -- yet I cannot help entertaining a
high opinion of his guest too; there must be something more than common in him,
that in so short a time should win so much upon the affections of his host; --
And of his whole family, added the Corporal, for they are all concerned for
him. -- Step after him, said my uncle Toby, -- do Trim, -- and ask if he knows
his name.

-- I have quite forgot it, truly, said the landlord, coming back into the
parlour with the Corporal, -- but I can ask his son again: -- Has he a son with
him then? said my uncle Toby. -- A boy, replied the landlord, of about eleven
or twelve years of age; -- but the poor creature has tasted almost as little as
his father; he does nothing but mourn and lament for him night and day: -- He
has not stirred from the bedside these two days.

My uncle Toby laid down his knife and fork, and thrust his plate from before
him, as the landlord gave him the account; and Trim, without being ordered,
took away, without saying one word, and in a few minutes after brought him his
pipe and tobacco.

Trim! said my uncle Toby, I have a project in my head, as it is a bad night,
of wrapping myself up warm in my roquelaure, and paying a visit to this poor
gentleman. -- Your honor's roquelaure, replied the Corporal, has not once been
had on, since the night before your honor received your wound, when we mounted
guard in the trenches before the gate of St. Nicholas; -- and besides, it is so
cold and rainy a night, that what with the roquelaure, and what with the
weather, it will be enough to give your honor your death, and bring on your
honor's torment in your groin. I fear so, replied my uncle Toby; but I am not
at rest in my mind, Trim, since the account the landlord has given me. -- I
wish I had not known so much of this affair, -- added my uncle Toby, -- or that
I had known more of it: -- How shall we manage it? Leave it, an't please your
honor, to me, quoth the Corporal; -- I Will take my hat and stick and go to the
house and reconnoitre, and act accordingly; and I will bring your honor a full
account in an hour. -- Thou shall go, Trim, said my uncle Toby, and here is a
shilling sor thee to drink with his servant. -- I shall get it all out of him
said the Corporal, shutting the door.

It was not till my uncle Toby had knocked the ashes out of his third pipe,
that Corporal Trim returned from the inn, and gave him the following account.

I despaired, at first, said the Corporal, of being able to bring back your
honor any kind of intelligence concerning the poor sick Lieutenant -- Is he in
the army, then? said my uncle Toby -- He is: said the Corporal -- And in what
regiment? said my uncle Toby -- I Will tell your honor, replied the Corporal,
every thing straight forwards, as I learnt it. -- Then, Trim, I will fill
another pipe, said my uncle Toby, and not interrupt thee till thou have done;
so sit down at thy ease, Trim, in the window-seat, and begin thy story again.
The Corporal made his old bow, which generally spoke as plain as a bow could
speak it -- Your honor is good: -- And having done that, he sat down, as he
was ordered, -- and began the story to my uncle Toby over again in pretty near
the same words.

I despaired at first, said the Corporal, of being able to bring back any
intelligence to your honor, about the Lieutenant and his son; for when I asked
where his servant was, from whom I made myself sure of knowing every thing
which was proper to be asked, -- That Is a right distinction, Trim, said my
uncle Toby -- I was answered, an' please your honor, that he had no servant
with him; -- that he had come to the inn with hired horses, which, upon finding
himself unable to proceed, (to join, I suppose, the regiment), he had dismissed
the morning after he came. -- If I get better, my dear, said he, as he gave his
purse to his son to pay the man, -- we can hire horses from hence. -- But alas!
the poor gentleman will never get from hence, said the landlady to me, -- for I
heard the death-watch all night long; -- and when he dies, the youth, his son,
will certainly die with him; for he is brokenhearted already.

I was hearing this account, continued the Corporal, when the youth came into
the kitchen, to order the thin toast the landlord spoke of; -- but I will do it
for my father myself, said the youth. -- Pray let me save you the trouble,
young gentleman, said I, taking up a fork for the purpose, and offering him my
chair to sit down upon by the fire, whilst I did it. -- I believe, Sir, said
he, very modestly, I can please him best myself. -- I am sure, said I, his
honor will not like the toast the worse for being toasted by an old soldier.
-- The youth took hold of my hand, and instantly burst into tears. -- Poor
youth! said my uncle Toby, -- he has been bred up from an infant in the army,
and the name of a soldier, Trim, sounded in his ears like the name of a friend;
-- I wish I had him here.

-- I never in the longest march, said the Corporal, had so great a mind to my
dinner, as I had to cry with him for company: -- What could be the matter with
me, an' please your honor? Nothing in the world, Trim, said my uncle Toby,
blowing his nose, -- but that thou art a good natured fellow.

When I gave him the toast, Continued the Corporal, I thought it was proper to
tell him I was Captain Shandy's servant, and that your honor (though a
stranger) was extremely concerned for his father; -- and that if there was any
thing in your house or cellar -- (And thou might have added my purse too,
said my uncle Toby -- he was heartily welcome to it: -- He made a very low bow,
(which was meant to your honor), but no answer, -- for his heart was full --
so he went up stairs with the toast; -- I warrant you, my dear, said I, as I
opened the kitchen-door, your father will be well again. -- Mr. Yorick's curate
was smoking a pipe by the kitchen fire, -- but said not a word good or bad to
comsort the youth. -- I thought it wrong; added the Corporal -- I think so too,
said my uncle Toby.

When the Lieutenant had taken his glass of sack and toast, he felt himself a
little revived, and sent down into the kitchen, to let me know, that in about
ten minutes he should be glad if I would step up stairs. -- I believe, said the
landlord, he is going to say his prayers, -- for there was a book laid upon the
chair by his bedside, and as I shut the door, I saw his son take up a cushion.
--

I thought, said the curate, that you gentlemen of the army, Mr. Trim, never
said your prayers at all. -- I heard the poor gentleman say his prayers last
night, said the landlady, very devoutly, and with my own ears, or I could not
have believed it. -- Are you sure of it, replied the curate. -- A soldier, an'
please your reverence, said I, prays as often (of his own accord) as a parson;
-- and when he is fighting for his king, and for his own life, and for his
honor too, he has the most reason to pray to God, of any one in the whole
world. -- 'Twas well said of thee, Trim, said my uncle Toby. -- But when a
soldier, said I, an' please your reverence, has been standing for twelve hours
together in the trenches, up to his knees in cold water, -- or engaged, said I,
for months together in long and dangerous marches; harassed, perhaps, in his
rear today; -- harassing others tomorrow; -- detached here; -- countermanded
there; -- resting this night out upon his arms; -- beat up in his shirt the
next; -- benumbed in his joints; -- perhaps without straw in his tent to kneel
on; -- must say his prayers how and when he can. -- I believe, said I, -- for I
was piqued, quoth the Corporal, for the reputation of the army, I believe an'
please your reverence, said I, that when a soldier gets time to pray, -- he
prays as heartily as a parson, -- though not with all his fuss and hypocrisy.
-- Thou should not have said that, Trim, said my uncle Toby, -- for God only
knows who is a hypocrite, and who is not: -- At the great and general review of
us all, Corporal, at the day of judgment, (and not till then) -- it will be
seen who has done their duties in this world, -- and who has not; and we shall
be advanced, Trim, accordingly. -- I hope we shall, said Trim, -- It is in the
Scripture, said my uncle Toby; and I will show it thee tomorrow: -- In the
mean time we may depend upon it, Trim, for our comfort, said my uncle Toby,
that God Almighty is so good and just a Governor of the world, that if we have
but done our duties in it, -- it will never be enquired into, whether we have
done them in a red coat or a black one: -- I hope not; said the Corporal -- But
go on, Trim, said my uncle Toby, with the story.

When I went up, continued the Corporal, into the Lieutenant's room, which I
did not do till the expiration of the ten minutes, -- he was lying in his bed,
with his head raised upon his hand, with his elbow upon the pillow, and a clean
white cambrick handkerchief beside it: -- The youth was just stooping down to
take up the cushion, upon which I supposed he had been kneeling, -- the book
was laid upon the bed, -- and as he rose, in taking up the cushion with one
hand, he reached out his other to take it away at the same time. Let it remain
there, my dear, said the Lieutenant.

He did not offer to speak to me, till I had walked up close to his bedside:
-- If you are Captain Shandy's servant, said he, you must present my thanks to
your master. with my little boy's thanks along with them, for his courtesy to
me; -- if he was of Levens's -- said the Lieutenant. -- I told him your honor
was -- Then, said he, I served three campaigns with him in Flanders, and
remember him, -- but it is most likely, as I had not the honor of any
acquaintance with him, that he knows nothing of me. -- You will tell him,
however, that the person his good nature has laid under obligations to him, is
one Le Fever, a Lieutenant in Angus's -- but he knows me not, -- said he, a
second time, musing; -- possibly he may my story -- added he -- pray tell the
Captain, I was the Ensign at Breda, whose wife was most unfortunately killed
with a musket shot, as she lay in my arms in my tent. -- I remember the story,
an' please your honor, said I, very well. -- Do you so? said he, wiping his
eyes with his handkerchief, -- then well may I. -- In saying this, he drew a
little ring out of his bosom, which seemed tied with a black ribband about his
neck, and kissed it twice -- Here, Billy, said he, -- the boy flew across the
room to the bedside, -- and falling down upon his knee, took the ring in his
hand, and kissed it too, -- then kissed his father, and sat down upon the bed
and wept.

I wish, said my uncle Toby, with a deep sigh, -- I wish, Trim, I was asleep.

Your honor, replied the Corporal, is too much concerned; -- shall I pour your
honor out a glass of sack to your pipe? -- Do, Trim, said my uncle Toby.

I remember, said my uncle Toby, sighing again, the story of the Ensign and his
wife, -- and particularly well that he, as well as she, upon some account or
other, (I forget what,) was universally pitied by the whole regiment; -- but
finish the story thou art upon: -- It Is finished already, said the Corporal, --
for I could stay no longer, -- so wished his honor a good night; young Le
Fever rose from off the bed, and saw me to the bottom of the stairs; and as we
went down together, told me, they had come from Ireland, and were on their
route to join the regiment in Flanders. -- But alas! said the Corporal, -- the
Lieutenant's last day's march is over. -- Then what is to become of his poor
boy? cried my uncle Toby.

It was to my uncle Toby's eternal honor, that he set aside every other
concern, and only considered how he himself should relieve the poor Lieutenant
and his son.

-- That kind BEING, who is a friend to the friendless, shall recompense thee
for this.

Thou have left this matter short, said my uncle Toby to the Corporal, as he
was putting him to bed, -- and I will tell thee in what, Trim -- In the first
place, when thou made an offer of my services to Le Fever, -- as sickness and
traveling are both expensive, and thou know he was but a poor Lieutenant,
with a son to subsist as well as himself out of his pay, -- that thou did not
make an offer to him of my purse; because, had he stood in need, thou know,
Trim, he had been as welcome to it as myself. -- Your honor knows, said the
Corporal, I had no orders; -- True, quoth my uncle Toby, -- thou did very
right, Trim, as a soldier, -- but certainly very wrong as a man.

In the second place, for which, indeed, thou have the same excuse, continued
my uncle Toby, -- when thou offeredst him whatever was in my house, -- thou
should have offered him my house too: A sick brother officer should have the
best quarters, Trim, and if we had him with us, -- we could tend and look to
him: -- Thou art an excellent nurse thyself, Trim, and what with thy care of
him, and the old woman's, and his boy's, and mine together, we might recruit
him again at once, and set him upon his legs. --

-- In a fortnight or three weeks, added my uncle Toby, smiling, -- he might
march. -- He will never march, an' please your honor, in this world, said the
Corporal: -- He will march; said my uncle Toby, rising up from the side of the
bed, with one shoe off: -- An' please your honor, said the Corporal, he will
never march, but to his grave: -- He shall march, cried my uncle Toby, marching
the foot which had a shoe on, though without advancing an inch, -- he shall
march to his regiment. -- He cannot stand it, said the Corporal; -- He shall be
supported, said my uncle Toby; -- He Will drop at last, said the Corporal, and
what will become of his boy? -- He shall not drop, said my uncle Toby, firmly.
-- A-well-o'day, -- do what we can for him, said Trim, maintaining his point,
-- the poor soul will die: -- He shall not die, by G --,cried my uncle Toby.

-- The ACCUSING SPIRIT, which flew up to heaven's chancery with the oath,
blushed as he gave it in; -- and the RECORDING ANGEL, as he wrote it down,
dropped a tear upon the word, and blotted it out for ever.

-- My uncle Toby went to his bureau, -- put his purse into his breeches
pocket, and having ordered the Corporal to go early in the morning for a
physician, -- he went to bed and fell asleep.

The sun looked bright the morning after, to every eye in the village but Le
Fever's and his afflicted son's; the hand of death pressed heavy upon his
eyelids, -- and hardly could the wheel at the cistern turn round its circle,
-- when my uncle Toby, who had rose up an hour before his wonted time, entered
the Lieutenant's room, and without preface or apology, sat himself down upon
the chair by the bedside, and independently of all modes and customs, opened
the curtain in the manner an old friend and brother officer would have done it,
and asked him how he did, -- how he had rested in the night, -- what was his
complaint, -- where was his pain, -- and what he could do to help him: -- and
without giving him time to answer any one of the enquiries, went on and told
him of the little plan which he had been concerting with the Corporal the night
before for him. --

-- You shall go home directly, Le Fever, said my uncle Toby, to my house, --
and we'll send for a doctor to see what is the matter, -- and we'll have an
apothecary, -- and the Corporal shall be your nurse; -- and I Will be your
servant, Le Fever.

There was a frankness in my uncle Toby, -- not the effect of familiarity, --
but the cause of it, -- which let you at once into his soul, -- and showed you
the goodness of his nature; to this, there was something in his looks, and
voice, and manner, superadded, which eternally beckoned to the unfortunate to
come and take shelter under him; so that before my uncle Toby had half finished
the kind offers he was making to the father, had the son insensibly pressed up
close to his knees, and had taken hold of the breast of his coat, and was
pulling it toward him. -- The blood and spirits of Le Fever, which were waxing
cold and slow within him, and were retreating to their last citadel, the heart,
-- rallied back, -- the film forsook his eyes for a moment, -- he looked up
wishfully in my uncle Toby's face, -- then cast a look upon his boy, -- and
that ligament, fine as it was, -- was never broken. --

Nature instantly ebbed again, -- the film returned to its place, -- the pulse
fluttered -- stopped -- went on -- throbb'd -- stopped again -- moved --
stopped -- shall I go on? -- No.

All that is necessary to be added is as follows --

That my uncle Toby, with young Le Fever in his hand, attended the poor
Lieutenant, as chief mourners, to his grave.

When my uncle Toby had turned every thing into money, and settled all accounts
betwixt the agent of the regiment and Le Fever, and betwixt Le Fever and all
mankind, -- there remained nothing more in my uncle Toby's hands, than an old
regimental coat and a sword; so that my uncle Toby found little or no
opposition from the world in taking administration. The coat my uncle Toby gave
the Corpora; -- Wear it, Trim, said my uncle Toby as long as it will hold
together, for the sake of the poor Lieutenant -- And this, said my uncle Toby,
taking up the sword in his hand, and drawing it out of the scabbard as he spoke
-- and this, Le Fever, I Will save for thee -- it is all the fortune, continued my
uncle Toby, hanging it up upon a crook, and pointing to it, -- it is all the
fortune, my dear Le Fever, which God has lest thee; but if he has given thee a
heart to fight thy way with it in the world, -- and thou do it like a man of
honor, -- it is enough for us.

As soon as my uncle Toby had laid a foundation, he sent him to a public
school, where, excepting Whitsuntide and Christmas, at which times the Corporal
was punctually dispatched for him, -- he remained to the spring of the year,
seventeen; when the stories of the Emperor's sending his army into Hungary
against the Turks, kindling a spark of fire in his bosom, he left his Greek and
Latin without leave, and throwing himself upon his knees before my uncle Toby,
begged his father's sword, and my uncle Toby's leave along with it, to go and
try his fortune under Eugene. -- Twice did my uncle Toby forget his wound, and
cry out, Le Fever! I will go with thee, and thou shall fight beside me -- And
twice he laid his hand upon his groin, and hung down his head in sorrow and
disconsolation. --

My uncle Toby took down the sword from the crook, where it had hung untouched
ever since the Lieutenant's death, and delivered it to the Corporal to brighten
up; -- and having detained Le Fever a single fortnight to equip him, and
contract for his passage to Leghorn, -- he put the sword into his hand, -- If
thou art brave, Le Fever, said my uncle Toby, this will not fail thee, -- but
Fortune, said he, (musing a little) -- Fortune may -- And if she does, -- added
my uncle Toby, embracing him, come back again to me, Le Fever, and we will
shape thee another course.

The greatest injury could not have oppressed the heart of Le Fever more than
my uncle Toby's paternal kindness; -- he parted from my uncle Toby, as the best
of sons from the best of fathers -- both dropped tears -- and as my uncle Toby
gave him his last kiss, he slipped sixty guineas, tied up in an old purse of
his father's, in which was his mother's ring, into his hand, -- and bid God
bless him.

Le Fever got up to the Imperial army just time enough to try what metal his
sword was made of, at the defeat of the Turks before Belgrade; but a series of
unmerited mischances had pursued him from that moment, and trod close upon his
heels for four years together after: he had withstood these bussetings to the
last, till sickness overtook him at Marseilles, from whence he wrote my uncle
Toby word, he had lost his time, his services, his health, and, in short, every
thing but his sword; -- and was waiting for the first ship to return back to him

Le Fever was hourly expected; and was uppermost in my uncle Toby's mind all
the time my father was giving him and Yorick a description of what kind of a
person he would choose for a preceptor to me: but as my uncle Toby thought my
father at first somewhat fanciful in the accomplishments he required, he
forbore mentioning Le Fever's name, -- till the character, by Yorick's
interposition, ending unexpectedly, in one, who should be gentle tempered, and
generous, and good, it impressed the image of Le Fever, and his interest upon
my uncle Toby so forcibly, he rose instantly off his chair; and laying down his
pipe, in order to take hold of both my father's hands -- I beg, brother Shandy,
said my uncle Toby, I may recommend poor Le Fever's son to you -- I beseech
you, do, added Yorick -- He has a good heart, said my uncle Toby -- And a brave
one too, an' please your honor, said the Corporal.

-- The best hearts, Trim, are ever the bravest, replied my uncle Toby.

T. SHANDY. VOL. III. CHAP. 49. THE PULSE.
PARIS.

HAIL ye small sweet courtesies of life, for smooth do ye make the road of it!
like grace and beauty which beget inclinations to love at first sight: it is ye
who open this door and let the stranger in.

-- Pray, Madame, said I, have the goodness to tell me which way I must turn to
go to the Opera Comique: -- Most willingly, Monsieur, said she, laying aside
her work --

I had given a cast with my eye into half a dozen shops as I came along in
search of a face not likely to be disordered by such an interruption; till at
last, this hitting my fancy, I had walked in.

She was working a pair of ruffles as she sat in a low chair on the far side of
the shop facing the door --

-- Tres volontiers: most willingly, said she, laying her work down upon a
chair next her, and rising up from the low chair she was sitting in, with so
cheerful a movement and so cheerful a look, that had I been laying out fifty
louis d'ors with her, I should have said -- "This woman is grateful."

You must turn, Monsieur, said she, going with me to the door of the shop, and
pointing the way down the street I was to take -- you must turn first to your
left hand -- mais prenez guard -- there are two turns; and be so good as to
take the second -- then go down a little way and you will see a church, and when
you are past it, give yourself the trouble to turn directly to the right, and
that will lead you to the foot of the pont neuf, which you must cross -- and
there any one will do himself the pleasure to show you --

She repeated her instructions three times over to me with the same good
natured patience the third time as the first; -- and if tones and manners have
a meaning, which certainly they have, unless to hearts which shut them out --
she seemed really interested, that I should not lose myself.

I will not suppose it was the woman's beauty, notwithstanding she was the
handsomest Grisset, I think, I ever saw, which had much to do with the sense I
had of her courtesy; only I remember, when I told her how much I was obliged to
her, that I looked very full in her eyes, -- and that I repeated my thanks as
often as she had done her instructions.

I had not got ten paces from the door, before I found I had forgot every
tittle of what she had said -- so looking back, and seeing her still standing
in the door of the shop as if to look whether I went right or not -- I returned
back, to ask her whether the first turn was to my right or left -- for that I
had absolutely forgot. -- Is it possible! said she, half laughing. -- It Is very
possible, replied I, when a man is thinking more of a woman, than of her good
advice.

As this was the real truth -- she took it, as every woman takes a matter of
right, with a slight courtesy.

-- Attendez, said she, laying her hand upon my arm to detain me, whilst she
called a lad out of the back-shop to get ready a parcel of gloves. am just
going to send him, said she, with a packet into that quarter, and if you will
have the complaisance to step in, it will be ready in a moment, and he shall
attend you to the place. -- So I walked in with her to the far side of the
shop, and taking up the ruffle in my hand which she laid upon the chair, as if
I had a mind to sit, she sat down herself in her low chair, and I instantly sat
myself down beside her.

-- He will be ready, Monsieur, said she, in a moment -- And in that moment,
replied I, most willingly would I say something very civil to you for all these
courtesies. Any one may do a casual act of good nature, but a continuation of
them shows it is a part of the temperature; and certainly, added I, if it is
the same blood which comes from the heart, which descends to the extremes
(touching her wrist), I am sure you must have one of the best pulses of any
woman in the world -- Feel it, said she, holding out her arm. So laying down my
hat, I took hold of her fingers in one hand, and applied the two sore-fingers
of my other to the artery --

-- Would to heaven! my dear Eugenius, thou had passed by, and beheld me
sitting in my black coat, and in my lack-aday-sical manner, counting the throbs
of it, one by one, with as much true devotion as if I had been watching the
critical ebb or flow of her fever -- How would thou have laughed and
moralized upon my new profession -- and thou should have laughed and
moralized on -- Trust me, my dear Eugenius, I should have said, "there are
worse occupations in this world than feeling a woman's pulse." -- But a
Grisset's! thou would have said -- and in an open shop! Yorick --

-- So much the better: for when my views are direct, Eugenius, I care not if
all the world saw me feel it.

I had counted twenty pulsations, and was going on fast toward the fortieth,
when her husband coming unexpected from a back parlour into the shop, put me a
little out of my reckoning. -- 'Twas nobody but her husband, she said, -- so I
began a fresh score -- Monsieur is so good, quoth she, as he passed by us, as
to give himself the trouble of feeling my pulse -- The husband took off his
hat, and making a bow, said I did him too much honor -- and having said that,
he put on his hat and walked out.

Good God! said I to myself, as he went out -- and can this man be the husband
of this woman?

Let it not torment the few who know what must have been the grounds of this
exclamation, if I explain it to those who do not.

In London a shopkeeper and a shop-keeper's wife seem to be one bone and one
flesh: in the several endowments of mind and body, sometimes the one, sometimes
the other has it, so as in general to be upon a par, and to tally with each
other as nearly as man and wife need to do.

In Paris, there are scarce two orders of beings more different: for the
legislative and executive powers of the shop not resting in the husband, he
seldom comes there -- in some dark and dismal room behind, he sits commerceless
in his thrum nightcap, the same rough son of Nature that Nature left him.

The genius of a people where nothing but the monarchy is salique, having ceded
this department, with sundry others, totally to the women -- by a continual
higgling with customers of all ranks and sizes from morning to night, like so
many rough pebbles shook long together in a bag, by amicable collisions they
have worn down their asperities and sharp angles, and not only become round and
smooth, but will receive, some of them, a polish like a brilliant -- Monsieur
Le Marli is little better than the stone under your foot --

-- Surely -- surely, man! it is not good for thee to sit alone -- thou wast
made for social intercourse and gentle greetings, and this improvement of our
natures from it, I appeal to, as my evidence.

-- And how does it beat, Monsieur? said she. -- With all the benignity, said
I, looking quietly in her eyes, that I expected -- She was going to say
something civil in return -- but the lad came into the shop with the gloves --
A propos, said I, I want a couple of pair myself.

The beautiful Grisset rose up when I said this, and going behind the counter,
reached down a parcel and untied it: I advanced to the side over against her:
they were all too large. The beautiful Grisset measured them one by one across
my hand -- It would not alter the dimensions -- She begged I would try a single
pair, which seemed to be the least -- She held it open -- my hand slipped into
it at once -- It will not do, said I, shaking my head a little -- No, said she,
doing the same thing.

There are certain combined looks of simple subtlety -- where whim, and sense,
and seriousness, and nonsense, are so blended, that all the languages of Babel
set loose together could not express them -- they are communicated and caught
so instantaneously, that you can scarce say which party is the infector. I
leave it to your men of words to swell pages about it -- it is enough in the
present to say again, the gloves would not do; so folding our hands within our
arms, we both loll'd upon the counter -- it was narrow, and there was just room
for the parcel to lay between us

The beautiful Grisset looked sometimes at the gloves, then side-ways to the
window, then at the gloves -- and then at me. I was not disposed to break
silence -- I followed her example: so I looked at the gloves, then to the
window, then at the gloves, and then at her -- and so on alternately.

I found I lost considerably in every attack -- she had a quick black eye, and
shot through two such long and silken eye-lashes with such penetration, that
she looked into my very heart and reins -- It may seem strange, but I could
actually feel she did --

It is no matter, said I, taking up a couple of the pairs next me, and putting
them into my pocket.

I was sensible the beautiful Grisset had not asked above a single livre above
the price -- I wished she had asked a livre more, and was puzzling my brains
how to bring the matter about -- Do you think, my dear Sir, said she, mistaking
my embarrassment, that I could ask a sous too much of a stranger -- and of a
stranger whose politeness, more than his want of gloves, has done me the honor
to lay himself at my mercy? -- M'en croyez capable? -- Faith! not I, said I;
and if you were, you are welcome -- so counting the money into her hand, and
with a lower bow than one generally makes to a shopkeeper's wife, I went out,
and her lad with his parcel followed me.

SENT. JOURNEY, PAGE, 95. THE PIE-MAN.
SEEING a man standing with a basket on the other side of a street, in
Versailles, as if he had something to sell, I bid La Fleur go up to him and
enquire for the Count de B***'s hotel.

La Fleur returned a little pale: and told me it was a Chevalier de St. Louis
selling pates -- It is impossible, La Fleur! said I. -- La Fleur could no more
account for the phenomenon than myself; but persisted in his story: he had seen
the croix set in gold, with its red ribband, he said, tied to his button-hole
-- and had looked into his basket and seen the pates which the Chevalier was
selling; so could not be mistaken in that.

Such a reverse in a man's life awakens a better principle than curiosity: I
could not help looking for some time at him as I sat in the remise -- the more
I looked at him, his croix and his basket, the stronger they wove themselves
into my brain -- I got out of the remise and went toward him.

He was begirt with a clean linen apron which fell below his knees, and with a
sort of a bib which went half way up his breast; upon the top of this, but a
little below the hem, hung his croix. His basket of little pates was covered
over with a white damask napkin; another of the same kind was spread at the
bottom; and there was a look of proprete and neatness throughout; that one
might have bought his pates of him, as much from appetite as sentiment.

He made an offer of them to neither; but stood still with them at the corner
of a hotel, for those to buy who chose it, without solicitation.

He was about forty-eight -- of a sedatelook, something approaching to gravity.
I did not wonder. -- I went up rather to the basket than him, and having lifted
up the napkin and taken one of his pates into my hand -- I begged he would
explain the appearance which affected me.

He told me in a few words, that the best part of his life had passed in the
service, in which, after spending a small patrimony, he had obtained a company
and the croix with it; but that, at the conclusion of the last peace, his
regiment being reformed, and the whole corpse, with those of some other
regiments, left without any provision, -- he found himself in a wide world
without friends, without a livre -- and indeed, said he, without any thing but
this -- (pointing, as he said it, to his croix) -- The poor Chevalier won my
pity, and he finished the scene with winning my esteem too.

The king, he said, was the most generous of princes, but his generosity could
neither relieve or reward every one, and it was only his misfortune to be
amongst the number. He had a little wise, he said, whom he loved, who did the
patisserie; and added, he felt no dishonor in defending her and himself from
want in this way -- unless providence had offered him a better.

It would be wicked to withhold a pleasure from the good, in passing over what
happened to this poor Chevalier of St. Louis about nine months after.

It seems he usually took his stand near the iron gates which lead up to the
palace, and as his croix had caught the eyes of numbers, numbers had made the
same enquiry which I had done -- He had told them the same story, and always
with so much modesty and good sense, that it had reached at last the King's
ears -- who hearing the Chevalier had been a gallant officer, and respected by
the whole regiment as a man of honor and integrity -- he broke up his little
trade by a pension of fifteen hundred livres a year.

SENT. JOURNEY, PAGE, 148. As I have told this to please the reader, I beg he
will allow me to relate another, out of its order, to please myself -- the two
stories reflect light upon each other -- and it is a pity they should be parted.



THE SWORD.
RENNES.

WHEN states and empires have their periods of declension, and feel in their
turns what distress and poverty is -- I stop not to tell the causes which
gradually brought the house Do You**** in Britanny into decay. The Marquis Do You****
had fought up against his condition with great firmness; wishing to preserve,
and still show to the world, some little fragments of what his ancestors had
been -- their indiscretions had put it out of his power. There was enough left
for the little exigencies of obscurity -- But he had two boys who looked up to
him for light -- he thought they deserved it. He had tried his sword -- it
could not open the way -- the mounting was too expensive -- and simple economy
was not a match for it -- there was no resource but commerce.

In any other province in France, save Britanny, this was smiting the root for
ever of the little tree his pride and affection wished to see re-blossom -- But
in Britanny, there being a provision for this, he availed himself of it; and
taking an occasion when the states were assembled at Rennes, the Marquis,
attended with his two sons, entered the court; and having pleaded the right of
an ancient law of the duchy, which, though seldom claimed, he said, was no less
in force; he took his sword from his side -- Here, said he, take it; and be
trusty guardians of it, till better times put me in condition to reclaim it.

The president accepted the Marquis's sword -- he staid a few minutes to see it
deposited in the archives of his house, and departed.

The Marquis and his whole family embarked the next day for Martinico, and in
about nineteen or twenty years of successful application to business, with some
unlooked for bequests from distant branches of his house -- returned home to
reclaim his nobility and to support it.

It was an incident of good fortune which will never happen to any traveller,
but a sentimental one, that I should be at Rennes at the very time of this
solemn requisition: I call it solemn -- it was so to me.

The Marquis entered the court with his whole family: he supported his lady --
his eldest son supported his sister, and his youngest was at the other extreme
of the line next his mother -- he put his handkerchief to his face twice --

-- There was a dead silence. When the Marquis had approached within six paces
of the tribunal, he gave the Marchioness to his youngest son, and advancing
three steps before his family -- he reclaimed his sword. -- His sword was given
him, and the moment he got it into his hand he drew it almost out of the
scabbard -- it was the shining face of a friend he had once given up -- he
looked attentively a long it, beginning at the hilt, as if to see whether it
was the same -- when observing a little rust which it had contracted near the
point, he brought it near his eye, and bending his head down over it -- I think
I saw a tear fall upon the place: I could not be deceived by what followed.

"I shall find, said he, some other way, to get it off."

When the Marquis had said this, he returned his sword into its scabbard, made
a bow to the guardians of it -- and, with his wife and daughter, and his two
sons following him, walked out.

O how I envied him his feelings!

S. JOURNEY, PAGE, 153. THE ASS.
I WAS stopped at the gate of Lions by a poor ass, who had just turned in with
a couple of large panniers upon his back, to collect eleemosynary turnip-tops,
and cabbage-leaves; and stood dubious, with his two fore-feet on the inside of
the threshold, and with his two hinder feet toward the street, as not knowing
very well whether he was to go in, or no.

Now, it is an animal (be in what hurry I may) I cannot bear to strike -- there
is a patient endurance of sufferings, wrote so unaffectedly in his looks and
carriage, which pleads so mightily for him, that it always disarms me; and to
that degree, that I do not like to speak unkindly to him: on the contrary, meet
him where I will -- whether in town or country -- in cart or under panniers --
whether in liberty or bondage -- I have ever something civil to say to him on
my part; and as one word begets another (if he has as little to do as I) -- I
generally fall into conversation with him; and surely never is my imagination
so busy, as in framing his responses from the etchings of his countenance --
and where those carry me not deep enough -- in flying from my own heart into
his, and seeing what is natural for an ass to think -- as well as a man, upon
the occasion. -- In truth, it is the only creature of all the classes of beings
below me, with whom I can do this: -- for parrots, jackdaws, etc. I never
exchange a word with them -- nor with the apes, etc. for pretty near the same
reason; they act by rote, as the others speak by it, and equally make me
silent: nay my dog and my cat, though I value them both -- (and for my dog he
would speak if he could) -- yet some how or other, they neither of them possess
the talents for conversation -- I can make nothing of a discourse with them.

-- But with an ass, I can commune for ever. come, Honesty! said I, -- seeing
it was impracticable to pass betwixt him and the gate -- art thou for coming
in, or going out?

The ass twisted his head round to look up the street --

Well -- replied I -- we'll wait a minute for (...) driver:

-- He turned his head thoughtful about, and looked wishfully the opposite way
--

I understand thee perfectly, answered I -- if thou take a wrong step in this
affair, he will cudgel thee to death -- Well! a minute is but a minute, and if
it saves a fellow creature a drubbing, it shall not be set down as ill-spent.
He was eating the stem of an artichoke as this discourse went on, and in the
little peevish contentions of nature betwixt hunger and unsavouriness, had
dropped it out of his mouth half a dozen times, and picked it up again -- God
help thee, Jack! said I, thou have a bitter breakfast on it -- and many a bitter
day's labor -- and many a bitter blow, I fear for its wages -- it is all -- all
bitterness to thee, whatever life is to others.

And now thy mouth, if one knew the truth of it, is as bitter, I dare say, as
soot -- (for he had cast aside the stem) and thou have not a friend perhaps in
all this world, that will give thee a macaroon. -- In saying this, I pulled out
a paper of them, which I had just purchased, and gave him one -- and at this
moment that I am telling it, my heart smites me, that there was more of
pleasantry in the conceit, of seeing how an ass would eat a macaroon -- than of
benevolence in giving him one, which presided in the act.

When the ass had eaten his macaroon, I pressed him to come in -- the poor
beast was heavy loaded -- his legs seemed to tremble under him -- he hung
rather backwards, and as I pulled at his halter, it broke short in my hand --
he looked up pensive in my face -- "Don't thrash me with it -- but if you will,
you may" -- If I do, said I, I Will be d -- d. The word was but one half of it
pronounced, when a person coming in, let fall a thundering bastinado upon the
poor devil's crupper, which put an end to the ceremony. Out upon it! cried I.

TRISTRAM SHANDY, VOL. IV. CHAP. 13. THE SERMON.
HEBREWS XIII. 18. -- For we TRUST we have a good Conscience. -- "TRUST! --
Trust we have a good conscience!"

[Certainly, Trim, quoth my father, interrupting him, you give that sentence a
very improper accent; for you curl up your nose, man, and read it with such a
sneering tone, as if the Parson was going to abuse the Apostle.

He is, an' please your honor, replied Trim.

Pugh! said my father, smiling.

Sir, quoth Doctor Slop, Trim is certainly in the right; for the writer (who I
perceive is a Protestant) by the snappish manner in which he takes up the
apostle, is certainly going to abuse him; if this treatment of him has not done
it already. But from whence, replied my father, have you concluded so soon,
Doctor Slop, that the writer is of our church? -- for aught I can see yet, --
he may be of any church. -- Because, answered Doctor Slop, if he was of ours,
-- he durst no more take such a license, -- than a bear by his beard: -- If, in
our communion, Sir, a man was to insult an apostle, -- a saint, -- or even the
paring of a saint's nail, -- he would have his eyes scratched out. -- What, by
the saint? quoth my uncle Toby. No, replied Doctor Slop, he would have an old
house over his head. Pray, is the Inquisition an ancient building, answered my
uncle Toby, or is it a modern one? -- I know nothing of architecture, replied
Doctor Slop. -- An' please your honors, quoth Trim, the Inquisition is the
vilest -- Prithee spare thy description, Trim, I hate the very name of it, said
my father. -- No matter for that, answered Doctor Slop, -- it has its uses; for
though I Am no great advocate for it, yet, in such a case as this, he would soon
be taught better manners; and I can tell him, if he went on at that rate, would
be flung into the Inquisition for his pains. God help him then, quoth my uncle
Toby. Amen, added Trim, for heaven above knows I have a poor brother who has
been fourteen years a captive in it. -- I never heard one word of it before,
said my uncle Toby, hastily: -- How came he there, Trim? -- O, Sir! the story
will make your heart bleed, -- as it has made mine a thousand times; -- the
short of the story is this: -- My brother Tom went over a servant to Lisbon, --
and married a Jew's widow, who kept a small shop, and sold sausages, which
somehow or other, was the cause of his being taken in the middle of the night
out of his bed, where he was lying with his wife and two small children, and
carried directly to the Inquisition, where, God help him, continued Trim,
fetching a sigh from the bottom of his heart, -- the poor honest lad lies
confined at this hour; he was as honest a soul, added Trim, (pulling out his
handkerchief) as ever blood warmed. --

-- The tears trickled down Trim's cheeks faster than he could well wipe them
away. -- A dead silence in the room ensued for some minutes. -- Certain proof
of pity! Come, Trim, quoth my father, after he saw the poor fellow's grief had
got a little vent, -- read on, -- and put this melancholy story out of thy
head: -- I grieve that I interrupted thee; but prithee begin the Sermon again;
-- for if the first sentence in it is matter of abuse, as thou say, I have a
great desire to know what kind of provocation the apostle has given.

Corporal Trim wiped his face, and returned his handkerchief into his pocket,
and, making a bow as he did it, -- he began again.]

THE SERMON.
HEBREWS, XIII. 18. -- For we TRUST we have a good Conscience. -- " -- TRUST!
trust we have a good conscience! Surely if there is any thing in this life
which a man may depend upon, and to the knowledge of which he is capable of
arriving upon the most indisputable evidence, it must be this very thing, --
whether he has a good conscience or no."

[I am positive I am right, quoth Dr. Stop.]

"If a man thinks at all, he cannot well be a stranger to the true state of
this account; -- he must be privy to his own thoughts and desires; -- he must
remember his past pursuits, and know certainly the true springs and motives,
which, in general, have governed the actions of his life."

[I defy him, without an assistant, quoth Dr. Slop.]

"In other matters we may be deceived by false appearances; and, as the wise
man complains, hardly do we guess aright at the things that are upon the earth,
and with labor do we find the things that are before us. But here the mind has
all the evidence and facts within herself; -- is conscious of the web she has
wove; -- knows its texture and fineness, and the exact share which every
passion has had in working upon the several designs which virtue or vice has
planned before her."

[The language is good, and I declare Trim reads very well, quoth my father.]

"Now, -- as conscience is nothing else but the knowledge which the mind has
within herself of this; and the judgment, either of approbation or censure,
which it unavoidably makes upon the successive actions of our lives; it is plain
you will say, from the very terms of the proposition, -- whenever this inward
testimony goes against a man, and he stands self accused, -- that he must
necessarily be a guilty man. -- And, on the contrary, when the report is
favorable on his side, and his heart condemns him not; -- that it is not a
matter of trust, as the apostle intimates, but a matter of certainty and fact,
that the conscience is good, and that the man must be good also."

[Then the apostle is altogether in the wrong, I suppose, quoth Dr. Slop, and
the Protestant divine is in the right. Sir, have patience, replied my father,
for I think it will presently appear that Saint Paul and the Protestant divine
are both of an opinion. -- As nearly so, quoth Dr. Slop, as east is to west; --
but this, continued he, lifting both hands, comes from the liberty of the press.

It is no more, at the worst, replied my uncle Toby, than the liberty of the
pulpit, for it does not appear that the sermon is printed, or ever likely to be.

Go on, Trim, quoth my father.]

"At first sight this may seem to be a true state of the case; and I make no
doubt but the knowledge of right and wrong is so truly impressed upon the mind
of man, -- that did no such thing ever happen, as that the conscience of a man,
by long habits of sin, might (as the scripture assures it may) insensibly
become hard; -- and, like some tender parts of his body, by much stress and
continual hard usage, lose by degrees that nice sense and perception with which
God and nature endowed it: -- Did this never happen; -- or was it certain that
self-love could never hang the least bias upon the judgment; -- or that the
little interests below could rise up and perplex the faculties of our upper
regions, and encompass them about with clouds and thick darkness: -- Could no
such thing as favor and affection enter this sacred COURT: -- Did WIT disdain
to take a bribe in it; -- or was ashamed to show its face as an advocate for an
unwarrantable enjoyment: Or, lastly, were we assured that INTEREST stood always
unconcerned whilst the cause was hearing, -- and that Passion never got into
the judgment seat, and pronounced sentence in the stead of Reason, which is
supposed always to preside and determine upon the case: -- Was this truly so,
as the objection must suppose; -- no doubt then the religious and moral state
of a man would be exactly what he himself esteemed it; -- and the guilt or
innocence of every man's life could be known, in general, by no better measure,
than the degrees of his own approbation and censure."

"I own, in one case, whenever a man's conscience does accuse him (as it seldom
errs on that side) that he is guilty; and unless in melancholy and hypocondriac
cases, we may safely pronounce upon it, that there is always sufficient grounds
for the accusation."

"But the converse of the proposition will not hold true; -- namely, that
whenever there is guilt, the conscience must accuse; and if it does not, that a
man is therefore innocent. -- This is not fact -- So that the common
consolation which some good christian or other is hourly administering to
himself, -- that he thanks God his mind does not misgive him; and that,
consequently, he has a good conscience, because he has a quiet one, -- is
fallacious; -- and as current as the inference is, and as infallible as the
rule appears at first sight, yet when you look nearer to it, and try the truth
of this rule upon plain facts, -- you see it liable to so much error from a
false application; -- the principal upon which it goes so often perverted; --
the whole force of it lost, and sometimes so vilely cast away, that it is
painful to produce the common examples from human life which confirm the
account."

"A man shall be vicious and utterly debauched in his principles; --
exceptionable in his conduct to the world; shall live shameless in the open
commission of a sin, which no reason or pretense can justify, -- a sin by
which, contrary to all the workings of humanity, he shall ruin for ever the
deluded partner of his guilt; -- rob her of her best dowry; and not only cover
her own head with dishonor; -- but involve a whole virtuous family in shame
and sorrow for her sake. Surely, you will think conscience must lead such a man
a troublesome life; -- he can have no rest night or day from its reproaches."

"Alas! CONSCIENCE had something else to do all this time, than break in upon
him; as Elijah reproached the god Baal, -- this domestic god was either talking
or pursuing, or was in a journey, or peradventure he slept and could not be
awoke. Perhaps HE was gone out into company with HONOR to fight a duel; to pay
off some debt at play; -- or dirty annuity, the bargain of his lust; Perhaps
CONSCIENCE all this time was engaged at home, talking aloud against petty
larceny, and executing vengeance upon some such puny crimes as his fortune and
rank of life secured him against all temptation of committing; so that he lives
as merrily." -- [If he was of our church, though, quoth Dr. Slop, he could not]
" -- sleeps as soundly in his bed; -- and at last meets death as unconcernedly;
-- perhaps much more so, than a much better man."

[All this is impossible with us, quoth Dr. Slop, turning to my father, -- the
case could not happen in our church. -- It happens in ours, however, replied my
father, but too often. -- I own, quoth Dr. Slop, (struck a little with my
father's frank acknowledgment) -- that a man in the Romish church may live as
badly; -- but then he cannot easily die so. -- It Is little matter, replied my
father, with an air of indifference, -- how a rascal dies. -- I mean, answered
Dr. Slop, he would be denied the benefits of the last sacraments. -- Pray how
many have you in all, said my uncle Toby, -- for I always forget? -- Seven,
answered Dr. Slop. -- Humph! -- said my uncle Toby; though not accented as a
note of acquiescence, -- but as an interjection of that particular species of
surprise, when a man in looking into a drawer, finds more of a thing than he
expected. -- Humph! replied my uncle Toby. Dr. Slop, who had an ear, understood
my uncle Toby as well as if he had wrote a whole volume against the seven
sacraments. -- Humph! replied Dr. Slop, (stating my uncle Toby's argument over
again to him) -- Why, Sir, are there not seven cardinal virtues? -- Seven
mortal sins? -- Seven golden candlesticks? -- Seven heavens? -- It Is more than
I know, replied my uncle Toby. -- Are there not Seven wonders of the world? --
Seven days of the creation? -- Seven planets? -- Seven plagues? -- That there
are, quoth my father, with a most affected gravity. But prithee, continued he,
go on with the rest of thy characters, Trim.]

"Another is sordid, unmerciful," (here Trim waved his right hand) "a
strait-hearted, selfish wretch, incapable either of private friendship or
public spirit. Take notice how he passes by the widow and orphan in their
distress, and sees all the miseries incident to human life without a sigh or a
prayer." [An' please your honors, cried Trim, I think this a viler man than
the other.]

"Shall not conscience rise up and sting him on such occasions? -- No; thank
God there is no occasion, I pay every man his own; -- I have no fornication to
answer to my conscience; -- no faithless vows or promises to make up; -- I have
debauched no man's wife or child; thank God, I am not as other men, adulterers,
unjust, or even as this libertine, who stands before me. A third is crafty and
designing in his nature. View his whole life, -- it is nothing but a cunning
contexture of dark arts and unequitable subterfuges, basely to defeat the true
intent of all laws, -- plain-dealing, and the safe enjoyment of our several
properties. -- you will see such a one working out a frame of little designs
upon the ignorance and perplexities of the poor and needy man; -- shall raise a
fortune upon the inexperience of a youth, or the unsuspecting temper of his
friend, who would have trusted him with his life. When old age comes on, and
repentance calls him to look back upon this black account, and state it over
again with his conscience -- CONSCIENCE looks into the STATUTES at LARGE; --
finds no express law broken by what he has done; -- perceives no penalty or
forseiture of goods and chattels incurred; -- sees no scourge waving over his
head, or prison opening his gates upon him: -- What is there to affright his
conscience? -- Conscience has got safely entrenched behind the Letter of the
Law; sits there invulnerable, fortified with Cases and Reports so strongly on
all sides; -- that it is not preaching can dispossess it of its hold."

[The character of this last man, said Dr. Slop, interrupting Trim, is more
detestable than all the rest; -- and seems to have been taken from some
pettifogging lawyer amongst you: -- amongst us, a man's conscience could not
possibly continue so long blinded, -- three times in a year, at least, he must
go to confession. Will that restore it to sight? quoth my uncle Toby. -- Go on,
Trim, quoth my father. It Is very short, replied Trim. -- I wish it was longer,
quoth my uncle Toby, for I like it hugely. -- Trim went on.]

"A fourth man shall want even this refuge; shall break through all their
ceremony of slow chicane; -- scorns the doubtful workings of secret plots and
cautious trains to bring about his purpose: -- See the barefaced villain, how
he cheats, lies, perjures, robs, murders! -- Horrid! -- But indeed much better
was not to be expected, in the present case -- the poor man was in the dark! --
his Priest had got the keeping of his conscience; -- and all he would let him
know of it, was, That he must believe in the Pope; -- go to Mass; -- cross
himself; -- tell his beads; -- be a good Catholic, and that this, in all
conscience, was enough to carry him to heaven. What; -- if he perjures! -- Why;
-- he had a mental reservation in it. -- But if he is so wicked and abandoned a
wretch as you represent him; -- if he robs, -- if he stabs, will not
conscience, on every such act, receive a wound itself? -- Aye, -- but the man
has carried it to confession; -- the wound digests there, and will do well
enough, and in a short time be quite healed up by absolution. O Popery! what
have thou to answer for? -- when, not content with the too many natural and
fatal ways, through which the heart of man is every day thus treacherous to
itself above all things; -- thou have wilfully set open the wide gate of deceit
before the face of this unwary traveller, too apt, God knows, to go astray of
himself; and confidently speak peace to himself, when there is no peace."

"Of this the common instances which I have drawn out of life, are too
notorious to require much evidence. If any man doubts the reality of them, or
thinks it impossible for a man to be such a bubble to himself, -- I must refer
him a moment to his own reflections, and will then venture to trust my appeal
with his own heart."

"Let him consider in how different a degree of detestation, numbers of wicked
actions stand there, though equally bad and vicious in their own natures; -- he
will soon find, that such of them as strong inclination and custom have
prompted him to commit, are generally dressed out and painted with all the
false beauties, which a soft and a flattering hand can give them; -- and that
the others, to which he feels no propensity, appear, at once, naked and
deformed, surrounded with all the true circumstances of folly and dishonor."

"When David surprised Saul sleeping in the cave, and cut off the skirt of his
robe -- we read his heart smote him for what he had done: -- But in the matter
of Uriah, where a faithful and gallant servant, whom he ought to have loved and
honored, fell to make way for his lust, -- where conscience had so much
greater reason to take the alarm, his heart smote him not. A whole year had
almost passed from the first commission of that crime, to the time Nathan was
sent to reprove him; and we read not once of the least sorrow or compunction of
heart which he testified, during all that time, for what he had done."

"Thus conscience, this once able monitor, -- placed on high as a judge within
us, and intended by our Maker as a just and equitable one too, -- by an unhappy
train of causes and impediments, takes often such imperfect cognizance of what
passes, -- does its office so negligently, -- sometimes so corruptly, -- that
it is not to be trusted alone; and therefore we find there is a necessity, an
absolute necessity, of joining another principle with it, to aid, if not
govern, its determinations."

"So that if you would form a just judgment of what is of infinite importance
to you not to be misled in, -- namely, in what degree of real merit you stand
either as an honest man, an useful citizen, a faithful subject to your king, or
a good servant to your God, -- call in religion and morality. -- Look, what is
written in the law of God? -- How read thou? -- Consult calm reason and the
unchangeable obligations of justice and truth; -- what say they?"

"Let CONSCIENCE determine the matter upon these reports; -- and then if thy
heart condemns thee not, which is the case the apostle supposes, -- the rule
will be infallible," -- [Here Dr. Slop fell asleep] -- " thou will have
confidence toward God; -- that is, have just grounds to believe the judgment
thou have past upon thyself, is the judgment of God; and nothing else but an
anticipation of that righteous sentence, which will be pronounced upon thee
hereafter by that Being, to whom thou art finally to give an account of thy
actions."

" Blessed is the man, indeed, then, as the author of the book of
Ecclesiasticus expresses it, who is not pricked with the multitude of his sins:
Blessed is the man whose heart has not condemned him; whether he be rich, or
whether he be poor, if he have a good heart, (a heart thus guided and informed)
he shall at all times rejoice in a cheerful countenance; his mind shall tell
him more than seven watchmen that sit above upon a tower on high."

" -- In the darkest doubts it shall conduct him safer than a thousand
casuists, and give the state he lives in, a better security for his behavior
than all the causes and restrictions put together, which lawmakers are forced
to multiply: -- Forced, as I say, as things stand; human laws not being a
matter of original choice, but of pure necessity, brought in to fence against
the mischievous effects of those consciences which are no law unto themselves;
well intending, by the many provisions made, -- that in all such corrupt and
misguided cases, where principles and the checks of conscience will not make us
upright, -- to supply their force, and, by the terrors of gaols and halters,
oblige us to it."

[I see plainly, said my father, that this sermon has been composed to be
preached at the Temple, -- or at some Assize. -- I like the reasoning, and am
sorry that Dr. Slop has fallen asleep before the time of his conviction: -- for
it is now clear, that the Parson, as I thought at first, never insulted St.
Paul in the least; -- nor has there been, brother, the least difference between
them: -- A great matter, if they had differed, replied my uncle Toby, -- the
best friends in the world may differ sometimes. -- True, -- brother Toby, quoth
my father, shaking hands with him, -- we'll fill our pipes, brother, and then
Trim shall go on. --

He read on as follows.]

"To have the fear of God before our eyes, and, in our mutual dealings with
each other, to govern our actions by the eternal measures of right and wrong:
-- The first of these will comprehend the duties of religion; -- the second,
those of morality, which are so inseperably connected together, that you cannot
divide these two tables, even in imagination, (though the attempt is often made
in practice) without breaking and mutually destroying them both."

"I said the attempt is often made; and so it is; -- there being nothing more
common than to see a man who has no sense at all of religion, and indeed has so
much honesty as to pretend to none, who would take it as the bitterest affront,
should you but hint at a suspicion of his moral character, -- or imagine he was
not conscientiously just and scrupulous" to the uttermost mite."

"When there is some appearance that it is so, -- though one is unwilling even to
suspect the appearance of so amiable a virtue as moral honesty, yet were we to
look into the grounds of it, in the present case, I am persuaded we should find
little reason to envy such a one the honor of his motive."

"Let him declaim as pompously as he chooses upon the subject, it will be found
to rest upon no better foundation than either his interest, his pride, his
ease, or some such little and changeable passion as will give us but small
dependence upon his actions in matters of great distress."

"I will illustrate this by an example.

"I know the banker I deal with, or the physician I usually call in," --

[There is no need, cried Dr. Slop, (waking) to call in any physician in this
case]

" -- To be neither of them men of much religion: I hear them make a jest of it
every day, and treat all its sanctions with so much scorn, as to put the matter
past doubt. Well; -- notwithstanding this, I put my fortune into the hands of
the one; -- and what is dearer still to me, I trust my life to the honest skill
of the other."

"Now let me examine what is my reason for this great confidence. Why, in the
first place, I believe there is no probability that either of them will employ
the power I put into their hands to my disadvantage; -- I consider that honesty
serves the purposes of this life: -- I know their success in the world depends
upon the fairness of their characters. -- In a word, I Am persuaded that they
cannot hurt me without hurting themselves more."

"But put it otherwise, namely, that interestlay, for once, on the other side;
that a case should happen wherein the one, without stain to his reputation,
could secret my fortune, and leave me naked in the world; -- or that the other
could send me out of it, and enjoy an estate by my death, without dishonor to
himself or his art: -- In this case, what hold have I of either of them? --
Religion, the strongest of all motives, is out of the question; -- Interest,
the next most powerful motive in the world, is strongly against me: -- What
have I lest to cast into the opposite scale to balance this temptation? --
Alas! I have nothing, -- nothing but what is lighter than a bubble -- I must
lie at the mercy of HONOR, or some such capricious principle Strait security
for two of the most valuable blessings! -- my property and myself."

"As, therefore, we can have no dependence upon morality without religion; --
so, on the other hand, there is nothing better to be expected from religion
without morality; nevertheless, it is no prodigy to see a man whose real moral
character stands very low, who yet entertains the highest notion of himself, in
the light of a religious man."

"He shall not only be covetous, revengeful, implacable, -- but even wanting in
points of common honesty; yet inasmuch as he talks aloud against the infidelity
of the age, -- is zealous for some points of religion, -- goes twice a day to
church, -- attends the sacraments, -- and amuses himself with a few
instrumental parts of religion, -- shall cheat his conscience into a judgment,
that, for this, he is a religious man, and has discharged truly his duty to
God: And you will find that such a man, through force of this delusion,
generally looks down with spiritual pride upon every other man who has less
affectation of piety, -- though, perhaps, ten times more real honesty than
himself."

" This likewise is a sore evil under the sun: and, I believe, there is no one
mistaken principle, which, for its time, has wrought more serious mischiefs."

" -- For a general proof of this, -- examine the history of the Romish
church;" --

[Well what can you make of that? cried Dr. Slop.] -- "see what scenes of
cruelty, murder, rapine, bloodshed," -- [They may thank their own obstinacy,
cried Dr. Slop] -- "have all been sanctified by a religion not strictly
governed by morality."

"In how many kingdoms of the world has the crusading sword of this misguided
sainterrant, spared neither age or merit, or sex, or condition? -- and, as he
fought under the banners of a religion which set him loose from justice and
humanity, he showed none; mercilessly trampled upon both, -- heard neither the
cries of the unfortunate, nor pitied their distresses."

[I have been in many a battle, an' please your honor, quoth Trim, sighing,
but never in so melancholy a one as this. -- I would not have drawn a tricker
in it against these poor souls, -- to have been made a general officer. -- Why?
what do you understand of the affair? said Dr. Slop, looking toward Trim, with
something more of contempt than the Corporal's honest heart deserved. -- What
do you know, friend, about this battle you talk of? -- I know, replied Trim,
that I never refused quarter in my life to any man who cried out for it; -- but
to a woman, or a child, continued Trim, before I would level my musket at them,
I would lose my life a thousand times. -- Here Is a crown for thee, Trim, to
drink with Obadiah tonight, quoth my uncle Toby, -- God bless your honor,
replied Trim, -- I had rather these poor women and children had it. -- Thou art
an honest fellow, quoth my uncle Toby. -- My father nodded his head, -- as much
as to say, -- and so he is. --

But prithee, Trim, said my father, make an end, -- for I see thou have but a
leaf or two left.

Corporal Trim read on.]

"If the testimony of past centuries in this matter is not sufficient, --
consider at this instant, how the votaries of that religion are every day
thinking to do service and honor to God, by actions which are a dishonor and
scandal to themselves."

"To be convinced of this, go with me for a moment into the prisons of the
Inquisition." -- [God help my poor brother Tom] -- "Behold Religion, with Mercy
and Justice chained down under her feet, -- there sitting ghastly upon a black
tribunal, propped up with racks and instruments of torment. Hark! -- hark! what
a piteous groan!" -- [Here Trim's face turned as pale as ashes] -- "See the
melancholy wretch who uttered it" -- [Here the tears began to trickle down.] --
"just brought forth to undergo the anguish of a mock trial, and endure the
utmost pains that a studied system of cruelty has been able to invent." -- [D
-- n them all, quoth Trim, his color returning into his face as red as blood.]
-- "Behold this helpless victim delivered up to his tormentors, -- his body so
wasted with sorrow and confinement." -- [Oh! it is my brother, cried poor Trim
in a most passionate exclamation, dropping the sermon upon the ground, and
clapping his hands together -- I fear it is poor Tom. My father's and my uncle
Toby's heart yearned with sympathy for the poor fellow's distress; even Slop
himself acknowledged pity for him. -- Why, Trim, said my father, this is not a
history, -- it is a sermon thou art reading; prithee begin the sentence again.]
-- "Behold this helpless victim delivered up to his tormentors, -- his body so
wasted with sorrow and confinement, you will see every nerve and muscle as it
suffers."

"Observe the last movement of that horrid engine!" -- [I would rather face a
cannon, quoth Trim, stamping.] -- "See what convulsions it has thrown him into!
-- Consider the nature of the posture in which he now lies stretched, -- what
exquisite tortures he endures by it! -- it is all nature can bear! Good God! see
how it keeps his weary soul hanging upon his trembling lips!" [I would not read
another line of it, quoth Trim, for all this world; -- I fear, an' please your
honors, all this is in Portugal, where my poor brother Tom is. I tell thee,
Trim, again, quoth my father, it is not an historical account, -- it is a
description. -- It Is only a description, honest man, quoth Slop, there is not a
word of truth in it. -- That Is another story, replied my father. -- However, as
Trim reads it with so much concern, -- it is cruelty to force him to go on with
it. -- Give me hold of the sermon, Trim, -- I Will finish it for thee, and thou
may go. I must stay and hear it too, replied Trim, if your honor will allow
me; -- though I would not read it myself for a Colonel's pay. -- Poor Trim!
quoth my uncle Toby. -- My father went on. --

"Consider the nature of the posture in which he now lies stretched, -- what
exquisite torture he endures by it! -- It Is all nature can bear! Good God! See
how it keeps his weary soul hanging upon his trembling lips, -- willing to take
its leave, -- but not suffered to depart! -- Behold the unhappy wretch led back
to his cell!"

-- [Then, thank God, however, quoth Trim, they have not killed him.] --

"See him dragged out of it again to meet the flames, and the insults in his
last agonies, which this principle, -- this principle, that there can be
religion without mercy, has prepared for him. The surest way to try the merit
of any disputed notion is, to trace down the consequences such a notion has
produced, and compare them with the spirit of christianity; -- it is the short
and decisive rule which our Savior has left us, for these and such like
cases, and it is worth a thousand arguments -- By their fruits ye shall know
them."

"I will add no farther to the length of this sermon, than by two or three
short and independent rules deducible from it."

" First, Whenever a man talks ^^^dly against religion, always suspect that it
is not his reason, but his passions, which have got the better of his CREED. A
bad life and a good belief are disagreeable and troublesome neighbors, and
where they separate, depend upon it, it is for no other cause but quietness
sake."

" Secondly, When a man, thus represented, tells you in any particular
instance, -- That such a thing goes against his conscience, -- always believe
he means exactly the same thing, as when he tells you such a thing goes against
his stomach; -- a present want of appetite being generally the true cause of
both."

"In a word, -- trust that man in nothing, who has not a CONSCIENCE in every
thing."

"And, in your own case, remember this plain distinction, a mistake in which
has ruined thousands, -- that your conscience is not a law: -- No, God and
reason made the law, and have placed conscience within you to determine; -- not
like an Asiatic Cadi, according to the ebbs and flows of his own passions, --
but like a British judge in this land of liberty and good sense, who makes no
new law, but faithfully declares that law which he knows already written."

END OF THE SERMON.

T. SHANDY, V. 1. C. 40. REMAINDER OF THE STORY OF TRIM'S BROTHER.
AS Tom's place an' please your honor, was easy -- and the weather warm -- it
put him upon thinking seriously of settling himself in the world; and as it
fell out about that time, that a Jew who kept a saugage shop in the same
street, had the ill luck to die of a strangury, and leave his widow in
possession of a rousing trade -- Tom thought (as every body in Lisbon was doing
the best he could divise for himself) there could be no harm in offering her
his service to carry it on: so without any introduction to the widow, except
that of buying a pound of sausages at her shop -- Tom set out -- counting the
matter thus within himself, as he walked along; that let the worst come of it
that could, he should at least get a pound of sausages for their worth -- but,
if things went well, he should be set up; inasmuch as he should get not only a
pound of sausages -- but a wife -- and a sausage shop, an' please your honor,
into the bargain.

Every servant in the family, from high to low, wished Tom success, and I can
fancy, an' please your honor, I see him this moment with his white dimity
waistcoat and breeches, and hat a little o'one side, passing jollily along the
street, swinging his stick, with a smile and a cheerful word for every body he
met.

But alas! Tom! thou smilest no more, cried the Corporal, looking on one side
of him upon the ground, as if he apostrophised him in his dungeon.

Poor fellow! said my uncle Toby, feelingly.

He was an honest, light-hearted lad, an' please your honor, as ever blood
warmed --

Then he resembled thee, Trim, said my uncle Toby, rapidly.

The Corporal blushed down to his fingers ends -- a tear of sentimental
bashfulness -- another of gratitude to my uncle. Toby -- and a tear of sorrow
for his brother's misfortunes, started into his eye, and ran sweetly down his
cheek together; my uncle Toby's kindled as one lamp does at another; and taking
hold of the breast of Trim's coat (which had been that of Le Fever's), as if to
ease his lame leg, but in reality to gratify a finer feeling -- he stood silent
for a minute and a half; at the end of which he took his hand away, and the
Corporal making a bow, went on with his story of his brother and the Jew's
widow.

When Tom, an' please your honor, got to the shop, there was nobody in it, but
a poor negro girl, with a bunch of white feathers slightly tied to the end of a
long cane, flapping away flies -- not killing them. --

It Is a pretty picture! said my uncle Toby, -- she had suffered persecution,
Trim, and had learnt mercy --

-- She was good, an' please your honor, from nature, as well as from
hardships; and there are circumstances in the story of that poor friendless
slut, that would melt a heart of stone, said Trim; and some dismal winter's
evening when your honor is in the humor, they shall be told you with the rest
of Tom's story, for it makes a part of it

Then do not forget, Trim, said my uncle Toby.

A negro has a soul? an' please your honor, said the Corporal, (doubtingly).

I am not much versed, Corporal, quoth my uncle Toby, in things of that kind;
but I suppose, God would not leave him without one, any more than thee or me.

It would be putting one sadly over the head of another, quoth the Corporal.

It would so, said my uncle Toby.

Why then, an' please your honor, is a black wench to be used worse than a
white one?

I can give no reason, said my uncle Toby. --

-- Only, cried the Corporal, shaking his head, because she has no one to stand
up for her --

It Is that very thing, Trim, quoth my uncle Toby, -- which recommends her to
protection -- and her brethren with her; it is the fortune of war which has put
the whip into our hands now -- where it may be hereafter, heaven knows! -- but
be it where it will, the brave, Trim, will not use it unkindly.

-- God forbid, said the Corporal.

Amen, responded my uncle Toby, laying his hand upon his heart.

The Corporal returned to his story, and went on -- but with an embarrassment
in doing it, which here and there a reader in this world will not be able to
comprehend; for by the many sudden transitions all along, from one kind and
cordial passion to another, in getting thus far on his way, he had lost the
sportable key of his voice, which gave sense and spirit to his tale: he
attempted twice to resume it, but could not please himself; so giving a stout
hem! to rally back the retreating spirits, and aiding nature at the same time
with his left arm a-kimbo on one side, and with his right a little extended,
supported her on the other -- the Corporal got as near the note as he could;
and in that attitude, continued his story.

As Tom, an' please your honor, had no business at that time with the Moorish
girl, he passed on into the room beyond, to talk to the Jew's widow about love
-- and being, as I have told your honor, an open, cheary hearted lad, with his
character wrote in his looks and carriage, he took a chair, and without much
apology, but with great civility at the same time, placed it close to her at
the table, and sat down.

Now a widow, an' please your honor, always chooses a second husband as unlike
the first as she can: so the affair was settled in her mind before Tom
mentioned it.

She signed the capitulation -- and Tom sealed it; and there was an end of the
matter.

T. SHANDY, V. IV. c. 64. THE BEGUINE.
SO, thou wast once in love, Trim! said my uncle Toby, smiling --

Souse! replied the Corporal -- over head and ears! an' please your honor.
Prithee when? where? -- and how came it to pass? -- I never heard one word of
it before, quoth my uncle Toby: -- I dare say, answered Trim, that every
drummer and serjeant's son in the regiment knew of it -- It Is high time I
should -- said my uncle Toby.

Your honor remembers with concern, said the Corporal, the total rout and
confusion of our camp, and the army, at the affair of Landen; every one was
left to shift for himself; and if it had not been for the regiments of Wyndham,
Lumley, and Galway, which covered the retreat over the bridge of Neerspeeken,
the King himself could scarce have gained it -- he was pressed hard, as your
honor knows, on every side of him --

Gallant mortal! cried my uncle Toby, caught up with enthusiasm -- this moment,
now that all is lost, I see him galloping across me, Corporal, to the left, to
bring up the remains of the English horse along with him to support the right,
and tear the laurel from Luxembourg's brows, if yet it is possible -- I see him
with the knot of his scarf just shot off, infusing fresh spirits into poor
Galway's regiment -- riding along the line -- then wheeling about, and charging
Conti at the head of it -- Brave! brave, by heaven! cried my uncle Toby, he
deserves a crown -- as richly, as a thief a halter; shouted Trim.

My uncle Toby knew the Corporal's loyalty; -- otherwise the comparison was not
at all to his mind -- it did not altogether strike the Corporal's fancy when he
had made it -- but it could not be recalled -- so he had nothing to do, but
proceed.

As the number of wounded was prodigious, and no one had time to think of any
thing, but his own safety -- Though Talmash, said my uncle Toby, brought off
the foot with great prudence -- but I was left upon the field, said the
Corporal. Thou wast so; poor fellow! replied my uncle Toby -- so that it was
noon the next day, continued the Corporal, before I was exchanged, and put into
a cart with thirteen or fourteen more, in order to be conveyed to our hospital.
-- The anguish of my knee, continued the Corporal, was excessive in itself; and
the uneasiness of the cart, with the roughness of the roads which were terribly
cut up -- making bad still worse -- every step was death to me: so that with
the loss of blood, and the want of care taking of me, and a fever I felt coming
on besides -- (Poor soul! said my uncle Toby) all together, an' please your
honor, was more than I could sustain.

I was telling my sufferings to a young woman at a peasant's house, where our
cart, which was the last of the line, had halted, they had helped me in, and
the young woman had taken a cordial out of her pocket and dropped it upon some
sugar, and seeing it had cheered me, she had given it me a second and a third
time -- So I was telling her, an' please your honor, the anguish I was in, and
was saying it was so intolerable to me, that I had much rather lie down upon
the bed, turning my face toward one which was in the corner of the room -- and
die, than go on -- when, upon her attempting to lead me to it, I fainted away
in her arms. She was a good soul! as your honor, said the Coporal, wiping his
eyes, will hear.

I thought love had been a joyous thing, quoth my uncle Toby.

It Is the most serious thing, an' please your honor (sometimes), that is in
the world.

By the persuasion of the young woman, continued the Corporal, the cart with
the wounded men set off without me: she had assured them I should expire
immediately if I was put into the cart. So when I came to myself -- I found
myself in a still quiet cottage, with no one but the young woman, and the
peasant and his wife. I was laid across the bed in the corner of the room, with
my wounded leg upon a chair, and the young woman beside me, holding the corner
of her handkerchief dipped in vinegar to my nose with one hand, and rubbing my
temples with the other.

I took her at first for the daughter of the peasant; (for it was no inn) -- so
had offered her a little purse with eighteen florins, which my poor brother Tom
(here Trim wiped his eyes) had sent me as a token, by a recruit, just before he
set out for Lisbon. --

The young woman called the old man and his wife into the room, to show them
the money, in order to gain me credit for a bed and what little necessaries I
should want, till I should be in a condition to be got to the hospital -- Come
then! said she, tying up the little purse, -- I Will be your banker -- but as
that office alone will not keep me employed, I Will be your nurse too.

I thought by her manner of speaking this, as well as by her dress, which I
then began to consider more attentively -- that the young woman could not be
the daughter of the peasant. She was in black down to her toes, with her hair
concealed under a cambrick border, laid close to her forehead: she was one of
those kind of Nuns, an' please your honor, of which your honor knows, there
are a good many in Flanders, which they let go loose -- By thy description,
Trim, said my uncle Toby, I dare say she was a young Beguine, of which there
are none to be found any where but in the Spanish Netherlands -- except at
Amsterdam -- they differ from Nuns in this, that they can quit their cloister
if they choose to marry; they visit and take care of the sick by profession --
I had rather, for my own part, they did it out of goodnature.

The young Beguine, continued the Corporal, had scarce given herself time to
tell me "she would be my nurse," when she hastily turned about to begin the
office of one, and prepare something for me -- and in a short time -- though I
thought it a long one -- she came back with flannels, etc. etc. and having
fomented my knee soundly for a couple of hours, and made me a thin basin of
gruel for my supper -- she wished me rest, and promised to be with me early in
the morning. -- She wished me, an' please your honor, what was not to be had.
My fever ran very high that night -- her figure made sad disturbance within me
-- I was every moment cutting the world in two -- to give her half of it -- and
every moment was I crying, that I had nothing but a knapsack and eighteen
florins to share with her -- The whole night long was the fair Beguine, like an
angel, close by my bed side, holding back my curtain and offering me cordials
-- and I was only awakened from my dream by her coming there at the hour
promised and giving them in reality. In truth, she was scarce ever from me, and
so accustomed was I to receive life from her hands, that my heart sickened, and
I lost color when she left the room. -- Love, an' please your honor, is
exactly like war, in this; that a soldier, though he has escaped three weeks
complete of Saturdaynight -- may nevertheless be shot through his heart on
Sunday morning -- it happened so here, an' please your honor, with this
difference only -- that it was on Sunday in the afternoon, when I fell in love
all at once with a sisserara -- it burst upon me, an' please your honor, like
a bomb -- scarce giving me time to say, "God bless me."

I thought Trim, said my uncle Toby, a man never fell in love so very suddenly,

Yes an' please your honor, if he is in the way of it -- replied Trim.

I prithee, quoth my uncle Toby, inform me how this matter happened.

-- With all pleasure, said the Corporal, making a bow. I had escaped,
continued the Corporal, all that time from falling in love, and had gone on to
the end of the chapter, had it not been predestined otherwise -- there is no
resisting our fate. It was on a Sunday, in the afternoon, as I told your
honor. The old man and his wife had walked out -- Every thing was still and
hush as midnight about the house --

There was not so much as a duck or a duckling about the yard; when the fair
Beguine came in to see me.

My wound was then in a fair way of doing well -- the inflammation had been
gone off for some time, but it was succeeded with an itching both above and
below my knee, so insufferable, that I had not shut my eyes the whole night for
it. Let me see it, said she, kneeling down upon the ground parallel to my knee,
and laying her hand upon the part below it -- it only wants rubbing a little,
said the Beguine; so covering it with the bed clothes, she began with the
forefinger of her right hand to rub under my knee, guiding her forefinger
backwards and forwards by the edge of the flannel, which kept on the dressing.

In five or six minutes I felt slightly the end of her second finger -- and
presently it was laid flat with the other, and she continued rubbing in that
way round and round for a good while; it then came into my head, that I should
fall in love -- I blushed when I saw how white a hand she had -- I shall never,
an' please your honor, behold another hand so white whilst I live. --

The young Beguine, continued the Corporal, perceiving it was of great service
to me -- from rubbing, for some time, with two fingers -- proceeded to rub at
length with three -- till by little and little she brought down the fourth, and
then rubbed with her whole hand: I will never say another word, an' please your
honor, upon hands again -- but is was softer than satin. --

Prithee, Trim, commend it as much as thou will, said my uncle Toby; I shall
hear thy story with the more delight -- The Corporal thanked his master most
unfeignedly; but having nothing to say upon the Beguine's hand but the same
over again -- he proceeded to the effects of it.

The fair Beguine, said the Corporal, continued rubbing with her whole hand
under my knee, -- till I feared her zeal would weary her -- "I would do a
thousand times more," said she, "for the love of Christ." As she continued
rubbing -- I felt it spread from under her hand, an' please your honor, to
every part of my frame. --

The more she rubbed, and the longer strokes she took -- the more the fire
kindled in my veins -- till at length, by two or three strokes longer than the
rest -- my passion rose to the highest pitch -- I seized her hand -- And then
thou clapped'st it to thy lips, Trim, said my uncle Toby, -- and made a
speech.

Whether the Corporal's amor terminated precisely in the way my uncle Toby
described it, is not material; it is enough that it contained in it the essence
of all the love-romances which ever have been wrote since the beginning of the
world.

T. SHANDY, VOL. 4, CHAP. 43. MARIA.
-- THEY were the sweetest notes I ever heard; and I instantly let down the
fore-glass to hear them more distinctly -- It Is Maria; said the postillion,
observing I was listening -- Poor Maria, continued he, (leaning his body on one
side to let me see her, for he was in a line betwixt us), is sitting upon a
bank playing her vespers upon her pipe, with her little goat beside her.

The young fellow uttered this with an accent and a look so perfectly in tune
to a feeling heart, that I instantly made a vow, I would give him a
four-and-twenty sous piece, when I got to Moulines.

And who is poor Maria? said I.

The love and pity of all the villages around us; said the postillion -- it is
but three years ago, that the sun did not shine upon so fair, so quickwitted
and amiable a maid; and better fate did Maria deserve, than to have her Banns
forbid by the intrigues of the curate of the parish who published them --

He was going on, when Maria, who had made a short pause, put the pipe to her
mouth, and began the air again -- they were the same notes; -- yet were ten
times sweeter: It is the evening service to the Virgin, said the young man --
but who has taught her to play it -- or how she came by her pipe, no one knows;
we think that heaven has assisted her in both; for ever since she has been
unsettled in her mind, it seems her only consolation -- she has never once had
the pipe out of her hand, but plays that service upon it almost night and day.

The postillion delivered this with so much discretion and natural eloquence,
that I could not help decyphering something in his face above his condition,
and should have sifted out his history, had not poor Maria's taken such full
possession of me.

We had got up by this time almost to the bank where Maria was sitting; she was
in a thin white jacket, with her hair, all but two tresses, drawn up into a
silk net, with a few olive leaves twisted a little fantastically on one side --
she was beautiful; and if ever I felt the full force of an honest heart-ache,
it was the moment I saw her --

-- God help her! poor damsel! above a hundred masses, said the postillion,
have been said in the several parish churches and convents around, for her, --
but without effect; we have still hopes, as she is sensible for short
intervals, that the Virgin at last will restore her to herself; but her parents
who know her best, are hopeless upon that score, and think her senses are lost
for ever.

As the postillion spoke this, Maria made a cadence so melancholy, so tender
and querulous, that I sprung out of the chaise to help her, and found myself
sitting betwixt her and her goat before I relapsed from my enthusiasm.

Maria looked wistfully for some time at me, and then at her goat -- and then
at me -- and then at her goat again, and so on, alternately --

-- Well, Maria, said I, softly -- What resemblance do you find?

I do entreat the candid reader to believe me, that it was from the humblest
conviction of what a Beast man is, -- that I asked the question; and that I
would not have let fallen an unseasonable pleasantry in the venerable presence
of Misery, to be entitled to all the wit that ever Rabelais scattered -- and
yet I own my heart smote me, and that I so smarted at the very idea of it, that
I swore I would set up for wisdom, and utter grave sentences the rest of my
days -- and never -- never attempt again to commit mirth with man, woman, or
child, the longest day I had to live.

As for writing nonsense to them -- I believe, there was a reserve -- but that
I leave to the world.

Adieu, Maria! -- adieu, poor hapless damsel! some time, but not now, I may
hear thy sorrows from thy own lips -- but I was deceived; for that moment she
took her pipe and told me such a tale of woe with it, that I rose up, and with
broken and irregular steps walked softly to my chaise.

T. SHANDY, VOL. IV. C. 83. MARIA.
MOULINES.

I NEVER felt what the distress of plenty was in any one shape till now -- to
travel it through the Bourbonnois, the sweetest part of France -- in the
hey-day of the vintage, when Nature is pouring her abundance into every one's
lap, and every eye is lifted up -- a journey through each step of which music
beats time to Labor, and all her children are rejoicing as they carry in their
clusters -- to pass through this with my affections flying out, and kindling at
every group before me -- and every one of them was pregnant with adventures.

Just heaven! -- it would fill up twenty volumes -- and alas! I have but a few
small pages left of this to crowd it into -- and half of these must be taken up
with the poor Maria my friend Mr. Shandy met with near Moulines.

The story he had told of that disordered maid affected me not a little in the
reading; but when I got within the neighborhood where she lived, it returned
so strong into my mind, that I could not resist an impulse which prompted me to
go half a league out of the road, to the village where her parents dwelt, to
enquire after her.

It Is going, I own, like the knight of the Woeful Countenance, in quest of
melancholy adventures -- but I know not how it is, but I am never so perfectly
conscious of the existence of a soul within me, as when I am entangled in them.

The old mother came to the door, her looks told me the story before she opened
her mouth -- She had lost her husband: he had died, she said, of anguish, for
the loss of Maria's senses, about a month before -- She had feared at first,
she added, that it would have plundered her poor girl of what little
understanding was left -- but, on the contrary, it had brought her more to
herself -- still she could not rest -- her poor daughter, she said, crying, was
wandering somewhere about the road --

-- Why does my pulse beat languid as I write this? and what made La Fleur,
whose heart seemed only to be tuned to joy, to pass the back of his hand twice
across his eyes, as the woman stood and told it? I beckoned to the postillion
to turn back into the road.

When we had got within half a league of Moulines, at a little opening in the
road leading to a thicket, I discovered poor Maria sitting under a poplar --
she was sitting with her elbow in her lap, and her head leaning on one side
within her hand -- a small brook ran at the foot of the tree.

I bid the postillion go on with the chaise to Moulines -- and La Fleur to
bespeak my supper -- and that I would walk after him.

She was dressed in white, and much as my friend described her, except that her
hair hung loose, which before was twisted within a silk-net. -- She had,
superadded likewise to her jacket, a pale green riband, which fell across her
shoulder to the waist; at the end of which hung her pipe. -- Her goat had been
as faithless as her lover; and she had got a little dog in lieu of him, which
she had kept tied by a string to her girdle; as I looked at her dog, she drew
him toward her with the string -- "Thou shall not leave me, Sylvio," said she.
I looked in Maria's eyes, and saw she was thinking more of her father than of
her lover or her little goat; for as she uttered them the tears trickled down
her cheeks.

I sat down close by her; and Maria let me wipe them away as they fell, with my
handkerchief. -- I then steeped it in my own -- and then in hers -- and then in
mine -- and then I wiped hers again -- and as I did it, I selt such
undescribable emotions within me, as I am sure could not be accounted for from
any combinations of matter and motion.

I am positive I have a soul; nor can all the books with which materialists
have pestered the world ever convince me to the contrary.

When Maria had come a little to herself, I asked her if she remembered a pale
thin person of a man who had sat down betwixt her and her goat about two years
before? She said, she was unsettled much at that time, but remembered it upon
two accounts -- that ill as she was, she saw the person pitied her; and next,
that her goat had stolen his handkerchief, and she had beat him for the theft
-- she had washed it, she said, in the brook, and kept it ever since in her
pocket to restore it to him in case she should ever see him again, which, she
added, he had half promised her. As she told me this, she took the handkerchief
out of her pocket to let me see it; she had folded it up neatly in a couple of
vine leaves, tied round with a tendril -- on opening it, I saw an S marked in
one of the corners.

She had since that, she told me, strayed as far as Rome, and walked round St.
Peter's once -- and returned back -- that she found her way alone across the
Apennines -- had traveled over all Lombardy without money -- and through the
flinty roads of Savoy without shoes -- how she had borne it, and how she had
got supported, she could not tell -- but God tempers the wind, said Maria, to
the shorn lamb.

Shorn indeed! and to the quick, said I; and wast thou in my own land, where I
have a cottage, I would take thee to it and shelter thee: thou should eat of
my own bread, and drink of my own cup -- I would be kind to thy Sylvio -- in
all thy weaknesses and wanderings I would seek after thee and bring thee back
-- when the sun went down I would say my prayers; and when I had done thou
should play thy evening song upon thy pipe, nor would the incense of my
sacrifice be worse accepted for entering heaven along with that of a broken
heart.

Nature melted within me, as I uttered this; and Maria observing, as I took out
my handkerchief, that it was steeped too much already to be of use, would needs
go wash it in the stream -- and where will you dry it, Maria? said I -- I will
dry it in my bosom, said she -- 'twill do me good.

And is your heart still so warm, Maria? said I.

I touched upon the string on which hung all her sorrows -- she looked with
wistful disorder for sometime in my face; and then, without saying any thing,
took her pipe, and played her service to the Virgin -- The string I had touched
ceased to vibrate -- in a moment or two Maria returned to herself -- let her
pipe fall -- and rose up.

And where are you going, Maria? said I. -- She said, to Moulines. -- Let us
go, said I, together. -- Maria put her arm within mine, and lengthening the
string, to let the dog follow -- in that order we entered Moulines.

Though I hate salutations and greetings in the marketplace, yet when we got
into the middle of this, I stopped to take my last look and last farewell of
Maria.

Maria, though not tall, was nevertheless of the first order of fine forms --
affliction had touched her looks with something that was scarce earthly --
still she was feminine -- and so much was there about her of all that the heart
wishes, or the eye looks for in woman, that could the traces be ever worn out
of her brain, and those of Eliza's out of mine, she should not only eat of my
bread and drink of my own cup, but Maria should lie in my bosom, and be unto me
as a daughter.

Adieu, poor luckless maiden! -- imbibe the oil and wine which the compassion
of a stranger, as he journeyeth on his way, now pours into thy wounds -- the
Being who has twice bruised thee can only bind them up for ever.

SENT. JOURNEY, PAGE 217. SENSIBILITY.
-- DEAR Sensibility! source inexhausted of all that is precious in our joys, or
costly in our sorrows! thou chainest thy martyr down upon his bed of straw --
and it is thou who lifts him up to HEAVEN -- eternal fountain of our feelings!
it is here I trace thee -- and this is thy " divinity which stirs within me" --
not, that in some sad and sickening moments, " my soul shrinks back upon
herself, and startles at destruction" -- mere pomp of words! -- but that I feel
some generous joys and generous cares beyond myself -- all comes from thee,
great -- great SENSORIUM of the world! which vibrates, if a hair of our heads
but falls upon the ground, in the remotest desert of thy creation. -- Touched
with thee, Eugenius draws my curtain when I languish -- hears my tale of
symptoms, and blames the weather for the disorder of his nerves. Thou giv'st a
portion of it sometimes to the roughest peasant who traverses the bleakest
mountains -- he finds the lacerated lamb of another's flock -- This moment I
beheld him leaning with his head against his crook, with piteous inclination
looking down upon it! -- Oh! had I come one moment sooner! -- it bleeds to
death -- his gentle heart bleeds with it --

Peace to thee, generous swain! -- I see thou walk off with anguish -- but
thy joys shall balance it -- for happy is thy cottage -- and happy is the
sharer of it -- and happy are the lambs which sport about you.

SENT. JOURNEY, P. 226. THE SUPPER.
A SHOE coming loose from the fore-foot of the thill-horse, at the beginning of
the ascent of mount Taurira, the postillion dismounted, twisted the shoe off,
and put it in his pocket; as the ascent was of five or six miles, and that
horse our main dependence, I made a point of having the shoe fastened on again,
as well as we could; but the postillion had thrown away the nails, and the
hammer in the chaisebox, being of no great use without them, I submitted to go
on.

He had not mounted half a mile higher, when coming to a flinty piece of road,
the poor devil lost a second shoe, and from off his other fore-foot; I then got
out of the chaise in good earnest; and seeing a house about a quarter of a mile
to the left hand, with a great deal to do, I prevailed upon the postillion to
turn up to it. The look of the house, and of every thing about it, as we drew
nearer, soon reconciled me to the disaster. -- It was a little farm-house
surrounded with about twenty acres of vineyard, about as much corn -- and close
to the house, on one side, was a potagerie of an acre and a half full of every
thing which could make plenty in a French peasant's house -- and on the other
side was a little wood which furnished wherewithal to dress it. It was about
eight in the evening when I got to the house -- so I left the postillion to
manage his point as he could -- and for mine, I walked directly into the house.

The family consisted of an old grey-headed man and his wife, with five or six
sons and sons-in-law and their several wives, and a joyous genealogy out of
them.

They were all sitting down together to their lentil-soup; a large wheaten loaf
was in the middle of the table; and a flaggon of wine at each end of it
promised joy through the stages of the repast -- 'twas a feast of love.

The old man rose up to meet me, and with a respectful cordiality would have me
sit down at the table; my heart was set down the moment I entered the room; so
I sat down at once like a son of the family; and to invest myself in the
character as speedily as I could, I instantly borrowed the old man's knife, and
taking up the loaf, cut myself a hearty luncheon; and as I did it, I saw a
testimony in every eye, not only of an honest welcome, but of a welcome mixed
with thanks that I had not seemed to doubt it.

Was it this; or tell me, Nature, what else it was that made this morsel so
sweet -- and to what magic I owe it, that the draught I took of their flaggon
was so delicious with it, that they remain upon my palate to this hour?

If the supper was to my taste -- the grace which followed it was much more so.

THE GRACE.
WHEN supper was over, the old man gave a knock upon the table with the haft of
his knife, to bid them prepare for the dance: the moment the signal was given,
the women and girls ran all together into the back apartment to tie up their
hair -- and the young men to the door to wash their faces, and change their
sabots; and in three minutes every soul was ready upon a little esplanade
before the house to begin -- The old man and his wife came out last, and
placing me betwixt them, sat down upon a sopha of turf by the door.

The old man had some fifty years ago been no mean performer upon the vielle --
and, at the age he was then of, touched it well enough for the purpose. His
wife sung now-and-then a little to the tune -- then intermitted -- and joined
her old man again, as their children and grandchildren danced before them.

It was not till the middle of the second dance, when for some pauses in the
movement wherein they all seemed to look up, I fancied I could distinguish an
elevation of spirit different from that which is the cause or the effect of
simple jollity. -- In a word, I thought I beheld Religion mixing in the dance
-- but as I had never seen her so engaged, I should have looked upon it now as
one of the illusions of an imagination which is eternally misleading me, had
not the old man, as soon as the dance ended, said, that this was their constant
way; and that all his life long he made it a rule, after supper was over, to
call out his family to dance and rejoice; believing, he said, that a cheerful
and contented mind was the best sort of thanks to heaven that an illiterate
peasant could pay --

-- Or a learned prelate either, said I.

SENT. JOURNEY, P. 227. COTTAGE HAPPINESS.
NATURE! in the midst of thy disorders, thou art still friendly to the
scantiness thou have created -- with all thy great works about thee, little
have thou left to give, either to the scythe or to the sickle -- but to that
little thou grantest safety and protection; and sweet are the dwellings which
stand so sheltered.

SENT. JOURNEY, P. 233. ILLUSION.
SWEET pliability of man's spirit, that can at once surrender itself to
illusions, which cheat expectation and sorrow of their weary moments! -- Long
-- long since had ye numbered out my days, had I not trod so great a part of
them upon this enchanted ground; when my way is too rough for my feet, or too
steep for my strength, I get off it, to some smooth velvet path which fancy has
scattered over with rose-buds of delights; and having taken a few turns in it,
come back strengthened and refreshed -- When evils press sore upon me, and
there is no retreat from them in this world, then I take a new course -- I
leave it -- and as I have a clearer idea of the Elysian fields than I have of
heaven, I force myself, like Aeneas, into them -- I see him meet the pensive
shade of his forsaken Dido -- and wish to recognize it -- I see the injured
spirit wave her head, and turn off silent from the author of her miseries and
dishonours -- I lose the feelings for myself in here is -- and in those
affections which were wont to make me mourn for her when I was at school.

Surely this is not walking in a vain shadow -- nor does man disquiet himself
in vain by it -- he oftener does so in trusting the issue of his commotions to
reason only -- I can safely say for myself, I was never able to conquer any one
single bad sensation in my heart so decisively, as by beating up as fast as I
could for some kindly and gentle sensation to fight it upon its own ground.

SENT. JOURNEY, P. 165. LE DIMANCHE.
IT was Sunday; and when La Fleur came in the morning, with my coffee and roll
and butter, he had got himself so gallantly arrayed, I scarce knew him.

I had covenanted at Montriul to give him a new hat with a silver button and
loop, and four Louis d'ors pour s'adoniser, when we got to Paris; and the poor
fellow, to do him justice, had done wonders with it.

He had bought a bright, clean, good scarlet coat, and a pair of breeches of
the same -- They were not a crown worse, he said, for the wearing -- I wished
him hanged for telling me -- They looked so fresh, that though I knew the thing
could not be done, yet I would rather have imposed upon my fancy with thinking
I had bought them new for the fellow, than that they had come out of the Rue de
Friperie.

This is a nicety which makes not the heart sore at Paris.

He had purchased moreover a handsome blue satin waistcoat, fancifully enough
embroidered -- this was indeed something the worse for the service it had done,
but 't was clean scoured -- the gold had been touched up, and upon the whole
was rather showy than otherwise -- and as the blue was not violent, it suited
with the coat and breeches very well: he had squeezed out of the money,
moreover, a new bag and a solitaire; and had insisted with the Fripier, upon a
gold pair of garters to his breeches knees -- He had purchased muslin ruffles,
bien brodees, with four livres of his own money, -- and a pair of white silk
stockings for five more -- and, to top all, nature had given him a handsome
figure, without costing him a sous.

He entered the room thus set off, with his hair dressed in the first style, and
with a handsome bouquet in his breast -- in a word, there was that look of
festivity in every thing about him, which at once put me in mind it was Sunday
-- and by combining both together, it instantly struck me, that the favor he
wished to ask of me the night before, was to spend the day as every body in
Paris spent it besides. I had scarce made the conjecture, when La Fleur, with
infinite humility, but with a look of trust, as if I should not refuse him,
begged I would grant him the day, pour fair le galant vis-a-vis de sa
maitresse.

Now it was the very thing I intended to do myself vis-a-vis Madame de R**** --
I had retained the remise on purpose for it, and it would not have mortified my
vanity to have had a servant so well dressed as La Fleur was, to have got up
behind it: I never could have worse spared him.

But we must feel, not argue in these embarrassments -- the sons and daughters
of service part with liberty, but not with Nature, in their contracts; they are
flesh and blood, and have their little vanities and wishes in the midst of the
house of bondage, as well as their task masters -- no doubt, they have set
their self-denials at a price -- and their expectations are so unreasonable,
that I would often disappoint them, but that their condition puts it so much in
my power to do it.

Behold! -- Behold, I am thy servant -- disarms me at once of the powers of a
master. --

-- Thou shall go, La Fleur! said I.

-- And what mistress, La Fleur, said I, can thou have picked up in so little
a time at Paris? La Fleur laid his hand upon his breast, and said 'twas a
petite Demoiselle at Monsieur Le Count de B****'s -- La Fleur had a heart made
for society; and, to speak the truth of him, let as few occasions slip him as
his master -- so that some how or other; -- but how -- heaven knows -- he had
connected himself with the demoiselle upon the landing of the staircase,
during the time I was taken up with my passport; and as there was time enough
for me to win the Count to my interest, La Fleur had contrived to make it do to
win the maid to his. -- The family, it seems, was to be at Paris that day, and
he had made a party with her, and two or three more of the Count's household,
upon the boulevards.

Happy people! that once a week at least are sure to lay down all your cares
together, and dance and sing, and sport away the weights of grievance, which
bow down the spirit of other nations to the earth.

SENT. JOURN. P. 190. THE MONK.
CALAIS.

A POOR monk of the order of St. Francis came into the room to beg something
for his Convent. No man cares to have his virtues the sport of contingencies --
or one man may be generous as another man is puissant -- sed non, quo ad hanc
-- or be it as it may -- for there is no regular reasoning upon the ebbs and
flows of our humors; they may depend upon the same causes, for aught I know,
which influence the tides themselves -- 'twould often be no discredit to us, to
suppose it was so: I Am sure at least for myself, that in many a case I should
be more highly satisfied, to have it said by the world, "I had had an affair
with the moon, in which there was neither sin nor shame," than have it pass
altogether as my own act and deed, wherein there was so much of both.

-- But be this as it may: The moment I cast my eyes upon him, I was
predetermined not to give him a single sous, and accordingly I put my purse
into my pocket -- buttoned it up -- set myself a little more upon my center,
and advanced up gravely to him: there was something, I fear, forbidding in my
look: I have his figure this moment before my eyes, and think there was that in
it which deserved better.

The monk, as I judged from the break in his tonsure, a few scattered white
hairs upon his temples, being all that remained of it, might be about seventy
-- but from his eyes, and that sort of fire that was in them, which seemed more
tempered by courtesy than years, could be no more than sixty -- Truth might lie
between -- He was certainly sixty-five; and the general air of his countenance,
notwithstanding something seemed to have been planting wrinkles in it before
their time, agreed to the account.

It was one of those heads, which Guido has often painted -- mild, pale --
penetrating, free from all commonplace ideas of fat contented ignorance
looking downwards upon the earth -- it looked forwards; but looked, as if it
looked at something beyond this world. How one of his order came by it, heaven
above, who let it fall upon a monk's shoulders, best knows: but it would have
suited a Bramin, and had I met it upon the plains of Indostan, I had reverenced
it.

The rest of his outline may be given in a few strokes; one might put it into
the hands of any one to design, for 'twas neither elegant or otherwise, but as
character and expression made it so: it was a thin, spare form, something above
the common size, if it lost not the distinction by a bend forward in the figure
-- but it was the attitude of Entreaty; and as it now stands present to my
imagination, it gained more than it lost by it.

When he had entered the room three paces, he stood still; and laying his left
hand upon his breast, (a slender white staff with which he journey'd being in
his right) -- when I had got close up to him, he introduced himself with the
little story of the wants of his convent, and the poverty of his order -- and
did it with so simple a grace -- and such an air of deprecation was there in
the whole cast of his look and figure -- I was bewitched not to have been
struck with it.

-- A better reason was, I had predetermined not to give him a single sous.

-- It Is very true, said I, replying to a cast upwards with his eyes, with
which he had concluded his address -- it is very true -- and heaven be their
resource who have no other but the charity of the world, the stock of which, I
fear, is no way sufficient for the many great claims which are hourly made upon
it.

As I pronounced the words great claims, he gave a slight glance with his eye
downwards upon the sleeve of his tunick -- I felt the full force of the appeal
-- I acknowledge it, said I, -- a coarse habit, and that but once in three
years with meagre diet -- are no great matters: and the true point of pity is,
as they can be earned in the world with so little industry, that your order
should wish to procure them by pressing upon a fund which is the property of
the lame, the blind, the aged, and the infirm -- the captive who lies down
counting over and over again the days of his afflictions, languishes also for
his share of it; and had you been of the order of Mercy, instead of the order
of St. Francis, poor as I am, continued I, pointing at my portmanteau, full
cheerfully should it have been opened to you, for the ransom of the unfortunate
-- The monk made me a bow -- but of all others, resumed I, the unfortunate of
our own country, surely, have the first rights; and I have left thousands in
distress upon our own shore -- The monk gave a cordial wave with his head -- as
much as to say, No doubt, there is misery enough in every corner of the world,
as well as within our convent -- But we distinguish, said I, laying my hand
upon the sleeve of his tunick, in return for his appeal -- we distinguish, my
good father! betwixt those who wish only to eat the bread of their own labor
-- and those who eat the bread of other people's, and have no other plan in
life, but to get through it in sloth and ignorance, for the love of God.

The poor Franciscan made no reply: a hectic of a moment passed across his
cheek, but could not tarry -- Nature seemed to have had done with her
resentments in him; he showed none -- but letting his staff fall within his
arm, he pressed both his hands with resignation upon his breast, and retired.

My heart smote me the moment he shut the door -- Psha! said I, with an air of
carelessness, three several times -- but it would not do: every ungracious
syllable I had uttered, crowded back into my imagination: I reflected, I had no
right over the poor Franciscan, but to deny him; and that the punishment of
that was enough to the dissappointed, without the addition of unkind language
-- I considered his gray hairs -- his courteous figure seemed to re-enter and
gently ask me what injury he had done me? -- and why I could use him thus? -- I
would have given twenty livres for an advocate -- I have behaved very ill, said
I within myself; but I have only just set out upon my travels; and shall learn
better manners as I get along.

SEN. JOUR. P. 5. THE MONK.
THE good old monk was within six paces of us, as the idea of him crossed my
mind; and was advancing toward us a little out of the line, as if uncertain
whether he should break in upon us or no. -- He stopped, however, as soon as he
came up to us, with a world of frankness; and having a horn snuff box in his
hand, he presented it open to me -- You shall taste mine -- said I, pulling out
my box (which was a small tortoise one) and putting it into his hand -- It Is
most excellent, said the monk: Then do me the favor, I replied, to accept of
the box and all, and when you take a pinch out of it, sometimes recollect it
was the peace offering of a man who once used you unkindly, but not from his
heart.

The poor monk blushed as red as scarlet. Mon Dieu! said he, pressing his hands
together -- you never used me unkindly. -- I should think, said the lady, he is
not likely. I blushed in my turn; but from what movements, I leave to the few
who feel to analyze -- Excuse me, Madame, replied I -- I treated him most
unkindly; and from no provocations. It Is impossible said the lady. -- My God!
cried the monk, with a warmth of asseveration which seemed not to belong to him
-- the fault was in me, and in the indiscretion of my zeal -- the lady opposed
it, and I joined with her in maintaining it was impossible, that a spirit so
regulated as his, could give offense to any.

I knew not that contention could be rendered so sweet and pleasurable a thing
to the nerves as I then felt it. -- We remained silent, without any sensation
of that foolish pain which takes place, when in such a circle you look for ten
minutes in one another's faces without saying a word. Whilst this lasted, the
monk rubbed his horn-box upon the sleeve of his tunick; and as soon as it had
acquired a little air of brightness by the friction -- he made a low bow, and
said 'twas too late to say whether it was the weakness or goodness of our
tempers which had involved us in this contest -- but be it as it would -- he
begged we might exchange boxes -- In saying this he presented his to me with
one hand, as he took mine from me in the other: and having kissed it -- with a
stream of goodnature in his eyes, he put it into his bosom -- and took his
leave.

I guard this box as I would the instrumental parts of my religion, to help my
mind on to something better: in truth, I seldom go abroad without it; and often
and many a time have I called up by it the courteous spirit of its owner to
regulate my own, in the justlings of the world; they had found full employment
for his, as I learnt from his story, till about the forty-fifth year of his
age, when upon some military services ill requited, and meeting at the same
time with a disappointment in the tenderest of passions, he abandoned the sword
and the sex together, and took sanctuary, not so much in his convent as in
himself.

I feel a damp upon my spirits, as I am going to add, that in my last return
through Calais, upon inquiring after Father Lorenzo, I heard he had been dead
near three months, and was buried, not in his convent, but, according to his
desire, in a little cemetery belonging to it, about two leagues off: I had a
strong desire to see where they had laid him -- when upon pulling out his
little horn box, as I sat by his grave, and plucking up a nettle or two at the
head of it, which had no business to grow there, they all struck together so
forcibly upon my affections, that I burst into a flood of tears -- but I am as
weak as a woman; and I beg the world not to smile, but pity me.

S. JOURNEY, PAGE, 34. FELLOW-FEELING.
THERE is something in our nature which engages us to take part in every
accident to which man is subject, from what cause soever it may have happened;
but in such calamities as a man has fallen into through mere misfortune, to be
charged upon no fault or indiscretion of himself, there is something then so
truly interesting, that at the first sight we generally make them our own, not
altogether from a reflection that they might have been or may be so, but
oftener from a certain generosity and tenderness of nature which disposes us
for compassion, abstracted from all considerations of self: so that without any
observable act of the will, we suffer with the unfortunate, and feel a weight
upon our spirits we know not why, on seeing the most common instances of their
distress. But where the spectacle is uncommonly tragical, and complicated with
many circumstances of misery, the mind is then taken captive at once, and were
it inclined to it, has no power to make resistance, but surrenders itself to
all the tender emotions of pity and deep concern. So that when one considers
this friendly part of our nature without looking farther, one would think it
impossible for man to look upon misery without finding himself in some measure
attached to the interest of him who suffers it -- I say, one would think it
impossible -- for there are some tempers -- how shall I describe them? --
formed either of such impenetrable matter, or wrought up by habitual
selfishness to such an utter insensibility of what becomes of the fortunes of
their fellow creatures, as if they were not partakers of the same nature, or
had no lot or connection at all with the species.

SERMON, III. P. 43. THE UNMERCIFUL MAN.
LOOK into the world -- how often do you behold a sordid wretch, whose strait
heart is open to no man's affliction, taking shelter behind an appearance of
piety, and putting on the garb of religion, which none but the merciful and
compassionate have a title to wear. Take notice with what sanctity he goes to
the end of his days, in the same selfish track in which he at first set out --
turning neither to the right hand nor to the left -- but plods on -- pores all
his life long upon the ground, as if afraid to look up, lest peradventure he
should see aught which might turn him one moment out of that strait line where
interest is carrying him; -- or if, by chance, he stumbles upon a hapless
object of distress, which threatens such a disaster to him -- devou^ passing by
on the other side, as if unwilling to (...) himself to the impressions of
nature, or (...) the inconveniences which pity might lead him into upon the
occasion.

SERMON, III. P. 46. PITY.
IN benevolent natures the impulse to pity is so sudden, that like instruments
of music which obey the touch -- the objects which are fitted to excite such
impressions work so instantaneous an effect, that you would think the will was
scarce concerned, and that the mind was altogether passive in the sympathy
which her own goodness has excited. The truth is -- the soul is generally in
such cases so busily taken up and wholly engrossed by the object of pity, that
she does not attend to her own operations, or take leisure to examine the
principles upon which she acts.

SERMON, III. PAGE 51. COMPASSION.
IN generous spirits, compassion is sometimes more than a balance for self
preservation. God certainly interwove that friendly softness in our nature to
be a check upon too great a propensity toward self-love.

SERMON, V. PAGE 89. SLANDER.
OF the many revengeful, covetous, false, and ill-natured persons which we
complain of in the world, though we all join in the cry against them, what man
amongst us singles out himself as a criminal, or ever once takes it into his
head that he adds to the number? -- or where is there a man so bad, who would
not think it the hardest and most unfair imputation, to have any of those
particular vices laid to his charge?

If he has the symptoms never so strong upon him, which he would pronounce
infallible in another, they are indications of no such malady in himself -- he
sees what no one else sees, some secret and flattering circumstances in his
favor, which no doubt make a wide difference betwixt his case, and the parties
which he condemns.

What other man speaks so often and vehemently against the vice of pride, sets
the weakness of it in a more odious light, or is more hurt with it in another,
than the proud man himself? It is the same with the passionate, the designing,
the ambitious, and some other common characters in life; and being a
consequence of the nature of such vices, and almost inseparable from them, the
effects of it are generally so gross and absurd, that where pity does not
forbid, it is pleasant to observe and trace the cheat through the several
turnings and windings of the heart, and detect it through all the shapes and
appearances which it puts on.

SERMON, IV. P. 72. HOUSE OF MOURNING.
LET us go into the house of mourning, made so by such afflictions as have been
brought in, merely by the common cross accidents and disasters to which our
condition is exposed, -- where, perhaps, the aged parents sit brokenhearted,
pierced to their souls with the folly and indiscretion of a thankless child --
the child of their prayers, in whom all their hopes and expectations centered:
-- perhaps a more affecting scene -- a virtuous family lying pinched with want,
where the unfortunate support of it having long struggled with a train of
misfortunes, and bravely fought up against them, -- is now piteously borne down
at the last -- overwhelmed with a cruel blow which no forecast or frugality
could have prevented. -- O God! look upon his afflictions -- behold him
distracted with many sorrows, surrounded with the tender pledges of his love,
and the partner of his cares -- without bread to give them, unable, from the
remembrance of better days, to dig; -- to beg, ashamed.

When we enter into the house of mourning such as this -- it is impossible to
insult the unfortunate even with an improper look -- under whatever levity and
dissipation of heart, such objects catch our eyes, -- they catch likewise our
attentions, collect and call home our scattered thoughts, and exercise them
with wisdom. A transient scene of distress, such as is here sketched, how soon
does it furnish materials to set the mind at work? how necessarily does it
engage it to the consideration of the miseries and misfortunes, the dangers and
calamities to which the life of man is subject? By holding up such a glass
before it, it forces the mind to see and reflect upon the vanity, -- the
perishing condition and uncertain tenure of every thing in this world. From
reflections of this serious cast, how insensibly do the thoughts carry us
farther? -- and from considering what we are -- what kind of world we live in,
and what evils befall us in it, how naturally do they set us to look forwards at
what possibly we shall be? -- for what kind of world we are intended -- what
evils may befall us there -- and what provision we should make against them
here, whilst we have time and opportunity. If these lessons are so inseparable
from the house of mourning here supposed -- we shall find it a still more
instructive school of wisdom when we take a view of the place in that more
affecting light in which the wise man seems to confine it in the text, in
which, by the house of mourning, I believe, he means that particular scene of
sorrow, where there is lamentation and mourning for the dead. Turn in hither, I
beseech you, for a moment. Behold a dead man ready to be carried out, the only
son of his mother, and she a widow. Perhaps a more affecting spectacle a kind
and indulgent father of a numerous family, lies breathless -- snatched away in
the strength of his age -- torn in an evil hour from his children and the bosom
of a disconsolate wife. Behold much people of the city gathered together to mix
their tears, with settled sorrow in their looks, going heavily along to the
house of mourning, to perform that last melancholy office, which, when the debt
of nature is paid, we are called upon to pay to each other. If this sad
occasion which leads him there, has not done it already, take notice, to what a
serious and devout frame of mind every man is reduced, the moment he enters
this gate of affliction. The busy and fluttering spirits, which in the house of
mirth were wont to transport him from one diverting object to another -- see
how they are fallen! how peaceably they are laid! In this gloomy mansion full
of shades and uncomfortable damps to sieze the soul -- see, the light and easy
heart, which never knew what it was to think before, how pensive it is now, how
soft, how susceptible, how full of religious impressions, how deeply it is
smitten with sense and with a love of virtue. Could we, in this crisis, whilst
this empire of reason and religion lasts, and the heart is thus exercised with
wisdom and busied with heavenly contemplations -- could we see it naked as it
is -- stripped of its passions, unspotted by the world, and regardless of its
pleasures -- we might then safely rest our cause upon this single evidence, and
appeal to the most sensual whether Solomon has not made a just determination
here, in favor of the house of mourning? not for its own sake, but as it is
fruitful in virtue, and becomes the occasion of so much good. Without this end,
sorrow I own has no use but to shorten a man's days -- nor can gravity, with
all its studied solemnity of look and carriage, serve any end but to make one
half of the world merry, and impose upon the other.

SERMON. II. P. 33. FRAILTY.
THE best of men appear sometimes to be strange compounds of contradictory
qualities: and, were the accidental oversights and folly of the wisest man, --
the failings and imperfections of a religious man, -- the hasty acts and
passionate words of a meek man; -- were they to rise up in judgment against
them, -- and an ill-natured judge be suffered to mark in this manner what has
been done amiss -- what character so unexceptionable as to be able to stand
before him?

SERMON. XXXI. P. 33. INSENSIBILITY.
IT is the fate of mankind, too often, to seem insensible of what they may
enjoy at the easiest rate.

SERMON. XLVI. P. 226. UNCERTAINTY.
THERE is no condition in life so fixed and permanent as to be out of danger,
or the rea^^ of change: -- and we all may depend upon it, that we shall take
our turns of wanting and desiring. By how many unforeseen causes may riches
take wing! -- The crowns of princes may be shaken, and the greatest that ever
awed the world have experienced what the turn of the wheel can do. -- That
which has happened to one man, may befall another; and, therefore, that
excellent rule of our Savior's ought to govern us in all our actions, --
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do you also to them likewise. --
Time and chance happens to all; -- and the most affluent may be stripped of all,
and find his worldly comforts like so many withered leaves dropping from him.

SERMON. XLI. P. 209. THE DEAD ASS.
AND this, said he, putting the remains of a crust into his wallet -- and this
should have been thy portion, said he, had thou been alive to have shared it
with me. I thought by the accent, it had been an apostrophe to his child; but
'twas to his ass, and to the very ass we had seen dead in the road, which had
occasioned La Fleur's misadventure. The man seemed to lament it much; and it
instantly brought into my mind Sancho's lamentation for his; but he did it with
more true touches of nature.

The mourner was sitting upon a stone-bench at the door, with the ass's panel
and its bridle on one side, which he took up from time to time -- then laid
them down -- looked at them -- and shook his head. He then took his crust of
bread out of his wallet again, as if to eat it? held it some time in his hand
-- then laid it upon the bit of his ass's bridle -- looked wistfully at the
little arrangement he had made -- and then gave a sigh.

The simplicity of his grief drew numbers about him, and La Fleur amongst the
rest, whilst the horses were getting ready; as I continued sitting in the
post-chaise, I could see and hear over their heads.

-- He said he had come last from Spain, where he had been from the furthest
borders of Franconia; and had got so far on his return home, when his ass died.
Every one seemed desirous to know what business could have taken so old and
poor a man so far a journey from his own home.

It had pleased heaven, he said, to bless him with three sons, the finest lads
in all Germany; but having in one week lost two of them by the smallpox, and
the youngest falling ill of the same distemper, he was afraid of being berest
of them all; and made a vow, if heaven would not take him from him also, he
would go in gratitude to St. Jago in Spain,

When the mourner got thus far on his story, he stopped to pay nature her
tribute -- and wept bitterly.

He said heaven had accepted the conditions, and that he had set out from his
cottage with this poor creature, who had been a patient partner of his journey
-- that it had eat the same bread with him all the way, and was unto him as a
friend.

Every body who stood about heard the poor fellow with concern -- La Fleur
offered him money -- The mourner said he did not want it -- it was not the
value of the ass -- but the loss of him. -- The ass, he said, he was assured,
loved him -- and upon this told them a long story of a mischance upon their
passage over the Pyrenean mountains which had separated them from each other
three days; during which time the ass had sought him as much as he had sought
the ass, and that they had neither scarce eat or drank till they met.

Thou have one comfort, friend, said I, at least in the loss of thy poor beast;
I Am sure thou have been a merciful master to him, -- Alas! said the mourner, I
thought so, when he was alive -- but now he is dead I think otherwise. -- I
fear the weight of myself and my afflictions together have been too much for
him -- they have shortened the poor creature's days, and I fear I have them to
answer for. -- Shame on the world! said I to myself -- Did we love each other
as this poor soul but loved his ass -- 'twould be something.

SEN. JOURNEY, P. 74. HUMOURING IMMORAL APPETITES.
THE humouring of certain appetites, where morality is not concerned, seems to
be the means by which the Author of nature intended to sweeten this journey of
life, -- and bear us up under the many shocks and hard jostlings, which we are
sure to meet with in our way. -- And a man might, with as much reason, musfle
up himself against sunshine and fair weather, -- and at othertimes expose
himself naked to the inclemencies of cold and rain, as debar himself of the
innocent delights of his nature, for affected reserve and melancholy.

It is true, on the other hand, our passions are apt to grow upon us by
indulgence, and become exorbitant, if they are not kept under exact discipline,
that by way of caution and prevention 'twere better, at certain times, to
affect some degree of needless reserve, than hazard any ill consequences from
the other extreme.

SERMON, XXXVII. P. 13. UNITY.
LOOK into private life, -- behold how good and pleasant a thing it is to live
together in unity; -- it is like the precious ointment poured upon the head of
Aaron, that run down to his skirts; -- importing that this balm of life is felt
and enjoyed, not only by governors of kingdoms, but is derived down to the
lowest rank of life, and tasted in the most private recesses; -- all, from the
king to the peasant, are refreshed with its blessings, without which we can
find no comfort in any thing this world can give. -- It is this blessing gives
every one to sit quietly under his vine, and reap the fruits of his labor and
industry: -- in one word, which bespeaks who is the bestower of it -- it is
that only which keeps up the harmony and order of the world, and preserves
every thing in it from ruin and confusion.

SERMON, XLI. P. 203. OPPOSITION.
THERE are secret workings in human affairs, which overruled all human
contrivance, and counterplot the wisest of our councils, in so strange and
unexpected a manner, as to cast a damp upon our best schemes and warmest
endeavors.

SERMON, XXXIX. P. 170 Captain Shandy's Justification of his own Principles and
Conduct, in wishing to continue the War. Written to his Brother.
I AM not insensible, brother Shandy, that when a man, whose profession is
arms, wishes, as I have done, for war -- it has an ill aspect to the world; --
and that, how just and right soever his motives and intentions may be, -- he
stands in an uneasy posture in vindicating himself from private views in doing
it.

For this cause, if a soldier is a prudent man, which he may be, without being
a jot the less brave, he will be sure not to utter his wish in the hearing of
an enemy; for say what he will, an enemy will not believe him. -- He will be
cautious of doing it even to a friend, -- lest he may suffer in his esteem: --
But if his heart is overcharged, and a secret sigh for arms must have its vent,
he will reserve it for the ear of a brother, who knows his character to the
bottom, and what his true notions, dispositions, and principles of honor are:
What, I hope, I have been in all these, brother Shandy, would be unbecoming in
me to say: -- much worse, I know, have I been than I ought, -- and something
worse, perhaps, than I think: But such as I am, you, my dear brother Shandy,
who have sucked the same breasts with me, -- and with whom I have been brought
up from my cradle, -- and from whose knowledge, from the first hours of of our
boyish pastimes, down to this, I have concealed no one action of my life, and
scarce a thought in it -- Such as I am, brother, you must by this time know me,
with all my vices, and with all my weaknesses too, whether of my age, my
temper, my passions, or my understanding.

Tell me then, my dear brother Shandy, upon which of them it is, that when I
condemned the peace of Utrecht, and grieved the war was not carried on with
vigor a little longer, you should think your brother did it upon unworthy
views; or that in wishing for war, he should be bad enough to wish more of his
fellow creatures slain, -- more slaves made, and more families driven from
their peaceful habitations, merely for his own pleasure: -- Tell me, brother
Shandy, upon what one deed of mine do you ground it?

If when I was a schoolboy, I could not hear a drum beat, but my heart beat
with it -- was it my fault? Did I plant the propensity there? Did I sound the
alarm within? or Nature?

When Guy, Earl of Warwick, and Parismus and Parismenus, and Valentine and
Orson, and the Seven Champions of England were handed around the school, --
were they not all purchased with my own pocket money? Was that selfish, brother
Shandy? When we read over the siege of Troy, which lasted ten years and eight
months, -- though with such a train of artillery as we had at Namur, the town
might have been carried in a week -- was I not as much concerned for the Greeks
and Trojans as any boy of the whole school? Had I not three strokes of a ferula
given me, two on my right hand and one on my left, for calling Helena a bitch
for it? Did any one of you shed more tears for Hector? And when king Priam came
to the camp to beg his body, and returned weeping back to Troy without it, --
you know, brother, I could not eat my dinner.

-- Did that bespeak me cruel? Or because, brother Shandy, my blood flew out
into the camp, and my heart panted for war, -- was it a proof it could not ache
for the distresses of war too?

O brother! it is one thing for a soldier to gather laurels, -- and it is another
to scatter cypress.

-- It Is one thing, brother Shandy, for a soldier to hazard his own life -- to
leap first down into the trench, where he is sure to be cut in pieces: -- It Is
one thing from public spirit and a thirst of glory, to enter the breach the
first man, -- to stand in the foremost rank, and march bravely on with drums
and trumpets, and colors flying about his ears: -- It Is one thing, I say,
brother Shandy, to do this, -- and it is another thing to reflect on the
miseries of war; -- to view the desolations of whole countries, and consider
the intolerable fatigues and hardships which the soldier himself, the
instrument who works them, is forced (for sixpence a day, if he can get it) to
undergo.

Need I be told, dear Yorick, as I was by you, in Le Fever's funeral sermon,
That so soft and gentle a creature, born to love, to mercy, and kindness, as
man is, was not shaped for this? But why did you not add, Yorick, -- if not by
NATURE -- that he is so by NECESSITY? -- For what is war? what is it, Yorick,
when fought as ours has been, upon principles of liberty, and upon principles
of honor -- what is it, but the getting together of quiet and harmless people,
with their swords in their hands, to keep the ambitious and the turbulent
within bounds? And heaven is my witness, brother Shandy, that the pleasure I
have taken in these things, -- and that infinite delight, in particular, which
has attended my sieges in my bowling green, has arose within me, and I hope in
the Corporal too, from the consciousness we both had, that in carrying them on,
we were answering the great ends of our creation.

T. SHANDY, VOL. III. CHAP. 75. MERCY.
MY uncle Toby was a man patient of injuries; -- not from want of courage, --
where just occasions presented, or called it forth, -- I know no man under
whose arm I would sooner have taken shelter; -- nor did this arise from any
insensibility or obtuseness of his intellectual parts; -- he was of a peaceful,
placid nature, -- no jarring element in it, -- all was mixed up so kindly
within him; my uncle Toby had scarce a hear to retaliate upon a fly: -- Go, --
says he one day at dinner, to an overgrown one which had buzzed about his nose,
and tormented him cruelly all dinnertime, -- and which, after infinite
attempts, he had caught at last -- as it flew by him; -- I Will not hurt thee,
says my uncle Toby, rising from his chair, and going across the room, with the
fly in his hand, -- I Will not hurt a hair of thy head: -- Go, says he, lifting
up the sash, and opening his hand as he spoke, to let it escape; -- go, poor
devil, -- get thee gone, why should I hurt thee? -- This world surely is wide
enough to hold both thee and me.

* This is to serve for parents and governors instead of a whole volume upon
the subject.

T. SHANDY, VOL. 1. CHAP. 37. INDOLENCE.
INCONSISTENT soul that man is! -- languishing under wounds which he has the
power to heal! -- his whole life a contradiction to his knowledge! -- his
reason, that precious gift of God to him -- (instead of pouring in oil) serving
but to sharpen his sensibilities, -- to multiply his pains and render him more
melancholy and uneasy under them! -- Poor unhappy creature, that he should do
so! -- are not the necessary causes of misery in this life enough, but he must
add voluntary ones to his stock of sorrow; -- struggle against evils which
cannot be avoided, and submit to others, which a tenth part of the trouble they
create him, would remove from his heart for ever?

T. SHANDY, VOL. II. CHAP. 14. CONSOLATION.
BEFORE an affliction is digested, -- consolation ever comes too soon; -- and
after it is digested -- it comes too late: -- there is but a mark between these
two, as fine almost as a hair, for a comforter to take aim at.

T. SHANDY, VOL. II. CHAP. 22. THE STARLING.
-- BESHREW the sombre pencil! said I vauntingly -- for I envy not its powers,
which paints the evils of life with so hard and deadly a coloring. The mind
sits terrified at the objects she has magnified herself, and blackened: reduce
them to their proper size and hue she overlooks them -- It Is true, said I,
correcting the proposition -- the Bastile is not an evil to be despised -- but
strip it of its towers -- fill up the fosse -- unbarricade the doors -- call it
simply a confinement, and suppose it is some tyrant of a distemper -- and not of
a man which holds you in it -- the evil vanishes, and you bear the other half
without complaint.

I was interrupted in the hey-day of this soliloquy, with a voice which I took
to be of a child, which complained "it could not get out." -- I looked up and
down the passage, and seeing neither man, woman, or child, I went out without
further attention.

In my return back through the passage, I heard the same words repeated twice
over; and looking up, I saw it was a starling hung in a little cage -- "I cannot
get out -- I cannot get out," said the starling.

I stood looking at the bird: and to every person who came through the passage
it ran fluttering to the side toward which they approached it, with the same
lamentations of its captivity -- "I cannot get out," said the starling -- God
help thee! said I, but I will let thee out, cost what it will; so I turned
about the cage to get the door; it was twisted and double twisted so fast with
wire, there was no getting it open without pulling the cage to pieces -- I took
both hands to it.

The bird flew to the place where I was attempting his deliverance, and
thrusting his head through the trellis, pressed his breast against it, as if
impatient -- I fear, poor creature! said I, I cannot set thee at liberty --
"No, said the starling -- "I cannot get out -- I cannot get out," said the
starling.

I vow I never had my affections more tenderly awakened; nor do I remember an
incident in my life, where the dissipated spirits, to which my reason had been
a bubble, were so suddenly called home. Mechanical as the notes were, yet so
true in tune to nature were they chanted, that in one moment they overthrew all
my systematic reasonings upon the Bastile; and I heavily walked up stairs,
unsaying every word I had said in going down them.

Disguise thyself as thou will, still, slavery! said I -- still thou art a
bitter draught! and though thousands in all ages have been made to drink of
thee, thou art no less bitter on that account. -- It Is thou thrice sweet and
gracious goddess, addressing myself to LIBERTY, whom all in public or in
private worship, whose taste grateful, and ever will be so, till NATURE herself
shall change -- no tint of words can spot thy snowy mantle, or chymic power
turn thy scepter into iron -- with thee to smile upon him as he eats his crust,
the swain is happier than his monarch, from whose court thou art exiled --
Gracious heaven! cried I, kneeling down upon the last step but one in my ascent
-- Grant me but health, thou great Bestower of it, and give me but this fair
goddess as my companion -- and shower down thy mitres, if it seems good unto
thy divine providence, upon those heads which are aching for them.

SENT. JOURNEY, P. 134. THE CAPTIVE.
THE bird in his cage pursued me into my room; I sat down close by my table,
and leaning my head upon my hand, I began to figure to myself the miseries of
confinement. I was in a right frame for it, and so I gave full scope to my
imagination.

I was going to begin with the millions of my fellow creatures, born to no
inheritance but slavery: but finding, however affecting the picture was, that I
could not bring it near me, and that the multitude of sad groups in it did but
distract me --

-- I took a single captive, and having first shut him up in his dungeon, I
then looked through the twilight of his grated door to take his picture.

I beheld his body half wasted away with long expectation and confinement, and
felt what kind of sickness of the heart it was which arises from hope deferred.
Upon looking nearer I saw him pale and feverish: in thirty years the western
breeze had not once fanned his blood -- he had seen no sun, no moon, in all
that time -- nor had the voice of friend or kinsman breathed through his
lattice -- his children --

-- But here my heart began to bleed -- and I was forced to go on with another
part of the portrait.

He was sitting upon the ground upon a little straw, in the furthest corner of
his dungeon, which was alternately his chair and bed: a little calendar of
small sticks were laid at the head, notch'd all over with the dismal days and
nights he had passed there -- he had one of these little sticks in his hand,
and with a rusty nail he was etching another day of misery to add to the heap.
As I darkened the little light he had, he lifted up a hopeless eye toward the
door, then cast it down -- shook his head, and went on with his work of
affliction. I heard his chains upon his legs, as he turned his body to lay his
little stick upon the bundle -- He gave a deep sigh -- I saw the iron enter
into his soul -- I burst into tears -- I could not sustain the picture of
confinement which my fancy had drawn.

SENT. JOURNEY, P. 138. THE DWARF.
I WAS walking down that which leads from the Carousal to the Palais Royal, and
observing a little boy in some distress at the side of the gutter, which ran
down the middle of it, I took hold of his hand, and helped him over. Upon
turning up his face to look at him after, I perceived he was about forty --
Never mind, said I; some good body will do as much for me, when I am ninety.

I feel some little principles within me, which incline me to be merciful
toward this poor blighted part of my species, who have neither size or
strength to get on in the world -- I cannot bear to see one of them trod upon;
and had scarce got seated beside an old French officer at the Opera Comique,
ere the disgust was exercised, by seeing the very thing happen under the box we
sat in.

At the end of the orchestra, and betwixt that and the first side-box, there is
a small esplenade left, where, when the house is full, numbers of all ranks
take sanctuary. Though you stand, as in the parterre, you pay the same price as
in the orchestra. A poor defenseless being of this order had got thrust somehow
or other into this luckless place -- the night was hot, and he was surrounded
by beings two feet and a half higher than himself. The dwarf suffered
inexpressibly on all sides; but the thing which incommoded him most was a tall
corpulent German, near seven feet high, who stood directly betwixt him and all
possibility of seeing either the stage or the actors. The poor dwarf did all he
could to get a peep at what was going forwards, by seeking for some little
opening betwixt the German's arm and his body, trying first one side, then the
other; but the German stood square in the most unaccommodating posture that can
be imagined -- -- the dwarf might as well have been placed at the bottom of the
deepest draw-well in Paris; so he civilly reached up his hand to the German's
sleeve, and told him his distress -- -- The German turned his head back, looked
down upon him as Goliath did upon David -- and unfeelingly resumed his posture.

I was just then taking a pinch of snuff out of my monk's little horn box --
And how would thy meek and courteous spirit, my dear monk! so tempered to bear
and forbear! -- how sweetly would it have lent an ear to this poor soul's
complaint!

The old French officer seeing me lift up my eyes with an emotion, as I made
the apostrophe, took the liberty to ask me what was the matter -- I told him
the story in three words; and added, how inhuman it was.

By this time the dwarf was driven to extremes, and in his first transports,
which are generally unreasonable, had told the German he would cut off his long
queue with his knife -- The German looked back coolly, and told him he was
welcome, if he could reach it.

An injury sharpened by an insult, be it to who it will, makes every man of
sentiment a party: I could have leaped out of the box to have redressed it. --
The old French officer did it with much less confusion; for leaning a little
over, and modding to a sentinel, and pointing at the same time with his finger
to the distress -- the sentinel made his way up to it. -- There was no occasion
to tell the grievance -- the thing told itself; so thrusting back the German
instantly with his musket -- he took the poor dwarf by the hand, and placed him
before him -- This is noble! said I, clapping my hands together -- And yet you
would not permit this, said the old officer, in England.

-- In England, dear Sir, said I, we sit all at our ease.

The old French officer would have set me at unity with myself, in case I had
been at variance, -- by saying it was a bon mot -- and as a bon mot is always
worth something at Paris, he offered me a pinch of snuff.

SENT. JOURNEY, P. 113. CHARITY.
WHEN all is ready, and every article is disputed and paid for in the inn,
unless you are a little sour'd by the adventure, there is always a matter to
compound at the door, before you can get into your chaise, and that is with the
sons and daughters of poverty, who surround you. Let no man say, "Let them go
to the devil" -- it is a cruel journey to send a few miserables, and they have
had sufferings enough without it: I always think it better to take a few sous out
in my hand; and I would counsel every gentle traveller to do so likewise; he
need not be so exact in setting down his motives for giving them -- they will
be registered elsewhere.

For my own part, there is no man gives so little as I do; for few that I know
have so little to give: but as this was the first public act of my charity in
France, I took the more notice of it.

A well-a-way! said I. I have but eight sous in the world, showing them in my
hand, and there are eight poor men and eight poor women for 'em.

A poor tattered soul without a shirt on, instantly withdrew his claim, by
retiring two steps out of the circle, and making a disqualifying bow on his
part. Had the whole parterre cried out Place aux dames, with one voice, it
would not have conveyed the sentiment of a deference for the sex with half the
effect.

Just heaven! for what wise reasons have thou ordered it that beggary and
urbanity, which are at such variance in other countries, should find a way to
be at unity in this?

-- I insisted upon presenting him with a single sous, merely for his politesse.

A poor little dwarfish, brisk fellow, who stood over against me in the circle,
putting something first under his arm, which had once been a hat, took his
snuff box out of his pocket, and generously offered a pinch on both sides of
him: it was a gift of consequence and modestly declined -- The poor little
fellow pressed it upon them with a nod of welcomeness -- Prenez en -- Prenez,
said he, looking another way; so they each took a pinch -- Pity thy box should
ever want one! said I to myself; so I put a couple of sous into it -- taking a
small pinch out of his box, to enhance their value, as I did it -- He felt the
weight of the second obligation more than that of the first -- 'twas doing him
an honor -- the other was only doing him a charity -- and he made me a bow
down to the ground for it.

-- Here! said I, to an old soldier with one hand, who had been compaign'd and
worn out to death in the service -- here is a couple of sous for thee, Vive le
Roi! said the old soldier.

I had then but three sous left; so I gave one, simply pour l'amour de Dieu,
which was the footing on which it was begged -- The poor woman had a dislocated
hip: so it could not be well, upon any other motive.

Mon cher et tres charitable Monsieur -- There Is no opposing this, said I.

My Lord Anglois -- the very sound was worth the money -- so I gave my last
sous for it. But in the eagerness of giving, I had overlooked a pauvre honteux,
who had no one to ask a sous for him, and who, I believed, would have perished,
ere he could have asked one for himself: he stood by the chaise a little
without the circle, and wiped a tear from a face which I thought had seen
better days -- Good God! said I -- and I have not one single sous left to give
him -- But you have a thousand! cried all the powers of nature stirring within
me -- so I gave him -- no matter what -- I am ashamed to say how much, now --
and was ashamed to think how little, then: so if the reader can form any
conjecture of my disposition, as these two fixed points are given him, he may
judge within a livre or two what was the precise sum.

I could afford nothing for the rest, but Dieu vous benisse -- Et le bon Dieu
vous benisse encore -- said the old soldier, the dwarf, etc. The pauvre honteux
could say nothing -- he pulled out a little handkerchief, and wiped his face as
he turned away -- and I thought he thanked me more than them all.

SENT. JOURNEY, P. 66. REFLECTIONS ON DEATH.
THE Corporal --

-- Tread lightly on his ashes, ye men of genius, -- for he was your kinsman:

Weed his grave clean ye men goodness, -- for he was your brother. -- Oh
Corporal! had I thee but now, -- now, that I am able to give thee a dinner and
protection, -- how would I cherish thee! thou should wear thy Monterocap
every hour of the day, and every day of the week, -- and when it was worn out,
I would purchase thee a couple like it: -- but alas! alas! alas! now that I can
do this, in spite of their reverences -- the occasion is lost -- for thou art
gone; -- thy genius fled up to the stars from whence it came; -- and that warm
heart of thine with all its generous and open vessels, compressed into a clod
of the valley!

-- But what is this -- what is this, to that future and dreadful page, where I
look toward the velvet pall, decorated with the military ensigns of thy master
-- the first -- the foremost of created beings; where, I shall see thee,
faithful servant! laying his sword and scabbard with a trembling hand across
his coffin, and then returning pale as ashes to the door, to take his mourning
horse by the bridle, to follow his hearse, as he directed thee; -- where -- all
my father's systems shall be baffled by his sorrows; and, in spite of his
philosophy, I shall behold him, as he inspects the lackered plate, twice taking
his spectacles from off his nose, to wipe away the dew which nature has shed
upon them -- When I see him cast in the rosemary with an air of disconsolation,
which cries through my ears, -- O Toby! in what corner of the world shall I
seek thy fellow?

-- Gracious powers! which erst have opened the lips of the dumb in his
distress, and made the tongue of the stammerer speak plain -- when I shall
arrive at this dreaded page, deal not with me, then, with a stinted hand.

T. SHANDY, VOL. III. C. 68. PLEASURES OF OBSERVATION AND STUDY.
-- WHAT a large volume of adventures may be grasped within this little span of
life, by him who interests his heart in every thing, and who, having eyes to
see what tinse and chance are perpetually holding out to him as he journeyeth
on his way, misses nothing he can fairly lay his hands on. --

-- If this wont turn out something -- another will -- no matter -- it is an
essay upon human nature -- I get my labor for my pains -- it is enough -- the
pleasure of the experiment has kept my senses, and the best part of my blood
awake, and laid the gross to sleep.

I pity the man who can travel from Dan to Beersheba, and cry, It Is all barren
-- and so it is; and so is all the world to him who will not cultivate the
fruits it offers. I declare, said I, clapping my hands cheerily together, that
was I in a desert, I would find out wherewith in it to call forth my affections
-- If I could do no better, I would fasten them upon some sweet myrtle, or seek
some melancholy cypress to connect myself to -- I would court their shade, and
greet them kindly for their protection -- I would cut my name upon them, and
swear they were the loveliest trees throughout the desert: if their leaves
withered, I would teach myself to mourn, and when they rejoiced, I would
rejoice along with them.

SEN. JOURNEY, P. 51. FEELING AND BENEFICENCE.
WAS it Mackay's regiment, quoth my uncle Toby, where the poor grenadier was so
unmercifully whipped at Bruges about the ducats? -- O Christ! he was innocent!
cried Trim, with a deep sigh, -- And he was whipped, may it please your honor,
almost to death's door. -- They had better have shot him outright, as he
begged, and he had gone directly to heaven, for he was as innocent as your
honor. -- I thank thee, Trim, quoth my uncle Toby. I never think of his,
continued Trim, and my poor brother Tom's misfortunes, for we were all three
school-fellows, but I cry like a coward. -- Tears are no proof of cowardice,
Trim, I drop them often times myself, cried my uncle Toby -- I know your honor
does, replied Trim, and so am not ashamed of it myself. -- But to think, may it
please your honor, continued Trim, a tear stealing into the corner of his eye
as he spoke -- to think of two virtuous lads, with hearts as warm in their
bodies, and as honest as God could make them -- The children of honest people,
going forth with gallant spirits to seek their fortunes in the world -- and
fall into such evils! poor Tom! to be tortured upon a rack for nothing -- but
marrying a Jew's widow who sold sausages -- honest Dick Johnson's soul to be
scourged out of his body, for the ducats another man put into his knapsack! --
O! -- these are misfortunes, cried Trim, pulling out his handkerchief, -- these
are misfortunes, may it please your honor, worth laying down and crying over.

-- 'Twould be a pity, Trim, quoth my uncle Toby, thou should ever feel
sorrow of thy own -- thou feel it so tenderly for others. -- Alack-o-day,
replied the Corporal, brightening up his face -- your honor knows I have
neither wife or child -- I can have no sorrows in this world. As few as any
man, Trim, replied my uncle Toby; nor can I see how a fellow of thy light heart
can suffer, but from the distress of poverty in thy old age -- when thou art
passed all services, Trim, -- and have outlived thy friends. -- An' please your
honor, never fear, replied Trim, cheerily -- But I would have thee never fear,
Trim, replied my uncle Toby, and therefore, continued my uncle Toby, throwing
down his crutch, and getting upon his legs as he uttered the word therefore --
in recompense, Trim, of thy long fidelity to me, and that goodness of thy heart
I have had such proofs of -- whilst thy master is worth a shilling -- thou
shall never ask elsewhere, Trim, for a penny. Trim attempted to thank my uncle
Toby, -- but had not power -- tears trickled down his cheeks faster than he
could wipe them off -- he laid his hands upon his breast -- made a bow to the
ground, and shut the door.

T. SHANDY, V. II. C. 39. SLAVERY.
CONSIDER slavery, -- what it is, -- how bitter a draught, and how many
millions have been made to drink of it; -- which if it can poison all earthly
happiness when exercised barely upon our bodies, what must it be, when it
comprehends both the slavery of body and mind? -- to conceive this, look into
the history of the Romish church and her tyrants (or rather executioners), who
seem to have taken pleasure in the pangs and convulsions of their
fellow creatures. -- Examine the Inquisition, hear the melancholy notes sounded
in every cell. -- Consider the anguish of mock trials, and the exquisite
tortures consequent thereupon mercilessly inflicted upon the unfortunate, where
the racked and weary soul has so often wished to take its leave, -- but cruelly
not suffered to depart. -- Consider how many of these helpless wretches have
been haled from thence in all periods of this tyrannic usurpation, to undergo
the massacres and flames to which a false and a bloody religion has condemned
them.

-- Let us behold him in another light. --

If we consider man as a creature full of wants and necessities (whether real
or imaginary), which he is not able to supply of himself, what a train of
disappointments, vexations and dependencies are to be seen, issuing from thence
to perplex and make his being uneasy! -- How many justlings and hard struggles
do we undergo in making our way in the world! -- How barbarously held back! --
How often and basely overthrown, in aiming only at getting bread! -- How many
of us never attain it -- at least not comfortably, -- but from various unknown
causes -- eat it all our lives long in bitterness!

SERMON, 10. PAGE, 202. OPPRESSION VANQUISHED.
I HAVE not been a furlong from Shandy-hall, since I wrote to you last -- but
why is my pen so perverse? I have been to *****, and my errand was of so
peculiar a nature, that I must give you an account of it. -- You will scarce
believe me, when I tell you, it was to outjuggle a juggling attorney; to put
craft, and all its power, to defiance; and to obtain justice from one -- who
has a heart foul enough to take advantage of the mistakes of honest simplicity,
and who has raised a considerable fortune by artifice and injustice. However, I
gained my point! -- it was a star and garter to me! -- the matter was as
follows. --

"A poor man, the father of my Vestal, having by the sweat of his brow, during
a course of many laborious years, saved a small sum of money, applied to this
scribe to put it out to use for him: this was done and a bond given for the
money. -- The honest man, having no place in his cottage which he thought
sufficiently secure, put it in a hole in the thatch, which had served instead
of a strong box, to keep his money. -- In this situation the bond remained till
the time of receiving his interest drew nigh. -- But alas! -- the rain which
had done no mischief to his gold, had found out his paper-security, and had
rotted it to pieces!" -- It would be a difficult matter to paint the distress
of the old countryman upon this discovery; -- Le came to me weeping, and begged
my advice and assistance! -- it cut me to the heart!

Frame to yourself the picture of a man upwards of sixty years of age -- who
having with much penury and more toil, with the addition of a small legacy,
scraped together about fourscore pounds to support him in the infirmities of
old age, and to be a little portion for his child when he should be dead and
gone -- lost his little hoard ot once; and to aggravate his misfortune, by his
own neglect and incaution. -- "If I was young, Sir, (said he) my affliction
would have been light -- and I might have obtained it again! -- but I have lost
my comfort when I most wanted it! -- my staff is taken from me when I cannot go
alone; and I have nothing to expect in future life, but the unwilling charity
of a Parish-Officer." -- Never in my whole life, did I wish to be rich, with so
good a grace, as at this time! -- What a luxury would it have been to have said
to this afflicted fellow creature, -- "There is thy money -- go thy ways -- and
be at peace." -- But, alas! the Shandy family were never much encumbered with
money; and I (the poorest of them all) could only assist him with good council:
-- but I did not stop here. -- I went myself with him to ****, where by
persuasion, threats, and some art, which (by the bye) in such a cause, and with
such an opponent, was very justifiable -- I sent my poor client back to his
home, with his comfort and his bond restored to him. -- Bravo! -- bravo!

If a man has a right to be proud of any thing, -- it is of a good action, done
as it ought to be, without any base interest lurking at the bottom of it.

LETTER VI. TO HIS FRIENDS. A SUBJECT FOR COMPASSION.
IF there is a case under heaven which calls out aloud for the more immediate
exercise of compassion, and which may be looked upon as the compendium of all
charity, surely it is this: and I am persuaded there would want nothing more to
convince the greatest enemy to these kind of charities that it is so, but a
bare opportunity of taking a nearer view of some of the more distressful
objects of it.

Let him go into the dwellings of the unfortunate, into some mournful cottage,
where poverty and affliction reign together. There let him behold the
disconsolate widow -- sitting -- steeped in tears; -- thus sorrowing over the
infant she knows not how to succor. -- "O my child, thou art now left exposed
to a wide and a vicious world, too full of snares and temptations for thy
tender and unpractised age. Perhaps a parent's love may magnify those dangers
-- but when I consider thou art driven out naked into the midst of them without
friends, without fortune, without instruction, my heart bleeds beforehand for
the evils which may come upon thee. God, in whom we trusted, is witness, so low
had his providence placed us, that we never indulged one wish to have made thee
rich, -- virtuous we would have made thee; -- for thy father, my husband, was a
good man, and feared the Lord, -- and though all the fruits of his care and
industry were little enough for our support, yet he honestly had determined to
have spared some portion of it, scanty as it was, to have placed thee safely in
the way of knowledge and instruction -- But alas! he is gone from us, never to
return more, and with him are fled the means of doing it: -- For, Behold the
creditor is come upon us, to take all that we have." Grief is eloquent, and
will not easily be imitated. -- But let the man who is the least friend to
distresses of this nature, conceive some disconsolate widow uttering her
complaint even in this manner, and then let him consider, if there is any
sorrow like THIS sorrow, wherewith the Lord has afflicted her? or whether there
can be any charity like that, of taking the child out of the mother's bosom,
and rescuing her from these apprehensions? Should a heathen, a stranger to our
holy religion and the love it teached, should he, as he journeyed, come to the
place where SHE LAY, when he saw, would he not have compassion on her? God
forbid a Christian should this day want it! or at any time look upon such a
distress, and pass by on the other side. Rather let him do, as his Savior
taught him, bind up the wounds, and pour comfort into the heart of one, whom
the hand of God has so bruised. Let him practice what it is, with Elijah's
transport, to say to the afflicted widow, -- See, thy Son lives! lives by my
charity, and the bounty of this hour, to all the purposes which make life
desirable, -- to be made a good man, and a profitable subject: on one hand, to
be trained up to such a sense of his duty, as may secure him an interest in the
world to come; and with regard to this world, to be so brought up in it to a
love of honest labor and industry, as all his life long to earn and eat his
bread with joy and thankfulness.

SERMON V. PAGE 112. COMPASSION.
I CANNOT conceive but that the very mechanical motions which maintain life,
must be performed with more equal vigor and freedom in that man whom a great
and good soul perpetually inclines to show mercy to the miserable, than they
can be in a poor, sordid, selfish wretch, whose little contracted heart melts
at no man's affliction; but sits brooding so intently over its own plots and
concerns, as to see and feel nothing; and in truth, enjoy nothing beyond
himself: and of whom one may say what that great master of nature has, speaking
of a natural sense of harmony, which I think with more justice may be said of
compassion, that the man who had it not, -- -- Was fit for treasons, stratagems
and spoils: The MOTIONS of his spirits are dull as night; And his affections
dark as EREBUS: -- Let no such man be trusted: --

SERMON V. P. 102 HAPPINESS.
THE great pursuit of man is after happiness: it is the first and strongest
desire of his nature; -- in every stage of his life, he searches for it as for
hid treasure; -- courts it under a thousand different shapes, -- and though
perpetually disappointed, -- still persists, -- runs after and enquires for it
afresh -- asks every passenger who comes in his way, Who will show him any
good? who will assist him in the attainment of it or direct him to the
discovery of this great end of all his wishes?

He is told by one to search for it among the more gay and youthful pleasures
of life, in scenes of mirth and sprightliness, where happiness ever presides,
and is ever to be known by the joy and laughter which he will see at once
painted in her looks. A second, with a graver aspect, points out to the costly
dwellings which pride and extravagance have erected: -- tells the enquirer that
the object he is in search of inhabits there, -- that happiness lives only in
company with the great, in the midst of much pomp and outward state. That he
will easily find her out by the coat of many colors she has on, and the great
luxury and expense of equipage and furniture with which she always sits
surrounded.

The Miser blesses God! -- wonders how any one would mislead and wilfully put
him upon so wrong a scent -- convinces him that happiness and extravagance
never inhabited under the same roof; -- that if he would not be disappointed in
his search, he must look into the plain and thrifty dwelling of the prudent
man, who knows and understands the worth of money, and cautiously lays it up
against an evil hour: that it is not the prostitution of wealth upon the
passions, or the parting with it at all that constitutes happiness -- but that
it is the keeping it together, and the having and holding it fast to him and
his heirs for ever, which are the chief attributes that form this great idol of
human worship, to which so much incense is offered up every day.

The Epicure, though he easily rectifies so gross a mistake, yet at the same
time he plunges him, if possible, into a greater; for hearing the object of his
pursuit to be happiness, and knowing of no other happiness than what is seated
immediately in his senses -- he sends the enquirer there; -- tells him it is in
vain to search elsewhere for it, than where nature herself has placed it -- in
the indulgence and gratification of the appetites, which are given us for that
end: and in a word -- if he will not take his opinion in the matter -- he may
trust the word of a much wiser man, who has assured us -- that there is nothing
better in this world, than that a man should eat and drink and rejoice in his
works, and make his soul enjoy good in his labor -- for that is his portion.

To rescue him from this brutal experiment -- ambition takes him by the hand
and carries him into the world, -- shows him all the kingdoms of the earth and
the glory of them, -- points out the many ways of advancing his fortune and
raising himself to honor, -- lays before his eyes all the charms and
bewitching temptations of power, and asks if there can be any happiness in this
world like that of being caressed, courted, flattered, and followed?

To close all, the philosopher meets him bustling in the full career of this
pursuit -- stops him -- tells him, if he is in search of happiness, he is far
gone out of his way. That this deity has long been banished from noise and
tumults, where there was no rest found for her, and was fled into folitude far
from all commerce of the world; and, in a word, if he would find her, he must
leave this busy and intriguing scene, and go back to that peaceful scene of
retirement and books, from which he first set out.

In this circle too often does a man run, tries all experiments, and generally
sits down wearied and dissatisfied with them all at last -- in utter despair of
ever accomplishing what he wants -- nor knowing what to trust to after so many
disappointments; or where to lay the fault, whether in the incapacity of his
own nature, or in the insufficiency of the enjoyments themselves.

SERMON I. P. I. TRIBUTE OF AFFECTION.
MY heart stops me to pay to thee, my dear uncle Toby, once for all, the
tribute I owe thy goodness; -- here let me thrust my chair aside, and kneel
down upon the ground, whilst I am pouring forth the warmest sentiments of love
for thee, and veneration for the excellency of thy character, that ever virtue
and nature kindled in a nephew's bosom. -- Peace and comfort rest for evermore
upon thy head! -- Thou enviedst no man's comforts, -- insultedst no man's
opinions. -- Thou blackenedst no man's character, -- devouredst no man's bread:
gently, with faithful Trim behind thee, did thou amble round the little
circle of thy pleasures, jostling no creature in thy way: -- for each one's
service thou had a tear, -- for each man's need, thou had a shilling.
Whilst I am worth one, to pay a weeder, -- thy path from thy door to thy
bowling green shall never be grown up. -- Whilst there is a rood and a half of
land in the Shandy family, thy fortifications, my dear uncle Toby, shall never
be demolished.

T. SHANDY, VOL. II. CHAP. 27. POWER OF SLIGHT INCIDENTS.
IT is curious to observe the triumph of slight incidents over the mind; --
What incredible weight they have in forming and governing our opinions, both of
men and things -- that trifles light as air, shall waft a belief into the soul,
and plant it so immovable within it, -- that Euclid's demonstrations, could
they be brought to batter it in breach, should not all have power to overthrow
it.

T. SHANDY, VOL. 2. CHAP. 62. CROSSES IN LIFE.
MANY, many are the ups and downs of life, and fortune must be uncommonly
gracious to that mortal who does not experience a great variety of them: --
though perhaps to these may be owing as much of our pleasures as our pains:
there are scenes of delight in the vale as well as the mountain; and the
inequalities of nature may not be less necessary to please the eye -- than the
varieties of life to improve the heart. At best we are but a short-sighted race
of beings, with just light enough to discern our way -- to do that is our duty,
and should be our care; when a man has done this, he is safe, the rest is of
little consequence --

" Cover his head with a turf or a stone,
" It is all one, it is all one!
LETTER IV. TO HIS FRIENDS. THE CONTRAST.
THINGS are carried on in this world, sometimes so contrary to all our
reasonings, and the seeming probabilities of success, -- that even the race is
not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong; -- nay, what is stranger still
-- nor yet bread to the wise, who should last stand in want of it, -- nor yet
riches to the men of understanding, who you would think best qualified to
acquire them, -- nor yet favor to men of skill, whose merit and pretenses bid
the fairest for it, -- but that there are some secret and unseen workings in
human affairs, which baffle all our endeavors, and turn aside the course of
things in such a manner, -- that the most likely causes disappoint and fail of
producing for us the effect which we wished, and naturally expected from them.

You will see a man, of whom was you to form a conjecture from the appearances
of things in his favor, -- you would say was setting out in the world, with
the fairest prospect of making his fortune in it; -- with all the advantages of
birth to recommend him, -- of personal merit to speak for him, -- and of
friends to push him forwards: you will behold him, notwithstanding this,
disappointed in every effect you might naturally have looked for, from them;
every step he takes toward his advancement, something invisible shall pull him
back, some unforeseen obstacle shall rise up perpetually in his way, and keep
there. -- In every application he makes -- some untoward circumstance shall
blast it. -- He shall rise early, -- late take rest, -- and eat the bread of
carefulness, -- yet some happier man shall still rise up, and ever step in
before him, and leave him struggling to the end of his life, in the very same
place in which he first began it.

The history of a second, shall in all respects be the contrast to this. He
shall come into the world with the most unpromising appearance, -- shall set
forwards without fortune, without friends, -- without talents to procure him
either the one or the other. Nevertheless, you will see this clouded prospect
brighten up insensibly, unaccountably before him; every thing presented in his
way shall turn out beyond his expectations, in spite of that chain of
unsurmountable difficulties which first threatened him, -- time and chance
shall open him a way, -- a series of successful occurrences shall lead him by
the hand to the summit of honor and fortune, and, in a word, without giving
him the pains of thinking, or the credit of projecting, it shall place him in a
safe possession of all that ambition could wish for.

SERMON VIII. PAGE 152. SELFISHNESS AND MEANNESS.
THAT there is selfishness and meanness enough in the souls of one part of the
world, to hurt the credit of the other part of it, is what I shall not dispute
against; but to judge of the whole from this bad sample, and because one man is
plotting and artful in his nature; -- or, a second openly makes his pleasure or
his profit the whole center of all his designs; -- or because a third
strait-hearted wretch sits confined within himself, -- feels no misfortunes,
but those which touch himself; to involve the whole race without mercy under
such detested characters, is a conclusion as false as it is pernicious; and was
it in general to gain credit, could serve no end, but the rooting out of our
nature all that is generous, and planting in the stead of it such an aversion
to each other, as must untie the bands of society, and rob us of one of the
greatest pleasures of it, the mutual communications of kind offices; and by
poisoning the fountain, rendering every thing suspected that flows through it.

SERMON VII. PAGE 137. VICE NOT WITHOUT USE.
THE lives of bad men are not without use, -- and whenever such a one is drawn,
not with a corrupt view to be admired, -- but on purpose to be detested -- it
must excite such a horror against vice, as will strike indirectly the same good
impression. And though it is painful to the last degree to paint a man in the
shades which his vices have cast upon him, yet when it serves this end, it
carries its own excuse with it.

SERMON IX. PAGE 173. EFFECTS OF MISFORTUNE.
WHAT by successive misfortunes; by failings and cross accidents in trade; by
miscarriage of projects: -- what by unsuitable expenses of parents,
extravagances of children, and the many other secret ways whereby riches make
themselves wings and fly away; so many surprising revolutions do every day
happen in families, that it may not seem strange to say, that the posterity of
some of the most liberal contributors here, in the changes which one century
may produce, may possibly find shelter under this very plant which now they so
kindly water. Nay, so quickly sometimes has the wheel turned round, that many a
man has lived to enjoy the benefit of that charity which his own piety
projected.

SERMON V. PAGE 98. YORICK'S OPINION OF GRAVITY.
SOMETIMES, in his wild way of talking, he would say that gravity was an errant
scoundrel; and he would add, of the most dangerous kind too, -- because a sly
one; and that he verily believed, more honest, well-meaning people were bubbled
out of their goods and money by it in one twelvemonth, than by pocket-picking
and shop-lifting in seven. In the naked temper which a merry heart discovered,
he would say, there was no danger, -- but to itself: -- whereas the very
essence of gravity was design, and consequently deceit; -- 'twas a taught trick
to gain credit of the world for more sense and knowledge than a man was worth;
and that, with all its pretensions, -- it was no better, but often worse than
what a French wit had long ago defined it, viz. -- A mysterious carriage of the
body to cover the defects of the mind.

T. SHANDY, VOL. 1. C. 11. REFLECTION UPON MAN.
WHEN I reflect upon man; and take a view of that dark side of him which
represents his life as open to so many causes of trouble -- when I consider how
often we eat the bread of affliction, and that we are born to it, as to the
portion of our inheritance -- when one runs over the catalogue of all the cross
reckonings and sorrowful items with which the heart of man is overcharged,
it is wonderful by what hidden resources the mind is enabled to stand it out,
and bear itself up, as it does against the impositions laid upon our nature.

T. SHANDY, VOL. 11. CHAP. 42. REVENGE.
REVENGE from some baneful corner shall level a tale of dishonor at thee,
which no innocence of heart or integrity of conduct shall set right.

-- The fortunes of thy house shall totter, -- thy character, which led the way
to them, shall bleed on every side of it, -- thy faith questioned, -- thy works
belied, -- thy wit forgotten, -- thy learning trampled on. To wind up the last
scene of thy tragedy, CRUELTY and COWARDICE, twin ruffians, hired and set on by
MALICE in the dark, shall strike together at all thy infirmities and mistakes:
the best of us, lie open there, -- and trust me, -- trust me, -- when, to
gratify a private appetite, it is once resolved upon, that an innocent and an
helpless creature shall be sacrificed, it is an easy matter to pick up sticks
enough from any thicket where it has strayed, to make a fire to offer it up with.

T. SHANDY, V. 1. C. 12. EJACULATION.
TIME wastes too fast: every letter I trace tells me with what rapidity life
follows my pen; the days and hours of it, more precious, my dear Jenny! than
the rubies about thy neck, are flying over our heads like light clouds of a
windy day, never to return more -- every thing presses on -- whilst thou art
twisting that lock, -- see! it grows gray; and every time I kiss thy hand to
bid adieu, and every absence which follows it, are preludes to that eternal
separation which we are shortly to make.

T. SHANDY, V. IV. C. 67. FATALITY.
THERE is a fatality attends the actions of some men: order them as they will,
they pass through a certain medium which so twists and refracts them from their
true directions -- that, with all the titles to praise which a rectitude of
heart can give, the doers of them are nevertheless forced to live and die
without it.

T. SHANDY, V. I. C. 10. CONJUGAL HAPPINESS.
IT must have been observed by many a peripateric philosopher, that nature has
set up by her own unquestionable authority certain boundaries and fences to
circumscribe the discontent of man: she has effected her purpose in the
quietest and easiest manner by laying him under almost insuperable obligations
to work out his ease, and to sustain his sufferings at home. It is there only
that she has provided him with the most suitable objects to partake of his
happiness, and bear a part of that burden which, in all countries and ages, has
ever been too heavy for one pair of shoulders. It Is true we are endued with an
imperfect power of spreading our happiness sometimes beyond her limits, but
it is so ordered, that from the want of languages, connections, and
dependencies, and from the difference in education, customs and habits, we lie
under so many impediments in communicating our sensations out of our own
sphere, as often amount to a total impossibility.

SEN. JOURNEY, P. 13. LIFE.
WHAT is the life of man! is it not to shift from side to side! -- from sorrow
to sorrow? -- to button up one cause of vexation; -- and unbutton another!

T. SHANDY, VOL. II. CHAP. 66. TRIM'S EXPLANATION OF THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT.
-- PR'YTHEE, Trim, quoth my father, -- What do thou mean, by " honoring
thy father and mother?"

Allowing them, an' please your honor, three halfpence a day out of my pay,
when they grow old. -- And did thou do that, Trim? said Yorick. -- He did
indeed, replied my uncle Toby. -- Then, Trim, said Yorick, springing out of his
chair, and taking the Corporal by the hand, thou art the best commentator upon
that part of the Decalogue; and I honor thee more for it, Corporal Trim, than
if thou had had a hand in the Talmud itself.

T. SHANDY, VOL. III. CHAP. 32. HEALTH.
O Blessed health! thou art above all gold and treasure; it is thou who
enlargest the soul, -- and openest all it is powers to receive instruction, and
to relish virtue. -- He that has thee has little more to wish for! and he that
is so wretched as to want thee, -- wants every thing with thee.

T. SHANDY, VOL. III. CHAP. 33. LOVE.
IT IS sweet to feel by what fine-spun threads our affections are drawn together.

SEN. JOUR. P. 126. SOLITUDE.
CROWDED towns, and busy societies, may delight the unthinking, and the gay --
but solitude is the best nurse of wisdom.

LETTER III. TO HIS FRIENDS. TRIBULATION.
THE way to Fame is like the way to Heaven -- through much tribulation.

LETTER IX. FRIENDSHIP.
FRIENDSHIP is the balm and cordial of life, and without it, it is a heavy load
not worth sustaining.

LETTER LXXX. SOLITUDE.
IN solitude the mind gains strength, and learns to lean upon herself: -- in
the world it seeks or accepts of a few treacherous supports -- the feigned
compassion of one -- the flattery of a second -- the civilities of a third --
the friendship of a fourth -- they all deceive, and bring the mind back to
retirement, reflection, and books.

LETTER LXXXII. FLATTERY.
DELICIOUS essence! how refreshing art thou to nature! how strongly are all its
powers and all its weaknesses on thy side! how sweetly do thou mix with the
blood, and help it through the most difficult and tortuous passages to the
heart.

SEN. JOUR. P. 210. PERFECTION.
MAN has a certain compass, as well as an instrument; and the social and other
calls have occasion by turns for every key in him; so that if you begin a note
too high or too low, there must be a want either in the upper or under part, to
fill up the system of harmony. -- A polished nation makes every one its debtor;
and besides, urbanity itself, like the fair sex, has so many charms, it goes
against the heart to say it can do ill; and yet, I believe, there is but a
certain line of perfection, that man, take him altogether, is empowered to
arrive at -- if he gets beyond, he rather exchanges qualities, than gets them.
I must not presume to say, how far this has affected the French -- But should
it ever be the case of the English, in the progress of their resentments, to
arrive at the same polish which distinguishes the French, if we did not lose
the politesse de caeur, which inclines men more to humane actions, than
courteous ones -- we should at least lose that distinct variety and originality
of character, which distinguishes them, not only from each other, but from all
the world besides.

SEN. JOUR. P. 171. FORGIVENESS.
THE brave only know how to forgive; -- it is the most refined and generous
pitch of virtue human nature can arrive at. -- Cowards have done good and kind
actions Christian Hero.
, -- cowards have even fought -- nay sometimes even conquered; but a coward
never forgave. -- It is not in his nature; -- the power of doing it flows only
from a strength and greatness of soul, conscious of its own force and security,
and above the little temptations of resenting every fruitless attempt to
interrupt its happiness.

SERMON. XII. P. 244. FAVORS.
IN returning favors, we act differently from what we do in conferring them:
in the one case we simply consider what is best, -- in the other what is most
acceptable. The reason is, that we have a right to act according to our own
ideas of what will do the party most good, in the case where we bestow a
favor; -- but where we return one, we lose this right, and act according to
his conceptions, who has obliged us, and endeavor to repay in such a manner as
we think it most likely to be accepted in discharge of the obligation.

SERMON. XIII. P. 260. RUSTIC FELICITY.
MANY are the silent pleasures of the honest peasant; who rises cheerfully to
his labor: -- look into his dwelling, -- where the scene of every man's
happiness chiefly lies; -- he has the same domestic endearments, -- as much joy
and comfort in his children, -- and as flattering hopes of their doing well, --
to enliven his hours and glad his heart, as you could conceive in the most
affluent station. -- And I make no doubt, in general, but if the true account
of his joys and sufferings were to be balanced with those of his betters, --
that the upshot would prove to be little more than this, -- that the rich man
had the more meat, -- but the poor man the better stomach; -- the one had more
luxury, -- more able physicians to attend and set him to rights; -- the other,
more health and soundness in his bones, and less occasion for their help; --
that, after these two articles betwixt them were balanced, -- in all other
things they stood upon a level: -- that the sun shines as warm, -- the air
blows as fresh, and the earth breathes as fragrant upon the one as the other;
and that they have an equal share in all the beauties and real benefits of
nature.

SERMON. XLIV. P. 260. DIFFERENCE IN MEN.
POVERTY, exile, loss of fame or friends, the death of children, the dearest of
all pledges of a man's happiness, make not equal impressions upon everytemper.
-- You will see one man undergo, with scarce the expense of a sigh, -- what
another, in the bitterness of his soul, would go mourning for all his life
long: -- nay, a hasty word, or an unkind look, to a soft and tender nature,
will strike deeper than a sword to the hardened and senseless. -- If these
reflections hold true with regard to misfortunes, -- they are the same with
regard to enjoyments: -- we are formed differently, -- have different tastes
and perceptions of things; -- by the force of habit, education, or a particular
cast of mind, -- it happens that neither the use or possession of the same
enjoyments and advantages, produce the same happiness and contentment; -- but
that it differs in every man almost according to his temper and complexion: so
that the self-same happy accidents in life, which shall give raptures to the
choleric or sanguine man, shall be received with indifference by the cold and
phlegmatic; -- and so oddly perplexed are the accounts of both human happiness
and misery in this world, -- that trifles, light as air, shall be able to make
the hearts of some men sing for joy; -- at the same time that others, with real
blessings and advantages, without the power of using them, have their hearts
heavy and discontented.

Alas! if the principles of contentment are not within us, -- the height of
station and worldly grandeur will as soon add a cubit to a man's stature as to
his happiness.

SERMON XLIV. P. 258 AGAINST HASTY OPINION.
THERE are numbers of circumstances which attend every action of a man's life,
which can never come to the knowledge of the world, -- yet ought to be known,
and well weighed, before sentence with any justice can be passed upon him. -- A
man may have different views and a different sense of things from what his
judges have; and what he understands and feels and what passes within him, may
be a secret treasured up deeply there for ever -- A man, through bodily
infirmity, or some complectional defect, which perhaps is not in his power to
correct, may be subject to inadvertencies, -- to starts -- and unhappy turns of
temper; he may lay open to snares he is not always aware of; or, through
ignorance and want of information and proper helps, he may labor in the dark:
-- in all which cases, he may do many things which are wrong in themselves, and
yet be innocent; -- at least an object rather to be pitied than censured with
severity and ill will. -- These are difficulties which stand in every one's way
in the forming a judgment of the characters of others.

SERMON XLIV. P. 255. VANITY.
VANITY bids all her sons to be generous and brave, -- and her daughters to be
chaste and courteous. -- But why do we want her instructions? -- Ask the
comedian who is taught a part he feels not. --

SERMON XVII, PAGE, 45. AFFECTED HONESTY.
LOOK out of your door, -- take notice of that man: see what disquieting,
intriguing, and shifting, he is content to go through, merely to be thought a
man of plain-dealing: -- three grains of honesty would save him all this
trouble -- alas! he has them not. --

SERMON XVII, PAGE, 45. AFFECTED PIETY.
BEHOLD a second, under a show of piety hiding the impunities of a debauched
life: -- he is just entering the house of God: -- would he was more pure -- or
less pious: -- but then he could not gain his point.

IBID. PAGE, 46. AFFECTED SANCTITY.
ABSERVE a third going on almost in the same track, with what an inflexible
sanctity of deportment he sustains himself as he advances: -- every line in his
face writes abstinence; -- every stride looks like a check upon his desires:
see, I beseech you, how he is cloak'd up with sermons, prayers, and sacraments;
and so bemuffled with the externals of religion, that he has not a hand to
spare for a worldly purpose; -- he has armor at least -- Why does he put it
on? Is there no serving God without all this? Must the garb of religion be
extended so wide to the danger of its rending? -- Yes truly, or it will not
hide the secret -- and, what is that? -- That the saint has no religion at all.

SERMON XVII P. 46. OSTENTATIOUS GENEROSITY.
-- BUT here comes GENEROSITY; giving -- not to a decayed artist -- but to the
arts and sciences themselves. -- See, -- he builds not a chamber in the wall
apart for the prophet; but whole schools and colleges for those who come after.
Lord! how they will magnify his name! -- it is in capitals already; the first --
the highest, in the gilded rent-roll of every hospital and asylum. --

-- One honest tear shed in private over the unfortunate, is worth it all.

SERMON XVII. PAGE, 47. OPINION.
WE are perpetually in such engagements and situations, that it is our duties to
speak what our opinions are -- but God forbid that this ever should be done but
from its best motive -- The sense of what is due to virtue, governed by
discretion and the utmost fellowfeeling: were we to go on otherwise, beginning
with the great broad cloak of hypocrisy, and so down through all its little
trimmings and facings, tearing away without mercy all that looked seemly, -- we
should leave but a tattered world of it.

SERMON XVII. P. 50 DEFAMATION,
DOES humanity clothe and aducate the unknown orphan? -- Poverty thou have no
genealogies: -- See! is he not the father of the child? Thus do we rob heroes
of the best part of their glory -- their virtue. Take away the motive of the
act, you take away all that is worth having in it; -- wrest it to ungenerous
ends, you load the virtuous man who did it with infamy: -- undo it all -- I
beseech you: give him back his honor, -- restore the jewel you have taken from
him -- replace him in the eye of the world --

It is too late.

IBID. P. 52 TYRANNY.
IT is the mild and quiet half of the world, who are generally outraged and
borne down by the other half of it: but in this they have the advantage;
whatever be the sense of their wrongs, that pride stands not so watchful a
sentinel over their forgiveness, as it does in the breasts of the fierce and
froward; we should all of us, I believe, be more forgiving than we are, would
the world but give us leave; but it is apt to interpose its ill-offices in
remissions, especially of this kind: the truth is, it has its laws, to which
the heart is not always a party; and acts so like an unfeeling engine in all
cases without distinction, that it requires all the firmness of the most
settled humanity to bear up against it.

SERMON XVIII, P. 61. RELIGION.
THERE are no principles but those of religion to be depended on in cases of
real distress, and that these are able to encounter the worst emergencies; and
to bear us up under all the changes and chances to which our life is subject.

SERMON XV. P. 12. ELOQUENCE.
GREAT is the power of eloquence; but never is it so great as when it pleads
along with nature, and the culprit is a child strayed from his duty, and
returned to it again with tears.

SERMON XX. P. 101 GENEROSITY.
GENEROSITY sorrows as much for the overmatched, as Pity herself does.

IBID. SOCIETY.
NOTWITHSTANDING all we meet with in books, in many of which, no doubt, there
are a good many handsome things said upon the sweets of retirement, etc.... yet
still " it is not good for man to be alone:" nor can all which the cold-hearted
pedant stuns our ears with upon the subject, ever give one answer of
satisfaction to the mind; in the midst of the loudest vauntings of philosophy,
Nature will have her yearnings for society and friendship; -- a good heart
wants some object to be kind to -- and the best parts of our blood, and the
purest of our spirits, suffer most under the destitution.

Let the torpid monk seek heaven comfortless and alone. -- God speed him! For
my own part, I fear, I should never so find the way: let me be wise and
religious -- but let me be Man: wherever thy Providence places me, or whatever
be the road I take to get to thee -- give me some companion in my journey, be
it only to remark to, How our shadows lengthen as the sun goes down; -- to whom
I may say, How fresh is the face of Nature! How sweet the flowers of the field!
How delicious are these fruits!

SERMON XVIII. P. 60. DISSATISFACTION.
I PITY the men whose natural pleasures are burdens, and who fly from joy (as
these splenetic and morose souls do), as if it was really an evil in itself.

SERMON XXII. P. 145. SORROW AND HEAVINESS OF HEART.
IF there is an evil in this world, it is sorrow and heaviness of heart. -- The
loss of goods, -- of health, -- of coronets and mitres, are only evil, as they
occasion sorrow; -- take that out -- the rest is fancy, and dwells only in
the head of man.

Poor unfortunate creature that he is! as if the causes of anguish in the heart
were not enough -- but he must fill up the measure with those of caprice; and not
only walk in a vain shadow, -- but disquiet himself in vain too.

We are a restless set of beings; and as we are likely to continue so to the
end of the world, -- the best we can do in it, is to make the same use of this
part of our character, which wise men do of other bad propensities -- when they
find they cannot conquer them, -- they endeavor, at least, to divert them into
good channels.

If therefore we must be a solicitous race of self-tormentors, -- let us drop
the common objects which make us so, -- and for God's sake be solicitous only
to live well.

SERMON XXII. P. 145. ROOTED OPINION NOT EASILY ERADICATED.
HOW difficult you will find it to convince a miserly heart, that any thing is
good which is not profitable? or a libertine one, that any thing is bad, which
is pleasant?

SERMON XXIII. PAGE, 163. DEATH.
THERE are many instances of men, who have received the news of death with the
greatest ease of mind, and even entertained the thoughts of it with smiles upon
their countenances, -- and this, either from strength of spirits and the
natural cheerfulness of their temper, -- or that they knew the world, and cared
not for it -- or expected a better -- yet thousands of good men, with all the
helps of philosophy, and against all the assurances of a well-spent life, that
the change must be to their account, -- upon the approach of death have still
leaned toward this world, and wanted spirits and resolution to bear the shock
of a separation from it for ever.

SERMON XVII. PAGE, 37. SORROW.
SWEET is the look of sorrow for an offense, in a heart determined never to
commit it more! -- upon that alter only could I offer up my wrongs.

SERMON XVIII. P. 64. SIMPLICITY.
SIMPLICITY is the great friend to Nature, and if I would be proud of any thing
in this silly world, it should be of this honest alliance.

SERMON XXIV. P. 187. COVETOUSNESS.
TO know truly what it is, we must know what masters it serves; -- they are
many, and of various casts and humors, -- and each one lends it something of
its own complexional tint and character.

This, I suppose, may be the cause that there is a greater and more whimsical
mystery in the love of money, than in the darkest and most nonsensical problem
that ever was pored on.

Even at the best, and when the passion seems to seek something more than its
own amusement, -- there is little -- very little, I fear, to be said for its
humanity. -- It may be a sport to the Miser, -- but consider, -- it must be
death and destruction to others. -- The moment this sordid humor begins to
govern -- farewell all honest and natural affection! farewell, all he owes to
parents, to children, to friends! -- how fast the obligations vanish! see -- he
is now stripped of all feelings whatever: -- the shrill cry of justice -- and
the low lamentation of humble distress, are notes equally beyond his compass.
-- Eternal God! see! -- he passes by one whom thou have just bruised, without
one pensive reflection: -- he enters the cabin of the widow whose husband and
child thou have taken to thyself, -- exacts his bond, without a sigh! --
Heaven! if I am to be be tempted, -- let it be by glory, -- by ambition, -- by
some generous and manly vice: -- if I must fall, let it be by some passion
which thou have planted in my nature, which shall not harden my heart, but
leave me room at last to retreat and come back to thee!

SERMON. XIX. PAGE, 81. HUMILITY.
HE that is little in his own eyes, is little too in his desires, and
consequently moderate in his pursuit of them: like another man he may fail in
his attempts and lose the point he aimed at, -- but that is all, -- he loses
not himself, -- he loses not his happiness and peace of mind with it, -- even
the contentions of the humble man are mild and placid. -- Blessed character!
when such a one is thrust back, who does not pity him? -- when he falls, who
would not stretch out a hand to raise him up?

SERMON XXV. P. 193 PATIENCE AND CONTENTMENT.
PATIENCE and Contentment, -- which like the treasure hid in the field for
which a man sold all he had to purchase -- is of that price that it cannot be
had at too great a purchase, since without it, the best condition in life
cannot make us happy, -- and with it, it is impossible we should be miserable
even in the worst.

SERMON XV. P. 16. HUMILITY CONTRASTED WITH PRIDE.
WHEN we reflect upon the character of Humility, -- we are apt to think it
stands the most naked and defenseless of all virtues whatever, -- the least
able to support its claims against the insolent antagonist who seems ready to
bear him down, and all opposition which such a temper can make.

Now, if we consider him as standing alone, -- no doubt, in such a case he will
be overpowered and trampled upon by his opposer; -- but if we consider the meek
and lowly man, as he is -- fenced and guarded by the love, the friendship and
wishes of all mankind, -- that the other stands alone, hated, discountenanced,
without one true friend or hearty well-wisher on his side; -- when this is
balanced, we shall have reason to change our opinion, and be convinced that the
humble man, strengthened with such an alliance, is far from being so
overmatched as at first sight he may appear; -- nay I believe one might venture
to go further and engage for it, that in all such cases, where real fortitude
and true personal courage were wanted, he is much more likely to give proof of
it, and I would sooner look for it in such a temper than in that of his
adversary. Pride may make a man violent, -- but Humility will make him firm: --
and which of the two, do you think, likely to come off with honor? -- he who
acts from the changeable impulse of heated blood, and follows the uncertain
motions of his pride and fury, -- or the man who stands cool and collected in
himself; who governs his resentiments, instead of being governed by them, and
on every occasion acts upon the steady motives of principle and duty.

SERMON XXV. P. 193 WITH regard to the provocations and offenses which are
unavoidably happening to a man in his commerce with the world, -- take it as a
rule, -- as a man's pride is, -- so is always his displeasure; as the opinion
of himself rises, -- so does the injury, -- so does his resentment: it is this
which gives edge and force to the instrument which has struck him, -- and
excites that heat in the wound which renders it incurable.

See how different the case is with the humble man: one half of these painful
conflicts he actually escapes; the other part fall lightly on him: -- he
provokes no man by contempt; thrusts himself forward as the mark of no man's
envy; so that he cuts off the first fretful occasions of the greatest part of
these evils; and for those in which the passions of others would involve him,
like the humble shrub in the valley, gently gives way, and scarce feels the
injury of those stormy encounters which rend the proud cedar, and tear it up by
its roots.

SERMON XXV. P. 190. PRIDE.
THE proud man, -- see! -- he is sore all over; touch him -- you put him to
pain: and though of all others, he acts as if every mortal was void of all
sense and feeling, yet is possessed with so nice and exquisite a one himself,
that the slights, the little neglects and instances of disesteem, which would
be scarce felt by another man, are perpetually wounding him, and oft-times
piercing him to his very heart.

SERMON XXIV. P. 174. Pride is a vice which grows up in society so insensibly;
-- steals in unobserved upon the heart upon so many occasions; -- forms itself
upon such strange pretensions, and when it has done, veils itself under such a
variety of unsuspected appearances, -- sometimes even under that of Humility
itself; -- in all which cases, Self-love, like a false friend, instead of
checking, most treacherously feeds this humor, -- points out some excellence
in every soul to make him vain, and think more highly of himself than he ought
to think; -- that, upon the whole, there is no one weakness into which the
heart of man is more easily betrayed -- or which requires greater helps of good
sense and good principles to guard against.

SERMON XXIV. P. 177. BEAUTY.
BEAUTY has so many charms, one knows not how to speak against it; and when it
happens that a graceful figure is the habitation of a virtuous soul, when the
beauty of the face speaks out the modesty and humility of the mind, and the
justness of the proportion raises our thoughts up to the art and wisdom of the
great Creator, something may be allowed it, -- and something to the
embellishments which set it off; -- and yet, when the whole apology is read, --
it will be found at last, that Beauty, like Truth, never is so glorious as when
it goes the plainest.

SERMON XXIV. P. 187. WISDOM.
LESSONS of wisdom have never such power over us, as when they are wrought into
the heart, through the ground -- work of a story which engages the passions: Is
it that we are like iron, and must first be heated before we can wrought upon?
or, Is the heart so in love with deceit, that where a true report will not
reach it, we must cheat it with a fable, in order to come at truth?

SERMON XX. P. 93. HUNGER.
OF all the terrors of nature, that of one day or other dying by hunger, is the
greatest, and it is wisely wove into our frame to awaken man to industry, and
call forth his talents; and though we seem to go on carelessly, sporting with
it as we do with other terrors, -- yet, he that sees this enemy fairly, and in
his most frightful shape, will need no long remonstrance to make him turn out
of the way to avoid him.

SERMON XX. P. 98. DISTRESS.
NOTHING so powerfully calls home the mind as distress: the tense fiber then
relaxes, -- the soul retires to itself, -- sits pensive and susceptible of
right impressions: if we have a friend, it is then we think of him; if a
benefactor, at that moment all his kindnesses press upon our mind.

SERMON XX. P. 97. IMPOSTURE.
IMPOSTURE is all dissonance, let what master soever of it undertake the part;
let him harmonise and modulate it as he may, one tone will contradict another;
and whilst we have ears to hear, we shall distinguish it: it is truth only which
is consistent and ever in harmony with itself: it sits upon our lips, like the
natural notes of some melodies, ready to drop out, whether we will or no; -- it
racks no invention to let ourselves alone, and needs fear no critic, to have
the same excellency in the heart, which appears in the action.

SERMON XVII. P. 48. CONTENTMENT.
THERE is scarce any lot so low, but there is something in it to satisfy the
man whom it has befallen; providence having so ordered things, that in every
man's cup, how bitter soever, there are some cordial drops -- some good
circumstances, which, if wisely extracted, are sufficient for the purpose he
wants them, -- that is, to make him contented, and if not happy, at least
resigned.

SERMON XV. P. 19. EVILS.
UNWILLINGLY does the mind digest the evils prepared for it by others; -- for
those we prepare ourselves, -- we eat but the fruit which we have planted and
watered: -- a shattered fortune -- a shattered frame, so we have but the
satisfaction of shattering them ourselves, pass naturally enough into the
habit, and by the ease with which they are both done, they save the spectator a
world of pity: but for those, like Jacob's, brought upon him by the hands from
which he looked for all his comforts, -- the avarice of a parent -- the
unkindness of a relation, -- the ingratitude of a child, -- they are evils
which leave a scar; -- besides, as they hang over the heads of all, and
therefore may fall upon any; -- every looker-on has an interest in the tragedy;
-- but then we are apt to interest ourselves no otherwise, than merely as the
incidents themselves strike our passions, without carrying the lesson further:
-- In a word -- we realize nothing: -- we sigh -- we wipe away the tear, -- and
there ends the story of misery, and the moral with it.

SERMON XXII. P. 134. OPPRESSION.
SOLOMON says, Oppression will make a wise man mad. -- What will it do then to
a tender and ingenuous heart, which feels itself neglected, -- too full of
reverence for the author of its wrongs to complain? -- see, it sits down in
silence, robbed by discouragements, of all its natural powers to please, --
born to see others loaded with caresses -- in some uncheery corner it nourishes
its discontent, -- and with a weight upon its spirits, which its little stock
of fortitude is not able to withstand, -- it droops, and pines away. -- Sad
victim of caprice!

SERMON XXII. P. 136. VIRTUE AND VICE.
WHOEVER considers the state and condition of human nature, and upon this view,
how much stronger the natural motives are to virtue than to vice, would expect
to find the world much better than it is, or ever has been. -- For who would
suppose the generality of mankind to betray so much folly, as to act against
the common interest of their own kind, as every man does who yields to the
temptation of what is wrong.

SERMON XXXIII. P. 61. SIN.
NO motives have been great enough to restrain those from sin who have secretly
loved it, and only sought pretenses for the practice of it.

SERMON XXXIII. P. 62. SINCERITY.
AN inward sincerity will of course influence the outward deportment; but where
the one is wanting, there is great reason to suspect the absence of the other.

SERMON XLIII. P. 246. WISDOM.
THERE is no one project to which the whole race of mankind is so universally a
bubble, as to that of being thought wise; and the affectation of it is so
visible, in men of all complexions, that you every day see some one or other so
very solicitous to establish the character, as not to allow himself leisure to
do the things which fairly win it; -- expending more art and stratagem to
appear so in the eyes of the world, than what would suffice to make him so in
truth.

It is owing to the force of this desire, that you see in general, there is no
injury touches a man so sensibly, as an insult upon his parts and capacity:
tell a man of other defects, that he wants learning, industry or application,
-- he will hear your reproof with patience. -- Nay you may go further: take him
in a proper season, you may tax his morals, -- you may tell him he is irregular
in his conduct, -- passionate or revengeful in his nature -- loose in his
principles; -- deliver it with the gentleness of a friend, -- possibly he will
not only bear with you, -- but, if ingenuous, he will thank you for your
lecture, and promise a reformation; -- but hint, -- hint but at a defect in his
intellectuals, -- touch but that sore place, -- from that moment you are looked
upon as an enemy sent to torment him before his time, and in return may reckon
upon his resentment and ill will for ever; so that in general you will find it
safer to tell a man, he is a knave than a fool, -- and stand a better chance of
being forgiven, for proving he has been wanting in a point of common honesty,
than a point of common sense. -- Strange souls that we are! as if to live well
was not the greatest argument of wisdom; -- and, as if what reflected upon our
morals, did not most of all reflect upon our understandings!

SERMON XXVI. P. 207. CORPORAL TRIM'S REFLECTIONS ON DEATH.
MY young master in London is dead! said Obadiah. --

-- A green satin nightgown of my mother's, which had been twice scoured, was
the first idea which Obadiah's exclamation brought into Susannah's head. --
Then, quoth Susannah, we must all go into mourning. --

-- O! 'twill be the death of my poor Mistress, cried Susannah. -- my mother's
whole wardrobe followed. -- What a procession! her red damask, -- her
orange-tawny, -- her white and yellow-lutestrings, -- her brown taffata, -- her
bone-laced caps, her bed-gowns, -- and comfortable underpetticoats, -- Not a
rag was left behind. -- " No, -- she will never look up again," said Susannah.

We had a fat, foolish scullion -- my father, I think, kept her for her
simplicity; -- she had been all autumn struggling with a dropsy. -- He is dead!
-- said Obadiah, -- he is certainly dead! -- So am not I, said the foolish
scullion.

-- Here is sad news, Trim! cried Susannah, wiping her eyes, as Trim stepped
into the kitchen, -- master Bobby is dead and buried, -- the funeral was an
interpolation of Susannah's we shall have all to go into mourning, said
Susannah.

I hope not, said Trim. -- You hope not! cried Susannah earnestly. -- The
mourning ran not in Trim's head, whatever it did in Susannah's. -- I hope --
said Trim, explaining himself, I hope in God the news is not true. I heard the
letter read with my own ears, answered Obadiah; Oh! he is dead, said Susannah --
As sure, said the scullion, as I am alive.

I lament for him from my heart and my soul, said Trim, fetching a sigh. --
Poor creature! -- poor boy! poor gentleman!

-- He was alive last Whitsuntide, said the coachman. -- Whitsuntide! alas!
cried Trim, extending his right arm, and falling instantly into the same
attitude in which he read the sermon, -- what is Whitsuntide, Jonathan, (for
that was the coachman's name), or Shrovetide, or any tide or time past, to
this? Are we not here now, continued the Corporal, (striking the end of his
stick perpendicularly upon the floor, so as to give an idea of health and
stability) -- and are we not -- (dropping his hat upon the ground) gone! in a
moment! -- 'Twas infinitely striking! Susannah burst into a flood of tears. --
We are not stocks and stones. -- Jonathan, Obadiah, the cook-maid, all melted.
-- The foolish fat scullion herself, who was scouring a fish-kettle upon her
knees, was roused with it. -- The whole kitchen crowded about the Corporal.

-- To us, Jonathan, who know not what want or care is, -- who live here in the
service of two of the best of masters -- (bating in my own case his majesty
King William the Third, whom I had the honor to serve both in Ireland and
Flanders) -- I own it, that from Whitsuntide to within three weeks of
Christmas, -- it is not long -- it is like nothing; -- but to those, Jonathan,
who know what death is, and what havoc and destruction he can make, before a
man can well wheel about, -- it is like a whole age. -- O Jonathan! 'twould make
a good-natured man's heart bleed, to consider, continued the Corporal,
(standing perpendicularly), how low many a brave and upright fellow has been
laid since that time! -- And trust me, Susy, added the Corporal, turning to
Susannah, whose eyes were swimming in water, -- before that time comes round
again, -- many a bright eye will be dim. -- Susannah placed it to the right
side of the page -- she wept -- but she curt'sied too. -- Are we not, continued
Trim, looking still at Susannah, -- are we not like a flower of the field -- a
tear of pride stole in betwixt every two tears of humiliation -- else no tongue
could have described Susannah's affliction -- is not all flesh grass? -- It Is
clay, -- it is dirt. -- They all looked directly at the scullion, -- the
scullion, had just been scouring a fish-kettle -- It was not fair. --

-- What is the finest face that ever man looked at! -- I could hear Trim talk
so for ever, cried Susannah, -- what is it! ( Susannah laid her hand upon
Trim's shoulder) -- but corruption? -- Susannah took it off.

-- Now I love you for this -- and it is this delicious mixture within you,
which makes you dear creatures what you are -- and he who hates you for it --
all I can say of the matter is -- That he has either a pumpkin for his head --
or a pippen for his heart, -- and whenever he is dissected 'twill be found so.

For my own part, I declare it, that out of doors, I value not death at all: --
not this.. added the Corporal, snapping his fingers, -- but with an air which
no one but the Corporal could have given to the sentiment. -- in battle, I
value death not this... and let him not take me cowardly, like poor Joe
Gibbins, in scouring his gun. -- What is he? A pull of a trigger -- a push of a
bayonet an inch this way or that -- makes the difference. -- Look along the
line -- to the right -- see! Jack's down! well, -- it is worth a regiment of
horse to him. -- No -- it is Dick, Then Jack's no worse. Never mind which, -- we
pass on, -- in hot pursuit the wound itself which brings him is not felt, --
the best way is to stand up to him, -- the man who flies, is in ten times more
danger than the man who marches up into his jaws. -- I Have looked him, added the
Corporal, an hundred times in the face, -- and know what he is -- He Is nothing,
Obadiah, at all in the field. -- But he is very frightful in a house, quoth
Obadiah. -- I never mind it myself, said Jonathan, upon a coach-box.

I pity my mistress. -- She will never get the better of it, cried Susannah. --
Now I pity the Captain the most of any one in the family, answered Trim. --
Madam will get ease of heart in weeping, -- and the Squire in talking about it,
-- but my poor master will keep it all in silence to himself. -- I shall hear
him sigh in his bed for a whole month together, as he did for Lieutenant Le
Fever. An' please your honor, do not sigh so piteously, I would say to him as
I laid beside him. I cannot help it, Trim, my master would say, -- it is so
melancholy an accident -- I cannot get it off my heart. -- Your honor fears
not death yourself. -- I hope, Trim, I fear nothing, he would say, but the
doing a wrong thing. -- Well, he would add, whatever betides, I will take care
of Le Fever's boy. -- And with that, like a quieting draught, his honor would
sall asleep.

I like to hear Trim's stories about the Captain, said Susannah. -- He is a
kindly-hearted gentleman, said Obadiah, as ever lived. -- Aye, -- and as brave
a one too, said the Corporal, as ever stepped before a platoon. There never was a
better officer in the king's army, -- or a better man in God's world; for he
would march up to the mouth of a cannon, though he saw the lighted match at the
very touchhole, -- and yet, for all that, he has a heart as soft as a child
for other people. -- He would not hurt a chicken. -- I would sooner, quoth
Jonathan, drive such a gentleman for seven pounds a year -- than some for
eight. -- Thank thee, Jonathan! for thy twenty shillings, -- as much, Jonathan,
said the Corporal, shaking him by the hand, as if thou had put the money into
my own pocket. -- I would serve him to the day of my death out of love. He is a
friend and a brother to me, -- and could I be sure my poor brother Tom was
dead, -- continued the Corporal, taking out his handkerchief, -- was I worth
ten thousand pounds, I would leave every shilling of it to the Captain. -- Trim
could not refrain from tears at this testamentary proof he gave of his
affection to his master. -- The whole kitchen was affected.

TRIS. SHANDY, VOL. III. C. 7. MR. SHANDY's RESIGNATION FOR THE LOSS OF HIS SON.
PHILOSOPHY has a fine saying for every thing -- For Death it has an entire set.

"'It Is an inevitable chance -- the first statute in Magna Charta -- it is an
everlasting act of parliament -- All must die."

"Monarchs and princes dance in the same ring with us."

" -- To die, is the great debt and tribute due unto nature: tombs and
monuments, which should perpetuate our memories, pay it themselves; and the
proudest pyramid of them all, which wealth and science have erected, has lost
its apex, and stands obtruncated in the traveller's horizon. -- Kingdoms and
provinces, and towns and cities, have they not their periods? and when those
principles and powers, which at first cemented and put them together, have
performed their several Revolutions, they fall back. -- "

"Where is Troy, and Mycenae, and Thebes, and Delos, and Persepolis, and
Agrigentum? -- What is become of Nineveh and Babylon, of Cyzicum, and
Mitylenae? The fairest towns that ever the sun rose upon, are now no more: the
names only are left, and those [for many of them are wrong spelt] are falling
themselves by piece-meals to decay, and in length of time will be forgotten,
and involved with every thing in a perpetual night: the world itself -- must
must come to an end."

"Returning out of Asia, when I sailed from Aegina toward Megara, I began to
view the country round about. Aegina was behind me, Megara was before, Pyraeus
on the right hand, Corinth on the left. -- What flourishing towns now prostrate
upon the earth! Alas! alas! said I to myself, that man should disturb his soul
for the loss of a child, when so much as this lies awfully buried in his
presence. -- Remember, said I to myself again -- remember thou art a man. -- "

"My son is dead! -- so much the better; -- it is a shame in such a tempest to
have but one anchor."

"But he is gone for ever from us! -- be it so. He is got from under the hands
of his barber before he was bald -- he is, but risen from a feast before he was
surfeited -- from a banquet before he had got drunken."

"The Thracians wept when a child was born -- and feasted and made merry when a
man went out of the world; and with reason. Death opens the gate of fame, and
shuts the gate of envy after it, -- it unlooses the chain of the captive, and
puts the bondsman's task into another man's hands."

"Show me the man, who knows what life is, who dreads it, and I Will show thee a
prisoner who dreads his liberty."

THE END.
Printed by C. ETHERINGTON, No. 3, Peterborough-Court, Fleet Street.

Just Published for the Improvement of Youth of both Sexes, in two Parts, the
fourth Edition, with the Head of the Author, Price 4s. 6d. sewed.

THE BEAUTIES OF JOHNSON: CONSISTING OF MAXIMS AND OBSERVATIONS, MORAL,
CRITICAL, AND MISCELLANEOUS Accurately extracted from the Works of DR. SAMUEL
JOHNSON, And arranged in Alphabetical Order, after the Manner of the Duke de la
Roche-Foucault's Maxims.

"We frequently fall into error and folly, not because the true principles of
action are not known, but because for a time they are not remembered: he may
therefore be justly numbered among the benefactors of mankind, who CONTRACTS
THE GREAT RULES OF LIFE INTO SHORT SENTENCES, that may be easily impressed on
the memory, and taught by frequent recollection to recur habitually to the
mind." RAMBLER.

[ Also, Price 3 s. 6 d.]

LETTERS UPON ANCIENT HISTORY, IN FRENCH AND ENGLISH; Chiefly written by the
EARL OF CHESTERFIELD TO HIS SON, PHILIP STANHOPE, Esquire Including short Accounts
of the TROJANS, ETHIOPIANS, EGYPTIANS, ASSYRIANS, MEDES, PERSIANS, GREEKS, AND
ROMANS.

PUBLISHED For the USE of SCHOOLS and PRIVATE PUPILS.


