The Abuses of CONSCIENCE: SET FORTH IN A SERMON, PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL
CHURCH OF St. PETER's, YORK, AT THE SUMMER ASSIZES, BEFORE THE Hon. Mr. Baron
CLIVE, AND THE Hon. Mr. Baron SMYTHE, On SUNDAY, July 29, 1750.

By LAURENCE STERN, A.M. Prebendary of the said Church.

Published at the Request of the High Sheriff and Grand Jury.

YORK: Printed by CAESAR WARD: or JOHN HILDYARD, in Stonegate, 1750. [Price
SIXPENCE.]

TO Sir WILLIAM PENNYMAN, Bart High Sheriff of the County of YORK,
AND TO Sir Edmund Anderson, of Kildwick-Percy, Bart. Ralph Pennyman, of
Beverly; Montagu Brook, of Skeleton; Thomas Norcliffe, of Langton; John Hutton,
of Marske; William Turner, of Clints; Thomas Fawkes, of Farnley; Richard
Langley, of Wykeham-Abbey; George Montgomery Metham, of North-Cave; Tindal
Thompson, of Setterington; Thomas Robinson, of Beckhouse; Edmund Charles
Blomberg, of Kirkby-Misperton; Francis Best, of Beverly; Thomas Bradshaw, of
Hemsworth; Roger Beckwith, of Handall-Abbey; William Sutton, of Carleton; Peter
Conset, of Brawith; George Iveson, of Bilton; Richard Dawson, of Poppleton;
William Meek, of Wighill-Park; John Tailor, of Foulforth; Charles Cottrell, of
Scarborough; and Ralph Lutton, of Knapton, Esquires.
GENTLEMEN,
I Thank you for the great Compliment passed on this Sermon, by your unanimous
Request to have it sent to the Press; which I have done, without sending any
Apology along with it for ^ts Unfitness to appear in Public; -- Ex^uses of this
Kind being generally so well known, both as to Substance and Form, that it is
altogether unnecessary to copy them.

I will therefore only beg your favorable Acceptance of it; and to believe,
That though my chief View in complying with your Desire, was the Hopes of doing
Good, by contributing something to the Interests of Religion and Morality; yet
it is no small Pleasure which I receive at the same Time, from the Opportunity
it gives me of declaring how great an Honor and Esteem I have for so many
Gentlemen of Worth and Character. I am,

Your most humble And most obedient Servant, L. STERN.

HEBREWS xiii. 18. -- For we trust we have a good Conscience, --
TRUST! -- Trust we have a good Conscience! -- Surely, you will say, if there
is any Thing in this Life which a Man may depend upon, and to the Knowledge of
which he is capable of arriving upon the most indisputable Evidence, it must be
this very Thing, -- Whether he has a good Conscience, or no.

If a Man thinks at all, he cannot well be a Stranger to the true State of this
Account; -- He must be privy to his own Thoughts and Desires; -- He must
remember his past Pursuits, and know certainly the true Springs and Motives,
which, in general, have governed the Actions of his Life.

In other Matters we may be deceived by false Appearances; and, as the Wise Man
complains, Hardly do we guess aright at the Things that are upon the Earth, and
with Labor do we find the Things that are before us: -- But here the Mind has
all the Evidence and Facts within herself: -- Is conscious of the Web she has
wove: -- Knows its Texture and Fineness, and the exact Share which every
Passion has had in working upon the several Designs, which Virtue or Vice has
planned before her.

Now, -- as Conscience is nothing else but the Knowledge which the Mind has
within itself of this; and the Judgment, either of Approbation or Censure,
which it unavoidably makes upon the successive Actions of our Lives, -- it is
plain, you will say, from the very Terms of the Proposition, Whenever this
inward Testimony goes against a Man, and he stands self-accused, -- that he
must necessarily be a guilty Man. And, on the contrary, When the Report is
favorable on his Side, and his Heart condemns him not, -- that it is not a
Matter of Trust, as the Apostle intimates, but a Matter of Certainty and Fact,
that the Conscience is good, and that the Man must be good also.

At first Sight, this may seem to be a true State of the Case; and I make no
Doubt but the Knowledge of Right and Wrong is so truly impressed upon the Mind
of Man; that, did no such Thing ever happen, as that the Conscience of a Man,
by long Habits of Sin, might (as the Scripture assures us, it may) insensibly
become hard; and, like some tenderer Parts of his Body, by much Stress, and
continual hard Usage, lose, by Degrees, that nice Sense and Perception with
which God and Nature endowed it. -- Did this never happen: -- Or was it certain
that Self-Love could never hang the least Bias upon the Judgment: -- Or that
the Little Interests below could rise up and perplex the Faculties of our upper
Regions, and encompass him about with Clouds and thick Darkness: -- Could no
such Thing as Favor and Affection enter this sacred Court: -- Did WIT disdain
to take a Bribe in it, or was ashamed to show its Face as an Advocate for an
unwarrantable Enjoyment: -- Or, lastly, were we assured that INTEREST stood
always unconcerned whilst the Cause was hearing, -- and that PASSION never got
into the Judgment Seat, and pronounced Sentence in the Stead of Reason, which
is supposed always to preside and determine upon the Case: -- Was this truly
so, as the Objection must suppose, no Doubt, then, the Religious and Moral
State of a Man would be exactly what He himself esteemed it; and the Guilt or
Innocence of every Man's Life could be known, in general, by no better Measure,
than the Degrees of his own Approbation or Censure.

I own, in one Case, whenever a Man's Conscience does accuse him (as it seldom
errs on that Side) that he is Guilty; and, unless in melancholy and
hypochondriac Cases, we may safely pronounce upon, that there is always
sufficient Grounds for the Accusation.

But, the Converse of the Proposition will not hold true, -- namely, That
wherever there is Guilt, the Conscience must accuse; and, if it does not, that
a Man is therefore Innocent. -- This is not Fact: -- So that the common
Consolation which some good Christian or other is hourly administering to
himself, -- That he thanks God, his Mind does not misgive him; and that,
consequently, he has a good Conscience, because he has a quiet one. -- As
current as the Inference is, and as infallible as the Rule appears at first
Sight, yet, when you look nearer to it, and try the Truth of this Rule upon
plain Facts, you find it liable to so much Error, from a false Application of
it: -- The Principle on which it goes so often perverted: -- The whole Force of
it lost, and sometimes so vilely cast away, that it is painful to produce the
common Examples from human Life, which confirm this Account.

A Man shall be vicious and utterly debauched in his Principles; exceptionable
in his Conduct to the World; shall live shameless, -- in the open Commission of
a Sin which no Reason or Pretense can justify; -- a Sin, by which, contrary to
all the Workings of Humanity within, he shall ruin for ever the deluded Partner
of his Guilt; -- rob her of her best Dowry; -- and not only cover her own Head
with Dishonor, but involve a whole virtuous Family in Shame and Sorrow for her
Sake. Surely, -- you will think, Conscience must lead such a Man a troublesome
Life: -- He can have no Rest Night or Day from its Reproaches.

Alas! Conscience had something else to do all this Time than break in upon
him: As Elijah reproached the God Baal, this Domestic God, was either talking,
or pursuing, or was in a Journey, or, peradventure, he slept and could not be
awoke. Perhaps he was gone out in Company, with HONOR, to fight a Duel; -- to
pay off some Debt at Play; -- or dirty Annuity the Bargain of his Lust. --
Perhaps, Conscience all this Time was engaged at home, talking aloud against
petty Larceny, and executing Vengeance upon such puny Crimes as his Fortune and
Rank, in Life, secured him against all Temptation of committing: -- So that he
lives as merrily, -- sleeps as soundly in his Bed; -- and, at the last, meets
Death with as much Unconcernedness, -- perhaps, much more so than a much better
Man.

Another is sordid, unmerciful; -- A strait-hearted, selfish Wretch, incapable
either of private Friendships, or public Spirit. -- Take Notice how he passes
by the Widow and Orphan in their Distress; and sees all the Miseries incident
to human Life without a Sigh or a Prayer. -- Shall not Conscience rise up and
sting him on such Occasions? No. -- Thank God, there is no Occasion. 'I pay
every Man his own, -- I have no Fornication to answer to my Conscience, no
faithless Vows or Promises to make up, I have debauched no Man's Wife or Child.
-- Thank God I am not as other Men, Adulterers, Unjust, or even as this
Libertine who stands before me.'

A Third is crafty and designing in his Nature. -- View his whole Life, -- It Is
nothing else but a cunning Contexture of dark Arts and unequitable Subterfuges
basely to defeat the true Intent of all Laws, plain Dealing and the safe
Enjoyment of our several Properties. -- You will see such a one, working out a
Frame of little Designs upon the Ignorance and Perplexities of the poor and
needy Man. -- Shall raise a Fortune upon the Inexperience of a Youth, -- or the
unsuspecting Temper of his Friend, who would have trusted him with his Life.
When old Age comes on, and Repentance calls him to look back upon this black
Account, and state it over again with his Conscience. -- Conscience looks into
the Statutes at Large, -- finds perhaps no express Law broken by what he has
done; -- perceives no Penalty or Forfeiture incurred; -- sees no Scourge waving
over his Head, -- or Prison opening its Gate upon him. -- What is there to
affright his Conscience? -- Conscience has got safely entrenched behind the
Letter of the Law, sits there invulnerable, fortified with Cases and Reports so
strongly on all Sides, -- that it is not Preaching can dispossess it of its Hold.

Another shall want even this Refuge, -- shall break through all this Ceremony of
slow Chicane; scorns the doubtful Workings of secret Plots and cautious Trains
to bring about his Purpose. -- See the barefaced Villain how he cheats, lies,
perjures, robs, murders, -- Horrid! But indeed much better was not to be
expected in this Case. -- The poor Man was in the dark! -- His Priest had got
the keeping of his Conscience, -- and all he had let him know of it was, That
he must believe in the Pope; -- Go to Mass; -- Cross himself; -- tell his
Beads; -- be a good Catholic; and that this in all Conscience was enough to
carry him to Heaven. What? -- If he perjures? -- Why, -- He had a mental
Reservation in it. But if he is so wicked and abandoned a Wretch as you
represent him, -- If he robs, or murders, will not Conscience on every such
Act, receive a Wound itself? -- Ay, -- But the Man has carried it to
Confession, the Wound digests there, and will do well enough, -- and in a short
Time be quite healed up by Absolution.

O Popery! What have thou to answer for? -- when not content with the too many
natural and fatal Ways through which the Heart is every Day thus treacherous to
itself above all Things -- Thou have wilfully set open this wide Gate of Deceit
before the Face of this unwary Traveller, -- too apt, God knows, to go astray
of himself, -- and confidently speak Peace to his Soul, when there is no Peace.

Of this the common Instances, which I have drawn out of Life, are too
notorious to require much Evidence. If any Man doubts the Reality of them, or
thinks it impossible for Man to be such a Bubble to himself, -- I must refer
him a Moment to his Reflections, and shall then venture to trust the Appeal
with his own Heart. Let him consider in how different a Degree of Detestation,
Numbers of wicked Actions stand there, though equally bad and vicious in their
own Natures -- He will soon find that such of them as strong Inclination or
Custom have prompted him to commit, are generally dressed out and painted with
all the false Beauties which a soft and flattering Hand can give them; and that
the others, to which he feels no Propensity, appear, at once, naked and
deformed, surrounded with all the true Circumstances of Folly and Dishonor.

When David surprised Saul sleeping in the Cave, and cut off the Skirt of his
Robe, -- we read, his Heart smote him for what he had done. -- But, in the
Matter of Uriah, where a faithful and gallant Servant, whom he ought to have
loved and honored, fell to make Way for his Lust; where Conscience had so much
greater Reason to take the Alarm, -- his Heart smote him not. -- A whole Year
had almost passed from the first Commission of that Crime -- to the Time Nathan
was sent to reprove him; and we read not once of the least Sorrow or
Compunction of Heart, which he testified during all that Time, for what he had
done.

Thus Conscience, this once able Monitor, -- placed on high as a Judge within
us -- and intended, by our Maker, as a just and equitable one too, -- by an
unhappy Train of Causes and Impediments, -- takes often such imperfect
Cognizance of what passes, -- does its Office so negligently, -- sometimes so
corruptly, that it is not to be trusted alone: And therefore, we find, there is
a Necessity, an absolute Necessity, of joining another Principle with it, to
aid, if not govern, its Determinations.

So that if you would form a just Judgment of what is of infinite Importance to
you not to be misled in; namely, in what Degree of real Merit you stand, either
as an honest Man, -- an useful Citizen, -- a faithful Subject to your King, --
or a good Servant to your God, -- call in RELIGION and MORALITY. -- Look --
What is written in the Law of God? -- How read thou? -- Consult calm Reason,
and the unchangeable Obligations of Justice and Truth, -- What say they?

Let Conscience determine the Matter upon these Reports, -- and then, if thy
Heart condemn thee not, -- which is the Case the Apostle supposes, -- the Rule
will be infallible, -- Thou will have Confidence toward God; -- that is, have
just Grounds to believe the Judgment thou have past upon thyself, is the
Judgment of God; and nothing else but an Anticipation of that righteous
Sentence, which will be pronounced, hereafter, upon thee by that BEING, before
whom thou art finally to give an Account of thy Actions.

Blessed is the Man, indeed then, as the Author of the Book of Ecclesiasticus
expresses it, Who is not pricked with the Multitude of his Sins. -- Blessed is
the Man whose Heart has not condemned him, and who is not fallen from his Hope
in the Lord. Whether he be rich, continues he, or whether he be poor, -- if he
have a good Heart (a Heart thus guided and informed) -- He shall at all Times
rejoice in a cheerful Countenance. -- His Mind shall tell him more than seven
Watchmen that sit above upon a Tower on high. -- In the darkest Doubts it shall
conduct him safer than a thousand Casuists, and give the State he lives in a
better Security for his Behavior, than all the Clauses and Restrictions put
together, which the Wisdom of the Legislature is forced to multiply, -- forced
I say, as Things stand; human Laws being not a Matter of original Choice, but
of pure Necessity, brought in to fence against the mischievous Effects of those
Consciences, which are no Law unto themselves: Wisely intending by the many
Provisions made, That in all such corrupt or misguided Cases, where Principle
and the Checks of Conscience will not make us upright, -- to supply their
Force, and by the Terrors of Jails and Halters oblige us to it.

To have the Fear of God before our Eyes; and, in our mutual Dealings with each
other, to govern our Actions by the eternal Measures of Right and Wrong: -- The
first of these will comprehend the Duties of Religion: The second those of
Morality; which are so inseparably connected together, that you cannot divide
these two Tables, even in Imagination (though the Attempt is often made in
Practice) without breaking and mutually destroying them both.

I said the Attempt is often made; -- and so it is; -- there being nothing more
common than to see a Man, who has no Sense at all of Religion, -- and indeed
has so much of Honesty, as to pretend to none; who would yet take it as the
bitterest Affront, should you but hint at a Suspicion of his Moral Character,
-- or imagine he was not conscientiously just, and scrupulous to the uttermost
Mite.

When there is some Appearance that it is so, -- though one is not willing even
to suspect the Appearance of so great a Virtue, as moral Honesty; -- yet, were
we to look into the Grounds of it in the present Case, I am persuaded we should
find little Reason to envy such a Man the Honor of his Motive.

Let him declaim as pompously as he can on the Subject, it will be found at
last to rest upon no better Foundation than either his Interest, his Pride, his
Ease; or some such little and changeable Passion, as will give us but small
Dependence upon his Actions in Matters of great Stress.

Give me Leave to illustrate this by an Example.

I know the Banker I deal with, or the Physician I usually call in, to be
neither of them Men of much Religion: I hear them make a Jest of it every Day,
and treat all its Sanctions with so much Scorn and Contempt, as to put the
Matter past Doubt. Well, -- notwithstanding this, I put my Fortune into the
Hands of the one, -- and, what is dearer still to me, I trust my Life to the
honest Skill of the other. -- Now let me examine what is my Reason for this
great Confidence. -- Why, -- in the first Place, I believe there is no
Probability that either of them will employ the Power, I put into their Hands,
to my Disadvantage. I consider that Honesty serves the Purposes of this Life.
-- I know their Success in the World depends upon the Fairness of their
Characters; -- that they cannot hurt me without hurting themselves more.

But put it otherwise, namely, that Interest lay for once on the other Side. --
That a Case should happen wherein the one, without Stain to his Reputation,
could secret my Fortune, and leave me naked in the World; -- Or that the Other
could send me out of it, and enjoy an Estate by my Death, without Dishonor to
himself or his Art. -- In this Case what Hold have I of either of them? --
Religion, the strongest of all Motives, is out of the Question. -- Interest,
the next most powerful Motive in this World, is strongly against me. -- I have
nothing left to cast into the Scale to balance this Temptation. -- I must lay
at the Mercy of Honor, -- or some such capricious Principle. -- Strait
Security! for two of my best and most valuable Blessings, -- my Property and my
Life!

As therefore we can have no Dependence upon Morality without Religion; -- so,
on the other Hand, there is nothing better to be expected from Religion without
Morality; nor can any Man be supposed to discharge his Duties to God, (whatever
fair Appearances he may hang out, that he does so) if he does not pay as
conscientious a Regard to the Duties, which he owes his Fellow Creature.

This is a Point capable in itself of strict Demonstration. -- Nevertheless,
it is no Rarity to see a Man whose real moral Merit stands very low, who yet
entertains the highest Notion of himself, in the Light of a devout and
religious Man. He shall not only be covetous, revengeful, implacable, -- but
even wanting in Points of common Honesty. -- Yet because he talks loud against
the Infidelity of the Age, -- is zealous for some Points of Religion, -- goes
twice a Day to Church, -- attends the Sacraments, -- and amuses himself with a
few Instrumental Duties of Religion, -- shall cheat his Conscience into a
Judgment that for this he is a religious Man, and has discharged faithfully his
Duty to God: And you will find, that such a Man, through Force of this Delusion,
generally looks down with Spiritual Pride upon every other Man who has less
Affectation of Piety, though, perhaps, ten Times more moral Honesty than himself.

This is likewise a sore Evil under the Sun; and I believe there is no one
mistaken Principle which, for its Time, has wrought more serious Mischiefs. For
a general Proof of this, -- examine the History of the Romish Church. -- See
what Scenes of Cruelty, Murders, Rapines, Bloodshed, have all been sanctified
by a Religion not strictly governed by Morality.

In how many Kingdoms of the World, has the crusading Sword of this misguided
Saint-Errant spared neither Age, or Merit, or Sex, or Condition. -- And, as he
fought under the Banners of a Religion, which set him loose from Justice and
Humanity, -- he showed none, -- mercilessly trampled upon both, heard neither
the Cries of the Unfortunate, nor pitied their Distresses.

If the Testimony of past Centuries in this Matter is not sufficient, --
consider at this Instant, how the Votaries of that Religion are every Day
thinking to do Service and Honor to God, by Actions which are a Dishonor and
Scandal to themselves.

To be convinced of this, go with me for a Moment into the Prisons of the
Inquisition. -- Behold Religion with Mercy and Justice chained down under her
Feet, -- there sitting ghastly upon a black Tribunal, propp'd up with Racks and
Instruments of Torment. -- Hark! -- What a piteous Groan! -- See the melancholy
Wretch who uttered it, just brought forth to undergo the Anguish of a
Mock-Trial, and endure the utmost Pains that a studied System of religious
Cruelty has been able to invent. Behold this helpless Victim delivered up to
his Tormentors. His Body so wasted with Sorrow and long Confinement, you will see
every Nerve and Muscle as it suffers. -- Observe the last Movement of that
horrid Engine. -- What Convulsions it has thrown him into. -- Consider the
Nature of the Posture in which he now lies stretched. -- What exquisite Torture
he endures by it. -- It Is all Nature can bear. -- Good God! See how it keeps
his weary Soul hanging upon his trembling Lips, willing to take its Leave, --
but cruelly not suffered to depart. Behold the unhappy Wretch led back to his
Cell, -- dragged out of it again to meet the Flames, -- and the Insults in his
last Agonies, which this Principle -- This Principle that there can be Religion
without Morality, has prepared for him.

The surest Way to try the Merit of any disputed Notion, -- is to trace down
the Consequences such a Notion has produced, and compare them with the Spirit
of Christianity. -- It Is the short and decisive Rule, which our Savior has
left for these and such like Cases, -- and is worth a thousand Arguments. -- By
their Fruits, says he, ye shall know them.

Thus Religion and Morality, like fast Friends and natural Allies, can never be
set at Variance, without the mutual Ruin and Dishonor of them both; -- and
whoever goes about this unfriendly Office, is no Well-wisher to either; -- and
whatever he pretends, he deceives his own Heart, and, I fear, his Morality as
well as his Religion will be vain.

I will add no farther to the Length of this Discourse, than by two or three
short and independent Rules, deducible from what has been said.

1 st. Whenever a Man talks loudly against Religion, always suspect that it is
not his Reason but his Passions which have got the Better of his Creed. -- A
bad Life and a good Belief are disagreeable and troublesome Neighbors, and
where they separate, depend upon it, it is for no other Cause but Quietness Sake.

2 dly. When a Man thus represented, tells you in any particular Instance, that
such a Thing goes against his Conscience, -- always believe he means exactly
the same Thing as when he tells you such a Thing goes against his Stomach, -- a
present Want of Appetite being generally the true se of both.

In a Word, -- trust the Man in nothing -- who has not a Conscience in every
Thing.

And in your own Case remember this plain Distinction, a Mistake, in which, has
ruined Thousands. -- That your Conscience is not a Law; -- no, -- God and
Reason made the Law, and has placed Conscience within you to determine, -- not
like an Asiatic Cadi, according to the Ebbs and Flows of his own Passions: --
But like a British Judge in this Land of Liberty, who makes no new Law, -- but
faithfully declares that glorious Law which he finds already written.

FINIS.
By (...) same AUTHOR, The Case of Elijah and the Widow of Zerephath,
considered: A CHARITYSERMON, Preached on Good Friday, April 17, 1747. For the
Support of Two Charity-Schools in York. Printed for JOHN HILDYARD. Price 6d.


