LETTERS OF THE LATE Rev. Mr. LAURENCE STERN, To his most intimate FRIENDS.

WITH A FRAGMENT in the Manner of Rabelais.

To which are prefixed, Memoirs of his Life and Family. Written by HIMSELF, And
published by his Daughter, Mrs. MEDALLE.

In THREE VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET, the Corner of the Adelphi, in the Strand. 1775.

LETTERS.
LETTER XXVII. To Lady D.
Paris, July 9, 1762.
I Will not send your ladyship the trifles you bid me purchase without a line.
I am very well pleased with Paris -- indeed I meet with so many civilities
amongst the people here that I must sing their praises -- the French have a
great deal of urbanity in their composition, and to stay a little time amongst
them will be agreeable. -- I splutter French so as to be understood -- but I
have had a droll adventure here in which my Latin was of some service to me --
I had hired a chaise and a horse to go about seven miles into the country, but,
Shandean like, did not take notice that the horse was almost dead when I took
him -- Before I got half way the poor animal dropped down dead -- so I was
forced to appear before the Police, and began to tell my story in French, which
was, that the poor beast had to do with a worse beast than himself, namely his
master, who had driven him all the day before (Jehu like) and that he had
neither had corn, or hay, therefore I was not to pay for the horse -- but I
might as well have whistled, as have spoke French, and I believe my Latin was
equal to my uncle Toby's Lilabulero -- being not understood because of it is
purity, but by dint of words I forced my judge to do me justice -- no common
thing by the way in France. -- My wife and daughter are arrived -- the latter
does nothing but look out of the window, and complain of the torment of being
frizled. -- I wish she may ever remain a child of nature -- I hate children of
art.

I hope this will find your ladyship well -- and that you will be kind enough
to direct to me at Toulouse, which place I shall set out for very soon. I am,
with truth and sincerity,

Your Ladyship's Most faithful, L. STERN.

LETTER XXVIII. To Mr. E.
Paris, July 12, 1762. Dear Sir,
MY wife and daughter arrived here safe and sound on Thursday, and are in high
raptures with the speed and pleasantness of their journey, and particularly of
all they see and meet with here. But in their journey from York to Paris,
nothing has given them a more sensible and lasting pleasure, than the marks of
kindness they received from you and Mrs. E. -- The friendship, good will and
politeness of my two friends I never doubted to me, or mine, and I return you
both all a grateful man is capable of, which is merely my thanks. I have taken
however the liberty of sending an Indian taffety, which Mrs. E. must do me the
honor to wear for my wife's sake, who would have got it made up, but that Mr.
Stanhope, the Consul of Algiers, who sets off tomorrow morning for London, has
been so kind (I mean his lady) as to take charge of it; and we had but just
time to procure it: and had we missed that opportunity, as we should have been
obliged to have left it behind us at Paris, we knew not when or how to get it
to our friend. -- I wish it had been better worth a paragraph. If there is any
thing we can buy or procure for you here, (intelligence included) you have a
right to command me -- for I am yours, with my wife and girl's kind love to you
and Mrs. E.

LAU. STERN.

LETTER XXIX. To T. H. S. Esquire.
Toulouse, August 12, 1762. My dear H.
BY the time you have got to the end of this long letter you will perceive that
I have not been able to answer your last 'till now -- I have had the intention
of doing it almost as often as my prayers in my head -- it is thus we use our
best friends -- what an infamous story is that you have told me! -- After some
little remarks on it the rest of my letter will go on like silk. **** -- is a
good natured old easy fool and has been deceived by the most artful of her sex,
and she must have abundance of impudence and charlatanery to have carried on
such a farce. I pity the old man for being taken in for so much money -- a man
of sense I should have laughed at -- My wife saw her when in town, and she had
not the appearance of poverty, but when she wants to melt **** heart she puts
her gold watch and diamond rings in her drawer. -- But he might have been aware
of her. I could not have been mistaken in her character -- and it is odd she
should talk of her wealth to one, and tell another the reverse -- so good night
to her. -- About a week or ten days before my wife arrived at Paris I had the
same accident I had at Cambridge, of breaking a vessel in my lungs. It happened
in the night, and I bled the bed full, and finding in the morning I was likely
to bleed to death, I sent immediately for a surgeon to bleed me at both arms --
this saved me, and with lying speechless three days I recovered upon my back in
bed; the breach healed, and in a week after I got out -- This with my weakness
and hurrying about made me think it high time to haste to Toulouse. -- We have
had four months of such heats that the oldest Frenchman never remembers the
like -- 'twas as hot as Nebuchadnezzar's oven, and never has relaxed one hour
-- in the height of this 'twas our destiny (or rather destruction) to set out
by way of Lions, Montpellier, etc. to shorten, I trow, our sufferings -- Good
God! -- but it is over -- and here I am in my own house, quite settled by M....'s
aid, and good-natured offices, for which I owe him more than I can express or
know how to pay at present -- It Is in the prettiest situation in Toulouse, with
near two acres of garden -- the house too good by half for us -- well
furnished, for which I pay thirty pounds a year. -- I have got a good cook --
my wife a decent femme de chamber, and a good looking laquais -- The Abbe has
planned our expenses, and set us in such a train, we cannot easily go wrong --
though by the bye the D -- is seldom found sleeping under a hedge. Mr. Trotter
dined with me the day before I left Paris -- I took care to see all executed
according to your directions -- but Trotter, I dare say, by this has wrote to
you -- I made him happy beyond expression with your crazy tales, and more so
with its frontispiece. -- I am in spirits, writing a crazy chapter -- with my
face turned toward thy turret -- It Is now I wish all warmer climates,
countries, and every thing else at -- that separates me from our paternal seat
-- ce sera la ou reposera ma cendre -- et ce sera la ou mon cousin viendra
repondre les pleurs dues a notre amity. -- I am taking asses milk three times
a day, and cows milk as often -- I long to see thy face again once more --
greet the Col. kindly in my name, and thank him cordially from me for his many
civilities to Madame and Mademoiselle Shandy at York, who send all due
acknowledgments. The humor is over for France, and Frenchmen, but that is not
enough for your affectionate cousin, L. S.

(A year will tire us all out I trow) but thank heaven the post brings me a
letter from my Anthony -- I felicitate you upon what Messrs. the Reviewers
allow you -- they have too much judgment themselves not to allow you what you
are actually possessed of, "talents, wit and humor." -- Well, write on my dear
cousin, and be guided by thy own fancy. -- Oh! how I envy you all at Crazy
Castle! -- I could like to spend a month with you -- and should return back
again for the vintage. -- I honor the man that has given the world an idea of
our parental seat -- it is well done -- I look at it ten times a day with a
quando te aspiciam? -- Now farewell -- remember me to my beloved Col. -- greet
Panty most lovingly on my behalf, and if Mrs. C... and Miss C... etc. are at
G.. greet them likewise with a holy kiss -- So God bless you.

LETTER XXX. To Mr. F. --, at Paris.
Toulouse, August 14, 1762. My dear F.
AFTER many turnings ( alias digressions) to say nothing of downright
overthrows, stops, and delays, we have arrived in three weeks at Toulouse, and
are now settled in our houses with servants, etc. about us, and look as
composed as if we had been here seven years. -- In our journey we suffered so
much from the heats, it gives me pain to remember it -- I never saw a cloud
from Paris to Nismes half as broad as a twentyfour sols piece. -- Good God! we
were toasted, roasted, grill'd, stewed and carbonaded on one side or other all
the way -- and being all done enough (assez cuits) in the day, we were eat up
at night by bugs, and other unswept out vermin, the legal inhabitants (if
length of possession gives right) of every inn we lay at. -- Can you conceive a
worse accident than that in such a journey, in the hottest day and hour of it,
four miles from either tree or shrub which could cast a shade of the size of
one of Eve's fig leaves -- that we should break a hind wheel into ten thousand
pieces, and be obliged in consequence to sit five hours on a gravelly road,
without one drop of water or possibility of getting any -- To mend the matter,
my two postillions were two dough-hearted fools, and fell a crying -- Nothing
was to be done! By heaven, quoth I, pulling off my coat and waistcoat,
something shall be done, for I Will thrash you both within an inch of your lives
-- and then make you take each of you a horse, and ride like two devils to the
next post for a cart to carry my baggage, and a wheel to carry ourselves -- Our
luggage weighed ten quintals -- 'twas the fair of Baucaire -- all the world was
going, or returning -- we were asked by every soul who passed by us, if we were
going to the fair of Baucaire -- No wonder, quoth I, we have goods enough! vous
avez raison mes amiss --

Well! here we are after all, my dear friend -- and most deliciously placed at
the extremity of the town, in an excellent house well furnished, and elegant
beyond any thing I looked for -- It Is built in the form of a hotel, with a
pretty court toward the town -- and behind, the best gardens in Toulouse, laid
out in serpentine walks, and so large that the company in our quarter usually
come to walk there in the evenings, for which they have my consent -- "the more
the merrier." -- The house consists of a good salle a manger above stairs
joining to the very great salle a compagnie as large as the Baron D'Holbach's;
three handsome bed-chambers with dressing rooms to them -- below stairs two
very good rooms for myself, one to study in, the other to see company. -- I
have moreover cellars round the court, and all other offices -- Of the same
landlord I have bargained to have the use of a country house which he has two
miles out of town, so that myself and all my family have nothing more to do
than to take our hats and remove from the one to the other -- My landlord is
moreover to keep the gardens in order -- and what do you think I am to pay for
all this? neither more or less than thirty pounds a year -- all things are
cheap in proportion -- so we shall live for very very little. -- I dined
yesterday with Mr. H -- he is most pleasantly situated, and they are all well.
-- As for the books you have received for D --, the bookseller was a fool not
to send the bill along with them -- I will write to him about it. -- I wish you
was with me for two months; it would cure you of all evils ghostly and bodily
-- but this, like many other wishes both for you and myself, must have its
completion elsewhere -- Adieu my kind friend, and believe that I love you as
much from inclination as reason, for

I am most truly yours, L. STERN.
My wife and girl join in compliments to you -- my best respects to my worthy
Baron d'Holbach and all that society -- remember me to my friend Mr. Panchaud.



LETTER XXXI. To J. H. S. Esquire.
Toulouse, Oct. 19, 1762. My dear H.
I Received your letter yesterday -- so it has been traveling from Crazy
Castle to Toulouse full eighteen days -- If I had nothing to stop me I would
engage to set out this morning, and knock at Crazy Castle gates in three days
less time -- by which time I should find you and the colonel, Panty, etc. all
alone -- the season I most wish and like to be with you -- I rejoice from my
heart, down to my reins, that you have snatched so many happy and sunshiny days
out of the hands of the blue devils -- If we live to meet and join our forces
as heretofore we will give these gentry a drubbing -- and turn them for ever
out of their usurped citadel -- some legions of them have been put to flight
already by your operations this last campaign -- and I hope to have a hand in
dispersing the remainder the first time my dear cousin sets up his banners
again under the square tower -- But what art thou meditating with axes and
hammers? -- " I know thy pride and the naughtiness of thy heart," and thou
love the sweet visions of architraves, friezes and pediments with their
tympanums, and thou have found out a pretense, a raison de cinq cent livres
sterling to be laid out in four years, etc. etc. (so as not to be felt, which
is always added by the D -- as a bait) to justify thyself unto thyself -- It
may be very wise to do this -- but it is wiser to keep one's money in one's
pocket, whilst there are wars without and rumors of wars within. -- St. --
advises his disciples to sell both coat and waistcoat -- and go rather without
shirt or sword, than leave no money in their scrip, to go to Jerusalem with --
Now those quatre ans consecutifs, my dear Anthony, are the most precious
morsels of thy life to come (in this world) and thou will do well to enjoy that
morsel without cares, calculations, and curses, and damns, and debts -- for as
sure as stone is stone, and mortar is mortar, etc. 'twill be one of the many
works of thy repentance -- But after all, if the Fates have decreed it, as you
and I have some time supposed it on account of your generosity, " that you are
never to be a monied man," the decree will be fulfilled whether you adorn your
castle and line it with cedar, and paint it within side and without side with
vermilion, or not -- et cela etant (having a bottle of Frontiniac and glass at
my right hand) I drink, dear Anthony, to thy health and happiness, and to the
final accomplishments of all thy lunary and sublunary projects. -- For six
weeks together, after I wrote my last letter to you, my projects were many
stories higher, for I was all that time, as I thought, journeying on to the
other world -- I fell ill of an epidemic vile fever which killed hundreds about
me -- The physicians here are the errantest charlatans in Europe, or the most
ignorant of all pretending fools -- I withdrew what was left of me out of their
hands, and recommended my affairs entirely to Dame Nature -- She (dear goddess)
has saved me in fifty different pinching bouts, and I begin to have a kind of
enthusiasm now in her favor, and in my own, That one or two more escapes will
make me believe I shall leave you all at last by translation, and not by fair
death. I am now stout and foolish again as a happy man can wish to be -- and am
busy playing the fool with my uncle Toby, who I have got soused over head and
ears in love. -- I have many hints and projects for other works; all will go on
I trust as I wish in this matter. -- When I have reaped the benefit of this
winter at Toulouse -- I cannot see I have any thing more to do with it,
therefore after having gone with my wife and girl to Bagnieres, I shall return
from whence I came -- Now my wife wants to stay another year to save money, and
this opposition of wishes, though it will not be as sour as lemon, yet 'twill not
be as sweet as sugar candy. -- I wish T -- would lead Sir Charles to Toulouse;
it is as good as any town in the South of France -- for my own part, it is not to
my taste -- but I believe, the ground work of my ennui is more to the eternal
platitude of the French characters -- little variety, no originality in it at
all -- than to any other cause -- for they are very civil -- but civility
itself, in that uniform, wearies and bodders one to death -- If I do not mind,
I shall grow most stupid and sententious -- Miss Shandy is hard at it with
music, dancing, and French speaking, in the last of which she does a
marveille, and speaks it with an excellent accent, considering she practices
within sight of the Pyrenean Mountains. -- If the snows will suffer me, I
propose to spend two or three months at Barege, or Bagnieres, but my dear wife
is against all schemes of additional expenses -- which wicked propensity (though
not of despotick power) yet I cannot suffer -- though by the bye laudable enough
-- But she may talk -- I will do my own way, and she will acquiesce without a
word of debate on the subject. -- Who can say so much in praise of his wife?
Few I trow. -- M -- is out of town vintaging -- so write to me, Monsieur Stern
gentilhomme Anglois -- 'twill find me. -- We are as much out of the road of all
intelligence here as at the Cape of Good Hope -- so write a long nonsensical
letter like this, now and then to me -- in which say nothing but what may be
shown, (though I love every paragraph and spirited stroke of your pen, others
might not) for you must know a letter no sooner arrives from England, but
curiosity is upon her knees to know the contents. -- Adieu dear H. believe me,

Your affectionate, L. STERN.
We have had bitter cold weather here these fourteen days -- which has obliged
us to sit with whole pagells of wood lighted up to our noses -- it is a dear
article -- but every thing else being extreme cheap, Madame keeps an excellent
good house, with soupe, boulli, roti -- etc. etc. for two hundred and fifty
pounds a year.



LETTER. XXXII. To Mr. F. at Paris.
Toulouse, November 9, 1762. My dear F.
I Have had this week your letter on my table, and hope you will forgive my not
answering it sooner -- and even to day I can but write you ten lines, being
engaged at Mrs. M -- 's. I would not omit one post more acknowledging the
favor -- In a few posts I will write you a long one gratis, that is for love
-- Thank you for having done what I desired you -- and for the future direct to
me under cover at Monsieur Brousse's -- I receive all letters through him, more
punctual and sooner than when left at the post house --

H -- 's family greet you with mine -- we are much together and never forget
you -- forget me not to the baron -- and all the circle -- nor to your domestic
circle --

I am got pretty well, and sport much with my uncle Toby in the volume I am now
fabricating for the laughing part of the world -- for the melancholy part of
it, I have nothing but my prayers -- so God help them. -- I shall hear from you
in a post or two at least after you receive this -- in the mean time dear F --
adieu, and believe no man wishes or esteems you more than your

L. STERN.

LETTER XXXIII. To the same.
Toulouse, Dec. 17, 1762. My dear F --
THE post after I wrote last -- I received yours with the enclosed draught upon
the receiver, for which I return you all thanks -- I have received this day
likewise the box and tea all safe and sound -- so we shall all of us be in our
cups this Christmas, and drink without fear or stint -- We begin to live
extremely happy, and are all together every night -- fiddling, laughing and
singing, and cracking jokes. You will scarce believe the news I tell you --
There are a company of English strollers arrived here, who are to act comedies
all the Christmas, and are now busy in making dresses and preparing some of our
best comedies -- Your wonder will cease, when I inform you these strollers are
your friends with the rest of our society, to whom I proposed this scheme
soulagement -- and I assure you we do well. -- The next week, with a grand
orchestra -- we play the Busy Body -- and the Journey to London the week after,
but I have some thoughts of adapting it to our situation -- and making it the
Journey to Toulouse, which, with the change of half a dozen scenes, may be
easily done. -- Thus my dear F. for want of something better we have recourse
to ourselves, and strike out the best amusements we can from such materials. --
My kind love and friendship to all my true friends -- My service to the rest. H
-- 's family have just left me, having been this last week with us -- they will
be with me all the holidays. -- In summer we shall visit them, and so balance
hospitalities.

Adieu, Yours most truly, L. STERN.

LETTER XXXIV. To the same.
Toulouse, Wednesday, Dec. 4. 1762. Dear F --,
I HAVE for this last fortnight every post-day gone to Messrs. B -- and sons,
in expectation of the pleasure of a letter from you, with the remittance I
desired you to send me here. -- When a man has no more than half a dozen
guineas in his pocket -- and a thousand miles from home -- and in a country,
where he can as soon raise the d -- l, as a six livres piece to go to market
with, in case he has changed his last guinea -- you will not envy my situation.
-- God bless you -- remit me the balance due upon the receipt of this. -- We
are all at H -- 's, practicing a play we are to act here this Christmas
holidays -- all the Dramatis Personae are of the English, of which we have a
happy society living together like brothers and sisters -- Your banker here has
just sent me word the tea Mr. H. wrote for is to be delivered into my hands --
it is all one into whose hands the treasure falls -- we shall pay Brousse for it
the day we get it -- We join in our most friendly, respects, and believe me,
dear F -- y, truly yours,

L. STERN.

LETTER XXXV. To the same.
Toulouse, March 29, 1762. Dear F --,
-- THOUGH that is a mistake! I mean the date of the place, for I write at Mr. H
-- 's in the country, and have been there with my people all the week -- how
does Tristram do? you say in yours to him -- faith but so-so -- the worst of
human maladies is poverty -- though that is a second lie -- for poverty of
spirit is worse than poverty of purse, by ten thousand per cent. -- I enclose
you a remedy for the one, a draught of a hundred and thirty pounds, for which I
insist upon a rescription by the very return -- or I will send you and all your
commissaries to the d -- l. -- I do not hear they have tasted of one fleshy
banquet all this Lent -- you will make an excellent grille -- P -- they can
make nothing of him, but bouillon -- I mean my other two friends no ill -- so
shall send them a reprieve, as they acted out of necessity -- not choice -- My
kind respects to Baron D' Holbach and all his household -- Say all that is kind
for me to my other friends -- you know how much, dear F --, I am yours,

L. STERN.
I have not five Louis to vapor with in this land of coxcombs -- My wife's
compliments.



LETTER XXXVI. To the same.
Toulouse, April 18, 1763. Dear F --,
I Thank you for your punctuality in sending me the rescription, and for your
box by the courier, which came safe by last post. -- I was not surprised much
with your account of Lord ***** being obliged to give way -- and for the rest,
all follows in course. -- I suppose you will endeavor to fish and catch
something for yourself in these troubled waters -- at least I wish you all a
reasonable man can wish for himself -- which is wishing enough for you -- all
the rest is in the brain. -- Mr. Woodhouse (who you know) is also here -- he is
a most amiable worthy man, and I have the pleasure of having him much with me
-- in a short time he proceeds to Italy. -- The first week in June I decamp
like a patriarch with my whole household, to pitch our tents for three months at
the foot of the Pyrenean Hills at Bagnieres, where I expect much health and
much amusement from the concourse of adventurers from all corners of the earth.
-- Mrs. M -- sets out at the same time, for another part of the Pyrenean Hills,
at Coutray -- from whence to Italy -- This is the general plan of operation
here -- except that I have some thoughts of spending the winter at Florence,
and crossing over with my family to Leghorn by water -- and in April of
returning by way of Paris home -- but this is a sketch only, for in all things
I am governed by circumstances -- so that what is fit to be done on Monday, may
be very unwise on Saturday -- On all days of the week believe me yours,

With unfeigned truth, L. STERN.
P.S. All compliments to my Parisian friends.



LETTER XXXVII. To the same.
Toulouse, April 29, 1763. My dear F --,
LAST post my agent wrote me word he would send up from York a bill for
fourscore guineas, with orders to be paid into Mr. Selwin's hands for me. This
he said he would expedite immediately, so it is possible you may have had advice
of it -- and it is possible also the money may not be paid this fortnight,
therefore as I set out for Bagnieres in that time, be so good as to give me
credit for the money for a few posts or so, and send me either a rescription
for the money, or a draught for it -- at the receipt of which we shall decamp
for ten or twelve weeks -- You will receive twenty pounds more on my account,
which send also -- So much for that -- as for pleasure -- you have it all
amongst you at Paris -- we have nothing here which deserves the name. -- I
shall scarce be tempted to sojourn another winter at Toulouse -- for I cannot
say it suits my health, as I hoped -- it is too moist -- and I cannot keep clear
of agues here -- so that if I stay the next winter on this side of the water --
'twill be either at Nice or Florence -- and I shall return to England in April
-- Wherever I am, believe me, dear F --, that I am,

Yours faithfully, L. STERN.
Madame and Mademoiselle present their best compliments -- Remember me to all I
regard, particularly Messrs. P -- d, and the rest of your household.



LETTER XXXVIII. To the same.
Toulouse, May 21, 1763, Dear Sir,
I Took the liberty three weeks ago to desire you would be so kind as to send
me fourscore pounds, having received a letter the same post from my Agent, that
he would order the money to be paid to your correspondent in London in a
fortnight. -- It is some disappointment to me that you have taken no notice of
my letter, especially as I told you we waited for the money before we set out
for Bagnieres, -- and so little distrust had I that such a civility would be
refused me, that we have actually had all our things packed up these eight
days, in hourly expectation of receiving a letter. -- Perhaps my good friend
has waited till he heard the money was paid in London -- but you might have
trusted to my honor -- that all the cash in your iron box (and all the bankers
in Europe put together) could not have tempted me to say the thing that is not.
-- I hope before this you will have received an account of the money being paid
in London -- But it would have been taken kindly, if you had wrote me word you
would transmit me the money when you had received it, but no sooner; for Mr. R
-- of Montpellier, though I know him not, yet knows enough of me to have given me
credit for a fortnight for ten times the sum.

I am, dear F --, your friend and hearty well-wisher, L. STERN.
I saw the family of the H -- yesterday, and asked them if you was in the land
of the living -- They said yea -- for they had just received a letter from you.
-- After all I heartily forgive you -- for you have done me a signal service in
mortifying me, and it is this, I am determined to grow rich upon it.

Adieu, and God send you wealth and happiness -- All compliments to -- Before
April next I am obliged to revisit your metropolis in my way to England.



LETTER XXXIX. To the same.
Toulouse, June 9, 1773. My dear F --,
I This moment received yours -- consequently the moment I got it I sat down to
answer it -- So much for a logical inference.

Now believe me I had never wrote you so testy a letter, had I not both loved
and esteemed you -- and it was merely in vindication of the rights of
friendship that I wrote in a way as if I was hurt -- for neglect me in your
heart, I knew you could not, without cause; which my heart told me I never had
-- or will ever give you: -- I was the best friends with you that ever I was in
my life, before my letter had got a league, and pleaded the true excuse for my
friend, "That he was oppressed with a multitude of business." Go on, my dear F.
and have but that excuse, (so much do I regard your interest) that I would be
content to suffer a real evil without future murmuring -- but in truth, my
disappointment was partly chimerical at the bottom, having a letter of credit
for two hundred pounds from a person I never saw, by me -- but which out of a
nicety of temper I would not make any use of -- I set out in two days for
Bagnieres, but direct to me to Brousse, who will forward all my letters. --
Dear F -- adieu. -- Believe me,

Yours affectionately, L. STERN.

LETTER XL. To the same.
Toulouse, June 12, 1763. Dear F --,
LUCKILY just before I was stepping into my chaise for Bagnieres, has a strayed
fifty pound bill found its way to me; so I have sent it to its lawful owner
enclosed -- My noodle of an agent, instead of getting Mr. Selwin to advise you
he had received the money (which would have been enough) has got a bill for it,
and sent it rambling to the furthest part of France after me, and if it had not
caught me just now it might have followed me into Spain, for I shall cross the
Pyreneans, and spend a week in that kingdom, which is enough for a fertile
brain to write a volume upon. -- When I write the history of my travels --
Memorandum! I am not to forget how honest a man I have for a banker at Paris.
-- But, my dear friend, when you say you dare trust me for what little
occasions I may have, you have as much faith as honesty -- and more of both
than of good policy. -- I thank you however ten thousand times -- and except
such liberty as I have lately taken with you -- and that too at a pinch -- I
say beyond that I will not trespass upon your good nature, or friendliness to
serve me. -- God bless you, dear F --

I am yours whilst, L. STERN.

LETTER XLI. To the same.
Montpellier, Oct. 5, 1763. Dear F.
I Am ashamed I have not taken an opportunity of thanking you before now, for
your friendly act of civility, in ordering Brousse, your correspondent at
Toulouse, in case I should have occasion, to pay me fifteen hundred livres --
which as I knew the offer came from your heart I made no difficulty of
accepting. -- In my way through Toulouse to Marseilles, where we have been, but
neither liking the place nor Aix (particularly the latter, it being a
parliament town, of which Toulouse has given me a surfeit) we have returned
here, where we shall reside the winter -- My wife and daughter purpose to stay
a year at least behind me -- and when winter is over, to return to Toulouse, or
go to Montaubon, where they will stay till they return, or I fetch them -- For
myself I shall set out in February for England, where my heart has been fled
these six months -- but I shall stay a fortnight with my friends at Paris; though
I verily believe, if it was not for the pleasure of seeing and chattering with
you, I should pass on directly to Brussels, and so on to Rotterdam, for the
sake of seeing Holland, and embark from thence to London -- But I must stay a
little with those I love and have so many reasons to regard -- you cannot place
too much of this to your own score. -- I have had an offer of going to Italy a
fortnight ago -- but I must like my subject as well as the terms, neither of
which were to my mind. -- Pray what English have you at Paris? where is my
young friend Mr. F --? We hear of three or four English families coming to us
here -- If I can be serviceable to any you would serve, you have but to write.
-- Mr. H... has sent my friend W -- 's picture -- You have seen the original,
or I would have sent it you -- I believe I shall beg leave to get a copy of my
own from yours, when I come in propria persona -- till when, God bless you my
dear friend, and believe me,

Most faithfully yours, L. STERN.

LETTER XLII. To the same.
Montpellier, Jan. 5, 1764. My dear Friend,
YOU see I cannot pass over the fifth of the month without thinking of you, and
writing to you -- The last is a periodical habit -- the first is from my heart,
and I do it oftener than I remember -- however, from both motives together I
maintain I have a right to the pleasure of a single line -- be it only to tell
me how your watch goes -- You know how much happier it would make me to know
that all things belonging to you went on well. -- You are going to have them
all to yourself (I hear) and that Mr. S -- is true to his first intention of
leaving business -- I hope this will enable you to accomplish yours in a
shorter time, that you may get to your long wished for retreat of tranquillity
and silence -- When you have got to your fireside, and into your arm-chair (and
by the by, have another to spare for a friend) and are so much a sovereign as
to sit in your furred cap (if you like it, though I should not, for a man's ideas
are at least the cleaner for being dressed decently) why then it will be a
miracle if I do not glide in like a ghost upon you -- and in a very
unghost-like fashion help you off with a bottle of your best wine.

January 15. -- It does not happen every day that a letter begun in the most
perfect health, should be concluded in the greatest weakness -- I wish the
vulgar high and low do not say it was a judgment upon me for taking all this
liberty with ghosts -- Be it as it may -- I took a ride when the first part of
this was wrote toward Perenas -- and returned home in a shivering fit, though I
ought to have been in a fever, for I had tired my beast; and he was as
unmovable as Don Quixote's wooden horse, and my arm was half dislocated in
whipping him -- This quoth I is inhuman -- No, says a peasant on foot behind
me, I Will drive him home -- so he laid on his posteriors, but 'twas needless --
as his face was turned toward Montpellier he began to trot. -- But to return,
this fever has confined me ten days in my bed -- I have suffered in this
scuffle with death terribly -- but unless the spirit of prophecy deceive me --
I shall not die but live -- in the mean time dear F. let us live as merrily but
as innocently as we can. -- It has ever been as good, if not better, than a
bishopric to me -- and I desire no other -- Adieu my dear friend and believe
me yours,

L. S.
Please to give the enclosed to Mr. T. -- and tell him I thank him cordially
from my heart for his great goodwill.



LETTER XLIII. To the same.
Montpellier, Jan. 20. My dear Friend,
HEARING by Lord R. who in passing through here in his way to Madrid has given me
a call, that my worthy friend Mr. Fox was now at Paris -- I have enclosed a
letter to him, which you will present in course or direct to him. -- I suppose
you are full of English -- but in short we are here as if in another world,
where unless some strayed soul arrives, we know nothing of what is going on in
yours. -- Lord G.......r I suppose is gone from Paris, or I had wrote also to
him. I know you are as busy as a be, and have few moments to yourself --
nevertheless bestow one of them upon an old friend and write me a line -- and
if Mr. F. is too idle and has ought to say to me, pray write a second line for
him. -- We had a letter from Miss P -- this week, who it seems has decamped for
ever from Paris -- All is for the best -- which is my general reflection upon
many things in this world. -- Well! I shall shortly come and shake you by the
hand in St. Sauveur -- if still you are there. -- My wife returns to Toulouse
and purposes to spend the summer at Bagnieres -- I on the contrary go and visit
my wife the church in Yorkshire. -- We all live the longer -- at least the
happier -- for having things our own way. -- This is my conjugal maxim -- I own
it is not the best of maxims -- but I maintain it is not the worst. Adieu dear F
-- and believe me,

Yours with truth, L. STERN.

LETTER XLIV. To Mrs. F.
Montpellier, Feb. 1, 1764.
I AM preparing, my dear Mrs. F. to leave France, for I am heartily tired of it
-- That insipidity there is in French characters has disgusted your friend
Yorick. -- I have been dangerously ill, and cannot think that the sharp air of
Montpellier has been of service to me -- and so my physicians told me when they
had me under their hands for above a month -- if you stay any longer here, Sir,
it will be fatal to you -- And why good people were you not kind enough to tell
me this sooner? -- After having discharged them, I told Mrs. S. that I should
set out for England very soon, but as she chooses to remain in France for two or
three years, I have no objection, except that I wish my girl in England. -- The
states of Languedoc are met -- it is a fine raree-shew, with the usual
accompanyments of fiddles, bears, and puppet-shews. -- I believe I shall step
into my post-chaise with more alacrity to fly from these sights, than a
Frenchman would to fly to them -- and except a tear at parting with my little
slut, I shall be in high spirits, and every step I take that brings me nearer
England, will I think help to set this poor frame to rights. Now pray write to
me directed to Mr. F. at Paris, and tell me what I am to bring you over. -- How
do I long to greet all my friends! few do I value more than yourself. -- My
wife chooses to go to Montauban, rather than stay here, in which I am truly
passive. -- If this should not find you at Bath, I hope it will be forwarded to
you, as I wish to fulfill your commissions -- and so adieu -- Accept every warm
wish for your health, and believe me ever yours,

L. STERN.
P.S. My physicians have almost poisoned me with what they call bouillons
refraichissants -- it is a cock flead alive and boiled with poppy seeds, then
pounded in a mortar, afterward passed through a sieve -- There is to be one
crawfish in it, and I was gravely told it must be a male one -- a female would
do me more hurt than good.



LETTER XLV. To Miss S.
Paris, May l5, 1764. My dear Lydia,
BY this time I suppose your mother and self are fixed at Montauban, and I
therefore direct to your banker, to be delivered to you. -- I acquiesced in
your staying in France -- likewise it was your mother's wish -- but I must tell
you both (that unless your health had not been a plea made use of) I should
have wished you both to return with me. -- I have sent you the Spectators, and
other books, particularly Metastasio; but I beg my girl to read the former, and
only make the latter her amusement. -- I hope you have not forgot my last
request, to make no friendships with the French-women -- not that I think ill
of them all, but sometimes women of the best principles are the most
insinuating -- nay I am so jealous of you that I should be miserable were I to
see you had the least grain of coquettry in your composition. -- You have
enough to do -- for I have also sent you a guittar -- and as you have no genius
for drawing, (though you never could be made to believe it) pray waste not your
time about it -- Remember to write to me as to a friend -- in short whatever
comes into your little head, and then it will be natural. -- If your mother's
rheumatism continues and she chooses to go to Bagnieres -- tell her not to be
stopped for want of money, for my purse shall be as open as my heart. I have
preached at the ambassador's chapel -- Hezekiah -- (an odd subject your mother
will say) There was a concourse of all nations, and religions too. -- I shall
leave Paris in a few days -- I am lodged in the same hotel with Mr. T.... they
are good and generous souls -- Tell your mother that I hope she will write to
me, and that when she does so, I may also receive a letter from my Lydia.

Kiss your mother from me, and believe me,

Your affectionate, L. STERN.

LETTER XLVI.
York, August 6, 1764. My dear F --,
THERE is a young lady with whom I have sent a letter to you, who will arrive
at Paris in her way to Italy -- her name is Miss Tuting; a lady known and loved
by the whole kingdom -- if you can be of any aid to her in your advice, etc. as
to her journey, etc. your good nature and politeness, I am sure need no spur
from me to do it. I was sorry we were like the two buckets of a well, whilst in
London, for we were never able to be both resident together the month I
continued in and about the environs. -- If I get a cough this winter which
holds me three days, you will certainly see me at Paris the week following, for
now I abandon every thing in this world to health and to my friends -- for the
last sermon that I shall ever preach, was preached at Paris -- so I am
altogether an idle man, or rather a free one, which is better. I sent, last
post, twenty pounds to Mrs. S. which makes a hundred pounds remitted, since I
got here -- You must pay yourself what I owe you out of it -- and place the
rest to account. -- Betwixt this and Lady Day next, Mrs. S. will draw from time
to time upon you to about the amount of a hundred louis -- but not more -- (I
think) I having left her a hundred in her pocket. -- But you shall always have
money beforehand of mine -- and she purposes to spend no further than five
thousand livres in the year -- but twenty pound, this way or that, makes no
difference between us -- Give my kindest compliments to Mr. P --. I have a
thousand things to say to you, and would go half way to Paris to tell them you
in your ear. -- The Messrs. T --, H --, etc. and many more of your friends with
whom I am now, send their services -- Mine to all friends -- Yours, dear F.
most truly,

L. STERN.

LETTER XLVII. To J. H. S. Esquire.
September 4, 1764.
NOW, my dear, dear Anthony -- I do not think a week or ten days playing the
good follow (at this very time) at Scarborough so abominable a thing -- but if
a man could get there cleverly, and every soul in his house in the mind to try
what could be done in furtherance thereof, I have no one to consult in this
affair -- therefore as a man may do worse things, the English of all which is
this, that I am going to leave a few poor sheep here in the wilderness for
fourteen days -- and from pride and naughtiness of heart to go see what is
doing at Scarborough -- steadfastly meaning afterward to lead a new life and
strengthen my faith. -- Now some folks say there is much company there -- and
some fay not -- and I believe there is neither the one or the other -- but will
be both, if the world will have but a month's patience or so. -- No, my dear
H... I did not delay sending your letter directly to the post -- As there are
critical times or rather turns and revolutions in *** humors, I knew not what
the delay of an hour might hazard -- I will answer for him, he has seventy
times seven forgiven you -- and as often wished you at the d -- l. -- After
many oscillations the pendulum will rest firm as ever. --

I send all kind compliments to Sir C... D.... and G -- s -- I love them from
my soul -- If G.....t is with you, him also. -- I go on, not rapidly, but well
enough with my uncle Toby's amors -- There is no sitting, and cudgeling ones
brains whilst the sun shines bright -- 'twill be all over in six or seven
weeks, and there are dismal months enough after to endure suffocation by a
brimstone fireside. -- If you can get to Scarborough, do. -- A man who makes
six tons of alum a week, may do any thing -- Lord G -- y is to be there -- what
a temptation!

Yours affectionately, L. STERN.

LETTER XLVIII. To Mr. F. at Paris.
York, September 29, 1764. My dear Friend,
I Have just had the honor of a letter from Miss T --, full of the
acknowledgments of your attention and kind services to her; I will not believe
these arose from the D. of A....'s letters, nor mine. Surely she needed no
recommendation -- the truest and most honest compliment I can pay you, is to
say they came from your own good heart, only you was introduced to the object
-- for the rest followed in course -- However let me cast in my mite of thanks
to the treasury which belongs to good natured actions. I have been with Lord G
-- y these three weeks at Scarborough -- the pleasures of which I found
somewhat more exalted than those of Bagnieres last year -- I am now returned to
my Philosophical Hut to finish Tristram, which I calculate will be ready for
the world about Christmas, at which time I decamp from hence, and fix my head
quarters at London for the winter -- unless my cough pushes me forwards to your
Metropolis -- or that I can persuade some gros my Lord to take a trip to you --
I Will try if I can make him relish the joys of the Tuileries, Opera Comique, etc.

I had this week a letter from Mrs. S -- from Montauban, in which she tells me
she has occasion for fifty pounds immediately -- Will you send an order to your
correspondent at Montauban to pay her so much cash -- and I will in three weeks
send as much to Becket -- But as her purse is low, for God's sake write
directly. -- Now you must do something equally essential -- to rectify a
mistake in the mind of your correspondent there, who it seems gave her a hint
not long ago, " that she was separated from me for life. -- Now as this is not
true in the first place, and may give a disadvantageous impression of her to
those she lives amongst -- 'twould be unmerciful to let her, or my daughter,
suffer by it; so do be so good as to undeceive him -- for in a year or two she
proposes (and indeed I expect it with impatience from her) to rejoin me -- and
tell them I have all the confidence in the world she will not spend more than I
can afford, and I only mentioned two hundred guineas a year -- because 'twas
right to name some certain sum, for which I begged you to give her credit. -- I
write to you of all my most intimate concerns, as to a brother, so excuse me
dear F --. God bless you -- Believe me,

Yours affectionately, L. STERN.
Compliments to Mr. Panchaud, D'Holbach, etc.



LETTER XLIX. To J. H. S. Esquire.
Coxwould, -- Thursday. My dear Cousin,
I Am but this moment returned from Scarborough, where I have been drinking the
waters ever since the races, and have received mavelous strength, had I not
debilitated it as fast as I got it, by playing the good fellow with Lord G -- y
and Co. too much. I rejoice you have been encamped at Harrowgate, from which,
by now, I suppose you are decamped -- otherwise as idle a beast as I have been,
I would have sacrificed a few days to the god of laughter with you and your
jolly set. -- I have done nothing good that I know of, since I left you, except
paying off your guinea and a half to K --, in my way through York hither -- I
must try now and do better -- Go on, and prosper for a month,

Your affectionate L. STERN.

LETTER L. To Mr. F. at Paris.
York, November 11, 1764. My dear Friend,
I Sent ten days ago, a bank bill of thirty pounds to Mr. Becket, and this post
one of sixty -- When I get to London, which will be in five weeks, you will
receive what shall always keep you in bank for Mrs. S --; in the mean time I
have desired Becket to send you fourscore pounds, and if my wife, before I get
to London, should have occasion for fifty louis let her not wait a minute, and
if I have not paid it, a week or a fortnight I know will break no squares with
a good and worthy friend. -- I will contrive to send you these two new volumes
of Tristram, as soon as ever I get them from the press. -- You will read as odd
a tour through France as ever was projected or executed by traveller, or
travel-writers since the world began -- It Is a laughing good tempered satyr
against traveling (as puppies travel) Panchaud will enjoy it -- I am quite
civil to your Parisians -- et pour cause you know -- it is likely I may see them
in spring -- Is it possible for you to get me over a copy of my picture any
how? If so I would write to Mademoiselle N -- to make as good a copy from it as
she possibly could -- with a view to do her service here -- and I would remit
her the price -- I really believe it would be the parent of a dozen portraits
to her, if she executes it with the spirit of the original in your hands -- for
it will be seen by many -- and as my phiz is as remarkable as myself, if she
preserves the true character of both, it will do her honor and service too. --
Write me a line about this, and tell me you are well and happy -- Will you
present my kind respects to the worthy Baron -- I shall send him one of the
best impressions of my picture from Mr. Reynolds's -- another to Monsieur P --.
My love to Mr. S -- n and P -- d.

I am most truly yours, L. STERN.

LETTER LI. To J. H. S. Esquire.
November 13, 1764. My dear Cousin,
IT IS a church militant week with me, full of marches, and countermarches --
and treaties about Stillington common, which we are going to enclose --
otherwise I would have obeyed your summons -- and yet I could not well have
done it this week neither, having received a letter from C --, who has been
very ill; and is coming down to stay a week or ten days with me. -- Now I know
he is ambitious of being better acquainted with you; and longs from his soul
for a sight of you in your own castle. -- I cannot do otherwise, than bring him
with me -- nor can I gallop away and leave him an empty house to pay a visit to
from London, as he comes half express to see me. -- I thank you for the care of
my northern vintage -- I fear after all I must give it a fermentation on the
other side of the Alps, which is better than being on the lees with it -- but
nous verrons -- yet I fear as it has got such hold of my brain and comes upon
it like an armed man at nights -- I must give way for quietness sake, or be
hag-ridden with the conceit of it all my life long. -- I have been Miss-ridden
this last week by a couple of romping girls (bien mises et comme il faut) who
might as well have been in the house with me, (though perhaps not, my retreat
here is too quiet for them) but they have taken up all my time, and have given
my judgment and fancy more airings than they wanted. -- These things accord not
well with sermon making -- but it is my vile errantry, as Sancho says, and that
is all that can be made of it. -- I trust all goes swimmingly on with your
alum; that the works amuse you, and call you twice out (at least) a day. -- I
shall see them I trust in ten days, or thereabout -- If it was any way
possible, I would set out this moment, though I have no cavalry -- ( except a she
ass) Give all friendly respects to Mrs. C. and to Col. H...'s and the garrison,
both of Guisbro and Skeleton. -- I am, dear Anthony, affectionately

Yours, L. STERN.

LETTER LII. To Mr. F. at P.
York, November 16, 1764. My dear Friend,
THREE posts before I had the favor of yours (which is come to hand this
moment) I had wrote to set Mrs. S. right in her mistake -- That you had any
money of mine in your hands -- being very sensible that the hundred pounds I
had sent you, through Becket's hands, was but about what would balance with you
-- The reason of her error was owing to my writing her word, I would send you a
bill in a post or two for fifty pounds -- which, my finances falling short just
then, I deferred -- so that I had paid nothing to any one -- but was however
come to York this day, and I have sent you a draught for a hundred pounds -- in
honest truth a fortnight ago I had not the cash -- but I am as honest as the
king (as Sancho Panca says) only not so rich.

Therefore if Mrs. S. should want thirty louis more, let her have them -- and I
will balance all (which will not be much) with honor at Christmas, when I
shall be in London, having now just finished my two volumes of Tristram. -- I
have some thoughts of going to Italy this year -- at least I shall not defer it
above another. -- I have been with Lord Granby, and with Lord Shelburne, but am
now sat down till December in my sweet retirement -- I wish you was sat down as
happily, and as free of all worldly cares. -- In a few years, my dear F. I hope
to see you a real country gentleman, though not altogether exiled from your
friends in London -- there I shall spend every winter of my life, in the same
lap of contentment, where I enjoy myself now -- and wherever I go -- we must
bring three parts in four of the treat along with us -- In short we must be
happy within -- and then few things without us make much difference -- This is
my Shandean philosophy. -- You will read a comic account of my journey from
Calais through Paris to the Garonne, in these volumes -- my friends tell me they
are done with spirit -- it must speak for itself -- Give my kind respects to
Mr. Selwin and my friend Panchaud -- When you see Baron d'Holbach, present him
my respects, and believe me, dear F.

Yours cordially, L. STERN.

LETTER LIII. To D. G. Esquire.
London, March 16, 1765. Dear G.
I Threatened you with a letter in one I wrote a few weeks ago to Foley, but
(to my shame be it spoken) I lead such a life of dissipation I have never had a
moment to myself which has not been broke in upon, by one engagement or
impertinence or another -- and as plots thicken toward the latter end of a
piece, I find, unless I take pen and ink just now, I shall not be able to do
it, till either I am got into the country, or you to the city. You are teized
and tormented too much by your correspondents, to return to us, and with
accounts how much your friends, and how much your Theater wants you -- so that
I will not magnify either our loss or yours -- but hope cordially to see you
soon. -- Since I wrote last I have frequently stepped into your house -- that is,
as frequently as I could take the whole party, where I dined, along with me --
This was but justice to you, as I walked in as a wit -- but with regard to
myself, I balanced the account thus -- I am sometimes in my friend -- 's house,
but he is always in Tristram Shandy's -- where my friends say he will continue
(and I hope the prophecy true for my own immortality) even when he himself is
no more.

I have had a lucrative winter's campaign here -- Shandy sells well -- I am
taxing the public with two more volumes of sermons, which will more than
double the gains of Shandy -- It goes into the world with a prancing list of de
toute la noblesse -- which will bring me in three hundred pounds, exclusive of
the sale of the copy -- so that with all the contempt of money which ma facon
de penser has ever impressed on me, I shall be rich in spite of myself: but I
scorn you must know, in the high ton I take at present, to pocket all this
trash -- I set out to lay a portion of it in the service of the world, in a
tour round Italy, where I shall spring game, or the duce is in the dice. -- In
the beginning of September I quit England, that I may avail myself of the time
of vintage, when all nature is joyous, and so saunter philosophically for a
year or so, on the other side the Alps. -- I hope your pilgrimages have brought
Mrs. G. and yourself back a la fleur de jeunesse -- May you both long feel the
sweets of it, and your friends with you. -- Do, dear friend, make my kindest
wishes and compliments acceptable to the best and wisest of the daughters of
Eve -- You shall ever believe and ever find me affectionately yours,

L. STERN.

LETTER LIVE. To D. G. Esquire.
Bath, April 6, 1765.
I Scalp you! -- my dear G --! my dear friend! -- foul befall the man who hurts
a hair of your head! -- and so full was I of that very sentiment, that my
letter had not been put into the post office ten minutes, before my heart smote
me; and I sent to recall it -- but failed -- You are sadly to blame, Shandy!
for this, quoth I, leaning with my head on my hand, as I recriminated upon my
false delicacy in the affair -- G -- 's nerves (if he has any left) are as fine
and delicately spun, as thy own -- his sentiments as honest and friendly --
thou know, Shandy, that he loves thee -- why will thou hazard him a moment's
pain? Puppy! fool, coxcomb, jack-ass, etc. etc. -- and so I balanced the
account to your favor, before I received it drawn up in your way -- I say your
way -- for it is not stated so much to your honor and credit, as I had passed
the account before -- for it was a most lamented truth, that I never received
one of the letters your friendship meant me, except whilst in Paris. -- O! how
I congratulate you for the anxiety the world has and continues to be under, for
your return. -- Return, return to the few who love you and the thousands who
admire you. -- The moment you set your foot upon your stage -- mark! I tell it
you -- by some magic, irresisted power, every fiber about your heart will
vibrate afresh, and as strong and feelingly as ever -- Nature, with glory at
her back, will light up the torch within you -- and there is enough of it left,
to heat and enlighten the world these many, many, many years.

Heaven be praised! (I utter it from my soul) that your lady, and my Minerva,
is in a condition to walk to Windsor -- full rapturously will I lead the
graceful pilgrim to the temple, where I will sacrifice with the purest incense
to her -- but you may worship with me, or not -- 'twill make no difference
either in the truth or warmth of my devotion -- still (after all I have seen) I
still maintain her peerless.

P --! good Heaven! -- give me some one with less smoke and more fire -- There
are who, like the Pharisees, still think they shall be heard for much speaking
-- Come -- come away my dear G -- and teach us another lesson.

Adieu! -- I love you dearly -- and your lady better -- not hobbihorsically --
but most sentimentally and affectionately -- for I am yours (that is if you
never say another word about --) with all the sentiments of love and friendship
you deserve from me,

L. STERN.

LETTER LV.
Bath, April 15, 1765. My dear F.
MY wife tells me she has drawn for one hundred pounds, and it is fit that you
should be paid it that minute -- the money is now in Becket's hands -- send me,
my dear F -- my account, that I may discharge the balance to this time, and
know what to leave in your hands. -- I have made a good campaign of it this
year in the field of the literati -- my two volumes of Tristram, and two of
sermons, which I shall print very soon, will bring me a considerable sum. --
Almost all the nobility in England honor me with their names, and it is thought
it will be the largest, and most splendid list which ever pranced before a
book, since subscriptions came into fashion. -- Pray present my most sincere
compliments to lady H -- whose name I hope to insert with many others. -- As so
many men of genius favor me with their names also, I will quarrel with Mr. H
-- e, and call him deist, and what not, unless I have his name too. -- My love
to Lord W. -- Your name, F. I have put in as a free will offering of my labors
-- your list of subscribers you will send -- it is but a crown for sixteen
sermons -- Dog cheap! but I am in quest of honor, not money. -- Adieu, adieu,
-- believe me, dear F.

Yours truly, L. STERN.

LETTER LVI. To Mr. W.
Coxwould, May 23, 1765.
AT this moment am I sitting in my summer house with my head and heart full,
not of my uncle Toby's amors with the widow Wadman, but my sermons -- and your
letter has drawn me out of a pensive mood -- the spirit of it pleases me --
but in this solitude, what can I tell or write to you but about myself -- I am
glad that you are in love -- 'twill cure you (at least) of the spleen, which
has a bad effect on both man and woman -- I myself must ever have some dulcinea
in my head -- it harmonises the soul -- and in those cases I first endeavor to
make the lady believe so, or rather I begin first to make myself believe that I
am in love -- but I carry on my affairs quite in the French way, sentimentally
-- " l'amour" (say they) " n'est rien sans sentiment" -- Now notwithstanding
they make such a pother about the word, they have no precise idea annexed to it
-- And so much for that same subject called love -- I must tell you how I have
just treated a French gentleman of fortune in France, who took a liking to my
daughter -- Without any ceremony (having got my direction from my wife's
banker) he wrote me word that he was in love with my daughter, and desired to
know what fortune I would give her at present, and how much at my death -- by
the bye, I think there was very little sentiment on his side -- My answer was
"Sir, I shall give her ten thousand pounds the day of marriage -- my
calculation is as follows -- she is not eighteen, you are sixty-two -- there
goes five thousand pounds -- then Sir, you at least think her not ugly -- she
has many accomplishments, speaks Italian, French, plays upon the guittar, and
as I fear you play upon no instrument whatever, I think you will be happy to
take her at my terms, for here finishes the account of the ten thousand pounds"
-- I do not suppose but he will take this as I mean, that is -- a flat refusal.
-- I have had a parsonage house burnt down by the carelessness of my curate's
wife -- as soon as I can I must rebuild it, I trow -- but I lack the means at
present -- yet I am never happier than when I have not a shilling in my pocket
-- for when I have I can never call it my own. Adieu my dear friend -- may you
enjoy better health than me, though not better spirits, for that is impossible.

Yours sincerely, L. STERN.
My compliments to the Col.



LETTER LVII. To Mr. F. at Paris.
York, July 13, 1765. My dear Sir,
I Wrote some time in spring, to beg you would favor me with my account. I
believe you was set out from Paris, and that Mr. Garrick brought the letter
with him -- which possibly he gave you. In the hurry of your business you might
forget the contents of it; and in the hurry of mine in town (though I called
once) I could not get to see you. I decamp for Italy in September, and shall
see your face at Paris, you may be sure -- but I shall see it with more
pleasure when I am out of debt -- which is your own fault, for Becket has had
money left in his hands for that purpose. -- Do send Mrs. Stern her two last
volumes of Tristram; they arrived with yours in spring, and she complains she
has not got them. -- My best services to Mr. Panchaud. -- I am busy composing
two volumes of sermons -- they will be printed in September, though I fear not
time enough to bring them with me. Your name is amongst the list of a few of my
honorary subscribers -- who subscribe for love. -- If you see Baron D'Holbach,
and Diderot, present my respects to them -- If the Baron wants any English
books, he will let me know, and I will bring them with me -- Adieu.

I am truly yours, L. STERN.

LETTER LVIII. To Mrs. M -- d -- s.
Coxwould, July 21, 1765.
THE first time I have dipped my pen into the ink-horn for this week past is to
write to you, and to thank you most sincerely for your kind epistle -- Will
this be a sufficient apology for my letting it be ten days upon my table
without answering it -- I trust it will -- I am sure my own feelings tell me
so, because I felt it impossible to do any thing that is ungracious toward
you. -- It is not every hour, or day, or week of a man's life that is a fit
season for the duties of friendship -- sentiment is not always at hand -- pride
and folly, and what is called business, oftentimes keep it at a distance -- and
without sentiment, what is friendship? -- a name, a shadow! -- But, to prevent
a misapplication of this, (though why should I fear it from so kind and gentle
a spirit as yours) -- you must know, that by carelessness of my curate, or his
wife, or his maid, or some one within his gates, the parsonage-house at Sutton
was burnt to the ground, with the furniture that belonged to me, and a pretty
good collection of books; the loss three hundred and fifty pounds -- The poor
man with his wife took the wings of the next morning, and fled away -- this has
given me real vexation, for so much was my pity and esteem for him, that as
soon as I heard of this disaster, I sent to desire he would come and take up
his abode with me till another habitation was ready to receive him -- but he
was gone -- and, as I am told, through fear of my persecution. -- Heavens! how
little did he know of me to suppose I was among the number of those wretches
that heap misfortune upon misfortune -- and when the load is almost
insupportable, still to add to the weight! God, who reads my heart, knows it to
be true -- that I wish rather to share, than to increase the burden of the
miserable -- to dry up, instead of adding a single drop to the stream of
sorrow. -- As for the dirty trash of this world, I regard it not -- the loss of
it does not cost me a sigh, for after all, I may say with the Spanish Captain,
that I am as good a gentleman as the king, only not quite so rich.

But to the point: Shall I expect you here this summer? -- I much wish that you
may make it convenient to gratify me in a visit for a few weeks -- I will give
you a roast fowl for your dinner, and a clean table-cloth every day -- and tell
you a story by way of desert -- in the heat of the day we will sit in the shade
-- and in the evening the fairest of all the milk-maids who pass by my gate,
shall weave a garland for you. -- If I should not be so fortunate, contrive to
meet me the beginning of October -- I shall stay a fortnight after, and then
seek a kindlier climate. -- This plaguey cough of mine seems to gain ground, and
will bring me to my grave in spite of me -- but while I have strength to run
away from it I will -- I have been wrestling with it for these twenty years
past -- and what with laughter and good spirits, have prevented its giving me a
fall -- but my antagonist presses closer than ever upon me -- and I have
nothing left on my side but another journey abroad -- A-propos -- are you for a
scheme of that sort? if not, perhaps you will accompany me as far as Dover,
that we may laugh together on the beach, to put Neptune in a good humor before
I embark -- God bless you, my dear Madam, -- and believe me ever yours,

L. STERN.

LETTER LIX. To Mr. W.
Coxwould, December 20, 1765.
THANKS, my dear W. for your letter -- I am just preparing to come and greet
you and many other friends in town -- I have drained my ink standish to the
bottom, and after I have published, shall set my face, not toward Jerusalem,
but toward the Alps -- I find I must once more fly from death whilst I have
strength -- I shall go to Naples and see whether the air of that place will not
set this poor frame to rights -- As to the project of getting a bear to lead, I
think I have enough to do to govern myself -- and however profitable it might
be (according to your opinion) I am sure it would be unpleasurable -- Few are
the minutes of life, and I do not think that I have any to throw away on any
one being. -- I shall spend nine or ten months in Italy, and call upon my wife
and daughter in France at my return -- so shall be back by the King's birthday
-- what a project! -- and now my dear friend am I going to York, not for the
sake of society -- nor to walk by the side of the muddy Ouse, but to recruit
myself of the most violent spitting of blood that ever mortal man experienced;
because I had rather (in case it is ordained so) die there, than in a
post-chaise on the road. -- If the amor of my uncle Toby do not please you, I
am mistaken -- and so with a droll story I will finish this letter -- A
sensible friend of mine, with whom not long ago, I spent some hours in
conversation, met an apothecary (an acquaintance of ours) -- the latter asked
him how he did? why, ill, very ill -- I have been with Stern, who has given me
such a dose of Atticsalt that I am in a fever -- Attic salt, Sir, Attic salt! I
have Glauber salt -- I have Epsom salt in my shop, etc. -- Oh! I suppose it is
some French salt -- I wonder you would trust his report of the medicine, he
cares not what he takes himself -- I fancy I see you smile -- I long to be able
to be in London, and embrace my friends there -- and shall enjoy myself a week
or ten days at Paris with my friends, particularly the Baron d'Holbach, and the
rest of the joyous set -- As to the females -- no I will not say a word about
them -- only I hate borrowed characters taken up (as a woman does her shift)
for the purpose she intends to effectuate. Adieu, adieu -- I am yours whilst

L. STERN.

LETTER LX. To Mr. F. at Paris.
London, October 7, 1765. Dear Sir,
IT is a terrible thing to be in Paris without a perriwig to a man's head! In
seven days from the date of this, I should be in that case, unless you tell
your neighbor Madame Requiere to get her bon mari de me fair une peruque a
bourse, au mieux -- c'est a dire -- une la plus extraordinaire -- la plus jolie
-- la plus gentille -- et la plus --

-- Mais qu' importe? jai l'honneur d'etre grand critique -- et bien difficile
encore dans les affairs de peruques -- and in one word that he gets it done in
five days after notice --

I beg pardon for this liberty, my dear friend, and for the trouble of
forwarding this by the very next post. -- If my friend Mr. F. is in Paris -- my
kind love to him and respects to all others -- in sad haste --

Yours truly, L. STERN.
I have paid into Mr. Becket's hands six hundred pounds, which you may draw
upon at sight, according as either Mrs. S -- or myself make it expedient.



LETTER LXI. To Mr. P. at Paris.
Beau Pont Voisin, November 7, 1765. Dear Sir,
I Forgot to desire you to forward whatever letters came to your hand to your
banker at Rome, to wait for me against I get there, as it is uncertain how long
I may stay at Turin, etc. etc. at present I am held prisoner in this town by
the sudden swelling of two pitiful rivulets from the snows melting on the Alps
-- so that we cannot either advance to them, or retire back again to Lions --
for how long the gentlemen who are my fellow-travellers, and myself, shall
languish in this state of vexatious captivity, heaven and earth surely know,
for it rains as if they were coming together to settle the matter. -- I had an
agreeable journey to Lions, and a joyous time there; dining and supping every
day at the commandant's -- Lord F. W. I left there, and about a dozen English
-- If you see lord Ossory, lord William Gordon, and my friend Mr. Crawfurd,
remember me to them -- if Wilkes is at Paris yet, I send him all kind wishes --
present my compliments as well as thanks to my good friend Miss P --, and
believe me, dear Sir, with all truth, yours,

L. STERN.

LETTER LXII. To the same.
Turin, November 15, 1765. Dear Sir,
AFTER many difficulties I have got here safe and sound -- though eight days in
passing the mountains of Savoy. -- I am stopped here for ten days by the whole
country betwixt here and Milan being laid under water by continual rains -- but
I am very happy, and have found my way into a dozen houses already -- Tomorrow
I am to be presented to the King, and when that ceremony is over, I shall have
my hands full of engagements. -- No English here but Sir James Macdonald who
meets with much respect, and Mr. Ogilby. We are all together, and shall depart
in peace together -- My kind services to all -- pray forward the enclosed --

Yours most truly, L. STERN.

LETTER LXIII. To the same.
Turin, November 28, 1765. Dear Sir,
I AM just leaving this place with Sir James Macdonald for Milan, etc. -- We
have spent a joyous fortnight here, and met with all kinds of honors -- and
with regret do we both bid adieu -- but health on my side -- and good sense on
his -- say it is better to be at Rome -- you say at Paris -- but you put variety
out of the question. -- I entreat you to forward the enclosed to Mrs. Stern --
My compliments to all friends, more particularly to those I most value (that
includes Mr. F. if he is at Paris.)

I am yours most truly, L. STERN.

LETTER LXIV. To the same.
Florence, December 18, 1765. Dear Sir,
I Have been a month passing the plains of Lombardy -- stopping in my way of
Milan, Parma, Placenza, and Bologna -- with weather as delicious as a kindly
April in England, and have been three days in crossing a part of the Apennines
covered with thick snow -- Sad transition! -- I stay here three days to dine
with our Plenipo Lords T -- d and C -- r, and in five days shall tread the
Vatican and be introduced to all the Saints in the Pantheon. -- I stay but
fourteen days to pay these civilities, and then decamp for Naples. -- Pray send
the enclosed to my wife, and Becket's letter to London.

Yours truly, L. STERN.

LETTER LXV. To Miss S.
Naples, February 3, 1766. My dear Girl,
YOUR letter, my Lydia, has made me both laugh and cry -- Sorry am I that you
are both so afflicted with the ague, and by all means I wish you both to fly
from Tours, because I remember it is situated between two rivers, la Loire, and
le Cher -- which must occasion fogs, and damp unwholesome weather -- therefore
for the same reason go not to Bourges en Bresse -- it is as vile a place for
agues. -- I find myself infinitely better than I was -- and hope to have added
at least ten years to my life by this journey to Italy -- the climate is
heavenly, and I find new principles of health in me, which I have been long a
stranger to -- but trust me, my Lydia, I will find you out wherever you are, in
May. Therefore I beg you to direct to me at Belloni's at Rome, that I may have
some idea where you will be then. -- The account you give me of Mrs. C -- is
truly amiable, I shall ever honor her -- Mr. C. is a diverting companion --
what he said of your little French admirer was truly droll -- the Marquis de --
is an impostor, and not worthy of your acquaintance -- he only pretended to
know me, to get introduced to your mother -- I desire you will get your mother
to write to Mr. C. that I may discharge every debt, and then my Lydia, if I
live, the produce of my pen shall be yours -- If fate reserves me not that --
the humane and good, part for thy father's sake, part for thy own, will never
abandon thee! -- If your mother's health will permit her to return with me to
England, your summers I will render as agreeable as I can at Coxwould -- your
winters at York -- you know my publications call me to London. -- If Mr. and
Mrs. C -- are still at Tours, thank them from me for their cordiality to my
wife and daughter. I have purchased you some little trifles, which I shall give
you when we meet, as proofs of affection from

Your fond father, L. STERN.

LETTER LXVI. To Mr. F. at Paris.
Naples, February 8, 1766. Dear Sir,
I Desire Mrs. S -- may have what cash she wants -- if she has not received it
before now: she sends me word she has been in want of cash these three weeks --
be so kind as to prevent this uneasiness to her -- which is doubly so to me. --
I have made very little use of your letters of credit, having since I left
Paris taken up no more money than about fifty louis at Turin, as much at Rome
-- and a few ducats here -- and as I now travel from hence to Rome, Venice,
through Vienna to Berlin, etc. with a gentleman of fortune, I shall draw for
little more till my return -- so you will have always enough to spare for my
wife. -- The beginning of March be so kind as to let her have a hundred pounds
to begin her year with. --

There are a good many English here, very few in Rome, or other parts of Italy.
-- The air of Naples agrees very well with me -- I shall return fat -- my
friendship to all who honor me with theirs -- Adieu my dear friend -- I am
ever yours,

L. STERN.

LETTER LXVII. To J. H. S. Esquire.
Naples, February 5, 1766. My dear H.
IT IS an age since I have heard from you -- but as I read the London Chronicle,
and find no tidings of your death, or that you are even at the point of it, I
take it, as I wish it, that you have got over thus much of the winter free from
the damps, both of climate and spirits, and here I am, as happy as a king after
all, growing fat, sleek, and well liking -- not improving in stature, but in
breadth. -- We have a jolly carnival of it -- nothing but operas --
punchinellos -- festinos and masquerades -- We (that is nous autres) are all
dressing out for one this night at the Princess Francavivalla, which is to be
superb. -- The English dine with her (exclusive) and so much for small chat --
except that I saw a little comedy acted last week with more expression and
spirit, and true character than I shall see one hastily again. -- I stay here
till the holy week, which I shall pass at Rome, where I occupy myself a month
-- My plan was to have gone from thence for a fortnight to Florence -- and then
by Leghorn to Marseilles directly home -- but am diverted from this by the
repeated proposals of accompanying a gentleman, who is returning by Venice,
Vienna, Saxony, Berlin, and so by the Spaw, and thence through Holland to
England -- it is with Mr. E...... I have known him these three years, and have
been with him ever since I reached Rome; and as I know him to be a good hearted
young gentleman, I have no doubt of making it answer both his views and mine --
at least I am persuaded we shall return home together, as we set out, with
friendship and good will. -- Write your next letter to me at Rome, and do me
the following favor if it lies in your way, which I think it does -- to get me
a letter of recommendation to our ambassador (Lord Stormont at Vienna) I have
not the honor to be known to his lordship, but Lords P -- or H --, or twenty
you better know, would write a certificate for me, importing that I am not
fallen out of the clouds. If this will cost my cousin little trouble, do
enclose it in your next letter to me at Belloni. -- You have left Skeleton I
trow a month, and I fear have had a most sharp winter, if one may judge of it
from the severity of the weather here, and all over Italy, which exceeded any
thing known till within these three weeks here, that the sun has been as hot as
we could bear it. -- Give my kind services to my friends -- especially to the
household of faith -- my dear Garland -- to Gilbert -- to the worthy Colonel --
to Cardinal S --, to my fellow labourer Pantagruel -- dear cousin Antony,
receive my kindest love and wishes.

Yours affectionately, L. STERN.
P.S. Upon second thoughts, direct your next to me at Mr. W. banker at Venice.



LETTER LXVIII. To Mr. P. at Paris.
Naples, February 14, 1766. Dear Sir,
I Wrote last week to you, to desire you would let Mrs. S -- have what money
she wanted -- it may happen as that letter went enclosed in one to her at
Tours, that you will receive this first -- I have made little use of your
letters of credit, as you will see by that letter, nor shall I want much (if
any) till you see me, as I travel now in company with a gentleman -- however as
we return by Venice, Vienna, Berlin, etc. to the Spaw, I should be glad if you
will draw me a letter of credit upon some one at Venice, to the extent of fifty
louis -- but I am persuaded I shall not want half of them -- however in case of
sickness or accidents, one would not go so long a rout without money in one's
pocket. -- The bankers here are not so conscientious as my friend P. they would
make me pay twelve per cent. if I was to get a letter here. -- I beg your
letters, etc. may be enclosed to Mr. Watson at Venice -- where we shall be in
the Ascension. -- I have received much benefit from the air of Naples -- but
quit it to be at Rome before the holy week. -- There are about five and twenty
English here -- but most of them will be decamped in two months -- there are
scarce a third of the number at Rome -- I suppose therefore that Paris is full
-- my warmest wishes attend you -- with my love to Mr. F. and compliments to
all -- I am, dear Sir, very faithfully,

Yours, L. STERN.
Sir James Macdonald is in the house with me, and is just recovering a long and
most cruel fit of the rheumatism.



LETTER LXIX. To J. H. S. Esquire.
May 25, near Dijon. Dear Antony,
MY desire of seeing both my wife and girl has turned me out of my road toward
a delicious Chateau of the Countess of M --, where I have been patriarching it
these seven days with her ladyship, and half a dozen of very handsome and
agreeable ladies -- her ladyship has the best of hearts -- a valuable present
not given to every one. -- Tomorrow, with regret, I shall quit this agreeable
circle, and post it night and day to Paris, where I shall arrive in two days,
and just wind myself up, when I am there, enough to roll on to Calais -- so I
hope to sup with you the king's birth day, according to a plan of sixteen days
standing. -- Never man has been such a wildgoose chase after a wife as I have
been -- after having sought her in five or six different towns, I found her at
last in Franche Comte -- Poor woman! she was very cordial, etc. and begs to
stay another year or so -- my Lydia pleases me much -- I found her greatly
improved in every thing I wished her -- I am most unaccountably well, and most
accountably nonsensical -- it is at least a proof of good spirits, which is a
sign and token given me in these latter days that I must take up again the pen.
-- In faith I think I shall die with it in my hand, but I shall live these ten
years, my Antony, notwithstanding the fears of my wife, whom I left most
melancholy on that account. -- This is a delicious part of the world; most
celestial weather, and we lie all day, without damps, upon the grass -- and
that is the whole of it, except the inner man (for her ladyship is not stingy
of her wine) is inspired twice a day with the best Burgundy that grows upon the
mountains, which terminate our lands here. -- Surely you will not have decamped
to Crazy Castle before I reach town. -- The summer here is set in good earnest
-- it is more than we can say for Yorkshire -- I hope to hear a good tale of
your alum works -- have you no other works in hand? I do not expect to hear
from you, so God prosper you -- and all your undertakings. -- I am, my dear
cousin,

Most affectionately yours, L. STERN.
Remember me to Mr. G --, Cardinal S --, the Col. etc. etc. etc.



LETTER LXX. To Mr. P. at Paris.
York, June 28, 1766. Dear Sir,
I Wrote last week to Mr. Becket to discharge the balance due to you -- and I
have received a letter from him telling me, that if you will draw upon him for
one hundred and sixty pounds, he will punctually pay it to your order -- so
send the draughts when you please -- Mrs. S. writes me word, she wants fifty
pounds -- which I desire you will let her have -- I will take care to remit it
to your correspondent -- I have such an entire confidence in my wife, that she
spends as little as she can, though she is confined to no particular sum -- her
expenses will not exceed three hundred pounds a year, unless by ill health, or
a journey -- and I am very willing she should have it -- and you may rely, in
case it ever happens that she should draw for fifty or a hundred pounds
extraordinary, that it and every demand shall be punctually paid -- and with
proper thanks; and for this the whole Shandean family are ready to stand
security. -- It Is impossible to tell you how sorry I was that my affairs
hurried me so quick through Paris, as to deprive me of seeing my old friend Mr.
F. and of the pleasure I proposed in being made known to his better half -- but
I have a probability of seeing him this winter. -- Adieu dear Sir, and believe
me

Most cordially yours, L. STERN.
P.S. Mrs. S -- is going to Chalon, but your letter will find her I believe at
Avignon -- she is very poorly -- and my daughter writes to me with sad grief of
heart that she is worse.



LETTER LXXI. To Mr. S.
Coxwould, July 23, 1766. Dear Sir,
ONE might be led to think that there is a fatality regarding us -- we make
appointments to meet, and for these two years have not seen each others face
but twice -- we must try, and do better for the future -- having sought you
with more zeal, than C.... sought the Lord, in order to deliver you the books
you bad me purchase for you at Paris -- I was forced to pay carriage for them
from London down to York -- but as I shall neither charge you the books nor the
carriage -- it is not worth talking about. -- Never man, my dear Sir, has had a
more agreeable tour than your Yorick -- and at present I am in my peaceful
retreat, writing the ninth volume of Tristram -- I shall publish but one this
year, and the next I shall begin a new work of four volumes, which when
finished, I shall continue Tristram with fresh spirit. -- What a difference of
scene here! But with a disposition to be happy, it is neither this place, nor
the other that renders us the reverse. -- In short each man's happiness depends
upon himself -- he is a fool if he does not enjoy it.

What are you about, dear S --? Give me some account of your pleasures -- you
had better come to me for a fortnight, and I will show, or give you (if
needful) a practical dose of my philosophy; but I hope you do not want it -- if
you did -- 'twould be the office of a friend to give it -- Will not even our
races tempt you? You see I use all arguments -- Believe me yours most truly,

LAURENCE STERN.

LETTER LXXII. To Mr. P. at Paris.
Coxwould, September 21, 1766. My dear Friend,
IF Mrs. S -- should draw upon you for fifty louis d'ors, be so kind as to
remit her the money -- and pray be so good as not to draw upon Mr. Becket for
it (as he owes me nothing) but favor me with the draught, which I will pay to
Mr. Selwin. -- A young nobleman is now negociating a jaunt with me for six
weeks, about Christmas, to the Fauxbourg de St. Germain -- I should like much
to be with you for so long -- and if my wife should grow worse (having had a
very poor account of her in my daughter's last) I cannot think of her being
without me -- and however expensive the journey would be, I would fly to
Avignon to administer consolation to both her and my poor girl -- Wherever I
am, believe me

Dear Sir, yours, L. STERN.
My kind compliments to Mr. F --: though I have not the honor of knowing his
rib, I see no reason why I may not present all due respects to the better half
of so old a friend, which I do by these presents -- with my friendliest wishes
to Miss P --.



LETTER LXXIII. To Mr. F. at Paris.
Coxwould, October 25, 1766. My dear F.
I Desired you would be so good as to remit to Mrs. S -- fifty louis, a month
ago -- I dare say you have done it -- but her illness must have cost her a good
deal -- therefore having paid the last fifty pounds into Mr. Selwin's hands, I
beg you to send her thirty guineas more -- for which I send a bank bill to Mr.
Becket by this post -- but surely had I not done so, you would not stick at it
-- for be assured, my dear F. that the first Lord of the Treasury is neither
more able or more willing (nor perhaps half so punctual) in repaying with
honor all I ever can be in your books. -- My daughter says her mother is very
ill -- and I fear going fast down by all accounts -- it is melancholy in her
situation to want any aid that is in my power to give -- do write to her -- and
believe me, with all compliments to your Hotel,

Yours very truly, L. STERN.

LETTER LXXIV. To the same.
York, November 25, 1766. Dear Sir,
I Just received yours -- and am glad that the balance of accounts is now paid
to you -- Thus far all goes well -- I have received a letter from my daughter
with the pleasing tidings that she thinks her mother out of danger -- and that
the air of the country is delightful (excepting the winds) but the description
of the Chateau my wife has hired is really pretty -- on the side of the
Fountain of Vaucluse -- with seven rooms of a floor, half furnished with
tapestry, half with blue taffety, the permission to fish, and to have game; so
many partridges a week, etc. and the price -- guess! sixteen guineas a year --
there is for you P. -- about the latter end of next month my wife will have
occasion for a hundred guineas -- and pray be so good, my dear sir, as to give
orders that she may not be disappointed -- she is going to spend the Carnival
at Marseilles at Christmas -- I shall be in London by Christmas week, and then
shall balance this remittance to Mrs. S. with Mr. S -- I am going to ly in of
another child of the Shandaick procreation, in town -- I hope you wish me a
safe delivery -- I fear my friend Mr. F. will have left town before I get there
-- Adieu dear Sir -- I wish you every thing in this world which will do you
good, for I am with unfeigned truth,

Yours, L. STERN.
Make my compliments acceptable to the good and worthy Baron D'Holbach -- Miss
P. etc. etc.



LETTER LXXV. To Mr. P. at Paris.
London, February 13, 1767. Dear P.
I Paid yesterday (by Mr. Becket) a hundred guineas, or pounds I forget which,
to Mr. Selwin -- But you must remit to Mrs. S. at Marseilles a hundred louis
before she leaves that place, which will be in less than three weeks. Have you
got the ninth volume of Shandy? -- it is liked the best of all here. -- I am
going to publish a Sentimental Journey through France and Italy -- the
undertaking is protected and highly encouraged by all our noblesse -- it is
subscribed for, at a great rate -- 'twill be an original -- in large quarto --
the subscription half a guinea -- If you can procure me the honor of a few
names of men of science, or fashion, I shall thank you -- they will appear in
good company, as all the nobility here almost have honored me with their
names. -- My kindest remembrance to Mr. F. -- respects to Baron D'Holbach, and
believe me ever ever yours,

L. STERN.

LETTER LXXVI. To Miss S.
Old Bond-street, February 23, 1767.
AND so, my Lydia! thy mother and thyself are returning back again from
Marseilles to the banks of the Sorgue -- and there thou will sit and fish for
trouts -- I envy you the sweet situation. -- Petrarch's tomb I should like to
pay a sentimental visit to -- the Fountain of Vaucluse, by thy description,
must be delightful -- I am also much pleased with the account you give me of
the Abbe de Sade -- you find great comfort in such a neighbor -- I am glad he
is so good as to correct thy translation of my Sermons -- dear girl go on, and
make me a present of thy work -- but why not the House of Mourning? it is one of
the best. I long to receive the life of Petrarch, and his Laura, by your Abbe,
but I am out of all patience with the answer the Marquis made the Abbe -- 'twas
truly coarse, and I wonder he bore it with any christian patience -- But to the
subject of your letter -- I do not wish to know who was the busy fool, who made
your mother uneasy about Mrs. -- it is true I have a friendship for her, but not
to infatuation -- I believe I have judgment enough to discern hers, and every
woman's faults. I honor thy mother for her answer -- "that she wished not to
be informed, and begged him to drop the subject." -- Why do you say that your
mother wants money? -- whilst I have a shilling, shall you not both have
ninepence out of it? -- I think, if I have my enjoyments, I ought not to grudge
you yours. -- I shall not begin my Sentimental Journey till I get to Coxwould
-- I have laid a plan for something new, quite out of the beaten track. -- I
wish I had you with me -- and I would introduce you to one of the most amiable
and gentlest of beings, whom I have just been with -- not Mrs. --, but a Mrs.
J. the wife of as worthy a man as I ever met with -- I esteem them both. He
possesses every manly virtue -- honor and bravery are his characteristicks,
which have distinguished him nobly in several instances -- I shall make you
better acquainted with his character, by sending Orme's History, with the books
you desired -- and it is well worth your reading; for Orme is an elegant
writer, and a just one; he pays no man a compliment at the expense of truth. --
Mrs. J -- is kind -- and friendly -- of a sentimental turn of mind -- and so
sweet a disposition, that she is too good for the world she lives in -- Just
God! if all were like her, what a life would this be! -- Heaven, my Lydia, for
some wise purpose has created different beings -- I wish my dear child knew her
-- thou art worthy of her friendship, and she already loves thee; for I
sometimes tell her what I feel for thee. -- This is a long letter -- write
soon, and never let your letters be studied ones -- write naturally, and then
you will write well. -- I hope your mother has got quite well of her ague -- I
have sent her some of Huxham's tincture of the Bark. I will order you a guittar
since the other is broke. Believe me, my Lydia, that I am yours affectionately,

L. STERN.

LETTER LXXVII. To Mr. P. at Paris.
London, February 27, 1767. Dear Sir,
MY Daughter begs a present of me, and you must know I can deny her nothing --
It must be strung with cat-gut, and of five chords -- si chiama in Italiano la
chitera di cinque cord -- she cannot get such a thing at Marseilles -- at
Paris one may have every thing -- Will you be so good to my girl as to make her
happy in this affair, by getting some musical body to buy one, and send it her
to Avignon directed to Monsieur Test? -- I wrote last week to desire you would
remit Mrs. S. a hundred louis -- 'twill be all, except the guittar, I shall owe
you -- send me your account, and I will pay Mr. Selwin -- direct to me at Mr.
Becket's -- all kind respects to my friend Mr. F. and your sister.

Yours cordially, L. STERN.

LETTER *LXXVII. To D. G. Esquire.
Thursday, Eleven o'Clock -- Night. Dear Sir,
'TWAS for all the world like a cut across my finger with a sharp penknife. --
I saw the blood -- gave it a suck -- wrapped it up -- and thought no more about
it.

But there is more goes to the healing of a wound than this comes to: -- a
wound (unless it is a wound not worth talking of, but by the bye mine is) must
give you some pain after. -- Nature will take her own way with it -- it must
ferment -- it must digest.

The story you told me of Tristram's pretended tutor, this morning -- My letter
by right should have set out with this sentence, and then the simile would not
have kept you a moment in suspense.

This vile story, I say -- though I then saw both how, and where it wounded -- I
felt little from it at first -- or, to speak more honestly (though it ruins my
simile) I felt a great deal of pain from it, but affected an air usual on such
accidents, of less feeling than I had.

I have now got home to my lodgings since the play (you astonished me in it)
and have been unwrapping this selfsame wound of mine, and shaking my head over
it this half hour.

What the devil! -- is there no one learned blockhead throughout the many
schools of misapplied science in the Christian World, to make a tutor of for my
Tristram? -- Ex quovis ligno non fit. -- Are we so run out of stock, that there
is no one lumber-headed, muddle-headed, mortar-headed, pudding-headed chap
amongst our doctors? -- Is there no one single wight of much reading and no
learning amongst the many children in my mother's nursery, who bid high for
this charge -- but I must disable my judgment by choosing a W -- n? Vengeance!
have I so little concern for the honor of my hero! -- Am I a wretch so void of
sense, so bereft of feeling for the figure he is to make in story, that I
should choose a praeceptor to rob him of all the immortality I intended him? O!
dear Mr. G.

Malice is ingenious -- unless where the excess of it outwits itself -- I have
two comforts in this stroke of it; -- the first is, that this one is partly of
this kind; and secondly, that it is one of the number of those which so
unfairly brought poor Yorick to his grave. -- The report might draw blood of
the author of Tristram Shandy -- but could not harm such a man as the author of
the Divine Legation -- God bless him! though (by the bye, and according to the
natural course of descents) the blessing should come from him to me.

Pray have you no interest, lateral or collateral, to get me introduced to his
Lordship?

Why do you ask?

My dear Sir, I have no claim to such an honor, but what arises from the
honor and respect which in the progress of my work will be shown the world I
owe to so great a man.

Whilst I am talking of owing -- I wish, my dear Sir, that any body would tell
you, how much I am indebted to you. -- I am determined never to do it myself,
or say more upon the subject than this, that I am yours,

L. STERN.

End of Vol. II.

