MANAGEMENT: A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.

AT PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.

By FREDERICK REYNOLDS.

LONDON: Printed by A. Strahan, Printers Street; FOR T. ^. LONGMAN AND O. REES,
PATERNOSTER-ROW.

1799.

[Price Two Shillings.]

PROLOGUE, WRITTEN BY MR. TAILOR.
SPOKEN BY MR. BETTERTON. A Well-known Muse, who labors once a year,
And often has found a safe Asylum here,
Though Critic storms a Mother's fears excite,
With her new Offspring ventures forth tonight.
Conscious the features must betray the Sire,
She seeks for no disguise of vain attire;
What honest Nature gave she brings to view,
And for a kind adoption rests on you.
Yet happily now with reason she appears
Oppressed with more than even maternal fears.
For since she last enjoyed your fost'ring smile,
A German Rival's charms have caught our Isle.
And though she knows that Rival's favored race,
With daring force combine a softening grace,
She knows, besides, that one of native breed
May always hope with Britons to succeed:
And hence, though fashion call her bigot-sool,
She takes no lessons from a foreign school --
But with a patriot pride she lets you know,
"'It Is English! English, Sirs! from top to toe!"
While on your liberal candor we rely,
And Fashion's rage with patriot zeal defy,
Think not our Author sees with jealous pain
Exotic merit British laurels gain --
No -- when to ALBION'S hospitable shore
MISFORTUNE flies protection to implore;
Or GENIUS darting from a distant sphere,
That mental Comet spreads its radiance here;
May Britons glow with philanthropic fire,
Eager alike to cherish and admire!

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
CAPTAIN LAVISH MR. LEWIS. MIST MR. FAWCETT. WORRY MR. MUNDEN. SIR HERVEY
SUTHERLAND MR. POPE. ALLTRADE MR. FARLEY. FRANK MR. KLANERT. STOPGAP MR.
SIMMONS. GEOFFRY MR. DAVENPORT.
MRS. DAZZLE MRS. DAVENPORT. BETTY MISS LESERVE. JULIANA MRS. POPE.
SCENE -- The Country.

MANAGEMENT.
ACT I.
SCENE -- A View of Sutherland-house, Park, Gardens, etc.
Enter GEOFFRY and two other Servants. GEOFFRY. COME, bustle, bustle -- all to
your several occupations. -- Bless me, who'd have thought of Sir Hervey coming
home: -- go -- enter the house, and prepare for his reception -- I Will wait his
arrival here.


Servants exeunt. Enter JULIANA. Juliana. Good morning, good old Geoffry. -- I
have once more eluded the vigilance of my persecutor -- once more stolen forth
from the castle, purposely to visit this spot; and if my father hears of it, I
hope he will not be angry with me: -- though he denies me his protection, surely
he will not preclude me from contemplating scenes that remind me of him and my
dear Mother! -- why, what is the matter? you seem agitated.


Geoffry. Well I may, Miss Juliana -- your father is arrived from Italy, and I
expect him here this very day.


Juliana. Expect my father!


Geoffry. Ay; after an absence of thirteen years, I expect Sir Hervey once more
at Sutherland-house: -- look, here is his letter.


Juliana (snatching the letter, reading and kissing it). Oh, I Am so happy! -- I
shall at last behold, perhaps embrace him.


Geoffry. Nay, I fear otherwise; Sir Hervey is of a most unforgiving
disposition, and the wrongs your mother put upon him were of a nature not
easily to be forgotten.


Juliana. Wrongs! -- what wrongs, Geoffry? is the dark tale for ever to be
concealed from me? -- I am deserted by my father, and not to know the cause! --
Come, good old man! remember, you promised you would one day tell me, and since
we are alone, and may not have another opportunity, come now -- unveil the
mystery -- how, how did my mother wrong him?


Geoffry. Well then, to keep my word -- Sir Hervey ever was, and I fear ever
will be, a dupe to fashion and its follies: -- he gamed, he intrigued -- and
though in his heart devoted to Lady Sutherland, he forsook her and his home for
scenes of riot and dissipation.


Juliana. Unfortunate infatuation!


Geoffry. Lady Sutherland a long while bore this with fortitude and
resignation; but young, beautiful, and accomplished, surrounded by admirers and
neglected by her husband, she at last listened to the addresses of an artful
and designing villain, who convinced her of Sir Hervey's infidelity, and, by
means of forged letters and other artifices, persuaded her to elope with him.


Juliana. Indeed!


Geoffry. It Is too true, madam; -- but her guilt was of short duration: -- in a
few days she came back to that house, all penitence and shame. -- I shall never
forget the day. -- I told Sir Hervey of her return, and he in a fit of rage and
madness bid me shut the door against her; this she overheard: 'twas too much
for a tender nature like hers: -- she fled, and soon after died -- died of a
broken heart!


Juliana (bursting into tears). Oh, for mercy! -- my poor, poor mother!


Geoffry. You were then but eight years old, and till that hour the idol of Sir
Hervey: -- but your likeness to your mother soon making him wish to avoid you,
you were removed to the castle; where he invested Mrs. Dazzle with the
unlimited power of a guardian over you, and which I fear she has exerted like a
tyrant.


Juliana. Yes. -- Sir Hervey could not mean that I should be her prisoner! --
But go on: he went abroad --


Geoffry. He did -- to Naples, where he has ever since resided: and now, what
think you, madam? do you blame the living or the dead?


Juliana. I have no right to condemn either -- but in my mind the husband who
neglects an amiable wife is responsible for all the evils that ensue. -- Died
of a broken heart! -- oh, that he had but pardoned her! -- then he had had a
wife, and I a mother to console me! -- but now -- Do I indeed resemble her?


Geoffry. You do -- you do.


Juliana. Thank Heaven! -- I may forgive her, though my father never can.


Worry (speaking without). This way, my lad -- this way.


Juliana. Ha! there is Sir Hervey! -- though I wish, you don't know how I dread
to see him: let me be gone.


Geoffry. No, it is only Worry, his old faithful follower; honest soul! he and
your father were fostered by the same nurse; and, though long since in easy
independent circumstances, he still follows Sir Hervey from motives of
affection. -- Suppose you ask him to be a mediator for you.


Juliana. Not now -- another time, another time -- I must return to my prison:
-- but though I shed tears over the fate of my mother, don't fancy I upbraid my
father. -- No! I feel for both -- and let him still avoid, still punish and
abandon me, I know his motive: and the fond hope that he will one day prove a
parent to me, will make me bear even greater ills with patience. -- Oh! may
that day be not far off! for 'twill be the proudest and the happiest of my life.


Exit. Enter WORRY and a Servant. Worry. Mind, do as I order you; when the
baggage arrives let me know. (Exit Servant.) What Geoff! -- give me your hand,
old Geoff! -- Sir Hervey is but a stage behind. -- 'Slife! I thought we should
never shake hands again.


Geoffry. So did I; it is thirteen years (shaking hands and looking hard at
Worry); but, heyday! how you are altered, Master Worry!


Worry. Yes, I Am not the same man I was.


Geoffry. So I see; but how has it happened?


Worry. I don't know -- I lead a different sort of life -- I think; and I Am
afraid I drink a great deal.


Geoffry. You drink! you that used to be the most temperate, sober --


Worry. Ay; and I used to hate cards, you know; now I could play all day: -- I
used to break appointments; now I come an hour before my time; -- and I that
always laid in bed till noon, now constantly rise with the crowing of the cock.


Geoffry. Why, what the deuce, are you mad?


Worry. No -- I Am married. -- I Have got a loving jealous wife! -- and whilst Sir
Hervey is continually miserable because Lady Sutherland ran away from him, here
am I -- I tell you what, Geoff -- if Mrs. Worry were to run away from me, I Am
sure I should be too much of a philosopher to repine on the occasion.


Geoffry. What! and is Sir Hervey likewise altered? -- or does he still go on
rioting in dissipation and extravagance?


Worry. Worse and worse -- only yesterday he employed Mr. Alltrade to raise
five thousand pounds for him on his bond -- offered a premium of fifty per
cent. and the moment he receives the money, away it will go in galas or at the
gaming table -- No, I beg pardon -- not at the gaming table -- now a days no
money ever goes there.


Geoffry. What! have they left off playing?


Worry. No -- but they have left off paying; -- and that is the reason the faro
banks are knocked up -- when people only play for love, friendship will not induce
them to keep open house. -- But Miss Sutherland -- there is Sir Hervey's
greatest plague. A meeting with her was his chief motive for leaving Italy, and
now we understand she vindicates her mother, and takes part against him.


Geoffry. She is belied, cruelly belied!


Worry. Nay; we have it from the best authority, -- Mrs. Dazzle -- the lady who
brought her up, and for whom I have a message -- but of this be assured, Geoff;
Sir Hervey's case is not half so desperate as mine: -- he is only tormented by a
daughter who will try to break his heart, but I Have got a jealous wife, who will
actually break my head, heart, and purse strings.


Re-enter Servant. Servant. Sir, the baggage is come.


Worry. You hear -- Mrs. Worry is arrived. -- Come, will you go and be
introduced?


Geoffry. With all my heart -- but mind now -- you will one day find that Mrs.
Dazzle has traduced Miss Sutherland, and only because she was a great favorite
of her late husband's. He was a distant relation, you know, and I did hope
would have remembered her in his will -- but no -- he, like the rest of her
family -- he -- has forgotten her!


Worry. To be sure; who ever got any good by these distant relations? Mrs.
Worry has a little thousand; and do you know my apartments are so constantly
crammed with cousins, neices, uncles, aunts, and grandmothers, that at
dinnertime I never get a chair to sit upon -- I eat flying! -- And talk of the
comforts of a fireside, curse me if I Have been within ten yards of mine since
the day I was married: -- not that I complain of cold though -- my house is
warm enough, I promise you: -- but come along; and sorry am I to be convinced
of Miss Sutherland's ingratitude. -- Were she the girl you describe, I would
not only be her friend and advocate, but if Sir Hervey refused to protect her,
I would myself be a father to her.


Exeunt. SCENE -- An Apartment in the Castle.
Enter Mrs. DAZZLE and BETTY. Betty. Even so, ma'am; Miss Juliana first robbed
you of your husband's friendship, and now of the Captain's love.


Mrs. Dazzle. Oh, the little viper! -- but I know how to be amply revenged: --
the great object of her life is a reconciliation with her father; -- this I
have already prevented, and will still prevent. -- But the Captain, Betty -- do
you think he has serious views?


Betty. He serious! what Captain Lavish prefer Juliana Sutherland without a
shilling, to the widow Dazzle with a nett estate of five thousand a year!


Mrs. Dazzle. That Is true: -- I married little Jerry for his fortune, and I am
certainly sole heiress -- to be sure I hav'nt yet seen the will, because he
died in London: -- but I expect his agent Mr. Alltrade with it every moment,
and then, Betty! -- poor Juliana! -- I hope the Captain will allow her half pay.


Betty. Oh you're too liberal, ma'am -- but see! here comes Mr. Alltrade with
the will.


Enter ALLTRADE. Alltrade. Well! madam, as good as my word, you see: -- this
moment arrived with my friend Sir Hervey.


Mrs. Dazzle. You are very kind, Mr. Alltrade; but there was no occasion to be
in any hurry -- every body knows how little Jerry loved me.


Alltrade. Oh, there is no doubt that the will is completely in your favor; but
you had better open it, lest there should be any small bequest or legacies --


Mrs. Dazzle. Well, to oblige you I Will just cast my eye over it -- ( takes the
will from ALLTRADE) Poor Jerry! -- he used to say he should fall a martyr to
love. (Reads will): By this my last will, I Jeremiah Dazzle give and bequeath
all the property of which I die possessed unto that most lovely and
accomplished of her sex -- Spare me -- spare a poor widow's blushes, Mr.
Alltrade.


Alltrade. Nay! it is not more than you deserve.


Mrs. Dazzle. Oh, Sir! (curtseying -- then reads on:) -- "unto that most lovely
and accomplished of her sex, Juliana Sutherland" -- Juliana! -- why, Mr.
Alltrade! (Half crying.)


Alltrade. Go on.


Mrs. Dazzle (reads on). Juliana Sutherland, whom being deserted by her father,
I take a pride in adopting. But my will further is, that she hold the said
property no longer than she remains unmarried. In case she marries, I give the
same to my widow Deborah Dazzle. And my only motive for thus tying up my cousin
Juliana, is to save her from entering into a state to which I fell a martyr. --
Why it is a forgery! he could not -- dared not!


Alltrade. Nay -- there is no doubt that it is genuine -- but be composed --
does not Miss Sutherland live in this house?


Mrs. Dazzle. She does.


Alltrade. Then it dawns! it glares upon me! -- Mark -- if she marries, the
estate devolves to you -- are not these Mr. Dazzle's words!


Mrs. Dazzle. They are: and I only wish I had been behind him when he wrote
them!.


Alltrade. Well: be patient -- don't destroy the will, because that is a serious
business (pulling up his neckcloth): -- only conceal it till you get Juliana a
husband -- then she forfeits the legacy, and you become heiress to a hundred
thousand pounds.


Mrs. Dazzle. Why that looks well -- but how? -- the Captain will not marry her.


Alltrade. No, but I will; in the first place her being in this house will give
me numberless opportunities; and in the next I am employed by Sir Hervey to
raise five thousand pounds for him on his bond -- now if we can get Juliana to
join in it, I shall have them both so completely in my power, that if I fail in
the character of a lover, I may succeed in that of a creditor: -- you
understand.


Mrs. Dazzle. I do -- excellent! -- and as a reward for your trouble --


Alltrade. I only ask a third of the estate.


Mrs. Dazzle. Granted -- it is a bargain.


Alltrade. Say you so? -- then let us to work instantly -- and look here comes
one who, from his influence over Sir Hervey, we must secure as a confederate.


Enter WORRY. Mrs. Dazzle. Worry, my old acquaintance! -- I give you joy of
your marriage, and sincerely wish you may never know the pangs of widowhood.


Alltrade. And so do I with all my heart, Worry.


Worry. And I wish with all my soul you would both keep your wishes to yourselves.
(Aside.) -- But I wait upon you, madam, from Sir Hervey: -- from your account
of Miss Sutherland's undutiful and indiscreet conduct, he persists in not
seeing her, and therefore while he stays in the country, he begs she may be
more closely confined than ever.


Mrs. Dazzle. I Will do all I can; but she is so artful and designing, that for
my part I don't think she will ever be safe till she gets a husband to protect
her.


Alltrade. Nor I; and I Will tell you a secret, Worry -- I love her, and wish to
be that husband: and since, from my humble birth and inferior situation, I
cannot aspire to gaining Sir Hervey's consent, will you aid and assist the
marriage?


Worry. With all my heart -- the more matches the better. -- When one's in a
scrape oneself, nothing's so consoling as to see all one's friends in the same
situation. (Aside.) I Will assist you -- but about the bond -- have you raised
the five thousand pounds.


Alltrade. No; and I despair of success -- the friend I applied to wants Miss
Sutherland to join.


Worry. She join! why she is as poor --


Alltrade. I know -- but he says she has rich relations -- may have a handsome
legacy -- in short, it will mend the security: -- therefore let Sir Hervey know
this, and he will see the necessity of commanding her to sign instantly.

(WORRY is going.)
Mrs. Dazzle. Good day, Worry -- I shall be always glad to see you: and because
there is a hatchment over my door, don't fancy this is absolutely the house of
mourning.


Worry. No, ma'am; -- I -- I --

(laughing and trying to conceal it).
Mrs. Dazzle. Why, what do you laugh at? -- speak out -- you will not offend me.


Worry. Shall Not I, ma'am? -- then begging your pardon, you need'nt have
cautioned me; for I always look on a hatchment outside of a widow's house like
a sign over an inn -- a certain emblem of revelry and good cheer. -- And when
I Am a widower -- oh! oh! oh!

(shakes his head, sighs, and exit)
Alltrade. So far, so well; he is in our interest -- but to get this bond out of
Sir Hervey's hands, we must at least advance a few hundreds, and where to raise
even those -- for my part I haven't a guinea.


Mrs. Dazzle. Nor I now a shilling! -- (sighing) nor do I know where to raise
one?


Alltrade. No!


Mrs. Dazzle. No; unless indeed Mr. Mist the manager of our country theater --


Alltrade. What! the quondam silversmith of Cheapside! -- he is an old friend of
mine,


Mrs. Dazzle, Is he? -- then you may aid my suit. -- You must know, smitten
with the love of same, eager to acquire the reputation of wit and genius, I
have written a most magnificent play, which of course I am all anxiety to see
acted; he has already promised to come and read it, and if it meets with his
approbation, very likely he may advance the money necessary to pay Sir Hervey.


Alltrade. True -- suppose I hasten his visit -- I Will seek him instantly; and
whilst you keep Juliana out of sight, I Will keep the will out of sight --
(putting will in his pocket). -- And with regard to the play, if you get money
by it, depend on it you will get reputation also; one generally follows the other.


Mrs. Dazzle. So it does -- and how the case is altered? -- formerly wits had
no money, and now he that has no money has no wit; for whilst a bad joke will
be applauded from the head of a great able, a good one will be lost if spoken
by him who has nothing but wit to recommend him! -- but away to the manager --
let the war begin, and doubt not our victory!


Exeunt. SCENE -- Outside of the Theater.
Enter STOPGAP (from the Box-office). Stopgap. Pooh -- I Will sit there picking
my teeth no longer; -- stay for ever, there will not be a place taken; for well as
Mr. Mist might understand conducting a shop, he knows so little how to manage a
theater, that during the time I have been prompter, treasurer, box-book-keeper,
and deputy manager, there have been only three boxes taken -- and they were by
particular friends, who thought they did him an honor by coming in with orders
-- psha! -- I Will go -- heh? -- who is here? -- aha? a flat at last!


Enter ALLTRADE. Stopgap. This way, Sir, -- there is the office -- have a front
row in any part of the house, Sir --


Alltrade. Sir, I want to speak to Mr. Mist -- where is he? (STOPGAP holds down
his head). -- Why don't you answer me? -- where can I find him?


Stopgap. He Is walking on the London road -- you will find him there, all
anxiety, looking out for the new Harlequin whom we expect every hour by the
slow wagon.


Alltrade. Expect Harlequin by the slow wagon!


Stopgap. Yes, Sir: and between you and me, it is high time he came; we play to
shocking houses -- last night to Hamlet we were obliged to make a show, by
shoving the band into the pit, the orange women into the boxes, and the
door-keepers into the galleries. -- Indeed no wonder at it, for Mr. Mist
himself played Hamlet.


Alltrade. The old tradesman act Hamlet!


Stopgap. Even so -- he always will act the best part -- but here he comes, and
spite of the bad houses, all bustle, life, and animation!


Enter MIST. Mist. Damn that slow wagon -- not here 'till season's over --
however, sure of tol lol house to night -- fine day -- strong bill -- nothing
against -- what Jack! Jack Alltrade! -- why what brings you to this -- oh! oh!
-- sly dog! -- written a Farce -- cannot get it acted in London -- and so come
--


Alltrade. Not I upon my honor.


Mist. Want an engagement then! -- what is your line? Ben, Scrub, and Calliban;
or Richard, Romeo, and the tiptops -- no difference though -- tragedy or comedy
-- play which you will, Jack -- sure to entertain audience -- he! he! he!


Alltrade. Why 'Slife -- here is an alteration! -- when I last saw you, you were
leaving off trade with a capital fortune, and retiring into the country free
from the cares and vexation of business.


Mist. Hem! much you know of the matter -- when I lost care and vexation, lost
my two best friends.


Alltrade. Care and vexation your best friends!


Mist. Yes: couldn't tell what to do with myself -- all day long watching
clock, or yawning at street door -- could'nt bear it -- hardly alive -- thought
of opening new shop -- when one lucky day! -- play house put up at auction --
always had theatrical twist -- so bid handsomely -- knocked down at large sum
to be sure -- but what then? been happy ever since -- had care and vexation in
abundance -- but mum -- shall not stop here -- London -- Covent Garden -- Drury
Lane -- they are my object!


Alltrade. Indeed! -- then why not make them your object now? -- why not engage
London players?


Mist. Um! (snapping his fingers) -- that for London players -- and that for
London authors -- soon have best actor and finest writer living -- heh: know
who I mean?

(mimics Harlequin.)
Alltrade. Harlequin!


Mist. Right -- back his wooden sword against their wooden heads -- bring all
Europe -- young and old boys -- little babies, and full grown babies: -- and
then for salary -- only twelve shillings a week, and fare of slow wagon --
whereas these London gentlemen, with their ten pounds a night and post chaises
and four -- besides, will not do here? -- don't I come from London? -- don't I act
Hamlet, and to what? -- not enough to pay the lighting? -- but cannot stay --
must go look after the tricks -- must get all smooth against great man's
arrival.


Alltrade. Nay: I Have an invitation for you -- Mrs. Dazzle is extremely anxious
about her play, and requests you would wait upon her.


Mist. I wait! -- who is manager? -- besides d -- d stuff I suppose.


Alltrade. That I cannot say -- but when I tell you, she is a lady I have the
greatest regard for --


Mist. Enough -- come this evening -- be there before doors open -- till when,
in the words of Hamlet, Remember me!


Alltrade. Hamlet! -- in the words of the Ghost, you mean.


Mist. Yes: but when I act Hamlet, play the Ghost too -- always take every good
speech in the play and whip into my part -- I Am manager -- he! he! he!


Alltrade. Well, adieu -- and after the reading, I Will look in at the theater.


Mist. Do -- shall not cost you a farthing -- put you in at stage door, and sit in
my box -- Strong bill tonight -- Beggar's Opera in two acts -- Filch by a
gentleman of the law, being his first and last appearance on any stage -- after
which, a grand spectacle of my own writing, called Gulliver the Great. -- In
the first act, all the characters will be killed -- in the second, introduced
their executors, administrators, and assigns -- but come and judge. -- I say
though, when new pantomime comes out, trouble you not to walk about the town,
Jack.


Alltrade. Why?


Mist. Why! -- who will pay to look at my clown, when they can see you for
nothing -- he! he! he! -- come along, Stop.


Exeunt. THE END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE -- Outside of the Castle.
Enter Sir HERVEY SUTHERLAND, WORRY, and GEOFFRY. Sir Hervey. 'Sdeath! how
mortifying! how perplexing! -- and yet, without the money, inevitable ruin
follows. Are you sure that was Mr. Alltrade's message?


Worry. Yes, Sir; he cannot raise the five thousand pounds unless Miss Juliana
joins in the bond.


Sir Hervey. Well, be it so. -- Enter the castle instantly, and tell her it is
by my command; the first and last request her father ever will make to her --
begone -- [WORRY exit]. -- And now, old man, obey my orders -- let there be
masks and dancing -- I cannot encounter solitude -- that leads to thought, and
thought engenders madness; and I must plunge 'midst any species of society to
save me from myself: therefore, let the doors of Sutherland-house once more be
opened, and let revelry and good cheer welcome my return.


Geoffry. I shall obey, Sir.


Sir Hervey. Give general invitation to my friends.


Geoffry. Your friends! -- Oh, I Am glad of that, Sir -- then I hope I know one
who will be of the party.


Sir Hervey. Indeed! who, Geoffry?


Geoffry. With submission, Miss Juliana, Sir -- don't be angry -- but if the
title of friend admits any one into your house, in my mind none ought to be
more welcome than your own daughter.


Sir Hervey. How! -- have a care, Sir.


Geoffry. Nay, you are deceived, cruelly deceived; she has no hope, no wish
beyond you: only this very morning, with tears in her eyes, she exclaimed, The
day that reconciles me to my father will be the proudest and the happiest of my
life! -- These were her words -- and now, to see her imprisoned! --

(pointing to the castle.)
Sir Hervey (much agitated). Did she -- did she say this, Geoffry?


Geoffry. She did, Sir -- and at the same time she put on such a sweet
fascinating look -- exactly such a one as her late mother --


Sir Hervey. Who, Sir?


Geoffry. Such a one as poor Lady Sutherland, Sir, --


Sir Hervey. Distraction! -- you have raised the latent fury here; and I would
sooner press a viper to my breast than the image of a woman who had so wronged
me. -- I Will hear no more -- besides, this is all artifice -- I Have been informed
how well she loves her father; and for the imprisonment you talk of, I sanction
and approve it. -- Better be even cloistered thus, than only come into the
world to vindicate and share a false, false mother's crimes.


Geoffry. What! can Mrs. Dazzle be base enough --


Sir Hervey. Peace, old man -- on pain of your dismissal utter not a word
against that best of women and of friends. -- Attend me home, and instantly
make preparation for splendid hospitality. --

(Going.)
Geoffry. Look, Sir! -- only look! -- there is poor Miss Juliana sitting at her
prison window! -- see, how innocent and how melancholy she appears! -- Suppose
now you were just to stay and -- and -- speak to her, Sir.


Sir Hervey. I speak! -- away! -- lead not my mind to thoughts that madden
whilst they charm me -- No -- in the husband's wrongs I Will bury all the fond,
fond feelings of the father. --

(Going, Geoffry stops him.)
Geoffry. Nay, Sir, only turn and take one look at her --


Sir Hervey. I dare not -- I dare not --

(rushes out, followed by Geoffry).
SCENE -- An Apartment in the Castle.
Enter JULIANA. Juliana. Oh, what a fate is mine! -- a father, whom I haven't
seen from infancy, and now so near me -- and I Am denied the sight of him -- nay
more, am told that, by his orders, this place is still to be my prison. -- Oh,
my mother! I feel my heart, like yours, cannot long support it. -- (Weeps.) -- I
shall soon follow thee!


Enter WORRY. Worry. So, there she is -- what a frightful, undutiful
countenance! -- Oh, she will see us all starve before -- Madam!


Juliana. As I live, the man that Geoffry spoke of -- what can he want? --
(Advances toward him.) -- May I ask -- I hope Sir Hervey's well?


Worry. No, he is very ill, I Am very much obliged to you.


Juliana. Ill! -- heavens! -- what is his complaint?


Worry. An ungrateful daughter! -- Your pardon, ma'am -- perhaps I Am somewhat
blunt -- but I have lived with Sir Hervey these twenty years: if he has faults
to others, he has none to me; and though the world deserts him, it is my duty
to stand or fall with him.


Juliana. Well, I applaud your zeal; but why, why charge me with ingratitude?


Worry. Because you are his enemy; because you take the part of her who basely
wronged him.


Juliana. Hold, censure me as much as you please; but breathe not a syllable
against my mother.


Worry. There! you avow it; you justify --


Juliana. No -- but I feel for her; I lament her fate: that consolation Sir
Hervey cannot deny me. -- And let him know me before he condemns me; for how
can that child be called ungrateful who never had an opportunity of evincing
either her duty or affection?


Worry. How!


Juliana. I never wronged him; and even in my infancy he shut his doors against
me. -- I am his child; and by denying his protection, he has exposed me to the
self-same snares my mother fell a martyr to. -- I Have not disgraced -- I Have ever
loved him: and let him give me but the trial -- oh! let him take me to his
heart; and if the caresses of an affectionate daughter do not atone for the
errors of a misguided mother, then let him cast me from him; but till then let
him not accuse me of ingratitude.


Worry. What! and you would -- how handsome she looks! -- you would be loving and
dutiful?


Juliana. Oh yes -- I Would watch, I Would nurse him -- weep as he wept, and bless each
smile that cheered him: and when time had mellowed his grief into a sweet
remembrance of my mother's loss, then I Would retrieve her honor in the grave: --
in my unvaried truth, all, all should be forgotten. I would revive the
friendship that he bore her, and she should live again in Juliana.


Worry. Bless my soul! -- now only think of my not marrying such a woman! --
and if he wanted money, and you had it to lend him --


Juliana. If I had millions, I would devote them all to him.


Worry. Old Geoff's right. -- May I never go to Heaven if she is not an angel!
-- and if the widow is not something else, may I go somewhere else.


Juliana. Ay, Mrs. Dazzle; she is my persecutor: from the hour I accidentally
interfered with her in Captain Lavish's affection, she --


Worry. Captain Lavish! -- what, your father's antagonist -- the man who two
years ago fought him in Switzerland?


Juliana. Alas! the same.


Worry. And did you return his affection?


Juliana. What could I do? -- he risked his own life to save mine -- it is but a
short and simple tale -- One day, when I had liberty to ride within the
precincts of the castle, my horse ran away with me, and he in stopping it broke
his arm: I could do no less than confess the obligation; and since his
recovery, often visiting Mrs. Dazzle, our intimacy increased, and gratitude
grew into love.


Worry. And all the time did you know of the duel?


Juliana. No; till yesterday I never heard of it; and then I instantly informed
him, that though Sir Hervey neglected his duty to me, I could never forget mine
to him, and nothing should induce me to receive that man as a lover, who
designed to be the murderer of my father. (WORRY crosses her as if going) --
Why, what is the matter? -- where are you going?


Worry. To Sir Hervey; to bid him remove you from the protection of a
hypocrite, and place you under his own.


Juliana. Oh, will you -- will you be so generous? Indeed in this castle I am
not safe a moment.


Worry. No -- nor any body else; for the roof will tumble in to a certainty;
but I Will go directly: and if I fail, and the war continues -- let the enemy
look to it -- I Have served many a hard campaign, and though not lately in the
battles abroad, thanks to Mrs. Worry I Have seen pretty warm service at home; and
sooner than you should remain under the rod of a tyrant, I Would storm the castle,
and revive the age of chivalry: -- yes -- I would -- I "Will Worry," the
married man! -- So retire, and wait my coming, madam -- I Will not be long.


Juliana. I Am sure you will not: and pray remind my father, that I have
suffered in my turn; that we are partners in calamity, and by meeting we might
divide and dissipate each other's woes. -- Tell him -- but you know my
thoughts, and to your conduct I commit a cause on which my hope, my happiness,
my life depends!


Exeunt. SCENE -- Another Apartment in the Castle, Mrs. DAZZLE and MIST
discovered sitting at a Table -- MIST with a Manuscript in his Hand.
Mrs. Dazzle. Now then, Mr. MIST -- now begin the play: but remember, I haven't
quite finished it.


Mist (reading). Mary Queen of Scots, a grand beroic drama; with new scenes,
new dresses, new decorations, new -- hem: that is my affair -- I Am manager --


Mrs. Dazzle. Oh, certainly, Sir --


Mist (reading). Scene the first -- a room in a Castle -- the Duke of Norfolk
discovered with a key in his band. The Duke -- Now, by my holy dame, with this
same key, Jockey of Norfolk, thou wilt unlock the gate of Scottish Mary's prison!
-- He unlocks ihe gate and leads forth Mary. -- Beshrew me, but your safe, and
so good morrow, good Queen Elizabeth! -- (MIST lays down the play, and rises:)
Will Not do -- will not bring sixpence -- refuse it -- I refuse it!


Mrs. Dazzle. How! why I flattered myself I had caught the true Shaksperian
fire.


Mist. And suppose you had -- what then? -- played Hamlet last night under ten
pounds; and I say that is a bad play that brings a bad house. -- Harlequin and
Abraham Newland -- they are the only pulling writers, except indeed the Germans;
and there! -- there I Am beforehand with the Londoners -- mum -- mine is a German
Harlequin -- he! -- he! -- However, try another page -- if that is not better,
don't you finish play -- audience will finish it for you.

(Reads play:) Enter Queen Elizabeth and Burleigh. -- The Queen -- Go to --
we'll nip'em in the bud. -- Why, how now, rebels? -- for this treacherous queen,
convey her to the tower -- and there, good Burleigh -- You take the hint --
Away! -- Burleigh carries off Mary and -- ( here MIST is interrupted by loud
rattling at stage door) -- You hear -- applause interrupts us.


Mrs. Dazzle. Who can it be? -- dear! was there ever any thing so unlucky?


Mist. Not at all; for this relief much thanks -- (taking up his hat and cane).
-- Decided, in my opinion -- first night disapprobation -- second, under
expenses -- third, nobody but the author. -- Yours, devotedly yours.


Mrs. Dazzle. Nay, I insist you don't stir (noise at door again). -- You hear!
-- do only be kind enough to step into the next room, and I Will get rid of this
intrusive person in a moment: come now, indulge an anxious author; and consider
though it don't read, it may act well.


Mist. That Is true; nothing reads worse than pantomime; but in representation!
-- Oh gods! and goddesses! -- give me the manuscript -- I Will indulge you (takes
the play) -- one -- two -- only four acts! -- never mind -- if play's bad, less
of bad thing the better -- if good, I and my copyist soon cobble up fifth act
for you -- but I Am gone -- (Going, returns) Mum! ever see Gulliver the Great?
-- that was our writing -- to be sure audience damned it the first night, but
what then? -- Theatre's mine! -- so gave 'em a dose of it; acted it fifty
nights running -- revenged myself there -- he! he! he! -- and in like manner
always will maintain dignity! -- always, as long as I Am P. M., Peter Mist --
and M. P. manager of a play house!


Exit. Mrs. Dazzle. Now then, for this tormentor -- ( opens door, and enter
JULIANA) -- You Miss! -- how dare you --


Juliana. Oh, madam! -- I Am so terrified! -- even now, Mr. Alltrade, a total
stranger, proposed marriage to me; and told me that, aided by his own merit and
your interest, he didn't doubt of success, -- Nay, on my refusing him, he
absolutely threatened to use force.


Mrs. Dazzle. And on this account you fled from him?


Juliana. I did, madam: and I entreat you to protect and save me.


Mrs. Dazzle. Base, worthless girl! -- then know Mr. Alltrade spoke truth; he
is the man I have selected for your husband.


Juliana. Heavens! and can you mean --


Mrs. Dazzle. I mean you should be his wife! and till you consent, your chamber
shall be your prison --


Juliana (falling at her feet). Oh, for mercy! -- Look at me -- I am
friendless, fatherless!


Mrs. Dazzle. And who have you to thank for it? -- Yes: it is as I said --
Captain Lavish has taught you to despise marriage, and copy the example of her
who made you fatherless.


Juliana. What! do you allude to --


Mrs. Dazzle. I do -- and beware, Miss -- dare not to imitate such false,
abandoned conduct.


Juliana. Abandoned!


Mrs. Dazzle. Ay: would you justify it? -- have you the audacity to vindicate
deeds the most licentious! -- actions --


Juliana (rising). Were you the being that I most respect -- were you my
father! -- I Would tell you it is false! -- Licentious! -- oh, had my illfated
mother possessed one atom that resembled you, I Would tear her image from my heart,
or die!


Mrs. Dazzle. Take care, or --


Juliana. Oh, shame! shame! -- is this the protection I might expect from one
of my own sex? -- Men would betray us; let us not betray each other! and while
she whom you censure might meet with pity and forgiveness, what can the female
seducer expect? -- the scorn of one sex, the abhorrence of the other.


Mrs. Dazzle. Begone I -- retire to your chamber -- nay, no reply; -- I will be
obeyed --

(walks up the stage in a rage).
Enter WORRY. Juliana (running hastily up to him). Oh! have you seen my father?
-- will he, will he take pity on me?


Worry. Alas, madam! -- I can do nothing for you.


Juliana. What! he persists!


Worry. Most obstinately: he says your offer of advancing money is no more than
your duty, and what a parent has a lawful claim to.


Juliana. Then may he feel -- but he is deceived, and I forgive him.


Mrs. Dazzle (coming down stage). Not gone yet! -- Do as I command: to your
chamber I insist -- (takes JULIANA by the arm and leads her to stage door --
JULIANA exit.) -- And you, Worry, as you have kindly undertaken to assist Mr.
Alltrade, go to him instantly; tell him Miss Sutherland has so grossly insulted
me, that I Have no longer any conscientious scruples, and if he chooses to secure
the marriage by carrying her off --


Worry. Carrying her off!


Mrs. Dazzle. Ay: force will be the shortest mode: so bid him come in a
post-chaise to the western gate, whilst I go and make sure of my prisoner. --
Away -- lose not a moment, and tell him I Will answer for the success of the
enterprise.


Exit. Worry. I go to Mr. Alltrade! -- I aid -- bless my soul! -- No wonder
she is a widow -- If she married every morning, her husband would die before
night: -- but I will aid in carrying her off -- I Will go directly and get
assistance -- I Will entreat the first man I meet to join with me: -- and let Sir
Hervey condemn, or, what is more tremendous, let Mrs. Worry scold me, I know I Am
doing my duty! -- So in spite of wives, widows, and devils, I Will secure her
escape, and still try to restore her to her father.

(Going.)
Re-enter MIST (with the Play in his hand). Mist. Oh, it will not do -- 'twill be
damned.


Worry. Now pray take pity -- pray give your assistance, Sir: -- there is the
sweetest young lady just locked into that room, and if you would but help to
release her --


Mist. How! what! young lady locked up! and I help to release her! -- pooh --
nonsense! -- what is her case! -- And me -- why apply to me?


Worry. Because I Am sure you will befriend us -- and if you did but know how
well she had conducted herself! -- how charmingly she had acted her part --


Mist. What! acted her part!


Worry. Ay! no woman ever acted better: -- such sense! such feeling, Sir! --
and now, when she is so ready to engage herself --


Mist. Ready to engage! -- oh, ho -- comprehend now -- locked up to keep her
from the stage, and apply to me 'cause I Am Manager -- he! he! -- Hark ye; how is
her voice?


Worry. Delightful.


Mist. And her action?


Worry. Graceful.


Mist. And her figure?


Worry. Beautiful.


Mist. Damme she will do my business till Harlequin comes! Say no more -- my
house is open -- I Will give her an appearance.


Worry. What! -- you will get her out!


Mist. To be sure I will -- in what part she likes best -- tragedy, comedy,
opera, farce, pantomime! -- And you! -- want a clown -- you shall play clown --
also if you're married! don't reply -- see it by your chin -- give you and your
wife freedom -- perpetual free admission. -- But now for it -- now to plan plot
-- Hem! -- Here is the author.


Enter (from folding doors) Mrs. DAZZLE. Mrs. Dazzle (locking doors and putting
the key in her pocket). So now Juliana's safe, and I get my husband's estate.
-- Oh, Worry, have you seen Mr. Alltrade?


Worry (confused). Hey! yes -- I Have seen Mr. Alltrade, and he will be here with
the chaise directly.


Mist (reading play). "Burleigh carries off Mary."


Mrs. Dazzle. What! no further, Mr. Mist? -- I suppose you're thinking of the
effect, Mr. Manager?


Worry. Mr. Manager! -- Oh! I understand now --


Mist. Yes; but cannot tell without rehearsal -- cannot judge unless I saw it on
the boards -- Let me see -- there is the prison gate -- (pointing to folding
doors): -- you are Jockey Norfolk -- no I Am Jockey -- I Will tell you what --
suppose we give it a trial!


Mrs. Dazzle. A trial! what a rehearsal now in this room? -- Delightful! -- I
should like it of all things.


Mist. So should I -- then listen -- I Will play Norfolk -- you Queen Elizabeth
--


Mrs. Dazzle. He, Burleigh --

( pointing to WORRY).
Worry. Who the devil's Burleigh. --


Mrs. Dazzle. And for Mary -- dear! dear! where shall we get a Mary?


Mist. Tell you -- all in way of rehearsal -- young lady you just locked in --
she is in same situation you know.


Mrs. Dazzle. So she is -- here, Worry! -- here is an excellent opportunity to
take her to Mr. Alltrade. ( Aside to WORRY, who nods to her significantly.) --
I declare I ca'nt help laughing.


Mist. No more can I: -- Oh damme, I see it will produce an effect now? -- give
me the key (Mrs. DAZZLE gives it him). -- All to our separate places, and let
rehearsal begin. -- Enter Duke of Norfolk. (Puts himself in a mock tragic
attitude, and speaks bombastically.) Now! by my holy dame, with this same key,
Jockey of Norfolk, thou wilt unlock the gate of Scottish Mary's prison. ( Unlocks
folding doors, and leads out JULIANA). -- Beshrew me, but you're safe, and so
good morrow, good Queen Elizabeth!


Mrs. Dazzle (also speaking bombastically). Go to -- we'll nip 'em in the bud.
-- Why, how now, rebels? -- For this treacherous Queen -- ( seizing JULIANA,
and delivering her to WORRY; who puts himself in a tragic attitude) -- convey
her to the tower! -- and there, good Burleigh -- You take the hint! -- Away!


Mist. Ay: -- You take the hint! -- Away!


Worry. Oh yes: -- I take the hint -- Away!

( Exit with JULIANA).
Mrs. Dazzle. Bravo! -- will it meet with disapprobation now? --


Mist. No -- it must be a very illnatured audience indeed, that don't applaud
so ingenious an exit. --


Mrs. Dazzle. Ay: there is authorship for you!


Mist. Egad, and there is management for you!


Mrs. Dazzle. Remember, Sir, but for me these characters wouldn't have been
brought on the stage.


Mist. No; and but for you they wouldn't have been got off the stage; but now
to get Norfolk off -- Must follow new actress. --

(Aside.)
Mrs. Dazzle. Stop! I Will tell you; Elizabeth first turns her back upon him --
then Norfolk makes a long harangue -- then --


Mist. Psha! hang long harangues, -- touch and go, -- that is the plan for
effect; I Will show you how to do Norfolk's exit! -- first turn your back on me
P. S. -- (Mrs. DAZZLE turns her back on him.) -- So, then I strut off O. P. --
Gently -- don't turn round till I Am gone: then work yourself into a furious
passion. -- Mary, I fly! -- I follow thee! and so, good morrow, good Queen
Elizabeth! -- Hem, -- there is another good exit!


Exit. Mrs. Dazzle. Oh, the old fool! how I shall wheedle him!


Enter Sir HERVEY and ALLTRADE. Sir Hervey. Madam!


Mrs. Dazzle. Is he gone! now then to work myself into a furious passion --
(turns round.) -- thou wretch! thou traitor! -- How! Sir Hervey! -- Mr. --
Heavens! have you seen nothing of Miss Sutherland? --

( to ALLTRADE.)
Alltrade. No; and Sir Hervey has brought the bond on purpose for me to present
to her, and now, to our astonishment, we find she and Worry have just gone out
of the castle together: -- what can it mean?


Mrs. Dazzle. Mean! (bursts into tears) -- that I am wheedl'd myself. -- Oh
that brute of a manager! -- Sir Hervey, it is too plain -- she has elop'd. --


Sir Hervey. Elop'd!


Mrs. Dazzle. No doubt she has fled to Captain Lavish; and these two impostors
are his agents. -- oh, I see it all! she has long intended it; and to avoid
signing the bond, she has hastened her departure.


Sir Hervey. Elope with Lavish, why this outdoes her mother: -- but can I stand
idly by? -- no -- I Will disappoint my enemy of this unmanly triumph, and save
her; spite of herself I Will save her -- Mr. Alltrade, wait upon him instantly,
and bid him restore my daughter on pain of a second and more desperate meeting.
-- Come, madam, we'll see him on his way.


Mrs. Dazzle. By all means, Sir Hervey: I only hope you don't blame me for my
pupil's indiscretion.


Sir Hervey. No: had she copied your bright and excellent example, this never
had happened -- but though her errors even exceed her mother's, and a
reconciliation is more than ever distant, yet she is still my child! -- and in
a moment dangerous as the present, for my own sake I Will prove a friend and
father.


Exeunt. THE END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE -- An Apartment in LAVISH's House -- Recess with small Folding Doors,
which are thrown open, and discover a Marble Pedestal surrounded by Doves and
Cupids -- a Table with Wine and Refreshments upon it.
Enter FRANK and a Workman. Frank. Ha! ha! so you have no sooner finished that
whimsical out-of-the-way job (pointing to the recess) -- than he sends for you
about another.


Workman. Ay, your master is an excellent customer, -- always up to his chin in
brick and mortar; and then for price -- 'gad! he never haggles about price.


Frank. No, and the best of the joke is, he calls himself an economist, and
comes down here on a saving scheme.


Workman. A saving scheme!


Frank. Ay! finding himself a little out of elbows in London, and the present
state of the Continent not allowing him to travel, he came here to live cheap,
and retrench. -- And there! (pointing to recess again) -- there is one specimen
of his economy. -- On the journey he bought a statue of Venus.


Workman. I know; and a great bargain it was: it only cost him five pounds.


Frank. True; but not choosing to have his beauties gazed at, he employed you
to build that strange sort of recess to put it in, which has cost him at least
five times the sum. -- This is always the way; if he bought a cheap boat, he would
cut a canal for it; and if a pulpit, he would build a church for it: -- in fact, he
is a false economist -- a self-deceiver; and here he comes to elucidate my
description.


Enter LAVISH. Lavish. Oh! if I go on in this close saving way only six months
longer, I shall be able to return to town and dash like the best of them: --
never was such a hand at buying bargains. -- Frank, come here you rogue: --
just now, at Squire Brozier's sale, what do you think I gave for a curricle? --
only forty pounds! -- there, there is economy for you.


Frank. Economy! -- begging your pardon, Sir, -- I see no economy in buying
what you don't want.


Lavish. How? -- would you let a bargain flip through your fingers, you
extravagant rascal?


Frank. No -- but you have no horses, Sir; and a curricle's useless --


Lavish. That Is what I said; says I, a curricle is useless without horses, --
so I bought a pair directly.


Frank. Bought a pair?


Lavish. Ay, gave a hundred and twenty pounds for them -- to be sure it is
money; but one's own carriage saves posting and drivers: in short, the worst
come to the worst, it is but a hundred and fifty pounds, and I Will save it a
thousand ways. -- Who are you, Sir?

(to Workman.)
Workman. I have finished that job, all but fixing up the statue, Sir; and now
I come about the billiard-room: -- but, to speak honestly, it is not worth
repairing.


Lavish. So I thought; I thought it was not worth repairing.


Workman. No, Sir; and a new room will not cost above three hundred pounds: --
but then to be sure it will be elegant and lasting.


Lavish. So it will, and the first expense is the least; so up with the new
room. -- (Workman exit.) -- And now to finish my vindication to Juliana --
(Sits at the table and writes): -- Your late mother was not only my relation,
but my friend and benefactress; and on Sir Hervey's one day reprobating her
conduct with unusual asperity, gratitude prompted me to defend it perhaps more
warmly than I ought, and a duel was the result. -- (Knocking at the door.) --
See who is there. -- (FRANK exit.) -- But what signifies writing? while she is
immured in her present den, I haven't a chance of success. -- Mrs. Dazzle
formerly seduced me into some gallantries, and a disappointed widow is the
devil.


Re-enter FRANK laughing. Frank. Sir, I beg pardon for laughing; but who do you
think is at the door? -- no less a gentleman than the one you caned at
Newmarket about four years ago.


Lavish. Caned! -- Oh! I recollect -- I detected him in an act of forgery. --
But what does the fellow want? -- I don't know his name, nor have I once seen
him since.


Frank. No; and though he now asks for Captain Lavish, he little thinks you are
the gentleman he is under such obligations to.


Lavish. Show him up (FRANK exit); -- introduce the Newmarket gentleman to his
two old antagonists the Captain and his cane. -- And, in the mean time --

(Sits at table, and takes up pen again).
Enter FRANK and ALLTRADE. Frank. This way, Sir -- there, that is my master

( pointing to LAVISH, whose back is turned toward ALLTRADE).
Alltrade. Oh, that is Captain Lavish, is it? -- Sir, I wait upon you --


Lavish (not regarding him). Yes, the widow is so jealous and so violent. --
(Turns round.) -- How do you do, my fine fellow? -- how do you do? -- My Newmarket
hero sure enough. --

(Aside.)
Alltrade (trembling). Amazement! why it is the very man who --


Lavish. What Is the matter? -- you seem cold -- shall I warm you?


Alltrade. Warm me! -- no -- I --


Lavish. Some wine -- give the gentleman some wine. -- This is the house of
frugality, and therefore I cannot offer you a great variety; but as far as
Burgundy, Madeira, and Champagne -- must drink them, if I save it a thousand
ways.


Alltrade. Sir, you will exeuse me. -- Why surely I Have mistaken my man -- he
would never be so civil: at all events he don't recollect me; so I Will pluck up
courage. -- (Aside.) -- Sir, I wait upon you from Sir Hervey Sutherland: he
arrived here today, and knowing of your love for his daughter --


Lavish. Came down to increase her confinement, I suppose.


Alltrade. No trifling, Sir; he is convinced you are concerned in her elopement
--


Lavish. Elopement! -- how! -- what! -- Juliana eloped?


Alltrade. You know she has, Sir; and Sir Hervey insists --


Lavish. Eloped! -- Juliana free! -- out of the widow's and her father's
custody! -- Which way did she go? -- what road did she take? -- speak, speak
this instant.


Alltrade. I speak! -- if I knew, of course you would be the last man I should
give information to.


Lavish. Indeed!


Alltrade. Certainly. -- Sir Hervey is my friend, and if his daughter is not at
present in your power, I shall unite with him in opposing your pursuit of her.


Lavish. You will!


Alltrade. Undoubtedly.


Lavish. Pray, Sir, were you ever at Newmarket?


Alltrade. Newmarket, Sir! -- I -- I --


Lavish. Ay, Newmarket, Sir, Newmarket. -- Frank, give me my cane.


Alltrade. Stay, Sir -- what do you want with your cane?


Lavish ( taking cane from FRANK). Only to help your memory. -- Look! --
(shaking it) -- were you ever at Newmarket?


Alltrade (bowing). Yes, I was, Sir.


Lavish. And you will oppose me in pursuing --


Alltrade. No, believe me, Sir.


Lavish. And if you knew which road she took --


Alltrade. I Would tell you, upon my honor, Sir.


Lavish. Then retire -- begone this instant. -- And do you hear, if you're not
satisfied with this treatment, call again, and I Will give you a warmer reception
-- ( shaking his cane, ALLTRADE exit). -- And now for Juliana -- now for the
idol of my soul! -- Frank, get the curricle: no, I shall only hurry and lame my
own horses -- get a chaise and four.


Frank. Chaise and four! -- is this the way to retrench? -- and consider, Sir,
Miss Sutherland has no money; and you always said you would never marry any woman
who had less than ten thousand pounds.


Lavish. I did: but that is an awkward sum: a woman with ten thousand pounds
expects houses, horses, carriages -- in short, to spend double her own income,
and her husband's too. But a woman without a farthing; she manages the house,
mends the linen, nurses the children, scolds the servants -- Oh! that is the
real rich wife -- and the poor Juliana will be the best bargain I ever made. --
So go, do as I tell you: and observe, I Will marry her if I sacrifice my whole
fortune in the pursuit.


Frank. Sacrifice your whole fortune, Sir!


Lavish. Ay, I will, if I save it a thousand ways.


Exeunt. SCENE -- Outside of LAVISH's House.
Enter Mrs. DAZZLE -- her hat and cloak on. Mrs. Dazzle. So, now to enter this
perfidious Captain's house. -- Not only love and jealousy urge me to separate
him and Juliana; but as I know he don't mean to marry her, it is my business to
get her once more into Alltrade's power: -- yes, Miss Juliana; let me recover
my husband's hundred thousand pounds, and I Will warrant I Will recover my Captain.
He, like the rest of the world, will not visit virtue in a cottage, but place me
in a magnificent house, -- ay, there is the secret: -- nowadays people visit
the building, not the owner of it; and on the size of the rooms, and the number
of the entertainments, we may not only calculate our friends and admirers, but
also the good and bad opinion of the whole fashionable world!


Exit into LAVISH 's house. Enter WORRY and JULIANA. Juliana. Look out; we are
pursued: -- I Am sure they were Mrs. Dazzle's servants.


Worry. They were! but we have outrun them.


Juliana. Yes: but if they come up with us, I shall be forced back and endure
increased persecution: -- Oh! I wish we were safe at this Mr. MIST'S house.


Worry. So do I: -- though you see what a strange gentleman he is! -- he left
us to examine the first slow wagon we met; but don't despond, madam: -- I
will not leave you -- no, I Will die first.


Juliana. Kind -- generous! but I cannot bear to involve you: remember you have
a wife, and --


Worry. Remember! -- I shall never forget it!


Juliana. Nay: but a husband is of so much consequence to his family --


Worry. Bless you, I Am of no consequence; nobody ever wants me: -- if any body
leaves a card, it is for Mrs. Worry: -- if any body sends an invitation, it is
for Mrs. Worry: -- if an invitation is sent in return, it is still Mrs. Worry:
nobody calls or asks after the husband, except indeed the tradespeople! -- they
are kind enough now and then to notice me: but like other great married men,
I Am obliged to be out when they call: so, curse me if I Have even the pleasure of
being at home to a dun! but we waste time, let us proceed to Mr. Mist's house.


Juliana. Ay: for Heaven's sake dispatch --


Alltrade (without). You take that side of the road, I Will take this: -- she
cannot escape then.


Juliana. There, it is Mr. Alltrade's voice! -- and both sides of the road are
guarded by enemies.


Worry. Yes: it is all over -- we are between two fires. -- Which way shall we
go? -- ( Pointing to LAVISH 's door:) that door stands most invitingly open,
suppose we enter it.


Juliana. Do -- instantly: why, what is the matter? you were quite valiant just
now!


Worry. I was: but I fancy my courage is more like a new acquaintance than an
old friend, -- professes a great deal at first, but generally sneaks off in the
hour of danger: however, lead on -- and let us hope to receive from strangers
that protection which friends have denied us.


Exeunt into LAVISH 's house. Enter ALLTRADE. Alltrade. So -- there she goes
into Captain LAVISH'S house: bravo, Miss JULIANA! -- and there she may stay for
me: I Will to Sir Hervey instantly, and let him come himself and fight it out:
for all the legacies registered in Doctors Commons should not induce me to
re-enter those doors and receive another warm reception!


Exit. SCENE -- Inside LAVISH'S house, recess, etc. as in first Scene of this
Act.
Enter LAVISH and Mrs. DAZZLE. Lavish. Now you have searched every part of the
house; now are you satisfied Miss Sutherland is not concealed in it? --
'Sdeath! to detain me at such a moment --

(Aside).
Mrs. Dazzle. No: -- she is not in the house I grant you; but the chaise! the
chaise and four! -- pray, most economical Captain, do you usually travel with
four horses?


Lavish. Always: -- it is by far the cheapest plan: it shortens the journey,
saves stopping at inns; in short, the additional shilling is no object, and if
I had but ten pounds a year, I Would always travel with four horses: -- and now, my
dear widow, allow me to see you home.


Mrs. Dazzle. Take care, Sir: -- disappointed love knows no bounds; and
recollect it is in my power to expose you to my rival: -- I have your letters
in my possession, -- letters in which you laugh and rail at marriage: --
letters --


Lavish. Nay, be patient. -- There now! this it is to be dragooned into an
attachment, -- she has me, by all that is frugal! -- (Aside.) -- Come then, sit
down, and let us drink to the revival of our friendship! -- See: here is famous
Madeira! -- ay: you may stare: but this too is on the cheapest plan I promise
you, for while it takes two bottles of port to make me drunk, one of Madeira
does it completely. -- So here is to the rival -- (tapping hard at stage door P.
S.) -- Why, what is that? ha!


Mrs. Dazzle. Mercy! -- somebody's coming! -- for heaven's sake don't let me be
seen -- I Will step into this room --

(Goes to stage door O. P. and tapping beard there).
Worry (outside the door). Madam, where are you, madam?


Mrs. Dazzle. Why, what is all this? -- it is done on purpose to expose me! --
Oh, Mr. Lavish! if you have either feeling or gallantry, think of my situation:
a widow only a fortnight, and to be detected alone in a Captain's house! --


Lavish. Well! step into that recess -- quick, quick -- (Mrs. DAZZLE in her
hurry drops her cloak, then enters recess, and LAVISH fastens the door upon
her). -- So -- there I have you fast; and now --

(taking his cane from the table).
Juliana (outside the door P. S.). Mr. Worry, why don't you answer? me, my dear
Mr. Worry.


Lavish. Damme, I Will Worry you -- I Will answer you ( opens door and enter
JULIANA): Heaven's! Miss Sutherland!


Juliana. Mr. Lavish! I beg pardon, Sir: -- when I took refuge in this house, I
little thought to meet you. -- Good day, Sir.

(Going).
Lavish. What! now -- the very moment that I Have found you?


Juliana. What can I do, Mr. Lavish! -- I own I owe you obligations -- nay,
more -- I confess I could have loved you: -- but I have told you my
determination -- you are my father's enemy -- therefore we cannot be friends:
-- farewell, Sir!


Lavish. Mighty well, madam, mighty well! -- but this is not your real motive --
you love another: you love this Mr. Worry! -- answer me heartily, ma'am! -- did
he not run away with you?


Juliana. He did! -- but --


Lavish. He did! -- then may I run into every species of extravagance, if when
I catch him, I don't give him the Newmarket flourish (shaking his cane). --
Where is he? -- where is this Mr. Worry?


Enter WORRY. Worry. Here at your service, Sir.


Lavish. This my rival! -- this ancient, wizen, dowager-like -- Don't be
unmanly, Lavish! -- never strike an old woman I entreat you (throwing away his
cane). -- Besides now I look at him, it is! it is Sir Hervey's -- you dear,
amiable, agreeable: -- one Mrs. WORRY is sufficient for you, or the devil's
in it.


Worry. Very likely, Sir: but if you have no rival in an old woman, as you
please to call me, I fancy Miss Sutherland has! when I listened at the door,
I Will swear I heard the widow's voice.


Lavish. The widow! -- no, Juliana -- I can prove myself as great an economist
in love as in money.


Worry. Are you sure you can, Sir?


Lavish. Sure! -- if since the hour I first beheld her, I haven't treasured
every thought, hoarded every look! -- stored --


Worry ( pointing to Mrs. DAZZLE 's cloak on the ground). Pray, SIR, who does
that cloak belong to?


Lavish. That cloak! -- Oh that cloak is one of my bargains.


Worry. Is it? then you buy very dear bargains, I fancy. -- Look, madam, --
(taking up clock) is not it Mrs. Dazzle's?


Juliana. It is: and since this confirms what I have long suspected, I have now
an additional motive for avoiding you. -- Mr. Lavish, we never meet again. --
Come

( to WORRY)!
Worry ( to LAVISH). I say, if you don't hoard your money better than your
love, never think of matrimony -- you will find it too expensive a bargain for
you, I promise you.

(Going.)
Sir Hervey Sutherland (without). Where is he? -- where is Captain Lavish?


Lavish. Sir Hervey! 'Slife! what brings him here?


Juliana. My father! oh Heavens! and to find me under the roof of his enemy --


Worry. And me also! -- Mrs. Worry herself couldn't terrify me more. -- Come
along, madam, and let us leave the Captain to stand the brunt. --


Juliana. Ay: lose not a moment. -- And oh, Mr. Lavish! as this is the last
time we shall ever meet, remember the parting words of her you once regarded --
Pacify my father, do not incence him -- be his friend, and 'spite of your
falsehood and unkindness, you may still be mine.


Worry. And mine -- ha! ha! there is another bad bargain for him!


(JULIANA exit -- WORRY is following, when LAVISH lays bold of him and prevents
his going). Holloa! what is the matter?


Enter Sir HERVEY. Sir Hervey. So, Mr. Lavish; it is still doomed that we are to
meet as enemies -- where is Miss Sutherland, Sir?


Lavish. Sir Hervey, on the honor of a gentleman, I know nothing of your
daughter's elopement; for any further information I refer you to Mr. Worry (
pushing WORRY forwards). I say, who has the best of the bargain now?


Sir Hervey. 'Sdeath! I Have a great mind -- ( advancing toward WORRY, and
stopping) -- but he is only agent; -- to you as principal, I look for
reparation and redress. -- Hear me, Sir -- Mrs. Dazzle, a lady of the strictest
truth and honor -- she first informed me of your infamous designs, and now --
not half an hour ago, a friend, on whose word I can equally rely, saw Miss
Sutherland enter this very house: therefore there is no alternative but this --
instantly restore her, or -- you guess the result.


Lavish. I do -- but I Will waste no more powder, Sir Hervey.


Sir Hervey. How?


Lavish. No: dying is certainly a cheap mode of living, and to a man in
desperate circumstances, a duel may be a good saving scheme: but having hoarded
enough to make life comfortable, why I Am a cursed fool if I don't save it a
thousand ways.

(Sits down).
Sir Hervey. Poor, paltry prevarication! -- Remember, Mr. Lavish, we were once
friends -- I treated you as a son -- you esteemed me as a parent -- and what
dissolved that friendship? -- you chose to vindicate the honor of a false
wife, and call me to the field -- did I not come?


Lavish. You did, Sir.


Sir Hervey. And now where is your consistency? -- you would bring my daughter
to the same degraded state; you would reduce her to the level of her mother;
and when an injured father asks for satisfaction, you refuse to give it him --
what is this but cowardice? plain unequivocal cowardice!


Lavish. Cowardice! ill as Miss Sutherland has treated me, I never meant to
raise my arm against her father: -- but when you allude to the memory of her I
owe such obligations to, and say I would reduce her daughter to the same
degraded state -- it is past bearing -- I cannot endure it! and you may shoot me
as soon as you please.


Sir Hervey. Here are the weapons then --

( putting pistol into LAVISH 'S hand).
Worry. Hold, Sir; he is innocent, Miss Sutherland is slandered! -- the lady
your friend saw enter this house was a very different person -- it was the
widow, indeed it was the widow!


Sir Hervey. Mrs. Dazzle?


Worry. Ay: it is she that carries on an amor with the Captain; and though I
cannot produce her to prove it, I can at least produce a part of her; -- look,
Sir -- do you see this cloak?


Sir Hervey. Away! it is my unfeeling daughter's, and the sight so heightens my
resentment -- Come, Sir, wrongs like mine will brook no more delay, and you
must either meet a coward's or a villain's fate --


Lavish. Coward again! -- Come, then -- here is my ground!

(goes up stage.)
Worry ( stopping Sir HERVEY). Don't think me impertinent Sir -- but while you
as a man of honor think it your duty to fight a duel, I as an honest man think
it mine to prevent it! -- it is the widow! upon my soul, it is the widow!

( holding Sir HERVEY'S arm who struggles to get it loosened.)
Sir Hervey. Distraction! -- nay then -- thus --

( throws WORRY violently from him, who, falling against doors of recess, they
burst open and Mrs. DAZZLE is discovered standing on the pedestal surrounded by
doves, etc.)
Worry (who has fallen at her feet, still looking up in her face). It Is the
widow! -- upon my soul it is the widow!


Sir Hervey. Amazement! -- can that be Mrs. Dazzle!


Lavish. No -- it is a statue -- you see it is a statue.


( Mrs. DAZZLE rises, walks quickly down the stage and exit.) Worry. Halloa!
will not you take your cloak along with you? you will want it to cover your sins!


Sir Hervey. Hypocrite! I now view her in her true colors, and I am doomed to
be the dupe of woman. -- Mr. Lavish, I see my friend was mistaken, and I
acknowledge I have wronged you.


Lavish. Psha! -- I want no acknowledgment -- if you wish to make me amends,
stay and dine with me -- mine is the system of economy, and as I cannot lay out
money to better advantage than in entertaining an old friend, I Will give you a
dinner fit for the court of Aldermen -- I will, if I save it a thousand ways.


Sir Hervey. Excuse me, Sir -- your innocence on the present occasion will not
do away former injuries; nor will Mrs. Dazzle's bad conduct be an apology for
my daughter's. -- No! -- whilst I thought love the cause of her elopement, it
was my duty to pursue and save her: -- but since I see self-interest is the
motive, and that she fled to avoid signing an instrument which would have saved
me from disgrace, and not have injured her -- I shall no longer condescend to
seek her.


Worry. It Is no such thing, Sir -- and if you will go to her at Mr. Mist's
house --


Sir Hervey. Peace! -- and instantly attend me home, where, if the account of
your own conduct prove not satisfactory -- (WORRY attempts to speak). -- Nay,
this is no place for explanation -- go on before -- Mr. Lavish, I have the
honor to wish you good evening!


(WORRY and Sir HERVEY exeunt.) Lavish. Here Is bad reckoning! -- it is well I
calculate better in money matters. But what is to be done? -- he said she was
gone to Mr. Mist's: -- well! if I follow her, she will not see me; -- if I write
to her, she will not answer my letter. -- Oh! she is lost! -- Juliana's lost to me
for ever!


Enter FRANK. Frank. Sir, is the chaise to wait?


Lavish (not regarding him). And yet, -- if I could gain an interview --
hark'ye, Frank -- do you know any body at Mr. Mist's the Manager's?


Frank. Yes: and so do you, Sir -- Stopgap, who left your service to go on the
stage, is now his prompter.


Lavish. That Is fortunate -- I Will go to him instantly; and if he will but do me
a favor --


Frank. That he will, if you will bribe him: only give him ten pounds -- but that
you know, Sir, will not suit your system of economy.


Lavish. Will Not it? -- ten pound is no object, and I Have lately made so many good
bargains, that it is d -- d hard if I cannot afford to throw away an odd bank
note or two. -- So, come along -- and if after all I do live a little beyond my
income, it is no fault of mine, Frank.


Frank. No! whose is it then, Sir?


Lavish. Whose! -- why it is the fault of those selfish harpies who make
economy useless -- who raise the price of every article: -- and if Sir Hervey
and other fighting gentlemen would unload their pistols on jobbers,
forestallers, and monopolizers, their valor would be directed to the best
purposes -- I might live cheap, and the country would be cleared of it is worst
enemies!


Exeunt. THE END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE -- Outside of a Theater, and MIST'S house;
LAVISH discovered listening at the door. Lavish. Gad! I hope the prompter
don't want prompting: (Looking at his watch) By this it is ten minutes, but by
my reckoning ten hours, since Stopgap entered this house with a letter for
Juliana, -- so -- he comes! -- he comes!


Enter STOPGAP (from the house). Lavish. Well! what news? -- have you seen Miss
Sutherland?


Stopgap. I have, and here --

(producing a letter).
Lavish. Here Is an answer to my letter.


Stopgap. No; -- there is your letter back again -- she refused to open it, and
in my presence ordered the servants not to admit you into the house.


Lavish. What! she persists --


Stopgap. Most obstinately, Sir; -- but spite of her refusal, make it worth my
while, and I Will procure you an interview: -- excuse the hint, Sir; but if you
recollect when I lived with you, you were so saving --


Lavish. So I am still: -- worse and worse, -- more economical than ever; --
but the hope of gaining such a treasure as Juliana! -- here you rogue, --
here is ten pounds on the strength of it

(giving him a bank note).
Stopgap. So there is; -- then listen: -- the play to night is the "Road to
Ruin," and Mr. Prettyman, who was to have performed Goldfinch, has just met
with an accident: -- now, Sir, having no substitute, and it being too late to
change the play, suppose you wait on the Manager, and offer to supply his place.


Lavish. I supply!


Stopgap. Why not? at the private theater I have seen you act this very part:
-- then an interview is certain; for Mr. Mist's house adjoins the theater, and
Miss Sutherland is now in a room close to the stage.


Lavish. Is she? -- then I Will double Prettyman; -- I Will act Goldfinch, --
"that is your sort;" -- but hold, hold -- don't introduce me by my own name;
call me Mr. Crib, or Mr. Glib, or Mr. Squib.


Stopgap. I will; I Will call you Mr. Squib. -- Hush! -- he comes.

(They stand aside.)
Enter MIST and Mrs. DAZZLE. Mist. How! what! London Manager! -- Husband die a
London Manager! -- Go on, imperial Mrs. M. P.


Mrs. Dazzle. Nay, I only tell you that Mr. Dazzle, a short time previous to
his decease, was in treaty for a moiety of one of the London theaters; but I
cannot say whether he lived to complete his purchase; -- however, I shall write
by this post.


Mist. And so will I: -- and if he did purchase, throne devolves to you. --
Bless me! how majestic she looks! -- and her play. -- When shall I hear the
rest of your most magnificent play? -- Nay, spare a country monarch: -- thought
her great actress, -- you humble auther: -- now you turn out manager, and she
worse than a dummy.


Mrs. Dazzle. Well, Sir, you know how to make atonement; your friend Mr.
Alltrade wishes to marry this ungrateful girl, and as she is now under your
roof --


Mist. Enough -- send for Alltrade, and then, "Good morrow, good Queen Mary."


Mrs. Dazzle. I will; -- I Will go write to him instantly; -- and in return, if I
do possess a London theater, depend on it you shall be my sole manager.


Mist. Right! -- I Am the man to rule behind curtain. -- I Am the man to accept
pieces, cast parts, and every night secure an overflow; -- but go, thou author
of the divinest tragedy ( kisses her hand, and Mrs. DAZZLE exit). Never shall
it be acted though; never shall she act her own infernal --


Stopgap (advancing). Sir! -- more bad luck, Sir! -- Mr. Prettyman, in trying
to pull on the only pair of new boots we have in the theater, has just put out
his shoulder bone, consequently there is nobody to act Goldfinch.


Mist. Put out shoulder bone! -- what now! -- Just before doors open?


Stopgap. Even so, Sir; and we have lately made so many apologies --


Mist. True; made one last night, two the night before: zounds! there'll be a
riot; and all owing to this ungrateful shamming -- See how it is -- benefit's
over -- that is it -- got four pounds over expenses, and till that is gone, act
Road to Ruin off, instead of on, the stage; but what is to be done? -- found
out, Stop; d -- e we shall be found out.


Stopgap. Nay: there is hope still -- look yonder, Sir; that gentleman is an
excellent substitute; he is perfect in the part, and with your leave is ready
to go on with it. -- I Will introduce him -- Mr. Squib, this is Mr. Mist.


Lavish. Sir, your most devoted --


Mist (haughtily). Servant, my lad; servant -- so, call yourself an actor! heh!
hem!


Lavish. I do -- at your service, Sir.


Mist. My service! -- he! he! -- that is another matter -- see you act first --
if miss, exit Squib -- if hit, enter at half a guinea a week.


Lavish. Psha! -- money's no object.


Mist. No!


Lavish. No, I Have saved a fortune, Mr. Manager, and am so attached to the
stage, that I Will not only act gratis, but when there are not expenses in the
house, I Will be bound to pay them -- I will, if I save it a thousand ways.


Mist. Will you? -- oh that I had a whole company like him! -- why you're a
high fellow!


Lavish ( speaking from GOLDFINCH.) To be sure -- know the odds -- hold four in
hand -- beat the mail -- come in full speed -- rattle down the gateway -- take
care of your heads -- never killed but one woman and a child in all my life --
that is your sort!


Mist. Bravo! -- capital! -- and no salary! -- my dear Mr. Squib -- all
gratitude -- all thankfulness -- by and bye rule a London theater -- perhaps
Covent Garden -- Know present acting manager!


Lavish. What!


Mist. Mum! -- kick him out, whip you in.


Lavish. That Is right -- kick out present stupid acting manager, and whip me
in; -- but come along -- is not it time to dress?


Mist. Not quite; just time to crack bottle, and draw up apology -- must get
one ready written: -- much warfare lately -- last night affronted audience
myself.


Lavish. Yourself! how?


Mist. Tell you: -- whenever theatre's thin, always get drunk.


Lavish. In the name of heaven, why?


Mist. He! he! he! -- 'cause it makes me see double -- so going to take a peep,
mistook my way, and in dagger scene of Macbeth, reeled upon the stage, and
staggered up to lamps! -- never so well received before; -- delighted with
applause, stood smiling and bowing, till Macbeth bore me off, 'midst the
shouting and huzzaing of a genteel, though not a numerous, audience -- Expect
bustle to night in consequence -- so must knock under a little -- not too much
though -- I Am Manager -- heh! -- hem! -- but come along; and over bottle drink
success --


Lavish. There Is no occasion; my Goldfinch never failed -- "that is your sort!"


Exeunt. SCENE -- A grand Saloon in Sutherland House -- Masks discovered
dancing.
After dance, ALLTRADE dressed in a Domino enters with a Servant. Alltrade (a
letter in his hand). From Mrs. Dazzle, you say; perhaps some news of Miss
Sutherland. (Opens letter and reads): Juliana is at Mr. Mist's, and he
completely in our interest. -- Come directly, and if Sir Hervey has given you
his consent, make him write it to his daughter: and if he objects to that from
motives of pride and delicacy, bid him write to the Manager, and entreat him to
enforce his command: this shown to Juliana will secure all; -- she will forfeit
the legacy, and a third of my husband's estate will be yours! -- Excellent! and
he has given me his consent -- what is here? a postscript! -- (Reads on): If
Juliana has signed the bond, don't mention it to Sir Hervey -- he will expect
money, and at present you know we have none to give him. -- True: and the bond
is already disposed of; for if all else fail, that will be a grand resource. --
My compliments to Mrs. Dazzle, and I Will wait upon her presently.


(Servant exit.) Enter Sir HERVEY hastily. Sir Hervey. Alltrade! my friend! --
I Am glad I Have found you --

(taking his hand).
Alltrade. Why, what agitates you?


Sir Hervey. I Am ruined -- I Am exposed -- look -- do you see those masks?

(pointing to two masks in dominos who stand apart from the rest).
Alltrade. I do -- what of them?


Sir Hervey (whispering him). Hush.


Alltrade. Bailiffs!


Sir Hervey. Ay, an execution for a thousand pounds, and a writ against my
person for nearly the same sum. -- And now, in the meridian of my splendour, I
am to meet the scorn of all around me; now, in the midst of friends -- but be
it so -- a gaol cannot yield me less substantial joy than this unmeaning,
artificial scene.


Alltrade. Come, come, don't rail at that which, till now, gave you happiness.


Sir Hervey. Never. -- What has it afforded me? days of distress, and nights of
fever and disgrace: borrowing one day, to pay double the next; flying to the
gaming-table -- sacrificing fortune, health, honor -- and for what? -- to
appear fashionable; to make a false display of wealth; and fritter away life in
the society of knaves I detest, and fools I despise. -- Call you this
happiness? -- No, it is desperation, it is delirium!


Alltrade. Nay, be composed; there is still a way to save you. You know this
distress would have been avoided had your daughter signed the bond.


Sir Hervey. Name her not -- I do not wish to curse her.


Alltrade. Well, but if she will still sign -- and remember our conversation
this morning -- on your wishing she had a husband to protect her, and my naming
myself, you were pleased to say she could not be in better hands.


Sir Hervey. I did -- but what has this to do with --


Alltrade. Every thing. -- Let the marriage take place, and I, in the character
of husband, can execute the bond myself. Then these debts will be discharged,
and all go well again. Come, though you say you don't dislike a prison, I am
too much your friend to see you put to the trial.


Sir Hervey. Well, I own I dread the exposure and disgrace.


Alltrade Then to avoid it, write a strong letter to your daughter; state that
her accepting my hand can alone save you from ruin.


Sir Hervey. I write! -- I condescend!


Alltrade. Nay then, to make it less irksome to your feelings, write to the
gentleman under whose protection she has placed herself; bid him exert his
influence. -- Come, step with me into the next room, and I Will dictate the
contents.


Sir Hervey. Well, do with me what you will; but I Have but little hope.


Alltrade. And I Am most sanguine; and before tonight is past, you shall again
enjoy this scene of splendid revelry.


Sir Hervey. What, when I view it in its proper light? -- No, my friend; strip
dissipation of its robe of fashion -- show it in its naked deformity -- see it
surrounded by its offspring, poverty, suicide, despair, and madness! -- and who
would be weak enough to pursue it? -- But lead on, I obey your wishes.


Exeunt. (Dancing renewed.) Re-enter SIR HERVEY. Sir Hervey. So, I have sent
the letter. -- I know not why, I trembled as I wrote it; and at the thought of
thus disposing of my child, my foreboding heart -- but I dare think no more --
let the dance go on.


Enter WORRY. Worry. Oh, Sir! -- such news! -- didn't you say Miss Sutherland
had not signed the bond?


Sir Hervey. I did: and but now my friend Alltrade --


Worry. Your friend! -- only listen, Sir -- my nephew, I Am sorry to mention it,
is an attorney; and he had the impudence to call here and ask for a ticket for
your masked ball. Says he, I can support a character. -- Says I, That Is
impossible, because you have no character to support. -- Nay, says he, I Am grown
honest since I saw you. -- Oh! you are, are you? says I; then pray walk up;
novelty at a masquerade is every thing.


Sir Hervey. Psha! what is this to me?


Worry. You shall hear, Sir. I am more sorry to mention he is Mr. Alltrade's
attorney; and, by his orders, has just taken the bond to Miss Sutherland, at
Mr. Mist's.


Sir Hervey. Indeed! and what was the result?


Worry. What! why the moment he showed her your name at the bottom of it, she
burst into tears; then taking up the pen, she exclaimed, Though my father is
unmindful of my distresses, I can never forget his; and were it to doom me to
imprisonment or death, I would execute with pleasure.


Sir Hervey. How! and did she --


Worry. She did. -- And another thing -- you must have signed the bond without
reading it: instead of two years, it is payable on demand.


Sir Hervey. It Is false! I Will not believe a word.


Worry. I thought so -- I thought this would be the case; and therefore I
persuaded my nephew to trust me with it -- (produces bond). -- Look, here is at
once a proof of your friend's villainy and your daughter's virtue! -- See how
you have wronged her, and how he has wronged you. But the widow, she is the
arch agent! and talk of gentlemen of the long robe, curse me but I believe
there is more mischief under one gown than another!


Sir Hervey (reading bond). Juliana Sutherland! -- (weeps and lets bond fall.)
-- Where is she, where is my daughter?


Worry. How I do you mean --


Sir Hervey. I do; I mean to prove myself her father: the bitter secret long
has rankled here, but now I can divulge it: and if a shattered heart can once
more vibrate at the touch of joy, it will be when I clasp my wronged, exalted
child! -- Come, let us fly!


Worry. Ay, the faster the better. -- I Am so happy! -- If Mrs. Worry were in
Heaven, I couldn't be happier! --

(as they are going, Bailiffs in dominos advance)
Bailiff. Excuse us, Sir Hervey, we cannot part with you; and unless the debt
is instantly paid, we must conduct you to prison.


Worry. To prison!


Sir Hervey. Ay; behold my well timed punishment! -- Now, on the brink of
happiness, I am to meet the sure reward of desperation and extravagance!


Bailiff. Nay, why upbraid yourself, Sir Hervey? a man of your rank couldn't
live shabbily.


Sir Hervey. No; but I might have lived honorably; I might have lived within my
income; that is the barrier no man of true honor ever passes: and if stealing
on the highway be punished with death, why should the more refined robber, who
defrauds the industrious tradesman of the hard earnings by which he is to
support his family, why should he escape? -- Oh! let no man boast the proud
name of gentleman, who contracts debts he cannot pay! -- But I attend you --
lead on -- and yet -- Distraction! -- William!


Worry. Sir!


Sir Hervey. The worst I had forgotten: you know not half your master's
weakness, half his villainy! -- not an hour ago I wrote a letter, and commanded
my daughter to marry --


Worry. Whom, Sir?


Sir Hervey. The worst, the vilest of mankind!


Worry. Mr. Alltrade?


Sir Hervey. Yes; I, her father, in return for all her fondness and affection,
commanded her to link herself to infamy, dishonor! -- But is it yet too late
to save her? -- will she not be merciful? -- oh! will she not disobey me?


Worry. No, she is so affectionate, that the moment she reads the letter --


Sir Hervey. Ay, but perhaps she has not yet received it. -- Go, lose not a
moment; it is directed to the gentleman at whose house she now resides.


Worry. I Will go; I Will do all I can to save her: and, in the mean time, pray
keep up your spirits, Sir: indeed, indeed you deserve a better fate.


Sir Hervey. No, I deserve it all! -- think what I am, and what I might have
been! -- now an outcast and a beggar, dragged from my home, and plunged into a
prison! -- and, but for fashion and its errors, that house had been a heaven!
-- But my child! -- go -- be swifter than the letter -- save her from seeing
what will make her curse me; and, whilst it dooms her to eternal misery, will
be an everlasting evidence of my disgrace!


Exeunt. SCENE -- An Apartment in MIST's House.
(Knocking at the door.) -- Enter Mrs. DAZZLE. Mrs. Dazzle. It Is he! it is
Alltrade! now for it! -- now if Sir Hervey has but consented to the marriage.
-- ( Here LAVISH opens door in back scene, and is coming out; but seeing Mrs.
DAZZLE stops and listens). Oh, I Am so anxious. -- ( Enter ALLTRADE.) -- Well!
what success? will the match take place? -- shall I inherit my husband's estate?


Alltrade. You will! this letter from Sir Hervey to Mr. Mist will explain and
secure every thing.


Mrs. Dazzle. Let me see -- (takes letter and reads): To Mr. Mist. -- Sir, My
daughter having placed herself under your protection, I am induced to think you
have an influence over her, though her father has none; therefore let me
entreat you to exert it, by persuading her to accept the hand of my friend Mr.
Alltrade, and assure her that her marriage with that gentleman can alone save
me from ruin, or lead to the reconciliation, she has so long pretended to wish
for. -- HERVEY SUTHERLAND.


Alltrade. There! she is too dutiful to refuse.


Mrs Dazzle. Oh, the thought of saving him from ruin would of itself induce her
to consent; but the hope of a reconciliation also! -- delightful! charming! Go,
take the letter to Mr. Mist, and bid him come and show it Juliana directly.


Alltrade. I will.


Mrs. Dazzle. And, do you hear; then away to a parson: in the mean time I Will get
a license, and in less than half an hour the marriage shall take place in this
very room.


Enter a Servant. Servant. Madam, here is a Mr. Worry --


Mrs. Dazzle. Don't admit him; remember you have orders to admit nobody. --
(Servant exit.) Away! dispatch, my friend; and now Miss Juliana, I defy you!
neither your father nor your lover, no, not even the economical Captian, can
save his darling treasure now.


[Exit. Lavish (advancing). Cannot he? he will try a thousand ways though. --
'Sdeath! no sooner reconciled to Juliana -- no sooner convinced her of my truth
and affection, than I Am to see her -- If she reads the letter; all is over! for
her last words were, I will marry no man, but the one my father selects for me.
-- and now, when his ruin and a reconciliation depend on her consenting --
plague on it! I could play the fool and weep: yes, I Am no niggard here! (putting
his hand to his heart) -- and if I can purchase her safety even at the loss of
my life, I shall reckon it the best bargain I ever made.


Mist (without). Very well, I Will deliver letter -- I Will make widow amends.


Lavish. Here he comes, and in his possession what will for ever ruin me and
Juliana; nay, also Sir Hervey: -- I Am sure he is under some dreadful error; and
if I can save his daughter at this moment, my triumph will be ten times greater
than in fighting him; -- yes, that I shall call honorable satisfaction. What
can I devise? -- see the letter she shall not! and there is no way to prevent
it but by getting this credulous old manager out of the room. Let me see -- I
have it! -- he talked of a riot in his theater! -- it will do! it will do!


Enter MIST drunk. Mist (the letter in his hand). So, here is Sir Hervey's
letter; and I Am to show it Miss Sutherland; and enforce marriage, and --
u.u-up! (Hiccuping): methinks I see double again -- methinks -- no -- no I Am
not on stage now, 'cause hear no applause: drunk or sober, sure to encourage
such a promising young actor.


Lavish (observing him). Drunk too! -- better and better!


Mist. He! he! he! -- wonder how Mr. Squib -- how Mr. No Salary's going on? --
says he, I Am a private actor! -- Hem, says I, more private the better: -- hope
they accept him though; hope they let him double Prettyman; if not, here is such
an apology! (pulling out a paper, and putting it back again) -- such a
beautiful, witty composition; but hold: -- now to see Miss Sutherland!


Lavish (coming against him). And now to prevent you. (Aside.) -- Oh, Sir, I
was just going for you: the riot is begun, -- the whole theater is in an uproar.


Mist. Devil! what! -- want Prettyman?


Lavish. No, they want you -- Tell you how it was -- Stopgap went on, and
claimed their usual indulgence -- on which a little tiger-faced fellow
exclaimed from the pit, We'll bear it no longer! -- if the Manager will
constantly make apologies, play the best parts, act his own farces, get drunk,
and reel upon the stage, why the theater is a nuisance!


Mist. A nuisance!


Lavish. Ay: And either let him come and account for his conduct, or let us
treat it as a nuisance: -- let us pull it down! -- He was strongly supported;
and I left the whole house calling "Manager! Manager!" -- so go -- go directly

(pulling him).
Mist. I go! I account! -- to whom: -- to a five pound house! -- to a
tiger-faced gentleman, and a dozen more ungrateful, tasteless scoundrels -- I!


Lavish. Tasteless!


Mist. Yes: haven't I done every thing! -- turned author, actor, engaged
Harlequin, and half ruined myself to please 'em? -- and now -- look 'ye, Mr.
Squib, here is my apology -- (taking paper out of his pocket): -- if that will
satisfy 'em, let Stop read it -- if not, and they still abuse me as acting
manager, see how they like me in another character -- acting magistrate! --
Damme! myself and two constables 'll take the whole house!


Lavish ( looking at the paper in MIST's hand). By heaven, he has mistaken! --
it is Sir Hervey's letter! (aside). -- Yes! that will do: give me that apology,
and I Will answer for every body being satisfied -- nay! there is no time for
hesitation -- they absolutely threatened to make you go down on your knees.


Mist. His knees! -- a Manager on his knees! -- that for 'em!

(snapping his fingers and turning away from LAVISH).
Lavish. Nay; the apology -- it is, it is Sir Hervey's hand! (aside). -- Give me
the apology.


Mist. That for 'em! will not -- will not condescend to let 'em hear even apology now.


Lavish. No! -- 'Sdeath: I Have marred every thing.

(aside).
Mist. No: soon manage London audience, and not even to them -- but they know
better -- and were I before 'em at this moment -- instead of asking for apology
-- instead of approving this mean cowardly piece of writing, they would applaud me
for destroying it -- they would! -- so there! -- preserved my character both as
man and as Manager!

( tears Sir HERVEY 's letter.)
Lavish. You have! and Juliana's preserved and I Am preserved! -- ( Enter Mrs.
DAZZLE.) -- Here am I, widow -- been to Hatchet's -- bespoke wedding coach --
all flash -- damn the expense -- that is your sort.


Mrs. Dazzle. You here, Sir! -- Mr. Mist, have you shown Miss Sutherland her
father's letter?


Mist. No; and cannot stay to do it now -- must go quell riot -- must talk to
tiger-fac'd gentleman --


Mrs. Dazzle (stopping him). Nay: if you wish to make me amends, I insist you
do it instantly, and let me be eye witness of his mortification and her despair
-- Come forth, Miss Juliana! -- ( opens door in back scene, and leads out
JULIANA). -- Now, Mr. Mist, where is Sir Hervey's letter?


Mist. Here

(pulling out paper).
Mrs. Dazzle. Then read it, and secure my triumph.


Mist. I will -- hem! (Reads). -- Ladies and Gentlemen, the disagreeable
dilemma to which I am reduced --


Mrs. Dazzle (snatching it from him). Why, you mistake -- let me read. --
(Reads) -- Ladies and Gentlemen, the disagreeable dilemma to which I am reduced
-- why what is this paper?


Mist. An apology -- that I Am ready to offer you, though not audience -- I Am
very sorry, but cannot stay to explain now --

(Going).
Mrs. Dazzle. Astonishing! -- why, what is become of Sir Hervey's letter?


Mist. What I (points to the tern letter), -- You take the hint -- must go to
tiger faced gentleman -- you take the hint.


[Exit. Mrs. Dazzle. What can he mean! -- I Will follow him, and have the matter
explained instantly -- and don't fancy to escape, Miss Juliana; for Sir Hervey
shall come himself and enforce his consent; and if that fails, -- the bond --
look to the bond -- Oh, you may smile, Sir ( to LAVISH), but you will find
revenge is still in my power.


[Exit. Lavish. You hear, Miss Sutherland; and to avoid the danger with which
you are threatened take my advice and be beforehand with them. -- Fly to your
father -- throw yourself at his feet -- entreat his protection --


Juliana. I will; there is no other hope -- go where I will, they still pursue
and persecute me. -- Yes! I Will to my father!


Lavish. Come then -- allow me to conduct you -- and if I too throw myself at
his feet, and he no longer thinks me his enemy --


Juliana. Alas! even then, Mr. Lavish -- consider. I am so destitute of every
hope of fortune --


Lavish. Fortune! oh, if that is all the difficulty, it is only to lessen our
expenses -- to live on a narrow scale: -- instead of a house in
Grosvenor-square, we must be content with one in Grosvenor-street: -- instead
of four horses, we must drive only a pair: -- and to avoid gaming and giving
great entertainments, we must go every night to the play or the opera. -- But
come -- and though thus far I shall stint you, my dear Juliana, in every other
respect I Will indulge you to the last shilling -- I will, if I save it a
thousand ways!


[Exeunt. THE END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE -- The Courtyard of a Prison, Wall and great Gates in back Scene; on
each Side Apartments in the Prison, and O. P. Steps leading up to a Door. --
Moonlight.
Sir HERVEY and WORRY discovered. Worry. Nay, let me entreat you, Sir, retire
to your chamber! -- you forget you are in a prison.


Sir Hervey. But are you sure my daughter is not Alltrade's wife?


Worry. I am, Sir! and that she owes her deliverance to the generous exertions
of Captain Lavish. (Loud knocking at gate.) -- There -- you hear, Sir! -- now
pray, pray retire.


Sir Hervey. Well! conduct me; and in the morning wait on Captain Lavish, and
express my warmest gratitude. --


Worry. Aye, that I will, Sir! and make every inquiry after Miss Sutherland: --
but now, Sir! (Loud knocking again). -- Bless me! this is a most unconscionable
sort of place! -- neither let people in or out! -- it is devilish hard: -- I
dare say the gentleman has as much right to be here as any body! -- This way,
Sir, this way!

(Sir HERVEY and WORRY ascend steps, and exeunt.)
( Gates are opened, and enter JULIANA and two Bailiffs.) First Bailiff. Come,
come! -- now all is safe! -- though if we had'nt contrived to separate her from
Captain Lavish by means of a forged letter --


Second Bailiff. Ay, that was my planning! -- so here you are, Miss! arrested
on your bond for five thousand pounds; -- and you know Mr. Alltrade's terms! --
either sign a contract of marriage --


Juliana. That I never will.


First Bailiff. Good night then.


Juliana. Stay! -- spare me but a moment! -- unused to this scene of terror and
distress, unless some friendly hand is stretched to save me, I must even fall
and perish here! -- Oh, I am faint! quite -- quite sick at heart.


Second Bailiff. You Would better sign the contract then.


Juliana. Never! never! (Bailiffs exeunt). -- They Are gone: -- now, Juliana,
summon all your courage! -- alone, -- unprotected! in the worst place, amongst
the worst society; separated from the man you love, deserted by the father you
revere, and so deprived of every hope of aid, that, should you linger on for
years, here, here at last must be your grave! (Shouting and laughing without.)
-- Heavens! what noise is that? -- a set of the most needy and most desperate!
(Stamping:) Again! -- they come this way -- and I am left to be the victim of
their brutality! -- I cannot support it! -- I faint with terror! -- Oh, help!
help! (Falls at the foot of the steps).


Re-enter Sir HERVEY. Sir Hervey. Surely I heard a woman's voice, -- and
seemingly in much distress! -- it is so! -- poor wretch! -- she scarcely
breathes: -- Within there! ( Re-enter Worry:) -- give your assistance! help me
to raise this poor unfortunate.


Worry. I will, I will! ( They raise JULIANA, who remains in a lifeless state).
-- Merciful powers!

(seeing her face, starting, and moving away).
Sir Hervey. Ha! what alarms you? -- do you know her?


Worry. I do!


Sir Hervey. Who is it? -- what brings her here? speak! -- has she no friends?
no relations?


Worry. Yes: -- she has a father!


Sir Hervey. Barbarian! -- could he not prevent --


Worry. He could, but -- ask your own heart! mine would burst to speak it.


Sir Hervey. How?


Worry. Ay, your much wronged daughter! -- who evidently has been brought here
on the bond she signed to save you! -- but don't -- don't be unhappy, Sir! I Will
go directly for assistance.


Sir Hervey. Fly! begone! (WORRY exit. -- JULIANA remains still lifeless in Sir
HERVEY'S arms:) -- can I behold all this, and live? -- Poor girl! -- the very
features of -- Oh, God! Oh, God!


Juliana. Give me air! -- So; I am much, much better.


Sir Hervey. Indeed! -- I am glad, cordially glad: ha! ha! (weeping) -- you have
saved my life!


Juliana. Your life! -- such kindness from a stranger! -- Oh! in this place I
little thought to find a friend!


Sir Hervey. And do you call me friend!


Juliana. I hope I may! you seem to take an interest in my sufferings.


Sir Hervey. I do -- I do! and well I know the author of them all! -- too well
I know the father that has caused them.


Juliana. My father! do you know my father? -- Oh, when you see him, don't tell
him you found me in prison! that would afflict him, and it would double my
misery to add to his! -- don't -- pray don't tell him, Sir.


Sir Hervey. Why not? -- why feel for him who never felt for you! has he not
from your infancy deserted you? -- has he not shut his doors against you? and,
instead of being your friend and protector, has he not proved himself your
enemy -- your persecutor?


Juliana (haughtily). Well! if he has, Sir?


Sir Hervey. Did he not thwart you in your affections, -- tear you from the man
you love, and command you to marry him you hate? -- and after these accumulated
injuries, and you had involved yourself to support him, what was his return?
ingratitude! what was your inheritance? poverty! -- what has been your reward?
a prison! -- Oh, villain! villain! -- worst of villains!


Juliana. Villain! -- hold your unlicensed tongue. Villain! -- who are you that
dare thus accuse my father?


Sir Hervey. A libertine; whose dissipation drove his wife into such scenes of
error and remorse that she died of a broken heart! -- an outcast! who, not
content with that, would have reduced his daughter to the same unhappy fate! --
a wretch! who, abandoned her not for her own conduct, but her mother's! -- who
brought her to a prison! -- who sees her there without the hope of saving her!
-- or, to sum up all in one emphatic word -- to give the aggregate of
complicated infamy -- I am your father!


Juliana. My father!


Sir Hervey. Ay, look at me! -- view me well -- do you not shudder at the
hideous sight? will you not curse -- avoid me as a pestilence? -- a fiend!


Juliana. No: I will cling to you! -- thus grow for ever round you! (throwing
herself into his arms). -- My father! my dear, dear father!


Sir Hervey. Juliana, be merciful! -- load me with reproaches -- this kindness
will destroy me!


Juliana. Reproach you! -- what, at the moment I have sound you? -- no: let me
but be near you, and I will bless the hour that brought me to this place! --
for it has given me the utmost wishes of my soul -- it has restored to me a
parent!


Enter ALLTRADE and WORRY. Worry. There! it is as I expected; they are
reconciled -- look! have you the heart to interrupt their joy?


Alltrade. Sir Hervey, I have no wish but to give you both liberty; and if you
will fulfill your promise, by persuading Miss Sutherland to accept my hand --
nay: why frown? -- you see I come as a friend.


Sir Hervey. Friend! away -- I Am weary of the very word.


Alltrade. What! weary of friendship, Sir Hervey!


Sir Hervey. Ay, Sir; time was, when friendship wore a bold and open aspect,
and as it spoke it acted: but now it is masked; and underneath it lurks all
modern villainy. Who betrayed my wife? a friend! -- who belied my child? a
friend! -- who immured her in a gaol, and if she does not prostitute her hand
and heart, will see her perish there -- who, but my friend! -- Can my enemy
thus injure me? -- No; in him I place no confidence or trust; and henceforth
let me rather meet a thousand foes than the designing arts of one false friend.


Alltrade. Well, as you please -- ( Enter LAVISH behind) -- here is Miss
Sutherland's discharge; but since you don't choose to accede to my proposals,
good night

(showing discharge, and putting it up again).
Juliana. Nay, let me entreat you, Mr. Alltrade.


Worry. And let me entreat you, Mr. Alltrade.


Alltrade. No, I can be obstinate in my turn -- good night.


Lavish ( advancing and turning ALLTRADE round). Then let me entreat you, Mr.
Alltrade -- nay, don't think to escape, Sir -- Bless you! you are quite
mistaken; Mr. Alltrade's the most kind, obliging -- The discharge -- give me
the discharge, you scoundrel -- or else, Newmarket in the first place (shaking
his cane), and high life in the second

(pulling up his neckcloth).
Alltrade (trembling violently). Well, Sir -- since you insist, Sir --


Lavish. I do; and be quick -- dispatch -- (ALLTRADE gives LAVISH a paper). Oh,
this is the very thing I suppose -- (begins reading it) -- By this my last
will, I Jeremiah Dazzle give and bequeath --


Alltrade. Stop, stop -- that is the wrong paper -- here, here is the discharge.


Lavish (takes it and puts it into his pocket). Very well -- a good economist
pockets every thing -- (Reads on): all the property of which I die possessed,
unto that most amiable -- Juliana Sutherland. -- Amazement! ( Sir HERVEY,
JULIANA, and LAVISH all look at each other with astonishment, and during pause
ALLTRADE exit.) There -- you take care of that, Sir Hervey, whilst I take care
of Mr. -- ( turns round and finds ALLTRADE gone) -- what! gone! -- I Will follow
him -- I Will -- but no -- we have got all we want from him -- and so, 'spite of
our former animosities, Sir Hervey, allow me to congratulate you.


Sir Hervey (having read the will). No, Sir; my hopes are vanished, I find here
the fortune is conditional: -- if my daughter marries, it devolves to Mrs.
Dazzle.


Lavish. If she marries?


Sir Hervey. Ay, Sir! -- while she remains single, she may roll in affluence,
and I be restored to all my former splendour; -- but will that give either of us
consolation? No; my own sad example has taught me the reverse; and therefore,
mark me, Juliana -- I wish to make atonement, to give you fixed, unceasing
happiness; -- and having proved myself unfit to guard so dear a charge, -- let
him who best deserves, let him protect you!


Juliana. Him! -- whom, Sir?


Sir Hervey ( pointing to LAVISH). Him! -- Accept her, Mr. Lavish, -- take her
as the best recompense for all the wrongs I Have done you. -- Nay, I know the
penalty: -- I know, by marrying you she forfeits this estate; and for your sake
I wish it had accompanied her; but for my own! -- at last I Have acted as a
parent ought, and though these gates are ever shut against me, I know my
daughter's happy, and that thought will give what wealth can never purchase; --
a quiet conscience and unbroken rest.


Lavish. Sir Hervey, you have acted nobly -- but --


Sir Hervey. But what? -- You are sufficiently affluent to maintain her.


Lavish. No; there is the curse on it: I thought I had saved a fortune; -- but
just now, when I heard of your mutual distress, and drew bills on my steward
and my banker, they refused payment; -- to my astonishment they said I had not a
shilling! -- there you see, there is the end of my economy!


Sir Hervey. And you would have paid my debts -- you would have released your enemy?


Lavish. Ay, that I would, if I Would saved it a thousand ways; -- but to marry on
such conditions! -- No -- I Will die first.


Juliana. And so will I; and hard as it is, here let us separate, Mr. Lavish.


Sir Hervey. Never! -- never shall you be divided! -- and though we can expect
no liberality from Mrs. Dazzle, yet under all the circumstances she may be
induced to compromise -- perhaps allow us a moiety, or a third.


Lavish. Ay, or any thing, -- if she will only allow us two hundred a year, with
my management I Will be bound we'll all live comfortably; -- I Will go make her
proposals instantly, and don't fear my success; -- for at a bargain, -- never
was such a fellow at making a bargain.


Juliana. Adieu, Mr. Lavish; pray Heaven you may succeed!


Worry. So say I: and if she don't come to an amicable adjustment, contest the
will, and employ my nephew to file a bill in Chancery against her.


Lavish. No, that will never do: rather give up the whole property than go to
law. -- Come, that is good economy, or the devil's in it.


Exit. Sir Hervey. Come, Juliana, in my apartments we'll wait his return. -- (
To WORRY): You also, faithful, constant friend!


Juliana. How shall I thank you? how repay --


Worry. Repay! -- Look! are you not reconciled? Is Not that repaying me? -- Oh!
I am the happiest fellow living! -- No -- I forgot Mrs. Worry.


Exeunt O.P. SCENE -- A Street in the Town.
Enter ALLTRADE, Mrs. DAZZLE, and a Servant. Mrs. Dazzle. Don't talk to me,
Sir. -- The will discovered!


Alltrade. I tell you it was no fault of mine, and my life on it Miss Sutherland
will marry the Captain, and still forfeit the bequest.


Mrs. Dazzle. She marry! she marry! nonsense! Haven't I this instant seen the
faithless Captain, and is not it exactly as I suspected? -- Take my word for it,
Juliana will keep the estate and her lover too.


Alltrade. How! what mean you?


Mrs. Dazzle. Mean? that the Captain never thought of making her his wife; and
the father, to gain his liberty and five thousand a year, will be unprincipled
enough to consent to his daughter's disgrace.


Alltrade. Oh, I understand now: -- live together without marrying.


Mrs. Dazzle. Ay; Mr. Lavish not only didn't deny the infamous scheme, but
absolutely offered me two hundred a year if I Would give up all claim under my
husband's will; if not, he said he and Juliana would go to Italy, and live on
the profits. What shall I do? -- deprived of my husband's estate, I Am
absolutely pennyless.


Alltrade. I know; and you see they are decided; therefore, why hesitate? --
two hundred a year is certainly better than nothing.


Mrs. Dazzle. True; and as I have no other hope, -- John, go to Mr. Lavish, say
I accede to his proposals, and if he will bring an agreement to my house, I Will
sign directly. (Servant exit.) Oh! that it should come to this; -- but I Will
expose them -- I Will --


Enter STOPGAP (with a letter). Stopgap. From Mr. Mist, Madam; -- it is of the
utmost consequence, and requires an immediate answer

(giving letter).
Mrs. Dazzle. Indeed!


Stopgap. Yes, Madam; -- he has this moment received positive information, that
Mr. Dazzle died possessed of half a London theater; and as you are his widow,
Madam -- but the letter will explain.


Mrs. Dazzle (reading). Majestic Mrs. M. P. -- only time to say, forget past
bad management -- accept hand and fortune; we'll instantly act Benedict and
Beatrice. -- Doors to be opened at eight, and performance begin precisely at
nine, Vivant Rex et Regina! -- P.M. --. N. B. Would have waited on you in
person, but Harlequin and slow wagon are just arrived. Delightful! glorious!
-- now I am rich enough to defy the Captain and his associates: -- My
compliments to Mr. Mist, I Will wait upon him instantly, and the sooner the
marriage takes place, the happier it will make me. (STOPGAP exit.) -- Come, Mr.
Alltrade, you shall share my good fortune, and when the Captain brings the
agreement, how I shall laugh at him; I now despise, as much as I once loved him.


Exeunt. SCENE -- Inside of a Theater.
MIST discovered. Mist. Forfeit 'em, -- I Will forfeit 'em. -- Harlequin arrived!
-- first call new pantomime, and not an actor come to rehearsal; -- vagabonds!
-- all envy -- all jealousy; -- dread his immortal powers, and want to knock
him up; -- will not do though -- not easily put out of countenance.


Enter STOPGAP. Stopgap. Joy! I give you joy, Sir; Mrs. Dazzle consents.


Mist. What! doors opened at eight.


Stop. Ay, and performance begin at nine.


Mist. And no money returned after curtain's drawn up! -- tol de roll, toll,
loll: -- I Am a real London Manager! -- that, (snapping his fingers,) that for
this half or rather no priced toy-shop: -- but where is she? -- where is the
imperial Mrs. M. P.


Stopgap. She Will be here directly, and Mr. Squib also: I met him in the street,
and on my telling him you were about to marry Mrs. Dazzle for the sake of her
theatrical property, he said you were grossly imposed upon, and that he would wait
upon you, and explain the matter instantly: -- and see, here he comes.


Mist. He explain! psha! what does he know about -- ( Enter LAVISH) -- Excuse
me, Mr. Squib, cannot talk to strollers now; I Am real -- a Royal London Manager.


Lavish. So am I; I Am a real Royal London Manager.


Mist. You! -- good, very good; and you have got old Dazzle's share, suppose?


Lavish. Yes, and I Have got old Dazzle's share, suppose.


Mist. Better and better! -- in right of the heiress too?


Lavish. Yes, in right of the heiress too.


Mist. What, you mean to marry the widow?


Lavish. No, damn me if I do; and if I did, that wouldn't help me.


Mist. No!


Lavish. No; the theater is not hers, it belongs to Miss Sutherland --
(producing will): -- here it is under old Dazzle's hand: here is another
apology, read it, and then once more -- Ladies and Gentlemen, the disagreeable
dilemma to which I am reduced -- ha! ha! there is a Manager for you!


Mrs. Dazzle (without). Where is my life, my lord, my husband?


Lavish. There, you read the will, while I talk to the heiress. -- (MIST and
STOPGAP retire up the stage with the will, Mrs. DAZZLE enters.) -- So, widow,
here is the agreement.


Mrs. Dazzle. Then you may take it back again; I shall not sign it.


Lavish. No!


Mrs. Dazzle. No; my marriage with Mr. Mist makes me sufficiently rich and
independent to refuse the paltry offer; and I can now show the world that I Am
above being a party in so infamous a transaction! so I wish you a pleasant tour
to Italy, good Signor Lavishini.


Lavish. You're wrong! it is a mighty pretty income: -- I Would be bound to keep a
carriage on two hundred a year.


Mrs. Dazzle. Very likely: but you have your answer, Sir.


Stopgap ( behind to MIST). Yes: Miss Sutherland's heiress! -- Mr. Squib
Manager.


Mist. And I Am dethroned: -- exit Mist.


Mrs. Dazzle. Look! there is my dear intended! Now, Sir, see me take possession
of his hand and ate. -- Oh, Mr. Mist!

(curtseying.)
Stopgap ( aside to MIST). I have a thought, Sir! rhaps Miss Sutherland may
wish to sell -- and through Mr. Squib's interest, and by securing him the
deputyship --


Mist. I may get purchase! well prompted, Stop -- we'll pay court to new
monarch; -- now mind, one of best benefit bows. --

( They put themselves in bowing attitudes and advance toward Mrs. DAZZLE.)
Mrs. Dazzle. Delightful man! -- with what awe he approaches me! -- you see,
Signor -- you see!

(MIST and STOPGAP pass by Mrs. DAZZLE and come close to LAVISH.)
Mist. Royal Mr. Squib -- see your authority, and humbly --


Mrs. Dazzle (turning him round). Why, Mr. Mist, I Am on this side.


Mist. I know! but I am on the other side: a good Manager always goes with the
ruling party: -- any reparation to you or the heiress, Mr. Squib! would she
choose the freedom? or you take a benefit? -- play myself, and give you first
night of new pantomime.


Lavish. You see, Signora, you see! -- why if you're in earnest, Mr. Mist, Miss
Sutherland's father is in prison, and as this Will gives him no ready money --


Mist. I take -- what is the debt?


Lavish. A trifle! -- but a thousand pounds, which in the course of a month I
can save and repay you! -- or if that security don't content you, you shall
have a mortgage on the theater.


Mist. That Is it; that is the best security on earth! far better than meadows
and corn fields! -- people will go without bread, but, bless 'em! never without
plays! -- Come along, Stop -- prison only next door -- jailer take my word: --
re enter with Sir Hervey instantly.


Mrs. Dazzle. Why, are you mad, Sir? -- will you again disappoint and deceive
me?


Mist. Deceive you! -- hem! -- who concealed will? -- passed off for Manager,
and turns out only author? -- who under false pretenses would have pocketed all
my scenes, dresses, and decorations? -- No, no -- you deceived me; and
therefore, Mary, once more I follow thee! and so, Good morrow, good Queen
Elizabeth!


Exit with STOPGAP. Mrs. Dazzle. Barbarian! Savage! -- this is the third time
he has made a dupe of me, Mr. Lavish! (Bursts into tears). -- I Will sign the
agreement, Mr. Lavish!


Lavish. Excuse me! -- I Am above being a party in so infamous a transaction.


Mrs. Dazzle. Nay: when you consider the smallness of the sum, and that I bind
myself to give up all claim under my husband's will: --


Lavish. Why, that is true; and seriously speaking two hundred a year is no
object; and therefore, I Will indulge you? -- sign directly, and I Will indulge you!


Mrs. Dazzle. The sooner the better! -- I long to be out of the monster's
house! -- here is pen and ink.


Lavish. And here is the agreement!

(they go to the table).
Enter MIST, Sir HERVEY, and JULIANA. Mist. Take care -- consider you're a new
performer, Sir Hervey -- you also, Miss M. P. mind the traps.


Sir Hervey. Sir, I know not how to express my thanks or my astonishment.


Lavish (coming from table -- agreement in his hand). Huzza! Sir Hervey, I give
you joy -- Miss Sutherland, I give you joy -- here it is, signed and sealed. --
Mrs. Dazzle generously takes two hundred a year, and gives up all claim under
her husband's will -- there! there is a bargain maker for you!


Sir Hervey. Is this true, Madam?


Mrs. Dazzle. True! -- you know I Have been tricked into it.


Lavish. You have -- you tricked yourself into it.


Mrs. Dazzle. Myself!


Lavish. Ay! you would be indulged; and as here is now no longer any bar to our
union, with this lady's ( taking JULIANA 's hand) and her father's leave allow
me to introduce you to Mrs. Lavish elect.


Mrs. Dazzle. How! your wife!


Lavish. Ay; you thought I Would call her by another name; but I am still old
fashioned enough to think the word "wife," heightens happiness and gives a zest
to love! -- (Mrs. DAZZLE is going to speak) -- Nay, don't blame me! -- you have
to thank yourself for the whole transaction; and when any body makes false
charges, I hope I shall be always too good an economist not to make them pay
for them.


Mist ( to Mrs. DAZZLE). You take the hint! -- you take the hint!


Mrs Dazzle. Oh, I shall go wild -- I --

(stamping violently). --
Mist. Gently -- you will be down the trap.


Mrs. Dazzle. So, Miss, you mean to allow me only this paltry --


Juliana. No, Madam! -- with my husband's permission the annuity shall be
doubled. -- The widow of my benefactor must be more amply provided for.


Lavish. Certainly! -- I can save it a thousand ways! -- And now, Mr. Mist, as
we shall certainly dispose of our theatrical property, you shall be the
purchaser -- Only mind, I make the bargain -- never was such a fellow at making
bargains!


Mist. Name your own terms -- only let me be London Manager! -- Oh, for the
opening! -- Oh, for the first night! -- After Hamlet, what an address will I
make to them?


Lavish. Address! why what will you say?


Mist. Tell you -- Ladies and Gentlemen -- on the part of the company in
general, and myself as proprietor, author, actor, and manager in particular --
confess faults -- acknowledge obligations -- and humbly entreat your usual
candor and indulgence. -- Then getting nearer the lamps -- Ladies and
Gentlemen, tomorrow and following evening, with your permission, this play
will be repeated!


THE END OF THE COMEDY.
EPILOGUE, WRITTEN BY GEORGE COLMAN, ESQUIRE.
Spoken by Mr. FAWCETT in the Character of MIST. A London Manager of high
degree,
I, Peter Mist, now enter here O. P.;
My country playhouse, ever I came to town
Almost knocked up, has been in lots knocked down.
A sturdy farmer bought the walls: -- why then,
What was a barn will be a barn again.
Corn on the stage, not mummers will be seen;
And oats be thresh'd where actors should have been;
Wheat strew the boards where erst did heroes tread,
To make -- what heroes never made there -- bread.
Stage-struck, but hen-peck'd, honest Justice Dunder
Has all my clouds, -- his lady has my thunder.
Dick Drench, the snug apothecary, means
To give a private play, so buys my scenes:
Drench, "smelling of the shop," and idem semper,
Could not resist scenes painted in distemper.
The Member for the town bought all my coats;
There he was wise -- for I command two votes;
And playhouse coats (again he showed discerning)
Will suit a Member, for they are used to turning.
My wigs the women quarreled for, sweet souls!
My daggers stuck in selling; but my bowls
Mine host of the Red Lion clapped his eyes on,
And bought 'em, as I did, to serve up poison.
Thus all my country stock, as Shakspeare says,
"My cloud-capt towers, my gorgeous palaces,
"Yea, my great globe," (the barn,) so much involved,
And "all it did inherit, have dissolved."
But if some future Manager should take
My "solemn temple," which I now forsake;
My "fabric of a vision," he will find
That I have left a cursed "wreck behind."
Here then I come, by rural schemes half undone,
But country stumps appear new brooms in London.
Egad I Will sweep all clean -- look to it -- never doubt me --
A London Manager, I Will lay about me;
And, as a sample, you shall hear my hints,
To be inserted in tomorrow's prints:
"A five act play last night was represented,
"By an amazing Dramatist invented!
"Author's and Actors' merits were immense,
"And Fawcett even surpassed his usual excellence!
"Great care it is plain was taken in rehearsal;
"And" -- may I add with truth? -- "applause was "universal."

PLAYS, etc. printed for LONGMAN and REES, No. 39, Paternoster Row.
1. The VOTARY OF WEALTH, a Comedy; by Mr. HOLMAN. 2 s. 2. LAUGH WHEN YOU CAN,
a Comedy; by Mr. REYNOLDS. 2 s. 3. The DRAMATIST, a Comedy; by Ditto. 1 s. 6 d.
4. NOTORIETY, a Comedy; by Ditto. 1 s. 6 d. 5. HOW TO GROW RICH, a Comedy; by
Ditto. 1 s. 6 d. 6. The RAGE, a Comedy; by Ditto. 2 s. 7. WERTER, a Tragedy; by
Ditto. 1 s. 6 d. 8. SPECULATION, a Comedy; by Ditto. 2 s. 9. WILD OATS, a
Comedy; by Mr. O'KEEFFE. 1 s. 6 d. 10. The CASTLE OF ANDALUSIA, a Comic Opera;
by Ditto. 1 s. 6 d. 11. SPRIGS OF LAUREL, a Comic Opera, in Two Acts; by Ditto.
1 s. 12. HARTFORD BRIDGE, an Operatic Farce, in Two Acts; by Mr. PEARCE. 1 s.
13. The MIDNIGHT WANDERERS, a Comic Opera, in Two Acts; by Ditto. 1 s. 14.
NETLEY ABBEY, an Operatic Farce, in Two Acts; by Ditto. 1 s. 15. ARRIVED AT
PORTSMOUTH; by Ditto. 1 s. 16. WINDSOR CASTLE, an Opera, performed in Honor of
the Marriage of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales; by Ditto. With an
elegant Vignette. 1 s. 6 d. 17. The MAID of NORMANDY; or, The DEATH of the
QUEEN of FRANCE, a Tragedy; by Mr. AIR, late of Pembroke College, Cambridge. 1
s. 6 d. 18. CONSEQUENCES; or, The SCHOOL for PREJUD^CE, a Comedy; by Ditto. 1
s. 6 d. 19. The FATAL SISTERS, and POEMS; by Ditto. 4 s. 20. The DISCARDED
SECRETARY; by Ditto. 2 s. 21. The MYSTERIES OF THE CASTLE, an Opera; by M. P.
ANDREWS. 2 s. 22. CROTCHET LODGE, a Farce; by Mr. HURLSTONE. 1 s. 23. The
IRISHMAN IN LONDON, a Farce; by Mr. M^READY. 1 s. 24. ZORINSKI, a Play; by Mr.
MORTON. 2 s. 25. The WAY TO GET MARRIED, a Comedy; by Ditto. 2 s. 26. The CURE
FOR THE HEART ACHE, a Comedy; by Ditto. 2 s. 27. SECRETS WORTH KNOWING, a
Comedy; by Ditto. 2 s. 28. LOCK AND KEY, a Farce; by Mr. HOARE. 1 s.

