THE CASE OF THE BARBERS of LONDON.
THE Barbers of London were a Fraternity before the Time of Edward the Second,
and by Letters-Patent of Edward the Fourth were made a Body Corporate, and
invested with several Powers and Privileges. In the 32d Year of Henry the
Eighth, the public Policy thought proper to unite them with another Company
(not then incorporated) called the Surgeons of London, in order, (as is most
probable) to transfer those Powers and Privileges to the latter, without
directly appearing to wrest them from the former to whom they had been
originally granted.

This Coalition of the two Companies having now subsisted above Two Hundred
Years, the Barbers are surprised to find an Attempt made by the Surgeons to
dissolve it, by Authority of Parliament, without their Participation or Consent.

The principal Reasons assigned by the Surgeons, in their printed Case, to
induce the Legislature to this extraordinary Act of Power, are,

Barbers, in the Time of Henry the Eighth, were all Surgeons, and that the
Parliament, by uniting them with others of superior Abilities, intended their
Improvement in that Profession; but that they having, long since, ceased to
intermeddle with any Branch of Surgery, this Intent of the Act is frustrated,
and the laudable Purpose of the Union at an end.

Alteration of the Circumstances of things, the Junction of the two Companies
(how advantageous soever in former Times) is now become highly inconvenient.

Surgeons, if distinctly incorporated, would be encouraged to meet and
communicate to one another their Experiments and Successes.

Paris, Edinburgh, and Glascow.

BUT the first of these Reasons is grounded on a Mistake in point of Fact; for
though it be true that the Barbers were all originally Surgeons, and incorporated
as such, yet long before the Union in question, most of them had quitted the
actual Exercise of that Profession, and the Right itself of exercising it in
virtue of their Charter, had been 3 H. 8. Chapter 11. No Person within the City of
London, nor within seven Miles, shall occupy as a Surgeon, except he be first
examined, approved, and admitted by the Bishop of London or Dean of St. Paul's.
taken away by Parliament: And though in the Preamble of the uniting Act, both
Companies are styled Surgeons, yet from the 32 H. 8. Chapter 42. Sect. 3. No Person
within the City of London, Suburbs of the same, and one Mile Compass of the
said City, using any Barbery or Shaving, shall occupy any Surgery, Letting of
Blood, or any other Thing belonging to Surgery, Drawing of Teeth only except.
Enacting Part (which expressly restrains the Barbers from occupying any part of
Surgery, except Tooth-drawing) it is evident the Legislature did not consider
them as real Surgeons, nor could intend their Improvement in a Science they
were forbid to practice, so that the Circumstances of Things are not altered
from what they then were, or from what they manifestly were designed to be; and
therefore the Barbers having no Relation to the Surgeons, or their Art (as it
was then deemed no Objection to their Union) cannot now, with any Propriety, be
insisted on as a Reason for their Separation.

With regard to the Inconveniences complained of, as the Charge is general,
this general Answer only can be given, That the Barbers have always, with the
greatest Deference, submitted to the Surgeons in all Matters peculiar to them,
and cheerfully contributed, out of their common Stock, toward every Expense
which they have declared necessary for the Honor or Advancement of their
Profession. And since none of these Inconveniences have been of Consequence
enough to deserve being particularly pointed out, we may venture to pronounce
them inconsiderable, and unworthy the Attention and Redress of Parliament; and
the rather, as all of them put together, have not prevented the Surgeons of
London from carrying the Improvement of their Art, both in Speculation and
Practice, to a greater Height than has been done in any other Place or Nation.

That the frequent Meetings of ingenious Men, and their free Communications on
the Subject of their Profession, may tend to the Benefit of Mankind in general,
and to the Honor of their Country in particular, is not denied: But surely the
Constitution of the united Company is no obstacle to these laudable Purposes.
The Barbers have for many Years, at their Monthly Courts, submitted to withdraw
at a stated Hour, and resigned the Parlour to the Surgeons: And if this
Condescension is not supposed to afford them sufficient Time for Conversation
on these particular Days, nothing hinders them from holding separate Assemblies
at the Hall almost every other Day in the Year.

As to what is said to have been done at Paris, Edinburgh, and Glascow, no
particular answer can be given, unless it appeared by what Means, for what
Reasons, and upon what Terms the Separations in those Places were brought
about. In London there are but two Instances of Separations of Companies, viz.
that of the Feltmakers from the Haberdashers in 1604, and that of the
Apothecaries from the Grocers in 1617; but both these were effected by mutual
Consent, without the Intervention of Parliament; and it may be proper to
observe, that the Feltmakers miscarried in a former Application for an
exclusive Charter in 1576 for want of the Haberdashers Consent.

Upon the whole, therefore, the Barbers humbly hope the forgoing Reasons will
be deemed insufficient to induce the Legislature to destroy an Union they
themselves thought proper to form, an Union which two hundred Years Existence
has rendered venerable, and which, by the Improvements abovementioned, appears
to have answered all the Purposes for which it was established.

But if for other Reasons (which the Surgeons say may be given) the Parliament
shall be inclined to favor them in this part of their Request; the Barbers,
from the scrupulous Regard and Tenderness which that August Assembly has always
shown for private Property, cannot but hope they shall be continued in the
Enjoyment of all their present Possessions, without any Division whatsoever,
and that, for the following Reasons:

united Company's Lands and Tenements, (particularly the Site of their Hall,
Parlour, etc.) originally belonged to them, and by the uniting Act 32 H. 8. Chapter
42. The united Company shall have, possess, and enjoy, to them and their
Successors for ever, all such Lands and Tenements, and other Hereditaments
whatsoever, which the said Company or Commonalty of Barbers have and enjoy, to
the Use of the said Mystery and Commonalty of Barbers of London.
seem with great Justice to have been intended to remain to their sole and
separate Use, though in fact the Surgeons have hitherto been indulged in the
equal Enjoyment of them with the Barbers.

Surgeons Share of what may have been acquired since the Union, will scarce be
an adequate Recompense to the Barbers for the above Indulgence, much less for
the unmerited Loss of a Brotherhood now so honorable and advantageous to them.

Barbers when distinctly incorporated, can fall but very little, if any thing,
short of those of the united Company, so that a Reduction of Income must
subject them to very great Difficulties, which (considering that they neither
desire, nor have given the Surgeons just Cause to desire a Separation) would be
extremely hard and unreasonable.

flourishing Condition of the Surgeons, (the only real Alteration in the
Circumstances of Things) will sufficiently enable them to support the Dignity
of their new and favorite Institution with becoming Splendour, without
distressing their less happy Brethren the Barbers.

THE CASE OF THE BARBERS of London.


