AN ACCOUNT OF Mr. Whiston's PROSECUTION at, AND BANISHMENT from, THE
University of CAMBRIDGE.

First Printed at the End of the Historical Preface, A.D. MDCCXI. And now
Reprinted on Occasion of Dr. Bentley's late Prosecution, Suspension, and
Deprivation from all his Degrees, Rights, and Titles in the said UNIVERSITY.

With an APPENDIX: Containing Mr. Whiston's farther Account; and particularly
his Petition to the Vice Chancellor and Heads of Colleges, after they had
chosen a New Professor: Never before Printed.

Judge not according to the Appearance, but judge Righteous Judgment. Joh. vii.
24. LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR; And are to be Sold by J. Roberts, near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1718. Price 6 d.

An ACCOUNT of Mr. Whiston 's Prosecution at, and Banishment from the
University of Cambridge.
UPON Sunday, October. 22. 1710. (on which Day a Sermon in Defense of the
Athanasian Creed was preached by Mr. Hughes of Jesus -- College, at St.
Mary's;) I was summoned by Mr. Atwood of Pembroke, Deputy-Beadle, to appear
before the Vice Chancellor the next Day, at Three a Clock in the Afternoon.
Accordingly, I was that Day (about Four a Clock) conducted into an Upper-Room
of the Vice-Chancellor's Lodge; and appeared before Dr. Roderick, Provost of
King's-College, the Vice Chancellor; Sir John Ellis, Knight, Master of
Caius-College; Dr. James, Master of Queen's, Regius Professor of Divinity; Dr.
Blithe, Master of Clare-Hall; Dr. Balderston, Master of Emanuel; Dr. Covel,
Master of Christ's; Dr. Richardson, Master of Peter-House; Dr. Ashton, Master
of Jesus; Dr. Fisher, Master of Sidney; and Dr. Lany, Master of Pembroke: The
University-Register, Mr. Grove of St. John's, being there also. Where Note,
That the Lord Bishop of Chester, Master of Catherine-Hall, though newly come to
Town, never appeared with the Heads at any of their Meetings about me; but,
publicly at least, kept himself wholly unconcerned in the Matter.

I came to the Vice-Chancellor's Lodge with a Friend, whose Presence and
Assistance I desired. But he was not permitted to go up Stairs: So I was all
alone before my Judges. I was then immediately showed a Book by Mr.
Vice Chancellor, and asked whether I would look upon it, and own it to be mine?
Perceiving that it was the Sermons and Essays upon several Subjects, I replied,
that I would not answer any such Questions; nor would I so much as look upon
the Book: Affirming, that all which I had to say, was in a written Paper in my
Hands. Neither would I make any other Answer; though then, and all along, many
ensnaring Questions were put to me. But when I still persisted in the same
Answers, the Vice Chancellor, who (with the rest) seemed much surpised at this
cautious Conduct of mine, was obliged to call for other Evidence. Accordingly
Mr. Crownfield, our Printer, (who had been terrified, and threatened with being
turned out of his Place by some of the Heads, for barely permitting his Boy to
carry the Proposals for Printing my Primitive Christianity Revived to them) was
sent for, and deposed so much as amounted to probable Evidence, That I had sent
the small Essay upon the Epistles of Ignatius, to be dispersed in Cambridge;
and that I had sent a Letter to the Vice Chancellor, [which is set down p. 84,
etc. of my Historical Preface:] and to plain Proof, That I desired his Boy
might carry the forementioned Proposals to the several Heads of Colleges the
Tuesday before; but could say nothing to the Sermons and Essays on several
Subjects. The Regius Professor particularly wondered that I would not clear Mr.
Crownfield, by owning the sending the Proposals; and intimated, That he
supposed the Vice Chancellor would also have an Order from the Chancery, to
oblige Mr. Benjamin Took the Bookseller to come from London, to prove the
Sermons and Essays upon me, and to inform them how they came to Cambridge. I
said that it was not yet Time to say all I intended: But that when I made my
proper Answer, it would be Time enough to think of such Things. That I had been
accustomed to Reason, Arguments, and Testimonies, but not to Law: So I had
taken Advice as to my Answers, and observed the same Advice all along: Which he
owned it was reasonable for me to do, as one that he believed had never before
been used to such legal Proceedings. He also took notice of an Expression of
mine in my Letter to the Vice Chancellor, beforementioned, as if I were
apprehensive of somewhat like Persecution that might befall me: And he added,
that he durst say, No Body there had any Intention to persecute me. About this
Time it was that the Depositions of Mr. Hughes and Mr. Townsend of Jesus; of
Mr. Amyas and Mr. Macro of Caius; and of Mr. Thackham of King's; (which were in
Part, if not wholly obtained by the Vice-Chancellor's Procurement, not by the
voluntary Appearance of the Parties themselves) were openly read to me, as they
here follow, Verbatim.

Certificates, afterward deposed upon Oath.
I well remember, that hearing Mr. Whiston one Sunday in the Afternoon, at the
Parish Church of St. Clements, in the Town of Cambridge, explaining the First
Article of the Apostles Creed; Having established the Unity of the Godhead by
several proper Arguments, he asserted, There was but One God, and that God the
Father only was that One God; That the Father was in all the Ancient and
Primitive Creeds mentioned to be the Only God; That the Son was indeed exalted
above all Creatures, and made a Partaker of many Divine Excellencies and
Perfections, and as such He was to be worshipped with a Sort or Degree of
Divine Worship. This is the Substance of what I heard the said Mr. Whiston
deliver in that Lecture. There were several other very black and aggravating
Expressions, which in so long a Space of Time have slipped my Memory. But as to
the Truth of this, I am ready and willing to give my Oath.

JOHN HUGHES.

In the Year 1708. in the Parish Church of St. Clement's in Cambridge, I heard
Mr. Whiston in one of his Carechetical Lectures upon the Apostles Creed,
deliver these Words, or Words to this Effect; viz, As to the Dignity of our
Savior's Person's, though he be a Being of vastly great and immense
Perfections, yet I cannot say, as some do, that he is equal to God the Father:
Because I should contradict my Blessed Savior himself, who says expressly, My
Father is greater than I. Neither can I assert, that he is Omniscient; for if I
should, I should contradict my Blessed Savior himself, who says, He knew not
of the Day of Judgment. Of that Day and Hour knows no Man, no not the Angels
which are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. Neither can I assert,
that he is Essentially Good; For then also I should contradict my Blessed Lord
and Savior himself, who, to a certain Ruler that called him Good Master, said,
Why call thou me Good? None is Good, save One, that is God.

Witness my Hand, SA. TOWNSEND.
October. 19. 1710.
The Two First Articles mentioned by Mr. Townsend I do likewise attest. To
which Mr. Whiston at the same Time added, That all the Old Books of our
Religion witnessed the same; or Words to that Effect.

J. AMYAS.

I do Declare that at the same Place and Time, I heard Mr. Whiston speak those
Words all abovementioned by Mr. Townsend, or Words to that Effect.

Witness my Hand, THO. MACRO.

October. 20. 1710.
Memorand. That at a Meeting of the Ministers concerning the Charity-Schools,
at the Old Coffee-House in Cambridge, about Michaelmas last was Twelvemonth,
Mr. Townsend making a Motion for the Removal of Mr. Whiston from the
Stewardship, by reason of Heretical Tenets interspersed in his Catechetical
Lectures, Mr. Whiston Inquired, What Tenets they might be? I replied, The
Denial of the Divinity of the Son. He said, He owned him as God. I asked,
Whether as God ab aeterno? He answered, No: Nor had any of the Fathers for the
first Three Centuries.

At another Meeting about a Quarter of a Year since, on the Occasion, and at
the Place abovementioned, Mr. Whiston offered a Paper hereunto annexed, in
Vindication of his Alteration of the Doxologies subjoined to Dr. Brady's
Translation of the Psalms; a Part whereof he was authorized to Print, for the
Use of the Charity-Schools. He having asserted his Alteration to be such as we
might all join in, (as in the Paper is specified) I asked him whether he could
not join with us in this, To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, One God, whom we
Adore.He replied, He would be a Turk as soon

These several Depositions I am ready to confirm by Oath. W. THACKHAM.

N.B. The Paper referred to in this last Deposition is that inserted toward the
End of my Historical Preface. And observe, that the last vehement Expression of
mine, That I would be a Turk as soon, was, to the best of my Remembrance,
followed by these Words, or others to the same Effect, which are omitted by Mr.
Thackham; viz. That is a rash Expression: But I mean, that this Language is so
entirely contrary to the Nature of the Christian Religion, that I cannot go
into it for any Consideration whatsoever.

Some Time after these Depositions were read, I desired to know when it was a
proper Time to give in my Answer: Which when it was intimated, I publicly read
this Paper, and delivered it in as follows, Verbatim.

Mr. Vice Chancellor,
Saving to my self all future Legal Advantages, either as to the Jurisdiction
of this Consistory, to the Form of Proceedings therein, or to any other Matters
whatsoever; I do now desire that I may have a true Copy of the Statute upon
which I am charged, and of the Articles and Depositions given me. I do also
desire a competent Time may be allowed me for making my Defense; which is never
denied in Cases of this Nature: And that I may have Leave, though it be
Term-Time, to go to London for some Weeks, where those my Papers are out of
which my Defense is in good Part to be made: Especially since I intend that
that Defense shall be very full and particular, and drawn up by the best
Advice. And I cannot but beg and hope that you will all hear and consider what
I shall have hereafter to offer in my Answer with that Justice, Equity and
Candor, which the Laws of Nature, of the Gospel, and of the Land require; and
particularly in so important a Cause, concerning the True Christian Faith and
Practice; which your selves would expect to be heard with in the like Case; and
which the Certainty of all our Appearing before Christ's own Tribunal at the
Great Day does demand from you.

WILL. WHISTON.
Camb. October. 23. 1710.
Here follows also a true Copy of the 45th Statute of the University, upon
which all these Proceedings were grounded. CAP. XLV. De Concionibus.
Nullus Concionator sit, vel aliquam concionem pro gradu suo habeat, nisi ad
minimum Diaconus sit. Octavo Maij ad Henrici VII. commendationem sacra concio
sit, quam Regius in Theologia Professor faciet. Pridie uniuscu^usque Termini
concio Latina hora nona antemeridiana in Ecclesia Beatae Mariae habeatur. Primo
Termino anni concionabitur Regius Professor in Theologia: Secundo Professor
Dominae Margaretae: Tertio Concionator Academiae. Unoquoque die dominico de
anno in annum conciones in Academiae Templo fiant. Ordo itidem Collegiorum in
concionibus servabitur quem in disputationibus praescripsimus, incipiendo a
senioribus qui concionatores sunt in unaquaque combinatione, and sic
progrediendo ad juniores. Qui cursum suum in concionando omiserit viginti
solidis mulctabitur. Collegia pro singulis concionibus solvent Bedellis quatuor
denarios; nisi quis pro gradu concionatur. Concionatores autem in concione sua
utentur caputio sitato Nonregentis, sub poena sex solidorum, and octo de^
^orum, quoties deliquerint. Prohibemus ne quisquam in concione aliqua, in loco
communi tractando, in Lectionibus publicis, seu aliter public infra
Universitatem nostram quicquam doceat, tractet, vel defendat contra religionem,
seu ejusdem aliquam partem in regno nostro publica autoritate receptam and
stabilitam, aut contra aliquem statum, autoritatem, dignitatem, seu gradam vel
ecclesiasticum vel civilem hujus regni nostri Angliae, vel Hiberniae. Qui
contra fecerit errorem vel temeritatem suam Cancellarij jussu, cum assensu
majoris partis Praefectorum Collegiorum revocabit, and public fatebitur. Quod
si recusaverit, aut non humiliter so modo quo praescribitur perfecerit, eadem
art^^tate a Collegio suo perpetuo excludetur, and Universitate exulabit.



But to go on with my Narrative.

After I had delivered my Paper, desiring Copies of the Statute, and of the
Depositions, and competent Time for my Answer; the former Parts were readily
granted me, but the Third much debated. I desired six Weeks Time, as not too
long in a Matter of such great Importance; and gave particular Reasons for it.
I also assured them, that the main of that Answer would not be what they so
much, and often, and earnestly feared and cautioned against, the producing my
Original Testimonies in way of Justification of my Opinions; but would
principally turn on those very Two Heads Mr. Vice Chancellor proposed as proper
for it; viz. The showing that my Doctrines were either not truly and completely
represented, or were not so contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England
as the Vice Chancellor and some others imagined. I was answered, That this
Consistory-Court used not to allow so long Time as those at Westminster; and
thev were by no means willing to allow any considerable Time. However, the
Master of Jesus was for a competent Time, that I might send for my Papers from
London. And somebody hinted, as if a Week was more usually the Time afforded in
this Consistory. The Master of Peterhouse, though he did not own the Necessity of
a very long Time, yet confessed that I must have Time allowed me for my Answer.
Accordingly I fully expected such Allowance. And when the Master of Peterhouse
left them, it seems, a Week's Time was intended for that Answer. But all this
notwithstanding, when I was finally called in, that Master being gone, I heard
not a Syllable more about it; but was immediately ordered to appear again on
Wednesday, to receive the main Charge, (of which presently;) and for other
farther Proceedings. And when I once spoke of going to London for Advice or
Assistance, the Master of Emanuel said, It was fit I should go live elsewhere,
and remove from Cambridge, since I had there perverted some already. The
Masters of Sidney and Pembroke not only seemed to grudge the least Delay for my
Answer, but would needs tell me what an Answer I was to make. I replied, that I
should not ask their Advice for the making that Answer, but use my own
Judgment. Nay, when the Master of Jesus plainly owned the Reasonableness of
some considerable Time for my Answer, the Master of Pembroke seemed very angry
at him for it. Yet when I once, with some Vehemence, said, "There has somewhat
been alleged here, which I am surpised to find so many Clergymen to say;"
m^aning their Assertion, That the Three Persons collectively taken, were the
One God of the Christian Religion, and not God the Father; contrary to all
manner of Sacred and Primitive Doctrine and Language; no Notice was taken of it
at all. But to go on with the main Narrative. Upon a Second Summons, I appeared
again on Wednesday, October. 25th. But now in a lower Parlour of the same Lodge,
none being present but my Judges, as before. Dr. Covel and Dr. Richardson being
now absent; and Dr. Gower, Master of St. John's, the Lady Margarets's
Professor, present in their Room. When I appear d, expecting the allowance of
Time, not only for my main Answer, but for the clearing the Exceptions I had to
make to their Evidence and Proceedings; instead thereof, I had only the
sore-mentioned Paper of the main Charge given me, and a solemn Admonition
therewith to leave my Errors, and return to the Doctrine of the Church of
England, or else on Monday they would proceed to execute the Statute upon me.
Only I was allowed to read and deliver in what I had prepared as an Answer so
far; or as my Complaints of, and Exceptions against their Proceedings. These
Two Papers, the first delivered to me, and the second by me, here follow,
verbatim.

Positions published and spread about in the University of Cambridge, by Mr.
Will. Whiston, contra Religionem, etc. Stat. Acad. 45.
Vid. Postscript through out. Vid. Sermons and Essays, etc. p. 213. l. 19, to 23.
p. 215. l. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. l. 9, 10, 11. 26 to 34. Mr. Thackham's Depos. Mr.
Hughes Depos. Mr. Townsend, Mr. Macro, and Mr. Amyas's Depositions Vid. Sermon.
and Essays, p. 276. l. 21, to p. 278. l. 6.
(1) -- That the Father alone is the One God of the Christian Religion, in
opposition to the Three Divine Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being the
One God of the Christian Religion.

This Position is contrary to the 1, 2, and 5th of the 39 Articles, and to the
Nicene and Athanasian Creeds.

2 -- That the Creed commonly called the Creed of St. Athanasius is a gross and
Antichristian Innovation and Corruption of the Primitive Purity and Simplicity
of the Christian Faith among us.

This Position is contrary to the Rubric before the said Creed, and the 8th
Article.

Vid. Sermon and Essays, etc. Note (1) p. 296.
3 -- That the Canon of the Scripture, the Rule and Guide of a Christian's
Faith and Practice, is that contained in the last of the Ecclesiastical Canons,
ordinarily styled Apostolical: Which all along appears to have been the
Standard of the Primitive Church in this matter. I mean as including all the
Books we now own for Canonical; and also the Two Epistles of St. Clement, and
the Constitutions of the Apostles by St. Clement: To which the Pastor of Hermas
is to be added; as well as we have already added the Apocalypse of St. John.

Proposals, etc. 1 Side Vol. III. l. 10.
-- That the Doctrine of the Apostles appears to be a Sacred Book of the New
Testament, long lost to the Christian Church.

These Two Positions are contrary to the Sixth of the 39 Articles.

Proposals, first Side Vol. II.
Mr. Whiston undertakes to prove clearly, that the Apostolical Constitutions
are the most Sacred Part of the Canonical Scriptures of the New Testament.

Vid. Postscript, p. 47. l. ult.
Mr. Whiston asserts, that the Doxology, current in all these latter Ages, Vid.
Thackham his Deposition.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, was not the
true Christian Doxology.

This Position is against the Doxology received and established in the public
Liturgy.

Dated October. 25. 1710. This Paper was delivered to Mr. Whiston the Day and
Year above-written by Mr. Vice-Chancellor's Order. Witness my Hand, Robert
Grove.

My Answer: Or Complaints of, and Exceptions to these Proceedings; delivered in
the same Day.
Mr. Vice Chancellor,
The Accusation which now lies against me in this Place gives me but too much
Occasion both for Surprise and Complaint. For truly, I cannot but be surpised,
that after all my Care and Concern to demean my self honestly and inoffensively
both before God and Men, and to discharge my several Duties as a Man, a
Christian, a Clergyman, and a Professor of the Mathematics in this University;
after an uncommon Search after, and Zeal for the pure, original, incorrupt
Doctrines and Duties of Christianity, as they appear in the Sacred Books of the
Old and New Testament, and in all the most Ancient and Primitive Fathers; and
yet, as far as possible, with a constant and regular Compliance with the Rules
and Orders of the Church of England; after my earnest Endeavors to recover and
retrieve several of the Original Sacred Books of our Religion, long lost, or
despised, or neglected in these latter Ages, at least in these Western Parts of
Christendom; and after such great Success in those and my other Enquiries, that
of all the many Learned Persons who have perused my Papers, not any of them has
undertaken to write an Answer to them: After all this, I say, I cannot but be
surpised, that without sending for any of those Papers, or at all examining
them; and without allowing me any public Conference and Disputation about the
Notions contained in them; while every one else is permitted, if not encouraged
to preach and dispute against me upon all Occasions, I am forced to stand here
as an Offender, and a Criminal on Account of them. Nicodemus, though so timorous
as to come to Jesus by Night only, yet ventured to say in the midst of the
Rulers of the Jews, John VII. 50, 51.
Does our Law judge any Man before it hear him, and know what he does? And
certainly, it is not consistent with common Justice, with the Nature of the
Christian Doctrine, nor with the Honor of this Learned Body, to censure or
condemn either me or my Opinions, till upon a mature and solemn Examination it
plainly appears, that those Opinions are not only false but groundless; and by
Consequence, that I am grossly mistaken in them, and ought to retract them. And
give me leave to say, that this Method of Conference and Examination is that
which ought always to be, and has ordinarily been used in such Cases. Nor has
it, I suppose, been any where denied among those that call themselves
Christians, but in the Popish Inquision it self. And this is certainly the only
way to influence reasonable Men in such Matters. And as to my self, I promise,
that it shall influence me, even to perpetual Silence, and the burning my own
Papers, if the contrary Doctrines can produce but one Tenth Part of that
Evidence, that Original Evidence which I shall then allege for what I shall
there defend. Nor will any other Method at all weigh with me as to my Faith or
Practice. For I dare say you are all persuaded that I am not so insincere or
fearful, as to retract or renounce any thing, which, upon full Examination, I
am really persuaded to be either a Truth or a Duty of the Christian Religion,
out of the Apprehension of what any such Tribunal as this can inflict upon me.
Permit me, Mr. Vice Chancellor, to say farther, that this Way of Conference and
Examination is that very Method which is marked out by an Ancient and Famous
Precedent, when this very Statute now before you was first used: I mean the
Case of Professor Cartwright, in the Days of Queen Elizabeth; whom Archbishop
Whitgift, the then Vice Chancellor, and the University, would not proceed
against till they had invited him to a Conference, and that in Writing, in
order to his Conviction: But which he refused, and was thereupon censured and
expelled: As the Authentic Record, a Copy of which is hereunto annexed, will
testify. The Case is here quite otherwise. I am not only willing to accept of
any such Invitation, but do here solemnly Invite the University to this
Conference and Examination. Nay, I Demand it, as the Right of the Sacred Truths
of Christianity, and what this Learned Body, cannot either in Equity, or Honor
deny, that I be thus heard, and my Papers fairly and fully examined, before any
farther Proceedings be had in this Matter. And to encourage your Acceptance of
this Proposal, I do sincerely declare that I will have no regard therein to
Victory or Triumph; but will alone seek for Truth, and genuine Christianity.
For God is my Witness, that I am very unwilling to be in the least deceived my
self, or to deceive the Church of Christ: And that I am always very desirous of
the Opportunity of improving and correcting my Notions and Papers, that so the
least Syllable of the Truths of Christ Jesus may not receive any Diminution or
Misrepresentation by me, when my Papers come to be published.

But then, Mr. Vice Chancellor, besides my Surprise at the several Things
abovementioned, with Relation to this Procedure, I think I have great Reason
for Complaint on many Accounts also. Accordingly I must here take the Liberty
to complain, That Matters have a long while been very unfairly and clancularly
managed against me: That during the last Two Years and above half, wherein it
has been known that I have been upon those Enquires whence the present
Accusation is taken, No Vice Chancellor, no public Professor, not any one of
those in Authority here, which are known to be the most disatisfy'd, have ever
sent for me and my Papers, and discoursed me freely, or given me a friendly
Caution about them. I think I have also Reason to complain, that so many and
such improper Ways have been tried to procure some Censure upon me; as if I
were such a public Enemy, that all the Methods that could be thought of were
to be used for my Destruction. Once a Grace of the Senate House was to be
procured for my Expulsion, without my being heard at all. When that did not do,
I have, as I hear, been threatened with the Ecclesiastical Court, and with the
Assizes. Then Advice was taken, whether I could not with safety be legally
convicted of Heresy, and so be expelled by Mr. Lucas's Statutes. And now a
remote University Statute, not at all in its main and Original Design, as I
conceive, reaching my Case; and such an one as, if strained to the same Rigor
as to others, might expel, I believe, much the greatest part of the University,
is at last produced against me. This Statute is De Concionibus, concerning
public Sermons, and such like Public Acts and Lectures before the University.
How can this Statute possibly reach me? since I never had the Honor to preach
before the University in my Life. I never kept any Divinity Act, or opposed in
the Divinity Schools, since I was admitted. My Public Lectures have been all
Mathematical; and being most of them printed, will show how remote they have
been from any things of this Nature. This Statute must therefore be strained
beyond all reasonable Construction e're it can affect me. I have indeed
formerly had an Afternoon Lecture in the Town of Cambridge, by the Bishop's
sole Permission, and upon his sole Salary. But it is the Opinion of the best
Judges, that whatever I said there, can no way be used to my Prejudice in this
Place. The Parish Churches, at least ordinarily, when none but the Inhabitants
are supposed to be present, being certainly under no other Cognizance than of
the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of the Diocese. And accordingly, One Person
of this University about a Year and a half ago did once make some Complaint to
our Diocesan, for what happened in one of those Churches; who thereupon
appointed us to appear before him at a certain Hour the next day: I came at the
Hour appointed, and stayed about an Hour, expecting my Accuser; but he did not
come till the Bishop and my self were both gone: Which hindered any farther
Proceedings. And sure I cannot be accused both before the Bishop, and before
this Consistory for the same pretended Offenses, in the same Parish Church. I
do therefore insist upon it, that the true Extent of this Statute may be fully
considered before any thing be done against me by virtue of it. As also I
desire it may be considered, whether Words pretended to be spoken so long ago;
especially where the Time is either not specified at all, or not nearer than
that of a whole Year's space, can be admitted against me: And whether Books
published at London, and private Discourses elsewhere, can come within the
reach of this Statute; where the Offenses punishable by it must be committed
not only infra Universitatem nostram, in a Place belonging to the University,
but must be done public docendo, tractando, vel defendendo, in public and
solemn Sermons, Lectures, or Disputations before the same University. I do also
complain, that the Chancellor of the University has not, as I believe, been
acquainted with this Matter; when the Statute says all the Proceedings upon it
are to be Cancellarii jussa. And though in ordinary Affairs the Vice Chancellor
may have Authority enough to act for the Chancellor, and may well enough
exercise that Authority, yet certainly in a Case of so uncommon a Nature, and
of such mighty Consequence; [the like whereto I will be bold to say never
before came into this Consistory;] it was but reasonable that the Chancellor
himself should be acquainted, and his Directions received, before any
Proceedings should have been begun by the University. I do also complain that
the Accusations or Depositions against me relate generally to Things long since
past and gone, without the pretense of any new Offenses; unless the Civility of
sending some inoffensive Proposals to any of you can be esteemed of that
Nature. I hope I may well call them inoffensive, since they plainly are such,
and will appear such to every Christian Reader that peruses them. I have also,
I think, great Reason to complain that I am, as it were, by this Procedure
prevented in my honest Design, recommended to me by a very learned and pious
Prelate of our own Church, and readily agreed to by me, of laying all my Papers
before the Convocation, which is almost now ready to fit, for their
Consideration and Correction. Sure the University will never suppose, or
believe, that the Convocation will censure without Examination; nor is the
University to prejudge a Cause, which most properly belongs to the Cognizance
and Judgment of the Convocation. I do also complain, that I have been so
exceeding privately convened, and particularly interrogated; and not in the
Consistory, before the University; where all that desired might have been
present, and I might have had such Assistance as Law and Equity do allow. As if
some Men's Hopes of oppressing me, arose rather from the Prospect of the Terror
I should be under in such Circumstances, and the unwary Answers I should
thereupon make, than from the Strength of the Evidence, and the Notoriety of
the Offenses I could be proved to be guilty of. I do, lastly, complain, that as
I am informed, such a sort of Determination has been lately made about the
Sense of that Statute whereby I am charg d, as might best reach my Case, before
I have been any way heard, or any legal Advice has been taken concerning the
true Extent and Meaning of it; contrary, I think, to the plain Rules of Justice
and Equity in such a Case.

These, Mr. Vice Chancellor, are the principal Occasions of that Surprise and
Complaint which I at first mentioned. Not that they all directly affect your
selves; from whom I am willing to hope for nothing but Fairness, Justice and
Equity; but because they all belong to some Members of this University. And,
for a Conclusion, give me leave to say, that these Matters are of such mighty
Consequence, they are become so very public, and the Fairness and Necessity of
a solemn Examination are so generally owned by the Archbishops and Bishops, and
the rest of those learned Men of all Parties who have perused my Papers, that
if the Proceeding in this Matter here be with Haste, Precipitation, and
Severity, those that act in it, will not only wound their own Consciences,
commit an heinous Offense against God, and thereby expose themselves to severe
Punishment from his Hand; but there will hereby be laid a lasting, an indelible
Blot and Reproach upon the University; as undertaking rashly and violently to
punish me, before it appears that I am at all guilty of any Offense to deserve
that Punishment: While at the same time I shall not only have the Comfort of an
innocent Conscience for my Support, but shall also have the Expectation of
speedy Relief and Redress from the known Justice and Equity of those who
represent Her Sacred Majesty in Her Courts of Judicature; to which, in that
Case, I shall be obliged immediately to appeal.

Saving therefore to my self the Liberty of making any other future Exceptions
to these Proceedings against me, The principal ones that I make at present are
these: I say,

(1.) That I am charged with breaking that 45th Statute, which I have been
incapable of breaking, because it only concerns such Public
University-Exercises as I have never performed.

(2.) That the Place where most of the Words are pretended to have been spoken,
St. Clement's Church, is utterly out of the Jurisdiction of the University, and
so no ways within this Statute.

(3.) That the want of the Specification of the Time, or the too loose
Specification of it, renders most of the Depositions of no Value.

(4.) That Words charged at so great a Distance of Time, cannot be sworn to so
particularly as is necessary to affect me.

(5.) That Words spoken in private Conversation, or at a Coffee-House, or
[written] in a private Letter, can no way be within this Statute.

(6.) That no Books printed and published at London can be within this Statute.

(7.) That I ought to have been convened publicly in the Consistory, and
Evidence fairly there produced against me in an open Court; and not privately
in a Chamber been asked many ensnaring Questions, with the Exclusion of even a
single Friend, who was willing to have been there to assist and direct me.

(8.) That any prior Determination of the Sense of this Statute, before I have
had Council allowed me, or legal Advice taken about its true Extent and
Meaning, is of no Force at all against me.

And I desire and demand that I may have Time given me, and Council allowed me
to argue the Validity of these Exceptions.

WILL. WHISTON.
October. 25 1710.
N.B. The Record herein referred to about Professor Cartwright, is taken out of
Dr. Fuller's History of the University of Cambridge, Page 142. and runs thus:
Ann. Reg. Eliz. 1^. Ann. Dom. 157^. March 18.
Whereas it is reported, that Master Cartwright, offering Disputations and
Conference, touching the Assertions uttered by him, and subscribed with his
Hand, and that he could not obtain his Request therein; this is to Testify,
that in the Presence of us, whose Names are here underwritten, and in our
hearing, the said Mr. Cartwright was offered Conference of diverse; and namely
of Mr. Doctor Whitgift, who offered, That if the said Mr. Cartwright would set
down his Assertions in Writing, and his Reasons unto them, he would answer the
same in Writing also; the which Master Cartwright refused to do. Further, the
said Dr. Whitgift at such Time as Mr. Cartwright was deprived of his Lecture,
did in our Presence ask the said Mr. Cartwright, whether he had both publicly,
and privately diverse Times offered the same Conference unto him, by writing, or
not: To which Mr. Cartwright answered, That he had been so offered, and that he
refused the same. Moreover the said Mr. Cartwright did never offer any
Disputation but upon these Conditions: viz. That he might know who should be
his Adversaries, and who should be his Judges; meaning, such Judges as he
himself could best like of. Neither was this Kind of Disputation denied unto
him, but only he was required to obtain License of the Queen's Majesty or the
Council, because his Assertions be repugnant to the State of the Commonwealth,
which may not be called into Question by public Disputation without License of
the Prince or his Highness's Council.

John Whitgift, Vice Chancellor, John Mey, Henry Harvey, Thomas B -- -- Andrew
Pearne. William Chadderton. Edward Hawford. Thomas F -- -.

[ Note, Dr. Fuller says that this Instrument is Registered in Cambridge.]



When I had read and delivered in this Second Paper, I expected some Answer
thereto, and some legal Notice to have been taken of it. But all to no Purpose:
The Torrent was too strong to be stopped by any such Methods. The
Vice Chancellor pretended, (without the least Regard to what I had said,) that
they were agreed that the Positions charged upon me were both plainly contrary
to the Churches Doctrine; and were sufficiently proved against me; and so they
would proceed. I thereupon boldly desired to know, whether every one there
present, (for they were then the least Number possible that could act in such a
Case) had entirely agreed to both these Propositions? And particularly asked
Sir John Ellis's Opinion. He answered, that he agreed that the Paper delivered
to me contained Doctrines contrary to those of the Church of England: But
whether they had sufficiently proved that those Doctrines were chargeable upon
me, he did not determine, but left that to others. Yet did they proceed as if
Sir John had equally agreed to both those Particulars; which it is certain he
did not, and that he declared he did not: though he had hardly leave given him to
finish that his Declaration. I was then very gravely and solemnly admonished
again by the Vice Chancellor to leave my Errors, and return to the Church of
England, or else he let me know, that on Monday at Three a Clock, they would
proceed to execute the Statute against me; without the least Intimation of
allowing me so much as one Hours Time to answer the Charge, which not till now
was properly delivered to me. As to my Desire of Conference and fair
Examination, the Vice Chancellor said, that the Regius Professor might take me
to his Lodgings and discourse with me if he pleased; to which no Answer was
returned by any Body. The Lady Margaret's Professor also once upbraided me, as
if I denied Things there which elsewhere I asserted; which he looked on as no
Argument of that Sincerity I pretended to. Upon this I openly desired not to be
misunderstood, but that I only required Legal Proof for what was alleged
against me, without being ensnared by their Questions, and without affirming or
denying any Thing my self about them. Whereupon he said no more of that Matter.
And the Regius Professor, who understood me so all along, did me the Justice to
put that Matter right, and to explain in what Sense he supposed I did not now
own or assert any of the Things charged upon me. To which I fully assented; and
so that Imputation came to nothing. The Margaret Professor farther told me,
when I insisted on Examination before Censure, that I knew well enough, that
when Heretics arose, it was not usual to argue with them, but to quote some
Canon of a Council which condemned them, and so to anathematize them
immediately. I said to him; But suppose that what I said about the Apostolical
Constitutions, etc. should at last prove to be true? He replied, If so, he
would come and heartily beg my Pardon. The Master of Jesus thought Time might
be allowed me for my Answer. But so earnest and vehement was the
Vice Chancellor in his Proceedings, that all such Motions came to nothing. The
same Master of Jesus also asked me why I called the Constitutions The Most
Sacred Book of the New Testament? I answered, because they really were so, and
were so esteemed in the first Ages. I also said to him, that they would repent
their Severity to me: And that if he had been by, when Dr. Smalridge (who had
read my Papers, and of whom I believed he had a very good Opinion) and my self
lately discoursed upon these Matters, he would scarce have been against their
Examination before they censured me on Account of them. Upon which he owned
that he had himself also seen some of my Papers: Which I suppose was some Time
ago, when Mr. Hughes, and Mr. Townsend of the same College had the Perusal of
them: I mean those which concern the Trinity and Incarnation only. But finding
the Master of Sidney exceeding hot against me, I said to him, that I believed
he had not studied these Matters. He grew passionate, and said, That was my
Impudence. I said, I meant particularly as to the Constitutions. He replied,
that he had read them; but however that he knew my Assertions were contrary to
those of the Church of England; Which indeed he all along confined himself to:
insomuch that when on Monday the Vicechancellor had said, with some Moderation,
that my Tenets were Erroneous and contrary to the Churches Doctrine, and that
the ^fore I ought to retract them; and I had replied, Let them be but once
proved to be Erroneous, and I was most ready to retract them; the Master of
Sidney, at whose Elbow I stood, told me, they did not mean Ecroneous, but
contrary to the Doctrine of the Church. Nay, when I said to them, Will you
condemn or censure while none either will, or dare answer me? Somebody that was
offended at that last Word, replied, dare? But without any farther Addition.
And indeed great Care was all along taken that the Truth or Falsehood of my
Doctrines should be wholly waved, and all set upon their Contrariety to those
of the Church of England, without so much as a Pretense that any body would
answer the Arguments and Testimonies which I had to produce for them. It was
once urged, that my affirming the Constitutions and Doctrine of the Apostles to
be Sacred Books of the New Testament, was contrary to the Sixth Article of our
Church. I desired that Article might be read: which was done by the Master of
Pembroke. I said thereupon, It Is plain that this Article owns the present
Sacred Books, being all the Church then knew; and that had they known of more,
they would have set them down also: but that it is not affirmed in that Article
that there are no other than those, and so my Assertion is not contrary
thereto. Yet did this pass as a clear Contradiction to it. And no wonder; when
in the Paper given me from the Vicechancellor. the very Nicene Creed is it self
quoted as condemning my calling God the Farher the One God of the Christian
Religion, while yet that Creed begins with a direct and solemn Affirmation of
it; I believe in One God the Father, Almighty. After all, when the
Vicechancellor perceived that I began to draw some of the Heads into Arguing
and Reasoning about these Matters, he took one of the Candles himself, and
saying a few things to me about a Recantation, which I declared I could not
make with a safe Conscience, he said, He pitied me, and then he fairly
conducted me out of the Lodge. And so I took my leave: having before hinted to
them, that I did not design to wait on them any more about these Matters, but
to leave them to do as they pleased therein. Which Resolution I kept till
Monday accordingly. For when on Sunday I was again summoned by Mr. Atwood, to
appear the next Day at three a Clock, I made this Answer, That I saw no
occasion for appearing any more. However, for some Reasons, I afterward altered
my Mind, and came, and appeared again on Monday, in a lower Room of the same
Lodge, before the Heads, who were now Twelve in Number, whose Names will be set
down presently. And upon Mr. Vicechancellor's enquiring of me, Whether I came
disposed to make a Retractation of those my Errors concerning which he had
before Admonished me? Upon Leave given, I read the following Paper, as my
Answer; and delivered it in as follows, verbatim.

Mr. Vicechancellor,
I did not think to have appeared to Day at all, because I understood that this
Meeting was appointed only for my Retractation; for which I have neither had
any considerable Time, nor any proper Motives for Conviction afforded me; and
so to be sure I cannot be disposed for any such thing. Nay, indeed I cannot
allow that any Doctrines contrary to those of the Church of England, and within
your Cognizance by the 45th Statute, have been Legally proved upon me. However,
I have thought fit to appear according to the Summons given me Yesterday. What
I have at present to allege against these Proceedings, besides my former
Exceptions, is, That the Advice for the Study of Divinity quoted against me,
was written about February 1707/8, and that the Depositions as to what I said
in St. Clement's Church, belong to the Year 1708, and that if I committed any
Offenses in either Case, they are fully and completely forgiven by the last Act
of Her Majesty's most Gracious, General, and Free Pardon: Which therefore I do
here Plead, in Bar to all farther Proceedings. And I do think the Molestation
already given me, is Penal by that Act. As to Part of Mr. Thackham's
Deposition, which may seem to be a little later than that Act, it is not at all
charged upon me in the Paper delivered to me as the whole Charge against me;
and so is of no force at all. And as to the remaining Charges, that from the
other Part of Mr. Thackham's Deposition, is only that I would not use a
Doxology which our Church, I think, never uses, nor enjoins; and which stands
on the alone Footing of Dr. Brady and Mr. Tate, or suchlike private Persons.
And the other, concerning the stiling God the Father the One and Only God, it is
so expressly the Language of our Church in the Nicene Creed, and in the Collect
for the 18th Sunday after Trinity, that I am surprised at its being in this
manner alleged against me. But since you have given no time for the
Examination of my Legal Exceptions, nor for my own Answer, I publicly Protest
against your Proceedings; and desire that my Protestation may be entered into
the Records of the University.

WILL. WHISTON.
October. 30. 1710.
As Soon as I had delivered this Paper, and had owned to the Vicechancellor that
it contained all that I had to say at present, I took my Leave. Whereupon, the
Vicechancellor and the Heads soon came to a Resolution to Banish or Expel me;
as the following Public Act will inform the Reader: A true Copy of which shall
be here set down.

October 30th, 1710.
At a Meeting of Mr. Vicechancellor, and the Heads of Colleges in the
University of Cambridge, in the Vicechancellor's Chamber, in King 's College,
in the said University.
Whereas it has been proved before us, That William Whiston, Master of Arts,
Mathematick Professor of this University, has asserted and spread about in
Cambridge, since the 19th Day of April, 1709. diverse Tenets against Religion,
received and established by Public Authority in this Realm, contrary to the
Forty Fifth Statute of this University; And whereas the said William Whiston
being required and exhorted by Mr. Vicechancellor, to confess and retract his
Error and Temerity in fo doing, did refuse to make any such Confession and
Retractation; It is therefore agreed and resolved by Us, the Vicechancellor,
and Heads of Colleges, whose Names are here underwritten, that the said William
Whiston has incurred the Penalty of the foresaid Statute, and that he be
Banished from this University, according to the Tenor of the same. C.
Roderick, Vicechancellor; Jo. Else, Humf. Gower, Hen. James, S. Blithe, Joh.
Covel, Jo. Balderston, Gabr. Quadring, Tho. Richardson, Chapter Ashton, Bardsey
Fisher, Edw. Lany. Unde venerabilis vir Dr. Roderick, Dominus Procancellarius,
assidentibus and consentientibus Johanne Else Milite, Doctore Gower, Doctore
James, Doctore Blithe, Doctore Covel, Doctore Balderston, Doctore Qnadring,
Doctore Richardson, Doctore Ashton, Doctore Fisher, Doctore Lany, Collegiorum
Praefectis, sententiam ferendo decrevit, declaravit, and pronunciavit prout
sequitur. In the Name of God, Amen. I Charles Roderick, Vicechancellor of this
University, do decree, declare, and pronounce, that Mr. William Whiston,
Mathematick Professor of this University, having asserted and spread abroad
diverse Tenets contrary to Religion received and established by Public
Authority in this Realm, has incurred the Penalty of the Statute, and that he
is Banished from this University.

Lata fuit hujusmodi sententia per dictum Dominum Procancellarium, praesente me
Roberto Grove, Not. Pub. and Almae Universitatis praedictae Registrario.
Now the Reader is here to Observe, that since all the Depositions concerning
St. Clement's Church are here given up, as being long before the 19 th of
April, 1709. the Date for the Act of Pardon: Since the Passages quoted out of
the Advice for the Study of Divinity, were written still earlier; and there is
no Pretense of the least Evidence that I any way published it in Cambridge; and
since one Part of Mr. Thackham's Evidence is made no use of at all in this
Matter, It Is plain that this Banishment or Expulsion is solely grounded on
these Three Things. (1.) My affirming with our Savior, St. Paul, the Nicene,
and all the Original Creeds, and most ancient Fathers, that the One and Only
God of the Christians, is God the Father, John XVII. 3. 1 Cor. VIII. 6.
(2.) My Asserting an undoubted Matter of Fact, that the Original Christian
Doxology was not the Common One, but Glory be to the Father, through the Son,
or, and the Son, in the Holy Ghost, (3.) My Proposing to prove that the
Constitutions and Doctrine of the Apostles, are Sacred Books of the New
Testament; and the former of them, the most Sacred of the Canonical Books:
Which in time will appear to be undoubtedly true also. And all this is done
without the least Offer at any Examination into the Truth or Falsehood of the
same Assertions, and so without knowing whether the whole Proceeding be not
directly Fighting against God, and Opposing and Persecuting the Gospel and
Religion of Christ Jesus. And if it prove so at last, the Authors had need to
think of that timely Repentance and Retraction, which they required at my
Hands: Lest their present Authority, and Pretense of an University Statute,
should be too little to excuse them at the Day of Judgment.

But who should be the secret Movers, or what should be the secret Reasons why,
after so long a Forbearance, the Vicechancellor and the Heads should all on a
sudden, in this violent manner, resolve to Censure and Expel me, is too deep a
Mystery for me authentickly to dive into; and so I must leave it to another
Tribunal. For certainly it could not be the Vicechancellor's own Motion
originally; since he had forborne me all along, and was now in a manner out of
his Office, and was ever remarkable for Caution and Deliberation in all his
Proceedings: Especially when I suppose that neither himself, nor indeed the
Major Part of his Assessors, do at all pretend to have particularly Examined
the Matters themselves, concerning which they took upon them to be Judges; but
went plainly at Random, by their own Interpretation of an Old Statute, to
Persecute an Innocent Person for the sake of what they rashly call Orthodoxy. I
venture to style my self an Innocent Person, notwithstanding this their
Sentence against me; because I believe that every one of my Judges acquits me
in his own Conscience, from any base or sinister Design; and is satisfied, that
I did no other than what is certainly every Christian's Duty; viz. The
Declaring plainly what, upon the most complete Examination, I was satisfied
were the certain Truths and Duties of Christianity: For which yet, without such
Examination, they have now ventured to Censure and Expel me. Which things I own
I durst not have had a Hand in, in any like Case, for any Consideration
whatsoever. But though they were my Judges, I am not theirs; To their own Master
they must stand or fall. Romans XIV. 4.
And therefore I can only commit my Cause to God, the just Judge of all the
World, and leave it in his righteous Hands to determine between us. However, I
do heartily wish and hope, that as soon as my Papers are published, they will
still seriously consider them, and soberly reconsider this whole Matter; and
that their sineere Repentance and Retractation will prevent the Danger of any
future Punishment from God upon them, from that God who desires not the Death
of a Sinner, but his Repentance.

Thus ended this University Prosecution and Banishment of me; at least, this is
all that has been done till the Date of these Papers; without the least regard
to Mr. Lucas's Statutes, or to my Mathematick Professorship depending thereon:
And so without the direct affecting me as Mr. Lucas's Professor: How plainly
soever they have deprived me of that Membership of the University, which till
now, either by Right or by Courtesy, I was entitled to. So I shall go on no
farther with this Narration. I say in the main, affecting me as Mr. Lucas's
Professor only, meaning thereby that I claim still, notwithstanding this
Expulsion or Banishment, to be Professor of the Mathematics of Mr. Lucas's
Foundation; and have accordingly a just Right to the Profits thereof, upon my
doing that Duty by a Deputy, (as my Statutes direct on a long Absence) which I
cannot so well do in Person. Otherwise, this Expulsion must affect me sensibly
enough, in respect of my Maintenance: Since the Allowance to a Deputy, and the
Loss of the Advantages formerly arising from the Courses of Experiments, to say
nothing of those from Teaching privately in Cambridge, and the Charges and
Losses of a Removal, cannot well be estimated under 50 l. a Year; which is a
great Deduction out of a small Subsistence. Nay, there want not those who would
strain this Expulsion from the University to a Deprivation, as to my
Professorship, and so would deprive me of almost all, but what the Charity and
Kindness of Friends might afford me. Which last Method of Support is also by
some envied, and complained of beforehand. As if there were no way to satisfy
their Zeal against me, but my seeing me and my Family reduced to the utmost
Poverty and Distress, without a Friend to support and relieve me. But before I
conclude, I can hardly avoid saying here, that I take the true Original Cause
of this Severity to be plainly this, That I have written several Unanswerable
Books; which are therefore a terrible Eyesore to those who are more concerned
for Modern Orthodoxy, and the pretended Power of the Church in Controversies of
Faith, than for the pure and undefiled Religion of Christ Jesus. So that when
it appeared, as it has done for a considerable time, that none of the Learned
could or durst undertake the Answering me, in the way of Reason, Argument, and
Testimony, This Method of Ensnaring me by an Old Statute was thought of. And I
venture to say this, the rather, because that Open, that Unanswerable Challenge
I made in the Postscript of Ignatius to the Orthodox, to show but one single
Catholic Testimony before the Days of Athanasius, which affirmed the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost to be One God, or the One God of the Christian Religion;
while I promised above an hundred Testimonies in the same time, that God the
Father was that One God, appears to have been the principal Evidence against
me, and that which was most publicly and solemnly read to me by the Master of
Pembroke, as the main Article of my Charge; and for which chiefly, I am
Censured and Expelled. I call it an Open and an Unanswerable Challenge: And I
here again make it to the whole Body of the Christian World; and do venture, in
the most solemn manner, to Appeal to the Consciences of all the truly Learned,
whether what I have affirmed on this Head, be not undoubtedly and indisputably
true; and so whether I am not Censured and Expelled, for owning my self a
Christian; nay, I may add, for asserting the first and most Fundamental
Doctrine of the whole Christian Religion. I know this repeated Challenge may be
most easily Answered, in the same way that the former was, by a repeated
Censure: For in any other way, I am sure it cannot. And if that be again put in
Practice by any suchlike Body of this Church, I shall only beg one Favor,
That those who do it, will deal plainly, and declare that they are not, nor do
pretend to the Christians, but Members of the Church of England only: Or at
least that they are just so far Christians, as the Original Doctrines, and
Duties of Christianity, are agreeable to those that the XXXIX Articles, the
Book of Homilies, and the Common Prayer Book contain, but no farther. And then
it will be some small Satisfaction to have the World know, that as in Popish
Countries Christianity is generally no farther believed and obeyed, than it is
agreeable to the Decrees and Practices of the Church of Rome; so that in this
Protestant, this Reformed Country, the Case is the very same. Only with this
Difference, that the former pretends to that Infallibility and Dominion over
Conscience, which the latter disclaims; and by consequence, that the latter is,
of the two, in this Matter, the most plainly unjustifiable and inexcusable.
However, as to my being condemned for asserting what was undeniable and
unanswerable, we have a famous Parallel Example in the Sacred History. For
truly just so it was in the Case of the Protomartyr St. Stephen, all due
Allowance for the great difference of the Persons concerned, and of their
Circumstances, being still made. For when the Jews were not able to resist the
Wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke, Act. VI. 10, etc.
they drew him into their Consistory, and Accused him there. And when they
could not find any fair Reply to the force of his Reasoning, They were cut to
the Heart, and gnashed upon him with their Teeth. VII. 54.
And immediately, without any other Formality of Law, put him to a violent
Death. Then they cried out with a loud Voice, and stopped their Ears, and ran
upon him with one accord, and cast him out of the City, and stoned him. v. 57,
58.
Whether this Violence toward me, may not end in some Attempts not very
different from that Case, I cannot tell. However, I shall venture to use his
dying Petition for all my Persecutors; Lord, lay not this Sin to their Charge.
v. 60.


But now, if, after all, the Reader be desirous to know what sort of Answer I
should have made to the present Accusation, had I had competent time allowed
me, I shall plainly tell him in a few Words. I intended therein to have stated
some of my Opinions more fully and clearly than the Evidence produced did
inform my Judges: And in order to show that then they were not so contrary to
the Doctrine and Settlement of the Church of England as they supposed, I
designed to have insisted on such Heads as these:

To have showed,

(1.) That the Protestant Religion in general, and the Church of England in
particular, were begun upon this Foot; I mean the Acknowledgment of the
Churches Errors, and the Attempt for the Correction os the same, even with the
Hazard of the very Lives themselves of the Reformers.

(2.) That they are both built on the Foundation of the Holy Scriptures, and
most Primitive Writers; and always own that all Errors, when discovered, are to
be amended by those Original Standards.

(3.) That all Protestants, and particularly the Members of this Church, do
unanimously own the Fallibility of all Councils and Churches; and so cannot be
surpised, if, in Points never yet brought to a fair and public Examination,
some Errors be supposed still remaining among them.

(4.) That accordingly they have generally found Reason to alter their Opinions
in several Doctrines of Consequence; as our Church has in particular about the
Predestinarian Points: Nay, they have generally, even our Church her self,
found Reason to alter several Practices of Consequence also, since the time of
the Reformation. And so it can seem no Wonder, if there should appear Occasion
for the like farther Enquiries and Alterations at this Day.

(5.) That in the grand Point before us, that of the Trinity it self, Our
Church sometimes speaks according to those ancient Notions which I advance;
nay, commonly Prays and Practices agreeably thereto. So that the Corrections I
plead for would rather be the rendering the Church's Language and Practice all
of a Piece, than the entire Subversion and Alteration of the same.

(6.) That the most Learned and Impartial, both Papists and Protestants, and
those of our Church in particular, have in this last Age been forced to leave
the vulgar Notions in that Matter, and to come still nearer and nearer to that
most Primitive and Rational Account which I Plead for. As appears by Erasmus,
Grotius, Petavius, Huetius, Dr. Cudworth, Bp. Pearson, Bp. Bull, the Bp. of
Gloncester, Mr. Lock, and many others. So that my Notions are so far from New,
that they are rather the proper and last Result of the Enquiries of the Learned
since the Reformation.

(7.) That since I have taken all along the most Peaceable, Christian, and
Inoffensive Methods of bringing these Important Points to a fair Examination;
and have still laid my Papers before the Governors of the Church, and the
Learned Members of it, for their Consideration, and the necessary Corrections;
I have no way offended against the Laws of the Land, or even the Statutes of
the University, as to their main Design and Intention; which can never be
supposed to be the Punishment of an Honest and Innocent Man, when in so fair,
quiet, and open a manner, he Proposes Sacred Books, Doctrines, and Duties of
the Gospel, to the serious Consideration of the Christian World. However, if
the Laws of the Kingdom, or Statutes of the University be so Expounded, as to
forbid any thing that the Laws of God, and of the Gospel require, I know which
I am to obey. Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more
than unto God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen
and heard. Act. IV. 19. 20.


These were such Heads as I intended more largely and fully to have pursued,
had I had time allowed me for my Answer. But since I was not afforded that, I
shall wave the farther Prosecution of them: And conclude, not only with the
Declaration of the Readiness of my Submission to any Punishment, which my
Governors in any sort do Legally inflict upon me; but with my hearty Thanks to
the Divine Providence, which has disposed of me into this Kingdom of Freedom
and Liberty, where it is not very much that by the Laws can be laid upon me sor
the sake of my Conscience: Where therefore with small Legal Hazard I can
greatly promote the true Religion os Christ Jesus. And that I am not in Spain
or Portugal, or the like Countries, subject to the Terror of a Popish
Inquisition; wherein the speaking or writing a small Part of what I have here
spoken and written, would certainly have condemned me to a loathsome Dungeon,
and to an Ignominious Death. The utmost Severities of which I hope I should
yet, by God's Grace, have endured, rather than have retracted and renounced
what, upon such full and undoubted Evidence, I am entirely satisfied, is part
of the Revelation of God by his Son Christ Jesus. If any Man come to me, and
hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and
Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, He cannot be my Disciple. And whosoever
does not bear his Cross, and come after me, cannot be my Disciple. Lu. XIV. 26,
27.
I End the whole with our Savior's own Words, which in some small degree do
now plainly belong to me; Blessed are they which are persecuted for
Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Matt. V. 10.
Which Blessedness, I own I had rather have a Share in, than in all the
dangerous and ensnaring Pomp of this Vain and Transitory World.

WILL. WHISTON.
December. 23. 1710.
APPENDIX.
When the University had thus Banished me, they seemed somewhat at a loss what
they should do farther. Nor did they come to any Resolution for near a Year: In
which time I took the best Advice I could what was fit for me to do: And
according to that Advice, and the Power I had by Mr. Lucas's Statutes, I made a
sufficient Deputy, Mr. Christopher Hussy, Fellow of Trinity College, to
perform those Duties of my Place in the University, which my Banishment made it
not fit for me to do my self. Who yet found the University in such a Temper,
that he never durst venture actually to Read for me. Dr. Jenkins indeed, the
New Master of St. John's College, was so fair, upon my worthy Friend Mr.
Biller's Application to him on my account, for his Consent to my Deputy's
Reading for me, that He Declared He would Consent, if the rest of the Heads
were willing; but not otherwise. Which Answer I took very kindly from him; as I
think I had reason to do; especially when I compare this civil Treatment of his
with that of some others. For when I once, during this interval, and I think at
the same time, stayed at Cambridge a few Days, and endeavored to make the
Heads easy in the admission of my Deputy, I had a Beadle presently sent to me
by Dr. Lany, Master of Pembroke Hall, the then Deputy-Vicechancellor, to know
How I durst venture to appear even in the Town of Cambridge under my Banishment
from the University? Nay, I was informed, that One of the Heads said, I might
be laid by the Heels for my presumption. About a Year after my Banishment, Dr.
Lany, who was again Deputy-Vicechancellor, (for Sir Nathaniel Lloyd the
Vicechancellor would never himself consent to it;) Resolved to Proceed to the
Election of another Professor, and accordingly put up a Paper upon the Doors of
the Public Schools, appointing a Day for the filling up my Professorship:
Which was therein Declared to have been vacated, per bannitionem Gulielmi
Whiston, as I think the Words were; without any other Deprivation according to
Mr. Lucas's Statutes, by which yet alone surely I could be Legally Deprived
thereof. The Person who was Chosen was Mr. Nicolas Sanderson; who has ever
since taken upon him to be the Mathematick Professor in my room. Thus far the
Proceedings of the University were by their own Authority. But because they
were not of themselves able to eject me out of the Possession of the Lands and
Profits of my Professorship, which though Legally Vested in Trustees, were yet in
Fact ever under the Management of the Professor himself; They soon applied for
assistance to the High-Court of Chancery. And after the necessary Bills and
Answers were over, the Cause it self, and its real Merits seemed at last ready
for a fair, full, and public Hearing; for which I justly hoped, and had
prepared my self accordingly. The Points of Law, as I all along apprehended,
were these two; First, Whether an hasty Banishment, by an Old University
Statute, without hearing any Legal Exceptions, or affording any Council or Time
for a proper Defense and Answer to an Accusation was Statutable and Legal?
Secondly, Whether such Banishment, by an Old University Statute, if Legal,
could Vacate a Professorship which stood on an entirely different Foundation;
and where I had the Opinion of Council Learned in the Law, that it could have
no such effect? But instead of any such Hearing, we soon feared, and found that
the Lord-Chancellor Harcourt would take it for granted, without a distinct
Hearing, that what the Heads of the University had done, was within their Power
to do, and so was done Legally. Nay, He was pleased, though unwillingly, to give
the University Costs against me for this very and only Reason, as he told the
Court, that I had Obliged the University to bring a Cause before him in
Judgment, which He could not Hear; which was all the Hearing and Determination
I had there, as to the Legality of my Banishment. And as to the other Question,
which was to me and my Family of much greater moment, viz. Whether such a
Banishment would vacate my Mathematick Professorship or not? It never came to
any thing like a Hearing. Only the Lord Chancellor had been pleased, on a
former Occasion, to Declare in Court, that Although He could not determine a
Cause He had not heard, Yet He could not but think it strange that a Professor
of an University should be one that [by Banishment] was no Member of that
University. However, Finding soon that the Torrent was then too strong against
me; and being promised, if I submitted, great good Offices with the University,
by the beforementioned Dr. Lany, who then acted on their behalf, I was
prevailed on not only to deliver up my Writings, and to suffer the Decree to
pass against me; which were done immediately; but also to cast my self wholly
upon the Mercy of the University; which I did a little after by the following
Petition; which indeed Dr. Lany undertook to present and to support on my
behalf. It was in the Words following:

To the Worshipful the Vice Chancellor, and the Reverend the Heads of the
University of Cambridge, the Humble Representation and Petition of William
Whiston, late Professor of the Mathematics in the said University.
Shows,
THAT your Petitioner (in Order to render himself capable of being admitted
Mathematical Professor) did long ago surrender and lose the Vicaridges of
Lowestoft and Kessingland in the Diocese of Norwich, of a considerably greater
Yearly Value than the Lands settled sor the Maintenance of such Professor.

That by reason of Land-Taxes while your Petitioner was Professor, his Income
was corsiderably less than either of his Predecessors received; and yet your
Petitioner expended in Repairs, during the same time, near 50 l.

That when (with ^t any Prejudice to the Estate) your Petitioner had caused
Timber to be cut sufficient for reinbursing the Moneys so by him expended, as
well as for the Repairs then and now necessary, your Petitioner was hindered
from disposing of any part thereof, or Reimbursing himself thereby by the
Injunction of the Court of Chancery: So that your Petitioner has now been near
50 l. out of Pocket for some Years; which has been a great Hardship on him,
added to his other Misfortunes.

That by your Petitioner's Interest and Application, the said Estate has been
for these last four Years, or thereabouts, freed from the former Taxes; which
though it has been of little or no Advantage to himself, may be very much so to
those that succeed him.

That during the Time your Petitioner was Mathematical Professor, and before he
had the Misfortune of incurring the Displeasure of the University, and was
Banished from thence, He is humbly Confident, That (according to his Abilities)
He duly performed the Office of Mathematical Professor.

That your Petitioner's Banishment was not from any Neglect of his Duty, as
Mathematical Professor, but merely for certain Opinions in Religion; which He
taking and believing to be True, could not Retract, without doing the greatest
Violence to his Conscience; nor without being sensible (if he had so done) that
He should have deserved a much greater Punishment from God than has, or can be
inflicted on him by Man.

That the University having shown a Zeal, which possibly might have been
expected from them for the Established Opinions, by Banishing your Petitioner;
Yet well hoping (so long as he bumbly and quietly submitted to their Sentence
of Banishment) it might have been consistent with the Goodness of the
University, to have permitted him to enjoy part of the Profits of the said
Lands, He appointed a sufficient Deputy to perform the same Office; as your
Petitioner apprehended, and was advised by his Council, He had a Power to do by
the Statutes of the Founder. And when the University had thought proper to
appoint another to Read the Mathematical Lecture, your Petitioner readily
offered to have named him his Deputy, and to have made a competent Allowance
for his Pains therein.

That although your Petitioner was not indulged so far, yet He has not sought any
Relief against the said Sentence, but has submitted thereto; although the said
Sentence (it continuing in force) was the only Ground of any Advantage to be
taken against your Petitioner, as He was advised.

That your Petitioner's defending the Suit in Chancery against him, was not out
of any Obstinacy or ill Will to those that prosecuted it, or to him for whose
Benefit that Suit was brought, but out of a Sense of that Justice and Care
which your Petitioner owed to his Family, whose main Support the Rents of the
Lands in Question were; and for Preservation whereof your Petitioner was
advised by his Council to make such Defense, not without Hopes of Success
therein.

That yet your Petitioner's Friends advising him to relinquish all Legal
Advantages, and to cast himself upon the Mercy of the University, rather than
to Contend with them any further; And your Petitioner's Council not being
averse thereto, your Petitioner, with all Readiness complied with that Advice,
and gave Orders accordingly, and immediately delivered up the Principal
Writings before any Decree for so doing.

That your Petitioner does now (in pursuance of that Resolution) submit to the
Decree of the High Court of Chancery in the Premises; in humble Confidence,
That according to the Hopes then given to your Petitioner's Friends, that the
Vicechancellor and the Heads of the same University will have Regard to the
Premises, and consider his Case. To which End your Petitioner makes this
humble Representation thereof. And further, in all humble manner shows,

That there is a Clause in the Statutes of Mr. Lucas 's Foundation which
directs, That such Moderation should be showed to his Professor, that should be
deprived without his own Fault. That if he had behaved himself Worthily during
his Continuance in the Place, and had not One Hundred Pounas a Year of his own
Estate, that He should have a third Part of the Annual Salary during his Life.
As by a Copy of the said Clause underwritten appears.

That whatever Fault the University has judged your Petitioner Guilty of with
Relation to his Opinions in Religion, or public Profession thereof; yet your
Petitioner having performed the Office of Professor unblameably, as He humbly
hopes, and the said Sentence of Banishment regarding only his said Opinions,
and not the Discharge of his Office; And your Petitioner not having any thing
like such Yearly Income, as mentioned in the aforecited Clause;

Your Petitioner therefore humbly Hopes the University will Judge his Case to
come within the Equity of the said Clause; and will make him the Allowance
therein mentioned, or somewhat Equivalent thereto; which will be a great
Comfort and Relief to your Petitioner and his Family in their present
Circumstances.

And moreover, Your Petitioner humbly Prays, That in Regard of the Premis^s
aforesaid, the University would be pleased to Remit the Costs Decreed against
him; and the rather, for that the the Court, on making the said Decree, was
pleased twice to Declare, That the University ought not to ask Them; or to that
Effect. And for that your Petitioner has cheerfully referred himself, and does
hereby Refer himself wholly to the Equity and Mercy of the University: And He
cannot but be in Expectation of a favorable Answer.

And Your Petitioner shall Pray, etc.
And now, if the Reader enquire what Kindness and Relief I met with from the
University upon this Petition, I mean besides this, that they have not yet
demanded of me the Costs of the Suit for turning me out, as by the Rigor of the
Decree in Chancery they might have done, he will easily guess at it, when I
solemnly affirm, (and I appeal to the Conscience of every Member of that Body
now alive, that were then concerned, Whether that Affirmation, and this whole
Account be not the exact Truth) that to the best of my Remembrance I neither
then, nor any other time since my Banishment, have been once vouchsafed an
Answer to any such Applications I have made the Vicechancellor and Heads of the
University, whether it were for Justice or Mercy, to this very Day.

WILL. WHISTON.
Nov. 4. 1718.
A COPY of Mr. Lucas 's Statutes. Confirmed by the Royal Authority.
N.B. The Clause referred to in the forementioned Petition, is Noted by
inverted Comma's.

OMnibus Christi Fidelibus ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum pervenerit: Robertus
Raworth de Grayes-Inn in Comitatu Middlesex Armiger, and Thomas Buck de
Cantabrigia in Comitatu Cantabrig^e Armiger, Executores ultimi Testamenti
dignissimi Viri Henrici Lucas de London Armigeri nuper defuncti, Salutem in
Domino sempiternam. Sciatis, quod cum praedictus venerabilis and consultus Vir
Henricus Lucas Armiger, ex propenso suo in Academiam Cantabrigiensem, and in
rem literariam affectu, a praefatis Roberto Raworth, and Thoma Buck,
Executoribus suis terras comparari ad valorem centum librarum annuatim supremo
testamento mandaverit, in annuum Professoris, sen Lectoris Mathematicarum
Scientiarum in dicta Academia stipendium, vel salarium perpetuo cessuras, sub
ejusmodi constitutionibus and regulis, quas Executores sui, adhi ito
Procancellarii, and Praefectorum Collegiis dictae Academiae consilio, tam
honori magni istius corporis, quam hujusce literaturae, omni hactenus praemio
destitutae, incremento ac promotioni judicaverint summopere accommodatas; Nos
praedicti Executores, pro ratione fidei nobis commissae de exequendo praeclari
Benefactoris voluntate solliciti, rogato prius and impetrato dictorum
Procancancellarii and Praefectorum consilio, habitoque ad id consilium
praecipuo respectu, Ordinationes infra-scriptas promovendis istis studiis
Mathematicis, uti arbitramur, apprime conducentes approbamus, omniq, per dictum
Henrici Lucas Testamentum nobis concessa authoritate ratas volumus and
declaramus. Itaque Statuimus imprimis and Ordinamus, quod perpetuis futuris
temporibus quicquid annui reditus (deductis necessariis expensis) ^ex
praenotatis terris ad usum praedictum acquisitis vel acquirendis quacunque
justa ratione accreverit, id integre cedet in subsidium and praemium
Mathematici Professoris, modo infra-dicendo and sub conditionibns mox
exprimendis electi and constituti. Quod officium attinet dicti Professoris
Mathematici, ut horum studiorum qua public, qua privatim excolendorum, ratio
habeatur, Volumus and Statuimus ut dictus Professor teneatur singulis intra
uniuscujusque termini Academici spatium septimanis semel ad minus aliquam
Geometriae, Arithmeticae, Astronomiae, Geographiae, Opticae, Staticae, aut
alterius alicujus Mathematicae Disciplinae partem (pro suo arbitratu, nisi
aliter expedire Procancellario visum fuerit) per unius circiter horae spatium
legere atque exponere, loco and tempore a Procancellario assignandis, sub paena
quadraginta solidorum pro singula lectione omissa ex stipendio ipsi debito per
Procancellarium subtrahendorum, and Bibliothecae Academicae, pro coemendis
libris, vel instrumentis Mathematicis, applicandorum; nisi ex gravi corporis
infirmitate officio suo satisfacere non poterit: quam tamen excusationem
nolumus ultra tres septimanas valere, ut nisi elapsis tribus septimanis alium
substituat idoneum Lectorem, Procancellarii judicio approbandum, sciat sibi pro
qualibet lectione praetermissa viginti solidos de stipendio suo per
Procancellarium subtrahendos, and usui praedicto applicandos. Quo autem dictus
Professor ad munus hoc legendi non perfunctoric praestandum efficacius
astringatur, praestiti fideliter ab ipso officii certius extet indicium, and
studiorum praesentium fructus quadantenus etiam ad posteros derivetur,
Statuimus ut dictus Professor semel quotannis, proxime ante festum sancti
Michaelis, non pauciorum quam december ex illis, quas praecedente anno public
habuerit, Lectionum exemplaria nitide descripta Procancellario exhibeat, in
publicis Academiae archivis asservanda: quod si ante tempus praescriptum facere
neglexerit, cousque carcat stipendio suo, donec effectum det; and quanta suerit
rata portio temporis postea elapsi, usquedum id perfecerit, tantam reditus sui,
vel salarii annui partem Procancellario teneatur exolvere, Bibliothecae
Academicae ad usus praedictos applicandam. Quin etiam decernimus, ut dictus
Professor teneatur duobus per singulas cujusque termini hebdomadas a
Procancellario praestituendis diebus (unoque extra terminum die, quandocunque
dictus Professor in Academia praesens fuerit) per duas horas itidem
praefigendas omnibus illum consulturis vacare, liberum adeuntibus aperto
cubicuso accessum praebere, circa propositas ipsi quaestiones, and
difficultates haud gravate respondere, in eum finem globos, and alia idonea
instrumenta Mathematica penes se in promptu habere, inque omnibus ad illud
propositum spectantibus studiosorum pro sua virili conatus adjuva^e: quorum
aliquod si ultro neglexerit, corripiatur a Procancellario; and si de neglecto
officio saepius admonitus neutiqu^m se emendaverit, paenam incurrat
intolerabili negligentiae inferius decretam. Porro, ut horum observatio fortius
muniatur, and ne quis ex dicti Professoris absentia oboriatur neglectus,
statuimus ne dictus Professor intra praefinita terminorum intervalla Academia
excedat, aut alibi extra Academiam per sex dies continuos moretur, nisi
gravissima de causa per Procancellarium approbanda, idque petita prius and
impetrata a Procancellario venia: sin secerit secus, quanta fuerit rata portio
temporis ab egressu suo praeterlapsi, tanta salarii sui part penitus excidat.
Quod si forte diutioris ab Academia absentiae, quae dimidii termini spatium
excedat, causa, acciderit necessaria, Procancellario and duorum (qui
Collegiorum Praefecti fuerint) seniorum Doctorum judicio approbata, aliquem
interea idoneum substituat, qui suo loco legate, and reliquis muniis fungatur,
modo supradicto, and sub paena consimili. Quinimo pari causa, ne dictus
Professor ab officii sui debita executione distrahatur, nolumus omnino and
prohibemus, ut is ulla quavis Ecclesiastica promotione gaudeat, quae animarum
sibi curam adnexam habeat, aut residentiam exigat hisce Statutis adversantem;
sub paena amissionis, ipso facto, omnis juris, quod in hac sua professione
praetendere valeat. Quoad personam vero and qualitatem Mathematici Professoris,
volumus and injungimus, ut qui huic Provinciae admovetur, sit Vir Bonae famae,
and Conversationis honestae, ad minimum Magister Artium, probe ^ruditus, and
Mathematicarum praesertim Scientiarum peritio instructus. Ejus autem nominandi
and eligendi jus ac potestas esto penes nos praedictos Executores Venerabilis
Viri Henrici Lucas, durante nostra utriusque vita, aut uno supremum diem
obeunte, penes alterum e nobis qui in vita superstes permanserit. Postea vero
perpetuis suturis temporibus ejus eligend plena potestas sit penes
Procancellarium, and Praefectos omnium Collegiorum dictae Academiae, vel illam
partem Praefectorum, qui Electioni interfuerint, and peragatur tunc Electio in
hunc modum. Postquam Mathematici Professoris locum quacunque ex causa vacare
contigerit, Procancellario incumbet quam cito fieri poterit Schedula Scholarum
publicarum ostio per octo dies continuos affixa, cum de dicta vacatione, tum de
tempore ad futuram electionem destinato significare (tempus autem electionis
ultra trigesimum a prima significatione diem extrahi nolumus) quo tempore dicti
Electores publicis in Scholis in unum Congregati juramento semetipsos
obstringant, seposito omni privato respectu, affectuque sinistro se
nominaturos, and suo comprobaturos suffragio quem, conscientia test, ex
petitoribus, (vel ex iis qui ab Electorum quolibet nominantur) maxim secundum
praenotatas qualitates idoneum censuerint ad id munus obeundum; is vero, in
quem plura suffragia conspiraverint, pro electo habeatur: quod si duobus forte
vel pluribus paria obvenerint suffragia, Procancellario jus erit unum ex illis,
qui aliis (si quando id contigerit) plura and inter se paria suffragia
obtinuerit, pro suo arbitrio eligendi. Electus autem proximo opportuno tempore
admittatur a Procancellario, p^aestito ante admissionem juramento se munus
Professoris Mathematici a dignissimo Viro Henrico Lucas in hac Academia
institutum, juxta Ordinationes and Statuta officium suum concernentia^ pro suo
posse fideliter executurum. Denique quo praedicius Professor intra debitos
honestatis atque modestiae limits contineatur, neque de ulla criminum ultro
admissorum impunitate praesumat, starnimus ac decernimus, ut si dictus
Professor Convictus fuerit vel propria Confessione, vel per testes idoneos, vel
per Evidentiam facti de crimine aliquo graviore (puta de Laesa Majestate,
Haeresi, Schismate, homicidio voluntario, fu^to notabili, adulterio,
fornicatione, perjurio) vel si intolerabiliter negligens fuerit, neque paenis
superius expressis poterit emendari; per Procancellarium, and Collegiorum
Praefecto^ (vel majorem eorum partem) a sua amoveatur Professione, sine spe
regrediendi, aut commodum aliquod ulterius percipiendi. 'Quod si senio, morbo
diuturno, aut incurabili, impotentia, seu debilitate corporis, vel animi
fractus suae Professioni (modo and forma praedictis) perficiendae non
suffecerit, abrogetur ei Professio per Procancellarium and dictos Praefectos
(vel majorem eorum partem) hoc tantum adnibito moderamine, ut illi (sic ^a
Professionis munere non sua culpa dimisso) si tempore Professionis suae
laudabiliter se gesserit, neque alias ipsi de proprio ad valorem centum
librarum annuatim provisum fuerit, tertia pars stipendii remaneat usque ad
mortem suam; reliquis partibus Successor sit tantisper contentus, integrum post
ejus mortem percepturus. In cujus rei Testimonium nos Praefati Robertus Raworth
and Thomas Buck Sigilla nostra Praesentibus apposuimus. Dat. 19 die Decembris
Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Decimo Quinto, Annoque Domini 1663.

Robertus Raworth. Thomas Buck.


Sigillat. and Deliberat. in praesentia Jacobi Windet M.D. Isaaci Barrow
Richardi Spoure Michaelis Glyd Gulielmi Player.


FINIS.

