AN ACCOUNT Of the SUCCESS of INOCULATING THE SMALL POX In GREAT BRITAIN.

WITH A Comparison between the Miscarriages in that Practice, and the Mortality
of the Natural SMALLPOX.

Humbly Dedicated to Her ROYAL HIGHNESS the PRINCESS of WALES.

By JAMES JURIN, M.D. Secretary to the Royal Society, Fellow of the College of
Physicians, and Reader of Anatomy at Surgeons-Hall.

Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti.
LONDON: Printed for J. Peele, at Locke's Head in Paternoster Row. 1724.
[Price Sixpence.]

TO Her Royal Highness THE Princess of WALES.
MADAM,
THE great and undeserved Honor you have been pleased to grant me, of laying
these Papers at the Feet of your ROYAL HIGHNESS, justly demands the most
thankful Acknowledgement: Inasmuch, as it must be a Means of preserving me from
the Censures, or Suspicions of those, whom my own Character, little known in
the World, may not satisfy of the Impartiality and Regard to Truth, which I
have observed therein. For it will not surely be imagined, that I should
presume to offer to so Great, so Good, and so discerning a PRINCESS, any
Account of a Matter of so much Consequence to Mankind, but what is in all
Respects just and true, to the best of my Knowledge.

It is, MADAM, by such an Account, that the Practice of Inoculation must stand,
or fall. If upon a fair and exact Balance of the good and ill Success of it, it
appear in the main to be beneficial to Mankind; it will in Time, in despite of
Clamor and unreasonable Opposition, be reckoned among the many Blessings, for
which these Nations, under the Divine Providence, are indebted to the
Illustrious House of BRUNSWICK: And if it prove the contrary, I need not say,
that neither the Name and powerful Patronage of your ROYAL HIGHNESS, nor the
happy Success it has been attended with on the growing Hopes of BRITAIN, will
be able to protect it. For if this should be the Case, I am well assured, that
the same Noble and God-like Motive of doing Good, which has hitherto prompted
you to countenance this Practice, will then no less powerfully induce you to
abandon and discourage it. I am, with the greatest Submission, Respect, and
Duty,

MADAM, Your ROYAL HIGHNESS's Most obedient, Most faithful, and Most devoted
Servant, J. JURIN.

AN ACCOUNT OF The Success of Inoculating the SMALL POX in Great Britain, etc.
THE Disputes about the Practice of Inoculating the SMALL POX, like many of our
other Differences, have been carried to so great a Height, that it is difficult
for any one to write upon this Subject, without being drawn into Controversy,
even though he delivers only Matter of Fact, or the undeniable Consequences drawn
from it, and that with the greatest Impartiality, and the strictest Regard to
Truth. Though such a Procedure, one would imagine, should so far entitle the
Writer to the good Nature and Protection of the World, as to secure him from
the Attacks of either Party; especially as in acting thus, he cannot favor or
prejudice either of them, any otherwise than as the Facts themselves declare
for, or against them. At least, those who contend only for Truth, ought never
to be out of Humor with him, who indifferently furnishes either Side with the
proper Materials for the Support of their Opinion, or the Conviction of its
being not to be maintained.

With this Design I laid before the World a little Letter to Dr. Cotesworth.
Piece the last Year, and intend, God willing, to continue so doing, from Year
to Year, 'till the Practice of Inoculation shall either be established on a
firm and lasting Foot, or shall be justly exploded; the Fate thereof being, as
I conceive, only to be determined by Matter of Fact and Experience faithfully
related.

In Order to be able to do which, I have used my best Endeavors, with the
Assistance of my Friends, to procure the most Authentic Accounts I was able;
and I shall be thankful to all Persons, who at any Time hereafter, will be
pleased to send me well attested Relations of any Particulars relating to the
Success of this Practice, bad as well as good; all which, they may be assured,
shall be justly represented.

To impose upon the World in any Particular, is disingenuous and base; but to
deceive them in an Affair so nearly concerning the Lives of Mankind, is a
Wickedness worthy of the utmost Abhorrence and Detestation. I hope none, that
know me, will think me capable of any Thing so criminal; and as for others, I
beg they will not too easily give Credit to flying Reports, with which the
World is too often amused, without any just Foundation; but that, in Case of
Doubt about any Thing which I shall here deliver, they will be pleased to give
themselves the Trouble of perusing the Materials in my Hands, which I shall
carefully preserve, and be ready to show them for their Satisfaction, as
Vouchers of my Fidelity.

This Controversy, though drawn out into many Particulars, seems principally to
turn upon the two following Points.

1. Whether the Distemper given by Inoculation be an effectual Security to the
Patient, against his having the Small Pox afterward in the natural Way? 2.
Whether the Hazard of Inoculation be considerably less than that of the natural
Small Pox?
If these two Points were effectually settled, there would, I suppose, be an
End of the Dispute, at least among Physicians. For, if either of them be fairly
determined in the Negative, the Practice of Inoculation must on all Hands be
given up. And on the other Hand, if the Test of Experience should plainly
declare for the affirmative Side of both these Questions, I doubt not but that
every Gentleman, who has the Honor to serve his Country in the Capacity of a
Physician, will have Integrity and Humanity enough to declare himself honestly
and openly in Favor of the Practice. At least, he will consider, whether it
will be for his Reputation, when his Friend and his Patient shall put his Life,
or the Lives of his Children, into his Hands, to amuse himself with Theological
Disputes and Scruples, whether it be lawful to save them. For if the Practice
of Inoculation be really found to be a Means of preserving Life, it will not be
easy to make the World believe, that it is criminal to use it.

As to the first, therefore, of these Questions, though it will require a
considerable Length of Time, and a much greater Number of Experiments than have
yet been made, before it can be absolutely determined; yet thus much may at
present be said, that our Experience, as far as it goes, has hitherto strongly
favored the affirmative Side. For though many Trials have been purposely made by
Physicians and others, both upon Children and grown Persons, who have had the
Small Pox by Inoculation, in causing them not only to converse with, but to
handle, to nurse, and to lie in the same Bed with others sick of the natural
Small Pox; yet there is no Instance, as far as I have been able to learn, of
any one Person either in Turkey, New England, or here at Home, who has received
the Small Pox by Inoculation, that has afterward had it in the natural Way. If
any such Case shall hereafter come to my Knowledge, I shall not fail to lay it
faithfully before the World; though it is to be observed, that a single Instance
or two of this Kind, out of a very great Number of Persons inoculated, ought
not in Reason to overthrow the Practice. For it cannot be expected, that a
Person who receives the Small Pox by Inoculation, should be safer from having
it again, than one that has undergone it in the natural Way; and we are not
certain, that the Small Pox does never, though perhaps exceeding rarely, happen
twice naturally to the same Person. For my own Part, I have never known it: But
my ingenious Friend, Mr. Isaac Massey, Apothecary, whom I the rather name,
because he is known to be no Friend to Inoculation, has assured me, that he saw
the same Person twice undergo the natural Small Pox. This, however, undoubtedly
happens very seldom; but if it does happen in the natural Way, it may happen
likewise after Inoculation; and consequently, a Person who has received the
Distemper by this Means, must content himself with no greater a Degree of
Security, than if he had undergone it naturally.

But if the Person inoculated does not receive the Distemper in any Degree from
that Operation, as sometimes falls out; in such a Case we have no Reason to be
surpised, if he afterward happen to be taken with it in the natural Way.
Inoculation, like all other Applications in Physic or Surgery, will not always
produce the intended Effect. And no Wonder. We know from a thousand Instances,
that of several Persons, equally exposed to the same contagious Disease, Part
shall escape, and Part be infected; and the same Person, exposing himself in
the same Manner, at different Times, to the same Danger, shall escape at one
Time, and be seized at another. The same has happened twice in the Case of
Inoculation: Two Children, who had been inoculated without any Manner of
Effect, as is attested, not only by the Physician, Dr. Nettleton, but by the
Certificates of the Parents themselves, were afterward seized with the Small
Pox, when it raged epidemically where they were; they had it favorably, and
recovered. The Relation sent up to me, with the Certificates, by Dr. Nettleton,
was published some Months ago in the Daily Journal, and is reprinted at the End
of this Paper, the Originals being still in my Hands. And these are all the
Cases of this Kind that are come to my Knowledge, except a like Case of Mr. De
Grave the Surgeon's Daughter; an Account of which, under the Father's own Hand,
has been published by Mr. Maitland.

In Order to come to some Determination of the second Question, viz. Whether
the Hazard of Inoculation be considerably less than that of the natural Small
Pox? It is necessary in the first Place, to know what is the Proportion between
the Numbers of those that undergo the Small Pox in the natural Way, and those
that die of them. With this View, I have proved in my Piece Letter to Dr.
Cotesworth.
published last Year, that at least a fourteenth Part of Mankind die of the
natural Small Pox; and I have, I think, rendered it probable, that, of Persons
of all Ages undergoing that Distemper, there die at least two in seventeen.
These Deductions are drawn from the Consideration of the Bills of Mortality for
42 Years past: And from an actual Account of a great Number of Persons that
underwent that Disease, as taken in several Places, by a careful Enquiry from
House to House, I have there shown, that there died one in between five or six,
or about two in eleven. I shall now repeat that Account with several others,
which have since been communicated to me by Persons of Credit, in the following
Table.

Sick of the Small Pox. Died In Halifax 276 43 In a Part of the Parish of
Halifax, stretching toward Bradford 297 59 In another Part of the same Parish
268 28 In Barsland, Ripponden, Sorby, and another Part of Halifax Parish, about
four Miles from the Town 230 38 In Bradford 129 36 In Leeds 792 189 In
Wakefield 418 57 In Rochdale 177 38 In Asbton under Line, a small Market Town
in Lancashire, including two neighboring Villages 279 56 In Bolton, Lancashire
406 89 In Macclesfield 302 37 In Stockport 287 73 In Hatherfield 180 20 Ware
612 72 Salisbury 1244 165 Rumsy in Hampshire 913 143 Boston in New England 5742
841 Chichester 994 168 Haverford West in South Wales 227 52 Bedford 786 147
Total 14559 2351

The Result is, that as far as these Accounts can inform us, there dies nearly
one out of six Persons sick of the Small Pox in the natural Way, or (more
accurately) five out of thirty one: Which Proportion we must content our selves
with for the present; 'till by obtaining Accounts from more Places, we may by
the Largeness of the Numbers, come nearer to the true Proportion.

Such therefore being the Hazard of dying of the Small Pox in the natural Way;
we come now to consider what is the Hazard of dying of the Inoculated Small
Pox; in Order to which, we offer the following Lists of Persons inoculated;
which we hope may be depended upon, as having taken all possible Care to obtain
the best Accounts that we could.

The first contains the Number of Persons inoculated to the End of the Year
1723, with the Names of the Persons that performed, or directed the Operation,
and the Places where it was done.

Persons inoculated in the Years 1721, 1722, 1723.
In and about London, BY Claudius Amyand, Esquire; Principal and Sergeant Surgeon
in Ordinary to his Majesty 62 By Mr. Maitland, Surgeon 85 By Mr. Alexander
Geekie, Surgeon 2 Mr. Geekie, Jun. Surgeon 1 Mr. Weymish, Surgeon 5 Mr. Dover,
M. L. 5 The Reverend Dr. Johnson 3 In Yorkshire, and the County of Durham, etc.
By Ditto 8 Dr. Nettleton 80 In and about Norwich. By the Direction of Sir
Benjamin Wrench 6 Dr. Bohun 4 Dr. Offley 6 By Mr. Johnson, Apothecary 1 Mr.
Brady, Apothecary 2 At Stamford. By Mr. Hepburn, Surgeon 2 In and near
Portsmouth. By the Direction of Dr. Brady, Physician to the Garrison there 6
Mr. Waller. Apothecary 14 Mr. Robert Barkham, Apothecary 6 Mr. Row, Surgeon,
at Fareham 5 At Chichester. By Mr. Smith, Surgeon 11 Mr. Dymer, Surgeon 4 Mr.
Robert Baker, Surgeon in London, by the Direction of Dr. Whitaker 1 At Steyning
in Sussex. By Mr. William Hill, Surgeon 2 At Havant. By Mr. Millard, Surgeon,
by the Direction of Dr. Edward Bailey 2 At Winchester. By Mr. Baconneau, Surgeon
2 Mr. Godwin, Apothecary 15 At Rumsey in Wiltshire. By Mr. Oliver, Apothecary 3
At Salisbury. By Mr. James Elderton, M. L. 35 Mr. Geldwyer, Surgeon 51 Mr.
Foulks, Surgeon 13 At Shaftsbury. By Mrs. Dorothy Ringe 4 At Haverford-West,
South Wales. By Dr. Williams 7 Near Leicester. By Mrs. Roberts 5 In and about
Bedford. By Mr. Daniel, Surgeon 10 Mr. Fleming, Apothecary 1 At Bristol. By Dr.
French 1 At Cambridge. By Mr. Warren, Surgeon 4 Total 474

The second Table contains the Number of Persons of every several Age there
expressed, that were inoculated, with the Effect of the Operation

In Order to make which the better understood, as well as for the Information
of those Readers, who may have Occasion to make Use of this Practice, I shall
here give some Account of what is to be done, and what is usually observed in
Inoculation, as I have extracted it from a careful Examination and Comparison
of the several Relations transmitted to me, with Regard, 1st, To the Subject to
be inoculated: 2d, The Preparation: 3d, The Choice of the infectious Matter:
4th, The Operation: 5th, The Sickening, or the Symptons preceding the Eruption:
6th, The Eruption: 7th, The Running of the Incisions.

1. Great Care ought to be taken to inoculate none but Persons of a good Habit
of Body, and free, not only from any apparent, but, as far as can be judged,
from any latent Disease; for which Reason, every prudent Person will, in this
Case, have the Advice and Opinion of his own Physician, whether the Subject to
be inoculated, be in a fit Condition to undergo the small Pox; that so he may
not have that Distemper, and a bad Constitution, or perhaps another Disease, to
struggle with at the same Time; of which there have been several fatal
Instances, through the Neglect of this Caution. In some Cases indeed it has
fallen out, that the Person inoculated, has by this Means got free of another
Disease, under which he labored before; as sometimes happens likewise in the
natural Way, though the contrary is much more frequent.

2. The Body, especially if Plethorick, ought to be prepared by proper
Evacuations, as bleeding, purging, vomiting, etc. though in many Cases there will
be Occasion for very little or none of these, it being sufficient to enjoin a
temperate Diet, and proper Regimen: But this must be left to the Judgment of
the Physician.

3. The utmost Caution ought to be used in the Choice of proper Matter to
communicate the Infection. It should be taken from a young Subject, otherwise
perfectly sound and healthful, who has the Small Pox in the most favorable
Manner. When the Pustules are perfectly, maturated, and just upon the Turn, or
soon after, two or three of them should be ripp'd with a Glover's Needle, or
small Lancet, and a couple of small Pledgets of Lint, or Cotton, are to be well
moistened with the Matter, and immediately put into a little Vial, or Box, and
carried in the warm Hand, or Bosom of the Operator, to the House of the Person
to be inoculated.

4. The Incisions are usually made with a small Lancet in the brawny Part of
both Arms, or in one Arm and the opposite Leg, cutting just into, or at most
through the Cutis, or true Skin, for the Length of a Quarter of an Inch, half an
Inch, or at most an Inch. This being done, one of the Pledgets moistened with
the infectious Matter, is to be laid upon each Incision, and to be kept on by
Means of a Bit of sticking Plaster laid over it, for about four and twenty
Hours; after which, all may be taken off, and the Incisions dressed with common
Diachylon, or with only warm Cabbage or Colewort Leaves, once a Day at first;
and afterward, when the Discharge is considerable, twice a Day 'till they
heal; or only with a Linen Roller, to defend them from the Air.

5. The Person inoculated, sometimes receives the Small Pox without any
previous Sickness, as often happens in the most favorable Sort in the natural
Way. But the greater Part begin to be a little feverish, and have more or less
of the usual Symptoms preceding the natural Small Pox, most commonly upon the
eighth Day from Inoculation, though pretty often upon the seventh, and very
rarely a Day or two sooner or later.

6. The Patients are sometimes taken with flushing Heats, which disappear again
in a little Time, about the 4th or 5th Day; but the Eruption of the Pustules
happens generally within a Day, or sometimes two or three, after the sickening,
viz. most commonly on the ninth Day, less frequently on the 10th, and still
less on the 8th or 11th; in a few Cases it has appeared on the 7th or 12th, in
one Case on the 18th, in one on the 24th, in one on the 6th, and in another on
the 3d. The last Patient but one had the confluent Sort, and died: The last was
very full of the distinct Kind, and recovered.

7. The Incisions begin to grow sore and painful about the 4th or 5th Day, and
about the 6th, 7th, or 8th, they begin to digest, and run with a thick purulent
Matter, which gradually increases 'till about the Turn of the Distemper, during
which Time the Wounds grow wide and deep; afterward the Running gradually
abates, and they usually heal up in about a Month, sometimes in three Weeks,
though in some they continue running five or six Weeks, or something longer.
The greater the Discharge is by the Incisions, the more favorable the
Distemper is found in other Respects. When the Inoculation does not take
Effect, the Incisions heal up in a few Days, like a common Cut. Where Children
happen to have Issues before Inoculation, they begin in a few Days to run in a
much greater Quantity than usual, and continue so doing, in the same Manner as
the Incisions, during the State of the Distemper, after which, they return to
their ordinary Course.

In this Table, by having an imperfect Small Pox, is meant, the having some
slighter Eruption, of but a few Days continuance, but this attended with an
Inflammation and Running of the Incisions for the usual Time, and generally
preceded by some of the common Symptoms of the Small Pox; this being esteemed,
by the Accounts from Turkey, and our own Experience at Home, as far as it goes,
to be an effectual Security against having the Small Pox afterward in the
natural Way.

Under the Article of No Effect, are comprehended, not only all those Persons
upon whom the Operation produced no Effect of any Kind, but also those upon
whom the Eruption was so slight, and the Running of the Incisions so little in
Quantity, or of so short a Duration, as to render it justly doubtful whether it
would amount to a Security, or no. Two of these were known to have had the
Small Pox before, and were inoculated only for Experiment Sake, and several of
the rest underwent the Operation upon a Doubt whether they had had the Small
Pox before or no, the Distemper which they had undergone in the natural Way,
having been so slight and so favorable, as to make their Parents, themselves,
or their Physicians, to suspect that it was not the true Small Pox. But there
were some, upon whom Inoculation did not produce the Distemper, though there was
no Suspicion of their having had it before.

Under the Head of dying after Inoculation is comprised every Person, as far as
I have been been able to learn, that has either by the Friends, or Adversaries,
to this Practice, been suspected to have died of Inoculation.

Ages. Persons inoculated. Had the Small Pox by Inoculation. Had an imperfect
Small Pox by Inoculation. No Effect. Suspected ^o have died of Inoculation.
Und. 1 Year 11 11 00 00 00 1 Year to 2 15 14 00 01 02 2 3 31 31 00 00 01 3 4 41
38 00 03 01 4 5 33 31 00 02 01 5 10 140 137 01 02 02 10 15 82 76 00 06 00 15 20
56 50 01 05 02 20 52 62 50 03 09 00 Age unknown. 03 02 00 01 00 Total 474 440
05 29 09

From this Table it appears,

1. That of 474 Persons inoculated, 440 have received the Small Pox from that
Operation; to which if it be thought proper to add the five, who had an
imperfect Small Pox by Inoculation, the whole Number will be 445.

2. That the Operation has of ner failed of taking Effect upon those of more
advanced Ages, than upon young Children, as was naturally to be expected from
the Reasons mentioned above; it being more likely that Persons of such Ages
have had the Small Pox before, than Children.

3. That however more favorable the natural Small Pox generally is to Children
than grown Persons, yet Inoculation has been attended with better Success in
the latter than in the former; and in particular, that out of 50 or 53 Persons
of 20 Years of Age and upwards, that have had the Small Pox by Inoculation, not
one has miscarried.

4. That 9 is the Number of Persons, who have been suspected to have died of
Inoculation; so that, if this Operation was really the Cause of all their
Deaths, the Hazard of dying of the inoculated Small Pox must be that of 9 in
440, or 445, that is, of one in 49, or 50.

But the curious Reader will doubtless expect, that I should give him some
farther Information, in Order to enable him to judge, whether, or no, all these
Persons really died of Inoculation. This I shall endeavor to do with all the
Fidelity, that a Case of so much Importance requires, and with such
Impartiality, as to give no just Cause of Offense to either of the contending
Parties. With this View I shall here set down the Name of every Person, that
has been suspected by the one Side to have died of Inoculation; and on the
other Hand, I shall communicate the Accounts of those Cases, as they have been
transmitted to me by the Gentlemen concerned in inoculating those Persons,
subjoining every one's Name to his own Account.

1. The first is the Case of the Honorable Mr. William Spencer, aged about
three Years, who was inoculated in Town, April 2d, 1722, and died on the 21st
of the same Month. The Eruption appeared on the 9th Day; he had a fair and full
Eruption of Pustules of different Sorts, observing the common Periods and
Symptoms of Inoculation; and after the greatest Part of the Pustules were dried
off, he was seized, on a sudden, on the 21st Day, of a convulsive Fit, of which
he died. The Occasion of his Death may be farther inquired into, from the
printed Account. Mr. Maitland. Vid. Maitland's Answer to Dr. Waggstaffe.

2. Miss Rigby, aged a Year and six Months, was inoculated in London, April 29,
1722. She had a fair Eruption of Pustules, appearing on the eighth Day, and a
much more favorable Disease than her Sister, who recovered: But one of her
Arms swelled and imposthumated, (as is usual sometimes in the natural Small
Pox) and whether it was by that, or breeding her Teeth (for she cut some Teeth
about that Time) is uncertain; however she continued sickly, feverish and
hectic, and died about 8 Weeks after the Inoculation. N. B. Mr. Maitland
declined the inoculating her with her Sister; but the Father having had a
favorable Account of this Practice from the Turkey Merchants, would have it
done; and there was another unlucky Circumstance in this Affair; Mr. Maitland
was seized with a violent Fever for the Space of three Weeks, from the Day she
was inoculated, which, he thinks, might in some Measure have occasioned the
Soreness of her Arm, no such Thing having happened where he has been able to
attend. Mr. Maitland.

3. Lord Bathurst's Servant, aged 19, was inoculated in London, April 30, 1722.
He was lately come from the Country into my Lord's House, where five of his
Lordship's Children were then sick of the Small Pox: He was ill for some few
Days before he was inoculated, and his Complaints were such, that 'twas
apprehended 'twould be the Small Pox. Therefore he was removed to a Nurse's in
Swallow-Street, Piccadilly, who provides for Persons in that Way. By Mr. Mead's
Directions he was blooded, and vomited, and took several cordial Powders;
whereby being restored to Health it was thought proper to inoculate him. The
Small Pox appeared on him the 9th Day after Inoculation, of the favorable
distinct Kind, whereby his Complaints were allayed; but returning the next Day
with bilious Vomitings frequent Stools, and a Delirium, a great many of the
fluxed Kind then appeared. These continued more or less upon him,
notwithstanding all the Medicines which Dr. Arbutbnot, and afterward Dr. Me^d
in Conjunction wi^h him did prescribe. He died on the 7th Day from the
Eruption. His Lungs were found inflamed and mortified. Sergeant Amyand.

4. Miss Rolt, aged between 9 and 10 Years, was inoculated in London, together
with a Child of between 2 and 3 Years of Age, both with the same Matter, Sept.
25, 1723. Then both began to sicken on the eighth Day from Inoculation, and on
the 10th the Small Pox appeared on both of the distinct Kind. The Boy
recovered. Miss Rolt, the Day before the Eruption, complained of great Pains in
her Shoulders, Elbows and Knees, and the Fever continuing, the Small Pox fluxed
upon her the 3d Day from the Eruption. Sir Hans Sloane and Dr. Arbuthnot
attended her. She went through the Distemper with Ease; the Small Pox began to
turn on her the 7th Day; but 'twas not dried all over 'till the 14th. The
Fever, that arose then, occasioned her being blooded, and soon after several
Tumors appeared in the Neighborhood of several Joints, which were opened. The
Fever still continued, and more suppurated Tumors were daily appearing, which
were discharged as soon as possible. Sometimes she was troubled with a
Diarrhoea, whereby, as well as by the Suppuration of 20 or 30 Boils that were
opened, she was spent, so that she died the 27th of November following, that is
9 Weeks after the Inoculation. Her Incisions continued running to the last. By
all Accounts, she had a bad Habit of Body; she struggled with the Jaundice the
Year before, during six Months; it showed its Head again in the Spring, but was
soon conquered; and as I have been informed of late, she recovered of the
Measles but 10 Weeks before she was inoculated. Had I been informed of this
before, as well as of her irregular Life, no Ways suited to one of her Years, I
would hardly have adventured the Inoculation on her; though all that Time, she
seemed to me in a perfect State of Health, and perfectly recovered of the
Measles, which she had had in the most favorable Manner: Sergeant Amyand.

5. Miss Brooksbank, aged 15 Months, was inoculated at Ealand near Halifax, in
June 1723. She died suddenly on the 11th Day from the Eruption. Vid. Dr.
Nettleton's, and the Parent's Account at the End of this Paper.

6. Miss Betty a Court 4 Years of Age, inoculated at Ivy-Church near Salisbury,
Sept. 20, 1723.

She may very well be said to be born an infirm Child, for it is notoriously
known, that her Mother was so ill almost all the Time of going with her, that
her Midwife often despaired of her Life, as believing she would not go out her
Time. The Child, two or three Months after she was born, was seized with an
Ophthalmia in both Eyes, and after that she had a Humor to a great Degree,
which broke out under her Chin, her Throat being very raw from Ear to Ear,
which by purging, cutting an Issue, etc. went off. But still at Spring and Fall
she was subject to these Humors, but to a less Degree than at first. Her Issue
by the Negligence of the Nurse, was dried up some considerable Time before the
Child was inoculated, as Mr. a Court himself told me; and that the Child had
something of these Humors broke out upon her, not above 3 Weeks before the
Operation was performed, I was assured by the Servants in the House.

She was inoculated with her four Brothers and a Servant Maid, all with the
same Matter, from a Boy about 8 or 9 Years old, that had a kind Sort. I heard
nothing of any of their Complaints 'till the eighth Day, and then one had a
Pain in his Head, another in his Back, one was taken with a Shivering, another
with a Vomiting, and in short every one of them had something or other of the
Symptoms of the Small Pox, except the Maid Servant. Miss's Complaint was
chiefly in her Head and Back; the next Day, after the Symptoms came on, she was
flushed in her Face rather like an Erysipelas than the Small Pox, and in 24
Hours after that the Pustules appeared very thick in her Face, her right Arm
and right Thigh, and seemed to come on pretty well. They were as full on her
Breast, the Abdomen and Inside of the Thighs; yet they continued always flat
and languishing, without coming to Maturity, notwithstanding all the Doctor
could do to raise them. The Fever increased on her every Day, and she grew more
and more restless, though her Incisions discharged after a wonderful Manner. For
all round each Arm, from her Shoulders to her Elbows, they ran like large
Blisters, being as thick of Pustules as they could stand under the Dressings,
which gave us some faint Hopes she might get over it, 'till a Day or two before
she died. The Pustules on her Face, her right Arm and Thigh, turned the 7th and
8th Day; but then the second Fever came on, and it getting Ground every Day,
she continued in a languid State, and grew weaker and weaker, 'till she
expired, which was the 22d Day from the Incisions. Mr. Goldwyer.

A Daughter of Mr. a Court's, 4 Years of Age, was inoculated under a very ill
Habit of Body, and subject to inflammatory cutaneous Eruptions from its Birth.
Persecuted always by a hectic Heat, the Child was thin and weak, too weak,
indeed, to withstand the Malignity of the confluent Kind she labored under.
But the four Sons inoculated at the same Time, with Matter taken from the same
Person, had Diseases of the distinct Kind, and are recovered, though not the
most proper Persons for this Operation. Dr. Hele, Physician in Salisbury.

6. Francis Bacon, Esquire; 17 Years of Age, was inoculated at Earlbam near
No^wich, with his Sister, Sept. 11th, 1723. The Incisions did not inflame, but
healed in about 10 Days, like a common Cut: No Fever, nor any Sort of Eruption
followed; he was kept in breathing Sweats in Bed the 9th and 10th Day; a Day or
two after he was purged, and so a 2d, and a 3d Time.

On the 1st of October, a second Attempt was made with Matter taken from his
Sister; the Success was the same; he was purged again as before, and released
from his Confinement. During this whole Proceeding, he slept very well, had a
very good Appetite, and made not the least Complaint, 'till upon taking the Air
in a very sharp Day, toward the latter End of October, he grew feverish that
Night, with Pains in his Head and Limbs; his Pulse was strong, his Urine high
colored, with a good Sediment; he was not very hot, nor thirsty, but
inclinable to sweat; the greatest Uneasiness he felt, was from a decayed Tooth,
which he was forced to have drawn. This Disorder went off in 3 Days by natural
Sweats: All that was given him, was 3 or 4 Papers of Pulv. e Chel. Cancr. comp.
with Castor, etc. he being sometimes a little low spirited. A Faintness
remained upon him, four or five Days after the Fever went off, with want of
Appetite: But upon taking a little Rhubarb once or twice, he soon recovered his
Stomach, and seemed perfectly well, when he returned to Cambridge, about the
Middle of November. The only Difference I observed in him, was, that he was
paler than usual, which I imputed to a long tedious Confinement and a spare
Diet, together with some little Anxiety from the Disappointment he had met
with. What happened at Cambridge, I shall say nothing to, leaving that Part to
the Physician that attended him; I shall only observe, that this young
Gentleman has been very subject to Fevers, attended with nervous Symptoms; and
that a Person nearly related to him, who saw him in both Cases, told me, that
this last Illness differed in nothing, except in the Violence of the Symptoms,
from a Fever he was seized with about three Years ago. Dr. Offley.

This young Gentleman was taken ill of a nervous Fever, such as he had been ill
of several Times before, about Christmas last, and died on the 5th of Jannary.
No Spot, nor Eruption of any Kind appeared upon him; but a little before his
Death, a great Quantity of Blood and Matter gushed out at his Nostrils. Mrs
Bacon, Mr. Professor Green, Dr. Ashenhurst.

8. Mary Waller, five Years and a half old, was inoculated near Gosport, Oct.
18, 1723; together with two other Children, all with the same Matter. The other
two sicken'd on the 7th Day, the Small Pox appeared on the 9th, and they did
very well: But this Child sicken'd at the Completion of the 4th Day, and the
Eruption appeared on the sixth. She had the confluent Kind all over her, with
many Purples, and died on the 18th Day after she was inoculated. From the Vid.
page 14.
Earliness of her Sickening, and the Eruption, it is not improbable, that she
had taken the Infection the ordinary Way before. This Opinion is farther
strengthened by the following Circumstance. A Maid was violently seized with
the Small Pox in the common Way, a little before the Operation, and continued
there two Days in a narrow Room, her Breath smelling strong of the Infection,
and the Child was sometimes with her. To what is said, may be added, that the
Child was leprous. Mr. Waller.

9. Miss Brailsford, aged 2 Years, died the 26th Day after Inoculation, of a
Worm Fever. The Small Pox were all shal'd and gone off. Dr. Dover.

From the Facts here laid down, I am sensible the Inoculators will raise
several Objections against the Estimate of the Hazard of Inoculation, which I
have given above, and to do them Justice, I am obliged to lay what are, or may
be their Arguments, before the World.

1. They will maintain that the 4th, 6th, and 8th Cases ought to be left out of
the Computation, because the Patients were unhealthy Subjects, and therefore no
Argument can be drawn from their dying, to increase the Hazard of those who
shall be inoculated in perfect Health, pursuant to the Caution above given; and
consequently, that the Hazard to heathful Persons, can at most be reckoned to
be no more than that of six in 440, or 445, that is of one in 73, or 74.

2. They may object, that the seventh Case is entirely out of the Question, the
Person having been well so long after the Operation, and in his last Illness,
which happened near three Months after the second Inoculation, having had no
Manner of Appearance of the Small Pox, nor any other Symptons, (as appears by
the Acknowledgement of his nearest Relations and others,) but what he had had
more than once in former Fevers; except only the Eruption of Blood and Matter
from his Nostrils, a little before his Death; which often happening in other
Cases, seems not to be justly chargeable upon Inoculation, especially at so
great a Distance of Time from that Operation.

3. They may justly plead, that in a Comparison between the Hazard of the
natural and inoculated Small Pox, either only such, as die in the Course of the
Distemper, ought to be set down on both Sides; or that, if in the Case of
Inoculation, I will charge the Consequences of the Operation, in occasioning
other Diseases, of which, the Patients happen to die after the Small Pox are
entirely gone off, that I ought to do the same in the Case of the natural Small
Pox, it being notorious, that this Distemper frequently occasions other
Diseases, of which the Patients die a considerable Time after: And if I cannot
do this in the natural Way, because the Death of the Patient is, in this Case,
set down in the weekly Bills, etc. to the other apparent Disease, then I ought
to omit all such Cases in the Way of Inoculation, and consequently the 2d, as
likewise, the 4th and 7th for this Reason, besides the others before given,
ought to be left out of the Estimate.

4. They may likewise object to the 1st, 3d, and 5th Instances, from the
Circumstances mentioned in the Account of those Cases, and consequently will
not allow of more than one Case, where the Patient can be justly said to have
died of Inoculation: And perhaps even that will be disputed.

How far these several Objections are of Weight, is submited to the
Determination of those, who must and will judge for themselves, that is, to
every intelligent Reader, who being thus appriz'd of the Facts, may easily, by
striking off such of the Instances given above, as he thinks reasonable, form
to himself a Judgment of the Hazard of Life in this Operation: And to such
therefore I leave it But to save him some little Trouble, I shall only observe,
that if upon the Reasons here mentioned, he sees Cause to except one Person out
of the Number of those that are suspected to have died of Inoculation, the
Hazard must then be estimated to be that of one in 55, or 56.

If he except The Hazard will be Two One in 63, or 64 Three One in 73, or 74
Four One in 88, or 89 Five One in 110, or 111 Six One in 147, or 148 Seven One
in 220, or 222 Eight One in 440, or 445.

It may perhaps be expected from me by some Persons, that in giving Account of
the Miscarriages of Inoculation, I should not confine my self barely to Loss of
Life; but that I should likewise relate all the lesser Accidents, as the
breaking out of Boils, etc. that have followed upon that Practice, where the
Patient has escaped with his Life. But to such I must reply, that in a Design
to make a Comparison between the Hazard of the Distemper in the natural Way,
and when given by Inoculation, it would be improper and useless to insert such
an Account, if it could be obtained, on the one Side, unless it were done
likewise on the other. And every Physician knows, that such like Accidents
frequently happen upon having the natural Small Pox, which it would be next to
impossible to make a perfect Collection of, and as impracticable to set that
Collection in such a Light, as would be requisite, in Order to make a
Comparison between it and the Accidents owing to Inoculation. For this Reason,
I limit my Comparison to the Hazard of Life itself, and see no Reason to doubt,
but that such Way of having the Disease as less endangers Life, must be
likewise more favorable in all other Particulars. This is affirmed by the
Practisers of Inoculation, and their Adversaries, I think, do not offer to deny
it.

Before I conclude, it may not be improper, to take some little Notice of an
Article lately inserted in one of our public Papers. that in the Year 1722,
there died of the Small Pox, within the Bills of Mortality, 2167 Persons, and
that in the Year 1723, the Year of Inoculation, there died 3271, exceeding the
former Number by 1104.

With what View this was published, is best known to the Authors of that, and
some other such like Articles: But the Use that I have heard made of it in
Conversation, is, that inoculating the Small Pox, contributed very much to the
spreading of the Distemper, and consequently to the great Increase of the
Mortality abovementioned.

To obviate, which, I must take Notice in the first Place, that by the Accounts
now lying before me, it appears, that in the Year 1722, there were 63 Persons
inoculated within the Bills of Mortality, and in the Year 1723, which this
Writer calls the Year of Inoculation. the Number inoculated was 68, just five
more than the Year before.

2. That as there died of the natural Pox, 3271 Persons in the Year 1723, the
whole Number sick of the same Disease that Year, must have been, by the
Proportion laid down before, of six and something more to one, about 20000
Persons, and consequently the spreading of the Distemper by Means of
Inoculation, could bear no greater a Proportion to the natural Propagation of
it, than that of 68 to 20000, or of one to 300. For it will not, I suppose, be
pretended, that the Small Pox given by Inoculation, is more infectious than the
natural Sort. I believe every Person, who has been acquainted with both, will
think it less so, in Proportion, as it is more favorable.

Lastly, if I have not already taken up more of the Reader's Time upon this
Head, than the Thing is worth, I would desire him to cast his Eye upon the
following Account of the Mortality of the Small Pox, for several Years before
Inoculation was introduced among us, in some of which, he will find it greater,
and in others, nearly equalito the last.

Out of every thousand Persons that were buried, there died of the Small Pox,

In the Year 1668 115 1674 118 1681 125 1683 102 1685 107 1710 127 1714 106
1719 114 1723 112

The Consideration of the Bills of Mortality puts into my Head another Remark,
which I must beg leave to make.

For these ten Years last past, there have died of the Small Pox, within the
Bills of Mortality, at a Medium, 2287 Souls per Annum. Let us now consider a
little, what may be the Consequence, in Case Inoculation should hereafter
become a general Practice. If we allow all the Opposers of Inoculation contend
for, we shall find but one in 49 to die of Inoculation, and in the natural Way,
we have shown it to be one in six: It follows, that if we substitute
Inoculation for the natural Way, the Number of the Dead would be reduced seven
Parts in eight, and consequently 2000 Persons, that are yearly cut off, within
the Bills of Mortality alone, and those generally in the Beginning, or Prime of
Life, might be preserved to their King and Country. Let the warm Opposers of
Inoculation, lay their Hands upon their Hearts, and consider, whether the
saving of so many Lives, be contrary to any Precept of Law, or Gospel. We have
been told indeed, and from the Pulpit too, that this Practice came from the
Devil: But if it prove thus beneficial and salutary to Mankind, I, for my part,
shall make no Scruple of ascribing it to a greater and a better Author; and
undoubtedly, all sober and thinking Persons will judge and believe, that the
making known to the World, a Method of preserving their Lives from one of the
most terrible Diseases in Nature, can be owing to no other, than the kind and
tender Providence of the great Creator and Preserver of Mankind.

Part of a Letter from Dr. Nettleton to Dr. Jurin.
Halifax, Oct. 28, 1723. SIR,
I Was very much surpised to find it inserted in several of the News Papers of
the last Post, as a current Report, that I had been lately called to a Patient,
who was inoculated about a Year ago, and who is since dead of the natural Small
Pox; and I could not omit this first Opportunity to assure you, that the said
Report is entirely false, none who have been inoculated, having died of the
natural Small Pox afterward, neither have we any Reason to think worse of the
Practice here, than when I writ to you last, though we were far from expecting
that any Thing, in this World, should be so complete, as to be free from all
Inconveniences and Misfortunes. The Method has not been attended with any
Disaster in these Parts, excepting only one, which, I suppose, gave Rise to
these Reports in the public Papers, and of which, I shall give you a very
particular Relation; for I should be highly blameable, if I did either conceal,
or misrepresent any Circumstance relating to a Matter of so great Consequence
to Mankind.

About four Months ago, Mr. Brooksbank of Ealand, desired me to inoculate the
Small Pox upon a Daughter of his, aged about 14 Months, the Distemper being
then in the Neighborhood, and several having died in the natural Way; it was
accordingly done, and also upon some others, at the same Time, who did very
well; but in this Child, the Symptoms were very severe, and when the Pustules
appeared, they were very numerous, though distinct, and not so kindly as we could
expect to the eleventh Day, the Pustules crusted, and were many of them gone,
and the Child was very cheerful and brisk, and played about the Room, insomuch,
that we all concluded the Danger to be over: ut she died suddenly in the Night,
without any Notice of her being worse; whether her Death was from the Small
Pox, or some other Cause, occasioning some sudden Convulsion or Suffocation, I
will not presume to determine.


A second Letter from the same Gentleman to Dr. Jurin.
Halifax, Nov. 11, 1723. SIR,
THERE have been some Occurrences here, in the Method of Inoculation, which
have been misrepresented, of which it is necessary the Public should have a
true and impartial Account. It was altogether a Mistake to affirm, that one who
had been inoculated a Year ago, was lately dead of the natural Small Pox: But
it is very true, that one who had the Small Pox by Inoculation did die; and
also, that two others, whom we attempted to inoculate, but without Effect, had
the Distemper afterward in the natural Way. The Facts are contained in the
following Certificates, which will be attested upon Oath, by the Parties
concerned, whenever it shall be required.

We have Reason to believe, that the Death of the Child hereafter mentioned,
was owing to some other Cause besides the Small Pox; but if, to avoid Dispute,
we yield that Point, it must then be acknowledged, that out of Seventy four,
who had the Small Pox by Inoculation hereabouts, one has died; all the rest are
at this Time alive, and in good Health.

We have been told by all those, who have writ upon the Subject of Inoculation,
that it may sometimes fail, and produce nothing at all; in which Case, it can
be no more Security against the Distemper, than if nothing had been done. Most
of those who have been inoculated here, have been as much exposed, as these two
Children who have taken the Infection since; but we have not yet found, that
any, who had the Small Pox by this Method, though in the lowest Degree, ever had
it again in the natural Way. If any such Thing should happen, I shall not fail
to advise you of it. There has nothing occurred here, so far as I know, that
can possibly be represented to the Disadvantage of the Practice, besides what
is contained in the enclosed Papers.

I am, SIR, Your most obedient humble Servant, Thomas Nettleton.


Ealand, Nov. 8, 1723.
These may certify, that in February, 1721/2, the Small Pox was inoculated upon
two of our Daughters, the one about five, and the other four Years of Age, who
had, as far as we could judge, the true Small Pox, through which Distemper they
got with very great Ease. Some time after, the same Operation was performed
upon a Boy of ours, aged about three Years, but without any Effect: The Child
was not in the least disordered, had no Appearances upon his Skin, neither did
the Places of Incision swell or inflame as in the other Children, so that we
then concluded it would avail him nothing. About five Months ago, the Distemper
being then in the Neighborhood, and several having died of it in the natural
Way; we had the Small Pox inoculated upon a Daughter of ours, aged about 15
Months; with this Child the Distemper was more severe than usual; she was very
full, though the Pustules were distinct. She went on as well as we could expect,
and on the eleventh Day, was very cheerful and brisk, free from Heat or Thirst,
and the Small Pox were many of them crusted and gone off, insomuch, that we
thought her out of Danger: However, that Night she died suddenly, even before
any Alteration for the worse was perceived by those that attended her. This
unhappy Event may possibly expose us to the Censure of the World; but the
Consciousness of having done our Duty in using the most likely Means, to
preserve Life in a Time of common Danger, makes us easy and content. About ten
Days after this, our Son abovementioned, upon whom the Inoculation had no
Effect, was seized in the natural Way, had a very kindly Sort, and recovered
very well. The Distemper was, at that Time, very rife in two or three
neighboring Families, insomuch, that none escaped, who had not had it before;
amongst these, there were six Persons who had the Small Pox by Inoculation,
some of which were constantly, and the rest frequently, in Company with those
that were sick of the natural Sort, without being any Way affected.

To the Truth of the above, we subscribe.

To the above written Particulars, attest the Nurse and Maid, who attended the
Children, during their Illness. Joseph Brooksbank, Eliza. Brooksbank. Eliza. I
Brooksbank, Eliza. X Mellar.



Halifax, Nov. 5, 1723.
These may certify, that at our Request in February 1721/2, the Small Pox was
inoculated upon two of our Children, the one a Boy aged about 5 Years, the
other a Girl, about 3 Years old. The Girl, in a Week's Time, began to be very
feverish and ill, and after 2 or 3 Days the Small Pox appeared: They rose very
round and large, though but few in Number, and she soon recovered. The Boy was no
Ways affected, had no Manner of Illness that we could perceive, nothing
appeared upon his Skin, neither did the Places that were cut, look red and
angry, as they did in the Girl: But about a Week or ten Days after his Sister
recovered, he fell ill of the Small Pox, had more in Number, and was much worse
than she was, but after some Time recovered very well.

As Witness our Hands, Test. Martha Micheli, Thomas Thorp. William Clark, Phebe
Clark.

P. S. It is to be observed, that these two Children were not inoculated with
the same Matter. The Girl was from one, that had a very favorable Kind in the
natural Way. The Boy was from one that was inoculated; but I had the Misfortune
to come too late; the Pustules were withered, and almost gone, and the Matter
was chiefly taken from the Incision in the Arm. I did not think necessary to
mention this Particular, in the Account I gave of this Boy formerly, because I
could not conclude from one Trial, any Thing certainly. It is now very well
known, that the Matter taken from the Pustules of the inoculated Small Pox,
will convey the Distemper, as well as the natural; but I believe, that which
runs from the Incisions will not. I can give no Account how the Operation
happened to fail in Mr. Brooksbank's Boy; for two other Children were
inoculated at the same Time, with the same Matter, in whom it succeeded very
well.




ERRATA.
Page 20 Line 9, read Dr. page 24 Line 12, read 7.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
ALL Persons concerned in the Practice of inoculating the Small Pox, are
desired to keep a Register of the Names and Ages of every Person inoculated,
the Place where it is done, the Manner of the Operation, the Days of sickening
and of the Eruption, the Sort of Small Pox that is produced, and the Event.

Where the true Small Pox is not produced by Inoculation, it will be of Use to
take particular Notice, whether the Patient had any other Kind of Eruption,
what Symptoms preceded or attended it, whether the Incisions inflamed and run,
and for what Time their Running continued.

In Case any Person shall happen to die after Inoculation, either in the Course
of the Small Pox, or after they are gone off, it is desired that a particular
Relation of the Case may be made, and attested, if it be judged necessary, by
the nearest Relations of the Party deceased, or by other credible Persons, that
were Witnesses to the Fact.

They are entreated to send these Accounts, or an Extract from them,
comprehending all Persons inoculated from the Beginning, to the End of the
present Year, to Dr. Jurin, Secretary to the Royal Society, some Time in
January, or at farthest in February next, that so the Result of them may be
published early in the Spring.


