REASONS: WHY THE APOTHECARY May be supposed to Understand the Administration
of Medicines In the CURE of DISEASES, As well as the PHYSICIAN.

In a Letter from an APOTHECARY to a PHYSICIAN.

Et herbarum subjecta est Potentia nobis.

Ovid. Metam. Lib. 1. LONDON: Printed for Luke Stokoe, at the Golden-Key and
Bible at Charing Cross, 1704.

Reasons, why the Apothecary may be supposed to understand the Administration
of Medicines in the Cure of Diseases, as well as the Physician.
SIR,
YOU have at length found the most effectual means to prevail with me, to break
through the resolution I had taken, of having no share in the present
Controversy between the Physicians and the Apothecarys, by imputing my Silence
to the badness of my Cause: In the Vindication of which, you are pleased to
say, no Sober or Ingenious Person will offer to draw his Pen.

I must confess, I have hitherto been of the Opinion of the Major part of our
Profession; that what has yet appeared in public against us, has not deserved
a serious Answer, most of it being taken up on Prejudice, the rest a Scandalous
Aspersion, invented by a peevish Set of Men, who were angry that any body
thrived beside themselves.

Thus then have you unwillingly forced me into a spacious Field, where on each
side I may extend and dilate my self; and which way soever I turn, may find at
least quantum sufficit of Matter to Work upon.

But since you keep a more than ordinary pother with the high Advantages which
the Physicians have over us, I shall choose to examine the truth of that
Assertion, and endeavor to set those High Advantages, (as you call 'em) in a
true light; and then leave the Impartial World to Judge, whether all be Gospel
which proceeds from the Pen of a Dispensary Physician.

And first it is pretended, That the Phsician, by his liberal Education, (that
is, by being bred at an Academy) has greater and more frequent opportunities of
being instructed in the Practice of Physic, than the Apothecary can have; and
that not only from his own private Reading and Observation, the Care and
Direction of his Tutor, but also from the public Lectures of the Physic
Professor.

Now if it be expected that this Argument should have any force against us, it
must first be proved what extraordinary Benefits those are which Young Students
receive from Tutors and Physic Professors; and not think that we shall barely
assent to them, or believe them to be such mighty things upon their single
Affirmation. I fear when these wonderful Lectures come to be examined, they
will appear little better than Barren Animadversions on Galen, Hippocrates, or
some other of the old Physical Authors; which every Man is capable of doing,
who is able to read and understand them. And I believe we may venture to add,
that the Auditors of these Lectures generally return with the same degree of
Knowledge and Satisfaction, as a late Assembly did from a Lecture at
Exeter-Exchange, against the Circulation of the Blood.

It is again Objected against us, That the Opportunities of being Advanced in
the Knowledge of Anatomy and Chemistry, so essential to the Qualification of a
Person who is to Administer Physic, are greater in the Academy than in any
other place; and from whence the Apothecary is totally excluded.

It must be allowed, that the understanding the wonderful Contrivance and
Texture of so admirable a Machine, as is that of the Humane Body, is no
ordinary part of Science, and what undoubtedly the Person who Administers
Physic ought to be acquainted withal. From which notwithstanding, I cannot see
how the Apothecary is totally excluded, since there are constant Anatomical
Dissections at the Surgeon's Hall, which is open to Apothecarys as well as
Physicians; and where I presume there is more to be seen in one Year, than the
Young Physician meets withal in six at his Academy.

The pretended Advantages they have over us in Chemistry, are of a-piece with
those before mentioned: For not to Instance our own private Elaboratorys, the
public Elaboratory at the Hall, where all Chemical Preparations are made in
the highest Perfection, is a sufficient Confutation of that groundless
Assertion.

These, Sir, Being the principal Reasons on which You build your Hypothesis,
namely, the Advantages which the Physician has over the Apothecary, I shall not
content my self with this general Reflection on them, but shall proceed to
examine them more closely, and particularly that of Studying at the University,
by which is meant a liberal Education, as if the Streams of Polite Literature
and Knowledge were not alike diffused throughout the Globe, but were scantily
confined to the Banks of Cham or Isis.

We will suppose then, An Apothecary, who is Master of the Latin and Greek
Tongues, (as there are few of them but are) to be as duly Qualified for the
Reading, Comparing and Animadverting on Physical Authors, as the Academic
Physician, which I think no sober Intelligent Person will de^y, if he allows
that the Greek and Latin Tongues as Taught at Westminster, Paul's, etc. to be as
fit for that purpose, as what the Young Physician generally carries with him to
Oxford, etc.

Neither will it be disputed with me, I think, that Reading, Reffection,
Observation and Experiment, are the only known means of acquiring Humane
Learning and Science: To all which, the Apothecary thus Qualified, has as fair
pretenses as the most Elevated Physician of 'em all; and wherein the Apothecary
may as reasonably be thought to make as great a Proficience, provided he uses
the same Industry and Application.

It may be objected, That although the Apothecary be thus Qualified, yet whilst
he is an Apprentice he has little or no time for these Studys, if he had never
so great an Inclination; that what with the Duty to his Master, and the common
Necessities and Expense of Life, which ask some time to be repaired in spite
of us, there will be little or none left for any thing else.

To this I Answer, That although for the first Year or two there may be little
else done, yet by that time he begins to have a true Taste of the Matter, and
his Reason shines forth with brighter Rays: If he be a Youth of any Spirit and
Emulation, he will and does find a thousand opportunities of advancing his
Knowledge, equal, if not superior to the Academic Physician.

The Apothecary then thus Qualified, may very reasonably be thought to
understand the Study of Physic, the Natures of Diseases and their Cures,
equally with the Physician, though he cannot boast the High Advantages of a
liberal Education and Accademic Accomplishments.

Whilst the Physician contends with us after this manner, we shall never recede
from these Principles: But if he shall say, That the Advantages of an Academic
Education are a better Foundation for him to Set up for a Wit, a Poet, or
Entertaining Company; then indeed we submit, frankly acknowledging that we
industriously shun those Arts, which rather tend to the Subversion and
Destruction of the Animal Life, than its Preservation and Emolument.

If then the equal Learning of the Apothecary sets him upon a level with the
Physician, notwithstanding his boasted Advantages over him, it can never be
imagined that the Composition and Administration of Medicines by which he
discovers their Nature and Operations, will be any hindrance to him in the
persecution of those Studies which naturally lead him to any inquiry into the
Structure and Economy of the Humanedy, and the manner how these Medicines he
prepares Operate upon it.

This certainly without Vanity we may affirm, That we understand the Materia
Medica as well, not to say better than most Dispensary Physicians.

The World is very sensible what Advantages they owe to these Modern Reformers
of Physic; to whose wonderful penetration we have not yet heard that Physic
has been Obliged for one Addition or Discovery: But that is not their business,
it is sufficient for them if they can libel the Town in their awkard
Exclamations against the Apothecarys, by which they vainly imagined to have
Engrossed the whole Art of Compounding and Vending Medicines to the Public.
But alas! fond deluded Men, This knowing Age was not to be led Hoodwinked to
their Ruin. The Town saw through the thin Disguise, and laugh at the senseless
Contrivance: They knew the Abilitys of those Persons who undertook the Project,
and that most of 'em so far from being able to Compound Medicines as they ought
to be, scarce knew the Distinction between Mint and Cardus. It may be thought
perhaps, that here I have a little Transgressed, and gone beyond the limits of
Truth, for that so small a degree of Knowledge is sufficient for that purpose,
that it is next to impossible that even a Dispensary Physician should be
without it. Whatever may be thought of it, I have undeniable Proofs of this
Assertion to produce, when ever provoked to it.

It Is certain, That however Angry the Dispensary Physicians may be with us at
present, they had once a better Opinion of our Abilitys and Understanding; I
mean, when they Composed that most Elaborate Piece, the London Dispensatory;
where it is evident they did not understand what they were about, by the
unaccountable Jumble of Alteratives and Cathartics in the same Composition:
Nay, nor even the making the Composition it self; else, What is the meaning
that we so often meet with Vt Artis Est, Secundum Artum, and the like? By which
at least they tacitly confess that we are the more knowing of the Two.

Since so much has been said of the Dispensary Physicians, it may not be
unseasonable to speak a Word of their Mighty Captain, and to desire the
Impartial Reader to Examine that Famous Book, which has made so much Noise in
the World; wherein the Ignorance of its Writer is so very Conspicuous, that we
need hardly point at his Mistakes.

His Catalogue of Drugs and Simples, (notwithstanding the whole Conspiracy
labored for its Birth) is a handsome Specimen of his Knowledge in the Materia
Medica; wherein there is scarce a Paragraph which has not some one or more
ranged in their improper Classes.

The Senseless Remarks he has made on some of the best of Medicines, show
rather the Fertility of his Spleen, than his Understanding: The which
nevertheless he fancies unanswerable, by his having taken so much pains to
bring Quotations from some Authors as Obscure and Splenatick as himself for
his Vouchers.

His Spleen and Ignorance will be the more remarkable, when we reflect on that
Part of his Book, where with his wonted Assurance he tells his Readers, That
when it shall please the Almighty Dispenser of all things, to afflict them with
any Malady, that they need not be very sollicitous concerning the means of
their Cure, that they have nothing to fear but the Lethiferous Apothecary; That
if it should so happen that no Dispensary Physician be at hand, it is much safer
to trust to the uncertain Event of the Disease, and the Direction of Nature, or
to any thing else, though it were but an Old Woman and Water Gruel, than this
Bugbear Apothecary. This is fine Jargon, and without doubt will be very
grateful to a Person tortured with a Fit of the Stone, or indeed in any other
violent Paroxysm or Convulsion of Nature.

It is confessed, that Nature is most wise in all her Productions; and that if
we will closely attend to her, she will never fail to Indicate to us the true
way by which she would be assisted by us in her Labors. But this I take to be
beyond the Power and Address of an Old Woman, or even of our Dispensary
Physician himself.

To say but one Word more of the Ingenuity of this mighty Author; and that is,
that all the Bustle he has made in this Matter, arose from a private Quarrel
between him and an Apothecary, who it seems was a Man of too much Honor, and
of too tenacious a Temper for the Friendship of this worthy Physician. When
these things I say shall be duly considered, I make no question but the World
will have just such an opinion of him and his Performance as they both deserve.

Since then the Apothecary is not obliged to the Receipts of the Physician for
his Knowledge in the Administration of Medicines in the Cure of Diseases, as
the Vulgar falsely imagine, but goes to the same Fountain and Drinks as large
and as pure Draughts of Knowledge as himself: And since most of us are ready to
confess, that their Receipts have been so far from being a Direction to us,
that they have rather proved Ignes Fatui to mislead us into those Errors we
have been guilty of, in relation to Practice.

Since the Present Learning and Labors of the Apothecaries are so abundantly
evident in this Town, that it would be perfectly needless for me to mention
them.

And since we do, and can give Reasons equally with the Physician, of the
different Operations of Medicines used in the Cure of Diseases; Why are we thus
Branded with the Opprobrious Names of Quacks, Mountebanks, Empiricks, and what
not, by the Mouth of the Conspiracy, that Mighty Champion for the Cause, The
Renowned Dr. Pit. O Doctiorum puicquid est Assurgite huic tam colendo Nomini.

It Is possible, It may be thought by what I have said, that I intended to bring
an Odium on the Manner of Education, as now Practiced at the Universities, and
on those Learned Gentlemen who have been Educated there. I shall only beg leave
to assure those Honorable Foundations, for whom I have the Profoundest
Veneration, That I Contend for nothing but the bare Privilege which our
School-Learning Intitles us to, namely, the Understanding Greek and Latin
Authors, as well as the Physicians, though we have not had the Pleasure of being
brought up under their Benign Tuition.

And as for those truly Learned and Worthy Physicians, who have not departed
from their Integrity, We are so far from the thoughts of Interposing in their
Practice, That We are, and always shall be ready, as it is our Duty, to
Recommend and Introduce them, when ever it is in our Power.

Thus, Sir, Have I Answered Your Request; and I hope have made it appear as
much as the Brevity of this Letter will permit, that those High Advantages you
seem so fond of, are not so Unanswerable as You imagined; and that in reality,
They are no more than Vain, Empty, Airy Notions, the Genuine Production of the
Imagination of a Dispensary Physician.

As this is barely a Specimen of what I have to bring against You, when Leisure
and Opportunity offer themselves, I would desire You, as a Friend, in the mean
time, to provide your self with a better Shield, to Ward off the Blows of Your
Adversary, than your Boasted Advantages are like to prove: And withal, that You
will Publish Your Next, that the World may judge fairly the Merits of the
Cause, and give the Crown to the Conqueror.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 13. l. 1. read Prosecution for Persecution, l. 3. r. an for any, l. 5. r.
Body for die, l. ditto r. those for these. Page 14. l. 7. r. laugh't for laugh.
Page 15. l. 19. r. Artem for Artum.


