THE CAMP, A MUSICAL ENTERTAINMENT, AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, DRURY
LANE.

BY R. B. SHERIDAN, ESQUIRE.

London: PRINTED IN THE YEAR M,DCC,XCV.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Gage, Mr. PARSONS. O Daub, Mr. MOODY, Sir Harry Bouquet, Mr. DODD, Sergeant,
Mr. BANNISTER. Corporal William, Mr. WEBSTER. Boulard, Mr. BADDELY. First
Countryman, Mr. FAWCET. Second Countryman, Mr. KEEN. Old Man, Mr. CHAPMAN. Boy,
Mr. SUETT. Officers, Recruits, etc.
WOMEN.
Nell, Mrs. WRIGHTON. Lady Plume, Miss FARREN. Lady Sash, Miss POPE. Lady
Gorget, Mrs. WARD. Nancy Miss WALPOLE.
THE CAMP.
ACT I.
SCENE I. The Road near the CAMP.
Enter Old Man. COME along, neighbors, come along, we shall be too late for
the suttlers market.


Enter 2nd. Man. Put on, put on, neighbors. Here Robin, where are you boy.


Robin, Behind. I Am coming Feather, as soon as I can get the colt up, for the
plaguey beast is down again, and mother and chickens are all in the slough.


Old Man. Why, is the colt down again? You graceless dog, help your mother up.
-- Oh, neighbor Farrow has helped her up I see.


Enter, OLD WOMAN. O. Woman. Husband, as sure as you are alive, that rogue of a
boy drove the colt in the dirt for the purpose, and down we came with such a
wang. --


O. Man. What a mercy it is the chickens escaped! -- Come, put on neighbors.


Enter ROBIN and COLT. Robin. Why, Feather how could I help it? -- The colt has
not had an eye in his head these eight years.


O. Woman. O, here comes our Kinswoman, and her Daughter, ( enter Miss) Bless
me child! you are in such a heat you will quite spoil your complexion.


Miss. Lord neighbors, you hurry one so. --


2nd. Woman. Put on. put on; make haste, we shall be too late -- O dear, here
comes Nell, and she will scold us all, for cheating the soldiers.


3rd. Woman. Damn that wench, she will not cheat herself, nor let other honest
people do it, if she can help it: and she says she likes a soldier so well she
would sell them goods for nothing.


2nd. Man. Come neighbors, now we shall see what bargains your Daughter will
make at the Camp.


2nd. Woman. Aye, Aye, soldiers are testy customers -- They will not buy of the
ugly ones -- O, here Nell comes.


Enter NELL. Nell. Why how now, what you are consulting how you shall cheat the
poor soldiers: for shame! for shame! how can you use the poor fellows so? a
parcel of unfeeling wretches! Poor fellows, that risque their Lives to defend
your property, and yet you make it your study to defraud them.


O. Woman. It Is very hard, Nell; you will not let us have a little picking among
em. What is it to you what we do.


Nell. Yes it is to me; I never will bear to see a soldier cheated, with my
eyes open. I love a soldier, and will always stand by them.


Miss. Mind your own business, Nell.


Nell. What Is that you say, Miss Minx? Here Is a wench dressed out; the poor
soldiers are forced to pay for all this finery, you impudent slut you.


2nd. Man. Why, Nell, if you go on at this rate we'll tell his worship, Mr.
Gage of you: He Is an exciseman, and a great friend to us poor solks.


Nell. What Is that you say, master Grinder? Come forward, you sneaking
sniveling sot you, I think your tricks are pretty well known. Was n't you
caught soaking eggs in lime and water to make them pass for new ones: and did
not you sit in the stocks for robbing the 'Squire's rookery to make your pigeon
pies.


2nd. Woman. Well, well, we'll tell Mr. Gage, and then what will he say to you?


Nell. Tell Mr. Gage, will you, he is a pretty protector indeed he is a disgrace
to his Majesty's inkhorn -- while he seizes with one hand, he smuggles with the
other. -- Why, no longer ago than last summer he was a broken attorney at
Rochester, and came down here, and bought this place with his vote, and now he
is both a smuggler and contractor. O my conscience, if I had the management of
affairs, I would severely punish all such fellows who would be so base as to
cheat a poor soldier.


2nd. Woman. If his worship was here, you dare not say so. Here he comes, here
he comes. Now you will change your note.


Nell. Will I? you shall see if I do. No, no; I Will tell him my mind; that is
always my way.


Enter GAGE. All. Ah! Mr. Gage.


Gage. Hey dey! what is the matter? What the plague is there a civil war broke
out among you?


1st. Woman. Why, Mr. Gage, Nell here has been scolding us for cheating the
soldiers,


2nd Woman. Yes, and says you encourage us in it.


Gage. Encourage you? to be sure I do, in the way of trade.


All. Aye, in the way of trade.


1st. Woman. Yes, and she has been rating the poor girl, and says I dress her
up thus only to make the better bargains.


Gage. And e'cod you're in the right of it; your mother is a sensible old
woman. Well said dame, put plenty in your baskets, and sell your wares at the
sign of your daughters face.


1st. Woman. Aye, aye, so I say.


Gage. Right -- Soldiers are testy customers, and this is the market where the
prettiest will always make the best bargains.


All. Very true, very true.


Gage. To besure; I hate to see an awkward gawkey come sneaking into the
market, with her damned half-price countenance, and is never able to get scarce
double the value of her best goods.


Nell. I can hold no longer: are you not ashamed you who are a contractor, and
has the honor to carry his Majesty's inkhorn at your button-hole, to teach
these poor wretches all your court tricks. I Will tell you what. If I was to sit
on a court martial against such a fellow as you, you should have had your
deserts, from the pilfering suttler to the head contractor, you should have the
cat of nine tails, and be forced to run the gauntlet, from Coxheath to Warley
common, that you should.


1st. Man. How durst you talk so saucily to his worship?


Nell. Hold your tongue, or I Will throttle you, you sheep biter. ( collaring
him.)


1st. Man. O lord! your worship, if you don't put her under an arrest she will
choke me.


Gage. ( Aside.) Come, Nell, hold your tongue, and I Will give you a pound of
smuggled hyson, and, throw you a silk handkerchief into the bargain.


Nell. Here Is a rogue! Bear witness neighbors he has offered me a bribe; -- a
pound of tea. No, Sir, take your pitiful present, and know that I am not to be
bribed to screen your villainies by influence and corruption. ( throws it at
him,)


Gage. Don't mind her, she is mad, she talks treason. Away with you! I Will put
every body under an arrest that stays to listen to her.


All. Aye, aye, she is mad. Come along, we shall be too late for market. ( Gage
drives them all off.)


Gage. Here Nell, will you take the tea? ( offers it to her.)


Nell. No Sir, I wont.


Gage. Well then I will. ( puts it in his pocket.)


AIR.
NELL. Now coaxing, caressing,
Now wheedling, distressing,
As fortune delights to exalt or confound,
Her smile or her frown
Sets them up, knocks them down,
Turning, turning, turning as the wheel goes round.
II.
O fie, Mr. Gage!
Quit the tricks of the age;
Scorn the slaves that to fortune, false fortune are bound,
Their cringes and bows,
Protections and vows,
Turning, turning, etc.



Exit Nell.
Gage. Foolish girl, not to accept a bribe, and follow the example of her
betters. -- But who have we here?


Enter O DAUB. O Daub. Ah, my little Gage! to be sure I am not in luck; I will
not want an interpreter to show me the views about here; and by my shoul I Will
force you to accept my offer.


Gage. Why, what is your errand?


O Daub. Why upon my conscience a very dangerous one: Jack the Painter's job
was a fool to it. I am come to take the Camp.


Gage. The devil you are!


O Daub. Aye, and must bring it away with me in my pocket too.


Gage. Indeed!


O Daub. Aye, here is my military chest; these are my colors you know.


Gage. O, I guess your errand.


O Daub. Then faith it is a very foolish one. You must know, I got so much
credit at the Fete Champetre there, that little Roscius recommended me to the
Managers of Drury Lane, and so now I am a sort of deputy superintendant under
Mr. Lanturnburg, the great painter; that as soon as he executes a thing, I
always design it after him, my jewel; so I Am going to take a side front view of
it.


Gage. What then they are going to introduce the camp on the stage I suppose.


O Daub. To be sure you have hit it -- Coxheath by candle light, my jewel.


Gage. And will that answer?


O Daub. O, to be sure it will answer, when a jontlemen can have a warm seat,
and see the whole tote of it for two thirteens, and be comfortable into the
bargain. Why it has cost me above three guineas already, and I came the
cheapest way too, for three of us went halves in the Maidstone Dilly, my dear.


Gage. Well, and how do you like the prospect?


O Daub. Upon my shoul my jewel, I don't know what to make o'nt, so I am come to
be a little farther off, that I may have a nearer view of it. I think it looks
like my cousin O Doiley's great bleach yard in the County of Antrim. ( Boulard
fings without) Tunder and wounds! what outlandish creature is this coming here?


Gage. O, that is Monsieur Boulard, the suttler.


O Daub. Then perhaps he can help me to a bit of something to eat, for I feel a
sort of craving in my stomach after my journey.


Gage. Why he is a very honest fellow, and will be happy in obliging you, Oh,
here he comes.


Enter BOULARD. Boul. Ah! begar, Monsieur Gage, I am glad I have found you;
begar I have been through Berkshire, Suffolk, and Yorkshire, and could not find
you.


O Daub. Through Berkshire, Suffolk, and Yorkshire -- What the devil does he
mean?


Gage. O, he means through the regiments.


Boulard. By gar, mounsieur Gage, I must depend on you for supply. I have got
one, two, tree brigade dinners bespoke, besides the fat alderman and his lady
from London.


Gage. Then you must send out a party of cooks to forage at Maidstone.


Boulard. Parblue, monsieur Gage, I must look to you, for by gar I have got
nothing in de house to eat.


O Daub. Then the devil burn me if I come to dine with you honey.


Boulard. O, Sire, I have got every ting for you and Monsieur Gage. You shall
have any ting you ike in von moment!


O Daub. Ah, ha, I tank you honey: But pray now, Mr. Blaud, if your own
countrymen were to come over here, would not you be a little puzzled to know
which side to be on?


Boulard. Puzzled! -- parblue Monsieur, I do assure you I love de English ver
well, and vill never leave them vile dey are victorious; and I do love mine own
countrymen very well; but depend on it, Monsieur Gage, I will always stay with
do strongest.


Gage. You see, Mr. O Daub, my friend Monsieur Boulard is divested of all
national prejudice, I assure you.


Boulard. Prejudice -- by gar I have too much honor ever to leave de English
while dey do vin de battle. But, Monsieur Gage, vill you bring your friend, and
taste my vine; I have got every ting for you and your friend, I assure you. M.
Gage, I will never forsake de English so long as dey are victorious; but if
mine own countrymen were to come, and make de English run, I would run a little
way with them; and if mine own countrymen were likely to overtake them, I would
stop short, bow to them, and say, how you do, my ver good countrymen. By gar I
shall be ver glad to see you both, so come along -- but depend on mine honor,
Monsieur Gage, I will never leave de English vile dey do vin de battle. -- No,
never! never! ( Exit.

[Singing.
Gage. Well said Monsieur Boulard.


O Daub. Your sarvant Mr. Blaud, though faith to do him justice, he has forgot
the fashion of his country, for when he is determined to be a rogue he is
honest enough to own it. But pray what connection have you with the suttlers?
You are no victualler here are you?


Gage. Not absolutely a victualler, but I deal in various articles.


O Daub. Indeed.


Gage. Yes, but no business is done here only by contract.


O Daub. A contractor! Why what the devil you are not risen to such preferment
as that sure? I never knew you was able to furnish any contract.


Gage. Nothing more easy; the circumstance depends upon the quantity, not the
quality. I got on very well lately, but at first it brought me in several
confounded scrapes.


O Daub. As how?


Gage. Why, I undertook to serve a regiment with hair powder.


O Daub. Hair powder? What, and you sent them flower I suppose.


Gage. Flower! no, no -- I should have saved nothing by that: I went to the
fountain head -- the pit, and gave 'em a plentiful stock of lime.


O Daub. Lime? brick and mortar lime?


Gage. Yes, brick and mortar lime.


O Daub. And, what the plague, was not the cheat found out?


Gage. Why at first it answered the purpose very well, while the weather was
fine it did charmingly, but one field-day they was all caught in a fine soaking
shower; the smoke ran along the lines, ecod their heads were all slack'd in an
instant, and by the time they returned to the camp, damme if all their heads
were not as smooth as an old half crown.


O Daub. A very cross accident indeed.


Gage. Yes, I stood a near chanceof being tied up to the halberts; but I
excused myself by saying, they looked only like raw recruits before; but now
they appeared like old veterans of service.


O Daub. But you lost your contract I suppose.


Gage. Yes, but I soon got another; a shaving Contract to a company of
grenadiers.


O Daub. 'Faith I never knew you practiced that business.


Gage. Never handled a razor in all my life: I shave by deputy; hired Sam
Sickle down from London -- an excellent hand! handles a razor like a scythe; --
he will mow you down a regiment of beards in the beating a revally.


O Daub. Upon my conscience, a pretty way this of working at secondhand. I wish
myself could do a little by proxy.


Gage. But come, what say you for something to eat, and a glass of my friend
Boulard's wine, and drink his Majesty's health?


O Daub. With all my heart, my dear, and to the two camps if you will.


Gage. Two? -- what two do you mean?


O Daub. Why the one at Coxheath, and the other at Drury Lane.

[Exeunt.
SCENE. -- A Grove near the Camp.
Enter TWO COUNTRYMEN. First Countryman. I TELL you I will certainly list; I
have made up my mind on it.


2nd. C. Well, well, I Will say no more.


1st. C. Besides the camp lies so convenient, I may not have such another
opportunity.


2nd. C. Why its main jolly to be sure and all that so fair. Now if I were to
list, I should like hugely to belong to a regiment of horse, and here is one of
the grandest troop com'd lately. I see'd two of the officers, mighty delicate
looking gentlemen, they were dressed quite different from the others; their
jackets, indeed, are pretty much the same, but then they wear a sort of
petticoat as 'twere, with a large hat and feather, and a mortal sight of hair.
I suppose now they are some of your outlandish troops; your foreign Hessians or
such like,


1st. C. Aye, like enough. Here comes the sarjeant. Ecod he can sing louder
than his own drum. Zooks! see how brave they march. Well, walking is a mighty
dull way of going after all.


Enter SERGEANT, DRUMMER, RECRUITS, etc. SONG.
SERGEANT. Great Caesar once renownd in fame,
For a mighty arm, and a laurel brow,
With his VE-NI, VI-DI, VI-CI came,
And he conquered the world with his row dow dow.
Chor. Row, dow, dow; row, dow, dow,
And he conquered the world, etc.
Then should our vaunting Enemies come,
And winds, and waves their cause allow,
By Freedom's Flag we'll beat our drum,
And they will fly from the sound of our row, dow, dow.
Row, dow, dow, etc.
Then come my lads, our Bounty share,
Whose honest hearts British Valor avow,
In Freedom's cause to Camp repair,
And follow the beat of my row, dow, dow.
Row, dow, dow, etc.




Serj. Come my lads now is your time to serve the King, and make men of
yourselves: Well my lad, what do you say?


2nd. C. I canno' leave my farm.


Sergeant. Your farm? -- what would would you plow and sow for the hungry
Frenchmen to come and reap. Come my lads! let your fields lie fallow this year,
and I Will insure you double crops ever after. Why now here is a fellow made for a
soldier; there is a leg for a spatterdash, with an eye like the King of Prussia.


1st C. Aye, but sergeant, I hanna' the air.


Sergeant. The air, O, we'll soon learn you that; why now here is little Ralph;
there is a fellow for you, he has not been listed afortnight, and see what a
presence -- there is dignity! O, there is nothing like the drill for grace.


1st C. Sergeant, I Am your man.


2nd C. And so am I.


Serj. That Is right my lads; this is much better than to be dragged away like a
slave, or be scratched off the church door for the militia. Now you have
present pay, and the bounty money into the bargain. But come my lads, let me
ask you a few questions, and then the business is done.


TRIO.
Ser. Yet ere you're permitted to list with me,
Answer me strait twice questions three.

1st. C. No lies, master Sergeant, well tell unto you,
For though we be poor lads we are honest and true.

Ser. First, can you drink well?

1st. C. Cheerly, cheerly.

Ser. Each man a gallon?

2nd. C. Nearly, nearly.

Ser. Love a sweet wench too?

Both. Dearly, dearly.

Ser. The answer is honest, bold, and fair;
So drink to the King, for his soldiers you are.

Chorus. The answer is honest, etc.

Ser. When bullets are whizzing around your head,
You Will boldly march on wherever you're led.

2nd. C. To death we'll rush forward without delay,
If good master sergeant, you will show us the way

Ser. Next, can you swear well?

2nd. C. Bluffly, bluffly.

Ser. Handle a frenchman --

1st. C. Roughly, roughly.

Ser. Frown at a cannon?

Both. Gruffly, gruffly.

Ser. The answers are honest, bold, and fair,
So drink to the King for his soldiers you are.

Chorus. The answers are honest, etc.
Huzza! Huzza! Huzza!




Enter NELL. Nell. Well said my lads, I am glad to see so many good hearts in
the country -- O, but was not you saying one of your recruits knows me!


Ser. O, yes Nell, a lad from suffolk. Hark'ye, where is the Suffolk boy as we
call him? O, here he comes.


Enter NANCY. Nancy. Ah sergeant, did you not begin to think you had lost me?
But come, will you leave me a few minutes with Nelly.


Ser. With all my heart. Come, my lads, let us to the heart of oak, where we'll
drink his Majesty's health. ( Exit singing The answer, etc. and two huzzas.


Nancy. Why Nelly, don't you know me?


Nell. Know you? Egad I don't know whether I do or not -- sure it cannot be --
and yet, sure it is Nancy Granger.


Nancy. It is her, my dear Nelly, who kisses you now with the truest sense of
gratitude for your former kindness and friendship.


Nell. My dear girl -- Odso! I must take care of my reputation. -- But what in
the name, of fancy brings you here, and in this dress child?


Nancy. How can you ask me that question, Nelly? You are no stranger to the
love William and I have for each other; a few days would have united us for
ever, had not cruel fate separated us; the regiment being ordered to march
immediately, no resource was then left, but my flying from my father's house: I
procured a dress from one of our neighbors sons, and that love which induced
me to forsake my sex, still supports me under every affliction. Fortunately, on
my way, I met the sergeant, and after some entreaty was inlisted and equipped
as you see. What think you Nell? does not my dress become me?


Nell. Yes, indeed, I think you make a smart little soldier.


Nancy. Why indeed I am rather under size, but I fancy in action I could do
more real execution than those who look bigger, and talk louder. But tell me,
my dear Nelly, where is William? I long to see him: Does he ever speak of his
poor Nancy? sure he cannot be faithless.


Nell. Why really, Nancy, I have some doubts.


Nancy. Heavens! is it possible?


Nell. Ah, my poor little soldier, I only did it to try your affection. Your
William is true, and worthy of your love.


Nancy. You have made a greater shock on my spirits than even an army of
Frenchmen could have done.


AIR.
When War's Alarms enticed my Willy from me,
My fond heart with grief did figh,
Each fresh remembrance brought fresh sorrow on me;
I waked ere yet the morn was nigh,
No other could delight him,
Ah! why did I ere slight him,
Cooly answering his fond tale?
Which drove him far,
Amid the rage of war,
And left silly me thus to bewail.
But I no longer thus, a maid forsaken,
Nor will I mourn like yonder dove,
For ere the dawn tomorrow shall awaken,
I Will go seek my absent love:
The distant hills all over,
I Will fly to seek my lover,
Scorning every threatening fear;
Nor distant shore,
Nor cannon's loud roar,
Shall longer keep me from my dear.



Nell. But, my dear girl, consider, do you think you can cheerfully go through
the toil and fatigue and not repine after your own happy situation you left
behind you?


Nancy. O no, I still must love, though I should regret the occassion of our
difficulties.


Nell. Difficulty? -- Why then marry him at the drum head and that will end all
your difficulties.


AIR.
What can our wisest heads provide
For the child we dote on dearly;
But a merry soul, and an honest heart
In a lad who loves her dearly;
Who with kisses and chat,
And all all that,
Will sooth him late and early,
If the truth she tell,
When she knows him well,
She Will swear she loves him dearly.
Let the prude at the name or sight of man,
Pretend to rail severely;
But alack a day! unseen she will play
With the lad who loves her dearly,
Say old men whate'r they will,
It Is a lover still
Makes day and night roll cheerly
What makes our may
All holiday,
But the lad we dote on dearly.



Nell. Well, my dear Nancy, you must endeavor to throw off that dress as soon
as possible. I Will tell you what, here are some ladies in the camp, who
condescend, to notice me, I Will endeavor to introduce you to them, and they may
be of great service to you: in the mean time, should you by chance meet with
William, besure you don't discover yourself -- Hush! here is the sergeant.


Enter SERGEANT. Ser. Why Nelly, how is this? You have had a long conversation
together; I began to think you had run away with my new recruit.


Nell. O, there is no great danger sergeant; he is no soldier for me; pray is he
perfect in his exercise?


Ser. O, as handy a lad as ever was: Come, youngster, convince her. ( Nancy
goes through the exercise.)


Nell. Very well indeed: But sergeant, I must beg of you to befriend him as
much as you can, for my sake.


Ser. Any service in my power you may command, but a soldier's life is not the
easiest in the world, so they ought to befriend each other.


TRIO.
O the joy! when the trumpets sound,
And the march beats around,
When the steed tears the ground,
And shouts to the skies resound,
On glittering arms the sunbeams playing,
Heighten the soldier's charms.
The sife and the roll of the distant drum
Cry hark! the enemy come!
To arms! the attack's begun.



End of ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A Grove near the Camp.
Enter NELL, speaking without. WILLIAM! come speak to him another time, sure
nothing could be more lucky; however, I must obey their ladyship's
instructions, and keep him in ignorance, that they may be present at the
discovery. Poor fellow, its almost a pity too, when one has it in ones power to
make him so happy.


Enter WILLIAM. Will. I am sorry Nell to make you wait, but it was an old
friend.


Nell. Aye, aye, some one from Suffolk I suppose, who has brought you news of
your dear Nancy.


Will. I wish it had; it is unaccountable that I don't hear from her.


Nell. Unaccountable? not at all: I suppose she has changed her mind.


Will. No Nelly, that is impossible, and you would think so, had you heard how
she plighted her faith to me, and vowed, notwithstanding her parents were my
enemies, nothing but death should prevent our union.


Nell. O, I beg your pardon; if her father and mother indeed are against you,
you need not doubt her constancy. But come, don't be melancholy, I tell you I
want to have you stay somewhere near the Inn, and perhaps I may bring you some
intelligence of her.


Will. How! dear Nell?


Nell. Though Indeed I think you are very foolish to plague yourself so, for even
had Nancy loved you well enough to have carried your knapsack, you would have
been very imprudent to have suffered her.


Will. Aye, but prudence, you know, is not a soldiers virtue. Its our business
to hold life itself cheap, much more the comforts of it. Show me a young fellow
in our regiment who, if he gains the heart of a worthy girl, and afraid to
marry her for want of a little wealth, I would have him drummed out of the
regiment for discretion.


Nell. Very fine! but must not the poor girl share in all your fatigues and
mishaps.


Will. There Nell I own is the objection, but tenderness and affection may
soften even these; yet if my Nancy ever makes the trial, though I may not be
able to prevent her from undergoing hardships, I am sure my affection will make
her wonder at their being called so; I wish I could once boast that the
experiment was made.


AIR.
My Nancy quits the rural train
A camp's distress to prove,
All other ills she can sustain,
But living from her love.
Yet, dearest, though your Soldier's there,
Would not your spirits fail,
To mark the hardships you must share,
Dear Nancy of the dale.
Or should you, love, each danger share,
Ah! how shall I secure,
Your health, 'mid toils which you are born
To soothe, but not endure,
A thousand perils I must view,
A thousand ills assail,
Nor must I tremble even for you,
Dear Nancy of the dale.



SCENE II. -- An open View near the Camp.
Enter O DAUB; O Daub. Well, to be sure this same Camp is a pretty place with
their drums, and their fifes and their gigs and their marches, and their Ladies
in their regimentals; upon my conscience I believe they would form a troop of
side-saddle cavalry if there was any hopes of an invasion. But now I am alone
by myself, it is time I should be after taking my plan; and here I see are some
of my directions for it. ( pulls out a pocket book and pencil.) I cant think
what it is makes my hand shake so, unless it is Mr. Blaud's wine that is got
into my head: so, so! Let me study my orders a little, for I am not used to
this business, O. P. and P. S. Who the devil is to understand that? O! here is
the explanation: P. S. the prompter's side, and O. P. opposite the prompter. So
I Am to mark down the view as it is to be taken on one side, and the other. Very
well: P. S. and O. P. Let me see Somewhere hereabout is certainly the best
point to take it from. ( retires.


Enter SERGEANT and the TWO COUNTRYMEN. 1st. Countryman. There you rogues,
there he is!


2nd. C. Aye aye, that is him sure enough, I have seen him skulking about these
two days, if he ben't a spy I Will suffer hanging.


Ser. He certainly must be a spy by his drawing figures.


2nd. C. Do seize on him or the whole camp may be blown up before we are aware!


O Daub. Prompter's side.


Ser. Hush! we shall convict him out of his own mouth.


O Daub. O yes, the star and garter must certainly be P. S.


Ser. P. S. What the devil does he say?


2nd C. Treason you may be sure, by your not understanding him.


O. Daub. And then O. P. will have the advantage.


Ser. O. P. That Is the old Pretender. A damned Jacobite spy, my life on it.


1st. C. And P. S. is Prince Charles, I suppose.


Ser. No, you fool; P. S. is the Pretender's Son.


2nd. C. Aye, aye, like enough


O. Daub. Memorandum -- the officers tents are in the rear of the line.


2nd. C. Mark that.


O Daub. N B. the Generals tents are all houses.


1st. C. Remember that.


O Daub. Then the park of Artillery; I shall never make any thing of that. Oh!
the devil burn the park of artillery!


Ser. There Is a villain! He Will burn the park of artillery will he?


O Daub. Well faith this camp is easier taken than I thought it was.


Ser. Is it so, you rogue? but you shall find the difference on it. O, what a
providential discovery!


O Daub. To besure the people will like it much, and in the course of the
winter it may surprise his majesty.


Ser. O, the villain! seize him directly -- Fellow, you are a dead man if you
stir! -- We seize you Sir as a spy.


O Daub. A spy -- phoo, phoo; get about your business.


Ser. Bind him, and blinfold him if he resists.


2nd. C. Aye, blindfold him for certain, and search him too; I dare say his
pockets are crowded with powder, matches, and tinder-boxes at every corner.


O Daub. Tunder and owns! what do you mean?


1st. C. Hold him fast


O. Daub. Why here is some ladies coming, who know me. Here Is Lady Sarah Sash,
and Lady Plume, who were at the Fete-Champetre, and will give me a good
character.


Ser. Why, villain, your papers have proved you a spy, and sent by the old
Pretender.


O Daub. O Lord! O Lord! I never saw the old gentleman in all my life.


Ser. Why, you dog, did'n't you say the camp was easier taken than you thought
it was.


2nd. C. Aye, deny that.


Ser. And that you would burn the artillery and surprise his majesty -- so
come, you had better confess before you are hanged.


O Daub. Hanged for a spy? O, to besure myself is got into a pretty scrape.


Ser. Bring him away; but blindfold him, the dog shall see no more.


O Daub. I Will tell you what, Mr. soldier, or Mr. Sarjeant, or what the devil's
your name, upon my conscience and soul I Am nothing at all but an Irish painter
employed by Monsieur Lanternburg,


Ser. There, he has confessed himself a foreigner, and employed by Marshal
Leatherbag.


2nd. C. Oh, he will be convicted by his tongue. You may swear he is a foreigner
by his lingo.


1st. C. Bring him away. I long to see him hanging.


O Daub. Tunder and wounds! If I am hanged what will become of the theater and
the managers; and the devil fly away with you all together for a parcel of red
black-guards! ( They hurry him off.)


SCENE -- Part of the Camp.
Enter, LADY GORGET, LADY SASH, and LADY PLUME. L. Plume. O! my dear lady Sash,
indeed you are too severe; and I Am sure if Lady Gorget had been here she would
have been of my opinion.


L. Sash. Not in the least.


Lady Plume. You must know, she has been rallying my poor brother, Sir Harry
Bouquet, for not being in the militia, and so ill-naturedly.


L. Sash. So he should indeed; but all I said was, he looked so french and so
finical, that I thought he ran a risque of being mistaken for another female
chevalier.


L. Plume. Yet, you must confess, that our situation is open to a little
raillery: A few elegancies of accommodation are considerably wanting, though
one's toilet, as Sir Harry says, is not absolutely spread on a drum-head.


L. Sash. He vows there is an eternal confusion between stores military, and
millinery; such a description he gives -- On one shelf, cartriges and and
cosmetics, pouches and patches; here a stand of arms, there a file of black
pins; in one drawer bullet-moulds and essence-bottles, pistols and tweezer
cases, with battle-powder mixed with marechelle.


L. Gorget. O, the malicious creature!


L. Plume. But pray, Lady Sash, don't renew it, for see here comes Sir Harry to
join us.


Enter SIR HARRY BOUQUET. Sir Harry. Now, Lady Sash, I beg a truce; Lady Gorget
I am rejoiced to see you at this delectable spot, where Lady Plume, you may be
amused with such a dismal variety.


L. Gorget. You see, Lady Plume, he perseveres.


L. Sash. I assure you, Sir Harry, I should have been against you in your
raillery.


Sir Harry. Now as Gad's my judge, I admire the place; here is all the pride,
pomp, and circumstance of glorious war! Mars in a vis-a-vis, and Bellona giving
a Fete-Champetre.


L. Plume. But now, seriously brother, what can make you judge so indifferently
of the camp from any body else?


Sir Harry. Why seriously then, I think it the worst planned thing I ever
beheld, for instance now, the tents are all ranged in a strait line, now Lady
Gorget, can any thing be worse than a strait line; and is not there a horrid
uniformity in their infinite vista of canvas? no curve, no break, and the
avenue of marquees abominable.


L. Sash. O, to be sure a circus or a crescent would have been vastly better.


L. Gorget. What a pity Sir Harry was not consulted.


Sir Harry. As Gad's my judge I think so; for there is great capability in the
ground.


Lady Sash. A camp cognoscenti possitively, Sir Harry, we will have you publish
a treatise on military virtue.


Sir Harry. Very well, but how will you excuse this; the officer's tents are
close to the common soldiers; what an arrangment is that now? If I might have
advised, there certainly should have been one part for the canaille, and the
west end of the camp for the noblesse and persons of a certain rank.


L. Gorget. Very right. I dare say you would have thought of proper marquees
for hazard and quinze.


L. Plume. To be sure, with festino tents, and opera pavilions.


Sir Harry. Gad, the only plan that could make it supportable for a week; Well,
certainly the greatest defect in a general is want of taste.


L. Sash Undoubtedly, and conduct, discipline, and want of humanity, are no
atonements for it.


Sir Harry. None in nature.


L. Plume. But, Sir Harry, it is rather unlucky that the military spirit is so
universal, for you will hardly find one to side with you.


Sir Harry. Universal indeed; and the ridicule of it is to see how this madness
had infected the whole road from Maidstone to London; the camp jargon is as
current all the way as bad silver; the very postillions that drive you talk of
their cavalry, and refuse to charge on a trot up the hill, the turnpikes seem
converted into redoubts, and the dogs demanded the countersign of my servants,
instead of the tickets; then when I got to Maidstone I found the very waiters
had got a smattering of tactics, for enquiring what I could have for dinner, a
cursed drilled waiter, after reviewing his bill of fare, with the air of a
field marshal, proposed an advanced party of soup and bouille to be followed by
the main body of ham and chickens, flanked by a fricasee, with sallads in the
intervals and corpse de reserve of sweetmeats, and whipped syllabubs to form a
hollow square in the center:


L. Plume. Ha! ha! ha! Sir Harry, I am very sorry you have so strong a dislike
to every thing militaty; for unless you would contribute to the fortune of our
little recruit --


Sir Harry. O madam, most willingly; and very apropos here comes your
ladyship's protagec, and has brought I see the little recruit, as you desired.


Enter NELL and NANCY. Nell. Here Nancy make your curtsey, or your bow to the
ladies, who have so kindly promised you protection.


Nancy. Simple gratitude is the only return I can make, but I am sure the
ladies who have hearts to do so good natured a deed, will excuse my not being
able to answer them as I ought.


Nell. She means, an' please your ladyships, that she will always acknowledge
your ladyships goodness to the last hour of her life, and, as in duty bound,
will ever pray for your ladyships happiness and prosperity. That Is what you
mean, you know. ( aside to Nancy.


L. Plume. Very well: But, Nancy, are you satisfied that your soldier shall
continue in his duty.


Nell. O yes, your ladyship, she is quite satisfied.


L. Plume. Well child, we are all your friends, and be assured your William
shall be no sufferer by his constancy.


Nell. There Nancy, say something.


L. Sash. But are you sure you will be able to bear the hardships of your
situation. ( retires up with Nancy.


L. Plume. ( to Nell.) You have seen him then?


Nell. O, yes, your ladyship.


L. Plume. Go and bring him here. ( Exit Nell.) Sir Harry we have a little
plot, which you must assist us in.


Nancy. ( Coming forward with Lady Sash) O, madam, most willingly.


SONG.
The fife and drum sounds merrily,
A soldier, a soldier's the lad for me;
With my true love I soon shall be;
For who so kind, so true as he;
With him in every toil I Will share,
To please him shall be all my care;
Each peril I Will dare, all hardship I Will bear,
For a soldier, a soldier's the lad for me.
Then if kind heaven preserve my love,
What rapturous joys shall Nancy prove?
Swift through the camp shall my footsteps bound,
To meet my William with conquest crowned,
Close to my faithful bosom pressed,
Soon shall he hush his cares to rest;
Clasped in these arms, forget wars alarms,
For a soldier, a soldier's the lad for me.



L. Plume. Now Nancy, you must be ruled by us.


Nancy. As I live there is my dear William!


L. Plume. Turn from him -- you must.


Nancy. O, I shall discover myself -- I tremble so unlike a soldier.


Enter NELL with WILLIAM. Nell. Why I tell you, William, the ladies want to ask
you some questions.


Sir Harry, Honest corporal, here is a little recruit, son to a tenant of mine,
and, as I am told, you are an intelligent young fellow, I mean to put him under
your care.


Will. What that boy, your honor? Lord bless you sir, I shall never be able to
make any thing of him.


Nancy. ( aside.) I am sorry for that,


L. Sash. Nay corporal, he is very young,


Will. He is under-size, my lady, such a stripling is fitter for a drummer than
a rank and file.


Sir Harry. But he is straight and well made.


Nancy. I wish I was ordered to right about.


Will. Well I Will do all in my power to oblige your ladyship. Come youngster,
turn about -- ah, Nelly! -- tell me, is it not she?


Sir Harry. Why don't you march him off?


Nell. Is he undersize corporal? O, you block-head!


Nancy. O ladies pray excuse me! -- My dear William! ( runs in his arms.


Nell. They Will never be able to come to an explanation before your ladyships --
Go, go and talk by yourselves. ( they retire up the stage.


Enter SERGEANT, two COUNTRYMEN, Fife etc. Ser. Please your ladyships, we have
taken a sort of a spy this morning, who has the assurance to deny it, though he
confesses himself an Irish painter. I have undertaken however to bring this
letter from him to lady Sarah Sash.


Sir. Harry. What appears against him?


Ser. A great many suspicious circumstances, please your honor; he has an O
before his name, and we took him with a draught of the camp in his hand.


L. Sash. Ha, ha ha! this is ridiculous enough, it is O Daub, the Irish painter,
who diverted us sometime ago at the Fete-Champetre. Honest sergeant we'll see
your prisoner, and I fancy you may release him.


Sir Harry. Pray sergeant what is to be done this evening?


Ser. The line, your honor, turns out, and as there are pleasure tents
pitched, perhaps the ladies will condescend to hear a march and chorus, which
some recruits are practicing against his majesty comes to the camp.


L. Sash. Come Sir Harry, you will grow fond of a camp life yet.


Sir Harry. Your ladyships will grow tired of it first I Will answer for it.


L. Sash. No, no.


Sir Harry. Yes, on the first bad weather you will give orders to strike your
tents and toilets, and secure a retreat at Tunbridge.


A march while the scene changes to a View of the Camp. FINALE.
SERGEANT. While the loud voice of war resounds from afar,
Songs of duty and triumph we'll pay;
When our Monarch appears, we'll give him three cheers,
With huzza! huzza! huzza!

NANCY. Ye sons of the field, whose bright valor's your shield,
Love and beauty your toils shall repay;
Inspired by the charms, of wars fierce alarms,
Huzza! huzza! huzza!

WILLIAM. Inspired by my love all dangers I Will prove,
No perils shall William dismay;
In wars fierce alarms, inspired by those charms,
Huzza! huzza! huzza!

CHORUS. May true glory still wave her bright banners around,
Still with fame, power and freedom old England be crowned.




FINIS.

