THE RAGE: A COMEDY.

PRICE TWO SHILLINGS.

THE RAGE: A COMEDY.

AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.

BY FREDERICK REYNOLDS.

You fashionable People are very vulgar! GINGHAM. THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. N. LONGMAN, PATERNOSTER ROW.

M DCC XCV.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Gingham Mr. Lewis. Darnley Mr. Pope. Sir George Gauntlet Mr. Middleton. The
Hon. Mr. Savage Mr. Fawcett. Sir Paul Perpetual Mr. Quick. Flush Mr. Munden.
Ready Mr. Davenport. Signor Cygnet Mr. Bernard. Waiter Mr. Rees. Servant to Sir
George Mr. Abbott. Servants to the Hon. Mr. Savage Mr. Ledger. Servants to the
Hon. Mr. Savage Mr. Wild. Servant to Mr. Flush Mr. Cross. Groom Mr. Simmonds.
Clara Sedley Mrs. Mountain. Lady Sarah Savage Mrs. Mattocks. Mrs. Darnley Mrs.
Pope.
PROLOGUE TO THE RAGE.
( Written by JAMES BOADEN, Esquire.)
SPOKEN by Mr. HOLMAN. HOW narrow is the sphere a modern Bays
Is doomed to range, while he contrives his Plays;
Still urged by folly, Beings to explore,
Whom he and you so often saw before:
Precluded characters by their advance,
Whose minds could pierce through Nature with a glance,
And still of right possess the moral Stage
With lessons studied in a distant age;
In this, our glass, you yet reflected find
The levities which lessen human kind:
The lighter follies which the Town engage,
All that prevail in fashion makes -- the Rage;
Yes, all! though various be the motly forms,
That sway by weak'ning, or compel in storms:
That up to Fop evaporate the Lord;
Or down to Jockey sink the Maid adored;
Confound distinctions, firm and frail perplex,
And make it difficult -- to guess even sex.
But is the Rage to levity confined?
Does no just passion sway the general mind?
Lo! the rough Veteran, whom his Country's claim,
Rouses to vindicate her injured name!
The Rage is Conquest which his bosom fires,
The foe yields! then -- no! then his rage expires.
When in some dreadful contest on the wave
The gallant seaman finds a watery grave,
Ever the last pulse of ebbing life be over,
When the eye turns toward his native shore,
This thought may even the parting pang assuage
That, there -- Humanity is still the Rage.
Our Author's Muse follows with fashion's gale,
Down a smooth river an amusive sail;
She dares no sea where boisterous passions sway,
Or merely dips her wing, and hastes away.
O may her airy toil your love engage,
And her new flight to please you be -- The Rage.

EPILOGUE TO THE RAGE.
( Written by EDWARD TOPHAM, Esquire.)
SPOKEN by Mrs, MATTOCKS. WELL, Gentlefolks, again your most obedient;
That I Am the Epilogue is held expedient:
Our Bard, who for a youth well knows the Stage,
Thought as to speaking, Women were "The Rage,"
And said -- "Good Mrs. Mattocks, pray, advance;
Females must now step forward as in France."
My answer was -- my dear, kind Sir, have pity,
"Pray spare the Ladies -- Men secure our city.
"For armed by Parliament, to calm each fear,
"Huge corpse of Common-Councilmen appear,
"Wards, Liveries, Deputies, en Militaire,
"Led by Lieutenant Colonel -- my Lord Mayor!
"Each man, (a sight at which his Lady swoons,)
"Belt, sabre, helmet, spurs, and pantaloons!
"Dear Chuck" -- says Spouse -- "pray sit at home, do yielde,
"Consider, Love, your age; you grow unwieldy;
"Good twenty stone, Dear, cannot play about,
"Besides those cold Jack Boots hurt Lovey's Gout."
"Gout! vulgar nonsense Voman -- Gout! Gad's curse,
"Heavy! why I Am a private of Light Horse --
"Dress! wheel! charge! -- Could I on Horseback get
"I or my horse would do some mischief yet.'
Thus, meaning no offense, in language faint,
The City Rage for soldiering we paint.
But sure no sons of Briton, wish represt
That zeal which leads one man to serve the rest;
Which strives due right and order to maintain,
Against a Chaos that would come again.
Long may such Rage inspire the English mind!
In neighboring Climes a different "Rage" we find;
Poor Jean Francois who shouts for Liberte
Finds Slavery still the Order of the Day!
"Ma foi! he cries -- no people blessed as we
They force me out to fight to make me free,
Den! vif! alert! -- begar we must not tarry,
My Vife, for common good, oblige to marry:
She labor for the State, tant mieux pour elle,
She forget me -- I her -- c'est Bagatelle!
Allons au Guerre! L'eau de vie banish sorrow,
Victoire today -- La Guillotine tomorrow!"
English Tom Blunt, a dealer in small wares,
Who knows a bit what is passing above stairs.
Cries -- "Why in that there change of wives so fast
"I think a good one mayhap may come at last,
"But in that gulleting machine, do you see,
"I Have no idea how it makes one free:
"For my part now, whatever may be said,
"I Am for a little meat, and safe warm bed,
"I does not relish freedom -- when one's dead;
"So once for all my means and resolution
"Go, to stand by the good old Constitution."
Such and so different reign with sovereign power,
The various "Rages" of the present hour.
I wish, in truth I wish in very spite,
Your Rage may be, to see us many a night.

THE RAGE: A COMEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- DARNLEY'S Garden, and view of his small Villa.
Enter DARNLEY and Sir GEORGE GAUNTLET. SIR GEORGE. AND so, Darnley, you prefer
this solitary life, to all the joys of London -- to be sure you have a nice snug
Villa, and a charming wife here -- but its dull -- the scene tires -- it wants
variety, Harry.


Darnley. No, Sir George. -- Since I retired to this peaceful spot, I have not
had a wish beyond it: I Have been so happy in that humble cottage, that when I Am
doomed to leave it, the world will be a waste, and life not have a charm!


Sir George. How you are altered, Darnley? When we were brother officers you
were the greatest rake in the regiment; but from the time we were quartered at
Worcester, where you first beheld Miss Dormer --


Darnley. I saw the folly of my former life; I owned the power of her superior
charms, and leaving a busy and tumultuous world, retired with her to this
sequestered scene -- it is now three years since I married.


Sir George. And from that time to this, have you lived in this out-of-the-way
place?


Darnley. Yes: and till you yesterday honored me with a visit, I have not seen
a friend within my doors -- but is not it a happy life, Sir George? Our
affections have room to shoot -- care and distrust are banished from our
cottage, and with such a woman as Mrs. Darnley to converse with, what is the
world to me? I can defy and scorn its malice.


Sir George. She Is an angelic creature indeed, Darnley: and at Worcester, I had
myself nearly fallen a victim to her charms; but about your future life -- do
you mean to live for ever in these woods and meadows?


Darnley. No -- would to heaven I could! -- I fear I must forego my present
calm, and mix in active life again: When I married, I sold my commission, you
remember, to purchase this small farm -- Mrs. Darnley's portion was but a
trifle, and an increasing family has so enlarged my expenses, that unless I
return to the army --


Sir George. Ah -- you want to be raking again?


Darnley. No -- I want to secure an independence for my family -- I want to see
my children affluent, and to attain this, I have once more applied to my uncle
Sir Paul Perpetual, who was so offended at my selling out, that he has ever
since abandoned me.


Sir George. What -- does the old beau still persevere in his resentment?


Darnley. His anger has increased; for he writes me word; he intends marrying
Lady Sarah Savage, on purpose to have heirs more worthy his estate: -- Oh! my
friend: -- it is hard, that fortune should bestow such treasures, and then
compel me to desert them?


Sir George. So it is: but now I think on it, this Lady Sarah Savage and her
brother are my intimate friends; and as you are their neighbors, I Will
introduce you and Mrs. Darnley to their notice -- When are they expected from
town?


Darnley. To day.


Sir George. Then we'll pay them a visit: Lady Sarah Savage shall interfere
with your uncle, and if that fails, her brother can easily ensure your
promotion in the army -- but see; here is Mrs. Darnley?


Darnley. Look at her, Sir George -- do you, can you blame me? -- who would not
act as I have done?


Sir George. I would by heavens! -- I Would live with her in a hermitage! -- die
with her on a pilgrimage! -- I Would -- sdeath: if I don't mind, I shall discover
all.

Aside.
Enter Mrs. DARNLEY. Darnley advancing to her. Maria!


Mrs. Darnley. Oh Harry! -- I have been looking for you every where -- I
declare you're grown quite a truant -- Before your friend came, you used to
walk with me over the farm: or ride with me to see our children; or sit and
read to me under our favorite Beach Tree -- but now -- Sir George! -- I beg
your pardon -- I didn't see you before.


Sir George. Madam!

Bowing obsequiously.
Darnley. My friend is all kindness, Maria; he has promised to introduce me to
the honorable Mr. Savage:


Mrs. Darnley. What: -- take you to Savage house!


Darnley. Ay -- why not: -- you shall go with me.


Mrs. Darnley. No -- let me stay here -- I am not weary of my present life.


Darnley. Nor I -- but it is a great connection: and though not absolutely
distressed, I would improve my fortune -- I would see you and my children have
every comfort.


Mrs. Darnley. We have, while you are with us -- consider we have never lived a
day apart, and if they lure you into fashionable scenes, you will be corrupted,
Harry -- you will despise the humble roof you once revered, and I perhaps shall
be forgotten and neglected.


Darnley. Never! -- I cannot bear the supposition; and while we have hearts to
endure, and hands to labor, there is sufficient for our cottage! -- I will not
go -- My friend, who sees my motive, I Am sure, will not condemn me.


Sir George. No -- always obey the Ladies; but Darnley, I see our horses -- you
recollect we were to ride to see your children: so, Madam, I have the
superlative honor --


Enter CLARA SEDLEY -- a basket of flowers is hanging on her arm, and she is
eating an apple. Sir George. What, Clara! -- been picking flowers my angel! --
well! -- I thought they had all died -- all died from envy egad! ha! ha! --
excuse me -- I never laugh but at my own wit.


Clara. Do you? then you laugh very seldom, I believe.


Sir George. No -- very often: for I take the joke though nobody else does, ha!
ha! -- come Darnley -- adieu Ladies -- I Will not run away with him! --


(Exit Darnley and Sir George.) Clara. What a coxcomb it is! -- and if he
was not a duellist into the bargain, I Would tell Mr. Darnley all my suspicions --
that I would -- but he is so fond of fighting, that I heard him say, he once
sent a man a challenge for wafering a letter instead of sealing it. -- I wish
he was gone.


Mrs. Darnley. Indeed so do I, cousin -- Mr. Darnley is so changed since he
arrived -- his ideas so enlarged -- he talks of visiting at Savage House, of
improving his fortune.


Clara. Fortune! -- ay: and this morning he gave me his note for two hundred
pounds, begging me to get one of my guardians to lend money upon it -- his
excuse was that his expenses exceeded his income, and by his uncle's marriage
with Lady Sarah Savage, all his expectations were ruined -- Now, my life on it,
this is all Sir George's doings -- He has stole into our cottage like the
Arch-fiend into paradise, and I will not eat another apple while he stays!

(Throws away the apple she is eating.)
Mrs. Darnley. Is Darnley then distressed? -- Oh Clara!


Clara. Don't be unhappy -- I shall apply to both my guardians; Sir Paul and
Mr. Flush, they are now at Bath, and one way or other the Villa shall flourish
still -- Lord! I shall have plenty of money when I come of age, and I Will throw
it all into the scale, and come and plant, sow, and reap with you and your
husband.


Mrs. Darnley. What give up the gaieties of London, cousin?


Clara. London! ay: I hate it -- I once passed a month there, but they hurried
me so from sight to sight, that in the bustle all places appeared alike -- I
saw no difference -- And, if you will believe me, one morning after seeing
Westminster Hall in term time, they took me inside Bedlam; and so confused was
I, that I didn't know the lawyers and their clients, from the keepers and their
patients.

(Signor Cygnet without). "Trompite, trompite tra!"


(Singing an Italian air.) Mrs. Darnley. Who can this be?

Enter Signor CYGNET, spying. "Tra -- tra -- tra!"

(Singing.)
Clara. Bless us! -- What animal's this?


Mrs. Darnley. He has mistaken his way, I suppose -- Sir -- (Signor don't
regard her.) I beg pardon, Sir -- but perhaps you don't know that this garden
--


Signor. "Beviamo tutta tree!" -- ah, ha! -- les Demoiselles! -- Ladies, a votre
service. --


Mrs. Darnley. Sir!

(Curtseying.)
Signor. I and the Honorable Mister Savage arrive last night -- ce Matin I
take a my little valk -- see your small Chateau, and am so enchante w^^h the
spectacle that -- me voici! -- I honor you with my first visit -- eh bien! --
vat is your names?


Clara. Our names! -- rather we should ask yours.


Signor. Mine! -- Diable! -- do you not know me?


Clara. No -- how should we?


Signor. Vat! not know I am Signor Cygnet -- de first Violin in Europe! de best
composer in de whole world! -- de husband of Signora Cygnet -- de great singer
at de opera -- de professional -- de Abbey -- de -- Marbleu! -- and am I not
myself?


Clara. No -- I don't think you are yourself.


Mrs. Darnley. And so, Sir, you are on a visit at Mr. Savage's?


Signor. Oui -- in my vay to Bath I condescend to pass a few days there -- Lady
Sarah Savage, she love music, or pretend to love -- vich is de same ting you
know -- they entertain me comme ca -- give me good dinners, and take ticketts
for mine and my vife's concert -- mais there be two tings I don't like.


Clara. And what are they, Sir?


Signor. Vy Mister Savage, he give me cold suppers and sleep in the best bed
himself -- Now, begar! -- I will have hot suppers and de best bed, or else I
take a my fiddle and promenez -- "Malbrouk s'en va, etc." (Singing.) -- De
grand Duke -- O! de grand Duke -- he never use me thus -- never -- jamais!


Clara. The Grand Duke!


Signor. Oui -- ven I was at Florence how you tink he treat me? accoutez -- he
quarrel with all his Ministers -- all but one!


Clara. And who was that one?


Signor. Me! -- me he shake by the hand and go to my vife's benefit tout le
meme -- de same as ever!


Clara. -- [To Mrs. Darnley.] Upon my word, music seems so important a science,
that I think you had better let your little boy have some lessons -- it is
necessary for his education -- is not it, Signor?


Signor. Necessaire! -- ma foi: it is de only education nowadays -- never mind
vat you call Latin and Greek -- put de fiddle in his little hand and let him
scrape away! den he vill be great man -- like me: and call for hot supper and
best bed verever he go!


Mrs. Darnley. What! shall I give up making a parson of him, Clary?


Signor. Parson! -- pif! -- vat is de parson to de musician? -- he ride his old
white horse -- preach away at four or five churches, and vat he get? -- forty
pounds a year -- Eh bien! I and my vife ride in vis-a-vis -- sing only ven we
like, and make five thousand a year -- ah ha! voila la difference! -- Parson!
-- begar! de blind fiddler get more money!


Mrs. Darnley. More shame for the country then, where foreign arrogance is so
rewarded, and gentlemanly merit so insulted -- come Clara --


Re-enter Sir George GAUNTLET. Sir George Don't be alarmed, Mrs. Darnley; but I
and your husband have just been present at an accident, that --


Mrs. Darnley. An accident, sir!


Sir George. Yes: Lady Sarah Savage, who is one of those ladies called female
phaetoneers, was driving four in hand across the heath; the horses took fright,
and ran away with her, when Darnley, with more gallantry than prudence, rode
ahead of the unruly animals, and stopped them on the edge of a precipice.


Mrs. Darnley. Heaven be praised! -- and where is the lady, sir?


Sir George. My friend is conducting her to the villa, where he begs you will
instantly join them.


Mrs. Darnley. By all means -- come --


To Clara. Clara. Signor, will not you assist your friend?


Signor. Non -- I am musician, not physician, and my head is so full of de tune.


Clara. So full of de vapor, he means -- like the inside of his own violin --
come cousin -- now is not it a pity, that while we have butterflies and
bullfinches in the garden, we should be tormented with coxcombs and fiddlers --
insects, adieu


Exeunt Clara and Mrs. Darnley. Sir George. Signor, I rejoice to see you; you
have often assisted me in my amors, and I now want your aid more than ever.


Signor. Eh bien! -- my vife has a concert at Bath next week.


Sir George. Has she! then I Will give a dinner to some Somersetshire bumpkins,
and force off a score or two of tickets -- You saw the lady I first spoke to --
she has won my heart, and I have won her husband's.


Signor. Dat is good -- den if you make de discord between them --


Sir George. Ay, Sgnior: if I excite jealousy! and this accident has sprung the
mine -- Lady Sarah Savage is already half in love with Darnley -- She has
invited him to Savage house, and if he takes Mrs. Darnley along with him --


Signor. Dey will be both out of tune for ever -- ah ha! I go to Mr. Savage,
toutesuite.


Sir George. Do -- and increase Lady Sarah's love for Darnley -- assist in all
my schemes; triumph I must, and will; for I offered Mrs. Darnley my hand long
before this husband won her heart.


Signor. I will be first fiddle rest assure -- tenez; I will compose two
duettos -- one between Lady Sarah Savage and de husband -- de other between you
and de vife -- allons. You no conceive the power of music, Sir George.


Sir George. I do, Signor -- for as Shakespeare says: There Is naught so
stockish, hard and full of rage, but music for a time does change its nature.


Signor. Shakespeare! vat is dat Shakespeare? He never compose a single tune,
and dough at present he make a little noise, begar, you will soon find de fiddle
and de bravura vill lay him on de shelf -- nowadays, sound always get de
better of sense, mon ami -- Ah ha! venez! you no forget my vife's benefit.


Exeunt. SCENE II. -- A Room inside Mr. DARNLEY'S Villa, Prints, Books, Fowling
Pieces, Fishing Tackle, etc.
Enter Mrs. DARNLEY and CLARA. Mrs. Darnley. Well Clara: if Lady Sarah Savage
be a picture of town-bred women of fashion, let me remain a plain simple rustic
all my life -- Did you ever see any thing so confident -- so masculine -- her
brother too! "What you call impudence," says he, "we call ease."


Clara. Ay: they are a precious pair; and yet in London they are both the Rage!
-- quite at the top of the beau monde -- But, cousin, they have ordered their
carriages, and insist on our going to Savage house -- Mercy on us! what is to
become of two lambs amongst such a parcel of wolves?


Mrs. Darnley. This is Sir George's scheme: to delude Mr. Darnley from this
tranquil spot into fashionable life, is the first step toward affecting his
base designs -- He told Mr. Savage about your fortune too --


Clara. I know it: and the vulgar man made downright love to me directly; --
'faith-Coz. I believe Sir George wants to get me married, and you unmarried.


Lady Sarah Savage without.) Bring round the Phaeton, and do you hear -- don't
tighten the curbs -- I Will whip and gallop them every inch of the road.


Clara. "She Will whip and gallop them!" there now! -- this is one of the modern
breed of fine ladies, who, instead of being feminine and tender, have the Rage
for confidence and boldness -- Look at her dress -- she is more like a man than
a woman, and her language is as masculine as her manners.


Enter Lady SARAH SAVAGE dressed in a great coat, with a number of capes; a
plain round beaver hat; a fur tippet and sash. Boot shoes, a whip in her hand,
and a riding habit, under great coal; two grooms enter with her. Lady Sarah.
John, exercise the pointers, and the hounds -- I shall shoot tomorrow, and
hunt the next day.


Groom. Any thing else, madam?


Lady Sarah. No -- nothing -- Oh yes: call at the taylor's and enquire for my
fencing jacket -- tell him I broke two foils in my last rencontre, and ask him
if any body ought to make assaults in a gown and petticoat? -- Ah! my little
dears -- here (Seeing Mrs. Darnley and Clara, she makes them pull off her great
coat, which the groom takes.) Well! and how do ye do? Oh William! -- tell the
recruiting sergeant I must learn the new military maneuvers, and bid him bring
the largest fusil in the regiment -- there -- go along --


Groom Exeunt. Mrs. Darnley. I hope you have recovered your fright, ma'am.


Lady Sarah. Recovered! -- heh! -- why, where is my deliverer! -- my dear
charming Mr. Darnley?


Mrs. Darnley. Madam!


Lady Sarah. He is certainly the most divine engaging creature -- I mean to
take him home with me, and the Phaeton is waiting -- so call him, child -- (to
Clara.) call him directly.


Clara. Call: -- whom, madam?


Lady Sarah. Why, Mr. Darnley, to be sure; what does the girl stare at? -- did
she never see a person of quality before.


Clara. Never -- its the first time, ma'am; and if this is the specimen, I hope
it will be the last: -- I Will call Mr. Darnley.


Exit. Lady Sarah. I wish I was like you, my dear -- I wish I was married --
its so comfortable -- so convenient -- heigho! -- I shall be so glad when old
Sir Paul is my stalking horse -- my husband I mean -- shall not you, Mrs. --


Mrs. Darnley. Excuse me, madam: when I reflect, that Sir Paul is Mr. Darnley's
uncle, and by your union he is deprived of all his future fortune, you cannot
blame me, if --


Lady Sarah. Deprive my dear Darnley of his fortune! -- so it does -- well! --
that is vastly droll! -- but then it makes mine, which is the same thing you
know -- See! -- here is my bear of a brother! -- you have no idea what low, vulgar
company he keeps? -- nothing but Buffoons, Bow-street Officers, and Boxers! --
and only conceive, my dear, me and my friends mixing in such horrid society.


Mrs. Darnley. Surely Mr. Savage cannot wish --


Lady Sarah. He does, ma'am: and only conceive I say my intimate acquaintance
-- people of the first consequence -- such as Signor Cygnet, the husband of the
fine Soprano -- Monsieur Puppitini, the inventor of the dear Fantoccini, and
Count Spavin the greatest of Horse Doctors -- only imagine such picked company
as this, mixing with my brother's low-liv'd wretched crew.


Mrs. Darnley. Indeed, ma'am, people of rank ought to set a better example.


Enter the Honorable Mr. SAVAGE. Savage. So Savage -- sister I mean -- I lost
ten pounds by your silly accident -- The moment I saw the horses off, I said to
my friends around me, ten pounds to five, the driver gets a tumble -- "done!"
-- "it is a bett" says I -- away flew the racers, -- snap went the reins -- five
to four in my savor! -- when plague on it! the Squire rode across, stopped the
carriage -- you saved your neck, and I -- lost my wager.


Lady Sarah. You brute: did you ever hear your brother, Lord Savage, talk in
this manner?


Savage. My brother! -- pough! -- he is a gentleman to be sure -- proud,
independent, and all in the grandee style -- but I! -- I Am not like him -- I Am
a man of fashion -- I Am not a gentleman.


Lady Sarah. No -- that you are not upon my honor.


Savage. I am the hero of my society -- he is the slave of his -- he keeps high
company, ma'am (To Mrs. Darnley,) lives with judges, generals, and admirals --
but does he ever encourage the arts and sciences? does he ever shake hands with
men of genius? such as peace officers, tennis play'rs, and boxers -- no, no --
that was left for me.


Lady Sarah. Yes: and though born to wealth and titles, there you stand, that
have been six times bottle holder at a boxing match! -- vulgar science! -- I
hope Sir Paul don't understand it.


Savage. No -- not now -- but if he makes you his wife, it may be necessary he
should, learn, -- I say, ma'am, that was a straight one -- was not it.


Mrs. Darnley. Indeed I don't know, sir; -- Would Mr. Darnley were here! -- I
am unequal to their society; but from the little I have learnt, I think one
hour of domestic life worth all this new unintelligible scene.


Savage. Hark'ye: (to Lady Sarah,) here is a letter from the old beau, Sir Paul
-- he is coming to Bath, and can only stay one day with us, in his way; but as
people of quality are not always people of quantity you know, he shall not stir,
till the marriage is effected -- mum! -- I Will keep him close --


Enter DARNLEY. Savage. Ha! squire! -- come Mrs. Darnley; (takes her by the
hand.) I Will drive you and your pretty cousin --


Mrs. Darnley. Sir, I am unused to visiting; unfit --


Savage. Nonsense! -- I never take an excuse; when I ask people to my house, I
make them go when I like -- stay while I like, and behave as I like -- so come
along -- squire mind you don't snap the reins; and do you hear; as my sister is
rather lame -- only just recovered from the gout --


Lady Sarah. The gout! -- how dare you, sir?


Savage. What! -- do you deny it? -- do you disown having been our'd by a quack
doctor, and returning him thanks in all the papers? Lady Sarah Savage informs
Dr. Panacea, that his alagaronic antispasmodonic tincture, has entirely removed
the gout from the extremities, and she now hunts, shoots, eats and drinks more
freely than ever! -- now is not it a shame, ma'am? between them, they plunder
both the patient and the physician. -- The quack cheats the doctor of his fee,
and the woman robs the man of his gout.


Exit with Mrs. DARNLEY. Lady Sarah. Oh, Mr. Darnley! -- I am so glad you're
going to Savage house -- 'twill be such a relief -- come -- I Will appoint you my
rural Cicisbeo -- my guardian shepherd -- you saved my life, and I will not let
you die for me, I am determined!


Exeunt. END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE I. -- The Honorable Mr. SAVAGE'S Park and Garden -- a Canal with a
Vessel on it -- a Bridge -- a Temple surrounded with Weeping Willows -- at the
Wing a Portico and Steps leading to the House.
Enter DARNLEY and Sir GEORGE GAUNTLET from the Portico. Sir George. Why now
indeed you are an altered man?


Darnley. I am -- I am -- the wine -- the scene -- the company -- has so
transported me, that I begin to think I Am not quite sober, Sir George -- I do
indeed.


Sir George. No wonder at it -- you have led the life of a recluse and every new
scene dazzles you -- you are like a nun escaped from a convent.


Darnley. No -- more like a Friar in one -- at least if I may judge by my
eating and drinking -- But my friend -- this is a glorious place, and I begin
to think I Have lived too long out of the world -- cooped up in a cottage --
buried in a farm -- What did I know of life and all its pleasures?


Sir George. Ay: what indeed? -- in town -- and Savage-house is the same thing
you see; for they always bring London into the country with them -- but Lady
Sarah, Darnley -- I saw you at dinner; -- she gave you such affectionate looks.
--


Darnley. Fie! fie Sir George -- you forget -- I am a married man.


Sir George. A married man! -- what then!


Darnley. Why then I love my wife -- I do -- I tenderly love her -- and when I
choose to play the fool, let me expose myself, but not wound her for heaven's
sake!


Sir George. Nonsense! -- you don't know Lady Sarah -- she is one of those
confident females, who will not let a man escape -- who mark you for their prey --
lure you into their talons; and, if you don't yield, will so claw you. --


Darnley. What! make me love her whether I will or not?


Sir George. Certainly: but consider the advantages of her friendship: first
she can get you promotion in the army; secondly, by gaining an ascendancy over
her, you may prevent her marrying your uncle; and thirdly, you can provide for
your family without injuring your honor -- there! -- there is an opportunity!


Darnley. That Is true; and if I thought -- hark'ye; as we are alone, and you're
my best of friends -- I Have got a letter from her! the Signor brought it me --
here! (taking out a letter.) -- She appoints me to meet her in her
dressing room.


Sir George. Bravo, Signor! -- (aside) -- let us read. -- (Reads the Letter.) --
Lady Sarah Savage, having something particular to communicate to Mr. Darnley,
begs to see him in her dressing room in an hour's time. -- Go by all means, --
go, I insist.


Darnley. Why, if I can persuade her not to marry Sir Paul, or even get her to
interfere with him -- I Will go! -- I Am fixed -- I Will write to her this instant.
He that essays no danger gains no praise!


Enter the Honorable Mr. SAVAGE hastily. Savage. Joy! joy my lads! Sir Paul is
arrived! and how do you think the old boy introduced himself to my porter? --
"Tell your master, says he, a young gentleman desires to see him."


Sir George. Young gentleman! -- that is excellent -- he is at least seventy-two.


Savage. No, you wrong him; he is only seventy -- Sir Paul Perpetual -- Old P. I
mean; for that is his nick name you know -- has been the ancient beau of the age
these thirty years, and as his great grief is, that he never had a son, he
wants my consent to marry my sister.


Darnley. And do you mean to consent, sir?


Savage. Certainly -- I say (aside to Sir George) -- I want his fortune to
repair my own, and therefore he shall not leave the house till the marriage is
effected -- you know my way. -- I Have given the hint to the servants.


Enter a Servant. Servant. Sir here is the young gentleman.


Savage. Squire, take my place at the table -- push the wine about, and tell
the jovial crew to prepare for quizzing -- quizzing you rogue! -- go (Darnley
exit) -- the license is in my pocket, a parson's in the house, and if we can
but confuse the young gentleman, we'll marry him in a joke, and afterward take
his fortune in earnest.


Enter SIR PAUL PERPETUAL, in a riding dress. Sir Paul. "Be lively, brisk and
jolly! -- lively, brisk and jolly!" (singing.) Ah, my boys! -- here I am -- as
young and hearty -- but I cannot stay; I must be at Bath tomorrow.


Sir George. At Bath! -- what to drink the waters? to renovate before marriage,
Sir Paul.


Sir Paul. No -- upon my soul there is no occasion -- though, at present,
perhaps a little physical advice wouldn't be much amiss: for between ourselves,
I Have just cut a tooth, and suffered most violently from the hooping cough!
(They laugh) -- Why what do you laugh at?


Savage. Nothing -- nothing -- only we wondered how such a chicken as you could
struggle against a pair of such mortal disorders! -- but, seriously -- what
takes you to Bath?


Sir Paul. Such an event? I have traced a son; a boy above twenty years of age!
that is my first reason -- my second is -- to see my grandfather.


Savage. Your grandfather!


Sir Paul. Hark'ye -- he shall make settlements on my first four children.


Sir George. Pray, Sir Paul -- I beg your pardon though -- what age may your
grandfather be?


Savage. Two hundred, if he is an hour! heh? an't I right, old P.?


Sir Paul. Old P.! there it is now! -- here I stand, that walk as much as any
man -- that ride as much as any man -- that am every night at a concert, an
opera, or a club -- that sing, dance, game or intrigue! and what is more, that
have done all this for sixty years! -- and yet to be called old P! -- they said
I never was a father -- but I shall soon prove the great and glorious fact.


Savage. Ay! how will you prove it?


Sir Paul. How! why you have all heard of my little Nelly -- poor girl! she was
jealous, and she left me to marry a tradesman -- a clerk at a lottery office,
and three months after we parted she was delivered of a boy -- a fine boy! as
like me as one Cupid is to another -- a year after her marriage, she died, and
I can hear nothing of her husband; but let him say what he will, I Will swear the
boy was mine; I Will swear it, because I Am convinced I Am father to more children
than one, Sir George.


Sir George. Very likely; but where did you learn all this?


Sir Paul. From Nelly's sister; a month ago I accidentally met her at
Tunbridge; she had neither seen nor heard of the husband since her sister's
death, but she remembered the child went by his mother's name! its mine! -- I Am
sure its mine! and (they laugh again.) I tell you what -- you would better be
careful; for when you and other young sprigs of fashion smile at me, jeer me,
and call me the infirm old P.! -- 'gad! you little think you dogs, you are
laughing at your own father perhaps! however, I Have traced my boy to Bath, and
whoever discovers him shall have the too best racers in my stud.


Savage. What fidget and fizgig? then I Will seek for young P. myself -- I Will
find him -- I Will -- but hold -- hold -- (Stopping Sir Paul who is going) don't
go yet -- your nephew's in the house.


Sir Paul. What Darnley? -- zounds! then I will not stay a moment -- no -- not
even to see my dear Lady Sarah, who I Will marry if its only to disappoint that
rural reprobate -- that -- I Am gone.


Savage. No -- you're not -- I Will tell you a secret; you shall stay a week with
me.


Sir Paul. A week!


Savage. Ay: I Have my reasons -- so don't think of stirring; for your horses are
turned out to grass -- your saddles and bridles snug in a hiding place, and all
the gates double barred, inside and out.


Sir Paul. What the devil! make a prisoner of me?


Savage. Nonsense! -- I only forestall your wishes: -- I Am sure you want some
soft discourses with my sister, and don't I know what my visitors like better
than they do themselves? don't I know you like getting drunk? -- so come; come
in and drink!

(Pulling him.)
Sir Paul. I don't -- I hate drinking; and death and fire! haven't I told you I
want to find my son --


Sir George. (Aside to Sir Paul.) Humor him; humor him, Sir Paul; or he will
refuse you his sister.


Savage. Ay: give consent, or else --


Sir Paul. Or else I lose my wife I suppose; when I Am in the country, don't I
like always to live quiet, and keep early hours, and would you lock me in a
house where you never see the sun? where you go to bed just before it rises,
and get up the moment after it sets?


Savage. Will you give up the marriage, and let Darnley have his wish?


Sir Paul. No -- I Will die first -- I Will --


Savage. Then will you join the jolly crew and prove --


Sir George. That you have as much health, youth, and spirits --


Savage. As any choice spirit --


Sir George. Or young gentleman --


Sir Paul. In the whole world! -- I Am roused! I Am fired! and to show I Am
seasoned! true English heart of Oak! -- allons!


Savage. (Singing.) "Bring the flask! the music --


Sir George. (Singing.) "Joy shall quickly find us --


Sir Paul. "Let us dance and laugh and sing, and drive old care behind us!"


Exeunt at Portico. Enter Mrs. DARNLEY. Mrs. Darnley. Can this be the mansion
of elegance and taste? I meet with nothing but rudeness and neglect! -- I wish
I could find Mr. Darnley! -- I dare say, by this time, he is sicken'd of the
scene, and anxious as myself, to see his home again.


Enter DARNLEY from the Portico, half drunk, with Lady Sarah Savage's letter in
his hand. Darnley. (Speaking as he enters.) Fill away my boys! -- fill! --
fill! -- while I like a faithful gallant! -- gallant! hold, hold, friend
Darnley. This letter is to benefit your interest, not sacrifice your honor.


Mrs. Darnley. Heavens! -- what do I see? Mr. Darnley!


Darnley. (Not regarding her.) Yes: -- you do; you see Mr. Darnley.


Mrs. Darnley. Why? -- what is the matter with you! -- what is that letter?


Darnley. This letter? -- this is a love letter, my angel, -- ha! -- why it is!
-- it is my wife!


Mrs. Darnley. Yes: that wife who in the hour of dissipation you forget -- can
I believe it? -- in a little hour can all our past attachment -- but why am I
alarmed? -- Fashion may dupe the wicked and the weak, but virtue such as his
must scorn its empty power.


Darnley. Forget! -- no never! -- and now I look at you -- I think I ought to
be massacred for having even for a moment neglected you -- Oh Maria! -- I have
such news for you -- Lady Sarah has been so kind -- she has promised to promote
me -- to befriend you -- and in short she has taken a liking to the whole
family.


Mrs. Darnley. And why, Harry?


Darnley. Why! ay: there is the rub! but don't be jealous, Maria -- I entreat
you, don't be jealous! -- for by heaven, I love you! -- I do so tenderly that
if it were not for my promise, I could find in my heart to return home directly.


Mrs. Darnly. Do; let us begone -- the place distracts me: and I fear this high
company will corrupt you.


Darnley. High company! -- hang it: -- if that is all you're afraid of, there is
not much danger in this house I fancy -- but my letter -- my word to Sir George
-- and consider our interest, Maria.


Mrs. Darnley. Oh no -- consult our happiness my love; and surely there is none
in this tumultuous scene -- we left all joy behind us, in our children and our
cottage, Harry; and there alone we shall recover it -- come.


Darnley. She Is right -- the pretty prattler has reason on her side and who can
disobey -- (looks without,) ha! -- Sir George and Lady Sarah in close
conversation! -- they beckon me! -- again!


Mrs. Darnley. Why do you pause?


Darnley. I Am in for it -- the die is cast! -- Maria! -- excuse me.

(going from her.)
Mrs. Darnley. How! will you leave me, Mr. Darnley?


Darnley. What can I do? -- it is but for a short time. --


Mrs. Darnl^y. You must not.

(Laying hold of him.)
Darnley. Nay: only for an hour.


Mrs. Darnley. (Letting him go and taking out her handkerchief.) -- This is the
first time you ever used me thus.


Darnley. So it is -- now what a pretty scoundrel I am! -- and this is
fashionable life is it? -- Oh fool! fool! to quit substantial peace for
artificial pleasure! -- don't weep, Maria -- I go for our mutual advantage -- I
go to make our children happy.


Mrs. Darnley. Then stay with their mother -- they never wished that we should
part.


Darnley. Nor will we -- we have lived so long and happily together, that I would
rather lose the little we have left, than hurt your quiet. -- (Enter Sir George
Gauntlet.) Sir George stay with her -- I Will see Lady Sarah, entreat her
forgiveness, and return instantly; for, oh my friend! -- my heart drops blood
for every tear she sheds.


Sir George. P'sha! -- remember your interest -- Lady Sarah will soon reconcile
your scruples, and leave me to compose Mrs. Darnley -- nay: take your
opportunity -- you must keep the appointment -- I insist -- so begone! --
(Darnley exit.) What a fuss here is about a man's leaving his wife for an hour,
when so many worthy couple would be happy to part for ever.


Mrs. Darnley. Sir George, tell me, where is he gone? tell me, that I may fly
and overtake him!


Sir George. Why! cannot you guess?


Mrs. Darnley. No, indeed, I cannot.


Sir George. Not that he is gone to Lady Sarah to keep an assignation with her.


Mrs. Darnley. An assignation.


Sir George. In her dressing room! at this very hour -- the gay scene has so
altered him, that you see he has left you to keep the appointment.


Mrs. Darnley. I Will not believe it! -- he is above such baseness.


Sir George. Will Not you? -- then I Will prove it.


Mrs. Darnley. I defy you! -- he knows the value of my heart too well to trifle
with it; and I Have known his so long, that I Will not venture to suspect it -- no
-- though his friend defames it.


Sir George. Nay then -- you remember his handwriting -- here is his answer to
the lady's letter -- read.

giving her the letter.
Mrs. Darnley. (Looks over it.) Ha! -- it is too plain -- I am deceived --
deserted.


Sir George. I was the bearer of that letter, and preserved it merely to show
it you, I thought it the duty of a friend.


Mrs. Darnley. And from the same duty, you advised him to write it. -- Oh! I
have known you long, Sir George -- you are one of those who find no happiness
but in marring that of others -- who seduce the affections of the husband, the
better to betray the honor of the wife! and when you have spoilt all social and
domestic peace, the friend you laugh at, and the woman scorn! -- I know you
well!


Sir George. My dear ma'am, how you mistake! -- I meant to oblige you.


Mrs. Darnley. Sir -- there is but one way -- leave me -- nay, I insist --


Sir George. I shall obey.


Mrs. Darnley. I must have stronger proof before I am convinced, and then
observe, Sir George, if his truth weakens, I Will add strength to mine! my
constancy and honor shall be so exemplary, that I will shame him from his
follies! make him repent: and when reclaimed, be proud to say he is my own
again!


Exeunt. SCENE II. -- An elegant Apartment leading to Lady SARAH'S
Dressing Room -- the Door in the Flat.
Enter CLARA. Clara. Yes: yes: its all over the House -- Sir George makes no
secret of the assignation, and I Have no doubt but Darnley is now in that room
waiting for Lady Sarah Savage -- she cannot come at present -- the servant says,
she is gone to the stables to see the beasts unharness'd -- faith! if she would go
to her brother's party she would see that business already done! -- however I Will
prevent Darnley's exposing himself, and as he is certainly concealed in that
room, I Will talk to him. -- Dear! -- here is my guardian again!


Enter Sir PAUL PERPETUAL, (hastily.) Sir Paul. So far, I Am safe, my dear girl;
you don't know what your poor guardian has suffered in this high -- no -- this
low-lif'd house! -- they forced me into a room full of buffoons, boxers, and
blacklegs -- made me drink a bowl of punch, and I Would as soon drink so much
poison -- then winking and nodding they began whispering pretty loudly --
"smoke the old prig! -- damme, quiz him!"


Clara. Quiz him! -- what is that, Guardy?


Sir Paul. Why, with our young men of quality, quizzing is a substitute for
wit, my dear; so one man challenged me to play on the violin, and when I rose
to move my elbows, another whipped the chair from under me; a second put hot
coals into my pocket, so when I felt for my hankerchief, I burnt my fingers; a
third tried to cut off my tail, but that assassin I pursued, when unluckily in
running after him, they had tied a string across the stairs, and I pitched
headforemost into a barrel of water, they had placed for the purpose.


Clara. Indeed, its quite terrible, Gaurdy.


Sir Paul. Then they showed me a license; brought me a fat parson, and said, if
I Would instantly be married, they would let me go to find my son -- if not, I should
be locked in, and have plenty of it -- now here is hospitality! -- but they have
overshot the mark; and if I get out of their doors, I Will not only break off the
match, but promise to befriend Darnley. --


Clara. What! disappoint Lady Sarah, and relieve my poor distressed friend --
then I Will get you out of the house -- I will, if I Am quizz'd to death for it --
You see that door -- if he meets Darnley, he will at least interrupt the
assignation. --


Sir Paul. Secure my escape -- only get me out of this den of savages, and, if
I don't befriend Darnley, may I never live to see old age. Where does that door
lead to?


Clara. I fancy to Lady Sarah's dressing room; for it is full of half boots,
horse great coats, military sashes, helmet caps, and amazonian jackets! and
this is your only way to escape -- enter that room.


Sir Paul. Yes --


Clara. Put on one of Lady Sarah Savage's great coats, tie one of her sashes
round your waist -- throw a fur tippet about your neck, and with a whip in your
hand, and her driving hat on your head --


Sir Paul. I understand -- the servants will take me for their mistress, and
open the gates; Oh! you dear girl! (kisses her.) -- I Will about it instantly --
(opens the door in flat.) I say, Clara, the hounds below are unkennel'd; they
have started me for game, and after keeping them at bay, by sousing in a flood
of water, I take to cover; that is, I put on Lady Sarah Savage's clothes to
avoid passing for a wild beast; mum!

(enters the room.)
Clara. If he does but get out of the house, the marriage is broken off and
Darnley made happy.


Lady Sarah Savage (without.) I Am at home to nobody but Mr. Darnley.


Clara. (Going to the door.) We Are undone, ruined; stay where you are; here is
Lady Sarah.


Sir Paul. (putting his head out) -- The devil!


Clara. Hush! lock yourself in, and don't stir till I tap at the door, or stop
-- stop -- lest she or somebody else should tap, don't open it till I give you
a signal -- let me see; what shall be the watchword? Oh, "quizzing," you will not
forget "quizzing," Guardy.


Sir Paul. No -- I shall remember it these fifty years; so when I hear the word
"quizzing," out I come, and -- softly -- here she is

(shutting himself in.)
Enter Lady SARAH, with pocketbook and tickets in her hand. Lady Sarah.
(Speaking as she enters.) Tell my dear Signor, I shall get rid of all these
benefit tickets; heh! (taking out her spying glass.) -- what young creature's
this?


Clara. How do you do again ma'am?


Lady Sarah. Again! you're vastly forward child; I never saw you before.


Clara. No ma'am! that is very strange; you saw me this morning at Mr.
Darnley's, and invited me to your house.


Lady Sarah. Oh, ay: now I recollect; you must excuse me; we people of rank are
so very absent; we are extremely intimate with a person in the morning, and
don't know them at night; well! I Am vastly glad to see you; but you mustn't
stay here, I Am engaged child.


Clara. I shall not intrude, ma'am -- good day.


Lady Sarah. Adieu! stop -- stop -- I forgot; give me two guineas.


Clara. Two guineas, ma'am!


Lady Sarah. Yes: for these tickets; they are for the Signor's wife's benefit at
Bath next Monday, the whole town will be there -- nay, I shall attend -- I Would
make you take more, but as you will have to pay card money bye and bye, it would
be asking you to one's house absolutely to make a bargain of you! (Clara gives
the two guineas.) there -- you may go.


Clara. A bargain indeed! and a bad one too: for if I was mean enough to make
money by my guests, would I lay it out on foreigners who loll in carriages? no
-- not while so many of our gallant soldiers and sailors have only wooden limbs
to stand on! (half aside.) I am gone, ma'am, (curtseying.) and now may Darnley
get out of the scrape -- Sir Paul get out of the house -- and she and her
brother knock their stupid heads together.


Exit. Lady Sarah. I suppose this silly creature has interrupted the charming
Mr. Darnley, and he has stepped into my dressing room -- (goes to the door and
finds it fastened.) -- locked inside -- it must be so -- (listens) -- I declare
I hear him moving; (she listens again) -- he sighs! -- poor man! (she speaks
loudly.) -- don't be dejected, my dear sir; when I Am married to that old
tottering beau, Sir Paul, I Will think of nothing but you. So come, Mr. Darnley,
(Enter Mrs. Darnley,) come my sweet Mr. Darnley.


Mrs. Darnley. Can it be possible? -- then all is confirmed madam, when I am
convinced that my husband -- that Mr. Darnley has been decoyed into that room.


Lady Sarah. (spying at her.) Bless me! -- its Mrs. Darnley! -- this is a
little awkward -- however I Will soon talk her out of it, (aside.) Don't be
uneasy, my dear -- these fashionable intrigues are very harmless, I Will assure
you, and if you had had my free and liberal education -- but poor thing! I
suppose you were sent to school for instruction.


Mr. Darnley. To school! as certainly ma'am --


Lady Sarah. There it is then: for what could you learn! only to sing well
enough to spoil conversation -- to play on the harpsichord, so as to give papa,
mama, and the whole family an afternoon's nap -- to dance so aukwardly as to be
always out of tune and place; and to speak just French enough, to make you
forget English; this is a boarding school education -- But I my dear --


Mrs. Darnley. Hear me, madam! when I first saw you, I was the happiest of
women -- I had a husband who loved and honored me -- who doated on his
children, and knew no pleasure but in his family! and now how severe is the
reverse! you have robbed me of that treasure, seduced it from my heart, and I
return to a melancholy home, without a friend for my own distresses, or a
father for my children!


Lady Sarah. And how can I help it? -- didn't I mean to do you both a service
by introducing you to the great world?


Mrs. Darnley. Great world! -- there again, madam! -- when I entered this
house, I expected from the exalted rank of its owner to have been surrounded
with kindness, elegance, and hospitality! -- but I find that high birth does not
create high breeding, nor am I, because humbly born, less likely to set a
polished example than yourself -- Oh Darnley! why will you not come forth and
save your once loved wife from agonies too great to bear.


Enter Mr. SAVAGE. Savage. So Savage -- here is a pretty story buzzed about! --
they say that Darnley, the country 'squire, is locked up in your dressing room!
if this is true you Jezabel --


Lady Sarah. Scandalous brute! -- but I don't wonder at it, you have had such a
low vulgar education.


Savage. I had an education! -- well that is more than ever you had! -- but
look'ye, Miss, no time must be lost; for if Sir Paul discovers your intriguing,
he will break off the marriage, and we are ruined -- yes; ruined madam! (to Mrs.
Darnley,) you and your infamous husband will make your own plots and mar mine
-- so I Will unkennel him.


Mrs. Darnley. Hold, sir -- indeed he is not to blame -- he was betrayed into
that room.


Lady Sarah. Betrayed! -- nay, then I must confess, brother, that Mr. Darnley
is there; I dare say he concealed himself on purpose to expose me to Sir Paul
-- nay, I am sure of it now.


Savage, (looking through the keyhole.) I see him through the keyhole -- the
rascal's in disguise! (enter two servants.) John call up the club -- unloose
the hounds -- tell the whole house to prepare for quizzing -- quizzing, you
rogue. --


Sir PAUL dressed in Lady SAVAGE'S Great Coat, etc. opens the door, endeavors
to escape, but meeting Mr. SAVAGE retires again directly. Savage -- John, open
the backdoor, and show the disguised gentleman out of the house directly -- go
-- and as for you Mrs. Darnley --


DARNLEY enters, and Mrs. DARNLEY, Lady SARAH, and SAVAGE, stand astonished.
Savage. Confusion! -- Darnley!


Mrs. Darnley. Is he then innocent? -- Oh Harry!

(Embracing him.)
Lady Sarah. Amazing! why, who was that wretch in my coat, hat, and tippet!


Darnley. No less a gentleman than Sir Paul Perpetual -- Clara told me the
whole story -- he put on that disguise to avoid the snares that were laid for
him, and he has ere this left the house, determined to break off an union, that
would have undone me and my family -- lady Sarah, I entreat your pardon; but
here (taking Mrs. Darnley by the hand,) here is my apology.


Re-enter Servant. Serve. Sir, I have shown the disguised gentleman down stairs.


Savage. Go to the devil with you. --


Kicks the servant off. Lady Sarah. Brother!


Savage. Sister!


Lady Sarah. We are the fools that are outwitted.


Savage. Yes: we have turned out the wrong man -- but let us pursue and overtake
him instantly; come, -- 'squire, I insist you leave my house directly, and as
to you Miss -- if I catch the young gentleman, I Will have some sport, I Am
determined -- I Will turn you both loose amongst the hounds below, and the Club
shall decide, whether there old P. is not the prettiest looking female of the two!


Exit with Lady Sarah. Darnley. I resolved, Maria, to meet any censure, rather
than give a pang to such a heart as yours; but let us be gone --


Mrs. Darnley. Ay: let us return to our villa, nor ever wander more.


Darnley. No -- not yet Maria.


Mrs. Darnley. Not yet!


Darnley. No -- I have a plan to execute -- Sir George, my best of friends, has
invited us both to his aunt's house at Bath, and is now waiting without to
conduct us.


Mrs. Darnley. Do not go! let me entreat you; do not -- I have a thousand fears.


Darnley. Nay, nay: he will introduce us to friends, who can render us
essential service; come -- come -- indulge me -- the society will be pleasant,
and unlike this ill-bred scene --


Mrs. Darnley. Well! if it must be so -- Ah, Harry! I have now passed hours in
the humble and exalted scenes of life, and I find that good breeding is
confined to no rank or situation! it consists in good sense, and good humor,
and I believe we may see as large a share of it under the roof of the cottage,
as in the splendid mansions of the great!


Exeunt. END OF ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE I. -- A superb room in FLUSH'S house; handsome sideboard of Plate --
Pictures in elegant Frames -- gilded chairs -- two servants in fine liveries,
putting silver coffee pot, tea urn, etc. on the table for breakfast, a third
servant showing in READY.
Enter READY. Ready. Tell your master, his agent desires to see him.


Servant. Sir, Mr. Flush is hardly dressed yet.


Ready. Not up! -- why it is two o'clock.


Servant. Very likely, sir -- my master seldom rises sooner -- besides he gave
a grand supper last night; all the first people in Bath were present, sir.


Ready. Well! well! tell him Mr. Ready is here: (Servant exit.) now is not it
amazing that a man who was only twelve years ago clerk to a
lottery-office-keeper in London, should be so rich, and so visited, and how has
he done all this? how, but by the modern mystery of money lending! -- by
opening a shop in the city for linens, gauzes; and muslins -- by keeping a fine
house near Bond street, and another in Bath. His son manages in London, and I
here, while he by not appearing, is every where noticed and respected.


Flush. (without.) James! Thomas! tell the cook to send a plan of my dinner.


Ready. He Is such an epicure! and he, who formerly could scarcely get
necessaries, is now not satisfied with luxuries.


FLUSH enters with two servants. Flush. (sits.) Ha! Ready! how do you do, Ready?


Ready. Sir!

(bowing.)
Flush. Sit down, Ready -- sit down. (Ready sits.) well! how go on money
matters?


Ready. I have altered the advertisement as you desired, and inserted it in the
Bath and Bristol papers.


Flush. Read it -- read it. (Takes up a pine apple on the breakfast table) You
scoundrels! (to the servants.) is this a pine apple for a gentleman? buy a
larger; buy one if it costs ten pounds; I can afford it -- read, Ready, read.


Ready. (Reading a news-paper.) Money matters! -- the nobility, gentry, ladies
of fashion, officers of rank, bankers, etc. may be secretly accommodated with
money to any amount, on personal security only, by applying to P. O. Holly
Street, Bath -- No. 93.


Flush. Excellent! well! does the trap fill! have you caught any birds?


Ready. Plenty; plenty of pigeons already; (Takes out his pocketbook.) here,
here is a note for five hundred -- left by a dashing young parson -- I think
it is good.


Flush. (Looking at it.) It is -- treat him well; give him value; I can afford
it.


Ready. Value! but in what manner, Sir?


Flush. (rising.) Oh! pay him in the old way, Ready; first, give him my draft
at a week for thirty guineas, then offer him damaged linen and muslin to the
amount of one hundred and twenty, and bid him call again in a fortnight -- you
have his note all the time you know.


Ready. Certainly, sir; and when he calls --


Flush. Give him a bad bill for one hundred and fifty, and pay him the odd
hundred in trifles; such as paste buckles, gilt bracelets, Westphalia hams,
painted prints, neats tongues, and Stilton cheeses -- so shake hands, and have
done with Master Parson.


Ready. But not with the bill, sir.


Flush. No -- my bankers discount it, and pay it away, till passing through
different hands, somebody gives value for it at last, and then the glorious
work begins -- then comes the hero into combat! an attorney is employed! an
attorney, my boy! action is brought upon action! declaration filed upon
declaration! till the drawer, acceptor, and indorsers all get into the King's
Bench -- the King's Bench -- no -- I beg pardon; the high money-lenders, and
low attorneys, have so filled it, with their dupes, that there is not room there
-- the house overflows! so Newgate, Newgate is the shop!


Enter a Servant. Servant. Here Is your son! just arrived from London!


Flush. Show him in.


Exit servant. Ready. I Am told, sir, Mr. Gingham is quite another man, since I
saw him.


Flush. Yes, yes, you knew his cursed, ingenuous, candid disposition; he learnt
it in the country, the dog would speak the truth, and his simplicity so injured
our trade, that I threatened to turn him out of doors; but he has reformed
Ready! the boy has the good sense to tell a lie now, and I Have sent for him to
witness his blessed reformation.


Ready. Ay, sir, your son always spoke his mind too freely -- in short, Mr.
Gingham was too honest for his profession.


Flush. He was; however he has given me his word, never to speak what comes
uppermost, and he is now what he ought to be; a regular, solemn, jesuitical --
in short -- he is a very promising young man.


Enter GINGHAM. Gingham. Sir, your hand -- Ready yours, well! here I am --
quite converted -- like father, like son -- tell a lie without blushing.


Flush. Here -- I told you so -- ay, ay, I knew the boy would come to something
good at last -- so my dear boy you have left off telling the truth -- speaking
your mind.


Gingham. Mum! close as the cabinet -- keep you in my eye -- put on your face,
and do it so punctually, you wouldn't know young P. O. from yourself --
(Looking about the room,) zounds! what a fine house you have got! how its
furnished! what plate! what pictures!


Flush. The result of trade and honest industry, Frank -- yes -- its pretty
furniture is not it?


Gingham. Pretty furniture! it is so handsome, that except yourself, curse me,
if I see a shabby bit in the room! -- nay, nay, upon my soul, I didn't allude
to you; I meant Ready.


Ready. He Is at his old tricks I see -- as candid as ever.


Gingham. Plague on it! I could sooner bite off my tongue, than stop its
speaking what I think! nay, sir, now pray.


Flush. Well, well, I excuse you this once; I, a shabby bit! however we shall
soon see -- how goes on the shop in London?


Gingham. The shop!


Flush. Ay, the shop in the city that you have the care of -- the linens -- the
--


Gingham. Oh ay: now I recollect; why very well upon the whole, I believe, sir
-- very well -- only between ourselves; I Am afraid it will not last; I think we
and our tricks shall be found out -- you understand --


Flush. Found out! 'sblood, sirrah --


Gingham. Softly sir -- softly -- don't put yourself in a passion, and lay the
blame on me; don't charge me with our ruin, for every body knew my opinion long
ago; didn't they, Ready? I told it to a thousand people -- says I, "swindling
will never thrive, and I and my poor father shall get duck'd at last!"


Flush. You did! did you?


Gingham. That I did, sir; and I Will prove I said so -- the other night I slept
at the west end, and two friends -- distressed old officers in the army --
brought their notes to be discounted -- says I, Gentlemen, it will not do --
you will get little cash, but a quantity of trumpery nonsense, such as hams,
cheeses, prints, linens, and other vegetables! said they; we know that -- we
know you and your father are two infernal sharpers, but a guinea now is worth
ten a month hence -- so give us the money.


Flush. Well: and you took their note, didn't you?


Gingham. No, I didn't -- I gave them the cash, shook the two old soldiers by
the hand, and said I was tired of such d -- d swindling practices.


Ready. This is sad work, Mr. Gingham you will never be at the top of your
profession.


Gingham. The top! -- Oh! what the pillory? no -- I leave that to you, Ready!


Flush. Was there ever such a scoundrel? -- but we'll hear more, (aside.) --
So, you sleep at the west end of the town, do you?


Gingham. Always -- its vulgar to be in the city of an evening; besides I like
to walk in Kensington-gardens in the morning -- You know Kensington-gardens,
father -- the place where there is such a mixture of green leaves and brown
powder -- of blue violets and yellow shoes; and where there is such a crowd,
that to get air and exercise you stand a chance of broken bones and
suffocation! -- Well! -- there I strut away, my boys --


Flush. You do -- do you? -- I can hardly keep my hands off the rascal -- So
then I suppose, the moment my back was turned, you never thought of business.


Gingham. Business! -- no never -- Did I, Ready? I recollected my father played
the same game before me; that when he was clerk at the lottery-office, at
billiards all the morning, and at hazard all the evening -- therefore, says I,
where is the difference? -- none! but that he had the policy to conceal his
tricks, and I the folly to show mine -- heh! I Am right -- an't I, Ready?


Flush. You villain! -- is this your reformation? not even conceal your own
faults, much more mine. Expose my character, neglect my trade, and strut away
in Kensington-gardens! I have done with you from the country you came, and to
the country you shall return -- Speak the truth, indeed! zounds! sirrah, what
has truth to do with money lending!


Here Ready exit. Enter CLARA SEDLEY. Clara. Oh, Guardy -- I Am just come to
Bath with Mr. and Mrs. Darnley -- we are all on a visit at Sir George
Gauntlet's, and --


(seeing Gingham, she stops.) Flush. Its only my son, Clara -- a simple foolish
young man.


Gingham. (bowing to her.) More knave than fool, upon my honor, ma'am.


Clara. The gentleman don't praise himself I see, Mr. Flush.


Gingham. No, ma'am -- nor do I know any body that will praise me -- unless my
father indeed.


Flush. Silence, sir! -- well: but about the rural pair, my dear ward; do you
know I have a great regard for Mr. and Mrs. Darnley.


Clara. Have you? I Am vastly glad of that for your joint guardian, Sir Paul, is
so employed in seeking for his lost child, that he has forgot his promise to
assist Darnley; therefore I want you to do him a favor.


Flush. A favor! -- he may command me.


Clara. The case is this -- his increase of family has so enlarged his
expenses, that he has thoughts of returning to the army -- Sir George has
promised to procure him a company, but Mrs. Darnley, not choosing he should owe
his promotion to him, wishes he should purchase; now, Guardy, if you would lend
him two hundred pounds.


Flush. Two hundred pounds, child!


Gingham. Ay, two hundred pounds, father!


Flush. Who bid you speak, sir? -- Why, Clara, in money matters there is an
etiquette.


Clara. True: but this is your friend.


Gingham. So it is, ma'am: the man he has a great regard for.


Clara. And when you consider the charms of Mrs. Darnley, and the wants of her
children --


Gingham. He cannot refuse, ma'am -- indeed he don't intend it -- and therefore
as I see he means to grant the favor, I Will save him the trouble of putting his
hand in his pocket -- Here, ma'am! (taking out bank notes) here are two bank
notes of a hundred each -- they belong to Mr. Flush -- now they belong to Mr.
Darnley -- (Flush gets in his way and prevents Clara's taking them.) -- he begs
you will give them to his friend -- and present his compliments -- and say, he will
double the sum.


Flush. Stand off -- stand off -- or by heavens I Will --


Gingham. (Offering Clara the notes across his father) Double the sum, whenever
called upon, ma'am.


Flush. Hold your tongue, or I Will knock it down your throat, sirrah. -- I say,
Clara, in the the way of business, I Have no objection to do Mr. Darnley a
service; that is, if I can make a profit by it -- first, he should send me his
note.


Clara. Here it is, sir.

(Giving it to Flush.)
Flush. That Is right -- now we can proceed -- here, sir -- (Giving the note to
Gingham,) take the note to my agent, and tell him to give Mr. Darnley thirty
pounds -- I can afford it.


Gingham. This is too bad -- take in his own friend, and a man with a family,
(aside.) Sir, -- a word if you please -- I told you, we were all blown upon --
now, here is an opportunity for retrieving our reputation -- lend him the two
hundred pounds -- prove, for once, we can behave like gentlemen, and hark'ye --
we shall not reach the top of the profession.

(putting up his neckcloth.)
Flush. This is beyond bearing -- quit the room directly -- 'sdeath! -- leave
my house, sir -- begone! -- I disinherit you -- I --


Clara. Lord! -- why so angry, guardian? -- I Am sure he is a good young man,
and as warm in his heart --


Flush. Warm in his heart! -- nonsense! -- will he be warm in the funds? no --
never -- while he is so candid -- so --


Clara. Not while he is candid, sir?


Flush. No -- do you think I made my fortune by candor or openness; answer me,
sir -- did I ever get a shilling by speaking the truth -- speak!


Gingham. (In a melancholy voice.) No, sir, I never said you did -- I know the
contrary, sir; madam, I Am of a communicative disposition, I own; but there are
many secrets of my father's I never blabb'd.


Flush. Are there, sir?


Gingham. Yes, that there are, sir.


Flush. I don't recollect them.


Gingham. Don't you? Why, now, did I ever mention, sir, that you got these
pictures by sueing out execution? That you got that plate, by its being pawned
to you for half its value; that you intrigue with a female money-lender; and
that the last time you were made a bankrupt, you went to get your certificate
signed in a new vis-a-vis? did I, or will I ever mention these things?


Flush. Begone, sir -- I Will never see you more -- Yet, stay -- you have papers
in your possession -- meet me in an hour's time at my agent's, sir, -- at Mr.
Ready's.


Gingham. Forgive me this once, father -- I Will never let the cat out any more.


Flush. No, sir, I never will forgive you -- I am engaged, sir, and you know we
great men are select in our company.


Gingham. Well, if it must be so -- farewell, father! the world is all before
me, and what trade to follow, heaven only knows. Good bye, madam! -- your sex
will never befriend me, because I cannot keep a secret, you see.


Clara. I will befriend you, sir; for while there is so much deception and
hypocrisy in the world, it would indeed be unjust, not to approve such
frankness and honesty. Guardy, let me intercede for him; I Will answer for his
conduct.


Gingham. Aye; and if ever I mention ducking or swindling again. -- There! you
see he is fixed, ma'am.


Clara. At present he is, and therefore leave him, perhaps by the time you meet
him at the agent's I shall have talked him into good humor. Adieu! depend
on it, I shall not forget your generous intentions.


Gingham. Nor shall I, yours; and if fortune smiles on me, I Will prove that I
deserve your kindness -- If ever my father pardons -- but I see he is more and
more angry, so I take my leave. May every blessing attend you -- may you meet
with a heart as liberal as your own -- May your cousins' distresses vanish --
may your guardian once more value a son, who cannot help speaking the truth for
the soul of him.


Exit. Clara. Upon my word he is a charming man! and pardon him you must,
Guardy, if its only to please me.


Flush. No -- I Am determined.


Enter a Servant. Servant. The dinner's ready.


Flush. Come, Clara, you shall dine with me; I want to talk to you, and if I
could see my joint Guardian, Sir Paul --


Clara. I met him at your door -- he is only just gone by.


Flush. Just gone by! that is a mistake; for the old beau has been gone by these
thirty years: however, come in -- come, and eat and drink what you like. Call
for burgundy, champagne, or tokay -- Ay, call for tokay at a guinea a pint; I
can afford it, my dear Ward, I can afford it.


Exeunt. SCENE II. -- The Crescent and the surrounding country.
Enter Lady SARAH SAVAGE, and Sir GEORGE GAUNTLET. Lady Sarah. Sir George, I
own my weakness: the proud, the haughty lady Sarah is humbled; Darnley has
ensnared my heart, and one way or other, I must insure his pity -- Heigho! you
are his friend, Sir George.


Sir George. You see I am; and that he esteems me more than ever, is evident
from his bringing Mrs. Darnley to my house -- did you mind his orders to her?
-- take an airing my dear with Sir George in his phaeton! it will raise your
spirits, my love! -- Ha! ha! he absolutely throws her into my arms.


Lady Sarah. Yes; but she absolutely contrives to get out of them again.


Sir George. She does; and therefore, there is no way but the one I mentioned
-- we must make Darnley jealous.


Lady Sarah. True: -- I Will tell him that you love his wife.


Sir George. Nay, nay, not me -- fix on somebody else -- we'll soon find an
object, and then by convincing him of her falsehood, he naturally turns his
thoughts to another woman; which is you, you know -- and she wanting a
protector, consequently flies to another man, which is me, you know we'll add
the Signor to the confederacy.


Lady Sarah. You're a sad wretch -- a sad wretch indeed, Sir George, to impose
on a friend, who places such confidence -- such -- I will not hear you --
positively I will not hear you -- only observe, if I don't win the cruel Darnley's
affections, I Will drive my Phaeton down a precipice in reality; I will, or with
the bayonet of my fusil, pierce my too tender heart, and expire at his feet.


Enter the honorable Mr. SAVAGE hastily. Savage. So Sarah -- I and Sir Paul
have had such an adventure! -- though we quarreled last night, we made it up to
day; for I never think alike two hours together -- Do you, sister?


Lady Sarah. Never: but when I think of you brother, then I think more than I
say, I assure you.


Savage. No; you say more than you think, I assure you -- but would you believe
it? The old boy has seen his son, -- we traced him from the stage coach he came
in, to the pump room, from the pump room, to the billiard room -- there Sir
Paul saw him playing with the marker, and when he heard the young man's name,
he fainted; actually fainted in my arms.


Lady Sarah. What, in a fit! poor old man! well! if you will believe me, Sir
George, I never saw a person in a fit in all my life.


Savage. Long before he recovered, the young man was gone -- the bird was flown
-- for the standers by, all blacklegs began laying betts on Sir Paul's
recovery, and those who were against him, wouldn't let water be thrown in his
face.


Lady Sarah. Inhuman wretches! -- they ought to have sous'd him to death: but
pray, brother, who is this child? where does he come from? what is the story?


Savage. Why -- about twenty years ago, Sir Paul's lady quarreled with him at
Tunbridge, and married a citizen -- Four months after the marriage she had a
son, which the citizen brought up as his own, and Sir Paul now swears the boy
was his -- 'gad! it will be curious; for the child will have two fathers.


Lady Sarah. Curious! not at all -- but why should you meddle?


Savage. Because it secures me the two best racers in his stud -- Fidget and
Fizgig; and what is better, because it still secures us Sir Paul's fortune: for
though he will not marry you himself, he intends his son should; and, if I could
but once more see the young man -- I know he goes by his mother's name --
(Looking out) heh! its him! there he is again! -- get out of the way; don't
interrupt --


Lady Sarah. No -- I have too great a regard for Sir Paul's property to
interrupt any plan for securing it; besides, Sir George and I have business --
come -- I say brother, tell the old gentleman to be careful, and in his
eagerness bid him not claim another man's child instead of his own!


Exit with Sir George. Savage. Where can Sir Paul be loitering? he said he would
follow me -- mum!

Stands aside.
Enter GINGHAM. Gingham. Oh! what a whirligig world is this? I that was brought
up to lend money; must now try to borrow it: but where? who will trust a
wandering linen-draper! who will trust the notorious young P. O.? however, Iv'e
got my equivalent; I can speak my mind now -- no longer need I smother my
thoughts, and be ready to burst: no longer have an itching on my tongue, and be
ready to bite it in two -- no, no, I may open now. The sweet lady sends me word
my father is inexorable, but hopes she shall soon see me again; heigho! I hope
so too; when I think of her, my heart feels such queer sensations -- I have it:
she has taken lessons of my father, and swindled me out of my affections; but
then my poverty -- I can never indulge even a hope. -- (Sees Mr. Savage.) --
Ha! here is the friend of the queer old gentleman, who fainted in the billiard
room.


Savage. (advancing pompously.) Sir, the honorable Henry Savage has the
pleasure -- the felicity -- What are you --


Gingham. the honorable?


Savage. Ay: why didn't you know it?


Gingham. No: nor never should if you had not told me -- ha! ha! ha! ha!


Savage. Ha! ha! ha! you're a droll dog! 'gad! you shall come to my house, and
pass a week with me.


Gingham. Faith! a year with all my soul! I Have nothing to do with myself; I Have
left off trade; haven't change for sixpence in the world, and so my little
right honorable -- I Will honor you with my company.

[Shaking him by the hand.
Savage. Hush! if you want money don't own it: we great people are close --


Gingham. I know it; oeconomical too! -- you live cheap.


Savage. What! people of fashion live cheap?


Gingham. To be sure; you don't pay; and if that is not living cheap, the
devil's in it! -- ha! here is the fainting gentleman again! -- who the deuce is
he?


Savage. I fancy you will find him a pretty near relation of yours -- at least,
if you were born at Tunbridge, and your mother's name was Gingham.


Gingham. It was; that is the name of her, and of the town.


Savage. Say you so? -- (Enter Sir Paul Perpetual,) -- The racers are mine, Sir
Paul!


Sir Paul. Ay: my whole stud -- any thing: every thing! only let me have
another peep at my dear boy! -- only let me prove to posterity!


Savage. There he is!


Sir Paul. Where!


Savage. There! there is your son! who was born at Tunbridge -- whose mother's
name was Gingham, and who is now without a shilling in his pocket, or a friend
in the world -- joy! joy! old boy! you have got a young P. at last!


Sir Paul. Stand off! let me come at him; come to thy father's arms!


Gingham. My father!


Sir Paul. Ay: thy real father! who has a fortune to bestow on thee, and
health, youth, and spirits to share in all thy pleasures -- The dog has my
right eye to a T.


Gingham. (To Mr. Savage.) Pray does your friend bite in his fits?


Savage. (aside to Gingham.) Hark'ye -- its Sir Paul Perpetual! better known by
the name of old P. -- he has an immense property.


Gingham. Has he?


Savage. Yes: and if its certain you are his son, he will give you every farthing
of it.


Gingham. Oh! if that is the case -- if he has an immense property -- let me see
who dare deny it? Sir, your blessing! -- (kneeling.) -- I always said I was not
my father's own child.


Sir Paul. Rise my boy! my darling! and tell us how the citizen educated you!
-- The turn of my nose exactly!


Gingham. I Have done with linens, gauzes, and muslins now! -- let the shop and
all its swindling go to the bottom -- I Am the son of Sir Paul Perpetual, better
known by the name of old P. I Am not a tradesman --.


Sir Paul. Tradesman! -- zounds! -- my son brought up in a shop! -- how it
freezes my warm blood! -- look'ye, my boy -- two things I must request of you
-- never to talk about trade, or mention your former father's name.


Gingham. Never -- I Will never mention his name because I despise it; but as to
trade, what is bred in the bone, you know father --


Sir Paul. Well -- well -- come to Mr. Savage's house; there we'll introduce
you to your intended wise -- Miss Savage will soon break you of talking about
trade, or the city -- so come along.


Savage. Ay: pray give up the city -- the rich rogues have no taste for us men
of wit and genius -- they estimate every thing by property, and if the great
Ben Jonson -- nay, if the great Big Ben were alive, is there one citizen would
give the poor dogs a dinner?


Sir Paul. No -- you're right there; in the city a man that has no money, has
no wit -- the smallest bank note is more entertaining than the wittiest
manuscript; and talk of Ben Jonson's name for jokes -- damme, Abraham Newland
beats him hollow! is not it true, my boy?


Gingham. As true, as that you beat my other father hollow -- come --
henceforth, no money lending tricks for me. But young P. O. shall stick to gay
old P.


Exeunt. ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- A Drawing Room in Mr. SAVAGE'S House at Bath.
Enter Sir GEORGE GAUNTLET and Signor CYGNET. Sir George. Bravo! Signor
bravissimo! -- and so Lady Sarah Savage has actually persuaded Darnley, that
his wife loves another man?


Signor. Si -- at first he no believe -- but Lady Sarah lay it down with such
courage -- her oaths were so superbe, and mine so magnifique, that 'at last he
accompany us with tears -- pauvre Mister Darnley! -- Ah! ha! -- you no forget
my vife's concert.


Sir George. And who did you say Mrs. Darnley was attached to?


Signor. Attendez -- Sir Paul -- what you call -- old P. -- he has found one
child -- eh bien! -- the enfant was at the comedy, and saw Madame Darnley and
her 'cousin maltraite by some qu'on appelle bobbies -- villains who fight de
duels, and interrupt de music -- Vell! de child relieve de ladies, conduct them
home -- sup, and dough all de time he make love to Mad'moiselle Clara --


Sir George. Yet, Lady Sarah Savage fixes on him for Mrs. Darnley's gallant --
excellent! and if this scheme fails, I understand she has another -- there is
Mr. Flush -- a sort of money agent.


Signor. Je connois -- je connois -- he make a you poor, by lending you cash.


Sir George. This Mr. Flush has got Darnley's note for two hundred pounds --
now he cannot pay it; and therefore if Lady Sarah Savage buys it up --


Signor. Je comprehend -- she say, give me my heart, or pay me my money -- ah
ha! -- I see you will be the first fiddle yourself; -- (looking out.) le voici!
-- here is Mr. Flush!


Sir George. No -- it is Sir Paul and the son you spoke of -- good day Signor --
and if you see Darnley, tell him I Am out of town.


Signor I will! -- ecoutez -- I no like to meet this Sir Paul -- ven he ask me
to his house, he always sing himself -- toujours -- if he has de cold -- de
sore throat -- il chante! and begar: he sing as well with the hoarseness, as
without -- bon-jour, Sir George -- bon-jour -- (going, recollects and turns
back.) Ah ha! -- you no forget my vife's concert?


Exit. Sir George. Darnley, jealous of his wife! and she under my own roof! --
now, if I can persuade her to retaliate -- here is her supposed gallant.


Enter Sir PAUL and GINGHAM, elegantly dressed. Gingham. I tell you, father,
Clara Sedley is the girl of my heart! -- your ward is the girl for young P.


Sir Paul. Nonsense! -- haven't I made you a gentleman -- stuck a sword by your
side? -- haven't I brought you here to address Lady Sarah Savage? -- ha! Sir
George! -- now mind (to Gingham) and conceal your low education -- not a word
about trade or the warehouse; for I mean to put you into the army, and I Have
told every body you have been on your travels. -- Sir George! -- my son!


Sir George. (bowing,) Sir, I Am very proud of the honor.


Gingham. Sir! -- I Am very proud of -- (bowing up to him, and spying at his
chitterlin) -- right India muslin, by all that is -- mum!


Sir George. You Have been a great traveller, sir, -- much abroad?


Gingham. Abroad! -- yes, sir -- I was seldom at home -- generally at the West
End, for between ourselves, though I was brought up to trade, I always despised
the warehouse -- always -- pshaw!


Sir Paul. (taking him aside) Zounds! -- mind what you're at -- consider, if
you talk as my son, about linens and the warehouse, they will take your father
for a tradesman; they will say I Am a haberdasher, knighted on a city address!


Gingham. A haberdasher! -- that is a good one, a very good one -- upon my soul;
Sir George, my father is'nt such a fool, as you take him for -- no -- that he
is not -- are you, father?


Lady Sarah Savage. (without.) When Mr. Flush comes, show him up stairs.


Sir George. Here Is your intended wife, sir -- 'gad! I hope it will be a match,
for Lady Sarah is so anxious for a husband, that in the scramble, she might
seize me at last -- come, Sir Paul -- let us leave the happy pair together.


Sir Paul. Now, remember what I told you -- Lady Sarah is the essence of
fashion and good breeding; and if you want to polish, and rub off the
city-rust, imitate her -- copy her elegant manner.


Sir George. Ay: she is the rage! -- and, if he wants to secure her affections,
bid him imitate his father, Sir Paul -- copy you, and he must succeed with the
women.


Sir Paul. Ay, that he must, Sir George -- there is not a girl at Newmarket, not
a dancer at the opera, or a singer at the ancient concert, but adores me --
they treat me with the same respect they would a father -- they say I Am so
quiet -- so inoffensive -- so harmless.


Gingham. Harmless! do they say you're harmless, father?


Sir Paul. Ay, harmless, and under that idea, I Have done more mischief, then any
ten dangerous men in Europe -- So copy her manners, and success to you, my boy!


Exit with Sir George. Gingham. Bravo! these are fine times, Master Gingham, --
but will they last? -- is there no trick played, or to be played thee? -- Sir
Paul I Am told has a way of disguising himself in women's clothes, surely this
is'nt another masquerading affair -- Ah! here is spouse! -- now to imitate her
fashionable manners.


Enter Lady SARAH SAVAGE. Lady Sarah. Marry him, I will: because in the first
place, there is a scarcity of husbands; and in the next, being his wife, secures
Sir Paul's fortune, and makes Darnley for ever in my power -- besides, I can
draw the youth into all my schemes -- hem!


Gingham. Hem! (imitating her.) If this is a woman of fashion, the breed is
grown pretty bold I think.


Lady Sarah. I must show him my spirit -- terrify him before marriage, in order
to tame him after. (Going toward him wriggling her head.) Sir!


Gingham. (Going toward her wriggling his head.) Ma'am.


Lady Sarah. Give me a chair!

(Staring full in his face.)
Gingham. A chair, ma'am?


Lady Sarah. Yes, a chair, sir.


Gingham. (Staring full in her face.) Essence of breeding! -- she is the essence
of brass! (brings her a chair.) A chair, ma'am!


Lady Sarah. (Staring vacantly.) He little knows what a life I shall lead him.


Gingham. (Shows alarm.) Heh! -- a chair, ma'am! -- here is a chair, I say --

(loudly.)
Lady Sarah. Oh, I forgot -- I am really so absent -- (sits down) he! he! he!

(spying in his face.)
Gingham. (sitting down.) Are you really! -- he! he! he! -- I should like to --
(mimicking) imitate her manners! hang me if I dare -- she has set me all in a
tremble -- pheugh!

(Puffing himself with his hat, and drawing his chair from her.)
Lady Sarah. Look up, my hero! (slapping him.) You cannot think how I rejoice at
your being designed for the army. I Am of a military, martial turn myself, and
shall serve every campaign with you.


Gingham. You serve campaigns! -- I wish I was out of the room -- pheugh!

(aside.)
Lady Sarah. I shall make an excellent soldier -- a dauntless warrior! and if
you talk of little unfledged fluttering ensigns, look at me -- look! --
(shaking him) march! -- wheel about! -- left! -- make ready! -- present! --
fire!


Gingham. (Looking first at her feet, then at her head.) It is -- it is an
impostor! -- ugh!

(whistles.)
Lady Sarah. Shall Not I make a warlike appearance! animate one army, and
intimidate another? restore the name of amazon -- revive the age of chivalry,
and if there are fools that threaten, and cowards that dread an invasion; Oh!
how the thought fires me! -- (rises,) -- give me a few champions like myself,
and we'll stand on our white cliffs, and scare away whole nations.


Gingham. Damme, it is another man in woman's clothes! don't agitate yourself
-- be composed -- (to her as she walks about.) what would I give to be snug
behind the counter?


Lady Sarah. I am no timid helpless woman; I can shoot -- I can fence --
flourish a sword, or fire off a musket! -- penetrate your sword arm at the
first thrust, or lodge a bullet in your forehead at forty yards.


Gingham. Keep cool -- my hero keep cool! Oh! it is a clear case -- it is a man,
and here am I to rub off the rust, by being run through the body! sit down my
fine fellow! sit down.


Lady Sarah. Fine fellow!


Gingham. Ay, I see how it is -- Sir Paul has adopted me out of joke, and you
are to make mince meat of me for my vanity!


Lady Sarah. Why, what is all this! (smiling.) mince meat!


Gingham. He smiles! then the joke's at an end, and they don't mean to hurt me!
give me your hand -- you comical dog, give me your hand.


Lady Sarah. Comical dog! what do you mean? explain.


Gingham. Explain! nay: that is too bad -- do you think I don't know you my
jolly boy? -- do you think I cannot see you are a gentleman?


Lady Sarah. What! I a gentleman?


Gingham. Ay, and a brave one too! -- why I suspected you at first sight! -- I
saw there was nothing feminine about you, and then when I looked you full in
the face, "pooh," says I, this can never be a woman!


Lady Sarah. Not a woman! -- have I studied modern fashions? exceeded all the
present race of high spirited women! only to be mistaken for -- Oh Lord! I
never wept before in all my life -- but this -- Oh, I shall faint -- Oh! Oh!

(Sits in a chair weeping.)
Enter FLUSH. Flush. My rascal of a son has gone off with all my papers --
Darnley's note amongst the number -- and though Lady Sarah would give twice the
value for it, I cannot find him --


Gingham. (advancing to him.) Hush! not so loud father -- he will flourish a
sword -- fire off a musket!


Flush. He! -- who! -- but how came you here, sir? in this disguise too!


Gingham. Phoo! -- it is not me that is disguised; a word -- (whispers to him) --
there!

(pointing to Lady Sarah Savage.)
Flush. What! that lady!


Gingham. No; that comical dog -- I Am sure of it -- mum!


Flush. Ha! ha! ha! -- you blockhead! why it is Lady Sarah Savage! she is rather
masculine to be sure: but Lord help you -- she and I are old friends.


Gingham. What! you know her? do you!


Flush. Know her! -- why I Will take my oath she is a woman.


Gingham. He Will take his oath! -- Oh then I see my error -- she is on the pave,
discarded; and they want to palm her on me.


Flush. Fool! -- would you make more blunders! cannot you tell a women of
fashion from a --.


Gingham. No -- there it is, sir, -- if women of fashion will talk and dress
like women of another description, who the devil can tell one from the other!
and, if likewise they will hunt, shoot, and fence, and prefer masculine
assurance, to feminine diffidence, is it amazing, that a gentleman should
confound the sexes? however, I Am glad it is not a man.


Flush. Come -- come -- without further enquiry, give me Darnley's note; the
one Clara brought; the comical dog there, as you call her, is in love with
Darnley, and wants to hold the bill as a rod over his head: I shall only ask
her one hundred pounds premium for it.


Gingham. (Taking the note out of his pocket book.) Only a hundred premium! heh!


Flush. No; I can afford it: and she, by arresting him, can make her own terms
-- you understand!


Gingham. Perfectly; so I Will show her the note, and make peace -- (goes toward
Miss Savage, who is still sitting.) -- madam -- lady.


Lady Sarah. Pshaw! don't come near me, brute.


Gingham. I am convinced of my mistake, ma'am -- this gentleman will take his
oath on the subject, and therefore -- in hopes of making amends -- here is a
note, my lady; a note of Mr. Darnley's for two hundred pounds.


Lady Sarah. What did you say, sir?


Gingham. A note of Mr. Darnley's, ma'am!


Lady Sarah. (Looking at it.) So it is; signed with his own dear hand --
(rises) -- well, now I look at you again, sir, I Am quite ashamed of our silly
misunderstanding -- I am indeed -- he! he! perhaps it was my fault -- nay -- I
dare say it was -- and so, that is Mr. Darnley's note, is it?


Gingham. It is, and now I recollect, was not the lady I conducted from the
play, his wife?


Lady Sarah. It was -- but enter nous -- what is the price of that foolish bit
of paper?


Flush. Only three hundred pounds! one hundred for the premium, and two for the
principal.


Lady Sarah. Here is the money then.


Gingham. (Putting his hand on hers.) Softly; keep the principal, because
you will both want it, and as to the note, I Will keep that, lest somebody else
should want it! (putting it in his pocket,) you brought me up to the trade, and
if I haven't learnt a trick or two, Mr. Flush, it is no fault of yours.


Flush. What! would you turn swindler, you rascal!


Lady Sarah. Ay, this is a new mode of getting money.


Gingham. No -- not so very new -- is it Mr. Flush? -- however, as the wife is
the only person that ought to have a power over the husband, I Will even go
instantly to Mrs. Darnley, and give it her. --


Enter DARNLEY. Darnley, (fiercely.) What, sir?


Gingham. A note for two hundred pounds, sir, -- have you any objections? never
mind the loss of the premium, Mr. Flush -- you can afford it, you know --
adieu! -- Mr. Bluff, (To Darnley, who is frowning,) your servant -- it wouldn't
do -- you you comical dog, it wouldn't do! --


(Showing Lady Sarah Savage the note, and exit.) Darnley. (To Lady Sarah
Savage.) 'Sdeath! -- this is the very man you told me of.


Lady Sarah. Ay, now can you want further proof of his attachment to your wife?
-- I Will leave it to any body? -- is not it evident, Mr. Flush?


Flush. His giving her two hundred pounds is a strong circumstance to be sure
-- but then, when I recollect the money is mine, and not his --


Darnley. What then, sir.


Flush. Why then, I think, the lady ought to be in love with me, and not him,
sir.


Darnley. I Will set out for London, and never see her more -- yet no -- I Will be
satisfied -- I Will know the worst! -- I Will instantly pursue this new found idol
of her heart, and if I catch him in her presence --


Lady Sarah. Kill him -- for a wretch, who cannot distinguish the human species,
is not fit to live -- come -- I Will go with you.


Flush. So will I -- but pray don't kill him, till I Have got my papers.


Lady Sarah. Nay, don't fret about it, Mr. Darnley -- you shall return with me
to Savage-house -- come -- never think of going to London at this time of year
-- it is so thin -- all the great houses are locked up, and there is no making a
fashionable party; is there, Mr. Flush?


Flush. Your pardon, ma'am -- I and my attorney can always collect a
fashionable party, and if the great houses are locked up, why there are great
people in lock-up-houses, so don't be afraid of finding good company, Mr.
Darnley!


(Exeunt.) SCENE II. -- A library in Sir George Gauntlet's house.
Sir GEORGE, and a servant meeting. Servant. Sir! Sir! Mrs. Darnley is coming
here to look for some books.


Sir George. That Is fortunate: did you deliver my message to her, and her
husband?


Servant. I did, sir, I told them you were gone out of town, and would not
return till to morrow.


Sir George. Very well! then, in case of accident, leave open the private door
that leads behind the library. (Servant opens a door that leads behind the
library.) A man of intrigue should always have a place to lay snug in, and
where is he so little likely to be discovered, as amongst works of study and
reflection! here she is! mind we are not interrupted.

(Servant exit -- Sir George retires toward the Library.)
Enter Mrs. DARNLEY. Mrs. Darnley. Will Mr. Darnley never be convinced of this
friend's hypocrisy! he is so credulous, that he even now places more confidence
in him, than ever: I Am glad Sir George is out of town -- I can at least pass
another hour in peace, and --

(Going toward the Library, Sir George meets her.)
Sir George. Don't be alarmed, Mrs. Darnley; I Am only a living volume, and if
you will peruse my thoughts, you will read of nothing but yourself -- you are
engraved here in indelible letters, upon my honor.


Mrs. Darnley. Sir, I was informed -- but this is no time for parleying --
alone and unprotected!

(Going, Sir George stvnds in her way.)
Sir George. Nay, you know I have long professed a regard for you; long thought
you the finest woman on earth! and as a proof, didn't I offer you my hand,
before my friend --


Mrs. Darnley. Friend! call him by some other name, Sir George, and don't
profane such honorable terms.


Sir George. Why, is not he my friend? havn't I so completely gained his
affections, that he wishes me to win yours? does he not bring you here -- to my
house! -- leave me tete-a-tete with you! and in every respect prove so kind, so
obliging --.


Mrs. Darnley. Hold, sir -- if he has exposed me to insults, I am the person to
accuse him -- not you! I know his heart, and I know yours -- one has my love --
my esteem -- the other --


Sir George. Has what, my sweet creature?


Mrs. Darnley. My scorn.


Sir George. Nay then -- I must tell you, that when I condescend to love a
woman, I always insist on making her happy; and therefore, with opportunity on
my side, and the whole world to lay the blame on your husband --


Mrs. Darnley. On him! the world is not so easily deceived! but lest it should,
I Will vindicate his fame -- I Will proclaim the falsehood of his friend -- his
perfidy --


Sir George. Gently -- gently -- I see I must take advantage now or never!

(Goes to the door.)
Mrs. Darnley. What do you mean, sir?


Sir George. First to fasten the door, and then, my angel --

(As he opens it to fasten it closely, Gingham enters and pushes by him.)
Gingham. And then, my angel -- to give you two hundred pounds -- this note,
ma'am, is Mr. Darnley's -- it accidentally fell into my hands, and I designedly
place it in yours -- put it up, ma'am -- keep it tight in your pocket; for
what, with one having a rage for disguises -- another having a rage for
swindling -- a third -- (Seeing Sir George.) -- ha! my judge of good breeding!
is it you?


Sir George. This blockhead has ruined one scheme already, I see.


Gingham. I Will tell you a secret Sir George; you fashionable people are very
vulgar -- it is your fine clothes, gay equipages, and superb houses that are
well bred, and not yourselves, egad! now only pull off that spangled coat --
stick yourself behind a counter, and --.


Sir George. Sir, don't you see I Am busy?


Gingham. To be sure I do.


Sir George. Why don't you leave the room then?


Gingham. Because I Have no where else to go.


Sir George. Then I command you; this lady and I are engaged.


Mrs. Darnley. Engaged, Sir George! -- Sir, (to Gingham) if you will conduct me
to Mr. Darnley, I shall think myself a second time indebted to your gallantry.


Sir George. Madam, I insist -- (Crossing Mrs. D. and taking her by the hand,)
-- retire this instant, Sir -- retire --


Gingham. Oh! I perceive -- he detains her for base purposes! oh fie! fie! --
fie for shame, Sir George -- is this your good breeding! -- your hand, ma'am --

(Trying to pass Sir George.)
Sir George. 'Sdeath -- obey me, or this sword, with which I Have so often fought.


Gingham. Often fought! what in earnest?


Sir George. Rascal! draw.


Gingham. No -- I Would rather not.


Sir George. What! you don't like to fight!


Gingham. No -- who the devil does! but you call me rascal, sir -- now I Have
been long in doubt whether I am one or not -- but if I was half as clear on the
subject as you must be, I Would own it publicly -- I Would say, "I Sir George Gauntlet
am such a rude -- ill bred -- vulgar" --.


Sir George. Coward! -- come on --

(Drawing his sword.)
Gingham. Come on! -- well! why shouldn't I! I may be alarmed at masculine
women, but I don't care that -- (Snapping his fingers,) -- for effeminate men!
so, though I never learnt to fence in all my life -- though I don't know
whether to hold my sword in my right hand or my left, have at thee! -- ha! --
ha! --


Sir GEORGE and GINGHAM make two or three passes, when loud knocking at the
door interrupts them. Sir George. Zounds! -- if this should be Darnley --
(looks out.) -- it is! I Am ruined -- undone! --


Gingham. Ay, ay, I must take lessons -- I Am touched -- pink'd --

(shaking his hand which is slightly wounded.)
Sir George. If I stir, I meet Darnley -- hark'ye Sir -- (aside to Gingham,) --
that lady's husband is now on the stairs, and your present wound is only a
slight one; but if you hint or speak one word against my honor --


Gingham. You Will run me through the body I suppose -- well! as I cannot fence --
mum!


Sir George. I shall not leave the room -- I shall be concealed, and on the
slightest insinuation, by heaven! I Will come forth and cut you into atoms;
promise -- or -- you know my way --


Gingham. I do -- I Will live and fight another day.


Sir GEORGE goes behind the Library unperceived by GINGHAM or by Mrs. DARNLEY.
Gingham. I wish I knew the name of Sir George's fencing master -- (Mrs. Darnley
comes to him) -- my dear ma'am, don't be uneasy -- it is only grazed, and if
they don't send doctors and apothecaries to me, I shall live to pink him, again
and again.


Mrs. Darnley. Let me bind your hand, with my handkerchief. (Darnley enters
behind.) Indeed -- indeed, I owe you much.


Darnley. (still behind) It Is now beyond a doubt -- Oh woman! woman!


Gingham. (to Mrs. Darnley.) You hav'nt got the rage -- no, you are what a
woman ought to be; mild, gentle, affectionate -- an angel by all that is sacred.


Darnley. How! make love before my face! -- (advances) So Mrs. Darnley --


Mrs. Darnly. Oh my dear! -- I Am so glad you're come -- this gallant, generous
young man --


Darnley. Generous young man!


Darnley. Generous young man!


Mrs. Darnley. Has been wounded in my cause, and --


Darnley. And you bound up his arm, with your handkerchief! -- nay, don't deny
it, madam -- with my own eyes, I saw it -- well, sir! what have you to say,
sir? to that handkerchief, sir?


Gingham. Say, sir! -- why, I say, the handkerchief is as fine cambrick as ever
was sold -- twelve shillings a yard, sir! -- at least I used to sell such for a
guinea -- a guinea, Mr. Bluff -- as to any thing else, if you are the lady's
husband --


Darnley. I am her husband, sir! -- who has long loved -- long adored her! --
and now comes here to witness her falsehood and his own dishonor.


Mrs. Darnley. What does he say? -- dishonor!


Darnley. Yes, madam -- with him! with this gallant, generous young man! did he
not last night accompany you from the play, and now do I not find you praising
each other to my very face? -- observe me, Maria -- as you have found me tender
in my affections; so you shall find me severe in my resentment.


Mrs. Darnley. I know not what he means: but I thought they would make him hate me
-- I guilty of falsehood! dishonor to my husband! Oh, Harry! if you believe me
so debased, take up that weapon, and pierce me to the heart! -- in pity do! --
I cannot live and know that you condemn me.


Darnley. (taking her hand.) Do you not love him.


Mrs. Darnley. Whom!


Darnley. (Pointing to Gingham.) Him.


Gingham. Me! -- love me! -- I wish she did, for if I didn't use her better
than you do, I Would cut my jealous head off! -- look'ye, great lord and master! --
she is more faithful to you, than you deserve -- I know it, because just before
you entered the room, Sir George Gauntlet, like a vile seducer as he is, was
attempting to -- (here a book falls from the library.) crau -- au -- au!
(checking himself.) I shall be a dead man, before I know it.


Darnley. Sir George Gauntlet! -- paltry evasions! -- he is out of town and has
so often proved himself a friend. --


Mrs. Darnley. Friend! -- Oh, Mr. Darnley! at last I am compelled to tell you,
he is your enemy and mine -- it is that very friend, who would destroy your
domestic peace; who would rob you of a heart, that is, and ever shall be all
your own! and that, even now, might have triumphed over a helpless woman, had
not his friendly arm been stretched to serve me.


Gingham. It Is true -- I Will swear it! -- I Will -- (another book falls.) crau --
au -- au!


Darnley. I Will not believe it -- he is above such arts, and I would have you,
madam, not increase your guilt, by daring to abuse my best of friends.


Gingham. Best of friends! -- upon my soul* you have a rare set of acquaintance
then. -- Sir! I always had a knack at speaking what comes uppermost, and I say,
Sir George wanted to turn me out, in order to lock her in -- I say, he gave me
this wound, in trying to defend her from his insolence -- I say he is now
concealed in this room!


( Books fall from the Library, and leave an open space. GINGHAM looks round,
and sees Sir GEORGE'S face frowning at him through the aperture.) Gingham. No
-- I don't say he is in the room -- I don't! because -- because -- (looking
round again) its better to be choked then killed.


Darnley. See how he prevaricates: and therefore, that my friend may be
slandered and I deceived no longer, it is time I should decide -- Maria! -- It
almost kills me to pronounce it -- (aside) we meet no more --

(going.)
Mrs. Darnley. (Holding him.) Stay -- spare me but a moment -- I cannot -- will
not lose him; Harry, think of our love -- our children. --


Gingham. Sir! sir! -- let me ask you two questions -- (Another book falls, and
Sir George frowns at him.) Ay, grin away you -- Sir! can you sense, and will
you fight?


Darnley. Perhaps, you will find, I can, sir.


Gingham. And if I prove that Sir George hid himself to avoid you, will you
stand by, and see a poor fellow cut to atoms?


Darnley. No -- on the contrary, I shall be so convinced of the truth of your
story --


Gingham. Say you so? then come out you black infernal seducer!


( Runs up to the Library -- forces open the front doors, and amidst the
falling of all the books, Sir GEORGE GAUNTLET is discovered!) Gingham. There --
there he is! and now come on, if you dare -- here is a pair of the best fencers
in Europe?

(Snatching up a sword and placing himself by Darnley.
Darnley. It Is all unravel'd -- detested hypocrite!


Sir George. Ah, Darnley! -- how do you do! -- this is a droll circumstance,
is not it! -- but I hope you are convinced.


Darnley. Yes, sir, I am convinced.


Gingham. We Are all convinced, sir.


Darnley. That you and Lady Sarah have joined in a conspiracy to deceive me and
betray my wife; that you have meanly put on the mask of friendship, to conceal
the blackest artifices, and that if you had come to my house and boldly
plundered me of all my fortune --


Gingham. He Would only have been hanged! -- but now he shall be cut to atoms.


Sir George. Be cautious in your language, Mr. Darnley -- you know my
disposition.


Darnley. I do -- I know you well: and henceforth if you dare, either by
action, word, or look; mark me, sir -- raise but a blush in her unsullied
cheek, I will resent it -- I Will inflict a punishment, great as your arrogance
deserves!


Sir George. Arrogance!


Gingham. Ay, arrogance! -- are you deaf!


Sir George. Sir, this requires an explanation; you shall hear from me.


Gingham. Pooh!


Darnley. Delay not then, for I shall leave your house this moment, (Sir George
exit.) -- come Maria -- to you and this gentleman I have a thousand apologies
--


Gingham. Bless you! I Am amply paid in letting my tongue wag -- and as to any
thing else, allow me once more to speak my mind to your sweet cousin, Clara!
come let us go to her -- Oh! you well bred ruffian! -- to be first pink'd, and
then nearly choked by such a --; on the whole, though, I never fought better
in all my life!


Exeunt. ACT V.
SCENE I. -- A Room in a Tavern -- Dinner under Covers -- Darnley discovered
sitting at the Table -- Waiter attending.
Darnley. Tell Sir George Gauntlet, Mr. Darnley is waiting -- what is o'clock?


Waiter. Six, sir.


Darnley. The time draws near -- I wonder where my friend can be? put some wine
on the table and leave me.


Waiter. Sir George is below, in close conversation with a gentleman, who seems
anxious to see you, sir.


Darnley. His second, I suppose -- tell him, I am here -- (Waiter exit.)
'Sdeath! -- to what have I reduced myself? -- I that had every joy this world
can give -- a peaceful home -- a wife that loved, and children that revered me!
-- I to be now in a tavern, on the eve of meeting with a professed duellist? to
be about to commit murder, or else to live dishonored and disgraced -- Oh,
Maria! -- when thou shall hear thy husband is no more, will thou forgive me? --
will thou -- but my fate determines hers, and if I fall she is for ever lost!


Re-enter the Waiter. Waiter. The gentleman from Sir George Gauntlet, sir.


Darnley. Admit him -- now then for the event!


Enter GINGHAM hastily. Gingham. I Am so fag'd -- so completely knocked up (sees
the dinner.) ha, ha! what is here? -- the very thing to revive me.


Darnley. I hope, sir, you haven't been talking to Sir George.


Gingham. Yes, but I have though -- you employed me as second, and if you're
shot, it shall be in the way I like best. (sitting down) Waiter! waiter!


Waiter. (To Gingham, who is going to pull off a cover of one of the dishes.)
Sir! sir! -- Sir George ordered that dish not to be touched till he came.


Gingham. Did he? -- then it is the picked thing I suppose, so I Will eat it all
up directly, (uncovers it, and sees a brace of pistols laying 'midst powder and
ball.) here -- it is quite at his service, and I wish the whole were in his
stomach with all my soul! -- (giving the dish to the waiter, and uncovering
another.) Ah! here is something that I can swallow. (begins eating.) Well after
hunting every where for Sir George, I found him below stairs at last -- "so"
says I "my little Librarian" -- alluding to the book-case you know -- "when are
you and this jealous husband" -- alluding to you, you know -- "to fight this
foolish duel?" (drinks a glass of wine.) Clara! my dear Clara Sedley!


Darnley. Well, sir.


Gingham. Says I "the fact is this; one will be killed, the other be hanged,
and the world get rid of two hotheaded fellows:" says he, "Will Darnley make
me an apology?" says I "he might as well."


Darnley. You did not!


Gingham. Ah, but I did though "it is very well for fashionable husbands, to
leave their wives with friends, in hopes of getting divorces and damages; but
what right," says I, "has a country squire to quit his farm, and trust his
wife, with baronets, fools, and coxcombs? -- to plant his own horns" says I!
(drinks.) "Success to trade."


Darnley. And how did this end, sir?


Gingham. How! -- why the other second interfer'd -- said Sir George could'nt
fire at you, and advised him to apologize -- he hesitated -- I put my hand on
my sword -- reminded him of my fine fencing -- he signed this paper -- I Have
already shown it to Mrs. Darnley, and so -- (drinks) Here Is the child that has
two fathers!


Darnley. (Reading the paper.) It Is ample, final satisfaction -- was not my
Maria happy?


Gingham. She was -- but with women, grief soon follows joy, you know -- she
says, your uncle, whoever he is, has ordered you to quit Bath, and go abroad --
that she is to be left behind, and as your fortune is exhausted, she fears you
must consent -- I Am sorry I Am pinched too -- however -- (drinks.) Here Is
confusion to your stingy old uncle!


Darnley. Unfeeling! persecuting man! -- separate me from all I love -- I know
the motive for this barbarous conduct -- he has found a son, on whom he means
to lavish all his favors, and while he rolls in luxury, I and my family may
starve -- may -- but he comes.


Enter Sir PAUL PERPETUAL. Sir Paul. So Mr. Darnley: how dare you intrude into
the houses of great people, and thus repeatedly disgrace me? -- look'ye, sir --
I have made up my mind -- you must seek your fortune abroad -- I Will pay your
expenses to the continent, and lest your family should be a burden to you,
I Will provide for your wife at home.


Darnley. Oh, sir! do not part us!


Sir Paul. I will! -- I Am resolved! (seeing Gingham.) hah! -- what do I see? --
my boy! -- my darling! -- how came you here you rogue?


Gingham. Father, you're come in time -- just in time to finish the bottle!
(filling him a humper, and putting it in his hand) drink! drink the last toast!


Sir Paul. Ay, what is it?


Gingham. "Confusion to Darnley's" --


Sir Paul. With all my heart -- "confusion to Darnley's" --


Gingham. "Stingy old uncle!"


Sir Paul. (spitting out the wine.) Stingy old uncle! -- why that is confusion
to myself you dog!


Gingham. What! is it you -- well! hang me if I didn't think it was my father
-- that is my other father, the money-lender -- cousin -- relation -- how are
you!

(shaking Darnley by the hand.)
Sir Paul. Nonsense! never mind him -- I Have brought you your commission -- a
company in a regiment serving in Ireland.


Gingham. Have you! (to Sir Paul.) who'd have thought my father was your
miserly uncle, heh!

(to Darnley.)
Sir Paul. It Is three hundred a year, my boy! psha! don't mind him I tell you,
(pulling him away from Darnley.) I reserve every thing for you -- I always
meant to give all I could to my son.


Gingham. Did you! -- Oh then it comes to the same point; why, perhaps, you will
give me two hundred pounds.


Sir Paul. Ay, that I will.


Gingham. What! and the commission too!


Sir Paul. Yes, and the commission too! here they are both -- and some ten
years hence, I Will join the regiment, and serve under you; under my brave son!


Gingham. No -- under your brave nephew if you like -- I don't understand the
exercise, and Darnley does! and therefore, as we are all relations -- all in a
family, I Will even give him the commission -- Nay, don't be shy cousin -- it
makes no difference father, does it?


Sir Paul. Death and fire! it does, sir, it makes all the difference, and I
swear --


Gingham. Softly -- you can make me a hero in another way -- as I was brought
up to trade, pop me into the train bands -- then I can be killed in the
artillery ground in one day, and be alive in the shop the next! so keep the
commission, cousin; keep it -- (Forcing it into Darnley's hand.) and here --
here is the money to take you, your wife and children to Ireland -- (giving the
bank notes. -- there! now moderate your joy, father! you have done a kind,
generous action to be sure: but why! why in such an ecstacy!


Sir Paul. Ecstacy! agony you puppy!


Gingham. Gently, gently, at the public breakfast I shall sound forth your
praises -- come, cousin -- the best of the joke is, I Have another father; and
though he wont lend you a shilling, I Will make him send you linen enough to
shirt your whole regiment. -- Farewell, thou liberal man! -- look! --
Self-gratification has brought tears of joy into his eyes!


(Exit with Darnley.) Sir Paul. Tears of joy! -- if being cheated out of my
money, makes me cry for pleasure, what shall I do, if I get it back again? --
was there ever such a fellow? -- however the commission is of no use to Darnley
-- but then the two hundred pounds -- and the ease with which he did it.


Enter a Servant. Servant. A letter from your Ward, Sir Paul. It requires an
immediate answer.


Sir Paul. (Reading it.) Sir, I am now at the Public Breakfast, where Miss
Savage actually insisted on my coming. I have discovered a deep plot of Mr.
Savage's, and when I tell you, I am in danger of being run away with, without
my consent, I Am sure you will fly to the relief of your -- Affectionate Ward,
CLARA SEDLEY.
Sir Paul. I Will come directly -- (Servant exit.) -- So -- So -- they have heard
of her sudden acquisition of fortune -- of the Copper Mines being discovered on
her estate, and now like true savages, they mean to paw the property -- but
I Have a husband for her in my eye. She has formed an affection for this liberal
son of mine, and the dog cannot take her for a man in woman's clothes.


Enter FLUSH. Flush. You knave! -- if I catch you -- how! has he left the
tavern! -- Ah! Sir Paul! -- pray Sir, have you seen any thing of my son?


Sir Paul. I know nothing of your son, sir.


Flush. He has been distributing my property -- giving away my money, Sir Paul.


Sir Paul. 'Gad! My son has been doing me the same favor.


Flush. Ay, sir; but my son has swindled me out of two hundred pounds.


Sir Paul. That Is the exact sum! -- my son has swindled me out of -- so let us
shake hands and cry for joy!


Flush. Well, well -- I can afford it -- but, Sir Paul, there is only one way
he can make me retribution -- you have heard of our ward's copper mines, and
though you have only known me as a private gentleman, and I you as joint
guardian -- yet I think you will consent to her marrying the man I propose.


Sir Paul. And pray, who may the gentleman be? -- not the Honorable Mr.
Savage, I hope, for he has no property, but my two racers.


Flush. No -- no -- my Son! -- my rogue of a Son! -- will you agree?


Sir Paul. Why I would with pleasure only --


Flush. What Brother Guardian?


Sir Paul. I mean to propose my rogue of a son.


Flush. Your son! -- why how came you by a son? -- but to the point -- my boy
has won her heart, Sir Paul.


Sir Paul. So has mine too, Mr. Flush.


Flush. Yours too! -- Sdeath, Sir Paul -- this racing has turned your brain.


Sir Paul. Racing! -- Iv'e done with it, sir -- I hate it -- I Am above the turf
now.


Flush. Above the turf! -- I wish you were under it! -- do you pretend she
loves both our sons? -- two men at the same time, sir?


Sir Paul. To be sure -- she is not the first woman that has loved twenty at the
same time, sir -- but as she cannot marry without our joint consent, and is now
in great distress at Lady Sarah Savage's public breakfast, let us adjourn there
directly.


Flush. With all my heart -- I can afford it -- Public breakfast! -- why this
is later than usual -- (Looking at his Watch) -- Nine o'clock at night!


Sir Paul. Ah, these are late hours: but what need we care, Mr. Flush? -- we
that have health, youth, spirits -- do you know there is only one house in
England that affects my constitution?


Flush. And what house is that?


Sir Paul. (Whispers him.) I never was there but twice -- the first time there
was a motion about relieving poor insolvent debtors, and the house was so empty
I got an ague. The next time, somebody moved to remove the hackney coaches from
Bond-Street, and the benches were so crammed that I was thrown into a sever! --
So hey for the breakfast. -- Youth's the season made for joy!


Flush. Love is then our duty! etc.


(Exeunt singing together.) SCENE II. -- A garden at Mr. Savage's on Lansaown
hill -- a marquee at the upper wing, in which is seen a table full of fruits,
wine, meat, tea urns, coffee pots, etc. A distant view of Bath -- moon rising.
-- Long flourish of clarinets!
Enter Lady SARAH SAVAGE and a Servant. Lady Sarah. Call Miss Clara -- (Servant
enters marquee.) -- I have given this party in order to secure this young
creature and her fortune, for my brutish brother has so lessened our gold, that
only her copper can save us from sinking -- if her guardians refuse, we are
prepared for bolder schemes. Enter CLARA. Well: my dear girl, how do you like
our breakfast? -- breakfast by moonlight? is not it quite charming -- so
nouvelle?


Clara. Quite -- and in addition to tea and coffee, here are fowls, fruit, and
wine, so that you may breakfast, dine, drink tea, and sup all in the same meal
-- nouvelle! -- surely nobody else is so singular.


Lady Sarah. I don't know -- I never copy -- the world's so very ignorant --
that only act unlike other people, and you're pretty sure of being right, but,
didn't you like the music -- the singing? --


Clara. No; I don't much like these sine singers -- it is a long time before you
prevail on them to sing, and then when they once begin -- faith! they never
stop. I declare I only saw one person I liked amongst the party.


Lady Sarah. And who was that? -- the dear Signor!


Clara. No -- the dear creature, my guardian's son.


Lady Sarah. What! that monster? I wonder who invited such a heterogeneous
animal, and you to prefer him --


Clara. Even to your brother, Ma'am -- I know Mr. Savage designs me his hand;
but, if my guardians will agree -- and why they leave me in this scene of
danger when I wrote to Sir Paul --


Lady Sarah. Here they are both -- I Will go call my brother, and by the time I
return, I hope I shall call you sister -- adieu! -- Gingham, indeed!


[Exit. Enter Sir PAUL and FLUSH. Flush. Here she is -- here is the girl to
answer for herself -- now be cool, Sir Paul -- compose yourself, and I Will
fairly put the question to her. Clara, haven't you fixed your affections?


Clara. To confess the truth, I have, Sir.


Flush. Very well -- softly, Sir Paul! and now, what is the Gentleman's name?


Sir Paul. Ay, what is his name, Clary?


Clara. Gingham, Sir.


Flush. There! I told you so -- it is my son!


Sir Paul. Why there! I told you so -- it is my son!


Flush. Your son! -- In the first place I don't believe you have a son; and in
the next, do you pretend that this Gingham --


Sir Paul. Is my boy! my own darling child! -- and I Will prove it.


Flush. Well, well, if this is the case. I Will make you a fair proposition,
let us call in both our sons, and let the one she prefers be her husband.


Sir Paul. Agreed -- and I Will bet you a hundred pounds she chooses mine.


Flush. Done, -- I Will bet you a hundred she chooses mine.


Gingham. (Within the Marquee.) My life! my love! my Clara!


Flush. Here he comes!

(Rubbing his Hands.)
Sir Paul. Here he comes

(Rubbing his Hands.)
Gingham. (Within Marquee) I cannot live a moment from thee -- I --


GINGHAM enters from the Marquee, and, seeing his two fathers together, pauses
and starts. Flush. Now, Clara -- Silence, Sir Paul! -- don't you choose him! --
him! -- for your husband?


Clara. I do, Sir.


Flush. Huzza! I Have won my bet!


Sir Paul. Here is a father don't know his own child.


Gingham. (Coming between them) And here is a child don't know his own father!
upon my soul, Gentlemen, I cannot tell which of you had the honor of inventing
me; but here I am, and if you have more property to distribute -- if either of
you has another two hundred pounds, I Will dispose of it so nearly, that tears of
joy shall trickle down your cheeks!


Flush. (After looking some time at Sir Paul.) Sir Paul!


Sir Paul. Mr. Flush -- We were joint guardians just now and --


Flush. And now we are joint fathers it seems. --


Sir Paul. This must be the tradesman -- a word in private, if you please, Sir.
(They enter the Marquee.


Gingham. Lay your heads together; settle it as you please; for while Clara
smiles on me, I care not whether I Am son to a haberdasher, or heir to the grand
Turk.


Cara. I hope they will not quarrel -- I fear Mr. Flush will insist --


Gingham. He insist! -- bless you, he would sell me for half a crown.


Re-enter FLUSH and SIR PAUL Sir Paul. He Is mine! he is mine! the father knows
his own child at last. -- I never suspected Flush was clerk to a Lottery
Office, and consequently little thought he was the tradesman who married my
Nelly -- 'gad! I always took him for a gentleman.


Gingham. Did you? -- that was very good natured of you -- and so you give me
up, Mr. Flush?


Flush. Yes, I can afford it. -- The Tunbridge story is perfectly explained,
and I have done with you, you rogue -- Your wise father here has promised to
restore my papers, so now you may speak truth till you're black in the face.


Gingham. May I? -- then I will not; lest other faces should be of the same
complexion -- but, gentlemen, since you have found out who I belong to, will you
inform me who this lady is to belong to?


Clara. Ay, Mr. Flush -- I Am sure I shall have your consent -- you are a monied
man and have lived with people of rank.


Flush. Your pardon, ma'am, if I had lived with people of rank, I had not been
a monied man -- the fact is, I touch cash wherever I can, and Sir Paul has
bribed me so handsomely, that I have sold my consent -- I have sold my ward as
well as my son, and for this plain reason -- I can afford it.


Sir Paul. Clary, take his hand, my Girl. (Giving her to Gingham.) The dog has
an odd way of speaking his mind, but instead of checking him, encourage him;
many a man only wants to be told of his errors to correct them, and that is my
case --


Gingham. Your case, Sir?


Sir Paul. Yes, my boy -- since you talked of self-gratification bringing tears
of pleasure into my eyes, I resolved to try the experiment -- I determined to
retrench my expenses, to sell my hounds, dispose of my stud, and see if I could
not lay out my money on rational and solid pleasures; in bestowing happiness on
two as innocent and injured creatures as ever existed!


Enter Mr. and Mrs. DARNLEY. Sir Paul. Niece, your hand -- Darnley forgive
what is past, and henceforth if I don't prove a friend to you, tell that son of
mine to speak his mind to me -- tell him to take another two hundred pounds out
of my pocket; nay, disperse my whole property -- any thing, so you don't drink
"Confusion to a stingy old uncle!"


Mrs. Darnley. Sir, we owe every thing to your son -- he has been our pilot
through the storms of fashion, and if he now secures to us independence and our
cottage --


Sir Paul. Independence and a cottage! S'life! you shall have affluence and a
farm as large as Salisbury Plain -- I Will come and see you every summer! ay! for
sixty years to come! -- odsheart! they say I Am like an old Volcano burnt out!
but it is a mistake -- I Am like an Egyptian lamp that flames for ever! -- A'nt
I, my boy?


Gingham. Must I speak truth, father? -- mum!


Darnley. (To Sir Paul.) You have made me the happiest of men, Sir Paul; but
you must excuse me when I say, that your son has the first and greatest claim
--


Gingham. Nay, Cousin; if you knew me half as well as I know myself, you would
find I have as many faults as any of you. -- But come, let us adjourn from this
vulgar fashionable scene, and while they drink one toast, we'll give another --

-- May manners masculine no more deface
The charms that constitute each female grace.
To man, be bold and daring schemes confined,
Woman for softer passions was designed,
And by meek virtue -- to subdue mankind!

[Exeunt.] FINIS.
PLAYS, etc. printed for T. N. LONGMAN, in Paternoster Row.
1. THE DRAMATIST, a Comedy, by Mr. Reynolds, Price 1 s. 6 d. 2. NOTORIETY, a
Comedy, by Mr. Reynolds, Price 1 s. 6 d. 3. HOW TO GROW RICH, a Comedy, by Mr.
Reynolds, Price 1 s. 6. 4. WILD OATS, a Comedy, by Mr. O'Keeffee, Price 1 s. 6.
5. THE CASTLE OF ANDALUSIA, a Comic Opera, by Mr. O'Keeffee, Price 1 s. 6. 6.
SPRIGS OF LAUREL, a Comic Opera, in two Acts, by Mr. O'Keeffee, Price 1 s. 7.
THE MIDNIGHT WANDFRERS, a Comic Opera, in two Acts; by Mr. Pearce, Price 1 s.
8. NETLEY ABBEY, a Comic Opera, in two Acts, by Mr. Pearce, Price 1 s. 9.
ARRIVED AT PORTSMOUTH, a Comic Opera, in two Acts, Price 1 s. 10. THE IRISHMAN
IN LONDON, a Farce, Price 1 s. 11. THE MAID OF NORMANDY; or, the Death of the
QUEEN of FRANCE: a Tragedy, by Mr. Air, late of Pembroke College, Cambridge,
Price 1 s. 6 d. 12. CONSEQUENCES; or, the SCHOOL for PREJUDICE, a Comedy, by
Mr. Eyres, Price 1 s. 6 d.

