AN ACCOUNT OF THE Virtues, Use, Dose, and wonderful manner of Operation OF THE
Pilulae Polychrestae. Which Speedily and Safely extirpate those Opprobria's of
Physicians, the Gout, Madness and Melancholy of all Sorts, Stone and Gravel in
the Kidneys, etc. herein specified.

Printed in the YEAR MDCCXIX.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Virtues, Use, Dose, and wonderful manner of Operation OF THE
Pilulae Polychrestae.
AS there seems no Necessity to indicate to the Reader the Signs and Causes of
those dangerous Diseases that are most certainly and safely cured by the
Pilulae Polychrestae, (for Non Eloquentia sed remediis curantur morbi, said
Celsus, that Privy-Councellor to Nature) so we thought it better to be potent
in Fact than only to appear puissant in Words, (as do the Generality of our
modern Doctors) and to relieve Persons under exquisite Pain, than to divert our
Reader with Conclusions drawn from Topics grounded on fundamental Truths or
essential Verities: Expect not therefore to meet with many profound
Philosophical Hypothesis's, or that I should prove the abstruce Principles, or
real Grounds of Sympathy, or concupiscible Attraction and Coition; nor with
Mathematical Demonstrations, which I mention last, because I think the least
necessary in Physic.

It is enough, (at least for a time) that we have made known (for universal
Good) such a Polichrestick, or Sovereign Medicine, as one operating Consimilar
to it cannot be produced by any Doctor, Chemist, or Apothecary in Great Britain:
Yea, and such a one as will extirpate those Hydra's of Diseases undermentioned,
which have for so many Ages bid Defiance to the most eminent and sage
Physicians. Let not this seem a bold and emperical Assertion, but suspend your
Verdict till you have perused the following Account; which before we proceed to
give, it will be requisite to tell you, that the Author has used them with
admirable yea almost incredible Success, above these Thirty Three Years, not
only in this Metropolis, but in most Parts of Great Britain; and though he seldom
administered them to any but such as were (by the ablest Physicians) pronounced
incurable, and had languished under their Misfortunes, some Three, some Seven,
some Ten and some Twenty Years, yet there were none, though their Cases were
never so complicated, or of never so long Continuance, but were in the Space of
one Month (at most) restored (by the help of these Pills) to a perfect State of
Health. And though I could nominate above a hundred extraordinary and almost
incredible Cures performed by them, (to many of which some of our eminent
Doctors now in being are no Strangers) yet I decline it, and refer the Matter
to Experience, which is the only true Examen or Lydian Touchstone, to
distinguish Truth from Falsity, and matter of Fact from spurious and odible
Imposture.

The Virtues of these PILULAE POLYCHRESTAE.
First, THEY Cure all Manias or Madness in either Sex, but sooner in Men than
Women, by reason of the Furer Vterinus, which is commonly either the primary or
secondary Cause; concerning which Disease, and the mistaken Notions both of its
Cause and Cure, I propose at a convenient Time to treat.

2dly. Melancholy of all Sorts whteher Splenetic, Hypocondriac, or Hysteric,
which is commonly called Vapors, though of ever so long Duration.

3dly. Pains in the Head, chiefly Sympathetic, that is, which proceed from some
Indisposition of the Hypochonders, Spleen, Womb, etc.

4thly. All wandering Pains, whether Rheumatic, or Scorbutic, in any part of
the Body.

5thly, Pains in the Stomach, whether from Wind pent up in Viscid Slime, or
from some pungent, acid, or acrid Humor, pricking, and ^^l^^cating the Vessels.

6thly. The Cholic, from what Cause soever.

7thly. The Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys.

8thly. Suppression of Urine, either from Stones, Gravel, Sand, Wind, or slimy
Matter, whence Stones, etc. are commonly generated.

9thly. Obstructions in the Liver and Spleen, and Ductus Biliarius, or Gall
Passage.

10thly. Heat and Hardness of the Liver, which usually causes the Jaundies,
both yellow and black, and a schirrhus or stony Hardness of the Liver,
generally thought incurable; and indeed if the Patient has been a hard Drinker
and in Years; if likewise the Distemper has been of long Continuance, it may be
concluded so; but if none of these Three Circumstances occur, these Pills have
been found experimentally to restore the Liver to its proper Function. They
also perfectly cure the black and yellow Jaundies.

11thly. Dropsies of all Sorts, whether Ascites, Anasarcites, or Tympanities,
which is a Dropsy of the Womb, or that Disease which in outward Appearance
Symboliseth with it, the Tumor of the Ovarium, (as some Doctors call it)
whether from Wind or Water, or both: But as the Tympany of the Womb, always
proceeds from Wind, it is impossible to cure it by Purges, the more you exhibit
the worse they are; neither by Tapping, after which I don't remember one to
have lived above 14 Days.

12thly. The Gout, provided it be neither Nodose nor Cretaceous, that is, if it
be accompanied with neither Knots, nor Chalky Concretions in the Joints: And
one Dose taken Spring and Fall perfectly prevents its returning under any Form
or Symptom whatever, in any Part of the Body. What Affinity there is between
the Chalky Concretions lodged in the Joints of Gouty People, and the Stone
generated in the Kidneys, shall one time or other be farther considered.

13thly. The Pleurisy, and all Pains in the Sides, or in any other Part of the
Body, whether wandering or fixed, though of the longest Continuance, without
Bleeding, Cupping, or blistering.

14thly, The Palsy, whether of any particular Part or Member of the Body, or
universal all over; whether with a Tremor or trembling, or numb or dead, (as it
is called): provided they have been neither Vomited, Purged, nor Clystered;
much less Blooded, Blistered, or Cupped. Provided also that the Patient be of a
Plethoric, or full habit of Body, not Thin, Meagre, or Lean, Old, or
Superannuated; or that the Palsy has not supervened some preceding Distemper,
as a Fever, etc. then these Pills will certainly restore the Members to their
Pristine Strength, and the Patient to perfect Health.

15thly, All hardness with Extension or swelling of the Peritonaeum, and Belly,
not only about the Navel, but between that and the Pit of the Stomach,
accompanied with pain and difficulty of bending the Body downwards: Which in
Men, has by many Doctors been taken for a Dropsy, (as they do a Tympany of the
Womb) and handled with the like Success. Several other Cases I could mention,
surpassing belief, attended with such Symptoms as the Doctors could neither
tell what to call, nor how to manage; which perhaps we may take occasion to
insert in the next Edition of these Directions. This only will I add, as a
general Rule, that in all Cronic and Complicated Cases, if the Party has store
of Fluids, these Pills are never given without the desired Success.

I have by by this time ('it is supposed) a little startled you, by citing such a
Scroll or Catalogue of direful Diseases, and the Gout it self, which for many
Ages has withstood the force of all Medicines that could be opposed, by the
most learned Academicks; I say, no doubt but you will wonder, that they should be
eradicated by a Dose or Two, of one only Medicine; but we boldly and openly bid
defiance to all the Aesculapian Tribe in Great Britain, to produce a Medicine
operating like this, the subsequent Account of which will probably put the
matter out of all Dispute, and to your entire Satisfaction.

Their manner of Operation, and the Method of ordering the Patient.
A Convenient Room with a Fire in it, being provided, and Two Persons to
attend, let the Patient go into a warmed Bed, at Eight a Clock in the Evening
(or any other time in case of Necessity) put at the same time a blade or two of
Mace and an upper Crust of Bread, into a Pint of Ale, and cover it up close:
Which done, give him the Pills in the Pulp of a roasted Apple, (which is the
best) or a Wafer moistened with Water or Canary, drinking nothing either with,
or after them; then composing himself, he will presently be a Sleep, and
continue so Four Hours, and no longer; during which time he will sweat most
powerfully, and care must be had neither to wipe the Sweat off his Face, nor do
any thing else to disturb him. The Four Hours being expired, and the Patient
awake, let two People rub him dry with hot Clothes, and put on him a clean hot
Shirt and Gown; then bring him to the Fire, and let him eat a Morsel of the
Bread, and sip some of the Mace Ale made very hot, and well sweetened with
single refined Loaf-Sugar; when he has done this, and drank the remaining part
of the Ale, Sweating will immediately cease, which is e diametro, or directly
contrary to all the Sudorifics or Sweating Medicines now in use. Presently
after they work plentifully by Urine, (which when cold, in some Cases and
Constitutions may be cut with a Knife as Size.) To see the Contents of which, a
clean White-Ware Chamber Pot must be in a readiness, for they cleanse the
Kidneys and Ureters of abundance of Stones, Sand, Slime, etc. if any be lodged
there: When he has been up betwixt a quarter and half an Hour, let him repair
to Bed again, it being turned and well warmed, or another well seasoned put in
its place, the Sheets and Blankets likewise being changed, and others well
heated put on; then the Pills begin to work strongly, by breaking Wind
downwards, to his own and the bystanders great surprise.

The Patient must neither eat nor drink any thing till Dinner, if he can fast
so long; if he cannot, a Morsel of Bread, and a quarter of a Pint of hot Ale,
sweetened with single refined Loaf-Sugar may be taken. Let his Dinner be hot,
but neither of baked, fried, nor frigofy'd Meat, his drink also must be hot,
and I forbid Wines of all sort, during the whole course of these Operations,
and 24 Hours after they all cease, and it would be better if necessity would
permit to forbear Wine for 24 Hours before the Pills are taken.

About two Hours after Dinner they begin to work downwards by Stool, except the
Patient has Obstructions in the Liver, Kidneys, Lacteals, etc. or a Tympany of
the Womb, or that Distemper which the Doctors call a Tumor of the Ovarium; in
all which cases, and some others, the working by Stool is introduced by one
large but easy Vomit; without any previous Nausea, or Sickness which brings up
none of the Meat with it. During the time they Purge, which is without any
Sickness or Gripes, the Patient must by no means stop a Motion, or expose
himself to any cold or damp Air, or place; neither (except in Cases of extreme
Thirst, which I never knew to happen) must he drink any thing; but if
Thirstiness urge, a little Tea, made of good Juniper Berries, and sweetened with
single refined Loaf-Sugar, may be drank.

About an Hour and half, or two Hours at most, after Supper (which must be
hot,) the Patient must go to a well warmed Bed; and the Pills taken the Night
before, will repeat their Operations successively as at first, but in a much
weaker degree: So that sometimes there is no occasion either to rub the Party
or change his Linen. In some Cases and Constitutions, the first Dose will work
2 or 3 Nights and Days, and the second Dose 3 or 4, especially in hot Weather,
or Summer Time; and then there must be an Intermission of 2 or 3 Days before
the Third Dose be taken; but two Doses commonly perform the Cure, be the Case
never so Chronic and Complicated: In all my 33 Years Practice and upward, I
never knew but one Patient that had Occasion for the Third Dose; whose Case and
many others very wonderful, shall in another Essay be fully related.

Indeed their manner of Operation is so particular and extraordinary, that I
almost think it has scarce been paralleled in any Age; for though they work
most powerfully by all the Emunctories, yet they are so gentle and agreeable to
Nature, that she is not only exceedingly refreshed by them afterward; but even
pleass'd with the seeming Disturbance they give her. Hence it is no wonder that
these Pilulae Polychrestae, should extirpate so many dreadful Diseases in so
short a time.

The DOSE
OF these Pills is first Four, then Five, lastly Six, taken as above: But if
the Patient labors under any acute and painful Disease, as the Gout, etc. let
him begin with Five, increasing one the next Dose. After the Cure of any
Chronic Distemper, it is requisite to take one Dose every Spring and Fall, which
must be as large as the last Dose that was taken before, and this will be
sufficient to carry off whatever peccant Matter may be collected since the last
Time of taking.

These Pills are sealed up in little Thumb Bottles, by which means their
Virtues will be preserved Twenty Years in all Regions; but observe that in all
hot Climates, the Dose must be less than in England or a colder Climate.

Sold only at Mr. Winstone's at the Black Boy and Comb, near Fleet Bridge in
Fleet Street, at One Guinea per Bottle, containing Three Doses, ^wo of which is
commonly sufficient to cure any of the abovesaid Diseases.

Where this Book is gave away gratis, to any ^ne that will ask for it.

For the Encouragement of the Buyers, and ^^at they may not in the least
suspect being ^^^pos'd upon, any Persons agreeing to the Proposals made at the
Place of Sale, may be attended, and no Money received till the Cure be
perfected.

N. B. No Woman with Child must take these Pills, nor any one that has an
Erysipelas, (which is the St Anthony's Fire) Elephantiasis, or Noli me Tangere.

Above all things great Care must be taken, that no sort of Liquor be drank,
either presently before, with, or after these Pills; even not so much as one
Drop to moisten the Mouth or wash them down, otherwise they will be of no
Effect.

Secondly, Observe that while the Patient sweats, no more Clothes be put upon
him than usual.

Lastly, All the Directions given in this Paper, are to be exactly and
punctually observed, if you intend to receive Benefit by them, or else you must
blame your self and not me.

FINIS.

