ABELARD TO ELOISA.

Price 1 s. 6d.

ABELARD TO ELOISA: A POEM.

BY MR. JERNINGHAM.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. ROBSON, NEW BOND-STREET.

M. DCC. XCII.

TO THE EARL OF CARLISLE.
IN addressing this Poem to Your Lordship, I am endeavoring to obtain for it
the sanction of a very skillful Judge; of a Person who has himself adorned the
poetical walk, and who has exalted the muse of Tragedy, in that excellent
composition, The Father's Revenge.

I have the honor to be, with the impression of the greatest regard,

Your LORDSHIP's Obedient humble Servant, EDW. JERNINGHAM.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE monastery of CLUNI, from whence ABELARD is supposed to write the following
Epistle, was founded in the year 611, near the village of Mascon, on the river
Graone. The Head of this convent (in the time of ABELARD) was distinguished for
his learning and humanity. History elevates him above the vulgar herd of monks
by the appellation of the Venerable PETER! He extended his generous protection
to the unfortunate ABELARD, when he was under the censure of the court of Rome.

SAINT BERNARD also is connected with the story of Paraclete. This great man
stands eminently forward in the picture of the twelfth century: Born with a
mind too restless and enterprising to be confined within the circle of monastic
occupations, he rushed into the tumult of active life, and took the lead in
some of the most important transactions of that period. With an undisciplined
ardour peculiar to his character, he precipitated his country into that ruinous
measure, the second crusade. Behold him at another time hastening to the
contest that held all EUROPE in suspense, which exhibited two contending
candidates for the popedom. The authority and vehemence of BERNARD overpowered
the pretensions of ANACLETUS, and INNOCENT was seated on the papal throne. The
enemies of this celebrated Abbot never impeached his moral character; but it
must be allowed that in his zeal against the innovation of new opinions, he has
sometimes left unregarded the superior duty of charity. A letter of his to the
Cardinal GUIDO, the pope's legate in France, contains the most intolerant and
sanguinary counsel: His persecution however of ABELARD was prompted (according
to the opinion of some authors) by an impulse of jealousy, alarmed at the
splendid literary reputation of so young a person.

ABELARD in the following epistle lays a considerable stress upon his sentence
of excommunication: In the dark ages, that spiritual humiliation was felt as
the greatest calamity; the relation, the parent, the lover, the friend,
suspended their endearing offices, and withdrew from the degraded offender.

ABELARD TO ELOISA.
YON midnight bell, that frights the peaceful air!
Commands the Fathers to their wonted prayer:
Now in long order flows the sable throng,
Like a dark, sullen stream that creeps along:
Why joins not ABELARD the sainted train?
Does torpid sloth his lingering steps detain?
These walls, that pillow steeped in tears, attest
That sleep is exiled from this tortured breast:
This lamp proclaims the same, whose trembling beam
Guides while my hand pursues the glowing theme:
While the dread secret from my soul I tear,
And unreserv'd my bosomed feelings bear.
Ah me! the passion that my soul, misled
Was checked, not conquered; buried, but not dead:
Now bursting from the grave, in evil hour,
It hastens to its prey with fiercer power,
And, vulture-like, with appetite increased
It riots on the undiminish'd feast.
Daughter of Paraclete do thou complain
In iron silence that I locked my pain?
That not to thee (soft solacer in woe)
I bad the troubled waves of Anguish flow?
Methought the course of three long years' retreat
Would scarce thy lengthening sacrifice complete:
Methought I should profane the hallowed rite,
Did my laments thy pitying ear affright:
Thus at the altar, wrapped in holy dread,
The youth of Macedon in silence bled,
Nor from his tortured and consuming hand
Dismissed the living close-adhering brand Alluding to the boy at Athens, who,
while he was assisting at a religious ceremony, endured a burning coal that
sell on his hand, rather than disturb the sacrifice.

But now thy slow inauguration's over,
And thou have reached Religion's tranquil shore,
Now that stern habit throws without control
Her chain of adamant around thy soul,
May not the unhappy ABELARD disclose
(To her who pities most) his train of woes?
Ye sullen gates, within whose bound confined
The wretch who enters flings his joys behind!
Emerging from the dome, ye crowding spires,
Which sun-robed glitter like ascending fires!
That funeral spot with many a cypress spread,
Where shriek the spirits of the guilty dead!
Yon moping forest, whose extensive sway
Admits no lucid interval of day,
No cheering vista with a trail of light
Flies through the heavy gloom of lasting night:
Ye hermitages, deep immersed in wood,
Washed by the passing tributary flood,
Whose easy waves, soft-murm'ring as they roll,
Lull the strong goadings of the feeling soul:
Ye towering rocks, to wonder's eye addressed,
Misshapen piles by Terror's hand impressed! --
Ah, not these scenes magnificently rude
To Virtue's lore have ABELARD subdued.
When late my steps drew near the peopled choir,
What erring wishes did my heart inspire?
To the deep mysteries as I advanced,
Still in thy presence was my soul entranced:
While, bending to the earth, the choral throng
Pause, 'ere they usher the emphatic song;
While kneeling seraphs, trembling as they glow,
Veil with their radiant wings their bashful brow;
While the deep organ (as by fear controlled)
Its solemn sound like distant thunder rolled;
While thick'ning odours dimmed the dread abode,
And the altar shudder'd at the approaching God! --
'Midst these august, terrific rites unmoved,
My guilty thoughts to other altars roved:
In Love enchas'd, a dearer image blessed
That living chapel, my impassioned breast!
Where burns a hungry and insatiate flame
To that soft deity I blush to name.
Those hours to recollection spring renewed,
When Passion urged us, and when Pleasure wooed;
When, captur'd by Desire's voluptuous hold,
Involved -- combined -- embodied -- and insoul'd --
Forbear....Let dim Oblivion cast behind,
Words that would soil thy purity of mind:
Recall, recall that interesting hour,
When in the flush of Youth, and Beauty's flower,
(Ah! doomed, severely doomed, to meet no more)
When from each dearer self our forms we tore,
How, to Affection's finer touch consigned,
My face upon thy summer cheek inclined,
Felt as it dropped thy tear's celestial dew,
While sighs, not words, breathed forth our last adieu.
Intruding Fancy raised the veil between,
And showed Futurity's unwelcome scene,
Nights of long absence that expect no dawn,
Divorcing gulphs that must for ever yawn.
In thy pure soul a purer self I traced
Our glowing minds with energy embraced,
Whence the intellectual progeny arose
Which kindred fears and kindred hopes compose,
Endearments tending to one mutual aim,
The same our sorrow and our joy the same.
Now that thy spirit is divinely wrought,
To nobler objects flies thy soaring thought;
For free and unrestrained of human ties,
Thy soul uncaptiv'd springs into the skies!
To Contemplation's height sublime you sail,
While wings seraphic aid the hallowed gale;
From man to God! Perfection's dazzling source,
Unwearied you pursue your bright ning course,
And as through station'd angels you advance,
Send on the throne of Heaven a daring glance.
For me, unequal to this dizzy height,
Undisciplined, unwing'd for mystic flight,
To speed the lingering step of cloister hours,
To science I consigned my mental powers:
Fame met me in her path, and round my brow
Engarlanded the wreath of Splendor's glow.
Then swelled, disturbed with Envy's withering power,
The serpent Bernard hissed within my bower,
Poured the black venom with insidious aim,
Chilled my soul's health, and dimmed my radiant name:
Still, still inventing some malignant plan;
Impetuous, turbulent, vindictive man!
Behind the simple, meek, monastic vest,
Ambition blazes in his troubled breast.
Averse amid the pensive shades to dwell,
He shuns the stillness of the lonely cell,
Embroils the contests that involve^ the great,
Deepens the storm that darkens over the state,
And like the bird of Jove by vengeance driven,
Bears in his grasp the artillery of Heaven!
See Anacletus, trembling at his frown,
To Innocent resign the doubtful crown:
Mark, at the impulse of his bold command,
The throng that hastens to the palmy land:
See to his gaudy levee crowds resort;
See the gay tinsel'd ^oplings of the court:
There too the hoary sages of the law,
And military chiefs approach with awe;
There abbots, princes, cardinals, advance,
And all the splendour, all the pride of France
As not unworthy of his sainted rage,
Now meaner objects tread his busy stage;
He bids thy ABELARD ascend the scene,
And pours the torrent of his holy spleen:
Then Persecution with resistless sway,
Through her long-sounding floodgates burst away;
Her armory the Vatican displayed,
In all its proud magnificence arrayed;
From whence abrupt the avenging Pontiff sprung,
And at my peace the bolt of terror flung.
While over her victim (to dishonor led)
Her cloud of iron extirpation spread.
Now the pale outcast both of Heaven and earth,
I cursed the day that glimmer'd on my birth:
Degraded -- shunned -- to infamy allied,
Amidst the ruins of my soul I cried,
No more my image to her thought adjoin'd
Shall share the heaven of ELOISA'S mind:
No more (I cried) my reprobated name
Shall from her lips its daily honor claim,
No longer to the throne of GOD repair,
Borne on the wings of her triumphant prayer.
Now frenzy urged my wild'ring steps to rove
Beneath the night of yon extensive grove:
Now urged along the moutain's top to range
(Despair still haunting me through every change)
To tread the adventurous path that coasts the brow
Which scowls tremendous over the vale below:
Then to the summit of yon rock I toiled,
That shoots its crags fantastically wild!
There rushed upon my view the hallowed cross,
Clothed in the garb of venerable moss!
This wonted pledge of mercy and delight
Struck on my fading hope a dark'ning blight;
No more the saving all-atoning rood,
The grisly symbol of revenge it stood!
Lost in the extacy of strong despair,
With madd'ning hand I tore my rooted hair. --
'Twas then the seer of warm compassion came
To lull my tortures and dispel my shame:
"Desist," the Priest of Charity began,
"And own once more the dignity of man!
"No longer Rome and ABELARD are foes,
"The thunders of the Vatican repose;
"The holy church, by my remonstrance won,
"Takes to her bosom her still darling son."
Hail to the tidings of that chearing voice
That bids the humbled ABELARD rejoice!
That bids his image to her thought rejoined,
Still share the heaven of ELOISA'S mind.
Yet not thy person (that attractive sight)
Diffusing round ineffable delight,
Nor thy discourse, illum'd with Wisdom's ray,
Which with soft rapine steals the sold away:
That eye, where meek Dominion holds her throne;
That voice, where Music smooths her softest tone;
By liberal Nature prodigally given,
(What words cannot paint) that smile of opening Heaven:
These various charms that pass all human praise,
These charms that once adorned my happier days,
No more shall I behold -- it is folly to complain,
Those days of splendour never must rise again.
Adieu thou mistress of enchanting power!
Thou blissful vision of a transient hour!
For such appears (to Fancy still how dear)
The sloping race of Rapture's swift career,
When Heaven enforcing its benign decree,
With lavish bounty gave thy form to me.
Hope now is dead, and Pleasure's knell is rung;
With sable thoughts my dreary mind is hung.
'Twas at the hour when from the sorrowing view,
The glowing God of day his beams withdrew,
When Vesper all her pageantry displayed,
Fretting the sky with many an awful shade:
Here trees appeared that struggled with the storm,
There a wan cloud assumed a spectre's form:
A solitary hand here grasped a spear,
There angry meteors combated in air:
Now riding on the wind with threatening mien,
The dark, terrific phantom Death was seen:
From a thick vapour's dread unfolding womb
Now bodied forth the likeness of a tomb:
Thy form, oh ELOISE, I clearly traced,
Thine airy arms the sepulcher embraced:
That mimic tomb my early fate foreshews,
While my soul labors with prophetic throes:
Now closes fast my short disastrous day,
To life's dark boundary I haste away.
The virtuous CLUNI still relieves my pains,
To thee will he convey my cold remains:
This kind assurance mitigates my doom,
Thou Wilt stand the guardian angel at my tomb:
Closed be this form in ELOISA'S fane,
She Will sight my requiem with a Lover's strain:
Often to my grave with sorrowful delight
Will she repair, as glooms the thick'ningnight:
Burst from thy cloud, oh Cynthia, burst away,
The holy shadow of her frame display!
Let the soft texture of her lengthening shade.
Repose along the spot where mine is laid!
Were thus her presence to my wishes given,
Death would rejoice, my grave would then be Heaven!
Forgive this last effusion of a heart
Which Love and Nature formed unstained by Art;
Which midst the fears that wait on Death's decree,
With all its wonted ardor darts to thee.
Prepare, prepare for that relentless day
When the dark hearse this form shall bear away!
When to the fane of Paraclete conveyed,
My humble bier shall at thy feet be laid:
Prepare, prepare -- throw back the vestal gate,
Receive the victim of untimely fate:
Receive the Youth misfortune held to view
^till mid his woes invariably true:
That Youth (from other strong affections free)
Whose life was one continued hymn to thee:
That Youth whom passion rushing on his breast
With torturing and extatic hand impressed.
^repare, prepare -- yet check the bursting moan,
^hou to compassion exquisitely prone!
Lest glowing sympathy, with Death at strife,
Should kindle my cold ashes into life,
And my roused voice invading Nature's laws
Breathe in loud accents terrible applause.
Yet will my soul pour forth another claim....
Ah me! what sudden langour chills my frame?...
My tremulous and feeble hand denies
Its function...gathering vapors cloud my eyes...
Of all that passion dictated of mine,
If now I touch the sad, the closing line,
If 'ere these words thy pity shall implore,
This warm and raving heart shall throb no more?
Farewell -- Be thou with added years still blessed --
Ah, let me live in thy recording breast.
FINIS.
Just Published, Price is. 6d. A NEW EDITION OF The SHAKSPEARE GALLERY, A POEM,
By Mr. JERNINGHAM.

ALSO, A New Edition, 2 Vols. 8vo. elegantly printed, Price 5s. sewed, POEMS,
By Mr. JERNINGHAM.

Lately published, Price 2s. elegantly printed, ENTHUSIASM, A POEM, in Two
PARTS.


