ANCIENT and MODERN ITALY COMPARED: Being the FIRST PART of LIBERTY, A POEM.

By Mr. THOMSON.

LONDON: ^^inted for A. MILLAR, over against St. Clement's Church in the
Strand. M.DCC.XXXV. (Price One Shilling.)

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS FREDERICK, PRINCE of WALES.
SIR,
WHEN I reflect upon that ready Condescension, that preventing Generosity, with
which YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS received the following Poem under your Protection; I
can alone ascribe it to the Recommendation, and Influence of the Subject. In
you the Cause and Concerns of Liberty have so zealous a Patron, as entitles
whatever may have the least Tendency to promote them, to the Distinction of
your Favor. And who can entertain this delightful Reflection, without feeling
a Pleasure far superior to that of the fondest Author; and of which all true
Lovers of their Country must participate? To behold the noblest Dispositions of
the Prince, and of the Patriot, united: an overflowing Benevolence, Generosity,
and Candor of Heart, joined to an enlightened Zeal for Liberty, an intimate
Persuasion that on it depends the Happiness and Glory both of Kings and People:
to see these shining out in Public Virtues, as they have hitherto smiled in all
the Social Lights and Private Accomplishments of Life, is a Prospect that
cannot but inspire a general Sentiment of Satisfaction and Gladness, more easy
to be felt than expressed.

IF the following Attempt to trace Liberty, from the first Ages down to her
excellent Establishment in GREAT BRITAIN, can at all merit your Approbation,
and prove an Entertainment to YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS; if it can in any Degree
answer the Dignity of the Subject, and of the Name under which I presume to
shelter it; I have my best Reward: particularly, as it affords me an
Opportunity of declaring that I am, with the greatest Zeal and Respect,

SIR, YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS'S Most Obedient And most Devoted Servant, James
Thomson.

LIBERTY.
PART I.
OMY lamented TALBOT! while with Thee
The Muse gay-rov'd the glad Hesperian Round,
And drew the inspiring Breath of Ancient Arts;
Ah! little thought she her returning Verse
Should sing our Darling Subject to thy Shade.
And does the Mystic Veil, from mortal Beam,
Involve those Eyes where every Virtue smiled,
And all the FATHER'S candid Spirit shone?
The Light of Reason, pure, without a Cloud;
Full of the generous Heart, the mild Regard;
Unblemished Honor, uncorrupted Faith;
And limpid Truth, that looks the very Soul.
But to the Death of mighty Nations turned
My Strain, be there absorbed the Private Tear.
MUSING, I lay; warm from the sacred Walks,
Where at each step Imagination burns:
Ten thousand Wonders rolling in my thought,
As the Great Scene of deathless deeds I tread,
Tread the blessed Ground by more than mortals trod,
And see those Skies that breathed the Roman Soul.
Mean time wide-scatter'd round, awful, and hoar,
Lies a vast Monument once glorious Rome,
The Tomb of Empire! Ruins! that efface
Whatever, of finished, modern Pomp can boast.
Of these Ideas full, reposing Sense
In slumber sunk; and Fancy's Magic hand
Led me anew over all the solemn Scene,
Still in the Mind's pure eye more solemn dressed.
When strait, methought, the fair majestic POWER
Of LIBERTY appeared. Not, as of old,
Extended in her hand the Cap, and Rod,
Whose Slave-inlarging touch gave double life:
But her bright Temples bound with British Oak,
And Naval Honors nodded on her Brow.
Sublime her Port. Loose over her Shoulder flowed
Her seagreen Robe, with Constellations gay.
An Island Goddess now; and her high care
The Queen of Isles, the Mistress of the Main.
My heart beat filial transport at the sight;
And, as she moved to speak, the awakened Muse
Listened intense. A while she looked around,
With mournful eye the well-known Ruins marked,
And then, her Sighs repressing, thus began.
Mine are these Wonders, all thou see is mine;
But ah how changed! the falling poor Remains
Of what exalted once the Ausonian Shore.
Look back through time; and from the gloom disclosed,
Painting my words, behold the scattered Scene.
The Great Republic see! that glowed sublime
With the mixed Freedom of a thousand States;
Raised on the Thrones of Kings her Curule Chair,
And by her Fasces awed the subject World.
See busy Millions swarming all the Land,
With Cities thronged, and teeming Culture high:
For on her freeborn Sons then Nature smiled,
And poured the Plenty that belongs to Men.
Behold, the Country chearing, Villas rise,
In lively Prospect; by the secret lapse
Of Brooks now lost, and Streams renowned in Song:
In Umbria's closing Vales, or on the brow
Of her brown Hills that breathe the scented gale:
On Baia's viny coast; where peaceful Seas,
Fan'd by kind Zephirs, ever kiss the shore;
And Suns unclouded shine, and purest Air:
Or in the spacious Neighborhood of Rome;
Far-shining upwards to the Sabine Hills,
To Anio's Roar, and Tibur's Olive Shade;
To where Preneste lifts her airy Brow;
Or downwards spreading to the sunny shore,
Waved from the main, where Alba draws the Breeze.
See distant Mountains leave their Valleys dry,
And over the proud Arcade their Tribute pour,
To lave Imperial Rome. For ages laid
Deep, massy, firm, diverging every way,
From sea to sea, her Public Roads behold:
By various Nations trod, and suppliant Kings;
With Legions flaming, or with Triumph green.
Full in the Center of these wondrous Works,
While Tombs of Heroes consecrate the way,
The Pride of Earth! Rome in her Glory see!
Behold her Demigods, in Senate met;
All Head to counsel, and all Heart to act:
The Commonweal inspiring every Tongue
With fervent Eloquence, unbrib'd, and bold;
Ere low Corruption taught the Servile Herd
To know a Master's voice. Astonished, mark
Her Forum, earnest, popular, and loud,
In trembling wonder hushed, when the two L. J. Brutus, and Virginius.
SIRES,
As they the Private Father greatly quelled,
Stood up the Public Fathers of the State.
See Justice judging there in Human Shape.
Hark how with Freedom's voice it thunders high,
Or in soft murmurs sinks to TULLY'S tongue.
Her Tribes, her Census see; her Generous Troops,
Whose Pay was Glory, and whose best Reward
Free for their Country and for ME to die;
Ere Mercenary Murder grew a Trade.
Mark, as the purple Triumph waves along,
The highest Pomp and lowest Fall of Life.
Her Festive Games, the School of Heroes, see;
Her Circus, ardent with contending Youth;
Her Streets, her Temples, Palaces, and Baths,
Full of fair Forms of Beauty's eldest born,
And of a Race by Plastic Virtue marked.
While Sculpture lives around, and Asian Hills
Lend their best Stores to heave the pillar'd Dome:
All that to Roman Grandeur the soft Touch
Of Grecian Art can join. But Language fails
To paint this Sun, this Center of Mankind;
Where every Virtue, Glory, Treasure, Art,
Attracted strong, in heightened luster met.
Need I the Contrast mark? unjoyous View!
A Land in all, in Government, and Arts,
In Virtue, Genius, Heaven and Earth reversed.
Who but these far-fam'd Ruins to behold,
Proofs of a People, whose heroic Aims
Soared far above the little selfish sphere
Of doubting modern Life; who but inflamed
With Classic Zeal, the consecrated Scenes
Of Men and Deeds to trace, the Wonder, Theme,
And Model of Mankind; unhappy Land!
Would trust thy Wilds, and Cities loose of sway?
Are these the Vales, that once exulting States
In their warm bosom fed? The Mountains these,
On whose high-blooming sides my Sons of old
I bred to Glory? These dejected Towns,
Sordid, and mean, where Life can scarce subsist,
The Scenes of Ancient Opulence, and Pomp?
Come! by whatever Sacred Name disguised,
OPPRESSION, come! and in thy works rejoice!
See Nature's richest Plains to putrid Fens
Turned by thy Rage. From their unchearful bounds
See razed the enlivening Village, Farm, and Seat.
First Rural Toil, by thy rapacious hand
Robbed of his poor Reward, resigned the Plow;
And now he dares not turn the noxious Glebe.
It Is thine entire. The lonely Swain himself,
Who loves at large along the grassy Downs
His flocks to pasture, Thine abhorrent flies.
Far as the sickening Eye can sweep around,
It Is all one Desert, desolate, and gray,
Grazed by the sullen Bufalo alone;
And where the rank unventilated Growth
Of rotting Ages taints the passing Gale.
Beneath the baleful Blast the City pines,
Or sinks infeebl'd, or infected burns.
Beneath it mourns the solitary Road,
Rolled in rude Mazes over the abandoned Waste;
While Ancient Ways, ingulph'd, are seen no more.
Such thy dire Plains, thou Self-Destroyer! Foe
To Human-kind! Thy Mountains too, profuse
Where savage Nature blooms, seem their sad plaint
To raise against thy desolating Rod.
There on the breezy Brow, where thriving States,
And famous Cities once, to the pleased Sun,
Far other Scenes of rising Culture spread,
Pale shine thy ragged Towns. Neglected round,
Each Harvest pines; the livid, lean Produce
Of heartless Labor: while thy hated Joys,
Not proper Pleasure, lift the lazy hand.
Better to sink in Sloth the Woes of life,
Than wake their rage with unavailing Toil.
Hence drooping Art almost to Nature leaves
The rude, unguided Year. Thin wave the Gifts
Of yellow Ceres, thin the radiant Blush
Of Orchard reddens in the warmest ray.
To weedy wildness run, no Rural Wealth,
(Such as Dictators fed) the Garden pours.
Crude the wild Olive flows, and foul the Vine;
Nor Juice Coecubian, nor Falernian, more
Streams Life, and Joy, save in the Muse's bowl.
Unseconded by Art, the spinning Race
Draw the bright thread in vain, and idly toil.
In vain, forlorn in wilds, the Citron blows;
And flowering Plants perfume the desert gale.
Through the vile hedge the tender Myrtle twines.
Inglorious droops the Laurel, dead to Song,
And long a stranger to the Hero's brow.
Nor half thy Triumph this: cast from brute Fields
Into the Haunts of Men thy ruthless eye.
There buxom Plenty never turns her horn;
The Grace and Virtue of exterior Life,
No clean Convenience reigns; even Sleep itself,
Least delicate of Powers, reluctant there
Lays on the Bed impure his heavy head.
Thy horrid Walk! dead, empty, unadorned,
See Streets whose Echos never know the voice
Of cheerful Hurry, Commerce many-tongue'd,
And Art mechanic at his various task
Fervent employed. Mark the desponding Race,
Of Occupation void, as void of Hope;
Hope the glad Ray, glanced from ETERNAL GOOD,
That Life enlivens, and exalts it is Powers,
With views of Fortune -- Madness all to them!
By Thee relentless seized their better Joys,
To the soft aid of cordial Airs they fly,
A kind Oblivion breathing over their Woes,
And Love and Music melt their Souls away.
From feeble Justice see how rash Revenge,
Trembling, the Balance snatches; and her Sword,
Fearful himself, to venal Ruffians gives.
See where GOD'S Altar nursing Murder stands,
With the red touch of dark Assassins stained.
But chief let Rome, the mighty City! speak
The full-exerted Genius of thy Reign.
Behold Her rise amid the lifeless Waste,
Expiring Nature all corrupted round;
While the lone Tyber, through the desert Shore,
Winds his waste stores, and sullen sweeps along.
Patched from my Fragments, in unsolid Pomp,
Mark how the Temple glares; and, artful dressed,
Amusive draws the superstitious Train.
Mark how the Palace lifts a lying front,
Concealing often, in magnific Jail,
Proud Want, a deep unanimated Gloom!
And often joining to the drear abode
Of Misery, whose melancholy walls
Seem its voracious Grandeur to reproach.
Within the City Bounds, the Desert see.
See the rank Vine over subterranean roofs,
Indecent, spread; beneath whose fretted gold
It once exulting flowed. The People mark,
Matchless, while fired by me; to Public Good
Inexorably firm, just, generous, brave,
Afraid of nothing but unworthy Life,
Elate with Glory, an Heroic Soul
Known to the Vulgar Breast: behold them now
A thin despairing Number, all subdued,
The Slaves of Slaves, by Superstition fooled,
By Vice unmanned and a licentious Rule,
In Guile ingenious, and in Murder brave.
Such in one Land, beneath the same fair Clime,
Thy Sons, OPPRESSION, are; and such were MINE.
Even with thy labored State, for whose vain show
Deluded Thousands starve; all age-begrim'd,
Torn robbed and scattered in unnumber'd Sacks,
And by the Tempest of two thousand Years
Continual shaken, let my Ruins vie.
These Roads that yet the Roman hand assert,
Beyond the weak repair of modern Toil;
These fractur'd Arches, that the chiding Stream
No more delighted hear; these rich Remains
Of Marbles now unknown, where shines imbibed
Each parent ray; these massy Columns, hewed
From Africk's farthest shore; one Granite all,
These Obelisks high-towering to the Sky,
Mysterious marked with dark Egyptian Lore;
These endless Wonders that this Via Sacra.
Sacred Way
Illumine still, and consecrate to Fame;
These Fountains, Vases, Urns, and Statues, charged
With the fine stores of Art-compleating Greece.
From these too drawn, mine is thy every Boast:
Thy M.ANGELO BUONAROTI, PALLADIO, and RAPHAEL D'URBINO; the three great modern
Masters in Sculpture, Architecture, and Painting.
BUONAROTIS, thy PALLADIOS mine;
And mine the fair Designs, that RAPHAEL'S soul
Over the live canvass emanating breathed.
What would you say, ye Conquerors of Earth!
Ye Romans! could you raise the laureled Head;
Could you the Country see, with Seas of blood,
And the dread Toil of ages, won so dear;
Your Pride, your Triumph, your supreme Delight!
For whose Defense often, in the doubtful hour,
You rushed with rapture down the gulf of Fate,
Of Death ambitious! till by awful Deeds,
Virtues, and Courage, that amaze Mankind,
The Queen of Nations rose; possessed of all
That Nature, Art, and Glory could bestow:
What would you say, deep in the last Abyss
Of Slavery, Vice, and unambitious Want,
Thus to behold her sunk? Your crowded Plains,
Void of their Cities; unadorned your Hills;
Ungrac'd your Lakes; your Ports to Ships unknown;
Your lawless Floods, and your abandoned Streams;
These could you know? these could you love again?
Thy Tibur, HORACE, could it now inspire
Content, Poetic Ease, and Rural Joy,
Soon bursting into Song: while through the Groves
Of headlong Anio, dashing to the Vale,
In many a tortured Stream, you mused along?
Tusculum is reckoned to have stood at a Place now called Grotta Ferrata, a
Convent of Monks.
Yon wild retreat, where Superstition dreams,
Could, TULLY, you your Tusculum believe?
And could you deem yon naked Hills, that form,
Famed in old Song, the Ship-forsaken The Bay of Mola (anciently Formiae) into
which HOMER brings ULYSSES, and his Companions. Near Formiae CICERO had a Villa.
Bay,
Your Formian Shore? Once the Delight of Earth,
Where Art and Nature, ever-smiling, joined
On the gay Land to lavish all their Stores;
How changed, how vacant, VIRGIL, wide around,
Would now your Naples seem? Disaster'd less
By black Vesuvius thundering over the Coast,
His midnight Earthquakes, and his mining Fires,
Than by Despotic Rage: that inward gnaws,
A native Foe; a foreign, tears without.
First from your flattered CAESAR'S This begun;
Till houseless spreads, at last, the Campagna selice, adjoining to Capua.
Siren Plain,
That the dire Soul of HANNIBAL disarmed;
And wrapped in Weeds the The Coast of Baia; which was formerly adorned with the
Works mentioned in the following Lines; and where amidst many magnificent
Ruins, those of a Temple erected to Venus are still to be seen.
Shore of Venus lies.
There Baia sees no more the joyous Throng;
Her banks all beaming with the Pride of Rome:
No generous Vines now bask along the Hills,
Where sport the Breezes of the Tyrrhene main:
With Baths and Temples mixed, no Villas rise;
Nor, Art-sustain'd amid reluctant Waves,
Draw the cool murmurs of the breathing Deep:
No spreading Ports their sacred Arms extend:
No mighty Moles the big intrusive Storm,
From the calm Station, roll resounding back.
An almost total Desolation sits,
A dreary Stillness, sad'ning over the Coast;
All along this Coast, the ancient Romans had their Winter retreats; and
several populous Cities stood.
Where, when soft Suns and tepid Winters rose,
Rejoicing Crowds inhal'd the balm of Peace;
Where city'd Hill to Hill reflected blaze;
And where, with Ceres, Bacchus wont to hold
A genial Strife: Her youthful Form, robust,
Even Nature yields; by Fire, and Earthquake rent:
Whole stately Cities in the dark Abrupt
Swallowed at once, or vile in rubbish laid,
A nest for Serpents; from the red Abyss
New Hills, explosive, thrown; the Lucrine Lake
A reedy Pool; and all to Cuma's Point,
The Sea recovering his usurped Domain,
And poured triumphant over the buried Dome.
Hence, BRITAIN, learn; my best-establish'd, last,
And more than GREECE, or ROME, my steady Reign;
The Land where, King and People equal bound
By guardian Laws, my fullest Blessings flow;
And where my jealous unsubmitting Soul,
The dread of Tyrants! burns in every breast:
Learn hence, if such the miserable fate
Of an heroic Race, the Masters once
Of Humankind; what, when deprived of ME,
How grievous must be thine? In spite of Climes,
Whose Sun-enliven'd Ether wakes the Soul
To higher Powers; in spite of happy Soils,
That, but by Labor's slightest aid impelled,
With Treasures teem to thy cold Clime unknown;
If there desponding fail the common Arts,
And sustenance of life: could Life itself,
Or, heart-consum'd, a Tyrant's rotten Pomp,
Subsist with thee? Against depressing Skies,
Joined to full-spread Oppression's cloudy Brow,
How could thy Spirits hold? where Vigor find,
Forced Fruits to tear from their unnative Soil?
Or every Harvest storing in thy Ports,
Profuse of all, to plow the dreadful Wave?
Here paused the GODDESS. By the Pause assured,
In trembling accents thus I moved my Prayer.
"Oh first, and most benevolent of Powers!
"Come from eternal Splendors, here on Earth,
"Against despotic Pride, and Rage, and Lust,
"To shield Mankind; to raise them to assert
"The native Rights, and Honor of their Race.
"Teach me thy lowest Subject, but in Zeal
"Yielding to none, the PROGRESS OF THY REIGN*
"And with a Strain from THEE enrich the Muse^
"For thy proud Slave, alone; her Patron Thou,
"And great Inspirer be! then will she joy,
"Though narrow Life her Lot, and Private Shade:
"And when her Venal Voice she barters vile,
"Or to thy open or thy secret Foes;
"May never those sacred Raptures touch her more,
"By slavish Hearts unfelt! and may her Song
"Sink in oblivion with the nameless Crew!
"Vermin of State! to thy overflowing Light
"That owe their Being, yet betray thy Cause."
Then, condescending kind, the HEAVENLY POWER
Returned. -- "What here, suggested by the Scene,
"I slight unfold, record, and sing at home,
"In that blessed Isle, where (so we Spirits move)
"With one quick effort of my Will I am.
"There Truth, unlicens'd, walks; even Kings themselves
"Invite her forth, the Monarchs of the Free!
"By that best Glory pierced, that God-like Joy,
"That gay Security, that Pride of Rule;
"When Men, not Slaves, when all-performing Love,
"Not sluggish Hate, and faithless Fear, obey.
"Fixed on my Rock, there an Indulgent Race
"Over BRITONS wield the Scepter of the Heart:
"And, mixing Worth with Worth, the ROYAL PAIR
"To steady Justice yielding Goodness join.
"Nor sets the Prospect in this pleasing view;
"While there, to finish what his Sires began,
"A PRINCE behold! for ME who burns sincere,
"Even with a Subject's Zeal. He my great Work
"Will Parent-like sustain; and added give
"The Touch, the Graces and the Muses owe.
"For BRITAIN'S Glory swells his panting Breast;
"And Ancient Arts He emulous revolves:
"His Pride to let the smiling Heart abroad,
"Through Clouds of Pomp, that but conceal the Man;
"To please his Pleasure; Bounty his Delight;
"And all the Soul of TITUS dwells in Him."
Hail glorious Theme! But how alas! shall Verse,
From the crude Stores of mortal Language drawn,
How faint and tedious, sing, what, piercing deep,
The GODDESS flashed at once upon my Soul.
For, clear Precision all, the Tongue of Gods
Is Harmony itself; to every Ear
Familiar known, like Light to every Eye.
Mean time disclosing Ages, as She spoke,
In dread Succession poured their Empires forth;
Scene after Scene, the Human Drama spread;
And still th'embody'd Picture rushed to sight.
Oh THOU! to whom the Muses owe their flame;
Who bid'st beneath the Pole Parnassus rise,
And Hippocrene flow; with thy bold Ease
The striking Force, the Lightning of thy Thought,
And thy strong Phrase, that rowls profound, and clear;
Oh gracious GODDESS! reinspire my Song:
While I, to nobler than Poetic Fame
Aspiring, thy Commands to BRITONS bear.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by A. Millar.
I. THE History of the Union of Great Britain, done from the Public Records;
containing, I. A General History of Unions in Britain. II. Of Affairs of both
Kingdoms introductory to the Treaty. III. Of the last Treaty properly called
the Union. IV. Of the carrying on of the Treaty in England, next in Scotland.
V. The Proceedings and Minutes of the Parliament of Scotland, with Observations
thereon, as finished there, and exemplified in England; in which is contained
the Right and Method of electing the Peers and Commons; and all the Articles
relating to both Kingdoms, as confirmed by the Parliament of Great Britain: To
which is added an Appendix of Original Vouchers. II. Georgii Buchanani Scoti,
Poetarum sui seculi facile principis, Opera omnia, ad optimorum codicum fidem
summo studio recognita, and castigata: nunc primum in unum collecta, ab
innumeris fere mendis, quibus plerique omnes editiones antea scatebant,
repurgata; ac variis insuper notis aliisque utilissimis accessionibus
illustrata and aucta, folio, curante Tho. Ruddimanno, A. M. 2 Tom. III.
Collections relating to the History of Mary Queen of Scotland, containing a
great number of original Papers, never before printed: Also a few scarce Pieces
reprinted, taken from the best Copies, by the Learned and Judicious James
Anderson Esquire late Postmaster-General and Antiquary of Scotland. With an
explanatory Index of the obsolete Words; and Preface, showing the Importance of
these Collections. In 4 Vol. on a fine imperial Paper, and a most beautiful
Letter. 4 to.
N. B. There is a Second Edition, printed on a smaller Paper.

IV. The Seasons. A Hymn. A Poem to the Memory of Sir Isaac Newton. And
Britannia, a Poem. By Mr. Thomson. With Cuts; both in 4 to and 8 vo. V. The
Tragedy of Sophonisba. Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, by his
Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr. Thomson. Both in 4 to and 8 vo. VI. Poems, 2
vol. in 12 mo. VII. The Ever-Green; being a Collection of Scots Poems wrote by
the Ingenious before 1600. 2 vol. 12 mo. VIII. The Tea-Table Miscellany, or a
Collection of Scots Songs. 3 vol. IX. The Gentle Shepherd; a Scots Pastoral
Comedy.
N. B. The last four published by Allan Ramsay.

X. Eurydice, a Tragedy. Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, by his
Majesty's Servants.

