AMANA. A Dramatic Poem.

Libertas, et natale solum. By a LADY.

LONDON: Printed by T. HARRISON; For W. JOHNSTON in Ludgate Street. MDCCLXIV.

PREFACE.
THE story of this piece is taken from the moral and ingenious writings, lately
published, styled THE ADVENTURER, Numbers 72 and 73. But the Drama, which was
too much confined in the fable, has been enlarged here, by the addition of four
persons, namely, NARDIC, ABDALLAH, FATIMA, and HAMET. For though NARDIC, and
ABDALLAH (SANBAD, in the original) are mentioned in the story, they are not
introduced into the scene.

Some other alterations have been made in the fable, in order to accommodate
the representation to a British audience: the machinery of genie's has been
laid aside, and the catastrophe brought to pass without the declared
interposition of superior agents: the time and place too, have been restrained,
to preserve two of the unities. Shakespeare alone could call spirits from the
vasty deep; he was himself a superior intelligence; could create beings not to
be found in nature or fable, could rock ages to sleep to hasten his events, and
annihilate both time and space, to bring the history of a man within the
representation of a day. "Existence saw him spurn her bounded reign,
"And panting time toiled after him in vain."
But modern wits are no more able to stride in Shakespeare's buskin, than modern
beaus to shoot in Ulysses' bow.

The moral, professed in the original story, is, To show the folly of human
wishes and schemes for correcting the moral government of the world; which
sentiment is preserved here in a speech of Amana's.

O Nouradin!
Forgive this fatal rashness -- Had I staid
A few short moments, we had now been blessed;
But wresting from the hand of providence
The means of my escape, we both are wretched.
But I confess that the reflections which occurred to my mind most strongly, on
the perusal of this tale, were a tender and humane resentment of the miseries
of those nations which are subject to despotic power, and an exulting sense of
the peculiar blessings of liberty, that we enjoy in these thrice happy kingdoms.

The contemplation of this contrast, both suggested and inspired the plan of
the following writing; in which I have endeavored to contribute my grateful
mite of praise to those laws, and to that government, under which our superior
advantages are established, defended, and preserved; and however the
presumption of this attempt may be condemned, I hope that the faults of the
performance may be pardoned, as the first essay of

A Woman.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE The Countess of Northumberland.
MADAM,
I Beg leave to lay at your ladyship's feet a work, which from the spirit of
liberty it attempts to breathe, may hope for the honor of your patronage. Your
ladyship's own character justifies this address, and the names of PERCY and
SEYMOUR demand it. History is my voucher, and fame my herald. Liberty was their
crest, and Glory their motto.

BUT such an heroic subject is beyond my strength, and I shall content myself
with praising and admiring the more social and amiable virtues of your
ladyship, your humanity, benevolence and affability; which latter quality is
the characteristic of true nobility, in opposition to that haughtiness which is
frequently observable in those who have sprung from obscurity -- Those who are
placed on an eminence may descend, but those on a level would rise.

IF this little work, the offspring of a female and unlettered pen, shall be so
happy to amuse your ladyship for half an hour, it will afford the highest
satisfaction to the author, who humbly presumes to hope, that your ladyship's
candor will pardon whatever defects your judgment may find in this piece, for
the sake of those sentiments it is intended to convey.

I have the honor to be, With the profoundest respect, and humblest duty,
MADAM, Your most humble and obedient servant, ELIZA GRIFFITH.

LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
A.
THomas Adderly, Esquire Rev. Charles Agar. Rev. Paris Anderson. James Agar, Esquire
B.
The Earl of Belvedere. Walter Butler, Esquire John Butler, Esquire Amyas Bushe, Esquire
Mr. Gervis Parker Bushe. Mrs. Elizabeth Bushe. The Rev. Thomas Bushe. Mrs.
Catherine Bushe. Rowland Bateman, Esquire Mrs. Bateman. Rev. Dr. Brodrick. Rev.
James Blair. Rev. Peter Bristow. Rev. William Baker. Rev. Dr. Brown. Rev. John
Burgh. Mr. Bourke, Author of the Sublime and Beautiful. Major Brereton. John
Bambrick, Esquire Miss Meliora Bermingham. Mr. Garret Barry. Mr. Peter Bluett. Mr.
John Bardin. Colonel Charles Bucknal. Richard Barret, Esquire Captain Basset. Hon.
Mrs. Beresford. Hon. and Rev. Wm. Beresford. Rev. Mr. Baggs. Mr. William
Berkley. Mr. Isaac Boardman. Mrs. Berkley. Rev. Dr. Ed. Bailie. Mrs. Bishop.
General Boscawen. Dr. Bourke. William Burton, Esquire Anderson Baker, Esquire John
Blunden, Esquire Richard Baldwin, jun. Esquire Miss Bradley. Mrs. Boswell. Mr. Edward
Brereton. William Bushe, Esquire
C.
The Earl of Clanricard. The Earl of Cork. The Earl of Carrick. Abraham
Creichton, Esquire Hugh Carmichael, Esquire Miss Clements. Mr. William Clements.
Archbishop of Cashel. Richard Chamberlain, Esquire Mrs. Clayton. Rev. Archdeacon
Cockburn. Denny Baker Cuffe, Esquire Maurice Cuffe, Esquire Mrs. Judith Cottingham.
Lady Charlotte Colthurst. Councellor Costelloe. The Rev. Mr. Clarke.
D.
Lord Desert. Sir Robert Deane, Bart. William Deane, Esquire Joseph Deane, Esquire
Councellor Dennis. Captain Henry Dickson. Captain Henry Butler. Mr. Michael
Dease. William Donaldson, Esquire Mr. George Darley. Matthew Dubourgh, Esquire Mr.
William Dalton. Mr. John Dickson. Mrs. Catherine Dykes. Councellor William
Doyle. Miss Margaret Davison. Nehemiah Donnellan, Esquire James Lenox Dutton, Esquire
Mrs. Dutton. Rev. Dean Delany.
E.
Ambrose Evans, Esquire Mr. Francis Evans. Mrs. Evans. Mr. John Exshaw. Lieutenant
Edgeworth. Colonel Este. Richard Elliot, Esquire
F.
Henry Flood, Esquire Lady Frances Flood. Dr. John Forstal. Santry Francis, Esquire Mr.
Philip La Franchini. James Frazier, Esquire Councellor Warden Flood. Miss Isabella
Flood. Councellor John Flood. Sir William Fownes, Bart. Arthur Forbes, Esquire
Charles Flood, Esquire Jon Fitz Gibbon, Esquire
G.
Colonel Henry Gore. Thomas Gilbert, Esquire David Garrick, Esquire Rev. Chapel Whaley
Grange. Lieutenant Gore. Cornet Samuel Gale. Mr. George Gibbons. Major Edward
Griffith. Mr. John Griffith. Mr. Godfrey Green. John Green, Esquire Mr. John
Galwey. Mrs. Gardener.
H.
Rev. James Hawkins. Robert Hartpole, Esquire Mrs. Mary Hartpole. Rev. James
Hamilton. Rev. Dean Handcock. Hon. Mrs. Hamilton. John Hely, Esquire Mr. Samuel
Heatly. Mr. Edward Hunt. Mr. Benjamin Higgins. John Hatch, Esquire Mrs. Handcock.
Mrs. Elizabeth Handcock. Mr. Tottenham Heaphy.
I.
Mrs. Jane Jackson. William Johnson, Esquire Mr. William Johnson. Rev. William
Jackson. Rev. James Jackson. William Izod, Esquire Dr. Johnson. Henry Jenney, Esquire
Rev. Charles Jones. Councellor Jesse.
K.
William Knox, Esquire Mr. Thomas Kirby. William Keane, Esquire Mrs. Elizabeth Kelly.
Thomas Kavanagh, Esquire Mrs. Jane Kanning. Mr. Daniel Kanning.
L.
Lord Lyttleton. Earl of Louth. John L^^^, Esquire James L^m^ard, Esquire Hamilton
Low, Esquire Mrs. Margaret Lescure. Hercules Langrishe, Esquire Mrs. Lumm. Mr. Edward
Lord. Rev. Dean Lewis. James Lacy, Esquire Mrs. Longfield. George Lowther, Esquire Hon.
Henry Loftus, Esquire Henry Lions, Esquire Dr. Lions. Dr. Lucas. John Lodge, Esquire Rev.
Smith Loftus. Mr. Lefanu. Mrs. Laughlin.
M.
The Earl of Mornington. Captain Madden. Malcolm M'Neale, Esquire Thomas Monck, Esquire
Mrs. Mason. Major Henry Mason. John Monck Mason, Esquire Rev. Michael M'Kinley.
John Macarthy, Esquire Miss Murray. Right Hon. Lady Mountmorres. George Paul Monck,
Esquire Hon. Harvey Morres, Esquire Lord Viscount Mountgarret. Mrs. M. Maurice, 50
Books. Mrs. Hannah Mathews. Mrs. Ellinor Morgan. Captain Percy Monck. Rev. Mr.
Mathews. Captain Luke Mercer. Edward Martin, Esquire Miss Jane Martin. Major James
Mansergh. Mrs. Ellinor Marelli. Mrs. Elizabeth Mathews.
N.
Brockhill Newburgh, Esquire Arthur Jones Nevill, Esquire William Norcliffe, Esquire Mr.
Hugh Neile. Edward North, Esquire
O.
Bishop of Ossory.
P.
Colonel Pomeroy. Arthur Pomeroy, Esquire Charles Parker, Esquire Mr. Samuel Powell.
Rev. Mr. Pack. Rev. Mr. Price. Rev. George Philips. Rev. Marmaduke Philips.
Miss Coelia Parry. William Phelp Perrin, Esquire
Q.
Dr. Quin.
R.
Right Hon. Lord Rusborough. John Rochfort, Esquire William Rochfort, Esquire George
Rochfort, Esquire Richard Robbins, Esquire John Read, Esquire Richard Read, Esquire Rev. Mr.
Rookey. Hayden Read, Esquire Mathews Read, Esquire Mr. William Rutlidge.
S.
Earl of Shannon. Hon. Thomas Southwell, Esquire Robert Shearman, Esquire William
Southwell, Esquire Richard St. George, Esquire Mrs. St. George. Mr. Michael Swift.
Benjamin Stratford, Esquire Miss Shirley. Ralph Smyth, Esquire Lord Southwell. Lady
Southwell. Mrs. Sheridan. Edward Sterling, Esquire Rev. John Sterling. Mr. John
Sterling. Mr. James Savage. General Sandford. Dr. Sandford. Lieutenant William
Scott. William Smith, Esquire Rev. Doctor Smyth. Mrs. Smyth. Mr. James Smyth. Rev.
Thomas Stephens. John Steare, Esquire Mr. Sands. Richard Strange, Esquire
T.
William Talbot, Esquire Mrs. Tighe. Mrs. Tilson. Wentworth Thewles, Esquire Air
Trench, Esquire Mrs. Tailor.
V.
Richard Vicars, Esquire Captain Veracre. Miss M. Vandelure. Benjamin Victor, Esquire
Captain Meade Vanlewen.
W.
The Earl of Wandesford. Rev. Mr. Williamson. Dr. Charles Walker. Mrs. Walker.
Patrick Welsh, Esquire Rev. Arthur Webb. Captain Joseph Walker. Mr. Stephen
Wybrants. Samuel Wilkinson, Esquire Mr. Henry White. Francis White, Esquire Rev. Samuel
Woodroffe. Mrs. Wood. Mr. William Wetherall. Mrs. Rose Whitwell. Mrs. Ellinor
Whitwell. Mrs. Margaret Wybrants. William Whittingham, Esquire Mrs. Watson. Folliot
Warren, Esquire Captain John Waringe. Hugh Waringe, Esquire
Y.
Mr. James Young. Mr. Samuel Yeates. Mrs. Yeates.
AMANA. A Dramatic Poem.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
OSMIN, Sultan of Egypt. NARDIC, his Prime Minister. HAMET, Aga of his Guards.
NOURADIN, an Egyptian Merchant. CALED, his Slave. ABDALLAH, Father to Amana.
WOMEN.
Amana. FATIMA, Sultaness.
Attendants, Guards, etc.

SCENE, in and near Grand Cairo.

AMANA.
ACT I.
SCENE, A Fountain.
Enter AMANA, with a Goblet in her Hand. Amana. HAIL sacred fount! blessed by
our holy prophet
Whose precepts, pure as thy translucent stream,
Cleanse the foul man, diffusing health and virtue.
Frequent ablutions purge our outward stains,
And moral laws preserve our inward pureness.
But hark! a caravan approaches near.
Quick from all eyes let me conceal my own.

veils. Enter CALED. Caled. Damsel, by heat and thirst impelled, I come
To seek refreshment from this hallowed spring.
Say, will thou lend that goblet?

Amana. Take it freely.

reaching it to him.
Caled. Heavens! what an arm, a shape, a mien, an air!
Such are the Houries promised us above,
And why not taste our happiness below?
She must unveil. aside. Withdraw that curtain, maid,
To cure my passion, or confirm my wonder.
taking hold of her.
Amana. Rude stranger, hold --


Caled. Nay then, I Will do it for thee.


they struggle, and her veil falls off. Enter NOURADIN. Nouradin. Insolent
slave, forego thy brutal hold,
Or by the soul of my departed father,
strikes him. This moment is thy last. Say, beauteous maid,
Can you forgive this ruffian's barbarous outrage,
Or shall his instant death make just atonement?

Enter ABDALLAH, and Amana runs to him. Amana. O! let me hide me in my father's
bosom.


Abdallah. My loved Amana! my last grasp of life!
What monster viler than the wildest Arab,
Could dare insult thy unoffending youth,
Or force thee lave thy glowing cheeks with tears?

Nouradin. The slave who dared offend the angelic maid,
Waits to receive his doom from her decree,
And justice satisfied, too lovely fair,
I hope that vassal's crime will rest on him,
Absolving us from any purpose vile;
Nor may the innocent atone the guilty.

Amana. Injustice dwells not in a heart like mine,
Nor can resentment there long hold a place.
To you, my lord, my grateful thanks are due,
Who rescued me from brutal violence:
That wretch's rude assault I pardon, also.
Let him depart unharmed.

Nouradin. Excellent maid!
Thy mind and body sure are of a piece,
Bright emanations of the deity!

Abdallah. If you from insult have preserved Amana,
O! take a father's prayer, whose feeling heart,
For every wrong she suffers, must drop blood:
My age's darling! sole remaining stay
Which holds my frame from sinking to the grave.
O! could I see that tender lilly propt
By fortune's fostering hand, or better far,
Supported by the bridegroom rose, I then,
With smiles would close my wearied eyes in death.

Nouradin. O! if the purest flame that ever warmed
A virgin heart, for such is mine to love,
Unknowing of its pleasures or its pains,
'Till I beheld this loveliest of her sex,
And gazed my soul away. O! if a passion,
Which in a moment equals that of years,
Can make me worthy to possess such charms,
Accept that prop, that firm support in me,
Whose circling arms shall screen her from each blast,
Cherish her blooming years, and nurse her age.

Abdallah. Since heaven deprived me of its richest bounty,
My lost Amestris, joy has never once
Pervaded this dark mansion: the busy guest
Now fills each space, nor leaves me room for utterance --
Generous young man! thy worth, thy wealth and power,
To me are fully known, with gratitude
I willingly accept the proffered honor,
If my Amana's heart feel no reluctance
To aid her father's wish, and make us blessed.
But should all Egypt's monarch, from his Throne
Descending, court her to the bridal bed,
If her repugnant heart refused his love,
I would remit a father's stern behest,
Nor force my child to splendid misery.
What says Amana?

Amana. My father's tenderness has been so great,
That I have scarcely felt the bonds of duty,
As inclination prompted every act
Which might appear obedience; and in this,
The most important deed of all my life,
My heart feels no reluctance to obey.

Nouradin. Extatic sound! thus prostrate at thy feet,
Let my full heart pour forth its grateful rapture;
And by a life of love, and friendly care,
Repay the happiness I now receive.

Abdallah. Arise, my son, and may our holy prophet
With benign aspect smile upon your union:
May long and prosperous days attend your lives,
And every hour increase your mutual flame.

Nouradin. This day the mourning for my father ends;
From Mecca's shrine, to which in pilgrimage
I went, I now return; some Angel, sure,
Has led my footsteps near this sacred fount,
And in reward for filial duty paid,
Has blessed me with an husband's happy rites.
With here is and your consent, tomorrow's sun
Shall see us joined in Hymen's constant bands.
Meantime, to Cairo instant we'll repair,
Where choicest ornaments shall deck my fair.
Their rays inferior by thy eyes be shown,
Which shine in native modesty alone.

exeunt Nouradin, Amana and Abdallah. Manet CALED. Caled. May swift destruction
overtake you both,
And if wronged Caled's means can lend it aid,
They shall be well supplied. Thou Nouradin,
Have robbed me of this maid; I met her first,
And had a prior claim. Her childish coyness
Would soon have yielded to my free-est wishes,
Had thou not intervened; while she, right woman,
Preferred the fortune to the man. Nor yet,
Is this the worst offense; did he not strike thee?
And act the bravo's part throughout? A blow!
What though the chance of war has quite reversed
My outward seemings, still my pride remains
As high, as when in Spain, my native country,
I was saluted by the style of lord.
And though the Turk has sold my limbs to bondage,
The inward man no shackles can control.
My abject state restrains a nobler daring;
Therefore I Will seek amends by cautious means,
And may revenge quick animate my purpose!
It Is said that love has wings -- But vengeance still
Outstrips its flight -- The Cyprian queen is drawn
By doves -- The bird of Jupiter's an eagle.
On eagles wings my vengeance now shall speed,
And in my talons grasped these doves shall bleed.

exit. SCENE changes to a palace.
Enter OSMIN. Osmin. What art thou, pomp? an airy being sure,
Delusive shade! which fools alone admire,
But wisemen never enjoy. Even substances
Grow vain, and mock the eager grasp; the mind
Sated, not satisfied with blooming beauty,
Lo! dull disgust pursues the tired embrace.
Variety's a cheat -- Instead of quickening,
It only palls the taste; and sinks our relish
To depravity. The lowly cottager,
Whose homely wife, made coarse by labor, rests
Within his arms, feels more of bliss than I,
Who can command a thousand various fair,
To inspire new wishes, and revive my ardor:
But then it is submission, and not love,
Which prompts their yielding -- They choose not Osmin,
But obey the Sultan; while in full gust
Of amorous dalliance, I but feel myself
An happy brute, yet still a wretched man!

Enter FATIMA. Osmin. Why Fatima, with ill-timed zeal and fondness,
Do thou obtrude upon my private leizure?

Fatima. Blame not th'impatience of unchanging passion,
Which follows where attraction leads the way:
Though that, which once to me you urged, is dead,
Mine, like the fragrant mittle, lives in frost:
Thy chilling coldness may destroy its blossoms,
But cannot kill the root.

Osmin. These strong professions,
Of never-ceasing love, sound like upbraidings
To my tired ear -- I like them not -- nor thee.

Fatima. Oh! do not wound me with such harsh expression;
But since my once loved image has forborne
To mark its former traces in thy bosom,
Yet still, in pity to my sex's weakness,
Restrain thy speech from scorn. O! spare the guilt
To thy own breast, of stabbing mine with grief;
Yet leave me hope -- the wretch's only solace --
And let the jealous doubts of slighted love,
And not thy stern decree, pronounce my doom.
Oh! suffer me to gaze sometimes in rapture,
Upon my sovereign's face; to hear that voice,
Which whilom used to inspire my soul with joy,
And ease my heart with sighing on thy bosom.

Osmin. Away -- away -- dalliance without desire,
Is lifeless sport -- besides, it might increase
Thy hapless flame; and I in generous pity,
Would quickly cure thy simple sex's folly.
Retire -- I am used to dictate -- not to argue.

Fatima. Since you pronounce it, I will go for ever,
A banished wretch, exiled of joy or hope.
But dread the anguish thou have made me feel,
May be repaid thee in the same degree:
Love is a vengeful power, and will, I hope,
Resent his votary's cause: some beauteous maid
Shall yet avenge my wrongs, and make thee know
Worse pangs than I do now -- if possible.

Osmin. Thy vain predictions, like phantastic dreams,
Vanish in empty air. I dare deny
That all the charms of thy whole sex conjoined,
Can raise, or pain or pleasure, in my breast --
Full well I know, therefore despise ye all.

Fatima. Then hear, almighty love, thy suppliant's prayer --
If thou do ever touch that stubborn heart,
With bitterest venom tinge the piercing dart;
Mix yellow jealousy, and fire-eyed rage,
And may no healing balm his pangs assuage;
Let him feel all love's anguish, all its pain,
And may his fondest wishes meet disdain.

exit. Enter NARDIC. Nardic. May endless days of never fading bliss
Await my sovereign, may still ripening honors
Bloom round his brow, and each day add new trophies
To adorn his fame. Behold from Gaza's walls
A messenger arrived, proclaims your arms
Victorious over the rebel slaves, who now
All own allegiance to thy rightful sway.

Osmin. It Is well.
Now let those lofty disaffected towers,
That braved the heavens, and me, be razed to earth;
And let all those who dared oppose my reign,
Now feel my vengeance. Is the city sacked?

Nardic. Yes, mighty Sultan.


Osmin. Then let its name no longer be remembered.
But see, O Nardic! how the short-lived joy,
Inspired by this success, like the swift glare
Of lightning, is extinguished. Discontent
Returns, and renders still thy prince unhappy.

Nardic. Where then may we seek bliss, if he whose nod
Gives life or death, while numerous nations wait
Attendant on his will, can yet be wretched!
Whose every sense is gratified to fullness;
While all of art, and all of nature join
To soothe his wish, and court his appetite!
Our bounteous Nile yields all that can indulge
The smell or taste, of fruits and flowers luxuriant;
Our minstrels cunning in their harmony,
Draw forth such dulcet sounds as might assist
Creation in her work, and animate
The dust from whence we sprang. But, O! the last,
The best, the highest pitch of mortal bliss,
See the collected master works of nature,
The lovely fair from various regions sought,
Envying each other every partial smile.

Osmin. Avaunt, audacious slave! dare thou presume
To expostulate with me? When I have said
That I am most unhappy, think thou then,
Thy flattering tongue can gloss my wretchedness?
But wherefore do I suffer thee to breathe,
Thou abject thing, except to administer
Delight to Osmin? Then hear my firm resolve --
If in three days thou find'st not some new joy,
Some untried vanity, that may awake
My soul, and rouse it to a sense of pleasure,
Thy head shall pay the forfeit -- Vanish straight,
Nor waste thy precious time in vain debating.

exit Nardic. Osmin. I have surrounded joy's capricious maze,
Yet cannot find the clue -- Some demon sure
Withholds it -- But I Will seek it in the pit
Of Acheron, or missing, sink in the pursuit.
Nor rapes, nor murders, shall obstruct my course,
Pleasures, like maids, must first be won by force;
Of them too, when we taste, we soon are cloyed,
And only sigh for those not yet enjoyed.

End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE, NARDIC 's Apartment.
NARDIC Solus. Nardic. TERROR, solicitude, and wild despair,
Pursue my steps! Each moment seems my last!
The tyrant seeks my life, and he must have it --
Where can I turn to find new joys for one,
Who has in vain exhausted nature's treasure,
And plenteous as she is, has made her bankrupt?
Were he indeed a king, I might supply
New objects daily to relieve his languor,
And yield him transports beyond mortal sense.
To feed the poor, to comfort the distressed,
To usher bashful genius into life,
Become a parent to the orphan's tear,
"And cause the widow's heart to sing for joy,"
Exalt a monarch to an angel's rank:
But virtue never has warmed his earth-born soul,
It Is a sixth sense to Osmin. Science fair
To him has spread her lettered page, in vain --
His mind never reached to contemplation's height,
Nor felt the rapture of a moral sense:
His pulse, his nerves form all his notices;
His heart, his soul are aliens to his joys.
I have sent proclamation forth, that he,
Who in two days produce the fairest virgin
To fill the Sultan's arms, shall in degree,
Stand next to Nardic, be the third within
This spacious realm. No claimant yet appears.

Enter an Attendant, and CALED. Attendant. This stranger, mighty lord, earnest
desires
To come into thy presence. I have now
Fulfilled thy wish.
to Caled.
Nardic. It Is well -- Retire. exit Attend. What would thou?


Caled. Let Nardic's smiles from out the dust raise up
The lowest slave that mingles with his fellows.
Here may my faithful service be accepted,
And Osmin's arms be blessed with sovereign beauty.

Nardic. Say on, for lo! my ears are all attention.


Caled. This day the merchant Nouradin prepares
To wed the fairest maid Circassia's plains,
Or Georgia's vales have ever yet presented
To the seraglio's of the South or East.
The fabled Venus fails of her description,
And those angelic nymphs which by our prophet
Are promised to the happy saints above,
But equal her perfection. Never sure,
For vulgar use were charms like here is ordained --
Our Caliph only may deserve such bliss.

Nardic. If that thy tongue, unused to flattering speech,
Has but reported truly, quick expect
The high reward proclaimed -- Nay more, endowed
With all the active friendship of my life.
Haste then, and bring this most transcendent fair,
To bless my longing sight.

Caled. My gracious lord,
Without thy aid our purposed wish were vain.
Lo! Caled is the slave of Nouradin;
And shall he dare to ravish from his arms
The bride of his affections? Thou must lend
The Sultan's power, which only can accomplish
His happiness and ours: with that invested,
Instant I Will force her to your raptured gaze,
And prove that I want art to paint her charms.

Nardic. The royal mandate quick shall be prepared,
And if our holy prophet aids my prayer,
She Will answer to thy boast. Come in with me.

exeunt. SCENE, A Garden.
NOURADIN and AMANA seated in a Bower. Nouradin. My beauteous bride, with
pleasure I survey
These dazzling gems diminished in their luster
By thy bright eyes, like stars before the sun.
But O! that glorious planet moves but slowly,
Stopping perhaps his course to gaze on thee.
Were Thetis such a bride as my Amana,
His chariot would outspeed the wind, and yet,
Not equal my impatience for the night.

Amana. All that I hear, all that I see, is new;
Yet not the pride of sudden elevation
Swells my full heart, but gratitude to thee.
These splendid ornaments, and this gay scene,
Attract my wonder, but inspire not joy:
It Is he, the fond dispenser of them all,
It Is Nouradin alone that gives them value,
And makes them pleasing to Amana's eyes.

Nouradin. O! were the flaming mines where diamonds grow,
With all of wealth and grandeur, in my power,
How poorly should I estimate the gift,
Compared to that which I receive from thee!

Amana. Too highly do thou rate so slight a prize,
For poor Amana's heart is all her treasure,
There humblest duty, joined with tenderest love,
And grateful sentiment, shall ever dwell,
For thee, my lord, my lover, husband, friend.

Nouradin. Transporting charmer, generous to excess!
But words are feeble to express my sense.
Here then I make a solemn vow, that though
kneeling. Our law admits plurality of wives,
Thy Nouradin's sincere and faithful heart
Shall never wander from Amana's charms,
Nor feel the power of beauty but from her,
The pride, the pleasure of his future life,
His whole of bliss below. Who dares intrude?
rising.
Enter CALED, and Guards. Nouradin. Unmannered slave! what insolence to rush
Into my presence thus?

Caled. Then know my errand.

presenting the mandate.
Nouradin. With reverence I receive the Caliph's mandate.

reads.
Caled. Can thou not read it? Why do tremble so?
Arouse, and be a man -- I did not strike thee --
Thou first bereaved me of that precious beauty --
I but repay thee justice for thy wrongs.

Nouradin. Ten thousand daggers stick within my heart --
Monster, Barbarian, Oh!

drops the paper, and Caled takes it up. Amana. Alas! he faints,
Quick let me fly to aid him.

runs to him. Caled. Lovely maid,
Thy tender cares must henceforth be bestowed
On one more worthy of thy charms. The Sultan
In tedious languishment attends thy presence,
And we must not delay.

Amana. Oh! never, never --
This world has no exchange for Nouradin.

Nouradin. Tear out my heart, pluck all my limbs asunder,
Wreak thy full vengeance on this wretched body --
But spare, Oh! spare Amana.

Amana. Naught but death
Shall ever wrest me from my love. My father!
Enter ABDALLAH. Will thou not rescue me?

Caled. Observe this mandate.

to Abdallah.
Abdallah. Alas! my child, it is not in my power.


Nouradin. Since wealth can bribe thee to an act of baseness,
Let it, for once, inspire humanity.
Take all that I possess -- excepting her --
Thou can not leave me poor --

Caled. Were all thy wealth
Trebled a thousand fold, nay were it more
Than even thought can number, for it all
I Would not forego the joys I feel in vengeance.
Now thou art answered -- Quick prepare to part --
I will indulge thee with a last embrace.

Amana. They shall dismember me to loose this hold --
Oh! kill me, sir, and save me from dishonor.
to her father.
Abdallah. Oh! my unhappy child, thy father wishes
To see thee dead, but cannot give the blow.

Caled. Come, madam, to delay your bliss were vain;
If you consent not, force shall make you happy.

lays hold of her. Nouradin. Oh! do not hurt her tender limbs, and I
Will quit my hold of her, and life together.
My loved, my lost Amana!

they force her off. He falls. Abdallah. Cursed be this clime, and doubly cursed
its Prophet!
For whose false faith I left the only true;
At once abandoned heaven, and my country,
Renounced both worlds for my Amestris' charms.
O liberty! thou first, best gift, to man
Bestowed in Paradise -- Nature's creation
Subject to him, himself without control,
Except to heaven alone. Thus, thus derived,
We claim it as our birthright. Yet, O shame!
Whole nations have resigned this right divine,
From heaven revolting, yet submit to man.
Albion alone preserves the blessed Palladium,
Where every power of doing good is free,
And peasants may defend their rights from kings.
A second Eden in religion also,
In faith and practice purest among men.
Yet I a renegade to each advantage,
Though born a Briton, bred a Christian too,
My creed, my country, for a woman's love
Did forfeit. True indeed, my paradise
I have enjoyed below -- But vengeance sure
Though slow, has now o'erta'en, and my Amana
Is marked a victim for her father's crime.
Yet still, just heaven! If sin may be attoned
kneels. By deep contrition, weigh my penitence,
Nor shed the parent's guilt upon the child.
Oh! rather let me live while nature's powers
Admit existence, in that life be cursed
With pain, with penury, with every ill
To vex the mind, or torture human sense:
Extend those evils to my latest gasp,
And purge my apostasy with wounds and death!

Nouradin. Why did I part with her! Why not sustain
starting up. The Sultan's cruelty, and Caled's vengeance!
Oh! had they hewed me piecemeal, what could they
Have done, but killed me! And I now must suffer
A thousand, thousand deaths! But fear for her
Unmanned my nature quite -- For in the strife,
They might have injured her. There, there I died --
Torn from my bleeding heart where is she now?
Perhaps encircled in the Caliph's arms!

Abdallah. Stay that ungenerous thought -- though born a slave,
My daughter ever has been bred a Briton;
Nor will she condescend to live on terms
Which her chaste soul abhors -- From earliest youth,
She has been taught to know that life is dowerless.
Without virtue: stripped of that rich portion,
One lot alone remains -- to die with honor.
Therefore believe Amana still a virgin,
Or no more --

Nouradin. Why do thou seek to aggravate my sorrows?
I hoped Amana's heart might be at peace,
That wealth, that grandeur might have bought her smiles,
And left me only, wretched -- Oh! it is false!
Vile treason against love! That heavenly maid,
Within this hour, declared she only lived
For Nouradin -- Then let me instant fly,
To save her from pollution: this good sword
Lodge deep in Osmin's breast -- or in my own.

Abdallah. My son, attend. A thought has quick occurred,
Which may perhaps, redeem us from despair.
The captain of the guards, his name is Hamet,
Was once a well tried friend of mine: honest,
Sincere and brave; strict bound in gratitude,
For services, no matter now to tell.
And if the modes of court have not erased
All generous feelings from his aged breast,
He will both pity, and assist our purpose.
Should he but lend his aid, I yet have hope,
Of rescuing Amana from perdition.
But, oh! he never felt a father's anguish,
Nor did his heart ever bleed as mine does now!

Nouradin. O! lose not time in fruitless doubts or fears.
But fly this moment, and strong urge your suit;
Use every argument that thought can frame,
To bind him to our friendship: if my wealth
Can buy his service, let him take it all,
And pay me with one sight of my Amana.

Abdallah. Thou need'st not seek to press a father's haste
To save an only child; for though no raptures
Now fire my blood like yours, more generous passions,
Rage against oppression, with parental fondness,
Have made my heart as brave as his who dares
The cannon's roar in battle. But my son,
Know that the adventure is most hazardous;
Therefore with caution let us now proceed,
Entreating heaven to bless the pious deed --
And if we fail, I am prepared to bleed.

End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE, NARDIC 's Apartment.
Enter NARDIC. Nardic. WHAT strong impatience agitates my mind!
Would Caled were arrived. I long, yet dread
To view this promised maid, upon whose charms
Depends my life or death. Oh! the mean slavery
Of proud dependence! How contemptuous seem
All power, all greatness, which we poorly borrow
From another's smiles! or purchase basely
With office servile, or with treachery buy!
Strange state of man, to be or slave or tyrant!
Is there no mean condition, holy prophet?
Are all then born for one? No way to blend
Prerogative with liberty? To poise
In equal scales, the prince and people's rights,
And make them mutually suspend each other?

Enter CALED, leading in Amana veiled. Caled. Now let thy servant's truth be
fully proved.
Behold the fair Amana.

Nardic. Her shape and stature vouch in part thy praise,
Her face I hope will certify the rest.
takes off her veil. (...) ^scendent charmer, dry those falling tears,
And let thy lovely eyes be decked in smiles,
To ^reet thy coming greatness; happiest,
As fairest of thy sex, I hail thee queen,
prostrates himself before her. And here devote my future life, and service,
To the commands of our bright Sultaness,
The fair Amana.

Amana. O detested flattery!
Offspring of meanness and ambition, fostered
In courts, luxuriant soil for every vice
To thrive and flourish in. Know I disdain
The Sultan and his greatness. If indeed,
Thou mean thy kind professions for my service,
O! give me back to a fond father's arms,
To a despairing husband's bleeding heart,
Or with thy poignard set my own at rest.

Nardic. Alas! bright maid, thy youth and inexperience
Have much deceived thee, and thou know not yet
The joys superior which attend on greatness.
Soon in the Caliph's arms thou will renounce
The mean plebeian whom thou now lamentest,
And thank our prophet for the blessed exchange.
The highest transport to a female heart,
Shall too be thine; for thou will triumph over
Contending rivals for the prize of beauty.
A thousand fair ones shall obey thy will,
Who while they pine in envy at thy bliss,
Must still acknowledge thy superior charms.
I soon shall lead thee to true happiness,
And lodge thee safe in Osmin's fond embrace.

exeunt Nard. and Call. Amana. Rather to instant death convey me straight!
What will my fate do with me? Oh, Nouradin!
Why did my soul receive its first, its tenderest,
Its only feelings, from thy worth! Why was
Thy generous love bestowed on such a wretch,
Lost and abandoned now to vile pollution!
No -- it shall never be -- though void of means
To free myself by force, my daring soul
Shall seek some horrid way -- I know not what --
To rescue me from force, and prostitution.

Enter OSMIN and NARDIC. Nardic. There stands the lovely fair, whom I described
--
Now let thine eyes be judge.

Osmin. Retire a while.
exit Nardic. My beauteous maid, bend not thy eyes thus mournful,
Upon the earth, but let them shine on Osmin.

Amana. O let the judge of nations hear my prayer!
throws herself at his feet. With eyes of pity not desire, behold
The unhappiest of her sex; unworthy far,
Or of his greatness, or his love: for oh!
Her aliened heart was wholly won, ever she
Beheld the mighty Osmin, given away
By sacred contract, to a lovely youth;
And this day was to have solemnized our nuptials,
But for the treachery of a barbarous slave.
Then let not him for whom fond beauties sigh,
Retain the furtive prize of villainy;
But quick restore her to the virtuous ties
Of filial duty, and of wedded love.

Osmin. Arise -- but be assured thou plead'st in vain --
The tenderness of thy complaint has moved me,
But not to pity -- Since thou can feel love,
Why not sustain its pleasing pains for me?
Thou art not formed of coarse plebeian mould,
Too delicate to sill a vassal's arms.
I would preserve thy passion in its force,
But thou must learn to change the happy object.
The task is easy, from my own experience,
For I have loved before -- and now love thee.

Amana. As well might thou command sweet flowers to grow
On the tempestuous sea, as force true love
To change its object. It Is impossible!
From one strong stem, rooted in both our hearts,
Our passions bloomed at once, reciprocal:
Thy breath may blast the fruit, but never thy hand
Reap the ripe harvest. Then, O mighty Sultan!
If ever thou do hope to taste the joys
Of mutual love, O let my streaming eyes,
And lifted hands, procure my reconveyance.
Or if thou enviest him this poor possession,
Quick let my death destroy his hopes, with thine.

Osmin. Thou shall not die, nor will I part with thee --
But know the slave for whom thy fondness pleads,
Shall bleed within thy sight, if in the space
Of two revolving suns thou yieldest not
To gratify my wish with soft compliance.
It Is thy own fault if henceforth thou art unhappy --
By gentle means I choose to win thy love;
My utmost power thou may command, at will,
Thy friends shall all be great; nay more, the slave,
The very slave thou sigh'st for, will I serve:
His life or death depends on thee -- thou art,
As well as mine, his destiny -- Farewell.

offers to go. Amana. O! do not leave me! Thy relenting heart
Speaks in thy eyes, and gives a dawn of hope.
Thou will not murder Nouradin! Thou will not --
I know thou will not. Say his life is safe,
And bid me be at peace from wild distraction.

Osmin. I have already told thee my resolve,
Nor am I used to trifle in my speech.
My words are firm decrees; and since pronounced,
That wretch's fate now rests on thee -- Not me.

Amana. Then hear my resolution, fixed as thine --
Though dearer to my heart is Nouradin,
Than sight is to the blind, health to the sick,
To prisoners liberty -- O far, far dearer
Than life, and all its joys, to his Amana --
Yet will I put with him, survey the mutes
Fixing the bow string round his neck, where I
Should fold my grateful arms, to death devote him,
Rather than wound his image in my heart,
Or stain that mirror with a second object.

Osmin. Beware, and stop thy heedless tongue, lest I
Revoke the clemency my grace has proffered,
And doom thy minion to an instant death.

Amana. Oh! I am silent, will not dare to speak,
Even to entreat thy pity -- O Nouradin!
Thou can not know what I endure for thee.
aside.
Osmin. It Is well -- restrain thy impetuous grief, and let
The tedious interval I have indulged thee,
Be well employed to brighten every charm,
Which now obscured, and deadened by thy sorrow,
Show like Aurora when her infant beams
Hold contest with the gloomy shades of night.
And like the glorious ruler of the day,
Let genial warmth dispel the sullen mist;
Then in the full meridian of thy charms,
With perfect beauty bless my longing arms.

exeunt severally. Enter NARDIC, CALED and HAMET. Nardic. Joy to thee Caled!
May still prosperous days
Attend thy life with full and long enjoyment.
Our Sultan has accepted thy fair gift,
And owns her equal to his fondest wish.
Therefore with power in next degree to mine,
I here invest thee Aga of the guards.
Hamet in thy new office will instruct thee --
He has resigned it to make way for Caled.

Caled. Most mighty lord, Caled is bound to thee,
Thy future slave; for even those flattering honors
With which thou load'st him, hold inferior rank,
As second to the higher debt he owes thee
Who slaked his thirsty soul with sweet revenge.
But much I long to know how did Amana
Receive the overture of Osmin's flame?
True woman, I suppose, for such the sex,
One lover out of sight, with greedy ear
She listened to the second's soothing tale,
Forgot her vows, and sunk into his arms.

Nardic. Caled, you are much deceived -- her stubborn will
Yet bends not -- She is indeed a woman --
Perverse and obstinate -- pleads plighted love
To Nouradin, entreats to be restored
To his embrace, or begs that she may die.

Caled. How would her sighs delight my listening ear!
But then I fear lest through her sullen coyness,
The Sultan take disgust, and cast her from him.
Perhaps restore her to her husband's arms --
The thought has daggers in it.

Nardic. O fear not that --
He is too much enamoured of her charms,
To quit the fond pursuit: the power of beauty
Had never such effect upon his heart,
Since first I marked the movement of his passions.
Besides, his restive pride will scorn to yield,
And force is ready should persuasion fail.
He has allowed a respite of two days,
To abate her grief, and tune her soul to joy;
While, as he knows his own unbridled will,
Which like a whirlwind bears down all before it,
He has withdrawn himself from the serrail,
To waste the tedious space in solitude,
At The plain of the Mummies, near Kairo.
Sakara upon the bank of Nile;
Where I must now attend him, by command.
Thou Caled to thy charge repair, and know
That any who attempt to pass thy watch,
Within the palace wards, must die. Farewell.

Caled. Adieu, and fear not Caled's strictest duty.


exeunt severally. Manet HAMET. Hamet. Oh! I am well repaid for thirty years
Of brave and faithful services, displaced
For a vile pandar. True indeed, I never
Have ravished virgins from their bridegroom's arms,
To gratify his satyr's lust -- I warred
With men, not maids; and often in heat of battle
At peril of my own have saved his life.
But that is past -- his kingdom is at peace,
He does not want me now; and like his armor,
I am left to rust, too cumbrous to be worn.

Enter ABDALLAH. Hamet. Welcome, my ancient, and approved friend,
Thou come in proper time to lend me aid
And comfort with thy philosophic counsel.
Thou art the man on earth I wished to see --
Thy friendly tongue has often advised beware
The dangerous shoals and rocks which frequent lurk
Beneath the tide of royal favor -- Now,
Behold me stuck aground, shipwrecked indeed!

Abdallah. Thy adverse fate sincerely I lament,
Thy well-proved merit claims this tribute grief.
But oh! my friend, a nearer, higher sorrow
Now fills up all my thoughts -- A father's anguish
For an only child! My lost Amana!

Hamet. Say, what of her? My dear, unhappy friend!
Has the destroying angel torn her from thee,
And veiled her beauties in the silent tomb?

Abdallah. Had fate demanded her, I were resigned --
But oh! she still survives, a sacrifice
To brutal force, unless thy generous aid
Shall join to rescue her from vile pollution.

Hamet. By this good sword, which never yet has failed me,
In hottest battle, even by Hamet's life,
Or what is dearer still, his unstained honor,
I swear I will redeem the virtuous maid,
Or failing, perish in the attempt.

Abdallah. Enough --
But see the monster Caled nigh approaches --
Let us retire, and plan the generous purpose.

Hamet. The die is cast -- my life upon the hazard.


exeunt. Enter CALED, as they are going out. Caled. Amana's father, in
discourse with Hamet!
I like not that -- perhaps they plot my ruin.
I stand on slippery ground. My elevation
Was too precipitate; and like the pine,
Whose hastened growth outstrips its slender girth,
Each blast alarms me, and I shrink my head.
Old Hamet's well earned post, and long worn honors,
He has resigned with silence and submission,
Unlike a soldier conscious of his worth;
Therefore I doubt not deep within his heart
He will retain the sense of injury,
Which like an inward wound will rankle there,
'Till it break out and show the putrefaction.
Though freed from bondage, yet a slave to fear,
That worst of tyrants, I am wretched still.
His steps I must attend with cautious eye,
Quickened by malice -- For whom we have wronged,
It Is natural to fear, and thence, to hate.

exit. SCENE, NOURADIN's apartment.
He lying on a couch. Nouradin. This feverish grief, and torturing expectation,
Drink up my blood, my bosom is on flame,
My nerves shrunk up, and I shall first expire
Before Abdallah comes to tell me -- What?
What can he tell me! Save that my Amana
Is dead -- or worse -- a victim to dishonor!
His frigid age feels not a lover's pains,
Nor can the fondness of a thousand fathers,
In nature or degree, compare with mine.

Enter ABDALLAH. Abdallah. Arise, my son, and let thy soul taste hope.


Nouradin. Thou do not mock me sure, oh! quickly speak,
Say does she live, and free from brutal stain?
Have thy blessed eyes beheld the unsullied maid?
Oh! say may she again be mine! My wife?

Abdallah. I have not seen her, but I know she lives,
And dwells in innocence; and may, I hope,
Again be thine -- The friend I told thee of,
Has proved his worth, and with his utmost power,
Has promised to assist the bold adventure,
Therefore prepare to quit this cursed land,
Where tyranny is law; and innocence
Can find no safety, but in hasty flight.
If we succeed in rescuing Amana,
My native country shall afford us refuge;
But if successless in the brave attempt,
Our solace be that we shall die in virtue.

Nouradin. Oh! I am all impatience for the trial:
To live with her were happiness indeed!
But if my fate that blessing shall deny,
Death is its next best gift. Now speak the means.

Abdallah. Know then, the tyrant, whether through compassion,
Or still in hope to soothe her to compliance,
Has granted her two days to wean her sorrow,
To conquer nature, and submit to fate;
During which interval he has retired
To Sakara, whence like an epicure,
Fasting from beauty to increase appetite,
He, like an hungry glatton, may return,
And feast his quickened sense with fuller gust.

Nouradin. O! may the grasp of death first seize his heart,
And cast him forth a prey to ravening vultures!

Abdallah. To disappoint his vicious purpose, know,
My ancient friend, the kind, the generous Hamet,
Late captain of his guard, now subaltern
To impious Caled, from a twofold reason,
Impelled by friendship's ties, and just disdain,
On being thus disgraced to pay the hire
Of hellish deeds, of rape and treachery,
Will introduce thee in the Sultan's robes,
His yearly perquisite, at dusk of even,
To the seraglio, to Amana's ward;
From whence, by means which Hamet shall direct,
Thou may descend into the garden, where
I shall be stationed to receive my children,
And through a private portal straight convey
A treasure richer than the crown of Egypt.
From thence to happy England let us repair,
That land of liberty, and wealth, and valor.

Nouradin. Whether indeed thou rav'st of that blessed clime,
In mere Eutopian dream, I cannot say,
But this I dare pronounce, that with Amana,
A desert would supply that heaven on earth,
My paradise below, is love and virtue.

Abdallah. Within this hour Hamet will doubtless bring
The safe disguise, by him thou must be led.
But oh! when thou beholdest thy Amana,
Beware, my son, of dalliance, suffer not
A lover's fondness disappoint his wishes:
Lose not the important moment, but remember
Each instant's precious to thy life, and here is.

Nouradin. Oh! that the hour were come! fear not, Abdallah.
If Nouradin's fond arms once more enfold her,
Again behold that face, that form divine,
No power on earth shall ever force her from me,
And leave me life to plain, as I do now.

Abdallah. Alas, my son, I doubt not of thy prowess,
It is thy fondness which I fear; that weakness,
Which only brave men know; and while it sinks
Their spirit as a vain presumptuous man,
Exalts it to the softness of a seraph.

Nouradin. Were but my life, my happiness, at stake,
Well might thou doubt the weakness of my virtue,
Against Amana's charms -- But where her safety
Becomes the question, I can turn a stoic;
Scarcely indulge my ravished eyes to gaze,
Or raptured hand to feast upon her touch,
'Till I restore her to her father's arms,

Abdallah. O! may the blessings of a mutual love,
Light on you both: let me but see you safe
Beyond the tyrant's lust, or violence,
And all the business of my life is over.

exeunt. SCENE, the seraglio.
Enter AMANA and FATIMA. Amana. Unhappy fair! I pity thy sad fate,
Though quite unlike my own. I never thought
The chaste, the tender love that women feel,
Could ever be won by outward form of man.
Beauty's our own peculiar character,
Their's, sense and learning, bravery and honor:
Desire and admiration are their role;
Esteem, submission, gratitude are ours.

Fatima. Sure in some northern climate thou were born,
Where Cupid, as the poets represent him,
Is but a child indeed -- A playful god --
His darts unvenomed, and unnerved his arm.
Not so he took possession of my heart;
But shot himself, with his whole train of ills,
Into my glowing breast: thou happy fair,
Were formed to inspire the passion in its rage,
Thy heart insensible to all its pangs.

Amana. Alas! thou art deceived: Amana's heart
Feels all the fond solicitudes of love:
But then it was thy chaste, thy generous passion,
Unhappy Nouradin! that lighted up
The flame in my cold bosom, which with life
Alone shall be extinguished.

Fatima. Hapless maid!
Here I return thy pity twenty fold --
Alas, thou art more wretched than myself --
I have but one concern -- with mutual warmth
To inspire the Sultan's breast -- while doubly vexed,
Thou have a love debarred, and one to shun.
The Caliph's fate and mine exact the same;
Pursuing, fled from, meeting hate for love.

Amana. Cursed be his passion, cursed his vicious love,
And doubly cursed the hour he saw Amana!
Oh! that deformity would spread its veil
Over these few but ill-starred charms! To avoid
His brutal passion I would even forego
The chaste, the tender love of Nouradin;
Or trust to constancy to insure his faith.
Or that the sudden hand of death would seize
My captive limbs, and rescue my free soul
From the more dreaded tyrant. Some way yet,
I will escape -- Despair point out the means!

Fatima. If thou indeed hate Osmin more than death;
And art yet unprovided of the means
To shun his loathed embrace, I may, perhaps,
Assist thy frenzy; but, unhappy fair one,
Weigh well the desperate deed; for once begun,
It were too late to save thee from thy folly.
Thou might indeed rob Fatima of life,
But naught of mortal aid could rescue thine.

Amana. O! do not judge so poorly of Amana,
To think that she could ever be induced
To wrong her kind deliverer -- Here I vow,
No rack shall wrest the secret from my lips,
Which with their latest breath shall bless thy service.

Fatima. My mother was well skilled in nature's lore;
And this small vial dying she bequeathed me,
Saying, that should this world of teeming ills,
Ever load my life with woes too strong for sufferance,
I need but quaff this draught, and ready death
Within an hour would swallow up my pains --
Accept it then, for wretched as I am,
Even lost to hope, I dare not wish to die.

Amana. With gratitude sincere I thank thee for it --
Welcome thou anodyne of human cares!
I Will place thee near my heart; for oh! it is thou,
And thou alone, I fear, can give it rest.
Now, hated Osmin, I defy thy vice,
In spite of thee I shall escape dishonor.
Wafted on air my unstained soul shall fly,
And seek its native mansion in the sky;
A bower of bliss for Nouradin prepare,
And deck it with the choicest garlands there;
Await his coming for a little space,
Then live for ever in his chaste embrace.

End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE, A Gothic building, representing the palace of Sakara.
Enter OSMIN and NARDIC. Osmin. HOW poor is greatness, and how weak is power!
When a fond girl shall dare resist my will,
And yield that love which I in vain solicit,
To a plebeian, to an abject slave,
Low as the grovelling worm on which I tread,
Compared to Osmin's wealth, his rank, his birth.
My word may render that mean wretch unhappy,
But cannot make me blessed -- Even in my arms
The adverse fair will sigh for Nouradin,
And curse the tyrant for the unwilling joy.

Nardic. And what avail her curses, while her charms
Shall gratify my sovereign's fond desire,
And feast his every sense?

Osmin. Away -- away --
I am surfeited of sense, want higher gust,
Which love reciprocal alone can yield.
Oh! must I never taste the fond embrace
Of mutual love? The ardour never behold
Of unfeigned passion, modesty alone,
That brightest ornament of female beauty,
Restraining its excess? Must I never see
The half denying, half consenting glance
Steal from Amana's eye? I may possess,
But not enjoy her charms -- Dull feast!
To gorge a clove-foot satyr's appetite!
O! that I could transform my outward semblance,
And take the shape and garb of Nouradin!
Then might I feel the true extatic joy
Of being pressed with transport to the heart
Of this too lovely, but capricious fair.
The very thought inspires an half enjoyment.

Nardic. Then why not practice the deceit, my liege?
I have seen this Nouradin, when late he came
To sue a license out for Mecca's shrine,
Whither his filial piety and duty
Inclined him to perform a pilgrimage,
In zeal and honor of his father's shade.
He seemed a comely youth; in face and person
Resembling much my prince. The least disguise,
In the dun shades of night, might gratify
My sovereign's present wish: thy fond embrace
Would fill her arms as well as Nouradin.
'Twill make her happy during the delusion,
And save a world of virgin coyness: then,
If she be woman, she will forgive the cheat,
And bless the artifice that saved her shame.

Osmin. Haste then -- supply me with a merchant's garb,
This night I Will play Amphytrion; absolved
By gods who smile at the fond frauds of love.
I Will enter the seraglio, steal into
The sighing fair one's ward, disguise my voice,
And whisper in her ear, "'It Is Nouradin,
"Thy love, thy husband! Quick let us enjoy
"Those transports which the sacred priest this morn,
"Has sanctified by Hymen's virtuous bands.
"Thus, thus, w'ell disappoint the tyrant's hope."
O the transcending joy I then shall feel,
When full possessing all she can bestow,
I let her know it is Osmin she has blessed,
And like another Jove confound her sense
With my full blaze of glory.

Nardic. I am charmed
At this fair scene which opens to thy view,
Such happy thefts exceed those dull enjoyments
Which willing beauty yields. This key conveys
My royal master through the palace gates,
Unseen by all his guards. Within an hour,
I will provide a dress to suit the intent,
Exact the same that bridegrooms wear, for such
We must suppose was Nouradin's this morn,
When habited in form to espouse the fair.
And may success attend my sovereign's will,
Equal to his and Nardic's mutual wish.

exit. Osmin. Cold and inanimate thou talk of wishes,
Who neither know the pride of king's disdained,
Nor the indignance of a thwarted passion --
O! could I, like another Phaeton,
But guide the Sun's bright chariot, for a day,
I Would plunge the world in deep and sudden darkness,
Nor ask for light but from Amana's eyes.
Like him too, once to obtain my soul's ambition,
I Would hazard mine, and this whole globe's existence;
For I in truth, could never yet believe
Our lying Imans, or their flattering prophet:
All that I know of bliss, I will enjoy,
And leave the rest to chance, or destiny.

exit. SCENE, NOURADIN's House.
Enter NOURADIN in the Sultan's Robes, with HAMET and ABDALLAH. Hamet. My
friends, I have risqued my life to aid your cause,
And much I fear, but more I hope the event;
These robes of royalty sit easy on thee,
And as thou bear a likeness to the Sultan,
The guards will never suspect the masquerade --
But should the least suspicion chance to arise
In any of the watch, deep plunge this dagger
In his heart, and speed thy course in silence.

Nouradin. If there be such a deity as love,
He will protect and guide me to Amana;
For sure a fonder votary never bowed
Before his altar in the Cyprian isle.
Night too will be my friend; accustomed still
To smile on lovers, she will not refuse
Her aid to Nouradin. My beating heart
Bounds with prophetic rapture! I shall yet
Retrieve the angelic maid from soul offense,
And make her future life one scene of bliss.

Abdallah. I would not wish to damp thy virtuous hope,
But much I dread there is an heavy cloud
Hangs over our heads, to shower down evils on us.
My cursed apostasy has brought this ruin
On my ill-fated house, and my Amana,
With you my son, though innocent, may suffer
For my impiety -- So heaven decrees!

Nouradin. What means Abdallah?

Abdallah. In the distracted moment when my child
Was deemed a sacrifice to brutal lust,
And torn from thy despairing arms, and mine,
I told thee of my country and religion;
And oh! I told thee --

Nouradin. I do remember something like a dream;
While on the ground in agony I lay,
You talked methought, in wild phantastic vision,
Of lands of freedom, of a purer faith,
And judgments visited for sins derived.

Abdallah. To thee, my son, I might appear to rave,
Born as thou art beneath a tyrant's yoke,
And early taught to bend thy passive neck
To arbitrary sway. The mountain goddess
Has never deigned to mark her footsteps here;
Nor yet has heaven its saving grace extended
To lands of despotism, and gross imposture.
But what I tremble for is, lest the charms
Of my Amestris, opening in their prime
In my Amana, may perhaps induce
The curse of disobedience to our law.

Hamet. Let not thy timorous faith forebode such ills,
Nor sink the spirit of our bold emprize.
For thee or me, the muddy dregs of life,
Are scarcely worth the draught. A nauseous potion!
Therefore, without repining at the past,
With calmness let us wait the pregnant future,
And whether death or freedom be our lot,
Let us receive the alternative like men.

Abdallah. My friends, I fear not for myself, my life
Has filled its years; and like a full fed guest,
I Would gladly quit the banquet, and depend
On penitence sincere for future bliss.
But oh! I dread lest those, much dearer to me,
Than all the joys of earth combined, may starve,
Like dowerless children of a spendthrift father,
For my extravagance and luxury.

Nouradin. Forbear these sad reflections -- If high heaven,
Whose justice with the tenderest mercy tempered,
Presides over all its works, if it regard
The ways of man, its justice will pronounce
Amana mine, and in its goodness will
Restore her to my fond and faithful arms.

Hamet. Prophetic be thy hope -- This silver key,
The last remaining badge of Hamet's greatness,
None but the mighty Nardic has another,
And he most luckily attends the Sultan,
Will open every gate within the palace.
Beneath the garden wall we'll wait for thee --
If thou escapest we shall be free, if not,
This dagger shall release my bonds -- Farewell.

exit. Nouradin. The servent blessings of a grateful heart,
Raised from the depth of sorrow into joy,
Dwell ever round thee, and protect thy age.
looking after him. But why that heavy gloom upon thy brow,
Ill-boding to our hopes, as lowering clouds
In days of harvest, to the rural swain?
to Abdallah.
Abdallah. From threescore years of tedious disappointment,
I have been taught that hope is the true curse
Of Tantalus; and when the flattering draught
Seems just to touch our lips, some sullen sprite
Dashes the stream aside, and makes us feel
Our griefs increased, by bordering on joy.
Therefore I bid thy inexperience fear.

Nouradin. Thy philosophic lore I Will strive to learn,
When my tumultuous passions are at peace;
Then only can it rule the human heart:
The rudder's useless in a storm, must yield
To raging billows, and resistless winds,
Whilst the scared pilot stands in mute despair.
But to our holy prophet here I kneel,
To bless my little bark with prosperous gales --
Let but Amana be the precious freight,
No other treasure shall I wish on board,
Or care what course we steer -- Possessed of her,
All climes, all nations are the same to me.
Wherever she smiles a paradise will bloom,
And every withered herb breathe rich perfume;
Fruits will spontaneous grow beneath her eyes,
And flowers to deck her bed will gladly rise.

exeunt. SCENE, the Garden of the Seraglio.
Enter AMANA and FATIMA. Amana. My spirits are attuned to peace and harmony,
And now with tenderest pity I bemoan
Thy ill-placed love -- Surely I think there is
A curse attends that passion in our sex,
And she alone is blessed whose equal pulse
Beats undisturbed, in senseless apathy.

Fatima. O! say not so -- It is the balm of life,
And even its pains delightful -- What must then,
Its pleasures be! But those, alas! I fear,
I never again shall know.

Amana. Do not despair --
When the first tumults of the Caliph's rage,
For my escape, are past, then may thou hope.
By arts of soothing tenderness, once more
To steal into his heart, and win his love.
By soft indulgence to his present passion,
Thou may revive the former in his breast,
And thus regain the empire thou have lost.
She who would please proud man, must not disdain
The lowest methods to attain her purpose:
Humility's the garb in which their sex
The most delight to see us dressed -- By this,
Their vain superiority is shown,
And our dependent state upon their wills.

Fatima. Thy calm expressions raise my utmost wonder!
Thou can not surely, mean to die ever long,
Yet talk with such reflection and composure!

Amana. My soul is fixed, and therefore am I calm.
Did hope or fear perplex this constant breast,
The strong emotions could not be concealed.
What can I hope, from lust and tyranny?
Or what have I to fear, who in that hour
When I was forced from my fond husband's arms,
Lost the last glimpse of happiness below!
For thee alone, my generous Nouradin,
And my unhappy father, do I feel.
O! Fatima, this thought has roused sensations,
Which I could wish had slept -- I am, alas!
I feel it now, a weak, a very woman!

Fatima. Unhappy fair! thou speak too modestly --
No Greek or Roman ever yet recorded,
Has shown less fear, or more contempt of death.
If in the hour of trial, thy firm soul
Support thee thus, thou art a prodigy!

Amana. It will not then forsake me. I am armed
With innocence; and none but guilty souls
Should fear, or hesitate at death's approach.
My father will rejoice at my escape;
And even thy grief, my faithful Nouradin,
Will soften into tenderness and peace,
By knowing I am happy -- My loved shade
Thou will invoke, thy guardian seraph then!
Whilst I with joy still hovering over thy head,
Shall guide thy footsteps in the paths of bliss.

Fatima. Amazing fortitude! Sure angels prompt,
And will reward thy virtue. But behold,
The setting sun has warned us to retire --
Soft rest, and pleasing visions bless thy slumbers.

Amana. Adieu, my friend, may every happiness
Thou prayest for me, await thee in return;
May Osmin, since it is thy wish, restore
That aliened heart which thou have bought so dear.
exit Fatima. My senses are oppressed -- Within this bower
I will indulge their bent -- Spirits benign!
Who rule over dusk and dawn, watch and protect me
From all the dangers of the sullen night --
And O! if virgin thoughts as pure as snow,
May hope for favor from ye, send a dream
Of Nouradin, my lost, my hapless lord!
Let him be present to my sleeping eyes,
Whom waking I shall never more behold,
Or in these faithful arms again enfold;
In gentlest whispers let him breathe his love,
Then sighing leave me like the widowed dove.

End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE before the Palace.
Enter the SULTAN disguised. Osmin. I Have safely passed through all the several
gates,
And windings of these spacious courts, and trod
In paths I never traced before -- This door
Leads into the serrail, and brings me near
The summit of my joy -- Why do I not
Anticipate my bliss, feel all over rapture?
No -- I despise myself for such mean arts,
To put on this disguise, and counterfeit
A vassal's semblance thus, to gain -- a Woman!
Curse on the vulgar passion that enslaves us,
Which ever is at war with reason's laws,
And so fortuitous, we scarcely find
Two hearts united in one mutual flame,
While adverse loves still jostle one another.
Oh! it is the plague of man -- and woman too.
But what are they? The very sport of nature;
Formed solely for our use, like the fair flower
That blooms but to be cropped, then cast away.
Now let me haste to rifle its perfume,
Then loath the withering stalk. opens the door, out of which Caled. rushes and
draws his sword.
Ha! what art thou!

Caled. Beyond my wish, beyond my utmost hope,
This lucky incident has intervened --
I thank thee, gracious Alha! thou poor wretch,
As thou have raised, art bent to fix my fortunes.
Thy head shall shower down honors upon mine.
This instant I Will convey it to the Sultan,
Who highly will reward me for the prize.

Osmin. What means the frantic slave? Avaunt, and know
Thy Sultan stands before thee -- Quick retire,
Or instant death shall quit thy insolence.

Caled. Think thou thy ravings can affect my brain?
The shades of night are not so far advanced,
But I can spy the hero Nouradin,
Who for a girl's caprice, so bravely struck
His late dependant, his superior now.
The conference 'twixt Hamet and Abdallah,
I guessed might be for some such hopeful purpose,
And therefore, quite beyond my line of duty,
I have attended to this pass; and now
Shall make thy bridal robes thy funeral weeds.
Resistance all is vain, therefore submit.

Osmin. Thus then I recompense thy officious duty.


they fight, are both wounded, and fall. Caled. Thou have reached my heart, but
well I think my sword
Has met with thine -- Thou shall not triumph long,
Nor reap the fruits of thy rebellion -- Oh!

dies. Osmin. Too sure his weapon has been busy here --
My heart impatient of the least control,
Full of indignant rage opposed its point,
And now I bleed to death. Oh! the disgrace,
The shame that will attend my memory,
When I am found disguised, and by a slave
O'erpowered, in mean attempt to win a vassal!
This -- this wounds deeper than the fatal steel.
Curse on the wayward sex -- Curse my tame folly --
And oh! Curse --

dies. SCENE, An Apartment in the Seraglio.
Enter NOURADIN, in the Sultan's Robes. Nouradin. To that blessed providence
which hitherto
Has led my unerring steps through all the turns
And mazes of this palace, I with awe
And reverential gratitude, here bend.
O! power benign! continue thy protection,
And grant the arduous enterprise success.
Unless my speech betray me, the deep gloom,
Which now involves the world, will safe conceal
The honest fraud. Hamet desired me strike
Thus on the floor, when I would be attended.
he stamps, and enter a female attendant. Go bring Amana to my presence
straight,
And upon pain of death, let none else enter.
exit attendant. To gain this mighty realm I Would not endure,
But for another day, the strong emotions
Of hope and fear, which agitate my mind.
But it is an higher prize than wealth or power,
That stirs up my ambition -- It Is Amana,
Whose love rewards my hazard and my pains.
I had forgot that Hamet bid me enter
The close pavilion at this gallery's end;
Where Osmin still employs his vacant hours,
In amorous dalliance with the alternate fair;
And whither none uncalled, dare come. It Is here --
going to the side of the stage. I cannot calm my spirits -- My full heart
Beats at my breast, as if to force a passage
To my beloved, my betrothed Amana --
An universal tremor shakes my frame!
Sure it is the approaching joy of seeing her,
That makes this tumult here. I must, I will
Indulge ^y flattered soul in the fond triumph
Of seeing her disdainful hate of Osmin,
Quick change to tenderest love for Nouradin.
Would this important hour were past --
I will retire, and wait the wished event.

enters the pavilion. SCENE draws, and discovers Amana in a Bower, rising from
a Couch. The Attendant waiting.
Amana. Why did you wake me from the sweetest sleep
I ever yet enjoyed? My Nouradin
Soft called Amana, bid me rise and walk;
Straight I obeyed, and on he led my steps
To the Elysian fields; or if there be
A place more beautiful, 'twas there -- While he
With converse fond, but chaste, engaged my ear,
And sighed out vows of never ceasing love.
He promised too, that we should part no more,
But smile at tyranny, and death defy.
Oh! 'twas a dear delusion!

Attendant. 'Twas no more --
The Sultan has this moment summoned you
To attend his pleasure in the close pavilion;
Else I had not disturbed your happy slumber.

Amana. The Sultan, said you? What! is he returned!
Did he not promise me a poor two days,
And is this pittance now curtailed to half?
But what is a day, a week, a year, to me,
Whose fate's already fixed, and soul resolved!
Then why should I resent this breach of faith,
Or start at hastening from the griefs I feel,
And speeding to the land of peace and rest?
Retire a while, I shall obey the Sultan.
Attendant retires to the back of the scene. Now, now, Amana, summon all thy
courage --
What means this chilling damp that clings around me!
Why do I tremble thus! my tottering limbs
Why should they now refuse their wonted aid!
A little longer, and I shall not want it;
But pale and cold stretched on my parent earth,
No longer be a burden to myself.
Can love of life have power over the unhappy!
Or shall a wretch who languishes in prison,
Refuse to be set free? The instinctive voice
Perhaps of nature, pleads too strongly here,
And silences the stiller pleas of virtue.
But cannot love inspire my timid sex?
Shall I be led a willing sacrifice
To gratify a mean and gross desire!
O never! Death has lost its terrors now.
This cordial draught shall lead me to his arms,
To peace and Nouradin -- drinks. It Is done, and now,
Fear, hope, and every passion of the soul,
Are all extinct, but love -- That still remains,
And in my latest moments will prevail
In prayers and blessings on my Nouradin.
What strengthening power has braced my sinews thus?
It Is love, it is hope, it is immortality!
Lavinia come -- Attend me to the Sultan.

exeunt. SCENE, The Pavilion. The Stage darkened.
NOURADIN alone. Enter AMANA, and Attendant, the latter retires. Nouradin.
Approach, my fair, nor longer now delay
Thy suppliant monarch's bliss, whose fond impatience
Has urged him to infringe his royal word,
And make a sacrifice to love, transcending far
What he requests from thee. Reduce him not
To win by force, what he would owe to favor --
Believe me the rich bounties of thy love,
Shall not be spent on my sole luxury,
But treasured in my heart, to be repaid
With grateful use, to purchase joys for thee.

Amana. Banish those vicious hopes, and know that I
Nor dread thy power, nor supplicate thy pity.
Thou see no more the weeping, trembling maid,
Who late implored thy grace -- But one who comes
To dare thy rage, and prove its impotence.

Nouradin. Whence comes this boast? What means the frantic fair!


Amana. She means to pour out her whole soul before thee,
Its love, its hate, without disguise or fear;
To curse thee tyrant from her wounded heart,
And breathe forth fervent wishes for thy rival.
May every joy of which thou have deprived him,
Be doubled tenfold by all gracious heaven;
May long and happy days attend him here,
And may we meet again in that blessed place,
Where tyrants never can come, to part us more.

Nouradin. Thy prayers are prophesies, my virtuous bride!
Behold thy fondest wishes are fulfilled,
And underneath this hated garb thou see
The happy Nouradin! O! let me press
Thy constant heart close to his faithful breast.

Amana. Oh!


shrieks, and faints. Nouradin. She faints! the strong surprise has overpowered
Her delicate and agitated frame --
Awake, my love -- My soul's immortal joy
Revive, and bless me with a look, a word!

Amana. Oh Nouradin! fly, fly this hated place --


Nouradin. Come let me bear thee in these longing arms,
Convey thee quick from out these cursed walls,
And give thee back to love and liberty.

Amana. Alas! my bounds are set! I never shall quit
This fatal spot, 'till soul and body part.

Nouradin. Do thou indeed refuse to go with me!
Has bondage then such charms, or has thy tongue
Belied thy heart in feigning generous love,
To enhance thy sacrifice to princely grandeur?

Amana. O! cease to wound me by unkind suspicion!
My heart is wholly thine -- The last sad drops
It ever shall weep, will be fond tears for thee.

Nouradin. Why then, thou angel maid, will thou provoke
Our adverse fate, by this ill-timed delay?

Amana. Alas! I fear to tell what must be known,
For now ten thousand fires rage in my bosom,
Oh Nouradin!

Nouradin. I am on the rack! what mean these strong convulsions!
Speak quickly, my heart's love -- I am all distraction.

Amana. That pang is past; and if my strength will hold,
I Will tell thee the sad tale of woe.

Nouradin. O stay!
Whilst thou have ease let me convey thee hence.

Amana. Alas, my love! it is impossible.
Death riots in my veins.

Nouradin. Death! Said you death!


Amana. Too sure he has possession of my heart,
Thy only rival there! O Nouradin!
He grasps me hard, will thou not struggle with him!

Nouradin. I would contend with the united world,
To save my more than life. But say, O! say,
How came thou thus! I press, yet dread to know.

Amana. When torn from thee, and my unhappy father,
And led a captive to the foul serrail,
I firm resolved to die ever flames impure
Should blast this shrine, hallowed to love, and thee.
A rival sultaness approved my vow,
And whether moved by jealousy or pity,
Supplied the deadly draught which late I drank,
When summoned to attend the tyrant's will,
In this lewd scene of infamy and vice.
Now, now, I feel its baneful influence
Too strong for mortal powers --

Nouradin. O holy prophet!
Exchange my life for here is!

Amana. O Nouradin!
Forgive this fatal rashness -- Had I staid
A few short moments, we had now been blessed;
But wresting from the hand of providence
The means of my escape, we both are wretched.
But love and virtue called, and here resigned,
I fall a sacrifice to heaven, and thee --
Oh!

dies. Nouradin. Speak on, though every word thy lips may utter,
Be daggers here -- Yet O! Speak on, and live!
And art thou silent then! Shall I never hear
Thy tender, tuneful voice once more! Nay then,
No other mournful tale shall ever vex
My wounded ear, or grieve my tortured breast.
Thus, from all future anguish am I free!
My life, my soul shall follow my Amana.

stabs himself, and dies. Enter NARDIC, and FATIMA, with Lights. HAMET and
ABDALLAH, guarded. Nardic. The Sultan's slain -- Secure those hoary traitors --
The rack shall force them to reveal their crimes --
What Is here! Another Osmin dead! and by him
The fair Amana!

Abdallah. O! my unhappy children!


Hamet. Then all is at an end -- Now Nardic, know
I plotted not the Caliph's death; but sought
That maid's release; and in those royal robes
I gained admittance for that injured youth --
How heaven has countermined our honest purpose,
I cannot say; but this I know, that I
Am ready to resign a life, which both
My years, and this world's base ingratitude,
Have now made stale, and absynth to my sense.

Nardic. Convey him to the dungeon, and the wheel.
Do thou know aught of this sad tragedy?
to Fatima.
Fatima. My strong remorse, alas! too plainly shows
I am in part, an actor in this scene;
Though wholly guiltless of the Sultan's death.
How far concerned in this catastrophe,
When the fierce passions which now tear my soul,
Will give me leave, I shall with truth relate.

Abdallah. O! turn your vengeance on this guilty wretch!
It Is I am the cursed source of all these sorrows --
My darling child that now lies dead before you,
Was sacrificed by me -- Curse on this head,
And these gray hairs, which have involved you both,
In guilt like mine.
kneeling over the dead bodies.
Nardic. Thy wretchedness, old man,
Has turned thy brain -- How could thy feeble arm
Have power to bring these dread events to pass?

Abdallah. Not mine indeed, but heaven's avenging hand
Has struck this heavy blow -- The Sultan's vice
Has earned his fate -- For tyranny should bleed!
But these unhappy innocents were doomed
For my foul crimes, my vile apostasy;
For quitting heaven, and native liberty --
Let those who dwell in Albion's happy land,
Grateful acknowledge heaven's most bounteous hand:
Its choicest boon in freedom is bestowed,
And their best praise to its protector owed;
Who not in Britain's cause alone sustains
The toils of council, and of hostile plains:
The world's great champion, born for all mankind,
In whom the oppressed a certain refuge find:
Whose sword, but like the lancet, wounds to heal,
Where moral lenitives can naught avail;
Whose olive bearing laurel peace restores,
And calms the discord of contending powers.

FINIS.

