NON DEFIC^T ALTER
(...)



ALMEYDA, QUEEN OF GRANADA.

A TRAGEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.

BY SOPHIA LEE.

AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, DRURY LANE.

HE CHOSE A MOURNFUL MUSE
SOFT PITY TO INFUSE. --
DRYDEN. DUBLIN: PRINTED BY BRETT SMITH, FOR MESSRS. P. WOGAN, P. BYRNE, C.
BROWN, AND G. FOLINGSBY.

1796.

TO MRS. SIDDONS.
DEAR MADAM,
THE high admiration I ever felt for the superior talents you have so eminently
displayed in ALMEYDA, could alone have induced me to venture a second dramatick
production. To that admiration, a more intimate knowledge of you, has added an
esteem; which is, I flatter myself, reciprocal. Not all the various charms you
dignify the Drama with, can equal those of your sympathizing mind, and
unassuming manners. -- When thus united, they form a character it would be
vanity to praise, though virtue to delight in. With true gratitude,

I remain, DEAR MADAM, Your faithfully devoted Humble servant, SOPHIA LEE.
June 3, 1796.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IT was with no less awe than deference I ventured, in the present day, to
bring a Tragedy before the Public. How great, then, must be my gratitude for
the liberal acceptance it has met, and the tears with which it has been
honored. I must have wanted taste and feeling, not to have been animated, by
the exquisite talents of Mrs. SIDDONS, into an exertion of such as I possess.
That I have been the means of displaying, in a new point of view, her various
powers, is a most flattering recompense.

The story of ALMEYDA is wholly a fiction; and the incident which produces the
catastrophe the only one not my own. -- The deep impression made on me, long
since, by a similar denouement, in an old play of JAMES SHIRLEY's, determined
me to apply it.

The Stage requires a compression and brevity, which seldom improves a play to
the reader: I have, therefore, printed ALMEYDA at length, marking by inverted
commas the parts omitted in representation.

PROLOGUE.
THE Muses long through many a varying age,
With truth and fiction mixed, have graced the stage.
When weeping Constancy devoted stood,
Or patriot Honor sealed his faith with blood,
They bade the deep-toned lyre responsive flow,
Sublimed the suffering, and diffused the woe;
Applauding Greece the numbers loved to hear,
And her stern warriors gave the graceful tear.
At length her venal train Corruption led,
And, with the Virtues linked, the muses fled
Over Albion's happy land they paused awhile,
And shed the favoring influence of their smile.
Her HENRYS, HOTSPURS, trod the martial scene,
And sir'd to heroes whom they found but men.
Bold SHAKESPEARE poured the invigorating strain,
And ROW, and sweeter OTWAY, filled the train.
What if the modern bard no more aspire,
To rival OTWAY's sweetness, Shakespeare's fire;
What if no laurel meed his altar claim,
His censer boast no heav'n-enkindled flame,
Yet if beneath the smould'ring vapor shine
But one faint glimmering of the spark divine,
Ah! gently fan the flame! lest fashion's breath
Over the pale promise send the blast of death;
Nor let the wreath Thalia only wear,
Her sister muse deserves so well to share.
It Is here is the generous feeling to impart,
That mends the morals while it fills the heart:
Here Is are the energies that best inform,
The sighs that animate, and tears that warm.
Within the magic sunshine of her eye,
Truth, Honor, Loyalty, and Valor lie;
All the lord virtues that our sires approved,
And all that Britons boast, or Britons loved --
Th^n against the charm no more your bosom steel,
But own the manly privilege to feel.
^olly, and Vice, may often in smiles appear,
But bashful Virtue veils her in a tear.
The bread, loud laugh, the mirth-inspiring jest,
Humour's wild frolic, and gay fancy's feast,
Like brilliant bubbles sparkle over the mind,
But burst, and leave no radiant gleam behind;
While the bright pencil of the tragic muse,
Her sacred rainbow draws over chilling dews;
And though to air the transient glories run,
They give the promise of a golden sun!

The PROLOGUE and EPILOGUE were written by Miss HARRIET LEE.
CHARACTERS.
Ramirez, King of Castile Mr. AICKIN. Abdallah, Regent of Granada Mr. PALMER.
Alonzo, son of Ramirez Mr. KEMBLE. Orasmyn, son of Abdallah, and General of the
Moors Mr. WROUGHTON. Hamet, Captain of the Moorish Guard Mr. C. KEMBLE.
Nourassin, a Lord of the Council Mr. CAULFIELD. Officers, Guards, etc.
Almeyda, Queen of Granada Mrs. SIDDONS. Victoria, Princess of Castile Mrs.
POWEL. Abra, sister to Hamet, and attending on the Queen Miss HEARD.
Scene -- A Moorish Castle on a bold rock which overhangs the Guadalquiver.

Time from the dawning of one morning to the dawning of the next.

ALMEYDA: A TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Hall in the Castle, of Moorish architecture, with window^ of painted glass,
in the recesses of the arches low sofas are placed with cushions piled, on one
of these VICTORIA slumbers, while RAMIREZ walks in the Hall making notes in his
tablets; bright fleecy clouds rise behind the painted glass representing the
dawn of day. RAMIREZ. REMOVE those lights -- the day once more returns,
And nature springs into renewed existence!
Collects the fragrance breathing over her bosom,
And offers up the incense to the morn!
Slow over the mazes of the Guadalquiver
Curl the soft mists, that quicken every odor.
-- All animated beings gladly rise
To their diurnal task. -- Man, only man,
That froward favorite of indulgent heaven,
Drops from his weary eye the ungrateful tear,
To blight the coming blessing! -- dear Victoria!
Thy watching has o'erpower'd thee! -- soft, my child,
Like this, be all thy slumbers!

Victoria. Have I slept?
I pray you pardon the unconscious fault
And bless to me the morn. half kneeling.

Ramirez. May each to come
Breathe only peace upon thee; and restore
Those roses with ring on the shrine of friendship!

Victoria. Alas! my father, bless too my Almeyda!
That so^itary sovereign! born to weep
The greatness thousands covet! through the night,
Sleepless, and tearful, she has still entreated
That I would win you ever to retain her.
A Moor in name alone, Granada's throne
Charms not her heart -- possessed, and alienate.

Ramirez. I cannot choose but blame even thee, my child,
If thou have sought to win her from her duty.

Victoria. Nay, rather blame the parents who resigned her.

Ramirez. Forbear these rash conclusions -- Monarchs often
I ^ust sacrifice each feeling to their duty.

Victoria. Alas! that aught should break the tie of nature!
The ductile heart, as reason dawns, still takes
A soft impression of the nearest object --
Thus did Almeyda's -- yet an infant hostage,
She waked to knowledge on a foe's kind bosom.
Her lips first falter'd our Castilian tongue,
And, with becoming gratitude she found
In those who fondly trained her up to honor,
Each dear, each sacred tie, of love, and nature:
Nor did she mourn her sires, or brother's death,
As she does now to leave us.

Ramirez. Nor have I,
My daughter, ill-deserv'd this generous fondness,
Since with my children she has shared my heart,
-- No, though to death I hate the Moorish race,
Vindictive, and insatiate -- though my sword
Even yet could flame amid my country's foes
With energy unbroken, never knew I
To view a tender babe with abhorrence.
-- Ah! sweet Almeyda! in this very hall
Thy cries, unconscious of thy fate, assailed
A heart alive to nature and humanity!
When with the error of soft innocence
Thy little arms clung round thy father's foe.

Victoria. Was this the castle, where Almanzor chose
To lodge his queen for safety?

Ramirez. Ay -- and wife
Had proved his choice, if Heaven their arms had prosper'd.
-- Thou see -- it is solid as the rock that bears it;
Its proud towers shadow our Castilian plains,
Though severed from them by the Guadalquiver.
-- They since have awed their owner. -- For that day
Heaven blessed the holy valor it inspired!
That memorable day gave to our arms,
An host almost unnumber'd, but by slain.
-- Flushed with our conquest, we assailed this castle,
Which the intimidated queen threw open,
And as an hostage gave us up her daughter.

Victoria. Oh! mother ill-deserving my Almeyda!

Ramirez. Erroneous youth still takes the first impression,
Nor looks beyond the surface! Be more wise;
Learn to pierce through the veil of policy,
Undazzled by its colors. -- So thy friend
Shall better meet the future.

Victoria. I attend,
With reverence so profound, each other sense
Is lost in hearing --

Ramirez. Know the queen thy censure
Condemns unheard, should rather claim thy pity.
Matched to a monarch weak, vain, cold of heart,
Yet restless though inactive -- her short life
Passed in disquiet; from the hour that called her.
Almanzor's crafty brother gained the power,
And in the king's name sheltered every baseness.
Two rising princes scorned their uncle's sway,
Alas! perhaps too boldly! -- heaven alone
Can judge the malady that nipp'd their bloom.
-- Certain it is, Abdallah never offered
A due equiv'lent for our royal hostage
Until she heir'd Granada.

Victoria. Sweet Almeyda!
Is this the savage trusted with thy welfare?
-- Thou too, perhaps, art doomed by his ambition.

Ramirez. Not so my daughter. -- Politicians ever
Present a puppet to the public eye,
While they, unseen, delight to guide its motions.
-- Almeyda thus is needful to her uncle,
Who hopes to find in her a weak, vain woman.

Victoria. Heaven, for his punishment, then formed an angel!
-- Who, like Almeyda ever knew to blend
The eccentric, noble wildness of the Moor,
With every polished grace of our Castile?

Ramirez. She is too frank, incautious, and ungoverned.
More rude than cataracts her passions rage.

Victoria. Yet still like those, profusely pour upon us
Rich ore, for ever else beyond our reach!

Ramirez. She must conceal those passions to be great,
Subdue them to be happy. In the mind
All sov'reignty begins, and ends. -- Who rules
Impartially the frailties of his nature
Rises almost beyond it, and extends,
Far as his name is known, a willing empire.
Teach thy fair friend, my child, this useful lesson,
And next thy brother --

Victoria. Ah! alike he needs it!
-- I dread the wild concussion of his passions,
When he shall learn you choose the very hour,
In which he bravely fights his country's battles,
To yield the fair, who gives his life a value.

Ramirez. I therefore choose it. Well I know, his temper
Is, like Almeyda's own, warm and ungoverned.
Misjudging boy! to fix thy idle heart
On her, forever placed beyond thy reach!
Why saw I not, in childhood, this fond love,
Which, like a blight, clings to my life's best blossom?
-- Yet could my son ere hope to wed Almeyda?

Victoria. Alas, my father, when their love commenced,
Almeyda had two brothers; and my mother
Still fondly fancied, by this union, peace
Might one day bless the long contesting nations.

Ramirez. Romantic dream of youth, and idle passion!
What power can reconcile the cross and crescent?

Victoria. Frown not, my father, if I further add,
Endeared to christian laws, and christian manners,
Almeyda were to both an easy convert.

RAMIREZ (sternly.) Victoria, if thou would atone thy fault
In cherishing this weakness, join to soothe
Thy brother's disappointment -- Tell Alonzo,
My love for him -- my justice -- nay, my prudence
Constrain me to resign his heart's sole object.
-- Knows he not hardly we maintain our ground
Against these treacherous neighbors, and must still,
Whatever the sacrifice, defend our country?
-- No news from Murcia yet? -- Oh! how I long
To hear the issue of the impending battle!
-- The rising sun gleams on the Moorish helms,
And gives a trembling luster to yon fields!
-- The appointed moment comes to sign the treaty.
I see Almeyda too, but dare not meet her;
Far be it from me to offend her feelings,
Or sacrifice my own -- bid her adieu!
Exit Ramirez.
ALMEYDA (entering on the other side.) During this trying interval, Victoria,
I had prepared myself to meet the King,
And now with breathless fear impatient sought him.
Ah, wherefore flies he then? Still he relents not?
-- Thou, or I greatly err, have sued in vain --
Have sued a Sovereign might remain in bonds,
And yield dominion for implicit duty
-- Well then I bow disdainful to my fate --
Yet have a care, Ramirez, thy proud heart
May one day feel the pang that pierces mine.

Victoria. What means my dear Almeyda?

Almeyda. Ah! Alonzo!
Thou will not thus resign -- thou will not scorn me,
-- Amid the rage of arms -- the din of battle
Almeyda's sighs shall still be heard, still felt,
And counteract all policy -- alas!
(...) may err, and even Alonzo
May bid the eagle glory chase the dove,
And see the victim flutter to the ground.
-- Alonzo leads the war, and quite forgets me!

Victoria. Gentle Almeyda -- govern these wild transports,
Which ever warp your judgment --

Almeyda. Do not hope it --
Nor venture to decide a lover's conduct --
(...) tranquil blood flows equal through thy veins,
Like the clear riv'let through the grassy vale,
While mine, impetuous as the bounding billows,
Swells to my heart, thence rapidly returns
And in the tumult swallows up wrecked reason!
-- Had thou, like me, been bosomed among strangers,
And given thy soul in recompense for love,
When found thyself torn from this happy home,
To waste a gaudy life in cold indifference,
Like mine thy aching sense would swell to anguish,
Like mine in tears would drown thee.

Victoria. Yet believe
Alonzo's love unblemished as his honor,
And rather praise than blame his sense of duty.

Almeyda. Why will thou shame my cheek? -- Alas! Victoria,
Had I rememb'red mine, never had I shed
These burning drops -- even at this awful hour
When from the grave my ancestors demand me,
To all the pride, and power of purple empire,
My heart flies back to hover near my love,
And envies every slave, who daily sees him.

Victoria. This is alike erroneous -- darling friend,
With steadier eye survey the past and future --
So shall your mind extract repose from reason.

Almeyda. Away with ^eason! melancholy hermit!
Who idle eyes the storm, then, vainly active,
Collects, and treasures, every wreck of passion!
-- I shall have hopeless years enough for reason,
And give this hour to love. -- Oh! say Victoria,
-- And yet I dread to hear -- is the King fixed
To ratify the peace?

Victoria. He has no choice --
The rights of nations and his country's welfare,
Oblige him to restore you. --

Almeyda. Rather say,
He has no heart -- nor feels for my affliction --
-- Ah! if the rights of nations were his rule,
Why did he subjugate a Monarch's daughter?
Why win her easy heart by gracious treatment?
Until secure of silent, anxious, duty,
He gave the Moors a Queen -- himself a slave. --

Victoria. Wherefore reproach my father with his virtues?
He conquered for his country -- that loved cause
Induced him first to keep, and now to yield you.
-- Rather admire the impartiality
Which ranked you with his children in his heart.
-- Perhaps even deeper motives swayed his conduct;
-- Perhaps he stood between you and an uncle,
Who views with jealous eyes your right of empire.

Almeyda. Nay, now Ramirez speaks from prejudice.
Whom should I trust if not my father's brother?

Victoria. In Heaven, and your integrity; but never
In this vindictive, subtle, savage Moor.
-- Without he is as specious as the mountain,
Whose rich fertility delights each gazer,
But, oh! volcanos rage within! and gathering
Each noisome vapor of the o'ercharg'd earth,
Forth unsuspected bursts the flaming deluge,
Felt soon as seen -- even to annihilation!

Almeyda. Alas! and is it thus? To such a wretch
Must I be rendered up, in ignorance,
To learn the science of hypocrisy --
With worldly art to arrange each little sentence,
And preconcert each action? -- Never more
Shall I enjoy the sweets of confidence,
Or find in love a pleasure. -- Never more
Shall thy harmonious voice, Alonzo, charm me;
Or thine, dear rigid friend, reproving, soothe.

VICTORIA -- (taking her hand.) Yet shall the vows that bound our youthful
hearts
Remain inviolate.

Almeyda. And shall Alonzo's?
Ah, no! for nature here makes a distinction;
Forms man's large heart for many a various duty,
And blends his passion into a republic --
While woman, born for love and softness only,
Delights to feel love's absolute dominion!
-- Then tell thy brother -- Confused shouts heard.

Victoria. Look up, dear Almeyda!
Revive, and speak thy purpose.

ALMEYDA -- (leaning on her and fluttered.) Tell thy brother,
Almeyda will not bind him by one vow;
Nor claim one sacrifice. -- Pleased to have loved,
Pleased to have been beloved -- to that remembrance
She consecrates each future throb of passion;
And if she dares imagine yet a joy,
'Twould be to know him blessed, she might have made so.

Victoria. My father comes. -- Oh! now, my best Almeyda!
Now be yourself, and dignify the moment.

ALMEYDA (faintly.) It Is not in dying we must show our courage;
Ah, no! it is in the fearful preparation --
Enter RAMIREZ, attended. Health to my benefactor! glorious title,
More dear than that of father! -- He but gives
A vulgar being, while the man who rears
Our virtues to existence, is next Heaven,
The worshipped of our reason.

Ramirez. Rise, Almeyda
Queen of Granada, rise! we gladly hail thee.
Thy kinsman comes to invest thee with dominion,
And give thee to an eager nation's eyes. --
I glory, thus accomplished, to return thee.

Almeyda. Ah! reconcile me to my fate by coldness.
-- Know all the danger of this tender flattery!

Ramirez. In the poor word adieu, I sum each wish
Affection ever formed, in blessing virtue.
Farewell, at once -- I yield thee to thy duty!
-- Call into action every latent power,
Reign over thyself -- so shall thou bless thy people.

ALMEYDA -- (flying toward them). Tear out this heart! but do not, do not quit
me!
Oh! do not snap at once each link in life,
And leave me solitary in creation!

Ramirez. Afflict us not with such a vain request.
Even now our troops evacuate the castle,
And thine assume each post. -- Abdallah waits
To pass one gate until I quit the other.
-- Farewell, Almeyda! grace thy glorious fortune.

ALMEYDA sinks under the regal Canopy, in tears. -- The Moorish Music sounds,
and a long train entering do her homage, and arrange on each side; last comes
ABDALLAH, with the Diadem borne before him. ABDALLAH -- (doing homage). Fair
daughter of Almanzor! thus his brother
Hails thy return to freedom and dominion --
Thus tenders thee thy rich inheritance!
And thus, the formal task of duty ended,
Clasps thee with kindred, sympathising love:
Bids those bright eyes shake off the lucid drops,
And beam with all their own unequalled luster.

Almeyda. Alas! already he begins to flatter. aside.
-- I were not worthy of your tendered love,
My princely uncle, could I thus forget
At once the friends who reared me --

ABDALLAH -- (with a fierce irony). Friends do you call them?
You are too young thus nicely to distinguish.
Give not the crafty foe such undue honor.
Call those, indeed, your friends, who now surround you;
Call the fierce soldiers too your friends, who spread
In proud array over yonder pleasant plain; --
Nor think him less your friend, whose policy
Fomented the rebellion, which obliged
Ramirez to restore you

Almeyda. Oh! my heart!
Alonzo's absence then I owe to you! -- aside.
Noble Abdallah! be but gentle with me,
And I will meekly bear even reprehension.
-- All are my friends, who only wish to serve me;
Yet, let me add, I hardly owe those more
Who give my crown, than he who formed me for it.

Abdallah. Curse on his polished arts! they have made thee subtle;
And I must deeply probe thy nature's weakness,
Ere yet thou charm'st each hearer. -- (aside.) Fair Almeyda!
Emancipate thy soul from this fond bondage:
Live to Granada, and forget Castile!
-- No more repeat, with cherished latent love,
Names we were born to hate; but seek to win,
By partial kindness, those, who ever dread
The empire of a woman.

Almeyda. Have I empire?
Ah! no; for in the hour that ought to give it,
I first experience bondage. Stay, Ramirez,
King of Castile! Oh! hear me, and return!
Again receive -- protect me! Bind these hands,
But give my heart its freedom! Dear Victoria
Fix not thy tearful eyes upon these walls,
Lest I renounce all duties, and all ties,
To dwell with thee and friendship! Noble lords,
Pardon, I pray, frank nature's ebullition,
And see even virtue in the eager transport.
-- The love, I thus avow, was fairly won,
By equal love, and ever-lib'ral treatment.
Be like Castile indulgent, and this heart
Alike will glow with gratitude to you;
Will proudly cherish every regal virtue,
Shut out regret for all which it resigns,
Nor own, even to itself, it wants a joy,
While yet a duty claims it.

Abdallah. This is reason --
There spoke the royal heiress of Almanzor,
And no Castilian slave.

Almeyda. Still must I struggle -- aside.

Abdallah. Why do those beauteous eyes still seek the ground?
Oh! raise them, and survey the golden future.
Thou know not yet the pleasures of dominion!
-- Be willing to be happy, and each means,
Indulgent Heaven, in plenitude of power,
Ever gave humanity, is thine -- For thee,
Rich nature crowns this land with varying beauty;
And laboring art here fixes his perfection.
The sea wafts hither every foreign treasure,
And pale-eyed science waits to tell their value.
-- For thee, the poet's light hand sweeps the lyre,
With melody unequalled. Happy thousands
But wait to view thee, and to want a wish;
While those inured to misery, in thy coming,
Find an uncertain hope that soothes each pain.
-- Oh! new to life; accept, enjoy its blessings!
Come forth, and he adored! My son awaits thee:
Thy father's vet'rans, under his command,
Impatiently require their blooming queen.

ALMEYDA. -- (giving him her hand.) Conduct me wheresoe'er my duty calls.
And, oh! may no unbidden pang intrude,
To dim with tears these gildings of my fortune!

Exeunt, the Music sounding, ACT II.
SCENE. I. A COURT IN THE CASTLE.
Enter ABDALLAH and ORASMYN. ABDALLAH. WHEN will thou learn, my son, to guard
thy heart,
Which speaks but too expressively by glances?
-- I would not wish the council to discern
They but propose our pleasure. --

Orasmyn. Pray you, pardon,
If ardent nature stifles feebler reason.
-- Could I behold Almeyda, and restrain
This glow of transport, never could I deserve
The bliss our prophet promises the faithful.
-- No, not himself* though Heaven inspired, ere fancied
So exquisite a beauty! Yet that charm,
Nature's prime gift to woman, in Almeyda.
Is lost -- absorpt in mind! --

Abdallah. Check not thy transport;
For though to others I would have thee silent,
To me be wholly frank; and thus reward me
For all my anxious, fond solicitude,
Through many a long, long year. I own, I feared
That haughtiness, ill-suited to her years,
Would strike thee with displeasure.

Orasmyn. Call not thus
The sacred consciousness that waits on beauty,
And awes the wishes it awakes! I ever
Disdained our narrow laws, which make the sex
Domestic, artificial beings merely. --
-- No! it is a character refined, decided,
That greatly charms the soul, and charms for ever!
-- Why knew I not before she was unequalled?

ABDALLAH -- (smiling scarcastically). Perchance even now I know it not; yet
hear
These youthful flights well pleased: for thus each lover
Adorns his fancy's choice.

Orasmyn. But who can boast
A choice like mine? Nor did even I suspect,
Indulgent Heaven in prodigality,
Had centered all perfections in one woman. --
I came prepared by rigid rules to judge her --
Her before whom all rules, all modes, must vanish!
-- For, oh! when first my eyes beheld the queen,
My heart avowed her empire ere my tongue.
I wondering gazed! and, gazing more, more wondered!
Ethereal loveliness informs her frame,
And beams in living glory from her eyes!
Yet over these charms sublime, meek modesty
Draws a transparent veil of wandering graces,
As fleecy clouds flit over the noon day sun,
And leave us opportunity to gaze,
Upon an orb too bright else for beholding!

Abdallah. I could grow once again a boy to hear thee --
Graces I could perceive -- not perfect beauty --

Orasmyn. Beauty's an indeterminate idea
Till fixed by love -- whose ever-pow'rful magic
Awakens a new being -- love, when heaven
Leaves to the vulgar sense its work imperfect,
Illumes our sight to trace the angel there.
-- Through love we share our Maker's great prerogative,
Creating every charm, and then approving!
-- Yet when she spoke, I half forgot her beauty --
Oh! with what melting harmony she won,
The very air to silence; no rude breath
Dared blend with here is, but nature's self stood hushed
Awe-struck, even as Orasmyn --

Abdallah. Be warned in time
Against a reverence so profound; for women
(Capricious still and wayward) often scorn
Who grasps with trembling hand the fancied setter;
While with distinguishing regard, they view
The bolder man, who wears it as an ornament.

ORASMYN (disdainfully) How should this general censure touch Almeyda?

Abdallah. Nay then thou love indeed if thou have found
Already she is peerless -- I have done --
Even win her thy own way; but win her quickly.
To match thee with Almeyda, and exalt thee
To empire in her right, has been I own
The object of my life -- nor should I think
That life itself too dear to crown my purpose.
-- In the bold outline of my policy,
I heeded not, it is true, the glowing colors
Fond fancy gives her favorites -- yet those tints
Complete life's picture well -- to see thee great
Was all I asked but to behold thee happy
Leaves me without a wish!

Orasmyn. Still in this,
As in each incident of various life,
I owe much to my father! yet for once
This heart asserts a right to guide itself --
Nor would obtrude too early on Almeyda,
passion she might doubt. --

Abdallah. Again thou err'st --
But could thou win my judgment to approve
This idle scruple, it were now too late. --
The Council know my thoughts, and have ere this
Proposed thee to the Queen.

Orasmyn. Presumptuous! -- rash! --

Abdallah. Judicious rather! -- see thou not the prudence
To bind her to compliance, ever she knows
The power, the pride, the pleasure of dominion?

Orasmyn. But what can bind the heart, save its own choice?
I would have wooed her with watchful eyes,
Such unremitting tender, prompt, affection,
As might have won her of herself, and crowned
The future days of both with happiness.
-- Oh! never let ambition tie the knot,
Pure love alone can hallow!

Abdallah. Would 'twere tied,
Though all this wooing followed -- son, I tell thee,
Essential is the difference of her state,
Immured within this castle, where I reign --
While thou without maintain'st a like control,
And an obsequious council speak our will,
To the elation of unbounded power,
The sweets of flattery, and the charm of fondness,
The glowing grace of popularity! --
Almeyda wants not shrewdness soon to learn,
If she would see Granada, she must wed thee.

ORASMYN (turning sorrwfully from him.) More changeable than are the vernal
clouds,
Which borrow heaven's own hues one hour to charm us,
And ever the next burst in a gloomy deluge,
Is the fond happiness a lover fancies!
-- Oh, I do fear me, mine is gone already!
Did she not bear an elevated mind,
She might unconscious share a common fate
And so perhaps might I -- content to lose
Our lives in apathy, and call it duty.
-- But well Almeyda knows the rights of sex,
Of rank, and all the heart's refined distinctions,
Nor did she meet in mine one uncongenial.
-- Pardon, my Lord, those vain regrets -- I Will quell them,
And once more wait thee. Exit.

Abdallah. It is ever so,
Still in fruition are our wishes punished.
-- Orasmyn, I would have thee wed thy cousin,
But why this adoration? -- when I see her,
The spirits of the dead arise before me,
And wither all my projects, all my powers!
-- Wherefore should man invent a hell hereafter?
Alas! guilt makes one here! and he who sins,
Though never mortal eye, or voice reprove him,
Finds in his bosom every fiend that peoples
The dark profound -- in her I see her brothers --
Yet must she be Orasmyn's bride, or -- nothing. Exit.

SCENE II. THE APARTMENT OF THE QUEEN.
Enter ALMEYDA followed by ABRA. Almeyda. "Are these the charms of empire? Have
we "power
"To give that happiness, we never must know?
" -- The meanest slave attending on our person,
"Makes her heart's free election, and adorns
"With life's first charm a poor, and vulgar home!
" -- While rank, that splendid misery to woman,
"Enchains us to the car of victor man;
"And bartered now by policy, now honor,
"We buy an enemy, or we fix a friend!"
-- Marry Orasmyn -- no ambitious uncle;
Nor he, nor thou, shall thus control my will,
Nor even your instrument the servile council.
-- I was devoted thus -- allotted -- wedded --
Given, like the mere encumbrance of my crown,
^'er yet I wore it -- tell me gentle maid,
(For all can tell me of my wayward fate
More than I know myself) was I not given,
Long since to this young Prince?

Abra. Gracious lady,
So much your people tender Prince Orasmyn,
They much desire the union --

Almeyda. Then Orasmyn,
And his more crafty father, have seduced
My people from their duty. --

Abra. Dare I add,
Since youth's fair promise ripened into manhood,
Orasmyn still has risen in fame, in virtue!
Your friends all love -- your enemies all fear him.

ALMEYDA (sighing,) And so ever long may I --

Abra. Oh! do not wrong him! --
Never has the Prince disgraced your own great lineage
By one invidious, sordid, selfish, action.
He feels a brave contempt of mortal praise,
Even with a mighty avarice of desert --
To him the faulty fly, secure to find
The indulgence he requires not -- while the wretched
Freely demand his pity and protection --
-- His gitfs forerun his promise.

ALMEYDA (disdainfully). Well thou speak it!

" Abra. Believe me, madam, when you better know "him,
"I shall be but your echo. In my eyes,
"(And can I give the prince a nobler praise?)
"In character as features he is like you.

" Almeyda. Indeed, I own, I see not the resemblance,
"And, but for vanity, should call thee partial.

Abra. Yet am I merely just -- Though were I more,
In me it would be gratitude. My brother
Owes to Orasmyn a distinguished fortune --

Almeyda. He meanly, therefore, placed thee near our person,
A busy advocate. -- Retire, and leave me, Exit Abra.
I am environed by such sycophants --
And unobserved can scarcely breathe a sigh!
Thinks he by little arts like these to win me?
-- No! were my heart not wholly thine, Alonzo,
The aspiring, selfish lover, never should gain it.
-- Yet much I dread Abdallah. On his brow
Lives a black penetration, which deep-pierces
Through virtue's thin and variable complexion,
Extracting often, in blushes, the soul's meaning.
-- Ah, wherefore breaks he on me?

Enter ABDALLAH. Abdallah. Sweet Almeyda!
Swift are the feet of those who bear glad tidings.
Already has the council's wise proposal,
-- Already has thy gracious silence reached me. --
-- Blessed beyond fathers, in a son, it is thou,
Thou only, who can bless me with a daughter!

Almeyda. Silence, my lord, implies not a decision. --
^^rn in affliction, and in slavery nurtured --
The world, and all its ways, to me unknown,
I must have time to learn the needful science.

Abdallah. Thou shall escape the deep, laborious study;
Enjoy the sweets of life, with care unmixed;
Become at once the idol of Orasmyn,
And of a joyful people!

Almeyda. I want fancy,
To tinge the picture with so rich a color.
-- Raised on a sudden to a fearful height,
I view, uncertain which to choose, the paths
That wind around me in the world's vast maze.

Abdallah. Orasmyn's hand will guide -- his heart sustain thee.
" -- Would I were not his sire! for then, Almeyda,
"I might unblushing dwell upon his merits;
"Number the virtues, that from rea^on's dawn,
"Found in his heart their home, while, true to glory,
"He, with unequalled fame, has fought -- has conquered"!

Almeyda. -- Orasmyn's merits, time, my lord, will teach me. --
Seek not at once to snatch me from myself.
-- Were I to wed, while hardly yet enfranchised,
'Twould mark a latent weakness in my nature,
Or a determined selfishness in thine.

Abdallah. Ay; were thy spouse ignoble -- unbelov'd.
But with my son, dishonor never was named!
He was thy father's choice -- his eye's last object.
When life receded fast, he called Orasmyn;
Then, with parental fondness, wrung his hand,
And charged him to entender his Almeyda. --
-- Me he conjured to see his will obeyed,
And guard you both. --

Almeyda. Alas! so well to guard us!
As may complete thy will no less than his. aside.
Kings can give crowns, my lord, and sires commands,
Yet nature sometimes gives the heart a power
To rest self-poiz'd, even as the globe we tread on,
Dependant on no breath but our Creator's.

ABDALLAH -- (fiercely). "Yet man incensed, on this wide globe can spread
"A ruin nature shrinks from; stain her blooms
"With human blood, and load the vernal gales
"With groans but mocked by winter's rudest howlings.
"Nay, start not, princess! it is thyself has taught me
"To threat by implication.

Almeyda. "Savage tyrant!
"Victoria! oh, Victoria! well thou spok'st him. aside.

Abdallah. But see, thy lover! And at his approach
My swelling heart overflows with tenderness!
How could I cherish, worship, love Almeyda,
Would she but deign alike to bend her nature!

ORASMYN -- (entering, kneels). Say, will my sovereign pardon, if I press
Unlicens'd on her leisure; break through forms
Cold hearts imposed, to level with themselves
More generous natures, thus again to tender
A homage circles never knew to pay --
A vow imprinted here?

Almeyda. Orasmyn, rise!
The pageant's over; and this devotion, mock'ry.

Orasmyn. If to behold Almeyda, and adore her;
To see in fancy's eye the world created,
And, in herself, the first, the only woman;
In each new glance to find a nameless charm,
And in each sigh to breathe a new infection:
If this offend, ah, who shall gain her favor?

Almeyda. A flame at once so prudent and so sudden
Confided to the council, ere its object,
May well surprise --

Orasmyn. Forgive the interruption --
And know, Almeyda! hardly would thou scorn
Such intervention, more than would Orasmyn.
-- Yet, by thy own pure nature, deign to judge
Of his before thee! sanction but his service;
Allow him time to win upon thy favor,
And, by the holy warmth that prompts the vow,
Thy will shall guide him!

Almeyda. Wherefore trust to time?
This moment stamps the passion and its motive.
-- I would like you be guarded, prudent, selfish;
Preserve a silence might ensure my safety,
And rest upon the future -- But my soul
Disdains the mean, the temporising wisdom,
Nor knows to tremble in the cause of truth.
-- Vie with me, princes, in sincerity!
Hence with inflated phrase! and plainly say,
It is my diadem, not me, you woo.

Abdallah. Were that Orasmyn's object, he might
wear it.
Who shall oppose his will? A feeble woman!
Of little estimation in society,
And less in empire --

Orasmyn. Spare me, Sir! oh! spare me
The deep disgrace of this ungoverned passion!

Almeyda. Even in his insolence I praise his candor;
And most despise who makes the most professions.

to Orasmyn. Abdallah. Yet, hear me, princess! nor incense a nature
That deigns once more to struggle with its fierceness.
"His only fault, Orasmyn owes to thee:
"A fond, a foolish passion, chills his powers,
"And leaves him but the semblance of himself.
"Had he thus trembled in the battle's front,
"Applauding nations never had thronged to see him,
"Nor had thou worn the crown thou vaunt'st so bravely!
-- Droop not, my son, beneath a woman's frown.
Tomorrow, and perhaps the fair one sues!
Such is their weak, their fluctuating natures.
Even now this proud one shrinks! Upon her cheek
The rose of youth is blanched. Princess! farewell;
Remember, I or hate, or love, with ardour!
It Is yet within thy power to fix the feeling. Exit.

Almeyda. Alas! what power can change it? Lost Almeyda!

ORASMYN (irresolutely) How shall a heart ill-understood, abhorred,
Win on thy confidence, or guide thy councils?
By heaven! I melt in womanish lamentings,
Thus innocently to excite thy hatred!
Yet, hear me! be advised; disguise thy feelings.
Thy safety rests in quitting this lone fortress!
And every hour thou stay'st in it, distracts me.

Almeyda. Who shall endue thee with the grace of truth,
Or give me faith to trust thee? Well I see,
One is to terrify, and one to soothe me!
" -- Though had indulgent nature crowned thy youth
"With every charm and virtue given to man,
"Yet left thee still the son of fierce Abdallah,
"Even though the earth I stand on yawn'd a grave,
"That grave should be my choice rather than thee!
-- Have I for this renounced each tender tie,
Of bleeding love, and ever faithful friendship?
-- Not thus Alonzo wooed -- Victoria won me!
No sighs, no tears, no honors, no despair!
No threat of misery, no dread of bondage,
No sound of death ever mingled with his passion!
-- His polished heart felt and inspired a love,
Which, far outswelling this world's narrow bound,
Both may delight to bear into a better!

Orasmyn. The unwary flight expounds a mystery
My shallow sense o'erlook'd. Oh! well I see
Why thou would not do justice to Orasmyn.
-- Yet, oh! I pity, far more than I blame thee!
Hide from all eyes, but chiefly from my father's,
The unsanction'd prepossession! Ruin -- murder,
A thousand ills, I will not shock thy sense with,
Lurk in the thought of love, and of Alonzo!
-- Born to adore, to follow, to protect thee!
Think not Orasmyn will desert himself,
To force a heart upon thee! -- Oh, farewell!
I cannot coin in words my soul's soft meaning! Exit.

Almeyda. There is a glowing grandeur in this prince,
Worthy a better sire! But, oh, Alonzo!
Never shall thou know the shadow of a rival,
Even though alone I breast the beating storm,
And fall the single object of its rage!

ACT III.
SCENE I. A COURT IN THE CASTLE.
Enter ABDALLAH, followed by an officer. ABDALLAH. COMMAND a council? without
my concurrence
Already dares she queen it? Haste! and say
You found me indisposed; and wave the meeting.
-- While to the lords you urge -- not my excuse,
But frame one from Almeyda. --
Should thou suggest an intellectual wandering,
Which makes her say and unsay, it were apt.
Thou art discerning, and do understand me --
She is too young to follow her own guidance,
While that of others wrings her! Exit Officer.
Have I waded
Through many an artifice, and many an horror,
Seen time and circumstance mature my views,
To let a haughty, foolish woman, cross me?
-- Hah! -- might I not improve my own suggestion,
And work her high-wrought passions into phrenzy?

Enter HAMET. Hamet. My Lord, even now, a young Castilian presses
Importunately to address the queen --
I heeded well your wish, and studious sought
To learn his embassy; but, or prepared,
By those who sent him, or his own discretion,
He foiled my skill.

Abdallah. Thou win'st for life my favor --
Search, and some curious billet, love-inscrib'd
Will tell the mighty secret. --

Hamet. Naught is found,
Above his own degree -- nor arms, nor letters --
Save but a ring; which he at first delivered;
The guard incautious sent it to the Queen,
Who wills to see him.

Abdallah. Ah! there is more in this! --
Careful conceal that I have been informed,
And lead Almeyda to the hall of audience.
There, through the secret lattice, I may hear,
A tale of import -- be thyself at hand --
-- Now, now, Orasmyn, comes thy fortune's crisis.

Exeunt severally. SCENE II. THE HALL OF AUDIENCE.
Enter ALMEYDA, gazing on a ring. Almeyda. Oh! fond memorial of delightful days,
For ever vanished! in this little mirror
A thousand fairy visions pass along,
Of love, and bliss! -- upon Alonzo's hand,
Mine playful fixed thee! -- ah! why art thou here?
-- Come thou the pledge of safety and of triumph,
Or the cold legacy of parting nature?
-- Oh! still beloved though in the grave I seek thee,
Thus I accept thy gift! -- a bridal token! --
Attends the messenger?

ALONZO (entering disguised.) He waits thy pleasure. --

ALMEYDA (starting.) Support me heaven! for ah! that voice should claim,
Long, long, acquaintance with this beating heart!
" -- But the charmed sense in many a various visage,
"Traces a likeness to the one adored,
"And hears in every voice the darling sound!"

Alonzo. Almeyda!

ALMEYDA -- (fainting.) Oh grief! -- Oh agony! -- oh nameless horror!

Alonzo. Lift up thine eyes, my soul! and, like Alonzo,
From this embrace derive a new existence!

ALMEYDA (springing from him in terror.) "How come thou here? What evil
genius led thee
"To cross yon fatal river?"

Alonzo. "He who led
"Leander, through the deep in midnight horror,
" -- But in his welcome, be forgot his danger" --

Almeyda. "Ah! thine is yet unknown" -- fly, haste, oh leave me!
Where waits thy train?

Alonzo. Amid the slaughtered Murcians.
Pride, pomp, and glory, yield to my Almeyda!
In vain would time, or distance, wrest her from me,
She, she alone can shield me in the war,
Or nerve my arm at the fierce battle's onset.
-- I knew untold her danger -- knew her fate
Required a desperate conquest! that achieved,
I breathed not till I should overtake my father!
-- Judge of my feelings when I crossed his train,
Retiring from this castle -- duty -- honor
Renown itself gave way to love, and thee --
-- I left my officers the pleasing task
T^ announce my triumph; and in mean disguise
Unaided and alone, thus reached thy presence.
-- Ah wherefore reached it? Since thine eye repels me?
No more the fond companion to my childhood,
No more the worshipped idol of my youth!
Queen of Granada, now thou stand'st before me!

Almeyda. Oh, hours! oh, days! which never must return
When thus thy accents charmed me! -- my Alonzo,
Thou think thou see me on my father's throne,
Whole nations smiling when I deign to smile,
Or at my frown dismayed -- how would thou feel
If this bright vision vanished -- if these halls,
O'er-arch'd with gilded roofs, and gaudy sculpture,
Presented only an imperial prison?
"How, if the radiant ensigns of dominion,
"Shrunk into chains? -- Alas! more truly such,
"Than ever I wore when in thy father's palace!"
-- Here in Granada -- mid my royal kindred,
By councils flattered, and an army hailed!
Almeyda, is a solitary wretch,
No being sympathizes with save you --
You, only you, of all the vast creation!

Alonzo. Whom can thou fear, my love, when I am near thee?

Almeyda. Heavens think thou for myself, I feel this pang?
For thee, for thee, alone, my nature shudders!
"Life has no charm but what your presence gives it,
"Nor death a fear but that your danger causes!"
-- And, ah! that danger fearfully appalls me!
Cold chills even at this moment counteract,
The joy, the tender joy, I take to see thee!

Alonzo. Art thou not sovereign? Who shall overruled thee?

Almeyda. That tyrant who alone permitted thee,
To cross this fatal barrier; which alive
Thou never shall repass! -- thou have not known him,
"Cow'rs not the dove whenever the vulture hovers,
"And shrink not I before the fierce Abdallah?
"Ere yet he knew my soul's most tender part
"Ere thy name reached him how has he appalled me
" -- I would have been thy fortune, my Alonzo,
"But was ordained thy sat!"

Alonzo. Were this fear just,
(Though surely it is thy fancy's wild creation)
Yet were I safe -- alone, and unsuspected,
Have I approached thee; and alike unknown
May I retreat -- recall once more my father;
Assert the power our victory has given us,
And dictate to this insolent Abdallah!

ABDALLAH (rushing on with guards.) Arrest this slave! we'll see who henceforth
dictates!

ALMEYDA (clasping his knees.) Ere yet you speak! -- "Ere yet that dreadful
voice,
"Denounces all your aspect threatens, pause!
"Oh, pause! and listen to the voice of nature!"
Through me Almanzor calls; through me he bids,
Even from the grave commands thee to be humane!

Abdallah. Would thou arrest the sentence on these lips,
Avow at once compliance with my will --
-- Will thou divide thy throne with my Orasmyn,
And shun to death this minion?

Alonzo. Sweet Almeyda,
Degrade not me by this humiliation! --
-- I was not born to supplicate a tyrant;
Who poorly plays upon thy sex's weakness.
-- Abdallah knows too well the rights of nations,
A father's feelings and a King's resentment,
To dare assail my life. --

Abdallah. Ah! say thou, youth?
Art thou so new to life, univers'd in policy,
To think the world need witness our decrees?
Thou, thou thyself, have shown me all my power,
Did I not learn from thy own lips, even now,
Unknown, and unassisted, thou art here?
Here, in Granada's confines -- in a fortress,
Where tongueless ministers perform my will,
Amid the murky horrors of the night,
And hollow rocks inter the nameless victim!
-- Even now death yawns beneath thy feet, a word,
A look, of mine, consigns thee to oblivion!

Almeyda. While I survive? -- Ah! how dare thou presume it?
-- His name -- his fate, should echo through the world --
To his dear memory, I Would devote my days,
And live but to avenge him. --

Abdallah. Thou too brave me!
Know thou shall live in vain -- thy feeble voice
Though truth-inspir'd, as was the Dardan maids,
Like here is shall cry unheeded; nor can aught,
Save him, or thee, but instant, prompt, obedience.

Almeyda. Oh! my too timid he art! -- speak, loved Alonzo --
There is a brutal fierceness in his nature,
Which mine was born to shrink from! -- busy fancy,
Fills up the bloody outline he has drawn,
And sees thee breathless! -- murdered! --

Alonzo. Thus behold me --
Ere to prolong an ignominious being,
I urge thee to debase a noble nature,
Or break a vow to me indissoluble!

ABDALLAH (to the guards.) Drag hence this slave -- untold ye know the rest.

[Alonzo is dragged off and Almeyda falls at the feet of Abdallah.] Almeyda.
"Oh! yet have mercy! -- hear in time my cries!" -- She rises with majesty.
Insulting tyrant! -- dread my desperation!
If thy malignity assail a life,
To which that wildly throbbing in this bosom,
Is valueless, nor fear, nor pride, shall bound me;
I will not rest, till I have found a means
To make my vengeance like thine own -- consummate.

Abdallah. Thou art too kind to warn me of thy purpose --
"Learn first by what enchantment thou shall pass
"The bounds my power prescribes thee -- in these chambers
"Unpitied -- unassisted -- shall thou rage,
"Till thou have found some surer way to move me.
-- The officer on guard?
Enter HAMET, and afterward ABRA. Hamet, approach --
Thou know my temper -- if thy life be dear
Guard well the Queen's apartment; nor allow
One being to pass out -- not even herself --
-- Reasons too cogent for thy knowledge, urge,
This seemingly strict measure --

Almeyda. " You are human!
"Oh, hear! yet hear one word." --

ABDALLAH (fiercely to Hamet.) "Have I not spoke?" Hamet retires.
Thou see my power --

Almeyda. Burst, burst, at once my heart!
This conflict is too mighty! -- do not leave me,
(sees Abdallah returning.) For dreadful as the sight is, I can never,
Never, survive the moment of thy going --
" -- As yet he breathes -- as yet my soul dares cherish
"The feeble hope that binds her down to suffer?
" -- Harsh as thou look -- yet nature must have given "thee,
"Affections, in their turn, as exquisite,
"As those that rend these heartstrings" -- can thou then*
Oh! can thou blight my youth, with such a sorrow?
-- Precipitate me early to the grave,
And mark life's little interval with frenzy?
-- Speak, tell me, thou will save him?

ORASMYN (speaks entering.) That sweet voice,
Strikes on the heart thy cruelty has chilled,
And, like the lyre of Orpheus, charms the dead!
-- In tears Almeyda? -- Wherefore this prostration?

ALMEYDA (with frenzy.) -- He Is murdered! -- lost! no earthly power can save
him*
The fiat is pronounced, and he must perish! --
-- Ah! is it you Orasmyn? -- give me language,
May touch^t his human rock into a heart!

Orasmyn. Allow me to partake, to soothe, this anguish --
Oh! give me but to know its secret cause!

Almeyda. Thou soothe it? -- Thou partake it? -- Mighty Alla!
This is but a refinement on misfortune --
Thou, thou thyself art its first cause -- thy love,
Thy selfish, thy ambitious love, undoes me!
Fly, save him, save him -- bring him instant hither,
E're yet the lifeblood blacken in his cheek,
E're yet those eyes are s^al'd in utter darkness,
And I Will forget the past, will pardon all,
Will worship his preserver! -- vain -- vain prayer
Thou art Abdallah's son! -- the dire inheritor,
Of his obdurate nature! -- hence, abhorred!
Oh! for some depth the sun may never pierce,
Where I can waste my being in lamenting! Exit.

Orasmyn. Danger and death I have faced in many a form;
I Have leaped into the deadly breach; and seen
An host of jav'lins quivering at this bosom,
But never knew I fear, despair, till now!
-- Follow thy hapless Queen, and in thy soothings
Have better fortune! -- agoniz'd -- bewildered -- Exit Abra.
I dread I know not what -- yet I observed
A strangeness in my father's quick departure!
-- Too well I know t'atchieve a darling purpose,
He would o'erleap the bounds of truth, and justice.
-- Perhaps this youth -- yet that is impossible --
Oh! that Almeyda, would enough esteem me,
To trust me with her sorrows! Exit.

Re-enter ALMEYDA, leaning on ABRA. Almeyda. He is gone
Nor can I pro^^t by returning reason,
To win his aid! -- Ah! wherefore should I win it?
"Alonzo, now exists but in my memory;
"Yet here I seek him -- here shall ever wander,
"Even as the spirits of the dead revisit,
"The spot where they have buried all their treasure.
" Here fancy pictures to the mental eye,
"That graceful form, while yet it was corporeal!
"Here last I heard that voice! -- oh! might it break,
"The bound 'twixt immortality, and life,
"To charm with heaven's own eloquence my woes!"

Abra. Beseech you, Madam, moderate this grief,
The Prince's life is safe

Almeyda. Safe with Abdallah?

Abra. His son, with generous fervor shared your sorrow,
And loves you too well, to desert its object.

Almeyda. "Abra, Orasmyn yet has love to learn --
" Love turns abhorrent from an act of violence,
"Too deeply wounded with a sorrowing sigh --
" -- Love! it is our all-refining touch of heaven;
"Whose kindling emulation ever gives,
"A self-exacted eminence of goodness,
"To vulgar minds unknown!"

Abra. "Yet is he safe" --
Never will my brother sacrifice his honor,
Much as he loves Orasmyn, fears Abdallah,
Or stain his soul with murder --

Almeyda. Ah! thy brother?
Is then the officer on guard thy brother?

Abra. Raised early to distinction by Abdallah.
Under himself he governs in this castle,
To him you are in charge --

Almeyda. Oh! Abra, hear me!
"If ever your features blossomed into beauty,
"Beneath the animating eye of love!
"If ever the throbbing tenant of your bosom,
"Felt the soft impulse of a generous passion,"
If you would not behold your heart's dear choice,
Like mine, the victim of some horrid treason,
And be yourself a miserable maniac,
Oh win your brother, to release Alonzo

Abra. Alas! too highly he regards his honor
Nor dare I tempt it. --

Almeyda. Call him instant hither!

Abra. He will not yield -- sweet Princess, be entreated.

Almeyda. Obey me -- nor reply -- a weak blind hope.
Exit Abra. Still, like the busy mole, essays to work,
Its slow way through the heavy weight fallen here.
presses her hand on her forehead. Re-enter ABRA with HAMET. Thou guardian of
my life in its best treasure!
Tell me, Alonzo lives?

Hamet. He lives -- as yet --

Almeyda. As yet -- Oh heaven

Hamet. Alas! it is too sure,
He totters on eternity's dark verge,
Unconscious of his danger -- this steep rock
Through many a winding path is scoop'd in dens,
Unknown -- impenetrable -- one o'erhangs,
An arm, which parting from the Guadalquiver,
Deep-plunging seeks an undiscovered course. --
-- There, through a fearful chasm wild nature wrought,
Full many a victim to the fears of state,
Has sunk into oblivion. --

Almeyda. Mighty Alla!
The savage uttered then but the mere truth.
-- Thus will assuredly Alonzo perish,
Unless thou save him!

Hamet. Me! -- impossible!
Yet think not ought shall win me to destroy him.

Almeyda. Oh! venture not to say thou want the power
Lest sudden frost should burst this swelling heart.

Hamet. I cannot, dare not disobey Abdallah;
Whose bounty first distinguished, still rewards me.

Almeyda. And cannot I distinguish -- I reward?
Oh! let me know Alonzo safe, and free,
And thou shall find I dare assert my rights,
Even till I awe Abdallah!

Hamet. Never -- never --
His nature's fierce -- obdurate -- uncontrollable --
-- Death in its simplest form to man is dreadful,
But when forerun by agony -- by torture --
And were I once to wrong his confidence --

Almeyda. Do not I too, know well his barbarous nature?
-- Have thou a fear applies not to Alonzo?
Thus must he suffer -- thus must he expire,
Unless thou 'rt won -- Alas! that I could barter,
This vain, vain pageantry of regal power,
To be but one hour Hamet.

Hamet. My touched heart,
Even bleeds with sympathy. --

Almeyda. It Is profanation,
To mingle in the anguish thou reliev'st not --
-- Said I an hour? A few short moments,
Would waft you over the river; and once landed,
Nor could Abdallah, nor his vengeance reach you!
-- Ramirez, gracious Monarch, would reward,
Protect -- adore his son's deliverer!
A grateful nation eye thee with delight,
While thy pure conscience would each plaudit echo!
Even she who sues, one day with pride might call thee,
To fame, to wealth, to greatness!

Hamet. Did not duty --

Almeyda. Know thou one duty stronger than humanity? --
That awful principle by heaven implanted,
To still the raging of the impetuous passions,
Or lead the swelling current up to virtue!
-- Oh! then be warned! and as thou die in peace,
List to the voice of heaven that speaks through me!

HAMET (kneeling.) Endu'd of heaven! it does indeed inspire thee!
And be my life, or long, or short, it waits
Henceforward on thy will!

ALMEYDA (leaning over him.) Oh! be it crowned,
With every grace, and glory, -- may no pain,
No sorrow touch the heart that melts with mercy,
"^ut such a blessedness possess it here,
"As makes this life the foretaste of a better"
-- Oh! from what dire extremes this virtue saves me!
Did I not say, my Abra, I would win him?
Now tell me, Hamet, how thou wilt save my love?

Hamet. "The will once fixed, I do not want the power"
" -- To me each gate, each dungeon, freely opens;
I will prepare a boat, and when the night
Spreads her dark mantle over a drowsy world,
I Will thither lead the Prince, and share his flight.

Almeyda. My guardian angel! who like him benign,
Receiv'st thy sole reward in conscious goodness!
pauses. -- If (and my heart forebodes some new affliction)
He should deceive me -- that -- would ascertain it --
Hamet I have considered -- and must see him --

Hamet. The prisoner Madam?

Almeyda. Ay the Prince Alonzo?

Hamet. You cannot mean it?

Almeyda. Never more intently!
If thou have power to free him; thou have power
To guide me to his dungeon!

Hamet. Through his guards,
And many a vaulted lab'rinth long, and lonely,
How should our beauteous sovereign pass securely?

Almeyda. I Will dare the chance! -- thy sister's veil shall hide
The splendour of these vestments -- now begone,
With circumspection plan Alonzo's flight,
Then haste, and lead me to him --

Hamet. You must rule --
Yet much I dread this needless enterprise!
-- Oh! sister, you have destroyed me! Exit.

Almeyda. Heed him not!
Never will thy Queen desert who truly serves her!
-- Oh! Abra, in the hour of mortal peril,
Should thou be born to suffer like Almeyda,
May one as generous as thyself arise,
To save thee from a pang more keen than dying!

ACT IV.
SCENE I.
A dark vault irregularly hewn in the rock, extending out of sight on one side,
in a vista of rude imperfect pillars. -- A small gate leads on the other side,
through an enormous crag of the rock -- ALONZO discovered, chained to a pillar,
against which he leans. ALONZO. WHY lingers thus the tyrant exquisite
In ill perhaps he thinks mere death indulgence;
And therefore leaves me leisure for reflection --
An awful pause, 'twixt life, and immortality!
-- Is this the Murcian victor? This the heir
Of great Ramirez? that Castilian sun,
Which rose to light a nation on to virtue,
Or early set amid a crimson glory? --
Eclipsed at once; the victim of his passions
He aids his murderers and but hopes oblivion. --
-- Long will my father wonder where I vanished! --
Almeyda, poor Almeyda's not so happy! --

The guards unbar the gate, and light in Abdallah; then fixing their torches in
clefts of the rock, they retire. Abdallah. Ere I pronounce my last resolve, I
ask,
Has so^itude restored thy better reason?

Alonzo. Has recollection humaniz'd thy heart?
Why should not virtue bear as fixed a tenor,
As vice can beast?

Abdallah. Yet dare thou vaunt it thus?
Rash youth, if thou would view the light of heaven,
Or breath untainted air --

Alonzo. Where are thy ruffians --
(...) thou not see I less abhor to die,
Than poorly to condition with Abdallah?
Why urge this parley?

Abdallah. Thou were born, Alonzo,
Thy enemies must own, to grace the name,
Transmitted thee from a long line of heroes --
Can thou then rashly fix thy fate, and perish
In flower of youth -- in ignominy -- bondage?

Alonzo. Ay -- with a firmness thou can never know,
Who liv'st in guilt; and therefore find'st in living,
Only a daily respite from damnation.

Abdallaeh. What is the mighty sacrifice enjoined?
Why but to yield what thou can never enjoy,
And bend Almeyda's will to meet her duty.
Then will these chains drop off; and our glad arms
In friendship fold thee.

Alonzo. By the light of heaven!
Forever vanished from these eyes, I swear,
I would not yield one chaste sigh of Almeyda,
To be the worshipped of an host of traitors!

Abdallah. Thou have not weighed the agonizing pangs
My power can make thee suffer, ere I grant thee
The comfort of expiring?

Alonzo. I have weighed
Thy character; and therefore am prepared
For all thy threats imply --

ABDALLAH (stamps, and guards enter with torches and leavers.) Employ your
leavers --
Raise yon enormous stone -- beneath that chasm
Through jagged rocks -- imperious -- horrible --
A stream, oblivious as the fabled Lethe,
Washes to many an undiscovered hollow,
The victims of my will --

Alonzo. Thy mercy then
Spares the soul-harrowing pomp of preparation,
And all the pangs of nature, and of love?

Abdallah. Hark! hear'st thou not in the deep sullen roar
The knell of death? -- Of those who have gone before thee,
Methinks the shrieks resound! -- a breath of mine,
Will add Alonzo to the untold many!
-- Then vainly shall Almeyda weep thy loss,
Ramirez shall in vain demand his son!
For, though he shook this fortress to the center,
Razed its enormous towers, and solid bastions,
Their ruins would but form the tomb he sought

Alonzo. I have not lived so ill, that I have now
To learn to die, -- and of Abdallah too!
No, white as angels if thou stood'st before me,
Denouncing thus my doom I could not fear thee,
How should I now?

Abdallah. Because you are in my power,
And I dare use it. -- Yet again reflect,
But know when next we meet my voice is mortal.

Alonzo. Be it so now! -- even now! -- why this display*
To the firm soul that never shrunk from danger?
-- By heaven I feel an infant once again,
When thus insulted with an infant's terrors!
-- Ye high-arch'd rocks! to groans alone resounding,
Witness one wretch has never tried your echo --
-- And you, oh! most adored! who over these dens,
Rend heaven, and earth, with vain, and fond lamenting,
For him thus strangely vanished -- never know
Your feet unconscious trod Alonzo's grave!

ORASMYN (descends with a torch.) Dark labyrinth, for murder fitly wrought,
At length I Have reached your limit! -- or ^er^,
Or this dim light gleams on the hapless stranger!
-- His mien bespeaks a deep disdain of death,
With princely graces blended -- youth unknown!
Dare thou reveal at once, thy rank and name,
With the dark embassy that thus entombs thee*

Alonzo. Orasmyn! for I need not ask thy title,
So well thy port bespeaks the prince and lover;
Why would thou know a name like thine renowned,
But, oh! unlike thin^, never stained with murder.

Orasmyn. Prince, thou art bound by chains, and I by feeling!
-- The sun that ripens in a Moor's warm heart
Even virtue into passion, ripens there
Those glowing frailties that o'errun ^he soil,
And poison its pure product -- I Would forget
If possible the arts that charmed Almeyda --

Alonzo. Can thou forbid the bud to blow? The zephyr
To wake the bird of spring? -- As well do this,
As chill the soul's soft breathings! disunite
Hearts, which but new to life, like infant plants
Entwined unconscious -- lived but by each other!
Alonzo never knew a guilty thought,
Or plan'd a guilty union! -- if Almeyda,
Gave him, Oh gift beyond all price! her heart,
Who would not think it cheaply bought with life?

Orasmyn. Fain would I hate Alonzo! like a rival
Fain would I hear thy words, survey thy actions!
But my pure nature does thee noble justice!
Why will thou not view me with equal candor?
Thou have Almeyda's heart -- oh blessed pre-eminence!
Outstrip me not too in the race of honor --
To her repose I sacrifice a passion
Strong as thine own -- oh! join with me to save her!

Alonzo. Ah! can thou love with so sublime a virtue!
She lives but to thy senses -- thou never knew'st
The chaste perfection of that generous nature!
Never mingled souls with her, in love as pure
As the intelligence that angels hold!
-- That bliss -- that agony was mine -- mine only!
To thee Almeyda seems impetuous, rash,
Touch but her heart and it overflows with softness!
-- Orasmyn, if thou love, it is thine to prove it.
-- A fearful crisis is at hand -- when over
Oh! soothe, support, console, the sorrowing angel.
Protect her from thy fierce obdurate sire,
I dare implore thee, from thyself protect her!
-- So shall that mortal hour no being yet
Encountered with indifference, be met
By me with fortitude! the long hereafter
So shall thou less regret! -- and even Almeyda,
At length perhaps forget me --

Orasmyn. Never -- never
When the soft fibers of the heart expand,
And thus enclasp another, time, or space,
In vain would break the hold, or make us single!
-- I see no more in thee a hated rival!
Virtue's own awful form appears before me --
Bids me behold a monarch's glorious heir!
The gallant leader of victorious armies!
The idol of whole nations! -- more, oh! more,
Her own devoted pupil! -- shall I then
Leave thee to die, and sin against society?
-- Oh my proud soul how it disdains the thought!
Yet for my father's sake, ere yet I free thee,
Assure me --

Alonzo. Spare thy generous cheek the blush
Of asking that unworthy thine own honor,
Nor less unworthy mine!

Orasmyn. Away with bonds --
For, even were vows unknown, a noble soul
Would feel untold a fellow-suff'rer's sorrows,
And blend self-love with social. -- Why, oh! why
Were we born enemies?

ALONZO -- snatching his hand. Ere yet we were,
Our finer tones of mind some guardian spirit
Touched into harmony; and, when we met,
The according strings struck forth a sound so sweet,
That heaven itself might listen! love! even love,
That brand of discord, burns within our bosoms,
Pale -- cold -- before the steady flame of virtue!

Orasmyn. The camp alone is mine. Once in its districts,
No human power can reach thee. It were wise
To wait the hour that wafts thee over the river.

ORASMYN takes the Torch, and guides ALONZO out. HAMET, after a proper
interval, descends, as lighting onward ALMEYDA. Hamet. We have been fortunate
to 'scape those slaves. --
-- Tread careful, madam; here the stones are loose.

ALMEYDA -- (descending.) Thus on the soul breaks love's celestial light,
And chears, with many a lengthning ray, misfortune!

HAMET -- (stopping as shocked.) -- These chains -- this silence -- Oh, unhappy
moment! --
They were the assassins, then, who even now passed us? --
-- For your soul's sake, and as you value reason,
Return at once, sweet princess!

ALMEYDA -- (waving him away with scorn.) Hence, rude man!
Were thou Abdallah's self, thou should^st not s^ay me,
Thus near Alonzo -- prithee love reprove him!

Hamet. Alas!

ALMEYDA (faintly and alarmed.) Have thou deceived me -- or within,
Is there some yet more deep -- more dreary den!

HAMET (in a broken voice.) There is indeed a deeper -- where Almeyda,
Shall never hear her lover! --

Almeyda. Never, said thou?
Recall that fearful word; nor at this crisis
Pluck from my soul the last prop that sustains it!

HAMET (in agony.) -- Oh! that I could beguile myself, or thee! --
-- These are the very chains with which I bound him,
And this the chasm (from whence the mass of stone
By leavers has been raised) where through the rocks,
Full many a victim to the fears of state,
Precipitated in the rushing torrent,
Has sought an unknown grave --

ALMEYDA (pressing the chains to her bosom.) Murdered -- lost --
Wisdom -- nor strength -- nor valor then availed thee!

Hamet. Oh prophet! should she die! infernal tyrant,
-- To choose my only absence for the murder --
-- How is it, Madam!

ALMEYDA (in a deep tone of despair.) Even as I would have it --
For that thy kindness meant to aid thy Queen
Take this -- she has no recompense to give,
(Loosens the jewel RAMIREZ gave her from her bosom, kisses it -- wipes her
eyes -- surveys and gives it HAMET.) -- Nor ever now will have -- begone and
leave me --
Nor let one human eye pervade a sorrow,
Too mighty for complaint!

HAMET (soothing her.) You will return?

Almeyda. Return? You mean me well, nor will I chide --
But hence at once, and leave me to an anguish,
Which would not waste itself in words, or tears,
But swell within and wash away remembrance!

Hamet. Oh! Madam, pardon him who dares not leave you.
Imagine the conjectures of the world,
If here you should be found --

Almeyda. My world is vanished! --
It was concentered in the spot he lived on,
And if it yet exists -- it is in his grave!

Hamet. Think of Abdallah! -- Can you fail to dread him?

Almeyda. Who has naught to hope, has little sure to fear --
-- Add not a feather to the weight that presses
Upon this brain, and turns it into chaos!
-- Go -- shield thyself -- and leave me to my fortune!
-- Why will thou urge the parley? -- and awake
The pride, the passion -- lost extinct -- in horror?

Hamet. -- Yet be advised -- sweet Princess quit this place!

ALMEYDA (pressing her forehead vaguely.) Will thou then kill me?

Hamet. Rather would I save --
-- Time will dry up these tears -- restore your peace
And make you joy in safety --

ALMEYDA (turning with horror to the Chasm.) Look there -- look there!
Then talk to me of peace, of joy, of safety. --

Hamet. The savage who dares wound his sov'reign's heart,
Would lacerate each vein of wretched Hamet's --
For my sake then, if not thine own, sweet Queen,
Fly hence! --

ALMEYDA (with increasing delirium.) Say thou to heaven?

Hamet. Alas! alas!
Her reason surely wanders! hark, I hear him.
-- By all the nameless agonies you feel;
Oh! pity him, destroyed by pitying you!

Almeyda. Hence -- hence -- whoever you are -- I will not go!
But reign for ever here! -- supreme in sorrow!
-- The sun no more shall visit these sad eyes,
Nor the wan moon present one soft reflection --
Winter no more shall chill -- or summer warm me;
Nor innocence, nor heaven itself supply,
One moment of delight! -- but damp, cold drops,
Thus petrify my heart! and night eternal,
(shivering and looking up.) Make vain the sense of sight! -- now come,
Abdallah,
Behold in me Alonzo's monument!

Hamet. Abdallah comes indeed! -- his voice resounds! --
It grows upon my ear -- one chance is mine --
-- Could I regain the cleft that lately hid us,
He might pass on -- and I, in flight, find safety!

(He treads on the torch and flies hastily.) ALMEYDA (in frenzy.) How suddenly
the night falls! -- Oh, my heart!
Will no one knit thy loosened strings, and staunch
The vital blood yet flowing? -- yes one hand --
-- Ah! no -- Ramirez, will to death abhor
Almeyda's fatal name!

Guards light in, and follow Abdallah. Abdallah. Are ye all in?
Now close the gate; that no obtrusive eye,
No foot unbidden press upon my secret.
-- So in the gulf with him, at once shall sink
All knowledge of his fate!

ALMEYDA (majestically.) Who pierces through
The grave's deep silence, with a voice so loud,
Disturbing my repose?

Abdallah. Can it be her!
Amazement! and Alonzo gone! -- Ah! vain,
Is every guard against that subtle sex!
-- She has found some ready villain to assist her,
And given the Prince his freedom. --

ALMEYDA (in a low anxious voice.) Comes Ramirez? --
He comes to seek his son? -- Ah! hapless monarch,
That name to him is nothing? -- yet I Will hide
These traces from his sight --

She advances wildly, and fearfully looking back. Abdallah. How now, Almeyda?
This can be only frenzy -- where is thy lover?

ALMEYDA (laying her hand on his arm.) Why do thou ask Ramirez? -- he is in
Murcia --
Did not thy policy dispose him there,
When fixed upon my ruin? Wretched Sire!
draws him aside. Fly from this den of death! -- here broods a serpent,
Fatal to thee, and to thy race! -- even now,
Dozing upon this flinty floor, I dreamt --
-- Oh! such a dream I shudder but to name it!

Abdallah. What dream Almeyda? I must soothe this transport,
If I would learn the truth --

Almeyda. Nay never frown,
I spoke it unawares -- but strange, strange visions,
Still swim before these eyes! -- yet not Alonzo --
-- Though him alone I sought. came to save,
-- Too late, alas! I came. Now thou will weep!
Or is thy brain, like mine, seared up in lead?

She leans on the shoulder of a Guard. Abdallah. This is an incident so
singular,
As out-runs fancy, and perplexes reason!
-- Nature's exhausted in her! Some dire truth
Lurks under all this mystery and frenzy.

Guard. My lord, behold the chains that bound the stranger.

Abdallah. And who durst take them off? Almeyda only!
-- Yet where then is he vanished? Ah! if grief,
At witnessing this woe, should have impelled him
At once to plunge into this yawning gulf!
How is it, Almeyda?

ALMEYDA -- (turning fondly to him.) Heavy -- strangely heavy!
Guide of my youth! sole partner in its sorrows!

kissing his hand. Abdallah. Astonishing delusion! Where Is Alonzo?

Almeyda. Did I not tell you of my horrid dream?
-- Sleeping, just now, upon this flinty floor,
Even from its solid base, I heard Alonzo,
Amid the rush of torrents -- Me he called,
And shook the deep profound! My fond heart
It answered too -- Oh! with such eager throbs,
The long vibrations spread beyond this frame,
Almost into Eternity! --

ABDALLAH -- (exultingly.) Even so! --
Thus have I the advantage, and not guilt.

Almeyda. Soft! or Abdallah comes. Not even you,
Warned as you were of all his selfish views,
Can guess at his barbarity! An uncle? --
Yet these dim eyes take pleasure to behold thee!
The ravenous vulture -- blood-incited wolf,
Prey not, when disappointed, on their species!
That pitch of cruelty was left for man.
-- Nature convulses at the bare idea,
Nor dares to snap the tie herself has formed!
-- He thinks I Will take this tamely! No, Abdallah,
I will have such revenge! -- From thy black heart,
At once I Will pluck away its worldly veil,
And punish thee in mere sincerity.

ABDALLAH -- (fiercely.) Thou shall not live to do it, subtle traitress!
"I will be warned in time -- For in these flights
"The soul's deep sense full often may be discovered!
He surveys wistfully Almeyda, the Guards, and the Chasm. " -- One moment might
effect it! and that moment
"Inter with her all traces of the deed!
" -- Further I Will try her. -- Will thou not forgive
"The involuntary wrong?

Almeyda. Whenever I do,
"May Heaven forget the wretch it now chastises!

Abdallah. "Nay, then thou die! nor prayers, nor
"tears, shall save thee.
"That word decides thy doom! Seize on her, strait!
"Precipitate her instant down the gulf,
"And live the favored objects of my bounty!

"Almeyda. Oh, that tremendous voice! -- Where fled my senses,
"That they acknowledged not yon ruthless savage?
" -- Him before whom I was born but to tremble?
"Slaves, drag me not! Ye will not murder me?
" -- Am I not reft of every good but being --
"A chearless being? Spare thy own remorse,
"Nor crown the pile of thy enormous sins
"With such a helpless victim!

"Abdallah. Vain are prayers,
"I have not ventured thus far, to recede!
"Naught but thy death can now assure my safety --
-- Who Is at the gate? Unbar it not, I charge you.
GUARD, opening the Gate. The Prince Orasmyn only.
Enter ORASMYN. (Almeyda flies to him.) Oh, protect me!
Guard -- save me -- hide me in thy very heart!

Orasmyn. Ay, while it beats, sweet flutt'rer! Good my lord,
What mean these haggard slaves, and this confusion?
-- How comes Almeyda here! Why thus afflicted?

Abdallah. Born to make vain my cares, and cross thy fortune,
Why art thou here? She, as thou see, is frantic.

Orasmyn. Alla forbid! Speak, dear one! -- Calm my fears.
Ah! tremble not -- but speak --

Almeyda. Alonzo, surely!
I hear thee, love; but dare not, dare not look. --

Orasmyn. Of the vast host of mental ills, ordained
To punish hapless man, the worst has seized her!
Alas! by my omission! Dear Almeyda,
Calm thy perturbed soul, and look around!
Thy friends alone are near thee.

ALMEYDA, Glancing around, she buries her face in Orasmyn's robe. Oh, no! -- no!
I see a fiend, who turns me into marble!
-- But I am safe with thee! Thou never wilt leave me,
My own Alonzo!

Abdallah. Thus she still has raved. --
"Even now, she took me for Ramirez! Yet
"Thou might improve this blindness -- if you are wise,
"Avail thyself of her fond fancy's error,
"And wed her strait!

"Orasmyn. Wed her. Forbid it Alla!
" -- Were reason perfect in her, this fond clasp
"I should pronounce a bliss more exquisite,
"Than all in cold futurity! -- But now,
"My heart recoils from her soft touch.
-- Sweet suff'rer, raise thine eyes! within this circle
Give thy woes respite: For, from this sad hour,
Never shall thou know another -- if this heart,
This arm, has power to save thee!

Abdallah. As thou will --
Thou know my mind! -- Now be the choice thine own. Exit; Guards follow.

Orasmyn. Oh, most unguarded! -- Ere I saved Alonzo,
I should have warned this dear one of my purpose.
-- How shall I now convince her? Oh! those eyes.
More beauteous for their wildness, how they wander!
-- Hear me, Almeyda! By the unsullied soul
Within this bleeding breast, thy lover lives --
-- Alonzo lives!

Almeyda. Ay; so I knew you would tell me:
But spare the specious tale. I know already --
I heard it from himself! Nay, nay, no more.

Orasmyn. Oh, agony! for human sense too touching!
Yet how to wake again her recollection?
Almeyda! do thou know me?

ALMEYDA (gazing vaguely on him.) I know one,
One only, in the circle of creation,
And he is strangely vanished!

Orasmyn. Yet he lives!
In safety lives.

Almeyda. Within this heart, do you say?
Ay, there he lives, indeed, and shall for ever!

Orasmyn. Never can I forgive my own neglect!
For, oh, this ^ight is dreadful! Yet Almeyda,
Thy own Alonzo lives, -- like me, to weep.

Almeyda. Yes; I have heard strange tales -- ye all have told me,
And seen such dismal sights! I dare not speak them!
-- No matter -- Time will clear all up. -- I Am weary.

Orasmyn. Oh! let me lead you hence --

Almeyda. Even where you will.
And by that voice of comfort, you should guide me
To my Alonzo's heaven.

"Orasmyn. Touching charmer!
"I dare not listen more; lest I, like thee,
"Grow out of love with reason, and delight
"Only to hear thy rhapsodies!

starting, and looking through the pillars. "Almeyda. " More dungeons!
"Perhaps more murd'rers, too. Now should they come,
"Exhausted as I am, no power could save me!
"Oh! they have strength to wrest one's very being!
"Look at this arm. -- baring he^^.

Orasmyn. "The savage gripe has purpled
"The purest white pulsation ever throb'd in!
He starts and wistfully surveys Almeyda and the chasm. "It cannot be! the fear
is too tremendous!
"Abhorrent Nature, from a deed so black,
"Would shrink, 'till these high rocks, o'erarch'd by art,
"Sink to the center! -- Oh! forgive the thought
"Thy own ambitious nature prompts, my father!
-- Rest on me, dear Almeyda! Near your chamber,
Faithful I Will watch the live-long night, and pray
It may breathe peace upon you. Pr'ythee lean!

Almeyda. Soft! have a care, we tread not on his grave!
Somebody showed it me. -- We Are very near it.

Orasmyn. Oh! that superior mind is gone for ever!
-- Yet still, thus ruined, like a broken mirror,
It gives a perfect image in each fragment! Exeunt.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
The magnificent Hall with which the Play opens; and similar Clouds, showing
again the Dawn of Morning. ABDALLAH enters, finding ORASMYN musing. ABDALLAH.
HAVE thou thus watched the night away, my son,
Regardless of the common dues of nature?
-- The day will come, when thou wilt regret in vain,
This lavish waste alike of health and feeling!
And why thus strictly-guard a maniac?
-- Who will assail Almeyda?

Orasmyn. Who will soothe her?
-- It is among the fatal rights of rank
To want all common blessings! Never more,
Alas! shall this sweet visionary find them.

Abdallah. Has, then, her frenzy known no interval,
And the long night elapsed in restless ravings?

Orasmyn. The inventive evil took such various forms
As fancy scarce could follow -- pausing often
In vacant silence, or in speechless anguish!
-- Anon, more musical than the lone bird,
Who pours her sorrows to the midnight moon,
She waked the drowsy night! Often the wild strain
Soared even to Heaven -- As often it died away, --
Like the uncertain sweetness of that harp,
The light breeze softly touches!

Abdallah. Thoughts like these,
Will undermine the firmness of thy nature. --
Orasmyn! as thou love me, shake them off!
Thou art the better part of my existence;
And when thou droop'st I sink.

Orasmyn. At once to see,
The flower of nature in the morning wither!
Even while my senses ached at its perfection! --

Abdallah. How wise -- how generous were those lavish tears,
Could sympathy restore the hapless suff'rer!
But other duties call thee into action. --
Time will not with thee watch Almeyda's frenzy,
Nor the great wheel of empire cease its motion --
Thy hand must guide it.

Orasmyn. Empire! said my father?
-- Shall I usurp Almeyda's royal seat?
Grow great by her misfortune! Rather bid me
Dig at her feet the grave she wildly calls for,
And fill it undishonor'd! Oh! no more.
I would not understand you!

Abdallah. Say thou will not,
And I am answered. -- Weak, romantic boy!
Loiter thy life away upon her threshold!
Renounce thy sire, thy rank, thy name in arms,
The golden wreath already hovering over thee,
And live a lover only!

Orasmyn. Live to honor!
To that quick sense, which, striking at the heart,
Damns, even on earth, the guilty! Oh, beware!
And dread, in time, to know the dire pulsation!

Abdallah. Dare thou suppose it?

Orasmyn. The mere thought was treason!
-- Yet, a calamity so sudden, speaks
Some known, yet latent cause. --

Abdallah. I heed thee well --
And feel, ungrateful son! through every fiber,
The yet unspoken censure! But yet, remember,
Had I more crimes than thoughts, it is thou have caused them!
-- Judge, then, what passes here, when thus I learn
Thou dare despise my views, my power -- my person!

Exit, into the Queen's apartment. Orasmyn. Stay, leave me not in wrath! --
forgive, my father,
A heart even bursting with conflicting passions!
-- If I have injured! -- It Is, alas, too much,
To shock his nature with the black suspicion!
Enter ABDALLAH again. -- My father, I have erred! -- Oh! deign to pity
Him, who, thus agoniz'd with doubt and fear,
Finds no power perfect but unshaken honor!
And that pure pride he will cherish, unto death.
-- No vain -- no selfish -- no ambitious thought,
Shall ever tempt me, even in thought, to wrong
That hapless sovereign I have sworn to guard!
The vow yet lives, unchill'd, upon your lips!
And, oh, her misery doubly should enforce it! --
Recall your honor! -- Love me in Almeyda! Exit.

Abdallah. It Is well. This black ingratitude has steeled me!
-- Cherish thy insolence of pride -- Thou Wilt need it.
Have I, then, lived for thee in vain, Orasmyn?
-- A girl, by one soft glance, annihilates
Those rights a life of fondness should have gained me!
-- Have thou forgot thy father's heir Granada,
Regardless of thy scruples, or thy choice?
-- Even now the golden circlet binds my brow,
And in Abdallah henceforth know thy king!
-- I have dispos^d the Council to believe,
Her frenzy constitutional. This hour,
Her hand unconscious might resign her crown,
Then never, never, need she see Granada.

Enter NOURASSIN. Nourassin. The Council waits, my lord, your wished
for presence.
-- How fares our hapless sovereign?

Abdallah. Lost in frenzy --
With vacant eye, even now, she gazed upon me,
But knew nor voice, nor feature! --

Nourassin. It Is too plain --
The malady's habitual! Those starts
Even as we hailed her glad return, bespoke
A strange distraction, or some buried passion.
-- Castile, with matchless policy, has kept
The mournful secret, 'till, the advantage gained,
With pomp he gave us back the gorgeous casket,
Nor owned the gem was vanished. --

Abdallah. Are the Council
So satisfied?

Nourassin. Not one dissents, my lord.

Abdallah. Why then should we delay the abdication?
A form alone is wanting; and her hand,
Unfit to govern, may with ease be led,
To delegate that power our laws deny her.
-- Perchance, in the next transport of her frenzy,
No human power may move her. --

Nourassin. It were wise,
Since to the nation we must vouch this truth,
To lead her forth, and summon in the Council.

Abdallah. Haste, then, my friend! Conduct Almeyda hither. Exit Nourassin.

SCENE II.
The Council assemble round the Canopy of State. ALMEYDA is led on, veiled; she
draws the veil at length aside, and, looking majestically around, speaks.
Almeyda. When late I closed these lips, I fully purposed,
Never again to break the awful silence,
Or view the light of Heaven, or face of man. --
Why then am I dragged forth, a spectacle?
What cruel eye would dive into this heart --
This broken heart, to mark the early ravage?
-- I wither in the sun -- chill in the breeze;
Yet the sun runs his wonted course in glory!
The vernal breeze invigorates the world!
And all the change is here! pressing her heart.

"ABDALLAH. (soothingly) "Lamenting still?
"Alas! that such a beauteous form should prove
"Only the soul's sad sepulcher! Yet often,
"In woman, (mutable in all beside)
"Love fixes even to frenzy!

"ALMEYDA (replying to an imaginary question.) "Idle question!
"Why did I love? As well might you demand,
"Why I saw light! -- why waked my soul to knowledge?
" Like light -- like knowledge, in my infant sense,
"Sunk imperceptible the tender impulse!
" -- Alonzo first partook each little care,
"And doubled every joy! Ah, dear were both,
"While crowns and sceptres yet were idle playthings!

"Abdallah. Inventive malady, which wounds yet
"charms us!
" (aside) There is too much of method in this frenzy.
"Would I had never trusted the event!

"ALMEYDA (appearing to listen, and trembling.) "Hold -- hide me! Save me from
this inward horror!
" -- Hark! hear ye not the murd'rers feet approaching?
" -- That death-devoting voice! Even now they come --
"They rush upon my love! -- Oh! spare him, spare him!
" -- Dare thou, inhuman? -- He Is a monarch's heir!
"Off, ruffians! nor profane that gallant form --
"Oh! for a giant's arm, to wrest him from you!
" -- Now, now, the steep rocks echo with his fall,
"And the rude surge entombs him! -- Oh, Alonzo!

"Abdallah. Ever Alonzo! He is all her cry. --

"Nourassin. Recall your erring sense, unhappy princess!
"Nor dwell for ever on these gloomy fictions. --

"Almeyda. Away, away! -- nor venture to console me --
" -- Thou have not known to blend thy heart with his,
"In faith indissoluble, and true passion --
" I was that wretch -- the visited of Heaven! --
"But, oh! the dire proportion of my misery! --
" -- Still must I seek him on the river's brink:
"Of seasons -- time -- of heat -- of cold, regardless!
" -- Or do I err; or does the surge return him?
"Swollen -- maimed, defaced! no charm -- no grace is left,
"Of all fond fancy worshipped. -- Scarce my heart,
"In this disfigured corse, can know Alonzo!
" -- Turn, hapless father! turn thine eyes away,
"Nor (...) the dreadful secret! Oh, that I,
"Like you, could hope a little while his coming,
" -- Start at his fancied footstep -- hear his voice,
"And die, at last, in blessed, blessed ignorance!

"Abdallah. "Mark, how this wildness shakes her! --
In such transport
"She cannot yield the crown.

Nourassin. "Yet will we try her.
-- Those faithful subjects, who but prayed to pass,
Beneath Almeyda's sway, their years in peace,
Behold, with grief, the malady that shakes
Her nobler faculties; they supplicate
That she to abler hands resign her power,
And in retirement soothe her soul's soft sorrows.

Almeyda. -- Soft! give me time to breathe. -- A moment's thought. --
They tender her the Regalia. The imperial wreath, with which, in one short day,
These throbbing temples have been overweigh'd,
I unregretting yield. -- Thou gaudy emblem
Laying her hand on the Crown. Of nature's ample round! In thy small circle
Lies all that man desires, and, oh! much more
Than man can ever enjoy, unless he finds
Heavens own supreme delight the bliss of blessing!
How have thou marked my fate with endless horror!
-- Hence, from my dim eyes, take the brilliant evil,
And gives the promised solitude!

Nourassin. Our laws,
With your own hand, require you to resign it,
To this your heir. --

Almeyda. To him! Oh, horrible!
-- Kill me, but show not to my eyes that monster!
-- Shakes not the earth beneath his bloody feet?
And sleeps in peace the thunder?

Abdallah. Alas! alas!
You see she knows me not!

Almeyda. Oh! would I did not!
Is there no help? Alas, I Am at his mercy!
His mercy, said I? It Is a word he knows not.
-- But, pray you, call no murd'rers -- I will die,
Without one struggle -- only have a grave
May decently receive me, when my heart
Completes his crimes, and bursts with this convulsion!

Abdallah. The strong necessity o'er-rules all form!
-- I must assume that crown she neither knows,
Duly, to wear or yield! --

Nourassin. Yet stay, my lord,
This is mere malady -- She may be won.

Almeyda. Oh, memory! thou return'st in all thy horrors! --
-- Alas I am not mad, but miserable!
-- Pity this anguish -- pause, oh pause, one moment!
And from the fearful height where reason totters,
Ready to plunge into the bright obscure,
Yet give me leisure slowly to recall her!
-- Awful supreme, support me! thou who know.
Al I have suffered! all I yet must suffer!
Suspend this cruel sense of my misfortunes!
-- Expunge the woman from this bleeding bosom;
Oh fill it wholly with those nobler duties,
Which supercede even self, and awe at once
Each human grief to silence!

Abdallah. Wherefore gaze ye?
-- This is a frenzy equals even her own!
" -- Like the wild fires of the conflicting elements,
"These flashes of the soul, often break the night,
"The long, long, night, which falls thus on a maniac."

Nourassin. Yet hear the Queen, Abdallah -- her discourse,
Sounds not like frenzy!

Almeyda. Rather truth, and reason --
-- My dismal fate's accomplished! -- Man nor Heaven,
Can mitigate its horrors! -- yet for you,
For you, unvers'd in suffering, still I feel --
Nor dare I delegate the power I hold,
To him I know incapable of pity --
-- To him, who would perpetuate, and extend,
The miseries I ever must groan under!

ABDALLAH (in a transport of rage). Fooled -- fooled at last! it is well -- I
have deserved it,
In trusting to a woman --

Almeyda. Ye, who hear me,
Know all the merit of this painful effort!
-- For you I yet will live -- for you will reign, --
And though my secret soul shall seek the grave,
Even to the hour that gives me to Alonzo,
Yet shall the lingering interval be marked,
By many an act of equity, and honor --
-- I here deliberately impeach Abdallah,
Of blackest treason to his lawful sovereign!
-- To crown his sins a nobler victim fell!
Oh! deed too horrible for thought! -- Oh deed!
Which ear has never heard, nor voice yet uttered!

Abdallah. Spare all thy eloquence! and this recital!
-- The evil thou'st escaped, now seizes me,
And makes my brain, like my wild soul, one chaos!
-- I do avow the intent, even of that deed,
Though of the fact I Am guiltless -- yet I Will try,
Thus to deserve thy charge! --

Nourassin. Seize on his sword!

he is disarmed. ORASMYN enters and draws to guard his father. How now?
Presumptuous man!

Almeyda. Ah! he too here!
For me there is nor justice then, nor hope!

ABDALLAH (gasping on the shoulder of his son.) Orasmyn! thou had nearly lost
a father!
-- No proud Almeyda!
For thee alone I lived not! had thou seen
No more than I intended for thy knowledge,
Thou had been happy! -- happy with Orasmyn!
I would have given thee him -- my life's best hope,
In whom I center all my pride -- my glory!
-- Yet at this awful crisis of existence,
No more will I dissemble my true motive!
-- To crown his youthful brow with that bright wreath
Injurious fortune bade him only look on,
Has been the single object of my life!

Orasmyn. He scorns the gift -- nor thinks he hears a father.
-- Recall your better self, and calm this transport

Almeyda. This artifice, Orasmyn, is too late --
-- Rather act like him -- own the glorious sin,
And still preserve one merit in thy candor!

Orasmyn. How? how have I deserved the bitter taunt?
How wronged my sovereign even in secret thought?
"Or dared obtrude one selfish view before her?
" -- If in this hour of wildness, and confusion,
"I joy to see her renovated reason;
"Proud to confirm her power, to guard her person,
" -- If this be treason, purify my heart --
" -- To thee I render gladly up the sword,
"Upon whose point no blood ere yet congealed,
"Save of thy foes!"

Almeyda. "Long, long, with glory wear it --
" -- I blush to have aspersed a soul so noble."

ABDALLAH (scornfully surveying him.) Thou traitor to thyself! -- my soul
disclaims thee!
Thou have foredoom'd thy sire, by basely bowing
Thus to thy heart's fond minion! -- hence, and leave me.

Orasmyn. Never can he err, whose monitor is virtue!
Revere her awful power, which saves at once,
Thy life my father -- sweet Almeyda's reason,
And even Orasmyn's honor -- fly to the gate,
And guide Alonzo hither -- oh recall
The last fond hope that beat within thy heart,
Ere yet its darling object vanished from thee!

(Gives a ring to an attendant who departs.) ALMEYDA (faint and trembling.)
Dread to awake the thought -- lost! lost! and murdered!

Orasmyn. The grave itself, has rendered up, ere now
A guiltless inmate! --

Almeyda. Does my sense deceive me?
-- Is he not dead -- repeat that little sentence --
Let my soul live one moment on the hope,
And take, each envied ensign of dominion --
-- For could I crown thee with the radiant gems,
That sprinkle over the blue expanse above,
'Twere recompense too poor! -- but, oh! I fear,
I fear, thou trifled with my heart's fond anguish!
-- Drawn a gay meteor over my gloomy fate,
Which only shows its blackness!

Orasmyn. " -- To appearance --

Almeyda. "Appearance, said thou? -- Think, ere
"yet again
"One breath escape thee, on the verge of being
"My soul now hovers, and a single word
"May make her quite immortal!

Orasmyn. If to know
Alonzo lives, can crown thy days with pleasure,
Be happy, ever happy! -- for I saved
The only lover I was born to envy!

(She looks doubtfully, then sinks fainting in his arms.) Abdallah. This is a
folly that transcends example!
-- Oh! for a pang at once to pierce them both!

Orasmyn. Her life seems gone -- soft -- bend her gently forward.

Abdallah. And hop'st thou then, ungrateful boy, to
save her?

Orasmyn. Wake not within my soul a thought so killing?
-- Call every aid --

Abdallah. Forbear the useless trouble --
It Is not in medicine to prolong her being --
A subtle poison sleeps in every pore,
And steals her from herself -- no human art,
Can bid her breathe one hour!

ORASMYN (throwing himself in an agony at her feet) Thou injured angel!
Could the lifeblood congealing in these veins,
Extend thy years, and give thee all thy wishes;
Even with the fierceness of that fatal savage,
I dare not call my father, would I gash
Each purple artery, and urge the current! --
-- Thou gav'st me being! -- though my soul abhors,
The tainted blessing! yet to thee I turn,
In this tremendous moment! -- hear, and pity!
Blot not at once thy honor, nor defame,
E're yet he soar to glory, that loved son,
Who never till now offended. --

Abdallah. "Need'st thou learn,
"I do not easily fix my decrees,
"But never know to change them. --

Almeyda. "Why, Orasmyn,
"Will thou thus plead for the poor life I heed not?
-- Life, the frail blossom of eternity!
"Which shrinks and shivers, in the vernal breeze,
"And sheds its purple bloom with every shower --
"Until the embryo fruit, arrived at fullness,
"Shakes its soft shelter to the dust? -- Most happy,
"Who ripen first! and quit this mortal coil,
"Unblighted, and unbroken!"

Orasmyn. "Is it thus,
"Celestial spirit! thus, thou would give me comfort?
"Oh! more we need thy example, than thy precepts!
"My father! have I then no influence with thee?
Long have thou studied nature's baleful secrets,
And well thou know their antidotes --

ABDALLAH (with bitterness.) But thou,
Again perhaps would scorn the tainted gift,
Again despise the giver!

Orasmyn. Oh! my father!
To this, how little were the life I owe you!

Abdallah. I have not been accustomed to deny thee --

(Gives a ring to an attendant, who goes out.) ORASMYN (turning with softness
to Almeyda.) "How often did I tell thee I had saved him!
"Even when thy reason, like a frighted bird,
"Forsook the home round which it fondly fluttered!
" -- Yet, oh Almeyda! not in vain thou'st suffered!
"That fatal passion which thy beauty caused,
"By all these miseries chastized to friendship,
"Retains its essence only, and appears,
"Like the cold luster of a winter sun,
"When all its glow, and purple vapors faded!

Abdallah. To her devoted, he nor hears, nor sees me --
Ah! should he dare despise -- Oh Mahomet!
To be the scorn of those for whom we sin --
-- This, this, is disappointment's consummation.
(Attendant brings him a goblet.) Orasmyn, from the memorable hour,
Thy voice first hailed me sire, even unto this
I Have granted all thy prayers!
The good I wish myself, be thine Almeyda!
I taste the draught, that thou may fearless share it!

ORASMYN (presenting the bowl.) Oh! do not hesitate a single moment.
"Hardly can I respire with apprehension --

ALMEYDA (fainting.) "If this be death, how falsely do we fear it!
"Care, pain, and sorrow, fade before the calm,
"The holy calm o'er-shadowing every sense! --
-- Methinks, without a crime, at once to 'scape,
The dreadful past, and all the doubtful future,
Were to accomplish early life's great purpose!

Orasmyn. Oh! spare me all the guilt, the grief, -- the horror,
Live, sweet Almeyda, live, though for another!

Almeyda. Oh! that this potent essence were compounded,
Of herbs might purify alike the soul,
And lull it to a deep, a long repose. -- Drinks the antidote.

Abdallah. Oh, transport! glory! Oh! tremendous triumph!
Sons may forget, but Mahomet remembers!
He has not scorned my prayer, nor quite renounced me
-- Prophetic was thy voice; for thou shall find
A long repose indeed! This was the poison
Which I with an indignant pleasure shared --
-- I had, alas! no other means to die:
Nor would I fall inglorious -- unlamented. --
-- Almeyda, proud Almeyda! even thy love,
In all the plenitude of rank and beauty,
Shall grace my obsequies! and thou, ungrateful!
Attend us, a true mourner.

Orasmyn. Speech is lost! --
-- A deed like this bursts the great chord of nature,
And makes this gorgeous world but one vast ruin!

Abdallah. Already do I feel the subtle essence --
It rages onward, like the fires of Etna,
And nature withers ere it yet approaches. --
-- Ah! she too sinks. Upon the lip of beauty!
Mortality now lays his livid finger!
-- This -- This is glorious mischief! and I joy
To die, the moment life has lost its value.

Orasmyn. But thus to blend me in so black a deed --
-- Make me the minister of my own destruction!
Oh! I have, guiltless, cropped creation's rose,
And shook its crimson glories to the dust!
-- List not those gracious eyes again to me,
Thou soft perfection! I no more dare meet them.
-- No, never dare I hope thou should forgive
The unparalled credulity! -- and he --
Yet, nature, yet thou wring'st me!

ABDALLAH (fiercely shaking him off.) Hence! begone --
^awn on thy minion! but no more approach
The sire thou have disgraced -- betrayed -- abandoned!
-- Even as I loved thee once, so now I loathe thee!
Oh! how I long to shut out life itself,
Since I with life can shut out thy rememb'rance!
-- Bear me, I pray you, to the Guadalquiver --
turns to the attendants. Plunge, plunge me in at once! My liver's calcined!
-- Oh, find some sudden means to quench this fire,
Ere yet my eye-strings crack! -- Away, Away!

Abdallah is borne off. Almeyda. Yet, yet, he comes not! -- Oh! no more
these eyes
Shall dwell delighted on their only object;
Nor this fond heart pronounce its last adieu!
turns and sees Orasmyn's bitter grief. "Take comfort, prince! -- Though small is
my own portion,
"Yet will I share it with thee! For thy sire,
"May Heaven, like me, forgive him!

Orasmyn. "Spotless victim!
"His vices have cut short his being here --
"But, oh! thy virtues speak his future fate.

ALMEYDA (growing more weak.) "Among the many wand'rers on this earth,
"Few are allowed to reach the mortal term:
"And of those few, scarce one expires content.
" -- The mind's deep agonies exhaust each power,
"And early fit the frame for dissolution --
"I only feel a numbness." Hark! I hear him.

Orasmyn. It is thy love! Ah, happy he! to know
The pangs of sorrow only.

ALONZO (entering.) Blessed be Heaven!
Which gives me once again to see Almeyda!
-- And blessed be, too, Orasmyn!

ALMEYDA (leaning fondly over him.) It Is thyself! --
My own Alonzo! -- all my soul's fond treasure!
"Thus on the dying eyes of ^ome lone hermit,
"O'erhanging angels pour a flood of glory,
"Even till his soul exhales in ecstasy!

Alonzo. Ah! why this mournful sweetness? In thine eye
The living luster fades; and on thy cheek
Each charm grows wan and hollow!

ORASMYN. (wringing his hand.) Oh, Alonzo!
No more must we contend for this rich prize!
Heaven claims its own -- and we alike must mourn.

ALONZO (shaking him off.) Prince! if thou'st done this deed --

Almeyda Oh! never think it --
Orasmyn's generous heart is virtue's temple!
Alonzo, dear Alonzo! honor -- love him.
Much will thou owe him for my mean injustice.
-- I only strove for life till thou were near. --
It now evaporates: Hardly speech is left me.
" -- I charge ye, never with blood defile the tomb,
"Which the true tears of both may nobly hallow.
-- And now, indeed, farewell! -- A hand for each.
This gives away my crown; and this, oh! this,
The faithful heart that is in it! -- I am cold;
And these dim eyes seek vainly for Alonzo!
-- Speak to me, love! -- Oh! speak to me, once more,
While yet I know that voice --!

Alonzo. Lost in a chaos
Of killing anguish, without one expression
May ease this laboring heart, how shall I soothe thee?
How mitigate thy pain?

Almeyda. Tell me you love me --

Lays her head on his hand, and dies. Alonzo. Love you! -- Oh, God! --

Orasmyn. Kissing and resigning her hand. Words -- vows -- weak, vain
indulgence!
Never -- Oh! never shall my soul forget you!

Both lovers remain mourning near her. HAMET (advancing). Tremendous moment!
awful pause of being!
-- When viewing thus the abdicated frame,
Where the fond soul had treasured all her wishes,
How does recoiling Nature feel at once
Her imperfection. Yet such scenes alone
Can show the danger of those cherished passions,
Which thus can antedate the hour of death,
(...) make existence agony!

EPILOGUE.
To be spoken in a Crier's Gown, and with a Bell. OYEZ! Oyez! Oyez!
Whereas on demand it does plainly appear,
That some wicked wag. -- Odso! how came I here?
What a blund'ring is this! One would think I were blind.
Here I Am got on before, when I should be behind.
-- Rare work, there, my friends! rare storming and fury.
No Epilogue's coming tonight, I assure you! --
Sure never poor author like ours has been crossed:
When meant to be spoken, she found it was lost.
Lost, Ma'am, says the prompter, all pale at the sound!
Lost, Ma'am, do you say? was re-echoed around, --
Lost -- stolen, she replied; it is in vain to deny it;
So dear Mr. KING, be so good as to cry it.
The thought was an odd one, you will say -- so did I:
But when ladies entreat, we are bound to comply.
Oyez! Oyez! Oyez! Rings the bell again.
Be it known,
To all it concerns, Wit, Critic, or Town,
That whoever brings it back shall receive, besides praise,
A handsome reward of a crown too of bays;
Whereas, if detained, heavy lawsuits will follow,
And damage be sued for, in court of Apollo.
Rare menaces these! you see how it stands --
She Will indite you all round; so up with your hands,
I Will examine each face, too -- In truth, a fine show. --
Whom first shall I try? Oh! my friends here below.
The Box claim precedence: but there I Have my fears;
Perhaps they will demand to be tried by their peers.
Yet methinks, when I view the fair circle around,
I Am in hopes they will not ask for what cannot be found.
An Epilogue stolen, cries Old Crusty, out yonder!
Pointing to the Pit. A fine prize, indeed! who should steal it I wonder?
He, surely, must be a strange dolt, who contested
A bill on Parnassus, so often protested. --
Nay, Sirs, it is a loss; so pray ye, don't flout it. --
Good or bad, (...) all, and we cannot do without it.
Yet, in search of our stray, I Will even now look elsewhere.
There Is no wit (...), I Am sure, so it cannot be there.
-- Higher up, then -- Hey -- what -- Nay, come, I Will not
wrong ye. To the Galleries.
Not one roguish face can I spy out among ye;
But sound hearts and sound heads, with too great a store
Of mirth in yourselves, to steal from the poor.
All good men and true. So I give up the cause.
And since, then, our Bard cannot bring you to the laws,
Even let her be the Culprit, and steal -- your applause.
God save the King!

Rings the Bell, and exit. FINIS.

