AN APPENDIX TO JOHN BULL Still In His SENSES: OR, Law is a Bottomless-Pit.

Printed from a Manuscript found in the Cabinet of the famous Sir Humphry
Polesworth: And Published, (as well as the three former Parts) by the Author of
the NEW ATALANTIS.

LONDON, Printed for John Morphew, ne^r Stationer's-Hall, 1712. Price 3 d.

AN APPENDIX TO John Bull Still in his Senses, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Apprehending, Examination, and Imprisonment of Jack, for Suspicion of
Poisoning.
THE attentive Reader cannot have forgot, that in my last Part, the Story of
Yan Ptschirnsooker's Powder was interrupted by a Message from Frog. I have a
natural Compassion for Curiosity, being much troubled with the Distemper my
self; therefore to gratify that uneasy itching Sensation in my Reader, I have
procured the following Account of that Matter.

Yan Ptschirnsooker came off (as Rogues usually do upon such Occasions) by
Peaching his Partner, and being extremely forward to bring him to the Gallows;
Jack was accused* as the Contriver of all the Roguery. And indeed it happened
unfortunately for the poor Fellow, that he was known to bear a most inveterate
Spite against the old Gentlewoman, and consequently, that never any ill
Accident happened to her, but he was suspected to be at the bottom of it. If
she pricked her Finger, Jack, to be sure, laid the Pin in the way: If some
Noise in the Street disturbed her Rest, who could it be but Jack in some of his
nocturnal Rambles? If a Servant run away, Jack had debauched him: every idle
Tittle-tattle that went about, Jack was always suspected for the Author of it:
However, all was nothing to this last Affair of the temperating, moderating
Powder. The Hue and Cry went after Jack, to Apprehend him, dead or alive,
wherever he could be found. The Constables looked out for him in all his usual
Haunts; but, to no purpose. Where do you think did they find him at last? Even
smoking his Pipe very quietly, at his Brother Martin's; from whence he was
carried, with a vast Mob at his Heels, before the Worshipful Mr. Justice
Overdo. Several of his Neighbors made Oath, That of late, the Prisoner had
been observed to lead a very dissolute Life, renouncing even his usual
Hypocrisy, and Pretenses to Sobriety: That he frequented Taverns and
Eating-Houses, and had been often guilty of Drunkenness and Gluttony at My
Lord-Mayor's Table: That he had been seen in the Company of Lewd Women: That he
had transferred his usual religious Care of the engrossed Copy of his Father's
Will, to Bank Bills, Orders for Tallies, and Debentures: Tale of the Tub.
These he now affirmed, with more literal Truth, to be Meat, Drink, and Cloth,
the Philosophers Stone, and the Universal Medicine: That he was so far from
showing his customary Reverence to the Will, that he kept company with those
that called his Father a cheating Rogue, and his Will a Forgery. That he not
only sat quietly and heard his Father railed at, but often chim'd in with the
Discourse, and hugged the Authors as his Bosom Friends: Tale of the Tub.
That instead of asking for Blows, at the Corners of the Streets, he now
bestowed them as plentifully as he begged them before: In short, That he was
grown a mere Rake; and, had nothing left in him of old Jack, except his Spite
to John Bull's Mother.

Another Witness made Oath, That Jack had been overheard bragging of a Trick he
had found out to manage the old formal Jade, as he used to call her. Damn this
numb'd-Skull of mine (quoth he) that I could not light on it sooner. As long as
I go in this ragged tattered Coat, I am so well known, that I am hunted away
from the old Woman's Door by every barking Curr about the House, they bid me
Defiance; there is no doing Mischief as an open Enemy, I must find some way or
another of getting within Doors, and then I shall have better Opportunities of
playing my Pranks, besides the Benefit of good keeping.

Two Witnesses Swore, that several Years ago, there came to their Mistriss's
Door, a young Fellow in a tattered Coat, that went by the Name of Timothy Trim,
whom they did in their Conscience believe to be the very Prisoner, resembling
him in Shape, Stature, and the Features of his Countenance; that the said
Timothy Trim being taken into the Family, clapped their Mistriss's Livery over
his own tattered Coat; that the said Timothy was extremely officious about
their Mistriss's Person, endeavoring by Flattery and Tale-bearing, to set her
against the rest of the Servants; no Body was so ready to fetch any thing that
was wanted, or reach what was dropped; that he used to shove and elbow his
Fellow Servants to get near his Mistress, especially when Money was a paying or
receiving, then he was never out of the way; that he was extremely diligent
about every Bodies Business but his own; that the said Timothy, while he was in
the Family, used to be playing Roguish Tricks; when his Mistress's back was
turned he would loll out his Tongue, make Mouths, and laugh at her, walking
behind her like a Harlequin, ridiculing her Motions and Gestures; if his
Mistress looked about, he put on a grave, demure Countenance, as he had been in
a fit of Devotion; that he used often to trip up Stairs so smoothly that you
could not hear him tread, and put all things out of Order; that he would pinch
the Children and Servants, when he met them in the dark, so hard, that he left
the Print of his Fore-fingers and his Thumb in black and blue, and then slink
into a corner, as if no Body had done it: Out of the same malicious Design, he
used to lay Chairs and Joint-stools in their way, that they might break their
Noses by falling over them. The more young and unexperienced, he used to teach
to talk Saucily, and call Names: During his stay in the Family there was much
Plate missing; that being caught with a couple of Silver Spoons in his Pocket,
with their Handles wrench'd off, he said, he was only going to carry them to
the Goldsmiths to be mended; that the said Timothy was hated by all the honest
Servants, for his ill-condition'd, splenetick Tricks, but especially for his
slanderous Tongue; traducing them to their Mistress, as Drunkards, Thieves and
Whore-masters; that the said Timothy, by lying Stories, used to set all the
Family together by the Ears, taking delight to make them Fight and Quarrel;
particularly one Day sitting at Table, he spoke Words to this Effect: I am of
Opinion (quoth he) That little short Fellows, such as we are, have better
Hearts. and could beat the tall Fellows; I wish it came to a fair Trial, I
believe, these long Fellows, as sightly as they are, should find their Jackets
well thwack'd. A parcel of tall Fellows, who thought themselves affronted by
this Discourse, took up the Quarrel, and to it they went, the tall Men and the
low Men, which continues still a Faction in the Family, to the great Disorder
of our Mistress's Affairs: That the said Timothy carried this Frolic so far,
that he proposed to his Mistress, that she should entertain no Servant that was
above four Foot seven Inches high, and for that Purpose had prepared a Gage, by
which they were to be measured: That the good old Gentlewoman was not so simple
as to go into his Projects, she began to smell a Rat. This Trim (quoth she) is
an odd sort of a Fellow, methinks he makes a strange Figure with that ragged,
tattered Coar, appearing under his Livery, cannot he go spruce and clean, like
the rest of the Servants? The Fellow has a Roguish Leer with him, which I don't
like by any means: besides, he has such a twang in his Discourse, and an
ungraceful way of speaking through the Nose, that one can hardly understand
him; I wish the Fellow be not Tainted with some bad Disease. The Witnesses
farther made Oath, That the said Timothy lay out a Nights, and went abroad
often at unseasonable Hours; that it was credibly reported, he did Business in
another Family; that he pretended to have a squeamish Stomach, and could not
eat at Table with the rest of the Servants, though this was but a pretense to
provide some nice Bit for himself; that he refused to Dine upon Salt-fish, only
to have an opportunity to eat a Calve's Head (his Favorite Dish) in private;
that for all his tender Stomach, when he was got by himself, he would devour
Capons, Turkeys and Sirloins of Beef, like a Cormorant.

Two other Witnesses gave the following Evidence, That in his officious
Attendance upon his Mistress, he had tried to slip in a Powder into her Drink,
and that once he was caught endeavoring to stifle her with a Pillow as she
was a sleep; that he and Ptschirnsooker were often in close Conference, and
that they used to drink together at the Rose, where it seems he was well enough
known by the true Name of Jack.

The Prisoner had little to say in his Defense; he endeavored to prove himself
Alibi; so that the Trial turned upon this single Question, whether the said
Timothy Trim and Jack, were the same Person? which was proved by such plain
Tokens, and particularly by a Mole under the left Pap, that there was no
withstanding the Evidence; therefore the Worshipful Mr. Justice committed him,
in order to his Trial.

CHAP. II.
How Jack's Friends came to visit him in Prison, and what Advice they gave him.
JACK hitherto had passed in the World for a poor, simple, well-meaning,
half-witted, crack'd-brain'd Fellow, People were strangely surpised to find
him in such a Roguery; that he should disguise himself under a false Name, hire
himself out for a Servant to an old Gentlewoman, only for an opportunity to
Poison her. They said, That it was more Generous to profess open Enmity, than,
under a profound Dissimulation, to be guilty of such a scandalous Breach of
Trust, and of the sacred Rights of Hospitality. In short, the Action was
universally Condemned by his best Friends; they told him in plain terms, That
this was come as a Judgment upon him, for his loose Life, his Gluttony,
Drunkenness and Avarice, laying aside his Father's Will in an old moldy Trunk,
and turning Stock-jobber, News-monger, and Busie-body, meddling with other
Peoples Affairs, shaking off his old serious Friends, and keeping Company with
Buffoons and Pick-pockets, his Father's sworn Enemies; That he had best throw
himself upon the Mercy of the Court, Repent, and change his Manners. To say
truth, Jack heard these Discourses with some Compunction; however he resolved
to try what his new Acquaintance would do for him: They sent Habakkuk Slyboots,
who delivered him the following Message, as the peremptory Commands of his
trusty Companions.

Habakkuk. Dear Jack, I am sorry for thy Misfortune; Matters have not been
carried on with due Secrecy; however, we must make the best of a bad Bargain:
Thou art in the utmost Jeopardy, that is certain; Hang, Draw and Quarter, are
the gentlest things they talk of. However, thy faithful Friends, ever watchful
for thy Security, bid me tell thee, That they have one infallible Expedient
left to save thy Life: Thou must know, we have got into some Understanding with
the Enemy, by the means of Don Diego Dismallo; he assures us there is no Mercy
for thee, and that there is only one way left to Escape; it is indeed somewhat
out of the common Road, however, be assured, it is the result of most mature
Deliberation.


Jack. Prithee tell me quickly, for my Heart is sunk down into the very bottom
of my Belly.


Hab. It is the unanimous Opinion of your Friends, that you make as if you
hanged your self; that they will give it out that you are quite dead, and
convey your Body out of Prison in a Beir; and that John Bull, being busied with
his Lawsuit, will not enquire further into the matter.


Jack. How do you mean, make as if I had hanged my self?


Hab. Nay, you must really hang your self up in a true genuine Rope, that there
may appear no Trick in it, and leave the rest to your Friends.


Jack. Truly this is a matter of some Concern; and my Friends, I hope, will not
take it ill, if I enquire a little into the means by which they intend to
deliver me: A Rope, and a Noose, are no jesting Matters!


Hab. Why so mistrustful? have* thou ever found us false to thee? I tell thee,
there is one ready to cut thee down.


Jack. May I presume to ask who it is that is entrusted with that important
Office?


Hab. Is there no end of thy How Is and thy Why's? that is a Secret.


Jack. A Secret, perhaps, that I may be safely trusted with, for I am not like
to tell it again. I tell you plainly, it is no strange thing for a Man, before
he hangs himself up, to enquire who is to cut him down.


Hab. Thou suspicious Creature! if thou must needs know it, I tell thee it is
Sir Roger; he has been in Tears ever since thy Misfortune. Don Diego and we
have laid it so, that he is to be in the next Room, and before the Rope is well
about thy Neck, rest satisfied, he will break in, and cut thee down: Fear not,
old Boy; we'll do it, I Will warrant thee.


Jack. So I must hang my self up, upon hopes that Sir Roger will cut me down,
and all this upon the Credit of Don Diego: A fine Stratagem indeed to save my
Life, that depends upon Hanging, Don Diego, and Sir Roger!


Hab. I tell thee there is a Mystery in all this, my Friend, a piece of
profound Policy; if thou knew what good this will do to the Common Cause, thy
Heart would leap for Joy: I Am sure thou would not delay the Experiment one
moment.


Jack. This is to the Tune of All for the better. What Is your Cause to me, when
I am hanged?


Hab. Refractory Mortal! If thou will not trust thy Friends, take what follows;
know assuredly, before next full Moon, that thou will be hung up in Chains, or
thy Quarters perching upon the most conspicuous Places of the Kingdom. Nay, I
don't believe they will be contented with Hanging, they talk of Empaling, or
breaking on the Wheel; and thou chusest that, before a gentle suspending of thy
self, for one Minute. Hanging is not so painful a thing as thou imagines. I
have spoke with several that have undergone it, they all agree it is no manner
of uneasiness; be sure thou take good notice of the Symptoms, the Relation will
be curious; it is but a kick or two with thy Heels, and a wry Mouth or so: Sir
Roger will be with thee in the twinkling of an Eye.


Jack. But what if Sir Roger should not come? will my Friends be there to
Succor me?


Hab. Doubt it not; I will provide every thing against to Morrow Morning, do
thou keep thy own Secret, say nothing: I tell thee, it is absolutely necessary
for the Common Good, that thou should go through this Operation.


CHAP. III.
How Jack hanged himself up by the Persuasion of his Friends, who broke their
Word, and left his Neck in the Noose.
JACK was a professed Enemy to Implicit Faith, and yet I dare say, it was never
more strongly exerted, nor more basely abused, than upon this occasion. He was
now, with his old Friends, in the state of a poor disbanded Officer after a
Peace; or rather a wounded Soldier after a Battle; like an old Favorite of a
cunning Minister after the Jobb is over; or a decayed Beauty to a cloyed Lover
in quest of new Game; or like an hundred such things that one sees every Day.
There were new Intrigues, new Views, new Projects on foot; Jack's Life was the
Purchase of Diego's Friendship, much good may it do them. The Interest of Hocus
and Sir Williams Crawly, which was now more at Heart, made this Operation upon
poor Jack absolutely necessary. You may easily guess that his Rest that Night
was but small, and much disturbed; however the remaining part of his Time he
did not employ (as his Custom was formerly) in Prayer, Meditation, or singing a
double Verse of a Psalm, but amused himself with disposing of his Bank-Stock;
many a Doubt, many a Qualm, overspread his clouded Imagination. Must I then
(quoth he) hang up my own personal, natural, individual Self, with these two
Hands! Durus Sermo! What if I should be cut down, as my Friends tell me? There
is something Infamous in the very Attempt; the World will conclude I had a
guilty Conscience. Is it possible that good Man, Sir Roger, can have so much
pity upon an unfortunate Scoundrel, that has persecuted him so many Years? No,
it cannot be: I don't love Favors that pass through Don Diego's Hands. On the
other side, my Blood chills about my Heart, at the thought of these Rogues,
with their bloody Hands grabbling in my Guts, and pulling out my very Entrails:
Hang it, for once I Will trust my Friends. So Jack resolved, but he had done more
wisely, to have put himself upon the Trial of his Country, made his Defense in
Form; many things happen between the Cup and the Lip, Witnesses might have been
bribed, Juries managed, or Prosecution stopped. But so it was, Jack for this
time had a sufficient Stock of Implicit Faith, which led him to his Ruin, as
the Sequel of the Story shows: And now the fatal Day was come, in which he was
to try this hanging Experiment. His Friends did not fail him at the appointed
Hour, to see it put in practice. Habakkuk brought him a smooth, strong, tough
Rope, made of many a ply of wholesome Scandinavian Hemp, compactly twisted
together, with a Noose that slipped as glib as a Bird-catcher's Gin. Jack shrunk
and grew pale at first sight of it, he handled it, measured it, stretched it,
fixed it against the Iron-bar of the Window to try its strength, but no
Familiarity could reconcile him to it. He found fault with the length, the
thickness, and the twist, nay, the very color did not please him. Will nothing
less th^n Hanging serve (quoth Jack)? Will Not my Enemies take Bail for my good
Behavior? Will they accept of a Fine, or be satisfied with the Pillory and
Imprisonment, a good round Whipping, or Burning in the Cheek?

Habakkuk. Nothing but your Blood will appease their Rage; make haste, else we
shall be discovered: There Is nothing like surprising the Rogues. How they will
be disappointed, when they hear that thou have have prevented their Revenge,
and hanged thine own self?


Jack. That Is true; but what if I should do it in Effigies? Is there never an
old Pope, or Pretender, to hang up in my stead? we are not so unlike, but it
may pass.


Hab. That can never be put upon Sir Roger.


Jack. Are you sure he is in the next Room? Have you provided a very sharp
Knife, in case of the worst?


Hab. Do take me for a common Liar? Be satisfied, no Damage can happen to
your Person, your Friends will take care of that.


Jack. May Not I quilt my Rope, it galls my Neck strangely? besides, I don't
like this running Knot, it holds too tight, I may be stifled all of a sudden.


Hab. Thou have so many If's and And's; prithee dispatch; it might have been
over before this time.


Jack. But, now I think on it, I would fain settle some Affairs, for fear of the
worst: Have a little Patience.


Hab. There Is no having Patience, thou art such a faintling, silly Creature.


Jack. O thou most detestable, abominable, Passive Obedience! did I ever
imagine I should become thy Votary, in so pregnant an Instance; how will my
Brother Martin laugh at this Story, to see himself out done in his own Calling?
He has taken the Doctrine, and left me the Practice. No sooner had he uttered
these Words, but like a Man of true Courage, he tied the fatal Cord to the
Beam, fitted the Noose, and mounted upon the bottom of a Tub, the inside of
which he had often Graced in his prosperous Days. This Footstool Habakkuk
kicked away, and left poor Jack swinging, like the Pendulum of Paul's Clock.
The fatal Noose performed its Office, and with most strict Ligature, squeezed
the Blood into his Face, 'till it assumed a purple dye: While the poor Man,
heaved from the very bottom of his Belly for Breath, Habakuk walked with great
Deliberation into both the upper and lower Room, to acquaint his Friends, who
received the News with great Temper, and with Geers and Scoffs instead of Pity,
Jack has Hanged himself (quoth they!) let us go and see how the poor Rogue
swings. Then they called Sir Roger. Sir Roger (quoth Habakkuk) Jack has hanged
himself, make haste and cut him down. Sir Roger turned first one Ear and then
the other, not understanding what he said.


Hab. I tell you Jack has hanged himself up.


Sir Roger. Who Is hanged?


Hab. Jack.


Sir Roger. I thought this had not been hanging Day.


Hab. But the poor Fellow has hanged himself.


Sir Roger. Then let him hang. I don't wonder at it, the Fellow has been mad
these twenty Years. With this he slunk away.


Then Jack's Friends began to hunch and push one another, Why don't you go and
cut the poor Fellow down? Why don't you? and why don't you? Not I (quoth one,)
not I (quoth another,) not I (quoth a third,) he may hang 'till Doomsday before
I relieve him. Nay it is credibly reported, that they were so far from
succouring their poor Friend, in this his dismal Circumstance, that
Ptschirnsooker, and several of his Companions, went in and pulled him by the
Legs, and thump'd him on the Breast. Then they began to rail at him for the
very thing which they had both advised and justified before, viz. his getting
into the old Gentlewoman's Family, and putting on her Livery. The Keeper, who
performed the last Office, coming up, found Jack swinging, with no Life in him;
he took down the Body gently and laid it on a Bulk, and brought out the Rope to
the Company. This, Gentlemen, is the Rope that hanged Jack; What must be done
with it? Upon which they ordered it to be laid among the Curiosities of Gresham
College, and it is called Jack's Rope to this very Day. However Jack after all,
had some small Tokens of Life in him, but lies at this time past hopes of a
total Recovery, with his Head hanging on one Shoulder, without Speech or
Motion. The Coroners Inquest supposing him Dead, brought him in Non Compos.

CHAP. IV.
The Conference between Don Diego Dismallo, and John Bull.
DUring the time of the foregoing Transaction, Don Diego was entertaining John
Bull.

D. Diego. I hope, Sir, this Day's Proceeding will convince you of the
Sincerity of your old Friend Diego, and the Treachery of Sir Roger.


J. Bull. What Is the matter now?


D. Diego. You have been endeavoring, for several Years, to have Justice done
upon that Rogue Jack; but what through the Remissness of Constables, Justices
and packed Juries, he has always found the Means to escape.


J. Bull. What then?


D. Diego. Consider then, who is your best Friend, he that would have brought
him to condign Punishment, or he that has saved him. By my Persuasion, Jack had
hanged himself, if Sir Roger had not cut him down.


J. Bull. Who told you that Sir Roger has done so?


D. Diego. You seem to receive me coldly; methinks my Services deserve a better
Return.


J. Bull. Since you value your self upon Hanging this poor Scoundrel, I tell
you, when I have any more Hanging-work, I Will send for thee; I have some better
Employment for Sir Roger: In the mean time, I desire the poor Fellow may be
looked after. When he first came out of the North-Country into my Family, under
the pretended Name of Timothy Trim, the Fellow seemed to mind his Loom and his
Spinning-wheel, till some body turned his Head; then he grew so pragmatical,
that he took upon him the Government of my whole Family: I could never order
any thing, within or without doors, but he must be always giving his Counsel,
sorsooth: Nevertheless, tell him, I will forgive what is past; and if he would
mind his Business for the future, and not meddle out of his own Sphere, he will
find that John Bull is not of a cruel Disposition,


D. Diego. Yet all your skilful Physicians say, that nothing can recover your
Mother, but a piece of Jack's Liver boiled in her Soup.


J. Bull. Those are Quacks: My Mother abhors such Canibal's Food; she is in
perfect He^lth at present: I would have given many a good Pound to have had her
so well some time ago. There are, indeed, two or three troublesome old Nurses,
that because they believe I am tenderhearted, will never let me have a quiet
Nights Rest, with knocking me up: Oh, Sir, your Mother is taken extremely ill!
she is fallen into a fainting Fit! she has a great Emptiness, and wants
Sustenance! This is only to recommend themselves, for their great Care. John
Bull, as simple as he is, understands a little of a Pulse.


FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by John Morphew, near Stationers' Hall; and A. Dodd, at the Peacock
without Temple Bar.

THE Examiners for the Year 1711. To which is added, an Explanatory Index. The
Conduct of the Allies, and of the late Ministry, in beginning and carrying on
the present War. 7th Edition. Pr. 6 d.

Some Remarks on the Barrier-Treaty, between Her Majesty and the
States General. By the Author of the Conduct of the Allies. To which are added,
the said Barrier-Treaty with the Two separate Articles; Part of the
Counter-Project; The Sentiments of Prince Eugene and Count Sinzendorf, upon the
said Treaty; and a Representation of the English Merchants. 2d Edit. Pr. 6 d.

Some Advice humbly offered to the Members of the October Club; in a Letter
from a Person of Honor, 2d Edit. Pr. 2 d.

A Journey to Paris: With some secret Transactions between the Fr -- King and
an Eng -- Gentleman. 3d Edit. Pr. 2 d.

The Characters and Principles of the present Set of Whigs 3d Edit. Pr. 3 d.

The Four Volumes of the Atalantis.

The D. of M -- h's Vindication: In Answer to a Pamphlet lately Published, cal^
Bouchain; or a Dialogue between the M^dley and the Examiner. 3d Edit,
corrected. Pr. 2

The Picture of a Modern Whig; First and Second Part. By Dr. Davenant.

Some Remarks on the Letters between the L -- d T -- nd and Mr. Sec -- tarry B
-- le. In a Letter to the Author of the Remarks on the Barrier-Treaty. Pr. 3 d.

John Bull Still in his Senses: Being the Third Part of Law is a Bottomless
Pit. Printed from a famous Manuscript found in the Cabinet of the famous Sir
Humphrey Polesworth; and Published (as well as the two former Parts) by the
Author of the New Atalantis. Pr. 6 d.


