SONGS, etc. ^N THE PROPHET; A COMIC OPERA.

Price SIXPENCE.

THE AIRS, DUETTS, TRIOS AND CHORUSSES, etc. IN THE PROPHET; A COMIC OPERA, IN
THREE ACTS; PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN. The Music partly
selected from the Works of Hayd'n, Purcell, Ployel, Anfossi, Cimaroso, Gretry,
Giordani and Sacchini, and partly composed by Mr. SHIELD; with a grand Overture
by Salieri.

LONDON: Printed for T. CADELL, in the Strand. 1788.

CHARACTERS.
Sultan, Mr. BANNISTER. Vizier, Mr. RYDER. Carlos, Mr. JOHNSTONE. Rathmud, Mr.
QUICK. Selim, Mr. EDWIN. Lazarus, Mr. BLANCHARD, Heli, Mr. BOOTH.
Farruknaz, Mrs. BILLINGTON. Ismene, Mrs. MARTYR. Amra, Mrs. WEBB.
Mob, Mutes, Guards, etc.

SCENE, -- Constantinople.

* The lines marked with inverted Commas are omitted in the Representation.

AIRS, DUETS, etc. IN THE PROPHET.
ACT I.
AIR I. -- ISMENE.
SWEET blushing flower! a while,
Breathe soft incense on the air,
Yet thy balmy dews distill,
And be the Gard'ner's pride and care!
Yet a little, charm the sense,
Yet a moment -- fix the eye;
Then, for thy short pre-eminence,
Be ravished from thy stock and die!
AIR II. -- FARRUKNAZ.
DEAR native scenes, fair Seville's Towers,
That rear your antique spires so high,
Your awful groves and fragrant bowers
Fond memory traces with reverted eye;
And Hope, of all that train remaining
Which once gay youth and pleasure led,
At every pause of my complaining,
Points to your vales beloved, and sacred shade.
" Happily beneath some crumbling ruin,
" Some dripping arch, or rifted tree,
" My Carlos lingers yet, renewing
" Vows of angelic love, and waits for me!
" There yet a while, sweet spirit hover! --
" I come, my holy vow to keep,
" I come to join my sainted lover; --
" And joy to die, who only live to weep.
AIR III. -- ISMENE.
THE heart which love has wounded,
By fear and death surrounded,
One only thought alarms;
It mocks the raging ocean,
The stormy winds commotion,
Or din of hostile arms:
Its wonted cares are banished,
Its early terrors vanished,
It pants with fears unknown,
Throbs with too fierce pulsation,
To mark the dull vibration,
That trembles with its own.
AIR IV. -- FARRUKNAZ.
" FROM Carmel's spicy groves, or where
" Stained with many a marty'rs blood,
" Old Kedron rolls his holy flood,
" To Sion Wall, the tomb of God,
" Pilgrims who precious relics bear; --
" If sudden on the scorching sand
" The prowling Arab's felon band
" Round the fainting Camels stand,
" Some portion feel of my despair!
Who, by the fraud-avenging sea,
Are dashed, upon some verdant Isle;
And worn with care, and spent with toil,
In sleep from thought escape awhile,
By some clear stream, or perfumed tree; --
But wake to savage songs, and view
The feathered chief, and sable crew,
And kindling fires on mountains blue,
May weep, and rage, and rave, like me!
AIR V. -- SULTAN.
THE God who formed our wretched race,
In pity closed the book of Fate,
Forbad with impious search to trace
The ills -- that all alike await.
Ah wherefore burst the friendly shade,
Which shuts the future from our sight;
And tear the veil, by mercy spread,
To shield us from a painful light!
Full soon shall Time, so seeming slow,
With noiseless steps his course fulfill,
And call to birth each destined woe,
Each embrio grief, and ripened ill.
AIR VI. -- VIZIER.
CHLOE, with all that Nature
Coud lend of loves and graces,
To deck each conquering feature,
Or wanton in her tresses,
For twenty years, the nation
Had ruled, with sway tyranny,
'Till for her soul's salvation,
She lately felt a panic.
Unlike the Grecian Bully
That all the world had won, Sir,
Then wept so pitifully
Because there was but one, Sir,
She in the skies discovers
An Empire worth acquiring;
So quits her quitting lovers,
And flies from the retiring,
For now her form is waining,
And eyes begin to twinkle,
And all the Loves remaining,
Are Loves, that love a wrinkle --
Herself, a Pagan Goddess,
Into a saint she turns, Sir,
Nor longer for the bodies,
But souls of men, she burns, Sir.
So, lest her faith should fail her,
Or youthful sins might sink her,
She keeps a preaching Tailor,
And apostolic Tinker;
Who, to regeneration
May guide her and refresh her; --
In case too of temptation,
May struggle with the flesh, Sir.
AIR VII. -- ISMENE.
HAVE you not seen an Infant's prize,
In vain its snowy pinions beat,
That tipp'd with gold, and Tyrian dies,
Are only guilty of its fate?
With cruel kindness, to her breast,
The thoughtless nymph her captive presies;
That tortured still, and still caressed,
Breathes out its little life in kisses!
Such is, in faithful lines portrayed,
The story of the woes I prove; --
So wretched woman is betrayed
By beauty, and undone by love!
With cruel kindness, etc.
TRIO -- AIR VIII. -- FARRUKNAZ, ISMENE, and SULTAN.
THINK not sorrow made for you!
The slaves of love are tortured too!
Eyer cruel, ever smiling,
Sill detected, still beguiling,
Cupid wreaths his chains with flowers,
And hides his rack in perfumed bowers!
Chorus. Think not sorrow, etc.

END OF FRST ACT.
ACT II.
AIR IX. -- CARLOS.
FAIR liberty! whom heaven gave
But where peculiarly it loves;
And put off all it meant for slave
With orange-bow'rs, and citron-groves!
The children of the frozen North,
Where nature half her gifts retains,
Are doomed to tame the churlish earth,
For tasteless fruits, and tardy grains;
Yet while their weary task they ply,
By thee their fainting souls are cheered!
No stern unfeeling Lord is nigh,
No rods are seen, no chains are heard!
Still as they guide the delving plough,
Or bind pale Autumn's scanty store;
To thee, their manly lives they vow,
To thee, their grateful strains they pour!
RONDEAU -- AIR X. -- CARLOS.
SWEET innocence has charms, to soothe
Each lawless thought, which love inspires,
And calms the fiery pulse of youth
With meek Devotion's pure desires!
To chasten, and refine, she knows,
Tumultuous wishes, burning sighs;
And turns the breath of eager vows
To incense, and to sacrifice!
AIR XI. -- AMRA.
TO be true to the man they admire,
Is a virtue, all women alike have --
When pleasure and duty conspire
Our conduct's as plain as a pike-staff:
But at once to detest, and be true too,
Another to love, and resist him,
Is on wives too tyranic a duty,
To be practiced by Turk, or by Christian.
AIR XII. -- RATHMUD.
SEE the mutes!
Cruel brutes!
They seize me --
Round they fling
Hempen string,
And squeeze me!
While I weeze,
My decease
They quicken --
I flicker,
Much quicker
Than chicken.
You stand by
While I die. --
Then, bolder,
With your blade,
Cut my head
From shoulder*
Down the staircase
Kick my carcass,
In a hole:
And my noddle
Rides a straddle,
On a Pole.
TRIO -- AIR XIII. -- LAZARUS, HELI, RATHMUD.
Laz. THOUGH Womansh and Wine be de blesshings of Laife,
Yet monish ish much more delighting --
For, Dese are de caushes of quarrelsh and shtraife,
But for dis we can cheat vedout faighting.

Heli. If the blessings of life be but women, and wine!
Never quarrel, but part them between us:
The joys of the rosy-cheek'd Bacchus be mine;
And do you take the pleasures of Venus.

Rath. To love and to drink, are the blessings of life,
When your wine than your mistress is older --
But so new is my wine, and so antique my wife,
My sole pleasure in drink, is to scold her.

Rath. and Heli. The joys of the rosy-cheek'd Bachus be thine / mine

Rath. and Laz. And we'll part the money between us.

Heli. And do you take the pleasures of Venus.

AIR XIV. -- LAZARUS.
WHEN I wash a mighty little boy,
Heart-cakes I made, and peppermint-drops,
Wafers and sweet-chalk I used for to cry,
Alicompain, and nice Lollipops.
Nexsht I made rollers for de Macs,
To curl deir hair, 'twash very good --
Rosin I painted for shealing-wax,
And forged upon it Well brand en vast houd.
" Slippers for Inns I next learnt to stitch,
" Quicksilver balls I made, to make Brass-Buckles white,
" Then a snug box I took very near Houndsditch,
" And, Oh, how I used to melt plate every night!
" Of their Commissions, Officers I chouse,
" Tradesmen I swindle of every dimensions;
" I cheat every soul that come to my house,
" Parsons of their Livings, Widows of their Pensions.
Then to try my luck in de Alley I went,
But of dat I soon grew tired, or wiser --
Monish I lent at fifty per cent,
And wash I. H. in de Public Advertizer.
De nexsht thing I did, wash a spirited prank,
Which at a stroke my fortune made,
For I happened to write so like de Cashiers of de Bank,
De Clerks didn't know de difference, and de monish was paid.
So having sheated the Gentiles, as Moses commanded,
I began to tremble at every Gibbet I saw,
So I got on board a ship, and here I am landed,
In spite of Judges, Counselors, Attorneys and Law.
AIR XV. -- SULTAN.
SAY, when the chast'ning hand of heaven requires
Of the torn breast, its better, dearer part;
Can Love, obedient, put out all his fires,
Or reason quell the pulse, and calm the heart?
" Will no fond passage linger in the mind,
" Nor tender words yet vibrate on the ear,
" Nor look nor gesture, leave its trace behind,
" The hand its pressure, nor its brine the tear?
No -- In this bleeding vault of breathing earth,
Thy gracious image shall for aye, remain,
Or from its living cavern bursting forth
Glide through the chambers of my madding brain!
By heaven rejected and of thee bereaved,
Madness or death must draw the shaft of fate.
My tortured sense must crack to be relieved,
My heart, to be at ease, must cease to beat.
AIR XVI. -- CARLOS.
IN each new scene of varied woes
My long-lost fair I find;
No picture of distress but shows
Her image to my mind --
No heart but Here Is, appears to thrill,
No bosom heaves but Here Is,
And with Her form my terrors fill,
Each dress affliction wears.
AIR XVII. -- SULTAN,
WHAT cares surround a Monarch's brow,
And weigh the splendid sufferer down;
Known victim of each public woe --
And silent martyr of his own.
With the bright circle of a crown,
Around our temples, grief we bind;
And press beneath the royal gown
The vulture, that devours the mind.
For Us no social bosom heaves,
No sympathetic sorrows roll;
But faith, proscribed with friendship, leaves
A dreary solitude of soul --
The ills of life alone we taste,
Thus insulated from our race!
Preside with Famine at the feast,
With Misery have the power to bless.
END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
AIR XVIII. -- FARRUKNAZ.
HOPE, treacherous meteor, lucid vapor!
Ever flying,
Still belying
The village taper --
Wandering pilgrims -- lone, benighted
Thy blue falsehood, pleased, descry;
See the cheerful faggot lighted,
Think the social cottage nigh. --
Lambent fire, deceive, but harm not;
Pallid gleam, relume, but warm not --
Light no error in my breast,
Sooth my weary soul, but charm not;
Unrelenting,
Unconsenting,
Swearing never to be blessed --
AIR XIX. -- CARLOS.
THE smiling years, that pleasure leads,
Unmarked, their placid tenor keep,
Ere yet the wounded bosom bleeds,
Or knows to wake and weep.
" But slow the lingering moments creep,
" And slow the flagging hour recedes;
" When taught by love, to wake and weep,
" The wounded bosom bleeds.
AIR XX. -- FARRUKNAZ.
SOMETIMES, it is said, the spirits of the blessed
Float on the buoyant bosom of the air;
And watch with aid divine, the maid distressed,
The Hermit's wandering step, or midnight prayer!
With pensile minstrelsy the heaven they fill --
With harps unseen the starry roofs resound;
While from their sacred ecstasies distill
Peace to each care, and Balm to every wound.
AIR XXI. -- FARRUKNAZ.
WHAT are the boasted joys of love!
By danger won, in fear possessed,
There scarce is leisure in the breast,
Its wished for state to prove!
How short the hours of bliss we know!
By toil forerun, by terror pressed!
The heart was never truly blessed,
That did not tremble too! --
DUO -- CARLOS and FARRUKNAZ.
Carl. " MERCY, sole right divine of Kings,
" Can all the toils of power atone --
" And guards with wide-expanded wings,
" The righteous Prince, and lawful throne.

Far. " For her the godlike Monarch bears,
" Oppressed with public ills, to live --
" And finds a balm for Empire's cares,
" In the blessed privilege -- to forgive.

Carl. " Who, of mankind's offending race
" At heaven's chancery shall appear,
" His conscious judge see face to face,
" The accuser of his bosom hear?

Far. " Yet mercy, tender seraph, still
" Pleads the general human cause;
" By tears she melts the heavenly will;
" By tears, the fixed eternal laws.

Both. " To Her we bend, in Her we trust,
" Through whom the best must be forgiven --
" Sublime mysterious Maid! more just
" Than justice, and more kind than Heaven.

FINALE -- AIR XXII. -- FARRUKNAZ.
IF glory charm the hero's soul
By godlike virtue won!
Spread wide his high renown
As winds can waft, or waters roll!
CHORUS.
Long, happy, great, and wise,
Rule over mankind, and late attain the skies!
A nation's vows, blessed insence, rise
Before the heavenly throne --
By wafting ages blown
Their curling volume to the skies.
CHORUS.
Long, happy, etc.
Deaf to the priest, or tyrant's prayers,
Heaven, when a people kneels,
By mighty works reveals,
It has no favorite but theirs.
CHORUS.
Long, happy, etc.
THE END*

