J. Clark



A Bold Stroke for a WIFE: A COMEDY; As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL IN
LINCOLN'S-INN-FIELDS.

By the Author of the BUSIE-BODY and the GAMESTER.

Omnia Vincit Amor. The SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for W. MERES and F. CLAY, without Temple Bar. MDCCXXIV. [Price
One Shilling.]

To His Grace PHILIP, DUKE and MARQUIS of WHARTON, etc.
MY LORD,
IT has ever been the Custom of Poets to shelter Productions of this Nature
under the Patronage of the brightest Men of their Time; and it is observed, that
the Muses always met the kindest Reception from Persons of the greatest Merit.
The World will do me Justice as to the Choice of my Patron, but will, I fear,
blame my rash Attempt, in daring to Address Your Grace, and offer at a Work too
difficult for our ablest Pens, viz. an Encomium on Your Grace: I have no Plea
against such just Reflections, but the Disadvantage of Education, and the
Privilege of my Sex.

If Your Grace discovers a Genius so surprising in this Dawn of Life, what must
your riper Years produce? Your Grace has already been distinguished in a most
peculiar Manner, being the first Young Nobleman that ever was admitted into a
House of Peers before he reached the Age of One and Twenty: But Your Grace's
Judgment and Eloquence soon convinced that August Assembly, that the excelling
Gifts of Nature ought not to be confined to Time. We hope the Example which
Ireland has set, will shortly be followed by an English House of Lords, and
Your Grace made a Member of that Body, to which You will be so Conspicuous an
Ornament.

Your good Sense, and real Love for your Country, taught Your Grace to
persevere in the Principles of your Glorious Ancestors, by adhering to the
Defender of our Religion and Laws: and the penetrating Wisdom of Your Royal
Master, saw you merited your Honors ere he conferred them. It is one of the
greatest Glories of a Monarch, to distinguish where to bestow his Favors; and
the World must do ours Justice, by owning Your Grace's Titles most deservedly
worn.

It is with the greatest Pleasure imaginable the Friends of Liberty see You
pursuing the Steps of Your Noble Father: Your Courteous, Affable Temper, free
from Pride and Ostentation, makes Your Name adored in the Country, and enables
Your Grace to carry what Point You please. The late Lord Wharton will be still
remembered by every Lover of his Country, which never felt a greater Shock than
what his Death occasioned: Their Grief had been inconsolable, if Heaven, out of
its wonted Beneficence to this Favorite Isle, had not transmitted all his
shining Qualities to you, and Phoenix like, raised up one Patriot out of the
Ashes of another.

That Your Grace has a high Esteem for Learning, particularly appears by the
large Progress you have made therein: and your Love for the Muses shows a
Sweetness of Temper, and Generous Humanity, peculiar to the Greatness of Your
Soul; for such Virtues reign not in the Breast of every Man of Quality.

Defer no longer then, my Lord, to charm the World with the Beauty of your
Numbers, and show the Poet, as you have done the Orator; convince our
unthinking Britous, by what vile Arts France lost her Liberty; and teach 'em to
avoid their own Misfortunes, as well as to weep over Henry IV. who (if it were
possible for him to know) would forgive the bold Assassin's Hand, for the
Honor of having his Fall celebrated by Your Grace's Pen.

To be distinguished by Persons of Your Grace's Character, is not only the
highest Ambition, but the greatest Reputation to an Author; and it is not the
least of my Vanities, to have it known to the Public I had Your Grace's Leave
to prefix Your Name to this Comedy.

I wish I were capable to cloth the following Scenes in such a Dress, as might
be worthy to appear before Your Grace, and draw Your Attention as much as Your
Grace's admirable Qualifications do that of all Mankind; but the Muses, like
most Females, are least liberal to their own Sex.

All I dare say in Favor of this Piece is, that the Plot is entirely New, and
the Incidents wholly owing to my own Invention; not borrowed from our own, or
translated from the Works of any Foreign Poet; so that they have at least the
Charm of Novelty to recommend 'em: If they are so lucky in some leisure Hour to
give Your Grace the Least Diversion, they will answer the utmost Ambition of,
my Lord,

Your GRACE's most Obedient, Most Devoted, and Most Humble Servant, SUSANNA
CENT-LIVRE.

RROLOGUE,
By a GENTLEMAN.
Spoken by Mrs. THURMOND. Tonight we come upon a bold Design,
To try to please without one borrowed Line:
Our Plot is new, and regularly clear,
And not one single Tittle from Moliere:
Over buried Poets we with Caution tread,
And Parish Sextons leave to rob the Dead.
For you, bright British Fair, in hopes to charm ye,
We bring Tonight a Lover from the Army:
You know the Soldiers have the strangest Arts,
Such a Proportion of prevailing Parts,
You Would think that they rid Post to Women's Hearts.
I wonder whence they draw their bold Pretense;
We do not choose them sure for our Defense:
That Plea is both impolitick and wrong,
And only suits such Dames as want a Tongue.
Is it their Eloquence and fine Address?
The Softness of their Language? -- Nothing less.
Is it their Courage, that they bravely dare
To storm the Sex at once? -- Egad, it is there:
They act by us as in the rough Campaign,
Unmindful of Repulses, charge again;
They Mine and Countermine, resolved to win,
And, if a Breach is made -- they will come in.
You Will think, by what we have of Soldiers said,
Our Female Wit was in the Service bred;
But she is to the hardy Toil a Stranger,
She loves the Cloth indeed, but hates the Danger;
Yet to this Circle of the Brave and Gay,
She bid me for her good Intentions say,
She hopes you will not reduce her to Half-Pay.
As for our Play, it is English Humor all;
Then will you let our Manufacture fall?
Would you the Honor of our Nation raise,
Keep English Credit up, and English Plays.
Dramtis Personae.
MEN.
Sir Philip Modelove, an Old Beau, All Guardians to Mrs. Lovely. by Mr. Knap.
Periwinkle, a kind of a silly Virtuoso, Mr. Spiller. Tradelove, a
Change-Broker, Mr. Bullock, sen. Obebiah Prim, a Quaker, Mr. Pack. Colonel
Fainwell, in Love with Mrs. Lovely. Mr. Chapter Bullock. Freeman, his Friend, a
Merchant, Mr. Ogden. Simon Pure, a Quaking Preacher, Mr. Griffin. Mr. Sackbut,
a Tavern-Keeper. Mr. Hall.

WOMEN.
Mrs. Lovely, a Fortune of Thirty Thousand Pound, by Mrs. Bullock. Mrs. Prim,
Wife to Prim the Hofier, Mrs. Kent. Betty, Servant to Mrs. Lovely, Mrs. Robins.

Footmen, Drawers, etc.

A Bold Stroke for a WIFE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. SCENE a Tavern.
Colonel Fainwell and Freeman over a Bottle. FREEMAN. COME, Colonel, His
Majesty's Health -- You are as melancholy as if you were in Love; I wish some
of the Beauties at Bath have not snapt your Heart.


Col. Why faith, Freeman, there is something in it; I have seen a Lady at Bath,
who has kindled such a Flame in me, that all the Waters there cannot quench.


Free. Women, like some poisonous Animals, carry their Antidote about 'em: --
Is she not to be had, Colonel?


Col. That Is a difficult Question to answer; however, I resolve to try: Perhaps
you may be able to serve me; you Merchants know one another -- The Lady told me
herself she was under the Charge of four Persons.


Free. Odso! it is Mrs. Ann Lovely.


Col. The same; do you know her?


Free. Know her! Ay -- Faith, Colonel, your Condition is more desperate than
you imagine; why she is the Talk and Pity of the whole Town; and it is the
Opinion of the Learned, that she must die a Maid.


Col. Say you so? That Is somewhat odd, in this charitable City -- She Is a
Woman, I hope.


Free. For ought I know; but it had been as well for her, had Nature made her
any other Part of the Creation. The Man which keeps this House, served her
Father; he is a very honest Fellow, and may be of use to you; we'll send for
him to take a Glass with us; he will give you the whole History, and it is worth
your hearing.


Col. But may one trust him?


Free. With your Life; I have Obligations enough upon him, to make him do any
thing; I serve him with Wine. [Knocks.]


Col. Nay, I know him pretty well my self; I once used to frequent a Club that
was kept here.


Enter Drawer. Draw. Gentlemen, do you call?


Free. Ay, send up your Master.


Draw. Yes, Sir.

[Exit.
Col. Do you know any of this Lady's Guardians, Freeman?


Free. Yes, I know two of them very well.


Col. What are they?


Enter Sackbut. Free. Here comes one will give you an Account of them all --
Mr. Sackbut, we sent for you to take a Glass with us. It Is a Maxim among the
Friends of the Bottle, that as long as the Master is in Company one may be sure
of good Wine.


Sack. Sir, you shall be sure to have as good Wine as you send in -- Colonel,
your most humble Servant; you are welcome to Town.


Col. I thank you, Mr. Sackbut.


Sack. I am as glad to see you, as I should a Hundred Tun of French Claret
Custom-free -- my Service to you, Sir. [Drinks.] You don't look so merry as you
used to do; are you not well, Colonel?


Free. He has got a Woman in his Head, Landlord, can you help him?


Sack. If it is in my Power, I shall not scruple to serve my Friend.


Col. It Is one Perquisite of your Calling.


Sack. Ay, at the other End of the Town, where you Officers use, Women are good
Forcers of Trade; a wellcustom'd House, a handsome Bar-keeper, with clean
obliging Drawers, soon get the Master an Estate; but our Citizens seldom do any
thing but cheat within the Walls -- But as to the Lady, Colonel; point you at
Particulars, or have you a good Champagne Stomach? Are you in full Pay, or
reduced, Colonel?


Col. Reduced, reduced, Landlord.


Free. To the miserable Condition of a Lover!


Sack. Pish! That Is preferrable to Half-pay; a Woman's Resolution may break
before the Peace; push her home, Colonel, there is no parlying with that Sex.


Col. Were the Lady her own Mistress, I have some Reasons to believe I should
soon command in Chief.


Free. You know Mrs. Lovely, Mr. Sackbut.


Sack. Know her! Ay, poor Nancy; I have carried her to School many a frosty
Morning. Alas, if she is the Woman, I pity you, Colonel: Her Father, my old
Master, was the most whimsical, out-of-the-way tempered Man, I ever heard of,
as you will guess by his last Will and Testament -- This was his only Child: I
have heard him wish her dead a thousand times.


Col. Why so?


Sack. He hated Posterity, you must know, and wished the World were to expire
with himself -- He used to swear, if she had been a Boy, he would have
qualified him for the Opera.


Free. It Is a very unnatural Resolution in a Father.


Sack. He died worth Thirty thousand Pounds, which he left to this Daughter,
provided she married with the Consent of her Guardians: But that she might be
sure never to do so, he left her in the Care of four Men, as opposite to each
other as Light and Darkness: Each has his quarterly Rule, and three Months in a
Year she is obliged to be subject to each of their Humors, and they are pretty
different, I assure you -- She is just come from Bath.


Col. 'Twas there I saw her.


Sack. Ay, Sir, the last Quarter was her Beau Guardian's -- She appears in all
public Places during his Reign.


Col. She visited a Lady who boarded in the same House with me: I liked her
Person, and found an Opportunity to tell her so: She replied, she had no
Objection to mine; but if I could not reconcile Contradictions, I must not
think of her, for that she was condemned to the Caprice of four Persons, who
never yet agreed in any one thing, and she was obliged to please them all.


Sack. It Is most true, Sir; I Will give you a short Description of the Men, and
leave you to judge of the poor Lady's Condition. One is a kind of a Virtuoso, a
silly, half-witted Fellow, but positive and surly; fond of nothing but what is
Antique and Foreign, and wears his Clothes of the Fashion of the last Century;
doats upon Travelers, and believes Sir John Mandiville more than the Bible.


Col. That must be a rare old Fellow!


Sack. Another is a Change-Broker; a Fellow that will out-lie the Devil for the
Advantage of Stock, and cheat his Father that got him in a Bargain: He is a
great Stickler for Trade and hates every thing that wears a Sword.


Free. He is a great Admirer of the Dutch Management, and swears they
understand Trade better than any Nation under the Sun.


Sack. The Third is an old Beau, that has May in his Fancy and Dress, but
December in his Face and his Heels; he admires nothing but new Fashions, and
those must be French; loves Operas, Balls, Masquerades, and is always the most
tawdry of the whole Company on a Birthday.


Col. These are pretty opposite to one another, truly! And the fourth, what is
he, Landlord?


Sack. A very rigid Quaker, whose Quarter begun this Day -- I saw Mrs. Lovely
go in not above two Hours ago -- Sir Philip set her down. What think you now,
Colonel, is not the poor Lady to be pitied?


Col. Ay, and rescued too, Landlord.


Free. In my Opinion, that is impossible.


Col. There is nothing impossible to a Lover. What would not a Man attempt for
a fine Woman and Thirty Thousand Pounds? Besides, my Honor is at Stake; I
promised to deliver her -- and she bad me win her, and take her.


Sack. That Is fair, faith.


Free. If it depended upon Knight-Errantry, I should not doubt your setting
free the Damsel; but to have Avarice, Impertinence, Hypocrifie, and Pride, at
once to deal with, requires more Cunning than generally attends a Man of Honor.


Col. My Fancy tells me I shall come off with Glory; I resolve to try, however.
-- Do you know all the Guardians, Mr. Sackbut?


Sack. Very well, Sir, they all use my House.


Col. And will you assist me, if occasion be?


Sack. In every thing I can, Colonel.


Free. I Will answer for him; and whatever I can serve you in, you may depend on.
I know Mr. Periwinkle and Mr. Tradelove; the latter has a very great Opinion of
my Interest Abroad. -- I happened to have a Letter from a Correspondent two
Hours before the News arrived of the French King's Death; I communicated it to
him; upon which he bought up all the Stock he could, and what with that, and
some Wagers he laid, he told me, he had got to the Tune of Five Hundred Pounds;
so that I am much in his good Graces.


Col I don't know but you may be of Service to me, Freeman.


Free. If I can, command me, Colonel.


Col. Is it not possible to find a Suit of Clothes ready made at some of these
Sale Shops, fit to rig out a Beau, think you, Mr. Sackbut.


Sack. O hang 'em -- No, Colonel, they keep nothing ready-made that a Gentleman
would be seen in: But I can fit you with a Suit of Clothes, if you would make a
Figure -- Velvet and Gold Brocade -- they were pawned to me by a French Count,
who had been stripped at Play, and wanted Money to carry him home; he promised to
send for them, but I have heard nothing from him.


Free. He has not fed upon Frogs long enough yet to recover his Loss; ha, ha.


Col. Ha, ha, -- Well, those Clothes will do, Mr. Sackbut -- though we must have
three or four Fellows in tawdry Liveries; those can be procured, I hope.


Free. Egad, I have a Brother come from the West Indies, that can match you;
and, for Expedition sake, you shall have his Servants; there is a Black, a
Tawny-moor, and a Frenchman; they don't speak one Word of English, so can make
no Mistake.


Col. Excellent -- Egad, I shall look like an Indian Prince. First I Will attack
my Beau-Guardian; where lives he?


Sack. Faith, somewhere about St. James's; though to say in what Street, I
cannot; but any Chairman will tell you where Sir Philip Modelove lives.


Free. Oh! you will find him in the Park at Eleven every Day; at least I never
passed through at that Hour without seeing him there. -- But what do you intend?


Col. To address him in his own Way, and find what he designs to do with the
Lady.


Free. And what then?


Col. Nay, that I cannot tell, but I shall take my Measures accordingly.


Sack. Well, it is a mad Undertaking, in my Mind; but here is to your Success,
Colonel. [Drinks.


Col. It Is something out of the Way, I confess; but Fortune may chance to
smile, and I succeed -- Come, Landlord, let me see those Clothes. Freeman, I
shall expect you will leave Word with Mr. Sackbut, where one may find you upon
occasion; and send my Equipage of India immediately, do you hear?


Free. Immediately.

[Exit.
Col. Bold was the Man who ventured first to Sea,
But the first vent'ring Lovers bolder were:
The Path of Love's a dark and dangerous Way,
Without a Landmark, or one friendly Star,
And he that runs the Risque, deserves the Fair.
[Exit.]
SCENE II. Prim's House.
Enter Mrs. Lovely and her Maid Betty. Betty. Bless me, Madam! why do you fret
and teaze your self so? This is giving them the Advantage with a Witness.


Mrs. Lov. Must I be condemned all my Life to the preposterous Humors of other
People; and pointed at by every Boy in Town? -- Oh! I could tear my Flesh, and
curse the Hour I was born. -- Is it not monstrously ridiculous, that they
should desire to impose their Quaking Dress upon me at these Years? When I was
a Child, no matter what they made me wear; but now --


Betty. I would resolve against it, Madam; I Would see 'em hanged before I Would put on
the pinched Cap again.


Mrs. Lov. Then I must never expect one Moment's Ease; she has rung such a Peal
in my Ears already, that I shall not have the right Use of them this Month -- What
can I do?


Betty. What can you not do, if you will but give your Mind to it? Marry, Madam.


Mrs. Lov. What! and have my Fortune go to build Churches and Hospitals?


Betty. Why, let it go -- If the Colonel loves you, as he pretends, he will marry
you without a Fortune, Madam; and I assure you, a Colonel's Lady is no
despicable thing; a Colonel's Post will maintain you like a Gentlewoman, Madam.


Mrs. Lov. So you would advise me to give up my own Fortune, and throw my self
upon the Colonel's.


Betty. I would advise you to make your self easy, Madam.


Mrs. Lov. That Is not the Way, I am sure. No, no, Girl, there are certain
Ingredients to be mingled with Matrimony, without which, I may as well change
for the worse as for the better. When the Woman has Fortune enough to make the
Man happy, if he has either Honor or Good Manners, he will make her easy. Love
makes but a slovenly Figure in that House, where Poverty keeps the Door.


Betty. And so you resolve to die a Maid, do you Madam?


Mrs. Love. Or have it in my Power to make the Man I love, Master of my Fortune.


Betty. Then you don't like the Colonel so well as I thought you did, Madam, or
you would not take such a Resolution.


Mrs. Love. It is because I do like him, Betty, that I take such a Resolution.


Betty. Why, do you expect, Madam, the Colonel can work Miracles? Is it
possible for him to marry you with the Consent of all your Guardians?


Mrs. Love. Or he must not marry me at all, and so I told him; and he did not
seem displeased with the News. -- He promised to set me free, and I, on the
Condition, promised to make him Master of that Freedom.


Betty. Well! I have read of enchanted Castles, Ladies delivered from the
Chains of Magic, Giants killed, and Monsters overcome; so that I shall be the
less surpised, if the Colonel should conjure your out of the Power of your
Guardians: If he does, I am sure he deserves your Fortune.


Mrs. Lov. And shall have it, Girl, if it were ten times as much -- For I Will
ingenuously confess to thee, that I do like the Colonel above all Men I ever
saw -- There Is something so Jantee in a Soldier, a kind of a Je ne scay quoi
Air, that makes 'em more agreeable than the rest of Mankind -- They command
Regard, as who should say, We are your Defenders, We preserve your Beauties
from the Insults of rude unpolished Foes, and ought to be preferred before
those lazy indolent Mortals, who by dropping into their Fathers Estate set up
their Coaches, and think to rattle themselves into our Affections.


Betty. Nay, Madam, I confess that the Army has engrossed all the prettiest
Fellows -- A laced Coat and Feather have irresistible Charms.


Mrs. Lov. But the Colonel has all the Beauties of the Mind, as well as Person.
-- O all ye Powers, that favor happy Lovers, grant he may be mine! Thou God of
Love, if thou be'st ought but Name, assist my Fainwell.

Point all thy Darts to aid my Love's Design,
And make his Plots as prevalent as thine.

The End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE 1. SCENE the Park.
Enter Colonel finely dressed, three Footmen after him. Col. So, now if I can but
meet this Beau -- 'Egad, methinks I cut a smart Figure, and have as much of the
tawdry Air, as any Italian Count, or French Marquee of 'em all -- Sure I shall
know this Knight again, -- ah! yonder he sits, making Love to a Mask, in faith,
I Will walk up the Mall, and come down by him.

[Exit.
SCENE draws, and discovers Sir Philip upon a Bench with a Woman masked. Sir
Phil. Well, but, my Dear, are you really constant to your Keeper?


Wom. Yes, really, Sir -- hey day! who comes yonder, he cuts a mighty Figure.


Sir Phil. Ha! A Stranger, by his Equipage keeping so close at his Heels -- He
has the Appearance of a Man of Quality -- Positively, French by his dancing Air.


Wom. He crosses, as if he meant to sit down here. --


Sir Phil. He has a mind to make love to thee, Child. --


Enter Colonel, and seats himself upon the Bench by Sir Philip. Wom. It will be
to no Purpose if he does.


Sir Phil. Are you resolved to be cruel then?


Col. You must be very cruel, indeed, if you can deny any thing to so fine a
Gentleman, Madam. [Takes out his Watch.


Wom. I never mind the Outside of a Man.


Col. And I Am afraid thou art no Judge of the Inside.


Sir Phil. I am positively of your Mind, Sir. For Creatures of her Function
seldom penetrate beyond the Pocket.


Wom. Creatures of your Composition have, indeed, generally more in their
Pockets than in their Heads. [Aside.


Sir Phil. Pray what says your Watch? mine is down. [Pulling out his Watch.


Col. I want 36 Minutes of Twelve, Sir -- [Puts up his Watch, and takes out his
Snuff Box.


Sir Phil. May I presume, Sir?


Col. Sir, you honor me. [Presenting the Box.


Sir Phil. He speaks good English -- though he must be a Foreigner; -- this Snuff
is extremely good -- and the Box prodigious fine; the Work is French I presume,
Sir.


Col. I bought it in Paris, Sir, -- I do think the Workmanship pretty neat.


Sir Phil. Neat! it is exquisitely fine, Sir; pray, Sir, if I may take the
Liberty of inquiring -- what Country is so happy to claim the Birth of the
finest Gentleman in the Universe? France, I presume.


Col. Then you don't think me an Englishman?


Sir Phil. No, upon my Soul don't I.


Col. I am sorry for it.


Sir Phil. Impossible you should wish to be an Englishman -- Pardon me, Sir,
this Island could not produce a Person of such Alertness.


Col. As this Mirror shows you, Sir. [Puts up a Pocket-Glass to Sir Philip's
Face.


Wom. Coxcombs! I Am sick to hear 'em praise one another; one seldom gets any
thing by such Animals, not even a Dinner, unless one can dine upon Soop and
Sallery.

[Exit.
Sir Phil. O Ged, Sir! Will you leave us, Madam? ha, ha.


Col. She fears 'twill be only losing Time to stay here, ha, ha, -- I know not
how to distinguish you, Sir, but your Mien and Address speak you Right
Honorable.


Sir Phil. Thus great Souls judge of others by themselves -- I am only adorned
with Knighthood, that is all I assure you, Sir, my Name is Sir Philip Modelove.


Col. Of French Extraction? --


Sir Phil. My Father was French.


Col. One may plainly perceive it -- there is a certain Gaiety peculiar to my
Nation, (for I will own my self a Frenchman) which distinguishes us every
where. A Person of your Figure would be a vast Addition to a Coronet.


Sir Phil. I must own, I had the Offer of a Barony about five Years ago, but I
abhorred the Fatigue which must have attended it -- I could never yet bring my
self to join with either Party.


Col. You are perfectly in the right, Sir Philip -- a fine Person should not
embark himself in the slovenly Concern of Politics; Dress and Pleasure are
Objects proper for the Soul of a fine Gentleman.


Sir Phil. And Love --


Col. Oh! that is included under the Article of Pleasure.


Sir Phil. Parbleu, il est un homme d'esprit, I must embrace you -- [Rises and
embraces.] Your Sentiments are so agreeable to mine, that we appear to have but
one Soul, for our Ideas and Conceptions are the same.


Col. I should be sorry for that [aside.] You do me too much Honor, Sir Philip.


Sir Phil. Your Vivacity and Jantee Mien assured me at first sight there was
nothing of this foggy Island in your Composition. May I crave your Name, Sir?


Col. My Name is La Fainwell, Sir, at you Service.


Sir Phil. The La Fainwells are French, I know; though the Name is become very
numerous in Great Britain of late Years. -- I was sure you was French the
Moment I laid my Eyes upon you; I could not come in to the Supposition of your
being an Englishman, this Island produces few such Ornaments.


Col. Pardon me, Sir Philip, this Island has two things superior to all Nations
under the Sun.


Sir Phil. Ay! what are they?


Col. The Ladies, and the Laws.


Sir Phil. The Laws indeed do claim a Preference of other Nations, -- but by my
Soul there are fine Women every where -- I must own I have felt their Power in
all Countries. --


Col. There are some finished Beauties, I confess, in France, Italy, Germany,
nay, even in Holland; mais sont bien rare: But les belles Angloises! -- Oh, Sir
Philip, where find we such Women! such Symetry of Shape! such Elegancy of
Dress! such Regularity of Features! such Sweetness of Temper! such commanding
Eyes! and such bewitching Smiles?


Sir Phil. Ah! parbleu vous estez attraper.


Col. Non, je vous assure, Chevalier -- but I declare there is no Amusement so
agreeable to my Gout, as the Conversation of a fine Woman -- I could never be
prevailed upon to enter into what the Vulgar calls the Pleasure of the Bottle.


Sir Phil. My own Taste, positivement -- A Ball, or a Masquerade, is certainly
preferable to all the Productions of the Vineyard.


Col. Infinitely! I hope the People of Quality in England will support that
Branch of Pleasure, which was imported with their Peace, and since naturalized
by the ingenious Mr. Heidegger.


Sir Phil. The Ladies assure me it will become Part of the Constitution, --
upon which I subscribed a hundred Guineas -- it will be of great Service to the
Public, at least to the Company of Surgeons, and the City in general.


Col. Ha, ha, it may help to ennoble the Blood of the City. Are you married,
Sir Philip?


Sir Phil. No, nor do I believe I ever shall enter into that honorable State;
I have an absolute Tender for the whole Sex.


Col. That Is more than they have for you, I dare swear. [Aside.


Sir Phil. And I have the Honor to be very well with the Ladies, I can assure
you, Sir; and I will not affront a Million of fine Women, to make one happy.


Col. Nay, Marriage is really reducing a Man's Taste to a kind of half
Pleasure, but then it carries the Blessing of Peace along with it, one goes to
sleep without Fear, and wakes without Pain.


Sir Phil. There Is something of that in it; a Wife is a very good Dish for an
English Stomach -- but gross Feeding for nicer Palates, ha, ha, ha!


Col. I find I was very much mistaken, -- I imagined, you had been married to
that young Lady which I saw in the Chariot with you this Morning in
Grace Church Street.


Sir Phil. Who, Nancy Lovely? I am a Piece of a Guardian to that Lady, you must
know; her Father, I thank him, joined me with three of the most preposterous
old Fellows -- that upon my Soul I Am in pain for the poor Girl, -- she must
certainly lead Apes, as the Saying is; ha, ha.


Col. That Is pity, Sir Philip; if the Lady would give me leave, I would
endeavor to avert that Curse.


Sir Phil. As to the Lady, she would gladly be rid of us at any Rate, I believe;
but here is the Mischief, he who marries Miss Lovely, must have the Consent of
us all four, -- or not a Penny of her Portion. -- For my Part, I shall never
approve of any, but a Man of Figure, -- and the rest are not only averse to
Cleanliness, but have each a peculiar Taste to gratify. -- For my Part, I
declare, I would prefer you to all Men I ever saw. --


Col. And I her to all Women --


Sir Phil. I assure you, Mr. Fainwell, I am for marrying her, for I hate the
Trouble of a Guardian, especially among such Wretches; but resolve never to
agree to the Choice of any one of them, -- and I fancy they will be even with me,
for they never came into any Proposal of mine yet.


Col. I wish I had your Leave to try them, Sir Philip.


Sir Phil. With all my Soul, Sir. I can refuse a Person of your Appearance
nothing.


Col. Sir, I am infinitely obliged to you.


Sir Phil. But do you really like Matrimony?


Col. I believe I could with that Lady, Sir,


Sir Phil. The only Point in which we differ -- but you are Master of so many
Qualifications, that I can excuse one Fault, for I must think it a Fault in a
fine Gentleman; and that you are such, I Will give it under my hand.


Col. I wish you would give me your Consent to marry Mrs. Lovely under your Hand,
Sir Philip.


Sir Phil. I Will do'r, if you will step into St. James's Coffee-House, where we
may have Pen and Ink -- though I cannot foresee what Advantage my Consent will be
to you, without you could find a way to get the rest of the Guardians -- but
I Will introduce you however, she is now at a Quaker's where I carried her this
Morning, when you saw us in Grace Church Street. -- I assure you she has an odd
Ragout of Guardians, as you will find when you hear the Characters, which I Will
endeavor to give you as we go along -- Hey! Pierre, Jaque, Renno -- where are
you all, Scoundrels? -- Order the Chariot to St. James's Coffee-House.


Col. Le Noir, la Brun, le Blanc -- Mortblu, ou sont ces Coquins-la? Alons,
Monsieur le Chevalier.


Sir Phil. Ah! Pardonnez moy, Monsieur.


Col. Not one Step upon my Soul, Sir Philip.


Sir Phil. The best-bred Man in Europe, positively.

[Exeunt.
SCENE Changes to Obediah Prim's House.
Enter Mrs. Lovely, followed by Mrs. Prim. Mrs. Pr. Then thou will not obey me;
and thou do really think those Fallals becomes thee?


Mrs. Lov. I do, indeed.


Mrs. Pr. Now will I be judged by all sober People, if I don't look more like a
modest Woman than thou do, Anne.


Mrs. Lov. More like a Hypocrite you mean, Mrs. Prim.


Mrs. Pr. Ah! Anne, Anne, that wicked Philip Modelove will undo thee -- Satan
so fills thy Heart with Pride, during the three Months of his Guardianship,
that thou becomest a Stumbling Block to the Upright.


Mrs. Lov. Pray who are they? Are the pinched Cap, and formal Hood, the Emblems
of Sanctity? Does your Virtue consist in your Dress, Mrs. Prim?


Mrs. Pr. It does not consist in cut Hair, spotted Face, and bare Necks, -- Oh
the Wickedness of this Generation! The Primitive Women knew not the Abomination
of hoop'd Petticoats.


Mrs. Lov. No, nor the Abomination of Cant neither. Don't tell me, Mrs. Prim,
don't -- I know you have as much Pride, Vanity, Self-conceit and Ambition among
you, couched under that formal Habit, and sanctified Countenance, as the
proudest of us all; but the World begins to see your Prudry.


Mrs. Pr. Prudry! What! do they invent new Words as well as new Fashions? Ah!
poor fantastic Age, I pity thee -- poor deluded Anne; Which do thou think
most resemblest the Saint, and which the Sinner, thy Dress, or mine? Thy naked
Bosom allureth the Eye of the By-stander -- encourages the Frailty of Humane
Nature -- and corrupts the Soul with evil Longings.


Mrs. Lov. And pray who corrupted your Son Tobias with evil Longings? Your Maid
Tabitha wore a Handkerchief, and yet he made the Saint a Sinner.


Mrs. Pr. Well, well, spit thy Malice -- I confess Satan did buffet my Son
Tobias, and my Servant Tabitha; the Evil Spirit was at that time too strong,
and they both became subject to its Workings -- not from any outward
Provocation -- but from an inward Call; -- he was not tainted with the
Rottenness of the Fashions, nor did his Eyes take in the Drunkenness of Beauty.


Mrs. Lov. No! that is plainly to be seen.


Mrs. Pr. Tabitha is one of the Faithful, he fell not with a Stranger.


Mrs. Lov. So! Then you hold Wenching no Crime, provided it be within the Pale
of your own Tribe -- you are an excellent Casuist truly.


Enter Obediah Prim. Ob. Pr. Not stripped of thy Vanity yet, Anne! Why do not
thou make her put it off, Sarah?


Mrs. Pr. She will not do it.


Ob. Pr. Verily, thy naked Breasts troubles my outward Man; I pray thee hide
'em, Anne; put on a Handkerchief, Anne Lovely.


Mrs. Lov. I hate Handkerchiefs when it is not cold Weather, Mr. Prim.


Mrs. Pr. I have seen thee wear a Handkerchief; nay, and a Mask to boot, in the
middle of July.


Mrs. Lov. Ay, to keep the Sun from scorching me.


Ob. Pr. If thou cou'd'st not bear the Sunbeams, how do thou think Man
should bear thy Beams? Those Breasts inflame Desire, let them be hid, I say.


Mrs. Lov. Let me be quiet, I say: -- Must I be tormented thus for ever? Sure
no Woman's Condition ever equaled mine; Foppery, Folly, Avarice and Hypocrisy,
are by Turns my constant Companions, -- and I must vary Shapes as often as a
Player. -- I cannot think my Father meant this Tyranny! No; you usurp an
Authority which he never intended you should take.


Ob. Pr. Hark thee, Do thou call good Counsel Tyranny? Do I, or my Wife,
tyrannize, when we desire thee in all Love to put off thy Tempting Attire, and
vail thy Provokers to Sin?


Mrs. Lov. Deliver me, good Heaven! or I shall go distracted. [Walks about.


Mrs. Pr. So! now thy Pinners are tossed, and thy Breasts pulled up; -- verily
they were seen enough before; -- fie upon the filthy Tailor who made them Stays.


Mrs. Lov. I wish I were in my Grave! Kill me rather than treat me thus. --


Ob. Pr. Kill thee! ha, ha; thou think thou art Acting some lude Play sure;
-- kill thee! Art thou prepared for Death, Anne Lovely? No, no, thou would
rather have a Husband, Anne: -- Thou want a Gilt Coach, with six lazy
Fellows behind, to flant it in the Ring of Vanity -- among the Princes and
Rulers of the Land, -- who pamper themselves with the Fatness thereof; but I
will take care that none shall squander away thy Father's Estate; thou shall
marry none such, Anne.


Mrs. Lov. Would you marry me to one of your own Canting Sex?


Ob. Pr. Yea, verily, no ne else shall ever get myonsent, I do assure thee,
Anne.


Mrs. Lov. And I do assure thee, Obadiah, that I will as soon turn Papist, and
dye in a Convent.


Mrs. Pr. Oh Wickedness!


Mrs. Lov. Oh Stupidity!


Ob. Pr. Oh Blindness of Heart!


Mrs. Lov. Thou Blinder of the World, don't provoke me -- lest I betray your
Sanctity, and leave your Wife to judge of your Purity: -- What were the
Emotions of your Spirit, -- when you squeezed Mary by the Hand last Night in
the Pantry, -- when she told you, you buss'd so filthily? Ah! you had no
Aversion to naked Bosoms, when you begged her to show you a little, little,
little Bit of her delicious Bubby: -- don't you remember those Words, Mr. Prim?


Mrs. Pr. What does she say, Obadiah?


Ob. Pr. She talks unintelligibly, Sarah. Which Way did she hear this? This
should not have reached the Ears of the wicked ones; -- verily, it troubles
me, [Aside.


Enter Servant. Serve. Philip Modelove, whom they call Sir Philip, is below, and
such another with him, shall I send them up?

[Exit.
Ob. Pr. Yea.


Enter Sir Philip and Colonel. Sir Phil. How do thou do, Friend Prim; odso!
my She-Friend here too! What, you are documenting Miss Nancy, reading her a
Lecture upon the pinched Coif, I warrant ye.


Mrs. Pr. I am sure thou never read her any Lecture that was good. -- My
Flesh rises so at these wicked Ones, that Prudence advises me to withdraw
from their Sight.

[Exit.
Col. Oh! that I could find Means to speak to her! How charming she appears! I
wish I could get this Letter into her Hand. [Aside.


Sir Phil. Well, Miss Cockey, I hope thou have got the better of them.


Mrs. Lov. The Difficulties of my Life are not to be surmounted, Sir Philip, --
I hate the Impertinence of him, as much as the Stupidity of the other. [Aside.


Ob. Prim. Verily, Philip, thou will spoil this Maiden.


Sir Phil. I find we still differ in Opinion; but that we may none of us spoil
her, pr' ythee, Prim, let us consent to marry her -- I have sent for our
Brother Guardians to meet me here about that very Thing. -- Madam, will you
give me Leave to recommend a Husband to you. -- Here Is a Gentleman, which, in
my Mind, you can have no Objection to.


[Presents the Colonel to her, she looks another Way. Mrs. Lov. Heaven deliver
me from the Formal, and the Fantastic Fool. [Aside.


Col. A fine Woman, -- a fine Horse, and fine Equipage, are the finest Things
in the Universe: -- And if I am so happy to possess you, Madam, I shall become
the Envy of Mankind, as much as you outshine your whole Sex. [As he takes her
Hand to kiss it, he endeavors to put the Letter into it, she lets it drop, --
Prim takes it up.


Mrs. Lov. I have no Ambition to appear conspicuously ridiculous, Sir. [Turning
from him.


Col. So fall the Hopes of Fainwell.


Mrs. Lov. Ha! Fainwell! it is he! What have I done? Prim has the Letter, and
all will be discovered. [Aside.


Ob. Pr. Friend, I know not thy Name, so cannot call thee by it; but thou see
thy Letter is unwelcome to the Maiden, she will not read it.


Mrs. Lov. Nor shall you; [Snatches the Letter] I Will tear it in a thousand
Pieces, and scatter it, as I will the Hopes of all those that any of you shall
recommend to me. [Tears the Letter.


Sir Phil. Ha! Right Woman, faith!


Col. Excellent Woman. [Aside.


Ob. Pr. Friend, thy Garb savoureth too much of the Vanity of the Age for my
Approbation; nothing that resembles Philip Modelove shall I love, mark that;
-- therefore, Friend Philip, bring no more of thy own Apes under my Roof.


Sir Phil. I am so entirely a Stranger to the Monsters of thy Breed, that I
shall bring none of them, I am sure.


Col. I am likely to have a pretty Task by that time I have gone through them
all; but she is a City worth taking, and 'egad I Will carry on the Siege: If I can
but blow up the Outworks, I fancy I am pretty secure of the Town. [Aside.


Enter Servant. Serve. Toby Periwinkle and Thomas Tradelove demands to see
thee. [To Sir Philip.


Sir Phil. Bid them come up.


Mrs. Lov. Deliver me from such an Inundation of Noise and Nonsense. Oh
Fainwell! whatever thy Contrivance is, prosper it Heaven; -- but oh! I fear
thou never can redeem me.

[Exit.
Sir Phil. Sic transit Gloria Mundi!

Enter Mr. Periwinkle and Tradelove. These are my Brother Guardians, Mr.
Fainwell; pr'ythee observe the Creatures. [Aside to the Col.


Trad. Well, Sir Philip, I obey your Summons.


Per. Pray, what have you to offer for the Good of Mrs. Lovely, Sir Philip?


Sir Phil. First I desire to know what you intend to do with that Lady? Must
she be sent to the Indies for a Venture, -- or live to be an old Maid, and then
entered amongst your Curiosities, and shown for a Monster, Mr. Periwinkle?


Col. Humph, Curiosities! that must be the Virtuoso. [Aside.


Per. Why, what would you do with her?


Sir Phil. I would recommend this Gentleman to her for a Husband, Sir -- a
Person whom I have picked out from the whole Race of Mankind.


Ob. Pr. I would advise thee to shuffle him again with the rest of Mankind, for
I like him not.


Col. Pray, Sir, without Offense to your Formality, what may be your Objections?


Ob. Pr. Thy Person; thy Manners; thy Dress; thy Acquaintance; -- thy every
Thing, Friend.


Sir Phil. You are most particularly obliging, Friend, ha, ha.


Trad. What Business do you follow, pray Sir?


Col. Humph, by that Question he must be the Broker. [Aside.] -- Business, Sir!
the Business of a Gentleman.


Trad. That is as much as to say, you dress fine, feed high, lie with every
Woman you like, and pay your Surgeon's Bills better than your Tailors or your
Butchers. --


Col. The Court is much obliged to you, Sir, for your Character of a Gentleman.


Trad. The Court, Sir! What would the Court do without us Citizens?


Sir Phil. Without your Wives and Daughters you mean, Mr. Tradelove?


Per. Have you ever traveled, Sir?


Col. That Question must not be answered now -- In Books I have, Sir.


Per. In Books? That Is fine traveling indeed! -- Sir Philip, when you present
a Person I like, he shall have my Consent to marry Mrs. Lovely, 'till when,
your Servant.

[Exit.
Col. I Will make you like me before I have done with you, or I am mistaken.
[Aside.


Trad. And when you can convince me, that a Beau is more useful to my Country
than a Merchant, you shall have mine: 'till then you must excuse me.

[Exit.
Col. So much for Trade, -- q'll fit you too. [Aside.


Sir Phil. In my Opinion, this is very inhumane Treatment, as to the Lady, Mr.
Prim.


Ob. Pr. Thy Opinion and mine happens to differ as much as our Occupations,
Friend; Business requires my Presence, and Folly thine, and so I must bid thee
farewell.

[Exit.
Sir Phil. Here Is Breeding for you, Mr. Fainwel! -- Gad take me, I Would give half
my Estate to see these Rascals bit.


Col. I hope to bite you all, if my Plots hit. [Aside.


End of the Second ACT.
ACT. III.
SCENE I. SCENE the Tavern;
Sackbut, and the Colonel in an Egyptian Dress. Sack. A Lucky Beginning,
Colonel -- you have got the old Beau's Consent.


Col. Ay, he is a reasonable Creature; but the other three will require some
Pains -- Shall I pass upon him, think you? Egad, in my Mind, I look as Antique
as if I had been preserved in the Ark.


Sack. Pass upon him! ay, ay, as roundly as White Wind dashed with Sack does
for Mountain and Sherry, if you have but Assurance enough --


Col. I have no Apprehension from that Quarter; Assurance is the Cockade of a
Soldier.


Sack. Ay, but the Assurance of a Soldier differs much from that of a Traveller
-- Can you lie with a good Grace?


Col. As heartily when my Mistress is the Prize, as I would meet the Foe when
my Country called, and King commanded; so don't you fear that Part; if he don't
know me again I Am sase -- I hope he will come.


Sack. I wish all my Debts would come as sure. I told him you had been a great
Traveller, had many valuable Curiosities, and was a Person of a most singular
Taste; he seemed transported, and begged me to keep you till he came.


Col Ay, ay, he need not fear my running away -- Let Us have a Bottle of Sack,
Landlord, our Ancestors drank Sack.


Sack. You shall have it.


Col. And where-abouts is the Trap-door you mentioned?


Sack. There Is the Conveyance, Sir.

[Exit.
Col. Now if I should cheat all these Roguish Guardians, and carry off my
Mistress in Triumph, it would be what the French call a Grand Coup d'Eclat --
Odso! here comes Periwinkle -- Ah! duce take this Beard, pray Jupiter it does
not give me the slip, and spoil all.


Enter Sackbut with Wine, and Periwinkle following. Sack. Sir, this Gentleman
hearing you have been a great Traveller, and a Person of fine Speculation, begs
leave to take a Glass with you; he is a Man of a curious Taste himself.


Col. The Gentleman has it in his Face and Garb: Sir, you are welcome.


Per. Sir, I honor a Traveller, and Men of your enquiring Disposition; the
Oddness of your Habit pleases me extremely; it is very Antique, and for that I
like it.


Col. It Is very Antique, Sir; -- This Habit once belonged to the famous
Claudius Ptolomeus, who lived in the Year a Hundred and Thirty Five.


Sack. If he keeps up to the Sample, he shall lie with the Devil for a
Bean-Stack, and win it every Straw. [Aside.


Per. A Hundred and Thirty Five! why, that is prodigious now -- Well, certainly
it is the finest thing in the World to be a Traveller.


Col. For my part I value none of the modern Fashions of a Fig-Leaf.


Per. No more do I, Sir; I had rather be the Jest of a Fool, than his
Favorite, -- I am laughed at her for my Singularity -- This Coat you must
know, Sir, was formerly worn by that Ingenious and very Learned Person, John
Tradescant.


Col. John Tradescant! Let me embrace you, Sir -- John Tradescant was my Uncle,
by Mother-side; and I thank you for the Honor you do his Memory; he was a very
curious Man indeed.


Per. Your Uncle, Sir, -- Nay then, it is no wonder that your Taste is so
refined; why, you have it in your Blood -- My humble Service to you, Sir, to
the immortal Memory of John Tradescant, your never-to-be-forgotten Uncle.
[Drinks.


Col. Give me a Glass, Landlord.


Per. I find you are Primitive, even in your Wine; Canary was the Drink of our
wise Forefathers; it is Balsamic, and saves the Charge of Apothecaries
Cordials. -- Oh! that I had lived in your Uncle's Days! or rather, that he were
now alive; -- Oh! how proud he would be of such a Nephew!


Sack. Oh Pox! that would have spoiled the Jest. [Aside.


Per. A Person of your Curiosity must have collected many Rarities.


Col. I have some, Sir, which are not yet come ashore, as an Egyptian Idol.


Per. Pray what might that be?


Col. It is, Sir, a Kind of an Ape, which they formerly worshipped in that
Country; I took it from the Breast of a Female Mummy.


Per. Ha, ha! our Women retain part of their Idolatry to this Day, for many an
Ape lies on a Lady's Breast, ha, ha --


Sack. A smart old Thief. [Aside.


Col. Two Tusks of an Hippotamus, two Pair of Chinese Nut-crackers, and one
Egyptian Mummy.


Per. Pray, Sir have you never a Crocodile?


Col. Humph! the Boatswain brought one with Design to show it, but touching at
Rotterdam, and hearing it was no Rarity in England, he sold it to a Dutch Poet.


Sack. The Devil's in that Nation, it rivals us in every thing.


Per. I should have been very glad to have seen a living Crocodile.


Col. My Genius led me to things more worthy my Regard -- Sir, I have seen the
utmost Limits of this Globular World; I have seen the Sun rise and set; know in
what Degree of Heat he is at Noon, to the Breadth of a Hair, and what Quantity
of Combustibles he burns in a Day, how much of it turns to Ashes, and how much
to Cinders.


Per. To Cinders? You amaze me Sir; I never heard that the Sun consumed any
thing -- Descartes tells us --


Col. Descartes, with the rest of his Brethren both ancient and modern, knew
nothing of the Matter -- I tell you Sir, that Nature admits an annual Decay,
though imperceptible to vulgar Eyes -- Sometimes his Rays destroy below,
sometimes above -- You have heard of Blazing Comets, I suppose.


Per. Yes, yes, I remember to have seen one; and our Astrologers tell us of
another which shall happen very quickly.


Col. Those Comets are little Islands bordering on the Sun, which at certain
Times are set on Fire by that Luminous Body's moving over them perpendicular,
which will one Day occasion a general Conflagration.


Sack. One need not scruple the Colonel's Capacity, Faith [Aside.


Per. This is mavelous strange! These Cinders are what I never read of in any
of our Learned Dissertations.


Col. I don't know how the Devil you should. [Aside.


Sack. He has at this Fingers Ends; one would swear he had learned to lie at
School, he does it so cleverly. [Aside.


Per. Well! you Travelers see strange things! Pray, Sir, have you any of those
Cinders?


Col. I have, among my other Curiosities.


Per. Oh, what have I lost for want of Traveling! -- Pray what have you else?


Col. Several Things worth your Attention -- I have a Muff made of the Feathers
of those Geese that saved the Roman Capitol.


Per. Is It possible?


Sack. Yes, if you are such a Goose to believe him. [Aside.


Col. I have an Indian Leaf which open, will cover an Acre of Land, yet folds
up in so little a Compass, you may put it into your Snuff Box.


Sack. Humph! that is a Thunderer. [Aside.


Per. Amazing!


Col. Ah! mine is but a little one; I have seen some of them that would cover
one of the Carribian Islands.


Per. Well, if I don't travel before I die, I shall not rest in my Grave -- Pray,
what do the Indians with them?


Col. Sir, they use them in their Wars for Tents, the Old Women for
Ridinghoods, the Young for Fans and Umbrellas.


Sack. He has a fruitful Invention. [Aside.


Per. I admire our East India Company imports none of them, they would
certainly find their Account in them.


Col. Right, if they could find the Leaves. [Aside.

-- Look ye, Sir, do you see this little Vial?


Per. Pray you, what is it?


Col. This is called Poluflosboio.


Per. Poluflosboio! -- it has a rumbling Sound.


Col. Right, Sir. it proceeds from a rumbling Nature -- This Water was part of
those Waves, which bore Cleopatra's Vessel when she sailed to meet Anthony.


Per. Well, of all that ever traveled, none had a Taste like you.


Col. But here is the Wonder of the World -- This, Sir, is called Zona, or Moros
Musphonon, the Virtues of this is inestimable.


Per. Moros Musphonon! What, in the Name of Wisdom, can that be? -- to me it
seems a plain Belt.


Col. This Girdle has carried me all the World over.


Per. You have carried it, you mean.


Col. I mean as I say, Sir -- Whenever I am girded with this, I am invisible;
and by turning this little Screw, can be in the Court of the Great Mogul, the
Grand Seignior, and King George, in as little Time as your Cook can poach an
Egg.


Per. You must pardon me, Sir, I cannot believe it.


Col. If my Landlord pleases, he shall try the Experiment immediately.


Sack. I thank you kindly, Sir, but I have no Inclination to ride Post to the
Devil.


Col. No, no, you fhan't stir a Foot, I Will only make you invisible.


Sack. But if you could not make me visible again.


Per. Come try it upon me, Sir, I am not afraid of the Devil, nor all his
Tricks. -- Zbud, I Will stand 'em all.


Col. There, Sir, put it on -- Come, Landlord, you and I must face the East.
[They turn about.] Is it on, Sir?


Per. It Is on. [They turn about again.


Sack. Heaven protect me! where is he?


Per. Why here, just where I was.


Sack. Where, where, in the Name of Virtue? Ah, poor Mr. Periwinkle! -- Egad
look to it, you had best, Sir, and let him be seen again, or I shall have you
burnt for a Wizzard.


Col. Have Patience, good Landlord.


Per. But really don't you see me now?


Sack. No more than I see my Grandmother that died forty Years ago.


Per. Are you sure you don't lie? Methinks I stand just where I did, and see
you as plain as I did before.


Sack. Ah! I wish I could see you once again.


Col. Take off the Girdle, Sir. [He takes it off.


Sack. Ah, Sir, I am glad to see you with all my Heart. [Embraces him.


Per. This is very odd; certainly there must be some Trick in it -- Pray, Sir,
will you do me the Favor to put it on your self.


Col. With all my Heart.


Per. But first I Will secure the Door.


Col. You know how to turn the Screw, Mr. Sackbut.


Sack. Yes, yes -- Come Mr. Periwinkle, we must turn full East. [They turn, the
Colonel sinks down a Trap-door.


Col. It Is done, now turn. [They turn.


Per. Ha! Mercy upon me! My Flesh creeps upon my Bones -- This must be a
Conjurer, Mr. Sackbut.


Sack. He is the Devil, I think.


Per. Oh! Mr. Sackbut, why do you name the Devil, when perhaps he may be at
your Elbow.


Sack. At my Elbow! marry, Heaven forbid.


Col. [Below] Are you satisfied, Sir?


Per. Yes, Sir, yes -- How hollow his Voice sounds!


Sack. Yours seemed just the same -- Faith, I wish this Girdle were mine, I Would
sell Wine no more. Hark ye, Mr. Periwinkle, [Takes him aside till the Colonel
rises again.] if he would sell this Girdle, you might travel with great
Expedition.


Col. But it is not to be parted with for Money.


Per. I am sorry for it, Sir, because I think it the greatest Curiosity I ever
heard of.


Col. By the Advice of a learned Phisiognomist in Grand Cairo, who consulted
the Lines in my Face, I returned to England, where, he told me, I should find a
Rarity in the Keeping of four Men, which I was born to possess for the Benefit
of Mankind, and the first of the four that gave me his Consent, I should
present him with this Girdle -- Till I have found this Jewel, I shall not part
with the Girdle.


Per. What can that Rarity be? Did he not name it to you?


Col. Yes, Sir; he called it a Chaste, Beautiful, Unaffected Woman.


Per. Pish! Women are no Rarities. -- I never had any great Taste that Way. I
married, indeed, to please a Father, and I got a Girl to please my Wife; but
she and the Child (thank Heaven) died together -- Women are the very Gewgaws of
the Creation; Play-things for Boys, which, when they write Man, they ought to
throw aside.


Sack. A fine Lecture to be read to a Circle of Ladies! [Aside.


Per. What Woman is there, dressed in all the Pride and Foppery of the Times, can
boast of such a Foretop as the Cockatoor.


Col. I must humor him. [Aside.] Such a Skin as the Lizzard?


Per. Such a shining Breast as the Humming-Bird?


Col. Such a Shape as the Antilope?


Per. Or, in all the artful Mixture of their various Dresses, have they half
the Beauty of one Box of Butterflies?


Col. No, that must be allowed -- For my part, if it were not for the Benefit
of Mankind, I Would have nothing to do with them, for they are as indifferent to
me, as a Sparrow or a Flesh-Fly.


Per. Pray, Sir, what Benefit is the World to reap from this Lady?


Col. Why, Sir, she is to bear me a Son, who shall restore the Art of
Embalming, and the old Roman Manner of Burying their Dead; and, for the Benefit
of Posterity, he is to discover the Longitude, so long sought for in vain.


Per. Od! these are very valuable Things, Mr. Sackbut.


Sack. He hits it off admirably, and the other swallows it like Sack and Sugar.
[Aside.] Certainly this Lady must be your Ward, Mr. Periwinkle, by her being
under the Care of four Persons.


Per. By the Description it should -- Egad, if I could get that Girdle, I Would
ride with the Sun, and make the Tour of the whole World in four and twenty
Hours [Aside.] And are you to give that Girdle to the first of the four
Guardiar s that shall give his Consent to marry that Lady, say you, Sir?


Col. I am so ordered, when I can find him.


Per. I fancy I know the very Woman -- her Name is Ann Lovely.


Col. Excellent! -- he said, indeed, that the first Letter of her Name was L.


Per. Did he really? -- Well, that is prodigiously amazing, that a Person in
Grand Cairo should know any thing of my Ward.


Col. Your Ward?


Per. To be plain with you, Sir, I am one of those four Guardians.


Col, Are you indeed, Sir? I am transported to find the Man who is to possess
this Moros Musphonon is a Person of so curious a Taste -- Here is a Writing
drawn up by that famous Egyptian, which, if you will please to sign, you must
turn your Face full North, and the Girdle is yours.


Per. If I live till this Boy is born, I Will be embalmed and sent to the Royal
Society when I die.


Col. That you shall most certainly.


Enter Drawer. Draw. Here Is Mr. Staytape the Tailor, enquires for you, Colonel.


Sack. Who do you speak to, you Son of a Whore?


Per. Ha! Colonel! [Aside.


Col. Confound the blundering Dog! [Aside


Draw. Why, to Colonel --


Sack. Get you out you Rascal. [Kicks him out, and Exit after him.


Draw. What the Devil is the Matter?


Col. This Dog has ruined all my Scheme, I see by Periwinkle's Looks. [Aside.


Per. How finely I should have been choused -- Colonel, you will pardon me that I
did not give your Title before -- it was pure Ignorance, Faith it was -- Pray
-- hem, hem -- Pray, Colonel, what Post had this Learned Egyptian in your
Regiment?


Col. A Pox of your Snear [Aside.] I don't understand you, Sir.


Per. No? that is strange! I understand you, Colonel -- An Egyptian of Grand
Cario! ha, ha, ha -- I am sorry such a well-invented Tale should do you no more
Service -- We old Fellows can see as far into a Millstone, as him that picks
it -- I am not to be tricked out of my Trust -- mark that.


Col. The Devil! I must carry it off; I wish I were fairly out. [Aside.] Look
ye, Sir, you may make what Jest you please -- but the Stars will be obeyed,
Sir, and, depend upon it, I shall have the Lady, and you none of the Girdle --
Now for Freeman's Part of the Plot. [Aside.]

[Exit.
Per. The Stars! ha, ha -- No Star has favored you, it seems -- The Girdle!
ha, ha, ha, none of your Lagerdemain's Tricks can pass upon me -- Why, what a
Pack of Trumpery has this Rogue picked up? -- His Pagod, Poluflosboios, his
Zonas, Moros Musphonons, and the Devil knows what -- But I Will take Care -- Ha
gone? -- Ay, 'twas time to sneak off -- Soho! the House! [Enter Sackbut.] Where
is this Trickster? Send for a Constable, I Will have this Rascal before the Lord
Mayor; I Will Grand Cairo him, with a Pox to him -- I believe you had a Hand in
putting this Imposture upon me, Sackbut.


Sack. Who I, Mr. Periwinkle? I scorn it; I perceived he was a Cheat, and left
the Room on purpose to send for a Constable to apprehend him, and endeavored
to stop him when he went out -- but the Rogue made but one Step from the Stairs
to the Door, called a Coach, leapt into it, and drove away like the Devil, as
Mr. Freeman can witness, who is at the Bar, and desires to speak with you; he
is this Minute come to Town.


Per. Send him in. [Exit Sackbut.] What a Scheme this Rogue had laid! How I
should have been laughed at, had it succeeded! [Enter Freeman Booted and
Spurred.] Mr. Freeman, your Dress commands your Welcome to Town; what will you
drink? I had like to have been imposed upon here by the veriest Rascal --


Free. I am sorry to hear it, -- The Dog flew for it -- he had not 'scap'd me,
if I had been aware of him; Sackbut struck at him, but missed his Blow, or he
had done his Business for him.


Per. I believe you never heard of such a Contrivance, Mr. Freeman, as this
Fellow had found out.


Free. Mr. Sackbut has told me the whole Story, Mr. Periwinkle; but now I have
something to tell you of much more Importance to your self -- I happened to lie
one Night at Coventry, and knowing your Uncle Sir Toby Periwinkle, I paid him a
Visit, and to my great Surprise found him dying.


Per. Dying!


Free. Dying, in all Appearance; the Servants weeping, the Room in Darkness;
the Apothecary shaking his Head, told me, the Doctors had given him over; and
then there is small Hopes, you know.


Per. I hope he has made his Will -- he always told me, he would make me his
Heir.


Free. I have heard you say as much, and therefore resolved to give you Notice.
I should think, it would not be amiss if you went down tomorrow Morning.


Per. It is a long Journey, and the Roads very bad.


Free. But he has a great Estate, and the Land very good -- Think upon that.


Per. Why that is true, as you say; I Will think upon it: In the mean time I give
you many Thanks for your Civility, Mr. Freeman, and should be glad of your
Company to dine with me.


Free. I am obliged to be at Jonathan's Coffee-House at Two, and it is now half
an Hour after One; if I dispatch my Business, I Will wait on you; I know your
Hour.


Per. You shall be very welcome, Mr. Freeman; and so your humble Servant.

[Exit.
Re-enter Colonel and Sackbut. Free. Ha, ha, ha, -- I have done your Business,
Colonel; he has swallowed the Bait.


Col. I overheard all, though I am a little in the dark: I am to personate a
Highway-Man, I suppose -- That Is a Project I am not fond of; for though I may
fright him out of his Consent, he may fright me out of my Life when he
discovers me, as he certainly must in the End.


Free. No, no, I have a Plot for you without Danger; but first we must manage
Tradelove -- Has the Tailor brought your Clothes?


Sack. Yes, Pox take the Thief.


Col. Pox take your Drawer, for a jolt-headed Rogue.


Free. Well, well, no matter, I warrant we have him yet -- But now you must put
on the Dutch Merchant.


Col. The Duce of this Trading-Plot -- I wish he had been an old Soldier, that
I might have attacked him in my own Way, heard him fight over all the Battles
of the Civil War -- but for Trade, by Jupiter I shall never do it.


Sack. Never fear, Colonel, Mr. Freeman will instruct you.


Free. You Will see what others do, the Coffee-house will instruct you.


Col. I must venture, however -- But I have a farther Plot in my Head upon
Tradelove, which you must assist me in Freeman; you are in Credit with him, I
heard you say.


Free. I am, and will scruple nothing to serve you, Colonel.


Col. Come along then -- Now for the Dutchman -- Honest Ptolomy, by your Leave,

Now must Bob-Wig and Business come in Play,
And a fair Thirty Thousand Pounder leads the Way.

End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. SCENE, Jonathan's Coffee-House in Exchange-Alley. Crowd of People
with Rolls of Paper and Parchment in their Hands; a Bar, and Coffee-Boys
waiting.
Enter Tradelove, and Stockjobbers with Rolls of Paper and Parchment. 1st
Stock. South Sea at seven Eights! who buys?


2d Stock. South Sea Bonds due at Michaelmas, 1718. Class-Lottery Tickets.


3d Stock. East India Bonds?


4th Stock. What all Sellers and no Buyers? Gentlemen, I Will buy a thousand
Pound for Tuesday next at 3 Fourths.


Coff. B. Fresh Coffee, Gentlemen, fresh Coffee?


Trade. Hark ye, Gabriel, you will pay the Difference of that Stock we transacted
for the other Day.


Gabr. Ay, Mr. Tradelove, here is a Note for the Money, upon the Sword-Blade
Company. [Gives him a Note.


Coff. B. Bohea-Tea, Gentlemen?


Enter a Man. Man. Is Mr. Smuggle here?


1st Coff. B. Mr. Smuggle's not here, Sir, you will find him at the Books.


2d Stock. Ho! here come two Sparks from the other End of the Town; what News
bring they?


Enter Two Gentlemen. Trade. I would fain Bite that Spark in the brown Coat, he
comes very often into the Alley, but never employs a Broker.


Enter Colonel and Freeman. 2d Stock. Who does any thing in the Civil List
Lottery? or Caco? Zounds, where are all the Jews this Afternoon? Are you a Bull
or a Bear to day, Abraham?


3d Stock. A Bull, faith, -- but I have a good Putt for next Week.


Trade. Mr. Freeman your Servant! Who is that Gentleman?


Free. A Dutch Merchant, just come to England; but hark ye, Mr. Tradelove, --
I have a Piece of News will get you as much as the French King's Death did, if
you are expeditious.


Trade. Say you so, Sir! Pray, what is it?


Free. [Showing him a Letter.] Read there, I received it just now from one that
belongs to the Emperor's Minister.


Trade. [Reads.] Sir, As I have many Obligations to you, I cannot miss any
Opportunity to show my Gratitude; this Moment my Lord has received a private
Express, that the Spaniards have raised their Siege from before Cagliari; if
this prove any Advantage to you, it will answer both the Ends and Wishes of,
Sir, Your most obliged humble Servant, Henricus Dusseldorp.

Postscript. In two or three Hours the News will be public.

May one depend upon this, Mr. Freeman? [Aside to Freeman.]


Free. You may -- I never knew this Person send me a false Piece of News in my
Life.


Trade. Sir, I am much obliged to you, 'Egad it is rare News. -- Who sells South
Sea for next Week?


Stock. Job. [All together.] I sell; I, I, I, I, I sell.


1st Stock. I Will sell 5000 l. for next Week, at five Eighths.


2d Stock. -- I Will sell ten thousand at five Eighths for the same time.


Trade. Nay, nay, hold, hold, not all together, Gentlemen, I Will be no Bull,
I Will buy no more than I can take: Will you sell ten thousand Pound at a half,
for any Day next Week, except Saturday?


1st Stock. I Will sell it you, Mr. Tradelove.


Free. [Whispers to one of the Gentlemen.]
Gent. [Aloud.] The Spaniards raised the Siege of Cagliari! I don't believe one
Word of it.


2d Gent. Raised the Siege! as much as you have raised the Monument.


Free. It Is raised I assure you, Sir.


2d Gent. What will you lay on it?


Free. What you please.


1st Gent. Why, I have a Brother upon the Spot, in the Emperor's Service; I am
certain if there were any such Thing, I should have had a Letter.


2d Stock. How Is this? The Siege of Cagliari raised; -- I wish it may be true,
'twill make Business stir, and Stocks rise.


1st Stock. Tradelove's a cunning fat Bear; if this News proves true, I shall
repent I sold him the five thousand Pounds. -- Pray, Sir, what Assurance have
you that the Siege is raised?


Free. There is come an Express to the Emperor's Minister.


2d Stock. I Will know that presently.

[Exit.]
1st Gent. Let it come where it will, I Will hold you fifty Pounds it is false.


Free. It Is done.


2d Gent. I Will lay you a Brace of Hundreds upon the same.


Free. I Will take you.


4th Stock. 'Egad, I Will hold twenty Pieces it is not raised, Sir.


Free. Done, with you too.


Trade. I Will lay any Man a Brace of Thousands the Siege is raised.


Free. The Dutch Merchant is your Man to take in. [Aside to Tradelove.]


Trade. Does not he know the News?


Free. Not a Syllable; if he did, he would bet a Hundred thousand Pound as soon
as one Penny; -- he is plaguey Rich, and a mighty Man at Wagers. [To Tradelove.


Trade. Say you so -- 'Egad, I Will bite him if possible: -- Are you from
Holland, Sir?


Col. Ya, Mynheer?


Trade. Had you the News before you came away?


Col. Wat believe you, Mynheer?


Trade. What do I believe? Why, I believe that the Spaniards have actually
raised the Siege of Cagliari.


Col. Wat Duyvels Niews is dat? It Is niet waer, Mynheer, -- it is no true, Sir.


Trade. It Is so true, Mynheer, that I Will lay you two thousand Pounds upon it --
You are sure the Letter may be depended upon, Mr. Freeman?


Free. Do you think I would venture my Money if I were not sure of the Truth of
it? [Aside to Trade.


Col. Two duysend Pond, Mynheer, it is gedaen -- dis Gentleman sal hold de Gelt.
[Gives Freeman Money.


Trade. With all my Heart, -- this binds the Wager.


Trade. You have certainly lost, Mynheer, the Siege is raised indeed.


Col. Ik gelove't niet, Mynheer Freeman, ik sal ye dubbled houden, if you
please.


Free. I am let into the Secret, therefore will not win your Money.


Trade. Ha, ha, ha! I have snapt the Dutchman, faith, ha, ha! this is no ill
Day's Work, -- pray may I crave your Name, Mynheer?


Col. Mine Naem, Mynheer! mine Naem is, Jan van Timtamtirelereletta Here van
Fainwell?


Trade. Zounds it is a damned long Name, I shall never remember it -- Mine Here
van Tim, Tim, Tim, -- What the Devil is it?


Free. Oh! never heed, I know the Gentleman, and will pass my Word for twice
the Sum.


Trade. That Is enough.


Col. You Will hear of me sooner than you will wish old Gentleman, I fancy.
[aside.] You Will come to Sackbut's, Freeman.

[Exit.
Free. Immediately. [Aside to the Colonel.


1st Man. Humphrey Hump here?


2d Boy. Mr. Humprey Hump is not here; you will find him upon the Dutch Walk.


Trade. Mr. Freeman, I give you many Thanks for your Kindness. --


Free. I fear you will repent when you know all. [aside.


Trade. Will you dine with me?


Free. I am engaged at Sackbut's; adieu.

[Exit.
Trade. Sir, your humble Servant. Now I Will see what I can do upon Change with
my News.

[Exit.
SCENE the Tavern.
Enter Freeman and Colonel. Free. Ha, ha, ha! the old Fellow swallowed the Bait
as greedily as a Gudgeon.


Col. I have him, faith, ha, ha, ha -- His two thousand Pounds secure -- if he
would keep his Money, he must part with the Lady, ha, ha -- What came of your
two Friends? they performed their Part very well; you should have brought 'em
to take a Glass with us.


Free. No matter, we'll drink a Bottle together another Time, -- I did not care
to bring them hither; there is no Necessity to trust them with the main Secret,
you know, Colonel.


Col. Nay, that is right, Freeman.


Enter Sackbut. Sack. Joy, Joy, Colonel! the luckiest Accident in the World!


Col. What say thou?


Sack. This Letter does your Business.


Col. (Reads.) To Obediah Prim, Hosier, near the Building called the Monument,
in London.


Free. A Letter to Prim; how came you by it?


Sack. Looking over the Letters our Post-Woman brought, as I always do, to see
what Letters are directed to my House, (for she cannot read you must know) I
spied this to Prim, so paid for it among the rest; I have given the old Jade a
Pint of Wine on purpose to delay Time, 'till you see if the Letter will be of
any Service; then I Will seal it up again, and tell her I took it by Mistake; --
I have read it, and fancy you will like the Project -- read, read, Colonel.


Col. [Reads.] Friend Prim, there is arrived from Pensilvania, one Simon Pure,
a Leader of the Faithful, who has sojourned with us eleven Days, and has been
of great Comfort to the Brethren -- He intends for the Quarterly Meeting in
London; I have recommended him to thy House; I pray thee entreat him kindly,
and let thy Wife cherish him, for he is of weakly Constitution -- he will depart
from us the third Day; which is all from thy Friend in the Faith, Aminadad
Holdfast.

Ha, ha! Excellent! I understand you, Landlord, I am to personate this Simon
Pure, am I not?


Sack. Don't you like the Hint?


Col. Admirably well!


Free. It Is the best Contrivance in the World, if the right Simon gets not
there before you. --


Col. No, no, the Quakers never ride Post; he cannot be here before tomorrow at
soonest: Do you send and buy me a Quaker's Dress, Mr. Sackbutt; and suppose,
Freeman, you should wait at the Bristol Coach, that if you see any such Person,
you might contrive to give me Notice --


Free. I will -- the Country Dress and Boots, are they ready?


Sack. Yes, yes, every thing -- Sir.


Free. Bring 'em in then, -- [Exit Sack.] Thou must dispatch Periwinkle first,
-- remember his Uncle Sir Toby Periwinkle is an old Bachelor of seventy five,
-- that he has seven hundred a Year, most in Abbey-Land; that he was once in
Love with your Mother, and shrewdly suspected by some to be your Father, --
that you have been thirty Years his Steward, -- and ten Years his Gentleman --
remember to improve these Hints.


Col. Never fear, let me alone for that, -- but what is the Steward's Name?


Free. His Name is Pillage.


Col. Enough -- [Enter Sackbut with Clothes.] Now for the Country Put --
[Dresses.


Free. Egad, Landlord, thou deservest to have the first Night's Lodging with
the Lady for thy Fidelity; -- What say you, Colonel, shall we settle a Club
here, you will make one?


Col. Make one; I Will bring a Set of honest Officers, that will spend their
Money as freely to the King's Health, as they would their Blood in his Service.


Sack. I thank you, Colonel. Here, here. [Bell rings.

[Exit Sackbut.
Col. So now for my Boots. [Puts on Boots.] Shall I find you here, Freeman,
when I come back?


Free. Yes, -- or I Will leave Word with Sackbut, where he may send for me --
Have you the Writings? the Will, -- and every thing?


Col. All, all! --


[Enter Sackbut. Sack. Zounds! Mr. Freeman! yonder is Tradelove in the
damned'st Passion in the World. -- He swears you are in the House, -- he says
you told him you was to dine here.


Free. I did so. Ha, ha, ha! he has found himself bit already. --


Col. The Devil! he must not see me in this Dress.


Sack. I told him I expected you here, but you were not come yet. --


Free. Very well, -- make you haste out,! Colonel, and let me alone to deal
with him: Where is he?


Sack. In the King's-Head.


Col. You remember what I told you?


Free. Ay, ay, very well. Landlord, let him know I am come in, -- and now, Mr.
Pillage, success attend you.

[Exit Sack.
Col. Mr. Proteus rather. --

From changing Shape and imitating Jove,
I draw the happy Omens of my Love.
I Am not the first young Brother of the Blade
Who made his Fortune in a Masquerade.
[Exit Col.
Enter Tradelove. Free. 'Zounds! Mr. Tradelove, we are bit it seems.


Trade. Bit do you call it, Mr. Freeman? I am ruined, -- Pox on your News.


Free. Pox on the Rascal that sent it me. --


Trade. Sent it you! Why Gabriel Skinstint has been at the Minister's, and
spoke with him, and he has assured him it is every Syllable false; he received
no such Express. --


Free. I know it: I this Minute parted with my Friend, who protested he never
sent me any such Letter, -- some roguish Stockjobber has done it on purpose to
make me lose my Money, that is certain; I wish I knew who he was, I Would make him
repent it -- I have lost three hundred Pounds by it.


Trade. What signifies your 300 l. to what I have lost? There Is two thousand
Pounds to that Dutchman with the cursed long Name, besides the Stock I bought;
the Devil! I could tear my Flesh, -- I must never show my Face upon Change
more, -- for, by my Soul, I cannot pay it.


Free. I am heartily sorry for it! What can I serve you in? Shall I speak to the
Dutch Merchant, and try to get you Time for the Payment?


Trade. Time! 'Ad'sheart! I shall never be able to look up again.


Free. I am very much concerned that I was the Occasion, and wish I could be an
Instrument of retrieving your Misfortune; for my own I value it not. -- 'Adso!
a Thought comes into my Head, that well improved, may be of Service. --


Trade. Ah! there is no Thought can be of any Service to me, without paying the
Money, or running away.


Free. How do you know? What do you think of my proposing Mrs. Lovely to him?
He is a single Man, -- and I heard him say he had a mind to marry an English
Woman -- nay, more than that, he said somebody told him, you had a pretty Ward
-- he wished you had betted her instead of your Money.


Trade. Ay, but he would be hanged before he would take her instead of the Money; the
Dutch are too covetous for that; besides, he did not know that there were three
more of us I suppose.


Free. So much the better; you may venture to give him your Consent, if he will
forgive you the Wager: It is not your Business to tell him, that your Consent
will signify nothing.


Trade. That Is right, as you say; but will he do it, think you?


Free. I cannot tell that; but I Will try what I can do with him -- He has
promised me to meet me here an Hour hence; I Will feel his Pulse, and let you
know: If I find it feasible, I Will send for you; if not, you are at liberty to
take what Measures you please.


Trade. You must extol her Beauty, double her Portion, and tell him I have the
entire Disposal of her, and that she cannot marry without my Consent; -- and
that I am a covetous Rogue, and will never part with her without a Valuable
Consideration.


Free. Ay, ay, let me alone for a Lie at a Pinch.


Trade. Egad, if you can bring this to bear, Mr. Freeman, I Will make you whole
again; I Will pay the Three Hundred Pounds you lost, with all my Soul.


Free. Well, I Will use my best Endeavors -- Where will you be?


Trade. At Home; pray Heaven you prosper -- If I were but the sole Trustee now,
I should not fear it. Who the Devil would be a Guardian,

If when Cash runs low, our Coffers t'enlarge,
We cannot, like other Stocks, transfer our Charge?
[Exit.
Free. Ha, ha, ha -- he has it.

[Exit.
SCENE changes to Periwinkle's House.
Enter Periwinkle on one Side, and Footman on the other. Foot. A Gentleman from
Coventry enquires for you, Sir.


Per. From my Uncle, I warrant you, bring him up -- This will save me the
Trouble, as well as the Expenses of a Journey.


Enter Colonel. Col. Is your Name Periwinkle, Sir?


Per. It is, Sir.


Col. I am sorry for the Message I bring -- My old Master, whom I served these
forty Years, claims the Sorrow due from a faithful Servant to an indulgent
Master. [Weeps.


Per. By this I understand, Sir, my Uncle Sir Toby Periwinkle is dead.


Col. He is, Sir, and he has left you Heir to Seven Hundred a Year, in as good
Abbey-Land as ever paid Peter Pence to Rome -- I wish you long to enjoy it, but
my Tears will flow when I think of my Benefactor -- [Weeps.] Ah! he was a good
Man -- he has not left many of his Fellows -- the Poor laments him sorely.


Per. I pray, Sir, what Office bore you?


Col. I was his Steward, Sir.


Per. I have heard him mention you with much Respect; your Name is --


Col. Pillage, Sir.


Per. Ay, Pillage! I do remember he called you Pillage -- Pray, Mr. Pillage,
when did my Uncle die?


Col. Monday last, at Four in the Morning. About Two he signed this Will, and
gave it into my Hands, and strictly charged me to leave Coventry the Moment he
expired, and deliver it to you with what Speed I could; I have obeyed him, Sir,
and there is the Will. [Gives it to Per.


Per. It Is very well, I Will lodge it in the Commons.


Col. There are two Things which he forgot to insert, but charged me to tell
you, that he desired you would perform them as readily as if you had found them
written in the Will, which is to remove his Corpse, and bury him by his Father
in St. Paul Covent Garden, and to give all his Servants Mourning.


Per. That will be a considerable Charge; a Pox of all modern Fashions.
[Aside.] Well! it shall be done, Mr. Pillage; I will agree with one of Death's
Fashion-Mongers, called an Undertaker, to go down, and bring up the Body.


Col. I hope, Sir, I shall have the Honor to serve you in the same Station I
did your Worthy Uncle; I have not many Years to stay behind him, and would
gladly spend them in the Family, where I was brought up -- [Weeps.] He was a
kind and tender Master to me.


Per. Pray don't grieve Mr. Pillage, you shall hold your Place, and every thing
else which you held under my Uncle -- You make me weep to see you so concerned.
[Weeps.] He lived to a good old Age -- and we are all mortal.


Col. We are so, Sir, and therefore I must beg you to sign this Lease: You Will
find Sir Toby has taken particular Notice of it in his Will -- I could not get
it time enough from the Lawyer, or he had signed it before he died. [Gives him
a Paper.


Per. A Lease for what?


Col. I rented a Hundred a Year of Sir Toby upon Lease, which Lease expires at
Lady Day next, and I desire to renew it for twenty Years -- that is all, Sir.


Per. Let me see. [Looks over the Lease.


Col. Matters go swimmingly, if nothing intervene. [Aside.


Per. Very well -- Let Us see what he says in his Will about it. [Lays the Lease
upon the Table, and looks on the Will.


Col. He Is very wary, yet I fancy I shall be too cunning for him. [Aside.


Per. Ho, here it is -- The Farm lying -- now in Possession of Samuel Pillage
-- suffer him to renew his Lease -- at the same Rent -- Very well, Mr. Pillage,
I see my Uncle does mention it, and I Will perform his Will. Give me the Lease --
[ Col. gives it him, he looks upon it, and lays it upon the Table.] Pray you
step to the Door, and call for a Pen and Ink, Mr. Pillage.


Col. I have Pen and Ink in my Pocket, Sir, [Pulls out an Inkhorn.] I never go
without that.


Per. I think it belongs to your Profession -- [He looks upon the Pen, while
the Col. changes the Lease, and lays down the Contract.] I doubt this is but a
sorry Pen, though it may serve to write my Name. [Writes.


Col. Little does he think what he signs. [Aside.


Per. There is your Lease, Mr. Pillage, [Gives him the Paper.] Now I must
desire you to make what Haste you can down to Coventry, and take Care of every
thing, and I Will send down the Undertaker for the Body; do you attend it up, and
whatever Charge you are at, I will repay you.


Col. You have paid me already, I thank you, Sir. [Aside.


Per. Will you dine with me?


Col. I would rather not, there are some of my Neighbors which I met as I came
along, who leaves the Town this Afternoon, they told me, and I should be glad
of their Company down.


Per. Well, well, I will not detain you.


Col. I don't care how soon I am out. [Aside.


Per. I will give Orders about Mourning.


Col. You will have Cause to mourn, when you know your Estate imaginary only.

You Will find your Hopes and Cares alike are vain,
In Spite of all the Caution you have taken,
Fortune rewards the faithful Lover's Pain.
[Exit.
Per. Seven Hundred a Year! I wish he had died seventeen Years ago; -- What a
valuable Collection of Rarities might I have had by this time? -- I might have
traveled over all the known Parts of the Globe, and made my own Closet Rival
the Vatican at Rome. -- 'Odso, I have a good Mind to begin my Travels now; --
let me see, -- I am but Sixty! My Father, Grandfather, and Great-Grandfather,
reached Ninety odd; -- I have almost forty Years good: -- Let me consider! What
will Seven Hundred a Year amount to -- in -- ay! in thirty Years, I Will say but
thirty; -- Thirty times Seven, is seven times Thirty -- that is -- just twenty
one thousand Pound, -- it is a great deal of Money, -- I may very well reserve
sixteen Hundred of it for a Collection of such Rarities, as will make my Name
famous to Posterity; -- I would not die like other Mortals, forgotten in a Year
or two, as my Uncle will be -- No.

With Nature's curious Works I Will raise my Fame,
That Men, 'till Doom's Day, may repeat my Name.
[Exit.
SCENE changes to a Tavern; Freeman and Tradelove over a Bottle.
Trade. Come Mr. Freeman, here is Mynheer Jan, Van Tim, Tam, Tam; -- I shall
never think of that Dutchman's Name. --


Free. Mynheer Jan Van Timtamtirelireletta Here Van Fainwell.


Trade. Ay, Here Van Fainwell. I never heard such a confounded Name in my Life,
-- here is his Health I say. [Drinks.


Free. With all my Heart.


Trade. Faith, I never expected to have found so generous a Thing in a Dutchman.


Free. Oh, he has nothing of the Hollander in his Temper -- except an Antipathy
to Monarchy -- As soon as I told him your Circumstances, he replied, he would
not be the Ruin of any Man for the World, -- and immediately made this Proposal
himself: -- Let him take what time he will for the Payment, said he; or if
he will give me his Ward, I Will forgive him the Debt.


Trade. Well, Mr. Freeman, I can but thank you, -- 'Egad you have made a Man of
me again; and if ever I lay a Wager more, may I rot in a Goal.


Free. I assure you, Mr. Tradelove, I was very much concerned, because I was
the Occasion, -- though very innocently I protest.


Trade. I dare swear you was, Mr. Freeman.


Enter a Filder. Fid. Please to have a Lesson of Music, or a Song, Gentlemen?


Free. A Song? Ay, with all our Hearts; have you ever a merry one?


Fid. Yes, Sir, my Wife and I can give you a merry Dialogue.

[Here is the Song.
Trade. It Is very pretty, Faith. --


Free. There Is something for you to drink, Friend, go, lose no Time.


Fid. I thank you, Sir.

[Exit.
Enter Drawer, and Colonel dressed for the Dutch Merchant. Col. Ha, Mynheer
Tradelove, Ik ben sorry voor your Troubles -- maer Ik sal you easy maeken, Ik
will degelt niet hebben. --


Trade. I shall for ever acknowledge the Obligation, Sir.


Free. But you understand upon what Condition Mr. Tradelove, Mrs. Lovely.


Col. Ya, de juffrow sal al te regt setten; Mynheer.


Trade. With all my Heart, Mynheer, you shall have my Consent to marry her
freely. --


Free. Well then, as I am a Party concerned between you, Mynheer Jan Van
Timtamtirelireletta Here Van Fainwell shall give you a Discharge of your Wager
under his own Hand, -- and you shall give him your Consent to marry Mrs. Lovely
under yours; -- that is the way to avoid all manner of Disputes hereafter.


Col. Ya, Waeragtig.


Trade. Ay, ay, so it is, Mr. Freeman, I Will give it under mine this Minute.
[Sits down to write.


Col. And so sal Ik. [Sits down to write.


Free. So, ho, the House, [Enter Drawer.] Bid your Master come up -- I Will see
there be Witnesses enough to the Bargain. [Aside.


Enter Sackbut. Sack. Do you call, Gentlemen?


Free. Ay, Mr. Sackbut, we shall want your Hand here. --


Trade. There Mynheer, there is my Consent as amply as you can desire; but you
must insert your own Name, for I know not how to spell it; I have left a Blank
for it. [Gives the Colonel a Paper.


Col. Ya, Ik sal dat well done. --


Free. Now, Mr. Sackbut, you and I will witness it. [They write.


Col. Daer Mynheer Tradelove is your Discharge. [Gives him a Paper.


Trade. Be pleased to witness this Receipt too, Gentlemen. [ Freeman and
Sackbut put their Hands.


Free. Ay, ay, that we will.


Col. Well, Mynheer, ye most mere done, ye most Mine voorspraek to de juffrow
Syn.


Free. He means you must recommend him to the Lady. --


Trade. That I will, and to the rest of my Brother Guardians.


Col. Wat voor den Duyvel heb you mere Guardians?


Trade. Only Three, Mynheer.


Col. Wat donder heb ye Mine betrocken Mynheer? Had Ik that gewoeten, Ik soude
eaven met you geweest Syn.


Sack. But Mr. Tradelove is the Principal, and he can do a great deal with the
rest, Sir.


Free. And he shall use his Interest I promise you Mynheer.


Trade. I will say all that ever I can think on to recommend you, Mynheer, and
if you please, I Will introduce you to the Lady.


Col. Well, dat is waer. -- Maer ye must first spreken of, Mine, to de juffrow,
and to de oudere Gentlemen.


Free. Ay, that is the best way, -- and then I and the Here Van Fainwell will
meet you there.


Trade. I will go this Moment, upon Honor, -- Your most obedient humble
Servant. -- My speaking will do you little Good, Minheer, ha, ha; we have bit
you, Faith, ha, ha; my Debt's discharged, -- and for the Man, He'as my Consent
-- to get her if he can.

[Exit.
Col. Ha, ha, ha, this was a Masterpiece of Contrivance, Freeman.


Free. He hugs himself with his supposed good Fortune, and little thinks the
Luck's of our Side; -- but come, pursue the fickle Goddess while she is in the
Mood. -- Now for the Quaker.


Col. That Is the hardest Task.

Of all the Counterfeits performed by Man,
A Soldier makes the simplest Puritan.
[Exit.
The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I. SCENE Prim's House.
Enter Mrs. Prim, and Mrs. Lovely in Quakers Dress, meeting. Mrs. Pr. SO, now I
like thee, Anne: Art thou not better without thy monstrous Hoop Coat and
Patches! -- If Heaven should make thee so many black Spots upon thy Face, would
it not fright thee, Anne?


Mrs. Lov. If it should turn your Inside outward, and show all the Spots of
your Hypocrisy, 'twou'd fright me worse.


Mrs. Pr. My Hypocrisy! I scorn thy Words, Anne, I lay no Baits.


Mrs. Lov. If you did, you would catch no Fish.


Mrs. Pr. Well, well, make thy Jests; -- but I Would have thee to know, Anne, that
I could have caught as many Fish (as thou call'st them) in my Time, as ever
thou did with all thy Fool-Traps about thee. -- If Admirers be thy Aim, thou will have more of them in this Dress than thy other. -- The Men, take my Word
for it, are most desirous to see what we are most careful to conceal.


Mrs. Lov. Is that the Reason of your Formality, Mrs. Prim? Truth will out: I
ever thought, indeed, there was no more Design than Godliness in the pinched
Cap.


Mrs. Pr. Go, thou art corrupted with reading lude Plays, and filthy Romances,
-- good for nothing but to lead Youth into the High Road of Fornication. -- Ah!
I wish thou art not already too familiar with the wicked Ones.


Mrs. Love. Too familiar with the wicked Ones! Pray no more of those Freedoms,
Madam, -- I am familiar with none so wicked as your self; -- How dare you talk
thus to me! you, you, you unworthy Woman you. [Bursts into Tears.


Enter Tradelove. Trade. What, in Tears, Nancy? What have you done to her, Mrs.
Prim, to make her weep?


Mrs. Lov. Done to me! I admire I keep my Senses, among you; -- but I will rid
my self of your Tyranny, if there be either Law or Justice to be had; -- I Will
force you to give me up my Liberty.


Mrs. Pr. Thou have more need to weep for thy Sins, Anne, -- Yea, for thy
manifold Sins. --


Mrs. Lov. Don't think that I Will be still the Fool which you have made me, --
No, I Will wear what I please -- go when and where I please, -- and keep what
Company I think fit, and not what you shall direct, -- I will.


Trade. For my Part, I do think all this very reasonable, Mrs. Lovely, -- it is
fit you should have your Liberty, and for that very purpose I am come.


Enter Mr. Periwinkle, and Obediah Prim with a Letter in his Hand. Per. I have
bought some black Stockings of your Husband, Mrs. Prim, but he tells me the
Glover's Trade belongs to you, therefore I pray you look me out five or six
Dozen of mourning Gloves, such as are given at Funerals, and send them to my
House. --


Ob. Prim. My Friend Periwinkle has got a good Windfall to Day -- seven Hundred
a Year.


Mrs. Pr. I wish thee Joy of it, Neighbor.


Trade. What, is Sir Toby dead then?


Per. He is! You Will take care, Mrs. Prim.


Mrs. Pr. Yea, I will, Neighbor.


Ob. Pr. This Letter recommendeth a Speaker, it is from Aminadab Holdfast of
Bristol; peradventure he will be here this Night; therefore Sarah, do thou take
care for his Reception. -- [Gives her the Letter.


Mrs. Prim. I will obey thee.

[Exit.
Ob. Pr. What art thou in the Dumps for, Anne?


Trade. We must marry her, Mr. Prim.


Ob. Pr. Why truly, if we could find a Husband worth having, I should be as
glad to see her married as thou would, Neighbor.


Per. Well said, there are but few worth having.


Trade. I can recommend you a Man now, that I think you can none of you have an
Objection to!


Enter Sir Philip Modelove. Per. You recommend? Nay, when ever she marries,
I Will recommend the Husband. --


Sir Phil. What must it be, a Whale or a Rinoceros, Mr. Periwinkle, ha, ha, ha?
Mr. Tradelove, I have a Bill upon you (gives him a Paper) and have been seeking
for you all over the Town.


Trade. I Will accept it, Sir Philip, and pay it when due. --


Per. He shall be none of the Fops at your End of the Town, with full Perukes
and empty Skulls, -- nor yet none of your Trading Gentry, who puzzle the
Heralds to find Arms for their Coaches, -- No, he shall be a Man famous for
Travels, Solidity and Curiosity, -- one who has searched into the Profundity of
Nature! when Heaven shall direct such a one, he shall have my Consent, because
it may turn to the Benefit of Mankind.


Mrs. Love. The Benefit of Mankind! What, would you anatomize me?


Sir Phil. Ay, ay, Madam, he would dissect you.


Trade. Or, pore over you through a Microscope, to see how your Blood
circulates from the Crown of your Head to the Sole of your Foot, -- ha, ha! but
I have a Husband for you, a Man that knows how to improve your Fortune; one
that trades to the four Corners of the Globe.


Mrs. Lov. And would send me for a Venture perhaps.


Trade. One that will dress you in all the Pride of Europe, Asia, Africa and
America -- a Dutch Merchant, my Girl.


Sir Phil. A Dutchman! ha, ha, there is a Husband for a fine Lady -- Ya Juffrow,
will you met mine Slapen -- ha, ha; he will learn you to talk the Language of the
Hogs, Madam, ha, ha.


Trade. He Will learn you that one Merchant is of more Service to a Nation, than
Fifty Coxcombs. -- The Dutch know the Trading Interest to be of more Benefit to
the State, than the Landed.


Sir Phil. But what is either Interest to a Lady?


Trade. It Is the Merchant makes the Belle -- How would the Ladies sparkle in
the Box without the Merchant? The Indian Diamonds! The French Brocade! The
Italian Fan! The Flanders Lace! The fine Dutch Holland! -- How would they vent
their Scandal over their Tea-tables? and where would you Beaus have Champaigne
to toast your Mistresses, were it not for the Merchant?


Ob. Pr. Verily, Neighbor Tradelove, thou do waste thy Breath about nothing
-- All that thou have said tends only to debauch Youth, and fill their Heads
with the Pride and Luxury of this World -- The Merchant is a very great Friend
to Satan, and sends as many to his Dominions as the Pope.


Per. Right, I say Knowledge makes the Man.


Ob. Pr. Yea, but not thy kind of Knowledge -- it is the Knowledge of Truth --
Search thou for the Light within, and not for Bawbles, Friend.


Mrs. Lov. Ah, study your Country's Good, Mr. Periwinkle, and not her Insects.
-- Rid you of your homebred Monsters, before you fetch any from abroad -- I
dare swear you have Maggots enough in your own Brain to stock all the
Virtuoso's in Europe with Butterflies.


Sir Phil. By my Soul, Miss Nancy's a Wit.


Ob. Pr. That is more than she can say by thee, Friend -- Look ye, it is in
vain to talk, when I meet a Man worthy of her, she shall have my leave to marry
him.


Mrs. Lov. Provided he be one of the Faithful -- Was there ever such a Swarm of
Caterpillars to blast the Hopes of a Woman! [Aside.] Know this, that you
contend in vain: I Will have no Husband of your choosing, nor shall you lord it
over me long -- I Will try the Power of an English Senate -- Orphans have been
redressed, and Wills set aside -- and none did ever deserve their Pity more --
Oh Fainwell! where are thy Promises to free me from these Vermin? Alas! the
Task was more difficult than he imagined!

A harder Task than what the Poets tell
Of yore, the fair Andromada befell;
She but one Monster feared, I Have four to fear,
And see no Perseus, no Deliv'rer near.
[Exit.
Enter Servant, and whispers to Prim. Serve. One Simon Pure enquireth for thee.


Per. The Woman is mad.

[Exit.
Sir Phil. So are you all, in my Opinion.

[Exit.
Ob. Pr. Friend Tradelove, Business requires my Presence.


Trade. Oh, I shall not trouble you -- Pox take him for an unmannerly Dog --
However, I have kept my Word with my Dutchman, and will introduce him too for
all you.

[Exit.
Enter Colonel in a Quaker's Habit. Ob. Pr. Friend Pure, thou art welcome; how
is it with Friend Holdfast, and all Friends in Bristol? Timothy Littlewit, John
Slenderbrain, and Christopher Keepfaith?


Col. A goodly Company! [Aside.] They are all in Health, I thank thee for them.


Ob. Pr. Friend Holdfast writes me Word, that thou came lately from
Pensilvania, how do all Friends there --


Col. What the devil shall I say? I know just as much of Pensilvania as I do of
Bristol. [Aside.


Ob. Pr. Do they thrive?


Col. Yea, Friend, the Blessing of their good Works fall upon them.


Enter Mrs. Prim and Mrs. Lovely. Ob. Pr. Sarah, know our Friend Pure.


Mrs. Pr. Thou art welcome. [He salutes her.


Col. Here comes the Sum of all my Wishes -- How charming she appears, even in
that Disguise? [Aside.


Ob. Pr. Why do thou consider the Maiden so intentively, Friend?


Col. I will tell thee: About four Days ago I saw a Vision -- This very Maiden,
but in vain Attire, standing on a Precipice; and heard a Voice, which called me
by my Name -- and bad me put forth my Hand and save her from the Pit -- I did
so, and me-thought the Damosel grew to my Side.


Mrs. Pr. What can that portend?


Ob. Pr. The Damosel's Conversion -- I am persuaded.


Mrs. Love. That Is false, I Am sure -- [Aside.


Ob. Pr. Will thou use the Means, Friend Pure?


Col. Means! what Means? Is she not thy Daughter, and already One of the
Faithful?


Mrs. Pr. No, alas! she is One of the Ungodly.


Ob. Pr. Pray thee mind what this good Man will say unto thee; he will teach
thee the Way that thou should walk, Anne.


Mrs. Love. I know my Way without his Instructions: I hoped to have been quiet,
when once I had put on your odious Formality here.


Col. Then thou wearest it out of Compulsion, not Choice, Friend?


Mrs. Lov. Thou art in the right of it, Friend --


Mrs. Pr. Art not thou ashamed to mimick the good Man? Ah! thou art a stubborn
Girl.


Col. Mind her not; she hurts not me -- If thou will leave her alone with me,
I will discuss some few Points with her, that may, perchance, soften her
Stubborness, and melt her into Compliance.


Ob. Pr. Content, I pray thee put it home to her -- Come, Sarah, let us leave
the good Man with her.


Mrs. Lov. [Catching hold of Prim, he breaks loose and Exit.] What do you mean
-- to leave me with this old Enthusiastical Canter? Don't think, because I
complied with your Formality, to impose your ridiculous Doctrine upon me.


Col. I pray thee, young Woman, moderate thy Passion.


Mrs. Lov. I pray thee, walk after thy Leader, you will but lose your Labor
upon me -- These Wretches will certainly make me mad.


Col. I am of another Opinion; the Spirit tells me that I shall convert thee,
Ann.


Mrs. Lov. It Is a lying Spirit, don't believe it.


Col. Say thou so? Why then thou shall convert me, my Angel. [Catching her
in his Arms.


Mrs. Lov. [Shrieks.] Ah! Monster hold off, or I Will tear thy Eyes out.


Col. Hush! for Heavens sake -- do thou not know me? I am Fainwell.


Mrs. Lov. Fainwell! [Enter old Prim.] Oh I Am undone! Prim here -- I wish with
all my Soul I had been dumb. [Aside.


Ob. Pr. What is the Matter? Why did thou shriek out, Ann?


Mrs. Lov. Shrick out! I Will shriek and shriek again, cry Murder, Thieves, or
any thing, to drown the Noise of that Eternal Babbler, if you leave me with him
any longer.


Ob. Pr. Was that all? Fie, fie, Ann.


Col. No matter, I Will bring down her Stomach, I Will warrant thee -- leave us, I
pray thee.


Ob. Pr. Fare thee well. [Exit.


Col. My charming lovely Woman. [Embraces her.


Mrs. Lov. What mean thou by this Disguise, Fainwell?


Col. To set thee free, if thou will perform thy Promise.


Mrs. Lov. Make me Mistress of my Fortune, and make thy own Conditions.


Col. This Night shall answer all thy Wishes -- See here, I have the Consent of
three of thy Guardians already, and doubt not but Prim shall make the fourth. [
Prim listening.


Ob. Pr. I would gladly hear what Argument the good Man uses to bend her.
[Aside.


Mrs. Lov. Thy Words give me new Life, methinks.


Ob. Pr. What do I hear?


Mrs. Lov. Thou best of Men, Heaven meant to bless me sure, when first I saw
thee.


Ob. Pr. He has mollified her -- Oh wonderful Conversion!


Col. Ha! Prim listening -- No more, my Love, we are observed; seem to be
edified, and give 'em Hopes that thou will turn Quaker, and leave the rest to
me. [Aloud.] I am glad to find that thou art touched with what I said unto
thee, Ann; another time I will explain the other Article to thee; in the mean
while be thou dutiful to our Friend Prim.


Mrs. Lov. I shall obey thee in every thing.


Enter Old Prim. Ob. Pr. Oh what a prodigious Change is here! Thou have wrought
a Miracle, Friend! Ann, how do thou like the Doctrine he has preached?


Mrs. Lov. So well, that I could talk to him for ever, methinks -- I am ashamed
of my former Folly, and ask your Pardon, Mr. Prim.


Col. Enough, enough that thou art sorry, he is no Pope, Ann.


Ob. Pr. Verily thou do rejoice me exceedingly, Friend; will it please thee
to walk into the next Room, and refresh thy self -- Come, take the Maiden by
the Hand.


Col. We will follow thee.


Enter Servant. Serve. There is another Simon Pure enquireth for thee, Master.


Col. The Devil there is. [Aside.


Ob. Pr. Another Simon Pure? I do not know him, is he any Relation of thine?


Col. No, Friend, I know him not -- Pox take him, I wish he were in Pensilvania
again, with all my Blood. [Aside.


Mrs. Lov. What shall I do? [Aside.


Ob. Pr. Bring him up.


Col. Humph! then one of us must go down, that is certain -- Now Impudence
assist me.


Enter Simon Pure. Ob. Pr. What is thy Will with me, Friend?


S. Pu. Did thou not receive a Letter from Aminadab Holdfast of Bristol,
concerning one Simon Pure?


Ob. Pr. Yea, and Simon Pure is already here, Friend.


Col. And Simon Pure will stay here, Friend, if possible. [Aside.


S. Pu. That Is an Untruth, for I am he.


Col. Take thou heed, Friend, what thou do say; I do affirm that I am Simon
Pure.


S. Pu. Thy Name may be Pure, Friend, but not that Pure.


Col. Yea that Pure, which my good Friend Aminadab Holdfast wrote to my Friend
Prim about, the same Simon Pure that came from Pensilvania, and sojourned in
Bristol eleven Days; thou would not take my Name from me, would thou? --
till I have done with it. [Aside.


S. Pu. Thy Name! I am astonished.


Col. At what? at thy own Assurance? [Going up to him, S. Pure starts back.


S. Pu. Avaunt, Satan; approach me not; I defy thee and all thy Works,


Mrs. Lov. Oh, he will out cant him -- Undone, undone for ever. [Aside.


Col. Hark thee, Friend, thy Sham will not take -- Don't exert thy Voice, thou
art too well-acquainted with Satan to start at him, thou wicked Reprobate --
What can thy Design be here?


[Enter Servant, and gives Prim a Letter. Ob. Pr. One of these must be a
Counterfeit, but which I cannot say.


Col. What can that Letter be? [Aside.


S. Pu. Thou must be the Devil, Friend, that is certain, for no humane Power can
stock so great a Falsehood.


Ob. Pr. This Letter says that thou art better acquainted with that Prince of
Darkness, than any here -- Read that, I pray thee, Simon. [Gives it the Col.


Col. It Is Freeman's Hand -- [Reads.] There is a Design formed to rob your
House this Night, and cut your Throat, and for that purpose there is a Man
disguised like a Quaker, who is to pass for one Simon Pure; the Gang whereof I
am one, though now resolved to rob no more has been at Bristol, one of them came
up in the Coach with the Quaker; whose Name he has taken, and from what he
has gathered from him, formed that Design, and did not doubt but he should
impose so far upon you, as to make you turn out the real Simon Pure, and keep
him with you. Make the right Use of this. Adieu. -- Excellent well! [Aside.


Ob. Pr. Do thou hear this? [To S. Pure.


S. Pu. Yea, but it moves me not; that, doubtless, is the Impostor. [Pointing
at the Col.


Col. Ah! thou wicked one -- now I consider thy Face I remember thou did come
up in the Leathern Convenience with me -- thou had a black Bob-Wig on, and a
brown Camblet Coat with Brass Buttons -- can thou deny it, ha?


S. Pu. Yea, I can, and with a safe Conscience too, Friend.


Ob. Pr. Verily, Friend, thou art the most impudent Villain, I ever saw.


Mrs. Lov. Nay then, I Will have a Fling at him. [Aside.] I remember the Face of
this Fellow at Bath -- Ay, this is he that picked my Lady Raffle's Pocket upon
the Grove -- Don't you remember that the Mob pumped you, Friend? This is the
most notorious Rogue --


S. Pu. What does provoke thee to seek my Life? Thou will not hang me, will thou, wrongfully?


Ob. Pr. She will do thee no hurt, nor thou shall do me none; therefore get
thee about thy Business Friend, and leave thy wicked Course of Life, or thou
may not come off so favorably every where.


Col. Go, Friend, I would advise thee, and tempt thy Fate no more.


S. Pu. Yea, I will go, but it shall be to thy Confusion; for I shall clear my
self: I will return with some proofs that shall convince thee, Obediah, that
thou art highly imposed upon.

[Exit.
Col. Then there will be no staying for me, that is certain -- What the Devil
shall I do? [Aside.


Ob. Pr. What monstrous Works of Iniquity are there in this World, Simon!


Col. Yea, the Age is full of Vice -- Z'death, I am so confounded, I know not
what to say. [Aside.


Ob. Pr. Thou art disordered, Friend -- art thou not well?


Col. My Spirit is greatly troubled, and something tells me, that though I have
wrought a good Work in converting this Maiden, this tender Maiden, yet my
Labor will be in vain; for the Evil Spirit fights against her; and I see,
yea I see with the Eyes of my inward Man, that Satan will re-buffet her again,
whenever I withdraw my self from her; and she will, yea, this very Damosel will
return again to that Abomination from whence I have retrieved her, as if it
were, yea as if it were out of the Jaws of the Fiend -- hum --


Ob. Pr. Good lack! think thou so?


Mrs. Lov. I must second him. [Aside.] What means this Struggling within me?
I feel the Spirit resisting the Vanities of this World, but the Flesh is
rebellious, yea the Flesh -- I greatly fear the Flesh, and the Weakness thereof
-- hum --


Ob. Pr. The Maid is inspired.


Col. Behold, her Light begins to shine forth -- Excellent Woman! [Aside.


Mrs. Lov. This good Man has spoken Comfort unto me, yea Comfort, I say;
because the Words which he has breathed into my outward Ears, are gone through
and fixed in mine Heart, yea verily in mine Heart, I say, -- and I feel the
Spirit does love him exceedingly, hum --


Col. She acts it to the Life. [Aside.


Ob. Pr. Prodigious! the Damosel is filled with the Spirit. Sarah!


Enter Mrs. Prim. Mrs. Pr. I am greatly rejoiced to see such a Change in our
beloved Anne -- I came to tell thee that Supper stays for thee.


Col. I am not disposed for thy Food, my Spirit longs for more delicious
Meat; -- fain would I redeem this Maiden from the Tribe of Sinners, and break
those Cords asunder wherewith she is bound -- Hum --


Mrs. Lov. Something whispers in my Ears, methinks, -- that I must be subject
to the Will of this good Man, and from him only must hope for Consolation, --
Hum -- it also tells me that I am a chosen Vessel to raise up Seed to the
Faithful, and that thou must consent that we two be one Flesh according to the
Word -- hum --


Ob. Pr. What a Revelation is here? This is certainly Part of thy Vision,
Friend, this is the Maiden's growing to thy Side; Ah! with what Willingness
should I give thee my Consent, could I give thee her Fortune too, -- but thou will never get the Consent of the wicked Ones.


Col. I wish I was as sure of yours. [Aside.


Ob. Pr. My Soul rejoiceth, yea, it rejoiceth, I say, to find the Spirit within
thee; for lo, it moves thee with natural Agitation, -- yea, with natural
Agitation, I say again, and stirs up the Seeds of thy Virgin-Inclination
toward this good Man -- yea, it stirs, as one may say, -- yea verily, I say
it stirs up thy Inclination -- yea, as one would stir a Pudding.


Mrs. Lov. I see, I see! the Spirit guiding of thy Hand, good Obediah Prim, and
now behold thou art signing thy Consent; -- and now I see my self within thy
Arms, my Friend and Brother, yea, I am become Bone of thy Bone, and Flesh of
thy Flesh [Embraces him] Hum --


Col. Admirably performed [Aside.] And I will take thee in all spiritual Love
for an Helpmate, yea, for the Wife of my Bosom, -- and now, methinks -- I feel
a Longing, -- yea, a longing, I say for the Consummation of thy Love, -- yea, I
do long exceedingly.


Mrs. Lov. And, verily, verily, my Spirit feels the same Longing.


Mrs. Pr. The Spirit has greatly moved them both, -- Friend Prim, thou must
consent, there is no resisting of the Spirit.


Ob. Pr. Yea, the Light within shows me, that I shall fight a good Fight --
and wrestle through those reprobate Fiends, thy other Guardians -- yea, I
perceive the Spirit will hedge thee into the Flock of the Righteous, -- Thou
art a chosen Lamb -- yea a chosen Lamb, and I will not push thee back -- no, I
will not, I say -- no, thou shall leap-a, and frisk-a, and skip-a, and bound,
and bound, I say -- yea, bound within the Fold of the righteous -- yea even
within thy Fold, my Brother -- Fetch me the Pen and Ink, Sarah -- and my Hand
shall confess its Obedience to the Spirit.


Col. I wish it were over.


[Enter Mrs. Prim with Pen and Ink. Mrs. Love. I tremble lest this quaking
Rogue should return and spoil all. [Aside.


Ob. Pr. Here Friend, do thou write what the Spirit prompteth, and I will sign
it. [ Col. sits down.


Mrs. Pr. Verily, Anne, it greatly rejoiceth me, to see thee reformed from that
original Wickedness wherein I found thee.


Mrs. Lov. I do believe thou art, and I thank thee. --


Col. [Reads.] This is to certify all whom it may concern, that I do freely
give up all my Right and Title in Anne Lovely to Simon Pure, and my full
Consent that she shall become his Wife, according to the Form of Marriage.
Witness my Hand.


Ob. Pr. That is enough -- give me the Pen. [Signs it.


Enter Betty running to Mrs. Lovely. Betty. Oh! Madam, Madam, here is the
Quaking Man again, he has brought a Coachman and two or three more.


Mrs. Love. Ruined past Redemption! [Aside to Col.


Col. No, no, one Minute sooner had spoiled all, but now -- here is Company
coming, Friend, give me the Paper. [Going up to Prim hastily.


Ob. Pr. Here it is, Simon, and I wish thee happy with the Maiden.


Mrs. Love. It Is done, and now Devil do thy worst.


Enter Simon Pure, and Coachman, etc. Sim. Pu. Look thee, Friend, I have
brought these People to satisfy thee that I am not that Impostor which thou
did take me for, this is the Man that did drive the Leathern Convenience,
that brought me from Bristol, -- and this is. --


Col. Look ye, Friend, to save the Court the Trouble of examining Witnesses --
I plead guilty, -- ha, ha!


Ob. Pr. How Is this? is not thy Name Pure, then?


Col. No really, Sir, I only made bold with this Gentleman's Name; -- but I
here give it up safe and found, it has done the Business which I had occasion
for, and now I intend to wear my own, which shall be at his Service upon the
same Occasion at any Time: ha, ha, ha!


Sim. Pu. Oh! the Wickedness of this Age.


Coach. Then you have no farther need of us, Sir.

[Exit.
Col. No, honest Man, you may go about your Business.


Ob. Pr. I am struck dumb with thy Impudence, Anne, thou have deceived me, --
and perchance undone thy self.


Mrs. Pr. Thou art a dissembling Baggage, and Shame will overtake thee.

[Exit.
Sim. Pur. I am grieved to see thy Wife so much troubled; I will follow and
console her.

[Exit.
Enter Servant. Ser. Thy Brother Guardians enquireth for thee; there is another
Man with them.


Mrs. Lov. Who can that other Man be? [To the Col.


Col. It Is one Freeman, a Friend of mine, whom I ordered to bring the rest of
thy Guardians here.


Enter Sir Philip, Tradelove, Periwinkle and Freeman. Free. [To the Col.] Is
all safe? did my Letter do you Service?


Col. All, all is safe! ample Service. [Aside.


Sir Phil. Miss Nancy, how do do, Child?


Mrs. Love. Don't call me Miss, Friend Philip, my Name is Anne, thou know.
--


Sir Phil. What, is the Girl metamorphos'd?


Mrs. Lov. I wish thou were so metamorphos'd. Ah! Philip, throw off that gaudy
Attire, and wear the Clothes becoming of thy Age.


Ob. Pr. I am ashamed to see these Men. [Aside.


Sir Phil. My Age! the Woman is possessed.


Col. No, thou art possessed rather, Friend. --


Trade. Hark ye, Mrs. Lovely, one Word with you. [Takes hold of her Hand.


Col. This Maiden is my Wife, thanks to Friend Prim, and thou have no Business
with her. [Takes her from him.


Trade. His Wife! hark ye, Mr. Freeman.


Per. Why you have made a very fine Piece of Work of it, Mr. Prim.


Sir Phil. Married to a Quaker! thou art a fine Fellow to be left Guardian to
an Orphan truly -- there is a Husband for a young Lady!


Col. When I have put on my Beau-Cloaths, Sir Philip, you will like me better. --


Sir Phil. Thou will make a very scurvy Beau, Friend. --


Col. I believe I can prove it under your Hand, that you thought me a very fine
Gentleman in the Park today, about thirty six Minutes after Eleven; will you
take a Pinch, Sir Philip -- out of the finest Snuff Box you ever saw. [Offers
him Snuff.


Sir Phil. Ha, ha, ha! I am overjoyed, faith I am, if thou be'st the Gentleman,
-- I own I did give my Consent to the Gentleman I brought here today, -- but
if this is he I cannot be positive.


Ob. Prim. Can thou not -- Now I think thou art a fine Fellow to be left
Guardian to an Orphan -- Thou shallow-brain'd Shuttlecock, he may be a
Pickpocket for ought thou do know.


Per. You would have been two rare Fellows to have been trusted with the sole
Management of her Fortune, would ye not, think ye? But, Mr. Tradelove and my
self, shall take Care of her Portion. --


Trade. Ay, ay, so we will. Did not you tell me the Dutch Merchant desired me
to meet him here, Mr. Freeman? --


Free. I did so, and I am sure he will be here, if you will have a little
Patience.


Col. What, is Mr. Tradelove impatient? nay then, ik ben gereet voor you, heb
ye, Jan van Timtamtirelireletta Here van Fainwell, vergeeten?


Trade. Oh! pox of the Name! What have you tricked me too, Mr. Freeman?


Col. Tricked, Mr. Tradelove! did I not give you Two thousand Pound for your
Consent fairly? and now do you tell a Gentlemen that he has tricked you?


Per. So, so, you are a pretty Guardian, faith, sell your Charge; what, did you
look upon her as part of your Stock?


Ob. Pr. Ha, ha, ha! I am glad thy Knavery is found out however, -- I confess
the Maiden over-reached me, and no sinister End at all.


Per. Ay, ay, one thing or another over-reached you all -- but I Will take care
he shall never finger a Penny ofher Money, I warrant you, -- Over-reached
quoth'a? Why I might have been over-reached too, if I had had no more Wit: I
don't know but this very Fellow may be him that was directed to me from Grand
Cairo today. Ha, ha, ha.


Col. The very same, Sir.


Per. Are you so, Sir? but your Trick would' not pass upon me. --


Col. No, as you say, at that Time it did not, that was not my lucky Hour; --
but hark ye, Sir, I must let you into one Secret -- you may keep honest John
Tradescant's Coat on, for your Uncle Sir Toby Periwinkle is not dead, -- so the
Charge of Mourning will be saved, ha, ha, -- don't you remember Mr. Pillage
your Uncle's Steward, ha, ha, ha.


Per. Not dead! I begin to fear I am tricked too.


Col. Don't you remember the signing of a Lease, Mr. Periwinkle?


Per. Well, and what signifies that Lease, if my Uncle is not dead? ha! I am
sure it was a Lease I signed. --


Col. Ay, but it was a Lease for Life, Sir, and of this beautiful Tenement, I
thank you. [Taking hold of Mrs. Lovely.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, Neighbors Fare!


Free. So then, I find you are all tricked, ha, ha!


Per. I am certain I read as plain a Lease as ever I read in my Life.


Col. You read a Lease I grant you, but you signed this Contract. [Shewing a
Paper.


Per. How durst you put this Trick upon me Mr. Freeman? did not you tell me my
Uncle was dying?


Free. And would tell you twice as much to serve my Friend, ha, ha.


Sir Phil. What the learned, famous Mr. Periwinkle choused too -- ha, ha, ha!
-- I shall dye with laughing, ha, ha, ha.


Ob. Pr. It had been well if her Father had left her to wiser Heads than thine
and mine, Friend, ha, ha.


Trade. Well, since you have outwitted us all, pray you what, and who are you,
Sir?


Sir Phil. Sir, the Gentleman is a fine Gentleman. -- I am glad you have got a
Person, Madam, who understands Dress and good Breeding, -- I was resolved she
should have a Husband of my choosing.


Ob. Pr. I am sorry the Maiden is fallen into such Hands.


Trade. A Beau! nay then she is finely helped up.


Mrs. Lov. Why Beaus are great Encouragers of Trade, Sir, ha, ha!


Col. Look ye, Gentlemen, -- I am the Person who can give the best Account of
my self, and I must beg Sir Philip's Pardon, when I tell him that I have as
much Aversion to what he calls Dress and Breeding, as I have to the Enemies of
my Religion. I have had the Honor to serve his Majesty, and headed a Regiment
of the bravest Fellows that ever pushed Bayonet in the Throat of a Frenchman;
and, notwithstanding the Fortune this Lady brings me, whenever my Country wants
my Aid, this Sword and Arm are at her Service.

And now, my Fair, if you will but deign to smile,
I meet a Recompense for all my Toil:
Love and Religion never admit Restraint,
Force makes many a Sinner, not one Saint;
Still free as Air the active Mind does rove,
And searches proper Objects for its Love;
But that once fixed, it is past the Power of Art,
To chase the dear Ideas from the Heart:
It Is Liberty of Choice that sweetens Life,
Makes the glad Husband, and the happy Wise.

EPILOGUE,
Written by Mr. SEWELL.
Spoken by Mrs. BVLLOCK. WHAT new strange Ways our Modern
Beaus devise!
What Trials of Love-Skill to gain the Prize!
The Heathen Gods, who never mattered Rapes,
Scarce wore such strange Variety of Shapes:
The Devil take their odious barren Skulls,
To court in Form of Snakes and filthy Bulls.
Old Jove once nicked it, I am told,
In a whole Lapful of true Standard Gold;
How must his Godship then Fair Danae warm?
In trucking Ware for Ware there is no Harm.
Well, after all -- that Money has a Charm:
But now indeed that stale Invention's past:
Besides, you know, that Guineas fall so fast,
Poor Nymph must come to Pocket-Piece at last.
Old Harry's Face, or good Queen Bess's Ruff,
Not that I Would take 'em -- may do well enough;
No -- my ambitious Spirit's far above
Those little Tricks of Mercenary Love.
That Man be mine, who, like the Colonel here,
Can top his Character in every Sphere;
Who can a thousand Ways employ his Wit,
Out-promise Statesmen, and out-cheat a Cit;
Beyond the Colors of a Trav'ler paint,
And cant, and ogle too -- beyond a Saint.
The last Disguise most pleased me, I confess,
There Is something tempting in the preaching Dress;
And pleased me more than once a Dame of Note,
Who loved her Husband in his Footman's Coat.
To see one Eye in wanton Motions played,
The Other to the Heavenly Regions strayed,
As if it for its Fellow's Frailties prayed.
But yet I hope, for all that I have said,
To find my Spouse a Man of War in Bed.
FINIS.

