ATYS AND ADRASTUS, A TALE In the Manner of DRYDEN'S FABLES.

By Mr. WILLIAM WHITEHEAD, Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

Infelix! Nati funus crudele videbis.
Hi nostri reditus, expectatique triumphi!
Haec mea magna fides! -- Virg. Aen. viii.
LONDON: Printed for R. MANBY, on Ludgate Hill: And Sold by M. COOPER, in
Paternoster Row. MDCCXLIV.

[Price One Shilling.]

This Story is related in the first Book of Heredotus's History. The Author is
translated from the Greek by Mr. Littlebury.
ATYS and ADRASTUS A TALE.
WHERE Hermus' Waters wash the Lydian Strand,
The powerful Craesus stretched his wide Command,
A Warrior King, whose willing Subjects bowed
To sceptred Worth, superior to the Crowd.
Vast was his Wealth, for Conquest swelled his Store;
Nor what enriched the Prince, had left the People poor.
Two Sons he had, alike in outward Mien,
The tender Pledges of a dying Queen.
But speechless one never taught his Sire to melt
With lisping Eloquence by Parents felt;
And mimic Art in vain Expedients sought,
To form the Tongue, and free the imprisoned Thought.
Yet blooming Atys well that Loss supplied,
Atys the People's Hope, and Monarch's Pride.
His beauteous Soul through every Feature glowed,
And from his Lips such soft Persuasion flowed,
As Nature had withheld the Brother's Share,
Only to pour a double Portion there.
But vain those Graces, since concealed from View
They droop in Shades, and wither where they grew.
For one dread Night, as over the weary King
The drowsy God had stretched his leaden Wing,
He seemed, he knew not where, in Wars engaged,
And, whilst around the doubtful Battle raged,
Saw from some hostile Hand unerring Part
A fatal Spear, that pierced his Atys' Heart.
He starts, he wakes, -- It Is Night and Silence all!
Yet, scarce confirmed, he still beholds him fall;
Still bleeds in Fancy's Eye the gaping Wound,
On Fancy's Ear the dying Groans resound.
Again he sleeps, the same sad Scenes return --
Restless he rolls, and waits the lingering Morn.
What can he do, or how prevent a Doom,
Which Heaven foretells, and Fate has said shall come?
"And yet perhaps the Gods these Dreams inspire,
"To save the guiltless Son, and warn the Sire.
"Too fond of Arms I Have wandered far astray,
"While Youth and blind Ambition led the Way.
"And ravaged Countries may perhaps demand
"This bleeding Sacrifice for Wrongs sustained.
"Then hear me, Gods, propitious, while I swear
"Peace, only Peace, shall be my future Care.
"O would your Powers but save my darling Boy,
"No more this Breast shall glow, this Arm destroy!
"Nor ever shall Atys the dire Sport pursue,
"Still in my Court, and seldom from my View,
"In Ease inglorious shall he pass his Days,
"Untaught to feel the insatiate Lust of Praise.
He spoke, and cautious far away removed
From Atys, what next Atys most he loved,
The Pomp of War: No Falchions guard the Gate,
And Chiefs unarmed around his Palace wait.
Nay farther still extends a Parent's Fear,
Even Arms themselves he dreads, and most the Spear;
Nor leaves of ancient Wars the weak Remains,
But strips their Trophies from the mouldering Fanes,
Lest, fixed too loosely form the faithless Stone
The casual Steel should drop, and pierce his Son.
Thus some sweet Warbler of the feathered Throng
Deep in the thorny Brake secures her Young;
Yet, vainly anxious, feels a fancied Woe,
And starts at every Breeze that stirs the Bough;
With silent Horror hears the whispering Groves,
And distant Murmurs of the Spring she loves.
Unhappy Sire! but vainly we oppose
Weak human Caution, when the Gods are Foes;
Thy Story's Sequel must too surely prove,
That Dreams, prophetic Dreams, descend from Jove.
Nor yet shall Atys thwart thy fond Designs:
He moves implicit as his Sire inclines.
On every Look his eager Duty hung,
And read his Wishes, ever they reached his Tongue.
With Smiles he strips his Helmet's plumy Pride,
With Smiles he lays his useless Spear aside;
Nor lets one Sigh confess a latent Care,
Reserving all his Griefs for his Adrastus' Ear.
Adrastus early did his Soul approve,
Brave, virtuous, learned, and formed for Atys' Love,
A Phrygian Youth, whom Fate condemned to roam,
An exiled Wanderer from a cruel Home.
For, yet a Boy, his inadvertent Lance
An Infant Brother slew, the Crime of Chance.
In vain he wept, no Expiation knew,
And loaded with a Father's Curse withdrew.
But not in vain the Gods such Ills dispense,
If soft-ey'd Pity takes her Rise from hence,
If hence we learn to feel another's Pain,
And from our own Misfortunes grow humane.
This young Adrastus found, and hence confessed
That mild Benevolence, that warmed his Breast.
Hence too his Fortune stretched a bolder Wing,
And placed her Wanderer near the Lydian King.
There long the favored Youth exalted shone,
Dear to the Sire, but dearer to the Son.
And powerful Sympathy their Hearts had joined
In stronger Ties, than Gratitude can bind.
With him did Atys every Sport pursue,
That Health demands, and earlier Ages knew.
At Morn, at Eve, at sultry Noon, with him
He roved the sunny Lawn, he swam the Stream;
Beside the Brook, that dimpling glides away,
Caught the cool Breeze, and lured the finny Prey;
Urged the light Car along the indented Mead,
Or hung impetuous over the loose-rein'd Steed,
Beneath whose Hoof unhurt the Flowrets rise,
And the light Grass scarce trembles as he flies.
But chief he loved to range the Woods among,
And hear the Music of Adrastus' Tongue
With graceful Ease unlock the lettered Store,
For that he learned from him endeared the Knowledge more.
Of Thales' Wisdom often the Converse ran,
How varying Nature's beauteous Frame began,
And erst to different Forms the Waters flowed,
As over the Chaos moved the breathing God.
And how, confirmed, when some few Years had rolled,
Expecting Nations did at length behold
Predicted Horrors of a darkened Sun,
And Spheres that shone with Luster not their own.
Of Solon too he spoke, and Laws designed
To guard fair Freedom, not enslave Mankind --
And hinted often what mutual Duties spring
'Twixt willing Subjects and their Father King;
How close connected Greatness was with Pain,
What earthly Bliss, and who the happy Man.
Nor less the while his youthful Breast he warms
With pictured Fights, the Theory of Arms;
Lest Honor's Barrier should be quite overthrown,
And Virtue weakened ever she mounts the Throne.
Thee, Homer, thee with Rapture they peruse,
Expand the Soul, and take in all the Muse;
Mix with thy Gods, with War's whole Ardor burn,
Or melt in silent Tears over Hector's Urn.
How often transported would young Atys cry,
"Thus might I fight, 'twere glorious thus to die!
"But why to me are useless Precepts given,
"Tied down and pinioned by the Will of Heaven?
"No early Wreaths my coward Youth must claim,
"No just Ambition warm me into Fame,
"Hid from the World to rust in Sloth, and buy
"A poor precarious Life with Infamy.
"Happy, thrice happy, on each hostile Strand
"The Youths that perished by my Father's Hand,
"Their Honor still survives, and over their Tombs
"Their Country's Tears descend, and Laurel blooms.
"To Life alone the Victor Sword's confined, --
"Would you indeed distress, employ a Love too kind.
As often Adrastus, studious to control
With Reason's Calm the Tumult of the Soul,
Would hint to what Excess soever wrought,
Paternal Fondness was a venial Fault.
Perhaps, as lenient Time stole gently on,
His Fears might soften, or be quite o'erblown,
And Sun-bright Honor only be delayed
Awhile to burst more glorious from the Shade.
"Yet think," he cried, "whatever they appear,
"Few are the Causes can excuse a War.
"To raise the Oppressed, to curb the insulting Proud,
"Or should your injured Country call aloud,
"Rush, rush to Arms, it is glorious then to dare,
"Delay is Cowardice, and Doubt Despair.
"But let not idler Views your Breast inflame
"Of boundless Kingdoms, and a dreaded Name.
"'It Is yours at Home to stem Oppression's Waves,
"To guard your Subjects, not increase your Slaves;
"On this just Basis Fame's firm Column raise,
"And be Desert in Arms your second Praise."
'Twas thus in Converse, Day succeeding Day,
They wore unfelt the tedious Hours away,
Till Atys' twentieth Year to bloom began,
And the Boy rose insensibly to Man.
What now shall Croesus find, what Siren Voice,
To make Retirement the Result of Choice?
No Father's stern Command these Years allow,
A Chain more pleasing must detain him now.
In rosy Fetters shall the Youth be tied,
And Mysia's Captive Fair the chosen Bride.
Haste, gentle God, whose Chains unite the Globe,
Known by the blazing Torch, and saffron Robe,
To Lydia haste, for Atys blames your Stay,
Nor fair Idalia's Blushes brook Delay;
Over Glory's Blaze your soft Enchantments breathe,
And hide the Laurel with the Myrtle Wreath.
And now the King with secret Transport found
His Hopes succeed, nor fears a martial Wound,
While lost in Love the happier Atys lies,
The willing Victim of Idalia's Eyes.
O thoughtless Man! from hence thy Sorrows flow,
The Scheme projected to avert the Blow
But makes it sure -- for see, from Mysia's Land
Round listening Atys crowds a suppliant Band.
Their Tears, their Cries, his easy Breast assail,
Fond to redress them ever he hears their Tale.
"A mighty Boar the Curse of angry Heaven
"Had from their Homes the wretched Suff'rers driven.
"Waste were their viny Groves, their rising Grain,
"Their Herds, their Flocks, the attendant Shepherds slain,
"And scarce themselves survive.
"O would but Atys' lead the hunter Train,
"Again their viny Groves, their waving Grain
"Might rise secure, their Herds, their Flocks increase,
"And fair Idalia's Country rest in Peace."
The Youth assents, the exulting Crowds retire;
When thus impatient speaks the trembling Sire,
"What means my Son? preserved, alas in vain,
"From hostile Squadrons, and the tented Plain,
"To rush on Death -- recall your rash Design,
"Mine be the Blame, and be the Danger mine,
"Myself will lead the Band." The Youth returned,
While his flushed Cheek with mild Resentment burned,
"Will Croesus lead the Band, a Hunter now,
"Skilled in the Fight, and Laurels on his Brow?
"Alas, such Mockeries of War become
"The Loit'rer Atys fearful of his Doom.
"To him at least these Triumphs be resigned,
"That not entirely useless to Mankind
"His Days may pass; These Triumphs all his Aim,
"These humble Triumphs scarce allied to Fame.
"And yet, dread Sir, if you command his Stay,
"(O force of Duty!) Atys must obey.
"Alas on you whatever Blame shall fall,
"A Father's Fondness can excuse it all.
"But me, of me, if still your Power withstands,
"What must the Lydian, what the Mysian Bands,
"What must Idalia think?" Adrastus here,
Soft interposed. "Great King dismiss your Fear,
"Nor longer Atys' first Request oppose;
"War was your Dream, no War this Region knows,
"For humbler Prey the Hunters range the Wood,
"Their Spears fly innocent of human Blood.
"Then fear not them. -- Or had the phantom Boar
"Dug deep the Wound, and drank the vital Gore,
"That dreadful Vision had excused your Care,
"Nor Atys offered an unheeded Prayer.
"I love the Prince, and, but I think his Life
"Safe as my own, would urge him from the Strife.
"Permit him, Sir, -- this Arm shall guard him there;
"And safely may you trust Adrastus' Care,
"For, should he fall, this Arm would surely prove
"My Bosom feels a more than Father's Love."
As, when impetuous through the autumnal Sky
Urged by the Winds the Clouds disparting fly,
Over the broad Wave, or wide extended Mead
Shifts the quick Beam, alternate Light and Shade;
So glanced the Monarch's Mind from Thought to Thought,
So in his varying Face the Passions wrought.
Often on his Son he turned a doubtful Eye,
Afraid to grant, nor willing to deny.
Often raised it, tearful, to the blessed Abodes,
And sought in vain the unregarding Gods.
Then looked consent. But added, with a Groan,
"From thee, Adrastus, I expect my Son."
Why should I tell, impatient for the Fight
How Atys chid the lingering Hours of Night?
Or how the roseate Morn with early Ray
Streaked the glad East, and gradual spread the Day,
When forth he issued like the Lycian God?
Loose to the Breeze his hovering Mantle flowed,
Waved the light Plume above, behind him hung
His rat'ling Quiver, and his Bow unstrung.
He mounts his Steed, the Steed obeyed the Rein,
Arched his high Neck, and graceful paw'd the Plain.
Even Croesus' self forgot a while his Fear
Of future Ills, and gazed with Transport there.
Or why relate, when now the Train withdrew,
How fair Idalia sighed a soft adieu;
How Croesus followed with his Voice and Eyes,
Fond to behold, but fonder to advise,
And often repeated, as they journey'd on,
"From thee, Adrastus, I expect my Son."
Suffice it us, they leave the Waves that flow
Over Beds of Gold, and Tmolus' fragrant Brow,
They pass Magnesia's Plains, Caicus' Stream
The Mysian Bound, that changed his ancient Name,
And reach Olympus' Verge, whose Summit nods
Over Phrygian Fields, nor boasts assembled Gods.
Here Desolation spread her ghastly Reign
Over trampled Vines, and dissipated Grain,
And saw with Joy revolving Seasons smile
To swell her Pomp, and mock the Lab'rers Toil.
Led by her baleful Steps the Youth explore
His dark Retreats, and rouse the foaming Boar.
Hard was the Strife: his horny Sides repel
Unting'd the plumy Shaft, and blunted Steel.
The Dogs lie mangled over the bleeding Plain,
And many a Steed, and many a Youth was slain.
When now his well-aim'd Bow Adrastus drew,
Twang'd the stretched String, the feathered Vengeance flew,
And rased the Monster's Neck: he roars, he flies,
The Crowd pursues, the Hills resound their Cries.
Full in the Center of a Vale, embrown'd
With arching Shades, they close the Savage round.
He wheels, he glares, he meditates his Prey
Resolved to strike, resolved to force his Way;
But Atys timely stopped his fierce Career,
And through his Eye-ball sent the whizzing Spear,
And joyful saw him reel; with eager Speed
He bares his shining Blade, he quits his Steed;
" -- Ah stop, rash Youth, not Conquest you pursue,
"Death revels there; the wretched Victim you;
"You rush on Fate" -- in vain -- he reached the Beast,
He raised his Arm, and now had pierced his Breast,
When in that Moment from the adverse Throng
A Heav'n-directed Spear Adrastus flung,
Glanced over the falling Beast the fated Wood,
And fixed in Atys' Breast drank deep the vital Flood.
The struggling Prince impatient of the Wound
Writhed on the Spear, the Crowds enclose him round,
Then sunk in Death unknowing whence it came,
Yet, even in Death, he called Adrastus' Name,
"Where flies Adrastus from his dying Friend,
"O bear me near." Poor Prince thy Life must end
Not in thy Murderer's Arms, he hears thee not;
Like some sad Wretch fixed to the fatal Spot
Where fell the Bolt of Jove, nor Ear, nor Eye,
Nor Arm to help, nor Language to reply,
Nor Thought itself is his. Obliged to move
As they direct his Steed, he leaves the Grove,
As they direct to Sardis' Towers again
In Silence follows the returning Train.
There too we turn, for there the pensive Sire
Now hopes, now fears, and pines with vain Desire.
In every Dust before the Wind that flies,
In every distant Cloud that stains the Skies
He sees his Son return: till often deceived
No more his Eye the flattering Scene believed.
Yet still he wandered, and with Looks intent,
The fatal Road his darling Atys went.
There to averted Heaven he tells his Pain,
And slaughtered Hecatombs decrees in vain.
There to Idalia, frequent by his Side,
Relates his Fears, or sooths the weeping Bride
With Tales of Atys' Worth, and points the Place
Where late he parted from their last Embrace.
And now, perchance, in Tears they lingered there,
When slowly-moving real Crowds appear.
"What means," he cried, and shot a trembling Eye --
A Youth deputed by the rest drew nigh,
And in sad Accents told the dreadful Tale. --
Rage seized the King; expiring, breathless, pale
Idalia sinks, the attendant Fair convey
With Tears, and Shrieks, the beauteous Load away.
"Where is the Wretch? -- hear hospitable Jove! --
"Is this, is this thy more than Father's Love?
"Give me my Son -- why stare thy haggard Eyes
"As fixed in Grief? here only Sorrow lies" --
And smote his Breast, "thy Life in Blood began
"A fated Wretch, a Murderer ever a Man.
"O foolish King! by my Indulgence stole
"This Serpent near me, that has stung my Soul.
"This thy Return for all a King could shower
"Of Bounty over thee, Life, and Wealth, and Power --
"But what are those? How great soever they be,
"I gave thee more, I gave myself to thee,
"I gave thee Atys, linked in Friendship's Chain --
"O fatal Gift, if thus returned again!
"Reach me a Sword -- and yet, dear bleeding Clay,
"Can his, can thousand Lives thy Loss repay?"
Then burst in Tears, "Heavens Instrument I blame,
"Though by his Hand, from Heaven the Vengeance came.
"This Stroke, O Solon, has convinced my Pride;
"O had I never lived, or earlier died!
"Alas, poor Wretch, why do thou bare thy Breast,
"And court my Sword? though lost himself to Rest,
"This cursed of Heaven, this Croesus can forgive
"The unhappy Cause, and bids the Murderer live."
"Ah stop," he cried," and write the milder Fate
"Here with thy Sword, I only lived for that.
"Undone, I thought, beyond Misfortune's Power,
"O do not by Forgiveness curse me more."
While yet he pleaded, to the mourning Crowd
Forth rushed Idalia by her Maids pursued;
Eager she seemed, with light Suspicions filled,
And on her Face Heart-piercing Madness smiled.
"Where is my wandering Love, ye Lydians say,
"Does he indeed along Meander stray,
"And rove the Asian Plain? -- I Will seek him there. --
"Ye Lydian Damsels of your Hearts beware,
"Fair is my Love as to the sunny Beam
"The light-spread Plumage on Cayster's Stream,
"His Locks are Hermus' Gold, his Cheeks outshine
"The Ivory tinctured by your Art divine. --
"I see him now, in Tmolus' Shade he lies
"On saffron Beds, soft Sleep has sealed his Eyes.
"His Breath adds Sweetness to the Gale that blows, --
"Tread light, ye Nymphs, I Will steal on his Repose. --
"Alas he bleeds, O Murder, Atys bleeds,
"And over his Face a dying Paleness spreads!
"Help, Help, Adrastus, -- can you leave him now,
"In Death neglect him? Once it was not so.
"What, and not weep! a Tear at least is due,
"Unkind Adrastus, he would have wept for you.
"Come then, my Maids, our Tears shall wash the Gore,
"We too will die since Atys is no more.
"But first we'll strew with Flowers the hallowed Ground
"Where lies my Love, and plant the Cypress round;
"Nor let Adrastus know, for should he come,
"New Streams of Blood would issue from the Tomb;
"The Flowers would wither at his baleful Tread,
"And at his Touch the sickening Cypress fade.
"Come, come -- nay do not tear me from his Side,
"Cruel Adrastus, am I not his Bride?
"I must, -- I will -- me would you murder too?"
At this unable to sustain his Woe,
"My Soul can bear no more," Adrastus cries,
(His Eyes on Heaven) "Ye Powers that rule the Skies!
"If your august, unerring, Wills decreed,
"That States, and Kings, and Families must bleed,
"Why was I singl'd to perform the Part,
"Unsteel'd my Soul, unpetrified my Heart?
"What had I done, a Child, an embrio Man,
"Ever Passions could unfold, or Thought began?
"Yet then condemned an infant Wretch I fled,
"Blood on my Hands, and Curses on my Head.
"O had I perished so! -- but Fortune smiled
"To make her Frowns more dire. -- This vagrant Child
"Became the Friend of Kings, to curse them all,
"And with new Horrors dignify his Fall."
Then eager snatched his Sword, "for Murders past
"What have I not endured? -- be this my last,"
And pierced his Breast. "This fated Arm shall pour
"Your Streams of Wrath, and hurl your Bolts no more.
"For Pangs sustained Oblivion's all I crave,
"O let my Soul forget them in the Grave!
"Alas, forgive the Wretch your Judgments Doom,
"Dark are your Ways, I wander in the Gloom,
"Nor should perhaps complain. -- Be Grief my Share
"But, if your Heaven has Mercy, pour it there,
"On yon heart-broken King, on yon distracted Fair."
He spoke, and drew the Steel; the weeping Train
Support him to the Bier, he grasps the Slain,
There feels the last sad Joy his Soul desires,
And on his Atys' much-loved Breast expires.
O happy Both, if ought my Muse could shed
Of "Tears eternal that embalm the Dead;"
While round Britannia's Coast old Ocean raves,
And to her Standard roll the embattled Waves,
Fair Empress of the Deep; so long your Names
Should live lamented by her brightest Dames;
Who often, at Evening, should with Tears relate
The murdered Friend, and poor Idalia's Fate;
And often, enquiring from their Lovers, hear
How Croesus mourned a twice revolving Year,
Then roused at Cyrus' Name, and Glory's Charms,
Shook off enervate Grief, and shone again in Arms.
FINIS.
Lately Published by the same Author, Ann Boleyne to Henry VIIIth, an Epistle.


