THE AUCTION A POEM: A FAMILIAR EPISTLE TO A FRIEND, With the head of
HARPOCRATES, the God of Silence amongst the Egyptians, in a Ring.

LONDON: Printed for GEORGE KEARSLY, at No 1, Ludgate Street. MDCCLXX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS Poem consisted originally of no more than about a hundred and fifty
lines, and was sent by the Author (with the head of HARPOCRATES, the God of
Silence, in a ring) to a particular friend, who suggested to him, that if it
were properly enlarged, it might not be unworthy the perusal of the Public; in
consequence of which he has accordingly enlarged it, and submits it to their
Candor and Indulgence.

If the Critic should accuse him of absurdity, for giving language to the god
of Silence, he answers, there may be times when the actions of men are so
palpably absurd, and so totally subversive of Liberty, that even the tongue of
Silence may become eloquent in its cause.

If this subterfuge is too flimsey to pass, he flies to the poetica licentia,
that extensive field of fiction, where the Poet is allowed to dispose of
animation, personification, or elocution, in any manner his fancy directs,
uncontrouled by the shackles of common sense.

That part of the Poem where Mr. HOLLAND is mentioned, was printed off before
his death, otherwise the Author would in a different manner have given his
opinion of the goodness of that valuable Actor's heart.

ERRATUM,
In Page 25, Line 17, for "bleeding blow," read "bleeding brow."

A FAMILIAR EPISTLE TO A FRIEND, etc.
WHEN science in her earliest day,
Beamed forth on man her friendly ray,
Though she excursively might roam,
She looked on Egypt as her home;
There, as the Nile overspread the earth,
And gave to vegetation birth,
She, fraught with sentiment refined,
Diffused her influence over the mind.
'Twas then, (convinced when folly hung
Impatient on the babler's tongue,
How much repose to all 'twould yield,
If by my power his lips were sealed,)
Her sapient sons my image reared,
And I became a God revered,
There many an age preserved my reign,
A foe to folly and her train.
At length, a mummy-hunting lord,
Whose head Virtu and dullness stored,
Who left his country to explore
The trifles of each foreign shore,
Brought me, with other wrecks of time,
To this all variable clime!
Long in his cabinet I lay,
Secluded from the face of day;
For though he traveled far and wide
To gratify his curious pride;
Had traversed Egypt, Greece, and Rome,
And brought a heap of trump'ry home;
It surely must provoke your laughter,
He scarcely ever saw them after.
At length, one night replete with evil,
The dice together with the devil,
Joined issue with the sons of fraud,
And I appeared again abroad,
The large estate, a father's care,
Bequeathed a most ungracious heir,
The hand of usury had seized,
And most unmercifully squeezed:
From thence no succors could arise,
No pleasing hope of new supplies;
Yet debts of honor all must pay,
Or they again can never play.
Many and artful were the ways
His lordship tried a sum to raise;
At first, he claimed the promised place
He earned by pimping for his grace:
But, who misfortunes can resist!
He and his party were dismissed.
Then to the next in power applied,
So mean his soul, so fallen his pride!
But, as they did not want his aid,
In vain was each concession made.
When finding all expedients fail,
At last he fixed on -- what? A sale.
To Langford straight, a message sent
Expressive of his full intent;
Who came, his orders to obey,
Bowing and smirking all the way.
A catalogue was quickly made,
Prefac'd with pomp and much parade;
Of urns, from Herculaneum brought
(In fact not worth a single groat)
Of headless trunk and noseless bust,
Tarnish'd by artificial rust;
Of medals brought from Rome and Greece,
Who know to pluck your English geese;
Fragments of pyramids from Egypt,
Fossils and shells long time in sea dipped,
With each exotic by the score
Which would a volume fill and more.
Some natives too, by Langford's art,
Made, of the catalogue a part.
The public prints announc'd the day,
When hundreds came who could not pay;
And yet they needs must come to show
Their veneration for Virtu.
The Seasons by Leticia Br -- nd -- n
Were bought her cabinet to stand on;
When he, who languish'd to be blessed,
Thus artfully the fair addressed,
" The Spring, when all its beauties rise,
I see depicted in your eyes;
See Summer, in its gayest pride,
Attendant ever on your side;
Rich Autumn in your bosom see,
And Winter in your chastity:
Tell me Leticia then the reasons
You thus are anxious for the seasons?
She felt the fascinating art,
And freely yielded up her heart.
The modern bards, as yet whose rhyme,
Is not with value stamped by time,
Were indiscriminately sold
For nothing, as they were not old.
For Clio, the historic muse,
Two authors bid with equal views;
The one in female vestments clad,
The other wrapped around with plad;
Long they contended for the field,
Too headstrong both and proud to yield;
At length exclaimed the bonny Scot,
Suppose, fair lass! we share the lot?
When lo! a hollow sound was heard,
And bursting from the floor appeared,
A reverend form, with aspect bland,
Fair Truth and Candor in his hand,
Around his honored brow was seen
The laurel ever fresh and green.
" How long, (began the reverend Sage,)
O Sm -- ll -- t, shall thy partial page,
Presumptuously my peace invade,
And draw me from Elysium's shade:
How long shall Clio! honored name!
By whom I reached immortal fame,
To prejudice and passion bend
To serve a hot-brained woman's end?"
The animated muse returned,
" Long have I with resentment burned,
Still hoping some propitious hour,
Would free me from tyrannic power:
It Is come! my soul with rapture warms,
Rapin, O! take me to thy arms,
The floor received them unadmonish'd,
And left the bidders all astonished.
When Phaeton, whose thirst of fame,
Had nearly set the world on flame,
Was by an able statesman bought
Whose soul with rectitude was fraught;
'Twas wondered, he, so fond of truth!
Should buy a headstrong brainless youth:
Said he, I buy him to rebuke
The conduct of a certain duke;
And, 'midst the universal stare,
Sent him post haste to Grosvener Square.
A Diomede, who slily bore
From Troy's ill-fated walls of yore
The sacred pledge of freedom given
To her by all indulgent heaven,
Was by an earl of Northern race
Purchased his cabinet to grace;
At which a patriot, high inflamed,
Indignantly and loud exclaimed;
" No wonder he who basely plan'd
The fall of freedom in this land,
Should with exhilerated soul
Buy him who Troy's palladium stole."
ALCIDES' club, whose ponderous weight
Seemed falling on the Hydra's pate,
Was by an enterprizing knight
Beheld with wonder and delight;
" That club, (said he,) with good direction,
" Would make fine work at an election:
" I Will have it, spite of all expense,
" Though murder prove the consequence."
He bought, and gave it to MAC'QUIRK,
Who made at Brentford glorious work;
Beat out poor CLARK'S ill-fated brains,
And gained a pension for his pains.
In bronze the bust of CROMWELL stood,
Anxious alone for England's good,
A noble Lord, of Stewart's race,
Turned pale, and trembling left the place,
And, while precipitate he fled,
Looked round in terror for his head.
" So long as shall exist this land
" May CROMWELL, fraught with terror stand,
" To him who Britain's law defies,"
A Middlesex elector cries.
When antiques made by modern hands,
Were bought by antiquarian S -- DS;
When he affected to define
This Grecian, and that Florentine,
O! how it tickled up the fancy,
Of nicely-judging Doctor CH -- NC -- Y.
For NEWTON'S head whose piercing eyes,
Explored the wonders of the skies;
Who could with certitude declare
The size and distance of each star.
MARTIN and FERGUSON contended,
And how the contest would have ended
I know not, had not evening come,
And called them both to lecture home.
They gone, no bidders could I see,
So light was held philosophy.
Close in a corner SHAKESPEARE'S bust
Neglected stood, defiled with dust;
When GARRICK saw it, with respect
He bowed and spoke to this effect,
" O! thou who could with ease impart,
" The passions of the human heart,
" Who studiously looked nature through,
" And showed her in each point of view.
" Shall it be told in future, I
" When thou were sold, stood tamely by,
" Forbid it all the powers above,
" Duty forbid, forbid it love;"
And thence to show his high regard,
He to his bosom hugged the bard.
The ancient poets heads were bought
By men, who would be poets thought.
First FAWKS and COLEMAN made a fuss,
Bought TERENCE and THEOCRITUS;
Next, FRANKLIN falling on his knees,
Worshipped and bought old SOPHOCLES,
But through so many ages soiled,
In cleaning, they the features spoiled.
ANTINOUS, blooming as the dawn,
In Titians glowing colors drawn,
By CH -- RL -- T H -- Y'S was bought with joy,
Who much admired the handsome boy.
Her keeper smiling at the bull,
Told her his character in full;
She trembled at the horrid tale,
Turned pale and red, and red and pale,
Grew quite enraged with grief and pain,
Then threw it from her with disdain.
A noble lord, with pitying eye,
Beheld his favorite prostrate lie;
And thus his sentiments expressed;
" Come injured beauty to my breast,
" To Italy, whose kindly arms
" Shall shield thee from these rude alarms,
" Together safely we'll retreat,
" Nor breath a sigh for T -- LN -- S seat."
And now a gay resplendent star,
Became the object of their care;
But where shall I description find,
To paint each agitated mind;
Charmed with the luster of its ray,
All madly bid, and bid away;
At length a patriot whose fame
Was raised by popular acclaim,
Who on the shoulders of the crowd,
Had bawled for liberty aloud;
For the bright gem, his freedom gave,
And down he sunk, a titled slave.
By BARRAT next, a noble view,
Was nobly purchased by BUCCLEUGH;
Happy the painter who can find,
A patron of exalted mind;
This to his tints fresh vigor gives,
By this the lifeless canvas lives:
And hence when BARRAT meets our eyes,
We see another BERGHAM rise.
A much esteemed Jardin d'amour,
Bought by his lordship in his tour,
For an original was sold,
And fetched its weight in sterling gold:
A Frenchman chuckled at the joke,
And thus in broken accents spoke;
" Mon Dieu, mon Pere! it make me laugh,
" To see de connoisseur, de calf;
" Dat fine original from France,
" Was copied dear, by Englis DANCE,"
To whom with joy, a stander by,
Quickly retorted this reply:
" When ancient Rome in arms was found,
" Superior to the nations round;
" When science reared her latent head,
" And all abroad her influence spread:
" When arts beneath her fost'ring wing,
" Luxuriously were seen to spring;
" The great Augustus mildly reigned,
" His peoples father, patron, friend.
" What wonder then, if we behold
" One cause the same effect unfold;
" Behold in Britain! favored isle,
" Excited by the royal smile:
" Arts, arms, and science justly claim
" The wreath of universal fame."
FOOT for the head of Momus tried,
And so did many a wag beside;
But whether 'twas prophetic fear,
Inspired the cautious auctioneer:
Or whether he, as often the case is,
Had bidders placed in different places;
Because this lot was of the number,
Left on his hands amongst former lumber;
Impossible for me to fix,
Who know so little of their tricks;
Thus much is certain, on his tongue,
These words reiterated hung,
" A going, going, speak in time,
" The price is nothing, it is a crime,
" A crime of most enormous hue,
" To trifle thus with dear Virtu;
" And Sir, believe me, till this hour,
" The lingering hammer, void of power,
" Had hung but that the general frown,
" Brought it precipitately down;"
FOOT gained the head, his foes defeated,
Quick to the theater retreated,
And close in league with Momun joined,
At LANGFORD laughed, and all mankind.
Poor POWELL's patent next appears,
To pay off all his old arrears;
When DAGGER MAR, and TOMMY CLOUGH,
Blasted and swore, and said as how,
'Twas the advice of all their friends,
That they should join their odds and ends;
That injured merit long kept down,
Might rise to entertain the town;
DAGGER says TOM, how stands your purse?
Ah me, says DAGGER! there is the curse;
Which to our rising fame I fear
Will prove a permanent barrier:
He drew it forth, and wrapped around
In dirty rag, a shilling found;
This might have done in FLEETWOOD's days,
Said TOM, when puppet shows and plays,
An equal share of fame possessed,
The puppet show, in general best;
But now by g -- were I to join,
My hoarded grunter's gig A cant term for a shilling.
to thine,
The patent's such a blasted price,
We should not get a single slice.
TOM loung'd, and MAR with tragic port,
Stalked swearing onward to Duke's Court,
Where drenched in beer 'till morning dawn,
Their future hopes, their money gone;
And quite with want of oaths oppressed,
They sunk insensibly to rest.
Now KING or HOLLAND 'twas agreed,
Were fittest POWELL to succeed;
But HOLLAND, when his friend was named,
Suppressed the tear, and thus declaimed;
" Say, can I think, e're well the tomb
" Is closed upon his manly bloom;
" While grief yet triumphs on the face,
" Of all his little orphan race;
" Say, can I think at their expense,
" To raise myself to eminence:
" No, rather let one greatly try,
" The patent for their use to buy:"
KING, who of generous mold is made,
And feels for all who want his aid;
Turns suddenly about, and cries,
Why? "what the devil ails my eyes."
Others there were who eyed askance,
The parchment with a longing glance;
Whose hearts obdurate never felt,
Whose eyes unpitying never melt:
To human nature a disgrace,
Who cursed their stars, and left the place:
While things in this uncertain state,
Hung wavering on the thread of fate:
A messenger arrived express,
And thus delivered his address;
" The noble friend, the gods be praised,
" Who POWELL to the patent raised,
" Has seen the hapless widow's tear,
" All copious streaming on his bier;
" And touched with pity at the sight,
" Transfers to her, her husband's right:"
A general plaudit shook the room,
And joy dispel'd the recent gloom.
A medal which no semblance bore,
To those by artists made of yore,
But smooth as one some years ago,
Invented, drawn, and engraved by YEO;
And lately bought on Stratford's plain,
Was for a dinner sold again:
Pox of the jubilee, said one,
Another, in sarcastick tone,
Swore 'twas a farce, a fair take in,
The whole not worth a single pin;
The ode no poetry could boast,
The music was in discord lost,
The temple to the first of bards,
Was like a tottering house of cards.
Thus he affected to despise,
What he had seen with envious eyes;
And swelling heard with conscious pride,
Loud peals of laughter on his side.
When from among the crowd, a youth,
Thus boldly spoke, impelled by truth;
" When culprit reason truant plays,
" And wanders forth in fancy's maze,
" Thy random shafts may please awhile,
" And raise the unreflecting smile,
" But soon as absent sense returns,
" Our cheek with indignation burns,
" We feel the folly and disgrace,
" Of being cheated by grimace.
" I too this institution saw,
" Which struck each feeling breast with awe;
" Saw all the human powers combined,
" In GARRICK's animated mind;
" Saw filial love his soul engage,
" To the great father of the stage:
" And felt, what thou can never impart,
" The bliss of reason round my heart."
At which Contempt in Laughter's place,
Possession took of every face;
So truth for ever with her frown,
Shall bear the bauble folly down.
A curious bust of Indian clay,
Which bore the marks of regal sway,
Brought in the Plassy from Bengal,
Was sent to Merchant Taylor's hall;
'T was by an Eastern artist wrought,
Beyond the reach of common thought.
A spring no mortal could suspect,
If touched, produced this strange effect;
The head would shake, the eyes would roll,
And seeming life possessed the whole.
To know its history and fame,
The universal wish became;
When one, in Eastern learning skilled,
The universal wish fulfilled.
" In ancient times, when the rude north,
" Poured her rapacious children forth,
" When like a widely spreading flood,
" They deluged all the East with blood;
" They seized that hapless prince's throne,
" And deemed his revenues their own;
" Some say, it still recorded stands,
" He fell untimely by their hands:
" But in these days, when justice reigns,
" The horrid tale, no credit gains."
While he proceeded to relate
This prince's, and his country's fate;
The messenger the busto bearing,
Returned, and begged a patient hearing.
" Soon as (said he) the spot I gained,
" Where truth and elocution reigned,
" Fronting the chair I took my stand,
" Applying to the spring my hand;
" Shake not, said one, thy head at me,
" Thou can not say, I murdered thee;
" Let not thine eye indignant roll
" Another cried, to fright my soul;
" A Third exclaimed, ye shades of night!
" It Is D -- W -- A, hide me from his sight:
" And now a general terror ran
" Through all, and caught from man to man;
" I seized the moment of dismay,
" And came with hasty steps away.
" When from a prince to empire born,
" The diadem is basely torn,
" The wretch who gave the bleeding blow,
" May well the action disavow;
" May well, should ever his shade appear,
" To petrifaction turn, with fear;
" But that the unpolluted heart,
" Should thus eccentrically start:
" That souls as virtue's bosom fair,
" Should shake at trifles light as air,
" Shake like the murderer and thief,
" Amazes me beyond belief:"
He ceased, and with him all agreed,
'Twas strange! 'twas passing strange, indeed
A group of heads, but lately brought,
From Herculaneum's dreadful vault;
(Gorged when the Almighty hid his face,
And nature trembled to her base,)
Came in rotation to be sold,
And LANGFORD thus, their history told.
" These were the men, when Rome arose,
" Said he, with vengeance on her foes;
" When from the orient, to the north,
" Her eagles flew with terror forth;
" When she to half the world gave law,
" And kneeling, kept the rest in awe:
" These were the men, who brought disgrace,
" On her, and all the Roman race;
" Restored what long she sought to gain,
" By millions spent, and thousands slain;
" And bid her conquering legions cease,
" Bribed by the nations round, to peace.
" 'Twas then the high patrician pride,
" Looked with contempt on all beside;
" 'Twas then the public treasure went,
" To serve each infamous intent;
" 'Twas then corrupt, her senate grown,
" Assumed a power, before unknown;
" And freedom by the swelling tear,
" Confessed her dissolution near.
" 'Twas then her judges warped the laws,
" To serve the abandoned villain's cause;
" Then over a son, whose guiltless blood
" Fast flowed, a weeping father stood;
" The prop of his declining day,
" Snatched by the murd'rer's arm away:
" And saw the wretch by vile chicane,
" Escape, by whom his son was slain.
" Then justice hid, abashed, her head,
" Misrule, her baleful influence spread,
" And stalking forth with giant stride,
" Menaced destruction far and wide.
" At length enraged, the people rose,
" And rushed impetuous on their foes;
" To justice brought them for their crimes,
" A mark to all succeeding times:
" And lo! beneath the sculptor's hand,
" Consigned to infamy they stand."
All looked astonished at the tale,
Some blushed, and some turned sickly pale,
When one, intelligent of soul,
Thus feelingly addressed the whole.
" Would you, my countrymen, but cast
" A retrospect, on cent'rys past;
" Would you explore the historic page,
" Transmitted down from age to age;
" Then would you feel without alloy,
" The many blessings you enjoy.
" Thrice happy England, happy plains,
" Where justice dwells, and freedom reigns,
" Where round a virtuous monarch, stand,
" A glorious patriotic band,
" Watchful and firm, with ARGUS' eyes,
" To guard her laws against surprise.
" Where GRAFTON, ever honored name,
" Immortal on the roll of fame;
" Who like an ATLAS, bears the weight,
" Attendant on a mighty state;
" Never leaves the council, never attends
" Newmarket, and his jockey-friends,
" Who when the fascinating die,
" Bids ample patrimonies fly;
" Never mingles in the guilty train,
" Damned to variety of pain:
" Where GRAFTON stands, unawed by fear,
" Though faction thunder in his ear;
" Let fear the guilty mind deform,
" The virtuous man defies the storm.
" Where BEDFORD, whose exalted breast,
" Is by fair freedom's love impressed;
" To whom Hibernia's sons shall raise,
" The voice of unabating praise:
" Who when the laurel, once the boast
" Of Britain's nervous sons was lost,
" Bid war, with all his horrors cease,
" And gave his vanquished country peace:
" Refused all profit for himself,
" (Superior to the love of pelf,)
" All, save a snuff box, (trifling thing,)
" Presented by the Gallic king:
" Where BEDFORD stands, beyond the reach
" Of those, who dare his fame impeach;
" Contemns the shafts around him hurled,
" And scorns the malice of the world.
" Where virtuous MANSFIELD, first and best
" Of orators, by all confessed,
" Whose firm undeviating heart,
" From rectitude shall never depart;
" But who, an angel might believe,
" If he attempted to deceive:
" Who in the gay convivial hour,
" When wine prevails over reason's power;
" Has seen his friends drink copious streams,
" In healths to CHARLEY, and to JAMES:
" Has seen them on their knees implore,
" High heaven their S -- n to restore;
" Yet has refused the knee to bend,
" Solicited by every friend;
" And nobly scorned the guilty wine,
" True to the Hanoverian line:
" Where MANSFIELD stands, O! glorious cause,
" To guard, and to explain her laws.
" Laws, which our ancestors obtained,
" When JOHN, and either HENRY reigned;
" When they the tyrant's arm withstood,
" And purchased freedom with their blood.
" Laws, which at every father's hand,
" The son with justice may demand,
" Still unsubverted and entire,
" As he received them from his Sire.
" O! it is a theme, on which to dwell
" With pleasure, makes each art'ry swell,
" Extatick to the last degree,
" Britannia's highborn sons to see;
" With fond parental care secure,
" Her laws inviolably pure.
" But for those grinning traitors there,
" Condemned their country's hate to bear;
" Take them, my friend, O! take them hence,
" And with another lot commence."
Next came an old historic piece,
Which rivaled all the works of Greece;
The story was so well portray'd,
Assisted so by light and shade,
That even the most consummate dunce,
Might know the history at once.
The hero of the canvas stood,
In many a different attitude.
First in the senate he appeared,
And seemed with much attention heard.
Then as a minister of state,
He scowl'd around with pride elate.
Next stood an army in array,
Which he appeared employed to pay;
One hand (in business nicely skilled,)
Performed that office, 'tother filled
A coffer of enormous size,
On which he looked with jealous eyes.
Near this again he stood confessed,
A tempting coronet, his crest,
The sure, the never-failing boast,
Of those who serve their country most.
But last, disgraceful situation,
Accused by all of peculation;
Abandoned and detested grown,
He safety sought behind a throne.
Whether the people dragged him thence,
To pay for his supposed offense;
Or suffered him secure to stay,
The painter's art forbore to say;
Forbore on purpose, I presume,
To give imagination room.
Still were the tints so fresh and fair,
Though painted many a hundred year;
The preservation still so nice,
'Twas sold at an enormous price.
Its fate extremely odd appeared,
When from the buyer's lips we heard,
" 'Twas bought alone to decorate,
" The room where traitors to the state;
" For manifold offenses lie,
" Before they on the scaffold die."
Last came an urn, which L -- GF -- D feigned,
Was carved when good AURELIUS reigned;
But which to me and all appeared,
The work of days far less revered.
Full in the front, in bass-relief,
Rome's colonies o'er-whelm'd with grief
Were seen, whilst commerce trembling stood,
And feared again to tempt the flood:
In alto on the other side
Enthroned, oppression sat, and pride,
Corruption near them held her seat,
And freedom crouch'd beneath their feet;
Whilst faction, bursting from her cell,
Encouraged millions to rebel.
Around this motto struck the eye,
The sad remains of liberty;
Who for so many ages spurned,
Tyrannic rage, behold inurn'd:
Cut off! O, most unhallowed deed!
When least of all she feared to bleed.
Much said, the auctioneer to raise
The price and credit of the vase,
'Twas he declared, no modern bauble,
But an Etruscan veritable;
And fit, so capital a thing,
Fit for the palace of a king.
When one distinguished from the crowd,
Whose genius was by all allowed,
Superior to the common herd,
On his own knowledge thus declared.
" This curious vase, exceeding like
" In all respects, the true antique;
" Is made my friends, of modern clay,
" By artists of the present day;
" I know them perfectly, could teach
" The name and character of each:
" Could tell how all their lives were spent,
" To bring about this blessed event;
" Who mixed the clay, who formed the urn,
" Who bid the flame so fiercely burn,
" With life, whose hand each figure crowned:
" And who inscribed the motto round.
" But it is enough for me to prove,
" Excited by my country's love;
" To prove of equal rank in fame,
" The ancient and the modern name.
" He sent it to Saint STEPHEN's fane,
" Where liberty was wont to reign,
" And said, though she be banished thence,
" Her ashes cannot give offense.
" When all the catalogue was sold,
" Bust, Urn, and Picture, turned to gold,
" By L -- D's art, who said his say,
" In his obliging smiling way;
" I, hapless I, who tell the tale,
" Was offered up to public sale:
" Silence! a lady cried for shame,
" Silence! indeed, I hate the name;"
An empty prating fool replied,
" Madam, with you I coincide,"
" And so do I, replied a brother,"
Another still, and still another,
Replied the same, and all the cry
Was, who the duce would Silence buy;
" No bidders, L -- D knocked me down,
" To a Jew-broker for a crown,
" Who with small interest content,
" Sold me for ten times ten per cent,
" From him 'twas my mishap to pass,
" Into a Virtuoso's glass;
" Near whose abode, a structure stands,
" Where men from the remotest lands,
" Of indiscriminate degrees,
" All buz, and gather round like bees;
" Where Christians, Jews, and Turks confound
" Language, in undistinguished sound.
" Behind it stands that famous place,
" Where modesty never shows her face;
" Where ignorance, if she chance to come,
" Is certainly sent wadling home,
" Whose lawless sons avow this creed,
" By lies and fraud we best succeed;
" And meet tumultuous every day,
" On each unwary fool to prey:
" Offended thus my eyes and ears,
" Out burst involuntary tears;
" My long invelop'd tongue I tried,
" Nor found the use of speech denied --
Said I, "O! -- if thy breast,
" Compassion feels for the distressed;
" If when the heart-depressing sigh,
" Has burst the sluices of the eye,
" Thy soul susceptible has known,
" Concern for sorrows not thy own;
" Surely thou will with pity hear,
" Nor treat contemptuously my prayer,
" Deliver me for thou art able,
" From this detested modern Babel:"
He listened with astonished ear,
The tongue of Silence thus to hear;
And while his breast with anger burned,
Thus with severity returned;
" Dare thou presumptuously defame,
" This spot, by that opprobrious name,
" Where matchless beauty every day,
" Shines forth with undiminish'd ray:
" Where merchants meet of genuine worth,
" From the four quarters of the earth,
" Men who expand the golden sail
" Of commerce, to the rising gale;
" Bring tides of wealth in copious streams,
" Along the bosom of the Thames,
" And bid AUGUSTA in the eyes
" Of all, the grand emporium rise.
" Dare thou presumptuously reflect,
" On such a place with disrespect!"
Said I, "Ah, little did I dread,
" To draw thy vengeance on my head,
" Else had consummate Silence hung,
" For ever, on my hapless tongue;
" But how shall misery find relief?
" If she neglect to tell her grief;
" How shall the wretch oppressed with woe,
" Emerge, if none his sorrows know?
" I hoped in some sequestered cot,
" Such as thou often have wished thy lot;
" Beside a stream, and sylvan shade,
" Thou kindly would have seen me laid;
" Or to some friend to sense and thee,
" Who, when from folly's children free,
" Glad from the bustling world retreats,
" And science in his study meets,
" Thou would my person have consigned,
" In mercy to my tortured mind;
" Let then compassion in thine eye,
" Assure me thou will yet comply:
" Let anger in thy bosom cease,
" And give me once again to peace:
" And now his stubborn soul subdued
" No longer was my prayer withstood;
When kindly he; "O, cease to grieve,
" I pity thee, and will relieve:
" I have, HARPOCRATES, a friend,
" Who never will thy ear offend."
" Dumb, I presume?" "Not he, indeed,
" He talks as fast as I can read,
" But then his tongue flows smoothly on,
" With sense, in perfect unison;"
" Go to him, give my compliments,
" Assure him why thou come, and whence,
" Tell all thy tale, nay, do not linger,
" And beg he will wear thee on his finger."
FINIS.

