THE ARTIFICE. A COMEDY.

As It Is ACTED At the THEATER ROYAL in Drury Lane. By His MAJESTY's Company of
COMEDIANS.

By Mrs. CENT-LIVRE.

It is a Kind of Slander, to trust to RUMOR.

Ben. Jonson's Cataline. LONDON: Printed for T. PAIN, near Stationers' Hall,
M.DCC.XXIII. [Price 1 s. 6 d.]

TO ERASMUS EARL, Esquire
SIR,
THE Weak naturally fly to the Brave for Protection; and, methinks, a Play in
which a Soldier carries off the Prize, has a sort of Right to a Patron out of
the Camp. Your condescending to serve, for some little Time, as Subaltern
Officer, while You are in the actual Possession of so Noble a Paternal Estate,
is equally Admired, and Applauded, by All who have the Happiness to know You.
This is truly doing an Honor to the British Service; And how much is it to be
desired, that so Bright an Example, may be Imitated by other Gentlemen of the
best Families, and Fortunes.

We have scarce an Instance in Ancient, or Modern History, of any Hero who has
Commanded WELL, without having first learned what it was to OBEY. The Greatest
among the Greek and Roman Generals, made their First Campaigns in the Nature of
Volunteers; and the Greatest Modern Hero, whose Loss we so lately lamented,
served first in the same Post You now Adorn.

IF a Fine Person, a most Graceful, and Easy Behavior, joined to a great
Knowledge of the World, and a general Insight into all Parts of Polite
Learning, are the most likely Means to raise a Man to Greatness, I know not
what Bounds You can reasonably set to Your Ambition! One Thing I am well
assured of, That it will be a Happiness to your Country, to see You in some of
her Highest Military Honors.

I confess, I am glad to lay hold of any Opportunity of paying my Early Court
to so distinguished a Merit; and hope, Sir, That my laying this Trifle at Your
Feet, however poor it may be in itself, will be at least some small Proof of
that Zeal and Respect, with which I am,

SIR, Your Most Obedient, and Most Humble Servant, SUSANNA CENT-LIVRE.

PROLOGUE.
By Mr. BOND.
Spoken by Mr. MILLS.
OUR Wits of late, grown wondrous Weather-wise,
Change, like the various Seasons of the Skies.
They, each dull Winter, Sullen and Severe,
And Cloudy, as its Gloomyest Days appear:
Yawn over their Desks, sigh forth some Tragick-Scene,
Then Treat the Town with Products of their Spleen.
Our Author takes a different Way to please;
Heals Injured Love, and Cures its Jealousies.
You Tender Virgins, and Neglected Wives,
For You, She all her ARTIFICE contrives.
You cannot deny her -- Your Protection, surely,
She hides your Slips, and brings you off -- so purely!
Bold in her Sex's Cause, She always rouzes
Against their Worst Foes, False Lovers, and Dull Spouses.
But, oh! ye Critics! Comic-Bards are few,
And we have no Wit beneath the Sun, that is New:
Ask not, in such a General Dearth, much Wit,
If she your Taste in Plot, and Humor hit:
Plot, Humor, Business, form the Comic Feast,
Wit's but a higher-relish'd Sauce, at best;
And where too much, like Spice, destroys the Taste.
You Sparks in Red, she knows, will all befriend her;
Nay, Faith, You're bound in Honor to defend her.
You, in her Plays, her choicest Favors share;
She never fails to raise her Men of War.
It Is seldom known, You Brothers of the Blade,
Let Women make Advances Un-repaid.
You Chiefs in War, that Monarchs can subdue,
Yet own -- The Ladies Victors over You.
A Single Helen, once Divinely Fair,
Summoned a Crowd of Heroes to the War:
And Brighter Helens raise your Courage -- There.
You, while our Author pleads in Beauty's Cause,
Join on her Side, and Arm in her Applause:
Be Heroes in a Woman's Cause to Day,
And as you Love the Sex, Defend the Play.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir Philip Money-Love, Father to Olivia, a Man whose Morals are only
subservient to his Interest Mr. Miller. Sir John Freeman, Heir to 4000 l. per
Annum, but disinherited. In Love with Olivia Mr. Wilks, Sen. Ned Freeman, His
Younger Brother; possessed of the Estate Mr. Mills. Fainwell, An Ensign under
the Name of Jeffery; in Disguise, a Footman to the Widow Headless Mr. Wilks,
Jun. Mr. Watchit, A Country-Gentleman, very jealous of his Wife Mr. Griffin.
Tally, One belonging to a Pharoah-Bank; an Humble Servant to Widow Headless,
under the Character of Lord Pharoah-Bank Mr. Harper. Demur, A Doctor of the
Law.
WOMEN.
Olivia, Daughter of Sir Philip Money-love. In Love with Sir John Freeman. Mrs.
Horton. Louisa, a Dutch Lady, formerly contracted to Ned Freeman Mrs. Younger.
Mrs. Watchit, Wife to Mr. Watchit Mrs. Oldfield. Widow Headless, worth 20,000
l. an affected vain Widow, an Admirer of Quality, and resolved never to marry
beneath a Lord Mrs. Thurmond. Lucy, Servant to Mrs. VVatchit Flora, Servant to
Louisa Judith, Servant to Mrs. Headless Constable, Watch, and other Attendants.
THE ARTIFICE. A COMEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE the PARK.
Enter Fainwell in a Livery, meeting Sir John Freeman in Mourning. Fain. HA!
Freeman in Black? Dear Jack, how must I distinguish thee?


Sir John. Dear Jack! -- How came you and I so well acquainted, Fellow?


Fain. Oh! -- that is too long a Story at present.


Sir John. Fainwell! -- what the Devil is this Metamorphose for?


Fain. Love! Almighty Love! Copying of the Gods, you know.


Sir John. What Game are you in Pursuit of?


Fain. The old standing Dish, a WIFE! Here Is no Hopes of War, no Rising in
View! and Subaltern's Pay will make a Man rub but slowly through the World. I
have got Leave of my Colonel to be absent from my Post for Two Months, in which
Time, I intend to make my Fortune. -- You know the Widow Headless!


Sir John. Very well! Ha! -- is not that her Livery?


Fain. Yes, faith, I march in the Number of her Retinue.


Sir John. To what End?


Fain. That Is uncertain. If you know the Widow, you are no Stranger to her
Taste in Servants.


Sir John. I know she keeps none but awkard Country Things.


Fain. Ay! and is a perfect Jockey in her Family, and takes as much Pains to
polish her Train, as they do to break their young Colts. Now, you must know, I
pass with her for as arrant a Rustic, as ever wielded Cudgel at a Country
Wake, or tumbled Girl upon a Hay-mow.


Sir John. But wherein can this advance your Design?


Fain. Why, you must know, I make Love to her.


Sir John. Make Love to her! what, under the Character of a Footman?


Fain. No, no, under the Character of a Gentleman of Fifteen hundred Pounds a
Year in Gloucester-shire, of which Country I pretend to be; for having
Quartered heretofore in that Shire, I counterfeit the Dialect very well.


Sir John. But what Service can this be to you?


Fain. Why, I write to her as from Mr. Worthy; my Man brings the Letters; and I
deliver them as Jeffrey, her Footman; and when I find her in Humor, I intend
to give her my Picture, in so simple a Manner, that she shall take it all for
Gospel.


Sir John. But what signifies the Copy? How will you introduce the Original?


Fain. That has been done already. I have made her several Visits. My Man is
now gone to her with a Letter.


Sir John. But suppose she should enquire after this Mr. Worthy? It is an easy
Matter to know all the Gentlemen in Gloucestershire, and what Estates they are
possessed of too.


Fain. She cannot trap me there, if she does: For, between you and I, there is
such a Person as Mr. Worthy, Master of the very Estate I mention, who has given
me Leave to take his Name. -- But I have discovered since I have been in her
House, that an Irish Baron is my Rival.


Sir John. Then you are undone; for I am told, she declares against Matrimony
without a Title. Who is he?


Fain. My Lord Pharoah-Bank, I think they call him, of the County of Tipperary.


Sir John. I don't remember ever to have heard of any such Nobleman.


Fain. Recommended, they say, by Sir Philip Money-Love.


Sir John. For which he is to have a valuable Consideration; for I am sure, he
does nothing out of Honor or Honesty. I wish thee Success with all my Heart.


Fain. I thank you, Freeman; but prithee, who are you in Mourning for? Is the
old Knight at Rest Six Foot deep? ha, Jack?


Sir John. He has been dead to me these Seven Years; but is now so to all the
World, Fainwell.


Fain. Sir John! I give thee Joy of Four thousand Pounds per Annum. Embracing
him.


Sir John. I hope you will give me the Estate too, Fainwell; for, I assure you, I
have not one Foot of Land by the Death of my Father.


Enter Sam. Fain. He did not disinherit thee, sure.


Sir John. Neither better nor worse.


Sam. I ever thought my old Master would dye hard, and take the Left Hand Road.


Sir John. Ha! what is Sam with you still?


Sam. You know, Sir, I always stick as close to my Masters, as their Breeches.


Sir John. Ay! whilst there is any Money in them; but, I remember, you left me
for fear of Starving.


Sam. Starving! Oh, no, no! -- Not Starving, Sir; though, I must confess, my
Waist-band was Three Inches too wide for me.


Fain. You saucy Rascal! ha, ha? Well, did you deliver my Letter?


Sam. Yes, I did Sir; and into the Widow's own Hands; and, truly, by what I can
find, Sir*, you have nothing to hope for, if I have any Judgment.


Fain. Why? What have you discovered?


Sam. Why, I observed when she read your Epistle, she smiled scornfully, thus
-- tossed your Letter upon her Toylet; turned upon her Heel; tipp'd her Maid a
Box of the Ear for Grinning, and bad me tell you, it required no Answer.


Sir John. Cold Comfort!


Fain. Not a Jot the less, for giving herself that Air. But is it possible,
that pure Party-Rage could make thy Father so unkind, Sir John!


Sir John. Add to that some little Wildnesses. But the main thing that did my
Business, was this; When I found nothing would open his Purse-strings, I
pretended to embrace his Principles.


Sam. I remember that Time, Sir: We lived in Clover then! Many a delicious
Morsel of Flesh have I served up, and supped luxuriously out of your Leavings,
Sir.


Sir John. But, as the Devil would have it, one Day, in my Cups, I chanced to
stumble into a Non-juring Meeting, with half a Dozen honest Officers at my
Back, drove out the Congregation, tied the Parson Neck and Heels, locked the
Door, and took the Key in my Pocket.


Fain. Good! And what became of Old Sedition?


Sir John. Some of his Flock returning to Evening. Prayer, broke open the Door,
and freed him from Durance; amongst which Number was my natural Father.


Fain. Rather Unnatural! That was very unlucky, Sir John.


Sir John. Ay; for that Action not only lost me a paternal Blessing, but a
paternal Estate.


Fain. Which would have afforded thee many Blessings, Wine and Women, Sir John,
the only Blessings in this World! So your younger Brother Ned has the Estate, I
suppose.


Sir John. Every Acre! My Fortune is crammed into such a Narrow Circumference,
I can cover it with my Thumb. Only -- a single Shilling.


Fain. Damned Barbarity! 'S' Death! were he my Brother, I Would cut his Throat.


Sam. There Is the Inside of a Soldier for you! aside.


Sir John. So say Passion and Necessity; but Conscience and Humanity offer to
my cooler Thoughts a brown Musket rather. I confess, I long to exert the elder
Brother, and beat him a little; In order to which, I have done all I could to
provoke him to give me Occasion; but he avoids me as carefully as if he durst
not fight, though I know he is no Coward.


Fain. Well! Heaven be praised, I am not afraid of being disinherited. I wear
my Fortune with my Red Coat; and whilst there is one Mischief-making Priest in
the World, Soldiers will never want Bread.


Sam. Ay, the Priests have ever been fast Friends to the Soldiers. Nothing like
a Pulpit-Drum. -- But it ruins the Surgeons Business quite.


Sir John. Ay! how so?


Sam. Why, where is the Occasion for their retailing Lancet, when the other lets
the Nation Blood by Wholesale?


Fain. My Rascal has a kind of smattering after Wit, ha, ha. No more of your
Impertinence.


Sam. Impertinence! these Gentlemen will allow no body to say a good Thing but
themselves. Aside.


Sir John. Ha! yonder is my Brother coming this Way. How stately the Rogue
walks, with Three Footmen at his Heels!


Fain. Whilst thou have not so much as one Scoundrel, to pick up a Wench for
thee.


Sam. Oh, for that, Sir! with your Leave, he may always command his humble
Servant.


Fain. He struts like an elder Brother. He wants nothing but your Title, Sir
John.


Sir John. I wish I could transfer it; for it is of no Use to me. Honor's a
Commodity not vendable among the Merchants; there is no Draw-back upon it.


Fain. That Is a Mistake, Sir John; I have known a Statesman pawn his Honor as
often as Merchants enter the same Commodity for Exportation; and like them,
draw it back so cleverly, that those who give him Credit upon it, never
perceived it 'till the Great Man was out of Post.


Sir John. Honor's a stale Cheat.


Fain. It may pass at Court, or the Groom-Porter's; but no Citizen will lend a
Shilling upon it.


Enter Ned. Freeman. Ned. Brother! Your Servant. If this young Fellow had not
been in a Livery, I should have sworn it had been Ensign Fainwell!


Fain. The very Numerical Person you mention, is as you see, at your Service,
Mr. Freeman. I believe you are surpised at the Figure I make; but there are
Reasons, which another time shall be yours. In the mean while, I must entreat,
that wherever you see me, you know me for nothing above my present Appearance.


Ned. Whatever Design you may have in View, it shall never miscarry through any
Fault of mine. -- Well! how go Matters in the North, Captain?


Sir John. Your Party performed no Wonders there.


Ned. Nay, if you are entering upon Party Matters, good by-t'ye; You know I
always decline Politics in your Company.


Sir John. It Is the Sign of an ill Cause.


Ned. Then Disputes will not mend it. Here -- which Color would you advise me to
for a Wedding Suit?


Fain. What! just upon the Brink of Matrimony? Is it with the Dutch Lady you
wrote such Panegyricks on, when you was in Holland?


Ned. What, the old Burgo-master's Daughter of Haerlem? No, no! that Affair's
ended long since. She was a good natured fond Fool, and, to say Truth, I did
love her; but the old Carl her Father, did not like a younger Brother for a
Son-in-Law then, and I Am a better Friend to my Country, than to take a Dutch
Wife now. I did him one Piece of Service; I left some English Blood in his
Family. I met a Gentleman at Paris, who told me, she was brought to Bed of a
fine Boy.


Sir John. If I mistake not, you made that Lady a Promise of Marriage, Brother.


Ned. Could I do less for a Maidenhead?


Fain. It is the Custom in Holland, after such a Promise, the Girl never
scruples to go to Bed, and thinks herself as much your Wife, as if the Parson
had said Grace; and if ever you are found in that Country, their Laws will
oblige you to perform Articles.


Ned. Ay, if they catch me in the Corn, let 'em put me in the Pound.


Sir John. Whatever you think of such Proceedings, I assure you, I should have
very little Confidence in that Man who forfeited his Faith and Honor to a
Woman.


Ned. Preserve your Opinion, Brother; the Ladies will like you never the better
for it. Every Female has Vanity enough to believe her Charms sufficient to
secure what another lost.


Fain. But who is the Object of your present Passion?


Sir John. Pray Heaven, it proves not where I guess! Aside.


Fain. Who is the Beauty that inslaves you now?


Ned. Nay, I Am not so prodigiously enslaved as you imagine.


Sir John. What! and just going to be Married?


Sam. Mr. Freeman speaks like an experienced Traveller; he is entering upon a
Journey for Life; the Whip, and Spur, are for the short Stages of Love. It
would kill the Devil to ride full Speed down a Lane that has neither End nor
Turning.


Ned. Ha, ha, ha! Sam has a right Notion of Matrimony.


Sir John. A Lady must be extremely happy with such a Husband. But may we not
know the Lady?


Ned. Yes, Yes, Brother, I Am not ashamed of the Lady; she has Beauty enough for
a Wife, and One Charm, as desirable, as a New Mistress.


Fain. Videlicet.


Ned. Twenty thousand Pounds.


Sir John. Ha! that one Article strikes through me.


Aside. Ned. It Is Sir Philip Money-Love's Daughter.


Sir John. As I imagined! -- This Blow wounds deeper, than my being
disinherited. Have you that Lady's Consent, Brother?


Ned. I have her Father's, and he has the Disposal of her Fortune, though left
by her Grandfather. She commands not a Penny, if she marries without his
Consent.


Sir John. A most pernicious Clause! -- Yet, if Louisa his Dutch Mistress, who
I have sent for, comes Time enough, I may chance to spoil your Market.


Aside. Ned. I think I stand very fair; I have had his Promise these Ten Days.


Sir John. Just the Time that Sir Philip forbid me his House; since when, I
have often watched him in, and fearing the Consequence, I sent for his
Mistress; and if there is the least Grain of Virtue left in that Heap of Muck
and Immorality, Sir Philip, I may yet prevent this hateful Match. Aside.


Fain. I wish you Joy, Mr. Freeman. --


Sir John. Wish him Hell! where he may Taste in part the Pains he gives me now.
-- Olivia! -- Oh! my Olivia! -- Aside.


Ned. My Brother has no Relish for my good Fortune. -- I perceive you affect
Gravity in my Company, Sir John, and seem to have no Taste for any Joy of mine,
-- Prithee, how have I offended? You may have Reason to blame our Father,
perhaps; but how is that my Fault? I have really as much Love for you, as if
you had been born a Year after me, and will treat you as well.


Fain. That is to say, he shall live like your Brother. --


Ned. He shall live as he thinks fit, Sir; I shall not pretend to direct him.


Fain. But you must put it in his Power! -- Come, shall I make a Proposal?


Ned. Out with it.


Fain. Buy him a Colonel's Post in the Guards.


Ned. I don't think to part with any Money that way. --


Sir John. Not without it were to serve a certain Person, you know where. Oh!
that vile, restless Principle of yours! --


Ned. Shall never disturb you with a Commission any where. Look ye, Brother,
you shall not want for what is Necessary.


Sir John. Necessary! I suppose you reserve to your own Judgment how far that
Word may extend.


Ned. It shall extend so far, Sir, as becomes a Brother who has the Estate, to
him that has none.


Sam. Humph! That is as much as to say, in plain English, you may Starve or
Steal, and be Hanged, for Him. Aside.


Sir John. As far as becomes your Elder Brother?


Ned. I cannot say that, for perhaps you may fancy my Estate may become you
better than it does me.


Sir John. Your Estate! Going up to him.


Sam. [Stepping between.] Sir, Sir, With your Leave! Where-abouts do you think
the Soul of my old Master may be now?


Ned. That Thought never entered my Head, Sirrah. I know where his material
Soul, the Estate is, and how to Spend it too. So, Brother, if you will be
Cheerful. --.


Sir John. Cheerful! Bid the Directors, when there is a Run upon the Bank, be
Cheerful; the Merchant who hears the Shipwreck of his freighted Vessel; or bid
the Mother, weeping over the Corpse of her departed Son, be Cheerful. -- Bid
them be Mad, rather, to avoid Reflection. -- Cheerful, Quotha?


Sam. That Is breaking a Man's Legs, and then bidding him cut Capers. Aside.


Fain. Philosophy is a noble Study, Sir John* but few of us poor Rogues can
pursue it.


Sir John. With what Elegance might my Brother there, display the Beauty of
Patience and Poverty?


Ned. No, Faith, Jack, I am no Orator.


Keeps looking upon the Papers. Sir John. Oh! What Serenity of Mind attends
Four Thousand Pounds a Year? whilst Passion, Pride, and all the Deadly-Sins,
fill up the Train of a poor Dog, like me.


Sam. That Is true to a Tittle, I know it by my self. Aside.


Sir John. Poor Olivia! now I understand thy Letter, wherein thou said, That
we must part for Ever; but I will see Thee now, though certain Death attend it;
though robbed of Birthright by this younger Brother, let him not hope to take my
Mistress from me. --

Such an Attempt will far more dangerous prove:
He robs me of my Life, that robs me of my Love.

Exit. Ned. That is the Color for my Money.


Fain. Ay, White is the Bridegroom's Color.


Ned. Ha! What is my Brother gone?


Fain. So it seems -- Poor Sir John! --


Ned. Pox of this Livery, I should have been glad we could have Dined together
to Day.


Sam. Now you talk of Dining -- your Uncle called at your Lodging this Morning,
Sir, and bad me tell you, he wonders how you bestow your Time, that you don't
come and Dine with him as usual. --


Ned. Who Is that?


Fain. An Uncle of mine, to whom I had once some hopes of being Heir.


Ned. And what has stifled them?


Fain. Why, the Devil put Matrimony in his Head, and spoiled my Fortune. --


Ned. Then he has Children, has he?


Fain. One, which happening to be Red-hair'd, and the Parson of the Parish
being Sandy, my Uncle, not content with forbidding him his House, bid adieu to
the Country, and brought my Aunt to Town.


Sam. An excellent Place to preserve Virtue in.


Ned. How came he to suspect the Doctor?


Fain. Why, my Aunt is a Roman Catholic, you must know, and I suppose my Uncle
had a mind to make a good Protestant of her, and brought the Doctor to Convert
her; but finding his Arguments more prevalent for Love, than Religion, thought
fit to remove her.


Ned. Ha, ha, ha! Where has he Lodged her?


Fain. He has taken a House in the Pall Mall, within a Door of my Colonel's. --


Sam. Who has as good a hand at Converting, as the Parson, if he can find a way
to come at her. Aside.


Ned. In the Pall Mall! If this should be my Mistress now? [Aside.] So, the old
Fellow is very Jealous of her, you say?


Fain. So Jealous, that he locks her up, it seems, resolving to Father no
Children for the future, but his own; He allows her the Sight of nothing that is
Male.


Ned. It must be she; this agrees exactly with her Story. [Aside.] Such
Restraint sets all the Wheels of Invention at Work, and a Million to Nothing,
but she will find a way to use him as he deserves. And how does she take it?


Sam. Oh! not at all Sir, -- You hear my Master say, she is Locked up.


Ned. Her Confinement, I mean, Sirrah?


Sam. Oh! her Confinement.


Fain. Not seeing her the last Time I dined there, I inquired after her Health,
and was answered, she was Indisposed; yet I observed he cut her a Plate of
every thing that came to the Table, and sent up to her Chamber, which, as the
Maid told me afterward, is his constant Custom of late, when any body Dines
with him. He is a true Spanish Husband.


Ned. And if she proves but a true English Wife, his Children may be nothing
akin to him, for all his Caution. Is she handsome?


Fain. So handsome, that I could venture my Soul with her; and if I had her
Consent, my Uncle Watchit, should be advanced in Honors. -- You understand me.


Ned. Watchit! Mum! that is the Name. Fainwell must not know where I live.
[Aside.] -- You would not Cuckold your Uncle, would ye?


Fain. Why not? I think a well bred Gentleman ought to have as much regard to
the Breed of his Family, as a Fox-Hunter has to those of his Dogs and Horses.
Where do you Lodge, Mr. Freeman? I must bring a School-Fellow of mine to wait
on you, one who has a Play upon the Stocks: You must give him leave to Dedicate
to you. It is young Distich.


Ned. Ha! Little Distich! I shall be glad to see him. When I have finished an
Affair which I have upon my Hands at present, I shall come somewhere to this
End of the Town; but I am Incog. for a little while.


Fain. What, are you upon an Intrigue?


Ned. Yes, Faith, and with one of the prettiest Women in Town; a Citizen's
Wife, whose Husband is Tinctured with thy Uncle's Distemper: He permits her
neither to pay, or receive Visits; but in spite of his Blockade, I have found
means to open a Communication between my Self and his Female, and hope I shall
be able to spring a Mine, and blow up the Fort of her Chastity, maugre all his
Iron Guards.


Fain. You talk like an Engineer, Mr. Freeman; but if she is so closely
confined, how got you acquainted with her?


Ned. Very accidentally. You must know, her House, and That which I lodge in,
were formerly one, so that there are Doors remaining, though fastened up --
Sitting one Evening in my Chamber reading, I heard the Voice of Women, and
found by their Discourse 'twas a Lady complaining to her Maid of her Husband's
ill Usage. If I were in your place, says the Maid, I Would be revenged of the old
Brute: Ay, quoth the Lady, but show me the Means. -- Upon which, having bored a
Hole in the Door, I put my Mouth to it, and cried, The Means is ready, Madam,
if you will Consent to it. She was a little surpised at first, but we soon came
to a right Understanding.


Fain. Ha, ha! so she opened the Door!


Ned. Not that Door: But the Chambermaid, who knew her Business perfectly
well, after inquiring who Lodged at next House? in the Morning, knocked gently
at this private Door, and calling me by my Name, gave me to understand, that
there was a Door, between her Room, and a Garret in our House, which if I could
find the way to open, I might have an Opportunity of playing a Game at Picquet
with her Lady sometimes, in her Master's Absence: I took the Hint, agreed with
my Landlord for that Garret, and fell to work immediately. The Passage was soon
opened, and we came to an Interview, liked one another's Proposals, called for
the Cards, and sat down to Play, where I had the Game all to Nothing, having
Point, Quint, and Quatorze, the first Deal, had not the old Fellow come in, and
forced us to throw up our Cards.


Fain. For which you both cursed him, I suppose; but you have found a Time,
it is to be hoped, to finish your Game.


Ned. I shall do, this Day, I believe. Wish me Success, Fainwell.


Fain. I do with all my Heart: I know you used to be Generous, you will not
expose her. When you have corrupted her, you may help your Friends, before she
falls into the Hands of the Public.


Ned. With all my Heart! Now for the finishing Stroke: I Will Home, and watch the
old Fellow out, and then L' Affair il sera fait, as the French say -- Which way
are you going, Fainwell?


Fain. Every way! I have some Twenty How-d'-ye's to deliver; the constant
Business of Men of my Cloth, you know.


Ned. Ha! yonder comes my Father-in-law that is to be. I must avoid him.


Fain. And the Widow's Lord with him. Aside. Pray who is the Gentleman with
him, Mr. Freeman?


Ned. His Name is Bite, to the best of my Memory. He belongs to a
Pharoah-Table, I used to see him Tally sometimes, that is all I know of him.
Adieu.


Exit. Fain. I Am glad I know so much of him. Bite, Quotha! Egad, I Will take care
he shall not Bite me of the Widow. -- Is this her Man of Quality? -- Sam, go you
home, and don't you be out of the way, if I should want you. Do you hear?


Sam. Yes, yes, Sir.


Exit Sam. Fain. Egad, this Woman fatigues me more than a long March. But the
Hopes of her Gold, like the Hopes of Plunder, give me fresh Courage for
continuing the Siege.

Still to Besiege, and Storm, the Soldier's Trade is,
In War, to carry Towns; -- In Peace, the Ladies.

ACT II.
SCENE Sir Philip Money-love's House.
Enter Olivia, and Louisa weeping. Oli. YOUR Story, Madam, I confess is moving;
but I am more surpised at Freeman's Insensibility, than at his Perjury. It is
no wonder to find a Man false; but that he should be Blind to so much Beauty,
is an Argument of Stupidity.


Lou. Not when he changes for Superior Merit;
But if you love not the Dissembler;
Oh, give him back to my desiring Arms!
For we are fit Companions for each other.

Oli. All I can, besure I Will do to serve thee.
Dear have thou bought, the faithless, worthless Man

Lou. Too late, I blame my credulous Nature.
Our Sex, like Roses blooming on the Tree,
Admired by every gazing Passenger:
The Flower once cropped, a while it is worn in Triumph;
Then thrown aside, to wither in Disgrace.

Oli. Be pleased to give this Letter to Sir John, and pursue whatever he
directs you. Depend upon any Thing in my Power to serve you, Madam; My Soul
abhors this Treachery, and had he been as Dear to me, as his poor Injured
Brother is, I would renounce him now, though Life went with him.


Enter Sir Philip. Oli. My Father! that is unlucky. Aside.


Sir Philip. Pray, Daughter, what is this pretty Resolution of yours? Who would
you renounce?


Oli. One whom you would have me, Sir, if you but wish my Happiness; it is that
Deceiver Freeman.


Sir Philip. How! Why, what has Sir John recovered the Estate then? If so, Egad
I shall renounce him too, Girl. -- Ho'now, Who have we here? Some
Letter-Carrier, ha? Pray, who let you in, Mistress?


Oli. Justice.
Look on this Lady, Sir, with Eyes more human,
On her whom Freeman basely has betrayed,
Just in her rising Bloom and Pride of Youth.

Sir Philip. Why, you would make an excellent Actress; you Rant and Strut it well;
but who is this Lady you are so tender of, pray?


Oli. She Is Freeman's Wife, by all the Ties of Love.


Sir Philip. Ties of Love -- Hark ye! Has the Parson tied 'em? Love makes none
but running Knots, and a Man may slip those at Pleasure; but the Parson's Noose
is as sure as the Hangman's; nothing but the Grave unties it. -- Now if you
have him in that String, Madam, you are on the right side of the Hedge, and I
must look out for another Son-in-law. -- Otherwise, you must look sharp for
another Husband -- that is all.


Lou. By my Country's Custom it is I claim him.
I can have no other Husband;
For all our Vows are Registered in Heaven.

Sir Philip. Humph! that is a long way off, and very few Lawyers go that
Circuit. I doubt you will lose your Cause for want of Evidence too.


Oli. No, Sir, she has a living Witness of his Guilt,
A Boy, the very Picture of the Villain.

Lou. A Pledge of Love, and everlasting Faith.


Oli. Can you defend his Treachery, Sir?


Sir Philip. Can you defend her Folly? Treachery Quotha! He Is a Traitor who
weakens his King, not he who adds to the Number of his Subjects. -- You say,
you claim him by your Country's Custom, pray what Country is that, Madam?


Lou. Holland, Sir.


Sir Philip. Odso! Holland; why their High Mightinesses ought to settle a
Pension upon you. I wish you much Joy of your Son, Madam. I warrant him a Hero,
or a Politician. Every English-Man's Son, merrily begot, proves a Great Man.
Fools and Cowards are the Product of our Wedding-Sheets. I wish he had laid
such a Foundation in my Family, before the Lawfulness of the Pleasure spoils
the Breed.


Oli. Are these fit Speeches for a Daughter's Ear?
And this the Language of a Virtuous Parent?

Sir Philip. The Virtue of a Parent consists in Interest and Cunning
Nowadays, as your Sex's Modesty does in Pride and Affectation.


Oli. Monstrous Precepts!


Sir Philip. I suppose, Madam, you had nothing but Mr. Freeman's bare Word?


Lou. Words of the most Sacred Form! Vows of Eternal Faith! Eternal Constancy!


Sir Philip. But how the Devil could you expect Peformance? Can any Man promise
for Futurity? You should have got him into Bonds. Hereafter let me advise you,
Do nothing till you have 'em under Black and White. -- Then, if they fly the
Parson, catch 'em with the Proctor.


Lou. Unmannerly Advice; but I was told before I came, what small Regard you
paid to Justice. -- It is in you, Madam, that all my Hopes are centered.


Oli. Depend on me, in all I can.


Sir Philip. No whispering in my House, no cabaling, no underhand Dealing. --
Look ye, Madam, the Man's disposed of; but if you will let me know whereabouts
your Fortune may be, I Will do my Endeavor to get you a Husband. -- I will,
Faith.


Lou. Since Injured Virtue is become your Sport,
And you, instead of pitying, mock my Sorrow,
I Will try all Arts that may his Soul subdue;
But if I fail his Passion to renew,
The Traitor dies, to be revenged on you. Exit.

Oli. Why will you raise her Indignation thus?
Do you not dread the Consequence?
Base as he is, will you not guard his Life?
Oh! call her back, and calm her Passion;
If you prevent not, you encourage Murder.

Sir Philip. No, no, the Threats of your Sex, like Courtiers Promises, vanish
into nothing. Passion has left the weeping Corner, and now it blusters like the
North Wind, that is all. I wonder who let this Woman in. I shall examine that
Point with my Servants.


Aside. Oli. Are you a Man yet void of all Humanity?


Sir Philip, If your Mother were alive, she would tell you: How dare you call me
Father, and question my Manhood? What would you make your Mother, Hussy? ha!


Oli. Oh do not name my Mother! Were she alive, you would not treat me thus.
Remember your Promise to Sir John.


Sir Philip. But when I made that Promise, he was Heir Apparent to Four
Thousand Pounds a Year, and Nobody dreamt of his being Disinherited. -- Zounds,
do you think I Will throw away my Money upon your Inclination, Mistress? No, mark
me, Were thy Mother here in all her Bloom of Beauty; here, here, upon her Knees
before me, I would not break my Word to Freeman; that is to say, whilst he is
Master of his Father's Estate; therefore urge me no more, but prepare to be his
Wife to morrow. Do You hear?


Exit. Oli. To morrow! short Warning! yet short as it is, I shall have time for
Resolution; and you shall find it, Father, as Unalterable as your own.

If where I Have fixed my Love, I must not Wed,
I Will choose a Coffin for my Bridal Bed.

Exit. SCENE Watchit's House.
Mrs. Watchit, Sola. Mrs. W. SINCE my Husband resolves to immure me, I Am glad
my Jayl is so luckily situated. Here I may hope for some Consolation; The
agreeable Address of Freeman charms me; my Husband's Jealousy provokes me; and
the Convenience of that dear Door, is so irresistible, that if I should not be
able to withstand Temptation, my Husband may take it for his Pains: Besides, as
the Poet says, One had as good commit the Fau't,
As always to be Guilty thought.
There Is some Pleasure in reflecting upon past Delights; and Confinement will
sit more easy, when one knows one deserves it; but to be shut up for nothing,
is not to be borne.

Enter Lucy. Well, Lucy: Have you given the Signal?


Lucy. There was no need of a Signal, Madam: I found Mr. Freeman in my Chamber,
waiting the happy Minute. Oh! were these Men but half so eager after
Possession! -- But then, the Park, the Play, a Bottle; nay, an Afternoon's Nap,
shall have important Business in it. -- But here he is, Madam.


Enter Ned Freeman, and runs into her Arms. Ned. My Charmer! I have stood
Sentinel at my Window these Two Hours, to watch your old Jailer out; and the
Moment I saw him hobble over the Channel, I flew to the kind Door, impatient to
be let into Paradise.


Mrs. Wat. The impatient'st Lover, at the Beginning of an Amor, commonly
proves the most indolent after Possession, they say.


Ned. That, Madam, in a great measure, depends upon the Wit and Temper of the
Lady; After Enjoyment, Love grows nice; Beauty kindles up the Flame: But there
is more required to keep that Flame alive: But you may boast your Sex's whole
Perfection: He who puts on your Chains, must be your Slave for Ever. Where
Souls sympathize, the Bodies fear no Separation. When I but kiss thee
[Embracing her] my Heart flutters at my Lips, as if 'twould tell thee every
Thought within.


Mrs. W. Bless me! what do you mean? I doubt you have naughty Thoughts! -- Give
us the Cards. -- Come, I must have my Revenge.


Ned. That you shall, with all my Soul, instantly.


Mrs. W. Be quiet then, and take the Cards.


Ned. The Cards! No, no, my Angel, I shall beat you at Cards; there is a
sweeter Game for your Revenge.


Mrs. W. Pish! what Game? -- Lud! -- you smother one. Suppose any of the
Servants should be upon the Stairs? -- Lucy!


Lucy. [aside.] Humph! I understand her. I Will take Care of that, Madam. Exit.


Ned. You see, my Life, Mrs. Lucy knows her Business: Why should we neglect
ours?


Mrs. W. Business! What Business? Oh Lud! what would you have me do? Struggling
a little.


Ned. Make me the happiest of Mankind. A thousand Loves are dancing in your
Eyes. Your balmy Lips and heaving Breasts invite me to the Banquet.


Mrs. W. Don't talk to me thus, you insinuating Devil, you! -- Let me go! -- Oh
gad! I an't able to struggle any longer! --


Ned. Why will you struggle at all? Why destroy that Pleasure which your
Consent so infinitely would raise? Come, lead me to my Bliss, where, folded in
each other's close Embraces, we'll bid Defiance to a Husband's Frown, and kiss,
and laugh at all his jealous Folly.


Mrs. W. Oh gad! -- Oh, oh Lud! -- I have not Breath to answer -- Oh, oh! I
must not -- dare not -- will not -- Oh Lud! -- I have such a Swimming in my
Head! -- Let me go! -- Though if you do, I am sure I shall fall down.


Sinks into his Arms. Ned. Oh my yielding Dear! -- Where the Duce shall I find
the Bed Chamber?


Mrs. W. It Is the next Room. -- Ha! What have I said? Did you name the
Bedchamber? Oh Gad! I will not go into the Bedchamber.


Ned. No, no, no, my Dear, I would not offer to injure your Modesty with such a
Thought for the World. Go into the Bedchamber! No, no, I Will carry thee
thither. Takes her in his Arms.


Mrs. W. Nay, how can you be so rude? Lord, whither are you going? I swear I
have a good Mind to cry out. Lucy shrieks without.


Ned. Ha! What Shriek is that?


Mrs. W. It Is Lucy's Voice! Set me down, set me down! my Husband is most
certainly returned. What shall I do? O Invention! O Invention! Pauses.


Ned. Pox take him for an unmannerly Churl, to make a Gentleman rise from Table
before he has tasted the first Dish; and with such an Appetite too!


Mrs. W. Oh gad! don't loiter here; but fly, fly, Sir!


Ned. But whither, Madam? Whither? Which way can I get up Stairs, without
meeting him full in the Teeth? Except you have any back-way.


Mrs. W. I Will venture; (for it is impossible for him to get out.) Here, here,
here, Sir, step behind this Screen, and stir not for your Life, 'till I give
you Notice. Ned goes behind the Screen.


Enter Watchit, and Lucy. Wat. What the Devil did you shriek out for? To give
Warning, Mrs. Scriech-Owl?


Lucy. Warning! of what, I wonder? Who could you expect to catch, that you came
creeping up in this Manner, to fright a-body out of one's Wits? You suffer
nothing to come near my Lady but Flies, that I know of.


Mrs. W. [Throwing herself upon the Floor.] Oh, Misery! -- Oh, oh, oh! --


Wat. Nothing but Flies! why Flies breed Maggots, Hussy.


Mrs. W. Oh undone! Undone for ever!


Lucy. Oh my poor Lady on the Floor! Help, Sir, help. -- Where have you put the
Gentleman, Madam? Aside to Mrs. W.


Mrs. W. Behind the Screen. [Aside.] Oh, oh!


Wat. Pud, What is the Matter, Pud?


Mrs. W. I fear I have broke my Leg, Mumps.


Wat. Heaven forbid! -- Though if she has, there will be one Advantage in it;
she will not teize me to go abroad these two Months. [Aside.] -- Let me see;
where-abouts have thou hurt thy pretty Leg?


Mrs. W. Just in my Instep, Mumps! -- Oh, oh!


Wat. Lucy! Where are you, Hussy! help me to set your Mistress in a Chair. How
came thou to fall, Pudsey? They lift her into a Chair.


Mrs. W. Why, hearing her shriek, I ran hastily to see what was the Matter; and
my Heel happening to catch in my Hoop, down I came, with my Foot double under
me. -- Oh dear Mumps! you hurt me terribly! Pray lead me to my Bed, that I may
lie down 'till a Surgeon can be sent for.


Ned. [Peeping] Well proposed!


Wat. No, no, let me rub it a little; I don't find it is broke: One must not
make Surgeon's Work of every little Accident. It is not broke, Pudsey, that is
certain.


Lucy. I wish your Neck had been broke, when you came Home. Aside.


Wat. It may be sprain'd, perhaps. I have some Camphirated Spirits of Wine in
the Corner-Cupboard, behind that Screen. I Will fetch it, and bathe it with some
of that. It is exceeding good for a Sprain.


Ned. [Peeping] So! I find a Lawsuit commenced already.


Mrs. W. If he comes near the Screen, I Am undone.


Aside. Lucy. What, in the Name of Jupiter, will become of the Gentleman?


Mrs. W. Oh dear, dear, Mumps! do not leave me. Give Lucy the Key; let her
fetch it. Catches hold of him.


Lucy. Ay, ay, Sir, give me the Key; and do you keep rubbing, that the Blood
may circulate.


Ned. [Peeping] Well said, Mrs. Abigail.


Mrs. W. Ay, do, dear Mumpsy! Methinks there is a kind of Ease whilst you are
rubbing it. -- Oh, oh!


Wat. [rising] No, no, she cannot find it; she will fling down some of the
Bottles; that is all the Good she will do.


Mrs W. Oh, I shall swoon, if you stir, Mumps! -- I shall, I shall! Catches
hold of him.


Wat. Well, well! I will not go! -- You Women are so impatient! Here, Lucy, take
the Key. It is in a Crystal Bottle. Don't you do Mischief now, amongst the rest
of the Spirits.


Ned. [Peeping] I wish I were a Spirit to go out unseen. --


Mrs. Watchit beckons Ned to go off, whilst old Watchit is rubbing her Foot.
Lucy. She beckons you to go out, Sir.


Ned. I understand her. But if the old Fellow should look up!


Lucy. No, no, never fear; I Will help to screen you from his Sight. [ Runs and
flaps herself down by Watchit] Here, here, Sir, here is the Bottle. I Am sure
it is the right.


Wat. What is the Devil in the Wench! have you a a Mind to lame me, Hussy? Why
don't you pull out the Cork?


Ned advances, but as Watchit looks up, retires. Mrs. W. Hang the Cork. -- Rub,
rub, rub, dear Mumps.


Lucy. [ Beckons Ned] Now, now, now.


Wat. What Is now, now! ha!


Lucy. Why, now the Cork's out! Lord, you don't mind my Mistress's Foot?


Mrs. W. [Aside.] Ah! he will catch him, that is certain. -- I have such a
Terror upon me, that I Am disarmed of all Excuses.


Wat. Where lies thy Pain, Pud?


Mrs. W. Just where you are.


Lucy. That I dare swear [Aside.] -- Bless me, Sir, how my Lady's Ancle swells?


Wat. Your Nose swells, don't it? What do you fright your Mistress for, Hussy?
I see no Swelling.


Lucy. I don't know how he should. Aside.


Ned. [Aside.] She might have laid a Foundation for a Swelling, if you had been
Civil enough to have stayed away half an Hour longer.


Advancing to the middle of the Stage. Wat. Come, try to stand upon it, Pudsey.


Mrs. W. [Shrieking.] Ah! my dear, dear Life and Soul! I cannot bear it!


As Watchit is raising her up, she throws her Arms about his Neck to prevent
his seeing Ned. Wat. [Struggling] What, will you smother me? How now! Who have
we here?


Ned. So! he has me! -- I admire you leave your Doors open, Sir, and not a
Servant in the Way to take a Message.


Wat. Had you any to send up, Sir? I don't like a Man that comes up to my Nose;
then tells me, I admire you leave your Doors open. -- Zounds, was there not a
Knocker to the Door?


Ned. I did knock, Sir; but my Business would not give me leave to wait.


Wat. Business* -- What, to rob my House? or lie with my Wife, I warrant, had I
been out of the Way. [Aside] -- I pray you, sweet Sir, What may your hasty
Business be?


Ned. What, in the Name of Jupiter, shall I pretend? Aside.


Mrs. W. [ Aside to Lucy] Oh Lud! what Tale can he invent? I tremble every
Joint of me.


Lucy. [ Aside to Mrs. W.] If he proves of the true Irish Breed, all may go
well yet.


Wat. I am afraid, Sir, you have forgot your Business. -- A clean-limb'd young
Rascal, this; -- and has a damned Cuckold-making Air: Zounds, how my Wife eyes
him! Aside.


Ned. I have it; Impudence protect me [Aside.] The Affair I come upon, Sir,
requires your private Ear.


Wat. Sir, I keep my private Ears, for my public Friends. I have surveyed you
round, and round; and, to be plain, I don't like your Phiz, and, may be, I
shall like your Business worse. Therefore, will hear, whether it be worth going
out of the Room for or not.


Ned. I can easily pardon your Dislike to my Face; but I must insist upon
speaking with you alone.


Wat. I insist upon your speaking here, Sir -- The Dog will cut my Throat,
perhaps. Aside.


Mrs. W. I Am in pain for the Event. Aside to Lucy.


Lucy. The Gentleman promises well; Have Courage, Madam. Aside to Mrs. W.


Ned. But your Reputation is concerned, Sir.


Wat. My Reputation does not depend upon your Tongue, Sir; and I Will not stir a
Foot.


Ned. But have you no Regard to your Lady, Sir? for I perceive this is your
Wife.


Wat. And what of that, Sir? What have you to say against my Wife? Out with it.


Ned. I have nothing to say, Sir, against your Wife.


Wat. 'S'death, Sir! What is your Business? What have you to say? Speak, Sir;
-- Or, or --


Ned. Nay! if I must speak here! Then know, Sir, I am employed by Sir Andrew
Gudgeon.


Wat. Gudgeon! I doubt, Friend, you have mistaken your Fish; for I know no Man
of that Name.


Ned. Hark ye, Sir, a Word. [Speaks in his Ear] You know his Wife, I suppose,
if you don't know him.


Wat. Wife! what Wife? Ad's Heart! speak out, and keep farther off. -- This
Dog's a Pick-pocket, for aught I know. Aside.


Ned. Why then, I must tell you, Sir, that Sir Andrew will have Satisfaction,
before he and you have done.


Wat. Satisfaction for what, Sir?


Ned. For lying with his Wife, Sir, since you will have it out.


Mrs. W. Adultery! Very fine, truly!


Lucy. Bless me! who could have thought, that my Lady had not been sufficient
for you, Sir?


Wat. Zounds! what do you mean, Sir? Do you think to make a Gudgeon of me?


Ned. Nor you must not think to make a Cuckold of Sir Andrew, without making
him Satisfaction, Sir. I don't value your high Words, nor your big Looks. I am
not to be frighted out of my Business, Sir. I am a Proctor in the Bishop's
Court, and employed by Sir Andrew, to exhibit a Libel against you for
Incontinency.


Wat. Oh Lord! oh Lord! I incontinent! I Will be judged by my own Wife. -- Pud!
-- come hither, Pud -- speak the Truth, and no more but the Truth, -- Did
thou ever find me a Man given that way?


Mrs. W. I wonder you have the Assurance to look me in the Face! I find your
Suspicions of my Virtue, proceeded from the Weakness of your own -- Ungrateful
Man! Have I kissed and hugged you in my Arms for this? Bursts seemingly into
Tears.


Lucy Ah! did ever I think this of you, Sir? You, who have such a tender, fond,
loving, lovely Wife of your own! I cannot help weeping to see my poor Lady so
ill-treated.


Wat. Was ever innocent Man thus baited?


Mrs. W. Ah, Mumps! I never thought you were such a Hypocrite. -- How often
have you told me, what a crying Sin Adultery is! And --


Wat. This must be a Trick to abuse me! -- Get out of my House, Sir. Zounds,
get out of my House!


Ned. Get out of your House! Get ready your Bail, Sir. The Allegations against
you are so plain, and positive, you will scarce have any Room for an Evasive
Answer, or to cross-examine the Witnesses upon New Interrogatories, Sir, --
Mind that.


Wat. You and your Interrogatories had best march off, Sir, without any more to
do, or --


Mrs. W. If I might advise you, make up this Matter, and don't expose yourself.


Wat. Why Pud! do you think I am guilty, Pud? Oh Lud! oh Lud! oh Lud!


Mrs. W. Why, can you have the Assurance to deny it, after what the Gentleman
has said?


Ned. His denying it, Madam, will signify nothing; we have unquestionable
Proofs; Causes of this Nature never come into our Court without Demonstration.
-- He must undergo the Sentence usual in these Cases. -- Which is, To stand in
a White-Sheet, and humbly confess his Faults before the Congregation. Besides
which, [Turning to Him.] you will be compelled to pay Costs and Damages. -- And
if you are found Guilty of Contumacy, as your present Behavior seems to
promise, we shall get you Excommunicated.


Mrs W Excellent Fellow! Aside.


Ned. Upon which comes out the Writ Excommunicato Capiendi: That, whips you up
in an Instant; carries you to the next Jayl, and delivers you into Salvo
Custodio; without Bail, or Mainprize.


Wat. What, hoa! within there? Where are all my Rascals? Hussy, go look 'em, [
pushes Lucy] and bid 'em call a Constable. I Will Bail and Mainprize you, I
warrant you, Sirrah: Why don't you go?


To Lucy. Lucy. I Will not stir a Step: You wicked Man, you! --


Ned. A Constable! -- that may not be so well. Aside. I Am not afraid of a
Constable, Sir. Send for him, and welcome; but the least Noise you make in this
Affair, the better, Sir Nicholas!


Mrs. W. Sir Nicholas! here must be some Mistake in this; my Husband's Name is
not Nicholas, Sir!


Ned. What say you, Madam? Is not this Sir Nicholas Widgeon?


Wat. No, nor Woodcock neither, as you shall find, Sir!


Ned. Bless me! What have I been saying all this while? I ask your Pardon, Sir,
with all my Heart. How the Vengeance could I make such a Blunder? I was
directed next Door to the Sun.


Lucy. If I mistake not, Sir Nicholas lives at the next House but one. I am
glad to find it a Mistake, Sir, and that you are not guilty of wronging so good
a Woman, as my Lady is.


Wat. It is a very pretty Mistake, though, to come into a Man's House, and abuse,
and threaten him with White-Sheets, Penance, and the Devil; and then, I ask
your Pardon, Sir. A Pox on you and your Pardon too, Sir.


Ned. Nay, you have Reason to be angry, I own, Sir -- and I wish I knew how to
make you some Satisfaction. -- Madam, Can you forgive me? Upon Honor, I Am in
such Confusion!


Mrs. W. I believe him. [Aside.] The Pleasure of finding my Husband innocent,
inclines me the more easily to pardon your Mistake, Sir.


Ned. I protest, Sir, I am very much out of Countenance!


Wat. I wish you were out of my House, Sir. --


Ned. If you should ever have any Business in Doctors Commons, Sir, I assure
you, no Body shall be --


Wat. I assure you, Sir, that nothing can oblige me more, than to see your
Backside; and so, sweet Mr. Proctor, with your Excommunicato Capiendi, I am
your very humble Servant.


Ned. Sir, I am yours entirely. Exit.


Mrs. Wat. Charming Fellow! Aside.


Wat. Pox take him, he has given me the Palpitation of the Heart, which I
shall not get rid of these two Hours. -- Why, what a multitude of Troubles will
this poor Sir Nicholas be in now? His Sweet Meat will have Sour Sauce. -- Odd,
there is a pretty Penny to be made of these Cuckold-making Dogs* if one could
but catch 'em Napping. Aside.


Mrs. W. [Aside.] Well, this is a Jewel of a Man, Lucy.


Lucy. Ay, Madam, this Man has a Genius, and deserves a Woman. Aside to her.


Wat. I cannot get this Fellow's Mistake out of my Head; it is a cursed odd one,
methinks. Aside.


Lucy. How does your Foot do, Madam?


Mrs. W. Pretty well, I think, Lucy: Your Hand has done me exceeding Service,
Mumps. --


Wat. Ay, ay, Chick, every one don't know the Virtue of a warm Hand. -- I don't
like this sudden Cure. -- To roar out, but now when I touched it; and now to
walk about, as if nothing ailed her.


Aside. Lucy. If you were a Surgeon, Sir, and could effect Cures so soon, you would
grow Rich apace.


Wat. [Aside.] I wish you, and your Mistress, have not all your -- I might not
always be so lucky.


Lucy. To prevent your being made a Cuckold, I grant you. Aside.


Wat. I took this, just in the Nick.


Lucy. Or she had Nicked you. Aside.


Wat. That is to say, just as 'twas done.


Lucy. Nay, before it was done; to my Lady's Sorrow. Aside.


Mrs. W. Well, Mumps! I must remind you of your Promise: I must go out to Day.


Wat. Fie, fie, you would not walk upon your Foot so soon; would you?


Mrs. W. Pho! I tell you my Foot is well: Besides, I can take a Chair.


Wat. Prithee, what Business have thou abroad, Wife?


Mrs. W. Why, I want to go to Chapel, in the first Place.


Wat. The Saints will hear you as well, from your Closet.


Mrs. W. I cannot Pray in my Closet.


Wat. Nor any where else, I believe. Aside.


Mrs. W. Besides, here are Priests in London.


Wat. Ay! Enough to corrupt the whole Nation. --


Mrs. W. And it is a mortal Sin not to Confess, when it is in one's Power to do
it.


Wat. Pray, what Sins have you committed, that you are in such haste to
unburthen?


Mrs. W. You are not qualified to know.


Wat. Well, since your Conscience accuses you, you shall have a Priest. I Will
send to the What-d'ye-call-'em Ambassador's, for one of his; who shall take
your Confession in your Closet; but I Will stand at the Door: For I would not
trust one of these Pardon-selling Rogues: They have such convincing Arguments
for Cuckoldom.


Mrs. W. Why, do you think, Sir, that I Will be shut up thus, for ever?


Wat. Nay, if you begin to exalt your Voice, then I must tell you, It is my
Pleasure to have it so. Let that suffice.


Mrs. W. No, that will not suffice; for it is against my Inclination.


Wat. Which is not to be sufficed? for you are never satisfied with gadding; if
we Husbands should always follow our Wives Inclinations, we should be in a fine
Condition.


Lucy. I am sure you have all Conditions, but good ones. Aside.


Mrs. W. Is this your Matrimonial Vow! to imprison me; You that would Cherish,
Love, and Worship me!


Wat. So I do, don't I, my dear Flesh and Blood? Thou are my Goddess, and I
adore Thee; and cannot suffer Thee out of my Sight.


Lucy. If you Two are One Flesh, how come you to have such different Minds,
pray, Sir?


Wat. Because the Mind has nothing to do with the Flesh.


Mrs. W. That Is your Mistake, Sir; the Body is governed by the Mind. So much
Philosophy I know.


Wat. Yes, yes; I believe you understand Natural Philosophy very well, Wife: I
doubt the Flesh has got the better of the Spirit in you. -- Look ye, Madam!
Every Man's Wife is his Vineyard; you are mine, therefore I Wall you in.
Ads-budikins, never a Coxcomb in the Kingdom, shall plant so much as a Primrose
in my Ground.


Mrs. W. I am sure, your Management will produce nothing but Thorns.


Wat. Nay, every Wife is a Thorn in her Husband's Side; Your whole Sex is a
kind of Sweet-Bryer, and he who meddles with it, is sure to prick his Fingers.


Lucy. That is, when you handle us too roughly. --


Mrs. W. You are a kind of Rue; neither good for Smell nor Taste.


Wat. But very wholesome, Wife. --


Mrs. W. Ay, so they say of all Bitters; yet I would not be obliged to feed
upon Gentian, and Wormwood.


Wat. No, you like Sweetmeats better.


Mrs. W. Confinement would Cloy me with Them too.


VVat. Or you are no Woman. --


Mrs. VV. But what does this signify to our Marriage-Articles? You know the
Forfeiture, if you deny me Ghostly Aid.


VVat. A Thousand Pounds. -- You bit me there. -- Have a care I don't bite you
again. [Aside.] -- Well, well, you shall have this Ghostly Aid -- But do you
consider, you never had the Smallpox, and it never was so Mortal as now;
therefore it is not convenient you should go Abroad; indeed it is not, Pudsey.
-- It Is out of pure Love to thee, Faith, my Dear; for the Smallpox would spoil
that pretty Face: It would truly, Pud: Prithee now, believe thine own Mumps. --


Mrs. VV. Away! -- I hate your Wheedling. Those who languish under the Plague,
need not fear the Smallpox.


Exit with Lucy. VVat. Humph! Say you so? I shall indeed be a Plague to you, if
I catch you tardy, Gentlewoman. Odd, I cannot put this Foot of hers out of my
Head; it looks like an Excuse to conceal some secret Failing, and puts me in
mind of a youthful Stratagem of my own. Having been a little Familiar with one
of my Mother's Maids, and like to have been caught, I cut my Finger, and
pretended I came for a Rag to bind it up. -- This Fellow with his Excommunicato
Capiendi, too, may have more in it than I can see through: I resolve to examine
my Servants, if ever they saw him before; but in Personating this Priest, I
shall know all.


Lucy listening. Lucy. Shall you so?


VVat. I have bespoke a Disguise; and am resolved to take her Confession my
self.


Lucy. Indeed! -- My Lady shall know your Contrivance; and if she does not fit
you for your Curiosity, I am mistaken, old Gentleman.


Exit. VVat. If she has Cuckolded me, though but in Thought, I will enjoin her
such a Penance!

'Ounds! I Will so swinge, so mortify the Jade,
That she shall never forget my Ghostly Aid.

ACT III.
SCENE, Widow Headless's House. She Wiping down the Dust with her Handkerchief.
Enter Judith. Widow. JUDITH! What have thou been doing all this Morning, that
my Dressing Room is in this Pickle?


Jud. Pickle!


Wid. Ay, Pickle, Sauce-box; Why do thou Echo me?


Jud. Echo you!


Wid. Again! -- Indeed I shall slap your Chaps, if you don't learn to leave
off repeating my Words after me.


Jud. After you! -- Marry, I --


Wid. [Gives her a Box of the Ear] You will do it then.


Jud. Will do what? Chem zhour, chem can do nothing to please you! Chem cleaned
it as it hod bin vor min Life; zo I dud.


Wid. Life! what is thy Life, Muck-worm, to a clean Room? Do thou imagine
Rooms lie thus at Court? Ha, Slattern?


Jud. They cannot lie better, I think.


Wid. Think! Why do thou think, Animal? What have thou to do with Thought?
Mind thy own Business, and never puzzle thy Noddle with Thought.

Enter Sir Philip, and Tally. Bless me! my Lord, and Sir Philip! -- I am
ashamed to be caught in this Disorder!


Sir Phil. My Lord and I have been fetching a Walk, and I could not persuade
his Lordship to pass by your Door, Cousin, without calling. You are his North,
and he is embarked in the Cock-boat of Love, and is constantly pointing this
way.


Wid. You are very pleasant this Morning, Sir Philip. But. --


Tally. I ask your Pardon, Madam; but finding your Door open, and nobody in
the way, the Knight undertook to be Master of the Ceremonies, as well as to
answer the Reproaches I might reasonably expect from you, for this Liberty --


Wid. Oh, good my Lord, no Apology! That ought to be done by me for the
Disorder your Lordship finds me in. -- Go, Beesom, and look for your
Fellow-Puzzles, and ask 'em, Why they leave my Doors open? I shall be robbed
one of these Days. -- Sure, never anybody was so fatigued with Servants as I
am. Did you ever visit a Lady in a Stable before, my Lord? Oh gad! I shall be
stuck, mir'd, laid fast, and forced to be dug out like a Potatoe.


Holds up her Coats, and walks cautiously. Tally. A Stable, Madam! I protest I
think your House is as much in Order, as any Lady's in London.


Sir Phil. Ay, my Lord, there are few of the Quality such Housewives, as my
Cousin. If it be your Lordship's good Fortune to marry her, she will set the
Ladies at Court a Pattern.


Wid. Fie, Sir Philip! This to my Face! it looks like Flattery.


Tally. What would be Flattery to another, is but doing you Justice, Madam. --


Wid. Women have no Defense against the fine Things you well-bred Men say. To
raise our Vanity, and make us have a good Opinion of ourselves, you are sure,
is one way to be well in our Esteem.


Tally. I should think myself the happiest Man living, if I could perceive I
had the least Share in yours, Madam.


Sir Phil. His Lordship complains, Cousin, that you are Inexorable. -- Hark ye,
one Word with you. -- Don't over-stand your Market. A Man of Quality is not to
be caught every Day.


Fain. [Listening] There Is an old Rogue, now!


Aside. Wid. Would you have me marry a Man as soon as he asks me the Question,
Sir Philip? I think, to have an Amor with a Person of Rank known and talked
of, is one of the greatest Inducements to Matrimony; especially if it gives the
rest of my Sex Pain.


Fain. [Aside] Right Woman, on my Conscience!


Wid. My Lord! will not your Lordship please to rest yourself?


Tally. My Rest depends upon your Ladyship.


Fain. [Aside] Who shall never be a Resting Place for you to Tally on.


Wid. I Am certain, it is not in my Power to give your Lordship Pain.


Fain. So -- Another Trap! but I Will spoil the Dialogue.


Enter Fainwell. Tally. More than your whole Sex.


Wid. Your Lordship will make me vain.


Sir Phil. If there could be any Addition to the Vanity that thou have already.
Aside.


Wid. Oh, Jeffery! -- Well, have you delivered all my Messages?


Fain. Be Mess, I think so.


Wid. Ha! Looking wistfully at him.


Fain. How many dud you gi me, Forsooth?


Wid. Madam, -- Oh the Clodhopper! Aside.


Fain. Mrs. What-ni-cull-um, at the Hog's-Head, was gone out, chu'd seem.


Wid. Madam! Blockhead.


Gives him a Box on the Ear. Sir Phil. Ha, ha, ha! this is like to be a
diverting Scene.


Wid. How often must I instruct you to behave your self before Company? Will
you never learn Manners, Booby?


Fain. No, I shall not, an you go on at thick same slip-slap Rate. -- Nouns, an
thick be London-Breeding, send me into the Country again, I say.


Tally. If I were thy Lady, Fellow, thou should have thy Wish.


Fain. Say you so? Ay! but Cursed Cows have short Horns, we say in our Country*
-- I shall never be your Servant, I hope!


Wid. How now, Sause-box! do you know who you talk to?


Fain. Yes, I do -- better than you think for, me-hap.


Tally. [Aside] How Is that? 'S Death, if this Bumkinly Dog should know me,
he will spoil all.


Wid. I have a good Mind, Sirrah, to dash your Teeth down your Throat.


Fain. So you ma' an you wol. What does he meddle wi' me for, then? I dud not
meddle wi' him; dud I?


Sir Phil. You Will have your Bones broke in London, Sirrah. I admire my Lord
does not Cane you, Scoundrel.


Tally. His being this Lady's Servant protects him.


Fain. No, it is that protects you; for an I had you in my Country --


Tally. This Fellow and I must have a little Confabulation. I must stop his
Mouth.


Wid. Sirrah, no more of your Impudence; but give me an Account of the Business
I sent you about. How does Lady Lucy, Lady Lock-up, Lady Love-it, Lady Set-up,
Lady Comely, Lady Revel, Lady Ramble, Mrs. Prim, Mrs. Prude, Mrs. Costly, and
Mrs. Travel?


Fain. Nowns! her Tongue runs like the Mill at Vather's Orchard-End, that
scares Crows fro' the Cherry-Tree.


Wid. Does it so, Sirrah?


Runs to beat him, but Tally steps in between. Tally. Hold, hold, dear Madam:
Let me intercede for Mr. Jeffery this once.


Fain. [Aside.] How civil the Dog is!


Wid. Your Lordship commands me. Well, Mrs. Fisk-out, at the Boar's-Head, which
you call the Hog's-Head, Clumsy! was gone out, you say?


Fain. So she was.


Wid. How Is that?


Tally. [ Aside to Fainwell.] Madam! -- Jeffery -- Madam -- You forget.


Fain. Madam --


Wid. Hoa! you have squeezed out Madam at last.


Fain. Squeezed -- Od! would I had the squeezing of you.


Wid. How, Sirrah, you squeeze me! -- My Lord! Sir Philip! Did you ever hear
such a Varlet!


Tally. You see, Madam, your Beauty reaches all Degrees. He speaks his Heart, I
dare swear.


Sir Phil. You have him as you breed him.


Wid. Oh, that is barbarous, Sir Philip. You don't know the Pains I take with
my Clodpated Family. -- Well! Looking at Fainwell.


Fain. Yes, they are well, Madam. -- An hope you are well, Madam -- And they will
all -- or some of them, come to see you, Madam. -- So they gi' their Loves --
Loves? No, no -- So they gi' their Service to you, Madam -- An, an, an, an, So
that is all, Madam. -- There Is Madam enough for you now, I think, if you know
when you have enough.


Tally. Now Jeffery has done it. Ha, ha, ha!


Wid. I have been teaching him the distinguishing Rap, these three Days; and
yet, I warrant, he will knock with the sneaking Air of a Tailor. Let Us hear how
you perform? He knocks aukwardly.


Wid. Execrable! -- Didn't I tell you so? -- There, Blockhead. -- She thunders
at the Door.


Fain. By'r Lady! that is enough to fright all the Dogs in Town.


Wid. In the Opinion of such a Puppy as you are -- Go, bid the Cook set on the
Tea-kettle, and cut some Bread and Butter -- But, do you hear? don't you bring it
dangling in your Fist, as you did Yesterday, Sloven -- If you do, I shall throw
it at your Head, Sir. Remember to bring me nothing without a Plate: Do You hear?
-- You have not Breakfasted, I hope, Sir Philip?


Sir Phil. Yes, long since.


Tally. So have I, Madam.


Sir Phil. Jeffery's talking of Dogs, puts me in mind of a Message from my
Daughter. She bid me tell you, she expects a Puppy: Has your Bitch litter'd
yet, Cousin?


Wid. Not yet, Sir Philip. You never saw a poor Creature so big in your Life.
Jeffery fetch Misha hither [Fainwell going] -- Hark-ye! Hark-ye! -- Come back.
[He runs up to her Nose.] What! -- will you run your Nose into my Mouth? Where
are your Manners, when you leave the Room? -- Still that Scrape? I thought I
had showed you to bend your Body only, and keep your Feet upon the Ground.


Fain. By'r Lady, you will make an ambling Nag of me by-and-by. Exit.


Tally. [Aside.] Nothing but thy Twenty thousand Pounds could make Amends for
thy Impertinence. -- I admire you give your-self the Trouble of
Country-Servants, Madam.


Wid. I would not keep a Town-Servant, my Lord, if they would live with me for
nothing. Their whole Attention is Drunkenness and Pride. The dirtiest Trollup
in the Town must have her Top-knot and Tickin-shoes. This City spoils all
Servants. I took a Welsh Runt last Spring, whose Generation scarce ever knew
the Use of Stockens: And -- will you believe me, my Lord? She had not lived
with me Three Weeks, before she sewed Three Penny-Canes round the Bottom of her
Shift, instead of a Hoop-Petticoat.


Sir Phil. That was something better than a Wench at my House, who dis-rob'd a
Barrel, and let all the Ale about the Cellar. One of the Ends of the Hoop
working out, discovered the Trick, and at the same time flung down a Side-Board
of Glasses. -- Ha, ha, ha!


Tally. Ha, ha, ha!


Wid. Ay, they do more Mischief than their Necks are worth. If the Parliament
don't lay a Tax upon their Pride, there will be no living. I wish your Lordship
would take it into Consideration.


Enter Fainwell. Wid. Well! -- Where Is Misha?


Fain. By Mess, I cannot bring her; not I.


Wid. How so? Is she so heavy?


Fain. No, she is not so heavy: But I cannot make her lie upon a Plate, for the
Blood of me, so I cannot.


Sir Phil. Ha, ha, ha! Ridiculous enough! -- Ha, ha!


Wid. A Plate, Blockhead! a Plate! Did you ever see a Dog brought on a Plate,
Clodhopper? Did you?


Following him about. Sir Phil. Pure Innocence, faith!


Fain. Nay, how do I know your London Vashons? -- You bad me but now, I Am zure,
to bring you naught without a Plate; so you dud.


Wid. What! -- Living Things! -- Ha, Did I say Living Things?


Fain. Living Things! 'S'Blead, the Devil would not live wi'yow -- The Cobbler
wants Sixpence for mending your Clogs, Judith bod me tell you.


Wid. These Wretches will distract me! -- Is that a Message to be delivered to
me in Public? Ha, Thickscull? -- But since you had no more Wit, let me see
what he has done for the Money. -- My Lord, youll excuse this Piece of
Economy. --


Exit Fainwell. Tally. Oh! Madam --


Fainwell Reenters, with the Clogs on a Plate. Wid. Did you ever see the
Fellow of him, Sir Philip? I protest he puts me into an Agony! Why, you
Thickscull'd Rascal! -- You unthinking Dolt! -- You senseless idiot! -- Was
ever a Pair of dirty Clogs brought upon a Plate, Sirrah? -- Ha? -- Was there?
-- Was there? -- Was there? -- Hedge Hog?


Follows him about and beats him, Sir Philip interposing. Fain. What do you
strick me vor! -- The Clogs ar'nt Living Things too, are they? -- By the Mess,
Ill take the Law of you, so I will, an you thrash me about at thick same Rate.
S'Blead, an you were a Man, I Would dress your Jacket for you.


Sir Phil Fie, fie, Cousin, this is not like a fine Lady.


Wid. That Is your Mistake, Sir Philip; My Lady Flippant beats her whole Family,
from her Husband to her Coachman.


Tally. [Aside] I shall teach you better Manners, if once I get you.


Fain. [Aside.] O Money! Money! what a Charm have Thou?


Wid. Out of my Sight, Sirrah! --


Fain. Who the Murrain, cares to stay in it I wonder? Ah! Jeffery! Jeffery!
thou art right enough served! -- Why did thou leave thy Sweetheart, Cicely,
to pine away like a Goose in a Penn?


Sir Phil. Why then you are False-hearted, Jeffery?


Fain I have been Sir; with Shame I confess it, or I had never come under
Mistress's Clutches. -- But,

May all false-hearted Men my Fortune have,
And who slights Woman, be a Woman's Slave!
I Have somewhat to say to you, my Lord, when Time shall serve.

As he goes out.
Tally. I Will meet you in Covent Garden Piazza, in Half an Hour. Aside to
Fainwell.


Re-Enter Fainwell. Fain. Here Is the Knight in Black to speak wi' you. -- Sir,
Sir Freeman, I think you call him.


Wid Sir John Freeman, you mean -- Show him up.


Sir Phil. Hold, hold, let me begone first. I have some Reasons why I don't
care to see him. -- I had some Business with you, Cousin; but I Will send to you.
-- Will you walk, my Lord? Or shall I leave your Lordship?


Tally. I Will wait on you, Sir Philip. -- I take an unwilling Leave, Madam: But
it may not be convenient to press upon your Business. -- I long to know what
this Fellow has to say to me [Aside.] -- Your most obedient humble Servant.


Exit Tally and Sir Philip. Wid. I am your Lordship's --


Enter Sir John. Sir John. I ask you Pardon, Madam; I fear my Visit has robbed
you of better Company.


Wid. Not at all, Sir John: Your Father-in-Law, that was to have been, is just
gone out; He seemed unwilling to meet you.


Sir John. Well he might, after his perfidious Usage.


Wid. But is your Brother really to marry my Cousin Olivia?


Sir John. I have Reason to fear it; but hope he will be disappointed. I
received Instructions from Olivia to wait on you, Madam, to ask a Favor of you.


Wid. She may command every thing in my Power, Sir John. What is it?


Sir John. That you would give a Lady Entertainment in that Appartment which
opens into the Backstreet.


Wid. What, is it the Dutch Lady, Sir John?


Sir John. The same, Madam,


Wid. She Is welcome. May her coming prove propitious!


Enter Judith. Judith. Here Is one Mr. Freeman, to wait on you, he says.


Sir John. My Brother! What can he want? Does he use to visit you, Madam?


Wid. He never was here in his Life! I cannot imagine his Business! -- Would you
see him?


Sir John. Yes, yes; but not a Word of the Business I came about.


Wid. You don't think me so indiscreet, I hope: Show him up, Judith.


Enter Ned Freeman. Ned. Madam, your Servant. Ha! Brother! I Am glad to find you
in such good Company. My Brother Jack's a pretty Fellow, Madam.


Wid. So he is indeed, Sir. He wants nothing but a Wife, in my Opinion.


Ned. [Aside.] Brother, I hope you conceive a Widow, when she makes such Wishes
in your Favor. -- She has Twenty thousand Pounds.


Sir John. And what then, Sir?


Ned. What then, Sir? Why then He who marries her, will be worth Twenty
Thousand Pounds -- That Is all!


Sir John. I would advise You to marry her your self.


Ned. I thank you, Sir; but I Am provided.


Sir John. So am I.


Ned. Why then I wish you Joy, Brother, if you are sure of it. -- Madam, I have
a Message to you from Sir Philip Money-Love, who intended to have delivered it
to you himself; but Company coming in, and being to meet a Lawyer at the
Rummer, where I now left him, he was obliged to leave your Ladyship without
telling you, that he came to know your Resolution about a Piece of Land that he
mentioned to you some time ago. He would gladly buy it, or exchange with you
for another; because that Ground is contiguous to some Part of his Estate,
which he is about to settle upon his Daughter.


Wid. Pray, Sir, let my Cousin know, that I gave my Lawyer Orders to treat with
him about that Matter.


Ned. Where does your Lawyer live, Madam?


Wid. At Number [2] in the King's Bench Walks in the Temple. Sir Philip knows
him.


Ned. Very well, Madam. -- Brother, where shall I see you in the Evening?


Sir John. I am engaged this Evening.


Ned. You Will make one in a Country Dance to Morrow, I hope? For that is to be
my Wedding Day --


Sir John. I hope to baulk you yet. [Aside.] -- I can promise nothing for
Futurity, Sir.


Ned. Humph! You cannot! -- what you please, Sir. -- Madam, your most humble
Servant.


Wid. How he triumphs! -- How can you bear the Airs he gives himself, Sir John?


Sir John. To do him Justice, Madam, I believe he knows nothing of my
Pretensions to Olivia. He was Traveling, when first I made my Addresses; and
since his Return, we have not been so well with one another, to communicate
Things of this Nature.


Wid. I ask your Pardon, Sir John, for keeping you standing. Will Not you please
to sit, Sir?


Sir John. Excuse me, dear Madam; I intend to take this Opportunity to see
Olivia, whilst her Jaylor's abroad, let the Consequence be what it will; and
let her know, how much we are obliged to you, Madam.


Wid. My good Wishes attend you both, Sir John.


Exit. SCENE changes to the Piazza in Covent Garden.
Enter Fainwell, Solus. Fain. HA! not here! Sure he does not suspect me; and
apprehend a Duel might ensue; All my Measures are broke, if he should. -- Ho!
here he comes.


Enter Tally. Tally. What can this Fellow have to say to me, I wonder? If he
has discovered me, he wants a Bribe. But I hope it is not so: for I should be
loath to have a Secret of this Nature lie in the Breast of such a Blunderer.
[Aside.] -- Mr. Jeffery! I protest I did not see you. -- Well, what can I serve
you in?


Fain. In naught, that I know of, Zir; but me-haps, I may zerve you in
zomewhat, Zir, -- my Lord, I would zay. I beg yowr Pardon, Zir; we dan't zee
zouch vine Voke in our Country every Day -- zo that I hope you will not be angry
an I should not hit upon your Worship's Name at every turn.


Tally. Angry! no, no, Mr. Jeffery, I hate Ceremony. -- I find he does not know
me; all is safe. [Aside.] If it were not necessary that we People of Quality
should be distinguished by the Titles and Degrees his Majesty has been pleased
to Exalt us to; I would not care if I were called plain Jack.


Fain. If you were Exalted according to your Merit, you would take your Degree at
Tyburn. [Aside.] -- Ay, ay, nothing but right, Zir, nothing but right.


Tally. But which way am I to be obliged to you, Mr. Jeffery? I shall not prove
ungrateful, I assure you. --


Fain. Nay, as for that, do you zee -- that is not the matter -- I dan't want a
Bribe. An though I be but a poor Fellow, and wears a tawdry Coat here, and am
thumpt, and beaten about as you zee, I have an honest Heart in my Belly, and
good Blood in me too, for aught I know: For you mun understand, Vather was my
Lord Firebrand's Gardener, when I was got, chou'd zeem, and they zay, Mother
was a deadly pretty Woman --


Tally. From whence you would infer, that his Lordship might be your Father --
Not unlikely; but go on --


Fain. I perceive yowr Lordship is a Suitor to my Mistress.


Tally. I confess you are a Man of Penetration. I am indeed an Admirer of hers.
--.


Fain. The more's the pity. -- I Am zorry for it.


Tally. Why so?


Fain. Because, I Am zure she will use you like a Dog: I have not lived a Month wi'
her, and to my knowledge she has made Fools of Three, or Four; main sightly
Men, I promise you.


Tally. The Devil!


Fain. [Starts.] Mercy of me! Where, Zir? Dud you zee any thing, my Lord?


Tally. No, no, I was only surpised. -- Cursedly Ignorant! Aside.


Fain. Surpised! be mess, the Devil would surprise any Man, an though he were
the Parson of the Parish.


Tally. But has she had so many Lovers, say you?


Fain. Oh, a mort, Zir, a mort: But I can tell you one thing; She likes you
woundy well.


Tally. Ay! How do thou know that, my Boy?


Fain. Why, our Mary knows all her Heart, mun, an she tells me every thing.
Odd, an you knew as much as I could tell you, yowr Business might zoon be done,
Zir; my Lord, I would zay. --


Tally. Ay! How, prithee?


Fain. But will not you be false-hearted now, and tell?


Tally. What, against my self? No, no, there is no danger of that. Besides, I
hope you don't think I would be so ungenerous to you!


Fain. Nay, as for that -- I Am but a Servant; an one Place will not do, another
woll, for that matter. Now what I am going to tell your Lordship, is none of my
Business, as one may zay; but it would make a-body mad to zee a Woman flounce
about House, like a Dog in a Ducking-Pond. -- Now, Zir, an she had a Husband,
-- He, he, he, he! why me-haps, -- he, he! -- me-haps, I zay, he might vind her
somewhat else to do, zometimes. You understand me, Zir?


Tally. Yes, yes, very well, Jeffery: If I had her once, I Would make her turn over
a new Leaf.


Fain. That I dare swear. [Aside.] Why, that was my very Thought now. -- I wish
you had her, Sir; But you will find it a knotty Piece of Work, let me tell you
but that; she deals as Scurvily with her Sweethearts, one way, as with her
Servants another; and, I Cod, I have found her Fingers come slip-slap, this
a-way, and that a-way, like a Flail upon a Wheatsheaf.


Flinging out his Arms, hits Tally a Slap of the Face. Tally. A Pox of your
Similies. -- Aside.


Fain. Od save me! Dud I hit you, Zir?


Tally. Oh, no matter, Jeffery. -- Go on --


Fain. I hope yowr Lordship's Worship will forgive me, Zir; I meant no harm,
not I, Zir -- But as I was zaying, -- Mistress will give you the Dog to hold,
an you do'no' give her somewhat.


Tally. Think thou so, Jeffery? Why what would thou have me do?


Fain. Don't you know that, without telling? There is zomewhat to be don, Zir,
beside the Parson, or you may dangle after her till Doom's Day, to no more
purpose, than to winnow Corn without a Wind. -- Her the other Husband dud n't get
her with Compliments, my Lord. --


Tally. No!


Fain. No, no. He had been in Ireland, and knew better Things, Mun.


Tally. Ha, ha, ha, ha! Are We thought to have any particular Method to gain
the Women, Jeffery? For I am of that Country, you must know. --


Fain. Are you zo, my Lord: Nay, then, an all be true they zay of yowr
Countrymen, one need not tell you which End to begin yowr Work at.


Tally. Ha! Is she to be won that way? I thank you for the Hint. -- I find thou
art a Lad of Parts; and when I am thy Master, I Will have thee taught to Shave,
and make thee my Valet de Chamber.


Fain. I shall Shave you, I believe, before I have done with you. -- With what
an Assurance the Rogue talks. [Aside.] -- I shall be main Thankful to yowr
Lordship, an you do, Zir; When wol you come to our House again?


Tally. This Evening. -- What is the best Time to find her alone?


Fain. Be mess, I known't that; but an you find her alone, I Will take care
Nobody shall disturb you, an yow'll put it home to her. --


Tally. Wo't thou! Egad, there is a Guinea for thee to drink my Health, then. --
Never fear, I warrant thee, Boy, I Will have her. Exit.


Fain. Ha, ha, ha! How Generous the Rogue is: Well, I hope by this Stratagem,
to give her a Disgust to his pretended Lordship; at least, I shall prove, if
she has any thing valuable, besides her Money.

To Talk of Virtue, is the Women's Pride;
But they give Proofs on it, who resist, when tried.

Exit. Enter Sir John, Solus. Sir John. THIS is the House! Oh! for an Art to
make my-self Invisible!


Knocks, the Porter opens the Door. Por. Who would you speak with, Sir?


Sir John. With your young Lady, Friend.


Por. I wonder you will be so troublesome, Sir. I told you before, I would not
disobey my Orders. [He offers Money.] -- I Will have none of your Money, Sir, --
I Am not to be bribed to betray my Trust, I Would have you to know that.


Sir John. Then you must be kicked out of it, Sir.


Pulls him out, gives him a Kick, enters, and shuts the Door. Por. Murder!
Thieves! Murder! -- This is a terrible Fellow. For my Part I Will never hinder
him going in again. -- And now he is in, I wish I had taken the Money. -- He
has shut the Door, and the Devil take them that open it, for Dick. Exit.


The SCENE changes to the Inside of the House.
Olivia and Sir John Meeting. Olivia. DIck! Will! John! What Noise of Murder is
that? -- Ah! Freeman! --


Half fainting; he catches her. Sir John. My Life! my Soul! Am I become so
hateful to thee, that thou can not bear my Sight?


Oliv. How ill do thou interpret my Surprise!
The unexpected Joy of seeing thee,
When no one Means supplied me with a Hope,
To tell thee, -- That to Morrow --

Sir John. Thou art to be my Sister.


Oliv. Blast the Name!


Sir John. Perish my Brother first. -- If thou art true. If thy Heart has not
consented --


Oliv. To him nor any, but thy-self.


Sir John. Then not all the Brothers upon Earth shall take thee from me. Mrs.
Headless readily complied with your Request, and I have sent Louisa thither.


Oliv. Alas! I fear that Lady's come too late.
The Time's so short, the Plot cannot succeed!

Sir John. Do thou think so? Yet will thou stay, and sacrifice Thy-self and
Me? Consent to fly with me, now, whilst Sir Philip is abroad.


Oliv. But whither shall we fly?


Sir John. Where Love directs us.


Oliv. I could, methinks, run any Risque with Thee; and thou perhaps, would
do the same with Me. Now in the Summer of our Love, little Cares would not
offend us: But when the Glowing of the Passion's over, and pinching Cold of
Winter follows, will amorous Sighs supply the Want of Fire? Or kind Looks and
Kisses keep off Hunger?


Sir John. I think they would. But Love never reasons thus, Olivia. I fear my
Brother's Gaudy Train, has raised this Picture of Despair. He, he, has my
Estate! Dare I, stripped as I am, pretend to vye with him? I, who live upon his
Bounty! -- Bounty! damn the Word? Live on a younger Brother's Bounty, and see
him wed the Woman I adore! -- That Thought will hurry me to Madness!


Oliv. You wrong my Love, and I should chide you for it, were our Condition
happier. But to show you I am a Lover-Errant, consider what Trade you can take
up for a Livelihood. For my part, I can make Purses by Day, and sing Ballads by
Night. Now, if you can grind Knives, or turn Tinker, I Am Yours. Slapping her
Hand into his.


Sir John. Fortune can never cast us down so low. She owes thy Virtues more,
methinks; This Dawn of Mirth, portends a joyful Day. Haste then my Fairest: Let
us leave this Place, that we may gain Time, at least, to work Louisa's Purpose.


Oliv. I Will only fetch a few Jewels; a sure Relief in Time of Need. [Goes to
the Door, starts, and runs back.] Undone for ever! my Father's coming up!


Sir John. Mischievous Accident! -- What shall we do? Humph: [Pauses.] I have
it. -- Run you to your Chamber, my Angel, and when you hear a Noise, come
forth, and wonder.


Exit Olivia. Sir John lies down on a Couch, and pulls his Hat over his Eyes.
Enter Sir Philip. Sir John. Thus to be circled, thus to be embraced!
Oh! that I could hold thee Ever!

Sir Phil. Ha! What Is this of embracing and holding for ever?


Sir John. The Curtain's drawn, and see! She Is here again!


Sir Philip. She Is here! -- Who Is here? What is the Meaning of this?


Sir John. Jocasta! Ha! What fallen asleep so soon?


Sir Phil. Jocasta! Who Is Jocasta? What in the Name of Vengeance, have we here?


Sir John. How fare's my Love?


Sir Phil. Nay, who the Devil knows?


Sir John. Ha! Lightning blast me! Thunder rivet me for ever to
Prometheus'-Rock, and Vultures gnaw out my incestuous Heart!


Sir Phil. With all my Soul.


Sir John. By all the Gods, it is my Mother Merope.


Sir Phil. Merope! Who, in the Devil's Name, is she? -- Ouns! Where are all my
Rascals? Now will I be hanged if here is not a Pack of Strollers got into my
House. Why, Rogues! Villains! where are you all? Who have you let in, Rascals?


Enter two or three Servants. 1 st Servant. We let in Nobody, Sir, not we.


Sir John. My Sword -- A Dagger -- Ha! who waits there?


Sir Phil. Go look!


2 d. Ser. Oh Lord! Nobody, nobody at all, Sir. Fly, Master, fly! It is a
Madman, to be sure!


1 st Ser. Come away, Sir, come away? He Will certainly kill us. Exeunt Servants.


Sir Phil. The Devil go with you all --


Sir John. [rising] Most triumphant Mischief! --
And now, whilst thus I stalk about the Room,
I challenge Fate to find another Wretch
Like Oedipus!

Sir Phil. Oedipus! Just as I thought; Strollers! neither better nor worse. But
how the Devil they got into my House, that is the Question?


Sir John. Horror! Death! Confusion! Hell! and Furies!
Where am I?

Sir Phil. Where you shall not be long, I promise you. -- Ouns, it is that beggarly
Badge of Quality, Sir John Freeman!


Sir John. Oh, my Jocasta!
Let me hold Thee thus, thus to my Bosom,
Ages let me hold thee!

Runs, and catches Sir Philip in his Arms* Sir Phil. Murder, Murder! 'S'Death!
the Rogue will squeeze my Guts out.


Enter Olivia. Oli. Bless me! what is the matter, Sir? -- Ha! Sir John!


Sir Phil. How you stare, Mistress! -- You did not know that he was here! --
No, not you -- You was not to have been an Actor in this Droll, I warrant.


Oli. Not I, indeed, Sir. I heard you cry out, and came to know the Cause.


Enter Footmen. 1 st Foot. What is the Matter, Sir?


Sir Phil. I Will tell you, Rascals, by-and-by.


Sir John. Gentlemen, you are very welcome to stay and see the Play; but I must
beg it may be on the other side the House. You Will crowd the Scenes so much,
that the Actors cannot enter.


Sir Phil. The Actors! What Actors, Sir! -- Ouns do you think I am to be
droll'd out of my Daughter? -- I thought I had forbid you my House?


Sir John. Pish, pish; you are out, Sir; confoundedly out -- Hark-ye! Did you
ever rehearse this Part, Sir?


Sir Phil. 'S'Death he will make me Mad! -- I shall make my Part good with you, I
fancy. Fetch me a Constable.


Sir John. Out again! -- A Constable! Why, there is not such a Word in the
whole Play. A Constable! why, they never heard of such a Thing in Thebes!


Oli. Alas, Sir! don't you perceive his Brain is turned?


Sir Phil. His Brain! If he had had any Brains, he had not lost his Estate.


Sir John. If I had had your Conscience, I should not.


Aside. Sir Phil. [pulling off his Hat.] Sir, will you be pleased to walk out
of my House.


Sir John. Look-ye, Sir, if you study your Part no better, I Will forfeit you, by
Jupiter. -- Hold, hold, hold! Ad's-Heart, Madam! You entered too soon -- Oh
think of something to defer this Marriage, though but for a Day. Aside to Olivia.


Sir Phil. What a Vengeance are you whispering? ha?


Sir John. Why, was that your Cue, now? If you don't mind your Cues, you can
never make an Actor, Sir. -- Here, Sir! here is a Woman for you, who never trod
the Stage before, yet I Will be bold to say, That she will surprise you. -- Come!
hold up your Head, my Dear -- Mind your Business. -- Enter boldly, and when you
Exit, Exit -- nimbly -- Thus -- Exit.


Olivia. I wish I could Exit with thee. Aside.


Sir Phil. Stark Mad! This comes of sticking to Principles! I have known
Principle starve Five hundred Fools; but never knew it feed one Wise Man yet.


Oli. It will never starve you, I Am sure. Aside.


Sir Phil. I Am glad he is gone -- Come, come, dry up your Tears, and think of
him no more. A Coach with Six before, and Six behind, with a pretty Fellow in
the Middle, will make Amends for Beggary, and Madness.

Enter Ned Freeman. Here Is Mr. Freeman! Leave your Sniveling, and mind your
Obedience, I command you.


Oli. Souls know no Command, though Bodies do.


Ned. I deny that Position! I am all yours -- All, and All, and every Part.

-- Command, and try your Power.


Oli. It shall be then, to see my Face no more. Exit.


Ned. A very extraordinary Wife, I Am like to have, truly! -- Very singular in
her Manners, Faith! --


Sir Phil. Oh, never mind what a Woman says, or does, before Marriage. She Will
be gentler after.


Ned. That Is doubtful; for I cannot perceive her to have the least Inclination
for me.


Sir Phil. Pish, pish; when you have been Married a Night or Two, you will tell
me another Story, Mr. Freeman -- Her Mother was thus before her.


Ned. I wish it may prove so, Sir Philip:

For who by Force the Courted Bliss receives*
Never tastes the Joy the Willing Fair-One gives.

ACT IV.
SCENE Watchit's House.
Watchit, Solus. Wat. WAS ever Man so Cheated, Choused, and Cuckolded, as I am?
By a Priest too, a Pox of his Sanctity! Well, this was an admirable
Contrivance. Little did she think, who was her Ghostly Father. Ah! the
Wickedness of this Age! Ah! Tim! Tim-Watchit! all thy Care is vain. Zounds! why
did I grope for what I feared to find? I was but a Cuckold in Conceit before;
now every Fool will hang his Hat upon my Horns! Oh! that I had her in Spain!
I Would Spitch-cock her, like an Eel. -- But just Revenge is counted Murder, in our
Country; and a Man must be Hanged for doing himself Justice. -- This Priest
must be a Conjurer! he must have some Charm to make me sleep sound; or, he
could never have come to Bed, and I not hear him. Nay, she says every Door in
the House flies open as soon as he approaches. -- These are fine Holy Guides,
truly; No wonder there is so many Female Proselytes, when the Priests take so
much Pains to Convert 'em. -- Which way shall I be Revenged of this
Cuckold-making Dog? [Pauses] -- No, that will not do. -- Ay, it must be so. --
Goes to the Scene, and calls. Pud, Why Pud, where are you, Pudsey?


Enter Mrs. Watchit. Mrs. VV. Did you call, Snub?


VVat. Snub! Why how many Names must I have, ha? Snub! Pray who taught you that
Name, Wife?


Mrs. VV. Taught me! Why, do you think I don't know how to put four Letters
together?


VVat. Ay, the Priest has taught her the Art of Coupling; Pox take him for it.
Aside.


Mrs. VV. But what did you call me for?


VVat. To tell you that some Affairs oblige me to go out of Town to Night; and
that you must not take it ill, if I lock you into the House, that Nobody may
come in or out, till I come back.


Mrs. VV. Ay, into my Chamber if you please; I begin to Relish my Confinement
tolerably well -- But may it not be dangerous to Travel so late?


VVat. For her Ghostly Father, it may, if I catch him. [Aside.] No, no, not at
all. Go, get you to your Chamber, Pud, I Will follow you; perhaps I may take a
Nap before I go. --


Mrs. VV. I wish it might be your Last. -- Lucy shall give Mr. Freeman Notice
of this lucky Opportunity, [Aside.] Well, as you please, Snub: I Am all
Obedience. Exit.


VVat. If you were, Snub, I should be too Happy. Ah! She is a delicious Bit! a
tempting Morsel. Ah! these Priests! these pampered Priests! What would become
of good old English Property, had they once Footing here again? God's Death, what
had I to do with Beauty? What Business had I for a Wife, a handsome Wife? Of
all Men living, I Am the most unqualify'd for a Husband! Husbands should be
kind, sociable, courteous, gentle, loving, blind Animals; if they are so
bewitched to pitch on Beauty.

For he who Marries with a handsome Wife,
Engrosses all the Plagues of human Life.

Exit. SCENE changes to Mrs. Headless's House.
Enter Mrs. Headless on one side, and Fainwell on the other. Fain. DUD you call,
forsooth, -- Madam?


Wid. Fie, fie, Jeffery, will you ever be this stupid Wretch, notwithstanding
all the Pains I take with you? Is not Madam, as soon, and as easily pronounced
as Forsooth?


Fain. Ay, every whit, do you zee, an I could but hit on it; but my Memory is
short, an you hare a-body zo, that you fright it out of one's Head again --
Madam.


Wid. Hare you, Quotha! I Am sure you Craze me. You behave your self so
awkardly before Strangers, they will believe, perhaps, that I don't understand
better. When I Am alone, I don't care: Nay, sometimes your Blunders conduce to
my Pleasure.


Fain. I could find a way more conducive to her Pleasure, if she would give me
leave. [Aside.]


Enter Judith, and Sam. Jud. There Is Mistress; An you mun gi't her yowr zelf;
gi't her, an you wol.


Exit. Sam. My Master, Madam, gives his humble Service to you; and begs the
Favor of an Answer.


Gives her a Letter. Wid. I admire your Master will give himself and me this
Trouble, when I have so often assured him it is to no purpose.


Opens the Letter, and looks over it. Sam. Sure, I have seen your Face before,
Brother.


Fain. Ma hap, you may, Friend, and ma-hap, you may not.


Sam. Are'n't you Gloucestershire?


Fain. Yes, I am. -- I will not deny my Country. --


Sam. Is not your Name Crumplin?


Fain. Ay, marry, is it; be mess, I should know you too!


Sam. Honest Jeffery Crumplin! I Am glad to see thee. Kisses him.


Fain. P'shaw! I dan't like this zame slabbering Vashon. -- But, pray, what may
one call you? I know yow'r Face. -- Ah. --


Sam. My Face! Why I cannot be so altered in Six or Seven Years, sure! my Name
is Sly!


Fain. Odd sa' me! Sam Sly! gi' me thy Hond, [Shakes him by the Hand.] Well, an
how! an how have you done, Sam, ever sen we used to break one another's Head at
Cudgels, ha? they told me you was gone over Seas. --


Sam* I have not been in England above Six Weeks.


Fain. Say you zo! Good lack! Well, an have you bin in Gloucestershire?


Sam. Yes, I came from thence but the other Day; I lived with Mr. Worthy.


Fain. What, Master Worthy of VVorthy-Hall?


Sam. The same.


Fain. Odd, you had rare luck, hark-ye, to light on zo brave a Place. Well, an
dud you zee our Volk? how do Vather, and Mother, and Sisters? Ha?


Sam. All well, and brisk, Jeffery.


Fain. Odd, Master Worthy is a main honest Man.


Sam. As lives by Bread, and as well beloved.


Wid. Ha! these two Fellows are acquainted, I find. Aside.


Sam. They would have my Master set up for Parliament Man.


Fain. I wish he were qualified for it. [Aside.] An he does, I Am zure he will
carry't: An Mr. Worthy comes to Rule the Roast, we shall zee better Times, I Am
persuaded. -- Well! besure I Am huge glad to zee you, Sam. -- Where may a body
zee you, some Day to drink a Pot to all our Friends in Gloucestershire? ha? I
have zome there, I believe; ha?


Sam. I Will call on you some Evening, and show you where I live.


Wid. Mr. Worthy writes me word, that he is going to Jamaica. It is only a
Pretense, I suppose. I Will hear what his Servant says [Aside.] Is your Master
going to Travel, young Man?


Sam. Not for his Pleasure, Madam --


Wid. I did not speak of Pleasure; I asked you, if he is going Abroad?


Sam. It is in your Power to stop him, I believe, if he is, Madam?


Wid. Still foreign to my Question! Cannot you answer directly, Friend?


Sam. That depends so entirely upon your Ladyship, that it is impossible to
answer you directly. -- I know he has an Uncle dead in Jamaica, that has left
him Forty Thousand Pounds; but I also know* he is so much in Love with your
Ladyship, that he does not care Forty Shillings for it.


Wid. The Fellow's Mad! Not care for Forty Thousand Pounds? Why, the fourth
Part on it would purchase a Barony!


Fain. If I had the Sixth Part of it, I Am sure thou shoud'st never purchase me.
[Aside.] What! is that zame Uncle dead, that came over once with a huge sight
of Blackamoors at's Tail?


Sam. Ay, ay, Jeffery! he is Dead.


Fain. Is he zo? He was mainly Rich, chu'd seem?


Wid. You are mainly Impertinent, chu'd seem. -- Pray, ask your Countryman
here, if he puts in his Verdict, when his Master's talking? -- Pray tell, Mr.
Worthy, that I shall be at Home all this Evening; and he may, if he pleases,
give me an Opportunity of wishing him a good Voyage. --


Fain. To the Island of Matrimony? or I shall make but a broken Voyage of it.
Aside.


Sam. I shall inform him, Madam.


Exit. Wid. How came you to know this Gentleman, Jeffery?


Fain. Who! Master Worthy! Why every Body knows him in Gloucestershire; Vather
has worked for him, and the old 'Squire, these Twenty Years chu'd seem. He Is a
fine Man, and has no more Pride in him, than I have. He keeps a topping House
-- He has humming March Beer! and deadly strong Cider! There Is rare Doings at
Cursmas.


Wid. What Doings?


Fain. Why, he keeps open House for all Comers.


Wid. He ought to be very Rich; whose Economy is so Profuse.


Fain. Rich, Quotha! Nouns, he knows no End of his Means; he has a mort of
Land! I have seen a Hundred; Nay, be mess, I known't an there warn't two
Hundred, at Dinner in the great Hall, one Plough-Monday; All his own Tenants;
an Master was so familiar and so merry wi' 'em, and made 'em zo Drunk! Lord,
what Work was there! --


Wid. It was a beastly Pleasure; and no Sign of his Frugality, whatever it may
be, of his Goodnature.


Fain. Ah! he is the sweetest natured Man in the World. Nobody ever saw him out
of Humor, that ever I could hear on: His Vather, indeed, would bawl, and make
a noise, chu'd seem; but as for thick same Gentleman, he is quite another Thing;
he is so good to the Poor, and so loving to all his Neighbors; that there is
not a Man Twenty Miles round him, but would run through Fire and Water for him.
-- He is counted a main wise Man too; he makes no more of a Lawyer, or a
Justice of the Peace, than, than, than, you do of me, Madam. -- Nay, it is
thought by zome Volk, that he is so deep Learned, than an he would, he could
puzzle, even the Parson of the Parish.


Wid. That may be; and he no Conjurer, neither. He shall know what a Favorite
he is of yours. --


Fain. That he knows already. Aside.


Wid. You seem to know him perfectly well.


Fain. I wish you knew him as well, -- Madam!


Wid. It is pity he is not a Man of Quality; These Qualifications, though I
confess they are very bright ones, signify nothing without a Title, Jeffery!


Fain. I Am sure thy Vanity will never entitle Thee to the Heart of any Man of
Sense. Aside.


Wid. Go, get me some Tea.


Fain. Did I not hope to Command in my Turn; I should not Obey so readily. Exit.


Enter Judith. Jud. There Is a Lady below, that want's you, she says, -- Madam.


Wid. Bring her up. -- This must be the Lady Sir John, mentioned.


Enter Louisa, with a Letter. Lou. It Is from Olivia, Madam.


Gives her the Letter, she opens it, and reads. Wid. You are Welcome, Madam. --
I Will wait on you to that Appartment my Cousin mentions. It is impossible Mr.
Freeman should know it to be any part of my House, when he is brought in by the
Backdoor; Your own Servants must attend; I Will give Orders that none of mine
are seen on that side of the House.


Lou. I am extremely obliged to you, Madam. I have sent a Servant with a Letter
to Mr. Freeman, and expect his return every Moment. -- I Will wait on you, Madam.


Wid. Be pleased to walk this way. Exeunt.


The SCENE draws, and Louisa comes forward, meeting Flora.
Lou. IS Frederick come back, Flora?


Flora. Yaw, ye Vrow, an he heb dat Lettre gi brought.


Gives her a Letter. Exit Flora. Lou. What Pleasure once these Letters gave me!
And with what Eagerness I broke the Seals!
Then kissed and dwelt upon each poisoned, pleasing Vow!
And thought the Perjury all Faithful Love.
-- But now! --
I fear to read; so much his Style is altered! --
Opens the Letter, and reads. MADAM,
I AM not more surpised to hear you are in England, than that you so earnestly
desire to see me before I am married. But since you promise it shall be the
last Trouble you will give me of this kind, I design to oblige and wait on you
immediately, to know your important Business. If it be to upbraid me with past
Conduct, you must expect but a short Visit, from

Your Humble Servant, FREEMAN.



Lou. Perfidious Man! well may thou fear to stay,
To hear those Solemn Vows repeated
Which thou did make so falsely.

Enter Flora. Flora. Here bin Minheer Freeman, ye Vrow.


Lou. Show him up. [Exit Flora.]
Oh! my Heart! -- Lie still, thou Flutterer!
And aid me all the Cunning Courage of my Sex!

Enter Freeman. Salutes her. Lou. That cold Salute, is nothing like my Freeman.
You was not wont to kiss me thus!


Ned. Faith, Madam, I keep no Journal of my Pleasures; so cannot recollect how I
used to behave my-self.


Walks about. Lou. With what Indifference he regards me! Hold in, Resentment.
Aside.


Ned. Pray, Madam, what brought you to England?


Lou. Do you ask, why I follow where you lead me? Where should I be, but where
my Husband is?


Ned. Hold, hold, -- You Will spoil my Marriage -- Husband! ha, ha, ha! Don't you
rave, Child!


Lou. Have you forgot the Promises you made me?


Ned. No, nor what you gave me in Return, neither, my Dear.


Lou. Did you not love me, Freeman?


Ned. Did I not give thee Proofs of it? How does my Boy do? Ha? I think you
must lend him me for a Pattern. You have heard I am going to be Married, I find.


Lou. Yes -- I Have heard such News, but cannot think it true. Weeps.


Ned. I cannot help that. Nay, nay, nay, if you are at that sport, good-bye
to ye. -- Going, she stops him.


Lou. You shall not go.


Ned. Indeed but I shall, Madam. -- Pish! prithee show me none of your
Tragedy-Airs. Let go my Coat. You know, I hate to see Women cry. -- To what
purpose are these Tears? -- I thought I gave you a Caution of it in my Letter.


Struggles to get from her. Lou. O do not struggle to be gone; but hear me; My
Tears will fall; but I Will strive to suppress 'em.


Ned. Do so; For if you have any thing to say to me, you must deliver it in a
more entertaining manner, or I Am your humble Servant. Again! Humph! -- I
imagined how 'twou'd be. -- 'S'Death! what a Fool was I to come? I hate
Upbraidings of this Nature.


Lou. I sent not for you to upbraid you.
I see too well I Have lost your Heart.
May she be Happy who enjoys it now.
Yet sure your Pity's not extinguished too.
Not for my sake, but for your Child's, I hope it;
Who, if you relieve him not, must perish. --
My Father, some Three Weeks ago, expired,
And left me but a Shilling to support me.
Nor have we upon Earth a Friend, if you're not one.

Ned. Well! and could not you have told me this, without Whimpering! -- Pox of
the old Dog! A Shilling! -- What a Duce shall I do with this Heifer and her
Calf now! She comes very unlucky too at this Time. If Olivia should hear of
her, my Business will be done there. [Aside] -- Send out your Maid, Louisa.


Lou. Leave the Room; But when I call, do as I directed. Aside.


Exit Flora. Ned. [Sitting down.] What do you pay for these Lodgings?


Lou. Nothing. The People are related to a Friend of mine in Holland; from whom
I brought a Letter. I believe they let no Lodgings. I would not willingly
trespass long upon them.


Ned. Well, my Servant shall take Lodgings for you. -- Dry up your Tears, and
come and kiss me. [Pulls her on his Knee, and kisses her.] You foolish Girl
you, to blubber and spoil your Face at this Rate, when you have nothing else to
trust to! [He wipes her Eyes.] -- So, there! kiss me again, you Chit, you. --
I Will take Care of you. I have a Man in my Eye; a Lord too; that is very fond of
your Country-Women.


Lou. What means my Dearest. Rises.


Ned. To get thee a good Settlement. A Lord's Mistress lives as great as his
Wife, and is as much respected in our Country. -- And thou shall be Initiated,
according to Custom.


Lou. Monstrous, filthy Custom!
Indeed, my Freeman, I Will be only Thine:
For after thee, I never can love another.

Ned. Pish, pish; Yes, yes, a hundred, I warrant thee --


Lou. Unkind, and Cruel! -- Can I love --


Ned. Well, well, as to Love, that is not essential to a Mistress: Provided the
Gallant has your Person, you may dispose as you think fit of your Inclination.


Lou. Sometimes to see my Freeman, 's all I wish.


Ned. Well, well, you shall see me; but we must manage that Point with
Prudence: There must be a Decorum observed at home. For if it should reach my
Wife's Ear, it would prevent my seeing you at all -- Ah, Louisa! I wish the
Lady I Am to marry, loved me as well as thou do.


Lou. I hope she does.


Ned. No, faith, she says she hates me; so that, for ought I know, you are in a
fair Way to be revenged of me.


Lou. I wish it not, nor would I seek Revenge on thee, more than on my own
Heart -- Flora! [Goes to the Scene, and calls] -- You must drink something with
me --


Enter Flora, with Two Glasses of Wine on a Salver. Lou. Come, Here Is to your
Future Happiness!


Ned. I Will pledge that Generous Toast, and kiss thee for it -- Why this is as it
should be now. [Kisses her.] If Women understood their own Interest, they would
find us less prepared to resist the Force of their Good Humor, than all the
Artillery of Tears, and Ranting! -- Egad! methinks thou art as handsome now, as
when I first enjoyed thee: Lips, as soft, and panting Breasts as hard as ever!
-- Oh, you are a tempting Baggage! [Embracing her.] -- What if we should try to
get a Girl to our Boy, Louisa?


Lou. What! sin anew, ever we have repented of the past?


Ned. Sin! you silly Jade! Come, come, we'll repent once for all, my Dear.
Pulling her.


Lou. It must be quickly then -- Or Life will be too short to do it!


Ned. What say thou?


Lou. Forgive me, Freeman! Thou art poisoned.


Falls on her Knees. Ned. Ha! -- Dye thou, then, from whose Hand I took it!
Draws, and runs at Flora.


Flora. [Shrieking] Ah! ick heb nit dat ga don, Minheer --


Louisa rises, and runs between the Maid and him. Lou. O spare the Maid, who
acted by my Order,
And turn your Point on me, the sole Agressor.
I had no other Way to keep thee mine.

Ned. Am I then caught! poisoned! -- What! Dye the Death of Rats! -- Confusion!
Murdered by my Whore!


Lou. No, I Am thy Wife, thou vile Detractor!
Thou would have made me that detested Thing! --
Shame on thy Project to expose thy Wife!

Ned. Wife! Name that no more, I charge thee,
Lest I forget thy Sex, and spurn thee from me!

Lou. Not name it! Yes, I will, whilst Living, name it.
Call to Mind, who witnessed to your Vows;
By whom your swore when first our Faiths were plighted.
It was by you All-seeing Power Above,
At whose Tribunal we shall soon appear.
Death summons now our trembling Souls to Trial;
Stripped of Excuses, Custom, and Evasion;
This guilty Deed of mine will fall on Thee.
There, there, our Marriage Contract is recorded;
There is a Judge from whom you cannot Appeal:
Your Jury cannot be Bribed to save you:
Your casting Witness is your broken Vows!

Ned. Methinks, her Words pierce, like a Dagger, through me,
And more than ever now I wish to Live. --
Repair thy Fault, and call Physicians hither.

To Flora. Lou. Call the kind Physician of the Soul,
Thy Body can receive no help from Art.
The Poison is too strong, t'admit of Antidotes.

Ned. Then Heaven have Mercy on my Soul. Kneels.
O my Louisa! can thou forgive me! Rises.
O could Revenge, the blackest Fiend in Hell,
Shroud itself beneath that Angel's Form?

Lou. Called not Revenge, but Love. -- Be Witness, Heaven,
I drank the healing Draught, with greater, stronger
Gust of Pleasure, than others take rich Cordials,
To lengthen fleeting Life, which I despise.
Since in fair Fame I could not live thy Wife,
My only Wish was, We might dye together.
Oh! my Heart!

Ned. The Poison works! I feel it too in mine!
Oh! might I live to make thee Satisfaction --

Lou. And would thou do it? would thou marry me?

Ned. As willingly as I did ever promise thee.


Lou. My Soul revives at thy returning Virtue,
Only to bear the Rack of deep Despair. --
Now, now, I do repent the desperate Deed,
And wish my Freeman's Life a longer Date.
I should have trod the Paths of Death alone!
But 'twill not be! -- A few short Minutes hence
We both shall be no more!

Ned. Oh! Shock of Nature! Bitterness of Thought!
Oh! whither am I going? --
Haste! Let the Holy Man be called!
And it is most fit a Lawyer too be sent for.
Something I must adjust before I go. --
And then, oh! World, farewell! --

Lou. Haste, Flora, and obey. Exit Flora.


Ned. I feel a strange Disorder in my Brain!
My Heart beats fast too, and my Spirits flutter!
My boiling Blood runs swiftly through my Veins,
In haste to Man the Last Retreat of Life!
Oh! Louisa! would I had Married thee --

Lou. Do it now. 'Twill wipe off many Sins from thee,
When we appear in the other World together --
The virtuous Act may plead my Pardon too.
If thou can but forgive the Rashness of my Love.
Again, upon my Knees I ask it.

Ned. As willingly, as I would be forgiven!
A sudden Faintness seizes me all over:
I will be thine, if Life will last so long.

Lou. Blessed Sound! -- Come, lean on me.
I Will lead thee to my Bed,
Where we will rest, and wait the Holy Man.
Our Bridal Bed! from whence we both shall rise,
Disrobed of Scandal, to substantial Joys!

Exeunt. SCENE changes to Watchit's House.
Mrs. Watchit in a Night-Dress on a Couch. Mrs. W. I Wonder what carries my
Husband out of Town, so late? But no Matter, it gives me an Opportunity to see
Freeman, who I know will be here as soon as Lucy has given the Signal -- Ha!
sure I heard the Door go.


Enter Watchit. Wat. I have unluckily forgot my Powder-horn; and how I shall
find it in the Dark, I cannot tell. -- I don't care to disturb the Family for a
Candle.


Mrs. W. He is here already! -- Oh, the dear impatient Man! -- Bless me, Lucy,
why did you let him come so soon? I don't think your Master is got out of the
Street yet.


Wat. How Is this? Aside.


Mrs. W. And if he should take it in his Head to come back, I should be
terribly frighted.


Wat. 'Ounds! I Am Thunderstruck! this Dog of a Friar is here already! and of
Lucy's bringing! Oh! the Jade! Ad's-heart! I might have waited without Doors
'till Dooms day.


Mrs. W. Distraction! What have I said? -- It is my Husband's Voice! What will
become of me now!


Wat. Here needs no Conjuration. My Turtle seems willing enough to coo with
him; and is only afraid I should return to spoil Sport. O the Strumpet! But let
me hear what this Rogue answers. Which way will she get off now, I wonder?
Aside.


Mrs. W. I have no Pretense to get off, but by going on. [Aside.] Well, Lucy
tells me you are the most dextrous Fellow at this Business --


Wat. Business! What are they come to Business, already?


Mrs. W. I know not why; but methinks, I Am half afraid to venture on a Stranger.


Wat. A Stranger! What, then this is a new Rogue? -- Ounds! I shall be
Cuckolded by Church and State!


Mrs. W. How now! What do you mean? You will not offer to come to Bed to me, sure?


Wat. You Will take it very ill if he don't. -- Ounds, I have not Patience to hear
it out.


Mrs. W. O Gemini! What do you do? -- How dare you be so rude?


VVat. There Is a Question to ask a Man that she has brought into her
Bedchamber!


Mrs. W. If my Husband should come!


VVat. As he really is. --


Mrs. W. If he should catch you! --


Wat. As he most surely will -- Thou Sorceress!


Mrs. W. Nay, nay; Indeed, and indeed, but I will not.


Wat. Indeed, and indeed, but you will. -- This is a thorough-pac'd
Cuckold-making Dog! -- How softly the Villain whispers! -- I cannot hear one
Word he says.


Mrs. Wat. What gave you the Assurance to imagine I Would Cuckold my Husband, who
is the best of Husbands?


Wat. That Is a Lie.


Mrs. W. Let me go, will you? I protest I Will cry out.


Wat. That Is another Lie.


Mrs. W. Nay; Lord! -- Pish; don't, -- Fie! -- What do you do?


Speaks as if she was struggling with somebody. Wat. 'S'Death! I shall stand
and hear my-self Cuckolded! -- A Light! a Light, there! Thieves, Thieves! A
Light a Light! --


She rises hastily. He pulls out a Pistol. Mrs. Wat. Ah, Heavens! what Noise is
that? Why Lucy, Lucy! Thieves, Thieves! A Light! a Light! [She gropes about,
and lays hold on his Pistol.] Thieves! -- Ah, a Pistol! Murder! Murder! Oh save
my Life, and I Will lead you to all the Money, Plate, and Jewels in the House.
Oh, oh, oh!


Enter Lucy with a Light. Mrs. W. Mumps! Oh, save me, save me!


Flies about his Neck. Wat. Off, thou foul Adultress! Don't think to smuggle
me, 'till your lewd Paramour escapes.


Snatches the Candle, and looks about. Lucy. Bless me, Madam! Master looks as
if he would eat a-Body! What was all this Outcry for?


Mrs. W. I Will tell you anon. Aside to Lucy.


Wat. Where have you hid this Rogue of your providing, Hussy? Ha?


Lucy. Of my providing? What do you mean, Sir?


Mrs. Wat. Nay, nay, don't stand prating; but call up the Servants to assist
your Master. -- Don't, dear Mumps, don't be too venturesome. The Thieves have
Pistols, and may kill thee.


Wat. May they so! A Pox of your Sneer. -- Now does she look as if she knew not
one Word of the Matter.


Mrs. W. I hope to prevent your knowing one Word of the Matter, that is my
Comfort. Aside.


Lucy. Why what should she know, Sir?


VVat. Go look, Mrs. Pander.


Mrs. W. I Am sure, I know nothing, but that I was waked with the Cry of
Thieves, Thieves! If it was a false Alarm, so much the better: It did me
Service, however, for it waked me out of a Dream, that frighted me as bad as
the Noise did.


Wat. A Dream! Why, what was you dreaming on, pray?


Mrs. W. Why, methought Lucy had brought me a Corn-cutter, a great, fat,
clumsey, black Fellow; but the most dextrous Fellow in the World, she told me,
at that Business.


Wat. [Aside.] Ha! I remember dextrous was one of the Words she spoke. Perhaps
it might be nothing but a Dream.


Mrs. W. And the impudent ugly Villain, methought, would have come to Bed to
me. I was struggling with him in my Sleep, and vowed I Would cry out, just as the
Noise waked me.


Wat. Say thou so, Pud! And was all this splutter about a Corn-cutter? --
Why then, to tell thee the Truth, thou did cry out, and I thinking Thieves
were got into my House, cried out too; for I never dreamed of thy talking in
thy Sleep, Child. -- I don't remember ever to have heard thee before.


Lucy. So have I, a hundred times; but you snore so loud, that no-body's Noise
can be heard but your own. -- This Corn-cutter has put the Corn-maker out of
his Head. I smell the Plot already. Aside.


Mrs. W. [Aside.] It takes, as I could wish -- But where was Freeman, Lucy?


Lucy. Gone out, Madam. Aside.


Mrs. W. [Aside.] 'Twas lucky that he was. -- Ah, Mumps! I know what you
thought.


Lucy. Ay, Madam, he thought you had got a Gallant through the Keyhole. Had I
a Husband of Master's Temper, I Would fit him, I warrant him. He should not be
jealous of me for nothing.


VVat. That I dare swear.


Lucy. As you are of my Lady. She has a comfortable Life, has she not? To have
you vex and teize, and break her Rest for nothing.


VVat. Take care I don't break your Head for something.


Lucy. I care not if you do. I will speak. You could not use my Lady worse, if
she had Cuckolded you. -- You are like some litigious Farmers, who Pound their
Neighbors Cattle for a Trespass, though they have more Ground, than they can
stock themselves.


VVat. Hussy! You have Stock for the whole Parish! -- Get out of my Sight, or
I Will break your Neck down Stairs.


Mrs. VV. Excellent Wench! [Aside.] Fie, Lucy, how you talk to your Master? I
assure you, I shall discharge you my Service, if you don't behave your self
better.


Lucy. I shall get another, I hope, if you do? Don't think I Will be suspected of
procuring Gallants for you! Did he not ask, where the Rogue was of my
Procuring? -- I Will bring my Action against you, for Scandal. I have nothing but
my Reputation to live by. Take That from me, and you take all. If he is your
Husband, Madam, he is not mine. Bursts into Tears.


Wat. No, thank Heaven, I have enough of one of you.


Mrs. VV. Leave the Room, I say.


Lucy. It Is for, for, your Sake -- or, or -- I Would tear his Eyes out! [Sobs.]
Take away my Reputation! Exit.


VVat. Oh! the wondrous Reputation of a Chambermaid! -- This Slut has strangely
provoked me. I wish I were rid of her. Aside.


Mrs. VV. [Aside.] I wish I knew what brought him back; and if he intends to go
again.


Wat. [Aside.] Ah! that the Husband of that Charming Woman should be Cornuted
by a Priest! --


Mrs. W. [Aside.] What would I give to be rid of his Company? Yet I dare not
ask him, how he designs to dispose of himself, for my Soul.


VVat. What art thou thinking of, Pudsey?


Mrs. W. Of your Unkindness, Mumps! To pretend Business out of Town, and leave
me starving in Bed by myself. I Am sure if you loved me, you would not let
Business take you from my Arms. Indeed, indeed, you would not, Mumpsy.


In a wheedling Tone. VVat. Ah! those pretty Pouters! I must kiss them, thou
coaxing Pug, thou! [Kisses her.] Do thou really love thine own Mumpy?


Mrs. VV. Naughty Mumps! is that a Question now! Have NOT I given you all the
Signs of it? Don't I lie close to your Back? and warm your Feet every Night in
my Lap? And creep gently out of Bed in the Morning, without waking you? Don't
I? Can you deny this, Mumps?


VVat No, nor I will not deny it, Pudsey. And I hope you will allow me some Merit in
my Turn, Pudsey.


Mrs. VV. Nay, Mumps, I scorn to derogate from your Merit. I must confess, you
never do any thing to break my Rest, but when you are so naughty to leave me.
-- For then I do so tumble, and toss -- and dream -- and am so terribly
frighted -- as I was but now, you know. -- Well, I protest, you shall not go out
again to Night! -- If you do, I will not love you again these Three Days; so I
will not.


Pats him on the Cheek. VVat. Thou handsome Creature! Oh! 'twas that bewitching
Leer, that snapt my Heart -- What has she in her Head now? -- I never knew her
in this wheedling Humor, but she had some Design [Aside.] -- Well, Pudsey,
What is that begging Face put on for?


Mrs. W. That Is a Secret, past your finding out. Aside.


Wat. What can I do to please my Pudsey?


Mrs. W. Even very little truly. [Aside] -- I could tell you, Mumpy; but may
be, you will not do it.


VVat. But may be I will do it. In a fond Tone.


Mrs. VV. Will Not you go out no more to Night, then? But say your Prayers, and go
to Bed, and snore like any little Pig in your Punny's Bosey?


VVat. [Aside.] Humph! Now is she afraid of her Ghostly Father. She certainly
smokes my Design. -- On my Conscience, she is in Love with him. -- I warrant,
he is a strapping young Dog. -- Ounds! if I can but light of him?


Mrs. VV. What is he pondering on? Pray Heaven he does not take me at my Word,
and stay at Home in Complaisance. [Aside.] -- What will not you answer me, Mumps?


VVat. Why, Pudsey, thy Kindness so confounds me, that I know not what to
answer thee. -- I am loath to displease thee, and yet I must leave thee
instantly.


Mrs. VV. [Aside.] Little does he think, that it is the only thing he can do to
please me. I hope Freeman is come home by this Time.


VVat. I only came back for my Powder-horn; that is all, Pud; but I Will make all
possible haste back: I will indeed, Pudsey, to make thee easy.


Mrs. VV. Or otherwise. [Aside.] Well! if it must be so! [Sighing.] I must be
content, and make my self as happy as I can without you, Mumps.


In a melancholy Tone. VVat. Ay, ay, I will not be long from thee. Go, prithee,
get me a Dram, I Will but take my Powder-horn, and follow thee -- Exit Mrs.
Watchit.


VVatchit Solus. I know not what to think. Sometimes I think she loves me --
and sometimes I think she does not. And if Father Domini comes within the Reach
of my Blunderbuss, have at him! If not, she shall produce him: I Will confront
her with her own Confession. If once I get him in my Power, I Will turn his own
Inquisition upon him. His Church never tortured Heretic, as I will him.

I Will teach him to keep Handmaids of his own,
And let his honest Neighbor; Wives alone.

Exit. ACT V.
SCENE Mrs. Headless's House.
Mrs. Headless, Sola. Wid. I AM strangely divided between Inclination and
Grandeur. I confess, I like Mr. Worthy's Person better than my Lord's; but
marry him, and I shall be called plain Mrs. Worthy: Then, where is the
Distinction between me and my Butcher's Wife: And who in their Senses would
part with Twenty thousand Pounds, to be nothing but what one was before? My
Lord can make me a Woman of Quality, and entitle me to treat all below me with
Contempt. That carries a valuable Consideration. -- Methinks, there is an Air
in the very Footman of a Woman of Quality. He approaches with such profound
Submission! And in a Tone so Soft, -- Did your Ladyship call, Madam? Whereas,
now, my blundering Rascals come trotting up to my Nose, with a Dud you want me,
Forsooth? -- Ha! Lord Pharoah-Bank.


Enter Tally. Tally. I hope you will pardon this abrupt Intrusion, Madam. It is
entirely chargeable on the Impatience of my Love. Command my Absence, I beseech
you, if I break in upon your more diverting Thoughts.


Wid. I had no Amusements, my Lord, but what ought to give way to better
Company.


Tally. You do me a particular Honor in that Distinction.


Wid. If I had not some Skill in the Choice of my Acquaintance, I should be
stifled with Impertinence. The first Lesson I teach my Servants, is, To
distinguish between Persons of Rank, and the Dross of Human-kind. I am pleased
to find my Instructions are not lost upon 'em, by admitting one of your
Lordship's Figure upon such easy Terms.


Tally. Such an Approbation from a Lady of your good Taste, cannot fail of
inspiring me with a better Opinion of my-self, and a Confidence of my not being
unwelcome to my Dear Widow. [Kisses her.] She kisses softer than a Southern
Wind!


Wid. Pugh! I hate to be Complimented with Fragments of another's Wit, my Lord.
It argues a Decay of Charms in the Person you address.


Fainwell peeping. Tally. I own it is a Fault, Madam. Your Ladyship has Beauty
enough to inspire the dullest Genius with something New.


Fain. [Aside.] You mean, she has Money enough to inspire you with Impudence.


Tally. Apollo and the Muses dwell upon these Lips. Another Kiss, and I shall
be --


Wid. A Poet?


Tally. Whatever you would have me. Kisses her.


Wid. Say you so, my Lord? I have an odd Whim come into my Head. -- Will you
give me a Proof of my Power, my Lord? I want an Elegy.


Tally. On a departed Monkey, or a Favorite Kitten, I presume.


Wid. No, upon a Living Subject.


Fain. [Aside.] A pretty new Invention, to bury People before they are dead.


Tally. A Living Subject! An Elegy upon a Living Subject?


Wid. You are not inspired yet, I find, my Lord. I mean, a Characteristick of
human Life; Dead, and yet Existing.


Fain. [Aside.] Mystery!


Tally. Popery! Downright Popery! May the Genius of England defend us. -- Let
me see! What dead Folks have we among the Living? -- There Is a Disbanded
Officer. -- An old Beau. -- A broken Tradesman. -- A Degraded Parson. -- A
Quondam South Sea Director. -- An Eunuch. -- An, an, an Old Maid.


Wid. You have hit it, my Lord.


Tally. Then Crown my Success with another Draught of Nectar. Kisses her.


Fain. [Aside.] How warmly the Rogue Kisses! He makes Love with as much
Assurance, as if he had Two Bottles of Burgundy in his Belly, and a real Title
to support his Impudence.


Wid. I protest, one should take your Lordship for a Soldier; for you attack a
Woman, as they do a Fortified Town.


Tally. Love, and War agree in every Point, my dear Widow; The Blockade of a
Town resembles an obstinate Woman, and a Phlegmatic Lover, who resolves to
weary her into Compliance. A Kiss now and then from a diffident Lover, is like
stealing a March, and surprising the Enemy, by a circumspect General. But eager
and repeated Kisses, are, like Storming, more glorious to the Assailant.


Embracing and Kissing her in a Rapture. Fain. [Aside.] These Rogues happen
into good Company sometimes, one may know by their Gleanings of Wit.


Wid. Oh gad, my Lord, what do you mean, by Ruffling one at this Rate?


Tally. Judge my Meaning, by the Quickness of my Pulse, the Throbbing of my
Heart, and Trembling of my Limbs! The unquestionable Proofs of Love, and Eager
Wishes for Possession. -- Come, come! Thou art no Stranger to a Lover's
Meaning! -- My Life, my Soul! Let us improve this Dawn of Pleasure.


Embracing her. Wid. As how, my Lord?


Fain. [Aside.] Sure she would not have him tell her in plain Terms.


Tally. P'shaw! for a Woman of thy Experience, to ask that Question! -- Come,
come, the Sight of the Bedchamber, will refresh thy Memory.


Pulling her. Wid. -- Pish! -- Nay, fie -- Be Civil, my Lord.


Seems to struggle. Fain. [Aside.] Humph! -- If it be come to Pish, and Fie
already, another Volly of Kisses, and she surrenders at Discretion.


Tally. Nay, Struggling is your Sex's Privilege. You wisely know Resistance but
inflames Desire.


Wid. I protest, I Will cry out, my Lord.


Tally. With all my Heart. Your Servants know their Duty better than to come,
if you do. -- Honest Jeffery has taken Care of that. Aside.


Fain. How secure the Rogue thinks himself! Aside.


Tally. I will positively enjoy thee this Night -- Honorably, if you please.


Wid. Or not at all, my Lord, if you were the First Man of Quality in England!


Tally. Send for the Parson this Minute then.


Kisses her again. Wid. Oh Gad! You stop one's Breath. -- You are the most
impatient Man! --


Tally. Impatient, quotha! Who can behold these dear Eyes without Impatience
for the Blessing? --


Wid. Well, my Lord, let us sign Articles: -- And then --


Tally. I Will give thee a Chart-Blanche. Make thy own Terms; so that I may this
Night take Possession of these Arms.


Wid. Well, since your Lordship will have it so --


Fain. Nay, you mou'not go in, an you were Ten Master Worthess -- [In his own
Voice.] [Fainwell within, in Jeffery 's Voice.] I tell you, I had your Lady's
Commands to wait on her, and must, and will go in: So, sweet Mr. Jeffery
Crumplin, by your Leave.


Fainwell rushes in, in his own Dress. Wid. Oh Gad! that is Mr. VVorthy's
Voice! What can he think, when he see's one ruffled in this Manner! -- I Am
surpised! -- Did not I hear my Clod-hopper's Voice, in a resisting Tone, Mr.
Worthy?


Fain. I was so far out of my Country-man's good Graces, that he would neither
bring in my Name, nor permit me to enter.


Tally. [Aside.] That was in Favor of me. Jeffery is a Man of Honor, I find.
-- But who is this Mr. Worthy? Disappointment catch him, for coming so
Mal-a-propos.


Wid. That Fellow is the most impenetrable Sot! -- Why did not you break his
Head, Mr. Worthy?


Fain. That Is a Liberty, Madam, no Man ought to take in your House, 'till you
have made him Master of it. -- Were I that happy Person --


Takes hold of her Hand. Tally. [Stepping in between them.] You Would kick
everybody out of it, I suppose?


Fain. That gives me just Provocation, Sir.


Steps in between. Wid. If they should quarrel now! -- Mr. Worthy, pray let
me speak a Word with you. -- Do you know who this Gentleman is?


Fain. Very well, Madam.


Tally. Then if you know me, you know your Distance. Steps between again.


Fain. So well, Sir, [Goes between 'em.] that were you not protected by this
Lady's Presence, there should be just the Distance from hence to the Street
between us.


Tally. How, Sir? Stepping up to him.


Fain. Through the Window, Sir. Pushes him away.


Tally. You dare not talk thus elsewhere.


Fain. You dare not give me an Opportunity.


In his Ear. Wid. Dear Mr. Worthy, for your own sake, consider what you do.
-- He is a Man of Quality; and, for ought I know, a Privy-Counsellor. --


Aside to Fainwell. Fain. To nothing above a Gang of Pick-pockets, I Will answer
for him. Hark-ye, Tally; how long have you worn this Surtout of Honor, I
beseech you? In what Reign were you created a Baron, pray?


Tally. Humph! He knows me, I find. -- My Business is done here.


Wid. My Stars! Is not he a Man of Quality?


Fain. Yes, yes, Madam, I Will give you his Titles in a very few Words. -- He is
Baron of Fair-Chance, and Viscount of all the Pharoah-Tables in and about
London. He has a Pack of Cards for his Coat of Arms, quartered with Knaves; and
False Dice, in a Field of Impudence. -- His Crest is a Fool; his Supporters,
are Parolie, and Trait la va.


Tally. [Aside.] The Rogue has Blazoned me! -- But I must carry it off as well
as I can. -- I hope you will prove this, Sir.


Fain. Oh! instantly, Sir. -- Sam!


Enter Sam. Fain. Call a Constable.


Wid. Not for the World. I beg I may have no more Bustle in my House.


Fain. You understand me. VVhispers to Sam.


Sam. Perfectly well. -- Will your Lordship please to walk this Way -- What
think you, my Lord, of a Pot of Porter, to drink to our better Acquaintance?


In a screaming Tone. Tally. A Pox of Ill-luck! -- I may find a Time, Sir --
Exit with Sam.


Fain. Not to cheat me of my Money, Sir. -- Ha, ha, ha!


Wid. I hope you are not mistaken in the Man, Mr. Worthy.


Fain. I Am glad You were not, Madam.


Wid. Which is entirely owing to your timely Discovery, or I had been undone.


Fain. For which, give me leave to say, you might have thanked your own Vanity.
Nothing but a Lord would go down! -- I admire, a Woman of your Discretion, and
a Widow too! should prefer Empty Title to Real Pleasure, and mere Shadow to
conjugal Affection. Embracing her.


Wid. A Fiddle of Affection, Mr. Worthy; I tell you, I have been Laced very
tight once in my Life; but having made my Fortune, and got my Liberty, if ever
I try again the Matrimonial Bodice, the Lace shall be tagg'd with a Title, I
assure you.


Fain. Ah! that will make a Noise in the World; but your Pleasure, like a
Squib, will vanish in the Bounce, ha, ha, ha! -- To give Twenty thousand Pounds
for the bare Name of my Lord's Lady, whilst Ten to One, but your Chambermaid
supplies your Ladyship's Place in his Arms, and rattles about Streets in her
Berlin, supported out of your Ladyship's Fortune.


Wid. You seem well acquainted with the Map of this World.


Fain. Perfectly, Madam; and have made this Observation, That Women who love to
indulge their Vanity, and yet hope for their Dividend of Pleasures, are acting
as inconsistent a Part, as they who give a Loose to their Fancy, and at the
same Time think to preserve their Reputation. -- I tell you, Madam, A Man of
Quality will no more throw all his Love upon a Wife, than a Farmer will sow all
his Land with the same Grain. The only Way to engross your Joys, is to marry
one of us Country-Gentlemen.


Wid. To be rivaled by March-Beer, Tobacco, and Fox-hounds.


Fain. Even those are preferable to Cards, Dice, and a Wench, as you would have
experienced, had not I come in.


Wid. So! now will he value himself upon my Deliverance. [Aside.] -- Well,
well, Mr. Worthy, since this Fellow proves a mere Plebeian, he is a worthless
Rascal; but if he had really been a Lord, what is now Impudence, would only
have been the Violence of his Love.


Fain. Humph! a very pretty Distinction! -- No, Madam, I deny that Position --
Love is soft and gentle, as the Morning-Sun in Autumn, mellowing Inclination by
Degrees; but its Twin-Brother, like a Foot-Pad, knocks you down, and rifles you
at once. -- He was impatient for your Money only, Widow. -- I, for this dear
Person. -- Now, why cannot you like me as well as a Lord?


Wid. Like you! For what?


Fain. For what! Why for an unalterable, faithful, constant Doting --


Wid. Hold, hold, Sir. Your Epithets are running away with your Meaning. --
But to prevent your explaining it, I must tell you, That the very Name of
Matrimony with a Commoner, will flatten our Conversation, and make us look very
simple.


Fain. Ay! but there is something so expressive in that Simplicity, that it
gives a deeper Impression than all the Gildings of Rhetoric. Ah! my dear,
Widow, would you but return my Love, how many Cupids should I behold dancing in
these Eyes! Nay, and you should see strange Things before Morning. --


Wid. Sha! you talk foolishly.


Fain. That Is inherent to a Lover.


Wid. And so you would have me a Fool too, to keep you in Countenance. A very wise
Foundation for the Fabric of Matrimony. -- No, no, I tell you once for all,
Though I do like your Person, you and I must never be conjured into the Circle
of a Wedding-Ring.


Fain. And no other Circle will do my Business. -- I Will try if she has really a
Liking for my Person.


Aside. Wid. Well! what have I put you in the Dumps, now? Are you considering
what Death will revenge you of an ungrateful Mistress. Ha, ha!


Fain. No, faith, Madam; I Will live to be revenged, and balk your Vanity --

Then farewell Love;
Farewell Love, and all soft Pleasure,
Honor calls, and we must part.

Sings in a careless manner. Wid. You are the merriest Lover at parting!


Fain. I am of Ben's Mind, Madam; resolve to be merry, though the Ship were
sinking. And since I must never hope to call you mine, I here dismiss all the
Retinue of a formal Lover. Such as Vows, Ogles, Sighs, Dreams, Visions,
Sonnets, Gingles, Epigrams, Couplets, with a long etc. -- Thus, with infinite
Struggles, I hope to entertain as mean an Opinion of Matrimony, as your
Ladyship, in a very little Time.


Wid. Oh! that he had a Title to support this Humor; he should find, I have no
mean Opinion of Matrimony. Aside.


Fain. And, for the future, shall look upon the Parson's Patchwork, like a
Pilgrimage to Mecca, or Jerusalem, fit only for the Superstitious, and People
who have periodical Inclinations, to fill up the Vacancies of human Life with a
huge Caravan of Children; a long Journey; dirty Road; through the Turnpikes of
Jealousy, Anxiety, Suspicion, Animosity, pinching Cares, and a Thousand other
Inconveniences. -- By the way, you have traveled the Stage, and, I suppose,
know what I say to be true.


Wid. Ha! -- All is not right within this Breast. I begin to perceive his
Indifference gives me Pain.


Aside. Fain. I fancy the only Object to give one a Surfeit of Matrimony, would
be to see a Pair of distempered Creatures in the Corner of a Room, in close
Conspiracy to deceive one another; very sincerely promising mutual Love for
Fifty Years ensuing; when, upon Trial, a Month's Fruition makes either a
Caterwauling Correspondence, or a more peaceable and elegant Way, of Separate
Beds. -- She seems nettled, I Will proceed. [Aside.] -- With this Thought I
comfort my-self: And here, Madam, bid Matrimony and You Eternally Farewell --
Who would be led for Life.


Sings and Hums that Tune. Wid. Eternally! -- I wish I had never seen this
Fellow. -- Lord, how my Heart sinks. Aside.


Fain. Come all ye Winds, come all away,
And briskly in our Canvass play;
Waft me gently over the Main;
Farewell, Widow! Farewell, Pain!
Lara, dera, lara, dera, lal, lal, la!

In the Tune of Over the Hills and far away. Wid. You are exceeding Gay, Sir.


Fain. Tous jour Gay, as the French say. I always meet the Frowns of Fortune
thus -- The Jade may jilt, but never inslave me. -- But, to be serious, To
morrow, Madam, I embark for the Indies. It will be a secret Pleasure to me, if
you will permit this Paper Room in your Cabinet. It is my Last Will and
Testament. If I miscarry in the Voyage, that will entitle you to Forty thousand
Pounds, my Uncle's Death enriched me with in Jamaica; whither I am bound. This
is a Proof of my Esteem, though you have forbid my Love.


Gives her a Paper, and takes up a Book from the Table, and seems to look in it.
Wid. This is an Act so singular, so full of Generosity, that it almost lays me
under a Necessity of making you some Return.


Fain. Very singular, faith, if she knew all. Aside.


Wid. Forty thousand Pounds! -- Why one Quarter of that Money, would buy a
Barony.


Fain. Quarter me, if I would lay it out that way, if I had it. Aside.


Wid. Or, suppose you should sell Part of your Estate in, in, in --
Gloucester-shire?


Fain. Ay! or any other Shire. Aside.


Wid. A Patent would be no difficult Thing to obtain.


Fain. No! but the Money to pay for it, would. Aside. Ha! -- What Is here, The
Pleasures of a Single Life? Luckily Encountered! --


Wid. P'shaw! a Fiddle of Single Life!


Fain. Nay, since you have imposed the Study, Madam, you must give me Leave to
con my Lesson.


Seems to read. Wid. Pugh! now I Am serious, you are turning every Thing to
Ridicule. -- About this same Patent, I say; -- Suppose you sell part of your
Estate.


Fain. Faith, Madam, my Estate is like a Wife, Entailed; and my Father made me
swear, never to levy a Fine upon any Consideration, but making a Lady a
Jointure. So that it is like to be mine for Life. -- But, I know, this sudden
Pretense of yours, is only to try the Strength of my new Resolution. -- You are
not in Earnest.


Wid. Well, pursue your Voyage to Jamaica; sell your Effects; return and
purchase a Barony; which you may easily do, in Eight or Ten Months, and you
shall see if I am in Earnest, or not.


Fain. Eight, or Ten Months! Ha, ha, ha! Men love not now, Child, the
Patriarchal Way. No, no, I would not trust to a Woman's Promise Eight or Ten
Hours. -- Marry me before I go, and then --


Wid. O! then you will not go at all.


Fain. Just the same as if you do not marry me.


Wid. But what a ridiculous Figure I shall make, after so many Declarations
against Plebeianism, when I shall be wished Joy by that vulgar Epithet -- Mrs.
Worthy?


Fain. If that be an Objection, I Will give you my Honor, you shall never be
called Mrs. Worthy -- [Takes hold of her Hand, then snatches it away.] -- O the
Devil! that Touch has thawed all my Resolution, and Love and Folly begin to
pour in like a Deluge: But when I think of those terrible Words, You and I must
never be conjured into the Circle of a Wedding-Ring --


Wid. This is nothing to the Barony. Look-ye, Mr. Worthy, your Generosity has
made this Moment yours; but if you don't take me at my Word, Consideration may
spoil my Gratitude.


Fain. Nay, I Am to be taken in the Moment too. Therefore, if you will slip on
your Hood and Scarf, step into a Hackney-Coach with me, and drive to the Fleet,
where we may be tacked together by a Spiritual Journey-man, without a License,
or the Knowledge of either your Servants or mine; I promise you, as soon as the
Ceremony is over, I Will on Board; make what haste the Wind and Waves will
permit; Dispatch my Affairs with the utmost Expedition; and, with the first
Ship, return to these dear Arms. 'Till when, 'till when, thy Widow's Name be
worn. The World shall be insensible of my Happiness, 'till it rings with thy
Honor.


Wid. And you will perform this?


Fain. Most religiously -- Embraces her.


Wid. But --


Fain. Nay, no more Fairy-Fancies: Give real substantial Pleasure. We
Country-Gentlemen are so used to Surloyns of Beef, that we shall starve on the
Whipt-Cream of Airy Promises -- Take me, take me, whilst you may [Sings, then
runs and catches her in his Arms.] This Moment, whilst my Hopes are high;
whilst Imagination represents a Groop of Pleasures, thou wilt find thy Account
in it, I warrant thee, Widow!


Wid. Oh! I can refuse the dear Man no longer. -- Well, wait in a Coach at the
Corner of the Street, and I Will be with you in the Compass of a Wish.


Exit. Fain. Ha, ha, ha! she is caught, by Jupiter.


Enter Sam. Sam. Joy to you, Sir! I overheard the Bargain.


Fain. Not a Word in the Family.


Sam. Not for the World, Sir.


Fain. Wait you at my Lodging, with all Things in Readiness for Consummation.


Sam. Never fear my Part of the Business, Sir.


Fain. What have you done with his Lordship?


Sam. Reduced him to a Commoner again, Sir; But, the Fellow is a reasonable
Creature; provided you will forgive him, he will obey your Commands.


Fain. Very well! Away, and call me a Coach.


Sam. Yes, Sir, Yes. -- Exit.


Fain. Egad, I Have earned her Fortune by mere Dint of Policy. -- Thus,

When Truth, and Love, to win the Women fail,
A well-laid Plot, and Artifice, prevail. Exit.

SCENE changes to the Street, before Watchit's Door. He in Armor, with a
Blunderbuss on his Shoulder, which he often makes ready to fire.
Wat. I Shall pepper this Dog, if he comes in my way. -- Hark! Sure I heard
somebody tread. -- No, 'twas nothing but the Wind, I believe -- It Is very cold
-- I shall catch my Death; but it is better to die once for all, than to live
upon the Rack. What had I to do with a Help-Mete, when I was no Mete-Help for
her? God's Death, to be bubbled in my old Age; to father Children that I never got,
and leave my Estate to a Mungrel Race, half Fish, half Flesh, a Piece of
Priestcraft! I have had, as it were, by Instinct, a sort of an Aversion to
that kind of People from my Cradle. Ah! honest John Dryden, I shall never
forget a Passage of thine. -- Priests of all Religions -- Who comes there?
Stand, or you're a Dead Man.


Enter Demur, who draws, strikes up Watchit 's Piece, and disarms him. Them.
How! Villain -- I Will see you fairly trussed up, if I live.


Wat. 'Ounds, who are you, Sir? and what makes you sauntering here, at this
Time of Night? You are a Rogue, Sirrah, and I Will secure you. -- Watch, Watch,
Watch.


Them. That Pretense shall not save your Bacon, you old Villain you. Watch, Watch.


Enter Sir John with his Sword drawn. Sir John. What Is the matter here? Ha!
Doctor Demur? You are not hurt, I hope!


Wat. Doctor Demur! Who the Devil's he? a Patch of the Law? or a Carcass
mender? I expected a Botcher of another kind. -- Aside.


Enter Constable and Watch. Them. No, not hurt, Sir John; but I was like to have
had a Brace of Balls in my Guts.


Constable. Who called Watch?


Them. I did, Sir; Here Is a Rogue attacked me on the King's Highway, with a
Design to Rob, and Murder me, I suppose.


Wat. I did, Sir; This strapping young Dog disarmed me, with Intention to enter
my House Vi and Armis; plunder, and abuse me --


They both speak together. Constable. Your House! Where do you live, Sir?


Wat. What Is that to you, Sir? -- A Constable may Cuckold an Alderman. I don't
desire any of you Night-walking Sparks should know my House.


Aside. Constable. A plain Case, a plain Case! he is ashamed of his Habitation; away
with him.


Sir John. Ay, ay, Mr. Constable, he is a Rogue! This is a worthy Gentleman, a
Doctor of the Laws.


Constable. Yes, Yes, Sir; I know Doctor Demur to be as honest a Man, as any in the
whole Temple, and ruins as few, I believe. We'll Secure him, Sir.


Them. Do; I Will have him Examined before a Justice of the Peace in the Morning.


Wat. The Devil! This is a Trick to get me out of the way; and whilst I Am
detained by these Scoundrels, that Dog of a Friar will lie at Rack and Manger
with my Wife. Pray hear me, Mr. Constable.


Constable. Yes, yes, Sir, you shall be heard, before you go to Newgate. -- You're
a fine old Duke, to come to the Gallows at these Years. Come, bring him along.


Wat. Sir, I say I Will go before a Justice to Night, and will have my Wife with
me too. Zounds, I could tear my Flesh. -- Oh! Tim! Tim! that ever thou should
Marry?


Exit. Forced out by the Constable, etc. Sir John. This should be Fainwell's
Uncle, by his talking of his Wife; and certainly mistook you for one of her
Gallants.


Them. Odso! I have heard Fainwell speak of him. If it should be him, we shall
have good Diversion. Where are you going, Sir John?


Sir John. I am sent for by my Brother Ned; who, I am told, lies dangerously
Ill at the Widow Headless's.


Them. It Is thither I Am going; I am glad I met you: I hope it is for your
Advantage. -- I Will follow you, Sir.


Sir John. Haste should excuse Ceremony, Doctor.


Exit. Enter Constable and Watch, with Mr. Watchit and his Wife, and Lucy;
meeting Sir Philip Money-love. Constable. Come, come, bring them along to the
Round-House.


Mrs. W. Whither, cruel Man, must I be haul'd out of my Bed at this
unseasonable Hour?


Constable. Only to the Watch-house, Madam.


Wat. To the Watch-house! to the Devil, Sir! I Am a Gentleman, and will not be
abused. Carry me before a Justice instantly.


Sir Phi. What Is the matter here?


Constable. Oh! Sir Philip! Here, here is a Justice of Peace for you. This old Man,
Sir! assaulted Doctor Demur.


Wat. You lie, Sir! he assaulted me, Mr. Justice --


Sir Philip. Hold, hold, Sir; I cannot hear you in the Street. My Cousin
Headless lives at next Door, carry your Prisoners thither, Constable; you know
the House, I suppose.


Constable. Yes, yes, very well, Sir. Come, come, bring 'em along. Exeunt.


SCENE the Inside of Mrs. Headless's House.
The Back-Scene Draws, and discovers Ned Freeman, and Louisa, just Married;
(the Parson making his Exit) and Sir John and Demur; Louisa throws her Arms
about Freeman 's Neck. Lou. NOW I Am Happy! Now you are mine again!
Look up, my Love! my Freeman!
My Joy! my Soul! my Husband!
Take, take me in thy Arms; and say,
Thou do forgive me; or I Am still most wretched.

Ned. Ha! Why this Joy? From whence these Raptures,
When Life is on the Wing; and Death pursues it
With an Eagle's Swiftness?

Lou. Far be that Thought! far as my Wishes, send it!
I hope to hold thee many happy Years:
Thou art not Poisoned!
Forgive the Artifice that made thee mine.

Ned. Ha! not Poisoned!


Sir John. You're in no Danger, I assure you, Brother; it was only your
Surprise disordered you.


Ned. Give me leave to tell you, Brother, the Disorder I find my self in,
cannot proceed from Surprise alone.


Sir John. Something there was; but far from being fatal; The Doctor assured
me, it would have no other Effect than making you a little Sick for the
present. --


Ned. And I assure you, Sir, that I am not to be Tricked, Sir. [Draws] Cancel
the Deed this moment, or --


Sir John. [Draws.] That, and my Life shall go together.


Lou. Ah! [Shreiks.] Murder! Murder!


Demur draws, and parts them. Enter Sir Philip, Watchit, Mrs. Watchit, Lucy,
Constable and Watch. Sir Philip. Ha! Murder! I Charge you in the King's Name to
keep the Peace, Mr. Constable. -- What do I see! Mr. Freeman and the mad
Knight! -- What, would you murder your Brother, Sir. Secure him, Constable. --
I have been looking for you, Mr. Freeman, all the Town over. -- Do You hear, Step
to my House, and bid my Daughter come to me this Minute. [ To one of the
Watchmen, who Exits.] Hark-ye, Mr. Freeman; was not there something to be done
at my House to Night?


Ned. I thought so, Sir; but was unluckily prevented. --


VVat. This is the Rogue, that took me up, Mr. Justice.


Them. Did not you bid me Stand, Sir? and did not I disarm you of that
Blunderbuss in the Constable's Hand, you old Thief, you?


VVat. Thief! I scorn your Words, Sir; I was upon my Guard. --


Sir Philip. Guard of what, Sir?


VVat. Why, a Breach that is made in my Citadel here. Pointing to his Wife.


Sir Philip. Ha, ha, ha! By whom, pray?


VVat. Ask her that; she can tell you.


Lucy. Yes, Sir, my Lady can tell you, what melancholy Days, and wretched
Nights --


VVat. I Will wretched Night you, Hussy!


Holds up his Cane. Sir Philip. Hold, Sir; do you consider where you are?


VVat. Yes, and what I am too.


Sir Philip. And what may that be, I pray?


VVat. A Cuckold, Sir --


Them. If you are sure of that -- Why -- the Law is open, Sir.


VVat. Ay! so open! that it has swallowed both Justice and Conscience; and yet
is as Hollow as ever.


Sir Philip. Ha, ha, ha; But how came you armed? and to insult this honest
Gentleman?


VVat. Have a care what you say, Sir; he will bring his Action against you for
Scandal -- But I took him for just such another honest Gentleman; a Botcher of
Consciences. One that has a better Knack at making Sin, than forgiving it. --
My Wife knows what I say to be true; and my Intention was to have sent a Brace
of Balls Hue-and-Cry through his Body, in Pursuit of his Continency.


Them. Oh Lord! Oh Lord! Murder a Man for lying with your Wife! -- Why, you
should take the Law of him.


VVat. That the Lawyers might murder my Estate; No, I thank you; I Am for the
shortest way; I Would rather hang at Tyburn, than in one of your Courts. --


Mrs. VV. Have you Witness of what you say, my Dear?


VVat. Yes, your self, my dear Devil --


Mrs. VV. I deny it; Produce your Evidence!


VVat. Oh Impudence! Sir, Pray give her her Oath, and send her to the Devil at
once -- Did not you tell your Ghostly Father, Mistress, That a Friar enjoyed
you every Night? deny that, if you can! Nay, and even when I was in Bed with
you too! And that every Door in the House opened as soon as he approached it!
for which you believed him a Conjurer? A Pox on the Wizard, and the Circle too,
I say -- Now, Gentlewoman, can you safely take your Oath this was not your
Confession?


Mrs. VV. I can safely take my Oath, I go in danger of my Life with you.


VVat. No, no, it is I go in Danger of my Life, Mistress.


Mrs. VV. That shall be tried; for know, Sir, I can bear these base Insults no
longer -- I must not go abroad -- Not so much as to Church; nor see any Company
at Home; Not a Relation in Breeches; and whenever you take a Whim in your Head
to go Abroad, I must not lie in my Bed, though you have the Key of the Door in
your Pocket. Nay, in short, I must not Sleep, lest I should Cuckold you in a
Dream.


Sir Philip. Ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. W. A Woman may be made a Fool on, if she will; but you shall find, Mr.
Watchit, I have Friends, that will not see me abused. Lucy, call me a Chair --
I Will clear my self, I warrant you.


Wat. Hussy, Stir if you dare. [ To Lucy.] No, Madam, you shall clear your
self here, if you can.


Sir Philip. I would advise you, Sir, to agree with your Lady. -- Mr.
Constable, you may leave your Prisoners with me.


Exit Constable, etc. Them. This is a Cause for the Civil Court.


Mrs. W. I have something to offer under the Cognizance of Common Law; Have not
we an Act against Priests, that belong to no Ambassadors?


Them. Yes, Madam, it is Death for such to live in England; and it is pity that
Act is not put in Execution.


Mrs. W. Then, I here deliver up this Gentleman to you, Sir.


VVat. What, do you mean to Hang me for a Priest, Mistress? Am I a Priest?


Mrs. VV. So you pretended, when you took my Confession; Could you imagine, I
did not know you? Yes, and resolved to fit you for your Jealousy. And now this
good Company shall judge, if I don't Bed every Night with a Friar; and pray
you, Snub, what Door in our House keeps shut, when you approach, and bid it
open?


In a Drolling manner. Them. Ha, ha, ha! You are Bit, old Gentleman. -- I
suppose you will ask my Pardon now, Sir? Ha, ha.


VVat. The Devil sneer you. -- How have I exposed my self! Ah! Tim! Tim! Thou
art but a Fool of a Wise Man! Aside.


Enter Mrs. Headless. Sir Philip. Oh! Cousin Headless! you will forgive my taking
up your House here. --


Wid. My Servants told me the Reason. -- You are Welcome, Sir Philip. I hate
the sight of him; but it is no Time to tell him so now. -- Well! I have made no
ill Bargain. If this Spouse of mine should never return, this Writing intitles
me to all his Estate in Jamaica. -- If he lives to come back -- I shall be a
Woman of Quality; and our Laws make farther Provision for me, if he dies. I
wish all Widows were as Wise as my self. Cousin Olivia, Your Servant.


Enter Olivia. Oli. How go Matters here? Dear Cousin, inform me.


Wid. As you would have 'em, I believe; for the Parson was sent for; and,
methinks, one may read Matrimony in Mr. Freeman's Face already.


Sir Philip. Ho! Are you come. Seeing Olivia.


Oli. Did you send for me, Sir?


Sir Philip. Ay, ay, come hither, Child. -- Mr. Freeman, we had as good make an
End of the Business now; and this good Company will make up a Country Dance --
Here Is my Girl. Cousin Headless will send for a Parson.


Oli. Oh miserable! What do I hear? Aside.


Sir Philip. The Business will soon be done.


Ned. My Business is done, Sir.


Sir Philip. But not with my Daughter, Sir -- Come, hang Thinking; send home
the Dutch-Woman. They are heavy dull Jades! Here Is a Girl of the true old
English Breed, that will make you as merry as a Cricket, when the Parson has
said Grace, Boy.


Ned. I tell you, Sir Philip, I have more Occasion for the Hangman's Halter,
than the Marriage Noose.


Sir Philip. What! before you are Married? Pish, Pish! that is impossible -- But
were there not certain Articles to be performed on your part to Day?


Ned. I thought so Yesterday, Sir.


Sir Philip. Yesterday, Sir! Zounds! What do you mean, Sir?


Sir John. Why, in short, Sir, This Lady has stepped in between my Brother Ned,
and your Daughter, and supplied her Place; that is all, Sir.


Oli. O Blessed Sound! Aside.


Sir Philip. Ha, ha, ha! What, have you another Play to Act, Sir John?


Sir John. No, Faith, Sir Philip, the Play is ended; and, with your leave, this
Lady and I will speak the Epilogue.


Takes hold of Olivia 's Hand. Sir Philip. Stark Mad, by Jupiter! Hold, hold,
hold, Sir; this Lady does not understand Epilogues, nor Prologues neither
[Takes her from him] Do you think I am to be fooled, Mr. Freeman?


Lou. No, Sir; But I think you must look out sharp for another Son-in-Law, Sir
Philip; for I am on the Right-side the Hedge, now -- We are Married, Sir.


Sir Philip. Indeed! Is she in Earnest, Mr. Freeman?


Ned. Yes, Faith, I can see no Jest in it; and I Will tell you another Secret; I
have given my Brother every Foot of my Estate. --


Sir Philip. Really!


Them. Really, Sir Philip. I drew the Deed.


Sir Philip. Why then it was the worst Deed he ever did in his Life: And, if it
be true -- I wish you Joy, Sir John.


Sir John. To convince you, Sir, there is the Papers.


Gives him Papers. Sir Philip. Humph -- It Is even so -- I wish you Joy with
your Dutch Vrow, Mr. Freeman -- I do, Faith, Minheer.


Mrs. W. My Lover Married! Nay, then I Am glad we were no better acquainted.
Aside.


Wid. I wish you Joy, Madam. To Louisa.


Lou. It is not in the Power of Fortune to give me more. I hope, my Dear, you
are pretty well again.


Ned. Humph! My Sickness will continue longer than she imagines. [Aside.] You
assure me, I Am in no Danger of leaving the World, Madam; I wish you could tell
me how to live in it. --


Lou. Oh! trust to Love, my Dear!


Ned. And Starve, my Dear! Walks from her.


Wat. How shall I be able to look my Wife in the Face again?


Mrs. W. Methinks, Lucy, your Master seems to have an Air of true Penitence.


Lucy. He does, indeed, look Penitential, Madam.


Sir Philip. I Have been considering you from Head to Foot, Sir John; and, upon
my Soul, I think I never saw you look so well in all my Life: Though, to say
Truth, I always thought you a fine Gentleman. -- 'Till he was Disinherited.
[Aside.] -- Olivia, Come hither, Child! Give me thy Hand; It was ever my
Resolution, that thou should go with the Estate; and therefore, Sir John,
since you have got one, even take the other. [Throws her to him.] -- There, now do
your Endeavor to make me, within Ten Months, a Grandfather. --


Sir John. On my Knees I thank you. This Present is more Welcome, than what my
Brother gave me.


Ned. Return my Deed then; I did not give it you: You tricked me out of it;
Remember that, Brother.


Sir John. Out of nothing, but my own, Brother; but half my Estate is at your
Service. Your Generosity to this Lady commands that.


Sir Philip. Say you so, Sir? Then your Generosity shall command but half my
Daughter's Portion; Mark that.


Lou. I Bar that Injustice; the Fortune's all his own; Nor do we need your kind
Indulgence, Brother. --


Ned. No! -- Egad, I Am glad to hear that! Aside.


Lou. Yours was the Plot that made my Freeman mine; and Heaven Rewards you
for it, with your Estate; and puts it in my Power to raise your Brother above
the Reach of Want. Know, then, My Father left me his only Heir, and Mistress of
Forty Thousand Pounds.


Ned. Ha! Say thou?


Lou. I knew not where to find thee; but resolved to live Unmarried for thy
Sake. -- But, upon Sir John's Letter, hastened to prevent thy Breach of Faith.
It Is done; forgive the Artifice, and all my Fortune's thine.


Ned. Forgive thee! What, Forty Thousand Pounds, and ask Forgiveness! One
Quarter of the Money would purchase a Pardon for all the Sins of thee, and thy
Posterity! I affirm, no Woman can be Guilty of any Fault, that has Forty
Thousand Pounds -- But few of thy Sex can boast such Constancy. How shall I
thank thee for this excessive Goodness? -- Brother! Let me thank you too. Had I
known your Inclination for this Lady, you should have had no Rival here. Claps
his Hand on his Breast.


Sir Philip. And if he had not got the Estate again, he should have had no
Father here. [Clapping his Hand on his Breast] Come, come, it is all well, and
the Man has his Mare again. -- What are you musing on, Sir? [ To Watchit]
Prithee be cheerful Man -- Suppose you were a Cuckold, the Fault's not yours,
nor your Wife's neither: No doubt but you was born when Mars and Venus were in
Conjunction; and if so, who can withstand their Fate?


Omn. Ha, ha, ha, ha!


Them. Ha, ha; But this Gentleman is in no Danger -- Come, come, Sir, take your
Lady, and make much of her; give her her own Liberty; confide in her Honor,
and that way secure her Virtue.


Ned. I Am glad the old Cuff does not know me again. Aside.


Mrs. W. Let him cease to be Jealous, and when I give him real Cause, let him
expose me. -- What say you, Mumps? Shall I enjoy the Liberties of an English
Wife?


Wat. An English Wife! that is a large Latitude, Pud? But I agree to it; Come,
Buss, and Friends then! [Kisses her.] So now;

I Will from this Moment banish all my Cares,
With all my Locks, and Bolts, and Iron Bars.

Enter Fainwell, and Sam, singing, the last with a Bottle and Glass in his
Hand. Wid. Bless me! what do I see? my Rascal Drunk?


Sir Philip. Ha, ha, ha, Jeffery in his Cups?


Fain. Ay! I Am resolved to be merry to Night, bemess, Sir. -- Sings.


Sing Ola wa, Let us be merry -- Sam. O nilly wa, Let us be merry.


Fain. And drink the King's Health in racy Canary.


Sam. Ya honey Lee. --


Wid. I Will honey Lee you, Sirrah -- Runs to beat him.


Fain. Hold, hold, my Dear; though I allowed you to beat me, when you was my
Mistress, the Case is altered now you are my Wife --


Wid. Wife!


Fain. I am no longer Jeffery! but your Lord and Master. --


Wid. Ruined past Redemption! Oh! oh! oh!


Bursts into Tears. Fain. No, no, my Dear, I Will so Hug, Love, and Buss thee,
that thou shall own to Morrow Morning thy Money well laid out. [Goes to Embrace
her.]


Omn. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Wid. Stand off; I never can forgive you putting such a Trick upon me, Mr.
Worthy!


Fain. Mr. Fainwell, if you please, my Dear. You shall find me a Man of Honor.
You know, it was part of our Agreement, you should not be called Mrs. Worthy.


Wid. Not Worthy! Oh Heavens! then I have Married a downright Scoundrel! Oh!
undone, undone; get out of my Sight. Oh! oh.


Fain. Get out of thy Sight! No, no, I Will get into thy Arms, my Girl; where
I Will convince thee, that I Am a Gentleman, of a better Family than your
Sham-Lord. VVhispers Sam, who Exits.


VVat. That he is, I assure you, Widow; for he is my Nephew.


Sir Philip. A very odd Metamorphosis! You are an Excellent Actor, Sir.


Fain. Every Man in his Way, Sir.


Sir Philip. Is your Vanity come to this! Faith, you have made but a blind
Bargain of it, Cousin.


Fain. You had like to have cozened her into a blinder Bargain -- Hark-ye, Sir
Philip, what was you to have had, if this Noble Lord of your Dubbing, had been
in my Place?


Enter Sam, and Tally. Sir Philip. What do you mean by asking that Question,
Sir? Do you think I was to be Bribed?


Fain. So this honest Gentleman says, Sir; to the Tune of Three Thousand
Pounds. -- Is it not true, Tally?


Tally. To a Tittle, Sir --


Sir Philip. Why, you, you, you impudent Son of a Whore; were not Seventeen
enough for you?


Wid. Not if he had been what you represented him, Sir. But I have nothing to
thank your Friendship for.


Sir Philip. A Fig for your Reflections; nothing would go down with your
Vanity, but a Lord, forsooth; and since no Lord of the King's making would be
troubled with you, I made one on purpose for you. Look-ye, it is my Opinion,
every Man Cheats in his way -- And he is only Honest, who is not discovered.


Exit. Omn. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Fain. I believe, Sir, I have a Guinea of yours -- It is too much, to take both
your Money and your Mistress; there, Sir; [Gives him a Guinea] Now, Sir, I
presume your Absence will be very agreeable to this Company.


Tally. With all my Heart, Sir. -- And I am glad I Am come off so well. Exit.


Ned. Come, come, Madam, I think you have 'scap'd very well, considering all.
You might have been undone: The Prevention of which is owing to Mr. Fainwell.
There Is nothing in a Title -- Believe me, there are more heavy Hearts in
Coaches with Coronets behind 'em, than you will find in the Hacks, take 'em as
they run, from the Royal Palace to the Royal Exchange.


Sir John. I Am of my Brother's Opinion, Madam; Mr. Fainwell bears the King's
Commission; and though he is but a Subaltern, you have Fortune enough to buy him
a Regiment; and a Colonel's Lady is as good as my Lord's.


Wid. Well, since it is no better; it is well it is no worse -- But don't you
think, Sir John, a Thousand Pounds, rightly placed, would not get him Knighted?


Fain. Ha, ha, ha! We'll consider of that to Morrow Morning.


Wid. I hope you will forgive the Blows, I --


Fain. And promise never to return 'em too.


Wat. Nephew, I wish thee Joy with all my Heart.


Fain. I thank you, Uncle.


Sir John. I Am so much indebted to you, that I love you now, methinks, in
spite of Principle.


Ned. My Principle, dear Jack, is the same with thine. I did not think it
prudent to contradict my Father; but no Man shall do more in Defense of his
Country, or pay his Taxes more cheerfully. Come to my Arms --


Sir John. To my Heart. They Embrace.


Ned. Now every Man to his Mate; and let us have a Country Dance Goes to Louisa.


Sir John. Come, Mr. Watchit, take your Wife, and let me advise you, if she has
any Faults, hide them from the Public:

For He or She, who drags the Marriage Chain,
And finds in Spouse Occasion to complain,
Should hide their Frailties with a Lover's Care,
And let the ill-judging World conclude 'em Fair;
Better the Offense never reach the Offender's Ear.
For they who Sin with Caution, whilst concealed,
Grow impudently Careless, when revealed.

EPILOGUE.
By a FRIEND.
Spoken by Mrs. OLDFIELD.
SINCE Plotting is the Business of the Age,
Our Bard has paid it off upon the Stage,
And strongly labored in these Scenes, to show ye,
How Woman can in Artifice outdo ye.
You Bungle sadly, and are always Caught,
Ever half your Work is to Perfection brought.
Did our Town-Wives their Schemes no better lay,
What Monstrous Plots would break out every Day?
Ladies, I hope, I Have acted to your Mind,
And served my Jealous Monster in his Kind.
To play the Priest, and steal a Wife's Confession;
What Man can make Amends for such Transgression?
Should all our English Husbands Shrive their Wives,
Women would lead most Comfortable Lives.
For of all Slavery, it is the worst Condition,
To Live beneath a Marriage Inquisition.
What think you of our Hogan-Mogan Belle?
Didn't she trick the Trickster nicely well?
The Whipster thought, forsooth, 'twas smart and clever,
To swell the Young Vrow up, and then to leave her.
But on the Younker a Dutch Trick she palms;
Poison for Poison gives, and Qualms for Qualms.
What Rake among you, but, in his Condition,
Would even think a Wife a good Physician?
Did this Dutch Law our roving Gentry bind,
How Charming would it be for Womankind!
Then every Nymph that has vouchsafed the Favor,
Might tie her Lover up to good Behavior:
And after she has put him to the Test,
Might take, or leave him, -- as she liked it best.
You who are Noos'd, let me advise; Beware,
Give over your Jealous Freaks, and trust the Fair:
For, look-ye, you may Rant, and play the Devil;
There Is naught but Patience cures the Marriage-Evil.
The Thing is plain, and Instances are Common;
No Man is Half a Match for any Woman.
FINIS.

