THE GOTHAM ELECTION, A FARCE.

By Mrs. CENTLIVRE,

-- Quirites
Defossa in Loculis quos sportula fecit Amicos.
[Juv. Sat. 10. LONDON: Printed and Sold by S. KEIMER, at the Printing-Press in
Paternoster Row. 1715.

TO JAMES CRAGGS, Jun. Esquire Cofferer to His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales,
and Member of the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
Do me the Honor to afford your Protection to these two Petites Pieces; I am
sure none ever stood in more need of so generous a Friend and a Defender as you
are; though I dare not say they deserve this Benefit by any real Merit of their
own, yet they have one Title to the Protection of all well natured People,
which is, that they have Enemies undeserved, and were persecuted by those that
did not know 'em.

If they had gone through a legal Course of Theatrical Justice, though it might
have been partial, yet I should have submitted to it, as others had done before
me; but to be prejudged and condemned unheard, was harder Measure than any body
else meets with at this time a Day.

The Election, which had the Honor to pass your Approbation, was objected
against as a Party - Matter: I fancy both Sides will agree that there are
unreasonable Heats and Extravagancies belonging to each of 'em, which deserve
to be exposed, laughed at, and exploded by all true Lovers of their Country,
since by such Arts, our Enemies find the way to poison our Constitution.

For the other, it was said there would be Offense taken at the exposing a
Popish Priest. Good God! To what sort of People are we changed! Are those
worthy Gentlemen (the Emissaries of our most avowed and irreconcilable Enemy)
to be treated with so much Tenderncss.? Is not their very Profession Treason in
any Subject of Great Britain? Have our Neighbors in France treated the Clergy
of the Reformed Religion with the same Regard? But let that pass, since they
have their Friends and Advecates even here, I hope I have some too; it is not
an unpardonable Sin with every Body to wish well to the Liberties and Religion
of one's Country: No, Sir, I assure my self, you have Goodness enough to
overlook a great many other Faults, where you find an honest and disinterested
Zeal for our present happy Constitution. YOU, whose good Judgment ever engaged
you on the right Side, the Protestant Succession, and the Interest of Britain;
YOU who scorned to herd with the Betrayers of your Country, or raise your
Fortunes on the Ruins of your Fellow Subjects; YOU who so generously espoused
my Interest, when you knew my Intention of dedicating to His Royal Highness,
then Duke of Cambridge, will have the Goodness to protect a Woman who has no
other Merit but her good Inclinations, and perpetual Wishes for the Prosperity
of the present Government. These were Principles, which, you know, she was not
ashamed of owning, even when it was almost Criminal to pay any Marks of Respect
to that Royal Family, under which our Laws and our Liberties are now so happily
secured.

I wish, Sir, that you may find any thing in either of these little Comedies,
that may entertain you at some leisure Hour. I know very well, that your Time
is at present, too precious to be thrown away upon Trifles; that House of
Commons of which you are so worthy, and so ornamental a Member, have the
noblest and greatest Task now lying before them, the Vindication of our Public
Honor to all Europe, and the Extricating us out of such Difficulties, as only
one Set of Men in the World could plunge us into; but they will meet their
Reward; and You, with those worthy Patriots engaged with You, will find yours
in the Thanks of the present Age, and the Blessings of that of Posterity.

I might here expatiate on the many excellent Qualifications You are Master of,
did I not know it would be harder to obtain your Pardon for touching upon that
Subject, than for presuming to shroud these little Pieces under the Protection
of your Name; besides, I think it needless at high Noon, to tell the World that
it is light, since all that have Eyes, must see the Day; and all that have the
Honor to know Mr. Craggs, knows his Character is above my Reach, consequently,
would suffer from the Attempt of any Pen so weak as mine: Therefore shall only
beg Leave to subscribe with the profoundest Respect, Sir,

Your most Obliged, most Obedient, and most Devoted humble Servant, Susanna
Centlivre.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN I writ this little Farce, I was not without Hopes of having it
represented on the Stage; what I proposed to my self, was, the Honor to show
their Royal Highnesses the Manner of our Elections, and entertain the Town with
a Subject entirely new: It has had the good Fortune to please several Persons
of Distinction, and Taste, in the Reading, and some of our best Judges assured
me, it could not fail to entertain from the Stage; but the Subject being upon
Elections, the Master of the Revels did not care to meddle with it, and the
Players act nothing without his License, so that I had given over all Thoughts
of its appearing in Public. But the Word Election, it seems, immediately
furnished out a Thousand scandalous Stories, and I was become the Subject of
every Coffee-House in Town; and notwithstanding my Friends endeavored to do me
Justice as often as they heard me aspersed, yet for my clearer Justification,
they were of Opinion I ought to print it, since several Persons had been so
industriously malicious as to report that this Farce was a most impudent
notorious Libel upon her Late Majesty; than which there is nothing more false,
and the World will see how little Ground there is for such a Report; its so far
from being a Satyr upon her, that there is not one personal Reflection designed
through the whole Piece; I was obliged indeed to make an Opposition of Parties,
to heighten the Humor; it had been impossible to have writ any Thing upon the
Subject without it; but I dare be positive, that the Persons among whom the
Scenes lie would have given more Diversion than Offense to the Spectators of
either Party. I endeavored to make every Thing appear as natural as I could,
and for that Reason only, I stuck Wool in the Hats of my Whigs, and Laurel in
those of the Tories; though I would be glad to know why the latter made use of
the Laurel to dislinguish themselves, when they were laboring to give up all
the Conquests we had won: I should have thought a Sprig of Rosemary had been
the properer Emblem of the then approaching Funeral of our Church and State,
since the Chevalier's Friends were endeavoring to bury our Religion, and
Liberty, under Tyranny and Popish Superstition. Had Parliaments been Part of
the Legislature among the Ancients, and our Manner of Elections known to, and
practiced by them, Apollo would certainly have shown Vengance on the unworthy
Wearers of his favorite Tree: The Laurel was ever held the Emblem of Joy, and
Reward of Virtue: Hence it was worn by Victors in the Olympic Games; but have
Englishmen Reason to rejoice in those Measures, that paved the Way for a French
Government, and a Popish King?

The Roman Soldiers, who followed their Triumphs, were crowned with Laurel, to
denote an Expiation of the Blood which they had shed in the Wars; but our
Lawrel-wearers can draw no Parellel from thence, except deserting our Allies,
selling our Trade, disgracing our Generals, giving up those glorious Conquests
they had won, deserved to be crowned with Laurel, or that they would be thought
to wear it as an Expiation of the Blood of the Catalans, and of the Twelve
Thousand cut to Pieces at Denain, by the fatal Cessation of Arms.

Whatever Reason they had for wearing it, I am glad they had not an Opportunity
of making use of it, in the Triumph they designed over the Laws and Liberties
of their Country.

Here I cannot omit taking notice how much the Popish Faction increased under
the traitorous Management of the late Ministry, and we see by their daily
Insults, that it is at the hazard of Life or Interest, at least, that we dare
vindicate our Religion, and Liberty. Had the Author of Lady Jane Gray made her
a Papist, and Gardener a Bishop of the Church of England, and the Play been
represented on the French Stage, what Protestant would have dared to call it a
Popish Play, without running the Danger of the Galleys? If the Title of a
certain Monarch, who was also set up by the People, in Opposition to the Right
Line, were to be represented on the Theater of France, not even the first Peer
of that Nation durst to have vented one Murmur, much less his, without he were
furnished with Philosophy enough to endure the Bastile, and yet the Papists and
their Abettors dare to do it here. It is with the utmost Indignation, that I
see those wholesome Laws neglected, which ought to be put in Execution against
such professed Enemies of our Church and State; for to the Indolence of our
People in Power, are all our present Divisions and Distractions owing; though for
the Author of that excellently writ Poem abovementioned, I dare answer for
him, is under no Concern for any Thing that Faction can either say or write,
since it is very evident their Malice is not levelled against him but against
our Religion and Liberties, which he has in that Piece vindicated so well, and
set the Cruelties of Rome in so true a Light, that a great Part of our Clergy
may blush to see the Stage become a better Advocate for Protestantism than the
Pulpit; and as often as that Tragedy shall be represented the Author's Memory
shall be honored to Posterity, whilst those Pretenders to the Church, the
High-Flying and Nonjuring-Party shall be remembered. with the utmost Detestation.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Tlckup, a Candidate for Gotham. Sir John Worthy, another Candidate talked on
but not seen. Friendly, an Agent for Sir Roger Trusty. Scoredouble, an
Innkeeper. Watt Washball, a Barber. The Mayor of Gotham. Mallet, a Carpenter,
and his Son. Scruple a Quaker. A Cobbler. A Miller. Ben Blunt. Gregory Gabble.
Roger Sly. Timothy Shallow.
WOMEN.
Lady Worthy. Gooddy Gabble. Gooddy Shallow. Gooddy Sly. Midwife, and other
Women.
SCENE, Gotham. THE GOTHAM ELECTION,
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter on one Side Mr. Friendly, On the other, Scoredouble, an Innkeeper.
Friend. HA! Landlord, I Am glad to see you.


Score. Mr. Friendly, You are Welcome.


Friend. I hope Mrs. Score-double, and your pretty Daughter's well.


Score. Yes, Yes, Sir, the Women are in good Case; my Wife, as the old Zaying
is, is better in Health than good Conditions. In troth I Am glad to zee you,
pray, What brought you to Gotham an I may be so bold to ask you? Elections, I
warrant you?


Friend. Something like it, Landlord; pray what sort of a Man is your Mayor?


Score. Why his Worship is a huge Admiror of the French; Nay it is whispered by
zome, that his Zon is with the Knight of the Dragon, for he has never been zeen
zince the Duke of what do you call him went away.


Friend. Say you so!


Score. Ay, an he has a Daughter, a weighty Girl, I promise you: Od would you
had her, Mr. Friendly, she has five Thousand Pound, and a tight Lover of her
Country,


Friend. Five Thousand Pound! a-gad a sudden Thought comes into my Head, I Will
pursue it; who knows but I may make some lucky Discovery: I thank you for your
kind Wishes, Landlord, but I can never hope for such a Fortune: His Son with
the Knight of the Dragon, say you, why then your Mayor is a Jacobite.


Score. Nay, he is shrewdly suspected by zome to be a downright Papist in his
Heart; but to zay Truth of him, he does go to Church constantly, he does,
indeed; he does go to Church.


Friend. A pretty Fellow for the Head of a Corporation.


Score. What do you please to drink, Sir?


Friend. Why bring us the best your House affords.


Score. The best my House affords, ha, ha, ha, that is as you think it, Sir; --
now most of our Gentry, for this last vour Years, do you mind, will touch nothing
but French Claret, -- there are zome that like your Port Wines still, but very
few, and those of the poorer Zort too, as my Barboard can Witness.


Friend. Come, bring such as you like your self.


Score. Why then Master we'll have a Bottle of white Lisbon. -- Here Sam. bring
a Bottle of the best White Lisbon, do you hear.


Friend. Withal my Heart. -- Well Landlord, and how will Elections go with you
in Gotham?


Score. Why here is old tugging vort: -- Here has been zuch roasting of Oxen!
Zuch veasting, and zuch caballing, as you never zaw the like! Here Is one Squire
Tickup, a Londoner I think puts up for one; -- he is over Head and Ears in Debt,
they zay, and zo has a Mind to get above the Law, and pay no Body.


Friend. That Is one Way indeed to serve himself; but he that has not Honesty
enough to pay his own Debts, may easily be brought to give up the Debts of the
Nation. -- I hope he has no considerable Number of Votes secured, has he?


Score. He has zome. -- Here has happened an unfortunate Squabble between Sir
John Worthy, and his Lady?


Friend. Sir John Worthy! Does not he put up too?


Score. Ay, and he and his Family has represented this zame Borough of Gotham
these Vorty Years, and yet I believe he will lose it now, I am sorry vor't, vor
he is a very honest Gentleman.


Friend. How so prithee?


Score. Why you must know, his Lady is a what do you call it, -- a High-Flyer, --
and nothing zo great as our Parson's Wife and she; now you must know, the
Parson had given my Lady a Game Cockeril, -- and, as the Devil would have it, a
Diffenter's Dog happened to worry this zame Cockeril, -- and because Sir John
would not go to Law with him for his Dog's Fault, my Lady zwears he is a Rebel,
and would pull down the Church.


Friend. Ha, ha, excellent; but how does this effect Sir John's Election?


Score. Why my Lady being plaguey cunning de mind, -- she reserved to her self a
Thousand Pound when she married Sir John; now she swears she will spend every
Groat on it, but she will fling Sir John out of his Election, and under the Rose,
do you zee, they zay that she, and this zame Squire Tickup, are mainly well
acquainted; zo she veasts the Good Wives, do you mind, and so secures all those
Husbands Votes, whose Wives wear the Britches, ha, ha, ha.


Friend. Ha, ha, come my Service to you, and to all those honest Fellows not
under Petticoat Government.


Score. Withal my Heart, hang Petticoat Government I zay, Zooks I love to wear
my own Breeches.


Friend. Here Is strange Juggling it seems.


Score. Ha, ha, but now you talk of Juggling, we had rare juggling here not long
since, we had like to have had all the Money in the Country juggled away.


Friend. As how!


Score. Why here was a Trickster came down to Gotham. --

Enter Wat Washball. Ho, Wat Washball! Come in, come in mun; this zame Man can
testify what I am going to zay: He is a very honest Freeholder, of vour Pounds
a Year, zo he is, -- a Barber here by; with your leave Master I Will drink to him.


Friend. Pray do, you are welcome Friend.


Wat. Thank you Sir.


Score. Come puil a Chair Wat, and zit down; I was telling Master Friendly
here, of the Trickster that changed the Cards zo you know Wat, in the Town Hall.


Wat. Ay, that was a bitter Dog, I believe we shall not forget him in Haste.


Friend. Why what did he do?


Score. Why you must know Sir he played several Tricks, but his greatest Skill
lay in changing the Cards, -- He had a plaguey Nack at that; -- don't you
remember Wat, -- how he dealt a Card round the Hall, -- when our High Sheriff
had got the Ace of Hearts, you know?


Wat. Ay, as plain an Ace of Hearts as ever I zaw in all my born.


Score. Ay, and what does this zame Trickster but with one -- Whif, conjures a
way this zame Ace of Hearts, -- and claps the Knave of Clubs in its Place.


Friend. Ha, ha, ha.


Score. When my Neighbor Washball, and I zaw that, we would have had the Mayor
made his Mittimuss, and zent him to Gaol.


Wat. No, no, not for that, not for that Landlord, it was for changing an
English Guinea into a French Pistole, you know.


Score. Right, right, zo it was Wat, zo it was, and you know the Mayor said the
Pistole was the better Gold, and would not meddle with him vor't.


Friend. But there was Four Shillings lost by that Change, what could your
Mayor say for that?


Wat. Zay! Why he pretended to prove by Logic, I think he called it, -- that
Seventeen and Sixpence was more than One and Twenty and Sixpence.


Friend. Pretty Sophistry truly, for a Mayor of a Corporation; -- and what is
become of this Juggler?


Score. Gone to the Devil, vor ought I know.


Friend. From whence came he?


Wat. Why some say from one Part, some an other; but those that pretend to know
best, say he came from some Part of the Zouth-Seas.


Friend. I rather believe the South-Seas came from him.


Wat. Pray What is this zame Zouth-Zeas? A Shire, Town, Borough, or
Market Town?


Friend. It was a Market, and once had a very great Trade for Flumery and Leeks.


Score. Well, of all Garden Stuff, I hate those Zame Leeks.


Wat. They leave a plaguey stink behind them.


Enter Drawer. Drawer. Dinner's upon Table, Sir.


Score. Master Friendly, will you eat a Slice of a Buttock of Beef and Carrots?


Friend. Withal my Heart, -- and after Dinner, I should be glad if you would bring
me acquainted with some of the honest Fellows of Gotham; I Will try if I can
recommend a worthy Gentleman to them, one that has Gold enough, and owes no Man
a Groat, is as generous as a Prince, and loves his Country as he loves his Wife.


Score. Ha, ha, ha, troth Master that may be little enough, for what as I do
know, -- pray who is he?


Friend. Sir Roger Trusty.


Score. Sir Roger! I shall be glad to zee him with all my Heart Blood and
Gutts, as they zay.

(Exeunt.
SCENE changes to a Room in a Tavern. Enter Lady Worthy, Mr. Tickup, Gooddy
Gabble, and Gooddy Shallow. Lady. Never fear my dear Tickup, -- as far as my
Thousand Pound goes I Will stand by you, I Will spend it every Shilling but carry
my Point; I hate a Whig so much, that I ll throw my Husband out of his
Election, or throw my self out of the World; a Parsel of canting Rogues; they
have always Moderation in their Mouths, -- rank Resistance in their Hearts, --
and hate Obedience even to their Lawful Wives, -- and then they bear a Mortal
Hatred to Three Pound Fourteen and Fippence!


Tick. Ay, they hate all Coin that will not take their Impression.


Lady. Why there is my Brute of a Husband now, he hates the French so much, that
he will not let poor Fanny learn to dance.


Good. G. Nay my Husband is a little poisoned that Way too; -- will you believe
it, Madam, he had the Impudence to forbid me Dancing with your Honor's Worship
last Night; -- he said Dancing was a bold Recreation, and that it was an Inlet
to Sin; -- but I plucked up a Spirit, and told him I would do it, that I would
dance, and dance again, so I would, -- od my Gentleman was soon snub'd, for he
knew an he raised my Passion once, he would have enough to do to get it down
again.


Good. S. Well, an I zay but one Word to Timothy Shallow, down goes Thimble and
Shears, -- and up he takes Gloves and Stick, and away goes he. -- Ah, you're a
happy Woman, Gooddy Gabble, your Husband is a Man every Inch of him, I Will zay
that for him.


Good. G. You Will say that for him; Pray how come you to know what Man my
Husband is, Gooddy Shallow? Have you found him a Man for your Business, ha?


Good. S. I, I found your Husband a Man for my Business, I have a Husband as
fit for Business as yours; -- and though I zay it, that should not zay it, there
is not a better Workman in the Parish.


Tick. Ay, ay, they are both good Workmen enough in their Way; she only jested
with you, that is all.


Lady. Ay, ay Neighbors nothing else, -- well, you will use your Endeavors with
your Husbands to give their Votes for Mr. Tickup.


G. Gab. That I shall sure Madam, -- your Worship promises me I shall nurse the
young Squire, as soon as he is born.


Tick. That you shall.


G. Gab. And I am to have Twenty Pounds a Year. --


Lady. Ay, I Will pass my Word for it.


G. Gab. I thank your Ladyship, -- not that I doubt your Word Madam, or the
bountiful Squire's in the least; -- but, but, but, an, an the Squire would
advance a Years Sallery aforehand, it would go a great Way with my Husband; --
for you must know, that Gregory Gabble is an honest Man, and will not vote against
his Conscience, if it were not for his Interest; -- now Sir John, you know
Madam, promises to renew his Lease Gratis, if he votes for him, but an he votes
against him, he will not bate him a Groat so he will not, you know your Husband's
Temper, Madam.


Lady. Oh prithee name him not, you will give me the Vapors; there, there is
Twenty Pound for you, let me hear his odious Name no more.


Tick. Take Notice Gooddy Gabble, those Twenty Pounds are to pay for nursing of
a Child that shall be born, -- no Matter when.


G. Gab. No, no, no, no Matter whether ever or never, I Will take it when you
send it, sure sweet Squire.


Tick. It is not out of any Sinister End to suborn your Husband, no, I scorn
it, I am an honest Man, and a Lover of the Church, and will take Care the
Roguish Whigs don't pull down a Hassock in it.


Lady. Ay Neighbors, Mr. Tickup's a Good Churchman, mark that! He is none of
your occasional Cattle, none of your hellish Pantile Crew; -- Oh we shall never
thrive till all these canting Whigs are whipped out of the Kingdom; -- Oh that I
had the Jerking of them, I Would teach 'em Passive-Obedience, or make the Devil come
out of 'em.


G. Shall. Well, your Ladyship is a very wise Woman, that is certain: Good lack,
how she does talk, Neighbor Gabble? -- Oh she is a great Woman.


Lady. Ay, and you shall be a great Woman too, Gooddy Shallow, if Mr. Tickup
carries the Day; well, I Will say no more, but every Body don't know Mr. Tickup's
Power; -- but there is a certain great Prince, that shall be nameless, that has
a very great Kindness for him, and for ought I know he may stand as fair for a
Garter as the best of them, one Day.


G. Shall. Pray Squire, will you be so kind as to recommend my Tim. to that same
Great Prince, to be his Tailor?


Lady. He shall do it, your Husband shall be his Tailor, and you shall be
dresser to his Queen.


G. Shall. And will your Honor's Worship do this?


Tick. I Will do any Thing to serve you Gooddy Shallow.


G. Shall. Will you truly! Well Timothy Shallow, thou art a made Man; -- and am
I born to be a Courtier? Good lack, Good lack. --


G. Gab. Bless me! Who would have thought that you with your Broomstick, would
have come to such Honor, Gooddy Shallow?


G. Shall. Ay, who indeed; -- but I ha no vine Clothes to go to Court in though,
what mun I do for that now?


Tick. Why to show you that I have a Kindness for you and your Husband, there
is Ten Guineas to rig you, for the Honors I design to prefer you to. (gives
her Money.


G. Shall. Ah Heaven bless your good Worship, me and mine will be obliged to
pray for for you, as long as we live.


Lady. Look you there now, when would a Whig have done as much? -- Bless me,
I Am in a Sweat when I but name a Whig. -- (Fans her self and walks about.


Tick. I take a Pleasure to serve my Country Folks, and am proud of an
Opportunity to do good Offices; -- for my Part, I should not be concerned if I
lost the Election, otherways than not being in a Capacity to serve my poor
Country, at this Juncture.


Lady. There Is a Man for ye Neighbors! now could you find in your Heart,
Gooddy Shallow, to deny this Gentleman any Thing, any Thing, any Thing, I say?


G. Shall. No, by my truly, I think I could not, why should I belie my
Conscience? Madam, come here is the Squire's Health. (drinks.


Tick. I am obliged to you Goody Shallow. (kisses her.


G. Shall. Good Gentleman, he is not proud; -- odd he kisses main sweetly, Madam.


Lady. Ay, Does he not? -- Well, you will bring your Husband over?


G. Shall. Over! ay, Madam, or he shall never come over -- my Threshold more, I
can tell him but that.


Enter Drawer. Draw. Sir, here is Goodman Mallet, the Carpenter, enquires for
you; he says you sent for him.


Lady. No, -- I sent for him in your Name; he is a filly Fellow, but no matter
for that, he can do you great Service; humor him in all he says, bring him up.
(Exit Drawer. Give him Money, if you can handsomely top it upon him; -- there is
a hundred Guineas, when they are gone, you shall have more; -- if you can get
Mallet's Vote, he will bring you twenty at least.


Tick. My charming Woman, -- you oblige me to be for ever yours. (kisses her.


Lady. Come Neighbor, let us retire, it may not be proper for us to hear
Goodman Mallet's Business you know.

(Exit.
G. Gabb. No, no, no, no, come, come, come, we'll go, we'll go. Good Sir, your
most humble Servant, I Will bring you Gregory Gabble, I warrant you.

(Exit.
G. Shall. And so will I my Timothy Shallow, sweet Squire.

(Exit.
Enter Mallet. Tick. Mr. Mallet, your Servant.

(Takes out 20 Guineas, and plays with them on the Table as he talks.
Mall. your humble Servant, Sir, pray what is your Business with me?


Enter Drawer. Tick. Come sit down, Sir; -- here, the House.


Draw. Did you call, Sir?


Tick. Ay, what Wine do you drink Mr. Mallet?


Mall. It Is all one to me, Sir.


Tick. Then bring up a Bottle of French Red.


Draw. You shall have it, Sir.

(Exit.
Tick. Mr. Mallet, there is a very honest Gentleman gives his Service to you,
charged me to see you, and gave me a Token to drink with you.


Mall. Pray who may that be?


Tick. One Mr. Double.


Mall. Ha! Master Double.


Drawer within.] A Bottle of French Red in the Flower-de-Luce. Score.


Enter with Bottle and Glass. Tick. Come Mr. Mallet, Mr. Doubles Health to you.


Mall. With all my Heart, I have earned many a fair Pound of him; -- some says
he is an ill Paymaster, but I will not say so, for he paid me very honestly, though I
must needs say he is a little long winded. -- Sir, an you please, my Service to
you, remembering Master Double.


Tick. Thank you Mr. Mallet; well, how do you like the Wine? I think it is
pretty good. (drinks.


Mall. I think so too, Sir; -- but second Thoughts is best.


Pick. Right; -- Come here is to your Fireside, Mr. Mallet, I suppose you are a
married Man.


Mall. Ay, Master, I have been married these five and twenty Years; I have a
Son's Wife lies In now.


Tick. I Will stand Godfather, if he be not better provided, Mr. Mallet.


Mall. Sir, your humble Servant, a dare say he will accept of your kind Offer,
and thank you too.


Tick. Is he all the Children you have, Mr. Mallet?


Mall. No, Sir, I have four Sons and three Daughters in all, fine young Men and
Women as any in the Parish, no dispraise to the best. My eldest Son is a
Lawyer, just out of his time, a smart young Fellow, I promise you, Sir. My
second I brought up to my own Trade, and he is a very great Master of his
Business, though I say it, as any is in all Gotham. My third Son is a Bookseller,
a notable Fellow, he lives in London; he is a kind of a Wit; too, they say, and
makes Verses; then he has an admirable Knack at quacking Titles. Perhaps you
may know what that is, Sir, but for my part, I do not, I confess, understand
it; but they tell me, when he gets an old good for nothing Book, he claps a new
Title to it, and sells off the whole Impression in a Week.


Tick. It Is a good way of imposing on the Public, why he will be a rich Fellow
in a short time?


Mall. Ay, so they say; but my youngest Lad troubles me most of all.


Pick. How so, pray?


Mall. Why you must know, Sir, he is a main weakly Boy, he had the Rickets till
he was seven Years old, which took away his Strength, and hugely dulled his
Memory; so that he is dull, very dull, Sir; I cannot think what to breed him to,
that don't require much Strength of Body, nor Application of Mind: His Mother
is for making him a Parson, but the Rogue will not hear on it.


Tick. Oh, Mr. Mallet! by your Description, he is very unfit for a Parson.


Mall. Why so I tell her, Sir, and in my Opinion we had better get him a Place
at Court.


Tick. Ay, there indeed you are in the right; I don't know but I may be able to
serve you there, if you will endeavor to put it in my Power.


Mall. As how pray?


Tick. Why, Sir, you must know, I stand one of the Candidates for this Borough
of Gotham; and if you will be so kind to give me your own Vote, and engage your
Friends to do the same, I Will take care of your Son, I promise you.


Mall. Pray what may your Name be, Sir?


Tick. My Name is Tickup, Sir.


Mall. Tickup! ah, Sir, you lose it for a Wager with you.


Tick. Why do you think so?


Mall. Why, Sir, our Town has an Aversion for the Family of the Tickups; it is
a Name very much hated I assure you, an I might advise you, I Would change it into
Ready Cash, ha, ha.


Tick. You are witty upon my Name, Mr. Mallet; but no matter for that, what
will you lay I don't carry't? I Will hold you twenty Guineas to one I do, and you
shall hold Stakes.


Mall. By Mess, I Will take this Wager, if I never hold another, done, Sir.


Tick. Done; there, there is twenty Guineas. (pushes 'em to him.


Mall. Well, if I should lose my Guinea, Mr. Tickup, you will remember a Place
for my Son,


Tick. That I will indeed, Mr. Malet; but then you must not vote against me.


Mall. No, No, that I will not I promise you; but an I engage my Friends, you must
promise to do a Kindness or two more for me.


Tick. Name 'em, and command me.


Mall. Why could not you now get my Son the Lawyer made Lord Chancellor, think
you?


Tick. Cannot! Yes, and will too.


Mall. Will ye? Ay, pray you do -- an, an, hold, hold, I have the Names of all
the great Places in a Bit of Paper somewhere, if I find 'em, but -- I took 'em
out of the present State of Gotham, -- ho! here here it is -- Ay, let me see,
-- yes, yes, -- Lord Steward, ay, Lord Steward! ay, that is a very pretty Post,
that do you mark me, I would have for my Son Ned -- the Carpenter, he
understands how to keep the House in good Repair -- and that is a main Matter,
you know; his Majesty need give himself no manner of Trouble.


Tick. Oh, that will be a very great Advantage; well; I Will take care about that
too.


Mall. And the Bookseller! I Would have him -- de ze -- ho! I Would have him Groom of
the Stole.


Tick. There you are perfectly right, because he will have an Opportunity to
make use of his Verses.


Mall. Then for my youngest Son! What mun he be? -- Why, what an you should
make him Treasurer now! for the Rogue always loved Money. And for my Daughters
-- I fancy they would do rarely well for the King's Maids of Honor.


Tick. Oh excellently well -- all this I promise you.


Mall. Do you truly? -- Well, you are a huge civil Gentleman, and so my humble
Service to you -- Well, I Will say no more -- but an I do not bring you twenty
Votes, my Names's not Mallet, d' ye see, that is all, that is all -- and so, Sir,
your Servant with all my Heart (going. Hold! one thing more I must desire of
you -- I have an own Cosen, that is a Sailor -- suppose now you should make
him somewhat, -- an Admiral -- or a Boatswain, or so d' ye see?


Tick. He shall be one of them, I promise you.


Mall. Shall he in troth? -- well, good bye to you, and thank you kindly (going.


Tick. Mr. Mallet, your humble Servant, -- oh the Devil!


Mall. Methinks I love to do Good in my Generation; though to say Truth, the
graceless Dog does not deserve it; but no matter -- as long as you can have it
for speaking for, you know?


Tick. What is it? Death, this Fellow would tire a Porter.


Mall. I have a Nephew somewhere or other, his Name is Sam Slash, a Soldier.
Pray enquire him out, wol you, and make him -- ay, make him a Coporal, or a
Colonel, or somewhat of that, now.


Tick. Well, well, this I promise you, Have you any thing eise?


Mall. No, no, I will not trouble you any more, not I -- your Servant (going.


Tick. Give me leave to wait of you down.


Mall. Odso! I had forgot my Wife Joan, well thought on In Faith -- she would
never have forgiven me, if I had not remembered her; -- Joan must have
somewhat, Mr. Tickup, what can Joan have now, think; pray think a little for
her?


Tick, Let me see -- why, suppose she were made Oyster-Cracker to the Court now.


Mall. Oyster-Cracker! I don't remember any such Post in my List.


Tick. Oh! never trouble your Head about that, there is, or shall be such a
Post.


Mall. Shall there! well, well, that will do then -- but, but, but, I doubt
Joan will never be content to live at Court without me; -- Cannot you contrive
some small Place for me too -- Any thing will serve me -- I Will be satisfied
with being Lord Mayor; I am very modest in my Requests, you see?


Tick. Modest, quotha! ha, ha, well, well, you shall be Lord Mayor.


Mall. Well, well, that is enough -- will you believe me, Mr. Tickup? I really
love my Friends as well as my self -- why here is an honest Pot-Companion of
mine, Barnaby Bran, the Baker; methinks I would fain make his Fortune too, can
you think of nothing for him.


Tick. Honest Barnaby Bran, the Baker! I have a rare Place for him.


Mall. Have you really now! What is it pray?


Tick. Why he shall be -- Master of the Rolls.


Mall. He will be main thankful; what is it a Patent Place?


Tick. Yes, yes, a Patent Place?


Mall. And have you any thing for his Wife?


Tick. His Wife, ay, she shall have Pattins too.


Mall. Od, that will please her Husband mainly.


Tick. Ay, she has been a Clogg to him a great while, no doubt on it (aside.


Mall. Well, honest Squire, your humble Servant

(Exit.
Tick. I Am glad I Am rid of him; bless me, if it were in my Power now to keep my
Word, what a prodigious Company this Fellow has provided for! -- but thanks to
Policy, a Man is not always obliged to keep his Word: --

The Courtier, Politician, and the Beau,
Whatever you ask, will never anser, now
But Closely pressed, you will find their whole Proceeding,
Neither more nor less, than pure good Breeding.
(Exit.
Scene chages to the Mayor's House. Enter Mayor with a Letter in his Hand.
Friendly dressed like a Frenchman. May. Well, and how does all our Friends on
the other side the Water, ha? Well, I hope?


Friend. Oh fort bien, Monsieur Mayor, and Monsieur le Chevalier, be varey much
your humble Serviture, Begar.


May. I am very much his I am sure. -- Come Monsieur to the Fatherless and
Widow. (Drinks


Friend. Vid all mine Heart, dat every Man may have his his own, Begar (Drinks.


May. Amen, I say; -- but I must desire you, Monsieur, to explain this Letter
to me? My Daughter tells me it is not English?


Friend. No, dis be French, Sir.


May. French! what has my Son learned French already? -- But what made him
write French to me, when he knows that I can neither write nor read, -- and
that no Body understands a Word of French in the Parish?


Friend. Oh for dat very Reason he did write in French, because it be one grand
Secret, and he know me to be de very fedelle Person, in whom de Grand
Monarchs in dis Vorld put a der Confidance, you understand a me, Monsieur?


May. Yes, yes, Oh Blessings on my Boy, he will certainly raise his Family; --
a Secret! pray read it softly.


Friend. Oh softly by all Means. -- First, den, he tell you here, dat de Knight
of de Draggon give his most humble Service to you. and prays you to take a de
care to make de good Members for him.


May. Ay, ay, I will do all that in me lies.


Friend. And for dat purpose, you shall receive one, two, three hundred
Pistoles, in one, two, three Days ma foy.


May. Very well, very well; -- pray let him know that the last Money that was
remitted, has been prudently employed for the Chevalier's Service: Our Parson
Blow-Coal is right Stanch, he distributed it, with a strict Charge to have
Regard to the Church; the Noise of the Church, you know, does much, Monsieur?
-- My Brother, Alderman Credulous had two hundred Pounds.


Friend. Humph, well said Parson; this News shall to Sir Roger Trusty (aside)
ha, ha, ha, Begar, dat will do de Business; de Cry of de Church will bring in
de King par blue; but one ting more, Monsieur Mayor, he say here in dis Letter,
dat de Knight of de Draggon charge you right or wrong to return de vat do you
call 'em -- de High-Church.


May. Ay, ay, that he may depend on; oh my dear Boy! And what is my Boy a
Favorite abroad, ha?


Friend. Oh, a great Favorite, I assure you. -- Den here be one ting more; --
he prays you to send by me his Sister for de Education, -- because it be
whispered, dat if dese plaguey Low-Chucrh get de Day, -- dey vill make it
Treason for any one to send der Children to France, Begar; no, dey vill send
them for Education to Scotland, and bring all de young Ladies to de Stool of
Repentance, ma foy.


May. Zounds, I Would send mine to Lapland sooner, though I Am a Protestant my self,
because I was born so d' ye see; yet I had rather breed my Children at Rome,
than Geneva; Zounds, I hate these Whiggish Dogs.


Friend. Begar de Pope no love them neither, dey be de dam Fellows for de
Liberty and Property; but your Daughter, your Daughter, Monsieur Mayor. --


May. She shall along with you, Monsieur, -- her Aunt left her five thousand
Pounds; -- I wish you could persuade her to turn Nun; one thousand would
provide for her in the Nunnery, -- and the other four would make my Son a Lord.


Friend. Oh let de Priest get her once, and begar he vill make her -- someting,
I warrant you.


May. But which way shall I get her over, she will never consent to leave
England; for you must know she is plaguey Low in her Principles?


Friend. Me tell you one Politic, -- it is vine Veder! ask her to go vid you
and me to see de Ship dat bring me hither, and ven she be in de Ship vid me,
some body must stop your going up de Ship, and tell you dat Day came all
Express for you upon de grand Business of de Nation, ma Boy, so you leave us,
vid de Promise to return presently; -- so as soon as you be gone, me make a de
Master hoist a Sail, and away for Callais, Begar.


May. Excellent Contrivance! -- we'll about it this Moment. -- I can but laugh
to think how I shall chouse the young Jade into her Happiness.


Friend. And I can but laugh to think how you will be choused out of your
Daughter, if Luck favors me. (Aside,


May. And pray tell my Son, I Will observe his Direction, -- my Clerk shall sit
up all this Night to write Conveyances; -- I Will make twenty Freeholders before
Morning yet.


Friend. As how pray, Monsieur Mayor?


May. Oh we have Ways and Means, -- why I Will undertake, d' ye see, to make four
Notes out of a Gooseberry-Bush, and six out of a Hogs-Sty. --


Friend. Begar dose be de very sweet Votes.

(Exit.
Scene changes to the Street. A Cobbler at work in his Stall under an Alehouse.
Enter Mr. Tickup. Tick. Speed your Work, Friend, your Trade depends upon good
Husbandry.


Cob. Ay, Master, zo't does, as you zay; but I make new Shoes sometimes, as
well as mend old ones. --


Tick. Say you so! why you shall be my Shoemaker, -- if you will do me a small
Kindness.


Cob. Getting up with Cap in hand] What is it, Master, to put a Stitch in your
Shoe, I warrant you?


Tick. No, only to give me your Vote, that is all.


Cob. Sits down to work again.] All, quotha! why that is all many a Man has to
live on; at this time, a small Kindness! ha, ha, ha, it is a small Kindness,
truly.


Tick. What say you, Friend, will you?


Cob. I don't know, I believe not.


Tick. Why so, pray you?


Cob. I cannot tell, -- mehap I may; -- mehap I may not d' ye see.


Tick. Have you promised any body else?


Cob. Suppose I have, -- suppose I have not, what then? Look ye, my Vote's as
good as the best Man's in the Parish, or next Parish to it, that is proud Word d'
ye see; -- and I Would take care who I gin to, zo I wol. (sings.


Tick. Nay, you are in the right of that, but no Man shall do more for the
Corporation than my self.


Cob. Ay, ay, you all talk it well affore you get in; -- but you are no sooner
chose, -- but whip you are as proud as the Devil, -- and a Man cannot speak
Truth, but you come with your Candelum Natum sous upon us.


Tick. Pride is the least Sign of a Gentleman, and I don't know if I should not
rather be called Rogue, than a proud Man.


Cob. And mehap he would not lie that called you both, ha, ha.


Tick. I am sorry you should have so ill an Opinion of me.


Cob. Why are you not proud now?


Tick. I think I may safely say I am not.


Cob. Why then -- come and kiss me.


Tick. Withal my Heart. (kisses him.

Well, what think you now? will you give me your Vote yet?


Cob. Look ye, fare and softly, -- I am not throwly satisfied, whether I shall
give you my Vote or not.


Tick. I am sorry for that; -- but if you will go to the Tavern, I Will give you a
Pint of Wine, whether you will give me your Vote or not, for I like you for your
Bluntness.


Cob. I dant value your Wine of this Hog's Bristle, do you see; -- I am an honest
Man, do you see, -- and am for a free Government, I Am none of those that are to
be bribed; -- now an you are not proud, d' ye see, -- why come into my Stall,
here, and I Will give you a Flaggon of Ale.


Tick. Oh the Devil, that will dirty all my Clothes: (aside.) Had not we better
go into the Alehouse?


Cob. Look ye there now, did not I say you was proud? No, Sir, I will not leave my
Stall, those that are ashamed off me, -- why I am ashamed of them, d' ye see,
that is all. (Sings and works.


Tick. A Pox of the unpolished Blockhead, I must humor him. (Gathers up his
Clothes, and goes in.

Nay, nay, don't be angry, -- I only said it, to save you the Trouble of going
for the Ale, that is all.


Cob. Oh I have a Convenience for that, (Whistles, and the Boy enters. Look you
there, Sir; Sirrah, bring me a Pot of humming Ale, de you hear; -- what are you
afraid of your Clothes? Zblead, sit down, mun, though I Am a poor Fellow, I Have
zitten by as good as you affore now, mun. (pulls him down rudely.


Enter Boy with Drink on one side, and Tolefree the Miller on the other. Tick.
Ay, ay, Friend, who doubts it.


Tole. Hark ye, Neighbor Last, will you never have done cobling my Shoes?


Cob. Oh, Neighbor Tolefree, you come in the Nick; why here is Neighbor
Tolefree has a Vote too, and he will give it ye. --


Tick. I shall be much obliged to him, if he will, pray drink to him.


Cob. By and by, let his Betters be served before him, my Service to you, Sir;
-- come in, Neighbor Tolefree, -- come, we'll make you room. (Drinks.


Tole. Withal my Heart. (Gets in on the other Side Tickup.


Tick. I wish the Devil had them both, -- what a fine Pickle I shall be in,
pray have a care of my Clothes.


Cob. Clothes, nay, I hope I am a better Commonwealths-Man than to mind
Clothes, sit close, Neighbor Tolefree, or you will thrust me off the Form.

(The Miller hitches upon Tickup, and makes his Clothes all white.
Tick. These Dogs have a Design upon me, I wish I was fairly out; Death, what a
Coat is here? (aside.


Tole. Come, come, put about the Pot.


Tick. My Service to you, Sir, (drinks) the King's Health. --


Cob. I love the King, -- and so kiss me again. (claps his Hands on his Cheeks,
and pulls him to kiss him, and leaves them all black.


Tick. Confound the Rascal! how his Breath stinks -- Well, what say you now,
Gentlemen, will you both give me your Votes?


Tole. Give you my Vote! that will bring no Grist to my Mill, do you see.


Cob. Get out, and walk before my Door, now, two or three Turns, and I Will tell
you more of my Mind.


Tick. Death, he will make me jump over a Stick by and by. (Gets out, and walks.)

Well, what say you now?


Tole. You have a plaguey Hitch in your Pace, you learnt to dance of some
Frenchman, I Am certain.


Cob. Ha, ha, ha, ha, I think that you would think me a Fool, if I should give you
my Vote, now.


Tick. How so, pray?


Cob. How so! ha, ha, ha, you that are a fine bred Gentleman, here d' ye see;
-- yet can stoop so low, as to kiss, and Humor such a dirty Fellow as I am,
purely to buy my Vote. -- I dant know, d' ye see, but for a good round Sum you
might be prevailed upon to sell my Country, ha, ha, ha, ha: 'Look ye, I dan't
like you Coming Sparks, -- you should be a little more coy, ha, ha, ha.


Tick. You are merry, Friend.


Cob. Not so merry as you think for, mehaps; -- but Vriend me no Vriend, go
troop, Nouns, he looks like a Jesuit, does he not, Neighbor Tolefree?


Tole. Pull off his Whore's Hair, an ze an he has not a bald Crown.


Tick. The Devil! they will strip me by and by, I had as good walk off, for these
are both damned Whigs, I find that.


Cob. Ha, ha, he is gone! an he he not a plaguey High Boy, I Am mistaken. Come
Neighbor Tolefree, you and I will take a Pot of Ale together, to Sir John
Worthey's Health, you will vote for him, wol you not?


Tole. Yes, that I wol, -- for all my Lady has been tampering with my Wise
Margery, and has given her a vine Silk Gown, and a huge high Head; -- but I
dressed my Dame's Jacket for her, and made her carry 'em again; odsflesh, we
should have rare times, an we were to be ruled by our Wives, you know, ha, ha.

(Exit.
Enter Alderman Credulous. Alderman. Ha, ha, ha, I can but laugh to think how
my Wife's Brother, the Mayor, has over-reached his Daughter.


Enter Sir Roger Trusty. Sir Roger. Mr. Alderman Credulous! your most humble
Servant, Sir, I Am glad to see you so merry; Pray what may be the Occasion?


Ald. Family Affairs, Sir Roger; my Brother has disposed of his Daughter, --
that is all.


Sir Rog. Humph! not as he expected; though I believe, for her Advantage, I hope.
(Aside.


Ald. Ay, ay, Sir Roger, we Fathers know what is good for our Children, better
than they do themselves; they have naught to do but to submit to our Pleasures;
Passive Obedience is as absolutely necessary in our Wives and Children, as in
Subjects to the Monarch; is not your Opinion the same, Sir Roger?


Sir Rog. Yes, whilst Husbands, Fathers and Monarchs exact nothing from us,
contrary to our Religion and Laws: But pray, Mr. Alderman, How came you so
passive? I remember you wore other Principles in Eighty Eight; -- this is not
natural, Alderman.


Ald. Eighty Eight! that is a long time ago; I know some Men that have worn out
twenty Setts of Principles since Eighty Eight, both Men of the Robe, and Men of
the Gown.


Sir Rog. More the pity, Alderman, I am sorry Nature did not distinguish Men of
such Principles from the rest of her Handywork, that we might enjoy her Gifts
more amply, and be more thankful for the Blessings. When I reflect that I am of
the same Species with the Betrayers of my Country (for sure that Crime is the
greatest of all others) I could almost wish to wear any other Form of the
Creation. Life is a Blessing, or a Curse, according to the Fame we purchase,
and he that redeems twenty of his Fellow Creatures from the slavish Yoke of
Tyranny, does an Action worthy of a Man that bears the Image of his Creator,
whilst he who seeks by Treachery to inslave his Kind, to feed Ambition,
Avarice, or Revenge, is only the Pest of human Society, and ought to have a
Mark set upon him, that we might shun him as we would the Plague.


Ald. Ay, ay, so it ought to be, Sir Roger; but I have read somewhere, Nature
to Man's Breast has made no Windows,
To show us what they act within Doors.


For my part, I am for the Church, and my Country.


Sir Rog. So am I; their Interests are inseparable; who gives up one, betrays
the others: For my part, I intend to stand or fall by both; therefore I hope
you will do me the Honor of your Vote, Mr. Alderman.


Ald. Why truly Sir Roger, I am pre-engag'd, I will not tell a Lie for the Matter.


Sir Rog. To who, pray?


Ald. Why to Squire Tickup.


Sir Rog. Tickup! Why he is a Fellow not worth a Groat, and a known Jacobite.


Ald. Nay, look ye as that, his Means and his Religion is nothing to me, let
his Creditors take care of one, and our Parson of the the other; for my part, I Am
for the Church, as I said before, and would rather be a Papist than a
Presbyterian.


Sir Rog. Why, where is the Necessity of your being either? Come, come, there is
a more convincing Argument than what you have named; -- Mr. Tickup is
recommended by some great Man on whom you have Dependence.


Ald. Great Man! Why yes, truly, he is a pretty large Man; and I have, I trust
Heaven, very great Dependence on what he says: The Parson of the Parish, you
know, ought to be regarded, Sir Roger, and he told me that Mr. Tickup was a
good Churchman, and prayed me to vote for him, and to get all my Friends to do
the same, if I would promote the Interest of the Church.


Sir Rog. Ay, the Interest of the Church of Rome, not that of England; why I Will
undertake to prove this Fellow deep in the Interest of young Perkin, and that
he and his Friend, at Villa Coumbe, has bought up, and sent for his Service,
more than 2000 Horses within these last four Years; and can such a Man be a
proper Person to represent you in that August Assembly, where the People of
Gotham expect to have these pernicious Measures redrest?


Ald. Why I am confounded at what you tell me.


Sir Rog. I am amazed to find you in the Interest of the High-Boys, you that
are a Cloathier! What, can you be for giving up Trade to France, and starving
poor Weavers?


Ald. Trade, pish, pish, our Parson says that is only the Whigs Cant, and that
if the Bill of Commerce had passed, it would have been of signal Service to us.


Sir Rog. Which Way, I pray, Alderman?


Ald. Nay, I never asked him that, though no Doubt but he can tell you, for he is
a learned Man, and understands Matters better than I do.


Sir Rog. It is much to be wished for the Honor of our Religion, and the
Safety of our State, that those learned Men were more industrious in the Cure
of Souls, and less busy in Politics. -- But come come, Mr. Alderman, there is
yet a Secret behind the Curtain, Pray what could Mr. Tickup, or any of his
Friends oblige you with, that is not in my Power to have done: -- You and I
have been good Friends, and if a Brace of Hundreds had been wanting, -- why, we
could have served you as well as they.


Ald. So, so, I find whereabouts you are already. Well, there is nothing kept a
Secret in this damned Town: However I had not those Two Hundred Pounds by Way
of Bribe, I assure you Sir Roger.


Sir Rog. Ha, ha, why then you had Two Hundred Pounds?


Ald. Yes I confess, Mr. Blowcoal our Parson did give me Bills for Two Hundred
Pounds, Part of a Sum, he said, that was given him for charitable Uses, and bad
me dispose of it to proper Objects, as I thought fit, but not to bribe Votes I
assure you.


Sir Rog. No, no, no, no, 'twas to build Churches I suppose, and reward Secret
Merit, ha, ha, ha, ha, but I am sorry for your Sake, that they made their
Payment in Paper: -- Pray let me see those Bills, -- who are they upon?


Ald. See them! Ay, -- there they are, Sir Roger. (Gives him Bills.


Sir Rog. (Looks on 'em,) Upon Sir Charles Wealthy! As I suspected: -- Why he
is a Bankrupt, not worth a Groat, ha, ha, ha, why you are bit, Alderman,
Bloucoal has bit you, ha, ha, ha; Charity, quotha! Yes this is Charity with a
Vengance.


Ald. How! Am I tricked? But you are not in Earnest Sir Roger, are you?


Sir Rog. As certainly as that I my self lost Five hundred Pound by the same
Banker: I tell you Sir C^arles Wealthy has been gone off this Month.


Ald. The Devil he has! Odsheart I am finely served; why, I Am out of Pocket the
Lord knows what: Death! I shall lose all Patience!


Sir Rog. Look, ye Mr. Alderman, if you will yet hear Reason, I Will make up all
this Matter; see here; (pulls out a Purse.) here is 200 Guine as in this Purse,
all ready Cash, hang Paper; here is the best Provision for charitable Uses. --
Mr. Alderman! hark how religiously they Chink; what say you? Will you cheat
them, as they have cheated you? Come, for once, serve your self and your
Country old Boy.


Ald. But are you sure those Bills are not worth a Farthing, Sir Roger?

( Sir Roger claps the Bills into his Pockets, and takes out some Papers, and
tears 'em in small Piece.
Sir Rog. Sure on it, aye, as sure as I am that my Name is Roger Trusly; -- and
thus I sacrifice them to your Resentment, Mr. Alderman, and now. --


Ald. Death, Hell, and the Devil, I Am undone; -- but if I Am not revenged. --


Sir Roger. (Plays with the Purse.) It was a cursed Trick ind-ed to affront an
Alderman of a Corporation at this rate.


Ald. Give me the Purse; (Sir Roger slaps it into his Hand) and now, Sir Roger,
I am yours, if I do not fit Parson Blow Coal, say I am the Son of a dead
Cinder. -- I Will bring Sixteen Votes, Sir Roger; egad I Will overreach the
Rogues, I warrant 'em: This Purse is a Pledge for my Performance.

(Exit.
Sir Rog. And these Bills a Pledge for that Purse. Ha, ha, ha, (takes out the
Bills) I Will send my Servant to receive the Money immediately, I think I have
paid them in their own Coin.

In this at last we have the Advantage got,
We give the Treat, but they shall pay the Shot.

SCENE Mallets Son's House. Mallet, his Son, Lady Worthy, Gooddy Gabble, Gooddy
Shallow, Sly and his Wife, and Midwife with the Child; several Men and Women
drinking, as at a Christening, a Quaker filling Wine, and a Fiddler playing.
Enter Tickup. Mallet. We began to despair of your Company Sir, we have
Christened the Child, -- but we got one to stand in your Place, Squire.


Tick. Very well, I Will take the Charge upon me.


Midwife. (Presenting the Child. Here Is your Godson Sir, a fine thumping Boy,
he is almost big enough to ask you Blessing.


Tick. A fine Child indeed, -- (He takes the Child and kisses it, and gives it
a Silver Cup. Here Sirrah, here is a Cup for you, and besure you drink my Health
out of it as soon as you can speak, do you hear. -- Which is the Father.


Mal. This is my Son, Squire.


Son. Sir, you do me much Honor.


Tick. Sir, I wish you much Joy of my Godson, -- and may your good Lady bring
you every Year such another. Well which are the Godmothers? That I may
discharge my Duty.


Gooddy Sly. Why, I am one for want of a better, Sir.


Tick. Say you so! Have at you then. (Kisses her.


G. Gab. And I Am the other, sweet Squire.


Tick. Gooddy Gabble, (kisses her) nay I Am to go round, -- and you too Mrs.
Midnight, kiss me you old Jade you. --


Mid. Well, well, you Gentlemen are very happy at Midnight sometimes. -- Old
Jade! Not so old neither, but I can have a Civility done me by as fine a
Gentleman as your Squire's Worship, I Would have you to know.


Tick. P'shaw, who disputes that; -- Old Jade is my Favorite Name, you must
know egad I love an old Woman, -- I would not give a Fig for your green Girls
not I.


G. Sly. Ah, you are a merry Gentleman; -- He has a Breath as sweet as a Cow,
-- he kisses rarely well; -- Roger, you shall give this Gentleman your Vote,
Roger. (Aside to her Husband)


Roger. So, he has tickled her Fancy already,


G. Sly. I fancy you are a rare Dancer Squire, pray will you give us a Jigg?


Tick. A Jigg! Ay with all my Heart, if you will dance with me, Dame.


G. Sly. A lack! Squire, I cannot dance, Squire.


Tick. I warrant thee Dame: -- Come, strike up Fiddler. (He kisses her.


G. Sly. Nay sure I shall not be able to do it with such a vine Gentleman as
you. (they dance.


Roger. (Go^s up to his Wife,) Get home you Beast you, wol ye? A Plague of your
Jigging, will you never ha Jigging enough?


Tick. I hope you are not angry! Rather than disoblige you I Will kiss your Wife
no more.


G. Sly. Look ye there now Roger, -- you are always doing Mischief, so you are.


Lady. An't you ashamed of your self, Roger?


Roger. Ashamed of my self, vor what I tro?


Lady. Methinks you should take it as an Honor.


Roger. What vor him to lie with my Wife; lookye Madam, you may keep that
Honor for Sir John an you woll.


Lady. You saucy impudent Rascal! Who do you talk to, Sirrah?


G. Gab. Fie Neighbor Sly, you use my Lady like a common Woman, so you do.


Roger. If she is as common as those that take her Part, I Am sure she is common
enough.


G. Gab. Meaning me Sirrah, -- I Will make you prove your Words, you Rogue you:
-- Why Gregory, Gregory Gabble I say, -- do you hear what this Rogue Sly says?
(Gregory is kissing a Woman.

See, see, the Villain is minding his Pleasures, when he should be vindicating
his Wife; -- but I Will swinge you, -- I Will cool your Courage when I get you at
home, I will so. -- (Caping her Hands.


Lady. This Rascal Sly, was against the Peace, I remember it well, -- and I Will
have you hanged for it, I will, you Pantile Monster.


Roger. Nay, when such as you talk of Peace, we know the Devil is beating up
for Volunteers, ha, ha.


Tick. Prithee my Dear Life don't put thy self into a Passion. -- Mr. Sly, I
ask your Pardon, If I have given you any Offense.


Roger. I am no Pope Sir; -- but I ha done.


Mal. Why that is well said, -- my Neighbor Sly's an honest Man, he takes
nothing ill, I Will say that for him: Pray Mr. Tickup drink to my Neighbor Sly.


Tick. I filled the Glass for the same Purpose, Mr. Sly my hearty Service to
you. (Drinks.


Roger. Don't Master me Sir, -- I Am but a poor Man, my Name is Roger Sly, do you
see, that is all.


Mal. (to the Quaker) Neighbor Scruple will you do me the Favor to give this
honest Gentleman your Vote?


Scruple. Verily Neighbor Mallet, -- I do think I shall not do it.


Mal. Why so?


Scru. Am I obliged to give thee my Reasons?


Mal. No, not obliged, but I would be glad to know them.


Scru. Why then thou shall know them. Between thee and me, Neighbor Mallet, I
do not take him for an honest Man.


Lady. Not an honest Man! Why what can you say against his Honesty; -- he is
none of your canting Congregation, that is all.


Scru. I did not direct my Discourse to thee, and I would advise thee not to
put thy self into a Passion, it will much disorder thy outward Woman, -- and
make thy Lovers less desiring.


Lady. My Lovers! Goodman Goose-Crown, Who told you that I had Lovers, ha?
Goodman Maliet, why do you let your Son take Wine of this old canting Villain?
When there is ten times better, either at the Pope's Head, -- or the Devil.


Scru. Yea verily, I do perceive that thou art much in the Interest of those
two that thou have named, by thy Language, and thy Actions.


Lady. And what are you in the Interest of, Sirrah? -- not of your Country. --
you, you, you, -- Spawn of old Noll you. -- Here Fiddler, play me the Tune of,
The King shall enjoy his own again.


Sly. Ay, let 'en, let 'en an he dares, 'Zbud I Will ha no no Papists Tunes
played where I am; play Lillibullera, you Rogue.


Lady. You will not have no Papists Tunes! Sirrah, play what I bad you.


Sly. Wounds, play what I bad ye, ye Dog, or I Will break your Fiddle about your
Ears. (He plays Lillibullera.


Lady. You Presbyterian Son of a Conventicle, how dare you contradict me,
Sirrah? (Strikes him on the Face, and makes his Nose bleed.


G. Sly. Murder, Murder, my Husband's all of a gore Blood; ah you are a good
one to strike a Man, I warrant ye.


Lady. I Will murder you, you dirty dragletaild Slut, take that Huswife. (Strikes
Gooddy Sly, and makes her Nose bleed, she blows it into her Hand and shows it,
Crying.


G. Sly. See, see here, see here, how they begin to spill Protestant Blood
already; oh you Papist Devil you; -- ay, this is what you would be at.


Sly. Zounds, if she carries this off, -- I Would be hanged alive; I Will dress her
down, I warrant her, an she be for fighting. (Offers to strip; they hold him.


Mal. Oh fie, is she not a Woman?


Sly. Nay ask her Spark there, he knows best, or he is foully belied on. -- A
Woman, a shameless Beast, is she!


Tick. Let me persuade your Ladyship to leave the Room. (Aside to the Lady.


Lady. No, I Will have the Blood, the Blood, the Blood of these consounded
Whigish Dogs. (Stamps and tears.


Tick. Indeed you will ruin the Design by these Passions; did I not intend to
crush them a more effectual Way? You should see how be would use them now, but
we must bear with their Sauciness now, if we expect to gain our Ends; -- you
will by these Measures fright 'em all into your Husband's Interest.


Lady. Oh, oh, oh, well, well, that thought has cooled me, and I Will retire to
your Lodgings, make what haste you can after me where we will meditate on
Revenge to come.

(Exit.
Enter Servant. Ser. The Mayor is gone to the Hall, Sir, and the Election is
begun.


Tick. Well Gentlemen, I hope you will give me your Votes, none shall do more for
your Town then I will, I promise you.

(Exit.
Ser. Here Is a Letter for you Mr. Scruple, from your Wine Merchant, Monfieur
Traffic, the Man says. (Gives Scruple a Letter.


Scru. (Reads.) I should take it as a particular Favor, if you would give Mr.
Tickup your Vote, who is now with you in Gotham; he is an honest Gentleman I
assure you. -- Yea it would be a very particular Favor truly.


Mal. What would, Mr. Scruple?


Scru. Why thou must know, that this Letter comes from a Frenchman to direct my
Vote for a Member in an English Senate, ha, ha.


Mal. Perhaps there may be no harm in it, the Gentleman might mean it well.


Scru. Yea he does mean it well for himself no doubt on it, but he does not mean
it well for me. -- But come, let us to the Hall Neighbors.


Mal. Ay, ay, to the Hall, and act as Conscience, or cut Interest, leads.

(Exeunt
SCENE changes to the Street. Enter Friendly and Lucy. Friend. I hope you are
convinced, Madam, of your Father's Principle, and what you must have suffered
from it, if I had been really what I represented.


Lucy. I do believe the Design you speak of, A Nunnery! Heaven! I shudder at
the Thought.


Friend. Ay; where Swarms of Nuns and Priesss daily curse your Country, By
Beil, Book, and Candle, where you must have been taught to pray for its
Destruction too.


Lucy. No! Had I been trappan'd to that cursed Place, though but a poor
defenseless Maid alone; Yet I Would have shown 'em a true British Soul, and died
before I would have changed my Faith.


Friend. Well said Madam: But to the Point; -- you will not sure return to your
Father, and put it in his Power to betray you a Second Time.


Lucy. No that I will not.


Friend. May I not hope some Share in your Esteem?


Lucy. No, whining Love, I Am not to be caught that Way; -- this Day I am of
Age, and I choose you for my Guardian, -- and if you can bring me unquestionable
Proofs of your being an honest Man, -- that you have always been a Lover of
your Country, -- a true Asserter of her Laws and Privileges, and that you would
spend every Shilling of my Portion in Defense of Liberty and Property against
Perkin and the Pope, I Will sign, seal, and deliver my self into your Hands the
next Hour.


Friend. If I do not this, may I meet the Fate which every Traitor to his Land
deserves, my charming Heroine!

(A Noise of Mob without, crying, A Tickup, a Tickup, A Worthy, a Worthy, A
Trusty, a Trusty.
Lucy. The Election is begun; where shall I stay concealed?


Friend. At my Lodgings, Madam, where you shall quickly have the Proof that you
demand, to make my Happiness complete.


Enter Mob, with their Candidates at the Head of each Party; one bearing a
Pope, and wooden Shoes, with Wool in their Hats: The other a Tub with a
Woman-Preacher in it, and Laurel in their Hats; crying on one Side, A Tickup, A
Tickup; on the other, A Worthy, A Worthy, Huzza. Ben Blunt. No Pope, No Perkin.
A Worthy, A Worthy.


Tim. Shall. No Tub preaching, no Liberty and Property Men.


Gre Gab. A Tickup, a Tickup, a Tickup.


Ben Blunt. No Fire and Faggot, -- no Wooden Shoes, no Trade Sellers, A Low
Bow, A Low Bow.


Tim Shall. Z'blead! Who made you a Politician, in the Devil's Name. (Knocks him
down, Blunt gets up and collers him and pulls him down, and gets on him, and
boxes him: Half a Score more falls together by the Ears.


Gr. Gab. Down with 'em, down with 'em.


Roger Sly. Nay, an you're for that Sport have at ye: No Pope, No Perkin, knock
'em down, down with the Dogs, down with their Champion, -- down with that
frenchify'd Dog, Tickup; No High Boy, No High Boy.


Shall. No Worthy, No Worthy; A High Boy, A High Boy, A High Boy.

(Exeunt fighting.
Enter Mr. Scoredouble, Friendly, and Lucy. Score. I wish you much Joy with all
my Heart, Madam, you are the Nineteenth Bride I have been Father to, and I
never gave one to an honester Man in My Life, I Will zay that for him.


Friend. I thank you Landlord, -- and it shall be my constant study to make you
happy, Madam, and by my future Actions convince you, that you have not chose
amiss. (to Lucy.


Lucy. I cannot be unhappy, if your Conduct answers your Character; a moderate
Man, from a true innate Principle of Virtue, scorns to betray even his Enemies,
much less his Country or his Faith.


A great Shout within. Enter Mob bearing the chosen Member on Poles in a Chair,
huzzain^ cross the Stage. The Mayor following: Mayor. I say it is an unfair
Election, and I Will return Mr. Tickup. -- Ha! What do I see?


Friend. Your Son and Daughter Sir, if you please to give us your Blessing.
(Kneels.


Mayor. The Devil! Down right English, Sirrah, I Will have you laid by the Heels
for a Cheat.


Lucy. Then he will recriminate, my dear Father, and ten to one tell how
powerfully the Promise of French Pistoles swayed your Conscience, ha, ha.


Mayor. There Is a Jade now, Zounds, that ever I begot her. Huswife, if you are
married to that rascally, cheating, canting Low Boy, -- may -- Hell confound
you both.

(Exit.
Friend Ha, ha, ha, mind not his Curses, my dear Lucy, I Will be both a Father
and a Husband to thee.


Lucy. I do believe you, and thank you for this Deliverance; for if I had
escaped a Nunnery, ten to one but I had been thrown into the Arms of some of my
Father's Principle, and that would have been as bad.

This is my Maxim in a married Life,
Who hates his Country, never can love his Wife.

FINIS.

