A Bickerstaff's Burying; OR, Work for the Upholders. A FARCE; As it is ACTED
at the THEATERS, with Applause. By His MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by Mrs. Susanna Centlivre: Author of The Gamester, a Comedy.

DUBLIN: Printed by S. Powell, for George Risk, at the Corner of Castle-lane in
Dame-street, near the Horse guard, MDCCXXIV.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Mezro. Captain. Boatswain. 1 st Sailor. 2 d Sailor.
WOMEN.
Lady Mezro. Isabinda, her Niece. A Lady. Officer. Servants. Lucy.
To the Magnificent COMPANY of UPHOLDERS, etc.
CVstom has made some Things absolutely necessary, and two Sheets without a
Dedication, or a Preface, by way of Excuse, would be an unpardonable Indecency:
To avoid which, I was considering at whose Feet to lay these following Scenes.
First I thought of offering it to all those young Wives who had sold themselves
for Money, and been interred with Misery from the first Day of their Marriage;
but supposing their chief Pleasure to consist in Pride, and that they had
rather gratify their Ambition in the Arms of a Fool, or Fourscore, than wed a
Man of Sense of narrower Fortunes, I concluded 'em unworthy of my Notice.

Then the Race of Old Men presented themselves in my Mind, who, despising Women
of their own Years, marry Girls of fifteen, by which they keep open House for
all the young Fellows in Town, in order to encre^se their Families, and make
their Tables flourish like the Vine: But my Aversion to Fools of all Kinds,
made me decline them too.

At last, casting my Eyes upon the Title of the F^rce, I found it could justly
belong to none but the Magnificent Company of Upholders, whom the judicious
Censor of Great Britain has so often condescended to mention; to you then,
worthy Sirs, whose solemn Train keeps up the pompous State of Beauty, beyond
the Limits of a Gasp of Breath, and draws the gazing World to admire, even
after Death; to you this Piece I Dedicate; it is but Reason that you should
receive some Tribute from us Living, who so truly mourn us dead. What does not
Mankind owe to you? All Ranks and Conditions are obliged to you; the Aged and
the Young, the Generous and the Miser, the well descended and the boser born.
The Escutcheons garnish out the Hearse, the Streamers and Wax Lights, let (...)
into the Name of a Man, which, all his Life had been hi^ in Obscurity; and many
a Right Honorable would fall unlamented, we^e it not for your decent Cloaks,
and dismal Faces, that look as sorrowful as the Creditors the leave unpaid.
What an immense Sum might be raised from your Art to carry on the War, would
you, like true Briton^ exert your Power? The People being fond of Sights, wh^
might not be g^ther'd at a Funeral, when the Rooms a^ clad in Sable, the Body
dressd out with all your skilfu^ Care, the Tapers burning in their Silver
Socke^s, the weeping Virgins fixed like Statues round, and aromat^ Gums persume
the Chambers, I think it preferable to the Puppet Show, and a Penny a Head for
all the Curiou^ would, I dare be positive, amount to more than the Candl^ Tax;
and so make Death subservient to the Living.

But this, Gentlemen, I leave to your superior Judgme^^ in Politic Principles;
and only beg leave to remind yo^ that in this crowded Town, there are a
Prodigious Numb^^ of Mr. Bickerstaff's Dead Men, that swarm about Streets
therefore, for the Sakes of the most ingenious Part of Man kind, you ought to
take Care to interr them out of (...) Way, since he that does no Good in his
Generation, should not be reckoned among the Living.

And now to conclude, Gentlemen, I hope you will pard^^ this Liberty I have
taken, and accept this as a Token (...) the Respect I bear your noble Society:
I honor you though have no Desire of falling into your Hands, but I thi^ we
Poets are in no Danger of that, since our real Esta^lies in the Brain, and our
personal consists in two or th^^ loose Scenes, a few Couplets for the Tag of an
Act, and slight Sketch for a ^ong, and as I take it, you are (...) over-fond of
Paper-Credit, where there is no Probabili^^ of recovering the Debt: So wishing
you better Custome^^ I expect no Return, but am proud of subscribing (...) self,

GENTLEMEN, Your most obedient humble Serv^^^

A Bickerstaff's Burying; OR, Work for the Upholders.
SCENE I.
A working Sea seen at a Distance, with the Appearance of a Head of a Ship
bulging against a Rock: Mermaids rise and sing: Thunder and Lightning: Then the
Scene shuts. Enter Lady Mezro, and her Neice Isabinda, veiled. Isab. WHY will not
you tell me whither you are going, Aunt, this Morning? I can scarce keep Pace
with you. What is it that transports you so? you do not use to be so gay.


Lady M. Oh, my Girl, just now, from my Chamber-Window, I beheld a Ship, by
Stress of Weather, driven on our Coast; which, since the last unhappy one that
brought me here, I have never seen; pray Heaven it be English!


Isab. So say I, then I shall see the fine Men you have so often talked of,
Aunt.


Lady M. Ay, and the Country that breeds those Men, Child, if we can handsomely
get off.


Isab. With all my Heart; for I hate this Isle of Corgar, and all its barbarous
Laws, since you have informed me of those of Great Britain.


Lady M. Hush here is some of the Ship's Crew; let us step a-side and observe
them.

(Exeunt.
Enter Captain, Boson, and Sailors. Capt. Well, how fares the Ship, has she any
Damage?


Bos. Only the Leak, which the Carpenter has stopped, Captain.


Capt. That Is well: I cannot imagine what this Island produces!


Bos Monsters, I think; for they stare as if they never had any Commerce with
Mankind, or ever saw a Ship in their Lives.


Capt. I question if ever they did, and wish it had not been our Fortune to
have improved their Knowledge.


1 Sail. I wish so too; I hate making strange Land: Who the Devil knows where
to find a Wench now?


Bos. Here Is a ^og, that two Hours ago, drowned his necessary Orders with his
Prayers, and now is roaring as loud for a Whore


1 Sail. It Is our Custom, you know; out of Danger the Sailor must be merry
In Faith; ha, ha.


2 Sail. Nell, at the Ship at Chattam, shall know this.


1 Sail. I care not a Rope's-end if she does: Why, what the Devil do you think
I Will come into a strange Land, and not examine what Commodity it produces? No,
no, Faith; Nick must know if the Females here be Fish or Flesh, before he puts
off again.


Capt Ha, ha; Well, well, take Care you have not your Brains beat out: Go,
disperse your selves, and see what Provisions you can get. I just now met a
Native of the Country; who tells me, that the Prince is coming this Way: He
understands a little of the Arabian Tongue, and has promised to introduce me to
him; that I may endeavor, by some Presents, to gain his Leave to re-fit our
Ship, and supply our Wants.


Bos. Where shall we find you, Master?

(Exeunt Boson and Sailors.
Capt. Here, or hereabouts. Now for the Cabbacuca. Adsheart, what a Name's
there! If the Prince be as barbarous as his Name, we had as good perished in
the Storm: but I wonder the Fellow comes not, that is to conduct me to Court;
that is, I suppose, to a King sitting under a Palm Tree: What would I give for
a Friend there?


Enter Lady, and Isabinda. Lady. (Clapping him on the Shoulder) What would you
give, Captain?


Capt. Ha! English! Nay, then I am not so far out of Knowledge as I imagined.


Lady. You are a great Way from the Rose in Covent Garden, I promise you.


Capt. The Rose in Covent Garden! Let me see thy Face, thou dear Angel, or a
die. (Embraces her.)


Lady M. Die! Nay, then you have changed your Inclination with the Clime; you
never used to die for an old Acquaintance.


Capt. Ah! an old Acquaintance, here, Child, is welcomer than old Wine, and the
Accident will give it a new Relish.


Lady M. Say you so? well, whether you speak Truth or not, I protest this Sight
of you pleases me better than the first; and now, Sir, I am your humble
Servant. (Turns up her Vail.


Capt. Ha! Mrs. Take-it! Why what Wind blew you hither?


Lady M. Just such another as brought you, I fancy; our Ship was bound to
Madderass.


Capt. So was mine.


Lady M. After three Days tempestuous Weather, having lost our Mainmast, and
all our Tackle, expecting nothing but Death, when by a sudden Gust our Vessel
was driven upon you dreadful Rock, which split her into a thousand Pieces, and
only I by Providence was saved.


Capt. Thank Heaven, I Have not lost one Man; I pity your Misfortune, and yet, by
your Appearance, it is a Fault to pity you, for it has turned to your Advantage
Prithee what Business had you in the Indies?


Lady M. To get a Husband; you know few Wom^^ go there but to make their
Fortunes.


Capt. Which I suppose you have done here, Madam


Lady M. An Emir, which is a Lord, you must und^^stand, walking by the
Seaside, spied me on the Rock, (...) kindly helped me down, fell in Love, and
married (...) and I am now one of the greatest Women upon the Pla^^


Capt. I am glad on it, with all my Soul. Who is (...) Lady? another of my old
Acquaintance too?


Lady M. No, I promise you; there is a Face never (...) Covent Garden. She Is my
Husband's Niece, the best ^^mour'd Woman in the World; and for her Beauty,
(...) that speak for it self, (turns up her Vail) so, I see (...) your Eyes you
like her.


Isab. Grant, Great Prophet, that he may! for I li^^ him, I Am sure. (Asi^^


Capt. Like her! I'Gad, if your Island's peopled wi^^ such Angels, it is
certainly the Land of Promise, and eve^^ Ship will put in here for Provision.


Lady M. She Is the only handsome one in it, I prom^^ you; her Mother was
English, and cast hither by such another Accident as my self.


Isab. And do you think this Face will do in Cov^^^ Garden, Captain?


Capt. In Covent Garden, Madam! Where would it (...) do? Ha! your Skin's as
smooth as the Sea in a Cal^ and your Eyes outshine the Sun after a Storm; your
Voi^^ as sweet as Sirens Songs; and it is greater Pleasure to b^hold you, than
Land after a dangerous Voyage. I Will se^^ here, I Am resolved.


Lady M. Ah, the right London Strain. (Asi^^


Isab. And I Would rather go with him. (Asi^^


Capt. Where the Devil is my Ship's Crew? I Will ha^^ the Bottom of my Ship
beaten out immediately, tha^^ may never put to Sea again.


Isab. I Am afraid, young Gentleman, you will change yo^^ Note if you knew the
Custom of this Country.


Lady M. Indeed, my quondam Spark, you would be glad (...) get off in a Cock-Boat
if you do, by that time you ha^^ been married half so long as I have been --
I Am sure (...) would.


Capt. Ay? why so? you shine in Jewels.


Lady M. I once thought Riches the greatest, but now find them the least Part
of Happiness.


Capt. Oh, you want to see dear England again, and dazzle the Eyes of your old
Acquaintance.


Lady M. That Is not the Cause.


Capt. Your Husband is old, I suppose?


Lady M. True.


Capt. What is that to my Repentance? This Lady is young.


Lady M. Then he is as ugly as a Baboon.


Capt. Yet wide; this Lady's as handsome as a Cherubin.


Lady M. He Is as jealous as a Spaniard, as barbarous as a Turk, and as
ill-natured as an old Woman; and I hate him as heartily as one Beauty does
another; yet fear him as much as you Merchantmen do a French Privateer.


Capt. Why there is nothing supernatural in all this; Women hate their Husbands
all the World over.


Isab. I Am sure! should never hate you, if I had you once. (Aside) And are not
you even with us, Captain?


Capt. I will not answer for the whole Sex; but I Will engage for my self, if
thou wilt but try me, Child.


Isab. First here the Conditions annexed to Matrimony; then, if you will venture
--


Capt. Venture! What the Devil do think I that have faced so many Dangers,
should be afraid of fresh Water?


Lady M. Have a care what you say, Captain; for six to four but you will wish
your self unmarried again; as heartily as I do.


Enter Lucy. Lucy. Oh Madam! undone! undone! my Lord's just dying.


Lady M. Ah!


Capt. Undone! Pish, Pox, it is the best News thou ever brought in thy Life,
Wench.


Lady M. Ruined! past Redemption! Oh that ever I was born!


Capt. Ha! what is the Meaning of this?


Isab. Oh unhappy Woman!


Capt. Unhappy! adsheart, I should have guessed her the happiest Woman in the
World, now.


Lady M. Fly, call Physicians strait, here, bribe 'em (...) Jewels, (tears off
the Jewels) give 'em a King's Randso^ if they can but save his Life, load 'em
with Wealth (...) they sink beneath the Weight. Oh! my latest Hou^^ come!


Capt. What the Devil can be the Matter? why all (...) Noise? Here Is none but
Friends; I don't apprehend (...) any body can over-hear you; this is something
like (...) Irish Cry; I suppose it is the Custom of the Count^^ (Asi^^)


Lady M. Oh no! Neither Heaven nor Earth will h^^ me now! I Am lost, for ever
lost! Oh, oh, oh!


Capt. Humph! now I have found it; all the Esta^^ goes with him, I warrant.


Lady M. Estate! sink the Estate! my Life goes wi^^ him!


Isab. Oh cruel, oh inhuman Law!


Capt. What a-pox, she wont die for the Man she hat^^ will she? Did you not
wish to be unmarried just now and are you sorry that your Husband's a-dying?
(...) Woman's distracted sure!


Lady M. Oh, I must be burried with him alive! (...) dreadful Thought.

(Runs (...)
Capt. Ha! how 's that! Buried alive! I Am Thunde^ struck! Stay, I conjure you,
Madam, (to Isabinda) (...) explain to me this Riddle.


Isab. It is, Sir, the barbarous Custom of our Country first ordained from
frequent Poisoning here, that which soever of the married Pair died first, the
Survivor is buried with alive, dressed, and adorned, for a second Nuptial


Capt. E'gad it has turned my Stomach against the first (aside) Unheard of
Barbarity! Is none exempt the Pai^ of the Country?


Isab. None; all let down a deep hollow Mountain with some Loaves of Bread, and
some Bottles of Water, on which they may feed for some time, and then expire
within the loathsome Dungeon. My Mother in her Bloom was with my Father buried:
I was but thrice twelve Moons old; yet I remember even then it raised a Horror
in me, and as I grew up, fixed a Resolution in me, never to wed in this cursed
Place.


Capt. Faith you had Reason, Madam, and I admire (...) any body does.


Isab. Custom has made it easy to the true Cosgarian ^ce, but I have a British
Soul.


Capt. You must be rescued from this Imposition; your ^^nt too must be saved.


Isab. But how? If he dies, the Officers of Justice seize (...); nay, it is
Death for all the Household if Information (...) not given strait. Upon the
Wedding Day, two Coffins (...) always brought into the Bride-chamber, as Part
of (...) Ceremony.


Capt. E'gad I should have small Appetite to finish the ^^remony at the Sight
of 'em.


Isab. This is the deplorable State of Matrimony in our ^^untry.


Capt. If it were the Custom all over the World, we ^^ung Fellows should live
deliciously; Women would be (...) plenty as Blackberries; we might put forth
our Hands (...) take them without Jointures, Settlements, Pin-mony, ^^rson, and
so forth.


(Noise.) Isab. Hark! I hear a Noise! Oh my poor Aunt! I ^^st in, and see the
Event.


Capt. First promise me that if I contrive a Way to bear ^^u hence, you will
consent to go with me?


Isab. With all my Heart, there is my Hand upon it; (...) have no time for
Courtship; I Will meet you here again (...) an Hour. (Exit.)


Capt. Now if I can but handsomely carry off these Wo^^n, their Jewels will turn
to better Account than an ^^st-India Voyage.

Enter Boson and Sailors. Well, what cheer, my Lads; I have seen the Prince,
(...) obtained his Leave for every thing I asked.


1 Sail. Cheer! why Faith, Captain, we sail directly ^^ore the Wind; and I want
but your Consent to make (...) richest Port in the Universe.


Capt. What do you mean?


^ Sail. What! why I can have a fine Lady here, with (...) many Jewels about
her as will ballast a Ship if you will (...) give me my Discharge; nay, I will not
be ungrateful for it neither, you shall have all my Pay: What say y^^ Master,
will you lend me your Hand to heave me (...) good Fortune?


2 Sail. Will you be false-hearted then, Nick? (...) will hang herself in her
Garters when she hears it.


1 Sail. Let her, let her, what care I, odsfish! do y^^ think I Would leave a first
Rate for a Friggate, forsake a (...) Lady for Nell? That Is quitting a Bowl of
Punch (...) Draught of Seawater. (Spitting.)


Bos. I wonder what she saw in that ugly Phiz of thi^ that is always as dirty as
the Hammock you swing in; (...) as seldom washed as your Shirt, which is not
on^ Quarter.


2 Sail. Ha, ha, Oh she fell in Love with his Nos^ his Legs.


1 Sail. Why, what Fault can you find with my No^^ Bob. Ha! it is sound, and
perhaps that is more than your^


Bos. Nay, nay, don't find Fault with his Nose, (...) like the Bowsplit, and
his Legs would serve for a Ma^mast; I warrant the Jade understands Sailing, and
so w^^ly provides against Stress of Weather, ha, ha,


1 Sail. I faith, she is a tite Vessel, and I Will Man he^ titely I warrant ye my
Lads.


Capt. Ha, ha; hark ye Sirrah; there is such Conditi^^ entailed upon this Woman,
you are fond of, that (...) make you as Wife-sick, as the Sea did in your first
Voya^


1 Sail. Aye, it is no matter for that, Captain; (...) must not think to serve
me as you do a Whale, fling (...) an empty Cask till the Substance gets by.
Look ye, Ma^^ to fetch up half her Wealth, I Would dive to the Bottom of (...) Sea,
and venture being swallowed by a Shark, Nick wo^^ In Faith. Master.


2 Sail. Well said Nick, E'gad, I warrant you think (...) be an Ambral now.


1 Sail Why, why not, if I have Money enough (...) buy it? and I will be an
Ambral too, for all you, (...) my Master here, shall be my Rear-Ambral.


Capt. Oh your very humble Servant, Mr. Admira^ but suppose your Wife should
die, Nick?


2 Sail. Better and better still; her Gold and preci^^^ Stones, will not die too;
and E'gad, I Will drink to her go^^ Voyage in a Bowl of Punch, clap my Riches
aboard, and hoist Sail for merry England.


Capt. Ha, ha, Do you know that the Law of this Island buries the living
Husband with the dead Wife.


1 Sail. Ha! the Devil it does!


Capt. It Is even so.


Bos. Ambral, I wish you much Joy.


1 Sail. A live!


2 Sail. What, Is the Wind chopped full in your Teeth, Nick? Ha, ha, ha!


1 Sail. Ay Faith, and blows so hard, that it shall blow my Head off ever I
make the Port of Matrimony in this Island. Buried with her? quotha! E'gad, I
always thought the Wedding-sheet the Winding Sheet of Pleasure, after a Month;
but to have no Hopes beyond her; Zounds! I had rather sit in the Bilboes all
Days of my Life. I Will aboard this Minute. Boson, you grumbl'd at my good
Fortune just now, take her your self if you will.


Bos. The Devil take me if I do.


Capt. I told you I should take off the Edge of your Appetite: Go, go, try and
get the Ship off: I*ll be aboard immediately. Have you got any Provisions?


Bos. That we have good store.


Capt. Well, well, be gone then.


1 Sail. Ay, with all my Heart; if I get once aboard, I Will stick as close to
the Ship as Pitch to a Rope; and sink with her rather than come ashore again.
Buried with a Wife! The Devil!

(Exeunt Sailors.
Capt. Let me consider; what Stratagem shall I use to carry off the Women?


Enter Isabinda. Isab. There Is a sad House within; but hang me if I don't fancy
my Uncle counterfeits; for in my Mind his Pulse beats as regular as mine.


Capt. Ha! Say you so? Then I have it. Convey me into the House, where I Will
tell you the Plot, to free you from these Apprehensions.


Isab. If you effect it you are a Deity. Come along with me; in this Confusion
I can preserve you undiscovered.


Capt. Along then.

(Exeunt.
SCENE II.
The Emir on a Couch, with his Wife weeping (...) him, and Attendants round
about. Tab^^ Couch, 2 Chairs, Gally-pots, etc. Lady. Oh Distraction! Look up my
Lord, my Lo^^ my Husband! Oh you will break my Heart, and I sh^^ go before you!
Oh, oh, oh!


Emir. The Stars forbid! Oh, oh! (Gro^^


Lady. Ah! Help ye Slaves -- Gently bear him up* Rub his Temples -- Apply the
Hartshorn to his Nose* Oh speak and tell me how you do, my Dear! -- O^ oh, oh!
(roars (...)


Emir. Very bad -- Oh, oh!


Lady. Are you very bad, my Love? What will b^come of me? (Asi^^


Em. Very bad indeed, Wife -- Oh, I shall not li^^ this Day, I doubt.


Lady. Ah! What do I hear -- Oh ye cruel Po^^ers -- Why was I cast upon this
Shore? Curse on th^^ glittering Bawbl^s, whose bewitching Luster cheats (...)
of true Happiness. (Tears off her Jewels) A Thirst (...) Riches drew me from
that Land where Widow-hood (...) happy -- to die within a loathsome Dungeon,
unpiti^^ and forlorn.


Em. What does she say now? -- Prithee my Dea^ don't afflict yourself so much
-- You Will be sick, (...) Love --


Lady. But you will die, my Love -- Sick, quoth^ Good Heaven! Can I be well when
you are dying?


Em. Oh you think of the Custom of our Countr^ Wife; you fear to be buried with
me, that is all --


Lady. All does he call it --


Em. Now if it had pleased Great Mahomet, that thou should have gone first, I
should have accompanied thee with Pleasure --


Lady. That Is more than I shall do you, I Am sure. (Aside) So shall I you, my
Dear, as to any Business I have with Life, when thour't gone; but the Pain to
see thee die, to part with thee for ever, is the Shock that Nature feels -- and
it is unkindly urged to think I fear the Custom of the Island -- for what Joy
could I have when thou art gone?


Em. I doubt she lies -- But this is the only Way I could ever find to keep her
in Subjection, for as soon as I am well, whip! she is scamper'd, and I have no
more Comfort of a Wife than I should have in her Grave: If all English Wives
are such Gadders, Heaven help their Husbands, I say --


Lady. How do thou do, Jewel?


Em. I think I am a little better; I believe I could eat a Leg of that Chicken
within --


Lady. Fly ye Slaves, and fetch it instantly, Oh, all ye Powers, that protect
our Lives, I thank ye; I feel the Springs of Joy recruit; thy Words run through
my Soul with such exulting Pleasure, that it is all one Rapture -- Oh let me
hold thee ever in my Arms -- Oh! that single Word, Better -- has more Harmony
in it than the Music of the Spheres -- Thus let me kiss it from thy Lips, it is
the richest Cordial Nature could produce to raise my sinking Hopes. (Embraces
and kisses him in an Ecstasy) Where are you, Slaves, why do you stay so long.


Enter Servants. Em. Ah, this Wise of mine does but counterfeit this Love to
me, I fear -- If our Law did not bury the Living with the Dead, here would be
no Joy for my Recovery.


Lady. Come, my Dear, shall I cut it for thee?


Em. No, I Will not trouble thee. (He cuts and eats greedily.) It Is very good:
Will Not you eat a Bit of it, Deary?


Lady. No, thou shall eat it all -- He feeds heartily* Ah, if I had him in Old
England, I should wish it we^^ his last -- Oh the vast Difference between a
Widow's Weed and a Winding Sheet, between the civil Ceremonie^ of shedding
Tears at the Grave, and the barbarous Costom of making one's Bed there.


Em. How pleased she is? Ah, would she be in this good Humor always --


Lady. Much good may do you, my Dear. (Kisses him.


Em. I thank you my Love -- Ah you little Rogue how warm your Busses are --
(Rises from the Table Od, they infuse new Life into me; and methinks I fe^^
Health pop into my Heart, like a Pot-gun -- Another Kiss, my Dearest -- (Kisses
her) So, so, thou ha^ done it, thou have done it, thou dear Rogue -- Go what do
you stare at? begone and leave your Lady an^ I alone -- (To the Servan^


Lady. Say you so -- alone! alas, are you fit to (...) left alone -- leave a
dying Man alone -- Let the^ stir if they dare -- I shall take better Care of
yo^ than that comes to, my Dear.


E. Pish, Pish, I tell thee I am out of Danger.


Lady I wish thou were --


Em. Indeed I am, and thou shall find it so; therefo^^ prithee let them go --
(Winking at her


Lady. Alas, I fear you are lightheaded, my Dear. Aye, your Pulse is upon the
Gallop; you are in a raging Fever -- Oh, woe is me! Oh, oh, oh! Away, some of
ye, and fetch a Doctor.


Em. Sha, sha; I tell thee thou art mistaken; I am in no Fever but what
proceeds from thy pretty pouting Lips and thou art the best Physician, let me
kiss them again; ye, ye, ye, ye, dear soft Charmer, ye, ye.


Lady. Are you sure you are well?


Em. Very sure on it, my Dear -- Come, let us take a Nap together.


Lady. You know I cannot sleep in the Daytime: Besides you ought to return your
Prophet Thanks for your Recovery --


Em. Oh, that I Will do to morrow.


Lady. To morrow! a Man of your Years ought to be ashamed of deferring Things
of that Kind till to morrow.


Em. Why Child, upon Occasion one may --


Lady. Occasion! What Occasions have People of your Age for Life, but to pray
--


Em. Have Women in your Country no other Business for their Husbands, my Dear?


Lady. No --


Em. Humpth! That was the Reason you left it, I doubt --


Lady. Ah would I had never left it --


Em. But come, come, you jest but with me. Lucy, fetch your Lady's Nightgown
-- I love to see her in her Nightgown -- Ah those roguish Eyes! Another Kiss
and then --


Lady. You love to see me in my Nightgown, I think I shall not consult your Fancy
much -- Prithee no more Sloping; your Breath's ready to strike one down, and
your Beard's as rough as a Hedgehog. Lucy, fetch me my Vail, I have a Visit to
make.


Lucy. Yes, Madam. (Exit.


Em. So, she is no Changeling I find; never Man had such a Wife, certainly -- I
must always be sick, or she will always be out of Humor, (aside.) Sure you will
not leave me, Wife.


Lady. Indeed but I shall, Husband.


(Enter Lucy. Lucy. Here Is the Vail, Madam. (She puts it on.


Em. Well, go then, I will not hinder you -- Shadock, give me my Cloak; I Will go
see the Grand Emir, and pass away the Time a little till your Lady's Return.


Lady. Well, now I like your Humor. You should always let your Wife go, when
and where she pleases.


Em. That I resolve for the future -- Ha! what ails me -- Bless me, I Am very
sick of the Sudden; oh, oh! pray lead me to my Bed, or I shall die this Moment
--


Lady. Ha! what is that, die say you? (throws off her Vail) Oh wretched me!
here, here, here, here, take a little of this, my Lord. Judgment is pronounced
against my Life, and I must die at last, (aside) -- Away, and call the
Physicians: Haste, fly, Oh, oh, oh!


Em. No, no, 'twill off again; it is only a Fit -- thy Kindness is my best
Cordial. I Will try to rest a little.


Lady. Withdraw all of you, and separate into Silence, I Will watch by thee.
Heaven send my Love a comfortable Nap -- What Distractions tear my Breast --
Now Hope, then Despair, with alternate Sway, exercise their Power, and no kind
Glimpse of Safety offers me Relief.


Enter Isabinda. Isab. Oh Aunt, the Captain is without, and has a Secret to
deliver us from this Pla^e if you will but help the Design.


Lady Bring him in: If your Uncle wakes I Will tell him it is a Doctor.


Enter Captain and whispers the Lady. Isab. Here he is


Capt. Do you this, and I Will be ready to finish it. (Exit.


Lady. I Will ven^ure. Oh Fortune, be this once propitious, and I Will submit my
future Life, without the least Complaint. Ah! my Head turns round! Oh I faint,
I die! (Swoons.


Isab. Ah Help! Help! Where are you? My Aunt's dead. Help! Help!

(The Emir rises, runs, and catches hold of his Wife.
Em. I Am thunderstruck -- Oh, oh, oh, ho!


Serve. Ha! Dead! Nay then, where are the Coffins?

(Exeunt Servants
Em. Oh woe is me! Speak to me, my Dear; speak to me; speak to me.


Isab. As I suspected: See how nimble he is at the Apprehension of being buried
with her. What shall I do? she is breathless quite --


Em. Oh, oh, oh! (Roars out.) Undone, undone, for ever --


Isab. Ay, it is you have been the Cause, oh wretched Man! Prophet, thou art
just.


Em. Wretched indeed. I consess I did but counterseit -- Oh Alla, (Kneels)
pardon my Deceit, and give me back her Life, and let her cuckold me with every
thing she meets; let her be the veriest Wife that ever England bred, I never
will be jealous more! oh, oh! (Gets up and runs to her, and feels her Pulse,
then rubs her Temples, then prays again --) Is there any Hopes, Niece?


Isab. No, none. Oh distracting Thought! This comes of your frighting her so.


Em. Oh forgive me, Niece, for I truly repent: Alas! I did it only to keep her
in Subjection. Oh fetch the Cordial which I, like a false Wretch, had no
Occasion for! Oh! I do believe she loved me now! Oh Niece, try, try, to pour
some down her Throat; for I tremble so, I cannot guide it to her Lips.


Isab. Alas! her Teeth are set: She Is gone! for ever gone!


Em. Then I Am gone too! (bursts out again into Tears) Oh, oh, oh!


Enter Servants with two Coffins. Isab. Oh killing Sight! (kneels) Thou
glorious Sun assist us now and we are happy. (Aside.


Em. Ay do, do pray for thy Uncle, Child: Oh, oh, oh!


Isab. I have Occasion for my Prayers my self, at this Time, I thank ye, for
I Am afraid we are in the greater Danger at present. (Aside.


Em. (Turns and sees the Coffins) Oh, oh, oh, that ever I married! Where shall
I hide my self? Oh, oh, oh! (Runs off.


Serve. Stop him, stop him.

(Exeunt Servants.
Isab. Call the Officers of Justice strait; I must be cruel here. So, he is
gone, Captain, come forth.


Enter Captain. Lady M. I Am almost choked with holding my Breath so long;
what is to be done now? Pray Heaven we prosper!


Cap. I warrant you, Madam, come, come, be quick, you must aboard this Minute.
Have you any thing you would take with you?


Isab. I have packed up all your Jewels, and every thing of Value, here, Madam:
Mercy on me, how I tremble!


Lady M. And I Am ready to sink with Fear: If we are taken we are undone, and
you lose your Lives.


Capt. Nothing like a good Courage: Come let us not stand disputing, and lose
the lucky Minute.


Lady. From these cursed Laws, oh let me escape with Life.


Isab. And make me any Creature but a Wife.


Capt. Your Wealth at any time decides the Strife.

(Exeunt.
SCENE III.
A Cosgarian Lady, dragging in the first Sailor. Lady. Nay, don't think to
leave me, Sir, did you n^^ promise to stay here?


1 Sail. But will you promise not to die before (...) then? Answer me that:
Adsbud, who do you think (...) chouse? ha!


Lady. What are you afraid to die with her you love!


1 Sail. Love! Zounds! does any body love a Woman well enough to die with her?


Lady. Yes certainly with their Wives.


1 Sail. That Is a Mistake, do you see; for of all the W^men in the World we care
the least for our Wives, in (...) Country.


Lady. That Is strange. Why I should rejoice to (...) with you, pretty
Englishman.


1 Sail. Aye, one Way, perhaps, pretty Devil! But (...) be plain with you, I
desire to die no Way with you all; and so I shear off. (Going


Lady Stay. Cannot Gold and Jewels tempt you (Shows Gold and Jewe^


1 Sail. No.


Lady. What are you Englishmen made on?


1 Sail. Flesh and Blood, Child; If I can find one (...) Iron and Steel, I Will
recommend him to you.


Lady. Iron and Steel! What kind of Men are they?


1 Sail. Oh Things that are so well acquainted wi^^ the Earth, that they will lie
twenty Years in it and take (...) Hurt: Now for my Part, I have as much
Antipathy (...) fresh Mould as fresh Water; and had rather eat Sea-Bisk^ than a
green Sod; and the Wind will as soon blow Nort^ and by South, as I be prevailed
upon to turn in with yo^


Lady. Faint-hearted Wretch! Take me with you, then, to your World.


^ Sail. Look ye, I Will have nothing to do with you at all; and there is your
Answer; and if you offer to stop me, I shall make use of my Cat of Nine Tails,
in troth I shall. Zounds! I never had such an Aversion for a Woman in my Life.
(Exit Sailor.


Lady. Sure this is some Sea Monster, it cannot be a Man, and Proof against
Gold and Jewels.

The European's God is Gold, we Indians say,
Then dare they fly from that to which they pray!
When next --
To th'shining Ore thou do for Mercy sue,
As you have been deaf to me, may that be deaf to you.
(Exit.
Enter second Sailor. 2 Sail. Ha! the Woman here that Nick should have had; a
faint-hearted Dog! Now have I a Mind to knock her Brains out, and carry off her
Jewels.


Lady. What Is here -- another of the puny Knaves?


(a Whistle within.) 2 Sail. Ha! the Boson's Whistle! nay then I must be
speedy; and yet I cannot find in my Heart to kill her.

(Whistle again.) Adsheart, I shall be left ashore; I must away.


Lady. You look disordered, Sir; are you in Love?


2 Sail. With your rare glist'ning Stones I am; and if your damned Fashion did
not heave the living Husband (...) board with the dead Wife, I did not care if
I said I was in love with you.


Lady. Then take me where we may live for ever; for indeed I don't like this
Custom amongst us, but must obey it. Come bear me hence, and I will load thee
with wealth enough to buy thy Country.


(Whistle and hollow within.) 2 Sail. Ha! I have no time to think; come along
then; (...) venture to swing in a Hammock with you for once.

Blow gently, Boreas, Neptune's Rage confound,
And let us safely upon British Ground,
Where we will drink and sing till the whole World goes round.
(Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
The Emir dragged in by Officers, with Servan^^ bringing in Loaves of Bread and
Bottles Water. Off. What, a Native of Cosgar, and tremble at its Laws when even
our Kings are subject to 'em. For sham^ Emir, bear yourself like a Man -- Come,
open the Coffin, and put in the Loaves and Water.


Em. Ah, I shall have but small Stomach to eat. (Aside Confound our Laws; I Am
informed that no part of the World is cursed with such, but only us, the rest
live (...) long as they can: To be buried alive -- Oh cursed Custom! Oh, oh,
oh! In perfect Health too! Oh, oh, oh


Off. In Health! nay my Lord, that you are not; every body expected your Death
this Morning; the Fright (...) which, I suppose, has caused your Lady's: I Am
sure every body thought you very ill.


Em. Aye, and may be every body thought me willing to die too, but every body
was mistaken.


Off. My Lord, we have no time for Talking; it is no^ in our Powers to prevent
your Fate. Here lift him in^^ the Coffin. Where are your Cords to let the
Coffins dow^ the Mountain? (They seize him


Em. I will not go down the Mountain: Unconscionable Rogues! (Struggles with
them) I hope your Wive^ will die to morrow -- Hold, hold, let me see my Wi^^
first; she died suddenly, and may come to Life again.


Off. Pish! Pish! This is Trifling, in with him, I say


Em. I tell you my Wife was an English Wife, and troubled with Vapors, as all
that Country Wives are she used to die and come to Life again ten times in an
Hour, therefore I will see her. (Struggling to reach at her Coffin.


2 Off. Shall he see her, Brother?


1 Off. No, no.


Em. Ye Dogs, I will. (Gets hold on it, and pulls off the Lid.) By Alla, Sun,
Moon and Stars, here is no body! Hussa, here is no body, she is alive. (Jumps and
dances about.


Off. Alive! bring her out then.


Em. Nay do you bring her out, if you will, for you shall never bring me in.


Off. My Lord, I shall make you bring her out; you have buried her in your
Garden, I suppose; but that shall not serve: Produce her living, or I Will instantly
proceed to the Ceremony of Burial with you: Where is she?


Em. Sir, I told you before she was an English Wife, and I believe few Husbands
know where to find them.


Off. This shall not serve: Where Is Mrs Isabinda, your Niece?


Em. With her Aunt, for ought I know.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Oh my Lord, the Ship that was cast here, yesterday, is
gone off, and with it your Lady, Niece and Maid, with all your Jewels.


Emir. With all my Soul; and there is something for thy News; a boon Voyage, and
a merry Gale to them, say (...) it is the most comfortable Loss that ever Man
had.


Off. Why what a Misfortune's this! here is our Fees lost. (Aside.


Emir. And if ever you catch me marrying again, I Will give you leave to use your
Cords. Dogs! get out of my House, go; troop, Vermin, no going down the Mountain
now -- Here kick the Coffins after them, with their Loaves and Water; and there
shall never be more occasion for 'em in this House, I promise you -- Come,
where are my Servants? Here, let me have Music and Dancing, to cheer my
Spirits.

The Laws of Wedlock all Men think severe;
But it is Damnation sure to marry here.

FINIS.
POEMS and PLAYS Printed for, and sold by George Risk, Booksell^^ at the Corner
of Castle-lane in Dames-street.
ALlan Ramsay's Poems. Alexander Pennecuik's Poems. Edinburgh's Miscellany
Poems. Trivia, or the Art of walking the Streets of London, by (...) The first
Book of Homer, by Mr. Tickle. The Hoop Peticoat, by Mr. Gay. The Court Poems,
by Mr. Pope. The Gamester, by Mrs. Centlivre. King Henry V. of England, by Mr.
Hill. The Captives, by Mr. Gay. Lady Jane Gray, by N. Row, Esquire Sophonisha, or
Hanibal's Overthrow, by Mr. Lee. Sir Walter Raleigh, by Mr. Sewell. Spartan
Dame, by Mr. Southern. King Henry IV. of France, by Mr. Beckingham. The Rival
Queens, or the Death of Alexander the Gre^^ by Mr. Lee. Busiris, King of Egypt,
by Mr. Young. Non-Juror, by Mr. Cibber. Chit-Chat, by Mr. Killigrew. The
Conscious Lovers, by Sir Richard Steel. Three Hours after Marriage, by Mr. Gay.
The Earl of Essex, by Mr. Banks. The Fair Penitent, by N. Row, Esquire The Fop's
Fortune, or Love makes a Man, by Mr. Cibb^^ The Committee, or the Faithful
Irish Man, by Sir Rob^^ Howard. The Stage-Coach, by Mr. Farquhar. Cobbler of
Preston, by Mr. Johnston. The Per-Juror and Juror. Hob, or the Country Wake, by
Mr. Doget. The Contrivances, by Mr. Carey. The Country House, by Mr. Vanburgh.
The Adventures of Half an Hour, by Mr. Bullock. The Walking Statue, or the
Devil in the Wine Cellar, (...) Mr. Hi^^ The Slip, by Mr. Bullock. Hob's
Wedding. The Schoolboy, or the Comical Rival, by Mr. Cibbe^

