AN EPISTLE TO THE King of Sweden, FROM A LADY of GREAT BRITAIN.

AN EPISTLE TO THE KING of SWEDEN FROM A LADY OF GREAT BRITAIN.

LONDON: Printed for J. ROBERTS in Warwick Lane, and ARABELLA MORRIS without
Temple Bar. MDCCXVII. Price 6 d.

AN EPISTLE TO THE King of Sweden, FROM A LADY of GREAT BRITAIN.
TO Thee rude Warrior, whom we once admired,
And thought thy Actions spoke Thee half inspired,
While Justice held the Balance of thy Cause,
And every Language sounded thy Applause:
But since Ambition and Revenge prevails,
Thy Glories languish, and our Wonder fails;
To Thee a Woman sends with Generous Care,
And Warns thy Rashness timely to beware.
FAME now a Tale of fresher Date has told,
Beyond thy mad Romantic Feats of Old:
Our Malcontents thy numerous Squadrons boast,
Describe thy Penants waving on our Coast,
And to the Fearful cry, Britannia's lost!
But we, who know the Genius of our Isle,
At their Report, and thy Invasion smile.
ARE not our Dames in every Climate famed?
Les Belles Angloises by every Nation named?
Are not our Youth in foreign Fields admired*
Alike by Valor and by Love inspired*
And shall those Fair ones, who the Morning pass,
Consulting that dear Friend to Love, the Glass;
To set the Favorite, and the Patch to place;
To bow, and glance it, with becoming Grace
To melt the Hero's Heart and charm his Eyes,
Fall to thy Gothic Rage a Sacrifice?
No, to thy Terror learn, our British Youth
Are famed for Honor, Constancy and Truth:
Each would as soon consent thy Cause to aid,
As yield the Fair to whom his Vows are paid.
Unlike the Passive Females of thy Land,
The Arbitrators of the War we stand.
At Flurt of Fan, our armed Legions fly,
And they who dare offend, must dare to die.
We know thy daring Heart is nursed in Blood,
Wild as the fiercest Savage of the Wood;
With Fame like this, in Northern Slaughter shine,
^ough as the frozen Bear, thy neighboring Sign:
But here thy brutal Force no Growns shall gain;
By Love, as well as Arms our Monarchs Reign;
Can we our GEORGE and His loved RACE disown,
To find thy barren Chastity a Throne?
No! in thy shaggy Rugg rude Slumbers take,
And dream of Conquests thou shall never make;
At distance be thy Leathern Doublet worn,
Nor risque thy Life to purchase certain Scorn;
For now the Wormwood Dam'sels apprehend
The dismal Consequence of such a Friend:
Begin to tremble at the Truths they hear,
And vow their Champions shall for GEORGE declare:
They fear thy Taste should lead young James astray,
And quite unman their Monarch every way:
In his Excuse they still would have to tell,
Though War's his Foe, He loves exceeding well;
The Proof from whence he sprung, is'not to Fight;
His Surgeon proves Hereditary Right.
BUT if by thy Example he should grow
Cold as thy Rocks of Ice, and Hills of Snow:
Should he clean Linen hold in dire Disgrace,
And sable Crape his Ivory Neck enchase:
Should he, like thee, on Shives of coarsest Bread,
Rudely with dirty Thumbs his Butter spread;
Banish the generous Juice of Grapes away,
And with small acid Tiff his Thirst allay;
Swallow lean hasty Meals of Tastless Roots,
And Eat, and Drink, and Live and Reign in Boots;
Should he, like thee regardless of the Fair,
Lie down to Sleep, and only wake to War;
Could He in Arms, like Gallant Brunswick, Shine,
Yet would His Female Friends His Cause decline,
Nor justify a Right so slovenly Divine.
CONSULT thy Safety; send no Armies forth
Beyond the Confines of thy frozen North:
Since of our British Fair this Truth is told,
We love the Chaste, but we abhor the Cold:
But if thy daring Folly will proceed,
Fate drives thee forward, and thy Falls decreed.
EACH lovely Toast her Hero's Soul inspires,
Urges the War, and wakes his Martial Fires:
Think but what Terrors will thy Spirits seize
When thou shall face such Enemies as these;
See a Battalion laced with Point d'Espan,
And warm in glowing Velvets leads the Van:
With Warlike Air, the embroidered Chiefs appear,
And gracefully the Looms rich Labors wear:
In Modish Order, over their Sholders fly
Deville's Wiggs, or Lockman's smarter Tie;
The Gold-Clock'd Stocking draws the Gazer's Sight,
And Verdin's Red-top'd Shoe, stitched round with White:
Fine Meclin Laces round their Fingers play
From Snowy Shirts, at least changed twice a Day.
THESE well-dress'd Youths to thy Destruction move,
And Victory waits upon the Wings of Love,
Our Sexes Softness is to thee unknown;
What by a Look, or one kind Kiss is done!
Thou, who a Stranger art to Love's Delight,
Can never imagine how these Lovers Fight.
These are the Men, who on the Flandrian Plains
O'erthrew the Grand Monarch in Ten Campaigns:
Will these give way before Thy Vandal Host
And yield their former Labors all for lost?
No, these for Liberty, and Beauty draw,
And all around the Neighboring Tyrants awe:
These Cock, take Snuff, invoke the darling Fair,
And then dispatch the Foe endebonair.
AIM then no more, fond Prince, at George's Throne,
Wake from the flattering Dream, and guard thy own,
In every Element alike we Reign,
And launch our ready Squadrons on the Main:
Our Champions, jocund over the flowing Bowl,
Reigns in their Wooden Worlds, from Pole to Pole;
Fearless of Danger, cut their conquering Way,
And from invading Tyrants scour the Sea.
Safer thou might in Lakes of Sulphur sleep,
Than brave these dreadful Masters of the Deep:
Beneath their Cannons roar, thy Flaggs must fall,
ORFORD presides, and these are Brittons all.
These, bold as Lions, will the Fight maintain,
Or drive thee back, or sink thee in the Main:
Though Boisterous as the Winds at Sea they roar,
They Are gentle all, as Southern Gales on Shore.
The Engagement past, the tender Thoughts return,
And for the Fair in Love's foft Fires they burn;
In Beauty's dear Embraces lulled they lie,
But when their Country calls, Her strongest Foes defy.
THESE hoist their Sails, and wait thy Coming over,
And if thou dare to touch Britannia's Shore,
Never hope to see thy Native Sweden more.
How will thou dare these Hearts of Oak to meet
Should Young Augustus deign to lead the Fleet?
Augustus! He! who striding over the Slain,
Hunted thy New Ally over Flandria's Plain:
The Boy, whose Cause forsaken now by all,
Calls for a Madman to prevent his Fall.
No Dastard Blood our Princes Veins disgrace,
Unlike the Princes of a Former Race,
Who wisely Slept or Blubbered in Distress,
He Will Face the Battle, and will force Success.
FROM Great Plantagenet Augustus springs,
By His Example taught to Conquer Kings.
Methinks I see the Royal Warrior stand
Dealing amongst his Chiefs thy Forfeit Land;
While Thou shall fall Unpitied, and Forlorn,
All Europe's Terror once, but now all Europe's Scorn.
FINIS.

