MRS. CENTLIVRE.
^. S^rmin pinx. ^ Tayl^r sculp.


A WIFE WELL MANAGED. A FARCE.

-- Mulier saevissima tunc est,
Cum stimulos odio pudor admovet.
Juv. Sat. 10. LONDON: Printed and Sold by S. Keimer, at the Printing-Press in
Paternoster Row. 1715

Dramatis Personae
MEN.
DON Pisalto, Designed to have been reprefented by Mr. Norris. Father Bernardo.
By Mr. Shepherd. Teague. By Mr. Miller.
WOMEN.
Lady Pisalto. Mrs. Baker. Inis. Miss Younger.
SCENE, Lisbon.

A WIFE WELL MANAGED.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Lady Pisalto, and Inis. Lady. AH, Inis! My Indisposition is not to be cured.


Inis. Not without applying the proper Medicine I grant ye. -- Well, had I such
a Confessor as Father Bernardo -- I say no more -- but I sancy nothing would
trouble my Conscience long.


Lady. What do you mean?

Inis. My Meaning depends upon yours, Madam; pray what do you mean by painting
Farther Bernardo's Picture in every Room in the House, at your Beds-head, your
Toilet, at the Bottom of your Crucifix, at every Corner of your Handkerchief,
nay upon your very Fan too, as if the Good Father, like the Traveller in the
Fable, could heat and cool at once?


Lady. Is there any harm in wearing a good Man's Picture? Is he not one of the
Pillars of our Church? Eminent for de claiming against Herisy and Schism, and
fain would reconcile the World to Rome s pure Religion? Oh they are blessed that
he Converts, happy the Pair, who ever they be, that are in Wedlock joined by
him. Would I had been one of those.


Inis. If the Good Father has this healing Art, Why are you uneasy? A little of
his comfortable Consolation would revive the Color in those Cheeks, and give
great Satisfaction to your Mind, or I have lost my Judgment, and I don't use to
be out in my Guess, where Love's the Riddle.


Lady. Well, since thou have hit my Distemper so exactly, Girl, I Will confess
ingeniously to thee, I do love Father Bernardo to Distraction, but how to
discover my Passion, or what Reception it may meet with when discovered, is
that which wracks me.


Inis. A kind one I warrant you, Madam: For though Priests are forbid to marry,
as a mortal Sin, Fornication was never reckoned more than Venial; and for
Discovery, whilst there is Pen, Ink, and Paper in the World, a Woman can never
be at a loss to tell her Mind. Write to him Madam, write to him.


Lady. But who shall carry it?


Inis. Your Irish Footman; he is a simple honest Fellow, and may easily be
managed; do you write your Letter, Madam, and I Will give him Instructions in the
mean Time.


Lady. I Will do it this Minute.


(Exit Lady.) (Inis goes to the Door and calls, Teague* Enter Teague. Teague.
Well Mrs. Inis; What Commands have you for Teague now?


Inis. Do you think you can do a Message cunningly, Teague?


Teague. Cunningly! Yes Faith, we are all so cunning now -- What for a Message
is it?


Inis. It is a Letter for Father Bernardo at the Convent of St. Francis; if you
do it handsomely, a Moider is your Reward; do you hear, but if you make any
Mistake --


Teague. Hub, bub, bub, bu, Mistake! No Faith will not I, Arra! An will you be
after giving me the Moider indeed, and by my Shoul now?


Inis. Upon Honor. --


Teague. Arra, say no more now -- I will be here again in a Quarter of an Hour.

(going.
Inis. But you must stay for the Letter, Teague.


Teague. No, no, it is no Matter; I have a very clean Letter in my Pocket which
will do very well, upon my Shoul. (going) and save Time, yes Faith will it.


Inis. Ha ha; no, no, Teague, that will not do; come along with me, and I Will give
you the Letter; but if you should meet my Master Don Pisalto, not a Word of the
Letter for your Life -- And I charge you to give it into no Hands but the
Priests, and bring me an Answer, and then the Moider is your own.


Teague. Faith will I. --


(Exeunt. Re-enter Teague with the Letter. Teague. Arra, pon my Shoul, I have
forgot this plaguey Priest's Name -- Yes Faith have I -- Father Bom, Bom, Bom,
-- By St. Patrick I don't know who to ask for now -- Arra, What shall I do? --
Who the Devil shall I get to read the Outside of this Letter now?


Enter Don Pisalto behind him, and looks over his Shoulder on the Letter. Don
Pis. For Father Bernardo.


Tea. Oh, pon my Shoulvation dat is the Name now. (turns quick upon Don
Pisalto. Ha, my Maistre! What shall I say now,

(Aside.
Don Pis. Whither are you going with that Letter Sirrah? It is my Wives Hand,

(Aside.
Tea. Ha ha, pon my Shoul, a very good Jest, first reads the Direction, and
then asks me whither it goes.


Don Pis. It may not prove so good a Jest as you think Sirrah -- Who gave you
that Letter?


Tea. Arra Maistre, you are very uncivil now to enquire into other Folks
Business, so you are, yes Faith are you.


Don Pis. I shall be so very uncivil to break your Head Rascal, if you don't
answer me to the Purpose; give me the Letter you Dog you.


Tea. Faith will not I -- That Is the Way to lose the Moider, which I am to have
for carrying it.


Don Pis. A Moider for carrying it! Sure the Business must be very urgent, when
the Postage is so dear. Give it me, I say, or or,


(Lays his Hand to his Sword. Tea. No pon my Shoul will not I.


Don Pis. Will Not you Sirrah?


(Draws, and beats him. Tea. Arra, take the Letter (throws it down) Pox upon
me, if I don't wish the Devil had you both, yes Faith do I; for poor Teague
loses his Moider now, and Mrs. Inis will never send me of no more Arrands, no
Faith will not she.


Don Pis. Inis, Ho! Did she give it you --


(Opens it. Tea. Yes indeed now, and I believe there is some very great Sin in
the Letter now, that the Good Father was to send his Pardon for, so I do.


Don Pis. Monstrous! What do I see? Yes here is a Sin with a Witness -- (Reads)
Dear Father, you will forgive me when I tell you, that the more I see you, the
more I hate my Husband, (very fine) and the more I pray against Temptation, the
more powerfully my Inclinations plead in your Behalf, (Furies and Distraction,)
-- I implore your charitable Assistance to conquer this unruly Sin -- (Yes I Will
help you with a Vengance to you) -- Nothing but your Company can prolong the
Life of Flora. (Say you so Mistress? Very well. Inis gave you this Letter you
say!


Tea. Yes Faith did she -- Arra dear honny Maistre, an you have don with the
Letter give it now, that I may carry it to the Good Father, what de ye call
him, or I shall lose the Moider, yes Faith shall I.


Don Pis. Ha! A lucky Thought comes into my Head, and this Fellows Simplicity
is of use: Hark ye, Teague, come you along with me, I am acquainted with Father
Bernardo, I Will procure you an Answer to this Letter -- It is as you say, a
Letter of Confession, and I believe Inis might not perform Articles with you,
if she knew I had seen it; but take you no Notice of that, do you hear -- And
there is two Moiders for you Sirrah.


(Exit. Tea. Oh. by my Shoul Teague is dumb -- Now I shall have three Moiders;
Faith this is a lucky beating for poor Teague; now will I drink St. Patrick's
Health till I am as red as a Potato, yes Faith will I


(Exit. Enter Father Bernardo. Bernardo. I have had very odd Dreams to Night;
methought I was in Bed with Lady Pisalto -- Ah, would it was true, for she is a
charming Woman; by St. Anthony I never hear her Confession, but my Virtue is
much staggered; the Flesh and Spirit hold strong Contention; Oh, she is a
delicious Morsel.

Enter Don Pisalto. Ha! Her Husband, I hope did not overhear me.


Don Pis. So, I have dispatched the Irishman. Ha! Father Bernardo, well met; I
was going to your Convent, I have a Favor to ask of you.


Bern. You command me, Senior, Pisalto, pray what is it?


Don Pis. Why I must desire you to procure me a Habit of your Order for an Hour
or two.


Bern. I hope you have no Enterprise in View, that may scandalize the
Priesthood.


Don Pis. Fie, fie, does a Man of my Years give you Room for Suspicion? Besides,
I am a married Man you know.


Bern. And to the most beautiful Lady in Madrid -- A Religious, Virtuous Lady;
Ah, you are a happy Man, Senior.


Don Pis. A Curse of the Happiness -- Her Virtue, and your Sanctity, Father,
might have begot a Monster, called a Cuckold, if Fortune had not flung me in
the Way to prevent it.


Bern. What say you, Senior!


Don Pis. I say I am contented, Father.


Bern. Contented! Why another Man would be transported, ravished, nay almost
guilty of Idolatry.


Don Pis. Humph! There would have been fine Work if they had come together; Oh,
these Priests are full of Abstinence, and Piety! (Aside) If you will oblige me
with a Habit, let it be immediately, and I should be proud if you would give me
your Company this Evening to sup with my Wife and I; I Will assure you Father,
she has a profound Respect for you.


Bern. I am much obliged to her, Senior, I Will not fail to accept your kind
Invitation, come along with me and I Will give you the Habit. -- A profound
Respect for me -- Oh, that it were Love.


(Exit. Don Pis. I Will send for them this Minute, Father, but now I must pay a
Visit to my virtuous Wife, and see how she bears her Expectation.

Amongst all the Ills which clogg this Mortal Life,
The most acurst, and veriest Plague is -- Wife.

(Exit. SCENE Changes.
Enter Lady reading a Letter; Inis following. Lady. He has answered me as I
could wish -- Dear, dear Inis, how shall I reward thee? Take that in Earnest of
my future Kindness, he says he will come in the Twilight, which will soon be
here, though not so soon as I could wish it: -- He desires, for Reasons which he
will give me, he says, to be admitted in the Dark, which caution does not
displease me, since it will prevent the Confusion I should be in after such a
Declaration. --


Inis. He did that on purpose, Madam; he is a true Cavalier, and understands
his Business to a Hair; he knows Darkness is necessary upon rhese Occasions; it
prevents a Lady's Blushes. -- Ods heart, Madam, here is my Lord, I hear him
cough.


Lady. Oh mischevious Minute; -- Here, here, run down the back Stairs, and burn
that Letter immediately.

(Exit Inis. I Will to my Book.


(Sits down, and takes up a Book. Enter Don Pisalto. Don Pis. There she sits,
-- as if she knew nothing of the Matter, -- a Cockatrice, -- What always at thy
Devotion, Figgup?


Lady. How can I pass my Time better in your Absence, Pudsey? Were it not for
these good Books, I should be very melancholy, when you are from me, Pudsey.


Don Pis. Hell confound her for a desembling Witch.

(Aside.
Lady. What ails my Pudsey? You look out of Humor with your nown Figgup, What
have I done, ha?


Don Pis. Nothing yet I hope; -- But that is no Fault of hers.


Lady. Nay, what are you studying for, Pud, ha!


Don Pis. Why if you must know, little Figgey, -- then I Will tell thee; Don
Cammaray lays claim to Part of that Estate I bought last Year, and I must he
obliged to leave my dear Figgup for two or three Hours this Evening, in order
to consult my Lawyers about that Matter, that is all Figgey; -- And I was afraid
thou should take it ill of thy nown Pud.


Lady. Lucky beyond Expression: (Aside) No, no, Pud, I am not so unreasonable
neither; -- I can divert my self with my Books till thy return. -- But do
Puddey -- make all the Haste you can to your nown Figgup --


Don Pis. Ay, ay, more haste than you would wish I dare swear. (Aside) That I will
my Precious. --


(Going Lady. What never a parting Kiss, Pudsey? Oh you don't love your Figgup!
Go, go, you are a naughty Hubby; -- I I I I wish I could love you less than I
do, so I do.


(Sobbing, taking out her Handkerchief. Don Pis. Did ever Woman make a Cuckold
with a better Grace? Ounds she outdoes an English Wife. -- Nay don't weep
Figgup; I Will stay with thee, let the Estate go how it will, rather than
displease my little Figgey. --


Lady. Heaven forbid, that would be carrying the Jest too far. (Aside) No, no,
I don't desire that, Pud.


Don Pis. No, I dare swear it.

(Aside.
Lady. Go, but give me a kind Kiss first, Pudsey.


Don Pis. Ah you are a coaxing Baggage.

(Kisses her. Well, Good by Figgey.


(Exit. Lady. Good by Pudsey -- with all my Heart.

Enter Inis. He is gone Girl most fortunately.


Inis. I overheard all, and wish you Joy of this lucky Opportunity, -- Come,
come, Madam, away to your Chamber, it is near the Time, -- and there contemplate
on your coming Joy; whilst I, your Harbinger of Bliss, wait to conduct the Man
that is to crown your Happiness.


Lady. I fly, I fly Girl.


(Exeunt severally. SCENE changes, and discovers Lady Pisalto leaning on a
Couch.
Lady. Bless me, what Noise was that! -- My Heart aches horridly lest this old
Cuff should return and prevent my charming Priest.


Enter Inis, leading in Don Pisalto in a Priest's Habit. Inis. Fear nothing,
Father, strait forward is your Way to Happiness.


Don Pis. A Happiness, I fear, will bode somebody no Good. Hist, hist,
Daughter! Where are you?


(Exit Inis. Lady. Ha! He Is come, -- here, here, my too charming Father, can
you forgive a Woman's Weakness --

(groping about.
Don Pis. Common Frailties of Flesh and Blood, (groping about) if thou have
prayed against it, thou have done thy Part, and we are bound to comfort those
that faint.


Lady. Oh, I have often prayed, Father, but to no Purpose; you are the only
Object of my Wishes, I blush, though in the Dark, to own how much I love you. --


Don Pis. Come to my Arms, and hide those Blushes in my Bosom. (they meet and
embrace) Is your Husband safe*


Lady. Safe enough, though long he will not stay, Fortune smiled upon my Wishes,
and called him luckily abroad. --


Don Pis. Then let us improve the little Time we have; thus let me cool the
raging Fever in your Blood.


(Catches hold of her Arm, and pulls out a Ropes End and beats her soundly, she
roars out all the while. Lady. Oh! What do you mean, to murder me? Inhumane
Monster! Oh! Murder, Murder, Murder, -- oh, oh, oh,


(fails on the Couch. Enter Inis. Inis. Bless me! What Is the Matter, Madam?


(Don Pisalto turns and beats her. Don Pis. Only administering a little Penance,
Mistress; it will not be amiss to bestow a little Charity upon you too.


Inis. The Devil take you, and your Penance too, you old sanctified Dog you:
Thieves, Thieves; I Will have you equipped for the Opera, Sarrah, I will so: A
Light there a Light, here is Thieves in the House -- Oh, oh, Murder, Thieves, --
my Lady's murdered. --


Don Pis. I must not stay for a Light, least they discover who I am: -- One
farewell Stroke -- And now remember your Benefactor, Mistress Bawd.


(Exit. Inis. Yess, I shall remember with a Vengeance.


Enter Teague with a Candle. Tea. Arra by my Shoul what is de Matter now? Is de
House haunted? Has de great Devil and de little Devil put de Fright upon you
both together now?


Lady. Begone impertinent Fool.


Tea. Fool! Pon my Shoul Irishman are no Fools; -- By St. Patrick, we make
Fools of de very great many English, yes Faith and of de Spaniards too.


Inis. Get out Sirrah, or I Will fling the Candle at your Head.


Tea. Arra, Pox take your ugly Face, and him that would put a Kiss upon it, for
Teague.


(Exit. Lady. Oh, I am killed Inis! This cursed Priest has killed me.


Inis. Was there ever such a Monster? I dare swear I am black from Head to
Foot, he laid on most unmercifully: -- Well my Mind misgives me, this Priest is
no Man, this feels like an occasional Correction.


Lady. Occasional, do you call it? I Am sure he has given me occasion to
remember it this Twelvemonth.


(Don Pisalto within. Don Pis. Figgup, why Figgup -- where are you Child?


Lady. Ah Heaven, my Husband's Voice -- returned so soon! What shall I say for
my Indisposition?


Inis. Oh Invention! Where art thou?

(Pauses.
Enter Don Pisalto. Don Pis. What, asleep little Figgy?


Inis. Asleep, Senior, no, no, alas my poor Lady had like to have been killed
since you went.


Don Pis. Killed! As how? You make me tremble.


Inis. Going down Stairs, her Foot slipped, and down she tumbled from Top to
Bottom, and bruiz'd her self so sadly, that she is not able to stir a Finger;
it is a Mercy she was not killed out right.


Lady. Excellent Wench.

(Aside.
Don Pis. Here Is a pure Jade at Invention. -- They say the Devil's a Liar, but
I Will be hanged if this Wench will not out-lye the Devil. -- I Am heartily sorry for
this Misfortune, poor dear Figgy; -- but I hope thou have not broke any Bones,
my dear Figgup?


Lady. But I am much hurt, Pudsey.


Don Pis. I Am sorry for it, for I have invited Father Bernardo to sup wirh us; I
met him hard by here, and brought him back with me, -- because I know he is a
Favorite with my Figgy.


Inis. Not so great a Favorite as he was, if you knew all.

(Aside.
Lady. I beg you would excuse me, Pudsey, I cannot come down, besides I have no
Stomach.


Inis. No! The Priest has given her and me Supper enough, more than we can
digest this Twelvemonth.

(Aside.
Don Pis. Well, if thou can not eat, there is no more to be said. Take Care
of your Lady, Inis. -- We'll drink thy Health little Figgup.


(Exit. Lady. My Heart rises at the Villain, if I should see him, I think in my
Soul I should tear his Eyes out; Oh that I could be revenged.


Inis. Revenged! What Revenge could you take bad enough, Madam? It Is impossible
to find Revenge equal to the Affront; A Ropes End to a Lady that expected! -- I
could flea him alive, so I could.

(In a Passion.
Lady. My Head aches greiveously.


Inis. Let me cover you up upon the Bed, Madam, a little Sleep will Settle your
Head again.


(Exit. SCENE changes
Enter Don Pisalto and Priest. Bern. Your Lady possessed say you?


Don Pis. It Is even so Father, I left her well, and sound in her Senses, I
thought, about Two Hours ago; but now she raves, calls Names, Fights, and talks
of being beat by every Body that comes near her.


Bern. Poor Lady, I am exceeding sorry, I Will take Care she shall be prayed for
by the whole Convent.


Don Pis. I wish you would see her Father, perhaps your Ghostly Admonition
might do her good. Men of your Holy Function have Power over unclean Spirits;
pray try what you can do for her.


Bern. Withal my Heart, but I have no Holy Water about me; -- nothing frights
the Devil like Holy Water, -- thence comes the Proverb, you know.


Don Pis. I can help you to some, please to walk this Way, Father.


(Exeunt. SCENE changes, and discovers Lady Pisalto on a Couch, asleep.
Enter Priest, sets a Basin of Water on the Table, -- Don Pisalto listening.
Bern. Peace be here -- Ha! She sleeps: -- How invitingly she lies? Why what a
delicious Morsel has this old sapless Long every Night to snoar over.


Don Pis. Well said Priest; -- Oh this is a Holy Man; no Wonder he is the
Women's Favorite. --


Bern. I feel a strange Disorder on the Sudden, -- my Pulse beats quick, and
every Sense seems ravished at this Object. -- Ha! We are alone, -- What hinders
me to make use of the Opportunity? --


Don Pis. Zounds, I shall be Cuckolded before my Face.


Bern. Besides, none dare to press upon our Privacy, -- we have that Advantage
above the Laity, I Will try; if she should prove virtuous, and resist, the Noise
will pass upon her Husband, as the Effect of her Possession, for I shrewdly
suspect, she is not mad indeed, and only puts it on to avoid the Embraces of
that Skeleton, unfit for a Woman of her Youth and Fire.


Don Pis. Well, for a thorough paced Whoremaster, commend me to a Priest, I say.


Bern. I Will try I Am resolved.


(Steals softly to the Couch and kisses her. Don Pis. Very well, -- Zounds, I
shall not contain my self. --


Bern. Rapture! Her very Lips gives Ecstasy! -- She sleeps very sound -- once
more,


(Goes to kiss her again, and she lifts up her Eyes and sees him. Lady. I
dreamt! Ha! Bless me, the Monster's here! Oh that I could look him dead. --


(Going to rise, Bernardo stops her, and kneels. Bern. Oh do not rise my
charming Angel, let me feast my Eyes upon that lovely Face, the perfect Image
of the Blessed above.


Lady. Do not insult me, thou ungrateful Traitor! Do not.


Bern. What means my Charmer? Oh forgive my rash Proceeding, and blame your
Eyes, those dear bewitching Eyes, for all that I have done.


(Kisses her in Ecstasy. Lady. Off Monster, Devil, worse, if worse can be, than
Devil, thou very Priest. --


Don Pis. Excellent, it works now as I would have it. --


Lady. You thought you had killed me, I suppose, -- but you shall find, I live
to tear your Eyes out, Monster.


(Flys up and pulls his Hood off, and beats him. Bern. Help, Help, Help, bless
me! She is really possessed.


Enter Inis with a Stick. Iris. Ha! You here again, Old Beelzebub! but I Will be
even with you now, I will so.


(Lays on upon the Priest. Don Pis. Ha, ha, I shall dye with Laughing.


Bern. What do you mean Madam, pray be calm, I would comfort you.


Iris. As how pray Father; I am much mistaken if you have any Thing that can
comfort a Lady.


Bern. Oh Wickedness! Have I nothing that can comfort a Lady?


Lady. Yes Villain, I can show your Marks of Comfort, I can so; but I Will be
revenged on thee, I will.


(beats him. Inis. Yes, and I can show 'em too; this for my Lady, this for my
self.


(beats him. Don Pis. Ha, ha, O rare Figgup, O rare Inis.


Bern. Bless me! By St. Anthony they are both possessed, the Maid has caught her
Frenzy too, in Nomine Domine. --


(Runs to the Table, and catches up the Holy Water and flings, first on one,
then on the other. Don Pis. Ha, ha, O rare Priest, ha, ha.


Lady. I Will Nomine Domine you, you had better have hanged your self in your
Rope's End, than have used it about me, I Will make it a dear beating to you,
Sirrah.


Bern. Oh Maria Matter ora pro nobis.


(Flings Water still. Lady. Ah! He Will drown me. --


Bern. Avaunt Satan, I conjure thee, by St. Anthony, St. Bridget, and our Lady
of Loretta.


(flings Water. Inis. (Strikes down the Basin and breaks it.) -- What, hoa, A
Rape, A Rape, I Will cant you, I Will have you hanged; -- I Will show the World the
Jewel they dote on: I saw you when you would have ravished my Lady, -- thou
Monster of Iniquity.


Bern. Mercy on me, the Devil is very strong in them both.


Enter Don Pisalto. Don Pis. Ha, ha, I must release the Priest, or they will
murder him between them. -- Oh the Rage of a disappointed Woman. -- What Is the
Matter here? Pray Father withdraw, I am heartily sorry for your ill Treatment,
it is their height of Frenzy you see Father; I Will wait upon you in the next
Room immediately, you can do them no Good I see, Father.


Bern. Alas Senior, they are so strongly possessed that no one Man can deal with
them both.


(Exit. Inis. Will you let him go Senior, why he would have ravished my Lady,
if I had not cried out.


Don Pis. No Mistress, you cried out because he had not ravished your Lady. --
Go troop Mistress, I ll reckon with you within. (Exit Inis. And now Madam for
you. -- Do you know this Letter?


Lady. Ha! My Letter to Father Bernardo! the Villain has betrayed me! -- and
I Am undone!

(Aside.
Don Pis. Why don't you answer me? What, are you dumb? Then I must fetch you to
your Speech with this.


(pulls out a Dagger. Lady. Ah! Defend me Heaven. (falls on her Knees.) But why
name I Heaven; -- I have offended that in wronging you, though but in Thought; --
Oh forgive me, have Pity on my Youth, and let me live, punish me as severely as
you please, let even him who has betrayed me, name my Penance, and then I Am
sure it will be harsh enough, what ever it be, I will perform it most
religiously.


Don Pis. I melt, -- the cunning Baggage knows her Power. --


Lady. Oh! Do Pudsey do, will not you forgive your nown Figgup, can you pierce
this Bosom you have kissed so often, and see your Figgeys Blood run trickling
down? --


Don Pis. I am conquered, I can hold no longer. -- Rise Figgup, for this Time I
will forgive thee; but on Condition you never see your Ghostly Father more, no
more Harrangues in Praise of his Sanctity, and Holiness of Life; Do you hear,
Figgey?


Lady. No never indeed, Pudsey.


Don Pis. Take heed, for if again I catch you faulty, look to it, expect no
Pardon.


Lady. No, when I am, may I your Pardon miss,
Since you so generously forgive me this.

Don Pis. When Wives like mine gives Inclination Scope,
No Cure for Cuckoldom like Oil of Rope.

FINIS.

