THE CLAIMS OF THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND.

N. B. Those Persons, who have not Leisure (in the present awful and important
Crisis of public Affairs) to peruse this little Tract, may view the Substance
of it, in an ABSTRACT, at the End of the Book.

"The Work of RIGHTEOUSNESS" (which necessarily includes the duty of restoring
to all men their RIGHTS and just Claims) " shall be PEACE; and, the Effect of
RIGHTEOUSNESS, Quietness and Assurance for ever." -- Isaiah xxxii. 17. -- For
the Throne is established by RIGHTEOUSNESS. (Prove. xvi. 12.) But -- "there is
no PEACE, says my God, to the WICKED." -- Isaiah lvii. 21. LONDON* PRINTED IN
THE YEAR M.DCC.LXXXII.

The CLAIMS of the People of ENGLAND.
IN the beginning of the present century, (anno 1701, 12 W. III.) a sensible
and loyal Writer drew up a small Tract of political information, which he
entitled -- THE CLAIMS OF THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND essayed in a Letter from the
Country. But, before the Tract was printed, the Author had the satisfaction to
hear, that the Claims, he had asserted, were in many respects established by a
new Act of the Parliament then sitting; which seasonable attention to the
People's Rights he most gratefully acknowledged in a Postscript to his Letter.

The Act of Settlement, by virtue of which the present Royal Family succeeded
to the Crown of these Realms, was the Statute, which then so happily (in the
opinion of that Writer) secured THE CLAIMS OF THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND.

It is entitled, An Act for the farther Limitation of the Crown, and better
securing the Rights and Liberties of the Subject; -- and accordingly contains
eight very excellent Articles of Limitation, agreeable to the Claims of the
People of England; which, it seems, were enacted, with the unanimous
Concurrence of both Houses of Parliament, for the express purpose of securing
our Religion, Laws, and Liberties.

One of these Articles ordained -- "That" -- all matters and things relating to
the well governing of this Kingdom, which are properly cognizable in the Privy
Council by the Laws and Customs of this Realm, shall be transacted there, and
all Resolutions taken thereupon shall be signed by such of the Privy Council as
shall advise and consent to the same. This excellent provision would
effectually prevent any secret Council, or Faction, from becoming efficient
without Responsibility.


And by another of these Articles it was ordained -- That no person, who has an
Office, or Place of profit, under the King, or receives a Pension from the
Crown, shall be capable of serving as a Member of the House of Commons. It
might perhaps have been objected at that time, as well as at present, that such
a total exclusion of Placemen would withdraw from Parliament the Council and
Assistance of many worthy Men in Office, (or that ought to be in Office,) whose
parliamentary Abilities are the most distinguished and eminent in the Kingdom.
Yet there is and obvious answer to this objection, viz. That it is very easy
for a free Parliament (if in their wisdom they shall think it proper) to permit
the great Officers of State, or even their Secretaries or first Clerks to have
seats in Parliament, and, as Members, not only to declare their opinions, but
also, for the better information of the House, even to debate and reply upon
all questions relating to public affairs; which might be allowed without any
dangerous effect, provided they are duly restrained from the single privilege
of VOTING. The Nation by this means may have ample benefit in the exercise of
their great and shining abilities, without risque of undue influence, which
cannot justly be attributed to mere argument, as that has no other weight or
effect than what is fairly due to its merit; and any unreasonable length of
speech, whenever it is used with an apparent intention to procrastinate and
obstruct the intention of the Majority, may be duly restrained at the pleasure
of the House. But otherwise, (i. e. without some due restriction, and, more
especially, without an absolute exclusion from the power of voting,) a TREASURY
BENCH, or any other BENCH OF PLACEMEN, in the House of Commons, is a manifest
ABOMINATION, utterly repugnant to all just Ideas of a free uninfluenced
Parliament, and consequently is highly derogatory to the honor of that House!


But, as the Parliament was at that time invested with the dangerous
unconstitutional power of a triennial duration without Reelection, it was
impossible that the Elected (who thereby acquired a temporary independency of
the Electors, and, of course, too many of them, a separate interest of their
own) could long continue real Representatives of the People's Claims; and,
consequently, these two most excellent provisions against undue influence were
unhappily repealed, a very few years afterward, in the 4th year of Queen Anne
(c. 8.) Which amply proves, that the most salutary provisions for the Claims of
the people cannot be securely established under triennial or septennial
Parliaments; and, of course, that the ancient usage of sessional ELECTIONS is a
Claim, of all others the most essentially necessary for our welfare.

Since the fatal repeal above mentioned, the prevalence of undue influence has
so rapidly and enormously increased, that the ever-loyal Citizens of London
thought it their duty, in the year 1770, to bear testimony against it; and
accordingly they asserted, in a public declaration to the King himself, that
"the" (then) House of Commons did NOT represent the people. Representatives of
the People are essential to the making of Laws, and there is a Time when it is
morally demonstrable that Men cease to be Representatives. That Time is now
arrived. THE PRESENT HOUSE OF COMMONS DO NOT REPRESENT THE PEOPLE. -- Address
of the Mayor, Aldermen, etc. of the City of London, 1770.


Subsequent Facts have demonstrated the absolute necessity we are now under to
claim and promote an unequivocal abolition of all undue Influence in Parliament.

Measures, the most unrighteous, as well as the most ruinous that could have
been devised, have been adopted and carried on under a pretended sanction of
parliamentary Authority, This must of course be understood to refer (if you
please) only to former Parliaments that began the Mischief, whose pretended
Sanction had more of the Name than the Reality of parliamentary Authority, if a
real Representation of the Commons be at all essential to constitute a true
legal Parliament. The Representatives are chosen by a very small Proportion of
the People, and even that small Proportion of People is so monstrously unequal
in their power of delegation, that the small Number of 5723 Borough Voters
elect 254 Representatives, which is very near half the Number of
Representatives that are due to six Millions of People, and more than half, or
a Majority, of the Numbers that are ever known to attend at any one Time. The
INJUSTICE of such an enormous Disproportion in the Representation of the whole
People cannot be parallelled by any other gross Absurdity, except THE INIQUITY
of rendering that disproportionate Representation still more contemptible and
nugatory by SEPTENNIAL or (what were nearly as pernicious) TRIENNIAL, instead
of the ancient constitutional Usage of SESSIONAL, ELECTIONS.


which have involved both King and People (whose true interests are
inseparable) in the most alarming difficulties: and the ostensible Agents in
the mischief have obstinately persevered to the utmost extension of ability,
until public Disasters, and a happy preventive incapacity of their own, (their
Heads and Funds being equally exhausted of council and resource,) have
compelled them to make a temporary retreat; though the numerous Corpse of
Placemen, Pensioners, Contractors, etc. occasionally procured them a shameful
Majority almost to the last!

Hence it is evident that the Corruption of Parliament is the real source of
all our national calamities and grievances, which cannot therefore be relieved
by a mere change of Ministry.

The Minority in Parliament has once before, in the memory of most men, become
the Majority; and the worthy Opposers of bad measures were indulged with a
temporary administration of public Affairs, until the secret efficient Cabinet
could recover from the surprise and dismay of their former defeat in
Parliament, and, by a renewed exertion of their undue influence, were able to
shackle the new Administration with the rueful alternative, either to abandon
their newly-acquired dignities, or else to adopt such measures as must
effectually deprive them of the people's confidence; after which they were
contemptuously compelled (one by one, or as it might best suit the purposes of
the reigning system of undue influence) to yield up their places for the
emolument of the more pliant creatures of the secret faction.

It would be madness for Englishmen, after such galling experience, to neglect
their just and indispensible Claim to some immediate and effectual precaution
against similar delusions. To trust another new Administration, without
insisting at the same time on a constitutional limitation of power, by a free
uninfluenced Representation of the Commons, may be dangerous to our very
existence as an independent Kingdom!

The reduced circumstances of the Nation cannot admit the risque of another
such credulous experiment!

It is therefore become absolutely necessary, for the security both of King and
People, (which includes the true interest of all parties,) that the just
"Claims of the People" be satisfied in an immediate Restoration of the ancient
legal and responsible Government, by a Revival of the two repealed Articles of
the Act of Settlement, above recited, and by a Revival also of that most
excellent Statute for SESSIONAL PARLIAMENTS, passed in the 4th of K. Ed. III.
c. 14. declaring, "that a Parliament" (meaning a newly-elected Parliament, as
the writs of those times incontestably demonstrate) shall be holden every year
once, and more often if need be. But this indispensible Right and Claim of the
People (for the Act itself is no more than an authentic Declaration, or
Acknowledgement, of an ancient Right) cannot have complete effect without
totally repealing an Act of the 8th year of K. Hen. VI. (cap. vii.) which, on
false pretenses, (whereby it is rendered unworthy the title and dignity of a
Statute,) disfranchised at once by far the greatest part of the English Nation,
by robbing them of their BIRTHRIGHT, In the Act of Settlement, by virtue of
which the present King sits on the Throne, it is declared, that the Laws of
England are the Birthright of the people thereof: and, according to an ancient
Maxim of the Common Law, this our Birthright in the Laws is to be esteemed our
most valuable inheritance, superior to every other Denomination of PROPERTY.
Major Haereditas unicuique venit a jure et legibus quam a parentibus. Lord Coke
says it -- is the best Birthright the subject has; for thereby his Goods,
Lands, Wife, Children, his Body, Life, Honor and Estimation, are protected
from injury and wrong: and then he cites the maxim -- " Major Haereditas, etc.
2 Inst. p. 56. An Act of Parliament, therefore, which sets up an inferior and
mere pecuniary property as the object of representation, not only in
preference, but to the total exclusion of that superior property, or personal
Right, which ought to be esteemed the most valuable inheritance, or BEST
BIRTHRIGHT the subject has, etc. is such a malum in so, such an iniquitous
contempt and infringement of Common Right, against Reason and Justice, and
against the express declaration of a fundamental principle of the English
Constitution, (...) cannot fail to render the Act null and void in itself, if
the People will but unite in maintaining this just and legal plea against it;
for which they have ample authority. See Doctor and Student, c. 10. wherein it
is declared, that Statutes cannot exist against REASON or the LAW DIVINE, --
nec contra RATIONEM, nec contra LEGEM divinam existant: for the execrable
iniquity abovementioned is surely against both; and therefore as these two Laws
(the Law of Reason and the Law of God) cannot abate or turn aside, -- Hae duae
Leges declinari non possunt, (ib. c. 17.) it is manifest that the unjust Act is
utterly unworthy to be named a Statute, and must needs be void, Plowden has
reported a variety of cases, wherein Acts of Parliament were esteemed void in
Law through the want of truth in the recitals. See pages 398 to 400. (Sharp's
Declaration, p. 237.) Which legal disqualification is obvious in the preamble
to the Act in question.
as it cannot otherwise be esteemed than a mere corruption, (or corruptela,)
according to the express direction of the same approved Author in his 2d chapter --
viz. -- Against this Law, (i. e. the Law of Reason,) prescription, STATUTE, nor
custom, may not prevail; and, if any be brought in against it, they be not
prescriptions, STATUTES, nor Customs, but CORRUPTIONS, (CORRUPTELAE,) things
VOID and against Justice. -- Doct. et Stud. Eng. ed. 1668, p. 5.
the inestimable Right of voting for Representatives in Parliament, without
which they cannot properly be esteemed Freemen, because the Laws, their
BIRTHRIGHT and most valuable Property, may be changed, suspended, or entirely
withdrawn from them, without their consent; whereas, in ancient times, they
enjoyed not only the privilege of voting, in plen County, (i. e. the full
County Court or Parliament of each County,) for the Knights of the Shire, but
frequently also for the Citizens and Burgesses, elected in their respective
Counties; whereby the Equality of Representation was then preserved; and may
again be happily restored by some such equitable mode of transferring the
representation of depopulated or notoriously venal Boroughs to the Decision of
their respective County courts. Which method of equalizing Representation
deserves preference to all others, because it is not liable to the odious
charge of innovation, but, on the contrary, is authenticated by long-continued
usage and legal Precedents of ancient times: and the same may be said of all
the other changes already recommended in this Address.

By these approved and tried means, the just claims of the people may be amply,
as well as easily, established; and the happy effects of such a perfect
Reformation would be security and support to any virtuous Administration: for
it would prevent their just measures from being impeded and clogged by the
secret machinations of any private Cabal, or Cabinet Faction, that might
otherwise be efficient without Responsibility; and it would also exclude the
interested opposition of needy unprincipled persons, who at present can
introduce themselves into P -- l -- m -- t (if they can but find credit for the
purchase-money) merely for the purposes of private interest! a Trade as
dishonorable to themselves as it is baneful to the Nation; for the
Representation of many Boroughs is now commonly esteemed a mere pecuniary
property, and, as such, has in many instances been either notoriously bought
and sold; or else is holden at the absolute disposal of single Individuals,
(Peers and other overgrown Landholders,) for the dangerous purpose of enhancing
their own personal consequence! An "undue Influence" this (in whatsoever hands
it is lodged) that is most detestably disgraceful to the Nation as well as
fundamentally derogatory to the validity of every legislative Resolution! and,
what is still more alarming, will completely ruin the Kingdom, if the
constitutional Remedies here proposed are not speedily adopted.

London, March 23, 1782. A LOYAL ENGLISHMAN.

An ABSTRACT of the Claims, etc. and of the constitutional Means of redressing
public Grievances, without Innovation. P. 12.
CLAIM I. THAT neither the Privy Council, nor any secret Cabinet for State
Affairs, ought to be efficient without responsibility. P. 4. n. and p. 12.

REMEDY. Revive a repealed clause of the Act of Settlement, "That all matters
cognizable in the PRIVY COUNCIL shall be transacted there, etc. P. 4 and 9.

CLAIM II. That all undue influence of the Crown ought to be totally excluded
from Parliament, p. 6. and that a "Treasury-bench," or any other Bench of
Placemen, in the House of Commons, (unless duly restrained from the privilege
of voting,) is an ABOMINATION! utterly repugnant to all just ideas of a free
uninfluenced Parliament! P. 5. n.

REMEDY. Revive a repealed Clause of the Act of Settlement: That no person, who
has an office or place of profit under the King, etc. shall be capable of
serving as Members of the House of Commons. P. 4.

N.B. The ordinary objection to this clause may be obviated, by permitting the
great Officers of State, their Secretaries, etc. to sit, debate, and inform the
House, but without privilege of voting. P. 4 and 5. n.

CLAIM III. That the Laws of England are the BIRTHRIGHT of the People thereof
(p. 10, n.); yet the greater part of the People are robbed of the Birthright by
an unconstitutional exclusion from any share in the Legislature; so that the
Laws (the most valuable Property to EVERY MAN -- "UNICUIQUE VENIT," etc. p.
10.) may be changed, suspended, or repealed, without their assent. P. 11.

REMEDY. Repeal the Act of 8 Hen. VI. c. 7. whereby the People in general were
robbed of that BIRTHRIGHT. P. 10.

CLAIM IV. That the Representation of the People ought to be rendered more
equal.

REMEDY. Refer the enormous disproportion of delegating power, now enjoyed by
venal Boroughs, (p. 7. n.) to the decision of the County-Courts, according to
ancient Precedents. (P. 12.)

CLAIM V. Experience has demonitrate^, that neither the most salutary
provisions for our just Claims can long subsist, (p. 6.) nor any Changes of
Ministry, (p. 8.) be effectual to restore them, under triennial and septennial
Parliaments, p. 5. so that the ancient usage of renewing the Representation BY
A GENERAL ELECTION EVERY SESSION is the most essential Claim of all others for
the welfare of the Kingdom. P. 6.

REMEDY. Revive the Statute for SESSIONAL PARLIAMENTS, 4. Ed. III. c. 14. (See
p. 9.)

The certain Effect of these constitutional Remedies will be Security and
Support to a virtuous Administration. P. 12.

THE END.

