

THE Perjured Husband: OR, THE Adventures of VENICE. A TRAGEDY. As it is Acted
at the THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE. BY His MAJESTY's Servants.

Written by Mrs. CENTLIVRE.

LONDON: Printed for W. FEALES, at Rowe's- Head, over against St. Clement's
Church in the Strand, M.DCC.XXXVII.

To His GRACE WRIOTHESLY, DUKE of BEDFORD.
May it please your Grace,
IT is the just Prerogative of true Greatness to be universally admired by all;
and one so eminently possessed of it as your Grace, can no more escape the
Tribute of our Praise and Admiration, than you can cease to deserve it: Not
that it is in the Power of any one, or even the Applause of Multitudes, to reach
half your Merit, yet may we be allowed, according to the Proportion of our poor
Stock, to throw in our Mite; and not be frightened from the Hopes of your
Grace's Patronage, by considering the Unworthiness of the Offering; for were
none but worthy Offerings made, the Gods themselves would lose their Sacrifice;
and they that deserve most our Praise should have it least, because it is
hardest to give them their Due.

And it is impossible, my Lord, this Poem should find Sanctuary any where but in
the Umbrage of your Favor, for the Eyes of all Mankind are so fixed upon your
Grace, that 'twou'd be a Disappointment to the Public. to lay at any other's
Door, what is so much your Duee And though I hit not a Wildair for the Humor of
the Town in my Play, I may boldly say I have copied the greatest Part of
Mankind in the just Admiration of your Grace.

Your particular Art, in appearing free, complaisant and conversible, without
quitting a Noble Greatness proper to yourself, makes us at once approach you
with Freedom and with Awe: Your Goodness, that makes you stoop to your
Inferiors, loses nothing by being viewed near at hand, but is the more admired
for it; and thus we consider your Grace arrived at the Height of Greatness,
without a mortifying Reflection on the Lowness of our own Condition; nor does
the World envy the truly Great, who by their Goodness and Affability make
Mankind partake of their Felicity.

I may plead Prescription in Excuse of this Presumption, and tell how Poets in
all Ages have pretended a Right to lay their Works at some Nobleman's Feet; but
I Would rather submit to your Grace's Goodness; for if I have offended, it is a
Fault of the best kind, and proceeds from too much Zeal to let the World know
how much I am,

My Lord, Your Grace's most Obedient, and Devoted Humble Servant, Susanna
Centlivre.

PREFACE.
I SHOULD not trouble my Reader with a Preface, if Mr. Collier had taught
Manners to Masks, Sense to Beaus, and Good Nature to Critics, as well as
Morality to the Stage; the first are sure to envy what they cannot equal, and
condemn what they don't understand; the Beaus usually take a greater Liberty
with our Sex than they would with their own, because there is no Fear of drawing
a Duel upon their Hands; the latter are a Sort of rude splenatick Men, that
seldom commend any thing but what they have had a Hand in. These snarling
Sparks were pleased to carp at one or two Expressions, which are spoken in 'em
Aside by one of the inferior Characters in the Drama; and without considering
the Reputation of the Persons in whose Mouths the Language is put, condemn it
strait for loose and obscure: Now (with Submission to better Judges) I cannot
believe that a Prayer Book should be put into the Hands of a Woman, whose
innate Virtue will not secure her Reputation; nor is it reasonable to expect a
Person, whose Inclinations are always forming Projects to the Dishonor of her
Husband, should deliver her Commands to her Confident in the Words of a Psalm.
I heartily wish that those that find fault with the Liberty of my Style, would
be pleased to set a Pattern to the Town, by retrenching some of their
Debaucheries, for Modesty thrives best by Example. Modest Language from the
truly Virtuous is expected; I mean such as will neither act ill, nor suffer ill
to be acted: It is not enough that Lucy says she is honest, in having denied the
Brutal Part; who ever thinks Virtue centers in that, has a wrong Notion of it;
no, Virtue is a tender Plant, which cannot live in tainted Ground; Virtue is
what the Air of Flattery cannot blast, nor the vile sordid Dross of Gain
poison; and she that can withstand these two Shocks, may be styled truly
Virtuous. I ask my Reader's Pardon for my Bluntness, but I hope none of my Sex
so qualified will condemn me for exposing the Vices of the seeming Religious

I fear there are but too many hit by the Character of Signora Pizalta; I wish,
for the sake of the reverse Party, there were fewer, or they better known,
since the malicious World are so apt to judge of Peoples Inclinations by the
Company they keep; which is sometimes authentic, but not always an infallible
Rule. I shall say little in Justification of the Play, only desire the Reader
to judge impartially, and not condemn it by the Shortness of its Life, since
the Season of the Year never promised much better Success. It went off with
general Applause; and it is the Opinion of some of our best Judges, that it only
wanted the Addition of good Actors, and a full Town, to have brought me a Sixth
Night, there having been worse Plays within this Twelvemonth approved of.

THE PROLOGUE.
By a GENTLEMAN.
Spoken by Mrs. OLDFIELD. SUCH dreadful Laws of late against Wit are made,
It dares not in the City show its Head.
No Place is safe; each Cuckold turns Informer,
If we make merry -- it must be in a Corner.
And here is Tonight, what doubly makes it sweet,
A private Table, and a Lady's Treat:
At her Reflections none can be uneasy,
When the kind Creature does her best to please ye.
Humbly she sues, and it is not for your Glory
T'insult a Lady -- when she falls before ye.
But since no human Wit can stand the Test,
With Gorman! and the Champion of the West!
She Will fill the Lists, and then you cannot slight her,
(With Honor safe) for she is a fair Inviter.
Expects no Favor, but at Honor's Call,
Defies the boldest Briton of you all;
Whate'er's her Fate, she is sure to gain the Field,
For Women always conquer, when they yield.
THE EPILOGUE.
By Mr. B --.
Spoken by Mr. JO. HAINES. TOO long the Poets brought before the Bar,
Have with their bold Accuser waged the War;
They now plead Guilty: And confess the Stage
Has been immoral, and debauched the Age.
Nay, they will mend -- But wish that in their Station,
All Men were pleased to forward Reformation.
First, let no Politicians, with vain Fears,
About suceeeding Kings create new Jars;
Let Lawyers now no more perplex the Laws,
Nor with malicious Quibbles split a Cause;
Let Magistrates consider it is but fitting,
That as they take down Bills, they would put down cheating;
Let our young Heroes, who would be Commanders,
Brag less over Coffee, and fight more in Flanders;
Let Cheapside Doctors in a frantic Fit,
No more make impious War with sacred Wit;
Let City Wives (but that is too hard a Task)
Mimick no more Town-Ladies in a Mask,
Nor from their Prentices the Favor ask;
Let no old cast-off Miss assume the Saint,
Let Cowards cease to huff, and Beaus to paint;
Let at yond Corner House the Wits and Bards,
Gain by Religion, what they lose at Cards;
Let snarling peevish Critics cease to bite,
Or in a false Sublime dull Plays to write;
Let Galleries no more for Judges sit,
But leave to the bright Boxes, and the Pit,
Their lawful Empire over immortal Wit.
When all this heavy Task is well performed,
We dare engage the Stage shall be reformed.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Count Bassino, a Savoyard, married to Placentia, and in Love with Aurelia, Mr.
Mills. Armando, Bassino's Friend, Mr. Simpson. Alonzo, a Venetian Gentleman,
betrothed to Aurelia, Mr. Thomas. Pizalto, a Noble Venetian, Mr. Norris.
Ludovico, a Frenchman. Mr. Fairbank.
WOMEN.
Placentia, Bassino 's Wife, Mrs. Kent. Aurelia, a young Venetian Lady,
betrothed to Alonzo, but in Love with Bassino, Mrs. Oldfield. Florella, her
Woman, Mrs. Baker. Lady Pizalta, Pizalto 's Wife, Mrs. Moore. Lucy, her Woman,
Mrs. Lucas.
Maskers, Dancers, Singers, and Attendants.
SCENE, VENICE, in Carnival-Time. THE PERJURED HUSBAND.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
The Curtains fly up, and discover a Mask in Pizalto 's House. Pizalto, Lady
Pizalta, Lucy; Ludovico talking to Lady Pizalta; Bassino and Aurelia talking
together; Florella and other Maskers. A Spanish Entry. While the Dance is
performing, enter Armando, and gives Bassino two Letters, which he opens and
reads. Lady Pizalta and Lucy advance to the Front of the Stage. Lady Pizalta.
OH! Lucy, I Am undone --
That Stranger there has charmed my Heart: I feel
The Power of conquering Love; quick, quickly tell me,
What shall I do to ease this racking Passion?

Lucy. Nay, Madam, I fancy your Passion has little Occasion for Lenitives; it
blazes so violently at first, it is like to be soon extinguished.


L. Piz. Dear Lucy, don't trifle with me; but contrive, imagine, do any thing,
to bless thy Lovesick Mistress with the Sight of that dear Man: And as an
Earnest of further Rewards, here, take this -- [Gives her a Ring.


Lucy. Madam, I receive your Commands with much Joy, but your Present with more
-- [Aside.] I Will try what this projecting Brain can do, and if you step into
the next Room, I Will soon give you an Account of my Proceedings.

[ Exit L. Pizalta.
Bass. Ye Gods!
What have I done, that you pursue me thus!
Why did you ever decree that I should wed
A Wife I now must hate? Why did I see
The bright Aurelia? Why am I thus torn
'Twixt Love and Duty? Oh! what Pangs, what Torments
My Soul endures! Oh! my Aurelia!
[ Exeunt omnes, but Lucy and Ludov.
Lucy pulling Ludovico by the Sleeve. Lucy. Sir, Sir, one Word with you.


Lud. Your Business --


Lucy. May one ask you a civil Question, and be resolved?


Lud. Hum -- A civil Question, say thou? What Is it, prithee, a Night's
Lodging? If so, pull off thy Mask, and I Will resolve thee instantly -- But I
never strike Bargains in the Dark.


Lucy. I don't know, Sir, but it may tend to that, by way of Proxy, at the
long-run: But at present my Commission reaches no further than to know your
Lodgings; if any Thing comes on it, I fancy 'twill not displease you.


Lud. ( Aside.) Hum -- This is but a Pettifogger in Intrigues, I find -- Egad,
I Am like to be pretty well employed during the Carnival -- Well, considering I
am a Stranger here, this Hit may be a lucky one, and the Lady handsome -- Egad,
I Will fancy her so at least, were but for the Pleasure of Expectation.


Lucy. What are you studying, Sir? Are you so long resolving whether you shall
accept a Lady's Favor, or no?


Lud. No, faith, Child: I am not over-scrupulous in those Matters -- Let her be
but Woman, and we shall not disagree -- And so thou may tell her -- There Is a
Direction for thee. [Tears the Superscription of a Letter, and gives it her.

[ Exit Ludovico.
Lucy. Frank and easy, a la mode de Paris -- Well, these indifferent Sparks
charm more than all your cringing Fops -- Now for my Business -- Let me see --
I Will to my Lady, she will write; I Will carry the Letter, and the Devil will turn
Saint, if I don't bring 'em together, and merit a further Recompense

By Coupling many have there Fortunes made;
I only want Perferment, not my Trade.
[ Exit Lucy.
SCENE II.
The Scene changes to Bassino 's Lodgings and discovers the Count in his
Nightgown, a Table with Lights, and Letters lying on the Table. Bas. All
Things lie hushed in peaceful Silence here:
All but Bassino's Mind -- Oh! happy he
Who lives secure and free from Love's Alarms.
But happier far, who, Master of himself,
Ranges abroad without that Clog, a Wife.
Oh! rigorous Laws imposed on Freeborn Man!
On Man, by bounteous Nature first designed
The Sovereign Lord of all the Universe!
Why must his generous Passion thus be starved,
And be confined to one alone?
The Woman, whom Heaven sent as a Relief,
To ease the Burden of a tedious Life,
And be enjoyed when summoned by Desire,
Is now become the Tyrant of our Fates. [Takes up a Letter.
But hold, Bassino! whither does thy Passion
Hurry thy wandering Reason: Let this Letter
Re-call the Fugitive, and fix thy Senses
On dutious Love -- A Wife, so young, so fair,
So excellent, whose Charms not three Months since
Did fire thy Soul; a Wife, who dotes on thee;
A Wife to whom thou sworest eternal Love --
By Heaven, I swear again I will be true.
This Thought again restores my Peace of Mind --
No, charming Wife; no dear Placentia, no,
Thou shall not beg in vain: I will return. [Kisses the Letter.
But who comes here -- My Friend Armando?

Enter Armando. Arm. Dear Friend, I heard
The Conflict of your Passion, and my Joys
Are now complete, since Virtue gains the Day.

Bas. Yes, dear Armando, the Conflict is over,
And I Am resolved to fly to my Placentia.

Arm. Cherish that Thought: By Heaven your Resolution
Transports my Soul with Joy!
A kind, a virtuous Wife waits your Embraces;
A Wife, who like a Turtle mourns the Absence
Of her dear Mate. Haste then, my Friend, to drive
That Cloud of Sorrow which o'recasts her Mind,
And, like the Sun, dispel her gloomy Thoughts.

Bas. Thanks for your Counsel --
You like a God support my feeble Virtue.
This very Morning I Will prepare for Turin,
Where Time and Absence will deface the Image
Of that bewitching Beauty, which how haunts
My tortured Mind -- Yet, first I Will take my Leave
Of this fair Charmer -- And Heaven grant
That I may see her unconcerned --

Arm. My Lord, what do you mean?
Have you well weighed the Danger of this Visit?

Bas. What Danger can there be?

Arm. Danger! my Lord -- Consider well how feeble
Our Reason is against the Power of Beauty --

Bas. My Resolution's firm; no Charm can shake it.

Arm. If not her Beauty, fear her Siren Tongue;
Fear her endearing Prayers, her fond Reproaches,
Her tender Sighs, her Vows, her trickling Tears.
Nay -- if all these prove vain, fear her Despair,
A Woman, an abandoned Woman's Rage.

Bas. Were there more Dangers, yet I Will stand 'em all;
My Honor bids me pay this parting Visit:
My Heart shall have no Share in what I Will speak.
Trust me this once, and be yourself a Witness,
Bassino can control unlawful Love. --

Arm. My Lord, it is with Regret I see you go,
May Heaven assist you in this dangerous Strife.

SCENE III.
Aurelia 's Chamber; She in an Undress with Florella. Aur. No more of that --
Cease thy ungrateful Suit,
Alonzo is a Man I cannot love;
I own he is witty, generous and brave;
Has all the Charms that Nature can bestow
To fire a Woman's Heart -- Yet I Am insensible,
His very Sight chills all my trembling Spirits;
Therefore, name him no more -- I charge thee do not.

Flor. Madam. I Have done -- Yet shall I be permitted
To ask a Question? Are you then resolved
Never to admit a Passion in your Breast?

Aur. Oh! Dear Florella, press not a Confession,
Which but too well my Eyes themselves disclose.
Alas! I love -- I love to such Excess,
That though I know I Am loved again, my Mind
Is still perplexed with Doubts and jealous Fears.

Flor. You love and are beloved! Then sure you reach
The Height of human Bliss, and bounteous Heaven
Can scarce give more -- But who is the happy Man;
Is it not Count Bassino?

Aur. Oh! charming Name; there is Music in that Sound!
Yes, Count Bassino is the Man I love.
Can thou now blame my Coldness to Alonzo?

Flor. Forgive me, Madam, if I dare persume
To speak my Sentiments: I must confess
Bassino is a Man of excellent Virtue;
His Education at the Court of Savoy,
Has still refined what he received from Nature;
His Person too is charming --
And, what most Women court, he has a Title --
But then consider, you are unacquainted
With his Estate, and though his Equipage
Denotes an ample Fortune, yet we see
Many a Stranger here, during the Carnival,
Who makes a Figure by industrious Gaming.
As for Alonzo, he was born at Venice,
Of Noble Parents; his Estate, a large one --
Even from his Youth you had his amorous Wishes,
And as he grew in Years his Love increased:
You loved him too -- Nay, which is more, your Father
Approved your mutual Loves, and at his Death
Bequeathed you to Alonzo.

Aur. Oh! my Florella, thou have roused a Thought,
Which will for every break Aurelia's Rest.
I know my Father's Tenderness to me
Made him confirm Alonzo's Suit, for then
I loved Alonzo --
But were my gentle Father still alive,
I Am sure he would not cross my Inclinations.
But, Oh! name not my Father; I cannot bear
The sad Remembrance of so great a Loss. [Weeps.

Flor. But fear you not to offend his peaceful Ghost,
By breaking with the Man he destined yours?

Aur. It Is not my Fault: and just Heaven must forgive
What Heaven decrees -- Yes, it is my cruel Stars
That made my Heart inconstant to Alonzo,
It Is with Regret I break my plighted Faith;
In vain I strive to check my newborn Love,
I cannot, cannot live without Bassino.

Flor. Madam, I wish your Passion never prove fatal,
But much I fear this inauspicious Match.

Enter Bassino, Armando. Aur. May Heaven avert the unlucky Combination
Of our presaging Thoughts: For, know I tremble too --
But here is the Man that will dispel my Fears.

Arm. to Bass. My Lord, remember
To keep your Resolution.

Bas. to Arm. Yes -- I will keep it -- [To Aur.] Madam, you will pardon
A Morning Visit, when you know what Reasons
Pressed me to fix it on this early Hour. --
By Letters from the Court I was last Night
Commanded to return with Speed to Turin,
And thence set out for France, to represent
My Sovereign Liege in solemn Embassy.
This Day I must prepare to take my Journey,
Though it is with killing Grief I leave my dear,
My fair Aurelia -- [To Arm.] Now, my Armando.

Arm. My Lord, it is well: But still be on your Guard,
The dreadful Shock comes on --

Arm. This Day be gone! What means my Lord? Oh! Heaven,
My boding Fears are come to pass: I see
A Cloud of Woes just ready to overwhelm me.
Is It possible! how can that Form divine
Harbor such Treachery! Is then Bassino false?
Say, perjured Man, how often did you swear
This happy Day should make you mine for ever!
How can you now forget your solemn Vows?
Why have I met with this inhuman Usage?

Bas. Madam, my Prince's Orders
Are absolute: My Honor is concerned.

Aur. Must a vain Title be preferred to Love?
But no -- You never loved -- 'twas base Deceit.
Cursed, cursed dissembling Men! Their flattering Tongues
Can feign a Passion that will look like Love,
Till by Degrees they get us in their Power;
Then with bold Impudence they draw the Vizor,
And show the Cheat that mocked our credulous Hopes.
Faithless Bassino,
How often you swore your Love could never expire:
How often you swore one Smile of mine had Charms,
Even above the Glories of a Crown.
Those were the Oaths I fondly did believe;
Those Words conveyed a Poison to my Heart,
And even now I feel its mighty Force:
My Head turns giddy, and my trembling Knees
Betray their sinking Burden --
Alas! I faint, I die -- [ She faints, Bassino runs and embraces he^

Bass. Oh! stay, my Love, my Life, my Soul, my all*
The Conflict's past, and I am thine again.
But she is breathless! Oh! ye rigorous Gods,
Give back her Soul, or let my own be plunged
To dark Elysium -- Oh! my dear Aurelia! [ Hugs he^

Arm. Is this your Resolution? By Heaven, I blush
To call you Friend. Your Wife, my Lord, remembe^
Your Wife --

Bass. Curse on that Name --
Urge me no more to follow your Chimera's,
Left you oblige me to break off that Friendship
You blush to own -- Oh! my Aurelia!

Arm. aside. How sweet is treacherous Vice! how e^ ge^
Fond Man pursues his Ruin!
All Arguments were vain -- yet still one Way remain
Which cannot fail, to stop the Progress of this impio^ Lov^
His Wife, by my Direction, comes to Venice:
Her Sight will soon awake his slumbering Virtue,
At least it will retrieve Aurelia's Senses.
[ Exit Armand^
Aur. recovering. Where am I? Where Is my Lord, (...) false Bassino?

Bass. Here, here, my Soul, my charming Dear.

Aur. thrusts him off. Hold off -- Approach me not-urge not my Rage,
Or with this Dagger I Will revenge my Wrongs
On thy perfidious Heart -- But, oh! his
Heart's too hard,
^ven for tempered Steel -- Therefore I Will sheath it here. ( Offers at her
Breast: Bassino snatches the Dagger, and throws himself at her Feet in a
distracted Manner.

Bass. Oh! hold -- forbid it, Gods!
^ am the cursed Cause, and I must die.
^h! who could bear my Load of mortal Woe!
^e heavenly Powers bestow the Stroke of Grace,
and rack Bassino: Let your vengeful Thunder
^ow crush my guilty Head -- Or thou, Oh! Parent Earth,
^pen thy Bosom, and conceal my Crime. [Tears the Ground.
[Falls down.
Aur. Is he then mine again!
^ok up, my Lord, my Love, my Life!
^y dear Bassino! It Is Aurelia calls.
^t me for ever fold thee in my Arms,
^d beg thou wilt never speak of parting more. [Embraces him.

Both rise and embrace in an Ecstasy. Bass. Oh! never, never --
^e Poles shall meet, the Sun and Moon invert
^eir wonted Motion ere I part from thee.
^ondly tried how much I was beloved,
^d since you're true, my Bliss is now complete.

Aur. Was It but a Trial? then my Griefs are vanished,
^d I am lost in Joy -- Bassino's mine; [They embrace again.

Bass. Thine, thine for ever: And this happy Day,
^ll end Aurelia's Fears -- Ha --
^is Day, said I, but where is Placentia then?
^ Wife Placentia! Little does she think
^at Baseness I intend -- Oh! racking Thought!
^ it is resolved, I Will change nor think no more:
^ try to plunge, and reach the blissful Shore;
^d if I sink, yet still this Hope's my Friend,
^ snatch my Treasure ere my Course I end.
[Aside.
Aur. My Lord, what makes you pause?

Bass. The ravishing Thoughts of mighty Joys to come,
^t me in Ecstasy, and made me dumb;
When on thy snowy Breast dissolved I lie,
What Monarch can there be more blessed than I?
[Bassino leads her off with a languishing (...)
Enter Alonzo. Alon. Sure, if my Eyes deceive me not, I saw
Aurelia with the Count just parting hence,
Dissolved in Love, and languishing they seemed.
Damnation --
I cannot bear the Thought -- I Will after 'em.

Alonzo going. Enter Florella. Flor. aside. Ha -- Alonzo here! I must preven^
Discovery.


Alon. Florella here! she comes opportunely -- ^ may inform me of what I yet
but fear -- G^ morrow, Florella: How fares my Love, my dear ^relia?


Flor. Signior, Good Morrow; you are an early ^sitant.


Alon. Not for a Man in Love; but answer me, (...) does Aurelia?


Flor. Well in Health -- Only she is now and (...) in a little Fit of
Melancholy, such as usually pro^ from timorous Doubts about that dreadful State
of ^trimony: You know the Time draws nigh that (...) her to your Arms.


Alon. By Heaven! It Is an Age, there is six Day^ to come.


Flor. An Age, indeed, if he knew all. [ (...)


Alon. But haste, Florella; lead me to my Dear,
She only can contract that tedious Age
Of lingering Pain, and sooth it with her Smiles.
Say, is she alone?

Flor. Yes -- No --
Oh! Heaven! What shall I say? [ (...)
She Is, she is a --

Alon. Ha -- What means this faultering Answe^
All Is not right, and my Suspicion's true.

Flor. Signior, my Lady is not dressed, and I shall displease her, in admitting
even you, without her Leave.


Alon. Ha -- not dressed -- Take heed you mock me not;
Nor think to blind me with your feigned Excuse:
For in your guilty Face I read the Truth.
Come, tell me who is with her? is it not Bassino?

Flor. aside. Oh! Heaven! What shall I say?


Alon. Nay, nay, no Study: Lying will not do:
I saw 'em part from hence, just now I saw 'em.
Harkee, sweet Mistress, how long have you practiced
This subtle Trade? I find you're much improved.
Hell and Damnation -- quickly, tell me
What did Bassino give for his Admittance?
I Will double the Reward -- but she is not dressed for me --
Oh! damned, damned Sex!

Flor. Signior, what do you mean?


Alon. To see Aurelia -- see her instantly --
Nay, by Heaven! I will: All Opposition's vain:
For by the avenging Power of Love I swear,
Though in Bassino's Arms I Will drag her thence,
Only to cast her from my Sight for ever:
Nor shall he live to triumph in my Shame.
What though the Marriage Rites be not performed,
Yet I may call her Wife. Her Father gave her to me:
And her own Vows have fixed my Heart in here is.
Must then Alonzo be denied Admittance,
Under that poor Pretense that she is not dressed?
Whilst base Bassino lies dissolved in Pleasures
On her perfidious Breast -- Oh! killing Thought!
She makes my Name of Husband infamous,
Even before the Priest has joined our Hands.
I Will in, and if the Affront I tamely bear,
May Heaven deny me at my latest Prayer,
[Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
Ludovico's Lodgings. Ludovico solus. Lud. Who waits?


Enter Mountain. Mount. Did you call, Sir?


Lud. Mountain, run to Signiora Ronquilla, and tell her I have done with her
for ever, if she does not send this Evening the hundred Ducats she promised to
lend me -- And harkee, as you come back, acquaint Signiora Cornara I shall be
busy Tomorrow, and desire she will put off her Visit till another Day.

[Knocking at the Door.
Mount. Sir, there is somebody at the Door.


Lud. See who it is.


Mount. Sir, a Gentlewoman desires to speak with you.


Lud. A Gentlewoman! admit her -- Well,
It Is a great Fatigue to oblige the whole Sex.
Enter Lucy. Oh! what News from your Lady?

Lucy. This will inform you, Sir. [Gives him a Letter.


Lud. reads. Hum, hum, a Letter -- Though it may seem improper for one of my Sex
to make the first Step in an Amor, yet you ought to consider, that the
rigorous Confinement we are under all the Year round, may, in some measure,
excuse the Liberties we take during the Carnival. If you have the Courage to
meet me, I shall be at four in the Afternoon in the Plazza d' Espagna,
invisible to all but yourself. -- Well, I believe all Women in Venice are wild
for Gallants.


Lucy. Sir, what Answer shall I return to my Lady?


Lud. aside. Egad -- I am in doubt whether I shall throw my Time away on this
Intrigue or no -- Harkee Child, step into the next Chamber, and I Will answer
your Message instantly -- [ Exit Lucy.] Let me see -- [Reads in his Table Book]
Monday, at Two in the Afternoon I am to meet Signiora Belleza at her Nurse's --
She Is a pretty Rogue, and so I Will go -- At Three of the Clock, Signiora Dorinda
the Senator's Wife, at the Indian House -- Pshaw, she is an old Acquaintance, --
I shall not go -- At half an Hour past Three, the Countess Wrinkle, who presented
me with a Gold-hilted Sword -- Silly Fool! does she think I Will bestow one of my
Visits on an old shrivelled Piece of Antiquity, for a trifling Present, not
worth above threescore Pistoles -- At a Quarter past Four, my Semstress
Dorothy Steenkirk, who supplies me with Linen, -- Oh! this Visit may be put off
for a new Intrigue -- And so I Will acquaint the Messenger.

[ Exit Ludovico.
The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A Chamber in Signior Pizalto 's House. Enter Lady Pizalta, Lucy. Lady Piz. DID
you deliver my Letter to Ludovico, Lucy?


Lucy. Madam, I did; I found him in his Study, reading the Lover's Watch, which
he swears does not at all agree with his Constitution. He hates Injunctions of
Love, like those of Penance: For the one, says he, is no more pleasurable to
the Body, than the other beneficial to the Soul.


L. Piz. What a fine Gallant I Am like to have with these Principles! Well --
what did he say to a Summons from a Woman of my Quality? Did it not make him
wish the Time of Assignation were sooner than the Appointment in the Letter?


Lucy. He first hum'd over your Billet; and pausing a while, he desired me to
stay for an Answer in a next Room; then coming to me, he asked me what
Countrywoman you were? For, said he, if she should prove an old Acquaintance, I
would use her damnably -- But when I and assured him you never saw the Outside
of these Walls, he began to have that Desire which all Men have to a new Face


L. Piz. Very well; and what then?


Luc. He strait inquired whether you were black, brown, fair, old, young, Maid,
Wife or Widow? I told him you was a wretched Wise to an old, impotent, rich,
covetous, noble Venetian; beautiful, young, generous, and of a fair Complexion.
He hugged me at these Words, seemed transported with the News, and swore that
in Intrigues, a Wife was most suitable to his Temper; for, said he, there is
neither Children to father, nor Honor to repair: and where his Pocket and
Liberty are safe, he is contented to venture his Body and Soul,


L. Piz. Excellent Maxims!


Lucy. In short, Madam, he says he has had several Bills of this Nature drawn
upon him of late, and how much his Stock may be exhausted, he knows not; but
however he will meet you, and if he cannot answer your Expectation, he will give
you Earnest.


L. Piz. You talk merrily, Girl; I hope you did not tell my Name. I should be
loath to trust a Man of his Character with my Reputation at first Dash.


Lucy. No, Madam, I only told your Quality.


L. Piz. That Is well: Oh! Reputation, what several Sorts of Slavery do we
undergo to preserve thee! for to be thought virtuous, we are forced to be
constantly railing against Vice, though our Tongues and Maxims seldom agree.


Lucy. Alas! Madam, that Pretense is grown too common: For the Men now take it
for granted, that a Lady is very near surrendering, when once she holds out that
Flag of Defiance.


L. Piz. Well -- Men use us very barbarously: They will neither suffer us to be
honest, nor allow us to be thought so -- Here, take this Key, and secure every
thing that concerns my Reputation: And if my Husband wakes ere I come back, you
may easily find some Excuse to prevent his Enquiries; for the Carnival allows
us more Liberty, than at other times we dare pretend to -- I know thy Honesty,
and will rely upon it.


Lucy. Yes, indeed, Madam, I am honest at the Bottom.


L. Piz. Well, I Will be gone: It Is about the Hour

[ Ex. L. Piz.
Enter Pizalto. Lucy. Good Luck attend you, Madam -- Oh! Heavens! here is my
Lord -- Madam, Madam, Madam -- Oh! Lord, what shall I say, now she is gone?


Piz. Hist, hist, Lucy: Don't, don't, don't call your Lady, for I have a Word
or two to say to thee in private, and have waited for this lucky Opportunity a
great while --


Lucy, aside. Now Venus be praised, I hope he has found some Business of his
own, that may give my Lady an Opportunity to mind here is.


Piz. Well, Lucy, well, -- can thou guess my Business now?


Lucy. No, indeed, Sir -- But I Am certain, an old Man's Business cannot be
great. [Aside.


Piz. [Gives her a Looking-glass.] Here, Child, this will tell thee -- Look
in it, look in it, I say -- Ah! ah! thou have a pretty pouting Lip, a delicate
roguish Eye; such an Ogle, such a Cast -- Ah! Rogue -- Faith, you are very
pretty: And, in short, if any one rival thy Lady, it will be thee, Lucy --
Egad, I have Fire in me yet.


Lucy, aside. OF my Conscience, and little too, I believe: Yet I wish he has
enough to serve my Ends. I Will make my Fortune -- Lord, Sir, what do you mean? I
rival my Lady! Heaven forbid; I would not injure so good a Woman for the World
--


Piz. Pshaw, pshaw -- Where Is the Injury done to her, Child? Adod, I Will give
thee a hundred Crowns.


Lucy. No Injury, say you, my Lord? Why, I wonder you should be so jealous of
my Lady, and preach such religious Maxims to her, when your own Principles are
quite opposite.


Piz. Look ye, Child, a Man may do that, which would look abominable in a Wife
-- A Woman's Reputation is a nice Thing. --


Lucy. It Is so -- and therefore it is but Reason I should take Care of mine.


Piz. Prithee, no more of that: Thy Reputation shall be safe; I Will marry thee
to my Gentleman.


Lucy. Gentleman -- Valet! Faugh -- And what Good will a hundred Crowns do me,
when my Virginity is gone? Indeed, if you loved me as much as you say, and
would make my Fortune, (for I should love extremely to be a Lady) I cannot tell
how far you might persuade me -- I know my Reputation would be safe in your
Hands.


Piz. Make thy Fortune! Why, I Have known some of our Nobles marry a Wife with
less than a hundred Crowns -- But adod, you are a charming Girl, and therefore
I Will make it a hundred Pistoles -- What say thou now, Lucy? Ah! adod, I must
buss thee; [Kisses her.] Ah! Rogue, methinks I Am a young, lusty, vigorous
Fellow again -- Thou shall find I am, Girl.


Lucy aside. I believe I shall fail you, old Gentleman. Well, my Lord, make it
up a thousand Pistoles, and I am yours, else I Will die a Maid, I Am resolved.


Piz. A thousand Pistoles, why thour't the most unconscionable Wench in Italy:
Why, it is a Price for a Duchess in some Countries* Come, come, prithee be
reasonable, Lucy?


Lucy. Reasonable! why you don't ask a reasonable Thing -- Look you, you know
my Mind, I Will not bate a Penny -- I Will warrant my Lady will give me two hundred
at least for my Discovery [Going.


Piz. aside. Udslife! she will not tell my Wife, sure, ^m ruined if she does; I Would
rather give her two thou^and -- Hold, hold, Lucy, sweet Lucy, prithee ^ome back
-- Faith, you are so charming, I can de^y thee nothing -- Come, it shall be
what thou will -- Come now Rogue, let us retire to thy Cham^er --


Lucy. Nay, nay, no entering the Premises, till you ^ave paid the Purchase. --


Piz. Adod, you are a Wag -- Come in then, and I Will discharge the Debt: Thou
art a cunning Gipsy.

[ Exit Pizal.
Lucy. You shall have Reason to say so ere I have done with you, old Gentleman
-- For I am resolved to show you a Trick, and preserve my Virtue. [Aside.

For did base Men within my Power fall,
TO avenge my injured Sex, I Would jilt 'em all.
And would but Women follow my Advice,
They should be glad at last to pay our Price.
[ Exit Lucy.
SCENE II.
The Piazza d' Espagna in Venice. Enter Lady Pizalta sola. L. Piz. Not come
yet! ungrateful Man! must a
Woman of my Quality wait?
How have we lost our Power since the Creation?
When the whole World had but one single Lord,
Whom every Creature readily obeyed?
Yet he, that mighty he, caught with a Smile,
Hew to the Embraces of the tempting Fair.
But now each puny Sinner dares to cross
A Woman's Inclinations --
Enter Ludovico. Oh! are you come, Signior? I suppose you have
Some other Assignation, that made you miss
My Hour -- Pursue it pray -- I Will not interrupt you --
Your Servant -- [ Going*
I hope he will not take me at my Word. [ Asid^

Lud. Nay, nay, Signiora, why this Passion? [ Stops he^

You sent me a Challenge, and I, like a Man of Courage am come to answer it --
Pray don't let a Quarter (...) an Hour break Squares -- I own it was a Fault to
make a Lady wait; but Friends, Madam, Friends, and good Wine are the Devil --
Come I Will make you amends.


L. Piz. Friends and good Wine! I suppose those Friends were Female ones --


Lud. No, Faith: You shall judge of that -- But suppose they were -- Why should
you be angry that I did not fly with the desired Haste, as long as I am come
time enough to give you Satisfaction -- Besides, I have not seen your Face yet,
and for aught I know, it may not reward my Complement in coming now -- Prithee,
Child, unmask, and then I Will tell thee more of my Mind.


L. Piz. The Devil take this Fellow -- and yet methinks I love him for his
Indifferency -- [Aside.] You talk as if you were unskilled in the Art of Love:
Don't you know that Expectation feeds more than twenty tasted Pleasures?


Lud. Hum -- some Sort of Fops it may: But I Am none of those -- I never give my
Opinion of a Dish till I Have tasted; neither do I care to dine often on one Sort
of Meat without changing the Sauce -- But when that Cloud's withdrawn, how long
I shall keep my Resolution I know not.


L. Piz Say you so! Why then the only Way to preserve your Appetite is to feed
you slenderly; or only let you see the Food, but not to taste.


Lud. Faith, Madam, I Am no Camelion, but Flesh and Blood -- Therefore these
Prescriptions are of no Use -- One Sight of that dear charming Face of yours,
would be more obliging to your humble Servant.


L. Piz. unmasks. Well, Sir, what think you? Is there any thing in this Face
worth your Regard?


Lud. Ah! by Heaven, an Angel -- Oh! Madam, now blame yourself for my Neglect,
for had you sent the Picture of her, in whom all those Beauties center, I had
in this Place waited the coming of my Goddess, or rather flown on the Wings of
eager Love, to meet my Fair, though in the Arms of ten thousand Dangerss -- Say,
my charming Angel, do you forgive me? But why do I ask? your Eyes assure me you
do; at least I Will force a Pardon from these dear, soft, ruby Lips. [Kisses her
in Ecstasy.


L. Piz. Hold, hold! been't so lavish -- a sparing Gamester is the likeliest to
keep in Stock -- whilst a profuse Hand at one Cast throws all he has away.


Lud. To fear that, were to doubt your Charms, in which a Lover is sure to find
constant Supplies -- But we lose Time -- Let Us retire to my Lodgings, where
I Will give thee the best Proofs of my Love I can?


L. Piz. aside. Well! He Is a charming Fellow -- Oh! how happy are Wives in
France and England, where such as he swarm!


Lud. Come, Madam, come -- Why, what do you mean by this Delay? Consider I Am a
Man, a mortal, wishing, amorous Man --


L. Piz. And consider I Am a Woman --


Lud. aside. Ay, ay: That I know: At least I hope to find you such -- or I
would not be in such Haste --


L. Piz. And have a Reputation to preserve.


Lud. Oh! Lord, what a damned Turn's here? Reputation, say you? Egad, I find
all Women make Pretense to that mysterious Word. [Aside.] What! Are not you
married, Madam?


L. Piz. Yes, what then?


Lud. Why then you have a Reputation to preserve -- that is all.


L. Piz. All, Sir, yes, and all in all to me -- Do you consider what Country
you're in, Sir?


Lud. Yes, Faith, Madam; and what Constitution I am of too. I know Murder is as
venial a Sin here, as Adultery is in some Countries; And I am too apprehensive
of my mortal Part not to avoid Danger -- Therefore, Madam, you have an
infallible Security -- if I should betray you, I bring myself into Jeopardy,
and of all Pleasures, Self-Preservation is the dearest.


L. Piz. A very open Speaker, I vow.


Lud. Ay, Madam, that is best -- Hang your creeping, cringing, whining, sighing,
dying, lying Lovers -- Pough! Their Flames are not more durable than mine, though
they make more Noise in the Blaze.

Sings: Hang the whining Way of Wooing,
Loving was designed a Sport.

L. Piz. aside. The Duce take me if this Fellow has not charmed me strangely --
Well, the Carnival is almost over, and then must I be shut up like a Nun again
-- Hey! Hoa! This Time will be so short --


Lud. Let Us make the better Use on it then, my Dear. We will consider when we
have nothing else to do, but at present there is a Matter of the greatest
Moment, which I must impart to you -- Therefore, come dear Rogue, come --


L. Piz. [Looking on her Watch.] Hold -- I have outstaid my Time, and must
return home instantly, to prevent Discoveries.


Lud. Faith, Madam, this is not fair -- to raise a Man's Expectation, and then
disappoint him! Would you be served so yourself now?


L. Piz. I Will endeavor to disingage myself from my jealous Husband, and
contrive another Meeting.


Lud. But will you be sure to meet me again?


L. Piz. I give you my Hand as a Pledge --


Lud. kisses her. And I this Kiss in Return -- Adieu, my Charmer.


L. Piz. Signior, farewell.

[Exeunt severally.
Enter Bassino, Alonzo. Bass. Well, Sir, your Business --

Alon. It is to tell you --
You are a Villain --

Bass. Ha --

Alon. And that as such
I ought to have treated you before the Face
Of false Aurelia -- But I scorn to follow
The barbarous Custom of my native Country,
I seek with Honor to revenge my Wrongs;
Therefore, Sir, draw --

Bass. This Action speaks you noble -- be likewise just,
And let me know the Cause that moves your Anger.
By Heaven I Would rather call you still my Friend,
Than be your Enemy -- Yet, if I wronged you,
I Will give you Satisfaction --

Alon. Trifler away -- Too well thou know the Cause;
And now would sooth my Wrongs with Flattery.
But my Resolve is fixed as Heaven's Decrees:
And one of us must fall -- Let the Surviver
Dispose of that base, false, perjured Aurelia,
As both his Love and Honor shall direct.
If my propitious Stars defend my Life,
You shall not die alone -- The adulterous Fair
Shall bear you Company -- Now draw.

Bass. Oh! hold.
One Moment hold, I must unfold this Riddle:
Adulterous Fair, say you?

Alon. Yes: She Is my Wife.

Bass. Ha -- your Wife!
Sure there is a Curse entailed upon that Name. [Aside.
What! your real Wife?

Alon. If the Command of an expiring Father,
And her own Vows can make her mine, she is so:
Indeed the Marriage Rites are yet to come,
Which slily she delayed these two Months past,
On slight Pretense of finishing the Time
Of Mourning for her Father -- But it is plain,
I was a Property to your base Love,
And only designed to fill up your Place,
When surfeited you should return to Turin.
Hell -- Furies! Draw, or in my just Revenge,
I Will pin you to the Earth --

Bass. Oh! Woman! Woman! [Aside.
Yes, I will draw -- But ere the fatal Stroke
Is past Recall, I swear Aurelia's Virtue,
Is clear and spotless, like Diana's self:
Nor was I prompted on this early Visit,
But with Design to take my last Farewell,
Having last Night received my Prince's Orders
To haste to Turin -- Therefore if I fall,
I hope she will meet with Mercy -- Now come on.

Alon. Hold, hold, my Lord; Oh! could I credit this,
I would ask Pardon, and entreat your Friendship.

Bass. It Is true, upon my Honor --
But if you doubt my Words, I Am ready --
Though I have Reason to decline this Combat,
At least at present -- Oh! Placentia! [Aside.
Oh! my Placentia! why should I abuse thee?

Alon. My Lord, you seem disturbed --

Bass. Oh! Alonzo! Alonzo!
Should I acquaint you with my wretched Fate,
You Would find that Life itself is grown a Burden,
I cannot bear, since I can never be happy.
But it is a Story that must never be told,
Let it suffice, to settle your Repose,
That Turin holds the Cause of my Misfortunes.

Alon. Then I am happy: [Aside.
My Lord, I wish 'twere in my Power to serve you,
I Would do it as a Friend --

Bass. Generous Sir, I thank you;
As far as I am capable, I am Alonzo's. [Exit Alonzo.
Oh! Force of treacherous Love! to gain my End,
I wrong a Wife, a Mistress, and a Friend.
[Ex. Bassino,
The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Aurelia 's Lodgings. Enter Aurelia, Florella. Aur. OH! how I tremble for my
dear Bassino!
Haste, fly, Florella, brings me News he lives,
Or else expect to see thy Mistress die.

Flor. Madam, be patient --
Consult your Reputation, and consider
That the least Noise you make on this Occasion,
Reflects upon your Virtue --

Aur. Away, away -- Talk not of Reputation,
When Love's in the other Scale -- But what can shock my Reputation;
Heaven's my Witness, I never lodged a Thought,
For Count Bassino that could wrong my Virtue.
Perhaps the Gods pursue me with their Hatred,
Because I break my Promise to Alonzo.
But then, why did they not secure me his?
Why must weak Mortals be exposed to Passions,
Which are not in our Power to subdue,
And yet account for what they prompt us to?
But I will think no more -- Almighty Love,
Now hear my last Resolve -- if angry Heaven
Refused to guard my dear Bassino's Life,
Aurelia too shall fall, and leave his Murderer
Accursed for ever --

Enter Alonzo. Flor. Oh! Heaven! where will this end?

Aur. Ha. -- [Aside.
The Gods have sent him to decide my Fate.
How now! how dare you meet my angry View?
Or think I Will ever forgive the base Affront
This very Day you offered to my Fame?

Aur. Just Heaven refuses not a Penitent,
Therefore I cannot think that fair Aurelia,
Whose Charms are all divine, should sail in Goodness.
Oh! Let my Love atone for my rash Deed:
The Count and I are Friends, why should Aurelia be more severe?

Aur. He lives! blessed News!
Do then rash Actions speak your Love to me?
Must I in public bear with your Insults
Before I Am yours? what must I then expect
When the strict Ties of Marriage shall confirm
Your jealous Passions?
No, you have taught me to avoid the Shelf,
I was just running on -- know, base Alonzo,
That from this Moment I resume my Freedom,
I disingage you from your former Vows,
And will henceforth be Mistress of myself.

Alon. Ha -- [Aside.
This sudden Coldness has another Spring,
Than my rash Carriage -- Oh! my jealous Fears,
But I Am resolved to trace her winding Thoughts,
And fetch the Secret forth --
Madam, I hope you do but try my Love:
I cannot think Aurelia would be false.
Besides, you cannot recall what is registered in Heaven.

Aur. Then stay till we come there -- There you will have Witness.

Alon. Witness!
Oh! faithless, perjured Woman, can thou think
Upon thyself, and bid me call my Witness?
Yes, you are mine -- By all the Gods you are.
And shall there be a Power on this Side Heaven,
To stop my Bliss? No -- by my Love I swear.
I now can guess at your perfidious Meaning,
And though that cowardly Villain slily thought
To blind me with a Tale his Guilt had framed,
It Is plain he is your Minion -- yet wants Courage
To own his Treachery.

Aur. Detracting, slanderous Villain!
How dare you treat me thus?
Oh! for the Look of a fierce Basilisk,
To punish this audacious Insolence!

Alon. Marry thee! No -- by Heavens, I had rather
Be rackt'd to Death -- And for thy vile Injustice,
None shall enjoy thee, while this Sword is mine. [Lays hold on his Sword.
Nor shall your Lover escape, to serve your Lust,
Till he has forced a Passage through this Breast. [Points to his Breast.

Aur. Oh! my Bassino. [Aside.
Oh! cruel Man! Are not you then contented
To wreak your Spite on poor Aurelia?
Why must your Rage involve the Innocent?
Oh! Let me fall your Passion's Sacrifice;
Let my Blood wash the Stain you fix on me,
But do not blast your Name with base Revenge. --

Alon. By Heaven! she dotes on him! Oh! cunning Woman!
But this Pretense will not serve to save his Life;
I Will not be caught again -- No, Siren, No.
Bassino dies -- Nor will I leave to Fortune
The vengeful Stroke, but take a safer Way.

Aur. Oh! Heaven! [Kneels.
What Words shall I invent to sooth his Rage, [Aside.
And save my dear Bassino? Oh! Alonzo.
My once-lov'd, Dear, will you not here me speak?
Oh! I conjure you by our plighted Love's,
Whose Purity outshone the Stars above,
Hear me this Time, then use me as you please,

Alon. Oh! Woman, Woman!

Aur. If ever Aurelia
So much as in her Thoughts did wrong Alonzo,
May sudden Death pursue her perjured Steps:
Heaven forgive [Aside.
The Purjury, since I Have no other way
To save Bassino's Life. --

Alon. Aurelia, rise -- [Raising her.
Oh! could I credit this, how happy were Alonzo!
But something tells me that thou art forsworn;
And yet thou seem as fair as Truth itself;
How is it possible that Guilt can look
With so a Divine a Face?

Aur. Oh! kill me instantly: kill me, I beg you, kill me;
Let me not linger out an Age in Pain,
For such is every Moment of your Anger;
I cannot bear to live in your Displeasure.

Alon. By Heaven she is true --
Hence frivolous Fears be gone -- she is only mine.
Come to my Breast, my bright Aurelia, come. [Embraces her.
To that soft Shrine that holds that Sacred Image,
Which triumphs over my Soul, and grasps it all,
I knew my boundless Treasure, and the Thought
Of losing thee had raised my Love to Madness.
But now I Am calm -- No more shall that fierce Passion,
Rude Jealousy, disturb my peaceful Mind.
Do but forgive the Faults my Rage committed,
And you will find our Loves will grow the purer;
Just as the Sky looks brighter when the Storm
Is chased away, and Phoebus smiles again.

Aur. Since both have been to blame, let it suffice,
We both repent, and will offend no more.

Alon. Oh! never, never,
I Will never suspect you more -- Only resolve me this --

Aur. What Is it?

Alon. Why was Bassino
Admitted to your View, and I denied?

Aur. He came to take his Leave, and 't had been rude
Not to admit a Man of his high Birth
On this Occasion; Nor was you denied,
But through by Woman's Fears of your Suspicions.
She thought you would misconstrue the Count's Visit,
As you have really done -- I blamed her for it,
Indeed, this is the Truth -- I hope Alonzo
Believes me now --

Alon. Believe Thee! Yes -- As willingly as Martyrs
A State of endless Joy.
I will so love my Dear, that all Mankind
Shall look with Envy on our mutual Bliss.
I Am like a Merchant tossed at Sea by Storms,
Who his last Course with Prayers and Toil performs;
And the rich Cargo safely brought on Shore,
He hugs it thus, and vows to part no more. [Embraces her.

Aur. ( Aside.) So in a flowery Mead a Serpent lurks,
And the unwary Traveller surprises,
Where he suspects least Danger! Cursed Cheat. [Aside.
Oh! that I could disclose the fatal Story!
But it must never out -- I beg, Alonzo,
You Would leave me for a while, and rest secure,
You have my Love --

Alon. Then the bright Sun in all his circling Turn,
Cannot behold a Man more truly happy:
What you command, I readily obey.
Farewell, my Dear.
[ Exit Alonzo.
Aur. Where art thou now, Aurelia?
How will thou escape that dreadful Precipice,
On which thou art hurried on by thy fatal Passion?
With conscious Horror I deceived Alonzo;
I hate this base Treachery, but 'twas unavoidable:
The Truth had been more fatal --
More fatal! -- No -- For I must never wed
My dear Bassino, whilst Alonzo lives.
Oh! the distracting Thought! what shall I do?
Why! die Aurelia: That Is the only Way,
To keep thy Vows to both -- Ha -- die, said I?
But whether then? who knows what Punishment,
Just Heaven prepares for guilty Souls, like mine.
But I must think no more, lest I grow mad with Thought,
If there is a Power that guards us here below,
Oh! look with pitying Eyes on poor Aurelia:
Appease the Tumults of my anxious Fear,
And load me with no more than I can bear.
[ Exeunt Aurelia, Florella.
SCENE II.
Lady Pizalta 's Lodgings. L. Piz. Well, you are an admirable Girl! What would
half the Ladies in Venice give for such a Servant?


Lucy. ( Aside.) Truly you have Reason to say so, for it is not the first
Intrigue I have managed for you -- Oh! dear Madam, your Ladyship does me too
much Honor -- But how do you like your new Servant, Madam?


L. Piz. Oh! above all Men living, Lucy: He has the most bewitching
Conversation I ever met with -- Say, is there no way to contrive a second
Meeting? For I Am impatient till I see the dear Man again -- The End of the
Carnival draws near, which is indeed the End of Life to me: For then must I be
cooped up with Age: Condemned to an eternal Coughing, Spitting, Snoring and
Ill Nature -- Then let me make the best of Life -- since Hell cannot have a
worse Plague in Store than I have felt already.


Luc. Indeed, Madam, I pity you: And with 'twere in my Power to free you from
this old, withered Log, but though that is impossible, yet I may do you some
little Services to make Life's tedious Journey pleasant -- Let me see, I have
it -- What would you say now, Madam, if I should contrive a Way to have your
Lover in your own Chamber?


L. Piz. That were worth a King's Revenue -- Speak, quickly, how, how, good
Lucy?


Luc. Why, thus: He shall put on my Clothes, and in my Place attend you.


L. Piz. Rare Contrivance; but my Husband, Lucy?


Luc. Oh! let me alone, Madam, to manage him: He is defective in Sight, you
know; and not mistrusting any thing, will not be over curious: But if he
should, I have a way to bring you off -- My Life on it -- This Plot may be of
Use to my Design, I Will manage it with Care. [Aside.


L. Piz. Oh! the Pleasure of hearing my Husband lie coughing, and calling me to
Bed: And my answering him, I Am coming, Dear; and while he imagines me in the
next Room undressing, I Am happy in the Arms of my Ludovico. Certainly there is
as much Satisfaction in deceivig a dull jealous Husband, as in getting a new
Gallant; Were it not grown so common -- each. Tradesman's Wife must have her
Gallant too -- and sometimes makes a Journey-man of the Apprentice ever his
Indentures be half out -- It Is an unsufferable Fault, that Quality can have no
Pleasure above the Vulgar, except it be in paying their Debts. Well, dear Lucy,
I admire thy Contrivance -- About it instantly --


Lucy. ( Aside.) About it instantly! is that all? I must have my the other Fee
first. -- I will, Madam; and you may expect your Lover instantly. But, Madam,
what is to be done with your Brocade Night Gown you tore last Night? it can
never be mended handsomely.


L. Piz. Nothing to be done without a Bribe I find, in Love as well as Law --
Well, Lucy, if you manage this Intrigue with Care and Secresy, the Gown is
yours.


Enter Page. Page. Madam, my Lord desires so speak with you.


Lucy. Madam, I Will go about your Business: Your Ladyship's very humble Servant.

[ Exit Lucy.
L. Piz. Tell him I Am coming -- [ Exit Page. Now by way of Mortification, must
I go entertain my old, jealous Husband.

[ Exit Lady Pizalta.
SCENE III.
The Piazza. Enter Ludovico Singing. Give me but Wine, that Liquor of Life,
And a Girl that is wholesome and clean,
Two or three Friends, but the Devil a Wife,
And I Would not change State with a King.

Enter Lucy. Luc. What Singing, Signior! Well, you're a pleasant Gentleman --


Lud. Ah! my little Female Mercury, what Message bringst Thou? Ha -- will thy
Lady bless me with another Sight -- Ha -- How -- When? where? I am all in a
Flame.


Luc. Come along with me, Sir, I Will help you to an Extinguisher presently.


Lud. If thou meanest thy Lady, with all my Heart -- But I can tell thee,
she will rather prove Oil, than what you speak of -- But, say, where am I to see
my lovely Charmer?


Lucy. In her Chamber --


Lud. Good! But how the Devil can that be done?


Lucy. Nay, without the Help of a Conjurer, I assure you; If you dare take me
for your Pilot, I Will warrant you Success in your Voyage -- I Will set you safe in
the Island of Love; it is your Business to improve the Soil.


Lud. I warrant thee, Girl; do you but bring me there once, and if I play not
my Part, may I never more know the Pleasure of an Intrigue.


Luc. Which, if I mistake not, is the greatest Curse can fall on you -- Well,
you must suffer a small Metamorphosis: What think you of personating me a
little? That is dressing in my Clothes, and waiting on your Mistress in her Bed
Chamber -- Ha --


Lud. Egad, I Am afraid I shall make but an awkward Chambermaid, I Am
undisciplined in dressing a Lady's Head --


Lucy. Oh! Sir, your Commission will not reach so high as the Head: I believe my
Lady will excuse little Matters: You can undress, I suppose.


Lud. Oh! the best and the quickest of any Man in Venice. But a Pox on it --
Can find no other way? -- I, I, I, -- I like Petticoats in their proper
Places, but I don't care to have my Legs in 'em.


Luc. And so you resolve against it? Ha --


Lud. No, not absolutely resolve, Child: But -- a --


Lucy. But what, Sir!


Lud. Nothing -- I will follow thy Directions, whatever comes on it. Now lead
the way: For nothing suits better with my Humor than a Friend, a Bottle, a new
Mistress, and a convenient Place.

[ Exit. Lucy, Ludovico.
SCENE IV.
Pizalto's Lodgings. Enter Pizalto with a Bond in his Hand. Piz. Well -- My
Wife's a fine Woman! a very fine Woman! But a Pox she is a Wife still, and this
young Jade runs in my Head plaguly: Well -- here it is under my Hand; a Thousand
Pistoles -- A great Sum for a Maidenhead, as Maidenheads go nowadays -- Ah,
had I been young now.

A Fiddle and a Treat had bore the Prize away,
But when we old Fools dote, they make us pay.
Enter Lucy. Oh! are you come! Here, here, Lucy: Here Is a Fortune for thee,
worth Twenty Maidenheads, adod! I have not so much Money by me at present, but
there is Security. [Gives her the Bond.


Luc. Your Lordship's Bond's sufficient -- Well, but that I am satisfied my
Reputation is safe with your Lordship, or twice the Sum should not have
prevailed -- Go to my Chamber, my Lord, I Will but stop and see if my Lady wants
any thing, and I Will be with you instantly.


Piz You will not stay, Lucy? Ah Girl, buss thy Lady's Chucky; now do now --


Lucy. Oh! Lord! not here, we shall be discovered.


Piz. Well, thou art a cunning Sinner: make haste, Lucy, do hear?

[ Exit Piz.
Lucy. You're in mighty Haste, old Gentleman! but I shall deceive you,

My End is gained; I have my Fortune made,
Man has not me, but I have Man betrayed.

The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Armando 's Lodgings. Enter Armando, Placentia. Pla. OH! Armando!
Thou more than Friend to the distressed Placentia!
Say, how shall I regain my lost Bassino.
My false, perfidious Husband? [Weeps.

Arm. Dear Madam, moderate your Sorrow:
Reserve those Tears to move Bassino's Heart,
Mine is all Pity: You may rest secure
Of all the Arguments a Friend can use
To bring him back to your endearing Arms.
Virtue's not quite extinguished in his Breast,
Therefore I hope the Sight of bright Placentia
Will rouse his slumbring Reason --

Plac. Oh! Bassino! Bassino!
Oh! wretched Woman! Oh! that I had died
Ever I had known him false: Then I were happy:
And though contented with his second Choice,
He with a pitying Sigh, perhaps, had graced
My Memory --
Oh! all ye Powers that virtuous Love inspire,
Assist me now: inform my Vocal Organs
With Angel Eloquence, such as can melt
His Heart of Flint, and move his former Kindness.
( Aside.) But if that fail, I will remove the Cause
Of both our Woes -- Yes, that happy Charmer,
That Rival of my Love shall surely die.

Arm. Doubt not of the Success: What Heart of Steel
Could ere resist such Beauty dressed in Tears?

Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, Count Bassino enquires if you are within.


Plac. Oh! Heavens! how I tremble!

Arm. Lucky Opportunity -- show him up.
Madam, be pleased to step into that Closet,
Till I can sound the utmost of his Thoughts,
And show him naked to your secret View.
Then when he is in the Height of impious Passion,
You like a Bolt from Heaven shall rush on him,
And strike his Folly dumb.

Plac. Almighty Powers, whose providential Care
Is ever kind to virtuous Innocence,
Oh! help me now in this Extremity.
[ Exit Placentia.
Enter Bassino. Bass. How does my Friend Armando?

Arm. My Lord, Armando's well,
And wishes you were so.

Bass. Do thou discover ought that gives thee Cause
To doubt I am not well? Indeed I think
I am in perfect Health --

Arm. My Lord, I should be glad
To find that Fever of your Mind abated
In which I left you last --

Bass. aside. I must dissemble now,
Else I Will never gain my Ends -- my dear Armando,
That Fever, thou speak of, is now succeeded
By a cold Ague-Fit: The bare Remembrance
Of my unlawful Passion shakes my Soul.

Arm. Such sudden Cures have often proved pernicious,
And we have Reason to suspect a Wound
Too quickly healed --

Bass. Not when thou know what Balsom I applied.

Arm. There Is scarce a Balm for the deep Wounds of Love,
Besides Possession, and I cannot think
You have enjoyed Aurelia.

Bass. I swear I have not --
But I enjoy my Reason, my free Reason:
And who possesses that, can never cherish
A Thought against himself: For such I call
Whatsoever keeps me from my lawful Wife,
My dear Placentia, to whose Arms I Will fly
With all the eager Haste of a fond Bridegroom.
There I shall revel in the virtuous Pleasures
Of a chaste Bed -- Oh! my Friend Armando!
My dear Placentia's Friend! can thou forgive?
Indeed I Am penitent, and will offend no more.

Arm. My Lord, these are the Words you spoke before:
What greater Reason have I now to think
You Will keep your Promise?

Bass. Pride, Honor, Justice are come to my Aid,
And Love too feeble to withstand 'em all,
Has left the Field to my victorious Reason.
Pride, with the Prospect of my future Greatness,
Allures me to return with Speed to Turin,
TO obey my Prince's Orders.
Honor and Justice tell me I Am Placentia's,
And that Aurelia is Alonzo's Bride.
To him she gave her Virgin Vows: Nay, more,
To him her dying Father did bequeath her;
He loves her too, and shall not be deprived:
My Passion is subdued, and I Am resolved
Myself to give Aurelia to Alonzo.

Arm. If this be true, then you are my Friend again:
But how came you to learn Aurelia's
Engagement to Alonzo?

Bass. I have it from himself, who an Hour since,
With eager Fury sought to 'venge on me
His injured Love, and challenged me to fight:
I chose with Justice to defend my Life,
And quit Aurelia, rather than to vanquish
In such a Cause -- Alonzo strait embraced me,
Called me his Friend, and vowed I should not go,
Till I had seen him joined in solemn Marriage
With bright Aurelia -- This I readily granted.
Can thou believe me true?

Arm. My Lord, I do believe you --
And am o'erjoy'd to hear your Resolution:
By Heaven! there is more Glory in subduing
Our wild Desires, than an embattl'd Foe.
Now do I wish his Wife had never come. [Aside.

Bass. Armando, You Are my Friend, and on that Score
I must desire you to repair to Turin,
With all the Speed you can, to bear these Letters
To our great Prince, and beg he will excuse
My Stay for three Days more -- And here this Letter
Bear to Placentia -- speak to her the kindest
The softest Things thy Fancy can suggest.
I shall make good thy Promise --
My dear Placentia! Oh! that she were here
Panting and warm within these longing Arms!
It Is a long Age since I did see her last!
But come, my Friend, you must this Hour set forward.

Arm. With all my Heart: But 'twill not be amiss,
Before I go, to fix the Victory,
Which conquering Virtue in your Breast has gained;
And if what you pretend be real Truth,
I have a welcome Present for Bassino.
Madam, come forth --

Enter Placentia. Bass. What do I see! my Wife! This was a lucky Plot: [Aside.
Hypocrisy did re'er befriend me more.
This was not like a Friend -- why should Armando
Disturb her soft Tranquillity of Mind,
And give her ocular Proofs of my Disloyalty?
Oh! my Placentia! my beloved Wife! [Embraces her.
Oh! that I should ever think to wrong my Dear!

Pla. My Lord, waste not a Sigh on my Account:
My Joys are infinite, since you are mine,
And what is past I easily forget.
Nay, let me beg for Pardon: For I know
I have offended you in coming hither.
I should have waited this Return of Virtue:
Or, if abandoned, silently have mourned
My Loss, without upbraiding my loved Lord.
All this I should have done, but mighty Love,
Too powerful for Duty to withstand,
Guided my Steps to Venice --
In Hopes my Presence would retrieve your Heart.

Bass. Gods! that this Woman were Aurelia! [Aside.
Thou Wonder of thy Sex! thou best of Women!
I blush to think that thou have heard my Folly:
Yet since your Love cancels your just Complaints,
You make me doubly blessed: And I Will reward
This excellent Goodness with eternal Fondness.
Oh! that thou had been here! Not all the Beauties
That Venice holds could have diverted me,
No, not one Moment from my dear Placentia.
Long Absence is the Bane of newborn Love,
But Fate shall never have Power to part us more.

Plac. Oh! my dear Lord, your Goodness is too great:
And I Am o'er-paid for all my Sorrows past.
Armando, say, is not he wondrous kind?

Arm. Madam, I told you Virtue
Was struggling in his Breast; and that it might
Overcome his vicious Love, I thought your Presence
Was requisite -- And now, my Lord, I hope
You will forgive me, since all the Endeavors
I used before had been in vain. I once
Designed to let Aurelia know your Marriage;
But then perhaps she would not have believed me:
Let this plead my Excuse in sending for Placentia
Without your Knowledge.

Bass. I must not let him see I am concerned. [Aside.
I know 'twas Friendship all, well-meaning Friendship:
I only am to blame: But I Will retrieve
My Credit in your Heart, and still deserve
The Name of Friend -- And thou, the best of Wives,
Shall never have Cause to doubt my constant Love.

Plac. Oh! my Bassino! this Excess of Kindness
Exalts me over all Mortals, if you're true,
There Is not a Blast within the Power of Fortune
Can shock my Happiness.

Bass. Thou shall never find me false, I swear thou shall not.
Oh! that I could engage
She would return to Turin with Armando; [ As^de.
For if she stays, I never can enjoy
My bright Aurelia, and by Heaven I will,
Although ten thousand Lives should pay the Purchase.

Pla. My Lord, you seem disturbed.

Bass. It troubles me
You cannot appear in Venice with a Train
That may bespeak the Rank you hold in Savoy.

Plac. to Armando. Oh! Armando!
He is so kind, I wish I never had come!
What if I offer to return with you?

Arm. Madam, you will do well:
For I myself cannot suspect him now.

Plac. My Lord, let not my Presence here disturb you,
I doubt your Love no more, and to convince you,
I will go back before it is known I Am here.
Besides, it is fit I should prepare all things
To welcome you at home.

Bass. aside. Blessed Opportunity!
Fortune I thank thee: Would my Dear then leave me
So very soon? Alas! 'twill be an Age
Ever I return to Turin: Three long Days;
No, my Dear, no; I will not part from thee,
At least this Night, my Love --

Plac. Will then Armando stay?

Bass. No, my best Hopes, he instantly departs
With Letters to my Prince.

Plac. Then suffer me to go this very Moment.
Three Days will soon be over, and your Return,
Shall make me fully blessed -- If I should stay
'Twould look like base Distrust, and I cannot think
Bassino would be false --

Bass. aside. Oh! Heaven! that I were not!


Arm Indeed, my Lord, I think you're truly happy,
Scarce does any Age produce so good a Wife.

Bass. Oh! that I could reward this wondrous Goodness!

Plac. My Lord, what makes you sigh?

Bass. To part from thee: But since it is your Desire,
It shall be so. Armando, to thy Charge
I here commit the Treasure of my Soul,
Take Care of her, and think that on her Safety
My Life depends.

Arm. My Lord, I hope you do not doubt my Care

Bass. Dear Friend, I do not --
May Heaven's Blessings still attend my Love,
My dear Placentia. [Embraces, and goes to lead her off

Plac. As many more guard my Bassino.

Bass. aside. A sudden Horror seizes all my Limbs:
I tremble at the Thought of this base Deed -- [ Pulls out his Handkerchief,
and drops a Letter, which Armando takes up.
Ha -- Tears uncalled for bath my guilty Eyes --
Gods! either give me Virtue to withstand
This impious Love, or Courage to pursue it
Without Remorse; for I Am but half a Villain.
[ Exeunt Bassino, Placent.
Arm. opens the Letter. A Letter! and to Aurelia! now Curiosity prompts me to
know the Subject -- What Is here?

Reads. I have dispatched Armando to the Court of Savoy, and found Pretense to
stay behind --

False treacherous Man!

This Night I give a Mask at my Lodgings, which, I hope, will divert Alonzo,
till the Priest has joined our Hands; and while all the Company are engaged in
Mirth, I Will steal to the dear Arms of my divine Aurelia.

Oh! Villain, Villain! Monstrous Villain!
Oh! poor Placentia! But I will prevent
His Policy, and break his wicked Measures.
[ Exit Armando.
SCENE II.
Pizalto 's Lodgings. Enter Pizalto solus. Piz. Why, what makes this young Jade
stay so long? Adod, this is to pay beforehand -- Ha -- methinks I hear a
Laughing and Giggling in my Wife's Apartment; I must know whence their Mirth
proceeds. Ho! here is Lucy coming -- Harkee you, pray, why did you make me wait
so long? Nay, I Am resolved you shall not 'scape me now -- Goes to the Door, and
pulls in Ludovico in Lucy 's Clothes, whose Commode falls off in the Struggle,
and discovers his bald Head.] Oh! Benedicite! What have we here? A Man
disguised in my Wife's Chamber! and I unarmed! Oh! Cursed Minute! -- Speak, thou
wicked Prophet, thou Son of Iniquity, what came thou here for? Ha -- Thou
Priest of Baal, to offer Sacrifices on the Altar of my Wife? Oh! my Head! my
Horns weigh it down to the Ground already -- Within there, bring me my Sword
and Pistols.


Lud. A Pox on all Petticoats -- What a Devil shall I say now? Oh! for a Sword!
that would be of more Use to me now than my Tongue.


Enter Lady Pizalta. Piz. Oh! thou wicked salacious Woman!


L. Piz. What ails my dear Chucky? Why do thou call for Arms, Deary?


Piz. To cut down that vile Creeper which over-runs thy Garden of Virtue --


L. Piz. aside. Now Impudence assist me.

Ah! Heavens! What Is here? A Man in Disguise? A Thief it must be -- Raise the
Servants -- Oh! Heaven! we might have had all our Throats cut in our Beds --
Now for Lucy, for I am at a Loss to come off. [Aside.


Piz. No, no, I warrant, you know he is more gentle in Bed


Lud. aside. Oh! the Devil, what does she mean? Death, Hell and Furies! if I
come off now, catch me at this Sport again, and hang me --


Enter Lucy. L. Piz. Oh! are you there, Mistress? How came this Man here in
your Clothes? Ha! Gentlewoman --


Lucy aside. How confidently she asks the Question, poor Lady! as if she knew
nothing of it! Now must I bring her off -- For Reasons you must not know, Madam.


Piz. Ah! Thou wicked Pair of Bellows to blow the Fire of Iniquity! Why, thou
art the very Casement through which thy Mistress sucks the Air of Abomination --
Tell me, I say, how he came here, and for what -- and be sure it be a
substantial Lie, or 'twill not pass.


Lucy aside. All my Hopes are in her Impudence.


Lucy to Pizal. Harkee, Sir, one Word with you -- Do you remember our Agreement
Tonight?


Piz. Why, what of that? ha --


Lucy. Then imagine what I designed that Gentleman for: I Am honest, Sir, that is
all --


Piz. I Am honest, Sir, that is all -- [Mimicking her Tone.] Honest! with a Pox
-- What! and so you honestly provided a Companion for my Wife in my Absence --
ha --


Lucy No, Sir, I designed him for your Companion in my Absence -- This is the
Business he was dressed for: Therefore no more Words, but believe my Lady honest,
or all shall out.


Piz. Oh! the Devil! this shall not pass, Hussy -- Do you think I Will be cuckold,
jilted, bubbled, and let it pass for a Christmas Gambol. Adod, give me my Bond
again, or -- or -- [Holds up his Cane.


Lucy. No -- hold there, Sir: Women and Lawyers never refund a Fee: But it is
your best Way to be patient now, I Will not take Blows.


L. Piz. Why all this Whispering? Why may not I know the Business?


Piz. I am mistaken if you have not known too much Business already: But I am
right enough served -- I had more Ground before than I could manage; I had no
Need of my Neighbor's.


Lucy. Right, my Lord; Ground that lies fallow will breed Weeds in Time; but
yours is clear yet.


Piz. Damn your Jests: I shall expect a better Account, do you hear? I Will find
a Servant to see you out of Door. [To Ludovico.

[ Exeunt Pizalto and Lady.
Lud. Well, this was an admirable Lift at a Pinch -- She has brought me off now
-- And if ever they catch me at this Music again, I Will give 'em Leave to make
an Italian Singer of me -- No more Intrigues in Disguise -- if it had not been
for the Waiting Woman now, I might have been hanged for a Thief.


Lucy. What, all amort, Signior, no Courage left?


Lud. Faith, not much -- I think I have lost my Manhood with my Breeches --
This Transformation may suit with Gods, but not with Mortals of my Humor --
Come, prithee, good Mistress Lucy, help me to my proper Shape again; for though I
have a natural Inclination to Petticoats, I hate 'em upon my own Back.

[A Flourish of Music within.
Lucy. Hark! I hear Count Bassino's Music: He gives a Mask Tonight; you are
already dressed for Masquerade, will not you stay and take a Dance?


Lud. Egad, I Would rather dance a Jig with thee elsewhere: Faith you are a pretty
Girl -- and have a good deal of Wit too -- But then, Pox on it, you are honest,
thou say, thou cannot swallow a Pill, except it is gilded over with Matrimony.


Lucy -- And that turns your Stomach, I warrant.


Lud. Why, Ay: Faith my Stomach is damned squeemish in these Matters: Yet,
egad, if I could find one with half as much Money as thou have Wit and Beauty,
I Would marry, and live honest.


Lucy. That is, you would marry her Money --


Lud. One with the other, Child: There Is no living upon Love, thou know --
Though Faith I could live well enough too.


Lucy. Well, suppose I help you to a Lady with a round Sum; you would keep your
Word, and marry her?


Lud. I am a Gentleman, I scorn to break my Word.


Lucy. Well, Sir, come to the Mask, and I Will engage you a Mistress, if you are
not overcurious.


Lud. With all my Heart:
I Am now resolved to leave this Wenching-Trade:
For no Man's safe upon a Hackney Jade;
The Ally of Danger makes the Pleasure Pain,
A Virtuous Wife will always be the same.

The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
A Mask in Bassino 's Lodging. Bassino, Alonzo, Armando, in a Disguise;
Placentia in Man's Clothes, Signior Pizalto, Lady Pizalta, Lucy, etc. An Entry
of three Men, and three Women of several Nations. Bass. I Cannot imagine where I
dropped my Letter:
Pray Heaven it be where none can ever find it.
Gods! Let me once enjoy her, then call on me
Your Store of Plagues, and I will meet 'em all.

Enter Ludovico, singing. Lud. Ah! Mistress Lucy! I Am come thou see -- I
expect thou shall be as good as thy Word, Child -- is the Lady here?


Lud. The Lady is forthcoming, if you are still in the same Mind?


L. Piz. My Lover here! Harkee, Lucy.


Lucy. By and by, Madam, I am catering for myself now -- Well, Sir, will two
thousand Pistoles do?


Lud. I must humor her -- [Aside] Ay Child.


Lucy. Why then, I take you at your Word, Sir, and can produce the aforesaid
Sum -- [To Piz.] With a little of your Assistance, my Lord.


Lud. aside. Hum -- A pretty Wife I am like to have -- Catch me there if you
can --


Piz. Ha -- How Is that?


Lud. How! Mistress Lucy, worth two thousand Pistoles?


Lucy. Ay: And I have a very good Play Master for one Half of it two -- Do you
know this Hand, my Lord? [ To Pizalto.] ( Shows the Bond.)


Piz. aside. Confound your jilting Sneer.


Lud. Ha, ha, ha -- What, a Thousand Pistoles a Dish, my Lord? I hope you don't
change often, ha -- ha --


Piz. Hussy, I Will be revenged -- It Is all false, it is counterfeit.


Lucy. Ha -- ha -- But it had been current Coin, if I had suffered you to put
your Stamp upon it -- in my Bedchamber, my Lord --


L. Piz. How Mistress, have you tricked my Husband out of a thousand Pistoles,
and never told me of it?


Lucy. Nay, Madam, don't frown -- Remember you have tricked him out of
something too, which I never told him of -- Don't urge me to more Discoveries.


Lud. aside. So -- Here Is Trick upon Trick: But, Faith, you shall never trick
me out of my Liberty. I Am not so fond of a Wise to marry a Chambermaid, though
with ten Times as much Money: and so, sweet Mistress Abigail, your humble
Servant.

[ Exit. Ludovico.
L. Piz. aside. The Jade has me upon the Hip -- I must be silent.

She who has her Husband's Bed abused,
Can never expect she should be better used.
[Exit.
Lucy. Ha -- What! my Lover gone I With all my Heart: Better now than after;
for whilst I have my Fortune in my own Hands, I shall have no Need to sue for a
separate Maintenance, and get nothing for it neither.


Arm. to Placent. Now, Madam, go: May Heaven be propitious
To your Designs: I Will stay and watch Bassino:
And when he goes, will follow with Alonzo.

Pla. Oh! my sick Fancy frames a thousand Forms,
Which tell me that our Meeting will prove fatal,
And warn me not to go, what shall I do?
Must I bear calmly my Bassino's Loss?
Why do I tremble thus?
Sure it cannot be the Fear of Death -- No, for if
I go not I must lose him, and that is more
Than Death to me -- and if I go, I can but fall,
And Life without him is the greater Woe,
Therefore I Will on, I Will use the softest Words
That Tongue can frame to sooth her into Pity,
And dissuade her from this impious Marraige.
If I succeed I am completely happy,
If not, I Would rather die than live with Hate,
But first, cursed Rival, thou shall share my Fate.
[ Exit Placentia.
A Flourish of Music. Bass. It Is now the Time -- But whither do I go?
Shall I a Maid, a Wife, a Friend betray?
Mo matter --
All Arguments are vain, where Love bears Sway.
[ Exit Bassino.
A SONG.
When the Winds rage, and the Seas grow high,
They bid Mankind beware,
But when they smooth, and calm the Sky,
It Is then they would ensnare,
So the bright Thais Kindness shows,
By frowning on her Lovers,
For Ruin only from her flows,
When she her Charms discovers.

Piz. Come now, Gentlemen and Ladies, be pleased to walk into the next Room,
and take a small Collation -- But where is my Lord Bassino? Come, Gentlemen,
he is gone before us.


Arm. Where we will quickly follow. ( Aside.) Alonzo, a Word with you --

[Exit Omnes.
SCENE II.
A Chamber in Aurelia 's House. Two Arm-Chairs. Aurelia Sola. Aur. I wonder
much at my Bassino's Stay:
Oh! Love! how swiftly fly thy Hours away
When we are blessed! How tedious are thy Minutes
When cruel Absence parts two longing Lovers!
Enter Florella. Is my Bassino come? speak --

Flor. No, Madam, A young Stranger desires to speak with you: He says you are
not acquainted with his Name, but will soon with his Business, which is
something of great Import, that can be told to none but yourself.


Aur. A Stranger Business with me! I know of none
I have with Strangers -- Heaven! what is this?
I feel a sudden Throbbing in my Heart,
As if 'twas conscious of some fatal News -- [Aside.
Womanish Fears -- Admit him -- ( Exit Florella) it must be
One of Bassino's Friends, whom he intrusts
To be a Witness of our Marriage Vows.

Enter Placentia in Man's Clothes. Pla. Madam, I was informed that Count Bassino
Was to be here -- and having Things t'impart
That much concern him, I made bold to come --

Aur. Sir, I expect him straight -- if you're his Friend
I will account you mine -- Be pleased to sit.
[Both sit.
Pla. My Brother, Madam, is extremely happy
In being favored by so fair a Lady --

Aur. Your Brother, Sir! is then my Lord your Brother?

Pla. Madam, he is.

Aur. Then I may call you Brother too;
For all the solemn Vows of Love have passed
'Twixt him and me -- And blissful Hymen waits
With lighted Torch to tie the sacred Knot,
Which shall be done this Honr --

Pla. This hour! say you? Oh! Madam, have a Care:
You tread enchanted Ground, and ever you know
What Path you take, you're hurried to Destruction.

Aur. Where lies the Danger?

Pla. Oh! It Is a fatal Tale, yet you must hear it;
Therefore summon your Courage to your Aid,
For you will need it all, whilst I relate
The fatal Story --

Aur. Ah! how I tremble!
Say, is he dead? has any murderous Villain
Killed my Bassino?

Pla. No -- he is well in Health: but his distempered Mind
Is of a wild and feverish Disposition,
Longing to taste, what tasted will undo him.

Aur. Your speech is all a Riddle: Pray speak plainer:
But yet, ever you proceed, if Count Bassino lives,
I care not what must follow, since he is mine.

Plac. No, he is not yours -- Nor ever must.

Aur. It Is false -- There Is not a Power on Earth can part us:
Perhaps,
You think my Blood to base to mix with yours --
But, Sir, your Brother loves me, and in Love
All Ranks are equal --

Pla. No -- I wish that were all:
But there is a greater Obstacle -- He -- is -- married --
Oh! Gods! unfortunately married!

Aur. Married!

Pla. Yes -- Married -- to my Sister,
To my unfortunate, abandoned Sister.
Oh! do not you conspire t'undo her quite;
It is enough, she is false Bassino's Wife.

Aur. Gods! Married!
And is it possible! Oh! faithless Men!
Oh! Truth! Oh! Justice! Whither are you fled?
Now all my Fears and Horrors are explained.

Pla. I Am glad I reached this Place in Time, to hinder
Those Ills that must waited on your Marriage,
Now it is in your Power, both to be happy,
And, in some Measure, make my Sister so.
[Both rise.
Aur. A Paradox in Nature -- Bid Aurelia.
Be happy, when you rob her of her Heaven!
Her dear Bassino!
Indeed your Sister may be counted happy,
If she is his Wife -- Ha -- Wife -- By Heaven! it is false --
No, no -- He has no other Wife but me --
He is not married, you belly him basely --
He cannot be so treacherous --

Pla. Madam, I swear, whatever I said is Truth --
Do but defer this Marriage for a Day
And if I don't produce convincing Proofs,
May all the Plagues a Woman can invent
Fall on my perjured Head --

Aur. Defer our Marriage -- No, by Heaven I will not.
I cannot suspect him -- Neither do I think
You durst maintain this Story to his Face.

Pla. Madam, I dare; Nay, which is more, I Will die,
Or vindicate my injured Sister's Honor --

Aur. Bold Arrogance!
Oh! That he were but here to answer the Affront!
Perhaps he may have wronged your Family:
Debauched your Sister; for which you would force him
To marry her? -- But, I must tell thee, Boy,
He Is mine already: nor would he forsake me
To hold Command over all the Universe.

Pla. Oh! Heaven! must I bear this!

Aur. Nay, expect more, if he should find you here,
It Is not your being Brother to his Mistress,
That will secure you from his just Revenge.

Pla. Revenge! Nay, then away with all Disguise,
Pity be gone -- And in its Room fell Rage
Take place, that I may dash that haughty Insolence
That dares to treat me thus -- Know, Madam,
I am his Wife -- his lawful wedded Wife.
With borrowed Shape I came to try your Virtue,
Which I have found so light, that the least Puff
Of wanton Love will blast it -- Else my Visit
Had met a better Welcome -- Here with Sword in Hand
I Will wait his coming, [Draws.
And as he enters, pierce thy haughty Breast.
I know he loves thee, and therefore it is brave
Revenge, to let him see thy dying Pangs:
Thy parting Sighs will rack him worse than Hell.

Aur. His Wife! Oh! Insolence!
In vain you waste your Breath, it moves not me:
So much I love him, so much I Am beloved,
That should an Angel from yond Heaven descend,
To tell me he is married, I Would not credit him,
Kill me if you dare -- He will revenge my Death:
That pleasing Thought gives Courage to my Soul:
To live without him would be Death indeed!
No -- he will never leave me for a common Thing,
For such I Am sure thou art --

Pla. Common! Proud Wretch -- by Heaven that Word gives Wings
To my Revenge -- Vile Creature, die -- [Stabs her.

Aur. Help, -- Murder, murder --

Enter Bassino. Bass. Ha -- That to my Heart -- [ kills Plac.] Were thou a
Demi-god
And durst attempt this Shi^e, thus should thou fall --

Pla. falling. Oh! Bassino! Oh!

Aur. Oh! hold, my Lord, what has your Rashness done?
I only should have died -- I Will not upbraid
Your Treachery -- No, it is the Hand of Heaven
That guides the Stoke that takes my guilty Life,
For being faithless to Alonzo.

Bass. Talk not of Death, my fair, my dear Aurelia;
That very Sound does harrow up my Soul.
But who art than whose sacrilegious Hand
Durst to profane the Temple of my Love?

Pla. I am your Wife -- Your loving Wife Placentia.
Oh! Pardon this rash Deed; blame jealous Love --
And grace me with a Sigh, that I may die contented.

Bass. My Wife! And killed by me!
Under what Load of Miseries I stand!
Oh! Horror! Horror! Infinity of Guilt!
Hurl now your vengeful Bolts, Almighty Powers,
On my devoted Head!
Oh! I have wronged you both: Deceived you basely:
Thus prostrate on the Ground, let me beg Pardon: [Throws himself on the Ground.
I do not ask it with Design to live.

Aur. Oh! Dear Bassino, live:
And try to save her, for she is innocent:
We only are in Fault --
I urged my wretched Fate with impious Language,
For which I beg Forgiveness: Generous Lady,
Let not my Soul depart with Guilt oppressed.

Pla. As I forgive you, so may Heaven me.

Bass. Oh! Placentia! Oh! my Wife!

Aur. One thing more, and I Am happy --
Were but Alonzo here, that I might ask
Forgiveness for my Falsehood! But, alas!
My Spirits faint within my frozen Veins,
And every Thing seems double to my Sight:
Oh! How I dread the uncertain future State!

Bass. Unhappy Maid! Oh! my once dear Aurelia!
Cursed, Cursed Bassino! Oh! my Wife! How dare
I stand the View of both these injured Women!
Oh! Heaven! Why name I Heaven! Heaven will not hear
A Wretch like me -- No, even Hell wants Torment
Proportioned to my Guilt -- Oh! my Placentia! Oh!

Pla. Oh! my dear Lord, I cannot see you thus:
Live, live, my Lord; be happy when I Am dead.
Nay, for your Sake, I wish Aurelia too
May live to make you happy --

Bass. Oh! hold!
Heap not more Curses on me by your Kindness:
I wish that she might live, but not for me,
Only to clear me from her guilty Blood --
Oh! Placentia!

Pla. Rise, my Lord, rise: Do not indulge your Woe,
Your Sighs atone for all, and make even Death a Pleasure --
I see him coming, he will soon be here --

Bass. No, I will never rise: never see the Day.
The Sun would blush to shine on such an impious Wretch.
Here let me lie, and tear with these cursed Hands [Tears the Ground in a
distracted Manner.
A Passage through the Earth and hide my Face for ever.

Alon. within. Where, where is this Villian? Where Is Bassino?

Aur. It Is Alonzo's Voice.
Oh! fly, my Lord, fly from his just Revenge.

Enter Alonzo hastily. Bass. Fly --
Where shall I fly from Justice? No, Heaven is kind
In sending him to help my Journey forward.

Alon. Where Is Bassino?

Bass. rising. Here, Sir, I stand.

Alon. Then there stands a Villain -- Ha -- what
Do I see! -- Aurelia murdered!
Oh! treacherous Maid, thy Love have cost thee dear,
Think not thy broken Vows, and call to Heaven for Mercy.
Thy Death I will revenge, because I loved thee once.

Aur. Oh! Alonzo, pardon me.

Alon to Bassino. Now Villain, now what Story, what Pretense
Can thou invent to avoid my just Revenge?
Oh! That I never had listened to thy Tongue!
Thy base, perfidious Tongue! Then all these Murders
Had been prevented, and thou cursed in Hell --
Thou monstrous Fiend --

Bass. You talk too much -- Let Us see what you can do:
Thus I return your Villian --

Alon. Take thy Reward.
[ They fight, Bassino falls.
Enter Armando Arm. Hold! hold: Oh! Gods! I Am come too late
What has my fatal Friendship done!
Ha -- Placentia too -- cursed Letter!

Bass. My Friend Armando! Oh! I blush to see thee:
But let me have your Pardon -- now I need it.

Arm. Oh! first pardon me --
For I have been the Cause of all this Mischief.
Whilst my officious Friendship strives to save you,
I bring you all to this unhappy End.
Say, can you pardon me?

Bass. I do --
And Oh! my Friend! had Virtue been my Guide,
As it was thine, I still were truly happy.

Aur. Where am I?
Why do I hover thus 'twixt Rest and Misery?
Oh! good Alonzo, say you pardon me,
And let me die in Peace, else full of Horror
My guilty Soul must wander in the Shades
Of gloomy Night, and never, never rest.

Alon. Thou have my Pardon, and with it this Promise
Never to love again --

Aur. Oh! you're -- too -- kind -- and I want --
Breath to thank -- you -- Farewell. [Dies.

Bass. Oh! Placentia! [Embraces her.
Thus in thy Arms my Thread of Life shall break.

Pla. My Lord, my Husband, Oh! come nearer yet,
That I may take a parting Kiss, to smooth
My Passage to the Realms of endless Night. [Kissing him.
So -- Now -- I die -- much happier than I lived.
Farewell -- [Dies.

Bass. Farewell, fair Excellence! Thou best of Wives!
But I shall quickly follow -- Yet before I go,
I beg, Alonzo, let my Death atone
For all the Injuries my Life has done you.
Oh! spare my Memory, when I Am no more

Alon. By Heaven!
I see such Virtue struggling in thy Breast,
As makes me wish I could prevent the Flight
Of thy departing Soul --

Bass. No, no -- I would not live:
Had thou not come, my Hand had set me free.
But now I fell more nobly, and less guilty.
My Friend, my Dear Armando,
Haste to inform my Prince, Bassino rests:
But hide, if possible, my Shame: And let
One Grave hold both this wretched Corpse and mine,
Oh! my Placentia -- [Dies.

Alon. Unhappy Pair! But far more wretched me!
For I must live, and live without Aurelia!
Though I Am convinced she loved me not, I cannot
Banish her Image from my Lovesick mind
Oh! that I never had seen the charming Fair!

Arm. The Gods are just in all their Funishments:
And by this single Act, we plainly see
That Vengeance always treads on Perjury;
And though sometimes no Bolts be at us hurled,
Whilst we enjoy the Pleasures of this World;
Yet a Day waits, a Day of general Doom,
When guilty Souls must to an Audit come;
Then that we may not tremble, blush, or fear,
Let our Desires be just; our Lives unsullied here.
[Exeunt Omnes.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for W. FEALES, at Rowe's- Head, the Corner of Essex-Street in
the Strand.
THE Reports of Sir Henry Yelverton, Knight and Baronet, late one of the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, of diverse special Cases in the Court of
King's Bench, as well in the latter End of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, as in
the first ten Years of King James. With two Tables, one of the Names of the
Cases, the other of the principal Matters. Published originally in French, by
Sir William Wild, Knight and Baronet, the King's Sergeant, and Recorder of the
City of London. Now carefully translated into English, with the Addition of
many thousand References. The Third Edition, Corrected. The Adventures of
Telemachus, the Son of Ulysses; written by the Archbishop of Cambray. With a
Poem on a rural Retreat, written by the same Author, when a young Abbot among
the Mountains of Auvergne, in France: And likewise, by another Hand, the
Adventures of Aristonous. Translated into English from the best Paris and other
Edidions; by Mr. Ozell. To which are added, many large and explanatory Notes,
taken from the several Editions of this Work. In Two Volumes. All the Histories
and Novels written by the late ingenious Mrs Behn, entire, in Two Volumes.
Published by Mr. Charles Gildon. The Eighth Edition, corrected, and illustrated
with Cuts. The Art of pleasing in Conversation, in French and English, revised,
corrected, enlarged, and improved in every Page, from the last genuine Edition,
published in French by Henry Scheltus, Printer to the States of Holland.
Together with several additional Entertainments or Conversations, never before
translated; and likewise five others almost wholly new writ: With an Account of
the Author and his Writings, an alphabetical Index, and proper Notes to the
Whole. By Mr. Ozell. In Two Volumes. A new and easy Method to understand the
Roman History. With an exact Chronology of the Reign of the Emperors; an
Account of the most eminent Authors, when they flourished; and an Abridgment of
the Roman Antiquities and Customs. By Way of Dialogue, for the Use of the Duke
of Burgundy. Done out of the French, with very large Additions and Amendments,
by Mr. Tho. Brown. The Ninth Edition, Corrected. Recommended as useful for all
Schoels. A Week's Conversation on the Plurality of Worlds. By Monsieur De
Fontenelle. Translated from the last Edition, wherein are many Improvements;
and new Observations on several Discoveries which have been made in the
Heavens. By William Gardener, Esquire The Third Edition. To which is added, Mr.
Addison's Defense of the Newtonian Philosophy. The whole practical Works of Dr.
Thomas Sydenham. Wiseman's Surgery, 2 Vols. Vertot's Revolutions of Sweden.
Claudius Mauger's French Grammar. The Twenty-fifth Edition, much enlarged and
improved. Reading's English Clerks Instructor, 2 Vols. Shakespeare's Works, by
Mr. Theobald, 7 Vols. 8vo. -- Ditto 8 Vols. 12mo. By Mr. Pope. The British
Theater, in 10 Vols. Selected from the most celebrated Authors. Lee's Works, 3
Vols. Dryden's Works, 6 Vols. Otway's Works, 2 Vols. Vanbrugh's Works, 2 Vols.
Wycherley's four Plays. The Adventures of Lindamira. Paradise lost. Prior's
Poems, 3 Vols. The Englishman, the second Vol. by the la^^ Sir Richard Steel.

