THE Beau's Duel: OR A SOLDIER FOR THE LADIES. A Comedy, As it is Acted at the
New Theater in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, BY Her MAJESTY'S SERVANTS.

LONDON, Printed for D. Brown at the Black Swan, and N. Cox at the Golden Bible
next Paulsgrave-Head-Court, without Temple Bar, 1702.

TO Samuel Brown, Esquire OF Stocking-Hall IN RUTLAND.
SIR,
YOung Authors, like young Wives, are liable to distrust their own Conduct in
every thing; and, whilst they fear venturing too far, are apt to stop short,
and rob their Benefactors of those Acknowledgments they justly deserve: Or, by
useing too loose a Rein, unavoidably run into Adulation. But I need fear
neither of these Censures, since your Modesty, which is so conspicuous, will
pardon one, and your Character be a sufficient defense against the other, for
it is impossible to say more of you than you deserve.

To attempt your Character, would be too daring an Undertaking; For what Pen,
besides your own, could express that just Thought, lively Fancy, flowing and
easy Language, that adorn those Pieces, which, like inestimable Jewels, too
valuable for common use, are reserved for the Entertainment of your happy
Friends? Your luckly Genius in Poetry, and your peculiar taste for Music,
proclaim you the Muses Darling; for you they reserve their choicest Favors:
And, indeed, without such Qualifications, no Man can have a true Relish for
Productions of this kind; and the most Excellent Pieces, would be entertained
with Coldness and Contempt.

How I have performed in the following Scenes, is neither possible, nor proper
for me to determine; it is Praise enough, that you have given me leave to lay it
at your Feet, which I prefer before the vain Applause of clapping Multitudes;
nor could I ever excuse it, either to the World, or my self, if I slipped any
opportunity of publishing the Honor you do me: It Is a Vanity we are all liable
to, and we glory in the Excellencies of our Patron. Besides the advantage, it is
a piece of Justice due to this Poem, and my self, to fly for Sanctuary to one
who is most apt to Pardon, because the most capable to Judge; and has himself
not only approved, but also, by his inimitable Performance, Corrected and
Refined upon the most pleasant parts of Poetry.

To conculde, Sir, (for I would, above all things, avoid being too Prolix) give
me leave to join my hearty Wishes with the rest of Mankind, for your long
continuing, as you are, a great Incourager, and principle Ornament of all
Polite Literature, and Gentile Accomplishments, to the unspeakable Happiness of
all your Friends, among whom to find a place, is the highest Ambition of

Sir, Your most Obliged, most Obedinent, and most humble Servant, Susanna
Carroll.

PROLOGUE,
By a Gentleman.
WHat Hazards Poets run, in Times like these,
Sure to Offend, uncertain whom to please:
If in a well-work'd Story they aspire,
To imitate Old Rome^s or Athen's Fire,
It will not do, for strait the Cry shall be,
It Is a forced heavy piece of Bombastry.
If Comedy's their Theme, it is Ten to one
It dwindles into Farce, and then it is gone.
If Farce their Subject be, this Witty Age
Holds that below the Grand^ur of the Stage.
Our Female Author, though she sees what Fate
Does the Event of such Attempts still wait;
With a true British Courage venters on,
Thinks nothing Honor, without Danger won.
She fain would show our great Fore-father's Days,
When Virtue, Honor, Courage, wor^ the Bays:
Fain would she kindle up those fading Fires.
That warmed their Noble Blood to si^rce Desires.
When the Bold Hero, after tedious Wars,
With Bleeding Wounds adorned, and Glorious Scars,
From Conquest back r^^urn'd, with I^^^r^ls Crowned,
Where from the Fair, their just Rewards they found.
She thinks't a Crime in any one to dare,
Or hope to gain a Conquest over the Fair,
Who never could ^oast a Victory in War.
Let but your Arms abroad Successful prove,
The Fair at home shall Crown your Toils with Love.
Drammatis Personae.
Col. Manly In Love with Clarinda. Mr. Cory. Capt. Bellmein His Friend. Mr.
Booth. Toper An Enemy to Matrimony, and a Friend to the Bottle. Mr. Powell. Sir
William Mode A Fop, in Love with Clarinda, and countenanced by her Father. Mr.
Bowman. Ogle A Fortune hunter, a conceited Fellow, that fancies every body is
in Love with him Mr. Pack, Careful Father to Clarinda, Mr. Feildhouse.
WOMEN.
Clarinda In Love with Manly, Mrs. Prince. Emilia Her Cousin, an Heiress, newly
come out of the Country, Mrs. Porter. Mrs. Plotwell Formerly a Mistress to
Bellmein, Mrs. Lee. Maid to Clarinda
A Sergeant, Drumers, and Servants.
The Scene, LONDON. THE Beau's Duel: OR A Soldier for the Ladies.
ACT I.
SCENE I. The Street.
Enter Colonel Manly. Colonel. HOW do Men labor to fool themselves! What Pains
did I spare, or Excuse did I not invent, to persuade my Friends I was going
another way, to get rid of their troublesome Ceremony, that would have waited
on me home; and all this for an Opportunity only of taking a Turn or two before
this Window.

Oh Love! How powerful are thy Charms, thus to unman, and send me like a Boy,
gaping after Imaginary Joys.

Not all the Hazards of a Soldier's Life could half so much assect me, as the
dreadful Apprehension of displeasing this Girl.

Whatever I do, whether I Eat or Drink, whether I Sleep or Wake, whether I Am at
home alone, or abroad in Company, my Thoughts are still of her: She Is always
present, I can see nothing but her, I can hear nothing but her, I can think of
nothing but her; and in short, I care for nothing but her.

It Is Happiness enough for any Man to love and be beloved by such a Woman,
She Is so Beautiful, so Agreeable, and so Loving; yet so Virtuous, so Ch^st, and
so Constant, that it her Fathers rigid Opposition were removed, nothing could
add to the Blessing lies in store for me.


Enter Capt. Bellmein, goes within two or three yards of the door, then stops
short, looks up. Capt. Ho, this must be the House -- But what the Devil am I
the better for it, the Doors are locked, Windows barred, my Mistress asleep, and
I may return like an Ass as I came, without so much as being dreamed of -- Can
Love, that never fails his Votaries at a pinch, inspire no Stratagem now? Egad
I was never more able to offer him a plentiful Sacrifice; and did my Mistress
know with what warm Desires I come, she would meet me half way, or she deserves to
dye a Maid.


Col. The more I think, I still perplex my self the more; like a poor Fly in a
Spiders Web, by laboring to get loose, I work my self faster in the Toil.

And why should I struggle any longer with what I cannot master? or desire to be
without what I Am persuaded is the greatest Blessing in the World --

I Am resolved I will Love on -- [Turns short upon the Captain.] Ha! a Man, and
if I mistake not, mad Bellmein, whom I left at the Rose, he is upon some Amorous
Design, but is too open to hide any thing from his Friend, I Will accost him.

Good Morrow Captain, I commend your early Industry, you are choosing some
fortified piece of Virtue to lay a manly Siege to.


Cap. Ha, Colonel, Good Morrow to you with all my heart: No, Faith, I never
stay the Formality of a Siege; it is you honorable Lovers are forced to undergo
that Drudgery; whene're I meet any, as I rarely do, that resist the shock of my
first assault, I fairly draw off to the next, who are sure to surrender upon
more easy Terms.


Col. So you take all by Storm, Plunder the Garrison, Fire their Quarters, and
march off in Triumph.


Cap. What I do cannot be comprehended by constant p^leing Lovers.

They cannot bear those strong Joys we suck from our lusty Draughts of Love;
like weak-sighted Birds, they fly about in the twilight of Pleasure, not able
to bear the Meridional Heat and Pleasure of it.

One kind glance crowns all your Hopes, and raises you to the highest
Happiness; but then a Frown, or sower look, Colonel, throws you down again to
despair. So that --


Col. Have a care Captain, how far you launch out in this strain, lest you be
too like our Modern Widows, who exclaim most against a second Husband, when
they are just upon the point of having one.


Cap. So that from my laughing at honorable Lovers, as you call them, you
would learnedly infer I am one my self.


Col. Nay Railery apart, it has been seriously observed that you are --


Cap. What?


Col. Very much altered of late.


Cap. How! Faith I think my self the same Man, I have the same Appetites, the
same Desires, that ever I had.


Col. Ay, but you saunter about in Solitary places, avoid your Acquaintance,
and when you cannot escape them, art more uneasy than a rich Miser with a
borrowing Friend: And here now I find you out of your way, addressing your self
to senceless Wood and Stone.


Cap. Ay, my Friend, but this senseless Wood includes a more beautiful Daphne
than e're the Delian God pursued, a Girl so bright, so sparkling, and what
recommends her much more to me, so coming, [Embraces him] that had she lived in
the days of Venus, she would have rivaled that Goddess, and outdone her too in
her own Attributes.


Col. Have a care you don't mis-place your Worship, for to my particular
knowledge no such Person lodges in this House.


Cap. To my more particular knowledge such a Person does lodge in this House,
and in the Room that looks out at that Window too.


Col. Ha! Clarinda lodges there, it is true; but that she is such as he describes
is false -- Yet she is a Woman, and where Dissembling grows so much in use,
Perfection must be a Stranger. I Will for a while lay by the implicit Lover for
the more inquisitive jealous Man, and try him farther. [Aside.] Well, I may be
deceived, but how do you know you are not so too?


Cap. Why Faith, since I know you to be an honest Fellow, and a Man of Honor,
I don't care if I trust you with the Secret, upon condition your assistance
shall not be wanting upon occasion.


Col. 'Slife I shall be drewn in to help him away with my Mistress. [Aside.] If
she be such as you describe, I believe you will have no great occasion for
help. But to the purpose.


Cap. Why you must know that in this House lives a damned Positive ill-natu^'d
old Fellow.


Col. I know it too well, or by this time his Daughter had been out of your
reach. [Aside.]


Cap. And that there is a young Lady, his Daughter, Neice, or something. --


Col. A^ very probable. What then?


Cap. Way, that (...) my ^er^^^, that is all.


Col. H^w do you know this?


Cap. Know it? I have in^^llible signs of it; she makes Assignations with me,
and kee^s them; receive my Addresses, L^^ters, and Songs, nay sings 'em too,
and if these ben't signs she likes me, the Devil's in it.


Col. Well, but her Name -- I Will yet believe Clarinda Innocent, and it is some
one else he mistakes for her. [Aside.]


Cap. Nay, now faith Colonel you are unreasonable, you know it is not fair to
tell Names.


Col. Not tell me her Name! then I shall think you trin'd with me all this
while, and scorn the Friendship I offer.


Cap. I Will rather tell you all I know, but as for her Name Faith and Troth I
know no more hers than she does mine, her desire to be unknown her self, made
her the less pressing, I suppose, so that we freely pass amongst our selves for
Celadon and Cloe, as you may see by this Song, if you will be at the pains of
Reading it; it is the last I sent her, and though inconsiderable in it self,
receives from her Voice inestemable value.


Col. OF my Soul, the very Song I heard Clarinda sing, it is she past all doubt.


Cap. What, at a stand Colonel! ha^ What means all this Concern?


Col. It Is for you, my Friend; that Woman you admire I know to be the most
Cun^ing, Treacherous, false Dissembler, nay worse, if worse can be, in the
World; I would advise you to proceed with Caution; for Husbands, Captain, too
late Repent, when they cannot quit the ill.


Cap. (...), if it be only my danger that disturbs you I Will soon ease you of
that ^^ouble; Marriage is not the Course I Stear, we never admit ^o sour a
thought to turn our more pleasant Conversation*


Col. ^ow not Marry! What then does all this tend to?


Cap. Phoo, that is unreasonable again; why nothing, nothing, but a little
harmless Mirth or so.


Col. On my Soul he designs to Debauch her. [Aside.]


Cap. Ha! the Colonel in his dumps again, there is something in (...) don't
(...). [Aside.]


Col. Harkee, Captain, I know you have Courage, and (...) took you for a (...)
of honor, therefore think i^ worth my while to tell you this Woman you have
been so free (...) I have a (...) ^ime loved, therefore expect you'^ give me
(...) of what you have said, o^ meet me with your ^word, and so I (...) your
self f^r which you (...) most proper [(...)]


Cap. ^y da^ I Have I b^^n all this while making a (...) o^ my (...) to the
only (...) 'em from (...) made ^im so (...) Friendship, (...) may be (...) I Will
undertake to make out what I Have s^id.


Col. Upon (...) you Friend again, but if you should (...) you had (...) ^ook
to it.


Cap. Here Is some Company comin^ this way, let us ^etire till they pass, then
I Will tell you our whole Intreigne, and leave you to judge whether I have reason
to think as I do.

[They withdraw.]
Enter Sir William Mode. Sir Will. (...) Reviere. -- ( L^ric.) Sir. (Sir Will)
Blister me if you don't speak plain English I shall have the World think I Am
such a sloven as to keep an English Valet: Do you hear, if you don't Mini^k 'em
better I shall tu^n you away.


L. Rev. Me vil take al de ca^e imaginable, Sir.


Sir Will. Very well, Is the Music all come?


L. Rev. Y^ss Sire, here be de Fi^le, de H^uthois, de Cou^tel, and de Base
Vial, dey be all despose for to receive your Command.


Sir Will. It Is very w^ll -- d'hear, do you Marshal them in order before this
Window, and see they be ready to strike up as soon as I give the Word.

[The Colonel and Captain appears.]
Cap. What the Devil's here, another Lover? What think you now, Colonel, your
Mistress m^st be more than Woman if she can hold out against such a formal
Seige.


Col. This ^op I know too well to be jealous of, and know her so far from
encouraging him, that her Fathers Authority which countenances him, can scarce
procure him Common Civility from her.


Cap. Hist, the thing opens.


Sir Will. Well, it is an unspeakable Happiness we Men of parts enjoy above the
rest of Mankind: By our good Management we make our access to every thing we
admire, easy and certain: How many thick-skul'd Fellows are content to dream of
their Mistresses, while I take a more secure Method, and wake her in the
Morning with Harmonious Music.

I wonder how the Ladies can suffer these Idle Fellows that take no more Pains
to please them; for my own part, I believe I have something extraordinary in me
that makes me so acceptable to all the Women I come in Company with. -- Well
Music!

I hope you will all show your selves Masters in your Performance, come strick
up: Ah! Merciful Apollo, what a hideous noise you make; there is a found fitter
to storm a Breach with, than approach a Ladies slumbers. Play some soft Air, a
consort of Flutes would have done well.

[While the Music plays he uses a great many odd postures, seeing the door
open, the Music ceases, and he runs to meet Lucinda's Maid.]
Coll. How, the Door open?


Sir Will. Ha! my dear Angel, How does my Goddess receive my Morning Sacrifice?


Flo. As she does every thing that comes from the incomparable Sir William
Mode, with particular Marks of favor in Private, though she is obliged to lay
great restraint on her Carriage in Public, to appear cold to him.


Sir Will. But methinks she need not be so reserved, since I have her Fathers
Consent.


Flo. Ay, it is that makes her so; for his cross humor should she show the
Affection she realy has for you, would make him run counter to what he so
eagerly pursues now out of mere Opposition: For he never opposed Colonel Manly,
till she expressed some liking for him; and now she fears, should she own her
Love for you, 'twou'd prove as fatal to her hopes, therefore begs you by me to
take all Indifference in public for particular marks of favor.


Sir Will. Well, I Will take your Advice, and sweet Mrs. Flora let me entreat you
to accept of this small acknowledgement for favors I have received by your
means.


Flo. Oh! Lord, Sir, I vow I Am ashamed; but I shall be always ready to do you
good Offices with my Lady. Sir, your Servant.

[Exit.]
Sir Will. Adieu Angel, -- here Music, strick up a merry ramble, and lead to
my Lodgings.

[Exit.]
Col. O Woman! Woman! Now Friend I believe all you said, and a great deal more;
yet who could expect with so much Beauty such ug^y falsehood. For thee, or any
Man, she might have some plea; but this sign of a Man! to fall so low argues a
very depraved Appetite: God's Death I cannot bear the thoughts on it.


Cap. Have a little Patience, and every small discovery will help you forward
to your lost Liberty: Before to Morrow Night I Will lay such convincing proofs
before your Eyes, as shall infallibly complete your Cure.


Col. What Is here another Serenade? More Lovers yet?


Enter Toper Singing. The Devil a bit, care I for a Wit,
So I have but Wine and a Fire;
A Wench when I please, my Passion to case,
The Devil a Wise I desire.

Cap. Ha, ha, Drunken Toper Reeling home after a Nights deboach, sure he is no
Lover, 'twou'd be impossible for the Blind god to find his heart for the fumes
of Wine; besides, it is so indifferent to every thing else there is no taking it
but with a Bottle.


Col. Ha, Toper, thou hold thy own yet I see.


Top. Colonel, good Morrow, I wish you hold your own, Boy, for I met a thing in
the next Street may chance undermine your foundation, one who says he can do
more in one Night, than you in all the days of the Week.


Col. What do you mean?


Top. Why I met Sir William Mode big with success, returning from Clarinda,
who, he says, encourages his address in private, and only favors you in
public, to egg her Father on to Consumation with him; and this he purchased
with a Serenade.


Col. God's Death does he boast of his success, and must my Misfortune be the
subject of the Coxcomb's Railery? Am I published to the World as a blind for
his designs? Hell and Furies, it is not to be born: I Will after him immediately,
and were every Vanity about him a Hercules, I Would force my way through them all to
stop that foul breath of his. [Going.]


Cap. Hold, hold, you will but widen the Sore you design to heal, 'twill be no
hard matter from the Coxcomb's fruitful Impertinence to take another occasion
for quarreling, and then pay old scores; or if it be my luck first to meet the
opportunity, you may be sure I Will throw in a hearty Thrust for you.


Top. Nay, Sir, you may save your self the labor of quarreling, for he will not
answer Expectation, I asure you.


Cap. A Coward; Nay then he shall dance a minute the length of the Street,
while I beat time upon his backside.


Col. Hang him, he is not worth our Resentment: Prithee Toper, what is he, for I
have but barely seen him?


Toper. In the first place, he is a mere Compound of Powder, Paint and
Affectation, so persum'd, you may smell him a Mile, he thinks every Woman in
Love with him, and will allow no Man to claim a share in ought above a
Chambermaid; or stand in Competition with his Parts or Person.


Cap. And yet not fight, say you?


Toper. Fight, no, no, he hates the sight of a drawn Sword, as much as I do
that of an empty Bottle. He will sometimes pretend to Courage, as some Women
will to Honor and Honesty, though their Inclinations tend to neither, no more
than mine to Matrimony. He has 4000 l. a Year, which he spends in Intrigues,
sine Cloths, and Music. And he has always as many Fiddlers at his heels, as a
general, Officers at his Lovee.


Col. Whose attendance is better rewarded, I fancy, no doubt they taste the
Fruits of their labors sweetly.


Toper. I'my Conscience I believe they deserve it, for who becomes his
Favorite, must use as many Complements as would purchase a Maidenhead, though
the Woman's design was Marriage. Oh that Fortune should be so liberal to such a
Fool, when so many honest ^ellows sit in a Coffee-house all the Evening, for
want of Money to go to the Tavern.


Col. Riches are the common Chance of Knaves and Fools, Fortune is rarely
favorable to a Man of Sense, it is with difficulty and danger they purchase a
Smile from that Fickle Mistress, but Fools are still her care.

I shall take more notice of this Fellow the next time I see him.


Toper. Which may be this Morning if you will, for he just now invited me to an
Entertainment of Music, that is to be performed at his Chamber by some of the
best Masters; there will be Champaign Boy.


Cap. Will you go Colonel?


Col. Not I; the Conversation of Town-Ladies; who entertain you with the
Opinions of fifty Fools, of their Wit and Beauty, and how managed by them to
their ruin, would be a thousand times more acceptable to me, than the medly
Chat of Fops and Fiddlers.


Cap. Then you will not go?


Col. No, I Will expect you at my Lodgings.

[Ex.
Toper. But you will, there is Champaign, Pox of the Company.


Capt. And Music too, if that be good, the Company be hanged.

[Ex.
Scene changes to Clarinda's Lodging in her Father's House.
Enter Clarinda and her Cousin Emilia, undressed as waked by the Serenade.
Clar. Dear Emilia, you ask so many questions, prithee have some pity, and
spare me a little.


Em. Dear Cousin, do you pity me, and answer me a little.


Clar. I have answered you these three days you have been in Town, more
Questions than all the Astrologe^s and Philomaths in London could resolve in a
month.


Em. And I have as many more to ask before I can be satisfied: I Would fain know
the cause of all this alteration, why so much uneasinels, and so much Spleen?
Never pleased but when you are displeased, nor like your Company, but when you
are alone. In short, I have observed --


Clar. What have you observed, Cousin?


Em. Why that your Father is never well, but when talking to you of Sir
William; nor you pleased, but when you are thinking of some body else.


Clar. Oh, How-inquisitive are Girls!


Em. Oh, how reserved are Lovers!


Clar. Prithee, Cousin, learn to be more Serious.


Em. Prithee, Cousin, learn to be more free.


Clar. Then you positively believe I am in Love.


Em. Positively.


Clar. And with --


Em. Another-guess'd Man than your Father designs for you.


Clar. And nothing --


Em. Will persuade me to the contrary.


Clar. Why then I am; and since it is in vain to hide it from you, Emilia, I Will
try you with that confidence I hitherto thought you too young for.


Em. Alas she little thinks I have as great Intrigues of my own, as any she can
trust me with, though I have been but three days in Town. [Aside.


Clar. I am, as you see Cousin, besieged night and day, by two as different as
night and day; one in the head of innumerable Fopperies and Insolences,
attacks me with the assurance of a Conqueror, before he enters the Field; being
supported by the harsh Authority of a rigid Father. The other, after a thousand
obsequious Demonstrations of Love at respectful distance, courts to be admitted
mine, rather than seeks to have me his.


Em. I'my Conscience were it my case, I should not be at a stand which to
choose, there being such apparent difference.


Clar. Nay, there is more yet; for one is Generous and Brave, the other
Cowardly and Pitiful; one Judicious, the other Impe^tinent; one Const^^t, ^other
Whimsical; one a Man of Sense, the other a Block^ead; one admired by all, the other
ridiculed by all.


Em. One, I suppose, is the Gentleman that gave the Serenade, Sir William, of
whom I have heard so much since I came to Town, but the other, Clarinda, I fear
is no where to be found, such Men appear but as they say the Phoenix does, not
above one in an Age.


Clar. And that ours has one in him, the Judicious part of Mankind bears me
witness.


Em. Lovers, Clarinda, like People in motion, fancy every thing they see moves
as they do; and may be from the knowledge of your own Principles and
Resolutions, you from your Notion of his -- Now could I almost find in my heart
to discover my own Intrigue, it'twere only to let her see, there are Men that
equal, if not exceed hers, but that I Am ashamed of its forwardness in so snort
a time, [aside.] But how comes it, Cousin, that we never see this Man?


Clar. Before you came to Town, my Father forbid him the House, with any
farther Pretentions to me, upon Sir William's account, to whom his Honor was
engaged before he saw him, or else I believe his Follies would have out-weigh'd
his Estate, for he you know --


Em. I know too much of him, for I have seen him.


Clar. So you have the other too, he was one of the two that bowed to us the other
night from the side-box, and of whom you have since been so inquisitive, though I
never let you into the Secret till now.


Em. Of one of those, I know a Secret which! believe you are a Stranger to, and
which I would not for the World discover, till I know more on it. [Aside.] If
that be he, I like him as well as you can, but I think a Gentleman of Sir
William's Estate, should not seem to contemptible.


Clar. O dear Cousin don't name him, ^or besides the particular Aversion I have
for him, 'twould beget in the World a very slender Opinion of my Sense, should
I encourage such a Fop.


Em. O quite contrary; for Women of Sense strive to distinguish themselves, by
their choice of Asses fit to bear their Burdens: Besides, Cousin, if you hate
him, you can never get it in your power to torment him, more than by marrying
him.


Clar. That would be making my self uneasy, purely to trouble another; No, no,
I must have some Contrivance to expose him, and our Neighbor Mrs. Plotwell
shall help me in it.


Em. Does that Lady still continue her Persecution of ^ops?


Clar. With as much address and success as ever; and her pleasant accounts of
her feigned Intreagues, makes her very entertaining Company; she hates Sir
William Mode, and I am sure will assist in any thing. I never had a stronger
Temptation to Disobedience than now, Love and Merit plead on Manly's side,
Reason too approves my Choice; the other's an empty nothing, a mere Talker,
we'll show his right side, expose him, shall we not my Dear.


Em. With all my Heart, I love Mischief so well, I can refuse nothing that
farthers that.


ACT II.
SCENE. Sir William's Lodgings.
Enter Sir William in a Nightgown, looking in his Glass. Sir Will. THis rising
early is the most confounded thing on Earth, nothing so destructive to the
Complexion. Blister me, how I shall look in the side box to night, wretchedly
impair my Vigor. -- [Looking in the Glass all the a bile.] Yet it adds
something of a languithing Air, not altogether unbecoming, and by Candlelight
may do mischief; but I must stay at home to recover some color; and that may
be as well laid on too; so it is resolved, I will go. Oh it is an unspeakable
Pleasure to be in the side box, or crowd to the Stage, and be distinguished by
the Beau's of Quality; to have a Lord fly into ones Arms, and kiss one as
amorously as a Mistress: Then tell me aloud, that he dined with his Grace, and
that he and the Ladies were so fond of me, they talked of nothing else. Then
says I, my Lord, his Grace does me too much Honor -- Then my Lord, -- Pox on
this Play, it is not worth seeing; we have not been seen at ^'other House tonight;
and the Ladies will be disappointed, not to receive a Bow from Sir William. He,
he, he, says I, my Lord, I Will wait upon your Lordship. Then says my Lord, Lead
the way Sir William. Oh, pray my Lord, I beg your Lordships Pardon -- Nay, Sir
William -- Pray my Lord -- [Enter la Reviere.] Pray Sir William -- Pray my
Lord.


As he says this several times, la Reviere enters behind him, has as he designs
to pass by him, is still prevented by his turning from one side to the other, as
he acts himself or the Lord. l' Rev. Hey! What the Devil is he Conjuring, and
talking with invisible Lords? He Is in his Airs, some pleasing Imagination
hurries him out of his Senses -- But I must to my Lue, Hem, Hem, Sir, dear be
one two Gentlemen below, come to wait upon you dis morning, fall I show them up?


Sir Will. No, my Lord, by no means, I know better things.


l' Rev. What then am I a Lord? Egad I never knew my Quality before. [^side.


Sir Will. 'Shaw, this Blockhead has roused me from the prittiest
Entertainment in the World. [Aside.] Well, what would you, Sir?


L. Rev. I vovd tell you, Sir, dear be one two Gentlemen wait upon you.


Sir Will. And let 'em wait till I have done -- I had a thousand fine things to
say upon that occasion, but this rude fellow has frightened 'em all out of my
Head. [Aside.] Well, since my better Diversion is ^ver snow 'em up.


L. Rev. Y^^ Sir.

[Exit. L. Riv.]
Enter Captain Bellmein and Toper. Sir Will. Gentlemen, I Am your most humble
Servant, Mr. Toper I am extremely yours for the honor you have done me in
bringing your Friend; I ^ay under severe apprehensions that nothing could
engage you but a Drinking bout.


Top. Faith you were in the Right, for if your Champaine had not more charms
than your Music, your Fiddlers might have played by themselves for me.


Sir Will. Oh, how unpolished! how, barbarous that is!


Cap. Bell. Why do you expect any other from him? He admi^es no Music like
Wine rattling in the throat of a Flask, with a Chorus of Drawers at Coming Sir.


Sir Will. And that to me is the most Nautious thing under the Moon, impair my
Vigor.


Top. Impair my vigor! ha, ha, very pretty Faith; Prithee where did get that
Affirmative?


Sir Will. It Is my own, at the purchase of some days study, for to use another
Man's Oath, is, in my Opinion, as undecent, as wearing his Cloths: And to be in
the Road of the vulgar, is beneath a Gentleman, who, in my Judgment, ought to
be as much distinguished by his Expressions, as by his Coach and Livery.


Cap. Bell. Right, Sir, for since every Body that has Money enough, sets up an
Equipage, a Gentleman ought to sind out some other way of distinguishing
himself.


Sir Will. OF my Conscience they will ape us in that too, for they ape so
proud of following their betters, that they even tread upon their heels: not a
formal Cit, or awkard Lawyers Clerk, that ^on' Cour^ the Cook-wench a quarter
for Oil and Flower enough to ga^^ish ^^t his Wig for a day, that he may
Impudently mimick a Beau; if 'twe^^ not beneath me, I could kick such Animals
to a Jelly.


Top. How! kick 'em to a Jelly -- why I have seen of that kind you talk of,
brawny follows that could kick and cuff too stoutly.


Sir Will. Ay, that may be; but it is not a Gentleman's business; that always
wears a Sword, and has some half dozen of Footmen at his heels, to kick and
cuff; nor stand and consider whether the Mechanic be armed or not, it is enough
that he is, or but thinks he is, affronted, to atone for the Life of a
Scounderel.


Cap. Bell. Now would this Ass, rank Coward as he is, if not crab'd by the Law,
kill a hundred Men honester and stouter than himself, only because they don't
wear Swords, or are not so sinical.


Top. I should think, Sir William, these honest People that wear no Swords,
very harmless, because they carry no Instruments of Mischief about 'em.


Sir Will. Instruments! their very hands, their di^ty clothes, are Instruments
of Mischief. Lookee, Sir, I Will make it very plain to you, I may lawfully kill a
Man in my own defense that comes A^m'd, in Terrorem, to Rob me of Fifty Pound.


Cap. Bell. Right, Sir.


Sir Will. You allow that?


Top. We do.


Sir Will. Then I Will prove the ^est in an instant; I have a new suit on that
cost me ^ifty Pound, here comes thundering by a di^ty Drayman with his Cart,
that puts me in bodily fear, and rushing rudely by, da^bs all my Clothes, so
that I cannot wear them any more; now here is Fifty Pound lost by this Rascals
dirty Chothes, if I don't prevent it by ^unning him through the Body.


Cap. Bell. How! kill a Man for wea^ing dirty Clothes, ha, ha, ha, the Law
makes better Provision for Men's Live^.


Sir Will. The Law should make better provision for Men's Clothes too; for the
Insolence of the Vulgar is insufferable, and if one or two of them were made
examples, the rest would be more Cautious.

One Night after Play, I waited on a Lady from the Box to her Coach, comes a
clumsy Cit, with a paultry Mask out of the Gallery, rushed against me, threw
down the Ladies Page, brusht all the Powder out of my Wig, then cried ha, ha,
ha, we have ruined the Beau; had I been a Lord, I would have run him through
the Guts, but to be tried by a ^iddlesex-Jury is the Devil.


Top. Ay -- these vulgar, as you call them, have a greater respect for Men's
Lives, than to suffer that Man to escape that kills one of them. But I suppose
your Principle concern rises from your loss of the Ladies favor.


Sir Will. It had no such essect on her, I assure you, Sir; wherever I get
sooting in a Ladies Esteem, I stand too firm to be justled out by a Cit; as for
Instance, I Will give you another adventure of mine, Being engaged by Appointment
to meet a Lady at VVhite's, and detained by some extraordinary business, the
Lady chanced to be there in her Coach as soon as I arrived in mine, so that
lighting out of my Coach to go to hers, a nasty Fellow running just against me,
almost beat me backward; and, though he did it designedly, yet cried Zounds,
cannot you see! Your Wig blinds you does it! so taking one side, gave it such a
toss over my Shoulder, that, had not the Lady been passionatly in Love with my
Person, the disorder I appeared in might have spoiled my Amor.


Enter Servant and whispers. Cap. Bell. Incorrigable Coxcomb, pex on him, I Am
weary of him, there is so little variety he proves dull, Come shall we go?


Top. No, prithee stay a little till we see what becomes of the Music.


Cap. Bell. Of the Champaine you mean, Toper, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Will. Ah! Gentlemen, I Am the most unfortunate Man this day alive.


Cap. Bell. Why, What Is the Matter?


Sir Will. A cursed mi^chance has ^ob'd me.


Top. Not of your Wine, I hope.


Cap. Bell. Nor your Mistress?


Sir Will. No, but of Mr. Quaver.


Top. Why is he dead?


Sir Will. Not quite dead, but an unlucky accident has put it out of his Power
to oblige us with his incomparable Singing.


Cap. Bell. Is he run through the Body?


Top. Or Drunk before Dinner?


Sir Will. No, no, Gentlemen, but he has scalded his Mouth by Drinking his
Chocolate too hot this Morning, and cannot Sing.


Top. Ha, ha, ha, a sad mischance indeed.


Enter Servant and whispers, then goes out and brings him in a Letter. Cap.
Bell. Prithee, Toper, who is this Fellow he laments so much, some Raskal that,
finding his weakness, imposes on him?


Top. No, it is an intimate Friend of his, one as Whimsical as himself, and
truly fit for no other company; he made shift in a Months time, to purchase the
displeasure of most of the Quality in Town, in spite of some excellence he has
in Music; and now is become sit entertainment for such fops as this, who,
after the strictest engagement, will be put off with trifling excuses. [^side.]


Sir Will. You see, Gentlemen, how I spend my Life, I divide the greatest part
of it between Love and Music: And, to make amends for the disappointment of
one, fate has sent me some new discovery of 'tother. A new Amor enfeeble me,
for upon my Soul, Gentlemen, I never saw the hand before; and to convince you
of its Novelty, I Will open it fairly before you. [He opens it, and Toper looks
over his Shoulder.] Reads, Sir William, I Would beg the favor you would meet me -- Ay,
as I said, Gentlemen -- Prithee Toper Read it out.

[While be Reads, Sir William capers about.]
Top. A Belitdoux do you call (...)? It Is the most Mascaline one I ever saw,
and invites you to a rougher entertainment than you imagine, it is a very prity
Belitdoux truly, shall I read it out, Sir Willi^m?


Sir Will. Ay, prithee dear Mr. Toper.


Top. Sir William, I beg the favor you would meet me behind M^^ntague House, at
Six to Mo^^ow Morning, with your Sword in your h^nd, in order to answer what
shall be alleged against you, by yours, as you use me, Roughly.


Cap. Bell. A Bili^^oux, do you call it? Why it is a Challenge.


Sir VVi^^ Ha! [Taking the Letter and looking upon it.] it is so, impair my
Vigor; now (...) me, if I did not think it as ^lain a Bilitdoux, as ever I
read in all my (...). Where did the Porter say he brought this Letter from.


Sir. From ^ill's (...), Sir


Sir Will The De^^l ^e (...)! Why what has these Men of the Sword ^^^roach'd
upon our ^riviledge there too? What business can they have am^ngst us Bea^^s
and Poets -- What shall I do? For in short I will not sight a Man I don't know --
and, Gentlemen, I vow I don't remember I ever saw this Mr. Roughly in all my
Life.


Top. Oh he is a damned fighting ^ellow, your only way is to send him word
you will meet him on Calli^^ Sands, Duelling is unsafe in ^ngland for Men of
Estates, he will hardly be at the trouble of going over; so that if he will sight
you, he must draw upon you whenever he meets ^o^; if so, you will have both the
Mob and the Law on your side; an^ if you ^ill him, you need not care a ^o^s^.


Sir Will. Say you so Sir, I Will take your Advi^e, and answer it immediately.


Cap. Bell. I think M^. (...) has given you Counsel as ni^^ly, (...) you had
given five (...) ^or a ^ee.


Sir Will. I^m in^initely obliged to him.


Cap. Bell. Sir William, I ki^^ your hand.


Top. Good-by Knight.


Sir Will. Gentlemen, your most obsequious Servant.

[Exeunt severally.
SCENE II. Careful's House,
Ogle looking up at it. Enter on the other side Bellmein and Toper. Bell. Who
the Devil is that Fellow now? I think in my Conscience this place is become the
Pa^^ade of Lovers.


Top. What, don't you know him! Why it is Ogl^ the Fortune-hunter.


Bell A Fortune-hunter! I should sooner have taken him for a Sh^^p stealer.


Top. He was an Attorney's Cl^rk, but his Father dying, left him a small
Estate; he bought out his Time, and set up for a Fortune: There Is scarce a
Match-maker in the whole Town, but has had a Fleece at his Purse; nor scarce a
great Fortune in Town, but he will tell you has received his Addresses. In short,
He Is a Medly of Fop, Fool and Coward. Prithee let us speak to him, he may divert
us a little.


Bell. With all my Heart.


Top. Mr. Ogle, your Servant --


Ogle. Ha! Mr. Toper, I kiss your hand -- Sir, I Am yours. [to Bell.


Top. What makes you sauntering here? In my Conscience I believe you are in
Love with the great Fortune of this House.


Ogle. Why really Mr. Toper, to be ingenious with you, I am, and not without
some very good grounds neither, I assure you.


Bell. How! This Coxcomb encouraged too. [Aside.


Top. I was in hopes to have wished you Joy e're now, I think the last time I
saw you, you told me you was to be married to my Lady Rich.


Ogle. I did so; but sure I am the most unlucky Fellow living, the poor Lady
died e're she could have an opportunity of declaring her mind to me; and truly
I believe I may, without Vanity, say, she died for Love.


Top. What, did you never speak to her?


Ogle. Never.


Bell. How! Never speak to her say you; Why how the Devil did you make Love
then?


Ogle. By a Third Person, Sir.


Bell. I beg your Pardon, Sir -- Great Persons, I remember, do court by Proxy.


Ogle I had several Letters from her, Mrs. Cuple was intimately acquainted with
her; you know Mrs. Cuple, Mr. Toper?


Top. Oh very well, Match making is her business.


Ogle. I Will show you what she used to write to me [Pulling out Letters] Here --
no, hold, this is from a Baronets Lady, with whom I had an Intreague: This is
it -- no -- this is from a Merchants Wife, a City Animal, that pretends to a
nearer Taste than those of her Level, and would fain have a Child with the Air
of a Gentleman, but I begged her Pardon, I left her to the Brutes of her own
Corporation, for I will have nothing to do with the Body Politic.


Top. Ha, ha, ha.


Bell. Rediculous Monster.


Ogle. For if you observe, Sir, a Tradesman is the most litigious Cuckold
living, he never considers the Honor a Gentleman does him, but values himself
upon his Charter, and moves for Cost and Damages, when he ought rather to be
thankful for the Favor.


Bell. You are very severe upon the City, Sir, but where is the Letters you was
about to show us?


Ogle. Ha! upon my Life, Gentlemen, I put 'em into my Scrutore this Morning.
But as I was saying, Mrs. Cuple had a hundred Guinea's of me for the management
of that business; and if the Lady had not died, I Am certain she had been my
Wife. Well, I shall never forget what languishing looks she would cast at me at
Church; then put up her Fan to her Face and sigh, as much as to say, you are
the only Man can make me happy.


Bell. Ha, ha, ha, extraordinary Symptoms Faith, 'twas very unlucky that you
could not come to the speech of her.


Ogle. 'Twas my ill Fortune, but I am so used to Disappointments, that I bear
them the easier; what I have met with, would have broke the Heart of some Men;
the Lady Wealthy was perfectly forced from me by her Uncle, else I Am convinced
she had now called me Husband.


Top. Why what hopes had you of her?


Ogle. Hopes: Why the greatest in the World; she praised me to every body she
thought knew me; she said I had the hansomest Foot and Leg she ever saw, the
best manner of Dressing, and the genteelest Carriage -- She said she could
hardly believe me an Englishman, without doing Violence to her Reason.


Bell. I should be glad that every English-born Blockhead would disclaim his
Country, [Aside.] Truly, Sir, I Am partly of the Ladies Opinion.


Ogle. Sir, your very humble Servant --


Bell. But, Sir, was you not saying you had some reason to walk before this
House?


Ogle. I was so, Sir.


Bell. Do you know Mr. Careful's Daughter, Sir?


Ogle. Oh very well, Sir; though, I believe, not so well as she desires, and I
hope to do, in a little time.


Bell. Say you so, Sir?


Top. Then you are very well acquainted, Sir.


Ogle. Yes, very well acquainted, Sir.


Bell. Pray, Sir, can you introduce me?


Ogle. Faith, Sir, not very well, for I never spoke to the Lady in my Life.


Bell. How! never spoke to her: Why I understood you, that you was well
acquainted, Sir; Ha, ha.


Ogle Why so I am, Sir -- Why is it not possible to be acquainted without
speaking, Gentlemen? Why a Friend of mine lay all night with a Lady, and never
saw her Face, nor knows not who she is to this moment; now I think seeing is of
greater consequence than speaking. But you shall hear how far I Am acquainted
with this Lady; I lodge at her Milleners, you must know, and I have several
times passed through the Shop when she has been in it, and as soon as my Back
has been turned, she has always taken an occasion to commend me, and say
something extraordinary in my praise, which my Landlady never failed to tell
me, but with such an Air, as if she was desired to tell me. Then if she sees me
walking here -- as I generally do every Morning, she straight repairs to the
Window -- thus do you see -- stend you there -- Now suppose me the Lady -- you
look up at my Window and walk thus, do you see? -- Then I run to the Window
thus -- clap my Arms across thus -- and hang my Head these -- turn my Eyes
languishing thus -- as who should say, if it were the Custom for Women to make
the first Addresses, I would (...) be^^en you up.


Bell. And is this all the hopes you have?


Ogle. Why is this nothing, Gentlemen?


Top. Nothing at all; and six to four the Lady never thinks on you.


Ogle. N^^ think on me -- Eg^d if she don't Marry me, she is the arrantest Jilt
in Christendom.


Bell. How Jilt!


Ogle. Jilt! Ay Jilt: Why what the Devil need she have made any enquiry after
me, praised or looked at me; if she would not have me, why did she give me
Encouragement?


Top. Ha, ha, ha.


Bell. Must a Woman be obliged to Marry every Man she looks at?


Ogle. I am not every Man, Gentleman -- Egad I Am resolved I Will write to her,
I Will know what she means by her insinuating Carriage; I Will to the Rose and
write my Letter, if you will go with me, Gentlemen, you shall see what answer
she will send me.


Top. Egad I Am resolved to have good Diversion with this Fellow, prithee
Captain will you go with us?


Bell. I must pay a Visit to an old Mistress of mine that lodges hardby, but
I Will come to you.


Ogle. To be Jilted! Egad I cannot bear the thoughts on it; Come, Gentlemen.

[Ex.
The Scene changes to Mrs. Plotwell's Lodgings.
Mrs. Plotwell Sola. Mrs. Plot. I grow weary of Persecuting these Blockheads,
the very Idea of a Gallant is nauseo^s to me: Oh that all Women would but treat
(...) Fools as they deserve, would they take my advice, no Fop, whose
Impertinence tended to the Prejudice of Virtue, should 'scape unexpos'd,

Their different turns of Vice I Would show,
That this Censorious Town might know,
The greatest Monster in the World's a Beau.

Enter Bellmein. Bell. The vanity of Fops, you say, you would show,
That all Intreaguing Bells might know,
There Is danger in a noisy Beau.

Mrs. Plot. Ha! Who Is this that Ecchos my sound so justly, yet so much inverts
the Sense.


Bell. One that omits no pains to invert as many of your Sex as he can. A true
tried old Friend to Love. [Embracing her.]


Mrs. Plot. Ha! Captain Bellmein?


Bell. My charming Plotwell, as Blooming, Young, and Fair as ever, as Beautiful
as Masters Visions, and full of Pleasure and Delight as Dreams of longing Boys.


Mrs. Plot. Oh Lord, give me breath -- let me have a little Air, or I shall die
-- so --, well, Where have you been all this while? And how have you spent your
time? Lord I think I have a Thousand Questions to ask in one Breath.


Bell. And I have as many to ask you, but cannot spare time now; some more
pressing private business would take me wholly up, fitter for the next Room --
Shall we retire? [pulling her.]


Mrs. Plot. No, stand off, if we retire, it must be upon Conditions agreed to
beforehand.


Bell. With all my heart Child, I was never better conditioned for a Ladies
service in all my Life; lookee here -- here are Conditions, [shows a purse of
Gold.] Observe the Conditions, and let us be happy; though I never thought you
Mercinary till now.


Mrs. Plot. I Am not so much displeased with your mistaking me, as I should be
with any one else; for besides some allowance for your Humor, your absence
from Town so long, may excuse you from the knowledge of my present Principles
and Designs; and as great a Libertine as you profess your self, I know the
awful Luster of Virtue has always met with due respect from you, and that
respect is the only Condition I require you to observe.


Bell. Ha hy, Why what the Devil is here, my old Mistress setting up for
Virtue? For Heaven's sake, What do you mean, Madam?


Mrs. Plot. As I say, Sir, that I Am no more what you once knew me; since your
abode in Ireland, my Uncle, who kept me from my Estate, is dead, thank Heaven,
and I now am Mistress of a Fortune sufficient for my use; and, had I possessed it
sooner, I never had been what I was: But now, I scorn Mankind on terms like
those, all Innocent Diversions I freely take, I keep the best Company, pay and
receive Visits from the highest Quality, People who are better bred than to
examine into past Conduct.


Bell. Hy! I find then that Reputation is never lost but in an empty Pocket;
well then you are grown Virtnous, and I must never hope for the Blessing again.


Mrs. Plot. Never, but talk as free as you will, do but observe the Rules of
Modesty; I like your Company and Conversation as well as ever, I Am not so
Rigedly Virtuous to appear a Saint, I can lanch one and laugh with you
sometimes; ^ay, perhaps contribute to your Mirth. I Will give you a short account
(...) my time, in exposing to public view, all the Fo^ies or your Sex, that
part of them, I mean, whose Vanity brought them under my lash, such whose
Tiffany Natures are so easily imposed upon, to have the commonest Drabs in Town
topt upon them for Women of Quality.


Bell. This Town does abound with such as you speak of.


Mrs. Plot. Oh, did you but see with what variety it is furnished, and how
universally all Men are infected with an itch after Quality, you would be convinced
there is not one, from the Gentleman of the Bedchamber, down to a Lifeguard
Man, but thinks himself sufficiently qualified to deserve the favor of any
Lady in St. James's. I passed upon one for a Countess, upon another for a
Duchess, another a Baronets Lady, and so forth -- ha, ha, the poor Fools were
lost in a cloud of Ignorance, raised by the hurry of their own Expectations.


Bell. Why, truly it would surprise a Man, that never conversed with ought
above a Pit-Mask, to be invited to a Ladies Bed, ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. Plot. Such awkard Address, and the means every Man finds to recommend
himself by, one for Secrecy, 'tother Wit, a third his Person, so every Fool
finds something to think valuable in himself:


Bell. There Is your Weakly, Finieking, Dancing, Singing, Witty Fop, who values
himself upon Writeing Bilitdoux.


Mrs. Plot. And thinks his Company so very agreeable, that he Persecutes People
to death, before they can get rid of his troublesome Impertinence.


Bell. His chiefest Tallent consists in the Repertee of an Intrigue. But then
there is your old hardened Sinner.


Mr. Plot. Ay, he Cries up Secrecy and Security, his Years, Wrinkles, and
distorted Body, are sufficient defense against a slanderous Tongue; he values
himself more for what he has been, than for what he is, recommending himself
upon his knowledge and experience.


Bell. And his great Judgment in the happy management of an Intrigue. But the
Man of Sense.


Mrs. Plot. Him all Women ought to shun, that fears coming under his power; he
approaches Securely.


Bell. Addresses cunningly.


Mrs. Plot. Insinuates himself slily into a Ladies Favor.


Bell. Then seizes his Prey at once. [Embracing her.]


Mrs. Plot. Oh Lord, hold off.


Enter Plotwell's Maid, and whispers (...). Bell. Pox take her for coming so
unluckily, this denial of here is gives me a sharper desire than ordinary, that
she should grow so unseas^^ably Virtuous. [Aside.] Well, Madam, you have
business I see, I Will take my leave, some other time I Will hear it out --


Mrs. Plot. My business, at present, is for the good of your Friend Many, and I
don't know but we may have occasion for your head to help us out.


Bell. My head, together with the rest of my Body, is at your service, Madam,
whenever you please to command your humble Servant.

[Exit.]
Mrs. Plot. Clarinda desires to speak with me at her Father's House, say you?


Maid. Yes, Madam, instantly.


Mrs. Plot. I Will wait on her.

[Exit.]
Scene changes to a Tavern.
Topes and Ogle sealing a Letter. Ogle. Here, Porter, carry this Letter as it is
directed, and bring me an Answer.


Porter. Yes, Sir.

[Sir William Mode within.]
Sir Will. Here, Drawer, show a Room, and send your Master to me.


Top. Ha, that is Mode's Voice, a good hint, I Will have rare Sport with these two
Puppies. [Aside.]


Ogle. I think I heard Sir William Mode's Voice, Prithee Toper desire him to
walk in.


Top. Not for the World!


Ogle. No, Why pray?


Top. I know not, but some body has told him that you are his Rival, and he
Swears he will cut your Throat wherever he sees you.


Ogle. How, I his Rival? Where, pray you?


Top. In Clarinda, I suppose.


Ogle. But is it possible Sir William Mode should be my Rival, and never tell
me on it? But he is such an egregious Coxcomb, that he gives me no pain.


Top. He called you Pop, Blockhead, Baboon -- and said he would make mince Meat of
you.


Ogle. Oh, impossible, Sir, he could not mean me.


Top. Do you think I lie, Sir?


Ogle. Oh, by no means, Sir.


Top. Had any Man said so much of me, I would have made the S^n shone through
him; and I think you ought to send him a Challenge.


Ogle. What, Challenge my Friend! by no means, Sir; why, Sir, he is my Friend.


Top. So much the worse, you ought to resent an Affront from him the more for
that.


Ogle. Oh, Sir, you don't know us, we never mind what we say of one another; I
dare swear he never meant it an Affront.


Top. You ly, Sir, he did mean it an Affront.


Ogle. Sir, I heartily beg your Pardon; I believe he did, because you say it,
Sir, else I should not believe it.


Top. Sir, I say ^ou m^st sight him, and I Will carry the Challenge.


Ogle. That Is a sure way that I Challenge him, but how to come off as sure,
hang me if I know: Look you, Mr. Toper, I have not the ready use of both my
Legs, for, dancing at a private Ball 'tother Night, I cut something higher than
usually, and pitched upon a Cherry-stone, which t^rn'd my foot so violently,
that I vow I have been lame ever since, so that positively I cannot sight.


Top. Zounds, I believe you dare not sight him.


Ogle. Pardon me, Sir, I dare sight any Man, that will but give me time to
prepare my self for a Duel; For I think there shon'd be a Diet used for
sighting, as well as running.


Top. Ha, ha, ha, well, I find what you hin't at, I Will engage to bring you off
safe.


Ogle. As how pray?


Top. Why, as thus, do you Challenge him, and, when you meet, draw your Sword.


Ogle. But suppose he draws again.


Top. Then I Will step in and part you, so you are good Friends; for I don't
design you shall sight in carnest. [Aside.]


Ogle. A very good pr^ject.


Top. Come, come, Write three Words to him upon this Paper.


Ogle. But you will be sure to part us.


Top. Ay, certainly, [Ogle writes.] now I wish Bellmein was here to share the
Diversion. [Aside.]


Ogle. There, Sir, there is enough.


Top. Let me see -- Sir, you must resign all pretentions to Clarinda, or fight
me immediately, I wait in the next Room for your Answer.


Ogle. So, very well, do you stay here, I Will be back in a Minute.

[Exit.]
The Scene changes to another Room in the same House.
Sir William and the Tavern-Man. Sir Will. This Hermatage is not brisk.


Lan. Upon my Word, Sir William, there is not better in London.


Sir Will. It is not so good as the last you sent me.


Lan. It is the very same, Sir.


Sir Will. Well, send me in four douzen.


Lan. And how much Champagne, Sir William.


Sir Will. Four douzen of that too, and four of Burgun^y.


Lan. You shall have it, Sir.

[Exit.
Enter Toper. Top. Sir William, I Am your humble Servant.


Sir Will. Mr. Toper yo^^ Servant Pray how did you know I was here, I am not
usually found in a Tavern.


Top. I heard your voice, Sir William; just as you entered, I was engaged in a
Quarrel of yours.


Sir Will. Of mine.


Top. Ay, Sir William, 'ti^ a damned foolish business, I would have made it up,
but I found it impossible; so that being your Friend, I undertook to deliver
you this.

[Gives him the Letter.]
Sir Will. How Is this! a Challenge from Ogle; certainly the Fellow's Drunk, or
he would never do this.


Top. No, that he is not I Will promise you, he is Sober enough, but in a damned
Passion; he says you are a Fop, Fool, nay, Coward; if I might advise you, you
should sight him instahtly; 'Zdeath were I in your place, Sir William, such a
Dog should not dare to look, nay, think of a Woman I delign'd to ma^^y.


Sir Will. I hate sighting, but dare not tell this blustering Fellow so
[Aside.] Nay, I know he is a Blockhead, and a Coward too, but what C^arage Love
may have infused into him, I know not -- Why what the Devil he said not a word
of his Passion to me yesterday, he dined wit^ me.


Top. He did not know it then, but now he Swears he will spoil your hansome ^ace.


Sir Will. Oh Lord! I had rather be run through the Body, enfeeble me; Of My
Soul I wonder what makes Men so stout!


Top. I Will tell you, Sir William, Courage is nothing, nothing at all; now if
you look big, talk loud, and be very angry, you will f^ighten a Man that cannot do
so as well as you, so you are ^eckon'd a stout Man; and he that can do it
better, is a stouter Man than you that is all.


Sir Will. Is that all? Why then I Am resolved to be stout, enfeeble me. But
suppose he should draw?


Top. Why then I Will step in and part you.


Sir Will. A very good piece of Contrivance, impair my Vigor.


Top. Be sure you get the first word, for there is advantage in having the first
word.


Enter Drawer. Drawer. Did you call, Gentlemen?


Top. Ay: Is Mr. Ogle below?


Drawer. Yes Sir.


Top. Hold. I Will fetch him my self.

[Ex.
Sir Will. Now am I confoundedly afraid, lest this Fellow should let us fight
in earnest.


Re-enter Toper and Ogle, to whom he speaks at entering. Top. Be sure you speak
angerly, as if you would not hear what I say.


Ogle. Be sure you part us then -- Sir, I say I will hear of no Reconciliation,
except he resign Clarinda.

[ Toper runs to Sir William.]
Top. He Is in a damned Passion, your hand to your Sword quickly Sir William,
fear nothing, I Will stand by you --

[As soon as they see one another, they run and embrace.]
Sir Will. Mr. Ogle!


Ogle. Sir William!


Sir Will. Dear Mr. Ogle, I Am glad to see you.


Top. Zounds have I taken all this pains for this -- Harkee, Sir William, Dam
you draw upon him, or I Will draw upon you; do you hear no reply, but draw, do
you hear.


Sir Will. Oh Heaven! I must draw in my own defense; and I Am sure there is less
danger in Ogle, than in this Fellow. [draws.] I think, Mr. Ogle, you sent me a
Challenge just now, by Mr. Toper, and having paid the Ceremony due to Friends
and Acquaintance, you must draw, Sir, and return my Compliment. I Will be sure to
have some body to part us though. [Aside.]

[Runs and knocks at the door with his foot]
Top. Harkee, Ogle, you have ruined your self by letting him get the Advantage,
draw, draw, Sir.


Ogle. Draw, Sir; why, Sir, my Passion was over upon my Faith. Ho, here is Folks
enough, I Am resolved to draw now.

[Draws.
Enter two Drawers, one runs to Sir Will. the other to Ogle, and holds 'em. Sir
Will. Ah, stand off, I had ^ather be run through the Guts than you should touch
me with your dirty Apron, 'twill daub all my Clothes, off Scounderel.

[ Toper holds Ogle.]
Ogle. Let him come, let him come, one thrust will decide our dispute.


Sir Will. Pray give us way, 'twill soon be ended.


Enter Bellmein. Bell. Hy day, what is here, Swords drawn? Nay, then I Will make
one in the Number, [draws.] Why what the Devil do you hold the Gentlemen for?
Let 'em go and give one another Satisfaction, Z'death, I Will fight that Man that
shall but offer to hold 'em. [Takes off the Drawers and Toper.] Why don't you
fight now Gentlemen?


Sir Will. A Pox take him for hs Brutish Civility. (aside) Harkee Mr. Ogle, Do
you come along with me, and well contrive some way to make these Fellows
believe we dare Fight.

[When they are at Liberty they stand and look at one another. [He goes to
Ogle, and in a low Voice.
Ogle. Agreed. --


Sir Will. Come Mr. Ogle you shall along with me, we'll find a more convenient
Place to decide this Business in, where Friends shall not interrupt; you shall
hear of a Duel Gentlemen, though it is not proper to see it. Your humble Servant.

[Exit.
Ogle. With all my Heart, I dare Fight you any where. --


Roarwell. That Is a Lie, prithee order thy Footmon to watch 'em, I fancy
they will have some Comical Stratagem to deceive us. Ha, ha, ha.


Bell. With all my Heart; do you hear, be sure you take notice where they go, and
bring me word. Prithee how did work 'em up to this.

[Exit Servant.
Roarwell. With a World of Pains and difficulty I assure you; but there is no
fear of their doing one another any harm in a Fighting way. Is not that
Colonel Manly yonder?


Bell. It Is, and I have some Business with him, will you walk.


Roarwell. My Business at present lies another way, else I Would be glad to drink
a Bottle with him.

For though we Roar, and Rake, and Broils Commence.
Yet give me for a Friend a Man of Sense.

ACT III.
SCENE, Carefull's House.
Careful Solus, with Ogle's Letter. Caref. VEry fine, I find my Daughter is
resolved to have Strings enough to her Bow; Death, to give Encouragement to a
Dog that has neither Wit nor Money to recommend him; good Mr. Ogle, if I catch
you ogling hereabouts, I Will Hamstring you, I can tell you that for your
Comfort; I Am glad I got the Letter before her; my Spark's very familiar
methiuks, (Reads) Madam I Am Informed you Entertain Sir William Mode, if so, I
desire to know the reason why you Encourage me, I am not to be fooled, -- (who
the Devil is this Coxcomb) if you clear not this Amputation, I shall believe
you design to Jilt me, -- Very Complaisant truly -- answer per bearer, as you
value your Admirer Ogle; Yes I have answered per bearer with a broken Pate, and
I wish yours had been in his Place. Lord, Lord, who would be plagued with
Children, I Am resolved she shall Marry Sir William to Morrow; why she will have
as many Fellows at her Heels, as her Colonel has Soldiers waiting for their
Pay; why, what a Medly of Suitors has she? Fighters, Fools, and Fops. Well,
since you are so sickle, Mistress, I Will fix you presently, or Marry my self.
Mr. Roarwell was wishing me to a Cousin of his, who will be in Town to day;
adod if this perverse Baggage make one Scruple of obeying my Will, I Will have
her, and try if a Mother-in-Law will not hamper her; but I Will in, and send for Sir
William immediately.

(Exit.
The Scene changes to another Room in the same House,
Clar. and Emilia Dressing in Boys Clothes, Mrs. Plotwell with them. Cla. Here,
here, on with your Manhood quickly.


Emil. I fear, Clarinda, this Mosquerade will not be reputable for Women of
nice Honor.


Mrs. Plot. Oh don't fear that, since you only wear it to do your selves
Justice; for Justice can never be dishonorable.


Cla. You are not Insensible, Cousin, how resoloutely my cruel Father
Persecutes me with this Fop; therefore, since poor Clarinda is in all this
Danger, I my own Knight Errant, and thou my trusty Squire, will March
Encavalier, and deliver the distressed Damsel, by beating the Giant into a
Pigmy, then be our own Heralds, and proclaim our Victory to my Father, and
hollow the Coward so loud in his Ears, that we will shame him out of all
Thoughts of this Fool.


Mrs. Plot. If that don't do, my Plot shall, Roarwell has broke it to him, as I
told you.


Cla. I readily submit to any Proposal of yours, and will rely on your
Contrivance.


Mrs. Plot. You may command me, -- but be quick and Dress; who told you of this
Duel?


Cla. Sir William's Valet makes Love to my Woman, through (...) ^ve discovered
the Time and Place, but I know not the grounds of the Quarrel.


Mrs. Plot. That, I suppose, is your Ladyship; for, Mr. Ogle publicly declares
you are in Love with him.


Cla. Ogle, who is he?


Mrs. Plot. A foolish Fellow about Town, he Lodges at Mr^. Commo's your
Milliner's.


Cla. Oh Heavens, I believe I have seen him pass through the Shop, but never
had Curiosity enough to ask his Name; in Love with him, I should as soon be in
Love with a Weasel, Ha, ha, ha, why, is he Sir William's Antagonist, I fancy we
shall have rare Sport.


Mrs. Plot. They are as like as two Pees in every thing but Estate, and in that
Sir William outdoes him.


Cla. He is the very Quintessence of Fopery; his Name and Nature suits exactly,
for he is a nice Observer of the Modes; his Valet is forced to Counterfeit a
Frenchman, or he would turn him away.


Emil. Ha, ha, ha, Rediculous enough; well, thus Dressed, now what are we to do?


Cla. Why, when we are sated with their sordid Foppery, we'll kick 'em into
better Manners.


Emil. How kick, Clarinda, if they should return our Compliment, I shall
quickly discover my Manhood to be Counterfeit.


Mrs. Plot. Never fear it, they will not sight with a Mouse, I dare swear, If it
were out of a Trap.


Cla. I know Sir Wllliam's a Coward, I had been often told so, and to prove it,
I sent him a Challenge, as from one Mr. Roughly, his Man said it put him into
such a Consternation he should never forget him, he sent me word that he would meet
me on Calais Sands, and give me Satisfaction, Ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. Plot. Ha, ha, ha, A good Excuse, -- Indeed he is sit for nothing but to
set upon ones Cabinet to watch ones China. Well, I wish you good Sport, and am
your Humble Servant.

[ Exit Mrs. Plot.
Cla. I Am resolved e're I Will be forced into the Arms of a Person I loath and
despise, the Passion I have for Colonel Manly, will tempt me to make him my
Sanctuary.


Emil. I must tell her of his Falsehood, the thoughts of which has turned all
the foolish Passion I had conceived, (aside) take Care Clarinda you ben't
deceived in him.


Cla. What mean you, Emilia?


Emil. That he is false.


Cla. False! Impossible, How know you this?


Emil. I have the best Proof in the World of it, Occular demonstrations. He
makes Love to me; nay don't start; had I not been too much your Friend
Clarinda, I had not let you into the Secret, for upon my word I don't think him
disagreeable.


Clar. Oh Heavens she is in Love with him! and therefore would slyly persuade me
into an Opinion of him, (aside) How know you it is he Cousin?


Emil. I am sure that Gentleman that bowed to us in the Side-Box the first
Night I came to Town, has ever since pursued me with most violent Love; and I
must confess I liked his Humor so well, that I could not be displeased with
his playing the Fool.


Clar. Where did you see him next? How got he an Opportunity?


Emil. You know the next Night I went out with only my Woman.


Clar. I remember.


Emil. Why then I went to the Play in a Mask, purpose for a little Diversion,
and 'twas my Fortune to sit next him inthe Pit, where, during the Play-time he
entertained me with the prettiest Discourse in the World, and when 'twas done
he would not part with me till I had promised to write to him, and I could not
help keeping my Word if I was to be Hanged, -- But finding him false to you, I
hate him; this Letter I have writ to upbraid him.

[Shews a Letter.
Clar. How Is this! For Mr. Celadon?


Emil. Ay, we pass upon one another for Celadon and Cloe; for my part, I did
not enquire his Name because he should not ask mine.


Clar. Did he never ask your Name, nor tell you his?


Emil. No, and I suppose that was his Policy to prevent a discovery to you.


Enter Clarinda's Maid, gives her a Letter. Clar. Ha! It Is from Manly, --
what is this, (Reads) The private Encouragements you give that Fop Sir William,
is not so closely managed, to escape a Jealous Lovers Eye that sees you every
where to be deceived, touches my tenderest part, especially from one I thought
my own, but we are subject to Mistakes I find, that I am so in you, my Eyes, my
Ears are all Witnesses, I shall take what care I can not to be troublesome to
you, since I find you no longer value the Peace of Manly.

Oh Monstrous! perfidious Mankind! Oh I perceive your drift, he charges me with
this Fool, on purpose to find pretense for his own Falsehood, -- It is a poor
Excuse, -- but what will not Men fall too, when they quit their Honor; Oh that I
had but an opportunity of upbraiding him to his Face.


Emil. That you shall, he knows not yet of the Discovery, I Will write to him to
come here, I have no reason to suspect his disobeying the Summons, no more now
than formerly.


Clar. Did he use to meet you then?


Emil. Most punctually -- But I Will in and write to him, and be here again in a
Minute.

[Exit.
Clar. Well it is impossible to dive into the Heart of Man, for sure he has the
Face of Truth, nay I can hardly believe he is false yet, so deep an impression
did his seeming Honesty leave behind.


Re-enter Emilia. Emil. I have sent it away, and I doubt not but convince you
of the Truth of what I say; but come don't think on it now, but let us away,
methinks I long to Bully these Cowards, pray Heaven they prove so. --


Clar. Duce on it this will destroy half the Satisfaction I promised my self
from this Frollick; but come.

If me succeed in Proteus Artful School.
The World shall say, a very Beau's a Fool.
Exeunt.
SCENE, Hide-Park.
Enter Sir William, and Ogle, with Files, Pumps, and Night-Caps. Sir Will.
Here Is a Weapon Mr. Ogle will decide the Quarrel as well as e're a Sharp in
Christendom, and without danger.


Ogle. An Admirable Contrivance Sir William, for now they will hear of a Duel,
and we reckoned such skillful Artists, that neither cou'do'recome.


Sir Will. Right, I think a Gentleman ought to wear a Sharp for a terror to the
Vulgar, and because it is the Fashion; but he should never use it but as an
Ornament, and part of his Dress, I hope to see it as much a Fashion to Fight
with Files, as it is to Fence with them. If I was a Member of Parliament, I Would
bring in a Bill against Duelling, I Am sure the Clause would pass, for there is a
Majority in the House of my Constitution. Come approach, Sa, sa.


Enter Clarinda, and Emilia, with their Swords Drawn. Clar. Hold Gentlemen, I Am
bound in Honor to part you, ha, what is this!


Emil. Files upon my Honor, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Will. Why do you laugh Gentlemen? I think this the nicest way of deciding
a Quarrel, the other is fit for none but Bullies and Soidiers, that get their
Bread by it; it is easily seen this way who has most Skill; and pray what is got
by the other more rude Method, but a scandalous Character, or a shameful Death.


Ogle. And by my Consent, he that draws a Sword out of the Immediate Service of
the Queen should be hanged.


Clar. Say you so Sir! Now hear my Sentiments, he that would not draw a Sword
upon any Just Account, should be kicked thus, and thus Sir.

[Kicks them.
Sir Will. What do you mean Gentlemen?


Emil. Only to rub up you Courage a little.


Ogle. What Is that Sir?


Emil. You don't hear well Sir, I Will lengthen your Ears a little.

[Pulls him by the Ears.
Sir Will. I wonder that you who look so like a Gentleman, should be guilty of
such ill-bred Actions; Fie Kick! and Cuff! Exercises for Footmen; Pray learn
better Carriage of us.


Clar. I Would as soon learn Manners of a Muscovite.


Sir Will. Pray Sir who are you? And what Affairs led you hither?


Clar. I Am a Servant to Clarinda, and consequently a Rival of yours.


Ogle. O Lord! a Rival of mine too. [Aside.


Clar. I came hither to Kick you, and Expose you when I had done; the first you
are sensible I have performed, and from that Instance of my Honesty, you may
take my word for the rest.


Sir Will. I Am undone; Blister me if the very shadow of a Duel be not
unfortunate. [Aside.


Enter Colonel, and Captain Bellmein. Col. Man. Why how now young Gentlemen,
are you breathing your selves, or giving Lessons in the Stoic Philosophy to
that patient Disciple?


Cap. Bell. Or have you a Journey to ride, that you are getting your Backside
hardened for it.


Sir. Will. Manly here! I Would compound for half my Estate Blister me! [Aside.


Emil. Ha! Manly here! We must retire Cousin, lest it spoils our Plot, as
doubtless it will, if he knows us.


Clar. Methinks I could even here reproach him. Ex. Clar. and Emil.


C. Bell. This is a hearing of a Duel indeed, -- Files Ha, ha, ha, you was
resolved to prevent Murder; you need never fear the Exaltation of the Gallows,
for your Courage reaches but to a Chance Medly at most.


C. Man, Prithee who were those Gentlemen Sir William, methinks they used you
very familiarly.


Sir Will. Men of no Honor you may conclude Colonel, else they would not have
abused Gentlemen, when they was defenseless.


Col. Man. Right, but why would you be defenseless? Faith Sir William if this
News reaches your Mistress's Ears, it will ruin you in her Favor. Take this
for a Rule, the less regard you have for your Honor the more you sink in the
Esteem of your Mistress, for all Women hate a Coward; you ought to be forbid
the Habits of Men, who can be guilty of Esseminency that even Women would blush
at.


Sir Will. Why Gentlemen, I think Passive Valor sits well enough upon Men that
have Estates, and have a Mind to live and enjoy them.


Col. Man. Damn him for a Cowardly Blockhead; prithee lets go, I Am sick of
their Folly; besides you said you would convince me of Clarinda's Falsehood.


Enter Bellmein's Man, and gives him a Letter. Man. I have run Sir all the way,
for the Porter told me it must be given to you that Moment.


C. Bell. Ha! There Is a lucky hit Colonel; she Invites me to come to her
Lodging, and her Servant should be ready to convey me into her Apartment. Here
read it Man, now you may convince your self. -- Egad if I were not a damned
Honest Fellow to my Friend, now could I pass three hours the most agreeably in
the World. Pox on me for a prating Coxcomb, could not I have held my Tougue.
Well what think you of it Colonel?


Col. Man. It is not her Hand, but that is nothing, she might disguise that to
conceal it from me. I know not what to think, but I Am resolved to go, and if I
find her false 'twill cure me effectually.


C. Bell. Come on then

[Exeunt.
Ogle. I have been considering all this while upon what the Colonel said, and
I am resolved to be Valiant; for if Ladies don't like a Coward -- I shall never
get a Fortune; for ought I know I may Fight as well as any Body, I Am resolved
I Will try. Harkee Sr. William, our Servants are here by, let us send for our
Swords and fight in Earnest.


Sir. Will. Not I Mr. Ogle, I declare against Fighting positively.


Ogle. But I declare for Fighting, and so shall you, or resign all Pretensions
to Clarinda, for I design to Marry her my self, therefore don't think of her,
do you hear.


Sir Will. You Marry her, Ha, ha, ha.


Ogle. 'Zounds Sir, dare you laugh at a Gentleman, you dare not Fight, take
that Sir (Strikes up his Heels) and the next time I hear you speak a Word more
of her, I Will cut your Throat, and so good by. -- So, this is one step toward
Courage; I am resolved to Challenge every Man that pretends to a Fortune, till
I have got one my self; and now my Hand's in, I Will Challenge this Colonel the
next time. I see him, though at the Head of his Regiment.

I Will Cut and Slast, and Kill to that Degree,
I Will crowd up Hell till there is no Room for me.
[Exit.
Sir Will. Rat this Blockhead, what a Metamorphosis is here; it is well I fell
upon my Cloak, or I had daubed all my Clothes, Blister me, Well, to sing,
dance, or Court a Lady, or any such Gentieman-like Employments I Will turn my
Back of none; but for this slovenly Exercise of Fighting, I shall never be
brought to endure, impair my Vigor.

[Exit.
SCENE, Carefull's House.
Careful pulling in Emilia in Boys Clothes. Care. WHo the Devil have we here?
Nay, nay Sir, I must see your Face; another Gallant of my Daughter's I warrant!
Who are you Sir, from whence come you, what Business have you in my House, ha?


Emil. Oh Lord, what shall I say to this old Fellow, he will certainly know me.


Caref. What are you studying for a Lie Sir? Adod I shall make you find your
Tongue, speak quickly or I Will cut your Throat (Draws.) you Dog you.

Ah! Oh Lord a Sword! For Heavens sake Sir, Oh Lord Sir don't you know me?


Caref. Know you Sir? who the Pox are you Sir, ha? Emilia, why what
Masquerade's this? Where Is my Daughter.

Enter Clarinda. Ho Sir, your Humble Servant, why what a Pox are you going into
the Service; you are two pretty Volunteers faith.


Cla. Ha! my Father, what shall I say, -- I Will even face it out since he has
catc'd me; we have done a Friend of yours some Service Sir.


Caref. A Friend of mine! As how, pray forsooth?


Cla. Why you must know Sir I was informed of a Duel between Sir William Mode,
and a Brother Beau of his; the concern I knew you had for Sir William's safety,
engaged my Care for the Prevention; I was unwilling to Expose him, by sending
any body else, so that my Cousin and I, by the help of this Disguise, pa^ted
them; but we should not need to have made such haste, for the Puppits was
trying their Valor safely with a couple of Files, ha, ha.


Caref. Ha, ha, ha, And this was the occasion of your being in Breeches, ha?


Cla. And I think it a good project too Uncle.


Caref. You do, -- Well Daughter pray let us have you in your Feminine Capacity
again; for though you Bully in Breeches, I hope you will Marry in Petticoats.


Cia. Marry Sir!


Caref. Yes forsooth, I have sent for Sir William, in order to have the
settlement completed to Night, and to Morrow your Honor shall rise with the
Sun; that is to say, you shall be my Lady Mode.


Cla. Honor Sir, where is the Honor of such a Husband? I hope Sir you will not
Marry me to a Coward; why there is not a needy Bully about Town but will beat a
Maintenance out of him, and where is the Reputation of such a Marriage.


Caref. But he will make a swinging Jointure, and if you don't like him when you
have him, you may live apart. --


Cla. Oh Heaven what shall I say, -- Sir I beg you but delay your purpose for a
Month.


Caref. Not for a Day. --


Cla. Sir I have sworn not to Marry this Month.


Caref. Have you so, pray who have you swora to Mistress, to Mr. Ogle, ha?


Cla. Ogle, who is he pray Sir? -- Heaven, has my Father got this Story too!


Care. You don't know such a Person I Will warrant you as Mr. Ogle?


Cla. I have seen such a Fellow Sir, but never spoke to him.


Care. No -- look in my Face, -- You never spoke to him, that is, encouraged
his Love?


Cla. No -- Upon my Honor.


Caref. -- You lie, you have no Honor, read that, (throws her the Letter) and
do you hear, resolve to marry Sir William to morrow Morning by six, or I Will
Marry my self before Twelve; so take your choice. I Will Ogle you, and Soldier
you with a Pox to you.

[Exit.
Cla. Oh Impudence from Ogle, I Will have the Rascal tossed in a Blanket; see
Emilia what an audacious Letter it is, bless me, I have no Patience; I encourage
such a Rascal. --


Emil. He is very familiar methinks -- hang him, the Fool's below your Anger,
never think on it; come prithee think which way to turn your self if the
Colionel be false, as I dare swear he is. What think you of Marrying Sir
William, he is Master of a fair Estate, which you may make subservient to your
Pleasures, to make^ Life's rugged Journey pass the smoother. If he be true, as
you have but little reason to think he is, you may yet find some way to
accomplish your desires. Come the time draws on in which you will be convinced of
his Truth or Falshhood.

Come what will, resolve to be content,
And trust to Fortune for the wished Event.
[Ex.
Enter Careful, Toper, and Mrs. Plotwell, dressed like a Quaker. Caref. Mr.
Toper, Your Cousin is welcome, my House is at your Service Madam.


Mrs. Plot. I thank thee, but pray thee do not Madam me, my name is Anne.


Caref. A very handsome VVomand, and very modestly dressed.


Top. I have used all the Arguments in my Power to Convert her from this
Formality, but in vain, she is as averse to the Fashions, as other Women are
fond of 'em; but I hope your Neice and Daughter will work a Reformation in her.


Caref. I rather hope she will work one in them, I Will assure you I Will recommend
her as a Patron. Is this the woman you would recommend to me for a Wife Mr.
Toper.


Top. The same Sir.


Caref. I protest I like her exceedingly she seems, cut out on purpose for me;
her plain way of Living will improve my Estate, and her Morals will hamper my
Daughter, I like a Religious Woman.


Top. You cannot be better matched, if she has not too much; yesterday I carried
her to wait on a Relation of ours that has a Parrot, and whilst I was
discoursing about some private Business, she converted the Bird, and now it
talks of nothing but the Light of the Spirit, and the inward Man. Ha, ha.
Caref. Good lack, good lack.


Mrs. Plot. Well, well, thee wilt never leave thy rediculous Jests; I say that
Mankind were not made for Foppery and Pride, but to do good in their
Generation, -- Prithee show me one Text of Scripture for the Fashions, or where
Jewels are commanded, or what Holy Matron ever had a Valet, to dress 'em, as
they say the French Ladies have, Oh monstrous Fashion! -- No no, our devoutest
Women wore course Linen, or rather none at all.


Top. Ay, such Saints as wore their Congregations without side, and swarmed
with Christian Vermin, it must be them, ha, ha, ha, but you hold every handsome
Garment a Sin.


Mrs. Plot. Handsome Garment! Verily I believe, if we are punished with Taxes
again to carry on another War, 'twill be a just Judgment upon this sinful Land
for their full Wiggs, Favorites, Furbelows, false Teeth, and Patches.


Care. Truly I Am of her opinion, she speaks like an Oracle, for the Devil was
never so Proud as our Women are now a days, (Aside.) I am resolved, if my
Daughter show the least relunctance to my will, to Marry her out of hand. I Will
motion it to her, and try how she likes me. -- (aside.) What think you of a
Husband forsooth, for to be plain with you, your extraordinary qualities have
raised a great desire in me of becoming such.


Mrs. Plot. I doubt Friend thou wilt expect a larger Fortune than I am Dame of.


Care. I protest I don't care if you have not a Groat, your Virtue's a wealthy
Dowry to me, say you will but have me, and it is enough;


M. Plot. But it may be thou wilt be against my course of Life; I love
Retirement, must have time for my Devotion in my own way; I Am not used to the
Ceremony of Visits, and hate Tea-Table Vanity, and Card-play, as they call it.
Toper. Our Plot takes rarely. (Aside.


Care. This makes me love you the more.


Mrs. Plot. One thing more; Thou have a Daughter they say, a topping Gallant,
which I desire to see, and try if good Admonitions, together with Example, wont
reform her; for plainly I don't care to come under the Roof where Children are,
if they be not dutiful, so that I must see her first e're I can give thee my
Answer.


Care. That you shall presently -- Here carry this Gentlewoman to my Daughter
and tell her, she must entertain her as her Mother that is to be, tell her so
from me, do you hear.

[ Ex. Mrs. Plot. and Serve. Really Mr. Toper, Your Cousin is a profound
Christian, if my Daughter refuse to Marry Sir William, -- I Will Jointure her in
my whole Estate.


Top. For ought I know, You cannot do better than Marry; for who who would be
plagued with a disobedient Child?


Care. Especially when they depend upon us for their Fortunes, the Devil a
Young Fellow would care a Souce for their Persons, did not our Purse-strings
draw. Here forsooth my Daughter is running mad after a Soldier, a Fellow whose
Fortunes depend upon his Sword, and here we are going to Wars again, and six to
four but a Cannon-Bullet takes his Head off, and then the Wife is turned home
to her Father again, and in such Cases a Father has never disposed of his
Children entirely, and all the Jointure she will bring, will consist of
Housings, Holster-Caps, Pistols, and Swords.


Enter Servant. Ser. Here Is Sir William Mode below Sir.


Care. Tell him I Will wait on him presently. Come Mr. Toper, you shall be
witness of our Agreement; I sent for him to complete the Business, Sign Seal to
Night, and to Morrow we'll have a Dance.

[Exit
Top. I fancy we shall drive Dancing out of your Head, Old Gentleman.

[Ex.
ACT IV.
Clarinda, Emilia, and Mrs. Plotwel. Cla. WEll, in my Conscience the first
sight of you frighted me horribly, though I knew your Plot, I vow you make a
sanctified Figure.


Mrs. Plot. Might I pass upon the Brethren think you?


Em. Ay, and hold forth too I Will warrant you, without being discovered. But is
my Uncle so hot upon Matrimony say you.


Mrs. Plot. As a hound upon the Scent, though he will share no more of the
Pleasure, than the Dog of the Game he runs down, ha, ha.


Cla. I vow I cannot help laughing to think what a trick we shall put upon him,
-- but the duce on it I cannot be heartily merry till I se^ Event of this
Meeting; I long till the Colonel comes.


Em. So do I as much as you, to upbraid him with his Treachery.

Enter Maid and Winspers em. In my Conscience he is here, -- show him into my
Chamber, tell him Ill wait on him presently, -- Now Clarinda you shall go in
myplace.


Cla. Heaven! how I tremble. Oh the Perfidious Wreteh, sure he is quite lost to
Virtue, that he dares thus impudently venture into the very House. Oh give me
Patience Heaven, and Power to back my Resolution, and Scorn enough to show my
deep Resentment.

(Ex. Cla.
Mrs. Plot. I Will to the Old Man, and keep him in Discourse, that he may not
interrupt you.

[Exit.
Emil. Do so, -- I must listen a little to hear what Reception she gives him.

[Ex.
Enter Col. Manly Solus. Col. Man. This Love makes Men the Errantest Asses in
the World, what blustering Mars with all his Steely Garranture of War could
never do, this blind Boy does with a Feathered Reed. Oh my Soul, I think I Am
grown a Coward, and begin to fear, my Heart beats faster than a Raw Soldier's
in his first Engagement, or a Longing Maid in the Arms of a Man she likes, when
Opportunity makes her. Fear. Sure it cannot be Clarinda.

Enter Clarinda. Ha! By Heaven the very Crocodile. [Aside.


Cla. By all my hopes of Happiness the very Monster. [Aside.


Col. Man. Madam, you are surpised I believe, not to meet the Man you
expected; I beg your Pardon for this Disappointment.


Cla. Oh. Indignation! No Sir I have met the Man I expected, though you are
disappointed in your Woman.


Col. Man. What does she mean! -- Have you a Stratagem Madam, to bring you off,
-- come Ill help you; say, you happened into this Room by chance, and had no
knowledge of the Plot, expected no Gallant.


Cla. Oh unheard of Impudence! a Gallant! No thou Monster of Ingratitude; have
I refused all Mankind for thee? Nay, broke in upon the Rules of my Obedience,
that I might keep my Faith Inviolate, and am I thus Rewarded? Is it not enough
that you are False, and that I see you so, but you must add to your Barbarity,
and throw a Scandal on my Fame, to hide your base Proceeding. Marry thee, No!
From this Moment I resolve to hate thee, and to put it out of thy Power ever to
deceive me a second time I Will Marry. Instantly. ( Bellmein Peeping.


C. Bell. I must hear how the Colonel succeeds in my Place. --


Col. Man. It is enough I know thee guilty of that very Crime thou would
impose on me; know that you writ to my Friend to come here with whom you have
had many private Conferences, though I, Heaven knows, would not believe it, till
my Eyes convinced me; but now thy Crimes are obvious to my Sight, and I take
thee at thy word, and from this Moment I Will never see you more: Confusion on
your Sex.

(Exit.
Cla. Ha, his Friend! what can he mean, -- sure there is some Mistake in this,
yet I cannot call him back.


Enter Emilia pussing in Bellmein. Emil. What have we Eves-droppers; -- Oh
Heavens! why was not you with my Cousin?


C. Bell. Hey day! why was not you with the Colonel?


Emil. Why, are not you the Colonel?


C. Bell. No faith, and now I begin to suspect you are not Clarinda.


Em. you are in the Right indeed, I am not.


Cla. Oh Heavens I Am undone, Manly's innocent.


C. Bell. No, no Madam, I Will call my Friend back immediately, he shall beg
Pardon upon the Spot, -- Why, what a damned Mistake is here; faith he is gone,
but here is an old Gentleman coming up.

[Goes to the Door, and returns quickly,
Cla. Oh Lord, my Father, I Am undone if he finds a Man here; what shall I do?
This was your Project, Emilia.


C. Bell. Ha! 'Zdeath Madam where shall I run? For methinks I would not do any
more Mischief, what shall I do Ladies?


Em. Ha, a lucky thought comes into my Head; here, here, here, lie down upon
this Mat.


C. Bell. With all my Heart: Pox on it, to be thus put to it for nothing. If I
had but got a Maidenhead, or made a Cuckold, it would not have vexed me.

(Lies down, and they roll him up.
Enter Careful, and tumbles over the Mat. Emil. There, there, lie still.


Caref. A Pox on your Pride, we must have Matts with a Vengeance, but I Will turn
over a new Leaf with this House I Will warrant you; I Will have no Matts, but such
as lie under the Feather-Beds: Here I might have broke my Neck.

Enter Toby. Toby, Sirrah, remove that Matt, and do you hear, throw it into the
Horse-Pond; I Will have no more Mats in my House.


Toby. Matt, it is damned heavy; come out here, I believe the Dog is got into it.


Cla. Oh Lord, what shall I do? (aside.

[The Man goes to take up the Matt, and finds it heavy, shakes it and out drops
Belimein.
C. Bell. The Horse-pond! Nay then it is time to shift for my self.


Em. Here, here, There Is a Guinea for you Toby, bring him off some way or other.

[Runs to Toby.
Care. Ha, what was that?


Tob. Bark Sir, bark; only the great Dog Sir was crept in the Matt.


C. Bell. Wough, wough, wough, wough.

[Creeps off quick.
Em. Rarely done; expect a better Reward for this, Toby.


Care. The Dog was it, I protest I thought it had been a Thief.


Tob. No Sir, nothing else.

[Ex. with the Matt.
Care. Why how now! Methinks you are mightily prink'd up. Mercy upon me, what a
Bush of Hair is there fruz'd out; in my Conscience I believe you have got the
Fore-top of some Beau's Wigg.


Em. That Is the Fashion Uncle, you would not have us dress like my Quaking Aunt
that is to be. Ha, ha, ha.


Care. How now Sauce-box, your Quaking Aunt quotha.


Cla. Sir, I hope you don't design to Marry that thing.


Care. Thing do you call her? Icod you shall Marry Sir William immediately, or
call that thing Mother, I can tell you, that.


Cla. Oh Heaven, what shall I do?


Enter Sir William, and Mrs. Plotwell. Care. Here Sir William, I give her to
your Arms; I Will have my Coach harnessed, and to Church this Moment.


Sir. Will. Madam though I don't pretend to be a Beau, yet I hope the World will
distinguish the difference between a rough, unhewn Soldier, and a pollish'd
Gentleman; I don't, in the least, hint at Manly.


Cla. Insipid Coxcomb. [Aside.


Em. to Plot. For Heavens sake invent some way to give her an Hours time to
consider, or she is undone.


Mrs. Plot. Friend shall I speak one word with thee.


Care. Twenty if you please.


Mrs. Plot. Let me advise thee, do not be so passionate with thy Daughter, the
little Discourse I had with her, showed her to be tractable; if thou think
sit, Ill read her the other Lesson upon her Duty, and I don't doubt but she will
comply.


Care. With all my Heart; for whatever thou say, must be for her good, I Am
convinced. Sir William we'll go take a Glass in the next Room till the Bride be
ready, and then --


Sir Will. And then Madam I shall be the happiest Man alive; if I would change
conditions with the Czar of Muscovy, may I be Condemned to the Smoke of
Tobacco, and never know the Pleasure of taking Snuff.


Em. A very Courtly Wish indeed.

[Ex.
Mrs. Plot. Come, don't trifle away the time I have given you, but write to
Manly, and beg him to Protect you, and Rescue you from the Arms of this Fool.


Cla. Oh how can I write to him, whom I have abused?


Mrs. Plot. And did not he pay you in the same Coin! Come, come, this little
Mistake rather serves to increase his Love than diminish it, when he finds you
true, as no doubt but Bellmein has told him e're this, he will be glad to accept
the Conditions. Come, come, write to him Toper is within, and he shall carry it.


Cla. Well, it being my last Shift, I Will follow your Advice.

[Ex.
Mrs. Plot. Ay, ay, do so, I Will warrant you a Fortune, and the O^d Man's
Consent before I have done with him.

[Exeunt.
A Drum beating up for Volunteers. Bellmein crosses the Stage, and a Sergeant
after him. Serj. Captain, Captain.


C. Bell. Ha, Sergeant.


Serj. I have got the finest Volunteer, a Beau, Captain.


C. Cap. A Beau! Nay, if the Beaus begin to List, let the French look to it.
Where is he Sergeant?


Serj. He Is coming Sir.


C. Bell. I cannot stay now, but I Will be here in a Moment, and I Will bring the
Colonel with me.

[Exit.
Serj. 'll wait you here Sir.

Enter Ogle. The Captain will be here in a Moment Sir; but pray Sir why will
you go for a Soldier, Methinks you might get a Commission.


Og. Because I dreamt Sir I should be a General, -- and I have a a mind to rise
gradually, I hate Jumping into Honor at once.


Serj. Sir I honor you; no doubt but you Dream will come true.


Og. Sir I dreamt last Night that I saw two Armies join Battle, and m^thought ^n
the Scuffle my Brains was knocked out, and when I'wak'd, I wondered to find my
self with all my Limbs, I straight felt for my other Leg, and suspected my Eyes
when they informed me I had both Hands.


Serj. A very good Dream, and signifies your Advancement.


Og. Nay, after that I had the strangest Dream, my Man found me Scaling my
Curtains for a Fort, killing my Pillow, and entering Duel with my Breeches.
Methought all the Trojan Faces in the Hangings were turned Frenchmen, and a
Famine raging amongst 'em, they resolved to Eat me; so casting Dice what part
of me to devour first, the ^ot fell upon my Head. Now Sir, all these Dreams I
interpret quite contrary, I know I shall be a great Man.


Serj. No, doubt on it Sir -- I Am afraid all this Fellow's Courage lies in his
Sleep. I Am resolved to sound him a little. [Aside.]


Og. Prithee, Sergeant, tell me, what sort of a Thing a Camp is?


Serj. Why truly Sir, a Camp would be a pleasant place, did the Fields produce
Feather-beds; or if the Streams like those of the Golden Age! did run pure
Wine; Or if Camp Meals wou^d (...) Twelve and Seven observe due Hours! -- But,
Sir, (...) starved on scarce fresh Green Sword, just so much Earth, to (...)
then to live the Life of Nature; Or as some do call it, The Life of the Hardy,
to quench one's Thirst at the next Spring, (...) up one's self each Night in
Turff, and thence come sorth, like one of (...) Soldiers, sown of Serpents
Teeth, and (...) Furrow, is a Course of Life, I fear, will never suit with your
^^^stitution.


Og. It Is something hard truly, but no matter, I Am resolv^d.


S^^j. Oh! This is nothing Sir; here comes on a Troop, and you in Honor cannot
but lose an Eye; an Engine there goes off, and you will show your self a
Coward, unless you lose an Arm -- Here you are surrounded, and then 'twere base
to bring more than one Sholder off.


Og. [Rubbing his Shoulder.] Ha! I don't like it. (Aside.)


Serj. Nay Sir, consider ere you go -- For it is a danm'd Discredit to have a
Nose after a Battle, or to walk the Streets upon your own Legs.


Og. Humph! -- I feel my self already partly composed of Flesh, partly of Wood.
Methinks, I hang between two Crutches, like a Man in Chains, tossed by the Wind,
I don't like this Sli^ing into Reputation.


[Enter Bell. and Coll. Manly.] Bell. But these Men that you raise Sergeant, Are
they to go against the French or Spaniards?


Serj. Why do you ask Sir?


Og. Because I cannot in Honor draw my Sword against the French.


Serj. How so, pray? You're no Jacobite, I hope.


Og. Oh! Sir, my Scruples are not founded upon Religion; but I Will tell you, the
last Long Vacation, I made the Tour of Paris, where I received such
extraordinary Marks of Civility from the French Court, particularly from the
Duke of Berry, the Duke of Burgundy and the Duke -- and from the Governor of
Callis, such extravagant Obligations; But above all, from the Governor's
Daughter -- That upon my Soul, I cannot descend so far from the Punctilio's of
Honor, to go against 'em; But against Spain, I -- Ha! the Coll. I Am resolved
to fight him however, Death, Hell and Furies: Draw Sir!


C^ll. That I should be such a Sot to believe her false. Oh! I Am undone, ruined
beyond retrieving!


Coll. Draw Sir, For what, Sir? [To Bell.]


Og. Sir, I say Draw Sir, or else resign all Pretensions to Clarinda.


Bell. Why what a Metamorphus is this? Is this your Voluntier, Serjant?


Serj. Yes, Sir, but if you had not come as you did, he had been gone, for I
found his Courage began to sink.


Coll. To Clarinda! How dares such a Coxcomb as you Name Clarinda? [Draws and
Disarms him.] Now learn more Wit, or get more Courage.


Og. Courage, Sir, Z'death, Sir, I Will Box with you, [Pulling off his
Neckcloth.] you have got my Sword, but no matter for that, I ll Fight it out at
Fists; Lose a Fortune for want of Fighting, No!


Coll. I Will Box you, you Dog; give me the Cane, [To the Serjant.] Sirrah, I Will
make Mummy of your Bones, I Will make you forswear sauntering after Fortunes, nay
you shall not dare to look toward the House where they live, or so much as
think of them.

[Beats him all this time]
Og. Oh Lord Sir, for Heaven's sake! Sir, I Will observe the Conditions.


Bell. Nay now you are too rigid, I dare promise for Mr. Ogle.


Og. I will indeed Sir, only let me think of them, for who can help thinking,
Sir --


Coll. No, here Sergeant, take this Fellow, and let him run the Gauntlet, I Will
think you Sirrah.


Og. Oh Lord Sir! spare that, and I will not think of 'em upon my Faith, Sir.


Coll. Nay one thing more you must promise, which is, to resume your w^nted
Cowardice, and betake you to your Desk again. Go take Money of the Men you mean
to Cozen; talk little, except when you are paid for it, it is an Antidote against
Beating; keep your Hand from your Sword, and your Landresses Petticoats, and
you will live at peace.


Og. I will Colonel -- Give me Wisdom that is beaten into a Man, for that
sticks to him Egad. I Am wiser than a Justice of Peace; your Precepts are very
learned, Sir. I Am your humble Serva^t -- Farewell Sword, and welcome Tongue
again. Now cannot I positively tell, whether it is best to be Courageous, or to
have no Courage at all; Beaten if I Fight, and Beaten if I do not. -- Now I
think I know something of the Law, and yet if the Question was put to me I
could not Resolve it,

But for my own part, I Will lay Courage down,
As all Men do, when they take up the Gown;
Cloak'd with the Law, I may securely ^aul,
And he that dares Affront me then, shall pay for all.
[Exit.]
Bell. Ha! ha! ha!


[Enter Toper, and gives the Coll. a Letter.] Top. Ha! Coll. Opportunly met, I
bring an Express from the Queen of Beauty; her Orders are in that Paper.


Coll. Ha! It Is Clarindas hand -- (reads) I hope by this time, you are
satisfied of my Innocence, as I Am of yours; if not, I beg of you, by all the
Ties of Honor, to rescue me from this foolish Knight, to whom I am this Moment
to be married by the rigid Command of my barbarous Father; and if I don't clear
your Censures, use me as you please. Yours Clairnda -- Rescue thee yes, the
Fool shall quit all Pretensions to thee, unless this Arm deceive me.


Bell. If it does Boy, here is another at thy Service.


Top. You may seize her at the End of the Street as she passes; Be sure you
marry her as soon as you have got her; Let me alone to bring her Fortune, the
Captain must help our Plot forward, as soon as he has helped you, away with her
--


Bell. With all my Heart, I love Mischief; I have a plaguey hankering Mind after
this Cousin though, e're since Manly told me she has Ten Thousand pounds.


Top. The Yoke should be well lined, or 'twill sit very uneasy at best. --


Bell. Ay, there must be Gold proportionable to the Alloy, or 'twou'd not be
current Coin, Ha, ha.


Top. Ha, ha, Well, I Am a good Natured Fellow now, to spend my time in your
Business when I have an Assignation with one of the prettiest Girls about Town,
Faith.


Bell. Some old over worn Drab, I Will warrant, cast off by all the Beaus in
Town, and now is become a new Face to the Drunkards.


Top. No Faith, she is a kept Mistress, she Cost me not a Souce.


Coll. Thou art still laboring between two Tides, Wine and Women: Will thou
never take up till thou art confined by a Doctor to dry Diet.


Top. Dry Diet? You don't mean a Wife, I hope, catch me at that Meat and Choke
me with it, that is just a Confinement to Sea-Bis^uet at Land; though I Would do you
all the Service I can, Colonel, in helping you to your Mistress, yet I cannot
help lamenting the loss of a Friend.


Coll. Why will Matrimony lose me to my Friends? I shall love them as well as
ever, I assure you.


Top. Ay, but your Friends will not care that for you, [Snaping his Fingers.] for
e're the second Bottle, you will be calling, What Is to pay? Your Wife will not go to
Bed till you come Home; this makes Company uneasy, and what makes us uneasy
decreases our Value for^t; For my Part, I had rather be confined to Seamen in
a Storm, or the Cant of a Conventicle, than the Company of a Married Man, for
at every Mouse stirring, I should think the Comforts of Matrimony was coming,
with all its Commanding Retinue; A Wife, Egad I Would want Wine, the only Support
of this Body. --


Coll. Well, you declare for a Bottle, I for a Wife, which I think the greater
pleasure far.


Top. Where shall we find you?


Coll. At the Rose.


Top. Adieu, Belmein shall come to you there.

(Exit.)
Let Fools be fettered to that Clog, a Wife,
Whilst free, I reap the Pleasure of my Life;
And Heaven grant I may no longer live,
Than I c^n t^st the Joys which Wine does give.
(Exit. A clash of Swords. Sir Will. cries Murder. Coll. and Cla, Bell, and Em.
cross the Stage.
Coll. Haste, my Fairest, and let us tie that Knot, which naught but Death can
lose.

[Exeunt.] [Ent. Caref.]
Caref. Certainly, I heard Sir William's Voice cry [Ent. Sir Will.]. (...).
What Is the Matter Sir William? Where Is my Daughter?


Sir Will. E^f^eble me if I know; you had best send after her (...), or she will
be married to Manly, who drew upon me; and i^ I had ^^t ^uitted her, he had run
me quite through the Body, impair my V^g^r.


Caref. This was her Project of going on foot, she would not have (...), under
pretense of Notice being taken, forsooth; and your Persuasion made me go before
to get the Parson ready. Od's flesh, had I been there, this had not happened,
old as I am, they should not have escap^d so easily. Z'^^ath let a Man take
your Mistress from you In my Conscience, young F^llows are so rotten now
adays, they are afraid of every S^uffle, l^st they drop in pieces. Zounds, I
could curse the Minute I got this Bastard, to think what a Fortune she has
lost. (Aside.)


Sir Will. Do you take my Breeding to have been at a Bear-garden, Sir, or in
Bedl^m, to endanger my Life for your Daughter. No, let her go, I Would marry an
Ac^ress sooner, and have more Hopes of her Virtue.


Caref. Say you so, Mr. Di^ty Crown? Adod, I could find in my heart to dash the
Powder out of your Whores Hair for you.


Sir Will. Your Age protects you, Sir.

(Exit.)
Caref. Well, if I don^t sit the Baggage, I Am mistaken, Egad, I Will marry
Toper's Niece immediately. [Enter Toper]

Mr. Toper, you came luckily; I am resolved to marry your Cousin this Moment.
N^y I^ll settle all I have upon her. I Will hamper my Daughter, I Will warrant her.


Top. I came to inform you Sir, that I saw Coll. Manly and your Daughter enter
the Church; the Parson met them at the Door, and I Am much afraid they will be
married before you can get to 'em.


Caref. Let her marry and be pox't, I^ll not give her a Farthing, I am
resolv^d. Let her go Soldiering with her Husband, and carry his Knap-sack, like
a Trull as she is. If there be any Favor or Interest to be ^ad in an English
Parliament, I^ll have the Parson turned out of his place, for a J^co^ite that
coupled them.


Top. I have a Friend of mine at the Rose, just come from Oxford, If you please
Mr. Ca^e^ul, I Will fetch him, and you may be married in your own House.

[Ex. Roar.]
Caref. With all my heart. Adod, methinks I Am brisk and young again. This
Auda^ious Wench*

My Blood boils high, and all my Spirits move.
Revenge gives Strength to Age as much as Love.
[Exit.]
ACT. V.
SCENE Careful's House.
Careful Leading in Mrs. Plotwell. Caref. Well, my dearest Ann, I think my self
the happiest Man alive since I espoused thee: I have settl^d my whole Estate
upon thee, which, with this Kiss I do confirm to thee again.

[offers to kiss her.]
M. Plot. Pray forbear Sir --


Caref. How Wife! Refuse to kiss me?


M. Plot. Yes, except a sweeter Air came from you -- Faugh, you have turned my
Stomach; I wonder you can ask me, knowing your Lungs are perished.


Caref. Mercy upon me; Why, what have I married! --


M. Plot. Here, Where are my Servants. [Ent. a Maid] Run to the Exchange, Fetch
me a French Nightgown, and French Head; Set my Dressing-table in order, Do you
hear? Let my Paint, Powder, and Patches be ready.


Caref. Oh Lord! Oh lord! Paint, Powder, and Patches; Why, Hark y' Mistress,
Are you not a Quaker?


M. Plot. No Sir, I only made use of that Disguise to catch you in, but you
have Money enough to equip me after the Fashion, and that was the only Motive
of my Sanctity.


Caref. Oh! undone, undone!


M. Plot. Look you Sir, I shall never endure your Conversation, I must have two
Beds, two Chambers, and two Tables, it was an Article of our Agreement, you
know, that I should live retired -- That is apart Sir.


Caref. A curse on that Agreement -- But hark y' Wife, you are not in Earnest
sure?


M. Plot. In earnest, Why, Do you think I jest with Age?


Caref. And you will not Bed with me?


M. Plot. Did ever Man of your Hairs ask such Questions? I vow I blush at your
Unreasonableness.


Caref. O Monstrous! --


M. Plot. Is it fit I should be buried? For to Bed with you were a direct
Emblem of my going to my Grave!


Caref. Mercy upon me! Where is this Rogue, this Toper? What damned Succu^us
has he topt upon me?


M. Plot. I Will have your Fict^^e s^t in my Wedding Ring, to put me in Mind of
Mortality; Do you think I^ll come within your winding Sheets! For what, to hear
you (...) art all night, and in the Morning find half my Husband on the
Hangings --


Caref. I am married.


M. Plot. Pray why did you marry? In my Conscience, you're as youthful as a
Coffin, and as hot as the sultry Winter that froze over the Thames; they say
the Hard Time did begin from you. Ha! ha! ha!


Caref. Oh Heaven! I am made the Curse of all Mankind! O Patience! Patience!


M. Plot. Your Humors comes frost from you, and your Nose has Isicles in Luna


Caref. Hark y' Mistress, you that have a Fever and Dog Days in your Blood; if
you knew this, why did you marry me?


M. Plot. That your experienced Aches, that have felt Springs and Falls these
Forty Years, should ask such a Question, as if I could not find Friends to
supply your cold Defects; Do you think a Young Woman high in her Blood! --


Caref. And hot as Goats and Marmosets. (Aside.)


M. Plot. Apt to take slame, at any Temptation.


Caref. And kindle at the Picture of a Man. [Aside.]


M. Plot. Would w^d Dust and Ashes, unless she were --


Caref Cracked, tried, or broken up ha!


M. Plot. Right Sir, or lacked a Cloak.


Caref. Mischief, and Hell, was there none to make your Cloak but me!


M. Plot. Not so well lined Sir, Ha! ha!


Caref. Oh! You staid for a wealthy Cuckold, did you?


M. Plot. Your tame Beasts should have gilded Horns! -- Besides Sir, I thought
your Age would wink at stolen Helps, if I took Comfort from abroad.


Caref. Yes, Yes, You shall have Comsomsort -- I Will deliver Letters for you, or
hold the Door! --


M. Plot. No Sir, I^ll not give you that Trouble, I Will have a Maid shall do
that -- [Making a Courtesy.]


Caref. Oh Impudence, unheard of Impudence!


Mrs. Plot. But, Sir. I look your Coffers should maintain me at my Rate.


Caref. How Is that, pray?


Mrs. Plot. Why like a Lady; I must have you Knighted, for I don't like
Mistress. -- My Lady, would sound better.


Carf. Yes, -- I shall rise to Honor. -- [Aside.]


Mrs. Plot. I must have six Horses in my Coach, some are sit for those that have
a Charge of Children, you and I shall never have any.


Carf. If we have, all Middlesex will be their Fathers. --


Mrs. Plot. I Will have four Footmen, and this House cleared of all this Old
Lumber, and (...) ^ainscotted, and lined with Looking-Glass, have (...), and
China.


Carf. Mercy upon me. (...) ye, Mistress, you told me you loved Retirement,
hated Visits, and Bargain^d for Hours of Devotion.


Mrs. Plot. Right, Sir, but what Woman speaks Truth before she is Married?


Carf. Politickly Answered, and like one perfect in the sinning Trade.


Mrs. Plot. Well, Sir, don't discompose your self, 'twill signify nothing, I Will
in and examine your Jewels, choose some for every Day, and some for Masks and
Balls.

[Exit.]
Carf. The Devil go with you: Oh that I had my Daughter again! Two Days more of
this, and I shall grow Mad, or to Redeem my self, dash out my Brains.

[Exit.]
SCENE Changes to Plotwell's Lodgings:
Enter on one side, the Coll. Clarinda, and Em. on the other, Bell and Toper.
Top. We have done your Business, Colonel, Bellemin here has tacked 'em
together.


Bell. I Canted out the Form of Matrimony as gravely as if I had taken my
Degree at Edinborrough.


Coll. And how does it take?


Top. Oh! Admirably Well, I listened a while, and sound she managed it rarely.


Cla. She Will drive my Father out of his Wits.


Top. Well, Captain, you will observe what I told you, I Will follow you with
another Project, I Will warrant you, will give the Old Fellow enough of
Matrimony; Colonel, do you be ready when I call, to come in, do you hear? I
fancy they are in such Confusion that it would be no hard Matter for all of you
to get into the House unseen.


Cla. We'll endeavor it.


Bell. But hark ye, Madam, there is something more to be said, before you and I
part; Have you the Conscience to let your Friend launch into the Sea of
Matrimony alone?


Em. To choose, Sir, for if the Voyage prove Dang^^^^, on at a time is enough to
be lost.


Cla. Would you have her Surrender upon the first Summons, Captain? You must
expect some Fateague in Love, as well as War, the little disquiet of Hopes and
Fears, do but enhan^^ the Value of a Mistress when gained; Soldiers and Knight
Erra^^ (...) Court Danger and Despise an Enterprise that had no Difficulty
(...).


Bell. Ay, Madam, if I had but the Hopes of a Carnival (...) this Lent, 'twould
be a sufficient Recompense, but Exp^^lation and Uncertainty, is the worst Food
in the World for a Fellow of my Constitution.


Coll. Come, Madam, be Generous, you cannot have an Honester Fellow, I Will say
that for him.


Bell. Look ye there, Madam, he will Vouch for me, if you don't think my own Word
sufficient.


Em. I shall trust no Bodies Judgment but my own, and that tells me, you are
too much a Libertine for a Husband; why you have not the least Resemblence of a
Lover.


Bell. No Resemblance! Why I am a perfect Skeleton, do but see how pale and wan
I look! My Tailor shall Swear I am fallen away six Inches in the Wast, since
this Day seven Night, and if these be no Signs of being in Love, the Devil's
in it.


Om. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Em. Very violent Symptoms truly. -- Have you any more of them, Sir.


Bell. A Thousand; do but feel here the Palpation of my Heart, the Irregularity
of my Pulse, the Immotion of my Brain. -- In short, my whole Frame's
disordered, and without immediate Help, I Am a Dead Man. -- I Am quite out of
Breath, I hope she will not put me to the expense of any more lies, for certainly
I have told enough to deserve any one Woman in Christendom. [Aside.]


Em. Poor Gentleman; Well, if your Distemper continues, I Will consult my Pillow
for a Remedy.


Bell. Take me with you to that Study, Madam, the sight of me there, will very
much improve your Understanding. [Embracing her.]


Coll. Come, I hope to see thee Blessed as I am. -- And now my Fairest, my whole
Study shall be to make you Happy. [To Clarinda.]


Bell. Well, Madam, you had as good give me my Answer.


Em. Not till I see the event of your Plot upon my Uncle.

(Ex.)
Top. Come, come, she is thine Boy.

For tho'-at first the Sex o're-shoot, deny.
Press 'em but home, and they will all comply.

SCENE Carefull's House.
Careful Solves. Caref. Mercy upon me! What shall I do? -- Well you are right
enough served, old Boy -- Eh -- Pox of thy old doting Head [beats his Head.]
Thou must Marry for Revenge, must thou -- I am revenged with a Witness --


[Enter Bellmein.] Bell. Sir, your Servant, I come Sir, to do you a piece of
Service, if it be not too late; I heard just now, that one Toper had lodged a
Woman, under pretense of a Cousin, in your House.


Caref. Oh Heaven! I Am become the Town-talk already -- Well Sir, and what then?


Bell. She Is a common Strumpit, Sir.


Caref How Sir! Have a care what you say.


Bell. I Will prove it Sir, she is of known Practice, the Clothes she wears are
but her Quarters Sins -- She has no Lining but what she first offends for.


Caref. Oh! I sweat, I sweat.


Bell. Sir, she has known Men of all Nations, and lain in by two Parts of the
Map, Africa and America.


Caref. Oh! oh! oh! oh!


Bell. What ail you Sir, Are you not well?


Caref. Oh undone! undone! I am married Sir


Bell. Nay then, Heaven help you -- Why would you trust Toper, the debauchest
Fellow in Town; she was once his Mistress; Money falling short, I suppose, he
has topt her upon you, and is (...) be maintained out of your Bags.


Caref. Oh! I have settled all I have in the World upon her, that damned Rascal.
Oh that I could see him stretched upon a Rack now, I Would give a thousand Pound
for every Stretch that should enlarge the Rogue through all his Joints; that
should but show him Hell, and then recall his fleeting Soul, and give him
strength to endure his Torment often. I Would have him as long a dying as a chopped
Eel.

[Enter two Footmen bearing in a Frame of a Picture, with a Curtain before it.]
What have we here?


Foot. My Lady has sent your Wife a Present Sir.


Caref. Who is your Lady?


Foot. My Lady Manlove.


Caref. Pray what is it?


Foot. A Picture for her Bedchamber, Sir.


Caref. For her Bedchamber? There are but one sort of Pictures will please my
Wife there -- Pray draw back the Curtain.


Foot. My Lady charged that none should see it but your Wife, Sir.


Caref. Say you so Sir; but I will see it. [Draws the Curtain, and Toper comes
out of the Frame.] Hell! and Damnation! Are you there, Bawd, Pander, Sirrah,
I Will cut your Ears off.

[Draws, Bellmein hold him.]
Bell. Hold Sir, I must prevent your running into sarther Mischief; if you kill
him the Law pursues you.


Caref. The Law, who would scruple Hanging to be revenged on such a Dog --
Sirrah, you are a Villain --


Top. Sir, you are rude, and would be beaten; cannot a Man come in private, on
Business to your Wife, but you must be inquisitive --


[Enter Mrs. Plotwell.] Caref. Why this is beyond Example; Why do you hold me
Sir? Z'death, I shall be Cuckolded before my face!


Top. Ho! Are you come? I thought your Husband, to keep you chaste, had set a
Guard of Eunuchs over you, or shut you up in a Room, where no Male Beast is
pictured, lest the sight of ought that could beget, should stir Desires, for I
find he is as Jealous already as an Italian.


M. Plot. I wonder Sir, who licensed you to pry, or spy out my Friends that
come to me in private; it would be more to your Reputation to trust to my
Management, than to be peeping; but it shows your unbred Curiosity, which I
shall correct.


Caref. Zounds! This is beyond the Suffering of a Saint; let me go, and I Will
slit her Nose -- Thou Woman double stamped.


M. Plot. You Will dare to break up Letters shortly, and examine my Tailor when
he brings home my Gown, lest there be a Man in it. I Will have you to know Sir,
I Will have whom I please, and when I please, and in what Disguise Iplease, and
not have your sore Eyes so saucy to peep, as if by Prevention, you meant to
kill a Basilisk.


Caref. Mercy on me! I s^all lose my Understanderstanding.


M. Plot. Cousin Topez, I Will setch you the Hundred Pound immediately.

[Exit.]
Caref. A hundred Pound! Oh, oh, oh.


Bell. I vow Sir, I am very much concerned at your Misfortune, if I was in your
place, I Would take my Daughter home; the Colonel is a Man of Honor, and will at
least secure you from such Affronts as these.


Caref. Ah poor Girl! But I have not a Farthing to give her -- This (...) Woman
has got all.


Bell. Suppose Sir, I could contrive a way to null your Marriage, Would you
forgive your Daughter?


Caref, With all my Soul.


Top. What would you give for such a Project, Ha?


Caref. As much as I Would give to see you hanged -- Which is all I am worth --


Top. Ha, ha, ha, Well, you would forgive me too, would you not?


Caref. Ay, though thou had murdered my Father, and debauched my Mother.


Top. Say you so Sir -- Well, I will be with you in an instant.

(Exit.)
Caref. But which way will you do it, Sir?


Bell. Why you have not Consummated yet, have you?


Caref. No, thank Heaven.


Bell. Well, then take you no Care; you will give your Daughter the same Fortune
you designed for the Fop Knight?


Caref. Ay, that I will, and 500 l. more.


Bell. Come in Lovers, the Scene's changed.

[Enter Coll. Cla. Em. and Toper.]
Coll. Your Blessing, Sir.

[Kneels.]
Cla. And with it, your Pardon.


Caref. You have it, provided I get unmarried again.


Bell. We'll now call for your Lady; Oh, here she comes.

[ Enter Mrs. Plot.]
Caref. Zounds, I Tremble at the Sight of her.


Mrs. Plot. You shall not need Sir, for my Fury is over: I wish you Joy, Madam,
and Sir I here resign you up your Settlement again.

[Gives him Papers.]
Caref. How Is this? Ha, pray unfold this Mystery.


Top. Why, Sir, this is Mrs. Pl^twell, your Neighbor, who only put on this
Disguise to be Serviceable to your Daughter -- This honest Gentleman here, was
the Parson that Coupled you.


Bell Now Sir. I think, I have kept my Word with y^^.


Caref. Very well.


Mrs. Plot. Why, truly Sir, being ^^th to (...) this (...) thrown (...) h^d the
Pro^p^ct ^f s^^h a Worthy (...) Coll^n^l (...) to (...) you (...) your Reason,
and I don't (...) own I have done you a piece of Service, in for^ing yo^ (...)
Family, and in his (...) received (...).


Coll. It Is now Madam, my (...) my (...) for this (...) p^ay, which way I (...)
be Grate^ul.


Mrs. Plot. If I (...) done (...) R^wards it self; and if Mr. (...) be
over-paid.


Caref. With all my Heart. I (...) Frolic was a pretty Frolic -- Now it is
over.

[ Enter Sir Will. Mode.]
Sir Will. I heard you was Married, Mr. Careful, I wish you Joy.


Caref. You are mistaken, Sir William, it is my Daughter that is Married.


Sir Will. Ha, the Colonel Married to my Misiress. [Aside.]


Cla. Sir William, I desire all Quar^els between you and I may be Canceled.


Coll. Pray include me in that Treaty too, Sir William.


Caref. Here has been strange juggling, Sir William, I have been Tricked out of
my Consent, I hope you will Pardon me too.


Sir Will. I*m in such Confusion, that I know not what to say, but I must show
(...) my Soul's above an Affront, and that nothing can disorder the Serenity of
my Temper. [Aside.] Ay, we are all Friends, Gentlemen, and I forgive the Lady
too, for she has done more honestly by me than most Women would, she has
Married the Man she liked, though it is the Fashion to take the Rich Husband they
don't like, and make a Friend of the Man they do.


Om. Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Will. One thing I desire you would make clear to me, Madam, which is, Why did
you give me Encouragment by your Woman?


Cla. I give you Encouragment by my Woman? What do you mean?


Maid. I beg your (...). Madam, his Gold prevailed upon me, and I thought what
I s^^d would signify nothing, I hope you will forgive me.


Cla. Never: Our of my Doors, I suppose through your managment, Ogle was so
Familiar with me too. -- Out of my Sight.

[Exit. Maid.
Coll. Indeed, my Dear, I cannot Interceed in her behalf, since through her means
my first Suspicion came, that made us both uneasy; but as to Ogle, I
sufficiently Revenged your Quarrel, for I Will engage he never sets up for a Beau
again.


Sir Will. Confound your whole Sex, you're all not worth a Gentleman's Anger;
I Will to my Lodgings, and send for the Music, and think no more of you nor
Matrimony; if I do, I Will give 'em leave to ram me into a Hautboy and blow me
out at the Holes; Impair my vigor.

[Exit.]
Om. Ha, ha, ha.


Bell. Well, Madam, What say you? Have you a mind to see me swing to Elysium in
my Garters, and hear me sung about in a Ballad to a doleful new Tune, called,
The Gentleman's Farewell to his unkind Lady -- Or will you take Pity on me?


Em. Well, Sir, to prevent such sad Disasters, I don't care if I give you my
Hand, and as you deserve, my Heart shall follow.


Bell. Ay, give me but the Body, and I Will warrant you I Will get the rest.


Caref. Hey day! What a Wedding chopped up there too! Well, I never shall believe
common Report again, That all Women are Jacobites, since I find them so ready
to Reward the Soldiers Service to the Nation with their Persons and Fortunes.


Em. I wish every Brave Man was Rewarded according to his Merit, I Am certain
Captain Bellmein deserves more than I can give him.


Bell. Don't Compliment your Husband, Madam, you don't know half my Deserts yet.


Caref. Brave Boys, brave Boys.

[Enter Servant.]
Serve. Sir here is the Music without, come to Congratulate your Marriage.


Caref. Bid 'em come in, we'll have a Dance.

[here's a Dance.]
Top. Well, Gentlemen, I wish you Joy if there can be any such thing in a Wife;
but for my part, it shall always be my Maxim not to part with my Liberty, till
I cannot help it; What Bird would be confined to a Cage, when it can skip from
Tree to Tree? Colonel, I Will come and take a Bottle with you by and by.

[Exit.]
Cla. Madam, you deserve our best Thanks for this exemplary piece of Justice,
and be assured, you have laid an eternal Obligation on me.


Mrs. Plot. I am pleased that I have done you Service, and henceforth shall
Devote my self to Virtue, and I hope Heaven will Pardon the Follies of my past
Life.


Coll. Blessed in my Love, I Envy no Man's Fate,
Content alone, is the true happy State.

Mrs. Plot. Virtue thou shining Jewel of my Sex -- Thou precious Thing that
none knows how to Value as they ought, while they Enjoy it, but like
Spend-thrift Heirs, when they have wasted all their Store, would give the World
they could retrieve their lost Estate: Therefore beware, you happy Maids, how
you listen to the deluding Tongues of Men, it is only they have Power to betray
you.

Oh happy she, that can securely say
Folly be gone, I have no mind to Play,
My Fame is Clear, I have not Sinned to Day.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE
By the Author.
YOU see, Gallants, 't has been our Poets Care
To show what Beaux in their Perfection are,
By Nature Cowards, foo^ish, usele^s fools,
Made Men by Tay^ors, and by Women, Fools:
A F^ckle, False, a Singing, Dancing Crew,
Nay now we hear they have Smiling Masters too;
Just now a Frenchman in the Dressing Room,
From Teaching of a Beau to Smile, was come,
He showed five G^i^ea^. -- War'nt he rarely paid,
Thus all the World by Smiles are once betrayed;
The States Man Smiles on them he would Undo,
The Courtier's Smi^es are very seldom True,
The Lovers Smiles too many do believe,
And Women Smile on them they would Deceive;
When Tradesmen Smile, they safely Cheat with Ease,
And Smiling Lawyers never fail of Fees. --
The Doctor's Look the Patient's Pain beguiles,
The Sick Man lives. if the Physician Smiles:
Thus Smiles with Interest hand in hand do go,
He surest Strikes, that Smiling gives the Blow;
Poets, with us, this Proverb do Defy,
We live by Smiles, for if you Frown we die.
To Please you then shall be our chief Endeavor,
And all we ask, is but your Smiles for Ever.
[Going.] Hold -- I forget, The Author bid me say,
She humbly begs Protection for her Play:
It Is Yours -- She Dedicates, it to you all,
And sure you're too Generous, to let it fall;
She hopes the Ladies will her Cause Maintain,
Since Virtue here has been her only Aim.
The Beaux, she thinks, will not fail to do her Right,
Since here they are taught with safety how to Fight.
She Is sure of Favor from the Men of War,
A Soldier is her Darling Character;
To fear their M^rm^rs then would be absurd,
They only Mutiny when not Preferred:
But ^et, I see, she does your Fury dread,
And like a Prisoner, stands with fear half Dead,
While you are Judges, do her Sentence give,
(...) you're not pleat'd, she says she cannot live.
Let my Petition then for once prevail,
And let your generous Claps her Pardon Seal.

