Love at a Venture. A COMEDY. As it is ACTED By his Grace, the Duke of
Grafton's Servants, AT THE NEW THEATER IN BATH.

Written by the Author of the Gamester.

LONDON: Printed for John Chantry, at the Sign of Lincolon's -Inn-Square, at
Lincolons-Inn-Back-Gate, 1706. Price 1 s. 6 d.

To his Grace, Henry Duke of Beaufort, Marquess and Earl of Worcester, Baron
Herbert of Gower, Rawland, Chepstow, etc.
May it please your Grace,
IT has been a general, and allowed Custom, in all Ages, for Poets, to lay
their Works at some Great Man's Feet, and always to choose such as are eminently
Conspicuous for their Virtues. This made Horace single out Mecenas, and Terence
court the Protection of Scipio and Lelius; which encourages me, in humble
Imitation of those Great Men, to beg your Grace's Pratronage for the following
Scenes. It would be a kind of Poetical Sacrilege to offer them else where,
since it would rob your Grace of the Homage, to which your Quality, Sense, and
good Nature, your Indulgence to Poetry, and your Judgment as well as Love for
Music, give you an indisputable Title. Music is the Soul of Poesy, and
Numbers sound most sweet, when graced with soft harmonious Strains.

I am the more forward, to pay this just Debt, My Lord, because without the
help of Fiction, consequently without the help of Flattery, I have a large
Field for a Panegyric; which, however, I shall prudently decline, for fear of
degrading your Virtues through my Inability and Meanness of Expression. Yet I
cannot forbear mentioning the Excellency of your Grace's Temper, your Goodness
and Affability, and the Regard you have for that generous Custom, which
formerly distinguished the English Nation, from all the rest of the World, viz.
Hospitality: which makes your Grace admired, and beloved to a degree, next
Adoration, by all, who are so happy as to approach you.

Your Grace, is a true Pattern of Nobility: The prudent Management of your
Affairs; your Voluntary Retreat from Noise and Vice, show you have a right
Conception of the Joys of Life, as Cowley has described them. To favor your
Retirement, Nature seems to have taken peculiar Care to indulge your Grace's
Solitude, with all her choice Productions: For your Gardens exceed all that
Poets feign.

That your Grace, may long enjoy those Blessings in perfect Health, and
unmolested Peace, together with your Beauteous Lady; and that your Connubial
Joys may produce a perfect Copy of their Parents, which may adorn the Age to
come, with the same Singularity of Goodness, as your Grace does the present;
are, My Lord, the sincere Wishes of,

Your Graces, most Obedient, most Devoted, Humble Servant, Susanna Carroll.

PROLOGUE.
LEast any here should blame our Author's toil,
For stroling with her Boat a Hundred Mile.
By me to such, She does this Reason give,
Seeing how many Men by Ventures live.
She straight embarked, and hoisted Sail to try,
What pure good Nature in these Bottoms lie.
Beside, she hoped, she might divert you too,
By adding to your Pleasures something new.
The Virtue of these Baths had never been known,
If over these Hills, no Man had ventured down.
Here Doctors Venturing, come in hopes of Fees,
And Patients Venture, on their Skill for Ease,
For Wealth, the Merchant Ventures on the Seas.
The Lawyer Ventures upon any Cause,
And Venturing Client's beggered by the Laws.
The Lover Ventures, to Address the Fair,
With broken Speeches, and dejected Air,
She runs a Venture, who relieves his care.
The Gamester Ventures, to improve his Store,
And having lost, he Ventures on for more.
The London Punk, in Garret shut all Day,
At Night, with last half Crown she Ventures to the Play.
The Amorous Cully, meeting with the Miss,
Ventures at Water Gruel for a Kiss.
Since every Man, Adventures in his way,
Hither our Author ventured with her Play.
And hopes her Profits will her Charge defray,
If that bright Circle Ventures to adorn her Day.
EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Miss Jacobella Power. IN spite of dull insipid Rules, I Am come,
To learn what Fate attends my Virgin Bloom.
Strange things I Have heard this Night, that makes me fear,
Least I should find such Entertainment here.
You Men are grown so witty in Deceit,
That We, poor Girls, are often ruined by it.
It Is pity -- but I hope to cross this Play,
And be revenged on you some other way.
Well -- but consider, We are tender Things,
That Innocence, and sprightly Beauty brings.
Soft Accents, broken Words, and yielding Air,
Are all the Weapons, that attend the Fair.
And can you long resist, the sweet Temptation,
Give us at least a Bill of Reformation.
That the succeeding Age may say of you,
You dare be Civil, though you cannot be true.
But if at last no Charms have power to win-ye,
You're past Repentance -- or the Devil's in-ye.
(runs off.) Dramatis Personae.
Belair, -- A Gentleman just come from Travel; an Airy Spark. Sir William
Freelove, -- Friend to Belair, in Love with Beliza. Sir Thomas Belair, --
Father to Belair, Sir Paul Cautious -- A Whimsical, Desponding, Old Fellow. Ned
Freelove, -- Younger Brother to Sir William. Wou'dbe, -- A Silly, Projecting
Coxcomb. Positive, -- Father to Camilla. Robin, -- Servant to Belair.
WOMEN.
Lady Coutious, -- Wife to Sir Paul, and Sister to Sir William. Beliza, --
Camilla, -- Cousin to Beliza, a great Fortune. Patch, -- Maid to Beliza. Flora.
-- Maid to Camilla.
LOVE at a VENTURE.
ACT. I.
Sir Paul Cautious's House. Sir William Freelove's Apartment.
Enter Bellair and Robin, meeting Sir William. Bell. OH! Sir William, I am so
transported, I cannot speak in the common strain of Mankind.


Sir Will. And prethy, Bellair, What occasions this Transport?


Bell. Had thou been my professed Enemy all thy Life, and done me as much
mischief as the Turk in Hungary, or the French in Flanders; if thou wilt but help
me now, thou would make amends for all -- such a Creature! -- such an Angel!


Sir Will. What Visions! Aparitions?


Bell. Could I but hope to see her once more, I Would change the happiest half of
my Life for that one moment.


Sir Will. If you please to descend from your high flown Raptures, and walk
hand in hand with my Understanding.


Bell. You Will lead me to her. (hastily.)


Sir Will. Ha, ha, ha, what, before I know where she is -- you would be landed
at your Port before you have taken Shipping, or told the place you design for.


Bell. Pho; you know all my Designs.


Robin, When a Woman's concerned (aside.)


Sir Will. Are Extravagant -- you have more Intreagues upon your Hands, than a
handsome young Poet on the success of his first Play -- like a Dog in a Herd,
you run at all, and catch none, because you run with such ungoverned Heat, you
spring the Quarry before you can draw your Net.


Bell. But if I miss Sitting, I commonly hit 'em Flying -- but this is nothing
to the purpose; the Lady, Man, the Lady --.


Sir Will. Ay, the Lady; what of her?


Bell. Which I saw last Night -- Oh, such a Creature!


Sir Will. At what Window?


Bell. Such a Charming Air. --


Sir Will. What House was it at?


Bell. As much Youth as would serve to recover half the decayed Faces in the
Town.


Sir Will. What Street?


Bell. Wanton as a Nun, yet looked demure as a Quaker --


Sir Will. Z'death, where, where, is this rare Creature to be seen?


Bell. Then her Features, Sir William! Oh, such Features; she is the most
perfect Piece in the World -- her shape clean and easy -- a profuse quantity of
dark brown Hair -- and such a Complexion, as the Gods form when they design a
Miracle of Beauty.


Sir Will. Nay, since you will have your own way, I Will strike in with you -- a
charming high Forehead.


Bell. Ay, and such a Mouth --


Sir Will. Sparkling Black Eyes --


Bell. And such a Cast --


Sir Will. Such Dimples in her Cheeks --


Bell. Ay, ay, Rapture, Rapture.


Sir Will. Ah, he is got above the Clouds already -- when you have recovered
your Senses, Bellair, you may be fit for Conversation; I have a little business
to dispatch -- and must beg your Pardon. --


Bell. Thou will not leave me.


Sir Will. Why, what Service can I do you?


Bell. You must assist me in the Management of this Affair.


Sir Will. What Affair? Who is she? Where did you see her?


Bell. Why, when I left you last Night, I took a Boat resolving to go up the
River for a little Air, when the luckiest occasion presented to make me the
happiest Man living.


Rob. I have known a hundred of these lucky Occasions; in a Months time the
most unlucky Occasions, that ever Man had. (aside.)


Sir Will. What was it?


Bell. A Lady designing to Land at White Hall Stairs, stepping short from the
Boat, fell into the Water, I jumpt in after her, caught her in my Arms, and
brought her safe a-shoar.


Rob. Who could have believed he should be burnt in the middle of the Thames
now.


Sir Will. What Is her Name?


Bell. I know not, she inquired mine, and where I lived; gave me a thousand
Thanks, and promised I should hear from her.


Sir Will. Well, and what can I do for you?


Bell. I Will tell you, I must have Lodgings in this House, for here I directed
her; told her my Name was Constant, though, faith, Bellair was at my Tongues end;
but you know my Reasons for concealing my Name, least my Father hear I Am in
England, before I Would have him, and force me to marry the Woman he commanded me
Home for, which, for ought I know, may be Ugly, Old, Ill-natured, Foolish,
Conceited, Vain, and so forth -- at least, I shall think her such, because of
his choosing -- I like no Caterer in Love's Market --


Sir Will. You shall have these Lodgings to oblige you, good Mr. Constant --
but what have you done with the other Lady you told me of yesterday; you was
then dying for her?


Bell. Faith, I like her still -- but the other, the other, is a perfect Venus --


Rob. Pray, Sir, what is your Name to her? I shall certainly forget all these
Names --


Bell. Colonel Revel, you Sot.


Rob. Just come from where, Sir?


Bell. From Portugal, Blockhead.


Rob. And -- are you an -- Officer too in the other Place with your new Amor;
Co, co, co, con, pray, Sir, do me the favor to tell me your Name to this
Incognita once more?


Bell. Constant, Coxcomb.


Rob. And what are you, Sir, pray, what are you?


Bell. An Oxfordshire Gentleman; remember that, Sirrah, come up to Town about a
Lawsuit.


Rob. Yes, Sir -- Colonel Revell just come from Portugal -- Mr. Constant, an
Oxfordshire Gentleman, come up about a Lawsuit -- Very well, I have it now,
Sir, I warrant you.


Sir Will. Well, but do you think to manage both these Intreagues with Secrecy.


Bell. I do; and in order to it, I Will keep my own Lodgings, that are known to
the other, and these for my Incognita, and I Will engage to play my part with
both.


Sir Will. To what purpose?


Bell. Why, since my old Dad will have me Marry, I would willingly choose for my
self; now, you must know, I design to take my swing of Love and Liberty -- if,
in the chase, I chance to meet one that can fix me, her I Will Marry; till when
I Will, like the Be, kiss every Plant, and gather sweatness from every Flower --
Youth is the Harvest of our Lives, Sir William.


Sir Will. Well, in my Conscience, Travel has given thee a large Assurance.


Enter a Servant. Ser. Sir, here is Mr. Wou'dbe to wait on you.


Bell. Who Is he?


Sir Will. The Projecting Coxcomb, I told you of Yesterday.


Bell. What, he that Mimicks thee in his Clothes?


Sir Will. The same -- now, for hard Words, and soft Sense; bring him up.

(exit. Servant.)
Bell. I Will not stay -- I expect a Message from my the other Mistress at my
Lodgings; I Will send a Nightgown, and a suit of Cloths hither; and Robin shall
wait to call me, if my fair Unknown sends -- Oh the Pleasure of Intreague; it
finds Employment for every Sense, sharpens the Wit, and gives a life to all our
Faculties.

When pal'd with one, another still supplies,
Thus different Women gives us different Joys.
Beauty in one; in the other Wit we find;
In this a Shape, in that a spacious Mind;
But change, dear change, thou Life of human kind.
(exit.)
Enter Wou'dbe. Would. Dear, Sir William, my Stars are superabundantly
propitious, in administering the seraphick Felicity of finding you alone.


Sir Will. Oh, Mr. Wou'dbe -- spare me, I beseech you --


Would. My Soul's inhabited; or, rather Canonized, with an Alacrity to see you.


Sir Will. I know not how his Soul's inhabited; but his Head might pass for a
Colony, in Greenland, it is so thinly Peopled. (aside.)


Enter Ned, Free-Love. Ned. Brother, good Morrow; Mr. Wou'dbe, yours.


Wou'db. Sir, I am most obsequiously your Servant.


Ned. What Gentleman was that I saw go out just now?


Sir Will. A Friend of mine, who, for some reasons, I have promised this
Appartment to; I hope Sir Paul will not be alarmed; I think it is best not to let
him know it, if he does not find it out.


Ned. Much the best, for he will ask so many impertinent Questions about him, and
be in such a fright; he will call in half the Parish to watch with him -- Who is
the Gentleman?


Sir Will. If you remember, I told you, when I was in Spain, a Gentleman
rescued me from the hands of Ruffians, when I was set upon in the Night; this
is he, and ever since we have held a strickt Friendship -- Perhaps he may have
killed his Man, I know not; he desires privacy -- and I am bound, in honor, to
give it.


Ned. Doubtless -- What Is his Name?


Sir Will. Constant.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, the Tailor has brought home your Clothes.


Sir Will. Bring him in.


Would. But, Sir William, pray, how do you like my Way of greeting -- I never
want Words, you see -- I hate those dull Rogues, that have no better
Expressions at meeting their Friends than, dear Jack, how is it? [Enter Tailor,
and Sir William dresses] Mere Fustin -- ha! What do I see? Another Suit -- and,
upon my veracity, a Charming one -- I must put down the Triming exactly, I
shall obliterate half else. [Takes out a Book and Writes.


Ned. Our English Tongue is much obliged to you, Mr. Wou'dbe.


Sir Will. Is it not too short, Mr. Measure? (To the Tailor.)


Tay. Not at all, Sir.


Would. The Suit my Tailor is making, is the very same Color; I Will send, and
have it Trimmed exactly like that. (aside.)


Sir Will. How do you like my fancy in this Suit, Mr. Wou'dbe?


Would. Sir William, I reverence the sublimity of your Fancy -- If mine be not
done by Play-time, I Will break my Tayler's Head, and never pay the Bill. (aside.)


Ned. But what new Discoveries have you made lately, Mr. Wou'dbe? Never a
Project, ha!


Would. Yes, Sir, I am going to erect an Office for Poetry.


Ned. How! An Office for Poetry?


Would. Ay, Sir, where all Poets may have free access, paying such a moiety of
their Profits, and be furnished with all sorts of Refined Words adapted to
their several Characters.


Sir Will. The Poets will be very much obliged to you truly, Sir.


Would. I think so -- hark ye, I Am upon another Project, which you will not guess
for a Wager?


Sir Will. No, really, Mr. Wou'dbe; it is not in my shallow Capacity, to fathom
the profundity of your Wit.


Would. Oh, Sir William, such accumulated Kindness will Bankrupt my poor
Acknowledgments -- profundity of your Wit -- spoke like a Gentleman, and a
Scholar -- thou art expensively obliging, therefore I will Communicate -- though
it is not grown to a full Maturity, yet -- it is this -- for the good of the
Public, I am contriving how to save the charges of Hackney-Coaches; the
Rascals are so saucy, especially to Ladies, there is no enduring them; I resolve
to destroy their Constitution.


Ned. As how, prithee?


Sir Will. They are the most necessary things in the World; a Hackney-Coach
carries us from one end of the Town to the other in a trice.


Would. Ay, Sir William -- but my Project carries 'em quicker -- and without
go, ng out of their Houses.


Ned. That Is a Stratagem, indeed, beyond my Comprehension.


Sir Will. If you can do that, Mr. Wou'dbe, you need not fear a Patent; the
Ladies will be all of your side.


Would. They will have reason, Sir, for they may Dress, Patch, Paint, drink
Tea, or play at Piquet, all the while they are going to the Playhouse -- Is
not this an excellent Project?


Sir Will. Excellent, indeed; but, prithee, how is it?


Ned. Ay, ay, how is it, you must deal with the Devil certainly.


Would. No, without his help, I assure you, it is all my own -- this individual
Brain contrived it -- were I known at Court, I should be a great Man -- a most
magnificent Man.


Sir Will. Oh, this Project, Sir, will do your business.


Would. I know you are impatient for the Secret; you are my Friends, or I Would not
impart a matter of this Consequence.


Sir Will. I hope you don't doubt our secrecy?


Would. Not in the least -- to convince you, it is this, I Will make the Streets
to move.


Ned. Ha, ha, the Streets move! Prithee, how will thou do that?


Would. Oh, by Clock-Work, Sir.


Sir Will. By Clock-Work? What, make the solid Earth move by Clock-Work?


Would. Ay, Sir -- I affirm that is possible -- You mistake, the Earth is not
solid; read but Baker's Chronicle, and you will find a whole Field walked ten
mile in Queen Bess's days.


Ned. But not by Clock-Work, Mr VVou'dbe.


Would. Humph -- ha -- I cannot be positive in that, but -- if it can walk at
all -- why cannot it be made walk by Clock-work -- but in a Months time I shall
be able to answer that, and all other Objections -- For, you must know,
Yesterday I began my Study, in order to search out the Curiosity of every
Country, Language, Art and Science -- you shall hear how I have Cantoned out
the Day -- I rise about Five. my first hour is laid out upon Law -- it is fit a
Gentleman should understand the Laws of his Country, though I hate the confounded
Study, it is so crabbed -- At Six. I read a Lesson of Greek -- at Seven, one of
Hebrew -- Eight, is for Italian -- Nine, for Spanish -- Ten, for French --
Eleven Astronomy -- Twelve is proper for Geography, then the Sun Beams are
perpendicular --


Ned. Excellent, ha, ha, ha.


Would. At One I Dine -- then Repose an Hour, for Digestion -- at Three I Study
Physic -- that, if I Am Poisoned by the Vintners, I may not be killed by the
Doctors -- at Four Logic -- at Five Philosophy -- at Six Husbandry -- that
when my Father dies, my Steward, and Tenants, may't cheat me --


Sir Will. A Politic thought --


Would. Hawking, Hunting, Fishing, Fowling, at Seven -- Architecture at Eight
-- for to understand the Art of Building, is of mighty consequence toward
raising of a Man's Fortune, you know -- Nine for Poetry, in honor of the Nine
Muses -- because I love the Ladies Company toward Bedtime -- Thus, in a
Month, I hope to become Master of all these things; how like you my Rules,
Gentlemen, ha?


Ned. Oh, wonderfully, ha, ha.


Would. Well, Poetry is one of the noblest Parts of the Mathematics -- but we
have such Factions now on foot, that Music has put Poetry quite out of Tune --
but that Suit -- I must to my Tailor immediately -- (aside.


Ned. But, Mr. VVou'dbe, the Town say you are much in Beleiza's favor -- you
will not Rival my Brother, will you?


Would. Not I, upon my Soul -- but does the Town really say so?


Ned. Why should I tell you so else?


Would. Nay, the Elegance of my Fabric, has Titulated the Imagination of many
a fine Lady, I assure you.


Sir Will. Ha, ha, ha, the Fool believes you.


Would. Where do you Dine, Sir William?


Sir Will. With my Sister Cautious.


Would. If Beliza likes me -- I Am a happy Mortal; I Will make some advance, and
give her to understand I Am not inexorable (aside) I Will Rendezvouse you at the
Portal of her Apartment after Dinner; your most Obsequious --

(exit.
Ned. He took particular Notice of your Cloths, Brother; I Will venture a Guinea,
the next time he appears, he is Equipt to a Hair, if either Money or Credit be
in his Power; ha, ha, ha.


Sir Will. I believe that, but I Will give him enough on it if he is -- it is the
most Whimsical Coxcomb I ever saw --


Ned. Well, but how goes it between you and Beliza, Brother?


Sir Will. I begin to doubt a Rival there, but who, I cannot find out -- She is
grown indifferent of late, often abroad, and seldom in humor, when at home; if
there be a Favorite in reserve, let her take care to conceal him, for, Faith,
I have sucked in the Spaniard's Jealousy with their Air, and should breath a
Vain without scruple --


Ned. Well, if ever I be in Love -- of all Passions which agitate the mind of
Man -- grant I may never be infected with Jealousy.


Sir Will. Thou prayest against the only thing that gives Love a relish.

Love, like to Luscious Meat, will Surfeits breed,
And hurt the Stomach which they are Sent to feed.
Without a grain of Jealousy applied,
Your Appetite, your Health, and Life's destroyed.
(exit.
The Scene Changes to Bellair's Lodgings.
Bellair meeting Mrs. Patch. Bell. I foresee this Day, Mrs. Patch, will be a
Lucky-day -- the sight of thee --


Patch. Will not please you, I dare be positive, my Lady cannot see you to Day,
being obliged to go abroad.


Bell. Oh, propitious disingagement -- Now, if my Incognita does but send --
(aside.) I Will wait for her return, let it be never so late --


Pat. Not to day, sweet Sir -- your love runs on Wheels -- Pray, more softly,
Sir.


Bell. This Girl's very Pretty, I never minded her so much before -- Hark ye,
Child, I will come, if I miss thy Lady, thou shall keep me Company.


Pat. You are merry, Sir.


Bell. I must be so, when I Am near any thing -- belonging to Beliza -- Methinks
I entertain her, whilst thou art near me.


Pat. I cannot tell how you mean it, Sir -- but I assure you, as fine Gentlemen
as your self, have paid their Devotions to me, before now --


Bell. Why not? he must be Insensible, that so much Beauty cannot warm. (Kisses
her.)


Enter Robin. Rob. Why, the Devil's in my Master -- agad, I shall starve with
him in Love's Kitchen, for he Engrosses all sorts of Flesh, I find. (aside.)


Pat. Not so close, I beseech you, Sir. (pushing him away.)


Bell. I protest my Heart feels a thousand Emotions for thee --


Pat. Pray stop your Emotions, Sir -- and don't load me with your Heart, for I
have so many already I don't know where to put 'em, without choking one
another.


Rob. She need never fear that, he will not stay so long --


Bell. I protest it is a pleasure to look on thee --


Rob. He does not love to be idle, I Will say that for him; but I bring him
Employment, and must disturb him -- Sir.


Pat. I am not surpised at that -- for I take pleasure to look on my self, and
generally do it a thousand times a day.


Rob. Sir, -- Sir, -- Sir.


Bell. Ha! has she sent? (aside to Robin.)


Rob. The Maid stays for you, Sir.


Bell. Oh! Transport -- run -- fly, let every thing be ready for my change of
Dress, I Will be there in an Instant -- I wish this Girl were gone.


Rob. So, the Tide's turned already -- Why, what a hurrying Life's this I lead

(Exit.)
Pat. Well, what more fine things, Sir.


Bell. Nay, I see you don't believe what I have said already -- and an, an --
pish pox -- how shall I get rid of her --


Pat. You are out of humor, Sir, I hope, I --


Bell. No, no, no, no, Child, I, I, I -- what the Devil shall I say -- this is
the most unlucky accident.


Pat. What is, Sir?


Bell. A good hint -- why, my Man tells me there is a Friend of mine wounded in
a Duel, and desires me to bring a Surgeon immediately -- so dear little Rogue,
excuse me, this kiss to thy Lady, and tell her Revel Lives not in her absence
-- if this don't do it, I shall go distracted, that is certain -- (aside.)


Pat. Nay, I have done my Message, so, your Servant.

(Exit.)
Bell. So, now for my dear unknown -- Let me see, what am I? -- ho, a Country
Gentleman -- I must restrain my humor -- a little quantity will be necessary
to adorn that Character -- besides, the Inventions new, and gives the Intreague
the greater Gusto --

To gain my Point, I Will every Art improve,
All Policy's allowed in War and Love.
(Exit.)
ACT II.
Beliza's Lodgings.
Beliza and Camilla. Beliz. AND you are really in Love with this Stranger,
Cousin?


Came. I fear so, Beliza.


Beliz. To what purpose?


Came. To no purpose at all, without thy help.


Beliz. You are assured of me -- but, prithee, in what can I help thee? You
neither know who he is, nor what he is -- he may, for ought you know, be a
Wretch unworthy of your Esteem.


Came. Impossible -- I tell thee, he is a Country Gentleman, which the Term
brought up to Town on Business.


Beliz. Then, how are you sure he is not married in the Country?


Came. Start no Objections, I beseech you -- I am sure he is not married -- he
did not look as if he was.


Beliz. Well, suppose he is what you would have him be, you know your Father has
disposed of you, and I Am afraid will not be prevailed upon to alter his Mind.


Came. Ay, there is the only Bar to all my wishes; why should our Parents impose
upon our Inclinations, in that one Choice which makes us ever Happy, or ever
Miserable?


Beliz. It Is an unjust Prerogative Parents have got, from whence I see no
deliverance without an Act of Parliament.


Came. If thou art my Friend, Beliza, I may chance to Cross my Father's Design,
without the help of the Senate.


Beliz. I confess I am a well-wisher to Disobedience in Love Affairs -- there is
my hand, instruct me how I may be serviceable.


Came. Thus! I have sent Flora to give him an Invitation hither --


Beliz. Hither! -- to my Lodgings; it is well I sent Colonel Revel word I should
not be at home. (aside.)


Came. Yes, I hope you will forgive the Liberty I have taken, I was not willing he
should know mine, till I have your Approbation of him.


Beliz. But how if my Lover, Sir William, should happen to come, who is grown a
perfect Spaniard since his Travels, and has of late been apprehensive of a
Rival, though from what cause I know not -- the Country Gentleman would be in
danger, I assure you.


Came. To prevent his being seen, I have ordered him to be brought in the
Back-way -- he is yet a stranger to every thing that concerns me -- he neither
knows my Name nor Family -- nor shall he, if you approve him not; therefore,
after I have thanked him for the Service he did me, I Will give him to understand
I have a Relation whose Judgment I rely on -- and from her Mouth he must
receive his hopes, then I Will call you in and retire.


Beliz. You have a very good Opinion of me, Cousin.


Came. I have so.


(Enter Flora.) Flo. He waits your pleasure, Madam.


Came. Bring him in -- Cousin, you will be at Hand.


Beliz. In the next Room.

(Exit Beliz.)
Enter Bellair gravely Dressed. Bell. This is an Honor so much above my Merit,
Madam -- that I receive it with Consusion, and shall be uneasy till you inform
me, how I may return this wondrous Favor -- I am caught by Venus, what Eyes
are there --


Came. Rather instruct me, Sir, how I may return the Obligations I have to you;
they are no common Ones -- you purchased my Life at the hazard of your own, and
it shall be the business of that Life you saved (if ever ought falls within my
Power) to serve you. Oh, my Heart. (aside.)


Bell. On that kind Promise will I build my hopes; nay, I will rely upon it --
and now, Madam, I must declare that it is in your Power to over-pay the Hazard
you have mentioned; the only Woman I could be content to take, for Better for
Worse, I ever saw; egad, I Am upon the very precipice of Matrimony, if she
consents (aside.)


Came. Gratitude obliges generous Souls -- then be assured, and ask -- pray
Heaven his Designs be Honorable -- that he asks the right. (aside.)


Bell. It Is done, faith, (aside.) your Heart -- I fear you will think I am too
bold in my desires -- but you commanded me to speak -- and I durst not tell you
a Lie -- your self would have discovered it, for your Beauteous Image is drawn
so lively in my Breast, that you are Mistress of every Thought, and every Wish
about it.


Came. My Soul tells him, through my Eyes, (I fear) that his request is granted,
(aside) I confess you have surpised me, Sir, and I know not well what to
Answer you; only this -- were I free to dispose of my Person, with my Heart,
your Services should not go unrewarded.


Bell. Ha! what say you, Madam! your words shake me like an Ague Fit -- you are
not -- (forbid it Heaven) Married?


Came. Not Married.


Bell. Nor vowed against it?


Came. Neither -- but I Have a Father to whom my Duty must submit, without his
leave I measure not a Foot of his Estate, though I Am his only Child.


Bell. Let him keep it then, if Love had any Power over your Soul -- or had I
Charms to Wound like you, this would be no Obstacle.


Came. You have too many, and I find my Heart but too inclining -- were it
possible, but my Duty --


Bell. Oh, extafy, I shall not contain my self (aside) it is, it shall be possible
-- give me to understand your Father, Madam, that I may apply my self to him;
if Avarice affects him, and Wealth be his only aim, I am Heir to an Estate,
perhaps, as large as he can wish.


Came. But, how are your sure your Father will consent; and why would you hazard
his Displeasure for a Stranger, Sir?


Bell. The Estate's entailed, he cannot hurt me there, and here I must be
happy, or not at all -- may I not know your Family?


Came. Yet, you must not.


Bell. Why should you deny me -- Is it not in my power to know -- Can I not
inquire when I go out, whose House this is?


Came. Without any benefit by it -- for these are a Friend's Lodgings, whose
Judgment I esteem, you shall consult her; if she approves it, perhaps, you may
know mine before Night -- Who Is there?

Enter Flora. Desire Beliza to Walk in --


Bell. Ha! Did she not name Beliza? I hope it is not that Beliza I know -- if
it should, I Am in a fine condition -- [Enter Beliza and Patch.] by ill Luck --
the very she, -- what the Devil shall I do? (aside.)


Came. Cousin, this is the Gentleman I Am so much obliged to -- Mr. Constant,
this is a Relation of mine.


Beliz. What do I see? Colonel Revell here --


Pat. Ay, it is even he.


Bell. There is no excuse to be made now -- thou never failing Power of
Impudence assist me. (aside.) I must Honor every thing that is Related to you,
Madam. (Salutes her.


Beliz. How grave he is this disguise -- picques me, methinks, though I had no
design upon him.


Pat. How sober he looks --


Came. This is the Friend I refer you to, Mr. Constant.


Pat. Constant! -- Yes, he is Constant with a Witness.


Camil. What she promises I Will confirm.

(Exit.)
Bell. I Am in a hopeful way, faith -- egad, I am so confounded, I know not how
to look -- but I Am resolved to carry it off, and persuade her I Am not the Man.
(aside.) Madam, I Am obliged to my Stars, however, though they conceal the Family,
and Name of her I adore, they g^^^ me an opportunity of knowing her second
self, you being made so by the strictest bonds of Friendship -- this is the
hardest task I ever went through, by Jupiter. (aside.)


Beliz. I don't wonder that you know me -- but I am surpised at your Impudence.


Bell. This is the first time I was ever accused of that by a fair Lady; Wherein
have I incurred your displeasure?


Beliz. Pray, Sir, do you act this part upon a Wager, or do you think I have
lost my Senses -- very pretty, truly --


Bell. A Wager -- Part -- and Senses -- What do you mean, Madam? -- Oh,
mischievous encounter. (aside.)


Beliz. Colonel Revel can inform Mr. Constant of my meaning.


Bell. Colonel Revell! who is he? -- a Pox of the Name. (aside.)


Pat. So, he don't know himself --


Beliz. You don't know such a Man, as Colonel Revell*


Bell. Not I, upon my word, Madam --


Beliz. Well, such an Assurance, I never saw, and do you think this will pass
upon me?


Bell. I hope so, (aside.) I protest, Madam, I cannot guess what you aim at --


Pat. Were I in your place, Madam, I Would have him tossed in a Blanket.


Bell. Well said, Mrs. Patch; egad, would I were well out of their hands.
(aside.)


Beliz. Look ye, Sir, your Declaration for my Cousin concerns me not; sor, from
the first, to me you appeared as indifferent as now -- But if you think to
impose upon my Understanding, you will draw my utmost Malice on your Head.


Bell. And I need no more -- for the malice of a Woman, exceeds the Devils;
(aside.) Your Rallery is very pleasant, Madam; but very different from what I
expected -- for, I confess, I am a Stranger to your meaning.


Beliz. Oh, you shift your Shape so often, you may easily forget -- an
excellent Contrivance, to take as many Names, as you make Mistress's.


Pat. Consult your Pocketbook, Sir; and you will find your Name was, Revell, two
hours ago --


Bell. This is a new way of Treating Strangers, Madam; do you call this,
telling me the Secrets of the Unknown Fair; this will make the prittiest Novel,
in the World -- (aside.)


Beliz. The Secrets of the Unknown Fair; yes, She shall know your Secrets, I Will
promise you, and who you are -- believe me, your Affairs are done with her; you
shall neither know her Name, nor Quality.


Bell. Recall that Sentence, Madam; Or, let me fall a Sacrifice, to your
supposed Resentments -- never to know my Lovely, Dear Incognita, is Death, with
all the additional Racks Barbarians e're invented, to separate Soul and Body. I
begin to grow perfect in my double Art, I find. (aside.)


Beliz. This is the most Barefaced Impostor I ever saw. (aside.) Really now,
in my opinion, Colonel, you act the same Person too long -- come, come, pull
off the Masque, and I Will forgive you, ha, ha.


Bell. That wheedle shall not take, I Am in, and must go through it, (aside) Mask,
Madam! by all the pangs of Love I feel for your Beauteous Friend, I would wear
no disguise to any thing that belongs to her --


Pat. Well, was I my Lady, I Would have that Tongue pulled out of your Head.


Bell. Pray, Madam, who is that pretty Enemy; is she Friend, or some Relation?


Pat. Do, do, seem Ignorant, poor Devil -- you don't know me; not long since,
you knew me for this Lady's Maid, and liked me well enough, to think me worth a
Compliment.


Beliz. Make Love to my Woman! Pray, Sir, what Name would you have taken to
her, ha, ha.


Bell. You are in a pleasant humor, Ladies; I hope I shall find the benefit of
it; to my knowledge, I never saw any of you, till this hour -- This is a
Masterpiece of Art, to face down two Women at once. (aside.)


Pat. Nay, if I had believed all he said to me, I should have Registered him
amongst my Lovers. That is not true, neither?


Bell. As the rest -- Poor, Gentlewoman, I pity thee; prithy get Advice,
before thy Frenzy increase too much.


Beliz. So, you will persuade us we are Mad, by and by -- and you don't bear a
Colonel's Commission, and have not been in Portugal with Charles the Third?


Bell. No, upon my honor, Madam -- My Name is, Constant, born in Oxfordshire,
and come up about a Suit in Chancery; and know this Colonel no more, than you
know me; if you please, I Will give you my Oath on it -- which I can do without
Perjury, that is my Comfort. (aside.)


Beliz. A pleasant quibble, ha, ha.


Pat. This Story has cost you some Pains --


Bell. I wish I could see this Gentleman which you take me for; can you believe
I could be so base to make Love to another, if once I had presumed to mention
it to you -- your Charms are full security against such Proceedings; I am
concerned, that Nature has made any resemblance between us; I shall hate my
self for being like him.


Beliz. Well, whether you will, or you will not be him, it is the same thing --
provided you will tell him, that I suffered his Addresses only for my Diversion,
and that I never had any Passion for him, but loath, detest and hate him?


Bell. Tell him -- where shall I find him?


Beliz. I have done, and desire you would know your way out.


Bell. I would not willingly disobey a Lady; but here, Madam, you must pardon
me, since my future good or ill depends on you; I cannot stir from hence till I
obtain your promise to assist my Suit, and give me hopes that I, at last, may
know my Beauteous Fair.


Beliz. Ha, ha, ha, all that I can say, Colonel, is, that you are very unlucky
in this Affair, not but you Counterfeit to a Miracle; (...) the Mischief is,
that I have all my Senses, can see Colonel Revel, hear Colonel Revel, and
understand Colonel Revel, too well to solicit his Cause, I assure you.


Pat. There Is your Answer, Sir, -- and if you please to follow me, I Will show
you a way out better known to you than that you came in by.


Bell. Pray, good Mrs. Civility, be not so hasty -- give me leave, at least, to
see your Cousin before I go, Madam.


Beliz. To what end, pray?


Bell. To convince you of your Error.


Beliz. That Is the hardest task that you ever undertook, Colonel, and not to be
effected; therefore, once more I tell you, you have seen your last of her, and
your absence would oblige me.


Bell. It Is very hard, Madam, that because nature has made me resemble another
Person, who may, for ought I know, be a Man of Honor too, though unhappily under
your Displeasure, I should have the ill Fortune to suffer for Nature's Fault.


Beliz. That would, indeed, be unjust -- but I shall not be prevailed upon to
believe Nature in the fault here; therefore, pray retire, the Scene is long
enough, it is time to change it; good Colonel, don't oblige one to treat you
below your Title.


Pat. Don't you understand my Lady, Sir.


Bell. Yes, yes, Madam, but too well; and if I must go without the satisfaction
I expected, let me implore this favor, tell her, I dye hers.

(Exit.)
Pat. And every bodies, I dare swear, in his turn.


Beliz. This Man, is the very Epitome of his Sex; the compleatest Jugler I ever
saw; I protest, his Assurance has put me quite out of Countenance.


Re-enter Camila. Came. Well, how do you like him, Cousin; is he not a Charming
Fellow?


Beliz. I think not.


Came. Pish! I know you do.


Bell. Indeed, I don't; and if you knew as much as I, you would think him as
ugly as I do.


Came. Ugly! Can any mortal think that Man ugly? But, prithy, what have you
discovered -- wou'nt you tell me?


Beliz. Yes, if you promise to make right use on it.


Came. What do you mean?


Beliz. That your pretended Lover is a Villain.


Came. How! Pray, Cousin, Explain your Self within the Rules of good Manners.


Beliz. He deserves it not.


Came. I don't understand you -- and the Introduction grows tedious -- of what
do you accuse Mr. Constant.


Bell. In the first place, his Name is not Constant, but Revel.


Came. How know you that?


Beliz. From his own Mouth.


Came. When?


Beliz. A Week ago.


Came. Where?


Beliz. Here in this House.


Came. In this House, how came he hither?


Beliz. Upon his Legs, I think.


Came. On what Business, pray?


Beliz. Much upon the same Errand -- Love?


Came. Love! To whom?


Beliz. To your Friend and Servant.


Came. Ha, ha, ha, now I find your Drift -- you like him your self, and this is
an Artifice to blast my good Opinion -- it is poorly done, Beliza.


Beliz. No, my Constitution is not so warm as yours -- remember you took Fire
in the middle of Water; I despise him.


Came. We never despise indifferent things -- I little expected this from a
Friend.


Beliz. If you would have the Friend continued, don't provoke me to return
suspicions, Cousin.


Came. Don't you provoke me, by traducing of the Man I love -- he has not been
in Town two days, and you would persuade me he has made Overtures of Love to you a
Week ago.


Beliz. If I don't prove this is Colonel Revel, lately come from Portugal, and
been in Town this Fortnight, and made me several Visits under pretense of
Courtship A-la-mode, I Am content to forfeit both Friendship and Estate.


Came. How shall it be proved? It Is sure impossible.


Beliz. Write to him, and tell him what I have Confirmed; desire him to come
hither to Justify himself, if he expects any farther Favors from you -- at the
same time I Will send for him by the Name of Revel, and appoint him here also, if
there appear two Men exactly the same, (as I am sure they are) then I Will own my
self in the Wrong, and ask your Pardon; if not, you shall mine.


Came. Agreed, I Will in and write to him this moment; pray, Heaven, there be two
Socia's.

(Exit.)
Enter Sir William. Sir Will. I am pleased.


Beliz. That Is more than I am, I assure you, Sir William.


Sir Will. To find you alone, I meant, Madam; I am not surpised at your being
out of Humor, for I have seldom found you in it of late, the reason of which
I Am yet to learn, not being Conscious of having given you any Cause, except the
truest Passion that ever possessed the Heart of Man be one.


Beliz. Sometimes, and in some Persons it is so; but from whence you derive
your suspicions, I cannot imagine.


Sir Will. From your excessive coldness -- for some days past, I have beheld
such a reserve in all your Carriage to me, very different from what it used to
be, and I begun to fear your Heart had entertained some new Amor.


Bell. I hope he has not discovered this Impostor, he could not meet him, sure.
(aside.) you have no reason to doubt my Sincerity, Sir William; I Am not Subject
to fall in Love, I may venture to say, you hold the greatest share in my Heart.


Sir Will. That Is kind -- but this thin airy Diet of Hope and Expectation,
Beliza, starve those which feed on it -- will you not admit me to the Banquet of
Possession -- when shall I receive from this hand the Confirmation of those
Lips. (kisses her Hand.)


Beliz. When I can bring my Heart to a Resolution, Sir William, of quitting all
these little innocent Pleasures, a single Life permits, you shall have timely
notice for a License.


Enter Patch. Pat. Madam, your Cousin Camilla desires one Word with you.


Beliz. Pardon my leaving you in my own Lodgins, Sir William, some Affairs of
my Cousins, who is lately come to Town, press me at present; I shall come to
Cards at Lady Cautious's in the Evening.

(Exit.)
Sir Will. I Will not fail being at home -- there is something more in this than I
can Fathom; I resolve to watch her narrowly, if I have a Rival, and scapes me,
I forgive him.

(Exit.)
ACT III.
Sir William's Lodgings.
Sir William meeting Lady Cautious. Sir Will. IN Tears, Sister? What Is the
matter?


Lady, What should be the matter, but my Husband? that doting, old,
dispounding Wretch, whose Fears, Mistrusts and Jealousies, is enough to
distract any Body, still doubting Providence, and fearing every Wind -- yet you
are so far from pitying my Condition, you add to my Misfortunes, by making my
Confinement stricter, under pretense of the Honor of our Family -- I hope I Am
of Age to know how far that concerns me.


Sir Will. Ay, Sister, but the Wife that is displeased with the Husband -- and
the Husband that does not please the Wife, are always in Danger -- she of
liking some body else -- and he of being a Cuckold -- now, while there is such
a probability, the Honor of our Family requires a Guard.


Lady, Why was I married then to that I cannot Love?


Sir Will. My Father knew his Reasons doubtless, Sister.


Lady, Yes, and I know 'em too -- Sir Paul took me without a Fortune, by which
yours is the greater, yet the consideration has no weight with you; it pleases
you to see your Sister Condemned to the idle Fancies, and whimsical Mistrusts,
of this impertinent Doatard; he is so apprehensive of Death, that he allows a
Surgeon a Hundred a Year perpetually to attend him, and would not set a step
without him for a Thousand -- nay, he lies in the same Chamber -- just now he
fancied himself called three times, which he takes for an Omen of his Death,
pray Heaven it prove so -- and has sent for Twenty People to watch by him.


Sir Will. Ridiculous folly -- but you must bear with it, Sister; he is Old --


Lady, That Is the worst Argument under the Sun, for a young Woman to bear with
(aside.) pray. Brother, what Gentleman is that which you have obliged with
these Lodgings?


Sir Will. Ha! has she seen him? -- Why do you ask?


Lady, Is it a Crime. to ask who is in my own House?


Sir Will. Yes, if they are not in your own Appartment -- it is not Modesty in
your Sex to inquire after ours -- now I foresee my Error too late, in letting
him have these Lodgings -- How came you to know there was a Man here?


Lady. I must not say, I have seen him -- (aside) my Woman brought me word,
there was a Stranger dresing himself, when I sent her this Morning, to ask if
you would not drink some Chocolate with me.


Sir Will. Then, you did not see him your self?


Lady. No.


Sir Will. I Am glad to hear that, for he is Libertine enough to engage her.


Lady. But suppose I had, where had been the Crime?


Sir Will. Nay, no Crime, Sister -- only I would not have you affronted;
therefore, pray take care, not to come near this Apartment, for he hates the
sight of Women.


Lady. That Is false, to my knowledge -- for he said the softest things to me,
that Love could form; (aside.) say, you so, Brother? an Unpolished Brute, I
hope, he is not to continue long here?


Sir Will. Only, for two or three Days --


Lady. Oh, my heart -- so short a stay. (aside.)


Sir Will. Ho, here he comes, retire Sister.


Lady. I must see him again -- though you prevent me now; if I don't break
through this Constraint, say, Woman wants contrivance.

(Exit.)
Enter Bellair and Robin. Rob. Why then, this proved, a confounded mistake,
Sir, but were it possible you could not know the House again?


Bell. How could I, when I was conveyed the back way into an Apartment, where I
never was before; the cuningest Man alive, might have been deceived, as well as
I -- but the gift of Impudence is a wonderful gift; ha! Sir William -- I did
not see thee.


Sir Will. I believe not, Love and Variety, clouds thy sight, but what is the
Disappointment, you speak of?


Bell. I am an unlucky Dog, that is all -- I fell into the Company of both my
Mistresses, at once.


Sir Will. This it is, to have more Intreagues, than one can manage, ha, ha,
ha; and how did you behave your self?


Bell. Faith en'cavalierement -- I stuck close to the Name of Constant, and my
Incognita -- for I like her best.


Rob. Till he sees some body he likes better. (aside.)


Bell. And Swore, I never saw the other, in my life, nor never heard of the Name
of, Revell -- but was as downright a Country Gentleman, and made Love as
gravely, as ever a Squire of them all.


Sir Will. And did the Imposition pass?


Bell. Not without Scruple -- but I Will undertake to make my self two distinct
persons, as clear as the Sun at Noonday, if thou wilt assist me.


Sir Will. How? for the Frolicks sake, I care not I if do --


Bell. Then, as I have occasion, you shall receive Instructions, I want a
Messenger in my Interest.


Sir Will. That I can procure you -- but to what purpose.


Bell. You shall know in time -- I shall want thy personal appearance too.


Sir Will. You shall want nothing, in my power -- but prithy, do you like
either of 'em well enough to Marry?


Bell. In my Conscience I think I could be content with the Noose, if my
Incognita's Family be answerable to her beauty --


Rob. Nay, if he grows honorably in Love, I may hope for some rest at last.
(aside.)


Sir Will. Why will ye not quit the other then?


Bell. The Other is Related, and a Friend -- if I deceive her not, she will
maliciously spoil my intreague; besides, it is a pretty Amusement, and the
design so Novel, that I must pursue it for the pleasure of Invention, and I
think it possible to persorm; we have seen two People so very like, that when
absent they could not be distinguished from one another.


Sir Will. But if the Faces wore Resemblance, the Voice Shape discovered it.


Bell. But a good Assurance solves all that.


Rob. Why, Sir, if the worst come to the worst -- that they will both have you
-- why en'e marry them both, keep one for your self, and the other to entertain
your Friends -- or, if you please, Sir, -- to do you a Service, I don't care if
I take one of 'em off your hands,


Sir Will. Then you will venture to rely upon your Master's choice, ha, ha, ha.


Rob. Ay, Sir, sooner than ever a Man in England; my Master, has tasted so many
of those Dishes -- that I dare must to his Palate.


Bell. You are witty, Rascal, ha! Who have we here, thy Mimick.


Enter Wou'dbe, dressed like Sir William, and Ned. Freelove. Would. Well, I have
surprised some Ladies, strangely, that stopped their Coach, and called out Sir
William, Sir William; and when I turned back, and they discovered their
Mistake, they blushed intollerably, ha, ha, ha. (aside to Ned.)


Ned. Nay, your Dress is exactly the same with his; the mistake was very easy.


Sir Will. Mr. VVou'dbe, your Servant.


Would. Surprising! another Suit!


Bell. Ha, ha, ha, what a Consternation you have put him in?


Ned. What Is the matter with you, Sir? This minute you looked as Gay, and
Pleasant, as the Month of June, and now it is December at least -- he has
discovered you, Brother.


Would. Most beatifically expressed, and worthy of Quotation. (Takes out a
Pocketbook, and writes.)


Bell. I presume, Sir, you are examining, what Assignations fall out this hour,
that you may not disappoint the Ladies.


Would. No, Sir, I am taking Cognizance of the Gentleman's Wit.


Bell. I hope, you are not one of those Spungy-Brain'd Poets, that suck
something from all Companies to squeeze into a Comedy, at Acting of which, the
Pit and Boxes may laugh at their own Jests.


Ned. Where each may claim his share of Wit.


Bell. And by my consent, should claim a share of the Profits too, ha, ha.


Would. This is a Gentleman of an intellectual Sublimity -- No, Sir, I contemn
the Terrene extraction of those poor Animals, whose Barren-Intellects thrusts
such spurious Brats abroad; when I write, it shall be all my own, I assure you.


Sir Will. Oh, Mr. Wou'dbe can never want assistance of that kind.


Would. What shall I do with these Cloths! I would not give a Farthing for'em,
now he has left 'em off -- and that is ten times the prittier Suit in my opinion
-- Well, he is the most genteel Fellow in Europe.


Enter Robin. Rob. Sir, Sir, the Incognita's Maid, Sir, has brought you this
Letter, and stays for an Answer. [Gives him a Letter.


Bell. Ha! (Reads -- My Consin has a strange opinion of you, and nothing but
your Personal appearance immediately can prevent my giving credit to her Story;
make have, if you expect any farther favors from your Incognita -- any farther
favors! Yes, I do expect farther favors, or I Would never take half this pains --
Let me see (pauses.)


Would. I wished I could sell this Coat -- I shall never endure the sight of
it, that is certain. (aside.)


Bell. Hark ye, Sirrah, do you tell the Maid, I Will not fail the Summons -- and
do you hear, follow her at a distance, till you see her Housed; if he goes to
Belizas, do you ask to speak with Beliza's Cousin, and tell her you left me in
the Street talking to some body, but that she might not think me long, I sent
you before; besure you make no blunders, Sirrah.


Rob. I warrant you, Sir, Lying is become my Vocation; but, Sir, what Name, Sir!


Bell. Constant, you forgetful Blockead.


Rob. Ha, I have it, the Country Gentleman, Sir --


Bell. Ay, ay, away. (aside to Robin.)

[Exit. Robin.
Sir Will. What, another Biliet Doux?


Bell. It Is from my unknown -- now for thy Assistance.


Would. What contrivance shall I have for such a Dress -- my Rogue of a Tailor
will not trust, that is certain. Let me think -- that will not do -- nor that --
ho, I have it -- [Takes out his Book and writes.


Bell. This Messenger must be had immediately, Sir William.


Sir Will. I Will procure you one instantly.


Bell. Then I Am Master of my Art.


Would. Sir William, I recommend that to your perusal (Gives him the Tablets.)
If this Project takes not, I Am undone -- (aside.)


Sir Will. What Is this (Reads.) We whose Names are here Subscribed, do promise
to make our Personal Appearance in the Side-Box, the third Day of a new Play,
either Tragedy, Comedy, Farce, or Opera, that shall be written by Timothy
Wou'dbe, Esquire and Played at one of the Houses or both, as the Players can agree
about that, on forfeit of a Guinea, which we have deposited in the hands of the
Author.


Ned. Ha, ha, ha, a pretty contrivance for another Suit.


Bell. This is new, indeed, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Will. I love to encourage Ingenuity, he has flung away many a Guinea after
me, now I Will give him one -- pray, Enter me down Mr. Wou'dbe.


Would. Let me entreat your own hand, for the Encouragement of others. (Sir
William writes.)


Bell. I Will not be out at a Frolic, there is mine, Sir.


Sir Will. There, Brother, enter your Name too -- (Gives Ned a Guinea)


Ned. Ha, ha, with all my heart, there is Belvil, Loveill, and Freewit -- you
may depend on, Mr. Wou'dbe.


Would. I Will wait on 'em incontinently.


Bell. But, when is this Play to be writ, Sir?


Would. That I must consider on, Sir; too many things at once destroy the
Thought, and dull the Fancy.


Ned. But suppose it should not live till the third Day, the Town is very
Capricious.


Would. I know it, Sir, for that reason, I took this method; when their Gold is
at stake, they will bring in their Bodies, to save their Bail -- egad, I shall not
have Money enough -- Let me see -- I Will sell these Cloths, to make it up --
Gentlemen, I Am your most Obliged --

(Exit.)
Ned. Ha, ha, ha, he is upon the wing, with his Subscription, I Will follow, and
see if he goes to their Lodgings.

(exit.)
Sir Will. Now, for thy business, Bellair, where shall I find you half an hour
hence?


Bell. Here, for I must now dress me.


Sir Will. Very well.

(Exit.)
Bell. So, thus far I Am right -- now for half an hours Respit from the fateague
of business -- egad, I wish the Pretty Creature, I saw in the Morning, would
fall in my way -- who the duce is she, I wonder -- no matter who, she is
handsome -- and that is knowledge enough, to Recommend her -- Ha! here she
comes, by Jove.


Enter Lady Cautious. Lady, Here he is! a charming handsome Fellow -- what
Excuse shall I make? -- ha -- I thought Sir William had been here -- Sir, I beg
your pardon --


Bell. He Is just gone out, Madam, he is a happy Man, to have so much Beauty in
quest of him.


Lady, Beauty's an Epithet your Sex never fail to make use of to raise our
Vanity, when present, but the Object once removed, you soon recall your Praises.


Bell. Sometimes, Madam, good Manners produce Adulation; but here Flattery
dares not show her Face, your Charms are so conspicuous, they need no Art to
inform your Knowledge, nor I no Cunning to inslave my self; I am Chained
already, your Eyes at first sight reduced me, and the short moments which we
passed this day together, made such an Impression on my Heart, that I have
thought of nothing since but how to see you again.


Lady, Oh! How his Words run through my Soul -- alas, Sir, to what purpose
should you see me, I am Married.


Bell. Good --


Lady, Wretchedly Married.


Bell. Better and better -- wretchedly Married, say you?


Lady, Wretchedly -- to an old pevish disponding Wretch.


Bell. As I could wish -- her dislike of her Husband is my first step to
Possession -- (aside.)


Lady, Forced by my Friends to Wed him, by which all my happiness in this World
is lost.


Bell. Banish that thought my charming Creature -- it is a false one; there are
Joys, inestimable Joys in Store, give me but leave, and I Will inform you where
they may be reaped. (taking her Hand.)


Lady, Not by me without a Crime.


Bell. The Crime be on their Heads that forced your Marriage, Nature never
designed these Charms should wither in the Arms of Age, and destined only to a
Clod -- besides your not consenting to the Match, makes it invalid, and of no
force to hold you -- take pity, then, both of yourself and me, I languish,
sigh, despair -- nay, even die for you.


Lady, Help me, Heaven, I have no Power to Speak --


Bell. Oh! do not strugle so, nor dash my rising Hopes, leave me not, except
you wish my Death, which I resolve the moment you depart --


Lady, Forbid that Thought, I cannot see you die -- yet must not yield; let me
go for Virtues sake --


Bell. Love forbids it -- Oh! I shall faint with Extacy of Pleasure -- no
Jessemin nor Rose has half the sweets that dwell upon these Lips, it is Essence
from the Throne of Jove -- this Neck, this Breast -- Oh! every part about thee
is Celestial, Loadstone like, thy Breath attracts and draws my Lips to thine.
(kissing her.)


Lady, Oh! the difference between his Kisses, and my Husband's, what shall I
do. --


Bell. Do! Consent to bless the Man that loves you.


Lady, But how long will he do so?


Bell. That Is ever the Women's Question -- ask not that; can I prove false to
so much Beauty, oh, no, faithful as the Needle to its Pole, or Turtle to his
Mate, secret as a Priest -- and loving as the Vine -- give me Possession once,
and bind the truest of his Sex for ever -- (pulling her.)


Sir Paul within.. Sir Paul, Basilicon --


Lady, Ah, (shreecks.) my Husband's Voice.


Sir Paul, (within) Ah, Thieves, Thieves.


Bell. A Curse of all ill Luck -- Just in the critical Minute when she was
yielding -- 'Death, what shall I do, Madam, can, can, can, can, you put me no
where?


Lady, Impossible, he will search all the House -- now the Duce take me for
Shreeking -- (aside.)


Bell. Then there is no way -- but to cut his Throat.


Lady, Now help me, dear, dear Invention. (pauses.)


Sir Paul, Basilicon, why where is my Surgeon there -- I shall be Murdered,
here is Thieves got into my House.


Lady, A lucky hint, improve it.


Bell. Improve what?


(Enter Sir Paul and Servants.) Sir Paul, What Is here, a Man, a Thief, a Thief,
fall on, fall on.


Bell. I shall be apprehended for a Rogue, here -- make your Mermidons; be
civil, Sir, or I shall whip you through the Guts, by Hercules. (Lays his Hand on
his Sword.)


Sir Paul. Basilicon, keep near me Basilicon --


Lady, Oh! Hold, hold, Sir Paul, What do you do? Abuse a Gentleman that came to
save your Life.


Bell. What the Devil does she mean now -- some turn to bring me off, if I can
but hit her right.


Lady, Tell him you saw the House beset with Rogues, tell him, tell him, any
thing. (aside to Bell.)


Bell. Humph, ha, Oh, witty Rogue --


Sir Paul, Ha, how is that?


Bell. Yes, Sir, I came to do you Service.


Sir Paul, As how, pray, sweet, Sir? To lie with my Wife, ha!


Bell. No, Sir, coming by your House I saw four Men, and heard 'em say, that is
the Door, dog him to some Convenient place, and then secure him.


Sir Paul, Secure me, for what, Sir? I owe no body nothing, I have no
employment in the State, Sir.


Bell. Your Riches is much talked on, Sir, and People imagine you have got that
which we call the Philosopher's Stone; I believe they design to Rob and Murder
you, I heard 'em mutter something of Ripping you up, and Defecting you.


Sir Paul, Oh! Bloody Villians.


Lady, Excellent Fellow -- (aside.)


Bell. They talked as if you swallowed the Stone every Morning, and kept it in
your Body for greater security all Day.


Sir Paul, Monstrous!


Bell. I find their design is to search for that Stone, which, if they get it,
will make them as Rich as Aldermen ever after.


Sir Paul, Barbarous -- Sir, if you will believe me, I don't know what they mean
by the Philosopher's Stone, as I hope for long Life -- I have no Stone worth a
Groat, except the Stone of this Ring.


Bell. Nay, I know nothing of that, Sir, I thought my self bound in Honor,
though unknown to you, to give you notice of your Danger.


Sir Paul, Sir, I heartily thank you -- My Coachman, indeed, told me there was
four Men behind my Coach last Night, which made me not go abroad to day; these
must be the Rogues.


Lady, It passes as I would have it -- but I wish he had been at the bottom of
the Sea, when he interrupted us, for that Charming Fellow has got my Heart, I
sind that. (aside.)


Bell. Pox take him, for his unseasonable Intrusion. (aside.)


Sir Paul, I thought I heard you Screek out, Wife.


Lady, I wish I had been Dumb when I did -- yes, my Dear, with design to raise
the House, to pursue, and take the Rogues, this Gentleman told me of, at least
disperse 'em, that my Love might be in no danger.


Sir Paul, Oh, was that it, very well -- come you, and I, will retire to my
Closet, and return thanks for this Deliverance, Basilicon; come you along with
us, Sir, I thank you.

(exit.
Lady, I never had less Religion about me in my Life.

(exit.
Bell. If thou had stayed but one quarter of an hour longer, Old Noll, thou
should have had something to have thanked me for.


(Enter a Servant.) Servant, Sir William sends to tell you, that he, and the
Gentleman you want, stays for you at the Coffee-house, Sir.


Bell. I come -- (Exit Servant.) was there ever such a promising Project crossed;
I must have her -- and I find she must have me too --

What various hazards do we Rovers run,
To purchase what we slight, as soon as won;
And Women know it too, yet long to be undone.

ACT IV.
Robin Solus. Rob. HEre she went in! -- let me see -- I am to say -- what am I
to say? -- pox on it, my Master gives me so many different Lessons, one knocks
'tother out of my Head -- he is doing -- doing, no, no, he did not bid me say
he was doing -- he was stopped in the Street -- ay, ay, that is right, and his
Name -- Zads bud, I have forgot his Name now -- but here is the Maid, and so
it is no matter.


Enter Flora. Flor. Ha! Robin! is your Master come?


Rob. He Is coming, Child -- a Lawyer, I believe, for he had a swinging stroke
with his Tongue, stopped him in the Street, about his Law Suit, I suppose, so he
sent me Express, fraught with his eager Wishes, to beg thy Lady's patience for
two Minuets only, and then he will throw himself at her Feet -- egad, I think I
have made as noble a Speech as ever a Courtier of 'em all. (aside.)


Flor. Why don't you come in, and deliver your Message, then?


Rob. Now I have seen thee, I dare not.


Flor. Why, what do you fear?


Rob. Those pinking Ogles of thine -- But now I think on it, if my Master and
your Lady Cupple, thou wilt fall to me of Course.


Flor. To you -- I believe not, Sir.


Rob. But I believe yes -- are not we perquisites made for one another? -- our
Station's the same -- our Employment alike -- you Dress your Lady -- so do I my
Master -- you receive, and deliver Messages, so do I -- and lying is the common
Vocation of us both.


Flor. You are very familier in your Courtship.


Rob. It Is my way -- but I know Truth is an out-of-fashon'd Courtship, which
your Sex is not used too. Ha! my Master. (Enter Bellair dressed for Revel.) Sir,
I did your Message.


Bell. My Message, Fellow, what Message? This Dog will spoil all by his
blunders; he does not see that I Am Revel now; (aside.) do you know who you
speak too?


Rob. By my troth, I don't know -- and yet methinks I should know too.


Flor. It Is very strange if he should not know his Master.


Rob. Why, Sir, pray are not you my Master, co, co, co.


Bell. I Will tell you, Rascal. (Strikes him a box on the Ear.)


Rob. Egad, I Am in the wrong, but where I cannot tell -- his Fingers are grown
plaguey Flippant of late.


Bell. Is Beliza within, my Dear, do know?


Flor. I believe she is, Sir -- I Will let her know you would speak with her, if you
please to signify what Name you will wear at present --


Bell. Name! Why, my own Name, Child, Revel; what Name should I wear? Thou art
pleasant, ha, ha, ha.


Rob. There was my mistake, now. (aside.)


Flor. Here she comes, Sir.

(Enter Beliza.)
Bell. So Darts the Sun, through all the thick wrought Clouds, to Cheer the
laboring Swain. (Catching her in his Arms.)


Beliz. Hold, Sir! Who are you, pray? The Colonel, or the Country Gentleman --
the Grave, Serious, formal Lover, or the Gay Rakish Soldier? -- let me know, I
beseech you, that I may square my Conversation to yours.


Bell. Ha* ha, ha, Why these Interrogatories? Madam, do you walk in your Sleep?
-- now I fancy you are in a Dream; ay, it is so, faith -- and I cannot resist
the Opportunity for Gloves. (Kisses her.)


Beliz. Away, thou exquisite Dissembler -- How can you look me in the Face.


Bell. Because I don't know a Face in Europe that pleases me half so well --
but prithy, why this Air of indifference, or rather, resentment? Look ye,
Madam, if you affect this Quarrel by the way of Poignant Sauce -- you have no
need of those little recourses of your Sex -- Revel Loves as much as ever, and
dare promise --


Beliz. More than you perform. --


Bell. Accuse me not before you try me -- but why these Cross Purposes -- ha,
my Incognita! now Bellair, play thy part (aside.)

(Enter Camila.)
Beliz. Here Is one will inform you. --


Came. Oh, Mr. Constant, are you come?


Bell. Constant! yes, faith, Madam, I Am as constant as any Man -- this Lady can
witness for me.


Beliz. Not in the Court of Conscience, Sir.


Bell. Then you have no Conscience at all.


Rob. If my Master took up lying by the Week, what a Confounded Interest
'twou'd come to in a Year. (aside.)


Came. Do you know why I sent for you so soon, Mr. Constant.


Bell. No, Madam -- nor that you-sent for me at all.


Beliz. You mistake, Cousin, this is Colonel Revel, ha, ha*


Came. Colonel fiddle, is it not? -- sure I know Mr Constant.


Bell. Constant! Who is he, Madam.


Came. Who Is he? Why, are not you he?


Bell. Not that I know off.


Beliz. Ha, ha, you shall be Revel, Sir, till Constant comes, if my Cousin will
give you leave --


Came. I Am surpised at his Impudence -- pray, were not you here two Hours ago,
Sir?


Bell. Not that I remember --


Came. Impossible -- did not you save me from drowning, Yesterday.


Bell. 'Twas in my sleep, then -- for waking I am sure I did not.


Came. Distraction -- Nor is not your Name Constant? And Oxfordshire.


Bell. Quite wrong -- this is a pretty Christmas Game Lady -- but, pray let me
have some Commands, as well as all Questions.


Came. Nor you don't know this Footman?


Bell. Again -- No, Madam, never scaw him in my Life.


Rob. Oh Lord, Oh Lord, who am I now -- sor he has renounced me heartily.
(aside.)


Beliz. What say you, Friend, don't you know this Gentleman neither?


Rob. No more than I do the great Mogul; Madam.


Came. Who do you belong to --


Rob. Belong to, Madam! why, why, why, a pox of his 'tother Name, now I cannot
think on it, if I were to be hanged. (aside.


Came. Ay, who do you belong to, I say, again?


Rob. Why, I belong to my Master, Madam.


Beliz. And what is that Master's Name, pray?


Rob. Name, Madam -- his Name is -- ad, now I think on it, I will not tell his Name
-- why, sure I Am too big to be Catechized.


Bell. This Dog will betray me. (aside.)


Flor. You challenged this for your Master, just now.


Rob. What if I did, Mistress, what then? He is not, it seems, without his
being double, as you pretend -- the Devil should have doubled me too.


Came. What business have you here?


Rob. Business! why I brought a Message from my Master to one of you -- and so
good by --


Came. Hold, stay, Sir -- pray, what was that Message?


Rob. Why, that my Master would be here, presently --


Bell. Oh, I suppose, this is Mr. Constant's Man, that you mistake me for --
ah, pox of his Memory. (aside.)


Rob. You have hit it, Sir -- Mr. Constant is my Master, now his Name's out --


Came. I Am astonished! Cousin, did you ever hear the like?


Beliz. Yes, the very same -- but I traduced Mr. Constant then, you know --
What say you, Revel, did I?


Bell. Hey, Ladies! do you design to bait me, if so, give me fair play, at
least -- harkye, draw off your Cousin, and confess your Plot -- or egad I Will
humor her Frenzy, take the Name of Constant, and make Love to her before your
Face.


Beliz. Withal my heart, it is not the first time -- and I have no further
Services for you, ha, ha, ha.


Rob. So, he is in a fair way to loose 'em both (aside.)


Enter Messenger and Attendant. Mess. I Arrest you, Sir, in an Action of High
Treason.


Bell. Treason, Sir! Sure you mistake the Man.


Beliz. Ha! how is this?


Mess. Your Name's Revel, Sir.


Bell. My Name is Revel, Sir, but guilty of no such Crime.


Rob. Here Is a turn now -- I must second him. (aside.)


Mess. That must be proved, it is no business of mine, I am only to Execute my
Orders.


Came. I am concerned for him, methinks -- will not you take Bail, Sir?


Mess. In these cases no Bail is admitted, Madam.


Beliz. My Mind misgives me, this is a Trick.


Mess. Come, Sir, I cannot stay --


Rob. Hold, hold, Sir, pray Enter my Action too, for a Box of the Ear he gave
me just now -- this is some comfort, however, I shall see him hanged.


Bell. Come, Gentlemen, I can easily prove my Innocence -- if I stand fair in
this Lady's Opinion, I cannot fear the World. (to Beliza.)

(Exit. with Messengers.
Beliz. I wish you a good Deliverance, Colonel -- I know not what to think.


Rob. I Will see him lodged, I Am resolved.

(Exit.)
Came. Nor I -- to what end can a Man affect these Disguises?


Beliz. Out of Gallantry, Cousin -- I shall hardly be convinced without I saw
them both together -- I pity the Colonel's Unhappy Disgrace; but, believe me,
now he is Arrested, Constant is no more, his Man following him plainly showed
the Cheat.


Came. Nay, I confess they are extremely alike, but observing very narrowly, I
think their Features are not exactly the same.


Flo. You are of my mind, Madam -- for methinks, he is half an Inch taller than
Mr. Constant.


Came. And something about his Face, I don't know what --


Flo. I fancy his Nose is something longer.


Came. Thou have hit it; it is his Nose, I Am sure.


Enter Bellair for Constant. Beliza. You are both mad I Am sure -- ha, ha, ha,
-- bless me! Pray, Heaven it ben't the Devil that thus deludes us.


Bell. I am come, Madam, according to your Commands -- but if my Reception now
prove like the last, the pleasure of seeing you, will much abate -- I am first
at the Rendezvous, I perceive.


Came. Now, Cousin, you are convinced, I hope.


Beliz. You are, I see.


Flo. Now, Madam, I can tell you the very difference, his Eyes are a
little-little larger.


Came. Nay, I think they are a great deal larger.


Bell. Why do you Survey me so, Madam? is it possible, that you can be deceived
too -- Where is this Colonel to be found? Will he not come?


Came. He is just gone.


Beliz. He has Disengaged himself, Sir, to leave you room, to Act your part.


Bell. Why did not you keep him, I sent my Man before me, to let you know, I
would instantly be here.


Beliz. How could we, when the Queen's Authority favored his Retreat.


Bell. How say you, Madam? has the Queen sent for him.


Beliz. How cunningly you Dissemble -- but that is not new, Dissimulation, seems
your natural gift.


Bell. Still these Reproaches, will nothing, that I say convince you? -- Why
did you consent to let him go?


Came. Why, do you really think this is still the same? (to Beliza.)


Beliz. I do really -- the Trap was laid with too much Policy to be prevented,
knowing the Messenger I never suspected the truth of the Action -- but I may
change to Counter Plot you yet

(Exit.)
Bell. So, she is gone to the Prison -- but she will return as unsatisfied as she
went (aside.) Why do you take pleasure to insult the Man, your Beauty has
enslaved? If my Visits be offensive -- though I die without you -- I prefer your
Peace so much above my own, I Will never disturb you with my Presence more.


Came. He looks, methinks, with such an honest Face, it can be only Constant;
(aside.) you must own, I have reason to suspect you -- but you have a powerful
Advocate within, which Pleads in your excuse, and fain would Justify you.


Enter Robin. Rob. At last, I am satisfied -- the Spark is Cag'd.


Flo. Did you follow him?


Rob. Do you doubt it?


Bell. Whom, speak?


Rob. Oh, Sir, are you there? -- you will be hanged in Effigy to morrow --


Bell. How, Sause-box!


Rob. Ay, Sir, he did Box me, but I shall have a swinging Revenge.


Bell. Revenge, for what?


Rob. Why, Sir, your likeness -- that here has been such a sputter about -- is
taken up for Treason, Murder, Robbery, and the Devil and all --


Bell. Oh, misfortune! to be like such a Rascal.


Rob. Ay, so it is indeed, Sir -- I thought he would have been pulled to pieces
in the Street -- there were Girls of Fourteen, and Women of Fourscore, with
Actions of Ravishment against him -- and Tavern, and Eating-house Bills in
abundance.


Bell. The Rogue has improved the hint admirably (aside.)


Rob. It Is an illbred Scroundrel, he is very like you, Sir, that is the truth
on it,) he gave me the damndest Box on the Ear, only because I mistook him for
you -- he has a swinging Fist, Sir, that was all the Distinction I could make
between you -- but I shall see him trussed up for it, that is my comfort.


Came. I am extremely pleased to find they are two different Persons --


(Enter Sir William.) Sir Will. Constant! I cannot believe my Eyes.


Bell. Why, what surprises thee?


Sir Will. I met thy very Likeness in Custody of a Messenger, and stopped 'em to
examine the reason -- the Spark snapt me up short, and told me 'twas none of my
business, bad 'em pass on -- I admired at the meaning, for I could have sworn
it had been thee -- ha! that is Beliza's Lodgings, certainly. (aside.)


Bell. Were he Dressed like me too?


Sir Will. No, that was the only Distinction I found about him -- I wish Beliza
ben't the other Woman --


Bell. Now, Madam -- are you still in suspense?


Came. I Am convinced, and overjoyed, to find you what I wish you.


Sir Will. If my Suspicions be true, I have a pretty kind of an Employment here
-- serving my Rival against my self, (aside.)


Enter a Servant. Ser. Madam, your Father wants you -- he talks of having you
Married to Night --


Rob. How Is that, egad, my Master will be sobb'd at last, I fear. (aside.)


Came. Oh, Unfortunate --


Sir Will. If it be so, it is some pleasure at least to know the Man. (aside.)


Bell. What do I hear? Oh, Madam, if ever pity touched your Soul, exert it now
-- think where you are going, think too, who you leave -- give me some
assurance to support my hope, that you will disobey your Father -- or, I am
miserable.


Came. Believe me, my surprise is as great as yours, I promise to use my utmost
Arguments against it; if I fail, you then shall know my Father, and use your
own Discretion.

(Exit with Flora.
Bell. That Is all I ask -- unexpected turn of ill Fortune* this News has
changed the very Countenance.


Sir Will. Why, one would swear thou were really in Love.


Bell. And not be forsworn, Sir William; for, faith, I do love her heartily,
and am ready to Capitulate for better for worse, as soon as she pleases.


Sir Will. I Am glad to hear that -- one thing, pray, tell me, without reserve
--


Bell. Most willingly --


Sir Will. What design have you upon the other; for you cannot marry 'em both?


Bell. Humph -- faith, no design at all, if I could come off handsomely; though
she is very pretty, but too well acquainted with my Incognita, to have any
Intrigue with.


Sir Will. Does she love you Bellair?


Bell. Not that ever I could discover, to say the Truth.


Sir Will. One thing more -- is not her Name Beliza!


Bell. Ha! does he know her -- I Am afraid my Plot's spoiled again. (aside.)
Nay, Sir William, don't force me to tell Names, especially after the Stratagem
I have made use of.


Sir Will. Nay, nay, I am convinced it is the same; had I apprehended it sooner,
Friend, you had not carried your design thus far.


Bell. So, I have made my Rival, my Confident; I find I am a lucky Fellow, now,
may he, out of pure Revenge discover me (aside.) If I have committed any fault;
Sir William, 'twas a fault of Ignorance; could I devine the Lady was your
Acquaintance -- so that I am assured your Friendship must forgive me.


Sir Will. What Friendship must forgive, Love denies -- as I imagined, here she
comes.


Bell. Well, Sir William, whatever satisfaction you demand I Am ready to return
-- this favor let me obtain, as you are a Gentleman betray me not, to my fair
Unknown -- this is the most unfortunate thing.

(Exit.)
Rob. Quite undone again.

(exit.)
Enter Beliza. Beliz. I am confounded! I know not whether there be two or not
-- the Messenger affirms that Revell is in his Custody, but his Orders run so
strickt, that none must be admitted to see him -- ha, Sir William.


Sir Will. Pray, what was the Subject of your Ladyship's Comtemplation --
Colonel Revell.


Beliz. He has found it then at last -- why, do you know Colonel Revell, Sir
William?


Sir Will. You do, I find -- persidious Woman -- have I discovered thy falsehood
-- all thy turnings and windings of indifference, had their source from hence.


Beliz. The readiest way to stop his Tongue, is to let loose mine. (aside.) Do,
do, exalt your Voice, and raise your Passion hgher -- but know! your jealous
Rage shall extort no Submission from me, though I could clear my innocence with
ease -- but the Man that dares suspect my conduct -- and start a Quarrel
Husband-like, er'e I have confirmed his Title, I scorn to disabuse -- so leave
him to what method he thinks best.

(Exit.)
Sir Will. Oh, guilt! What an Assurance do thou give, Oh, Hell, Hell.

What Fate than this could more injurions prove,
Deceived by Friendship, and destroyed by Love
(Exit.)
Scene Changes to Sir William's Lodgings.
(Enter Bellair and Robin.) Rob. You Act your part very well, Sir, but there
was one thing Supersluous, in that of Revell.


Bell. What was that prithy?


Rob. The Box of the Ear, Sir; 'twas very uncomfortable.


Bell. On, there is a Cordial for thee. (Gives him Money) 'twas only to teach
you a good Decorum.


Rob. Oh, Sir, your humble Servant, I am ready to be taught, Sir, when ever you
please.


Bell. But how are you sure my Father knows I am in Town.


Rob. Sure on it, Sir! why I saw him, and told him you came but Two hours ago --
and that, you would wait upon him as soon as you had refreshed your self with clean
Linning --


Bell. Z'death, and why did you so Sirrah?


Rob. Because, Sir, that was the first excuse that came at my Tongues end --
and you know there is no humming and hawing with my Old Master, Sir.


Bell. I am in a blessed Condition, -- in Love, with I know not who, to be
found I know not where -- undoubtedly out of Favor with my Father, if I refuse
his Choice, as I most certainly shall --


Rob. Nay, good Sir, ben't over certain -- may be she is as handsome as the other
-- and you may like her as well.


Bell. And, in all probability, in danger of a Duel with my Friend -- to
rectify all these matters, require a Machivilian Brain -- go you wait at
the other Lodgings.


Rob. Yes, Sir. -- Now has he so many Women upon his Hands, he knows not what
to do with 'em -- the first time I ever saw him puzzled in these matters --

(Exit.
Lady Cautious passing over the Stage. Bell. My Charmer! the sight of thee
dispels my malancholy, and revives the Joy within my Breast, which first those
Eyes inspired --


Lady Why, were you Malancholy, Sir? impossible.


Bell. How should I be otherwise in the absence of my Love*


Lady. Abundance of Love, but not a grain of Constancy I Fear.


Bell. As constant as the Sun, my fairest --


Lady. What, like him, Court all you meet, and quit as soon as tasted -- Nature
never designed my Sex to feed your Luxery -- but for Health, Content and
Necessaries.


Bell. Right, why then can you deny the Man that endeavors to engross those
Necessaries you speak of.


Lady, Where they are Lawful -- but upon second thoughts, I find I have
scruples --


Bell. Vapors, Vapors, all -- Lawful! Why the Mechanical notion I have of the
World, is a rich Banquet, set off with all the choicest things of the Creation
-- where Man's the guest -- and would it not be the height of ill Manners to
snatch a Dish, and run away with it, when, perhaps, twenty more had a mind to
the same Meat --


Lady, And would it not be the extremity of Folly to taste of every Dish -- when
your curiosity may bring a Surfci. --


Bell. Then there is Physicians enough in Town to cure me --


Lady, Or kill you.


Bell. With all my Heart -- because a House may fall on my Head -- must I
therefore lie in the Field -- but what have we to do with Philosophy?

For softer Pleasures was your Sex designed,
Heaven formed, and sent 'em to delight Mankind.
No Rule or Custom, did we first obey,
But freely loved where Nature led the way. (Embracing her.

Lady, Bless me! you will smother me --


Bell. Let us not in cold Disputing wast the time, least Fortune, angry at our
dull delay, send another interruption --


Lady, Well, you was born to ruin me -- but do not, pray, do not -- use your
force -- for well I find my weakness -- (in a yielding Tone.)


Bell. A good hint -- sure fortune will not Jilt me agian -- but hold, I Will
secure the Door -- (shuts the Door.) now show me a Man possessed of half an
hour's happiness above me. (takes hold of her.)

(knocking with^^)
Lady, Undone for ever -- there is some body at the Doo^ if I Am discovered --
Ruin attends me.


Bell. Another malicious Devil has crossed me again -- (...) why, why -- which
way shall I get out? Is there (...) Stairs, nor Trap Door -- I, I, I, I Will Jump
out of the Win^^^


Lady, By no means -- what will come of me -- here, here, get into that Closet.
(Knocks again.)


Bell. Ay, ay, any where -- oh, Success, Success, thou have forsaken me

(Exit.) (she shuts the Door, then opens the other.)
Lady, Who knocks with that Authority? Brother, is it you! what shall I say?
(aside.)


Sir Will. What business have you here -- Confusion, how shall I contain my
self? (aside.)


Lady, If he has discovered me, I Am a dead Woman (aside.) why do you look so
angry, Brother -- Is it a Crime to be in your Lodgings?


Sir Will. Yes, I forbad you -- and what was the Door shut for, ha?


Lady, I shall be found out, there is no avoiding it -- because I was afraid the
stranger which you say hates Women should surprise me -- I came hither to be
private, and to avoid the Impertinency of Sir Paul -- I tremble every Joint.
(aside.)


Sir Will. Ay, she did come to avoid Sir Paul, that is plain enough -- Oh,
Nature, Nature, why did thou make a Woman? -- I Am sure I heard his Voice --
far off he cannot be -- that Closet must conceal him -- I Am glad to find you
was so Circumspect, Sister -- I am out of Humor -- you will forgive me -- how
shall I get rid of her. (aside.)


Lady, Better than I expected -- (aside.)


Sir Will. Pray, oblige me with Pen, Ink, and Paper, I have lost the Key of my
Scrutore, and cannot come at mine --


Lady, With all my heart, Brother -- a fortunate escape (exit.)


Sir Will. Let me consider -- shall I sacrifice his Blood to my injured honor
-- no, I owe this Life to him which now I beat -- and a solemn League of
Friendship joined our Souls -- I Lodged him here -- and shall I break the Laws
of Hospitality? -- no -- first, let me know how far my Honor is concerned --
if my Sister has betrayed her Virtue -- and I prove it -- my just Resentment
then shall fall on both -- it is resolved -- (puts out the Candle, goes to the
Closet and knocks. Sir, Sir -- ( Bellair opens the Door, and comes out.


Bell. Are they gone, my Life, my Love --


Sir Will. My Life, my Love! Damnation (aside.) they are gone, hush, make no
noise for your Life, I expect my Husband every Minute, therefore if you Love me
retire instantly --


Bell. Love thee; do I live? But, Oh, I fear these cursed malicious Planets
never will Crown my wishes.

(Exit.
Sir Will. By that I find he has not enjoyed her -- now to know how far she is
inclined. -- (goes into the Closet, and shuts the Door after him.


Enter Lady Cautious with Pen, Ink and Paper. Lady. Here Is Pen and Ink, Brother
-- ha, in the dark, Brother -- Brother -- ha! gonc -- lucky opportunity -- let
me 'scape now, and I Will never run the danger more -- (goes to the Closet.) you
may come out, the Coast is clear


(Enter Sir William. Sir Will. Then I Am happy -- now let us us lose no time --
but improve the precious Moments -- conduct me to some more private place,
there let me breath my Soul into your Bosom, and pay the hazards which we have
both run --


Lady, This is no time, except you wish my Ruin -- my Brother is alarmed, and
may return this Minute, and Sacrifice me to his Jealouse Fears -- have you no
regard for my safety -- yet will you loiter to undo me.


Sir Will. Destruction seize thee, (aside.) I will go, but first tell me when,
and where, I shall be blessed again.


Lady, Press me not to further folly -- I own the tender Sentiments of my Heart
-- and fear I love you --


Sir Will. Excellent Confession. -- (aside.)


Lady. But my fears grow strong, and represent Vice in hideous Forms -- twice
this day Surprise perserv'd my Virtue.


Sir Will. Twice! Oh, Trayteress. (aside.)


Lady, And now by all the Virtuous Stars, I Will never see you more. (Flings from
him, and Exit.


Sir Will. I Am glad to hear that -- but did not she know me? So took her
Opportunity to start from my Vengeance? It may be so, and this be all a Lie --
it must be so -- and now I could rip that Bosom where her Heart, her hot
Lustful Heart resides -- yes, if thou be'st Guilty -- these Hands shall strait
let out thy tainted Blood, to wash the Stains thou have thrown upon our Family.


(Enter Sir Paul with a Candle.) Sir Paul, Mercy on me, what a noise is here in
this House -- Zadsbud, it were a Blessing to be Deaf -- what did I say --
Heaven forgive me -- if I should be struck Deaf now, what a lamentable thing
'twou'd be -- humph -- ha -- in my Conscience, my Ears Sings, I have a strange
huming in my Head -- pray, Heaven, I grow not Deaf in earnest -- Well, my Wife
has so many Relations -- that Lodge here, and Visit her together -- I shall
certainly be undone -- it costs me, at least, Five Pound a Week in Coffee --
Tea -- Chocolate -- and Ratefia -- Mercy upon me -- if I should come to want
now in my old Age -- I may thank Marriage for it -- if I should come to be
maintained by the Parish now -- Oh, sad -- Oh, sad -- or should live to be
Blind -- and led with a Dog and a Bell -- what shall I do, if I come to that,
and who knows but I may -- Let me see, let me see, I Will try how I can walk in
the Dark. (puts out the Candle.)


Enter Bellair. Bell. The Devil take these Disappointments, I say -- I have
peeped into every room I could find open, but no sight of her -- well, if my
Incognita -- falls to my Lot at last, 'twill be some amends --


Sir Paul, What a wretched condition it is to be deprived of Sight -- the very
Apprehension puts me in a swet all over -- ah, ah, within there, Lights, Lights.


Bell. I cannot imagine into what part of the House I Am got. (runs against Sir
Paul.)


Sir Paul, What Is that? Thieves, Thieves.


Bell. Pox take this old Cuff, how came I to stumble on him.


Sir Paul, Basilicon, why Basilicon, I say, Murder, Murder.


Enter Servants with Lights, and Basilicon. Bell. Sir, I Am glad to see you
withal my Heart --


Sir Paul, That Is a lie, I believe -- but what is your business here now, Sir?
Answer me that -- do you come to bring me another Information of Rogues, ha! I
know you again -- either you come, Sirrah, to make me a Cuckold -- or to Rob my
House -- but I Will have you laid by the Heels -- I will so --


Bell. Very fine, faith -- my next step will be to Tyburn.


Sir Paul, Bind his Hands, there --


Bell. Keep off Scoundrils -- without you will have your Guts full of Oylet-holes.


Sir Paul. Oh, Basilicon, see, see, am I not wounded? Keep close to me.


Bas. Not in the least, Sir.


(Enter Sir William.) Sir Will. How now, what is the matter here --


Bell. Oh, Sir William, you come opportunely, to save me from these Rascals.


Sir Will. Sir Paul, why these Disorders? Of what are you Apprehensive -- this
Gentleman is a Friend of mine.


Sir Paul, But how came he here, Sir, in the Dark --


Bell. I mistook this for Sir VVilliam's Apartment --


Sir Will. Oh, Hippocrisy -- but e're you and I have done, you will own 'twas upon
another Score (aside.) it must be so, Sir Paul, I lent my Lodgings to this
Gentleman for two or three Days -- curse of my shallow reason -- I did not tell
you of it, Sir, not thinking it material enough to trouble you about.


Sir Paul, Say you so, Sir -- then Cuckoldom is nothing material, you shall all
out of my House -- you shall so, every Mother's Child of you --


Sir Will. What you please, Sir Paul -- harkye, Bellair, there is something to
adjust between you and I, which require more privicy -- follow me.

(Exit.)
Bell. So my Affair go swimmingly.

(Exit.)
Sir Paul, What the Devil had I to do with a young Wife?

They who in Age will drag the Marriage Chain,
Like me, they will find the hopes of Comfort Vain;
But if Relations usher in the Wife,
There needs no greater Curse to Human Life.
(Exit.)
ACT V.
SCENE is Sir William's Lodgings.
Enter Sir William and Bellair. Sir Will. THUS far, Sir, I have had a strict
regard to the League we made in Spain -- served you in the Minutest, as well as
greatest things, even beyond the Character of a Gentleman in helping you to
impose upon a Lady, making good Manners subservient to my Friendship.


Bell. Prithy, Sir William, let me know the Sum at once, without this Regular
Account.


Sir Will. 'Twill be cast up immediately -- at your Request resigned my own
Lodgings, to oblige you, kept your Secret, even to the Woman I Loved -- though
you abused her --


Bell. Nay, there is a false Tally, Sir William -- I never abused a Lady in my
Life --


Sir Will. Have you not abused Beliza?


Bell. Which way? I never asked a favor that could put her to the Blush -- or
promised Marriage, and declined my Word.


Sir Will. Have you not passed by a wrong Name to her.


Bell. But the Person is the same, when once a Woman likes the Man -- she
seldom finds fault with the Name.


Sir Will. Lookye, Bellair, you may affect what Air you please -- but
supplanting my Love, and dishonouting my Family, are things not to be repaired
with a Smile --


Bell. The Dishonouring of your Family! What mean you, Sir? Such Accusarions
are not like a Friend.


Sir Will. Nor such Actions, therefore Draw -- (Draws.)


Bell. I never Draw my Sword -- till I know the Cause you allege; I
endeavored to supplant you; I deny it -- I would not supplant my Friend though I
died for the Woman -- but this was only Gallantry -- and I ignorant of your
Pretenses; and before I knew you Loved Beliza, I had fixed upon her Friend --
that Point is cleared with any reasonable Man -- but the other Article it is
that stings me -- How have I dishonored your Family? -- for there my Honor,
Faith and Friendship, are concerned --


Sir Will. Are they gone, my Life -- my Love --


Bell. Ha! my own Words!


Sir Will. And spoke to my Sister, Sir --


Bell. The Devil they were,


Sir Will. What! are you astonished, Sir? Draw instantly -- or by the base
Astront you offered me --


Bell. Nay, nay, hold, hold, Sir William, for, faith, I will not Fight thee --
one word -- were it possible that I could know thy Sister by Instinct? Or, deny
a fair Lady in Distress.


Sir Will. Trifle no longer with my just Resentment --


Bell. Hear me out, and if I plead not within the Rules of Reason, Justice and
Probability, pass Sentence on me freely -- she is young and handsome -- her
Husband old and Impotent -- he full of whimsies, she full of Love; he wrinkled
and decayed -- she warm and wishing; I young and vigorous -- she Married
against her Will -- I not Married at all -- We met by accident -- she lamented
her Misfortune -- I pitty'd her -- and what return she might have made -- no
Man -- not your self, could have refused, had the case been yours -- Oh, but
then she proves the Sister of my Friend -- but my Friend never told me that --
Consequently he is the Agressor -- Now, Sir William, will you put your self
upon your Guard, or put up your Sword, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Will. My Friend, again -- I confess thy Arguments are unanswerable --
those we do not trust, can never betray us.


Enter Robin hastily. Rob. Oh, Sir, your Father, Sir Thomas, has found your
Lodgings, and hears you have been in Town this Fortnight -- and swears if I
don't find you out immediately, he will slice me into Hash-meat; he says, he shall
forfeit a Thousand Pound if you come not presently --


Bell. What shall I conclude on -- is he at my Lodgings?


Rob. No, Sir, he is upon the hunt like any Blood-hound; I run down twenty
by-Ways, least he should dog me -- for you know, Sir, I am your most careful
Servant.


Sir Will. That thou art, indeed -- you must resolve to see him.


Bell. And if I see him, there will be no avoiding this hated Match --


Rob. Without, Sir, you should take another Name, and persuade him you are not
his Son -- I have the same honest, lying Face still, Sir, I Will swear you are
none of my Master. (Knocks without.)


Bell. No, Sirrah, that will not do with him -- ha, see who Knocks.


Rob. If it be my old Master -- what shall I say, Sir, must I Lie, or speak
Truth.


Bell. Which you will, the Condition's desperate.


Re-enter Robin with a Letter. Rob. Safe, Sir, safe, a Letter from your
Incognita, Sir: (gives him the Letter.)


Bell. Thou dear Cordial to my Lovesick Mind (Kisses it.) (Reads.) I have used
all my Rethorick without Effect; my Father resolves this Night to give me to
thy Rival -- therefore if thou have any Stratagem to relieve me, be quick in
the Execution -- We are now coming to Sir Paul Cautious 's, who, it seems, is
an old Friend of my Father's, you being in the same House, renders you capable
of seeing -- your Incognita -- now, Sir William, I Will throw off Disguise,
confess who I am, and ask her of her Father -- if he refuse, my Rival must
measure Blades with me; you will be my Second, if it come to a push, Sir William.


Sir Will. My Sword is still at my Friend's Service.


Bell. Have at him, then -- I Will to my Lodgings, Dress, and return in an
Instant -- Now all ye Stars, that favor faithful Lovers, prevent my meeting
with my Father

(Exit.
Rob. And his Cane meeting my Shoulders.

(Exit.
Enter Sir Paul, pulling in Lady Cautious. Sir Paul, You, troop, troop --
there, Sir, take your Sister, and get out of my House -- do so -- you shall not
bring Gallants under my Nose, and lend your Lodgings to Rascals that would Cut
my Throat -- mercy upon me, it is a Miracle the House don't tumble on our Heads
-- I admire I Am alive --


Lady, Thou art alive, indeed, and that is all --


Sir Paul, All, Housewife, why, why, why, you have not poisoned me, or wounded me,
have you? (Looking and seeling about him) Basilicon [Enter Basilicon.] why,
where are you, Rascal? Look, am I hurt -- do I Bleed any where?


Basi. Not a drop, Sir.


Sir Paul, Can you know by my Eyes, or Hands, or any thing, if all be right
within me?


Basi. Very easily, Sir -- you are in perfect Health --


Sir Paul, You are sure on it?


Bas. I am sure on it, Sir!


Sir Paul, Why then, Mistress, what do you mean, ha!


Lady, That thou art an old Doting -- Despicable Wretch.


Sir Will. Hold, Sister -- better Language to your Husband would become you --
and for you, Sir, since your ill Manners proceed from groundless Jealousies,
Taxing a Gentleman with Crimes of which I know him Innocent -- making that a
pretense to traduce the Virtue of your Wife -- I advise you to recall your
Temper, and use her like my Sister -- or I shall use you like my Enemy.


Sir Paul, And run me through the Guts, I suppose -- was ever man thus plagued
before!


Lady, (Weeping,) This is the life I lead -- my Virtue still suspected -- my
Innocence accused, and the quiet of my Life destroyed -- Did I truly merit his
abuses -- Patience and Submission would become me -- but I defy, even the
Tongue of Malice, to asperse my Fame or Conduct -- and do you think, Brother,
I Will endure this -- tamely to Submit and Cringe to what I hate.


Sir Will. One word, Madam, -- (pulls her aside.) Boast not of your Conduct,
nor your Virtue -- Vile Audacious Woman -- the Closet, Mistress, think on the
Closet. --


Lady, Does he know that? now, I Am lost sor ever. --


Sir Will. Now, Vent your clamorous Virtue -- while those in whose hands you
lodge it, Echo back, you have none.


Lady, What sure Disgrace attends Unlawful Love; had I really fallen, I now
should die with shame.


Sir Paul, What are they whispering about, Now -- contriving to make me away,
ten to one, Basilicon.


Bas. Oh, Sir, I defy 'em to do that whilst I am near you.


Lady, Oh, Brother, forgive me; 'twas the only slip I ever made -- methinks I
hate my self, for having, but in wish, consented, and grow in love with Virtue.
-- Since I have not stained my Family -- the most was Thought, for some good
Angel still did interpose to prop my Nodding Virtue.


Sir Will. Take heed it nods no more.


Lady, I will, for now the Shame and Ruin that must have attended me, are so
conspicious to my Sight, that I will shun even the resemblance of a Crime like
this; if you will but pardon me, I Will vow never to fall again from Duty.


Sir Will, On that condition I do -- and now, Sister, since your Marriage-Knot
can never be dissolved, till Nature slips it -- show your self the Pattern of a
Virtuous Wife, indulge his Age -- and that way preserve your Ease, and by your
Meakness and Humility, fix your Reputation.


Lady. I readily obey -- Sir Paul, my Youth has hitherto engaged me in a
foolish Passion, Contradictory to your Will, but my Brother's Instructions has
so far informed me of my Duty, that my Behavior, for the future, shall give
you no cause for Complaint.


Sir Will. I Will engage my Honor for the performance of her Promise.


Sir Paul, Here Is a turn; who can find what Plot is going forward -- Are you
both in earnest now, or not?


Sir Will. Pray, be less Suspicious, and more a Man -- the less you suspect,
the more you are secured, Sir Paul.


Lady, A generous Confidence, will always oblige your Wife.


Sir Paul. Well, for once I will trust thee -- come to my Arms then -- hold,
hold, let me see -- you have no Penknife nor Pistole about you, have you?


Lady, To what purpose, my Dear, -- Nay, did you not say, you would trust me --


Sir Paul, Well, so I will then (Embrace.)


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, here is a Gentleman, calls himself Positive, to
wait on you, Mrs. Beliza, and another young Lady, with him.


Sir Paul, Bring them in immediately, I have not seen him this many a Year --
and your Mistress too Will, we will have a Match before you part, a faith we will,
my old Friend --

(Enter Mr. Positive, Beliza, Camilla, Patch and Flora.) Welcome, I Am glad to
see thee with all my Heart, Ladies, you are Welcome --


Pos. Sir Paul, your Hand -- I could not come to Town without seeing you, Faith
-- this is your Lady, I suppose; by your leave, Madam. (Salutes her.) This is
my Daughter, Sir Paul, I am come up to Marry her.


Sir Paul, Why then, I wish her much Joy.


Lady, I should be proud of being better known to you.


Came. And I of your Acquaintance.


Lady, Dear Beliza, how do you expect I should forgive your long absence? Not
see me in two Days.


Beliz. I confess my fault.


Sir Will. The readiest way to be pardoned, is not to persist in the wrong,
indeed, Madam.


Beliz. But who shall judge between Right and Wrong?


Sir Will. Our Reason, Madam.


Beliz. That very often deceives us, especially if we put too much trust in the
Person.


Sir Will. It requires Judgment therefore, to make a proper choice, for every
accident depends on that; but why this indifference, Madam?


Beliz. Why, that Question?


Sir Will. Because Love requires more freedom.


Beliz. But Jealousy forbids it, Sir William.


Sir Will, Only the effect of too much Love; I ask your Pardon for all past
Offenses.


Beliz. Rather of too much Folly. (Enter Belair.) Ha, Revell, at liberty again
-- and here, what can this mean?


Bell. Ladies and Gentlemen, your Servant -- Sir William, (takes him aside.)


Lady, Ha! the hansome Stranger -- ly still my Heart, and think not of him.
(aside.)


Came. Now am I distracted, to know whether this be her Lover, or mine. (aside.)


Sir Will. Sir, here is a Gentleman begs leave to Unfold a Secret to you --
(to Mr. Positive.)


Pos. To me -- out with it then.


Sir Paul, Has he a Secret for him too -- This Spark is full of Secrets.
(aside.)


Bell. Sir, I presume you are the Father of this Lady.


Came. This is Constant, that is certain. (aside.)


Beliz. So, now the Game's up -- as I suspected, all one Man. (aside.)


Pos. And, what then, Sir?


Bell. Then, my request is, to be admitted for your Son-in-Law.


Pos. For my Son-in-Law --


Bell. Yes, Sir, provided I make it appear my Fortune, and Family are equal to
yours --


Pos. Sir, in one word -- if you could prove your Descent from the Blood Royal,
and as many Acres of Land as the Po has engrossed, 'twou'd not avail you that,
do you see (snaps his Fingers.) my Word's my Word, she is disposed off already,
and so give you self no farther Trouble.


Came. Heartbreaking Sentence, (aside.)


Bell. Is this your final Resolution, Sir?


Pos. Why, Sir, what reason have you to believe I should alter it?


Bell. Because, Sir, I have some Reasons to believe, your Daughter Loves me --
and I hope you will not force her Inclinations --


Pos. You have some Reasons to believe she Loves you -- what Reasons, Sir, what
Reasons? You have not lain with her, have you? for that is the surest reason a
Man can build upon.


Bell. You Surprise me, with your Question, Sir, -- and make me blush, to hear
you give utterance to a thought like that -- Your Daughter's Virtue needs no
guard against such foul advances.


Pos. I hope not --


Came. I never shall give you Cause, to doubt my Virtue, Sir, and it is unkindly
urged -- I own, I Love this Gentleman.


Pos. What, this is he, that you have picked up since you came to Town, is it?


Came. This is he, that saved my Life, Sir -- and if I have him not, I never can
love another; yet your Commands shall fix me as you please.


Sir Paul, Well said.


Pos. As to your Love, and Liking, that is out of my Power, but your Portion and
Person are not -- so whether you consent or not, it is the same thing -- look
ye, my word's my word, so never trouble your self about that.


Bell. Is it so, I Will not leave the sight of her -- till I see my Rival -- and
then the best Arm carry her.


Beliz. And, this is your worthy Friend, you have so often mentioned, Sir
William?


Sir Will. The same, another time I Will inform you of every thing, and hope to
obtain your Pardon for him.


Beliz. Nay, I Am inclining to be good Natured; I like his humor mightily --


Came. But, Sir, have you no regard to the hazards which he run, to save my
Life; had not his generous Care preserved me, you had now been Childless in
your Age.


Pos. Humph! Why, to say truth, I would be grateful, but I want the means -- he
says, his Estate is large, so that he is above a Present -- and I know not what
to offer him -- Sir, I thank you for the Service which you did my Daughter, and
had I not given my Word, I might have chose you, as soon as another, but now,
there is no help for it -- if you will be one of her Bride-men, you shall have a
Favor to keep for her sake.


Sir Paul, That Is something.


Lady, Rude unpolished Monster, (aside.)


Bell. Insult me not, Sir, -- the Favor I would wear you have refused.


Enter Robin. Rob. Sir, here is your Father will come in, in spite of my Teeth
-- or he Swears he will have a File of Musketeers, and Blow the House up. (aside
to Bell.)


Sir Will. What News brings Robin?


Bell. That my Father is at the Door, I must go and try to appease him. (Goes
toward the Door, and meets Sir Thomas.)


Sir Tho. Give me Entrance, or, I Will knock you down, you Dogs -- (Enter Sir
Thomas.) Where is this Graceless Rogue.


Bell. (Kneeling.) Your Blessing, Sir, and with it your Pardon, for having thus
long concealed my self, but when you shall know my Reasons --


Sir Tho. Reasons, Sirrah, what Reasons have you to shun your Father -- and a
handsome Woman; come along, come along, (pulling him.) the Parson, and the
Bride, has waited this two hours, while I have been hunting you all over the
Town, Sirrah.


Bell. And now you have found me, Sir, I cannot comply with what you propose.


Sir Tho. How, how is this?


Bell. There stands the Lady that destroys my Duty --


Sir Tho. Ha! What do I see?


Bell. Now, Sir, show a true Paternal Love, and force me not to Wed against my
Will; for though the Lady you have chose, should have all the Charms that
bounteous Nature gave the whole Sex -- there I am fixed -- and must, and will,
refuse her.


Pos. Ha! Is not that Sir Thomas Bellair?


Sir Tho. Say thou so -- why, then, take her, my Boy; (throws her into
Camilla's Arms) for this is she, thy Father did design for thee.


Bell. Oh, Transport, oh, unexpected happiness!


Came. Oh, excess of Pleasure! (they Embrace.)


Sir Tho. Mr. Positive, your Servant; there is my Son --


Pos. So I see, Sir, and am glad of it, with all my Heart.


Bell. Now, Sir, your consent I hope is free.


Sir Paul, Why, this is the prittiest turn I ever saw.


Rob. I, I, I, am so overjoyed, I shall jump out of my Skin --


Pos. Camilla -- there take him. (calls her to him, and throws her to Bellair.)


Bell. My Love, my Life -- my Soul's best Comfort --


Beliz. I am pleased to see the Event so lucky.


Sir Will. So am I, Love is the strongest guard to restrain Liberty.


Came. Look up, my Constant, and bless out Friendly Stars that thus have turned
out Disobedience into Duty.


Bell. Oh, I was lost in Rapture, the powerful Torrent roul'd too fast, and
sinks me down with pleasure; now no more that Name, but know thy Husband wears
that of Bellair -- and now, Madam, I must ask your Pardon too -- and you my
Friend, I give you a thousand Thanks, and wish you, as happy in Beliza's Love
--


Beliz. I Am glad to see you out of Prison, Sir; but how?


Bell. Those Strategems are vanished now, and I rely on your good Nature to
forgive me.


Sir Paul, Nay, Niece, I seldom ask favors, therefore must not be denied; you,
and my Wife's Brother, must make the second Couple.


Lady, I must second Sir Paul, in that Request.


Came. Complete my Happiness, and bear me Company.


Bell. Augment my Joys, by Crowning of my Friends.


Sir Will. Let not all entreat in vain, Madam,


Beliz. Well, Sir William, I Will run the dangerous venture of a Jealous Husband,
for once; but let me Caution you, aforehand -- the more you suspect my Conduct,
the less I shall consult your Humor; the more you watch me, the more I shall
study to deceive you -- Leave then, your Spanish Airs -- and put the true
English Husband on, that is the only way to have a Virtuous Wife.


Sir Will. Your Advice is so reasonable, that you shall be Mistress both of
your self, and me.


Sir Paul, Well said, Brother, thy example shall be my Guide, for the future;
come, we'll be merry, I Am resolved; who is within there? (Enter Servant.) Go to
the Playhouse, and desire some of the Singers and Dancers to come hither; I am
not often in this humor, but will be merry while it lasts.


Sir Will. Go in my Name -- they will not refuse me.


Bell. No, thou art a good Benefactor to 'em.


Enter Ned. Ned. Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish you Joy, I overheard the
Conclusion of your Happiness -- and to Crown your Mirth, here is a Commical
Figure upon Entrance.


Enter Wou'dbe, in his VVastecoat. Sir Will, Ha, ha, ha, Mr. Wou'dbe, without
his Cloths -- what do thou design this for a Masquerade, at my Weeding.


Would. Married, and to Beliza, then the good Opinion Ned said she had of me,
is come to nothing. I find (aside.) Oh, Sir William, I am undone for ever,
Robbed of my new Coat, that I but just put upon my Back, by the most Whimsical
Strategem you ever heard.


Beliz. Ha, ha, ha, Mr. Wou'dbe out-Ploted.


Sir Will. How was it, prithy?


Would. Why, Sir, you must know I had just made up such a suit of Clothes as
that you have on -- and was coming hither, but meeting your Brother Ned, he
would needs press me to the Tavern to give him Beveridge, so in we went, the
Fellow that waited on us, told me I had a Cut cross the Shoulder of my new
Coat; I looked, and found I had -- he said there lived a Fine Drawer at next
Door -- he would draw it up in a Minute; Wherefore I gave it him, but my Eyes
never Encountered him since.


Omnes, Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Bell. Is your Subscription come to this, ha, ha, ha; why did not you Examine
the House.


Would. I did, and they say he came in with me, and told them he was my
Servant.


Ned. And that he never suffered a Drawer to wait on him, and therefore
borrowed an Apron of them to attend us.


Would. To cheat me of my Coat -- nothing vexes me so much, as that I have not
been seen in it, had I but made the Tour of St. James's, and both Play Houses,
my Passion for it would have Ebbed to an indifference -- and then --


Beliz. That was an unparalleled Grievance, indeed.


Bell. Mr. VVou'dbe, might I advise you as a Friend, leave off this foolish
Whim of Mimicking; Sir William he is a Gentleman of a plentiful Fortune, and
can afford change of Clothes for every Day; but you, whose slender Allowance
from a Father's Hand, admits of no prosuceness -- to imitate him is Madness.


Rob. What a grave piece of Advice is there -- well, Marriage has changed my
Master already, I find.


Beliz. I heard you was about writing a Play, Mr. VVou'dbe, I Would advise you to
make your top Character a Sharper -- you see they can out-wit a Gentleman; he
has showed you Plot for Plot.


Would. With what Courage can I proceed with the Play, when this Rascal is run
away with the Subscription -- Well, I Will into the Country, and never see this
damned Town again.

(Exit.
Enter Servant. Omnes, Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Servant, The Singers and Dancers are come, Sir.

[Here is Songs and Dances.
Sir Will. Bring 'em in, come, Gentlemen, take your Hats; but you forget,
Bellair -- Robin is unrewarded yet.


Bell. Why, he shall Choose between the two Maids.


Rob. Ah, Patch!


Pat. Me do you Choose?


Rob. Thou tempts me, and if I should look any longer, perhaps the Devil might
be more cunning then I.


Pat. You don't like me, then?


Rob. Look ye, Marriage is a lasting thing -- if it were for six Months only, I
might venture upon thee -- but for all days of my Life -- mercy upon me -- thy
features are too high prized, Furniture for Housekeeping, especially where
they must let Lodgings -- therefore, Flora, have at thee --


Flor. Why, will you quit her for me?


Rob. To show the Extremity of my Love, I will.


Pat. Fool, did thou think I would have had thee? Do thou know that I have
had my Nativity Cast, and am told that I shall Marry a Knight, at least, if not
a Lord.


Rob. Oh, good Night to your Ladyship, then.


Ned. Well, Patch, stay till my Brother Dies, and I Will Marry thee, to make good
thy Calculation, ha, ha.


Pat. Though you should make me a Lady, you would not better my fortune much by being
your Wife, our Humors would quickly Consume our Estate; -- I love fine Cloths,
-- fine Coach, -- fine Equipage, and fine House; -- Your Drinking, Wenching,
Gaming, and, soforth -- that when I wanted a New Suit, in the Morning, you have
flung off your Money Overnight --


Sir Will. She has hit you home, Brother, for your Jesting.


Ned. Well, since we know one another's Infirmities so well, we'll keep as we
are --


Bell. Now, my fair Camilla, I am happy -- these Arms shall fix my rambling
Heart.

Ungoverned Youth, of Taste not over-nice,
Roves through the various Fields of Poisonous Vice.
Cheated with Health, they Ride through Pleasure Post,
To Purchase Liberty, what er'e it Cost.
True English like, that Idol they adore,
And fears the Marriage-Knot, as much as Galick Power.
But if once Reason checks the looser Reins,
And bring sound Judgment into play again.
Then all must own --
The truest Joy that waits on human Life,
Is a constant Temper -- and a Virtuous Wife,

FINIS.

