A REPLY TO Mr. Douglass's Short Account of the State of MIDWIFERY in London
and Westminster.

WHEREIN His trifling and malicious Cavils are answered, his Interestedness and
Disingenuity impartially represented, and the Practice of Physic, but
particularly the Character of the late Dr. CHAMBERLEN, vindicated from his
indecent and unjust Aspersions.

By EDMUND CHAPMAN, Surgeon and Man-Midwife, in Orange-Street, near Red
Lion-Square.

Invidiosus sibi semper Molestus. LONDON: Printed for T. COOPER, at the Globe
in Paternoster Row; and Sold by JOHN BRINDLEY, at the King's Arms in New
Bond-street; JOHN CLARKE, under the Royal Exchange; and CHARLES CORBETT, at
Addison's Head over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1737.

(Price One Shilling.)

A REPLY TO Mr. Douglass's Short Account of Midwifery, etc.
MR. Douglass his short Account of the State of Midwifery in London and
Westminster, in which he has endeavored to cast a Cloud of Reproach over the
Characters of those that practice this noble and necessary Branch of Physic,
but particularly my own, need not have remained so long unanswered, could I
have persuaded myself it had deserved it.

Malicious Productions are generally best despised; but lest Silence should be
looked upon as an Argument of Guilt, as in these Cases by the Weak it sometimes
is, and Mr. Douglass should be encouraged to deal farther in Calumny and
Aspersion, I am at length induced to give him a Reply, which I shall at once
enter upon, without farther Preface or Preamble.

To begin then with his Dedication: The only Motives of Dedications seem to be,
either to submit one's Performance to a proper Judge, to make some small return
of Gratitude for Benefits received; or else to curry Favor. Now, as the
Honorable and worthy Lady, to whom Mr. Douglass has dedicated his Book, cannot
possibly be supposed to be a Judge of its Merit; and, in all probability, never
conferred the least Favor upon the Author, the Reader cannot well be mistaken
in conjecturing what was Mr. Douglass's true Drift in his Dedication.

His Quibble, how a Man can be a Wife, without being an Hermaphrodite? Whether
a Maid may not be taught the Art of delivering Women, and yet be no Wife? That
Widows lay Women, and yet are not Wifes, and his Query about Girl-Midwifes, are
too low and trifling to deserve a serious Answer, and seem rather to be the
product of a pert Sufficiency, than a sound Judgment. They are rather
Indications of one who was willing to cut himself out Work for criticizing at
all Events, than of a cool and sober Reasoner.

In answer to his, I shall beg leave to put the following Queries.

1. If the Term Midwifery is properly applied to the Practice of that Art, when
in the Hands of either Sex, why may not either Man or Woman so practicing, be
in Propriety of Speech called a Midwife? 2. Is not the Word Midwifery rather
expressive of Practice on a Wife, who only is presumed to want the Assistance
of a Man or Woman in the present Case, than of the Sex of the Person
practicing? 3. On receding from the common Form and Custom of Speech in this
Case, is not the supposed Absurdity exchanged for Unintelligibility? That is,
what Idea can be fixed to, what Etymology found for the new Term Midman and
Midwoman?
The Word Midman, he owns himself, is not an over-neat Expression, and it
certainly carries (to use his own Words) more Nonsense in the very Front of it,
than the Term he has endeavored to explode. Custom or Use has always the
Effect of a Law;

Quem penes arbitrium est and jus and norma loquendi.

Hor. And what is Language but a customary and received use of Words? So that
we may see the Term Man-Midwife may be defended, both from Custom and
Propriety, and will doubtless be in use long after Mr. Douglass himself shall
be forgotten.

In Page 3. Mr. Douglass falls very foul on the Character of the celebrated Dr.
Chamberlen, representing him as puzzling and confounding the Art he professed,
to the Advantage of most of the greatest Families in this Kingdom, rather than
improving it; and very indecently, and unjustly too, brands him as an artful
and insinuating Translator. He says, he rather darkens, than explains his
Author's ( Mauriceau's) Meaning; and confidently affirms, all the additional
Knowledge he was the Author of, to be only to tell the World, that He, and his
Family, can assist Women in Labor better than any body else, and gives him the
mean Epithet of a Nostrummonger. ( Page 4.) He pronounces every thing with an
ipse dixit, like a second Aristotle, and sets himself up at once, both for
Judge and Jury. The late learned Dr. Friend, in his Epistle to Dr. Mead, about
Purging in the Small Pox, gives Dr. Chamberlen a very different Character from
Mr. Douglass, speaking of him as one most skilful in the Art he professed; (
Hist. 5.) Whence we may plainly see, how different the Character of the same
Person is, when drawn by real and pretended Judges.

P. 5. He taxes him with perverting Mr. Mauriceau's Design by his Translation,
and having his own Literest at heart more than that of the Midwomen, as he
ridiculously terms them.

He accuses him of coaxing the Midwomen, and yet in the same Sentence coaxes
them himself, and pays a fulsome Compliment to the Qualifications of the Town
Midwomen above those in the Country. P. 5. The Town Midwomen may possibly (some
of them) become his Pupils, when he gives his intended Lectures, and so ought
in Prudence to be well spoken of. But those in the Country being too remote for
this extraordinary Advantage, will, for aught I can see, in his Opinion, still
labor under the Imputation of being unqualified ('till his Scheme for having
Midmen to instruct the Midwomen in Country places can take Effect) unless their
Affairs can permit them to take a Journey to Lad Lane, where, it seems, the
only Person proper to instruct them is to be met with.

Upon Dr. Chamberlen's saying, "that in Countries and Places where Advice is
not seasonably to be had, Midwifes are compelled to do their best, as God shall
enable them (P. 5.)" which is a common Expression for a conscientious discharge
of their Duty, according to the best of their Abilities. Mr. Douglass takes
occasion here, to cut a very indecent Joke upon the Deity, by asking, if God
has any where promised to give any more Assistance to a Country, than a Town
Midwoman? In the next place, he substitutes God and the Doctor acting as two
equal Beings; and then, to prove that the Divine Godhead will reward us with
the Knowledge of any useful Art, in Proportion to our own honest Diligence and
Assiduity, which in holy Writ he has assured us he will; or, which is the same
thing, to prove a point of Revelation, he quotes a Passage from a Heathen Poet;
Dii laborantibus omnia vendunt: thereby making mention of false Gods in the
plural Number, for what the true and one God only can perform. Risum teneatis?
Upon Dr. Chamberlen's advising the good Women not to blame those who are not
backward in dangerous Cases, to desire Advice, lest it cost them dear; he
indecently asks: If it does not always cost them dear when they do? Alluding, I
presume, to the Gratifications usually given in such Cases; notwithstanding he
advances, a little farther, that a SURGEON ought to be well satisfied for any
Improvement in, or Invention relating to, a manual Operation, P. 20. Is not
Delivery, wherever the Help of either Man or Woman is required, in the
strictest Sense a manual Operation? And if so, why must not a Physician be
rewarded for his Trouble, as well as a Surgeon. But Self, like Oil, will be
always uppermost.

In the same Page (the 7th.) the Plot of Mr. Douglass's whole Performance
begins to open, when he says, that the Midwomen's want of Knowledge is more
their Misfortune than their Fault, because they have not yet had such proper
Opportunities of informing themselves as they ought to have. But now it must
hereafter be their Fault more than their Misfortune, if they are not better
qualified, after knowing where the Source of all Knowledge in Midwifery is to
be found. This is the first Act of Mr. Douglass's Farce; and in the succeeding
ones the Plot will unravel itself more and more, so as to be well understood by
the dullest Reader, unless I am much mistaken.

He asking ( Page 8.) "Whether Physicians don't always make a sad Outcry, and
are not alarmed as if their Craft was in danger, when Surgeons use Pen and Ink,
except in PAUPER Cases," is an indecent and false Reflection on the Gentlemen
of the Faculty. Herein he brands Physic, that glorious Science, with the
ignominious Name of a Craft; as if it were only a knavish Combination of Men to
get Money, and at the same time openly taxes them with Covetousness, and
Hardness of Heart, in denying their Advice to Paupers. It is well known, that
all the Gentlemen of that Profession, whose Advice is worth having, are very
charitable, and willing to relieve the distressed Poor, without any View or
Expectation of Gratification. And where he can give me an Instance of one
Surgeon's curing a Wound, setting a Fracture, or reducing a dislocated Limb,
for nothing, I Will undertake to bring him five Physicians in this Town that have
attended in the most noisome and contagious Distempers, without the least
Desire of Reward: Nay, so far from it, they have relieved the Poor they have
thus generously cured, with Money and other Necessaries out of their own
private Bounty. But I shall leave this to the Resentment of those to whom it
belongs.

In the same Page he says, that the Doctor allows Midwives are compelled to do
their best, as God shall direct them; to which he replies: Now supposing God
should direct one of them to make use of a Crotchet, in a fit Case, and after a
proper manner, must she be tried for her Life for it? Which is another shocking
Joke upon the Godhead, equal, if not superior to that before observed.

Here too is another Coax to the London Midwomen, that the hardiest of them
would tremble, upon his Belief, at the very thought of a Crotchet, unless they
were fully instructed how to use it. But poor unfortunate Country Midwomen! he
cannot pretend to answer for them: They are at too remote a distance from Lad
Lane to come to his Lectures; and if upon this melancholy occasion I may be
allowed to borrow a Scrap of Latin from him, proh dolor! O lack! Olack!

Page 9. Mr. Douglass asks, if Dr. Chamberlen 's Cobweb is not easily seen
through? Now, were I disposed to Ill Nature, with how much more Justice might I
apply this Saying to his own?

Page 12. He seems to own my Observation on Dr. Chamberlen's Secret just. But I
was unwilling, like Mr. Douglass, to make any farther Remark upon it; and
thought, what I said sufficient, without an unmannerly Freedom.

Page 13. He bestows upon Dr. Chamberlen the ignominious Title of a magisterial
and dictatorial Writer.

Not content with this, in the next Page (14.) he very heartily calls him, a
fulsome Repeater, a nauseous Recommender of his Nostrum, a Writer that has not
made one Remark to the Advantage of Midwomen, and one who seems to have had
nothing else in view, but to tell them when they ought to send for him, and to
let them know, that he, etc. could serve them better than any body else. All
which may be reckoned as Proofs of Mr. Douglass's want of Candor and good
Manners. And now to make use of his own Words, utrum horum, p. 54.

Page 20. He owns, that Surgeons who have made any considerable Discovery in
manual Operations, which cannot be made universally useful, as Medicines may,
and really are, unless they are fully and distinctly explained, should always
communicate gratis the Fruits of their Labor and Expense. No, says he, they
ought to be handsomely rewarded, not only for the real Service they have done,
but to encourage Industry in others. Why then does he accuse me for keeping the
use of the Fillet a Secret, which is in the strictest Sense a manual Operation,
and one that cannot be made universally useful, as Medicines may? Indeed he has
here spoke my own private Sentiments; in this we entirely agree: and I presume
he will hardly hereafter ask me, why I don't communicate it? He himself, it
seems from his own Words, cannot expect it gratis; so that he must first tell
me what he will be pleased to offer, before, we can come to any other Terms.
However, for his Comfort, I promise him to be more reasonable than he says Dr.
Chamberlen was with the French King's Physician, p. 19. and to be contented
with less than Ten thousand Crowns; though in Proportion to the Superiority Mr.
Douglass always seems to think Surgeons have over Physicians, I ought at least
to insist upon Twenty thousand.

Page 21. He says Dr. Chamberlen is insolent, and there very heartily ranks
Doctors, Apothecaries, Shavers, and Nostrummongers, all together; but has
wisely left the Surgeons, and consequently himself, out of the Number, as being
superioris sortis (still to borrow a little more of his Learning) to Doctors
and Apothecaries. And now the Town has been informed of their superior Merit, I
hope no body will dare, after this public Notification, to refuse them their
proper Homage, upon pain of Mr. John Douglass's Displeasure.

In the same Page he puts a Question which no body ever denied: Whether the
Good which Surgeons do their Patients be not as evident as the Sun? E. g. When
they cut for the Stone, perforate the Scull, reduce a Luxation, etc. But it is
doubtful, it seems, from Baglivi, whether the Cures supposed to be performed by
Physicians, even those of the first Rank, are mostly owing to Nature, or the
Medicines, etc. which they directed. No one, that I know of, has ever
questioned the Good which Surgeons do in their own proper Profession; but I am
afraid, when they go beyond their Last, they will doubly verify Baglivi's Saying
of the Physicians, and do more Harm than they are capable of foreseeing.
Surgeons, he observes, only practice Midwifery in France; and so, says he, they
ought to do every where else. What then in his Wisdom he will propose to be
done with such Physicians as are engaged in this Profession, I know not, unless
he will generously procure them to be promoted to the Dignity of Shavers (among
which he just now chose to rank them) for which the Faculty ought doubtless to
be extremely thankful.

A little after, he accuses the Doctor of going out of his Ken; but why? Only
because he pretends to advise the Surgeons. And in the next Page (22.) to be
even with him for this Presumption, affirms, that the Doctor did not understand
that very little part of Surgery, the Method of cutting Childrens Gums, so well
as the very Nurses.

In the same Page he hints, as if the Doctor was not appris'd of the use of the
Crotchet; and in the next Page (23.) concludes, that Mr. Mauriceau was a good
and faithful Surgeon, and Chamberlen only a -- Doctor, with a long Dash before
it. It is to be hoped, Mr. Douglass may so far overcome his Modesty, as in the
next Edition of his elaborate Performance, to fill up the Blanks that are in
this. If the Antithesis here is to hold good, and Mr. Mauriceau was a good and
faithful Surgeon, which I will not deny, the contrary Character must
necessarily fall upon Dr. Chamberlen as a Physician. But how far Mr. Douglass
is capable of judging of the Qualifications of a Physician, or who set him up
for a Censor, I must leave the Faculty to determine.

Page 24. He sums up the whole he has to say in relation to Dr. Chamberlen, in
telling us, that his main Design, in his Preface and Notes upon Mr. Mauriceaus
Book, was to PUZZLE, rather than instruct the Midwomen or Midmen; and to
persuade them, that He, and the rest of the Nostrum-mongers, as he
ignominiously calls them, could serve them better than any other Artists.

Now, is not this a very fine Character of a Physician, who was allowed by all
proper Judges, to be a Man of great Honor and Abilities? If what he would
insinuate be believd, must not the Doctor appear viler than a common
Pick-pocket or Street-robber, wilfully to puzzle and mislead People in Matters
relating to Life and Death? But what seems to stick most upon Mr. Douglasss
Stomach, as a thing he can no ways digest, is the Doctor's recommending
Physicians as fitter Persons to deliver Women than Surgeons. Will Mr. Douglass
pretend to say, that the Surgeons have more Knowledge, Learning, and Abilities
than the Gentlemen of the Faculty? If not, how come Surgeons to be more
qualified for the Art of Midwifery than Physicians? But Self is here to be
concerned; and Mr. Douglass seems inclind for the common Good, to turn those
illiterate People the Physicians out of Practice, pointing out the Occupation
he thinks them most fit to be employed in, under the laudable Profession of
SHAVERS.

From Dr. Chamberlen, Mr. Douglass proceeds to Mr. Giffard, Surgeon, another
late Writer in Midwifery; for it seems they must all feel his critical Lash.
But as I shall leave the Defense of Mr. Giffard to his Publisher, and Reviser,
the ingenious Dr. Hoddy, who is much more capable of doing it than myself, I
shall be short in my Remarks on this Head.

First then, upon Mr. Giffards ingenuously relating, "That a Man-Midwife had
worked upon a poor Woman, and left her in a worse Condition than he found her,"
he makes this paultry Witticism, in a Parenthesis, That Midmen are not at all
Witches any more than the Midwomen.

Page 25. A little after, upon Mr. Giffards saying, that the Fate of those
Children, whose Placenta offers first, is Death, if a proper Person be not at
hand to deliver them immediately, he subjoins, who can be so proper, or likely
to be in the Way, as a skilful Midwoman? and yet at the same time he observes,
that as long as they want Skill to perform it, the Child must die before a
Midman can be brought. Now where the good Women are to meet with this
extraordinary Skill, the Reader will see in the Sequel.

Again, upon Mr. Giffard's heartily saying, "That Mischiefs may be prevented by
a skilful Operator, if sent for in Time," he replies, but much better if a
skilful Operatrix attended; thereby giving the Old Women the Preference before
the Surgeons, which, as it does not seem to have been Mr. Douglass's Drift,
must be looked upon as an unwary Concession.

Page 28. He asks what signifies finding fault with the Midwives in every Page
without attempting a Remedy? And Page 33. affirms, that it is our Way to haul
the Midwomen in HEAD and SHOULDERS, guilty or not guilty. To which I shall only
reply, that one, if not the only, Method of attempting a Remedy, is, to find
fault where they deserve it, and strictly, without Favor or Prejudice, to show
them their Errors; without which, they will never be much improved. But that we
haul them in, as he expresses himself, Head and Shoulders, guilty or not
guilty, is what Mr. Douglass ought first to have proved, before he had so
roundly and uncharitably chargd us with it.

Page 30. He asks if our Women are not as capable of being taught as the French
Women? I answer in the Affirmative, and beg he would tell me, who ever made a
Question of it?

Page 36. Upon Mr. Giffard's observing, what indeed is but too true, that the
Men-Midwife's being sent for, so late, too often proceeds from the Ignorance or
Self-sufficiency of the Midwife, he excuses them, by affirming, that it is
oftener from the Modesty of the Women, Covetousness, or real Poverty of the
Men, etc. Thus you fee his Pupils, the Midwomen, are infallible, and the Saddle
is to be placed on any Horse rather than the right one. Had Mr. Douglass long
practiced the Art of Midwifery, he would have been sufficiently sensible, that
many Men-Midwives have been hindered from being sent for in Cases of the utmost
Extremity, where the Sufferers were willing enough to have had superior Advice,
and the Husbands neither covetous nor poor.

Page 39. He says, it is true that Women may be taught the Method of touching
with very little Trouble. Now if he makes the same Concession in relation to
the other Branches of Midwifery, it is to be hoped his Lectures may be heard at
a very little Expense, which is a Consequence possibly he was not aware of.

From Mr. Giffard, Mr. Douglass advances to take notice of my own Essay upon
Midwifery, first published in 1733. and after I have dwelt so long in defending
the Character of the two forementioned Gentlemen, whose Shades are no way able
to answer for themselves, I hope I shall not be thought too partial if I should
now endeavor to defend my own, against Mr. Douglass's trifling and unjust
Aspersions.

In the first place, he charges me with complimenting the Midwomen, because I
wrote a Book for their Improvement, and thought that all the Treatises,
hitherto written on this Subject, were calculated more for the Instruction of
my own Sex than the other. Page 41. This he affirms to be a Mistake, because,
he says, Madam Du Tertre composed her Book for the Use of the Midwives
Apprentices in the Hotel Dieu, and Madam Lovys Burgeois's Book was translated
into English, and put forth for the sole Use of Midwives. Now as to the first,
I presume it never was translated (from his own Pretensions to undertake it)
and I do not pretend to understand the French Language. As to the other, I
never saw it, or heard of it before.

Upon my saying, "That I have daily, during the Space of above twenty Years
Practice, seen many fatal Mistakes committed by Midwives," he asks, what Sort
of Midwives these must have been, who committed fatal Mistakes, every Day, for
above twenty Years together? By Daily, I did not think I should be understood
every particular Day, but that I had frequently seen such fatal Practices, as
himself doubtless would, had he ever been conversant in the Practice of that
Art he would have the World believe him so expert in. Nor can I help observing
in this Place, that Mr. Douglass cannot be a proper Person to instruct others,
as not being Master of the Art himself. He then puts a Quere, how are the civil
Magistrates to be appriz'd of their Mal-practice, if the honest Testimonies of
such as are called in upon them, and are Witnesses and Judges of it, are not to
be regarded? How are the Women themselves to be made sensible of their Errors
if their Superiors are denied the Liberty of reproving them, when faulty, and
freely professing the Truth? If the Men are to be blamed for their Integrity
and Impartiality, and accused of hauling the Women in Head and Shoulders,
guilty or not guilty, whenever they blame the Midwives for their Faults, Mr.
Douglass's Quere, in relation to the civil Magistrates, is like for ever to
remain unanswered.

Again, upon my delivering it as my Opinion, "That such Mistakes could not have
happened had they ever read a Treatise so properly adapted to their Capacities,
and at the same time so full and plain as I hoped my own to be," he asks, with
his wonted Candor, whether, if they had read Madam Du Tertre's little Book,
they would not have found it more properly adapted to their Capacities, as full
and plain, and her Sentiments more accurately expressed? To which I reply, as
having never seen, nor been able to understand her Book, if I had; that I
cannot tell. Though at the same time I must, in justice to myself, observe, that
I cannot see what relation this has to the Matter in Dispute; nor can Madam Du
Tertres little Book, being as full and plain, or more accurately expressed,
than mine, hinder mine from being full and plain too, which is all that I have
asserted.

Besides, if forty Persons, as well as Madam Du Tertre, had made the same
Improvements and Observations in Practice, and wrote them in a Language I do
not understand how does that detract from, or lessen any thing I advance? A
candid Person would think that it rather confirmd it.

In the next place he taxes me with having the same Aim he has the Assurance to
assert Dr. Chamberlen had; namely, to tell the Midwomen, when, and in what
particular Cases to send for my superior Advice, and not to instruct them how
to give better Assistance themselves. After the very indecent Freedom he has
taken with the Character of Dr. Chamberlen, I cannot wonder at any he can take
with mine, as most willingly owning my own Inferiority. But before Mr. Douglass
had taxed me with this uncharitable Way of proceeding, he ought to have been
better acquainted with me than he seems to be, and to have proved, that I have
not laid down any Rules for the Improvement and Advantage of Midwives. Will he
affirm that I have advanced nothing toward their Instruction? If so, let him
ingenuously prove it, not by low and impertinent Cavils, but cool and sober
Arguments, and not arrogate to himself the Offices of both Judge and
Executioner, in a Cause wherein he appears only as an Accuser; and I doubt not,
but that before I have done pleading, the Court of impartial Readers will look
upon his Prosecution as entirely malicious, and readily grant me a Copy of my
Indictment. Does not he own that Madam Du Tertre and myself have advanced the
same Methods of Practice? And does not he highly extol many Things in her
Treatise which are found in mine? Since then we have lived in different Ages,
and have never had the least Knowledge of one another, how can that Practice be
esteemed bad in me, which is reckoned so extraordinary in Madam Du Tertre?

Page 43. He accuses me of first coaxing, and then threatening the Midwives, as
Dr. Chamberlen did before me, because I say, "I have ever found the most
experienced Midwives the most ready to call in farther Assistance, and that
they find their Account in it; whilst it is quite otherwise with those, who,
from too great an Opinion of their own Judgment and Abilities, run great
Hazards, or at the best call us in too late, and so lose their good Name, and
justly suffer in their Reputation. That the best Midwives send early for Advice
upon Appearance of Danger and Difficulty; the suffering Fair readily consents
to it, and by this means both Lives are saved." Pray who can see any thing in
this Passage like coaxing or threatening, or indeed any thing else, but plain
and known Truth? I would desire to know, who coaxes the Women, when he
immediately asks, "if the suffering Fair would not have been much more obliged
to her Midwoman, if she had performed the Work herself, and thereby saved both
the Uneasiness and Expense of superior Advice." Of the first Part of this
Accusation then, he appears to be guilty himself, and the Reader need not be at
a Loss for the Reason of it. But as for threatening, that was not Mr. Douglasss
Intention at a Time when he was bespeaking them for his Pupils; for it must be
a very silly Bird indeed, that, according to the Proverb, bewrays its own Nest.
He likewise desires to know, "If these two Speeches were not picked out of Dr.
Chamberlen's Preface?" I answer, No; but must beg leave to subjoin, that I
shall never have the worse Opinion of myself for thinking alike with so great a
Man, notwithstanding Mr. Douglass is pleased to give him the Title of a
puzzling, confounding, insinuating, insolent Nostrum-monger.

Upon my faying, "That I have an Invention of my own to extract Children when
the Head presents and sticks in the Passage, with the Fillet, which I must beg
leave to be silent in, as the great Dr. Chamberlen was before me, in choosing to
conceal the Method whereby he could extract Children in this Case without
Hooks, where other Artists are forced to use them," he adds, was there ever
such an Excuse beard of? Because the great Dr. Chamberlen, says he, acted a
very ungenerous Part in this Affair, therefore Mr. Chapman must be excused for
doing just the same Thing. Then he asks, whether I might not as well have said,
That the Doctor had been guilty of Simony or Sacrilege, and was not punished
for it, and therefore I might, for the same Reason, expect the same Grace, in
case I should ever take it in my Head to commit the same Crimes? Not
remembering his former Declaration, Page 20. Of his being far from thinking
that the Public has any Right to expect, that every private Man (who at a
considerable Expense, and assiduous Study, makes any considerable Discovery in
Manual Operations which cannot be made universally useful, as Medicines may,
and really are, etc.) should communicate gratis the Fruits of his Labor and
Expense. Besides at the same time that I keep the Fillet a Secret, I frankly
own the Forceps to be preferable, for which I give my Reasons. How then can the
Concealment of the former be an Injury to any?

A little after, Page 45. he taxes me with being mistaken, in affirming, that I
was the second Englishman who wrote originally and professedly on this Subject.
Now I never affirmed that I was the second Englishman, etc. only said, if I was
not mistaken, etc. Essay on Midwifery, first Edit. Preface, last Page but one.
This I afterward was sensible of, and accordingly heartily owned it, in my
second Edition, in this following Words, Second Edit. Preface, p. 22.
When I published the first Edition of this Work, I thought myself, at least,
the second Englishman, who had written professedly on the Subject; I have since
found I was mistaken, etc. so that Mr. Douglass himself is here guilty of a
Mistake, if not a wilful Misrepresentation. Though whether I was right or wrong
in this, it is nothing to the Subject Matter, and at best but a low and trifling
Cavil.

Upon my saying, if the Child offers any other Part than the Head, be it what
it will, the Hand is to be passed gently into the Womb, the Feet are to be
searched for, the Child to be turned, and that Way brought forth; and Page 20.
Having farther observed, that a Child, presenting with its Head, is often to be
turned and delivered with the Feet first, and in all other Postures whatever
always with the Feet first, Mr. Douglass proceeds, But suppose a Foot, or the
Feet present, what need have we then to pass the Hand into the Womb to fetch
them? And suppose the Buttocks present, and are so low in the Passage that they
cannot be pushed back without Danger, is it not much easier and quicker to slip
the Fingers over the Bend of the Thigh, or over the Ossa Ilia, and draw it
forward in that Posture, than to run the risque of forcing them back to come at
the Feet? And then triumphantly concludes it to be plain from these Quotations,
That I, notwithstanding my 25 Years Practice, was perfectly unacquainted with
this Case, though Madam Du Tertre describes it very accurately. I have said in my
first Edition, except when it presents with the Feet, etc. And, in my second,
have mentioned the Buttocks, and when the Child may be brought away in that
Posture. Page 11. I own there (by making that Case an Exception) that this had
slipped me in the first, so that nothing is more plain, than that I was not
unacquainted with the Case, though Mr. Douglass is pleased, with his usual
Candor, to accuse me of being perfectly so. No Person can possibly imagine a
Case of that Nature should never happen to me in twenty seven Years extensive
Practice. And though I forgot to take notice of it in the Essay, yet I have
sufficiently mentioned it in my Treatise. So that if the former had been much
more imperfect in this respect than it is, yet as it stands corrected in the
latter, it must certainly be very unfair and ungenerous to fix upon any but the
last Edition.

Upon my giving an Account of having with my Finger dilated and cast back the
Mouth of the Womb, and so released a little Prisoner, he asks, if Madam Du
Tertre's Finger would not have released the Prisoner as soon, and as safely as
mine? Page 47. Upon my saying again, that more than two Inches of the String
itself, from the Navel, is unnecessary, whereas I have commonly known Midwives
leave five or six, he adds; that Madam Du Tertre likewise advises the String to
be tied two Inches from the Child's Navel, and then triumphs in the following
Manner, Where now is the mighty Secret he makes such a FUSS about? Is it any
thing more than an OLD WOMAN told us before he was born? Page 48. Upon saying
too, that it is my constant Practice to pass my Hand immediately after the
Birth, in order to extract the Placenta; he enquires what there is so
extraordinary in it, that it deserves to be noted so emphatically, as my
constant Practice is? And then asks if Madam Du Tertre, etc. did not so? Page
56. Again, he twits Dr. Maubray, as well as myself, with Madam Du Tertre, as
likewise in Page 59. And lastly, Page 61. Upon my declaring my Unwillingness to
put a Person upon her Labor too early, which God knows is too often done, he
asks if Madam Du Tertre would not as carefully have avoided putting her upon
her Labor before her Time, as I did?

As for Madam Du Tertre and myself being of the same Opinion, I cannot possibly
see how he can fairly turn that to my Disadvantage, since what is right in
Madam Du Tertre can never be wrong in me. So that instead of doing me an
Injury, which I think was plainly his Intention, by such trifling Insinuations,
he has paid me a handsome Compliment, in owning my Practice to be the same with
Madam Du Tertre's whom he seems to be so very fond of.

To return; Page 47. After repeating what I have said in relation to the Folly
of dipping the Infant's Hand, when hanging out of the Womb, in cold Water,
rubbing it with Ice, or touching it with a wet Cloth, which some ignorant
Midwives practice, he desires to be informed, "how many Midwives I have ever
known guilty of these Fooleries?" I answer too many; and it is probable, had
Mr. Douglass long practiced the Art of Midwifery, he would have, met with the
same.

A much greater Instance, of his being but little conversant in this Art, he
gives us in the very next Page, where, upon my saying that few Midwives are
sufficiently appriz'd of the unhappy Symptom there mentioned, viz. a violent
Flooding, he declares, that he differs so far from me, in this Assertion, that,
in his Opinion, there is not one Midwife in a thousand who knows not, that a
violent Flooding will either occasion Abortion or Death. I confess few, if any
Midwives, can be so totally ignorant, as not to know that Flooding will
occasion Death if no Stop be put to its Fury. Yet many are apt to flatter
themselves, that the Sufferer may be delivered by her natural Pains, till it is
too late, as appears from several Cases I have cited (few to what I could have
given) which shows they were not sufficiently appriz'd of the Danger. And I
hope I may be excused being so full on this Head, as many have been before me,
since it is a Thing of such vast Consequence in Practice.

But to return back to Mr. Douglass's Observation in relation to what I
advanced about the Navel-string, Page 48. I thought it proper to mention what I
have there said, as I had very often found the leaving so much of the String to
be a common Practice, and indeed the Custom, of most Midwives in the Country. I
never once mentioned it as a Secret; so the FUSS about it, as he elegantly
words it, is with himself.

Again, as to his Quere, whether it is not every Body's Practice to pass their
Hand immediately and examine if there are any more Children, and if no more, to
fetch the Placenta? I answer No; not even among the Assistants of my own Sex,
much less with the Women, for I assert that few of them take this Method.

Few Midwives, even in this Town, pass their Hand (if I may give credit to
their Declaration, and my own Experience) and fewer yet in the Country. So that
the Woman in whose Case this is mentioned had really stood but a bad Chance;
had an ignorant Midwife been called in upon her, as I have there affirmed. Here
Mr. Douglass has certainly burnt his Fingers, and taken hold of one of the best
Observations in my whole Book; which may serve to show his extraordinary
Judgment. That few Midwives in this Town do pass their Hand is an Affirmation I
dare submit to the Chief of the Profession. Pray whence comes it that we are so
often sent for to extract the Placenta?

Is not what I have wrote on this Subject Matter of Instruction to Midwives?
And therefore as it is against my own Interest, it must be judged to be honest
at least, which, I trust will have no small Weight in my Favor.

If I have written any thing that will not stand the Test, but that my
Herculean Antagonist does not pretend to, why do not proper Judges disprove me?
If nothing but what will stand the Trial, why must I be loaded with such
trifling and malicious Cavils? Really I think no one more unhappy, than he who
snarls, and shows his Teeth, yet cannot bite; and I at once despise and pity
such a Person.

All Midwives are not Du Tertre's; and why I should not say, this is my
constant Practice, I know not; nor do I see wherein I could offend any Person
thereby (and nothing surely but Calumny and Ill Nature could ever have
suggested a Censure from this.) How wrongfully then does he accuse me of having
condemned the Midwives unjustly, because I affirm, that if an ignorant Midwife
had been concerned in the Case abovementioned, who had only taken the first
Child and Afterbirth, the last would probably have been left behind, and
either violent Flooding, or a bad Fever would have ensued; and, as the Woman
was before ill, and extremely weak, it would very likely have cost her her
Life? Is not what I have said true? Can what is here spoken, of an ignorant
Midwife, belong to a good one? And would not one, ignorant of her Profession,
have occasioned in all Probability the Misfortune I there mention? For I say
again, that few do pass their Hand. Upon the whole then, I think I may with
most Justice retort his own Words upon him, and apply what he says of the
Midwives to myself, viz. That, guilty or not guilty, it is all one, I must be
haul'd in, and condemned for an imaginary as well as a real Fault. Page 50.

Page 51. He relates the Case of my being sent for to a Gentlewoman who kept a
Tavern at Ipswich, viz. that the Child was dead, and the Mother flooding; that
when two Midwives and a Surgeon, just then set out in the Profession, had all
used their Endeavors to little or no Purpose, I was called in, and delivered
her in a Minute; that I left her under the Care of Dr. Beeston, but that she
died in six or seven Days. Upon this he very heartily observes, that I have not
indeed told this young Gentleman's Name, though I have described him so well that
he doubts there is not a Man in all Ipswich, nor perhaps twenty Miles round, but
can tell who I mean; and then craftily insinuates, What Injury might not such a
Tale do a worthy young Fellow? And twits me with being inconsistent with
myself, in relation to the Advice I gave in Page 114. of my first Edition;
namely, that we should not take an unkind Advantage of a Slip or Accident that
may happen to befall a Brother in his Practice.

I hope I cannot fairly be charged with being inconsistent with myself, or
taking an unkind Advantage of a Brother, whereas the Publication of my Essay
was many Years after the Case referred to, and the young Surgeon there
mentioned, had in all Probability, either given up that Branch of Practice, or
was well established in it.

In the next Page he cites a Passage from my Preface, wherein I say that the
Dignity of this Art will appear to every Person in a much more advantageous
Light, if we reflect on the Learning of the Professors of it, and then
ignominiously subjoins, E. G. Dr. C --, Dr. M --, Dr. W --, Dr. G --, Dr. A --,
Dr. B --, Dr. Gregoire, Tota notus in Urbe! etc. It is much to be wished that
Mr. Douglass had condescended so far as to have filled up this formidable
Catalogue of Blanks, that the Gentlemen, he there reflects upon, might have a
fair Opportunity of defending themselves from such scurrilous Treatment. Is
this being consistent with himself, to charge me with detracting from a young
Surgeon's Character, in so favorable a Manner; as not to give even the initial
Letter of his Name; when in the very next Paragraph, he uncharitably and
maliciously insults the Reputation of no less than seven Physicians, as he
himself seems to own, by giving them all the Title of Doctor; but if by this he
would only aim at those who would willingly impose themselves upon the World as
such, he should have told us their real Names, that Gentlemen of Learning and
Character may not suffer thereby; there being several Physicians of Reputation
in this City, the initial Letters of whose Names are the same he has thought
fit to set down.

Upon my saying, that the Improvements these, great Men have made in this Art,
have effectually wiped away the Load of Slander and Ignominy, with which this
Profession was formerly branded, he has the Assurance to ask, for I can call it
nothing else, if ninety nine in a hundred (a pretty large Proportion truly) of
these great Men I talk of, have not kept their Improvements to themselves? With
this insinuating Doubt, if ever they made any.

Now if this be not scurrilous Treatment, I know not what can possibly be so.
But this is not all, he proceeds farther, and asks if most of them now, as well
as myself, don't pretend to have Secrets? And if they don't endeavor to
puzzle, at the same time they make a show of instructing others? Don't they,
says he likewise, very seldom, if ever, consult together, as they always ought
to do in difficult or dangerous Cases? And then asks, What can hinder them,
except the Fear of discovering the Insignificancy of their pretended Secret, or
their REAL IGNORANCE? What intolerable Usage is here? What Opinion must
Bystanders have of the Profession, when one, who would impose himself upon the
Town as a Judge, represents the Professors of it as a Set of crafty, puzzling,
ignorant People? How far his Fellow Citizens are to thank him, for deterring,
by false and malicious Hints, those who are already (from a mistaken and
blameable Modesty) too averse to the Assistance of Men-Midwives, in Cases of
Extremity, where a faithful Wife, or hopeful Heir may perhaps be lost, is what
I think every reasonable Man may determine. But I shall leave him to the
Resentment of those worthy Gentlemen he has so much insulted, and only observe
farther on this Head, that I well hoped, (and still with Reason do) that the
late, and present Practitioners, had wiped off the Load of Scandal that was
used to blacken this Profession, and designed a just Compliment to them. But
nothing can stand good where Envy and Ill Nature meet. And indeed if they have
not done it, I can only be accused of being too complaisant; which is a Fault I
must do Mr. Douglass the Justice to own he has no where in his Book been guilty
of, unless once to his Friend and Countryman, Dr. Mitchell, as will presently
be made appear.

Upon my saying, in the second Edition of my Book, that I did not send my
Papers to the Press till I had got a Friend to revise and correct the Diction,
which I believe is not an usual thing, he desires to he informed, if I can be a
tolerable Judge of Diction myself, who have suffered my Friend to write
Woman-Midwife, Women-Midwives, etc. and then blames me, or my Corrector, for
calling Dr. Maubray an ingenious and laborious Author, endeavoring, at the
same time, to set the Doctor in a very ridiculous Light. Now allowing Dr.
Maubray to be as silly a Writer as Mr. Douglass would have him, he must own at
least, that I have some Goodnature in me (to which Mr. Douglass seems to be a
Stranger) to allow him a Character he did not well deserve. I shall always
endeavor to speak with Modesty and Respect of my Superiors; not following Mr.
Douglass's Example in recommending and puffing myself to the Town, as the only
Dictator left in my Profession.

After Mr. Douglass has vented his Spleen upon the Doctor, he triumphs in the
following Manner. "Pray does such a Writer as this deserve the Epithets of
ingenious and laborious? Wherein does his Ingenuity appear? Wherein is his
Labor of any Use? Pray can any thing expose a Man's Judgment more than
laughing or hissing, praising or finding fault in the wrong Place" Page 56.

Without doubt Mr. Douglass has Penetration enough to avoid those Sands in
which he sees others sink; and so great a Reformer as himself can never be
suspected of being guilty of those Faults he so vehemently reproves in others.
But to judge him now by his own Words. He reprimands me for calling Dr.
Maubray, an ingenious and laborious Author, and at the same time gives the late
Dr. Mitchell the Epithets, of a just, tart, reverend, and learned Writer. After
what I have advanced above, in relation to Mr. Douglass's very ill Usage of the
Gentlemen of the Faculty, it may seem odd perhaps, that I should here question
the Reputation of any Gentleman myself; nor should any thing have induced me to
it, had I not here a very fair Opportunity to display Mr. Douglass's great
Partiality. In order to which I appeal to all the Physicians in this Town, to
whom the LEARNED Dr. Mitchell, as he calls him, was but too well known, whether
he was not the great Physical-fool of the Age? The standing Jest of all his
Acquaintance? Though some Men of Sense thought him too low even for that, And as
for his SOOTERKIN DISSECTED, wherein, Mr. Douglass says, he has so JUSTLY and
TARTLY reprimanded Dr. Maubray (who certainly deserved it for such a false and
credulous Surmise as the Existence of the Suyger or Sucher, had Dr. Mitchell
been able to have done it) it is too well known, for its execrable Stupidity,
to need any Examination in this Place. For the Truth of which I Will stand by the
Determination of the most partial Reader that ever perused this extraordinary
Performance, excepting only Mr. Douglass, who, if he went through it with a grave
and composed Countenance, is, I believe, the only one that ever did. Mr.
Douglass too assures us, that he was, Utriusque Medicinae Doctor. P. 55.
Greatly to the Honor of both the Professions no doubt! Pray was not desiring
him to show his Diploma, which some Gentlemen of top Reputation thought to be a
sham one, a standing Jest at Child's? Was it not always produced with the
utmost Shame and Reluctance?

Now to retort Mr. Douglass's Words upon himself, which may be done with the
utmost Justice; pray does such a Writer as this deserve the Epithets of just,
tart, reverend, or learned? Risum teneatis? Wherein does his Tartness or
Learning appear? Pray can any thing expose a Man's Judgment more than laughing
or hissing, praising or finding fault in the wrong Place? And pray who would
think Mr. Douglass a Judge of Learning himself, who calls such a Writer as
this, a LEARNED one?

But to return; what had I to do with Dr. Maubray's Treatise, beyond what
belonged to my Subject? He might be very learned and laborious, yet erroneous
too; as I prove he was in relation to the Forceps, in which being obliged to be
close upon him, I thought I could do no less than do him Justice where I found
him right. I had no Business rudely to rake into his Ashes, neither was I
answering or writing against his Book. Besides, I showed him the more Respect,
from hearing him well spoken of by better Judges than Mr. John Douglass, or
myself. Nor could I imagine a Piece of just Civility would ever have been made
so illnatur'd an Use of by any, much less by the Doctor's own Countryman. Had I
treated Dr. Maubray with the ungentlemanlike Freedom Mr. Douglass has Dr.
Chamherlen, he might then, and I doubt not would, have fallen upon me for that
too. So that civil or uncivil, guilty or not guilty, I must be haul'd in, as he
says the Midwomen are, by the Head and Shoulders. Page 55. He hopes I will
explain the Doctor's Account of Men being changed into Women, in my next
Edition, for he owns, as it stands in the Doctor's Book, it is far beyond his
Comprehension; and that the Account he gives of it is so sublime, that it
rather puzzles than instructs him. But in the Name of Wonder what is all this
to me? What have I to do to explain in any Author that which is foreign to my
Subject. If I am to answer for all the silly or wrong things that are advanced
in Authors, I shall have enough to do with a Witness.

He says I make a great SPLUTTER (elegant indeed!) about breaking the Membranes
of the second Child, in Order to bring it away by the Feet, as if I had
discovered something new. But however, to make me some amends, he immediately
pays me a great Compliment, by observing that Dr. Maubray's Words on this
Occasion, which, he says, are perfect NONSENSE, are very different from mine;
which, as it is the only Place in his whole Book wherein he seems to have any
tolerable Opinion of me, I would not be thought so ungrateful as not to take
some notice of it. I never imagined that in this Case I had discovered any
thing new; and what I there said was for the Information of Women, who most of
them, if not all, leave the Birth of the second Child to Nature. So that I
think his own very genteel SPLUTTER might have been as well omitted.

In the same Page he asks, "Who ever called the Flowing of the Waters a
Flooding, but myself." And observes, that every body else means a dangerous
Flux of Blood by a Flooding. I never did call the Flowing of the Waters a
Flooding. It Is a base and false Charge. Pray have not I taken notice, that the
Flowing of the Waters was wrongfully called a Flooding? What Mr. Douglass then
has here said might have been let alone. I could as easily have called it
NONSENSE as himself.

Again, because I honestly and earnestly recommend the careful Extraction of
the Placenta, which can never be left behind without the greatest Danger, he
observes, Page 57. after his Laconick Manner, that I make a great ROUT about it
for three Pages together, as if no body had known any thing of the Matter
before; and upon my saying that I am glad to find Dr. Maubray recommending so
safe a Practice, he asks, "If I can find any body who does not recommend it, as
well as Dr. Maubray and myself?" Let who will recommend or disrecommend it, I Am
sure I have found several that don't practice it, to the endangering of their
Patients Lives; and to prevent such ill Consequences for the future, Was the
Reason of my making such a ROUT about it, or rather so faithfully and earnestly
recommending it.

I still assert that the Placenta is often left by Midwives, and for their
Instruction alone, it was I spoke so much about it. How-then can what I have
said be called a ROUT? But Mr. Douglass must necessarily be elegant if he
writes at all.

He affirms in the same Page 57. That I have censured Dionis, which I think, I
have done with a deal of Justice, for saying, "That the Placenta in an Abortion
of two or three Months may be left to come away of itself," and then replies,
That undoubtedly this may very often be done without ANY Danger, though he adds,
that it is certainly SAPER to bring it away at first, if sent for in Time, etc.
which seems to me to be Nonsense; for if it he safer to bring it away at first,
how can it be left without any Danger? Does not the Word safer naturally imply
a1 Danger in its being left behind? If not, how can one Practice be safer than
the other. If the Child has been come away some Time, he says, he should give
himself no Trouble about it till a Flooding appeared, and affirms, that he knew
it once left whole (by the Obstinacy of the Mother, who could by no means be
persuaded to have it taken away) between the fourth and fifth Month, and yet
she did very well. Whether the Words, I knew it once, were here meant to
signify his own practicing of this Art, I cannot determine; but he himself
seems to think this Practice wrong by blaming the Woman with Obstinacy, for not
consenting to have it taken away. Indeed, as he says, she might notwithstanding
this have done well; but then it was certainly great odds she might not, and
her Recovery was doubtless more owing to good luck than any thing else.

He says the experienced Mr. Giffard is also of the same Opinion, when he
observes, "That of two Evils the greater ought to be shunned, there being less
Danger in leaving Part of the Afterbirth, which will very often, without doing
any great harm, come away with the Lochia, than in using any force in
extracting it, by which we very often hurt the Womb." Without doubt of two
Evils the lesser ought always to be chosen; but I think Mr. Giffard's Words are
here to be taken with great Restriction. For his saying that the remaining Part
of the Placenta will often come away with the Lochia, implies that it will not
always do so; and that it will do no great harm plainly intimates that it may
do some. The Womb to be sure is never to be hurt, in extracting the Placenta;
and when it cannot be got away, without doing more harm than the Retention of
it may occasion (which I believe but seldom happens) it must doubtless be left
behind. But then this is nothing to the Necessity of its being always taken
away, which is what I have so earnestly recommended. Will Mr. Douglass affirm,
that it is ever safer to have it retained, than extracted? I hope he will not
pretend to give this Advice in his Lectures, lest Mankind should be but little
indebted to him, and the State of Midwifery, after his mighty Endeavors to
reform it, be left in a much worse Condition than he found it. This ought to be
looked upon as one of the most certain Maxims in Practice, that, where it can
possibly be done, the Womb ought to be cleared, and nothing suffered to be
included in it, lest a Fever or Flooding should ensue, which are but too
commonly the Consequences of such a Neglect.

A little after, he says, I give one Instance of a Child I delivered with the
Buttocks foremost, and then asks, how does this quadrate, with what I say, Page
11. of the same Book. "If the Child offers any other part than the Head, the
Hand is to be passed into the, Womb, the Feet searched for, and the Child, to
be turned, and brought forth by them." Here he wilfully omits an Exception I
make in the very next Line, thus: But there is one Case to be excepted, viz.
when the Child presents the Buttocks, and is far advanced in that Posture, even
beyond the Labia; it is then to be extracted as it lies: which I should choose
to perform by passing a Finger or two of one Hand, or if possible of both Hands
to the Groin, and thus bring the Child away, rather than attempt the FEET: This
however can be done only when the Child is small, or the Woman large; otherwise
the Woman is to be laid on her Back, with her Hips raised, and her Shoulders
low, and then the Child to be returned, so as the Feet may be commanded.

In the same Page, after having repeated what I said, in Case of a Child that
was extracted with its Face lying toward the Os Pubis, Page 174. of my second
Edit. "That I was unwilling to have recourse to Art." He proceeds, "Is it not
the Art of Midwifery, which the Midwomen have been taught, the only thing which
distinguishes them from other Women? Are not they obliged to make use of their
Art at every Labor they are called to? Why then does he so often make use of
the Words Art and Artists, and only apply them to himself and some other Men?
Will Not any one, who reads Madam Du Tertre's little Book, be convinced, that she
has shown more Art, and better Diction, than either Dr. Maubray, or -- Does her
being a Woman make it improper to say, she had Recourse to Art, or that she was
an Artist?"

I shall only observe here, that all the common Assistance was before given;
and as all Artists well know, the Expulsion now lay wholly upon Nature, except
the taking hold of the Head, which I was unwilling to come to, if Nature would
have finished her Work herself. But what harm there is in making use of the
Terms Art and Artists, I profess myself utterly incapable to comprehend. As to
his Query, why I keep the Fillet a Secret, after I have owned it to be neither
so speedy nor so secure a Method as the Forceps? Page 59. I shall only answer,
That I was fairly and honestly resolved to own as much, and that I had already
done it in the Body of my Treatise. So how insignificant this Remark is, will
appear to every Reader.

But in relation to his charging me with the Cut of the Forceps being but an
indifferent one, Page 60. I think I am not to answer for the Fault of the
Engraver, since the Form and Dimensions, the Use and Advantage are the same,
whether well represented or not?

Again, as to his asserting that I endeavor to fob him off with saying, that
all other People's Fillets are for the Foot, and mine only for the Head, I
heartily disown it. I never yet said that all other People's were for the Foot,
etc. but only that I did not believe the manner of passing it over the Head to
he so universally known and practiced. Which I still have as much Reason to
believe as ever; and if so, why must not I have the Liberty to mention it?

Page 62. After repeating two Instances wherein Mr. Giffard and myself have
complained of Mal-Practice, he subjoins, "Could a Turk believe there were any
wholesome Laws in a Country where such Barbarities were not severely punished?"
To which I shall only reply, as I have once before observed, how can the guilty
be punished for them, or how can their Faults ever come to the Cognizance of
the Public, if those who are Witnesses of them, and heartily relate them, must
have a Noise and Clamor raised against them, for so doing, and be represented
as a Set of partial designing Men, hauling in the Women by the Head and
Shoulders, and accusing them whether guilty or not?

In the Instance of Mal-Practice there mentioned, I have observed, that a
Physician was sent for, who had lately taken upon him to practice Midwifery,
but was so little acquainted with the Art, that he neglected the only thing
necessary in that Case, viz. a speedy Delivery by turning the Child; which
Words, marked here in Italick, he reprints in capital Letters, as pointing out,
I presume, my indecent Usage of a Gentleman or the Faculty. But if such a
Representation of bad Practice, as this, deserves to be distinguish in
Capitals, where shall we find Letters or Paper large enough to display his own
gross Usage of Dr. Chamberlen, and other Physicians?

Page 63. Mr. Douglass makes a very ungentleman like Reflection on many great
and worthy Gentlemen of the Faculty of Physic, and asks where these Doctors
could be admitted to their Degrees? Must it not, says he, have been in some
Popish Country, where Orthodoxy is reckoned a better Recommendation than the
Knowledge of Diseases? Where visiting Chapels three or four times a Day is
thought more conducive to the making a good Physician, than frequenting the
Hospitals as often? Among the rest he here ungenerously reflects on one, who
when he wrote this had the Honor to be related to (I mean his own Brother,
lately dead at St. Christophers) who, I have been told, took his Degree in
France. But what has the Religion of a Country to do with Art and Science? Have
not several extraordinary Men in the Profession, nay some of the greatest
Ornaments of it, taken their Degrees in Popish Countries. To mention no more
than his favorite Baglivi, whom he justly styles incomparable?

I shall dwell no longer on this ungenerous Subject, than whilst I put the
following Queries to him;

1. Whether his witty Reflections on Degrees taken in a Popish Country, are not
a monstrous Mixture of Impertinence, Ill-manners and Falsehood? 2. Whether a Man
is better qualified for Practice in England, who has been complimented with a
Degree from Leyden, a Scots University, or by the Prince's Nomination when at
Cambridge or Oxford, than some Gentlemen I could mention who studied in foreign
Countries, were regularly graduated, and are even licensed by the College at
London? 3. Whether visiting Churches is incompatible with visiting Hospitals?
Are well timed Acts of Devotion lawful Objections against the Qualifications of
a Physician? 4. Where did he know Degrees conferred on the Account of Orthodoxy,
preferable to other Qualifications?
Page 64. He asks if we don't want a proper School for Midmen as well as for
Midwomen? By which at least he intimates that Midwomen do; and now the Plot
begins to open. But if Men want a proper School, as well as Women, how comes it
that Mr. Douglass will not condescend to instruct them too? Why does he publish
Proposals for Midwomen only. Page 75? Thereby excluding the poor unhappy Men
from the Benefit of his Assistance. Surely the Reader will not be so unmannerly
as to suppose, what he does in relation to the Physician-Midwives not
consulting together, Page 52. and think that it is the Fear of his discovering
the Insignificancy of his pretended Lectures, or his own real Ignorance? Utrum
horum.

Upon my relating that a Woman had been twice or thrice delivered by a Man, of
Children that always presented with the Head, which the Operator took a fatal
Freedom with, viz. using the Hook, he asks, "How I could tell, who was not
present, but that all these Children were dead?" So that in one Place he blames
me for not finding fault with People where they deserve it, Page 58. and now he
condemns me because I do, and endeavors to excuse the Person in a Fault, though
he was not present himself, and consequently can know nothing of the Matter. Is
this being consistent with himself, as he asks me, Page 5? So that to use his
own Words, Does he expect to fob the Reader off so (Page 60.) and must not he
think him very weak and illiterate if he believed him? A little farther he
asks, "If a Man ought not to be very sure, before he accuses another after this
Manner?" To apply which to himself, ought not he to have been sure of the Truth
of what Dr. Chamberlen, Mr. Giffard, and myself had asserted, before he had
accused us of condemning the Women, guilty or not? Who does he expect should
inform him? Will the Women be ingenuous and honest enough to confess their own
Mal-Practice? And how can he tell, who was not present, whether we have accused
them unjustly or not? As for his thinking me to blame for not saying, whether
this fatal Freedom-taker was a Doctor or an Ayothecary Midman; probably I may
bethought much more culpable, when I tell him that it was a SURGEON Midman; but
as to the Truth of this Relation, I have all the Reason in the World to believe
the Children were living, if Credit may be given to no less than three Matrons
who were present at the several Labors, and all asserted the Fact. This indeed
was that Person's constant practice to Children in that Case, viz. to fetch
them with the Hook, whether living or dead.

In the same Page he excuses me in a great measure, though perhaps not
intentionally, for having slipped the Mention of a Child's advancing with the
Buttocks in my first Edition, by observing that Dr. Nicholls has omitted the it
in the following remarkable Passage, In omni malo situ, ut and in rebus
desperatis, pedibus extrahetur Foetus. Compend. Anat. Now if Dr. Nicholls, whom
he very justly styles excellent, has forgot to animadvert upon this Particular,
surely I, who am so much his Inferior, may be excused the same.

Having thus, as he thinks, triumphed over Dr. Chamberlen, Mr. Giffard, and
myself, he proceeds to make what he calls Deductions from the Premises; and
after expatiating upon the Havoc that is oftentimes made among his Majesty's
Subjects, by the Ignorance of Midwomen, he asks, if calling of Names, such as
rude, rough, negligent, ignorant, foolish, obstinate, etc. which we have so
liberally bestowed upon them, will make them more prudent or judicious, or
enable them in any degree to give better Assistance themselves, and then
replies in the Negative. Where Midwives are really rude, rough, negligent,
obstinate, ignorant, etc. ought they not to be properly reproved and
reprimanded for it? How will they otherwise know their Faults? Surely this open
Treatment of them is a very improper Method of getting them all at our BECK, as
he craftily insinuates; and I heartily agree with him, Page 66. That nothing
can better deserve the Attention even of the Legislature itself. But how is the
Legislature to be informed of the true State of their Practice, if we are not
to have the honest Liberty of professing and asserting the Truth? Will the
Midwomen, as he styles them, come and accuse themselves, or is the Legislature
to provide a Remedy for an Evil, of which they have no Knowledge or
Information? The Verdict of the regularly instructed, experienced, and knowing
Professors of this Art is likely to be much set by in the Eye of the
Legislature, if Mr. Douglass's Opinion of them is to be of any Weight, who has
unjustly and maliciously represented them as a Set of designing, puzzling,
crafty, covetous, hard-hearted, insolent, ignorant Nostrum-mongers. Is this
remedying die Evil he so loudly complains of, to deter our Wives and Daughters
from regular Assistance, by his calumnious Insinuations, and make them fling
themselves into the Hands of Women only, the Ignorance of whom he himself, a
little after, confesses to be undoubtedly the principal, if not the sole Cause
of these dire Events, ( Page 68.) Is it Charity and Humanity, which he pretends
so much to profess ( Page 66.) that has induced him to this? Surely no! ( P.
66.)

Page 67. and 68. he confesses, that our Wives and Children are cruelly
massacred by ignorant Hands, and that Numbers have been and daily are destroyed
by the Ignorance of Midwives. Have Writers in Midwifery then accused them
unjustly, and haul'd them in by the Head and Shoulders, whether guilty or not?

Page 66. He desires to know, "If these Gentlemen Complainants have proposed
any other Method, to prevent, for the future, this calamitous, this dismal,
this inhuman Practice, except to send for one of them, upon every little
trifling Difficulty?" Then he proceeds, "Is not this making mere Nurses of the
Midwomen, and -- ( Fools I suppose he means) "of their Patients? Is it not
telling them plainly, that they neither do, nor shall ever know any more of the
Matter by any Information they will give them, than (what they knew before)
just to receive a Child which drops into their Hands?"

Lastly, he accuses us of making mere Jackcalls of them, to hunt about in
Search of our Prey, and then send for us to devour it (P. 67.) Now is not the
very Reverse of all this true? Have not these Gentlemen Complainants, as he
calls them, proposed the best Methods to prevent this inhuman Practice? Do not
they instruct them faithfully in their Writings, and endeavor to make Midwives
instead of Nurses of them? Do they desire the Midwives to send for them upon
every little trifling Difficulty? And are they not Cases of real Difficulty and
Danger they desire to be called in upon? Does not he allow himself ( Page 70.)
that in many Cases Instruments are absolutely necessary, that they ought to
send directly for a Surgeon, instead of fatiguing the Mother, and endangering
both her and her Child, by needless Delays and fruitless Attempts. Are we to be
blamed then for informing them, in what Circumstances to send for us? Is it not
rather our Duty to do it? Would he have Women Midwives only concerned in Cases
of Extremity? Is instructing them in the most approved Methods of Practice, and
the Manner of turning Children with the greatest Safety, the same thing as
telling them, That they shall never know any more of the Matter, than they did
before? And is honestly exhorting them to send for superior Assistance, in
order to save a Fellow Creature from an untimely Death, making them like
Jackcalls to hunt about for our Prey, and then send for us to devour it? Or
rather must not he be besides himself, or at least think his Readers so, to be
gulled by such notorious Falsehoods?

But Page 70. Surgeons are directly to be sent for; why not such Physicians as
practice this Art? Have not they as much Knowledge, Experience, Charity, and
Integrity as the Surgeons? Are they not as capable of attaining to Perfection
in Manual Operations, and of using proper Instruments with as much Judgment and
Dexterity as the Surgeons? Why then must not they be concerned too? But as Dr.
Baynard says upon another Occasion, Oh! Self, Self, what a selfish Thing art
thou Hist. of cold Bathing, Ed. 5. p. 268.
!

Page 68. He says that the Unskilfulness of Midwives, is owing to their want of
a Proper Education, and not to their want of Capacity, and asserts, that it is
more their Misfortune than their Fault. I think, in many respects, the contrary
will hold good. For can it possibly be more their Misfortune than their Fault,
that they have not got such Instruction as is in their Power, from Books that
have been written for this Purpose? How many are there to be met with, that
never give themselves the Trouble of perusing them for their Information? Is
not this manifestly more their Fault than Misfortune, and owing rather to their
Indolence, and good Opinion of their own Sufficiency, than a want of means for
their Instruction?

Mr. Douglass thinks ( Page 68.) this fatal Distemper may be cured, and all its
bad Consequences for the future avoided, if it was put in the Power of the
Midwomen to qualify themselves thoroughly, and at a moderate Expense, in all
the Parts of their most necessary Office, before they are permitted to
practice. In order to attain this most desirable End, Mr. Douglass proposes,
First, the erecting an Hospital in London and Westminster (at the public
Expense, by Donation or Subscriptions, as several Almshouses, Infirmaries,
Hospitals, etc. of far less Consequence to the Commonweal, have been, and are
daily carried on) for the Reception of about two or three hundred poor Women
who are big with Child. Secondly, That a proper Number of Midwomen be appointed
to attend them. Thirdly, That two SURGEONS Midmen be appointed to assist these
Midwome, in all extraordinary Cases, and to demonstrate the Structure of the
Parts concerned, explaining the Art of touching, etc. in set Lectures, at least
three Times a Week, to all the Midwomen and their Apprentices who please to
attend. Fourthly, That every young Woman, who designs to practice Midwifery, be
obliged to attend these Courses, during her Apprenticeship* then go and
practice, for a set Time, under those expert Women in that Hospital; afterward
let them be examined, as to the Skill and Knowledge they have acquired in their
Profession, by two Surgeons, and six or seven other Persons, appointed by his
Majesty (because he does not think it reasonable that so many People's Bread
should depend on the Humor and Caprice of any two Men only) and if approved,
to receive from them a Certificate of their Fitness to practice in London, or
any where else. Fifthly, That until fit Hospitals can be built and endowed, a
Midman be appointed in every City, or Country-town in England, to read the
foresaid Lectures to all the Midwomen in the County, and demonstrate to them
the Truth of their Doctrines on the Poor of the Neighborhood, of which there
are plenty every where.

I shall forbear making any Remarks upon this Scheme, lest Mr. Douglass should
put a bad Construction on it; and shall only observe, that I shall be as glad
to see a proper Hospital erected, or any other Measures concerted for the
Improvement of Midwifery, as himself, and shall be as ready to contribute any
thing in my Power toward the Instruction of Midwives. 'Twas this Reason alone
that induced me to write my Essay on the Improvement of Midwifery, wherein I
have heartily informed them, according to the best of my Power. And can Mr.
Douglass be thought to have the real Interest of this Profession at his Heart,
when he fells foul upon Dr. Chamberlen, Mr. Giffard, and myself, for
endeavoring to improve it, and because we reprimand the guilty and ignorant,
and desire them to send for superior Advice in Cases of Extremity, and not
sacrifice the Life of the Mother, or Child, and oftentimes both to their own
Sufficiency? Does not he allow the Midwives himself to be oftentimes very
ignorant ( Page 68.)? And would not he have them instructed as before observed
( Page 70.) in the Knowledge of those Cases where Instruments are absolutely
necessary, that they may send directly for a SURGEON, etc. Now if there is many
times a Necessity for calling in better Assistance, of which no Man in his
Senses can doubt, why must we be so much blamed for honestly enforcing the same
Advice? Are we for this to be stigmatized as People who will not instruct them,
and represented as a Set of crafty designing Men, who had rather puzzle and
confound, than illustrate and improve the Art we profess? Is it not a little
surprising that Mr. Douglass should expect the Town to have any Opinion of his
Probity, or take any notice of his Scheme or himself, who can be guilty of
using others in such an unjust and scurrilous Manner. Though, as I observed
before, I should be glad to see any Scheme put in Execution for the real Good
and Improvement of Midwifery, yet I cannot be so sanguine, in relation to Mr.
Douglass's Proposal, as he himself seems to be, viz. That in very few Years
there would hardly be an ignorant Midwoman in England, Page 74.

The Profession might certainly receive great Advantage; but to extirpate
Ignorance, to that Degree, is a very hard Task indeed. When Mr. Douglass has
performed this wonderful Feat, I would have him undertake to find out the
Longitude, and square the Circle.

But Mr. Douglass having some Reason to doubt, whether the Public would take
any notice of this Scheme or not, has proposed another Expedient in the
Interim, and that is, to give a Course of Midwifery to Midwomen only (for the
Men it seems are to be deprived of this vast Advantage) wherein he promises
that the principal Operations of that Art shall be briefly explained (Page
ult.) And for their greater Encouragement assures them, that he is no less than
the Goddess of Midwifery, and the only one that is able to instruct them.

-- Dea sum Auxiliaris, opemque
Exorata-fero.
Here Mr. Douglass has openly acknowledged himself to be but an Old-woman;
which is the first modest Concession I have met with throughout his Book. How
far that threatening Parenthesis in Page 68. viz. That they, who did not
readily embrace the Opportunity, would not only be deservedly blamed, but ought
to be punished by the Civil Magistrate, may influence. Women to come to those
Lectures, I must leave.

Those, who pretend to instruct others in any Art, ought, to he Well versed in
it themselves; and as Midwifery is a Manual Operation, so it cannot well be
acquired but by a due Course of Practice. Whether Mr. Douglass has been much
conversant in this Profession, I will not take upon me to determine; though, I
confess, I never heard any Pretensions he had to Midwifery before he advertised
the printing of his Book. Indeed he tells us in Page 58. That he knew the
Placenta once left behind, which does not amount to any Proof of his practicing
himself, for he might know that by Relation, without ever having really
exercised this Art. But in Page 65. he goes farther, and informs us, that he
has found the Scissura rimae, ab Vulva ad Anum by REPEATED EXPERIENCE, not to
be at all dangerous, etc. which he might have experienced as a Surgeon, and not
professedly as a Man-Midwife, it being commonly a Surgeon's Business, and for
which Mr. Douglass might frequently have been consulted. There is no other
Passage to be met with in his whole Book, wherein he gives us the least Hint of
his having practiced himself. From whence I think We may fairly conclude, that
Mr. Douglass has bat very lately taken up this Profession; otherwise surely he
would not have omitted to have said something of his long Practice and
Experience, in order to bespeak the more favorable Opinion of himself among
the good Women. Before Mr: Douglass had made any Proposals for Lectures to the
Town, he ought at least to have cleared up this Doubt, Whether or no be ever
delivered a Woman in his Life. If not, the Reader may judge how fit he is to
take upon him the Instruction of others. He doubts not, P. 70. but the Midmen
will object and say, That the Midwomen want both Capacity and Strength
(instruct them as you please) to perform what he proposes. To which he
immediately replies, "That this is only an artful and groundless Insinuation,
and affirms, ore rotundo, plenis buccis (as he chooses to express himself) that
it is not want of Capacity, Docility, Strength, or Activity, but merely want of
fit and full Instructions in all the Parts of their Office, which disables them
to perform it in all Cases (excepting where Instruments are necessary) with as
much Ease, Safety, and Expedition, as the most dextrous Midman, etc." Must not
this Gentleman be in great Want of Matter to show his Abilities upon, to haul
in the Midmen making an Objection they probably never so much as thought of?
Before he had proceeded to this, he ought first to have told us, ore rotundo,
plenis buccis, as he affects to write, who ever doubted of the Women's want of
Docility, Strength, etc. Nor do I see what this Observation was brought in
upon, unless it was for the Sake of this paultry Scrap of Latin, that the Women
might take him for a great Scholliard, and admire his profound Knowledge in
that learned Language, like Scrub in the Play, who affirms, "That though he does
not understand Latin, yet he thinks there is something very pretty in the Sound
of it." As to their Want of fit Instructions in their Profession, I have before
observed, that they have more Opportunities of Information from Books that have
from Time to Time been printed for the Improvement of the Art of Midwifery,
than many of them through Indolence and Self-sufficiency ever made use of; as is
very plain from their running counter in Practice to the Rules there laid down.
And I am much deceived, if they may not meet with as much or more Information,
from Books, for the Value of three or four Shillings, as they will from
Lectures of so many Guineas. Besides, the great Probability of what they hear
in Lectures slipping out of their Memory, whilst a Book is always at Hand, and
ready to give them constant and repeated Instruction, if they will but be at
the Trouble of consulting it.

Page 73. He asks, if all Ages have not produced Women, who have made a Figure
in the most sublime Parts of Learning, and in all Manner of curious and useful
Arts? (But what Necessity for this Query? Who ever doubted it?) and then
subjoins, and also illiterate, thickheaded Priests, Lawyers, and Physicians?
But what have the Lawyers and Priests done to disoblige Mr. Douglass, that they
must be haul'd in too, by the Head and Shoulders, in a Book of Midwifery? But
all it seems must feel his critical Lash;

He hints, Page 73. That at the Time of Delivery it is least proper for Men to
come near the Women; forgetting that but a few Pages before ( Page 67.) he
blames the Women as obstinate and unseasonably modest, for not being willing to
admit a Midman. But great Wits, they say, have short Memories.

But to draw toward a Conclusion; what is all that Mr. Douglass has said, in
relation to myself? What has he detected in me that is wrong? Or what has he
advanced from the Writings of his Old-Woman which I have not?

As to informing Midwives, and directing them when to call in superior
Assistance, what have I left unsaid? Or what Direction can be farther given
them? Some of the chief of the Profession, of my own Sex, have told me I have
been too open; so that I Am found fault with on both Sides. But this gives me no
Uneasiness. I have a Satisfaction in doing what I judged to be my Duty, and
acting the Part of an honest Man which my Enemies can never be able to rob me
of. My Way is to walk in the Path which Providence has put me in, as
inoffensively as possibly I can; ever to give the Wall to my Superiors, and
never to jostle my Inferiors into the Kennel, or to affront any Person. But if
a BULLY draws upon me, I never fly, but defend myself, with proper Force.

I never said or did any thing to deserve this mighty Man's Displeasure; and
yet spurred on by an envious, jealous Fury he has attacked me: But alas, his
Arm is too weak, and his Thrusts are easily parried; not to mention that by too
much Heat he has over LUNGED.

Having now laid the whole of Mr. Douglass's Objections before the Reader, I
will not suppose that his main. Drift, after all his FUSS and SPLUTTER about
the Reformation of Midwifery, was purely to set himself up, as the only
Dictator in this Profession, and to inform the good Women that he was better
able to give them Lectures than any Body else. I shall pass over the artful
Methods he has made use of to insinuate himself into public Favor, by running
down and discommending every body else. It seems they are all a Set of
puzzling, designing Men, rather confounding and darkening, than illuminating
their Profession. But Mr. Douglass has no Design; his Candor, Modesty, and
good Usage of all he speaks of, will, not so much as admit of any such
Suspicion. To be sure he had no View of throwing a Cloud of Infamy and
Ignorance over his Neighbor's Character, that his own might appear to the
better Advantage. The Tenderness, he shows for other People's Reputation,
cannot fail of endearing him to the Town, and making every body as tender of
his. I will not so much as mention what perhaps some People may say, that the
Motto in the Front of his Book ought to be inverted, and read, non aliis, sed
sibi. But the Justice and Impartiality of this Author are of all his good
Qualities the most extraordinary, nor can the Reader well pass over the
following remarkable Instances of them. There is for Example, plain Dr. Hody,
and the ingenious and experienced Mr. Will. Giffard, Surgeon, Page, 52. the
disingenious (Page 53.) stupid (Page 54.) and absurd (Page 55.) Dr. Maubray,
and the just, tart, reverend, and learned Dr. MITCHELL Utriusque Medicinae
Doctor (Page 55.) The puzzling, confounding, artful, insinuating, darkening
(P.ag 3.) perverting, interested, coaxing, threatening (Page 5.)
Cobweb-spinning, emusing (Page 9.) magisterial, dictatorial (P. 13.) sulsom,
nauseous (Page 14.) sneering, insolent (Page 21.) imperious (Page 22.)
NOSTRUM-MONGER (Page 4, 12, and 24.) Dr. Chamberlen, and that accurate
Anatomist, and consummate Accoucher (his own Brother) Dr. James Douglass.

Though to be serious on this Head, I cannot think his worthy Brother has any
Reason to thank him for such a fulsom Compliment. The truly learned are always
modest, and a Gentleman, of Dr. James Douglass's well known Merit and
Abilities, can never stand in need of a such a paultry PUFF as this.

Mr. Douglass has gone long with this wondrous Birth; the first Account we had
of this Gentleman's Pregnancy, was several Months before he was delivered,
which at Length, on the 29th of April 1736, we had Notice of. Some think it a
monstrous, others an abortive Birth; all agree, that it was not come to its
full Perfection. But be that as it will, the Mountain was long in Labor, and
at length, like that in the Fable, brought forth a MOUSE.

Before I take my leave, I cannot but observe, that this Book is printed for,
and sold only by, the Author in Lad-Lane, near Guild Hall, at the Price of Two
Shillings, though it contains but 75 Pages, and that in a loose Print; which is
only double the usual Price of Pamphlets of that Size. Indeed such a
Production, as this, dees not happen often; and it is but fitting, that an
extraordinary Performance should be bought at an extraordinary Price. Which
brings to my Mind a remarkable Observation I remember to have read in the
Grub-street Journal of May 1. 1735, in relation to Mr. Douglas's Proposals for
a new Osteology tacked to his trifling Remarks, on a Piece upon the same
Subject, by an ingenious Author (to whom I am well informed Mr. Douglass lay
under the highest Obligations) viz. that he was much displeased with him for
making Twenty per Cent. of his Money, because he had entered into the same
Design, with a View of getting Five and Twenty himself, baiting and worrying
him with all the Boisterousness of Pedantry and Rusticity, at the same Time
that he exposes his own Nakedness.

Thus far I have persuaded myself to proceed in my Remarks on Mr. Douglass's
trifling and malicious Cavils; nor would I have him think, because he came off
unanswered in his paultry Attempt to depreciate that valuable Work (the Author
not thinking it worth his while to give him an Answer) that therefore he is
always to escape with Impunity.

Mr. Douglass seems to be in haste to dispose of the present Edition of his
Book, probably because he has some fresh Observations to oblige the Town with
in a future Edition of that elaborate Work.

But lest he should imagine me ready, to answer any farther, such false and
dirty Aspersions as he may think fit to fling upon me, I here assure him, once
for all, that I have Affairs of much more Consequence to mind, nor can I give
him a better general Answer, than what I am told the aforesaid Gentleman sent
him; when being asked by an Acquaintance of Mr. Douglass, if he would not give
a Reply, he cooly answered, Whenever I have as little Business, or as much
Malice as bimself, I will set about it.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
WHilst my Papers were in the Press, I happened to meet with a small Book,
entitled, THE MIDWIFE RIGHTLY INSTRUCTED, etc. by J. DAWKES, Surgeon; in which
the Author has treated me in so Gentleman-like a Manner, and (wholly different
from Mr. Douglass) quoted me so fairly and honestly, in the main, that I am
sorry, I am obliged, in Justice to myself, to take notice of a great Mistake he
made, in reading one Part of my Treatise, and giving it in quite different
Words than I had made use of, viz. in Page 84. he says, "Let any one consider
the Difficulty that must attend the getting down the Arms; in doing which,
according to Mr. Chapman's Advice, both the Hands must be at the same Time (as
well as the Child's Body) in the VAGINA, from which the Woman must necessarily
suffer an additional Pain, etc."

My Words are these, Page 27. of my first Edition, and Page 44. of my second
Edition, viz. The Child is to be drawn gently down, till advanced to the
Armpits, or thereabouts, when the Arms are to be fetched one at a Time, by the
Fingers of the Hand on that Side. Now, this is to be performed in a very little
Time, and with great Ease: That which he mentions is impossible.


