tableau ^ La Vergne del. M. V.ar Gucht sc.



THE WONDER: A Woman keeps a SECRET. A COMEDY. As it is Acted at the Theater
Royal in Drury Lane. By Her MAJESTY's Servants.

Written by the AUTHOR of the GAMESTER.

LONDON: Printed for E. CURLL, at the Dial and Bible, against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street, and A. BETTESWORTH at the Red Lion, on London Bridge.
1714.

TO His Serene HIGHNESS George Augustus, Electoral Prince of HANOVER, Duke and
Marquess of Cambridge, Earl of Milford-Haven, Viscount North-Allerton, Baron of
Tewksbury, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
May it please your Highness,
THIS Dedication, which I always intended to Address to your HIGHNESS, and
which I was in hopes might have Congratulated you upon your being in England,
must now wait for your Arrival. I am sure I speak the Sense of every honest
Briton, when I say that we expect it with the utmost Impatience.

Your Highness, who has been hitherto a Stranger among us, cannot easily
conceive the Confidence we repose in you; and it will, perhaps, hardly be
believed in future Ages, that the first Report of the Duke of Cambridge's
Design to Visit us, should raise the PUBLIC CREDIT of the British Nation.

We are filled with Pleasure, to think that the most accomplished of Princes
will perfect himself in the Arts of Government under the Eye, and Direction of
the Greatest of Queens.

If it is possible there should be a Set of Men among us who can wish to see
their Country become a Province of France, it is, I think, pretty evident that
your Residence in Great Britain will soon put an End to such Impious
Expectations.

The Law of Nature makes it not improbable that you will one Day reign over us,
and what may not our Posterity expect from a Prince who in his early Years
distinguished himself in the Cause of Liberty, and led their Ancestors on to
Victory? The Balance of Europe will doubtless be kept steady by that Hand which
has already performed such Wonders in order to maintain it; our Religion, our
Laws, and Civil Rites can be in no Danger under a Prince, who from his
Conversation with our Nobility, and his Presence at their most important
Debates, will have a perfect Insight into all the Parts of our Constitution.

Britain shall from hence-forward claim your HIGHNESS entirely as her own, and
endeavor by the most convincing Proofs of her Love and Respect, to make you
forget the Court of your Illustrious Father.

The Pains you have already taken to acquire our Tongue, cannot fail to endear
you to every Englishman; yet as the Idioms of a Language are the last Things we
arrive at, I am in hopes an English Comedy will not be thought the most
improper Present that could be offered to your HIGHNESS.

There is no doubt but you will soon be made the Subject of more Correct Pens,
and receive a just Tribute from the greatest Authors of our Nation: In the mean
Time, though I am, perhaps, the most unworthy, I have at least one Advantage,
that I am the first who have shown my Respect in this Manner, and sued for your
Protection.

I am your HIGHNESS's Most Obedient, Most Devoted, Most Humble Servant SUSANNA
CENT LIVRE.

PREFACE.
I Don't pretend to write a Preface, either to point out the Beauties, or to
excuse the Errors, a judicious Reader may possibly discover in the following
Scenes, but to give those excellent Comedians their Due, to whom, in some
Measure the best Dramatick Writers are obliged. The Poet and the Player are
like Soul and Body, indispensibly necessary to one another; the correct Author
makes the Player shine, whilst the judicious Player makes the Poet's Fame
immortal. I freely acknowledge my self obliged to the Actors in general, and to
Mr. Wilks, and Mrs. Oldfield in particular; and I owe them this Justice to say,
That their inimitable Action could only support a Play at such a Season, and
among so many Benefits. Let this encourage our English Bards to Write, furnish
but the artful Player with Materials, and his Skill will lay the Foundation for
your Fame.

I must again repeat that which I meet with every where, I mean the just
Admiration of the Performance of Mr. Wilks, and Mrs. Oldfield, and own that
they much out-did in Action the strongest of my Conceptions; for though Nature
was my Aim in the last Act of this Comedy, yet Nature herself were she to paint
a Love Quarrel, would only Copy them.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. MILLS.
OUR Author fears the Critics of the Stage,
Who like Barbarians, spare nor Sex, nor Age;
She trembles at those Censors in the Pit,
Who think good Nature shows a want of Wit:
Such Malice, Oh, what Muse can undergo it?
To save themselves, they always Damn the Poet.
Our Author flies from such a Partial Jury,
As wary Lovers from the Nymphs of Drury:
To the few Candid Judges for a Smile,
She humbly sues to Recompense her Toil.
To the bright Circle of the Fair, she next,
Commits her Cause, with Anxious Doubts perplexed.
Where can she with such hopes of Favor kneel,
As to those Judges, who her Frailties feel?
A few Mistakes, her Sex may well excuse,
And such a Plea, No Woman should refuse:
If she succeeds, a Woman gains Applause,
What Female but must favor such a Cause.
Her Faults, -- If such there be: -- Then, -- pass 'em by,
And only on her Beauties fix your Eye.
In Plays, like Vessels floating on the Sea,
There Is none so Wise to know their Destiny.
In this, however the Pilot's Skill appears,
While by the Stars his constant Course he steers;
In this our Author does her Judgment show,
That for her Safety she relies on You.
Your Approbation Fair ones, cannot but move,
Those stubborn Hearts, which first you taught to Love:
The Men must all Applaud this Play of ours,
For who dares See with other Eyes, than Yours?
Dramatis Personae.
Men.
Don Lopez, a Grandee of Portugal. Mr. Norris Don Felix, his Son, in Love with
Violante. Mr. Wilks. Frederick, A Merchant. Mr. Bickerstaff. Don Pedro, Father
to Violante. Mr. Bullock, Jun. Colonel Britton, A Scotchman. Mr. Mills. Gibby,
His Footman. Mr. Bullock, Sen. Lissardo, Servant to Felix. Mr. Pack.
Women.
Donna Violante, designed for a Nunby her Father, in Love with Felix. Mrs.
Oldfield. Donna Isabella, Sister to Felix. Mrs. Santlow. Flora, Her Maid. Mrs.
Cox. Inis, Maid to Violante. Mrs. Saunders.
Alguzil, Attendants, Servants, etc.
Scene LISBON. THE WONDER: A Woman keeps a SECRET.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Don Lopez meeting Frederick. FREDERICK. MY Lord Don Lopez.


D. Lop. How do you Frederick?


Fred. At your Lordship's Service, I am glad to see you look so well my Lord, I
hope Antonio is out of danger.


D. Lop. Quite contrary, his Fever increases they tell me, and the Surgeons
are of Opinion his wound is mortal.


Fred. Your Son Don Felix is safe I hope.


D. Lop. I hope so too, but they offer large Rewards to apprehend him.


Fred. When heard your Lordship from him?


D. Lop. Not since he went, I forbad him writing till the public News gave him
an Account of Antonio's Health, Letters might be intercepted, and the place of
his Abode discovered.


Fred. Your Caution was good my Lord; though I am impatient to hear from Felix,
yet his Safety is my chief Concern. Fortune has maliciously struck a Bar
between us in the Affairs of Life, but she has done me the Honor to unite our
Souls.


D. Lop. I am not ignorant of the friendship between my Son and You, I have
heard him commend your Morals and lament your want of noble Birth.


Fred. That Is Nature's fault my Lord, it is some comfort not to owe ones
Misfortunes to ones Self, yet it is impossible not to regret the want of noble
Birth.


D. Lop. It Is pity indeed such excellent Parts as you are Master of, should be
eclipsed by mean Extraction.


Fred. Such Commendation would make me vain my Lord, did you not cast in the
allay of my Extraction.


D. Lop. There is no Condition of Life without its Cares, and it is the
Perfection of a Man to wear 'em as easy as he can; this unfortunate Duel of my
Son's does not pass without Impression. But since it is past Prevention, all my
Concern is now, how he may escape the Punishment; if Antonio dies, Felix shall
for England. You have been there, what sort of People are the English?


Fred. My Lord, the English are by Nature, what the ancient Romans were by
Discipline, courageous, bold, hardy, and in love with Liberty. Liberty is the
Idol of the English, under whose Banner all the Nation Lists, give but the Word
for Liberty, and straight more armed Legions would appear, than France, and
Philip keep in constant Pay.


D. Lop. I like their Principles; who does not wish for Freedom in all Degrees
of Life? Though common Prudence sometimes makes us act against it, as I am now
obliged to do, for I intend to marry my Daughter to Don Guzman, whom I expect
from Holland every Day, whither he went to take Possession of a large Estate
left him by his Uncle.


Fred. You will not sure Sacrifice the lovely Isabella to Age, Avarice, and a
Fool, pardon the Expression my Lord, but my Concern for your beauteous Daughter
transports me beyond that good Manners which I ought to pay your Lordship's
presence.


D. Lop. I cannot deny the justness of the Character Frederick; but you are not
insensible what I have suffered by these Wars, and he has two things which
render him very agreeable to me for a Son-in-Law, he is Rich and well Born; as
for his being a Fool, I don't conceive how that can be any Blot in a Husband,
who is already possessed of a good Estate. -- A Poor Fool indeed is a very
Scandalous thing, and so are your Poor Wits, in my Opinion, who have nothing to
be vain of, but the inside of their Sculls; now for Don Guzman I know I can
rule him, as I think fit; this is acting the Politic part, Frederick, without
which, it is impossible to keep up the Port of this Life.


Fred. But have you no Consideration for your Daughter's welfare my Lord?


D. Lop. Is a Husband of twenty thousand Crowns a Year, no Consideration? Now I
think it a very good Consideration.


Fred. One way, my Lord. But what will the World say of such a Match?


D. Lop. Sir, I value not the World a Button.


Fred. I cannot think your Daughter can have any Inclination for such a Husband.


D. Lop. There I believe you are pretty much in the right, though it is a Secret,
which I never had the Curiosity to enquire into, nor I believe ever shall --
Inclination quotha! Parents would have a fine time on it, if they consulted
their Childrens Inclinations! I Will venture you a Wager, that in all the
Garrison Towns in Spain and Portugal, during the late War, there were not three
Women, who have not had an Inclination to every Officer in the whole Army; does
it therefore follow, that their Fathers ought to Pimp for them? No, no, Sir, it
is not a Father's business to follow his Childrens Inclinations till he makes
himself a Beggar.


Fred. But this is of another Nature my Lord.


D. Lop. Look ye Sir, I resolve she shall Marry Don Guzman the Moment he
arrives; though I could not govern my Son, I will my Daughter, I assure you.


Fred. This Match my Lord, is more preposterous than that which you proposed to
your Son, from whence arose this fatal -- Quarrel, Don Antonio's Sister Elvira,
wanted Beauty only, but Guzman every thing, but --


D. Lop. Money -- and that will purchase every thing, and so Adieu.

( Exit.
Fred. Monstrous! These are the Resolutions which destroy the comforts of
Matrimony -- he is Rich, and well born, powerful Arguments indeed! Could I but
add them to the Friendship of Don Felix, what might I not hope? But a Merchant
and a Grandee of Spain, are inconsistent Names -- Lissardo! From whence come
you?


Enter Lissardo in a Riding Habit. Liss. That Letter will inform you Sir.


Fred. I hope your Master's safe.


Liss. I left him so, I have another to deliver which requires -- haste -- Your
most humble Servant Sir ( bowing.


Fred. To Violante, I suppose.


Liss. The same.

( Exit.
Fred. ( Reads) Dear Frederick, the two chief Blessings of this Life are a
Friend, and a Mistress; to be debarred the sight of those is not to live. I
hear nothing of Antonio's Death, therefore resolve to venture to thy House this
Evening, impatient to see Violante, and embrace my Friend. Yours Felix.

Pray Heaven he comes undiscovered -- ha! Colonel Britton!


( Enter Colonel Britton in a Riding Habit.) Col. Frederick, I rejoice to see
thee.


Fred. What brought you to Lisbon Colonel?


Col. La Fortune de la Guerre, as the French say, I have commanded these Three
last Years in Spain, but my Country has thought fit to strike up a Peace, and
give us good Protestants leave to hope for Christian Burial, so I resolve to
take Lisbon in my way home.


Fred. If you are not provided of a Lodging Colonel, pray command my House,
while you stay.


Col. If I were sure I should not be troublesome, I would accept your offer,
Frederick.


Fred. So far from trouble Colonel, I shall take it as a particular Favor,
what have we here?


Col. My Footman, this is our Country Dress you must know, which for the Honor
of Scotland, I make all my Servants wear.


( Enter Gibby in a High-land Dress.) Gib. What mun I de with the Horses, an
like yer Honor, they will tack cold gin, they stand in the Caussway.


Fred. Oh! I Will take Care of them, what hoa Vasquez.

( Enter Vasquez, put those Horses which that honest Fellow will show you into
my Stable, do you hear? And feed them well.


Vas. Yes Sir. -- Sir, by my Master's Order, I am Sir, your most obsequious
humble Servant. Be pleased to lead the Way. ( bowing.


Gib. S'bled gang yer gat Sir, and I fall follow ye: Ise tee hungry to feed on
Compliments.

( Exit.
Fred. Ha, ha, a comical Fellow. -- Well, how do you like our Country, Colonel?


Col. Why Faith Frederick, a Man might pass his Time agreeably enough with
Inside of a Nunnery; but to behold such Troops of soft, plump, tender melting,
wishing, nay willing Girls too, through a damned Grate, gives us Brittons strong
Temptation to Plunder. Ah Frederick, your Priests are wicked Rogues. They
immure Beauty for their own proper Use, and show it only to the Laity to create
Desires, and inflame Accounts, that they may purchase Pardons at a dearer Rate.


Fred. I own Wenching is something more difficult here than in England, where
Women's Liberties are subservient to their Inclinations, and Husbands seem of no
Effect but to take Care of the Children which their Wives provide.


Col. And does Restraint get the better of Inclination with your Women here?
No, I Will be sworn not even in fourscore. Don't I know the Constitution of the
Spanish Ladies?


Fred. And of all Ladies where you come, Colonel, you were ever a Man of
Gallantry.


Col. Ah Frederick, the Kirk half starves us Scotchmen. We are kept so sharp at
home, that we feed like Cannibals abroad. Hark ye, have thou never a pretty
Acquaintance now, that thou would consign over to a Friend for half an Hour,
ha?


Fred. Faith Colonel, I am the worst Pimp in Christendom, you had better trust
to your own Luck, the Women will soon find you out I warrant you.


Col. Ay, but it is dangerous forraging in an Enemy's Country, and since I have
some hopes of seeing my own again, I had rather purchase my Pleasure, than run
the hazard of a Stilletto in my Guts. 'Egad, I think I must even Marry and
Sacrifice my Body for the good of my Soul, will thou recommend me to a Wife
then, one that is willing to exchange her Moyders for English Liberty; ha
Friend,


Fred. She must be very handsome I suppose.


Col: The handsomer the better -- but be sure she has a Nose.


Fred. Ay, ay, and some Gold.


Col. Oh, very much Gold, I shall never be able to swallow the Matrimonial
Pill, if it be not well Gilded.


Fred. Puh, Beauty will make it slide down nimbly.


Col. At first perhaps it may, but the Second or Third Dose will choke me -- I
confess Frederick, Women are the prettiest Play-things in Nature, but Gold,
substantial Gold, gives 'em the Air, the Mien, the Shape, the Grace, and Beauty
of a Goddess.


Fred. And has not Gold the same Divinity in their Eyes Colonel?


Col. Too often. -- Money is the very God of Marriage, the Poets dress him in a
Saffron Robe, by which they Figure out the golden Deity, and his lighted Torch
blazons those mighty Charms, which encourage us to List under his Banner.

None marry now for Love, no, that is a Jest,
The self same Bargain, serves for Wife, and Beast.

Fred. You are always gay Colonel, come shall we take a refreshing Glass at my
House, and consider what has been said.


Col. I have two or three Compliments to discharge for some Friends, and then I
shall wait on you with Pleasure: Where do you live?


Fred. At yon Corner House with the green Rails.


Col. In the close of the Evening I will endeavor to kiss your Hand. Adieu.

( Exit.
Fred. I shall expect you with impatience.

( Exit.
( Enter Isabella and Inis her Maid.) Inis. For goodness sake, Madam, where are
you going in this Pet?


Isab. Any where to avoid Matrimony; the thoughts of a Husband is as terrible
to me as the sight of a Hobgoblin.


Inis. Ay, of an old Husband, but if you might choose for your self, I fancy
Matrimony would be no such frightful Thing to you.


Isab. You are pretty much in the right, Inis; but to be forced into the Arms
of an Idiot, a sneaking, snivling, drivling, avaricious Fool, who has neither
Person to please the Eye, Sense to charm the Ear, nor generosity to supply
those Defects, ah Inis! What pleasant Lives Women lead in England, where Duty
wears no Fetter but Inclination: The Custom of our Country inslaves us from our
very Cradles, first to our Parents, next to our Husbands; and when Heaven is so
kind to rid us of both these, our Brothers still usurp Authority, and expect a
blind Obedience from us, so that Maids, Wives, or Widows, we are little better
than Slaves to the Tyrant Man, therefore to avoid their Power, I resolve to
cast my self into a Monastery.


Inis. That is, you will cut your own Throat to avoid another's doing it for you.
Ah Madam, those Eyes tell me you have no Nuns flesh about you; a Monastery
quotha! Where you will wish your self in the Green Sickness in a Month.


Isab. What care I, there will be no Man to plague me.


Inis. No, nor what is much worse, to please you neither -- Ad'slife Madam, you
are the First Woman that ever dispair'd in a Christian Country -- Were I in
your Place --


Isab. Why what would your Wisdom do if you were?


Inis. I Would imbark with the first fair Wind with all my Jewels, and seek my
Fortune on the other side the Water; no Shore can treat you worse than your own;
there is never a Father in Christendom should make me marry any Man against my
Will.


Isab. I am too great a Coward to follow your Advice. I must contrive some way
to avoid Don Guzman, and yet stay in my own Country.


Enter Don Lopez. Lop. Must you so Mistress, but I shall take Care to prevent
you. ( Aside.) Isabella, whether are you going my Child?


Isab. Ha! my Father! To Church, Sir.


Inis. The old Rogue has certainly overheard her. ( Aside.


Lop. Your Devotion must needs be very strong, or your Memory very weak; my
Dear, why, Vespers are over for this Night; come, come, you shall have a better
Errand to Church than to say your Prayers there. Don Guzman is arrived in the
River, and I expect him ashore to Morrow.


Isab. Ha, to Morrow!


Lop. He writes me Word, That his Estate in Holland is worth 12000 Crowns a
Year, which, together with what he had before, will make thee the happiest Wife
in Lisbon.


Isab. And the most unhappy Woman in the World. Oh Sir! If I have any Power in
your Heart, if the tenderness of a Father be not quite extinct, hear me with
Patience.


Lop. No Objections against the Marriage, and I will hear whatever thou have to
say.


Isab. That Is torturing me on the Rack, and forbidding me to Groan; upon my
Knees I claim the Privilege of Flesh and Blood.

( Kneels.
Lop. I grant it, thou shall have an Arm full of Flesh and Blood to Morrow;
Flesh and Blood quotha, Heaven forbid I should deny thee Flesh and Blood, my
Girl.


Inis. Here Is an old Dog for you.


Isab. Do not mistake, Sir, the fatal Stroke which separates Soul and Body, is
not more terrible to the Thoughts of Sinners, than the Name of Guzman to my
Ears.


Lop. Puh, puh; you Lie, you Lie.


Isab. My frighted Heart beats hard against my Breast, as if it sought a
Passage to your Feet, to beg you would change your Purpose.


Lop. A very pretty Speech this, if it were turned into blank Verse, it would
serve for a Tragedy; why, thou have more Wit than I thought thou had, Child.
-- -- I fancy this was all extempore, I don't believe thou did ever think of
one Word on it before.


Inis. Yes, but she has, my Lord, for I have heard her say the same Things a
thousand Times.


Lop. How, how, What do you top your second Hand Jests upon your Father, Hussy,
who knows betther what is good for you than you do your self; remember it is your
Duty to Obey.


Isab. ( Rising) I never disobeyed before, and wish I had not Reason now; but
Nature has got the better of my Duty, and makes me loath the harsh Commands you
lay.


Lop. Ha, ha, very fine! Ha, ha.


Isab. Death it self would be more welcome.


Lop. Are you sure of that?


Isab. I am your Daughter, my Lord, and can boast as strong a Resolution as
your self; I Will die before I Will marry Guzman.


Lop. Say you so, I Will try that presently. ( Draws.) Here let me see with what
Dexterity you can breath a Vein now, ( offers her his Sword.) The Point is
pretty sharp, 'twill do your Business I warrant you.


Inis. Bless me, Sir, What do you mean to put a Sword into the Hands of a
desperate Woman?


Lop. Desperate, ha, ha, ha, you see how desperate she is, what art thou
frighted little Bell. ha!


Isab. I confess I am startled at your Morals, Sir.


Lop. Ay, ay, Child, thou had better take the Man, he will hurt thee the least
of the two.


Isab. I shall take neither, Sir, Death has many Doors, and when I can live no
longer with Pleasure, I shall find one to let him in at without your aid.


Lop. Say thou so, my dear Bell. Ods, I Am afraid thou art a little Lunatic
Bell. I must take Care of thee, Child, ( takes hold of her, and pulls out of
his Pocket a Key.) I shall make bold to secure thee, my Dear: I Will see if Locks
and Bars can keep thee till Guzman comes; go, get you into your Chamber.

There I Will your boasted Resolution try,
And see who will get the better, you or I.
( pushes her in, and locks the Door.
ACT II.
SCENE, a Room in Don Pedro's House.
Enter Donna Violante reading a Letter, and Flora following. Flora WHAT must
that Letter be read again?


Vio. Yes, and again, and again, and again, a thousand Times again, a Letter
from a faithful Lover can never be read too often; it speaks such kind, such
soft, such tender Things --

( Kisses it.
Flo. But always the same Language.


Vio. It does not charm the less for that.


Flo. In my Opinion nothing charms that does not change; and any Composition of
the four and Twenty Letters, after the first Essay, from the same Hand, must be
dull, except a Bank Note, or a Bill of Exchange.


Vio. Thy Taste is my Aversion -- ( Reads.) My all that is charming, since
Life's not Life exiled from thee this Night shall bring me to thy Arms.
Frederick and thee are all I trust: These six Weeks absence has been in Love's
Account six Hundred Years; when it is Dark expect the wonted Signal at thy
Window, till when adieu, thine more than his own. Felix.


Flo. Who would not have said as much to a Lady of her Beauty, and twenty
Thousand Pounds. -- Were I a Man, methinks I could have said a Hundred finer
Things, I would have compared your Eyes to the Stars, your Teeth to Ivory, your
Lips to Corral, your Neck to Allabaster, your Shape to --


Vio. No more of your Bombast, Truth is the best Eloquence in a Lover. -- What
Proof remains ungiven of his Love? When his Father threatened to disinherit him,
for refusing Don Antonio's Sister, from whence sprung this unhappy Quarrel; did
it shake his Love for me? And now, though strict Enquiry runs through every Place,
with large Rewards to apprehend him, does he not venture all for me?


Flo. But you know, Madam, your Father Don Pedro designs you for a Nun, and
says your Grandfather left you your Fortune upon that Condition.


Vio. Not without my Approbation, Girl, when I come to one and Twenty, as I am
informed. But however, I shall run the risk of that; go call in Lissardo.


Flo. Yes, Madam, now for a thousand Verbal Questions.

(Exit. and Enter with Lissardo.
Vio. Well, and how do you do Lissardo?


Liss. Ah, very weary, Madam -- Faith thou look wondrous Pretty Flora. (
Aside to Flora.


Vio. How came you?


Liss. En Cavalier, Madam, upon a Hackney-Jade, which they told me formerly
belonged to an English Colonel. But I should rather have thought she had been
bred a good Roman Catholic all her Life time; for she down of her Knees to
every Stock, and Stone, we came along by. My Chaps Waters for a Kiss, they do,
Flora. ( Aside to Flora.


Flo. You Would make one believe you are wondrous fond now.


Vio. Where did you leave your Master?


Liss. Od, if I had you alone House-Wife, I Would show you how fond I could be -- (
Aside to Flora) at a little Farm-House, Madam, about five Miles off; he will be
at Don Frederick's in the Evening -- Od, I will so revenge my self of those
Lips of thine. ( to Flora.


Vio. Is he in Health?


Flo. Oh, you counterfeit wondrous well. ( to Lissardo.


Liss. No, every Body knows I Counterfeit very ill. ( to Flora.


Vio. How say you! Is Felix ill, What Is his Distemper? Ha!


Liss. A pies on it, I hate to be interrupted -- Love, Madam, Love -- In short,
Madam, I believe he has thought of nothing but your Ladyship ever since he left
Lisbon. I am sure he could not, if I may Judge of his Heart by my own ( Looking
lovingly upon Flora.


Vio. How came you so well acquainted with your Master's Thoughts, Lissardo?


Liss. By an infallible Rule, Madam; Words are the Pictures of the Mind, you
know; now to prove he thinks of nothing but you, he talks of nothing but you --
for Example, Madam, coming from Shooting the other Day, with a brace of
Partridges, Lissardo said he, go bid the Cook roast me these Violantes -- I
flew into the Kitchen, full of Thoughts of thee, cried, here Cook, roast me
these Florellas. ( to Flora.


Flor. Ha, ha, excellent -- You mimick your Master then it seems.


Liss. I can do every thing as well as my Master, you little -- Rogue, another
time: Madam, the Priest came to make him a Visit, he called out hastily,
Lissardo said he, bring a Violante for my Father to sit down on; -- then he
often mistook my Name, Madam, and called me Violante; in short, I heard it so
often, that it became as familiar to me as my Prayers.


Vio. You lived very Merrily then it seems.


Liss. Oh, exceeding Merry Madam.

( Kisses Flora 's Hand.
Vio. Ha! Exceeding Merry; had you Treats and Balls?


Liss. Oh! Yes, yes, Madam, several.


Flo. You are Mad, Lissardo, you don't mind what my Lady says to you. ( Aside
to Lissardo.


Vio. Ha! Balls -- Is he so Merry in my absence? And did your Master Dance,
Lissardo?


Liss. Dance Madam! Where Madam?


Vio. Why, at those Balls you speak of.


Liss. Balls! What Balls Madam?


Vio. Why, sure you are in Love, Lissardo; did not you say, but now, you had
Balls where you have been?


Liss. Balls, Madam! Odslife, I ask your Pardon Madam! I, I, I, had mislaid
some Wash-Balls of my Master's the other Day; and because I could not think where
I had laid them, just when he asked for them, he very fairly broke my Head,
Madam, and now it seems I can think of nothing else. Alas! He Dance Madam! No,
no, poor Gentleman, he is as Melancholy as an unbrac'd Drum.


Vio. Poor Felix! There, wear that Ring for your Master's Sake, and let him
know, I shall be ready to receive him,

( Exit Vio.
Liss. I shall Madam -- ( puts on the Ring) methinks a Diamond-Ring is a vast
addition to the little Finger of a Gentleman. ( admiring his Hand.


Flo. That Ring must be mine -- Well Lissardo! What haste you make to pay off
Arrears now? Look how the Fellow stands?


Liss. Egad, methinks I have a very pretty Hand -- and very white -- and the
Shape! -- Faith, I never minded it so much before! -- In my Opinion it is a
very fine shaped Hand -- and becomes a Diamond Ring, as well as the first
Grandees in Portugal.


Flo. The Man's transported! Is this your Love! This your Impatience!


Liss. ( Takes Snuff.) Now in my Mind -- I take Snuff with a very Fantee Air --
Well, I am persuaded I want nothing but a Coach, and a Title, to make me a very
fine Gentleman.

( Struts about.
Flo. Sweet Mr. Lissardo, ( Curtecying) if I may presume to speak to you,
without affronting your little Finger. --


Liss. Odso Madam, I ask your Pardon -- Is it to me, or to the Ring -- you
direct your Discourse, Madam.


Flor. Madam! Good lack! How much a Diamond Ring improves one.


Liss. Why, though I say it -- I can carry my self as well as any Body -- But
what were thou going to say Child?


Flor. Why I was going to say, that I fancy you had best let me keep that Ring,
it will be a very pretty Wedding Ring, Lissardo, would it not?


Liss. Humph! Ah! But -- but -- but -- I believe I shall not marry yet a while.


Flor. You shall not, you say -- Very well! I suppose you design that Ring for
Inis.


Liss. No, no, I never bribe an old Acquaintance -- Perhaps I might let it
sparkle in the Eyes of a Stranger a little, till we came to a right
Understanding -- But then like all other Mortal Things, it would return from
whence it came.


Flor. Insolent -- Is that your Manner of dealing.


Liss. With all but thee -- Kiss me you little Rogue you. ( hugging her.


Flor. Little Rogue! Prithy Fellow, don't be so familiar, ( pushing him away,)
if I may not keep your Ring, I can keep my Kisses,


Liss. You can, you say! Spoke with the Air of a Chambermaid.


Flor. Replied with the Spirit of a serving Man.


Liss. Prithy Flora, don't let you and I fall out, I am in a merry Humor, and
shall certainly fall in somewhere.


Flor. What care I, where you fall in.


Enter Violante. Vio. Why do you keep Lissardo so long, Flora? When you don't
know how soon my Father may awake, his Afternoon Naps are never long.


Flor. Had Don Felix been with her, she would not have thought the Time long;
these Ladies consider no body's Wants but there own. ( Aside.


Vio. Go, go, let him out, and bring a Candle.


Flor. Yes Madam.


Liss. I fly, Madam.

( Exit Liss. and Flor.
Vio. The Day draws in, and Night, -- -- the Lover's Friend advances -- Night
more welcome than the Sun to me, because it brings my Love.


Flor. Shrieks within.) Ah! Thieves, Thieves! Murder, Murder!


Vio. Shrieks.) Ah! Defend me Heaven! What do I hear? Felix is certainly
pursued, and will be taken.


Enter Flora, running. Vio. How, now! Why do stare so? Answer me quickly!
What Is the Matter?


Flor. Oh Madan! As I was letting out Lissardo, a Gentleman rushed between him
and I, struck down my Candle, and is bringing a dead Person in his Arms into
our House.


Vio. Ha! A dead Person! Heaven grant it does not prove my Felix.


Flor. Here they are Madam.


Enter Colonel with Isabella in his Arms. Vio. I Will retire till you discover
the Meaning of the Accident.

( Exit.
Col. ( Sets Isabella down in a Chair, and addresses himself to Flora.)


Madam, The Necessity this Lady was under, of being conveyed into some House
with Speed and Secrecy, will I hope excuse any Indecency I might be guilty of,
in pressing so rudely into this -- I am an entire Stranger to her Name and
Circumstances; would I were so to her Beauty too ( Aside) I commit her Madam to
your Care, and fly to make her Retreat secure; if the Street be clear, permit
me to return and learn from her own Mouth. If I can be farther serviceable,
pray Madam, how is the Lady of this House called?


Flor. Violante, Senior -- He is a handsome Cavalier and promises well. ( Aside.


Col. Are you she Madam?


Flor. Only her Woman, Senior.


Col. Your humble Servant. Mrs. Pray be careful of the Lady -- ( gives her two
Moyders.)

Exit Col.
Flor. Two Moyders! Well he is a generous Fellow this is the only Way to make
one careful; I find all Countries understand the Constitution of a Chambermaid.


Enter Violante. Vio. Was you distracted Flora? To tell my Name to a Man you
never saw! Unthinking Wench! Who knows what this may turn to -- What is the
Lady dead! Ah! Defend me Heaven, it is Isabella, Sister to my Felix, what has
be^a^n her? Pray Heaven he is safe, -- Run and fetch some cold Water, ( Exit
Flora, and enters with Water) Isabella, Friend, speak to me, Oh! Speak to me,
or I shall die with Apprehension.


Flor. See, she revives.


Isab. Oh! Hold my dearest Father, do not force me, indeed I cannot love him.


Vio. How wild she talks --


Isab. Ha! Where am I?


Vio. With one as sensible of thy Pain as thou thy self can be.


Isab. Violante! What kind Star preserved, and lodged me here?


Flor. It was a Terrestial Star, called a Man, Madam; pray Jupiter he proves a
lucky one.


Isab. Oh! I remember now, forgive me dear Violante, my Thoughts ran so much
upon the Danger I escaped, I had forgot.


Vio. May I not know your Story?


Isab. Thou art no Stranger to one part of it; I have often told thee that my
Father designed to sacrifice me to the Arms of Don Guzman, who it seems is just
returned from Holland, and expected ashore tomorrow, the Day that he has set
to celebrate our Nuptials, upon my refusing to obey him, he locked me into my
Chamber, vowing to keep me there till he arrived, and force me to consent. I
know my Father to be possitive, never to be won from his Design; and having no
hope left me, to escape the Marriage, I leaped from the Window, into the Street.


Vio. You have not hurt your self I hope.


Isab. No, a Gentleman passing by, by Accident caught me in his Arms; at first
my Fright made me apprehend it was my Father, till he assured me to the
contrary.


Flor. He is a very fine Gentleman I promise you, Madam, and a well bred Man I
warrant him. I think I never saw a Grandee put his Hand into his Pocket with a
better Air in my whole Life Time; then he opened his Purse with such a Grace,
that nothing but his Manner of presenting me the Gold could equal.


Vio. There is but one common Road to the Heart of a Servant, and it is
impossible for a generous Person to mistake it. -- But how came you hither
Isabella?


Isab. I know not, I desired the Stranger to convey me to the next Monastery,
but ever I reached thy Door, I saw, or fancied that I saw, Lissardo, my
Brother's Man, and the Thought that his Master might not be far off, flung me
into a Swoon, which is all that I remember: Ha! What Is here ( takes up a
Letter) For Colonel Britton, to be left at the Post House in Lisbon; this must
be dropped by the Stranger which brought me hither.


Vio. Thou art fallen into the Hands of a Soldier, take care he does not lay
thee under Contribution, Girl.


Isab. I find he is a Gentleman; and if he be but unmarried I could be content
to follow him all the World over. -- But I shall never see him more I fear. (
Sighs, and Pauses.)


Vio. What makes you sigh Isabella?


Isab. The fear of falling into my Father's Clutches again.


Vio. Can I be serviceable to you?


Isab. Yes if you will conceal me two or three Days.


Vio. You command my House and Secrecy.


Isab. I thank you Violante, -- I wish you would oblige me with Mrs. Flora a
while.


Vio. I Will send for her to you -- I must watch if Dad be still asleep, or here
will be no room for Felix.

( Exit.
Isab. Well I don't know what ails me, but methinks I wish I could find this
Stranger out.


Enter Flora. Flor. Does your Ladyship want me Madam?


Isab. Ay, Mrs. Flora, I resolve to make you my Confident.


Flor. I shall endeavor to discharge my Duty, Madam.


Isab. I doubt it not, and desire you to accept this as a Token of my Gratitude.


Flor. Oh dear Senjora, I should have been your humble Servant, without a Fee.


Isab. I believe it -- But to the Purpose -- Do you think if you saw the
Gentleman which brought me hither you should know him again?


Flor. From a Thousand Madam, I have an excellent Memory where a handsome Man's
concerned; when he went away he said he would return again immediately, I
admire he comes not.


Isab. Here, did you say? You rejoice me -- Though I Will not see him, if he comes,
could not you contrive to give him a Letter?


Flor. With the Air of a Duanna. --


Isab. Not in this House -- You must veil and follow him -- He must not know it
comes from me.


Flor. What do you take me for a Novice in Love Affairs? 'Tho I have not
practiced the Art since I have been in Donna Violantes Service, yet I have not
lost the Theory of a Chambermaid -- Do you write the Letter, and leave the
rest to me -- Here, here, here is Pen Ink and Paper.


Isab. I Will do it in a Minute.

( Sits down to write.
Flor. So! This is Business after my own Heart; Love always takes care to
reward his Laborers, and Great Britain seems to be his Favorite Country. --
Oh, I long to see the the other two Moyders with a British Air -- Methinks
there is a Grace peculiar to that Nation in making a Present.


Isab. So I have done, now if he does but find this House again!


Flor. If he should not -- I warrant I Will find him if he is in Lisbon.

( Puts the Letter into her Bosom.
Enter Violante. Vio. Flora, watch my Papa; he is fast asleep in his Study -- If
you find him stir, give me Notice. -- Hark, I hear Felix at the Window, admit
him instantly, and then to your Post.

( Exit Flora.
Isab. What say you Violante? Is my Brother come?


Vio. It is his Signal at the Window.


Isab. ( Kneels.) Oh! Violante, I conjure thee by all the love thou bear to
Felix -- By thy own generous Nature -- Nay more, by that unspotted Virtue thou
art Mistress of, do not discover to my Brother I am here.


Vio. Contrary to your Desire, be assured I never shall, but where is the Danger?


Isab. Art thou born in Lisbon, and ask that Question? He Will think his Honor
blemished by my Disobedience, and would restore me to my Father, or kill me,
therefore dear, dear, Girl.


Vio. Depend upon my Friendship, nothing shall draw thy Secret from these Lips,
not even Felix, though at the Hazard of his love; I hear him coming, retire into
that Closet.


Isab. Remember Violante, upon thy Promise my very Life depends.

( Exit.
Vio. When I betray thee, may I share thy Fate.


Enter Flora with Felix. Vio. My Felix, My everlasting Love.

( runs into his Arms.
Fell. My Life, my Soul! My Violante!


Vio. What Hazards do thou run for me; Oh, how shall I requite thee?


Fell. If during this tedious painful Exile, thy Thoughts have never wandered
from thy Felix, thou have made me more than Satisfaction.


Vio. Can there be room within this Heart for any but thy self. No, if the God
of Love were lost to all the rest of Human Kind, thy Image would secure him in
my Breast, I am all Truth, all Love, all Faith, and know no jealous Fears.


Fell. My Heart's the proper Sphere where Love resides; could he quit that he
would be no where found: And yet Violante I Am in doubt.


Vio. Did I ever give thee Cause to doubt my Felix.


Fell. True love has many Fears, and Fear as many Eyes as Fame; yet sure I think
they see no Fault in thee -- What Is that? ( the Colonel pats at the Window.
without.)


Vio. What? I heard nothing.

( He pats again.
Fell. Ha! What means this Signal at your Window?


Vio. Some Body perhaps, in passing by; might accidentally hit it, it can be
nothing else.


Col. ( Within) Hist, hist, Donna Violante, Donna Violante.


Fell. They use your Name by Accident too, do they Madam?

( Enter Flora.
Flo. There is a Gentleman at the Window, Madam, which I fancy to be him who
brought Isabella hither; shall I admit him! ( Aside to Violante.


Vio. Admit Distraction rather, thou art the Cause of this, unthinking Wretch!
( Aside to Flora.


Fell. What has Mistress Scout brought you fresh Intelligence? Death, I Will know
the Bottom of this immediately!

( offers to go.
Flo. Scout, I scorn your Words, Senior.


Vio. Nay, nay, nay, nay, you must not leave me.

( runs and catches hold of him.
Fell. Oh! It Is not fair, not to Answer the Gentleman, Madam, It is none of his
Fault, that his Visit proves unseasonable; pray let me go, my Presence is but a
restraint upon you. ( struggles to get from her)

( The Colonel pats again.
Vio. Was ever Accident so Mischievous? ( Aside.


Flo. It must be the Colonel, now to deliver my Letter to him.

( Exit.
Fell. Hark, he grows impatient at your delay -- Why do you hold the Man, whose
Absence would oblige you, pray let me go, Madam; consider, the Gentleman wants
you at the Window. Confusion! ( struggles still.)


Vio. It is not me he wants.


Fell. Death, not you? Is there another of your Name in the House? But, come on,
convince me of the Truth of what you say: Open the Window, if his Business does
not lie with you, your Conversation may be heard -- This, and only this, can
take of my Suspicion -- What do you pause! Oh Guilt! Guilt! Have I caught you,
Nay then I Will leap the Balcony, If I remember, this Way leads to it. ( breaks
from her and goes to the Door where Isabella is.)


Vio. Oh Heavens! What shall I do now, hold, hold, hold, hold, not for the
World -- You enter there -- Which way shall I preserve his Sister from his
Knowledge? ( Aside.


Fell. What have I touched you; do you fear your Lover's Life?


Vio. I fear for none but you -- For goodness Sake, do not speak so loud my
Felix. If my Father hear you I am lost for ever, that Door opens into his
Apartment, What shall I do if he enters? There he finds his Sister -- If he
goes out he will quarrel with the Stranger -- Nay do not struggle to be gone my
Felix -- If I open the Window he may discover the whole Intrigue, and yet of
all Evils we ought to choose the least. Your Curiosity shall be satisfied.
Whoever you are that with such Insolence dare use my Name, and give the
Neighborhood Pretense to reflect upon my Conduct. I charge you instantly be
gone, or expect the Treatment you deserve.

( goes to the Window and throws up the Sash.
Col. I ask your Pardon Madam, and will obey; but when I left this House to
Night.


Fell. Good!


Vio. It is most certainly the Stranger, what will be the Event of this Heaven
knows. ( Aside) you are mistaken in the House I suppose, Sir.


Fell. No, no, he is not mistaken -- Pray Madam let the Gentleman go on.


Vio. Wretched Misfortune, pray be gone Sir, I know of no Business you have
here.


Col. I wish I did not know it neither -- But this House contains my Soul, then
can you blame my Body for hovering about it!


Fell. Excellent!


Vio. Distraction! He will infallibly discover Isabella. I tell you again you
are mistaken; however for your own Satisfaction call Tomorrow.


Fell. Matchless Impudence! An Assignation before my Face -- No he shall not
live to meet your wishes.

( Takes out a Pistol and goes toward the Window; she catches hold of him.)
Vio. Ah! ( Shrieks) hold I conjure you.


Col. Tomorrow's an Age Madam! May I not be admitted to Night?


Vio. If you be a Gentleman I command your Absence. Unfortunate! What will my
Stars do with me? ( Aside.


Col. I have done -- Only this -- Be careful of my Life, for it is in your
keeping.

( Exit from the Window.
Fell. Pray observe the Gentleman's Request Madam. ( Walking off from her.


Vio. I am all Confusion. ( Aside.


Fell. You are all Truth, all Love, all Faith; Oh thou all Woman! -- How have I
been deceived? God's Death, could not you have imposed upon me for this one Night?
Could neither my faithful Love, nor the Hazard I have run to see you, make me
worthy to be cheated on?


Vio. Can I bear this from you?

( Weeps.
Fell. ( Repeats) When I left this House to Night -- to Night the Devil! Return
so soon!


Vio. Oh Isabella! What have thou involved me in? ( Aside.


Fell. ( Repeats) This House contains my Soul.


Vio. Yet I resolve to keep the Secret. ( Aside.


Fell. ( Repeats) Be careful of my Life, for it is in your keeping. -- Damnation!
-- How ugly she appears? ( Looking at her.


Vio. Do not look so sternly on me, but believe me Felix, I have not injured
you, nor am I false.


Fell. Not false, not injured me! Oh Violante, lost and abandoned to thy Vice!
Not false, Oh monstrous!


Vio. Indeed I am not -- There is a Cause which I must not reveal -- Oh think
how far Honor can oblige your Sex -- Then allow a Woman may be bound by the
same Rule to keep a Secret.


Fell. Honor, what have thou to do with Honor, thou that can admit plurality
of Lovers, a Secret? Ha, ha, ha, his Affairs are wondrous safe, who trusts his
Secret to a Woman's keeping, but you need give your self no Trouble about
clearing this Point Madam, for you are become so indifferent to me, that your
Truth, and Falsehood are the same!


Vio. My Love!

( Offers to take his Hand.
Fell. My Torment!

( Turns from her.
Enter Flora. Flo. So I have delivered my Letter to the Colonel, and received
my Fee. ( Aside) Madam, your Father bad me see what Noise that was -- For
Goodness sake Sir, why do you speak so loud!


Fell. I understand my cue Mistress, my Absence is Necessary, I Will oblige you. (
going)

( takes hold of him.
Vio. Oh let me undeceive you first!


Fell. Impossible!


Vio. It Is very possible if I durst.


Fell. Durst! Ha, ha, ha, durst quotha.


Vio. But another time I Will tell thee all.


Fell. Nay, now or never. --


Vio. Now it cannot be.


Fell. Then it shall never be -- Thou most ungrateful of thy Sex, farewell.

( Breaks from her and Exit.
Vio. Oh exquisite Trial of my Friendship! Yet not even this, shall draw the
Secret from me,

That I Will preserve, let Fortune frown, or smile,
And trust to Love, my Love to reconcile.
( Exit.
ACT III.
Enter Don Lopez. Lop. WAS ever Man thus plagued! Odsheart, I could swallow my
Dagger for Madness; I know not what to think, sure Frederick had no Hand in her
Escape -- She must get out of the Window; and she could not do that without a
Ladder; and who could bring it her, but him? Ay, it must be so. The dislike he
showed to Don Guzman in our Discourse to Day, confirms my Suspicion, and I will
charge him home with it; sure Children were given me for a Curse! Why, what
innumerable Misfortunes attend us Parents, when we have employed our whole Care
to educate, and bring our Children up to Years of Maturity? Just when we expect
to reap the Fruits of our Labor; a Man shall in the tinkling of a Bell, see
one hanged, and the other whor'd -- This Graceless Baggage -- But I Will to
Frederick immediately, I Will take the Alguzil with me, and search his House; and
if I find her, I Will use her -- by St. Anthony, I don't know how I Will use her.

( Exit.
The Scene changes to the Street.
Enter Colonel with Isabella 's Letter in his Hand, and Gibby following. Col.
Well, though I could not see my fair Incognita, Fortune, to make me amends, has
flung another Intrigue in my way. Oh! How I love these pretty, kind, coming
Females, that will not give a Man the trouble of wracking his Invention to deceive
them. -- Oh, Portugal! Thou dear Garden of Pleasure -- Where Love drops down
his Mellow Fruit, and every Bough bends to our Hands, and seems to cry come,
Pull and Eat, how deliciously a Man lives here without sear of the Stool of
Repentance? -- This Letter I received from a Lady in a Vail -- Some Duanna!
Some necessary Implement of Cupid; I suppose the Style is frank and easy, I
hope like her that writ it. ( Reads) "Sir, I have seen your Person, and like it
-- Very Concise. -- And if you will meet at five a Clock in the Morning upon the
Terriero de passa, half an Hours Conversation will let me into your Mind. -- "
Ha, ha, ha, a Philosophical Wench: This is the first time I ever knew a Woman
had any Business with the Mind of a Man. -- "If your Intellects answer your
outward Appearance, the Adventure may not displease you. I expect you will not
attempt to see my Face, nor offer any thing unbecoming the Gentleman I take you
for: -- "Humph, the Gentleman she takes me for, I hope she takes me to be Flesh
and Blood, and then I am sure I shall do nothing unbecoming a Gentleman. Well,
if I must not see her Face, it shall go hard if I don't know where she lives.
-- Gibby,


Gib. Here, an like yer Honor.


Col. Follow me at a good Distance, do you hear Gibby?


Gib. In troth dee I, weel eneugh, Sir.


Col. I am to meet a Lady upon the Terriero de passa.


Gib. The Deel an min Eyn gin I keen her, Sir.


Col. But you will when we come there, Sirrah


Gib. Like eneugh, Sir, I have as sharp an Eyn tul a Bony Lass, as ere a Lad in
aw Scotland, an what mun I dee wi her, Sir?


Col. Why, if she and I part, you must watch her Home, and bring me Word where
she lives.


Gib. In troth sal I Sir, gin the Deel tak her not.


Col. Come along then, it is pretty near the time. -- I like a Woman that rises
early to pursue her Inclination.

Thus we improve the Pleasures of the Day,
Whilst tasteless Mortals sleep their Time away.
(Exit.
Scene changes to Frederick 's House.
Enter Inis and Lissardo. Liss. Your Lady run away, and you not know whether!
Say you?


Inis. She never greatly cared for me after finding you and I together; but you
are very Grave, methinks, Lissardo.


Liss. ( Looking upon the Ring) Not at all -- I have some Thoughts indeed of
altering my Course of living; there is a critical Minute in every Man's Life,
which if he can but lay hold of, he may make his Fortune.


Inis. Ha! What, do I see a Diamond-Ring! Where the duce had he that Ring? You
have got a very pretty Ring there, Lissardo.


Liss. Ay, the Trifle is pretty enough. -- But the Lady which gave it me is a
Bona Roba in Beauty, I assure you.

( Cocks his Hat and Struts.
Inis. I cannot bear this -- The Lady! What Lady pray?


Liss. Oh fie! There Is a Question to ask a Gentleman.


Inis. A Gentleman! Why, the Fellow's spoiled; is this your Love for me?
Ungrateful Man, you will break my Heart, so you will.

( Bursts into Tears.
Liss Poor tender hearted Fool. --


Inis. If I knew who gave you that Ring, I Would tear her Eyes out, so I would.

( Sobs.
Liss. So, now the Jade wants a little Coaxing; why, what do thou weep for
now, my Dear? Ha!


Inis. I suppose Flora gave you that Ring; but I Will --


Liss. No, the Devil take me if she did, you make me Swear now -- So, they are
All for the Ring, but I shall bob 'em: I did but Joke, the Ring is none of
mine, it is my Masters; I am to give it to be new Set, that is all, therefore
prithy dry thy Eyes, and kiss me come.

( Enter Flora.
Inis. And do you really speak Truth now?


Liss. Why, Do you doubt it?


Flo. So, so, very well! I thought, there was an Intrigue between him and Inis,
for all he has forsworn it so often. ( Aside.


Inis. Nor have not you seen Flora since you came to Town.


Flo. Ha! How dares she Name my Name? ( Aside.


Liss. No, by this Kiss I have not.

( Kisses her.
Flo. Here Is a dissembling Varlet. ( Aside.


Inis. Nor don't you love her at all?


Liss. Love the Devil, why did not I always tell thee she was my Aversion.


Flo. Did you so, Villain!

( Strikes him a box on the Ear.)
Liss. Zounds she here! I have made a fine spot of Work on it. ( Aside.


Inis. What Is that for? Ha.

( Brushes up to her.
Flo. I shall tell you by and by, Mrs Frippery, if you don't get about your
Business.


Inis. Who do you call Frippery, Mrs. Trolup? Pray get about your Business: if
you go to that, I hope you pretend to no Right and Title here.


Liss. What the Devil do they take me for, an Acre of Land, that they quarrel
about Right and Title to me? ( Aside.


Flo. Pray, what right have you, Mistress, to ask that Question?


Inis. No matter for that, I can show a better Title to him than you, I believe.


Flo. What, has he given thee Nine Months earnest for a living Title? Ha, ha.


Inis. Don't fling your flearing Jests at me, Mrs. Boldface, for I will not take
'em, I assure you.


Liss. So! Now am I as great as the famed Alexander. But my dear Statira and
Roxana, don't exert your selves so much about me: Now, I fancy, if you would
agree lovingly together, I might in a modest way satisfy both your Demands
upon me.


Flo. You satisfy! No, Sirrah, I am not to be satisfied so soon as you think,
perhaps.


Inis. No, nor I neither. -- What do you make no difference between us?


Flo. You pitiful Fellow you; what you fancy, I warrant, that I gave my self
the trouble of dogging you, out of love to your filthy Person, but you are
mistaken, Sirrah -- It was to detect your Treachery. -- How often have you
Sworn to me that you hated Inis, and only carried fair for the good Cheer she
gave you; but that you could never like a Woman with crooked Legs, you said.


Inis. How, how, Sirrah, crooked Legs! Ods, I could find in my Heart.

( Snatches up her Pettycoat a little)
Liss. Here Is a Lying young Jade now! Prithy, my Dear, moderate thy Passion. (
Coaxingly.


Inis. I Would have you to know, Sirrah, my Legs was never -- your Master, I hope,
understands Legs better than you do, Sirrah. ( passionately.


Liss. My Master, so so. ( Shaking his Head and winking.


Flo. I am glad I have done some Mischief, however. ( Aside.


Liss. ( To Inis.) Art thou really so foolish to mind what an enraged Woman
says! Do'nt you see she does it on Purpose to part you and I, ( runs to Flora)
could not you find the Joke without putting your Self in a Passion! You silly
Girl you; why, I saw you follow us plain enough, Mun, and said all this, that
you might not go back with only your Labor for your Pains -- But you are a
revengeful young Slut though. I tell you that, but come Kiss, and Friends.


Flo. Don't thing to Coax me, hang your Kisses.


Fell. ( Within.) Lissardo.


Liss. Odsheart, here is my Master, the Devil take both these Jades, for me,
what shall I do with them?


Inis. Ha! It Is Don Felix's Voice; I would not have him find me here, with his
Footman, for the World.

( Aside.
Fell. ( Within) Why, Lissardo, Lissardo!


Liss. Coming Sir, What a Pox will you do?


Flo. Bless me, which way shall I get out!


Liss. Nay, nay, you must even set your Quarrel aside, and be content to be
mewed up in this Clothes Press together, or stay where you are, and Face it out
-- There is no help for it!


Flo. Put me any where, rather than that; come, come, let me in.

( He opens the Press, and she goes in.
Inis. I Will see her hanged, before I Will go into the Place where she is. -- I Will
trust Fortune with my deliverance: Here used to be a pair of back Stairs, I Will
try to find them out.

( Exit.
Enter Felix and Frederick. Fell. Was you asleep, Sirrah, that you did not hear
me call?


Liss. I did hear you, and answered you, I was coming, Sir.


Fell. Go get the Horses ready, I Will leave Lisbon to Night, never to see it more.


Liss. Hey day! What Is the Matter now?

( Exit.
Fred. Pray tell me, Don Felix! What has ruffled your Temper thus?


Fell. A Woman -- Oh Friend, who can name Woman, and forget Inconstancy!


Fred. This from a Person of mean Education were excusable, such low Suspicions
have their source from vulgar Conversation; Men of your politer Taste never
rashly Censure. -- Come, this is some groundless Jealousy. -- Love raises many
Fears.


Fell. No, My Ears conveyed the Truth into my Heart, and Reason justifies my
Anger: Violante's false and I have nothing left, but thee, in Lisbon, which can
make me wish ever to see it more, except Revenge upon my Rival, of whom I am
ignorant. Oh, That some Miracle would reveal him to me, that I might through his
Heart punish my Infidelity.


Enter Lissardo. Liss. Oh! Sir, here is your Father Don Lopez coming up.


Fell. Does he know that I am here?


Liss. I cannot tell, Sir, he asked for Don Frederick.


Fred. Did he see you?


Liss. I believe not, Sir; for as soon as I saw him, I ran back to give my
Master Notice.


Fell. Keep out of his Sight then. -- And dear Frederick, permit me to retire
into the next Room, for I know the Old Gentleman will be very much displeased
at my return without his leave.

( Exit.
Fred. Quick, quick, begone, he is here.


Enter Don Lopez, speaking as he Enters. Lop. Mr. Alguzil, wait you without
till I call for you. Frederick, an Affair brings me here -- which -- requires
Privacy. -- So that if you have any Body within Ear shot, pray order them to
retire.


Fred. We are private, my Lord, speak freely.


Lop. Why then, Sir, I must tell you, that you had better have pitched upon any
Man in Portugal to have injured, than my self.


Fell. ( Peeping.) What means my Father?


Fred. I understand you not, my Lord!


Lop. Though, I am Old, I have a Son. -- Alas! Why Name I him? He knows not the
Dishonor of my House.


Fell. I am confounded! The dishonor of his House*


Fred. Explain your self my Lord! I am not conscious of any dishonorable
Action, to any Man much less to your Lordship.


Lop. It Is false! you have debauched my Daughter.


Fell. Debauched my Sister! Impossible! He could not, durst not be that Villain.


Fred. My Lord, I scorn so foul a Charge.


Lop. You have debauched her Duty at least, therefore instantly restore her to
me, or by St. Anthony I Will make you.


Fred. Restore her my Lord! Where shall I find her?


Lop. I have those that will swear she is here in your House.


Fell. Ha! In this House?


Fred. You are misinformed my Lord, upon my Reputation I have not seen Donna
Isabella, since the Absence of Don Felix.


Lop. Then pray Sir -- If I am not too inquisitive, What Motive had you for
those Objections you made against her Marriage with Don Guzman Yesterday?


Fred. The Disagreeableness of such a Match, I feared, would give your Daughter
cause to curse her Duty, if she complied with your Demands, that was all my
Lord!


Lop. And so you helped her through the Window to make her disobey.


Fell. Ha, my Sister gone! Oh Scandal to our Blood!


Fred. This is insulting me my Lord, when I assure you I have neither seen, nor
know any thing of your Daughter -- If she is gone, the Contrivance was her own,
and you may thank your Rigor for it.


Lop. Very well, Sir, however my Rigor shall make bold to search your House,
here call in the Alguzile --


Flo. ( Peeping) The Alguzile! What in the Name of Wonder will become of me!


Fred. The Alguzile! My Lord you will repent this.


Enter Alguzile and Attendants. Lop. No Sir, it is you that will repent it, I
charge you in the King's Name to assist me in finding of my Daughter -- Besure
you leave no Part of the House unsearch'd; come, follow me.

( Goes toward the Door where Felix is; Frederick draws, and plants himself
before the Door.)
Fred. Sir, I must first know by what Authority you pretend to Search my House,
before you enter here.


Alg. How! Sir, dare you presume to draw your Sword, upon the Representative of
Majesty! I am Sir, I am his Majesty's Alguzile, and the very Quintessence of
Authority -- therefore put up your Sword, or I shall order you to be knocked
down -- for know Sir, the Breath of an Alguzile, is as dangerous, as the Breath
of a Demy-Culverin.


Lop. She is certainly in that Room, by his Guarding the Door -- if he Disputes
your Authority, knock him down I say.


Fred. I shall show you some Sport first; the Woman you look for is not here,
but there is something in this Room, which I Will preserve from your sight at the
Hazard of my Life.


Lop. Enter I say, nothing but my Daughter can be there -- force his Sword from
him.

(Felix comes out and joins Frederick.)
Fell. Villains stand off! Assassinate a Man in his own House.


Lop. Oh, oh, oh, Misericordia, what do I see my Son!


Alg. Ha, his Son! Here Is five hundred Pounds good, my Brethren, if Antonio
dies, and that is in the Surgeons Power, and he is in love with my Daughter you
know -- Don Felix! I command you to surrender your self into the Hands of
Justice, in order, to raise me and my Posterity, and in Consideration you lose
your Head to gain me five hundred Pounds, I Will have your Generosity recorded on
your Tombstone -- at my own proper Cost, and Charge -- I hate to be
ungrate-ful.


Fred. Here Is a generous Dog now --


Lop. Oh that ever I was born -- Hold, hold, hold.


Fred. Did I not tell you, you would repent my Lord, What ho! Within there (
Enter Servants) arm your selves, and let not a Man in, or out, but Felix --
Look ye Alguzile when you would betray my Friend for filthy Lucre, I shall no
more regard you as an Officer of Justice, but as a Thief and Robber thus resist
you.


Fell. Generous Frederick! Come on Sir, we'll show you Play for the five hundred
Pounds.


Alg. Fall on, seize the Money right or wrong ye Rogues.

( They fight.
Lop. Hold, hold, Alguzile! I Will give you the five hundred Pound, that is, my
Bond to pay it upon Antonio's Death, and twenty Pistoles however things go, for
you and these honest Fellows to drink my Health.


Alg. Say you so my Lord! Why look ye my Lord, I bear the young Gentleman no
ill Will my Lord If I get but the five hundred Pounds, my Lord -- why look ye
my Lord -- It Is the same thing to me whether your Son be hanged or not my Lord,


Fell. Scoundrels. --


Lop. Ay, well, thou art a good natured Fellow that is the Truth on it -- Come
then we'll to the Tavern, and sign and seal this Minute, Oh Felix be careful of
thy self, or thou will break my Heart;

( Exit Lopez, Alguzile and Attendants.)
Fell. Now Frederick, though I ought to thank you for your Care of me, yet till I
am satisfied about my Father's Accusation, I cannot return the Acknowledgments I
owe you: Know you aught relating to my Sister?


Fred. I hope my Faith, and Truth, are known to you -- And here by both I
swear, I am ignorant of every Thing relating to your Father's Charge.


Fell. Enough, I do believe thee! Oh Fortune! Where will thy Malice end!


Enter Servant. Ser. Sir, I bring you joyful News, I am told that Don Antonio
is out of Danger and now in the Palace.


Fell. I wish it be true, then I Am at Liberty to watch my Rival, and pursue my
Sister; prithy Frederick, inform thy self of the Truth of this Report.


Fred. I will this Minute -- Do you hear, let no body in to Don Felix till my
return.

( Exit.
Ser. I Will observe Sir.

( Exit.
Flo. ( Peeping) They have almost frighted me out of my Wits -- I Am sure -- Now
Felix is alone, I have a good Mind to pretend I came with a Message from my
Lady; but then how shall I say I came into the Cupboard. ( Aside.


Enter Servant, seeming to oppose the Entrance of some body. Ser. I tell you
Madam Don Felix is not here.


Vio. ( Within) I tell you Sir he is here, and I will see him. ( breaks in) You
are as difficult of Access Sir, as a first Minister of State.


Flo. My Stars! My Lady here!

( Shuts the Press close.
Fell. If your Visit was designed to Frederick, Madam, he is abroad,


Vio. No Sir, the Visit is to you.


Fell. You are very punctual in your Ceremonies Madam.


Vio. Though I did not come to return your Visit, but to take that which your
Civility ought to have brought me.


Fell. If my Ears, my Eyes and my Understanding ly'd, then I am in your Debt,
else not Madam.


Vio. I will not charge them with a Term so gross, to say they ly'd, but call
it a Mistake, nay call it any thing to excuse my Felix -- Could I, Think ye,
could I put off my Pride so far, poorly to dissemble a Passion which I did not
feel? Or seek a Reconciliation, with what I did not love? Do but consider, If I
had entertained another, should I not rather embrace this Quarrel, pleased with
the Occasion that rid me of your Visits and gave me Freedom to enjoy the Choice
which you think I have made; have I any Interest in thee but my Love? Or am I
bound by aught but Inclination to submit and follow thee -- No Law whilst
single binds us to obey, but you by Nature, and Education, are obliged to pay a
Deference to all Woman kind.


Fell. These are fruitless Arguments: It Is most certain thou were dearer to
these Eyes then all that Heaven ever gave to Charm the Sense of Man, but I
would rather tear them out, than suffer 'em to delude my Reason, and enslave my
Peace.


Vio. Can you love without Esteem? And where is the Esteem for her you still
suspect? Oh Felix! There is a Delicacy -- in Love, which equals even a
religious Faith; true Love never doubts the Object it adores, and Scepticks
there, will disbelieve their Sight.


Enter Servant. Fell. Your Notions are too refined for mine Madam. How now, what
do you want?


Ser. Only my Master's Cloak out of this Press Sir, that is all, Oh! The Devil,
-- The Devil,

( Opens the Press, sees Flora, and roars out.
Vio. Ha, a Woman concealed! Very well Felix!


Flo. Discovered! Nay then Legs befriend me.

( Runs out.)
Fell. A Woman in the Press!

( Enter Lissardo. How the Devil came a Woman there, Sirrah?


Liss. What shall I say now?


Vio. Now Lissardo show your Wit to brin gyour Master off.


Liss. Off Madam! Nay, nay, nay, there, there needs no great Wit to, to, to, to
bring him off Madam, for she did, and she did not come as, as, as, as a, a a
Man may say directly to, to, to, to speak with my Master Madam.


Vio. I see by your Stammering, Lissardo, that your Invention is at at a very
low Ebb.


Fell. God's Death Rascal, speak without Hessitation, and the Truth too, or I shall
stick my Stilletto in your Guts.


Vio. No, no, your Master mistakes, he would not have you speak the Truth.


Fell. Madam my Sincerity wants no excuse.


Liss. I am so confounded between one and the other, that I cannot think of a
Lie -- ( Aside.


Fell. Sirrah fetch me this Woman back instantly, I Will know what Business she
had here!


Vio. Not a Step; your Master shall not be put to the Blush -- Come a Truce Felix!
Do you ask me no more Questions about the Window, and I Will forgive this.


Fell. I scorn Forgiveness where I own no Crime, but your Soul conscious of its
Guilt, would fain lay hold of this Occasion to blend your Treason with my
Innocence.


Vio. Insolent! Nay, if instead of owning your Fault you endeavor to insult my
Patience, I must tell you Sir, you don't behave your self like that Man of
Honor you would be taken for, you ground your Quarrel with me upon your own
Inconstancy; it is plain you are false your self, and would make me the Agressor
-- It was not for nothing the Fellow opposed my Entrance -- This last Usage has
given me back my Liberty, and now my Father's Will shall be obeyed without the
least Reluctance.

( Exit.
Fell. Oh, stubborn, stubborn Heart, what will thou do? Her Father's Will shall
be obeyed! Ha, That carries her to a Cloister, And cuts of all my Hopes at once
-- By Heaven she shall not, must not leave me. No she is not false, at least my
Love now represents her true, because I fear to lose her, Ha! Villain, art thou
here! ( turns upon Lissardo) tell me this Moment who this Woman was, and for
what Intent she was here concealed -- Or*


Liss. Ah, good Sir forgive me, and I Will tell you the whole Truth.

( falls on his Knees.
Fell. Out with it then --


Liss. It, it it, was Mrs. Flora Sir. Donna Violante's Woman -- you must know
Sir, we have had a sneaking Kindness for one another a great while -- She was
not willing you should know it, so when she heard your Voice, she ran into the
Clothes Press, I would have told you this at first, but I was afraid of her
Lady's knowing it, this is the Truth as I hope for a whole Skin, Sir.


Fell. If it be not, I Will not leave you a whole Bone in it Sirrah -- fly, and
observe if Violante goes directly home.


Liss. Yes Sir, yes.

( Exit.
Fell. I must convince her of my Faith, Oh! How irresolute is a Lovers Heart! My
Resentments cooled when hers grew high -- Nor can I struggle longer with my
Fate, I cannot quit her, no I cannot, so absolute a Conquest has she gained --
Woman's the greatest sovereign Power on Earth.

In vain Men strive their Tyranny to quit,
Their Eyes command, and force us to submit.
So have I seen a metled Courser fly,
Tear up the Ground, And toss his Rider high;
Till some experienced Master found the Way,
With Spur and Rein to make his Pride obey.

Scene, the Terreiro de passa.
Enter Colonel, and Isabella veiled. Gibby at a Distance. Col. Then you say, it
is impossible for me to wait of you home Madam.


Isab. I say it is inconsistent with my Circumstance Colonel, and that Way
impossible for me to admit of it.


Col. Consent to go with me then -- I lodge at one Don Fredericks's a Merchant
just by here, he is a very honest Fellow and I dare confide in his Secrecy.


Isab. Ha, does he lodge there? Pray Heaven I am not discovered. ( Aside.


Col. What say you my Charmer? Shall we breakfast together; I have some of the
best Bohea in the Universe.


Isab. puh! Bohea! Is that the best Treat you can give a Lady at your Lodgings
-- Colonel!


Col. Well hinted -- No, no, no, I have other Things at thy Service Child.


Isab. What are those Things pray?


Col. My Heart, Soul, and Body into the Bargain.


Isab. Has the last no Encumbrance upon it, can you make a clear Title, Colonel?


Col. all Freehold Child, and I Will afford the a very good Bargain.

( embraces her.
Gib. Au my Sol, they make muckle Wards about it, Ise seer weary with standing,
Ise even tak a Sleep.

( Lies down.
Isab. If I take a Lease, it must be for Life, Colonel.


Col. Thou shall have me as long, or as little Time as thou will; my Dear, come
lets to my Lodging, and we'll Sign and Seal this Minute.


Isab. Oh, not so fast, Colonel, there are many Things to be adjusted before
the Lawyer and the Parson comes.


Col. The Lawyer, and the Parson! No, no, ye little Rogue, we can finish our
Affairs without the help of the Law -- or the Gospel.


Isab. Indeed but we cannot, Colonel.


Col. Indeed! Why have thou then trappan'd me out of my warm Bed this Morning
for nothing! Why, this is showing a Man half famished, a well furnished Larder,
then clapping a Padlock on the Door, till you Starve him quite.


Isab. If you can find in your Heart to say Grace, Colonel, you shall keep the
Key.


Col. I love to see my Meat before I give Thanks, Madam, therefore uncover thy
Face, Child, and I Will tell thee more of my Mind. -- If I like you --


Isab. I dare not risk my Reputation upon your Ifs, Colonel -- and so Adieu. (
Going.


Col. Nay, nay, nay, we must not part.


Isab. As you ever hope to see me more, suspend your Curiosity now; one Step
farther looses me for ever. -- Show your self a Man of Honor, and you shall
find me a Woman of Honor.

( Exit.
Col. Well, for once, I Will trust to a Blind Bargain, Madam. -- ( Kisses her
Hand, and parts.) But I shall be too Cunning for your Ladyship, if Gibby
observes my Orders: Methinks these Intrigues, which relate to the Mind, are
very insipid. -- The Conversation of Bodies is much more diverting. -- Ha! What
do I see, my Rascal asleep? Sirrah, did I not charge you to watch the Lady? And
is it thus you observe my Orders, ye Dog.

( Kicks him all this while, and he shrugs, and rubs his Eyes, and Yawns.)
Gib. That Is Treu, an lik your Honor; but I thought that when ence ye had her
in yer awn Honds, ye mite a orderd her yer sal weal eneugh without me, an ye
keen, an like yer Honor.


Col. Sirrah, hold your impertinent Tongue, and make haste after her; if you
don't bring me some Account of her, never dare to see my Face again.

( Exit.
Gib. Ay! This is bony Wark indeed to run three hunred Mile to this wicked
Town, an before I can weel fill my Wem, to be sent a Whore hunting after this
black she Devil. -- What Gat sal I gang to speer for this Wutch now? Ah, for a
ruling Elder -- or the Kirks Treaserer -- or his Mon. -- Id gar, my Master make
two oh this; -- But I Am seer there is na sike honest People here, or there would
na be so muckle Sculdudrie. Fornication.


( Enter an English Soldier passing along.)
Gib. Geud Mon, did ye see a Woman, a Lady any gate here away enough?


Eng. Man. Yes, a great Many. What kind of a Woman is it you inquire after.


Gib. Geud troth, she is ne Kenspekle, she is aw in a Clowd. --


Eng. Man. What, it is some High-land Monster which you brought over with you I
suppose, I see no such not I, kenspekle quotha!


Gib. Huly, huly, Mon, the Deel pike out yer Eyn, and then you will see the
barer, ye English bag Pudin Tike.


Eng. Man. What says the Fellow? ( Turning to Gibby.


Gib. Say! I say I am a better Fellow than ever stude upon yer Shanks -- an gin
I here mere a yer din, deal a my Sol, Sir, but Ise crack your Crown.


Eng. Man. Get you gone you Scotch Rascal, and thank your Heathen Dialect,
which I don't understand, that you have not your Bones broke.


Gib. Ay! An ye do no understond a Scots Man's Tongue -- Ise se gin ye can
understond a Scots Man's Gripe: Wha's the bater Man now Sir?

( Lays hold of him, strikes up his Heels, and gets a Stride over him.)
Here Violante crosses the Stage, Gibby jumps up from the Man, and brushes up
to Violante. Gib. I vow, Madam, but I am glad that ye, and I are foregather'd.


Vio. What would the Fellow have?


Gib. Nothing, away Madam, woe worth yer Heart, what a muckle deel a Mischief
had ye like to bring upon poor Gibby.


Vio. The Man's Drunk. --


Gib. In troth am I not. -- An gin I had not fond ye, Madam, the Lord knows
when I should; for my Master bad me nere gang Heam, without Tidings of ye,
Madam.


Vio. Sirrah, get about your Business, or I Will have your Bones drub'd.


Gib. Geud Faith, my Master has even dun that te yer Honds, Madam.


Vio. Who is your Master? Friend.


Gib. Money even Spiers the gat, they ken right weel. -- It is no so long sen
ye parted wi him, I wish he kent ye haafe as weel as ye ken him.


Vio. Pugh, the Creature's mad, or mistakes me for some Body else; and I should
be as Mad as he, to talk to him any longer.

( Exit.
Enter Lissardo at the upper end of the Stage. Liss. So, she is gone Home I see.
What did that Scotch Fellao want with her? I Will try to find it out, perhaps I
may discover something that may make my Master Friends with me again.


Gib. Are ye gaune, Madam, a Deel scope in yer Company, for I Am as weese as I
was; but I Will bide and see whase House it is, gin I can meet wi any Civel Body
to Spier at. -- Weel of aw Men in the World, I think our Scots Men the greatest
Feuls, to leave their weel favored honest Women at Heam, to rin walloping
after a pack of Gyrcarlings here, that shame to show their Faces, and peer Men,
like me, are forced to be their Pimps; a Pimp! Godswarbit, Gibby's never be a
Pimp. -- An yet in troth it is a threving Trade; I rememmer a Countryman aw mi
ean, that by ganging a sike like Errands as I am now, come to great Preferment:
My Lad, Wot ye wha lives here?

( Turns and sees Lissardo.
Liss. Don Pedro de Mendosa.


Gib. An did ye se a Lady gang in but now?


Liss. Yes, I did.


Gib. An dee ye ken her te?


Liss. It was Donna Violante his Daughter; what the Devil makes him so
inquisitive? Here is something in it, that is certain: It Is a cold Morning
Brother, what think you of a Dram?


Gib. In troth, very weel Sir.


Liss. You seem an honest Fellow, prithy lets Drink to our better Acquaintance.


Gib. Wi aw my Heart, Sir, gang yer gate to the next House, and Ise follow ye.
--


Liss. Come along then.

( Exit.
Gib. Don Pedro de Mendosa. -- Donna Violante his Daughter, that is as right as
my Leg now. -- Ise need na mere, I Will tak a Drink an then to my Master. --

Ise bring him News will make his Heart full Blee,
Gin he rewards it not, Deel Pimp for me.
(Exit.
ACT IV.
SCENE, Violante 's Lodgings.
Enter Isabella in a gay Temper, and Violante out of Humor. Isab. MY Dear, I
have been seeking you this half Hour, to tell you the most lucky Adventure.


Vio. And you have pitched upon the most unlucky Hour for it, that you could
possibly have found in the whole four and Twenty.


Isab. Hang unlucky Hours, I will not think of them; I hope all my Misfortunes are
past.


Vio. And mine all to come.


Isab. I have seen the Man I like.


Vio. And I have seen the Man that I could wish to hate.


Isab. And you must assist me in discovering whether he can like me, or not.


Vio. You have assisted me in such a Discovery already, I thank ye.


Isab. What say you my Dear?


Vio. I say I am very unlucky at Discoveries Isabella; I have too lately made
one pernicious to my Ease, your Brother is false.


Isab. Impossible!


Vio. Most true.


Isab. Some Villain has traduced him to you.


Vio. No, Isabella, I love too well to trust the Eyes of others; I never Credit
the ill judging World, or form Suspicions upon vulgar Censures; no, I had
Ocular Proof of his Ingratitude.


Isab. Then I am most unhappy; my Brother was the only Pledge of Faith betwixt
us, if he has forfeited your Favor, I have no Title to your Friendship.


Vio. You wrong my Friendship, Isabella; Your own Merit intitles you to every
thing within my Power.


Isab. Generous Maid -- But may I not know what Grounds you have to think my
Brother False.


Vio. Another time. -- But tell me, Isabella, how can I serve you?


Isab. Thus then -- The Gentleman that brought me hither, I have seen and
talked with, upon the Terreiro de passa this Morning, and find him a Man of
Sense Generosity, and good Humor, in short he is every Thing that I could like
for a Husband, and I have dispatched Mrs. Flora to bring him hither; I hope
you will forgive the Liberty I have taken.


Vio. Hither, to what Purpose?


Isab. To the great universal Purpose Matrimony.


Vio. Matrimony! Why do you design to ask him?


Isab. No, Violante, you must do that for me.


Vio. I thank you for the Favor you design me, but desire to be excused: I
manage my own Affairs too ill, to be trusted with those of other People;
besides, if my Father should find a Stranger here, it might make him hurry me
into a Monastery immediately; I cannot for my Life admire your Conduct, to
encourage a Person altogether unknown to you. -- 'Twas very Imprudent to meet
him this Morning, but much more so, to send for him hither, knowing what
Inconveniency you have already drawn upon me.


Isab. I am not insensible how far my Misfortunes have embarrrast you; and if
you please, sacrifice my Quiet to your own.


Vio. Unkindly urged -- Have I not preferred your Happiness to every Thing
that is dear to me.


Isab. I know thou have -- Then do not deny me this last Request, which in a
few Hours perhaps, may render my Condition, able to clear thy Fame, and bring
my Brother to thy Feet for Pardon.


Vio. I wish you don't repent of this Intrigue. I suppose he knows you are the
same Woman that he brought in here last Night.


Isab. Not a Syllable of that, I met him veiled, and to prevent his knowing the
House, I ordered Mrs. Flora to bring him by the back Door into the Garden.


Vio. The very Way which Felix comes, If they should meet, there would be fine
Work -- Indeed my Dear I cannot approve of your Design.


Enter Flora. Flo. Madam the Colonel waits your Pleasure.


Vio. How durst you go upon such a Message Mistress without acquainting me.


Isab. It Is too late to dispute that now, dear Violante, I acknowledge the
Rashness of the Action -- But consider the Necessity of my Deliverance.


Vio. That is indeed a weighty Consideration, well, what am I to do.


Isab. In the next Room I Will give you Instructions, in the mean time Mrs. Flora
show the Colonel into this.

( Exit Flora one Way, and Isabella and Violante another.)
Re-Enter Flora with the Colonel. Flo. The Lady will wait on you presently Sir,

( Exit.
Col. Very well -- This is a very fruitful Soil, I have not been here quite
four and twenty Hours, and I have three Intrigues upon my Hands already, but I
hate the Chase, without partaking the Game. ( Enter Violante veiled.) Ha, a
fine sized Woman -- Pray Heaven she proves Handsome -- I am come to obey your
Ladyship's Commands.


Vio. Are you sure of that, Colonel?


Col. If you be not very unreasonable indeed, Madam; a Man is but a Man.

( Takes her Hand, and kisses it.)
Vio. Nay, We have no Time for Compliments, Colonel.


Col. I understand you, Madam -- Montre moy votre Chamber.

( Takes her in his Arms.)
Vio. Nay, nay, hold Colonel, my Bedchamber is not to be entered without a
certain Purchase.


Col. Purchase! Humph, This is some kept Mistress, I suppose; who industriously
lets out her leisure Hours. ( Aside.) Look ye, Madam, you must consider we
Soldiers are not over stocked with Money. -- But we make ample Satisfaction in
Love; we have a world of Courage upon our Hands now, you know: -- Then prithy
use a Conscience, and I Will try if my Pocket can come up to your Price.

( Puts his Hands into his Pocket.
Vio. Nay, don't give your self the trouble of drawing your Purse Colonel, my
Design is levelled at your Person, if that be at your own disposal.


Col. Ay, that it is Faith Madam, and I Will settle it as firmly upon thee. --


Vio. As Law can do it.


Col. Hang Law in love Affairs, thou shall have Right and Title to it out of
pure Inclination. -- A Matrimonial Hint again! Gad, I fancy the Women have a
Project on foot to transplant the Union into Portugal.


Vio. Then you have an aversion to Matrimony, Colonel; did you never see a
Woman, in all your Travels, that you could like for a Wife?


Col. A very odd Question. -- Do you really expect that I should speak Truth
now?


Vio. I do, if you expect to be so dealt with, Colonel.


Col. Why then, -- -- Yes.


Vio. Is she in your own Country, or this?


Col. This is a very pretty kind of a Catechism; but I don't conceive which way
it turns to Edification: In this Town I believe Madam.


Vio. Her Name is. --


Col. Ay, How is she called, Madam!


Vio. Nay, I ask you that, Sir.


Col. Oh, ho, why she is called -- Pray Madam, how is it you Spell your Name?


Vio. Oh, Colonel, I am not the happy Woman, nor do I wish it.


Col. No, I Am sorry for that. -- What the Devil does she mean by all these
Questions? ( Aside.


Vio. Come Colonel, for once be Sincere. -- Perhaps you may not repent it.


Col. Faith Madam, I have an Inclination to Sincerity, but I Am afraid you will
call my Manners in Question: This is like to be but a silly Adventure, here is
so much Sincerity required. ( Aside.


Vio. Not at all; I prefer Truth before Compliment in this Affair.


Col. Why then to be plain with you, Madam, a Lady last Night wounded my Heart
by a Fall from a Window, whose Person I could be contented to take, as my
Father took my Mother, till Death us does part: -- But who she is, or how
distinguished, whether Maid, Wife, or Widow I cannot inform you, perhaps you are
she.


Vio. Not to keep you in suspense, I am not She, but I can give you an Account
of Her; that Lady is a Maid of Condition, has ten Thousand Pounds; and if you
are a single Man, her Person, and Fortune are at your Service.


Col. I accept the Offer with the highest Transports; but say my charming
Angel, art thou not she. ( offers to Embrace her.) This is a lucky Adventure. (
Aside.


Vio. Once again, Colonel, I tell you I am not she. -- But at Six, this Evening
you shall find her on the Terriere de passa, with a white Handkerchief in her
Hand; get a Priest ready, and you know the rest.


Col. I shall infallibly observe your Directions, Madam.


Enter Flora hastily, and Whispers Violante, who starts and seems surpiz'd.
Vio. Ha Felix, crossing the Garden, say you, what shall I do now?


Col. You seem surpised Madam.


Vio. Oh, Colonel, my Father is coming hither, an if he finds you here I am
ruined!


Col. Odslife Madam, thrust me any where, cannot I go out this way?


Vio. No, no, no, he comes that way, how shall I prevent their Meeting? Here,
here, step into my Bedchamber and be still, as you value her you love; don't
stir till you have Notice, as ever you hope to have her in your Arms.


Col. On that Condition I Will not breath.

( Exit.
Enter Felix. Fell. I wonder where my Dog of a Servant is all this while. -- But
she is at Home I find. -- How coldly she regards me. -- You look Violante as if
the sight of me were troublesome.


Vio. Can I do otherways, when you have the Assurance to approach me, after
what I saw to Day.


Fell. Assurance, rather call it good Nature, after what I heard last Night; but
such regard to Honor, have I in my Love to you, I cannot bear to be suspected,
nor suffer you to entertain false Notions of my Truth, without endeavoring to
convince you of my Innocence, so much good Nature have I more than you
Violante. -- Pray give me leave to ask your Woman man one Question; my Man
assures me she was the Person you saw at my Lodgings.


Flo. I confess it, Madam, and ask your Pardon.


Vio. Impudent Baggage, not to undeceive me sooner, what Business could you
have there?


Fell. Lissardo and she it seems imitate You and I.


Flo. I love to follow the Example of my Betters, Madam.


Fell. I hope I am justified. --


Vio. Since we are to part, Felix, there needed no Justification.


Fell. Methinks you talk of parting, as a Thing indifferent to you; can you
forget how I have loved?


Vio. I wish I could forget my own Passion; I should with less Concern remember
yours. -- But for Mrs. Flora. --


Fell. You must forgive her; -- Must did I say? I fear I have no Power to
Impose, though the Injury was done to me.


Vio. It Is harder to Pardon an Injury done to what we love than to our selves,
but at your Request, Felix, I do forgive her; go watch my Father, Flora, least
he should wake, and surprise us.


Flo. Yes, Madam.

( Exit Flora.
Fell. Do thou then love me, Violante?


Vio. What need of Repetition from my Tongue, when every Look confesses what
you ask?


Fell. Oh! Let no Man judge of Love but those who feel it, what wondrous Magic
lies in one kind Look. -- One tender Word destroys a Lover's Rage, and melts
his fiercest Passion into soft Complaint. Oh the Window, Violante, would thou
but clear that one Suspicion!


Vio. Prithy no more of that, my Felix, a little time shall bring thee perfect
Satisfaction.


Fell. Well Violante, on that Condition you think no more of a Monastery. --
I Will wait with Patience for his Mighty Secret.


Vio. Ah Felix, Love generally gets the better of Religion in us Women*
Resolutions made in heat of Passion, ever dissolve upon Reconciliation.


Enter Flora hastily. Flo. Oh Madam, Madam, Madam, my Lord your Father has been
in the Garden, and locked the back Door, and comes muttering to himself this
way.


Vio. Then we are caught: Now Felix we are undone.


Fell. Heavens forbid, this is most unlucky; let me step into your Bedchamber,
he will not look under the Bed; there I may conceal my self.

( runs to the Door, and pushes it open a little.)
Vio. My Stars! If he goes in there he will find the Colonel. -- No, no, Felix,
that is no safe Place, my Father often goes thither; and should you Cough, or
Sneeze, we are lost.


Fell. Either my Eyes deceived me, or I saw a Man within, I Will watch him close.
-- She shall deal with the Devil, if she conveys him out without my Knowledge.
( Aside.) what shall I do then?


Vio. Bless me, how I tremble!


Flo. Oh, Invention, Invention! -- I have it Madam, here, here, here Sir, off
with your Sword, and I Will fetch you a Disguise.

( Runs in and fetches out a Riding-Hood.
Fell. Ay, ay, any Thing to avoid Don Pedro.


Vio. Oh! Quick, quick, quick, I shall die with Apprehension.

(Flora puts the Riding-Hood on Felix.)
Flo. Besure you don't speak a Word!


Fell. Not for the Indies. -- But I shall observe you closer than you imagine. (
Aside.


Pedro. ( Within.) Violante where are you, Child, ( Enter Don Pedro.) Why, how
came the Garden. Door open? Ha! how now, who have we here?


Vio. Humph, he will certainly discover him. ( Aside.


Flo. It Is my Mother, and please you, Sir.

( She and Felix both Curtesy.)
Pedro. Your Mother! By St. Anthony she is a strapper; why, you are a Dwarf to
her. -- How many Children have you good Woman?


Vio. Oh! If he speaks we are lost. ( Aside.


Flo. Oh! Dear Senior, she cannot hear you, she has been Deaf these twenty Years.


Pedro. Alas poor Woman. -- Why, you Muffle her up as if she were Blind too.


Fell. Would I were fairly off. ( Aside.


Pedro. Turn up her Hood.


Vio. Undone for ever. -- St. Anthony forbid: Oh Sir, she has the dreadfullest
unlucky Eyes. -- Pray don't look upon them, I made her keep her Hood shut on
Purpose. -- Oh, oh, oh!


Pedro. Eyes! Why, what is the Matter with her Eyes?


Flo. My poor Mother, Sir, is much afflicted with the Cholick; and about two
Months ago she had it grievously in her Stomach, and was over-persuaded to take
a Dram of filthy English Geneva. -- Which immediately flew up into her Head,
and caused such a Defluxion in her Eyes, that she could never since bear the
Daylight.


Pedro. Say you so. -- Poor Woman! -- Well, make her sit down, Violante, and
give her a Glass of Wine.


Vio. Let her Daughter give her a Glass below, Sir, for my Part, she has
frighted me so, I shall not be my self these two Hours. I am sure her Eyes are
evil Eyes.


Fell. Well hinted.


Pedro. Well, well, do so, evil Eyes, there is no evil Eyes Child.

( Ex. Felix and Flora.
Vio. I Am glad he is gone.


Pedro. Have thou heard the News, Violante?


Vio. What News, Sir?


Pedro. Why, Vasquez tells me that Don Lopez's Daughter Isabella, is run away
from her Father, that Lord has very ill Fortune with his Children. -- Well, I Am
glad my Daughter has no Inclination to Mankind, that my House is plagued with
no Suitors. ( Aside.


Vio. This is the first Word I ever heard of it, I pity her Frailty. --


Pedro. Well said Violante. -- Next Week I intend thy Happiness shall begin.

( Enter Flora.
Vio. I don't intend to stay so long, I thank you, Pa, pa. ( Aside.


Pedro. My Lady Abbess writes Word she longs to see thee, and has provided
every Thing in order for thy Reception. -- Thou will lead a happy Life my Girl.
-- Fifty times before that of Matrimony, where an extravagant Coxcomb might
make a Beggar of thee, or an ill Natured surly Dog break thy Heart.


Flo. Break her Heart! She had as good have her Bones broke as to be a Nun; I
am sure I had, rather of the two. -- You are wondrous kind, Sir, but if I had
such a Father, I know what I would do.


Pedro. Why, what would you do Minx, ha?


Flo. I would tell him I had as good Right and Title to the Laws of Nature, and
the End of the Creation, as he had. --


Pedro. You would Mistress, who the Devil doubts it! A good Assurance is a
Chamber-Maid's Coat of Arms; and lying, and contriving the Supporters. -- Your
Inclinations are on Tip-toe it seems. -- If I were your Father, Housewife, I Would
have a Penance enjoined you, so strict, that you should not be able to turn you
in your Bed for a Month. -- You are enough to spoil your Lady Housewife, if she
had not abundance of Devotion.


Vio. Fie Flora, Are not you ashamed to talk thus to my Father? You said
Yesterday you would be glad to go with me into the Monastery.


Pedro. She go with thee! No, no, she is enough to Debauch the whole Convent. --
Well Child, remember what I said to thee, next Week. --


Vio. Ay, and what am I to do this too. -- ( Aside. I am all Obedience, Sir, I
care not how soon I change my Condition.


Flo. But little does he think what Change she means. ( Aside.


Pedro. Well said Violante. -- I am glad to find her so willing to leave the
World, but it is wholly owing to my Prudent Management; did she know that she
might command her Fortune when she came at Age, or upon Day of Marriage,
Perhaps she would change her Note. -- But I have always told her that her
Grandfather left it with this Proviso, That she turned Nun, now a small Part
of this twenty Thousand Pounds provides for her in the Nunnery, and the rest is
my own; there is nothing to be got in this Life without Policy. ( Aside.) Well
Child, I am going into the Country for two or three Days, to settle some
Affairs with thy Uncle. -- And then. -- Come help me on with my Cloak, Child.


Vio. Yes Sir.

( Exit. Pedro and Violante.
Flo. So now for the Colonel. ( Goes to the Chamber Door.) Hist, hist Colonel.
( Colonel peeping.)


Col. Is the Coast clear?


Flo. Yes, if you can Climb, for you must get over the Wash-House, and Jump
from the Garden-Wall into the Street.


Col. Nay, nay, I don't value my Neck if my Incogita Answers but thy Lady's
Promise.

( Exit Colonel and Flora.)
Re-Enter Pedro and Violante. Pedro. Good bye Violante, take Care of thy self,
Child.


Vio. I wish you a good Journey, Sir. -- Now to set my Prisoner at Liberty.

( Enter Felix behind Violante.
Fell. I have lain Perdue under the Stairs, till I watched the old Man out.


Vio. Sir, Sir, you may appear.

( Goes to the Door.
Fell. May he so, Madam. -- I had Cause for my Suspicion, I find, treacherous
Woman.


Vio. Ha, Felix here! Nay then, all is discovered.


Fell. ( Draws.) Villain, who ever thou art, come out I charge thee, and take
the Reward of thy Adulterous Errand.


Vio. What shall I say. -- Nothing but the Secret which I have Sworn to keep
can reconcile this Quarrel. ( Aside.


Fell. A Coward! Nay, then I Will fetch you out, think not to hide thy self; no,
by St. Anthony, an Altar should not Protect thee, even there I Would reach thy
Heart, though all the Saints were armed in thy Defense.

( Exit.
Vio. Defend me Heaven! What shall I do? I must discover Isabella, or here will
be Murder.


Enter Flora. Flo. I have helped the Colonel off clear, Madam.


Vio. Say thou my Girl? Then I am armed.


Re-Enter Felix. Fell. Where has the Devil in Complaisance to your Sex conveyed
him from my just Resentments?


Vio. Him, who do you mean my dear inquisitive Spark? Ha, ha, ha, ha, will you
never leave these Jealous Whims?


Fell. Will you never cease to Impose upon me?


Vio. You impose upon your self, my Dear, do you think I did not see you? Yes,
I did, and resolved to put this Trick upon you; I knew you would take the Hint, and
soon relapse into your wonted Error: how easily your Jealousy is fired, I shall
have a blessed Life with you.


Fell. Was there nothing in it then, but only to try me?


Vio. Will Not you believe your Eyes?


Fell. No, because I find they have deceived me; well, I am convinced that Faith
is as necessary in Love as in Religion; for the Moment a Man lets a Woman know
her Conquest, he resigns his Senses, and sees nothing but what she would have him.


Vio. And as soon as that Man finds his Love returned, she becomes as errant a
Slave, as if she had already said after the Priest.


Fell. The Priest, Violante, would dissipate those Fears which cause these
Quarrels; when will thou make me Happy?


Vio. Tomorrow I will tell thee, my Father is gone for two or three Days to my
Uncles, we have time enough to finish our Affairs. -- But prithy leave me now,
for I expect some Ladies to Visit me.


Fell. If you Command it. -- Fly swift ye Hours, and bring Tomorrow on. -- You
desire I would leave you, Violante.


Vio. I do at present.


Fell. So much you reign the Sovereign of my Soul,
That I Obey without the least Control.
(Exit.
Enter Isabella. Isab. I am glad my Brother and you are reconciled my Dear, and
the Colonel escaped without his knowledge; I was frighted out of my Wits when I
heard him return. -- I know not how to express my Thanks Woman. -- for what you
suffered for my Sake, my grateful Acknowlegements shall ever wait you; and to
the World proclaim the Faith, Truth, and Honor of a Woman --


Vio. Prithy don't Compliment thy Friend, Isabella. -- You heard the Colonel I
suppose.


Isab. Every Syllable, and am pleased to find I do not Love in vain.


Vio. Thou have caught his Heart it seems; and an Hour hence may secure his
Person. -- Thou have made hasty Work on it, Girl.


Isab. From thence I draw my Happiness, we shall have no Accounts to make up
after Consummation.

She who for Years, protracts her Lover's Pain,
And makes him Wish, and Wait, and Sigh in vain,
To be his Wife, when late she gives Consent,
Finds half his Passion was in Courtship spent;
Whilst they who boldly all Delays remove,
Find every Hour a fresh supply of Love.

ACT V.
SCENE, Frederick's House.
Enter Felix and Frederick. Fell. THIS Hour has been propitious, I am reconciled
to Violante, and you assure me Antonio is out of Danger.


Fred. Your Satisfaction is doubly mine.


Enter Lissardo. Fell. What Haste you made Sirrah, to bring me Word if Violante
went home?


Liss. I can give you very good Reasons for my stay Sir. -- Yes Sir, she went
home.


Fred. O! Your Master knows that, for he has been there himself Lissardo.


Liss. Sir, may I beg the Favor of your Ear.


Fell. What have you to say?

( Whispers, and Felix seems uneasy.)
Fred. Ha, Felix changes Color at Lissardo's News. What can it be?


Fell. A Scots Footman, that belongs to Colonel Britton, an Acquaintance of
Frederick's say you; the Devil! If she be false, by Heaven I Will trace her.
Prithy Frederick do you know one Colonel Britton a Scotsman?


Fred. Yes, why do you ask me?


Fell. Nay no great Matter, but my Man tells me that he has had some little
Difference with a Servant of his, that is all.


Fred. He is a good harmless innocent Fellow, I am sorry for it; the Colonel
lodges in my House, I knew him formerly in England, and met him here by
Accident last Night, and gave him an Invitation home, he is a Gentleman of a
good Estate, besides his Commission; of excellent Principles, and strict Honor
I assure you.


Fell. Is he a Man of Intrigue?


Fred. Like other Men I suppose, here he comes. --

( Enter Colonel. Colonel, I began to think I had lost you.


Col. -- And not without some Reasons if you knew all.


Fell. There Is no Danger of a fine Gentleman's being lost in this Town, Sir.


Col, That Compliment don't belong to me Sir. But I assure you I have been very
near being run away with.


Fred. Who attempted it?


Col. Faith I know her not -- Only that she is a charming Woman, I mean as much
as I saw of her.


Fell. My Heart swells with Apprehension. -- Some accidental Rencounter. --


Fred. A Tavern I suppose adjusted the Matter. --


Col. A Tavern! No, no Sir, she is above that Rank I assure you, this Nymph
sleeps in a Velvet Bed, and Lodgings every Way agreeable.


Fell. Ha, a Velvet Bed! -- I thought you said but now Sir, you knew her not.


Col. No more I don't Sir.


Fell. How came you then so well acquainted with her Bed?


Fred. Ay, ay, come, come, unfold.


Col. Why then you must know Gentleman, that I was conveyed to her Lodgings, by
one of Cupids Emissaries, called a Chambermaid, in a Chair, through fifty blind
Alleys, who by the help of a Key let me into a Garden.


Fell. God's Death, a Garden, this must be Violante's Garden. ( Aside.


Col. From thence conducted me into a spacious Room, then dropped me a Courtesy,
told me her Lady would wait on me presently, so without unvailing modestly
withdrew.


Fell. Damn her Modesty; this was Flora. ( Aside.


Fred. Well, how then Colonel?


Col. Then Sir, immediately from another Door issued forth a Lady, armed at
both Eyes, from whence such Showers of Darts fell round me, that had I not been
covered with the Shield of another Beauty, I had infallibly fallen a Martyr to
her Charms; for you must know I just saw her Eyes, Eyes did I say? No, no,
hold, I saw but one Eye, though I suppose it had a Fellow, equally as killing.


Fell. But how came you to see her Bed Sir? God's Death this Expectation gives a
thousand Racks. ( Aside.


Col. Why upon her Maid's giving Notice her Father was coming she thrust me
into the Bedchamber.


Fell. Upon her Father's coming?


Col. Ay, so she said, but putting my Ear to the Keyhole of the Door, I found
it was another Lover.


Fell. Confound the Jilt! 'Twas she without dispute. ( Aside.


Fred. Ah poor Colonel, ha, ha, ha.


Col. I discovered they had had a Quarrel, but whether they were reconciled or
not, I cannot tell, for the second Alarm brought the Father in good earnest, and
had like to have made the Gentleman and I acquainted, but she found some other
Stratagem to convey him out.


Fell. Contagion seize her, and make her Body ugly as her Soul. There Is nothing
left to doubt of now, -- It Is plain 'twas she, -- Sure he knows me, and takes
this Method to insult me, God's Death I cannot bear it. ( Aside.


Fred. So when she had dispatched her old Lover, she paid you a Visit in her
Bedchamber, ha, Colonel?


Col. No, Pox take the impertinent Puppy, he spoiled my Diversion, I saw her no
more.


Fell. Very fine! Give me Patience Heaven, or I shall burst with Rage. ( Aside.


Fred. That was hard.


Col. Nay, what was worse, the Nymph that introduced me conveyed me out again
over the Top of a high Wall, where I ran the Danger of having my Neck broke,
for the Father it seems had locked the Door by which I entered.


Fell. That Way I missed him: -- Damn her Invention. ( Aside.) Pray Colonel was
this the same Lady you met upon the Terrerio de passa this Morning?


Col. Faith I cannot tell Sir, I had a Design to know who that Lady was, but my
Dog of a Footman, whom I had ordered to watch her home, fell fast a Sleep -- I
gave him a good beating for his Neglect, and I have never seen the Rascal since.


Fred. Here he comes.


Enter Gibby. Col. Where have you been Sirrah?


Gib. Troth Ise been seeking ye an like yer Honor these two Hoors an mere, I
bring ye glad Teedings Sir.


Col. What have you found the Lady?


Gib. Geud Faith ha I Sir -- an She Is called Donna Violante, and her Parent
Don Pedro de Mendosa, an gin ye wull gang wa mi, an't like ye'r honor, Ise make
ye ken the Huse right weel.


Fell. Oh, Torture! Torture! ( Aside.


Col. Ha! Violante! That Is the Lady's Name of the House where my Incognita is,
sure it could not be her, at least it was not the same House I Am confident. (
Aside.


Fred. Violante! It Is false, I would not have you credit him Colonel.


Gib. The Deel brust my Blader, Sir gin I lee.


Fell. Sirrah, I say you do lie, and I Will make you eat it you Dog. ( kicks him)
and if your Master will justify you --


Col. Not I faith Sir -- I answer for no body's Lies, but my own, if you please
kick him again.


Gib. But gin he dus, Ise ne tak it Sir, gin he was a thousand Spaniards.

( walks about in a Passion.
Col. I owed you a beating Sirrah, and I Am obliged to this Gentleman for taking
the Trouble off my Hands, therefore say no more, do you hear Sir? ( Aside to
Gibby.


Gib. Troth de I Sir, and feel tee.


Fred. This must be a Mistake Colonel, for I know Violante perfectly well, and
I Am certain she would not meet you upon the Terriero de passa.


Col. Don't be too positive Frederick, now I have some Reasons to believe it
was that very Lady.


Fell. You Would very much oblige me Sir, if you would let me know these Reasons.


Col. Sir.


Fell. Sir, I say I have a right to enquire into those Reasons you speak off.


Col. Ha, ha, really Sir I cannot conceive how you, or any Man can have a right
to enquire into my Thoughts.


Fell. Sir I have a Right to every Thing that relates to Violante -- And he that
traduces her Fame, and refuses to give his Reasons for it is a Villain.

( Draws.
Col. What the Devil have I been doing; now Blisters on my Tongue, by Dozens. (
Aside.


Fred. Prithy Felix don't quarrel till you know for what, this is all a Mistake
I Am positive.


Col. Look ye Sir, that I dare draw my Sword I think will admit of no Dispute.
-- But though fighting's my Trade, I Am not in Love with it, and think it more
honorable to decline this Business, than pursue it. This may be a Mistake,
however I Will give you my Honor never to have any Affair directly, or
indirectly with Violante provided she is your Violante; but if there should
happen to be another of her Name I hope you would not engross all the Violantes
in the Kingdom.


Fell. Your Vanity has given me sufficient Reasons to believe I Am not mistaken,
I Am not to be imposed upon Sir.


Col. Nor I bully'd Sir.


Fell. Bully'd! God's Death, such another Word, and I Will nail thee to the Wall.


Col. Are you sure of that Spaniard.

( Draws.
Gib. ( Draws) Say ne mere Mon, aw my Sol here is Two, to Two, dona fear Sir,
Gibby stonds by ye for the Honor a Scotland.

( Vapers about.
Fred. By St. Anthony you shall not fight ( Interposes) on bare Suspicion, be
certain of the Injury, and then. --


Fell. That I will this Moment, and then Sir -- I hope you are to be found --


Col. When ever you please Sir.

( Exit Felix.
Gib. S'bleed Sir, there near was Scotsman yet that shamed to show his Face. (
strutting about.


Fred. (...) Quarrels spring up like Mushrooms, in a Minute: Violante, and he,
was but just reconciled, and you have furnished him with fresh Matter for
falling out again, and I am certain Colonel, Gibby is in the Wrong.


Gib. Gin I be Sir, the Mon that tald me leed, and gin he dud, the Deel be my
Landlard, Hell my Winter Quarters, and a Rope my Winding Sheet, Gin I dee no
lik him as lang as I can hold a Stick in my Hond, now see ye.


Col. I am sorry for what I have said, for the Lady's Sake, but who could
divine, that she was his Mistress, prithy who is this warm Spark?


Fred. He is the Son of one of our Grandees, named Don Lopez de Pementell, a
very honest Gentleman, but something passionate in what relates to his Love. --
He is an only Son, which perhaps may be one Reason for indulging his Passion.


Col. When Parents have but one Child, they either make a Madman, or a Fool of
him.


Fred. He is not the only Child, he has a Sister, but I think through the
Severity of his Father, who would have married her against her Inclination, she
has made her escape, and notwithstanding he has offered five hundred Pounds, he
can get no Tidings of her.


Col. Ha! How long has she been missing?


Fred. Nay, but since last Night, it seems.


Col. Last Night! The very Time! How went she?


Fred. No body can tell, they conjecture through the Window.


Col. I Am transported! This must be the Lady I caught; What sort of a Woman is
she?


Fred. Middle sized, a lovely brown, a fine pouting Lip, Eyes that roll and
languish, and seem to speak the exquisite Pleasure that her Arms could give!


Col. Oh! I Am fired with his Description -- It Is the very she -- What Is her
Name?


Fred. Isabella -- You are transported Colonel.


Col. I have a natural Tendency in me to the Flesh, thou know, and who can
hear of Charms so exquisite, and yet remain unmoved? Oh, how I long for the
appointed Hour! I Will to the Terreiro de passa, and wait my Happiness, if she
fails to meet me, I Will once more attempt to find her at Violante's in spite of
her Brother's Jealousy. ( Aside) Dear Frederick I beg your Pardon but I had
forgot, I was to meet a Gentleman upon Business at Five, I Will endeavor to
dispatch him, and wait on you again as soon as possible. --


Fred. Your humble Servant Colonel.

( Exit.
Col. Gibby I have no Business with you at present.

( Exit Colonel.
Gib. That Is weel -- naw will I gang and seck this Loon, and gar him gang with
me to Don Pedro's Huse -- Gin he will no gang of himsel, Ise gar him gang by
the Lug Sir; Godswarbit Gibby hates a Lear.

( Exit.
Scene changes to Violante 's Lodgings.
Enter Violante and Isabella. Isab. The Hour draws on Violante, and now my
Heart begins to fail me, but I resolve to venture for all that.


Vio. What does your Courage sink Isabella?


Isab. Only the Force of Resolution a little retreated, but I Will rally it again
for all that.


Enter Flora. Flo. Don Felix is coming up Madam!


Isab. My Brother! Which way shall I get out -- Dispatch him as soon as you can
dear Violante.

( Exit into the Closet.
Vio. I will. ( Enter Felix in a surly Posture.) Felix, what brings you back so
soon, did not I say tomorrow?


Fell. My Passion choaks me, I cannot speak, oh I shall burst! ( Aside.)

( Throws himself into a Chair.)
Vio. Bless me! are you not well my Felix?


Fell. Yes, -- No, -- I don't know what I am.


Vio. Hey Day! What Is the Matter now? Another jealous Whim!


Fell. With what an Air she carries it. -- I sweat at her Impudence. ( Aside.


Vio. If I were in your Place, Felix, I Would choose to stay at home, when these
Fits of Spleen were upon me, and not trouble such Persons as are not obliged to
bear with them.

( Here he affects to be careless of her.
Fell. I am very sensible Madam of what you mean: I disturb you no doubt, but
were I in a better Humor I should not incommode you less. I am but too well
convinced, that you could easily dispense with my Visit.


Vio. When you behave your self as you ought to do no Company so welcome -- But
when you reserve me for your ill Nature, I wave your Merit, and consider what is
due to my self -- And I must be so free to tell you Felix, that these Humors of
yours will abate, if not absolutely destroy the very Principles of Love.


Fell. ( Rising) And I must be so free to tell you Madam, that since you have
made such ill Returns to the Respect that I have paid you, all you do shall be
indifferent to me for the Future, and you shall find me abandon your Empire
with so little Difficulty, that I Will convince the World your Chains are not so
hard to break as your Vanity would tempt you to believe -- I cannot brook the
Provocations you give.


Vio. This is not to be born -- Insolent! You abandon! You! Whom I have so
often forbad ever to see me more! Have you not fallen at my Feet? Implored my
Favor and Forgiveness -- Did you not trembling wait, and wish, and sigh, and
swear your self into my Heart? Ungrateful Man! If my Chains are so easily broke
as you pretend, then you are the silliest Coxcomb living, you did not break 'em
long ago; and I must think him capable of brooking any thing on whom such Usage
could make no Impression.


Isab. ( Peeping.) A Duce take your Quarrels she will never think on me.


Fell. I always believed, Madam, my Weakness was the greatest Addition to your
Power, you would be less Imperious, had my Inclination been less forward to
oblige you. -- You have indeed forbad me your Sight, but your Vanity even then
assured you I would return, and I was Fool enough to feed your Pride. -- Your
Eyes, with all their boasted Charms, have acquired the greatest Glory in
conquering me. -- And the brightest Passage of your Life is, wounding this
Heart with such Arms as pierce but few Persons of my Rank.

( Walks about in a great Pet.)
Vio. Matchless Arrogance! True Sir, I should have kept Measures better with
you, if the Conquest had been worth preserving, but we easily hazard what gives
us no Pain to loose. -- As for my Eyes, you are mistaken if you think they have
vanquished none but you; there are Men above your boasted Rank who have
confessed their Power, when their Misfortune in pleasing you made them obtain
such a disgraceful Victory.


Fell. Yes Madam, I am no Stranger to your Victories.


Vio. And what you call the brightest Passage of my Life, is not the least
glorious Part of yours.


Fell. Ha, ha, don't put your self into a Passion, Madam, for I assure you after
this Day I shall give you no Trouble. -- You may meet your Sparks on the
Terriero de Passa at Four in the Morning, without the least Regard of mine. --
For when I quit your Chamber, the World shall not bring me back.


Vio. I am so well pleased with your Resolution, I don't care how soon you take
your leave. -- But what you mean by the Terreiro de passa at Four in the
Morning I cannot guess.


Fell. No, no, no, not you. -- You was not upon the Terriero de passa at Four
this Morning.


Vio. No, I was not; but if I was, I hope I may Walk where I please, and at
what Hour I please without asking you leave.


Fell. Oh, doubtless Madam! And you might meet Colonel Britton there, and
afterward send your Emissary to fetch him to your House. -- And upon your
Father's coming in, thrust him into your Bedchamber -- without asking my
leave. It Is no Business of mine if you are exposed among all the Footmen in
Town. -- Nay, if they Ballad you, and cry you about at a Halfpenny a piece. --
They may without my Leave.


Vio. Audacious! Don't provoke me -- Don't; my Reputation is not to be sported
with ( Going up to him.) at this rate. -- No Sir, it is not. ( bursts into
Tears.) Inhuman Felix! -- Oh Isabella, what a Train of Ills have thou brought
on me?


Fell. Ha! I cannot bear to see her Weep. -- A Woman's Tears are far more Fatal
than our Swords. ( Aside.) Oh Violante. -- God's Death! What a Dog am I? Now have I
no Power to stir: -- Do not thou know such a Person as Colonel Britton?
Prithy tell me, did not thou meet him at Four this Morning upon the Terreiro
de passa?


Vio. Were it not to clear my Fame, I would not answer thee thou black Ingrate!
-- But I cannot bear to be reproached with what I even Blush to think of, much
less to act; by Heaven I have not seen the Terreiro de passa this Day.


Fell. Did not a Scots Footman attack you in the Street neither Violante?


Vio. Yes, but he mistook me for another, or he was Drunk, I know not which.


Fell. And do not you know this Scots Colonel?


Vio. Pray ask me no more Questions, this Night shall clear my Reputation, and
leave you without Excuse for your base Suspicions; more than this I shall not
satisfy you, therefore Pray leave me.


Fell. Did thou ever love me, Violante?


Vio. I Will answer nothing. -- You was in haste to be gone just now, I should be
very well pleased to be alone, Sir.

( She sits down, and turns aside.
Fell. I shall not long interrupt your Contemplation. -- Stubborn to the last. (
Aside.


Vio. Did ever Woman involve her self as I have done?


Fell. Now would I give one of my Eyes to be Friends with her, for something
whispers to my Soul she is not guilty. -- ( He pauses, then pulls a Chair, and
sits by her at a little distance, looking at her some time without speaking --
Then draws a little nearer to her.) Give me your Hand at parting however
Violante, will not you, ( Here he lays his open upon her Knee several times.)
will not you -- will not you -- will not you?


Vio. ( Half regarding him.) Will Not I do what?


Fell. You know what I would have, Violante, Oh my Heart!


Vio. ( Smiling.) I thought my Chains were easily broke.

( Lays her Hand into his.)
Fell. ( Draws his Chair close to her, and kisses her Hand in a Rapture.) Too
well thou know thy Strength. -- Oh my charming Angel, my Heart is all thy
own, forgive my hasty Passion, it is the transport of a Love sincere!


Don Pedro within. Pedro. Bid Sancho get a New Wheel to my Chariot presently.


Vio. Bless me! My Father returned! What shall we do now Felix? We are ruined,
past Redemption.


Fell. No, no, no, my Love, I can leap from thy Closet Window.

( Runs to the Door where Isabella is, who claps too the Door, and Bolts it
within side.)
Isab. ( Peeping.) Say you so, But I shall prevent you.


Fell. Confusion! Some Body bolts the Door within side, I Will see who you have
concealed here if I dye for it; Oh Violante! Have thou again sacrificed me to my
Rival?

( Draws.
Vio. By Heaven thou have no Rival in my Heart, let that suffice -- nay sure
you will not let my Father find You here -- Distraction!


Fell. Indeed but I shall -- except You command this Door to be opened, and that
way conceal me from his Sight.

( He struggles with her to come at the Door.
Vio. Hear me Felix -- though I were sure the refusing what you ask would
separate us for ever, by all that is powerful You should not enter here, either
You do love me, or You do not, convince me by Your Obedience.


Fell. That Is not the Matter in debate -- I will know who is in this Closet, let
the Consequence be what it will. Nay, nay, nay, You strive in vain, I will go
in.


Vio. You shall not go in --


Enter Don Pedro. Ped. Hey day! What Is here to do! I will go in, and You shall not
go in, -- and I will go in -- why who are you Sir?


Fell. 'Sdeath! What shall I say now!


Ped. Don Felix, pray what is your Business in my House? Ha Sir?


Vio. Oh Sir, what Miracle returned you home so soon? Some Angel 'twas that
brought my Father back to succor the Distressed -- this Ruffian here I cannot
call him Gentleman -- has committed such an uncommon rudeness, as the most
profligate Wretch would be ashamed to own --


Fell. Ha, what the Devil does she mean! ( Aside.


Vio. As I was at my Devotion in my Closet, I heard a loud knocking at our
Door, mixed with a Woman's Voice, which seemed to imply she was in Danger --


Fell. I am confounded! ( Aside.


Vio. I flew to the Door with utmost speed, where a Lady veiled rushed in upon
me, who falling on her Knees begged my Protection, from a Gentleman whom she
said persued her, I took Compassion on her Tears, and locked her into this
Closet, but in the Surprise having left open the Door, this very Person whom
You see, with his drawn Sword ran in; protesting, if I refused to give her up
to his Revenge, he would force the Door.


Fell. What in the Name of Goodness, does she mean to do! Hang me. ( Aside.


Vio. I strove with him till I was out of Breath, and had You not come as You
did he must have entered -- but he is in Drink I suppose, or he could not have
been guilty of such an Indecorum. ( Leering at Felix.


Ped. I am amazed!


Fell. The Devil never failed a Woman at a Pinch, what a Tale has she formed in
a Minute -- in Drink quotha, a good Hint, I Will lay hold on it to bring my self
off. ( Aside.


Ped. Fie Don Felix! No sooner rid of one Broil, but you are commencing another
-- to assault a Lady with a naked Sword, derogates much from the Character of a
Gentleman, I assure You.


Fell. ( Counterfeits Drunkenness) Who, I assault a Lady -- upon Honor the Lady
assaulted me Sir, and would have seized this Body Politic upon the King's
Highway -- let her come out, and deny it if she can -- pray Sir command the
Door to be opened, and let her prove me a Liar if she knows how -- I have been
drinking right French Claret Sir, but I love my own Country for all that.


Ped. Ay, ay, who doubts it Sir? -- Open the Door Violante, and let the Lady
come out, -- come I warrant thee, he shall not hurt her.


Fell. Ay, now which way will she come off!


Vio. ( Unlocks the Door) come forth Madam, none shall dare to touch your Vail
-- I Will convey You out with Safety, or loose my Life -- I hope she understands
me. ( Aside.


Enter Isabella Veiled, and crosses the Stage. Isab. Excellent Girl!

( Exit.
Fell. The Devil! A Woman! I Will see if she be really so.

( Offers to follow her.
Ped. ( Draws) Not a Step Sir till the Lady be past your Recovery. -- I never
suffer the Laws of Hospitality to be violated in my House Sir. -- I Will keep Don
Felix here till you see her safe out Violante.


Vio. Get clear of my Father, and follow me to the Terreiro de Passa, where all
Mistakes shall be rectifyed. ( Aside to Felix.)

( Exit Violante.)
Ped. Come Sir, you and I will take a Pipe and a Bottle together.


Fell. Damn your Pipe Sir, I will not smoke -- I hate Tobacco -- Nor I, I, I, I
will not drink Sir -- No nor I will not stay neither, and how will you help your self?


Ped. As to smoking, or drinking, you have your Liberty, but you shall stay
Sir.

( Gets between him and the Door, Felix strikes up his Heels and Exit.)
Fell. Shall I so Sir -- But I tell you old Gentleman I am in haste to be
married -- And so God be with you.


Ped. Go to the Devil -- In haste to be married quotha, thou art in a fine
Condition to be married truly!


Enter a Servant. Ser. Here Is Don Lopez de Pimmentel to wait on you Senior.


Ped. What the Devil does he want? Bring him up he is in pursuit of his Son I
suppose.


Enter Don Lopez. Lop. I am glad to find you at Home, Don Pedro, I was told
that you was seen upon the Road to -- -- this Afternoon.


Ped. That might be my Lord, but I had the Misfortune to break the Wheel of my
Chariot, which obliged me to return -- What is your Pleasure with me my Lord?


Lop. I am informed that my Daughter is in your House, Don Pedro.


Ped. That Is more than I know my Lord, but here was your Son just now as drunk
as an Emperor.


Lop. My Son drunk! I never saw him in Drink in my Life, where is he pray Sir?


Ped. Gone to be married.


Lop. Married! To whom? I don't know that he courted any Body.


Ped. Nay I know nothing of that -- Within there! ( Enter Servant.) bid my
Daughter come hither she will tell you another Story my Lord.


Ser. She Is gone out in a Chair Sir.


Ped. Out in a Chair, what do you mean Sir?


Ser. As I say Sir, and Donna Isabella went in another just before her.


Ped. Isabella!


Ser. And Don Felix followed in another, I overheard them all, bid their Chairs
go to the Terreiro de passa.


Ped. Ha! What Business has my Daughter there? I am confounded, and know not
what to think. -- Within there.

( Exit.
Lop. My Heart misgives me plaguely -- Call me a Alguzile, I Will pursue them
strait.


SCENE changes to the Street before Don Pedro 's House.
Enter Lissardo. Liss. I wish I could see Flora -- Methinks I have an hankering
Kindness after the Slut -- -- We must be reconciled.


Enter Gibby. Gib. Aw my Sol, Sir, but Ise blithe to find ye here now.


Liss. Ha! Brother! Give me thy Hand Boy.


Gib. Notse fast, se ye me -- Brether me ne Brethers, I scorn a Liar as muckle
as a Theife, se ye now, and ye must gang intu^ this House with me, and
justify to Donna Violante's Face, that she was the Lady that gang'd in here
this Morn, se ye me, or the Deel ha my Sol, Sir, but ye and I shall be two
Folks.


Liss. Justify it to Donna Violante's Face, quotha, for what? Sure you don't
know what you say.


Gib. Troth de I, Sir, as weel as ye de, therefore come along, and make no mear
Words about it.

( Knocks hastily at the Door.)
Liss. Why what the Devil do you mean? Don't you consider you are in Portugal.
Is the Fellow mad?


Gib. Fallow! Ise none of yer Fallow, Sir, and gin this Place were Hell, id gar
ye de me Justice, ( Liss. going) nay the Deel a Feet ye gang.

( Lays hold of him, and Knocks again.)
Enter Don Pedro. Ped. How now! What makes you knock so loud?


Gib. Gin this be Don Pedro's House, Sir, I would speak with Donna Violante his
Daughter.


Liss. Ha! Don Pedro himself, I wish I were fairly off. ( Aside.


Ped. Ha! What is it you want with my Daughter pray?


Gib. An she be your Daughter, an lik yer Honer, command her to come out, and
answer for hersel now, and either justify or disprove what this Shield told me
this Morn.


Liss. So, here will be a fine Piece of Work. ( Aside.


Ped. Why what did he tell you, ha?


Gib. Be me Sol, Sir, Ise tell you aw the Truth, my Master got a pratty Lady
upon the how de ye called -- Passa -- Here at Five this Morn, and he Gar me
watch her heam -- And in Troth I lodged her here, and meeting this ill favored
Theife, se ye me, I spierd wha she was -- And he told me her Name was Donna
Violante, Don Pedro de Mendosa's Daughter.


Ped. Ha! My Daughter with a Man abroad at Five in the Morning, Death, Hell,
and Furies, by St. Anthony I Am undone.

( Stamps
Gib. Wunds Sir, ye put yer Saint intul bony Company.


Ped. Who is your Master ye Dog you? Adsheart I shall be tricked of my
Daughter, and my Money too, that is worst of all.


Gib. Ye Dog you! Sblead, Sir, don't call Names -- I wont tell you wha my
Master is, se ye me now.


Pedro. And who are you Rascal, that knows my Daughter so well? Ha!

( Holds up his Cane.)
Liss. What shall I say to make him give this Scots Dog a good beating? (
Aside.) I know your Daughter, Senior. Not I, I never saw your Daughter in all
my Life.


Gib. ( Knocks him down with his Fist.) Deel ha my Sol, Sar, gin ye get no your
Carich for that Lie now.


Pedro. What hoa! Where are all my Servants? ( Enter Servants on one side,
Colonel, Felix, Isabella, and Violante on the other side.) Raise the House in
pursuit of my Daughter.


Serve. Here she comes, Senior.


Col. Hey Day! What is here to do?


Gib. This is the Loon lik Tik, and lik yer Honor, that sent me Heam with a Lie
this Morn.


Col. Come, come, it is all well Gibby, let him rise.


Pedro. I am Thunderstruck -- and have not Power to speak one Word.


Fell. This is a Day of Jubilee, Lissardo; no quarelling with him this Day.


Liss. A Pox take his Fits. -- Egad, these Brittons are but a Word and a Blow.


Enter Don Lopez. Lop. So, have I found your Daughter; then you have not hanged
your self yet I see.


Col. But she is married, my Lord.


Lop. Married, Zounds to whom!


Col. Even to your humble Servant, my Lord, if you please to give us your
Blessing.

( Kneels.
Lop. Why hark ye Mistress, are you really married?


Isab. Really so, my Lord.


Lop. And who are you Sir?


Col. An honest North Britton by Birth, and a Colonel by Commission, my Lord.


Lop. A Heretic! The Devil!

( Holds up his Hands.)
Pedro. She has played you a slippery Trick indeed my Lord. -- Well my Girl
thou have been to see thy Friend married. -- Next Week thou shall have a better
Husband, my Dear. ( To Violante.)


Fell. Next Week is a little too soon Sir, I hope to live longer than that.


Pedro. What do you mean Sir? You have not made a Rib of my Daughter too, have
you?


Vio. Indeed but he has, Sir, I know not how, but he took me in an unguarded
Minute, -- when my Thoughts were not over strong for a Nunnery, Father.


Lop. Your Daughter has played you a slippery Trick too, Senior.


Pedro. But your Son shall be never the better for it my Lord, her twenty
Thousand Pounds was left on certain Conditions, and I Will not part with a
Shilling.


Lop. But we have a certain Thing called Law, shall make you do Justice, Sir.


Pedro. Well we'll try that, -- my Lord, much good may it do you with your
Daughter in Law.

( Exit.
Lop. I wish you much Joy of your Rib.

( Exit.
Enter Frederick. Fell. Frederick, Welcome! -- I sent for thee to be Witness of
my good Fortune, and make one in a Country-Dance.


Fred. Your Messenger has told me all, and I sincerely share in all your
Happiness.


Col. To the Right about Frederick, wish thy Friend Joy.


Fred. I do with all my Soul; -- and Madam I congratulate your Deliverance. --
Your Suspicions are cleared now, I hope Felix.


Fell. They are, and I heartily ask the Colonel Pardon, and wish him Happy with
my Sister; for Love has taught me to know, that every Man's Happiness consists
in choosing for himself.


Liss. After that Rule, I fix here. ( To Flora.


Flo. That Is your Mistake, I prefer my Lady's Service, and turn you over to her
that pleaded Right and Title to you to Day.


Liss. Choose proud Fool, I shall not ask you twice.


Gib. What say ye now Lass, will ye ge yer Maidenhead to poor Gibby. -- What
say you, will ye Dance the Reel of Bogye with me?


Inis. That I may not leave my Lady, -- I take you at your Word. -- And though
our Wooing has been short, I Will by her Example love you dearly.

( Music Plays.)
Fell. Hark! I hear the Music, some Body has done us the Favor to send them,
call them in.


A Country-Dance. Gib. Waunds this is bony Music. -- How caw ye that Thing
that ye pinch by the Craig, and tickle the Weam, and make it cry Grum, Grum.


Fred. Oh! that is a Guittar, Gibby.


Fell. Now my Violante, I shall Proclaim thy Virtues to the World.

No more, let us Thy Sex's Conduct blame,
Since you are a Proof to their eternal Fame,
That Man has no Advantage but the Name.

EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. SANTLOW.
Written by Mr. PHILIPS.
CUstom with all our Modern Laws combined,
Has given such Power despotick to Mankind,
That We have only so much Virtue now,
As they are pleased in favor to allow.
Thus like Mechanic Work we are used with Scorn,
And wound up only, for a present Turn;
Some are for having our whole Sex enslaved,
Affirming we have no Souls, and cannot be saved;
But were the Women all of my Opinion,
We'd soon shake off this false usurped Dominion;
We'd make the Tyrants own, that we could prove,
As fit for other Business as for Love.
Lord! What Prerogative might we obtain,
Could we from Yielding, a few Months refrain!
How fondly would our starving Lovers dote!
What Homage would be paid to Petticoat!
'Twou'd be a Jest to see the change of Fate,
How we might all of Politics Debate;
Promise, and Swear, what we never meant to do,
And what is still harder, keep your Secrets too.
Ay Marry! Keep a Secret says a Beau,
And sneers at some ill-natured Wit below;
But Faith, if we should tell but half we know,
There Is many a spruce Young Fellow in this Place,
Would never more presume to show his Face;
Women are not so weak, whatever Men prate;
How many tip top Beau 's have had the Fate,
To Enjoy from Mamma's Secrets their Estate.
Which if Her early Folly had made known,
He Would rid behind the Coach, that is now His own.
But here, the Wondrous Secret you discover;
A Lady ventures for a Friend, -- a Lover.
Prodigious! For my part I frankly own,
I Would spoiled the Wonder, and the Woman shown.
FINIS.

