Britannia Triumphans:

OR THE EMPIRE Sav`d, AND EUROPE Delivered. BY THE Success of her Majesty's
Forces under the Wise and Heroic Conduct of his Grace the DUKE of MARLBOROUGH.

A POEM, By Mr. Dennis.

Ab Jove Principium Musae. Virg.

LONDON: Printed for J. Nutt near Stationers' Hall. 1704.

To Her Most Sacred Majesty ANNE, Queen of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
The True Defender of the Protestant Faith;

The Great Supporter of the Liberties of Europe;

The Illustrious Maintainer of the Honor of the English Nation; and,

The Victorious Asserter of the Empire of the Ocean,

THE FOLLOWING POEM,

That it may live with the Immortality of Her Renown, is with all Humility
Dedicated by Her

Most Humble, most Faithful, and most Dutiful Subject and Servant, JOHN DENNIS.

PREFACE.
I Must confess I cannot in the Beginning of this Preface bespeak the Reader's
good Opinion, by informing him that I was put upon the following Work by the
Command of some great Man, who has Power and Interest. My Friends can bear me
witness that I wanted no such Incitement: That as soon as ever I heard of the
Victory I resolved upon writing the Verses; And though my Interest at that
time, as all who know me know very well, extremely required that I should do
something else, yet it was enough for me that I looked upon my self to be
obliged to do this, by the Duty which I owe to the Public; which I have always
preferred before my Interest. Thus I quickly came to a Resolution of writing
the following Verses, but as to the Form and the Manner of them I remained
something doubtful, till I was determined by her Majesty's Proclamation for a
general Thanksgiving. And that joined to the Consideration of reducing some
former critical Speculations into Practice, made me resolve as far I was able
to make the following Verses turn upon Religion. My Design, when I began them,
was to publish them upon the 7th of September, but besides that ill Health
intervening caused Delay, I soon found to my Sorrow that a Poem is not so
easily composed as a Prayer.

If the following Poem has any Degree of Force or Elevation in it, the
judicious Reader will easily discern that it owes them in a great measure to
the Religion which is mingled with it; for Religion, as I have formerly proved,
is the best and most solid Foundation of a great and lofty Spirit in Poetry.

If any one objects that the Religion is double in the following Poem, he will
find upon a more strict Enquiry that he is mistaken. For though I have made the
Danube a Person, that is not making him a Heathen God. David has done the same
thing by Jordan, and Deborah by Kishon.

I resolved to make the Religion that is mingled with the following Verses, as
Poetical as I could without making it Pagan. Though Fame is called a Goddess
there; I by no means design the Goddess of the Ancient Poets; but an Angel or
Celestial Spirit: For which I have the Authority of Milton, who in the seventh
Book of his Poem, by Urania does not mean the Heathen Muse, though he calls her
Goddess, but an Angel or Celestial Spirit. And he there makes a second
Invocation which is addressed to her, after he has invoked God himself in the
Beginning of his Poem. It Is true indeed Angels have been always painted
Masculine, but without either any sufficient Reason or divine Authority. If
they have Bodies I see no Reason why they may not be of both Sexes. If they have
none, I cannot imagine how they can be of either. But a Poet who must of
Necessity give them Bodies before they can be proper Machines for him; since he
gives them the Beauty of Women may very well give them the Sex too.

The following Verses were written without Rhyme, which I have a long time
believed to be below the Majesty of the greater Poetry; for which I have the
Authority of three eminent Poets, Mr. Milton, my Lord Roscommon, and Mr.
Dryden. The Reader may see Mr. Milton's Sentiments in the Preface to his
Paradise lost, and Mr. Drydens, and my Lord Roscommon's before the Beginning
and at the End of the Essay on translated Verse.

But only the Humble or the Weak will yield to meet Human Authority. They who
are conceited of their own Understandings will submit to Reason alone; And yet
methinks the former Authorities carry Reason along with them: For they who best
understand a Controversy, if they have Sincerity, are fittest to decide it. Now
the Sincerity of the three forementioned Writers in relation to Rhyme ought
never to be called in question; for Mr. Dryden and my Lord Roscommon are known
to have exploded it, at the very time that they wrote in it; and Mr. Milton was
very well known to be one who would not deceive either himself or his Reader.
It therefore follows that those three Gentlemen had less Understanding of the
Efficacy of Poetry, and the Power of Numbers, than our vulgar Readers who are
fond of Rhyme, or that Rhyme was very justly condemned by them.

We shall now with as much Brevity as we can, give some Reasons that are
independent of Authority, why Rhyme must of Necessity debase the Majesty and
weaken the Spirit of the greater Poetry, which, bceause the Arguments are
entirely new, may not perhaps be disagreeable to those who have a taste of
Poetry.

The Sentiments in Poetry ereate the Spirit, or the Passion, which are but two
Words for the same thing; and the Spirit or Passion produces the Expression,
and begets the Harmony. Now it is the Expression which shows the Spirit, and
it is the Harmony which causes it to make its utmost Impression. And when all
these things are adjusted, when the Sentiments are adapted to the Subject, the
Spirit or Passion in a just Degree to the Sentiments, and the Harmony and the
Expression to the particular Kind and Degree of Spirit or Passion, why then the
Result of all this is what the Men of Art call Perfection or the Truth of
Nature. I know indeed very well, that Expression and Harmony go together,
because the Expression includes the Harmony; yet for the better clearing of the
Matter we shall distinctly treat of them.

This then is certain, that every Sentiment or Thought has a Degree of Spirit,
or Passion, or Fire, call it what you please, which is proper to it, and every
thing above or below that Degree is utterly wrong. Now this is as certain that
there is but just one Expression which can convey that Spirit or Passion in its
true Proportion. And every thing that is not that one Expression is false, and
weakens the Spirit, and obscures the Sentiment. Now Nature whose Sagacity is
most admirable, and her Operations of Celerity almost infinite, and who goes
the shortest way to her Works, very often dictates that Expression at first,
especially in the greater Poetry, where the Imagination is always warm, and the
Thoughts are always flowing.

But this is plain from common Experience, that the Expression, which Nature
dictates at first, and whieh is powerful, sounding, significant, and in short
the true one, is very often altered upon the Account of the Rhyme. And a Word
or two are changed, which destroys its Beauty, and the greater part of its
Force; makes it less strong, less sounding, less significant, and weakens the
Spirit, and sets the Sentiment in a false Light: From whence it follows that
Rhyme in the greater Poetry running counter to Nature must be against Art.

But as every Sentiment has but one particular Expression which of Right
belongs to it, so that Expression has but one particular Harmony which is
adapted to that peculiar Degree of Spirit which naturally attends on the
Sentiment. Now Nature, who, as we observed before, is wonderful in her
Operations, very often in the greater Poetry dictates that Harmony together
with the Expression. Every Poet must know by Experience that the Harmony which
we naturally slide into in the greater Poetry is that of Blank Verse, which
whenever we are obliged to alter to introduce the Rhyme, we for the most part
impair the Harmony, infeeble the Expression, debase the Spirit, and set the
Sentiment in a wrong View.

There can be no nearer Relation between any two things in the World, than
there is, in writing, between Passion and Harmony. Harmony may be said to be
both the Father and the Child of Passion: it is produced by it, and begets it;
and the more pathetick any Discourse is, the more harmonious it must of
Necessity be. Even of Discourses in Prose, those are the most musical which are
the most passionate. The Orations of Cicero have more harmonious Periods than
his philosophical Discourses. And therefore Poetry is more harmonious than
Prose because it is more pathetick. And the more pathetick Poetry is, the
greater must be its Harmony. And therefore the Spirit, the Passion, the Fire,
or the Flame, being very great in the greater Poetry, and sometimes very
violent, have as it were a natural Tendency to the producing perfect Harmony.

But Rhyme being utterly false in Harmony, as we shall show immediately, must be
contrary to true Passion, and to the greater Poetry. Rhyme is the same thing in
Relation to Harmony that a Pun is in Relation to Wit; as a Pun is false Wit, or
a foolish Affectation of Wit, Rhyme is false Harmony, or an Affectation of
Harmony. Rhyme may not so absurdly be said to be the Pun of Harmony.

There are in our English Poetry four things which have been thought to cndouce
to Harmony; which are Number, Measure, Cadence, and Rhyme. Of these the three
first consist of several different Sounds which are dependant one of another.

Rhyme is wholly independent of the other three; and consists in the greater
Poetry but of two Sounds, which are Unisons. Now I appeal to all the Masters of
Music if Unisons can make any Harmony. Harmony is the Agreement of different
Sounds, and the Perfection of Harmony is the Agreement of discordant Sound by
the Mediation of others. And there is a great deal of Chromatick Harmony in
Poetry as well as in Music. And such particularly is a great deal of Virgil's
Harmony. Well then! Rhyme consisting of Unisons can have no Harmony in it self,
and being independent of Numbers, Cadence and Measure can never promote the
Harmony which they produce. And a Poet's constant Application to rhyme, diverts
his Application, in a great Degree, from Numbers, Measure, and Cadence, and
consequently is a severe Restraint upon the three Producers of Harmony. And as
it diverts the Application of the Writer, so by alluring the Attention of
vulgar Readers, it diverts them from the other three.

But besides that, Rhyme, by the Constraint that it puts upon the Writer,
impairs the Beauty and the natural Force of the Expression, and the Power of
true Harmony; it has something effeminate in its jingling Nature, and
emasculates our English Verse, and consequently is utterly unsit for the
greater Poetry. English Tragedies that have been writ in Rhyme most of them roll
upon Love. The Soul of a Tragic Poet, who has given himself up to Rhyme, has
seldom been capable of Terror or Majesty, or the Instruction of the noblest
Philosophy, or any thing that is truly great.

Besides Rhyme has in its Nature something that is low and comical, and the more
of Rhyme there is in a Verse, the nearer it comes to the Comic. Double Rimes
are more comical than the Single, and Treble Ones than Either. A Rhyme alone is
very often a Jest, as all who are acquainted with Hudibras very well know; but
never any one was extravagant enough to affirm that there was any thing great
and noble in Rhyme alone.

But the last Consideration but one, viz. The Effeminacy of Rhyme, and the
Influence which it had upon Tragedy, brings me to enquire further into the
Matter of Fact; and to add the Proof of Experience to those which we have drawn
from Authority and Reason. For Men of Sense are too proud to yield to
Authority, and Fools are too weak to submit to Reason, but Experience, which
never deceived any one, carries Conviction both for the one and the other.

The Matter of Fact then is, that most of our Plays that have been writ in
Rhyme, have been most abominably out of Nature. And where in Rhyme we have one
tolerable Tragedy, in Blank Verse we have ten. So that those very numerical
Persons who declare for Rhyme in other kinds of Poetry, are utterly against it
in Tragedy. But not only the Tragedies in Blank Verse are the best, but the
very best of our Epick Poems is writ in the same Verse. And that is the
Paradise lost of Milton. And though this may in some Measure be attributed to
the admirable and extraordinary Choice of the Subject, yet I am satisfied that
something of its Excellence is owing to the Blank Verse. For Mr. Dryden has
handled the very same Subject in Rhyme, but has fallen so infinitely short of the
Sublimity, the Majesty, the Vehemence, and the other great Qualities of Milton,
that they are never to be named together.

Well! But since it is manifest from what has been said, that Rhyme is
prejudicial both to Poetry and to true Harmony. The Reader may very naturally
enquire how it came at first to be introduced into our English Verse? Why,
Milton has given a very good Account of that; It was, says he, the Invention of
a barbarous Age, to set of wretched Matter and lame Meeter. When Rhyme was first
introduced into this Island, the Language was without Harmony, and the Writers
were without Genius. And Rhyme after all that has been said against it, must be
allowed to be an admirable Invention to conceal the want of Spirit, and the
want of Harmony. Verse with Rhyme seems to me to be like the Music of a
Bagpipe, where the Drone, by continually stunning your Ears, hinders you from
nicely enquiring into the Notes. And what a dexterous Expedient Rhyme is to
conceal the want of Genius, may appear abundantly from most of the Riming Plays
that were writ and acted in King Charles the Second's Time. In most of which it
is very plain that Rhyme made extravagant Simile pass for Nature, abominable
Fustan for fine Language, ridiculous Rant for great Spirit, and senseless
Whining for true Passion. Well! But is our Language now without Harmony? So far
from that that it is the most musical perhaps of the Western. Are now our
Writers without Genius! No certainly; not all of them. But why does Rhyme
continue then? Why is it writ? Why does it please! Why, in the first place,
there are Thousands who read Rhyme, who never so much as heard of Blank Verse;
and when we consider those who have heard of it, we have little Reason to
wonder that a great many of them can by no means taste it, if we reflect upon
the Prevalence of Prejudice, and the Force of Custom. They who read Poetry,
have been used to Rhyme from their Infancy; and what cannot long Habititude
render agreeable? Let us instance particularly in Sounds. Enquire of the
Inhabitants of London Bridge, if the Fall of the Water there is not grown as it
were natural to them by long use? Ask them if it be not necessary either to
compose their Spirits, or to keep them up? If they do not sleep with the more
Soundness for it, and wake with the more Cheerfulness? Examine a Fellow who has
lived all his Life in a Paper-mill, and he shall assure you, that not only the
Running round of the Wheels, and the hurrying Noise of the Mill, but even the
insupportable Jangling of the Cogs, is a thing that sooths him, is a thing that
pleases him; that he is melancholy when he is long out of the Hearing of it;
and even weary and sick of less tumultuons Sounds. Nay ask even a Fellow that
has been bred to sawing of Marble, and he shall tell you that the Sound which
it makes is Music to him. And sawing of Marble, is next to Riming, the most
impertinent Noise in Nature.

After what has been said, no Man will wonder if Readers, who have all their
Life Time been used to Rhyme, soon grow weary and sick of true Harmony unless in
Case of a delicate Ear, which is so rare a Gift of Nature, that it has been
observed in every Nation that Harmony has been the very last thing that has
been improved in Poetry, and as soon as in any Nation the Poetical Harmony has
grown perfect, there the whole Art of Poetry has been accomplished.

But to come from the Readers of Poetry to the Writers: These last are of two
Sorts; the good and the bad. The bad will certainly endeavor to maintain Rhyme,
because Rhyme does in some measure conceal their want of Ear, and their want of
Genius, and is perhaps as necessary to the giving them a sort of a dull Mettle,
and to the keeping them jogging on with their Burden of Dullness, as Bells are
requisite to a Cart-horse or to a Pack-horse; which very Bells upon the Course
at New Market, would but render the Racer ridiculous, and would but stop his
Speed. Rhyme has the last of these Effects upon a good Writer, and would have
the first, if it were not for the Force of Custom. And it is the Prevalence of
Custom alone, that keeps good Writers fast to it. Some great Men who have writ
well in spite of it, serve to keep them in Countenance: for they little
consider that those great Men would have writ much better, if they had writ
without it. Besides the Business of most even good Writers is to make
themselves popular, there are but few, very few of them who are capable of
sacrificing their Interest to their Reputations, and to the Service which they
do to the Public by improving a noble Art; and they are rather vain than
ambitious, and had rather have a present general Applause, than a Reputation in
time to come lasting and universal.

The universal use of Blank Verse in Tragedy, and be spreading Fame of Milton
is a sure Prognostic of he decaying Reputation of Rhyme. A Man may venure to
foretell without incurring the Censure of being (...) or visionary; that before
this Century is half expired Rhyme will be wholly banished from our greater
Poetry. A Custom that has been a long time generally received, cannot be broke
at once; but nothing that is false can remain always. It Is true indeed,
Prejudice, and Opinion, and Interest, and Vanity are frequent Friends to
Falsehood; but Time, the most sagacious of all Critics, will surely be a Friend
to Truth.

I desire that the Reader would take notice that it is only in the greater
Poetry that I have been condemning Rhyme. It may do well enough in Amorous
Verses, and it may be necessary in some sorts of Satyr. For the following
Verses, I do not pretend that because they are without Rhyme they are without
all Defects; If I had had more time they should have been less numerous, and
some Expressions should not have been repeated. Not but that there are several
Repetitions in the following Poem which were studied and sought for upon the
acc ount ofGrace and Ornament, but there is here and there one which should
have been omitted.

THE EMPIRE Sav`d, AND EUROPE Deliver`d.
UP, Rouse your selves, ye Nations, praise the Lord,
Sing, ye delivered Nations, to your God,
A lofty Song of Thankfulness and Praise;
For his Almighty Arm o'erthrew the Proud,
His be the Triumph, as the Conquest his.
And thou, O God, raised High above all Gods,
Thou God of great Revenge, true God of War,
Who when the injured World to thee appealed,
Descending bowed the very Heaven of Heavens,
And with Ten Thousand Terrors armed came down
On Bleinheim's dreadful Day, t'avenge the wronged,
Upon their mighty and their proud Oppressor:
Thou gav'st the Victory, do thou inspire the Praise,
If thou in Sacred Harmony delight'st;
Or if thou love to pass eternal Day
Pleased with the Songs of the triumphing Just,
O animate my Breast, inspire my Voice,
Invigorate my Mind, inflame my Song;
No wretehed, low, untuned, prosaick Song,
But lofty, spirited, inspired, divine,
That the admiring World may know it is thine.
From none but thee the lofty Thought could spring.
From none but thee the immortal Spirit flow,
Transporting, equal to the deathless Theme;
O may it last whole Ages, last as long,
As the Remembrance of the mighty Day,
Which now it Celebrates in sounding Verse;
That it be never by Human Wrongs oppressed,
Or be by Ancientness of Days defaced:
That when our late Posterity shall read,
Our late Posterity with melting Eyes,
With ravished Hearts, and with astonished Souls,
May prostrate all adore thy wondrous Power,
Thy Divine Mercy to their blessed Forefathers;
And that it may advance, whene're it is read,
Thy Glory, and Victorious England's Fame.
Such Moses and exulting Israel sang,
(Theirs was the Sound, the Inspiration thine)
When the Red Sea, the Chariots and the Horse
Of haughty wretched Pharaoh overturned,
Such the glad Prophetess Triumphant Sang,
Her Head environed with her Native Palm,
When rising Kishon with victorious Flood
The proud Oppressor Jabins Arms overwhelmed,
As Hoary Danube, with indignant Waves,
Swallowed the Gallick and Bavarian Hosts,
And at thy Word, O God, revenged his slaughtered Sons.
Begin my Soul, and strike the Living Lyre,
O raise thy self, O rouse thy utmost Powers.
Contemn the World, and every thing below,
And soaring Tower above Mortality,
To meet and welcome thy descending God.
It Is done! O Raptures never felt before!
Tempestuous Whirlwind of Transporting Flame!
O whither am I caught! O whither rapt,
To what immense unutterable Streights?
Begin my Soul, and strike the Living Lyre!
Join ye delivered Nations in the Song!
Your Voices ye delivered Nations join!
All your Harmoneous Instruments unite,
But ye peculiarly, ye chosen Tribes,
Professors of Reformed and Spotless Faith!
Let for one happy Hour the Church below
Triumph like that above, and ye blessed Beings,
Ye Hosts of Saints, ye glorious Hosts of Martyrs,
Who now in the exulting Realms of Light
Sing your old Triumphs over the Griezly King
Of Terrors in the noble Cause of Truth;
Ye Harmonious Hosts of Angels, who your Hours,
Your blissful Hours in tuneful Shouts of Joy,
And in eternal Hallelujahs pass,
Triumphing for old Conquests which ye gained,
Over the Infernal Tyrants dreadful Host,
And still the Fall of dire Ambition sing
In lofty Song with which all Heaven is charmed;
Let your bright Quires incline their listening Ears,
And for one Hour rehearse our numerous Song;
The Sacred Subject is the same with yours,
How is Ambition fallen, like you we sing;
We sing the Wonders of our Maker's Power,
His Glory, and the Triumphs of the Just.
Now let thy tuneful Joy, my Soul, grow loud,
So loud, that all the listening World may hear,
And let the attending Universe reply,
Let Earth and Heaven rehearse the lofty Song,
While the bright Church Triumphant in the Sky,
And the blessed Church Triumphing here below,
Join in one Chorus of Immortal Praise.
And thou, Great Queen, the Glory of thy Sex,
The Prop and Glory of the Noble Isle;
On whom even William looks admiring down,
And owns thee a Successor worthy him;
On whom the gazing World looks wondering up,
And its Deliverance waits from Heaven and thee,
Whose matchless Piety and watchful Care,
Shows all the wondering World that thou art sent
From the bright Church Triumphant in the Sky
To make the warring Church Triumph below;
Vouchsafe to Patronize this Sacred Song,
Great Championess of Liberty and Faith,
Great Patroness of all the Christian World!
Lo first for thee, and thy auspicious Reign,
The exulting Nation's Praise to Heaven return!
Is there a Climate so remote on Earth
Where distressed Virtue is beyond the Reach
Of thy extensive Charity? Thy Aid
Through all his rapid Course old Danube owns,
And proudly curling his Imperial Waves
To distant barbarous Armies transports thy Fame;
Thy wondrous Virtue to his gladsome Shores,
Transported Tagus wafts over Golden Sand;
(A Thousand Echoes from his Shores reply)
Thy Praise his Nymphs in tuneful Notes rehearse,
The Darling Theme of Lusitanian Song.
Thy Fame, Great Queen, the horrid Alps ascends,
And warms them, covered with eternal Snow;
Their Natives amidst wintry Horrors placed,
Warmly thy Goodness and thy Power extol;
Those dreadful Fortresses by Nature made
The Bounds of dire Ambition, were too weak,
Before thy generous Aid new Strength supplied.
Since then the Christian World repairs to thee
For Patronage and Shelter from their Foes,
Since Right and Truth from thee Protection find
Since purest Faith, the Darling Child of Heaven,
And every thing that is Sacred flies to thee
For Shelter under thy auspicious Power,
Vouchsafe, Great Queen, to grace this sacred Song
With thy Majestic Pratronage, this Song
Begun at thy Command so strictly given,
To celebrate with Pomp of Holy Praise
The Memory of Bleinheim's glorious Day,
A Song composed expressly to advance
The Glory of thy Maker in thy Fame.
Now let thy tuneful Joy, my Soul, grow loud,
So loud that all the listening World may hear;
And let the attending Universe reply,
Let Earth and Heaven rehearse the lofty Song,
While the bright Church Triumphant in the Sky,
And the blessed Church Triumphing here below,
Join in one Chorus of Immortal Praise.
Ye Nations raise your Tuneful Notes on High,
And raising to the Stars your mighty Arms,
Your Arms now mighty, now secured from Bonds
O lift above the Stars your joyful Praise,
To him from whom alone Deliverance flows.
But be thy Voice distinguished from the rest,
Thou stately Daughter of Imperial Rome,
Germania! Thou! Can thou confine thy Joy?
Can thou the Transports of thy Praise restrain?
O no! Thou surely wilt grow wild with Joy!
For thou have past at once beyond all Hope,
To blissful Rapture from extreme Despair;
Thou art delivered from a World of Woe.
Now naught but stormy Shouts of Joy are heard
From Rhaetian Mountains to the Northern Main,
Where lately naught but doleful Sighs were heard,
And piercing Groans, and Shrieks, and rueful Wails;
Thou stately Daughter of Imperial Rome
Were bound, alas, with most opprobrious Bonds,
And basely threatened with impending Rape.
Thy trembling Offspring helpless round thee ran,
And some shrieked piously aloud for Aid,
While others wrung their wretched Arms in vain;
Some frighted into Madness wildly star'd,
And some looked on with stupid Eyes aghast,
Some swooning, dying, with their Grief expressed
By their last Groans their vast Excess of Woe.
One desperate Villain helped thy raging Foes,
With execrable Hands his Mother bound,
And for her impious Ravishers prepared.
Thou Danube were confounded at the Sight,
And troubled, backward to thy Fountain turn'dst;
Then lifting thy sonorous Voice on High,
Call'dst to thy Brother Rhine aloud for Aid.
Thy Brother Rhine soon heard thy sounding Voice,
But sadly shaking his Majestic Head,
And casting a compassionating Look,
Strait hid himself within his thickest Ooze.
What could thou do? But shrink thy inglorious Head
Within thy Reeds, and breath forth empty Threats,
The windy Births of melancholy Rage.
When in the dreary Horrors of the Dark,
As often as Night returned to imbrown thy Waves,
Thou like a Bittern through thy doleful Reeds
Complaind'st in sullen and in moody Groans,
Expressing Manly Sorrow mixed with Rage;
While thy brown Billows sounding on thy Shore,
And swinging slow with hoarse and sullen Roar,
Kept murmuring Consort to thy threatening Moan.
Thou Danube to the Euxin durst not run,
To which insulting thou were wont to fly,
Not to discharge the Tribute of thy Waves,
But carry Terrors to the astonished Main,
And make the Crescent wear a deadlier Pale.
Now swiftly Danube to the Euxin fly,
And in thy rapid Flight thy Maker praise:
Sound, sound his Praise at all thy extended Mouths,
And let the attending Euxin with a Groan,
That may to Constantine's proud Towers resound,
Reflect how Heaven confounds persidious Men.
Then turning to the distant Rhine thy Voice,
Raise it that all the astonished Rhine may hear:
And lifting up thy Arms, now free from Bonds,
Lifting aloft thy now Victorious Arms;
Let him with Rapture see, with Rapture hear,
The Effects of Bleinheim's Field: He hears, he hears,
And rouzing up himself with generous Rage,
Prepares to shake off his ignoble Bonds,
And reap the Fruit of Bleinheim's glorious Day.
Germania, Raise thy tuneful Voice to Heaven;
Let thy fierce Eagle towering to the Skies,
In Thunder bear thy Maker's Praise to Heaven,
Who has for thee performed amazing things,
Which but to hope had been Presumption thought,
And what had looked like Wildness even to wish.
The unconquered English from the Northern Main
March to thy Aid, O vast Surprise of Joy!
Hark! How thy ravished Offspring shout for Joy!
Hark! How they fiercely cry Revenge, Revenge,
O welcome, welcome to our longing Souls,
For whose dear Sake a thousand times we'll die.
See, see thy Sons in firm Battalions stand,
Dejected now, desponding now no more;
See great Revenge inflame their Martial Eyes,
And round their Temples spread its warlike Die?
But whence this Spirit? Whence this wondrous Change?
The unconquered English from the Northern Main
March to thy Aid; O vast Surprise of Joy!
They whom thy wondering Eyes never saw before,
Nor them, nor their Forefathers since the Time
Thy rugged Saxons left their horrid Clime,
For Britain's gentle Shore, at last are come,
Are unexpected and unhop'd for come;
See to their ancient wretched Mother's Aid
The Pious Nation march impetuous on.
Germania raise thy tuneful Voice to Heaven,
And praise return to Heaven, and gracious Ann,
Who sends them to thy Aid; she Day and Night
Breaks her own Rest to give the World Repose,
To give it Liberty and lasting Peace.
For only Gracious Ann can under Heaven
Give Freedom to the World, and lasting Peace;
For only she over willing Nations reigns,
Over freeborn Souls, whose Glory, and whose Pride
Is to infranchize all the Christian World.
And she can give the laboring Nations Peace.
For as the Dove that from the Deluge fled
Brought her mild Olive to the sheltering Ark,
Framed by great Heavens Command to save Mankind,
And found Protection there; so gentle Peace,
Now Slaughter deluges the Nations round,
To Anna's sacred Breast for Shelter flies,
And finds sure Refuge there, and will from thence
Send its blessed Influence out to glad the World.
But the French Tyrant's Breast had never Peace,
There endless Strife, there dire Ambition reigns,
He what he never had can never bestow.
Peace without Freedom is an empty Name,
But he calls miserable Bondage Peace,
As Plunder, Murder, Rape he Empire calls.
Germania, Praise return to Heaven and Ann,
It Is Heaven and she that from the Northern Main
Have sent the noblest Nation to thy Aid,
Which the wide Ocean from the World divides;
A Nation round the which wise Nature casts
The stormy Main subjected to her Sway,
That no usurping Tyrant might invade
The sacred Refuge of fair Liberty,
And the World's Champion People might annoy,
For wheresoever faithless Gallia sends
Her Grim Destroyers, there Britannia sends
Her glad Deliverers to preserve Mankind;
A Nation which the lovely Fame enjoys
Still to have fought for Liberty, for Truth,
For all the injured Nations common Rights,
Which speaks to dire Ambition in the Tone,
The thundering Tone that Heaven reproves the Main,
Here know thy Bounds, here stop thy aspiring Waves.)
Here Is are the shining Squadrons that descend
Aiong thy Shore in terrible Array,
Their Forms not wholly like, nor yet unlike thy Sons,
Resembling just as far as Brethren should,
As they who from the same brave Sires descend*
How thou art ravished with their lofty Meens,
The Joy that in their Looks severely shines,
And all the dreadful Spirit in their Eyes
Dauntless, unparalleled, invincible,
Secure of Victory, secure of Fame!
Such Spirit never did thy Eyes behold;
No, never, thy Heroic Eugene cries,
Such mighty Eugene never saw before;
No, wondrous Prince, thou such could never see,
Though thou have long Triumphant Armies led,
Though thou have conquered Foes of every kind,
Humbling the Pride of the perfidious East,
And the more faithless Tyrant of the West;
Though thou have been victorious in more Lands
Than wandering Travelers have seen, yet thou
Could never before this Hour such Spirit see,
Because thou never before this Hour beheldst
An Army from a freeborn People chose:
For only Briton's of the Race of Men
Their Liberties entirely have maintained,
Nobly maintained against the joint Assaults
Of Homebred Treason, and external Rage,
The Pride of Foreign Tyrants, and their own.
Know it is from Liberty, thou wondrous Man,
Master of daring Councils yet of wise,
From Godlike Liberty this noble Fire,
This dauntless, this immortal Spirit flows.
Germania, raise thy tuneful Voice on high,
This is the Nation preordain'd by Fate
To save thee Daughter of Imperial Rome,
Just sinking in the vast Abyss of Time,
Like thy great Mother under barbarous Rage.
Hear this, y' aspiring Rulers of the Earth,
Ye who for empty Noise or transient Power
Oppress the weak, and undermine the strong,
Ye Plagues of God to scourge a guilty World
By vain Pursuits of Arbitrary Sway!
Who this magnanimous People would destroy,
That stands between your proud Designs and you;
Hear this, and think that nothing's lasting here,
Empires like Men insensibly decay,
Think that the time must come when you or yours
Must taste the sad Vicissitudes of Fate,
And in your Turns by proud Oppression groan;
Then hate so brave a People, if you can.
A People the sure Hope of the distressed,
The brave Defenders of the Rights of Kings,
And the just Guardians of fair Liberty,
Europe's immortal Body of Reserve
Against the Squadrons of Tyrannick Power.
Oh Austria, Austria, had thy Philip known
That time even then was harnessing the Years,
When this brave People, Object of his Rage
And of his Hate, should prove thy noblest Friends'
Should rescue both thy bright Imperial Crowns,
Deliver Germany, recover Spain.
Raise up thy drooping Eagle from the Dust,
And fix new Thunder on his soaring Wings;
Then deep Reflection on the just Returns
Of Fate had dashed his proud aspiring Thoughts.
The chief Ambition of his Soul had been
To be allied to such a generous Race.
He great Eliza would have courted then
For Friendship, as Maria for Desire,
That strict inviolable League which joins
Our Interests now, even then had been begun.
And Philip then like Leopold or Charles
With great Britannia's awful Queen had joined
To establish Right and Peace, and from the Proud
And strong Oppressor vindicate Mankind.
Ye Nations, who profess the Christian Faith,
Together raise your tuneful Notes on High,
So High that all the listening World may hear
And let the attending Universe reply,
Let Earth and Heaven repeat the lofty Song,
While the bright Church Triumphant in the Sky,
And the blessed Church Triumphing here below,
Join in one Chorus of Immortal Praise.
But let the Sound of thy aspiring Song,
Britannia, be distinguished from them all,
As among all thy Offspring Anna's famed
For pious Praise and Gratitude to Heaven;
So over thy Sister Nations be thy Song
Renowned, for Heaven and Nature have bestowed
On thee, the Talent of exalted Song.
Britannia, Thou can sing such lofty Strains,
As Heaven and Nature may rejoice to hear;
And Heaven superlatively honors thee;
And over thy Sister Nations lifts thy Name;
Thee they all bless, and thee they all admire,
Among them like the Morning Star thou shin'st;
But to Oppressors like the Fiery (Mars)
Star,
Or like a Comet that with sanguine Blaze
Denounces War and Revolutions dire,
To purple Tyrants a portentous Light.
Such new unheard of Fame thou have acquired,
As never old, nor modern Nations knew,
Grecians indeed, and Romans, Persians, Medes,
And modern Spaniards too, and modern Gauls
Have conquering fought for universal Sway;
For universal Freedom only thou,
By so much more illustrious than them all,
As it is more truly glorious to redeem
Than it is to damn the wretched Race of Men.
Then stretch thy lofty Voice to Heaven, and sing
Thy Maker's Praise, that Earth and Heaven may hear.
By him thou freed'st the World at Bleinheim's Field;
'Twas he supplied thee with the Godlike Will,
His Terrors and his Thunders armed thy Powers;
He thy Great Queen with sovereign Wisdom blessed,
Instructing her to choose the glorious Chief,
Deserving to command her daring Troops,
Embattel'd for the Freedom of the World.
A general Worthy of Heroic Times,
For Marlborough now fills the Breath of Fame.
Like Grecian, or the Godlike Roman Names,
But who shall paint thee wondrous Chief, in whom
Repugnant Qualities are reconciled;
Secret thy Soul as is the dead of Night,
Yet cheerful as the Smile of opening Day,
That lofty, awful, and commanding Brow
With sweet atractive Majesty invites.
Calm are his Thoughts in his profound Designs,
Yet swift though sure his executing Might,
His Breast supplied with all the glorious Fire
That burns with inextinguishable Flame
In the aspiring Minds of those brave Men,
Who by great Actions court eternal Fame.
Yet he by a transcendent Force of Mind,
Entirely Master of that towering Fire,
Which, like his Slave, he absolutely sways
With a Controuling and a Lordly Power.
Calm are his Gestures, his Majestic Brow
Composed, never dark with Grief, nor rough with Rage,
But always mild, attractive, bright, serene.
In whom deep Foresight dwells unknown to fear,
And Intrepidity unknown to Rage.
The Love of Fame that urges him away
TO immortal Actions still severely curbed,
Always obedient to cool Wisdom's Voice,
And guided like the Chariot of the Sun,
Whose animating Fires preserve the World
Far, far above the Tempests stormy Rage.
Wisely he manages the Nerves of War,
Yet a Contemner of the vastest Sums
When Glory and the general Cause require,
Tho new to the Command on Danube's Shore
His Essay an Heroic Masterpiece,
Whose Brightness dazles all Spectators Eyes,
Astonishes our Friends, confounds our Foes.
Stupendous the Design in every Part
Whether the vast Conception we regard,
Or the surprising Secresy with which
'Twas long concealed from penetrating Eyes,
Or the amazing Swiftness of his March
When from the Maese his wondering Troops he led*
Or the judicious Boldness of his Choice
When he began with dreadful Schellenbourgh,
Which Conquest opened the Bavarian Plains,
And made them to victorious Flames a Prey.
That their perfidious Chief impatient grown
Under his Country's irritating Spoil
Might force the backward French t'engage as soon
As Marlborough the bright Occasion found.
How great is he who in his ample Thought
Could comprehend and afterward prepare
By the illustrious Toils of two Campagns,
(In which a large Extent of Ground he gained
A strengthening Barrier for the cautious Dutch)
The astonishing Design, which all at once,
Like Magic changes all the Face of War;
Confounds the Gallick Tyrants proud Designs,
Dashes him headlong from his towering Thoughts
The Mountains heaped on Mountains in his Head,
From which his proud Imagination thought
To drive our Reason, God's Vicegerent here,
And rule the Earth with Hells dispotick Sway.
He like a hoary Wizard close immured
In his enchanted Castle sat retired,
And there unseen he muttered secret Sounds,
And there Infernal Characters he drew
That mustered up black Clouds t'obscure the Day,
And scare the Nations with their dreadful Gloom,
And then the Tempest raged, the Thunder roared,
Threatening the World with universal Wreck.
At length the time ordained by Fate is come,
The Conquering Hero's come who breaks the Charm,
And now the old Enchanter looks aghast,
Forlorn, forsaken by the Infernal Powers,
And trembling at the impending Wrath of Heaven
But of the Talents of thy mighty Mind
Immortal Marlbro' what we most admire
Is that Rapidity by which to Fame
Through all the Bars that Art or Nature cast,
Through hardest Rocks thou hew'st thy wondrous Way,
Daring yet wise thy Conduct, and resolved
With all the Judgment of discerning Thought,
For the great Juncture called for all thy Speed.
The insulting French were overturning all,
And Liberty in dire Convulsions lay;
The Empire foundring like a vast Galloon
That Is by the Tempest beat on every side,
When raging Ocean in a general Storm
Sends his sonorous Billows to the Assault:
Savoy was sinking, and the cruel French,
Climbing the Summits of the horrid Alps,
Embrue'd their murdering Hands in guiltless Blood,
Even in the dreadful Region of the Thunder.
The Lusitanian grumbled at the Chance
Of adverse War, and unexpected Rout,
And fondly sighed for ancient Leagues again.
With Terror more then cold Helvetia shook,
Whiter than Ambient Snow her deadly Hue,
And howling over her Alpine Rocks she ran,
Though fenced with Alpine Rocks yet unsecure,
And trembling with pale Fear, her hoary Hair
That hung disheveled, and the Sport of Winds,
She tore, and would have wrung her wretched Arms,
But her own Sons for mercenary Sums
Had bound her wretched Arms with Chains of Gold;
And her Majestic Robe had rudely torn,
And naked left her to the killing Cold.
A Giant over the Neighboring Mountains stalked,
With mad Deportment and with savage Mein.
And cruel Eyes that threatened instant Fate.
Italia, Ah how fallen, how changed from her,
Who won the World with her victorious Arms,
With the wide Ocean circumscribed her Sway,
And with the Stars her never dying Fame,
Was basely into vile Submission braved.
Britain in dreadful Expectation lay
By two contending Daughters to be torn,
Both stubborn Foes to Union, and yet both
Unless united hopelesly undone.
England was plagued with an unnatural Race,
A Race expecting but the Blow of Fate,
The cutting off one slender royal Thread,
That Thread on which the Christian World depends,
And then (but long avert that Hour ye Heavens)
Resolving infamously to betray
Their Country to a Foreign Tyrants Power.
These were the potent Reasons for Dispatch,
Beside the undaunted Spirit that appeared
In the brave Squadrons and Batallions joined,
That flashed victorious Lightning from their Eyes;
Which their great Leader soon perceived with Joy;
Too wise their boiling Ardor to restrain,
And check their Fire impatient to be freed.
Raised and inflamed by that stupendous March,
Such as their famed Forefathers never knew,
And which attracted the admiring Eyes
Of all the gazing World, and seemed to cry
They had not time to cool, but must do things
To satisfy the expecting World, so great
As scarce their great Forefathers ever performed.
Besides, it is not the Valor of their Troops
To which the French their boasted Conquests owe,
It Is not their Discipline which makes them dreadful,
It Is Treason, Subornation, Daggers, Poison,
Besides a thousand other Arts obscene.
Could they by Discipline or Force prevail,
It Is manifest they bravely would disdain
To have Recourse to such inglorious ways.
And wisely the sagacious General thought
The sooner he compelled them to decide
The Contest by the last Event of War,
The less Occasion would the Traitors find
To try detestable infernal Arts.
Add that the exhausted Empire could afford
No long Supply to such a numerous Host.
Lastly, this War was an Appeal to Heaven
And this great Cause the darling Cause of Heaven,
For 'twas for Truth they appeared in glorious Arms
For Justice, Liberty, Religion, God.
And showing his brave Troops that he reposed
His Confidence in Heaven would fire their Souls,
And would sustain them in the dreadful Field
More than a thousand Bodies of Reserve.
And what could more convince the impatient Troops
That he reposed his Confidence in Heaven,
Than sudden and determinate Recourse
To the decisive Vengeance of the Field.
Urged by these powerful Motives to Dispatch,
He his bold English leads to Schellenbourgh,
Where the Bavarian and the Gallick Troops
Lie with the utmost Skill of Art entrenched,
To guard the important Pass of Donawert,
Of Donawert, Bavaria's fatal Key;
Upon possessing which the great Success,
Of this illustrious Enterprise depends:
There he the Orders for the fierce Assault
Issues, with cheerful Majesty serene,
Valor in human Hearts too often proceeds
From ardent Temper, or from glowing Rage,
Provoked by mortal Wrongs, or Fear of Shame.
But here remote from Fear or Rage behold
A Valor worthy of the Heroic Chief,
Who leads the Squadrons that appear in Arms
For Liberty at once, and spotless Faith,
The two great Causes of the Earth and Sky.
And here the French their Maxim may recant Le Soleil ny la mortne se peuvent
Regarder Fixement. Roche. Refl. 30.

That no Man can with fixed Regards survey
The dazzling Front of Death, or of the Sun.
For as an Eagle with a steadfast Eye
Stares on the effulgent Fountain of the Day,
Which streaming with impetuous Flood of Light
Blinds other Gazers with its torrent Fire;
So Marlbro' with a calm considerate Soul
Undazle'd viewed the King of Terrors Front,
That cruel Front that with its ghastful Glare,
Without his Adamantine Mace can bill
Exposed to Gallick and Bavarian Fire,
He all his cheerful Majesty maintains,
His Orders to exact Advantage gives,
Commanding all the Movements of his Soul
With independent and with Lordly Power.
He who himself thus absolutely rules,
Seems by wise Nature framed for martial Sway;
His shouting Troops exalt him to the Sky,
Him they all imitate, him all admire.
On pointed Cannon they have run before,
Here they do more, and hushed and passive stand
While their invincible Brigades are formed,
Awaiting what Commands their wondrous Chief
Has to impose, while all the murd'ing Fire
Of the Bavarian Cannon tears their Ranks,
Troubling whole Squadrons with the Tyrant Rage
Of missionary Thunder, they mean while
Who by no Rage, no Fury are sustained,
The Frenzy that on Brutal Courage waits,
But by true Valor, by Heroic Minds
Unmoved, unshaken keep the dangerous Posts
Which were assigned them by their dread Commander.
The Friends and dear Companions of their Toyls,
Those whom they cherish equal to themselves
Torn from their Sides without Concern they see,
A nobler Care possesses all their Souls;
Themselves too torn they from themselves behold
Their mangled Trunks divided from their Limbs,
Yet all their dauntless Spirit they retain,
Even for themselves no Grief no Pity show;
They see the King of Terrors in their View,
They see him stalking near with hideous Stride,
They see him frowning with a ghastful Scowl,
Threatening to grasp their Hearts with Iron Gripe,
Yet see it all untroubled, undismayed.
O Greatness worthy Greece or Ancient Rome!
O Valor worthy of eternal Fame!
The great Epaminondas thus expired
For his dear Thebes, for his great Cause concerned,
Regardless of his Blood, regardless of his Life.
And they, like him, would think themselves too blessed
To see their Party Victors ever they expire;
If any show Concern, it is only Fear
Least they should fall before their General's Voice
Allows them to discharge the impetuous Fire,
That now pent inward choaks their generous Hearts;
Thrice happy if permitted, even in Death,
To be the Instruments employed by Fate
To bestow Freedom on the Christian World,
And on their Country never dying Fame.
But what are they unable to perform,
Who such Extremes with Godlike Patience bear?
They who appeared so calm, so meek before,
Are now all Rage, all storming Fury grown.
Now Fate looks frowning from their wrathful Brows,
Now from their flaming Eyes red Lightning flies,
While in their Arms the avenging Thunder roars,
And now of dying they can think no more,
Their General's fatal Order is to kill.
His Voice they as the Voice of Fate regard,
And as the Ministers of Fate themselves.
Rushing like sounding Waters they assault
The strong Retrenchments, so with bellowing Sound,
Old Oceans Rage attacks some lofty Digue,
Which sturdy Swains have raised to oppose his Power.
He Billows upon Billows storming pours,
Which rise, and swell, and rage, and foam, and roar;
Till the victorious Tenth at last comes on,
O'erwhelming all with dismal Inundation.
In vain the Foe outragiously resists,
The Trumpet kindles Mars with fiercer Sounds,
And in their Ears it clangs its martial Roar;
Which to the English sounds the Voice of Fame,
That to immortal Glory calls them on.
Now all War's Godhead rages in their Breasts,
And to themselves they Demi Gods appear,
Oh the transporting Fury! Has the World
An Enemy that can resist them now?
In vain grim Death in his most hideous Shape;
With haughty Strides along the Intrenchments stalts,
Whom all his Terrors, all his Plagues sustain.
The undaunted English turn him on the Foe,
He sees Britannia's Genius in their Eyes,
And in a dreadful Tone cries out my Friends;
These are my Friends, my Benefactors these,
Lead on, ye Race of Demi Gods, lead on,
I follow you, and all your Steps attend,
Fortune and Fate are on the Conqueror's Side.
Impetuous now they rush conducting Fate,
To their resistless Fury all things bow,
For what must not submit to Fate or them?
Now every thing against the Foe conspires,
And Fire and Water to confound them League.
Behind them conquering Death in fiery Cart
Drives on, and urges furiously the Chase,
Discharging Lightnings and the vollied Thunder.
Before them the revenging Danube swells,
And then he gaping with a hideous Yawn,
And roaring swallows down his impious Prey.
Britannia, Let thy Joy salute the Skies,
And to thy Maker tuneful Praise return,
For he the Valor of thy matchless Sons,
And thy great General's Conduct he inspired.
Let the whole Earth enquire of Bleinheim's Field,
And that immortal Field will cry aloud
To all enquiring Nations, all enquiring times,
Thy matchless Sons no mortal Valor showed,
And thy great General's Conduct was Divine.
And thou too with thy Maker's Praise resound,
Thou Field of Bleinheim, once obscure accursed,
But now great Bleinheim's happy glorious Field!
Thou who were charmed with the Transporting Sight,
Who sawst the Godlike Men, the Godlike Deed,
Who sawst them thundering in the fierce Pursuit,
While Danube rising with revenging Flood,
Swallowed whole Legions with a hideous Roar;
Immortal Bleinheim, preordain'd by Fate
To be the blissful Spot that frees the World;
Raise to the ravished Skies thy Thundering Voice,
And for thy mighty Bliss thy Maker praise,
For thou to all Posterity art blessed,
Blessed above all the beauteous Fields over which
The winding Danube curls his amorous Arms,
No Length of Days thy Glory shall deface,
Nor ever Darkness of the Night obscure.
All times, all Nations thee shall happy call,
By whom all times, all Nations shall be blessed,
Thou lovely Field of happy Bleinheim Hail!
May thou be ever fortunate as famed!
Thy Sons above the Race of Men be blessed!
May proud Oppression and revenging Care,
As they their executing Circuit go,
Fly from thy blissful Borders far away!
O may thou still be happy, still be free,
Thou who have made the happy Nations free!
And pour ye Heavens into her lovely Lap
Your sweetest and your most refreshing Dews!
That flowing Plenty all her Days may crown,
And golden Slumbers all her blissful Nights;
And when from Heaven the murdering Angel comes
To visit with consuming Plagues the Earth;
May he behold upon thy blissful Soil
The Stains of Gallick and Bavarian Blood,
And passing by revere the sacred Ground!
And thou, O sacred, O Majestic Day,
Who gav'st to the great Deed auspicious Light,
O thou who broughtst to Light the noblest Birth
That ever Fate begat on fertile time;
Still as thy Light revolves O sacred Day,
Resounding with thy Maker's Praise return!
For highly has thy Maker honored thee
Above all Days of the revolving Year!
His Praise then in a thousand Tongues resound,
Let Millions of glad Voices raise it high!
So may thou still be charmingly serene;
So may thy Halcyon Hours drive smoothly on,
Illustrious far above the rest of Days!
On thee may thy bright Sire profusely pour
A double Portion of his flowing Gold!
O may thou still with sacred Joy return
With all the Rapture of transporting Song!
And let the World forget the sprightly May,
The Day accomplishing the Joyful Spring
To celebrate thy lovelier Festival.
For Freedom is more joyful than the Spring,
Fairer than Light, and lovelier than the Morn.
Let never any Cloud thy Luster stain
And never any Grief pollute thy Joy!
May Grief and Care and Pain at thy Approach
As from descending Angels disappear!
May thou auspicious prove to every Deed,
Accomplish every Act begun on thee!
Thee may great Minds for mighty Actions choose!
By high Foreknowledge, sure O sacred Day,
Thou were ordained to accomplish wondrous things,
Thy happy Influence once before preserved
The laboring World from universal Sway,
At least a while delayed its dismal Fate.
'Twas upon thee the Carthaginian Chief,
Making the World's aspiring Tyrants yield,
Vanquished proud Rome at Canne's fatal Field.
But time was teeming with a nobler Birth,
And Bleinheim's Day surpasses Canne's Field;
At Cannae the contending Rivals strove
Which of them should enslave the vanquished World.
The great Contention was at Bleinheim's Field,
On one side to oppress immortal Liberty,
To make her wing her Flight from Earth to Heaven,
And there for ever with Astrea dwell,
Her divine Sister, on the other side,
The Intent was solidly to fix her here
In lasting Peace, and make of Earth a Heaven;
And never two more powerful Armies met,
Than that which strove to drive thee from below,
And that, O Goddess, which maintained thy Power.
On the Oppressors side the Hostile French
With the Bavarian Squadrons now were joined.
The fierce Bavarians were by Nature framed
Hardy and rough, and fit for Bloody Fields,
And Victory had raised their Spirits high.
Expert was their perfidious Chief and brave,
And now the Memory of past Success,
And Hope of future Empire fired his Soul,
And the wild Prospect of his flaming Towers
Stung him, till frantic with his Rage he roar'd'
And called on Heaven and Hell for dire Revenge.
The French were all of Gallick Troops the Flower,
Experienced and Victorious were their Chiefs,
Soldiers and Chiefs inured to vast Success:
And claiming Right to Conquest and Renown
From long Possession; with their dearest Blood
Resolved their lofty Title to defend.
By long Success presumptious grown and vain,
Aspiring to the Conquest of the World;
Believed by all the Nations and themselves
To be unequalled and invincible.
Proud of their Junction with Bavarian Powers,
Which they with so much Hazard, so much Toil,
Inspight of all great Eugene's Force achieved;
From which the Empire sure Destruction waits,
And all the Christian World perpetual Bonds.
But O how vain are human Hopes and Fears!
How blind is the poor Providence of Man,
And what a Fool to the Designs of Fate!
The dreadful Moment comes upon the Wing,
When they who make this Junction now their Boast,
Their Pride, their Hope, their Joy, their Ecstasy,
When they whole conquered Provinces would give
That this accursed Junction never had been,
When that which now deludes their glorious Minds,
With the vain Hope of Empire and of Fame,
Will prove the gaudy Lure thrown out by Fate
To bring them down from their aspiring Flight,
And leave them in the Dust.
For now the conquering English are in view,
Inspiriting the whole Confederate Power;
For what to them can be impossible,
After the glorious Rout at Schellenbourgh
A Conquest gained, when scarce their March was over;
A March like what great Philip's greater Son,
Or the first Caesar, took to win the World;
A March almost incredible to those,
Who saw at Schellenbourgh its great Effect;
A March so swift that it prevented Fame,
For such Dispatch transcends the Germans Thought;
At which their listless Nations look amazed.
They gazing seem the English to regard
As if descended to their Aid from Heaven;
And their illustrious Chief on Danube's Shore,
No less astonishes the various Powers.
Whose Squadrons the Confederate force compose,
Than a Bright Star that all at once appears
With new Effulge in the Hemisphere,
Amazes all the planatary Worlds,
Who gazing cry it is sent express from Heaven,
To change the Fortune of the Universe.
The Nations in the British Squadrons Eyes
Divine Presage of Victory behold.
Full of their Islands noble Pride they march,
Full of their fierce Forefathers conquering Fire,
And while they deathless Vigor in them feel,
Esteem themselves invincible alone;
Believing firmly that to conquer France
Is but their old Hereditary Right,
Which from remote Progenitors descends;
Who then were wont to triumph over France,
Even when they were a People fierce and free;
When for their Country and their Friends they fought,
Fought for their dear Relations and themselves.
How must they then disdain to yield to those,
Who to support a Griezly Tyrants Pride
Against their Country and their Friends contend,
Against their dear Relations and themselves?
That for their Parts they fight for Justice, Truth,
For God, and for Celestial Liberty.
That Fate the first Occasion now presents,
When they the Foe may in the Field surprise
Without oppressing Numbers on their Side;
Whom they resolve like Englishmen to attack,
That is like Men resolved to overcome or die.
That now the Eyes of all the Christian World
Are on this great decisive Action bent;
That all the Christian World expects from them
Deeds worthy of the Champions of Mankind
Against oppressing Tyrants, Beasts more wild
Than Africa e're produced, and which proceed
To render Europe yet more waste than her;
That they must fight like Heroes who support
The Glory of their conquering Ancestors,
Who great Britannia's Liberties assert,
And those of other sinking Realms restore;
Who vindicate their own undoubted Rights,
And those of all Posterity defend.
With Godlike Sentiments like these inflamed,
They under their heroic Leader march
TO attack the Foe encamped on Bleinheim's Field.
The rest to deathless Lyres ye Angels sing!
To such a Height no mortal Force can soar,
And now the Inspiration leaves my Soul*
Or if I must with feeble Wings essay
The Aetherial Flight, assist y' Aetherial Powers!
And thou the brightest Angel of the Sky,
With whose enchanting Beauties all the Host
Of Heaven above, all Heavenly Minds below
Are charmed, with whom the great Creator's charmed!
Eternal Fame! Thee Goddess I invoke,
For nothing without thy Aid was ever produced,
Or great or fair in Earth or Heaven above,
(So the great Maker willed, and made it Fate)
Descend bright Goddess to my Aid, descend
TO infuse a Beam of thy Celestial Fire
Into my Soul, and raise my adventurous Song.
If with thy Beauties all my Soul is fired,
If all that wretched Mortals here call great,
I sacrifice to Liberty and thee;
Instruct me, Goddess, for thou only know,
For thou with all thy Hundred Eyes were by
When stooping on thy azure Wings thou leftst
The Fields of Light for Bleinheim's glorious Field;
Thou Goddess with thy own Celestial Trump
Did sound the Charge through all the Aetherial Vault,
When at the Immortal Blast the Powers above,
Looked wondering from the Battlements of Heaven.
Thou saw how all the Host of Heaven looked down,
And shouting filled the eternal Realms with Joy,
To see bold Man the Cause of Heaven maintain;
The Souls of British Heroes from the Sky
Upon the Glories of that Field looked down,
Thither their Eyes the Conquering Edwards bent,
On that magnanimous Henry wondering gazed.
All charmed to see their times of Gold return,
All charmed to see bright Victory descend.
And perch upon an English General's Plume.
There the blessed Patron of Britannick Knights,
The Red Cross Champion looked transported down
To see the Honor of his Order raised*
And there looked down the blissful Souls of those
Who in the same immortal Cause expired
At Fleury and at Landen's fatal Plain.
And Godlike William looked with Rapture down
To see great Marlborough do what he had done,
Had but the false Bavarian been his Foe.
The preexisting Souls of future Kings
On that important Field looked down, on which
Their future Right and future Power depends.
Mean while the Sun, the World's great Eye and Soul,
With all his Power seren'd the Aetherial Space,
That no invidious Cloud might intercept
The eternal Deeds of Bleinheim's wondrous Day;
Which showed a nobler Sight than all the World's,
And all the Space immense that with one Kenn
He views, could all afford him, when it showed
So many Myriads of Heroic Souls
Resolve to conquer or devove themselves
In the great Cause of Liberty and Truth.
The Nations here below had all their Eyes
Intent upon that Field, on whose Event
Depended all their Freedom, all their Peace.
The very Elements attend in Truce
The dreadful Issue, silent were the Winds,
And hushed the Voice of Danube's angry Roar.
All Nature in all others Parts had Peace,
Discord had now no Leisure to attend
Inferior Strife, for Bleinheim claimed her all;
For there were all her Stygian Snakes employed,
There were the Fates and all the Furies there;
Who shaped like Faulcons waiting for their Prey,
were perched on baleful Eughs by Danube's Shore:
So that both Earth, and Heaven, and Hell below,
Times present, past, and future, all appeared
To be concerned on that important Day.
But hark! The Goddess gives the dreadful Charge,
I hear the enchanting Sound, I feel its Magic Power,
That Sound can like the last Angelick Trump,
From their eternal Mansions rouse the Dead;
That Magic Sound brings future times in view,
And makes the past return, that mighty Sound,
Swift as the Movement of quick Thought, transports
The Hearer to the World's remotest Ends.
I feel, I feel even now that I am rapt
Over Lands and Seas to Bleinheim's wondrous Field!
Do you see how the tempestuous Squadrons move,
Like Clouds with Thunder charged along the Plain!
Oh the transporting Sight! The noble Sound!
The sprightly Neighing of the Warlike Steed,
And the impatient Champions eager Shouts.
The Trumpets roar! The Thunder of the Drum!
How Danube rears his hoary Head aghast!
The adjacent Forest frightfully surveys,
The adjacent Forests darts a dreadful Gloom,
And on his Flood with double Horror frowns.
On to the Attack the thundering Squadrons move,
The very Heavens above them seem to smoke,
And the resounding Earth beneath them shakes;
The noble Rage of Battle fires the Plain:
Me too the noble Fury has inspired
Of Registring in Fame's Eternal Roll
Their Actions worthy the recording Muse,
The Daughter of Celestial Memory,
And the immortal Mother of Renown.
Eternal Fame, thy Summons I obey,
Like them thy Charge, great Goddess, I obey.
But while the Verse which thou inspir'st I sing,
Do thou, great Goddess, thou my numerous Song
Accompany with that Angelick Trump,
Whose Sound by all the listening Globe is heard,
And to the World's remotest times descends.
But now the Trumpet's Clangor's heard no more,
No more the impatient Warriors eager Shouts.
For now the Cannon thunders through the Plain,
And drowns all dreadful Noises in its own;
The moving Squadrons are no longer seen,
The very Earth and Heavens are seen no more.
For Earth and Heavens seem all involved in Night,
A Night of Dust and of tumultuous Smoke;
Or hid in Brightness of tempestuous Flames,
Too dazzling to be pierced by mortal Eyes.
But now the Goddess with Celestial Light
Dispells the Mist that veiled these mortal Eyes,
And now through Clouds of stormy Dust I see
Through curling Smoke, through dazzling Flames I see;
Say, Goddess, what heroic Forms are those,
Who the bold Britons lead impetuous on;
Who between them and Danger interpose,
And shield them with their very Breasts from Fate:
At once in Danger foremost and Renown;
Esteeming Glory cheaply bought with Life,
And frankly offering up their noble Hearts
A great unblemished Sacrifice to thee.
How each looks worthy of his high Command,
Each looks as if on his heroic Deeds
The Fate depended of this dreadful Day.
Ay, now their Shapes distinctly I discern,
Ay, now I know the herolck Leaders well!
And thou eternal Goddess know them well,
And thou with all thy Hundred Tongues wilt spread
Their deathless Actions, and extend their Praise
Wherever thou expand'st thy sounding Wings.
Hail Race of Heroes! British Worthies Hail!
Hail noble Churchill, Lumley, Villars, Wood!
And thou great Ingolsby, great Orkney thou!
Hail thou, the foremost in the dire Assault,
Brave Cuts, the Lightning of the British Thunder
Great Favorites of Deathless Fame, All Hail!
Those are the immortal Heroes whose Commands
The freeborn English joyfully obey,
The Pride and Flower of Britain's Godlike Sons.
Upon their Eyes the fierce Batallions gaze,
And from their Beams derive a glorious Fire,
And the Remembrance of great Henry's Days.
Now after them they move impatient on,
Impatient for the horrid Shock they earn;
Now meet the French and we with hideous Noise,
In Thunder, Lightning, and in Iron Hail.
Y' Immortal Powers assist Britannia's Cause!
Assist ye bright Spectators of the Sky!
The Cause of Justice and of Truth support!
The Cause of all the Christian World defend!
Ah miserable me! The immortal Powers
Either against their own great Cause declare,
Or else blind Fortune governs all below.
For see the unconquered English are repelled,
Bright Honor is repelled and Virtue lost,
And false Ambition wins, O dismal Sight!
O dire Calamity! Surprzing Fate! That such
As fought like these should ever know repulse!
Can they from such Heroic Chiefs retire!
O can they poorly yield in such a Cause!
No, see they Rally with a noble Fire,
And Shame grown Fury to the Charge returns,
But to the Valor of the Foe I hate,
I must do Justice here, a braver Foe
By Britain's Godlike Sons was never charged,
The French undaunted all their Fury meet,
And all with double Fury they repel,
And drive the English Horse like Lightning back,
See how once more confounded they retire!
O cursed Fate! O Fortune! O Despair!
Aloud methinks I hear all Nature groan,
Aloud methinks I hear the immortal Powers
Lament the Honor of Britannia lost,
The wretched Fate of Liberty lament.
O fond Imagination! Vain Conceit!
Immortal is the Date of Liberty,
And Britain's Honor never can be lost:
For see where now Heroic Marlborough comes!
Comes to maintain them, to revenge them comes.
See where the dusty Squadrons he collects
As Homer's Jove convenes the threatening Clouds
That with his dire Artillery are fraught!
With what exalted Air he leads them on,
Terror before him marches, Fame behind,
And Conquest like the Austrian Eagle shaped,
Over his Head flies towering to the Skies.
With such Majestic Air in Ancient Days
Phidias or great Euphranor formed his Jove;
But warring Jove preparing to discharge
Vindictive Thunder on the impious World.
Death his August Appearance sees from far,
And sees him worthy all his direful Rage;
TO attack him mounts upon a fiery Globe,
But as more near the Griezly Monarch draws,
He knows the Hero doomed to oercome by Fate;
And then his fiery Thunderbolt he shoots
Into the Earth, and all its Entrails tears;
About the Hero casts a Mount of Clay,
And buries him almost alive with Have,
To shun him sacred to eternal Fame.!
The Squadrons all with shudd'ring Horror shake,
And Ruin from that dreadful Moment wait,
He in that dreadful Moment is alone,
Fearless and calmly of them all takes Care.
An Intrepidity so like their own
Charms all the bright Spectators of the Sky;
The Squadrons now redouble all their Rage,
And catch Heroic Fortitude from him.
Their Flame rekindled rages in their Breasts,
And sparkling in their fatal Eyes it rowls,
Unanimous they to the Charge return,
With Resolution never seen before;
Each Champions with the Fate of Nations big,
All, All resolve to conquer or to die,
Ay now, even now, the dreadful Moment comes
On which the Destiny of Men depends;
Their raging Blood like fiery Torrents rowls,
Their Hearts even burst with Rage, their noble Hearts
That utterly disdain, that utterly abhor
The inglorious Thoughts of Flight or foul Retreat.
Again with dreadful Shouts rhey rend the Skies,
And now their murdering Carabines they sling,
With matchless Rage their flaming Swords they draw;
In missionary Death they trust no more,
But in their Hands they carry hideous Fate.
Now, now, with all their Might, with all their Souls
They rush on Death and Wounds, their dismal Way
With their protended bloody Points they plough,
Or brandishing aloft the horrid Edge,
Like ripened Corn the adverse Squadrons mow,
Extending them in Heaps upon the Plain,
The adverse Squadrons can no longer bear
Their fatal Weapons or their fatal Eyes,
Or their victorious Cries, but Slaughter some,
Some Pain and Anguish seize, Confusion all.
And now in Heaps they fall, in Crowds they fly;
They fly, fair Europe's proud Oppressors fly!
And Godlike Liberty's for ever fixed,
And to the Stars is England's Glory raised.
Victoria the transported Britons cry,
With Rapture Bleinheim's blissful Plain resounds,
To Bleinheim's Field the ravished Heavens reply;
And with victorious Shouts the Welkin rings,
Both Heaven and Earth, and Gods, and Men are charmed,
And Phoebus with redoubled Glory shines,
And on the blessed Event all ravished Nature smiles.
Danube transported drives his rapid Flood
With double Fury by his ecchoing Shores,
And to the Euxin sends the enchanting Sound;
Adown his Shores the Acclamation runs,
That Godlike Liberty's for ever fixed,
And to the Stars is England's Glory raised.
Oh Joy! oh Rapture never to be born!
They fly! Fair Europe's proud Oppressors fly!
The Victors rushing tear their trembling Rear;
Shouting they rage, and raging they pursue;
A dismal Joy is on their rattling Tongues,
Fate in their Arms and Fury in their Eyes.
Now Discord stalking with Gigantick Stride
Wades through a Crimson Stream of torrent Gore,
And hideous is the Face of Slaughter now,
And yet even now when all the conquering Troops,
Soldiers and Chiefs are all even wild with Joy,
All frantic with the Transport of their Rage.
Their great Commanders calm, he who before
In his own Danger dauntless was alone
Lord of himself in universal Joy,
Serenely doubts for all; yet his the Praise,
The Glory of the immortal Day is his,
He to a Pitch of human Glory raised,
To which no Subject ever rose before;
And by this great deciding Moment made
Darling of Nations, and Mankinds Delight,
Britannia's second Pride, Batavia's Hope;
The Roman Empires Ornament and Fame,
The everlasting Blessing of the Good,
And constant Panegyric of the Brave:
E'n in this great deciding Moment he
The impetuous Movements of his Soul commands,
Commands himself with more imperious Sway
Than even the meanest Warrior of his Troops;
To no unruly Transport he gives way,
To all Attacks remains invincible,
And stands the noble Conqueror of himself;
For now his Genius whispers him within
That while the Day is doubtless on his Side
Heroic Eugene is severely pressed,
And by the false Bavarian's Power distressed,
And wants the Succor of the Conquering Wing.
Then as great Virgil's Neptune with his Voice
Tames the wild Horrors of his frantic Waves,
And flattens with a Breath the refluent Main,
So mighty Marlborough with a Word, a Nod
The Fury of his Conquering Troops restrains,
E'n raging Madness hears that awful Voice,
And in a Moment sinks into a Calm;
That Voice the stormy King of Terrors hears,
He hears that Voice, and in midway arrests
His furious Arm descending to destroy.
And as the Hero with a Breath can calm
The raging Storm in forty thousand Breasts,
So with a Breath he reinflames them all.
Again like stormy Seas they waving roll,
And rise, and foam with far resounding Roar,
And tenfold Joy, and tenfold Rage succeeds.
For on the Spur the blissful News arrives,
That happy Eugene no Support requires;
That conquering Eugene making vast Efforts,
Efforts which never will be forgot by Fame,
A Third time rallied his disordered Troops,
And turned Confusion back upon the Foe.
Again great Marlborough gives the fatal Word,
Again the Goddess gives the dreadful Charge,
And the victorious Squadrons of the left
Again fall on with terrifying Cries.
Conquest before, now great Revenge they seek,
The French astonished, all Resistance loose,
All Resolution, Courage, Order, Thought.
Their Squadrons now confounded, all disband,
Each for himself takes sordid Care alone,
Sure Ruin both to Armies and to States.
The Victors with immortal Rage pursue,
And smite the affected French, like Wrath divine
That sweeps whole People, and lays Nations waste.
See this ye proud aspiring Tyrants, see,
And let the Face of Bleinheim's dreadful Field
Teach you to rremble at the Wrath of Heaven,
And the just Judgments of the avenging God!
Do you see that Heap of abject Wretches there,
That fall by Hundreds, and by Thousands fly.
How is Ambition fallen! How in his Turn
The insolent Oppressor faints and dies!
Are these the Brave, the Invincible? Are these
The Royal Household of the immortal King?
Are these the Bands so proud of Triumphs past,
So vain upon the Hopes of those to come?
And with the Spoils of conquered Nations big?
Are these the Giants who their Tyrant swelled
With the fond Hope of universal Sway?
How they fly! How they fall! How they tremble! How they die!
An Iron Tempest galls them in the Flank,
And the fierce Victor with ten thousand Swords
Insulting hangs upon their broken Rear.
Before them Danube rises on their Flight,
And loudly for Revenge, Revenge he roars,
Arresting their precipitated Flight,
He strikes them backward with his stormy Brow,
Or with his angry Voice their guilty Souls he scares.
But tenfold Horror drives them headlong on!
Down, down ten thousand take the fatal Leap,
And plunge among the Waves; the Danube raves,
And calls his stormy Billows to the Spoil,
His stormy Billows to the mighty Spoil
Drive on, advancing with a hideous Roar.
Ten thousand Warriors rolling ln the Flood,
Horses and Men reverst midst scattered Arms,
And floating Ensigns on each other Plunge,
Drive one another drowning to the Abyss,
And with tremendous Prospect strike the Eye.
The very Victors grow with Horror chill,
Shake at the dire Catastrophe they cause,
And tremble at the Terrors of a Scene,
Such as no no Nation of the World, no Age
Since the great Hebrews wondrous Passage saw.
Here Heavenly Goddess could thou but impart
To my weak Mind the Force, the immortal Force,
To paint with lively Strokes the dismal Scene,
To paint the Cries, the Shrieks, the dying Groans,
The Grief, the Rage, the Fury of their Fear,
And all the Horrors of their baleful Eyes,
And all the Astonishment, the Amazement of their Souls,
With every dreadful ghastful Circumstance;
Not Milton's wond'rousPiece should mine transcend
In which Messiah with his Thunders armed
Drove down the infernal Tyrants warring Host
With Terrors and with Furies through the Abyss,
Not Michael Angelo's stupendous Work;
Where the last dreadful Doom sends guilty Souls
Down to eternal Punishments in Hell;
Hell seizes them, Hell meets them on the Way,
For in their Air and in their Looks is Hell,
And endless Torments in their Baleful Eyes.
Thus fell the French before the Victor's Wrath,
They who had stood so many Storms of War,
Yet still unshaken kept their Ground in all.
Thus of tall Oaks I Have known a goodly Row,
That graced the winding Margin of the Flood,
Defy the Rage of many a wintry Blast,
The Tempest saw their Strength, and sighed, and past them by.
But when a Hurrican by Wrath divine
Came lately bellowing over the Western Main,
That with immortal Fury on them fell,
That made them tremble at impending Fate;
And rent at once their sturdy Trunks in twain,
Or twisted up their Roots, and whirled them in the Air.
That tore their lofty Branches down from Heaven,
And brought to light theirSerpent Roots fromHell.
Down they came rushing with a fatal Groan,
And strewn the River with their scattered Limbs,
And with their mangled Trunks his Channel pil'd,
Till Devastation choked the encumbered Stream.
O Conquering Death, like Sampson, blind though strong,
Had thou the glorious Hecatombs foreseen.
Which noble Marlborough was ordained by Fate
To offer up to thy insatiate Power,
Thou surely then had saved one Godlike Youth,
And to the Heroic Father given the Son.
But Blanford in his early Bloom was snatched
To make the Glory of the Sire complete;
Had noble Blandford still remained below,
He was good, so charming and so great,
So worthy all the Fathers fond Desire;
The invidious World might have pretended then
That Marlboro' had achieved his Godlike Deeds,
For private Ends to make his Offspring great;
Now clearly for his Country and his Queen,
For Liberty, and for the World he acts.
Thou too great Queen by whose auspicious Care
And Wisdom these astonishing Events
Were brought to Light, thou for thy Country act'st,
And for the World, for Children thou have none,
Too rigid Fate has ravished all away.
Oh Royal Gloucester had but cruel Death
Permitted thee to see this wondrous Day,
How had great Marlbro's Actions raised thy Blood,
And roused the Hero in thy Blooming Breast!
Till grown impatient thou had called to Arms,
Had like young Edward crossed the ambient Main
Attended with the Flower of British Youth,
Displayed thy Ensigns in the Galliek Plains,
While France had trembled at thy conquering Arms;
Once more had France an English Sovereign owned,
Once more had Spain its rightful Monarch seen,
Placed by a British Hero on his Throne.
But thou art gone, Britannia's Hope is gone,
For thee Britannia mourns like Royal Ann;
Thy Fate thy Mother's Happiness impaired,
But it has raised her Glory to the Stars;
The Wonders which she every Day performs:
Moved by the noblest Motives she performs,
Now for her Conntry and the World she acts,
For Liberty the Darling Cause of Earth,
For spotless Faith the darling Cause of Heaven.
Her Children all were snatched away in thee,
O fond Mistake! Whatever the best of Queens
Performs, she does it for her Children all,
Her happy People are her Children now.
And oh so good, so excellent is she
So tender of their Happiness and Fame,
So watchful over their Rights, so studious of their Peace,
To all extending her impartial Care;
So grateful and so dutiful are they,
Such Honor and such awful Love return,
Such Love as Heaven of Human Hearts requires;
That Fame is doubtful which she most shall praise,
The Childrens Duty or the Mother's Care.
The Dutiful'st of Children sure are they,
The very Best of tender Mothers she.
And not the fancied Mother of the Gods,
Great Queen, could boast a more Heroic Race;
And as that fancied Mother of the Gods
Was charmed at Sight of her immortal Sons.
With all my Power I Have rouzed my Genius up,
That thy victorious Subjects thou might see
Made like to Gods at Bleinheim's deathless Field*
What glorious Sight can more delight thy Soul
Than Conquest which thy Subjects Bliss ensures
Thy Glory, and the World's Felicity?
Yes Bleinheim still can show a nobler Sight,
A Sight that for thy Zeal has stronger Charms
Than all the World's vain Greatness can supply*
See there thy conquering Heroes who before
Were like to Gods, now equal to the Worm,
All low and prostrate as the vanquished now;
Humbling themselves before the God of Hosts,
Offering to him the Glory and the Praise,
The Sacrifice most worthy of the God,
The Almighty God of War, the God of great Revenge.
FINIS.

