JUDITH. A SACRED DRAMA. As it is performed at the THEATER ROYAL In DRURY LANE.
The MUSIC composed by Dr. ARNE.

LONDON: Printed for J. COOTE, in Paternoster Row; and T. DAVIES, in
Russel Street, Covent Garden. MDCCLXI. [Price One Shilling.]

Performers' Names.
Mrs. CORNELI. Sig^^. EBERARDI. Mr. CHAMPNES. Miss ELIZ. YOUNG. Mr. FAWCETT,
AND Miss BRENT.
Characters.
OZIAS. CHARMIS. HOLOFERNES. JUDITH. ABRA. Chorus of Israelites. Chorus of
Assyrians.
SCENE, BITHULIA. JUDITH. AN ORATORIO.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Chorus of Israelites. FATHER of Mercies lend thine Ear,
Behold us with a pitying Eye.
Thy wretched suppliant People hear,
Help, help, O Lord! or else we dye.

CHARMIS. Chorus. Char. Well may ye mourn, O miserable Race!
Well may ye mourn: The Angel of Destruction
Even now on Wing malignant hovers over us,
And showers upon our Heads the Wrath of Heaven.

A Man. Ye are the Cause, ye Governors and Rulers,
Of the dire Mischiefs that are fallen upon us.
Why sought ye not a Peace with these Assyrians
Ever they approached our City? Now their Troops
Encompass us about, have seized our Springs,
And through a Dearth of Water all must perish.

AIR.
A Woe. O Torment, great, too great to bear!
Parched up with Thirst I burn, I rage;
Distraction! Horror! and Despair,
Give me this Fury to assuage
One Drop, from some yet moist'ned Bowl
To cool the Fever in my Soul!



SCENE II.
OZIAS, CHARMIS, Chorus. A Man. Throw wide our Gates, let Holofernes enter
With all his Troops, and spoil us! we will serve him.
It Is better so to serve, than to behold
Our Wives and Children die before our Faces.

Ozias. Brethren take Courage, let us yet endure
Five Days, and if within that Space the Lord
Turn not his Mercy toward us, we will do
According to the Words ye now have spoken.

AIR.
Be humble, suffering, trust in God,
Who joys not with the chast'ning Rod,
To show his Power Divine;
No, he is Good as well as Great,
And Men, that will not patient wait,
Rebel, when they repine.



SCENE III.
JUDITH, ABRA. Jud. Have then our Miseries at length subdued us?
And must those Heathens lord it over the Race
Of abject Israel?

Abra. Within five Days
Bithulia shall be plundered, our young Men
Slain with the Sword, our Virgins violated;
And the small Remnant must groan out a Life
In Slavery and Exile.

Jud. Know thou not
What Wonders the Almighty can perform?
Oh weak of Faith! should God stretch forth his Arm,
Is it too late to save his sinking People?
I feel my Spirit stirred with strange Emotions.
Raise, raise some potent Strain, whilst I retireing,
In holy Meditation seek the Lord.

AIR.
Abra. Wake my Harp! to melting Measures,
Pour thy softest, sweetest Treasures,
Such as lift the Thoughts on high;
'Till the rapt Soul, Earth forsaking,
Heavenward it is Flight is taking,
On the Wings of Harmony.



SCENE IV.
JUDITH, ABRA. Jud. Where are the Ancients of the City? -- Lead me,
This instant lead me to them; with some vast
Design my Soul is big! Yet what am I,
Most Gracious! what am I, that thou should do
This Thing, and by an Instrument so feeble
Blazon thy glorious Name among the Nations.

AIR.
Adventurous, lo! I spread the Sail,
Steering where Patriot Virtue guides;
That marks my Passage, 'points the Gate,
And Pilot at my Helm presides.
With steadfast Heart I quit the Shore,
Nor Man's Assistance deign to court;
The Star of Mercy goes before,
In Promise of a joyful Port.



SCENE V.
OZIAS, CHARMIS, JUDITH, ABRA, Chorus of Israelites Ozias. Brethren, behold!
the Widow of Menasses,
Judith, for Wisdom, and for Beauty famed:
This way she comes attended by her Damsel.
Daughter, what would thou?

Jud. Hear me, O ye Rulers!
Ye have not rightly done to tempt the Lord,
By swearing, that unless within five Days
He turned to help us, ye would yield the City.

Charm. The rash Inhabitants compelled us to it.
But thou implore the Lord, that he may send
Rain from the Clouds, and we shall faint no more.

Chorus of Israelites. When Israel wept, no Comfort nigh,
Thou heardst, O Lord, thy People's Cry:
Tender as Shepherd of his Flock,
When through the Desert they were led,
From Heaven thy Bounty gave them Bread,
And poured them Water from the Rock.



Jud. Hear me! I mean to do an Act shall go,
Throughout all Generations: I will go
Forth from the City to the Assyrian Camp
With this my Virgin; and within the Time
Prescribed, the Lord shall save ye by my Hand.
But question not the Scope of my Design.
For naught I will divulge 'till all be finished.

AIR.
Remember what Jehovah swore
To Abram, and his Seed of yore,
Above it is on Record;
With this right Hand I plant thy Race,
No Power shall root it from its Place;
So spoke the living Lord.
And Suns may melt, and Stars decay,
Both Heaven and Earth shall pass away,
But not his sacred Word.


SCENE VI.
OZIAS. CHARMIS. Char. She breaths prophetic Strains! depart in Peace,
And the Lord God go with thee. Wonder not
My Brethren, that upon this Woman's Strength
We rest our Hopes of Safety! through the Tribes
The Fame of her Religion is gone forth;
And know, a single Champion so provided,
Is better than a Host of the Profane.

AIR.
Conquest is not to bestow
In the Spear, or in the Bow;
Nor does Victory belong
To the Valiant, or the Strong.
But the Pious and the Just,
Those who in Jehovah trust;
To their Foes the Sword may give,
They shall triumph, they shall live.



SCENE VII.
OZIAS, CHARMIS, Chorus of Israelites. Ozias. Lo! where fair Judith issuing
from the Gate,
With her Attendant, now descends the Mountain:
How beautiful she looks, and with what Vigor
She treads along! -- It Is God! it is God inspires her
To some great Purpose; laud his holy Name.

Chorus of Israelites. Hear! Angels, hear! -- Celestial Choirs,
In Rapture catch your golden Lyres.
With us your Voices raise;
To him the first and last be given
In lowest Earth, in highest Heaven,
All Glory, Power, and Praise.



END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
HOLOFERNES, JUDITH, ABRA. Jud. Thus, noble Holofernes, thou have heard
Why with this Virgin I forsook yon City;
Because the Inhabitants by Crimes most odious,
Where drawing on themselves the Wrath of Heaven.
When the dread Hour is nigh, God shall forewarn me,
And I, by secret Passes, will conduct
Thee, and thy Troops, to the devoted Walls:
Nor shall Bethulia only fall a Prey,
But all Judea.

Hol. Wonder of thy Sex! what Language can express
My Admiration? --
What Words do Justice to thy Excellence?
For Comeliness of Form, and Strength of Mind,
There is not such another.

Jud. Spoke my Lord
To his poor Handmaid? -- Let me not suppose it.
Far be such vain Thoughts from the Wretch that toils
In this dark Vale of Sin and Misery.

AIR.
Oh! strive not with ill-suited Praise,
Thy Servant's humble Mind to raise.
God be my Pride, his holy Ways,
My Ornaments alone:
This Merit only rests with me,
That, through the Veil of Charity,
Another's Blemishes I see,
Whilst I lament my own.



SCENE II.
HOLOFERNES, JUDITH, ABRA, Chorus of Assyrians. Hol. Strait through the Camp let
this Command be issued,
That none presume t'approach the Hebrew Women,
But with such due Respect and Reverence,
As suits the Friends of the Assyrian King.
An unmolested Passage let them find,
And ample Liberty to observe their Laws,
Their Customs, and Religion.

Chorus of Assyrians. Live for ever!
Nebuchodonosor and Holofernes!

Hol. Come, lovely Judith, for thy Residence
Yonder superb Pavilion we assign.

AIR.
Adorned with every matchless Grace
By Heaven from whence she sprung;
We view the Goddess in her Face,
We hear it in her Tongue.
Against such Charms, there is no Defense;
O take! Possess me whole!
Thy Beauty captivates my Sense,
Thy Wisdom quells my Soul.

Chorus of Assyrians. Rejoice! Rejoice! Judea falls,
Yon stubborn City bows her Walls;
Victors we come, her Gates display,
And Desolation marks our Way.
While every Sword from Slaughter reeks,
The Virgin cries, the Matron shrieks;
Through her pale Streets Groans, Shouts resound,
And all her Turrets flame around.



SCENE III.
JUDITH, ABRA. Jud. Thus far the Lord has led us by the Hand,
Till in the Midst of these Idolaters
We are set down. But know, like Sparks of Fire
Lodged in a Heap of Stubble, we shall soon
Blaze and consume them. Only thou, my Sister!
Beware of their Deceptions. Nor with Flattery
Let them intoxicate our Reason.

Abra. Never.
The Praise of the Abandoned to the Ear
Of Virtue, sounds but like the Serpent's Hiss
As timely Warning to avoid its Sting.
Too well by thy Example am I taught
To scorn the glittering Gewgaws they esteem.

AIR.
Vain is Beauty gaudy Flower,
Pageant of a Day, an Hour,
Born just to bloom and fade;
Nor less weak, less vain than it
Is the Pride of human Wit,
The Shadow of a Shade.



SCENE IV.
JUDITH, ABRA, Chorus of Assyrians. Jud. Soft, break we off, what wanton Troop
comes yonder?
This Way they bend their Steps. Now speak your Errand.
If from the Great, the gracious Holofernes,
Ought in Command ye bear, behold a Vassal,
Submissive to the Pleasures of her Lord.

A Man. Thus then our general greets the peerless Judith.
To Night he holds a Banquet, and her Presence
Only is wanting to complete its Splendour.
Further he charged me -- but I need not speak it,
Charms have the Hebrews, and the Assyrians Hearts.

A Woe. Come, beauteous Stranger! give a Loose to Joy --
Our General amidst the Noise of War,
Has a Soul tuned to all the softer Passions --
Enough, she smiles Consent, return we back
With the glad Answer of our Embassy.

AIR.
Haste to the Gardens of Delight,
Blessed Scenes! where plenteous Pleasures grow;
Where Fruits luxuriant charm the Sight,
And court the Hand from every Bough.
No Churls are bid to Nature's Treat,
The Goods the Gods provide, employ;
To thank the Givers pluck and eat,
And satisfy the Soul with Joy.



SCENE V.
JUDITH, ABRA. Jud. The Lyon's in the Toils, we have him fast,
And never shall he walk abroad again
To make the Forests tremble: Hie we hence
To this same Banquet, yet imagine not,
That my chaste Body I will render up
To fulsome Purposes; no, God shall save me;
To whose Almighty Guidance I resign
Myself this Night. Fall prostrate on the Earth,
Join me in fervent Prayer from Heart and Voice,
Let our warm Vows in Unison aspire.

DUET.
Oh thou, on whom the Weak depend,
Creator! Father! Champion! Friend!
Source divine of every Blessing,
Merciful beyond expressing,
To thy vowed Votarist's Suit attend.
Inspiration pure impart,
Nerve her Arms and steel her Heart.
Not sung. Kind Influence shed on this important Hour,
And as thou giv'st her Courage, grant her Power.



SCENE VI.
HOLOFERNES. Crown me with Laurels, bring the Chaplets hither,
With Roses and with Myrtle bind each Brow,
For we today are Conquerors. Thus surrounded,
Like the famed Son of Lybian Jove I stand,
When to the Indian Shore he led his Legions,
And Victory fought beside him! -- Fill the Goblets!
To Father Bacchus pour Libation due.
Let Mirth and Music testify Devotion,
So should the Deity be praised and honored.

AIR.
Hail, immortal Bacchus! known
By thy Vine encircled Zone;
By the Crew that on thee wait,
Thy rosy Crest and reeling Gait.
Hither vested like the God
With thine Ivy, Wreath, and Rod;
Hither come in jolly Pride,
And over thy festive Rites preside.



Chorus of Assyrians. Hail, immortal Bacchus! known
By thy Vine encircled Zone;
By the Crew that on thee wait,
Thy rosy Crest and reeling Gait.
Hither vested like the God
With thine Ivy, Wreath, and Rod;
Hither come in jolly Pride,
And over thy festive Rites preside.



SCENE VII.
HOLOFERNES, JUDITH, Attendant, Chorus. Hol. Silence each ruder Sound, let
nothing breathe
But softest Harmony. -- Fair Judith comes,
Another Venus by the Graces led.
So when the Sea-born Goddess from the Foam
Prolific sprung, as on the boiling Deep
Her Form appeared, the loud Winds fell to Whispers,
And the Waves crept in Murmurs to the Shore.

Jud. Behold at thy Command, O Holofernes!
Thine Handmaid stands before thee.

Hol. Thy Charms
O'erpow'r me with their Luster! in a Blaze
Of Beauty I am lost! -- O let me lean
My Head upon thy Bosom.

Jud. Shall I question what to my Lord seems good -- recline thy Head,
While I to lulling Sounds my Voice attune
And sing thy wearied Spirits to Repose.

AIR.
Sleep, gentle Cherub! -- Sleep descend!
Thy healing Wings protective spread,
And over his sacred Temples bend,
O bend their salutary Shade.



Abra. Bacchus to Venus has resigned the Hero
With Wine oppressed; and in extatic Slumbers
His Senses are dissolved; remove him gently
To the inmost Chambers of the Tent, beneath
The Purple Canopy, beside his Couch
The fair shall watch and guard him from Disturbance.

Chorus of Assyrians. Prepare the genial Bower, prepare,
And thou the Ruler of the Sphere,
Night halt thy sable Wain:
Halt, and shed double Darkness round,
Be still each Motion, hushed each Sound,
Let Love and Silence reign.



END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT. III.
SCENE I.
OZIAS, CHARMIS, JUDITH, ABRA. Ozias. Great are thy Works, O God! and wonderful
The Mercy which thou show the Sons of Men.
Daughter proceed, how scap'st thou undefiled?

Jud. When we were left together in the Tent,
There Holofernes lay, stupid with Wine:
Then came the Spirit of the Lord upon me,
And drawing from his Sheath his shining Faulchion
I smote him twice, and struck away his Head.
Which when my faithful Abra had received,
We passed unquestioned 'till we reached Bithulia.

Ozias. Blessed art thou, O Judith, among Women.
What thou have wrought today for Israel
Shall be remembered to thy Praise for ever.

AIR.
Amongst Heroes and Sages recorded,
Thou fairest and foremost shall shine;
For Fame is the Meed that is awarded,
To recompense Virtue like thine.
Whilst Men in a just Admiration
Of Wisdom and Valor agree.
So long every Age every Nation
Shall hallow a Laurel to thee.



SCENE II.
JUDITH, OZIAS, CHARMIS, ABRA, Chorus. Jud. Behold, my Brethren, how the Lord
has smitten
By a weak Woman's Hand, thine Enemy.
Here, take his Head, and hang it on the Walls,
Gird every Man his Sword upon his Thigh,
And feign yourselves preparing all for Battle.
The Assyrians will perceive ye are in motion,
And straitway call their General, Holofernes;
But no Cries wake the Dead; then shall they fear
And fly before you, while you thunder down,
And overthrow them with a mighty Slaughter.

AIR.
O Lord, our God! tremendous rise,
In Battle dreadful mount the Storm;
Before thy Face while Vengeance flies,
Thy wrathful Mandates to perform,
And blast thy Enemies
Not Sung. In thine Anger hot and fierce,
Melt their Hearts, their Hopes disperse;
Sweep their Bands like Chaff away,
And cast them to the Dogs a Prey.



Chorus of Israelites. Who can Jehovah's Wrath abide,
Who from his searching Fury hide,
He lifts his Arm in Ire;
Hell shrinks from the impending Stroke,
The Hills recede, the Mountains smoke,
Earth trembles, Heaven's on fire.



SCENE III.
Israelitish Priests, Men, Women, Elders. A Wom. Daughters of Sion, hear ye
what is done?
How Judith with the Damsel her Companion
Has brought Destruction and Reproach on Assure.
Take Branches in your Hands, and crowned with Garlands,
In Triumph let us bear them through the City.

A Man. Well have thou said. Prepare a solemn Feast
And high Rejoicing, for no less is due
To God, and his elected Members.

AIR.
No more the Heathen shall blaspheme,
O Lord of Hosts! thy holy Name,
In their polluted Place;
No more elate with impious Pride,
Thy sacred Sabbath shall deride.
Or vex thy chosen Race.



SCENE IV.
The TRIUMPH.
CHORUS.
Breath the Pipe, the Timbrel sound,
Strew the Olive, strew the Bays;
In grateful Songs rejoice,
Let every Hand and every Voice,
Join in matchless Judith's Praise.
Breath the Pipe, the Timbrels sound, etc.

AIR.
A Man. The Victor on his lofty Seat,
By shouting Crowds proclaimed the Great,
Exulting Pleasure feels;
While Spoils of Kings in Battle slain,
And captive Troops, a numerous Train
Surround his Chariot Wheels.

A Wom. But weak the Joys the ambitious Prize,
To those which round the Patriot rise,
And in his Soul prevail;
While thus a grateful People saved,
By Toils endured and Dangers braved,
Their Friend and Champion hail.

Chorus repeated.

SCENE V.
JUDITH, ABRA, Israelites. Jud. Israel, for Shame! -- What, are ye like the
Heathen,
To give the Glory of God's Works to Man?
Proceed no farther with this Profanation -- adore Jehovah.

AIR.
Not unto us, but to his Name,
The Praise, the Thanks bestow;
Who formed above the starry Frame,
And sunk the Deeps below.
Who gave the Seasons Day and Night
By Turns to rise and fall;
Who out of Shade created Light,
And out of nothing all.



SCENE VI.
OZIAS, ABRA, Israelites. Ozias. Israel rejoice! thy Horn is now exalted.
From hence we may descry the Assyrian Host
In wild Disorder, this and that Way flying. --
They cast away their Arms, and leave their Camps
A Spoil to our victorious Countrymen.
SEMI-CHORUS. O blessed Event! the Tempest is dispersed
Which threatened to overwhelm the House of David,
And now the Sun of Peace shall rise upon us.

DUET.
On thy Borders, O Jordan, again shall be seen,
Rich Industry leading gay Plenty along;
The Pipe of the Shepherds shall wake on each Green,
Every Grove shall resound with the Nightingales Song.



SCENE the Last.
OZIAS, CHARMIS, JUDITH, ABRA, Israelites. Jud. Here, O ye Sons of Jacob, let
us rest!
Yet since God heard you, when in sore Affliction
Ye sung a Hymn in Honor to his Name,
Joyful repeat it now; for to his Ear
Such Songs of Praise and Piety are sweet.
In grateful Clouds to Heaven they ascend
And fall again in Blessings on Mankind.

Chorus of Israelites. Hear, Angels hear! celestial Choirs,
In Raptures catch your golden Lyres,
With us your Voices raise;
To him the first and last be given,
In lowest Earth, in highest Heaven,
All Glory, Prayer and Praise.



FINIS.

