THE CHAPTER of ACCIDENTS: A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.

PRICE ONE SHILLING and SIXPENCE.

THE Chapter of Accidents: A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS, As it is performed at the
THEATER ROYAL IN THE HAY-MARKET.

WRITTEN by MISS LEE.

LONDON: Printed for T. CADELL, in the Strand. M.DCC.LXXX.

To MRS. P --.
OH, thou! who bad'st me fearless try the oar,
And launch uncertain on life's flattering sea,
Urging with trembling hand my bark from shore,
While wondering at thy own temerity.
Nameless, as are thy merits, still remain --
Yet let thy heart appropriate all its dues,
And, oh! whatever the event, do thou retain
The tender titles of my Friend and Muse!
Should Fortune's favorites, circling, close her throne,
And Fame's loud trump be mute to me alone,
The pity of the world I can return,
And still at unsuccessful Fiction spurn,
While Heaven's supreme indulgence gives to me
Its charms combined, and realiz'd in thee.
PREFACE.
THE aversion a woman ought to feel at the necessity of engaging even in a
literary contest has induced me to endure a variety of imputations; yet, to
publish a piece, and leave all unanswered, might at once give a sanction to the
past, and encourage future slanders: -- let this plead my excuse for
introducing myself to those who have so generously received a comedy I would
wish more worthy their patronage.

Charged early in life with the care of a family, I accompanied my father eight
years ago into the rules of a prison, where the perjury of an enemy, and the
injustice of a judge for a time confined him. To amuse some of my melancholy
leisure, I there (from a fondness for Marmontel's beautiful tale of Lauretta)
first conceived the design of introducing into the Drama a female heart,
capable of frailty, yet shuddering at vice, and perhaps sufficiently punished
in her own feelings. A lover, whose error was likewise in his heart, not head;
and even for him I contrived a chastisement in the agony of losing her: nor did
I imagine, in adopting a religious tenet, I could ever be accused of offending
morality. Subsequent characters and incidents arose in the manner they now
appear, except that the governor had then no place in it. It is now seven years
since the piece was brought thus forward; soon after which a friend lent me a
translation of Monsieur Diderot's Pere de Famille. -- This fine performance
gave me infinite pleasure under all the disadvantages of a translation; and the
chance-similitude which now and then occurred between that and mine rather
flattered than grieved me, since, conscious of my own originality, and
imagining even my worst enemy, if he charged me with a plagiarism, would at
least allow, while the subject was new to our stage, my only crime was in
denying it. -- I returned the translated play, and mine lay dormant several
years. Sentiment was now exploded, and I therefore sought to diversify it with
humor. The character of the austere Commander in Monsieur Diderot's play had
particularly pleased me; and not being mistress of the French language, I
sought in vain for a translation, on purpose to interweave him into mine. Not
able to meet with any, I created the character of Governor Harcourt, whose
chief likeness to the French uncle is in name) and heightened the piece with
every event relative to him: but an unbounded partiality I must ever retain for
music made me finish it as a three act opera.

In the interim my father had been engaged as a capital Actor by Mr. Harris.
Life opened gradually upon me, and dissipated the illusions of imagination. I
learnt that merit merely is a very insufficient recommendation to managers in
general; and as I had neither a prostituted pen or person to offer Mr. Harris,
I gave up, without a trial, all thoughts of the Drama, and sought an humble
home in Bath, resolving to bury in my own heart its little talent, and be a
poor any thing rather than a poor author. Some valuable friends, I had long
possessed there, insisted I should be wanting to myself in consigning this
piece voluntarily to oblivion, and offered me a recommendation to Mr. Harris,
with a promise of concealing my name, unless it was accepted. I could desire
nothing more: and under these circumstances it was put into that gentleman's
hands above a twelvemonth ago. The praises he gave it induced my friend to own
my name, and from that moment (let his conscience tell him why) it sunk in Mr.
Harris's favor. He said he had frequently refused a play of Mr. Macklin's
taken from le Pere de Famille, and could not accept another on the same
subject; insisted, that the serious part of mine was all Diderot's; advised me
to cut it entirely out, and convert the humorous part into an after-piece,
which be would bring out in the course of the season. -- Reasons very remote
from the Stage could alone induce me to listen a moment to his proposal, and
those brought me a hundred miles to converse with him on the subject; when he
produced me the copy sent him, so worn out and dirty, that I had reason to
conclude he had lent it to every one he knew, at least. -- I was enough
mistress of myself to listen with complaisance to the most supercilious and
unmeaning criticisms, and agreed to mutilate it according to his ideas. The
Actors were now named. I had every reason to imagine it a settled thing; and
returning to Bath, sent the reduced copy at the appointed time, viz. early in
September. A month elapsed without my even knowing he had received it; when,
with the continued ill-manners of addressing me by a third person, (for he
never wrote a single line in answer to several letters) I was shown a paragraph
from Mr. Harris by the friend already mentioned, importing, that I "had sent
him four acts instead of two, and must still take away half; adding, that he
advised me by all means to retain my own, disregarding Diderot's." -- I did
retain my own; for, as the manuscript was luckily returned for another
alteration, I thought it time to consider what was due to myself, and that the
character of mildness and complacency would be rather dearly bought if I gave
up all merit for it; I therefore wrote him a civil letter, and finally withdrew
it.

I shall not expatiate on this treatment. I was perhaps in some degree
blameable, for believing that man would set any value on my time or my money,
who knew not the value of his own; nay, I may be in reality obliged to him in
one sense, since his acceptance of my Comedy would inevitably have consigned to
oblivion those parts of it honored with the most lavish applause.

What pleasure do I feel in retracting the general aspersion cast upon
managers, when I speak of Mr. Colman -- Obliged to get the piece represented if
possible, lest the subject should be borrowed (an evil too common of late) I
enclosed it with an anonymous letter to that Gentleman, briefly relating these
particulars, and it was left at his house early in the year by an unknown
person. At the expiration of a fortnight the manuscript or his answer was
demanded, and the latter by this means rendered both impartial and decisive.
Mr. Colman thought the general name of Author entitled to the compliment of his
own handwriting; and, by a flattering opinion, and immediate acceptance of my
piece, encouraged me to avow myself. By his advice I cut out the songs, and
lengthened it into five acts. Nor did his kindness end there. He gave me the
benefit of his judgment and experience, both in heightening and abbreviating
the business, with every attention in casting and getting it up; generously
uniting to the name of Manager that of Friend Mr. Colman has brought into
notice a woman who will ever with pride and pleasure acknowledge the obligation.

PROLOGUE.
Written by GEORGE COLMAN, Esquire
Spoken by Mr. PALMER.
LONG has the passive stage, however absurd,
Been ruled by names, and governed by a word.
Some poor cant term, like magic spells can awe,
And bind our realms, like a dramatic law.
When Fielding, Humour's favorite child, appeared,
Low was the word -- a word each author feared!
'Till chased at length, by pleasantry's bright ray,
Nature and mirth resumed their legal sway;
And Goldsmith's genius bask'd in open day.
No beggar, however poor, a cur can lack;
Poor bards, of critic curs, can keep a pack.
One yelper silenced, twenty barkers rise,
And with new bowls, their snarlings still disguise.
Low banished, the word sentiment succeeds;
And at that shrine the modern playwright bleeds.
Hard fate! but let each wou'd-be critic know,
That sentiments from genuine feelings flow!
Critics in vain declaim, and write, and rail:
Nature, eternal Nature! will prevail.
Give me the bard, who makes me laugh and cry,
Diverts and moves, and all, I scarce know why!
Untaught by commentators, French or Dutch,
Passion still answers to the electric touch.
Reason, like Falstaff, claims, when all is done,
The honors of the field already won.
Tonight, our author's is a mixed intent --
Passion and humor -- low and sentiment:
Smiling in tears -- a serio-comic play --
Sunshine and shower -- a kind of April-Day!
A Lord, whose pride is in his honor placed;
A governor, with avarice not disgraced;
An humble priest! a lady, and a lover
So full of virtue, some of it runs over.
No temporary touches, no allusions
To camps, reviews, and all our late confusions;
No personal reflections, no sharp satire,
But a mere chapter -- from the book of Nature.
Wrote by a woman too! the muses now
Few liberties to naughty men allow;
But like old maids on earth, resolved to vex,
With cruel coyness treat the other sex.

PERSONS.
Lord Glenmore, Mr. BENSLEY. Governor Harcourt, Mr. WILSON. Woodville, only Son
to my Lord, Mr. PALMER. Captain Harcourt, Nephew to both, Mr. BANNISTER Jun.
Gray, an infirm Clergyman, Mr. AICKIN. Vane, Valet to Lord Glenmore, Mr. LA
MASH. Jacob, Servant to Cecilia, Mr. EDWIN.
Cecilia, Mistress to Woodville, Miss FARREN. Miss Mortimer, Ward to Lord
Glenmore, Mrs. CUYLER. Warner, Housekeeper to Lord Glenmore, Mrs. LOVE.
Bridget, Maid to Cecilia, Mrs. WILSON.
Scene, London.

Time, twenty-four Hours.

THE CHAPTER of ACCIDENTS: A COMEDY.
SCENE I. A Hall. Enter Vane in a Riding Dress, and a Footman. Vane. RUN, and
tell Mrs. Warner, my Lord is at hand; and bid the butler send me a bottle of
hock. (Throws himself along the hall chairs, wiping his forehead) Phew! the
months have jumbled out of their places, and we have July in September.


Enter Mrs. Warner. War. Servant, Mr. Vane.


Vane. Ah, my dear creature! how have you done these fifty ages?


War. Why, methinks, you are grown mighty grand, or you would have come to the
still-room to ask; will you choose any chocolate?


Vane. Why don't you see I am dead? -- absolutely dead; and, if you was to
touch me, I should shake to mere dust, like an Egyptian mummy. Because it was
not provoking enough to lounge away a whole summer in the country, here am I
driven up to town, as if the devil was at my heels in the shape of our hopeful
heir; who has neither suffered my Lord nor me to rest one moment, through his
confounded impatience to see his uncle.


War. Umph, -- he will have enough of the old gentleman presently. He is the very
moral of my poor dear lady, his sister, who never was at peace herself, nor
suffered any one else to be so. Such a house as we have had ever since he came!
-- why he is more full of importance and airs than a bailiff in possession; and
hectors over Miss Mortimer, 'till she almost keeps her chamber to avoid him.


Vane. Hates Miss Mortimer! -- why, here 'll be the devil to pay about her, I
suppose?


War. Hate her? ay, that he does. He looked, as if he could have killed her,
the moment she came down to see him; and got into his chamber presently after,
where he sends for me. -- "Who is this young woman, Mrs. What Is your name?"
says he. Why, sir, says I, she is the orphan of a Colonel Mortimer, whose
intimacy with my Lord, says I -- "Pho, pho, says he, all that I know, woman;
what does she do in this house?" says he; his face wrinkling all over, like
cream when it is skimming. Why, sir, says I, her father unluckily died, just
before the Duke his brother, and so could not leave her one shilling of all
that fine fortune; so my Lord intends to marry her to Mr. Woodville, says I. --
"He does? cries he; heaven be praised I Am come in time to mar that dainty
project, however. You may go, woman, and tell Miss, I don't want any thing more
tonight." -- So up goes I to Miss Mortimer, and tells her all this. Lord! how
glad she was, to find he intended to break the match, though she cannot guess what
he means.


Vane. Upon my soul, I think, it is full as hard to guess what she means. What
the devil, will not my Lord's title, fortune, and only son, be a great catch
for a girl without a friend or a shilling?


War. Ay; but I could tell you a little story, would explain all. -- You must
know, (sitting down; a loud knocking.)


Vane. (starts up) Zounds, here is my Lord!


Exeunt confusedly. SCENE, An Antichamber. Lord Glenmore and the Governor meet;
the latter hobbling. L. Glen. You are welcome to England, brother! I am sorry
your native air pays you so ill a compliment after sixteen years absence.


Gov. 'Faith, my Lord, and so am I too, I promise you: I put up with these
things tolerably well in the Indies; I did not go there to be happy; but, after
all my labors, to find I have just got the money when it is out of my power to
enjoy it, is a cursed stroke: -- like a fine ship of war, I am only come home
to be dismasted and converted into an hospital. However, I am glad you hold it
better: I don't think you looked as well when we parted. My sister, poor Susan!
she is gone too: -- well, we can never live a day the longer for thinking on it.
Where Is Frank? is he still the image of his mother?


L. Glen. Just as you left him, but that the innocence of the boy is dignified
by the knowledge of the man.


Gov. He will hardly remember his old uncle! -- I did love the rogue, that is
the truth on it; and never looked at my money-bags but I thought of him.
However, you have provided him a wife?


L. Glen. I have; you saw her on your arrival, I suppose, for I left her in
town to attend a sick aunt. Poor Mortimer! -- he died one month before the Duke
his brother, and missed a fine title and estate. You know how I loved the
honest fellow, and cannot wonder I took home his orphan'd daughter, as a match
for Woodville.


Gov. Brother, brother! you are too generous; it is your foible, and artful
people know how to convert it to their own advantage.


L. Glen. It is, if a foible, the noblest incident to humanity. Sophia has
birth, merit, accomplishments; and wants nothing but money to qualify her for
any rank.


Gov. Can she have a worse want on earth? Birth, merit, accomplishments, are
the very things that render money more essential: if she had been brought up in
a decent plain way indeed, -- but she has the airs of a peeress already; and,
if any philosopher doubts of the perpetual motion, I would advise him to watch
the knocker of your house. Then you have, out of your precise decorums, removed
your son, to make way for this flirt of fashion; and what is the consequence of
rendering him thus early his own master?


L. Glen. If you run on thus, only to divert yourself, with all my heart; but,
if you would throw a real imputation on Miss Mortimer's conduct, she is
entitled to my serious defense. I never saw any good arise from secluding young
people; and authorize Woodville and Sophia to live with that innocent elegance,
which renders every rank easy, and prevents pleasure from seducing the heart,
or ignorance the senses.


Gov. My Lord, I am amazed at you! was there ever yet a woman who didn't mean
to pass for a goddess? Do they not gain upon us continually, 'till nothing of
our prerogative remains but the name? We are wise fellows truly, if we do not
keep down this humor of theirs as long as possible, by breeding them in
retirement. Every tinsel fop will find address enough to convince wife she is
an angel; and the husband must be lucky, as well as sensible, who reconciles
her to treatment so inferior to her deserts. Woodville will agree with me, I
dare say; for the character suits with his intended; and, 'faith, he will make
but a modish husband, or he could not endure to see her flying about, like the
queen-bee with the whole hive at her heels.


L. Glen. You are too captious, brother!


Gov. And you too placid, brother! if, like me, you had been toiling a third of
your days to compass a favorite design, and found it disappointed at the
moment you thought it complete, what would even your serene Lordship say and
do? -- here have I promised myself a son in yours, -- an heir in yours; --
instead of which, --


L. Glen. His marriage with Miss Mortimer will not make him unworthy either
title.


Gov. Never mention her name to me, I beg, my Lord! -- I hate all mode-mongers
of either sex: the wife, I would have given him, has beauty without knowing it,
innocence without knowing it, because she knows nothing else, and to surprise
you further forty thousand pounds without knowing it -- nay, to bring all your
surprises together, is my daughter without knowing it.


L. Glen. Your daughter? why have you married since my sister's death? your
daughter by her, you lost before you went abroad.


Gov. Yes, but I shall find her again I believe -- I know you will call this
one of my odd whims as usual, but we all have some, witness this dainty project
of yours; and so I will tell you the truth in spite of that project. -- from
the very birth of this girl, I saw her mother would spoil her, and, had she
lived, proposed kidnapping Miss in her infancy.


L. Glen. Kidnap your own daughter! -- why brother I need only prove this to
obtain a commission of lunacy, and shut you up for life.


Gov. Why, though my wife was your Lordship's sister, I will venture to tell you
she was plaguey fantastical, and contrived to torment me as much with her
virtues, as others by their vices -- such a fuss about her delicacy, her
sensibility, and her refinement, that I could neither look nor speak, without
offending one or the other; and execrated the inventor of the jargon every hour
in the four and twenty: a jargon, I resolved my girl should never learn; and
heaven no sooner took her mother, heaven be praised for all things, than I
dispatched her draggle-tailed French governess; made a bonfire of every book on
education; whipped Miss into a post-chaise (under a pretense of placing her in a
nunnery) instead of which, I journey'd into Wales and left her under the care
of a poor curate's wife, whose name was up as the best housewife in the whole
country; then returned, with a solemn history of her death in the smallpox.


L. Glen. Well, this is indeed astonishing! an admirable tutoress truly for my
niece!


Gov. Yes, but there is a better jest than that --


L. Glen. Indeed! -- Is that possible?


Gov. How do you think I contrived to make them obey my instructions? -- I saw
they suspected I was some rich humorist, and was afraid they would, after all,
make a little bit of a gentlewoman of her, for which reason, except the first
year in advance, they never had a single shilling of my money.


L. Glen. This is almost incredible! and so you left your only child to the
charity of strangers?


Gov. No, no, not so bad as that neither. -- You remember my honest servant,
Hardy? after the poor fellow's leg was shot off in my tent, I promised him a
maintenance; so entrusting him with the secret, ordered him to live in the
neighborhood, have an eye on the girl, and claim her if ill-used: -- fine
accounts I had from him, 'faith! the old parson and his wife, having no
children, and not finding any one own her, gave out she was theirs, and doated
on her; in short, she is the little wonder of the country; tall as the
palm tree! with cheeks, that might shame the drawing room; and eyes, will dim
the diamonds I have brought over to adorn them. -- This confounded gout has
kept me in continual alarm, or else she should have spoke for herself.


L. Glen. Why then does not Hardy bring her up to you?


Gov. Why for two very sufficient reasons: -- in the first place, that
identical parson paid him the last compliment, that is, buried him, a
twelvemonth ago; and in the second, they would hardly entrust her to any man
but him who delivered her to them. -- Here was a girl, my Lord, to support your
title, of which I dare swear you are as fond as ever: she would have brought
you a race of true Britons; instead of which, from the painted dolls and
unjointed Macaronies of these days, we shall produce our own enemies, and have
a race of Frenchmen born in England.


L. Glen. I thank your intention, brother; but am far from wishing the chief
accomplishments of Woodville's Lady should be the making cream cheeses, goats
whey, and alder wine.


Gov. Let me tell your Lordship, women were never better than when those were
their chief accomplishments. -- But I may be ridiculous my own way, without
being singular. -- Harcourt shall have my girl, and my money too. -- Cream
cheeses, quotha? no, no, making cream faces is an accomplishment which the
belles of these days oftener excel in.


L. Glen. I would not advise you to publish this opinion, Governor!


Gov. But where is this son of yours? sure he has not totally forgot his old
uncle?


L. Glen. He will be here immediately.


Gov. Nay, I must even take an old man's fate, and follow his mistress without
complaint.


L. Glen. You have no reason for the reproach; this is not his hour for
visiting Miss Mortimer.


Gov. Miss Mortimer! -- ha, ha, ha! why, do you think I took her for his
mistress? -- what, I warrant, I can tell you news of your own family, though I
have hardly been three days in it? -- Woodville keeps a girl, and in great
splendour! -- nay, they tell me, that the unconscionable young rogue encroaches
so far on the privileges of threescore, as to intend marrying the slut.


L. Glen. You jest surely?


Gov. There Is no jest like a true one, -- ha, ha, ha, how foolish you look! --
this is your innocent elegance! this is the blessed effect of letting him live
out of your own house! --


L. Glen. Pr'ythee reserve your raillery, sir, for some less interesting
occasion; -- to have my views thus in a moment overturned, -- where does she
live?


Gov. Ha, ha, ha! -- oh, the difference of those little syllables me and thee!
now you can guess what made me so peevish, I suppose? -- as to where Miss
lives, I have not heard; but somewhere near his lodgings. -- A devilish fine
girl she is, by the bye. -- Ah, I told you, twenty years ago, you would spoil
this boy, -- entirely spoil him.


L. Glen. Zounds! Governor, you have a temper Socrates himself could not have
supported; -- is this a time for old sayings of twenty years ago? -- finish
dressing; -- by that time your nephew will be here, and I shall have reflected
on this matter.


Gov. With all my heart, -- it is but a boyish frolic, and so good morning to
you. -- Here; where is my triumvirate? Pompey, Anthony, Caesar! Exit.


L. Glen. A boyish frolic truly! -- many a foolish fellow's life has been
marked by such a boyish frolic! -- but her residence is the first object of my
enquiry. -- Vane! Enter Vane. Is not my son come?


Vane. This moment, my Lord; and walks till the Governor is ready.


L. Glen. Vane! -- I have deserved you should be attached to me, and I hope you
are?


Vane. My Lord! (what the devil is he at? -- aside.


L. Glen. This strange old Governor has alarmed me a good deal; -- you are more
likely to know, whether with reason, than I can be. -- Have you heard any thing
important of my son lately?


Vane. Never, my Lord.


L. Glen. Not that he keeps a mistress? -- what does the fool smile at?


Vane. I did not think that any thing important, my Lord.


L. Glen. I do, sir -- and am told a more important thing: that he even thinks
of marrying her; -- now, though I cannot credit this, I would choose to know
what kind of creature she is; -- could not you assume a clownish disguise, and,
scraping an acquaintance with her people, learn something of her character and
designs?


Vane. Doubtless, to oblige your Lordship, I could do such a thing. -- But, if
Mr. Woodville's sharp eyes (and love will render them still sharper) should
discover me, I might chance to get a good drubbing in the character of a spy.


L. Glen. Oh, it is very improbable he should suspect you: -- at the worst,
name your employer, and your bones are safe. -- The office perhaps is not very
agreeable, but I impose few such on you: execute it well, and you shall
remember it with pleasure. -- I will detain Woodville 'till you are ready; and,
as I doubt not that his next visit will be to this creature; by following him,
you will find out where she lives. Prepare then as quick as possible, and send
me word when you are ready; for, 'till then, I will not suffer him to depart.
Exit.


Vane. A pretty errand this his formal Lordship has honored me with! -- um; --
if I betray him, shall I not get more by it? -- ay, but our heir is such a
sentimental spark, that, when his turn was served, he might betray me. Were he
one of your hare-um scare-um, good-natured, good-for-nothing fellows, it would
go against my conscience to do him an ill turn. -- I believe, I stand well in
my Lord's will, if Counselor Puzzle may be trusted, (and, when he can get
nothing by a lie, perhaps he may tell truth) so, like all thriving men, I will
be honest because it best serves my interest. Exit.


SCENE, A confined Garden. Woodville walking about. Wood. How tedious is this
uncle! -- how tedious every body! -- was it not enough to spend two detestable
months from my love, merely to preserve the secret, but I must be tantalized
with seeing without arriving at her? yet how, when I do see her, shall I
appease that affecting pride of a noble heart conscious too late of its own
inestimable value? -- why was I not uniformly just? -- I had then spared myself
the bitterest of regrets.


Enter Captain Harcourt. Har. Woodville! how do? -- don't you, in happy
retirement, pity me my Ealing and Acton marches and countermarches, as Foot
has it? -- but, methinks, thy face is thinner and longer, than a forsaken
nymph's who is going through the whole ceremony of a nine month's repentance.
-- What, thou'st fallen in love? -- rustically too? -- nay, prithee don't look
so very lamentable!


Wood. Ridiculous: -- keep this Park-conversation for military puppies! -- how
can we have an eye or ear for pleasure, when our fate hangs over us undecided?


Har. I guess what you mean: but why make mountains of mole-hills? Is the
rosy-fisted damsel so obstinately virtuous?


Wood. Imagine a fair favorite of Phoebus in all respects; since, while her
face caught his beams, her heart felt his genius! -- imagine all the graces hid
under a straw hat, and russet gown; imagine --


Har. You have imagined enough of conscience! and now for a few plain facts, if
you please?


Wood. To such a lovely country maid I lost my heart last summer; and soon
began to think romances the only true histories; all the toilsome glories
recorded by Livy, phantoms of pleasure, compared with the mild enjoyments
described by Sir Philip Sydney; and happiness not merely possible in a cottage,
but only possible there.


Har. Well; all the philosophers (ancient and modern) would never be able to
convince me, a coach was not a mighty pretty vehicle; and the lasses as
good-natured in town as country: but pray let us know, why you laid aside the
pastoral project of eating fat bacon and exercising a crook all day, that thou
might conclude the evening with the superlative indulgence of a peat-fire
and a bed stuffed with straw?


Wood. Why, faith, by persuading the dear girl to share mine.


Har. Oh, now you talk the language of the world: and does that occasion thee
such a melancholy face?


Wood. How ignorant are you both of me and her! -- every moment since I
prevailed, has only served to convince me I can sooner live without every thing
else than her; and this fatal leisure (caused by my absence with my father) she
has employed in adding every grace of art to those of nature; till, thoroughly
shocked at her situation, her letters are as full of grief as love, and I dread
to hear every hour I have lost her.


Har. I dread much more to hear you have lost yourself -- Ah, my dear
Woodville! the most dangerous charm of love is, every man conceits no other
ever found out his method of loving: but, take my word for it, your Dolly may
be brought back to a Milkmaid. -- Leave her to herself awhile, and she will drop
the celestials, I dare swear.


Wood. She is too noble: and nothing, but the duty I owe to so indulgent a
father, prevents me from offering her all the reparation in my power.


Har. A fine scheme truly! why, Woodville, ar't frantic? -- To predestinate
yourself among the horned cattle of Doctors Commons, and take a wife for the
very reason which makes so many spend thousands to get rid of one --


Wood. To withdraw an amiable creature from her duty, without being able to
make her happy is to me a very serious reflection; -- nay, I sinned, I may say,
from virtue: and, had I been a less grateful son, might have called myself a
faultless lover.


Har. Well, well, man! you are young enough to trust to time, and he does
wonders. -- Don't go now and ruin yourself with your uncle; -- I have found him
out already, and advertise you, none of your formal obsequious bows and
respectful assents will do with him; having been cheated in former times of
half his fortune by a parasite, he mistrusts every one, and always mistakes
politeness for servility. Maintain your own opinion, if you would win his; for
he generally grows undetermined, the moment he knows those around him are
otherwise: and, above all, shake off this mental lethargy.


Wood. I will endeavor to take your advice. -- Should she fly I were undone
for ever! -- but you are no judge of my Cecilia's sincerity. How should you
know those qualities, which rise with every following hour? -- Can you think so
meanly of me, as that I could be duped by a vulgar wretch? a selfish wanton? oh
no! -- she possesses every virtue but the one I have robbed her of. Exit.


Harcourt alone. Har. Poor Frank! thy sponsors surely, by intutuition,
characterized thee when they gave thee that name -- did I love your welfare
less, I could soon ease your heart, by acquainting you of my marriage with Miss
Mortimer; but now the immediate consequence would be this ridiculous match. --
How, if I apprize either my Lord or the Governor? both obstinate in different
ways: I might betray only to ruin him. -- A thought occurs, -- my person is
unknown to her -- choosing an hour when he is absent, I Will pay her a visit,
offer her an advantageous settlement, and learn from her behavior her real
character and intentions. Exit.


THE END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, An elegant Dressing Room, with a Toilette richly ornamented. A
Harpsichord, and a Frame with Embroidery. Bridget fetches various small Jars
with Flowers, and talks as she places them. Brid. LORD help us! how fantastical
some folks not a hundred miles off are! If I can imagine what is come to my
lady? -- Here has she been sighing and groaning these two months, because her
lover was in the country; and now truly, she is sighing and groaning because
he is come to town. Such maggots indeed! I might as well have staid in our
parish all the days of my life, as to live mewed up with her in this dear sweet
town: I could but have done that with a vairtuous lady -- although I know she
never was at Foxhall in all her jaunts, and we two should make such a figure
there! -- Bless me! what is come to the glass? (setting her dress) why sure it is
dulled with her eternal sighing, and makes me look as frightful as herself! --
Oh, here she comes with a face as long, and dismal, as if he was going to be
married, and to somebody else too.


Cecilia enters, and throws herself on the Sopha, leaning on her Hand. Cec.
What can detain Woodville such an age! -- it is an hour at least since he rode
by. Run, Bridget* and look if you can see him through the drawingroom-window.


Brid. Yes, madam. (Exit, eyeing her with contempt.)


Cec. How wearisome is every hour to the wretched! -- they catch at each future
one, merely to while away the present. For, were Woodville here, could he
relieve me from the torment of reflection? or the strong, though silent,
acknowledgment my own heart perpetually gives of my error?


Brid. (Without) Here he comes, ma'am, here he comes!


Cec. Does he? -- run down then -- (fluttered)


Brid. Dear me, no; it is not neither: (enters) it is only the French
Ambassador's new cook, with his huge bag and long ruffles.


Cec. Blind animal! Sure nothing is so tormenting as expectation.


Brid. La, ma'am! any thing will torment one, when one has a mind to be
tormented; which must be your case for certain. What signifies sitting mope,
mope, mope, from morning to night? You Would find yourself a deal better if you
went out only two or three times a day. -- For a walk, we are next door to the
park, as I may say: and, for a ride, such a dear sweet vis-a-vis and pretty
horses might tempt any one: then, as to company, you will say, a fig for your
starched ladies, who owe their virtue to their ugliness, -- mine is very much
at your service. (Curtsies)


Cec. How could I endure this girl, did I not know that her ignorance exceeds
even her impertinence? -- I have no pleasure in going abroad.


Brid. Oh la, ma'am! how should you know 'till you try? Sure every body must
wish to see and be seen. Then there is such a delightful hurricane, -- all the
world are busy, though most are doing nothing: -- to splash the mob, and drive
against the people of quality; -- oh, give me a coach and London forever and
ever! You could but lock yourself up, were you as old and ugly as gay Lady
Grizzle at next door.


Cec. Had I been so, I had continued happy.


Brid. La, ma'am, don't ye talk so purphanely! -- happy, to be old and ugly? --
or, I Will tell you what, as you don't much seem to fancy going out, suppose you
were to come down now and then (you know we have a pure large hall) and take a
game of romps with us? If you were once to see our Jacob hunt the slipper, you
would die with laughing! Madam Frisk (my last mistress) used, as soon as ever
master was gone, (and indeed he did not trouble her much with his company) to
run down, draw up her brocaded niggle-de-gee, and fall to play at some good fun
or other: -- dear heart! we were as merry then as the day was long; I am sure I
have never been half so happy since.


Cec. I cannot possibly imitate the model you propose; but, though I don't choose
to go abroad, you may.


Brid. I don't love to go much among the mobility neither. If indeed, madam,
next winter you would give me some of your tickets, I would fain go to a masquerade
(it vexes me to see um stick in the thing-um-bobs for months together,) and
Mrs. Trim promises me the lent of a Wenus's dress, which, she says, I shall cut
a figure in. Now, ma'am, if I had some diamonds, (for beggars wear diamonds
there, they say) who knows but I might make my fortune, like you?


Cec. Mar it, much rather, like me. -- That is no place for girls of your
station, which exposes you to so much insult.


Brid. Ah, let me alone, madam, for taking care of number one. I ware never
afeard but once in my whole life, and that ware of grandfar's ghost; for he
always hated I, and used to walk (poor soul!) in our barken, for all the world
like an ass with a tye-wig on. (Knocking hard.)


Cec. Hark! that sure is Woodville's knock! fly, and see! (Walks eagerly to the
door, and returns as eagerly) Alas, is this my repentance? dare I sin against
my judgment?


Enter Woodv'lle. Wood. My Cecilia! -- my soul! -- have I at last the happiness
of beholding you? You know me too well to imagine I would punish myself by a
moment's voluntary delay.


Cec. Oh, no; it is not that -- (both sit down on the sopha.)


Wood. Say, you are glad to see me? -- afford me one kind word to atone for
your cold looks! -- are you not well?


Cec. Rather say I am not happy. -- My dear Woodville, I am an altered being:
why have you reduced me to shrink thus in your presence? -- oh, why have you
made me unworthy of yourself? (leans against his shoulder weeping.)


Wood. Cruel girl! -- is this my welcome? -- when did I appear to think you so?


Cec. Tell me, when any one else will think me otherwise?


Wood. Will you never be above so narrow a prejudice? are we not the whole
world to each other? -- nay, dry your tears! allow me to dry them; (kisses her
cheek) what is there, in the reach of love or wealth, I have not sought to make
you happy?


Cec. That which is the essence of all enjoyments, -- innocence: -- oh,
Woodville, you knew not the value of the heart, whose peace you have destroyed.
-- My sensibility first ruined my virtue, and then my repose. -- But, though
for you I consented to abandon an humble happy home, to embitter the age of my
venerable father, and bear the contempt of the world, I can never support my
own. -- My heart revolts against my situation, and hourly bids me renounce a
splendour, which only renders guilt more despicable. (Rises) I meant to explain
this hereafter; but the agitation of my mind obliged me to lighten it
immediately.


Wood. Is your affection already extinct? for sure it must, when you can
resolve to torture me thus.


Cec. Were my love extinct, I might sink into a mean content; -- oh, no. --
It Is to that alone I owe my resolution.


Wood. Can you then plunge me into despair? -- so young, so lovely too! -- oh,
where could you find so safe an asylum as my heart? -- whither could you fly?


Cec. I am obliged to you, sir, for the question; but who is it has made me
thus destitute? -- I may retain your protection, indeed, but at what a price!


Wood. Give me but a little time, my love! -- I am equally perplexed between my
father and my uncle; each of whom offers me a wife I can never love. Suffer
them to defeat each other's schemes! -- let me, if possible, be happy without a
crime; for I must think it one, to grieve a parent hitherto so indulgent. -- I
will not put any thing in competition with your peace; and long for the hour
when the errors of the lover will be absorbed in the merits of the husband.


Cec. No, Woodville! that was, when innocent, as far above my hopes, as it is
now beyond my wishes. -- I love you too sincerely to reap any advantage from so
generous an error; yet you at once flatter and wound my heart, in allowing me
worthy such a distinction: but love cannot subsist without esteem; and how
should I possess yours when I have lost even my own?


Wood. It is impossible you should ever lose either, while so deserving both.
-- I shall not be so easily denied hereafter, but am bound by the caprices of
others at present. -- I am obliged to return directly, but will hasten to you
the very first moment; -- when we meet again, it must be with a smile, remember.


Cec. It will, when we meet again. -- Oh how those words oppress me! (aside)
but do not regulate your conduct by mine, nor make me an argument with
yourself, for disobeying my Lord; for here I solemnly swear never to accept you
without the jointconsent of both our fathers; and that I consider as an eternal
abjuration: -- but, may the favored woman you are to make happy, have all my
love without my weakness! Exit in tears.


Wood. Disinterested, exalted girl! -- why add such a needless bar? for is it
possible to gain my father's consent? and yet, without her, life would be
insupportable: -- the censures of the world, -- what is that world to me? --
were I weak enough to sacrifice her to the erroneous judgment of the malicious
and unfeeling, what does it offer to reward me? -- commendations I can never
deserve, and riches I can never enjoy. Exit.


SCENE, A Street before Cecilia's House. Jacob opens the Door and lets out
Woodville, who passes over the Stage; Jacob remains with his Hands in his
Pockets, whistling. Enter Vane, disguised, with a Basket of Game in his Hand.
Vane. So, there he goes at last, I may open the attack without fear of a
discovery, since our hopeful heir will hardly return directly. -- This
intelligence of my landlord's of the Blue-Posts has made the matter much
easier. -- Um, a good subject! -- sure I ought to know that Bumpkin's face! as
I live, my play-fellow at the parish-school, Jacob Gawky! -- now for a touch of
the old dialect -- do you hire, young mon! -- preay, do ye know where one Bett
Dowson do live?


Jac. Noa; not I. --


Vane. Hay! -- why, zure as twopence, thou be Jacob Gawky!


Jac. Odsbodlikins! zo I be indeed! -- but, who be thee?


Vane. What, -- do not know thy old zkoolfellow, Wull, mun?


Jac. Hay! -- what, -- Wull? -- od rabbit it, if I ben't desprate glad to zee
thee, where doo'st live now, mun?


Vane. Down at huome, in our parish; -- I be com'd up with Sir Izaac Promise,
to be meade ex^^iseman.


Jac. Thee'st good-luck, faith I wish, no harm to thee, my fortin ware as good!
-- but theed'st always a muortal good notion of wroiting and ciphers, while I
don't know my own neame when I do zee it. -- What did leave zea for?


Vane. Why, I ware afraid I should be killed before I com'd to be a great mon:
-- but what brought thee into this foine house?


Jac. Fortin, Wull! fortin. -- Did thee know Nan of the Mill?


Vane. Noa, not I. --


Jac. Od rabbit it! I thought every muortal zoul had knawd zhe. -- Well, Nan
and I ware such near neighbors, there ware only a barn between us; -- she ware
a desperate zmart lass, that is the truth on it: and I had half a moind to teake
to feyther's business and marry zhe: -- but, ecod the zimpletony grow'd so
fond, that some how or other, I ware tired first! -- when behold ye, zquire
takes a fancy to me, and made I cuome and live at the hall; and, as my head run
all on tuown, when aw comed up to London, aw brought I wi un: -- zo I thought
to get rid that way of the bullocking of Nan.


Vane. But, Jacob, How did get into thic fine house?


Jac. Zoa, as I ware saying, -- one holiday I went to zee thic there church, wi
the top like a huge punch-bowl turned auver; and, dang it! who should arrive in
the very nick, but madam Nan -- well, huome comes I as merry as a cricket; --
squire caals for I in a muortal hurry; when who should I zee, but madam Nan or
her marrowbones a croying for dear loife! -- dang it, I thought at first I
should have zwounded: -- zo a meade a long zarment about 'ducing a poor girl,
and zaid I should certainly go to the divil for it, and then turned I off, --
But the best fun is to come, mun; -- rabbit me! if aw did not teake Nan into
keeping hisself; and zhe do flaunt it about, as foine as a duchess!


Vane. A mighty religious moral gentleman truly! (Aside.) Well, how came you to
this pleace?


Jac. Why, Meay-day walking in Common Garden to smell the pozeys, who zhould I
see but our Bridget? -- I was muortal glad to zee her, you must needs think,
and zhe got I thic here place.


Vane. Wounds! do live wi' a Lord in this foine house?


Jac. Noa; a Leady, your fool! but zuch a Leady! zuch a dear, easy,
good-natured creature! -- zhe do never zay noa, let we do what we wull.


Vane. Now to the point, (aside) is your Lady married?


Jac. Noa: but she is as good; and what'st think, mun? -- to a Lord's zon! --
though, if a ware a King, aw would not be too good for zhe. -- A mortal fine
comely mon too, who do love her, as aw do the eyes in his head. Couzin Bridget
do tell I, zhe zee'd a letter, where aw do zay aw wull ha her any day of the
week, whatever do come of the next. -- Why, I warrant, they have pointed
wedding day!


Vane. The devil they have? my Lord will go mad at this news. (Aside.)


Jac. Lauk a deazy! how merry we wull be on that day! wot come and junket wi'
us? --


Vane. Yes, yes; I shall certainly make one among you, -- either then or before
(aside) -- but now I must goa and give this geame to zquire -- zquire -- what
the Dickens be his neame? I do always forget it, -- there zhould be a ticket
somewhere: -- zoa, -- rabbit me! if some of your London fauk ha'no' cut it off,
out o'fun!


Jac. Ha, ha, ha! ecod nothing more likelier, -- (both laugh foolishly) the zum
people be zo zharp as needles. -- But there is no pleace like it, for all that
-- I be set upon living and dying in it.


Vane. Now to secure my return if necessary. (Aside) -- I Will tell thee what,
Jacob! seeing as how I ha lost thick there direction, do thee teake the basket:
it is only a present of geame from the parson o'our parish; and, if zo be I cannot
find the gentleman, why it is honestly mine. -- Meay be I Will come, and teake a
bit of supper wi'ye.


Jac. Wull ye indeed? -- dang it! that is clever; and then you will see our
Bridget. She Is a mortal zmart lass, I promise ye! -- and, meay be, may get a
peep at my Lady, who is desprate handsome! -- good bye to ye, -- Bridget's zo
comical! -- od rabbit it, we'll be main merry. Exit.


Vane alone. Vane. Thus far I have succeeded to admiration! -- our young heir
has really a mind to play the fool and marry his mistress! -- though, faith,
marrying his own does not seem very inexcuseable, when so many of his equals
modestly content themselves with the cast-offs of half their acquaintance. Exit.


SCENE, An Apartment in Cecilia's House. Enter Bridget. Brid. So, just the old
story again! crying, crying for ever! -- Lord, if I was a man, I should hate
such a wimpering -- what would she have I wonder? to refuse such a handsome,
genteel, good-natured man! -- and, I Will be sworn, he offered to marry her; for
I listened with all my ears! -- oh, that he would have me now! -- I should
become my own coach purdigiously, that is a sure thing. Hay, who knocks?


Enter Jacob. Jac. A young man do want my Leady.


Brid. A man? -- what sort of a man?


Jac. Why a man -- like -- just such another as I.


Brid. No, no, no; that is not so easy to find: -- what can any man want with
her? show him in here, Jacob.


Jac. (Returning in a kind of glee) When shall we have the wedding, Bridget?


Brid. We shall have a burying first, I believe.


Jac. Od rabbit it! we will not be their seconds there, faith! Exit.


Brid. Now, if he mistakes me for my Lady, I shall find out what he wants.


Enter Captain Harcourt, disguised, with Jacob. Har. (Surveying her) -- is that
your Lady?


Jac. He, he, he! lauk, zur, don't ye know that is our Bridget? Exit.


Brid. So, duce on him, there is my whole scheme spoilt! -- my Lady, Sir, is
engaged; but, if you tell me your business, it will do just as well.


Har. For yourself it may, child! (chucks her under the chin.)


Brid. What, you belong to Mr. Gargle the apothecary? or come from the jeweller
on Ludgate Hill? or have a letter from --.


Har. (Interrupting her) -- the very person, -- you have hit it. -- And now, do
me the favor to tell your Lady, a stranger wishes to speak to her on
particular business.


Brid. Very well, Sir: -- was ever handsome man so crabbed! Exit.


Har. Egad, if the mistress have half as much tongue as the maid, Woodville may
catch me in the midst of my first speech. -- Now for my credentials! and here
she comes! -- a lovely girl indeed! I can scarce blame Frank, for she awes me.


Enter Cecilia, followed officiously by Bridget. Cec. I was informed, Sir, you
had particular business with me?


Har. I took the liberty, madam, -- I say, madam I --


Cec. As I have neither friends or relations in London, (sighs) I am at a loss
to guess. --


Har. What I would communicate, madam, requires secrecy.


Cec. Bridget, go where I ordered you just now.


Brid. Yes, madam; -- but if I an't even with you for this. Exit.


Cec. I complied with your request, Sir, without enquiring the motive; because
you, I think, can have only one. -- My father, if I may trust my heart, has
made you his messenger to an unwilling offender.


Har. Pardon me, madam, but I refer you to this.


Cec. (Reads) "Madam,
"Being certainly informed Mr. Woodville is on the point of marrying a Lady
chosen by his friends, when it is presumed you will be disengaged, a nobleman
of rank, and estate above what he can ever possess, is thus early in laying his
heart and fortune at your feet, lest some more lucky rival should anticipate
him. -- The bearer is authorized to disclose all particulars, and offer you a
settlement worthy your acceptance. -- Deign, madam, to listen to him on the
subject, and you will find the unknown lover as generous and not less constant
than Woodville."



Cec. Good heaven's! to what an insult have I exposed myself! [ She bursts into
tears, and sinks into a chair, without minding Harcourt; who watches her with
irresolution.]


Har. What can I think? -- there is an air of injured delicacy in her, which
teaches me to reproach myself for a well-meant deceit. -- If, madam, --


Cec. I had forgot this wretch. (Rises) Return, sir, to your vile employer;
tell him, whoever he is, I am too sensible of the insult, though not entitled to
resent it -- tell him, I have a heart above my situation, and that he has only
had the barbarous satisfaction of adding another misery to those which almost
overwhelmed me before.


Har. Hear me, madam! -- I conjure you!


Cec. Never! -- a word would contaminate me. -- (Struggling to go off.)


Har. Nay, you shall -- You do not know half the good consequences of this
letter; I am the friend, the relation of Woodville, -- my name Harcourt!


Cec. Is it possible he should be so cruel, so unjust --


Har. He is neither cruel nor unjust, but only unfortunate. -- Hear -- he
designs to marry you; this I learnt from himself only this morning. As a proof
of my sincerity, I will own I doubted your right to that mark, of his esteem,
and made this trial in consequence. Pleased to find you worthy of his rank, I
feel shocked at reminding you, you ought not to share it. But, madam, if you
truly love him, you cannot wish that, to be just to you, he should be unjust to
those who have a prior right over him. -- This shall positively be my last
effort. (Aside.)


Cec. A motive like yours, sir, will excuse any thing. How little my
happiness, honor, or interest, ever weighed against his, need not be repeated.
Far be it from me now to disgrace him; he is apprized of my invincible
objections to a match which will never take place. May he form a happier, while
I by a voluntary poverty expiate my offense!


Har. Ma -- Ma -- what the devil choaks me so? -- I am struck with your
sentiments, and must find you a proper asylum. The moment I saw you, I had
hopes such manners could not veil an immoral heart. I have proved your
sincerity, and owe a reparation to your delicacy. The proposed bride of
Woodville is every way worthy that distinction; nor am I without hopes even she
will be prevailed on to protect you. -- But I must not leave a doubt of my
sincerity: -- do you know Miss Mortimer?


Cec. I have seen the lady, sir. But dare I credit my senses? -- has heaven
formed two such hearts, and for me? --


Har. With her, your story will be buried for ever: and, I think, the sooner
you disappear, the more easily will you prevent Woodville's disobedience. I
will open the affair to Miss Mortimer directly, and, if she acquiesces, desire
her to call for you in person, to prevent the possibility of any artifice.


Cec. He, who inspired such sentiments, alone can reward them! Oh, sir! you
have raised a poor desponding heart; but it shall be the business of my future
life to deserve those favors I can never half repay.


Har. I find, by punishing me with acknowledgments, you are resolved to be
obliged to me. The time is too precious to be wasted on such trifles. At seven,
you shall have certain intelligence of my sucsuccess: employ the interim to the
best advantage, and hope every thing from daring to deserve well.


Exit. Cecilia alone. Astonishing interposition of heaven! -- Hope? -- what
have I to hope? -- but, let the consciousness of acting rightly support me in
the sad moment of renouncing Woodville; and, in him, all that rendered life
desirable.

SCENE, Lord Glenmore's House. Lord Glenmore and Vane. L. Glen. And are you
sure of all this?


Vane. Absolutely, my Lord! I have known the bumpkin, her footman, from the
height of his own club.


L. Glen. What a cursed infatuation! -- these are the comforts of children: --
our fears beginning, from the moment our power ends: -- the happiest of fathers
is not to be envied; -- I know not what to resolve on!


Vane. If I may be permitted to advise, my Lord --


L. Glen. And who asked your advice, sir?


Vane. You have, my Lord, -- formerly.


L. Glen. Take care you stay 'till I do! -- leave me, sir.


Vane. If you don't like my advice, I shall give you my opinion very shortly.
-- A crusty crab!


Exit muttering. L. Glen. This is the certain consequence of entrusting low
people; -- and yet there is no doing without them. -- I can never master my
feelings enough to speak properly to Woodville on the subject, therefore must
fix on some other method. -- (pauses) -- That Is a sure one, and falls heavy on
the artful, aspiring creature, only! -- Vane! --

Re-enter Vane. -- Could not you procure me a travelling-chaise and four stout
fellows immediately?


Vane. To be sure, my Lord, I can order a chaise at any inn, if you choose it.


L. Glen. Pho, pho, -- don't put on that face; -- you must go through with this
thing like a man. -- Here Is something for the share you have already had in it.
-- Do what I have ordered, and wait near the Horse Guards in about an hour;
when I shall seize this insolent baggage, and convey her out of my son's reach.
-- You gave me a high-flown account of her: -- and, as you are a smart young
fellow, and she must at least be pretty, if we can contrive to frighten her
into taking you as a husband, it will end all my fears, and shall be the making
of your fortune.


Vane. Gad, I like the project well. -- A handsome wife is the best bait, when
we fish for preferment; -- and this gives me a double claim both on father and
son. (aside) -- Nothing but the profound respect I have for your Lordship could
induce me to think of this; -- though born without rank and fortune, I have a
soul, my Lord, --


L. Glen. Come, come; my good lad! I guess what you would say: but we have no
time for speeches. -- I have set my heart on the success of the project; and
you shall find your interest in indulging me. Exeunt different ways.


SCENE, Miss Mortimer's Apartment. Enter Captain Harcourt, meeting Miss
Mortimer. Har. If I were to judge of your temper by your looks, my dear, I
should say it was uncommonly sweet this morning.


M. Mor. A truce with compliment; I must, in reason, renounce dear flattery
after marriage.


Har. To flattery you never paid court; but the language of the heart and the
world will sometimes resemble. -- I ought, however, to praise your temper, for
I am come to try it, -- and give you a noble opportunity of exerting its
benevolence.


M. Mor. A benevolence you certainly doubt, by this studied eulogium.


Har. I might, did I not know it well. -- In short, my love, I have taken the
strangest step this morning --


M. Mor. What step, for heaven's sake?


Har. In regard to a lady. --


M. Mor. Not another wife, I hope?


Har. No, -- only a mistress. --


M. Mor. Oh, a trifle; a trifle. --


Har. You may laugh, madam, but I am serious; and a fine girl she is: and to
show you I have not read Chesterfield in vain, I have robbed my dearest friend
of her; in plain English, Woodville has a mistress he doats on so madly, as
even to intend marrying her. -- Imagining her, like most of her stamp, only an
artful and interested creature, I paid her a visit as a stranger, with an offer
which must have unveiled her heart, had it been base: -- but I found her, on
the contrary, a truly noble-minded girl, and far above her present situation;
which she earnestly wishes to quit. -- In short, my dear, I thought it prudent
to part them; and, in your name, offered her an asylum.


M. Mor. In my name? You amaze me, Mr. Harcourt! Would you associate your wife
with a kept mistress? bring such an acquisition into the house of Lord
Glenmore, and deprive Woodville of perhaps his only reason for not interfering
with us? -- Do you think I credit this sudden acquaintance?


Har. I deceived myself, I find: -- I thought you above such low suspicion,
that you could make distinctions.


M. Mor. Yes, yes, I can make distinctions more clearly than you wished. You
must excuse my interference in this affair, sir; and let me hint to you, that
your own will do as little credit to your heart as to your understanding.


Har. Mighty well, madam; go on I Settle this with respect to yourself, but do
not be concerned about me; for, in one word, if you cannot resolve on
protecting this poor unfortunate, I will.


M. Mor. (Aside) That must not be; yet his warmth alarms me. -- Nay but, my
dear, think deliberately! -- Supposing her all you say, the world judges by
actions, not thoughts, and will bury her merit in her situation.


Har. It is that cruel argument perpetuates error in so many of your frail sex:
be the first to rise above it. That you are in Lord Glenmore's house, will be
your justification, both to the world and himself: for, what but the design of
serving him and his son can actuate you? In my eyes, my dear Sophia, virtue
never looks so lovely as when she stretches out her hand to the fallen.


M. Mor. Oh, Harcourt! I am ashamed of my suspicion: I ought to have known all
the candor and generosity of your heart, and received in a moment the unhappy
woman it patronized: -- yet, at this crisis, in our own affairs to run the
chance of further exasperating my benefactor --


Har. I am not to learn, that friendship and love have been mere masks to fraud
and folly in the great world; no one would blame me, were I to suffer Woodville
to ruin himself, as the shortest way of fixing my own fortune, and obtaining my
Lord's approbation of your choice. But, I know not how it happened, that, when
a mere boy, I took it into my head, truth was as much to the purpose as lying;
and, as I never got into more scrapes than others, why I still pursue my
system, and prefer honor to art. Then, if we fail, we have something better to
console us than a pond or a pistol; and, if we succeed, what is there wanting
to our happiness?


M. Mor. And how do you mean to manage her escape?


Har. That, my dearest, is the difficulty. I found she had seen you, and
therefore was obliged to satisfy her of my honor, by assuring her you would
call for her in person.


M. Mor. Very well; we must carefully watch our opportunity. You dine here --
the word of command you are accustomed to obey, but you must now become
obedient to the look; for, you know, I have my difficulties, however strong my
desire of obliging you.


Exeunt. END OF THE SECOND ACT
ACT III.
SCENE I. A magnificent Drawing Room. Miss Mortimer pouring out Coffee sends it
to the Company; Captain Harcourt leans against a Panel near her, sipping it;
at a little Distance the Governor and Woodville playing at Backgammon, while
Lord Glenmore leans over his Chair, thoughtfully observing the Behavior of his
Son, who loses merely to make his Uncle leave off. Har. IT grows near the
appointed hour, my love! -- but how to make sure of Woodville.


M. Mor. You should have thought of that before, my sagacious confidante!
However, as I do not need your company, fasten it upon him: -- pretend a duel,
-- pretend an intrigue; -- in short, if all else fails, pretend you are dying,
and keep him to make your will, rather than suffer him to interrupt me.


L. Glen. (to himself) What way can I secure the absence of this son of mine?
for, I see plainly, another lucky hit would almost provoke him into throwing
the dice in the Governor's face: yet Vane, I doubt, has hardly been able to
procure me every convenience in so short a time. However, I will make one of my
own garrets his minx's prison, rather than suffer her to interfere with my
serious views.


Gov. (Rising from play) Zounds, Frank! you are like the French; so ready to be
beat, that there is hardly any triumph in conquering you. But you shall take
your revenge, I insist upon it.


Wood. Another time, sir; -- my head achs; -- my -- in short, I cannot play any
longer; my cousin will engage with you.


Har. (twitching his sleeve) Kind sir, your cousin is infinitely indebted to
you; but he, like yourself, may have something else to do; and so indeed has
every body, for we all seem impatient to separate.


M. Mor. (to the servant, removing coffee) Bid Warner send my cloak.


L. Glen. Going abroad, my dear?


M. Mor. Only a formal round, my Lord.


L. Glen. Woodville, you attend Miss Mortimer.


M. Mor. Sweetly contrived that, however, and my lover seems posed. (Aside to
Harcourt) -- I will not so severely tax Mr. Woodville's politeness, my Lord.


Wood. You are very obliging, madam; ( to Harcourt) and the only thing she has
said or done to oblige me this day, enter nous.


Har. (aside) Um, not quite sure of that, if you knew all -- ( turning to Miss
Mortimer) -- I will march off quietly, and lie in wait for Woodville, so that I
think you may depend on his not meeting you.


Goes off unobserved. Woodville, having taken his hat and sword, offers his
hand to Miss Mortimer. L. Glen. So, he is going to escape! They all take
pleasure in perplexing me. Frank, return to me directly; I have bethought
myself of something very important, in which I need your assistance.


Wood. Would I had bethought myself of vanishing, like Harcourt! How devilishly
vexatious!


Leads Miss Mortimer off. Gov. So, there goes madam, to coquette, curtsy, and
talk nonsense with every well-dressed ape of either sex. Before I would allow a
girl such a freedom --


L. Glen. Brother! do not judge 'till you know her! and give me leave to tell
you, these prejudices of your temper will render you very ridiculous.


Gov. The prejudices of my temper! Oh Lord, Oh Lord! this is an excellent jest.
Zounds, because you have not the use of your eyes --


L. Glen. I shall never have patience. My head is just now full of something
too important, to examine which of us is most in the wrong. I am fixed on
removing this ambitious minx of my son's for ever out his reach immediately.
Will you oblige me with the company of your servants? Being slaves, they will
not dare reveal the affair; and, were they so inclined, can hardly comprehend
it.


Gov. Will I? ay, that I will; and with my own company into the bargain.


L. Glen. Hist! he returns: and, if we may judge by his countenance, mortified
enough, to lose the evening away from her. Re-enter Woodville. Go, my dear
Frank, first to Puzzle's chambers; for the mortgage of Hayfield house, and
don't fail to learn his whole opinion upon the subject; ( aside to the
Governor) and that will take two long hours by a very moderate computation: --
then proceed to the London Tavern, and ask if Levi, the Jew, waits there by my
appointment? otherwise do you wait there 'till either he or I join you.


Wood. A pretty round-about employment my father has invented for me! (aside)
and I dare not give the least symptoms of disgust, lest that troublesome old
uncle of mine should pry into the cause. I shall observe your orders, my Lord
-- though, if the devil has called upon the counselor a little before his
time, I shall consider it as an eternal obligation. Exit.


L. Glen. Now I must enquire after Vane. Exit.


Gov. And I will give a little lecture to my myrmidons, and wait with them your
pleasure. Od, it will be precious sport, to catch madam so unawares, and see
her play off every virtuous grimace with which she entangled young 'Seapegrace.
Exeunt severally.


SCENE, The Hall. Enter Vane, looking about. Hey-day! sure his old-fashioned
Lordship has not employed two of us on one errand! An old man has been hovering
about madam's house, and has followed me here, without my knowing what to make
of him. However, ears befriend me! Retires, listening.

Enter the Governor, and his black Servants soon after. Here Anthony, Pompey,
Caesar! you dogs, be ready to attend my Lord and me on a little expedition. --
No; no flambeaus, boobies! -- the chaste Miss Diana will surely take a spiteful
pleasure in lighting us to catch another kind of Miss. -- And, do'ye hear? not
one syllable of the when, where, or how, except you intend to dangle on one
string, like a bunch of black grapes. Talks to them apart.

Enter Gray. Gray. It is here, I am at length informed, the father of this
abandoned seducer resides. -- Yet, what redress can poverty hope from pride? --
surely, however, for his own sake, he will assist me in regaining the poor
girl, and afterward prevent the wretch from pursuing her? -- there I suppose
he is! -- my Lord.


Gov. (Turns short upon him) Well, old sturdy! what do you want with my Lord?


Gray. -- Merciful heaven! the father of Cecilia!


Vane. (Listening) Hey? -- indeed!


Gray. Oh! how my heart misgives me! perhaps, this base Woodville -- her very
brother --


Gov. What, is the old man ill? -- sure I know this honest -- it is not -- yes
it is -- Gray?


Gray. The same indeed, my Lord.


Gov. No my Lord, to me, man! my name is Harcourt!


Gray. Blessed be heaven for that, however!


Gov. Be not righteous over much! for, that my name is Harcourt, I do not
reckon among the first favors of heaven. -- But, ha, ha! perhaps you thought I
had no name at all by this time? -- 'faith, I put a pretty trick upon -- well,
well, well! -- (to the blacks) you may retire till my Lord is ready. Exeunt. --
I am a riddle, honest Gray! but now I am come to expound myself, and make thy
fortune into the bargain. -- It is many a long day since I saw old England. --
But at last I am come home with a light heart and a heavy purse, design to
fetch up my Cicely, give her and my money to the honestest fellow I can find,
and grow old amid' a rosy race of Britons springing from a stem reared after my
own fashion. -- There Is news for you, my honest friend.


Gray. Alas, how little will he think I deserve his favor, when he hears my
account of her! and how can I shock a parent, with what too severely shocks
even myself? Aside.


Gov. What, -- silent, man? -- ha, ha, ha! I cannot but laugh to think how
foolish you looked at the second year's end, when no allowance came, -- but
that was my own contrivance: all done on purpose, my good old soul! and now it
will come in a lump; there is the whole difference. -- Well, and so my dame made
her a pattern of housewifery, hey? -- od! I don't intend to touch another
pickle or preserve that is not of my little Cicely's own doing; and I Will build
her a dairy with every bowl and churn of silver! -- zounds, it shall be a finer
sight than the Tower of London! -- and we'll set up dame Deborah's statue
before it, like Queen Ann's in St. Paul's Churchyard! -- but, why dost'nt
enjoy this discov'ry, man? art afraid I shall take her from thee? oh, never
think of that; for thou shall bless every pie she makes; ay, and taste it
afterward, Old Pudding-Sleeves.


Gray. Ah, Sir! (sighing.)


Gov. Hey? Zounds! -- what do mean? sure my Cicely is n't dead?


Gray. -- No, not dead, Sir!


Gov. She Is very near it, then, I suppose?


Gray. No, Sir.


Gov. No, Sir? then what the devil do you mean by alarming me thus? with your
"No Sirs," after all?


Gray. Alas, is there no greater evil?


Gov. None, that I know of; but your whole fraternity are not more like ravens
in color than note; -- come, let us know what this mighty evil is?


Gray. For years did she increase in goodness as in beauty; the charm of every
young heart, and the sole comfort of those old ones, to whom heaven and man
seemed to have consigned her for ever.


Gov. Well, well; I had a little bird told me all this --


Gray. About a twelvemonth ago, during a little absence of mine, a young man of
fashion introduced himself into my house; and, my wife being void of suspicion,
and the dear girl uninstructed in the ways of this bad world, --


Gov. The dog betrayed her? -- and is this your care, you old -- and that
ignoramus, your wife -- zounds! I am in such a fury! -- I want to know no more
of her infamous conduct. -- Od! I am strangely tempted to have you strangled
this moment, as a just reward for your negligence; and so bury the secret with
you.


Gray. It is as effectually buried already, Sir. -- I love the dear unhappy
girl too well, ever to tell her heaven gave her to such a father.


Gov. Yes, yes; -- you are better suited to the -- I hope she pays for this
severely! -- you make her stand in a white sheet, to be pointed at by the whole
village every Sunday, to be sure?


Gray. Alas, Sir, she put it out of my power even to forgive her. --


Gov. Forgive her! forgive her truly!


Gray. By flying immediately from her only friend. -- infirm and poor, I
struggled with the joint-evils till now; when, having collected enough to
support me, I walked up in search of her: -- it was only yesterday I discovered
her in a splendid coach, which I traced to her house.


Gov. A house, I shall run mad entirely -- a coach? -- why dare the little
brazen-face pretend to elegance, when I took such pains to quench every spark
of gentility in her?


Gray. In the neighborhood I discovered the name of her seducer; and, in
seeking him, met with you. -- Moderate your passion, Sir, -- reflect! when age
is frail, what can we expect in youth? -- shall man desert humanity?


Gov. So, so, so; now I am to be tortured with your preaching. -- I renounce
the unworthy little slut. -- I have no friend, -- no daughter, -- no any thing;
-- od! I would sooner build an hospital for idiots, like Swift, and endow it
with all my fortune, than bestow it on one who thus perverts reason: -- hark
ye, Sir, -- forget the way to this house I -- forget you ever saw my face! --
would I had never seen yours! -- for, if you dare to send her whining to me,
I Will torment you with every plague, power, wealth, law, or even lawyers can set
in motion -- by heaven, I abjure the audacious little wretch for ever! and will
sooner return to India and bury my gold with those from whom it was taken, than
bestow a single shilling on her, when she loses her coach and her house.


Gray. (Contemptuously) And I will sooner want a a shilling, than suffer her to
waste her youth in a state which will render her age an unsupportable burden.
Fear not, Sir, ever seeing her or me again; for the bosom which reared will
joyfully receive her, nor further embitter her remaining days with the
knowledge she was born the equal of her undoer; and deprived herself of all
those blessings heaven only hid, never denied her. Exit.


Governor alone. Gov. Who would have a daughter? -- zounds! I am as hot as if I
was in the black hole at Calcutta. -- If miss had only married a lout, from
ignorance of her birth, I could have forgiven it; but, her puppy being of
fashion, the papers will get hold of it, and I shall be paragraphed into
purgatory. -- Fools can turn wits on these occasions; and "a certain Governor
and his daughter," will set the grinners in motion from Piccadilly to Aldgate.
-- This insolent old fellow too! -- I need not wonder where she got courage! --
not but I like his spirit, -- od! I like it much! -- it proves his innocence.
-- What the devil did I drive him away for? -- here, dogs! run after that old
man in black, and order him to return to me this moment.


Enter Lord Glenmore. L. Glen. And now, brother, I am ready for you.


Gov. Yes; and now, brother, I have something else to mind, and my servants,
moreover. -- Exit.


L. Glen. What new whim can this troublesome mortal have taken into his head?
(a rapping at the door) I Am not at home remember -- Miss Mortimer! -- who is
with her?


Miss Mortimer enters, with Cecilia in mourning. Miss Mor. Nay, as to that
circumstance -- bless me! here is my Lord!


Cec. My Lord!-good heavens, I shall sink into the earth!


M. Mor. He can never guess at you; -- recover, my dear creature!


L. Glen. Is the lady indisposed, Miss Mortimer?


M. Mor. Yes, my Lord; -- that is, no -- I don't know what I am saying; -- she
has been ill lately, and riding has a little overcome her; that is all. --
(Aside to Cecilia) Struggle to keep up, for heaven's sake and your own.


Cec. Impossible! (Lord Glenmore draws a hallchair, in which she faints).


L. Glen. Warner! drops and water, in a moment. -- How beautiful she is! -- her
features are exquisitely fine!


M. Mor. They are thought so, my Lord. -- Bless me! where can I have crammed my
Eau de Luce! -- oh, I have it.


L. Glen. Her pulse returns, -- she revives.


Cec. I beg your pardon, madam! -- my Lord, too! -- I am shocked to have
occasioned so much trouble.


M. Mor. Absurd, to apologize for the infirmity of nature: -- my Lord, I do
assure you, was quite anxious --


L. Glen. The man must surely have lost every sense, who can see this lady,
even when deprived of here is, without emotion: -- but to me, the languor of
illness had ever something peculiarly interesting. -- (Aside) I wonder who this
elegant creature is! her hand seems to tremble strangely.


Cec. Oh, madam! --


M. Mor. Silence and recollection alone, can secure you from suspicion; -- I
confess, I relied on his absence.


Re-enter the Governor. Gov. He will not return, hey? -- od! I like the old
Cambrian the better for it: -- I have fired his Welsh blood finely. -- Why,
what a blockhead was I, not to go after him myself! -- methinks, I should like
to know miss, when I met her in her coach too, -- um; -- did he not tell me
something of tracing the seducer into this house! (stands in amazement a
moment, then whistles) Woodville's mistress, by every thing contrary! od, I
shall seize the gypsy with redoubled satisfaction! but I must keep my own
counsel, or my old beau of a brother will roast me to death on my system of
education. -- Hey! who has he got there? (Cecilia rises) a pretty lass, faith!
-- ah, there is the very thing I admire! -- there is gentility, without the
fantastical flourishes of fashion! -- just the very air I hoped my minx would
have had. (Lord Glenmore, having led off Cecilia, returns)


L. Glen. I don't know how, but my inclination to this business is over. I
think I Will let the matter alone at present.


Gov. The devil you will; -- why, by tomorrow, Woodville may have married her.


L. Glen. Do You think so? -- well, then let us go.


Gov. And, what do you mean to do with her, pray?


L. Glen. (aside) I will not trust this weathercock 'till all is safe. -- I care
not what becomes of her, so she is out of my way; -- send her to Bridewell,
perhaps!


Gov. To Bridewell, truly? -- no, that you shall not neither; Bridewell, quotha!
-- why, who knows but the fault may be all that young Rakehell your son's?


L. Glen. My son's, sir! let me tell you, I have not bred him in such a manner.


Gov. Oh, if breeding were any security -- zounds, I shall betray all by
another word! (aside)


L. Glen. What now can have changed you? -- but you are more inconstant than
our climate. -- Did you ever know one minute what you should think the next?
however, to satisfy your scru^les, I intend to dispatch her to a nunnery: and,
if that don't please you, even take charge of her yourself. Exeunt together.


Vane comes forward. Vane. Ha, ha, ha; why, this would make a comedy! -- and
so, of all birds in the air, his dignified Lordship has pitched on me for the
husband of the Governor's daughter and his own niece! -- well, if I can but go
through with this, it will be admirable! -- thanked by one for making my fortune,
and safe from the anger of all.


Enter a Servant. Ser. Mr. Woodville, Sir, is just gone into the house you bad
me watch. Exit.


Vane. The devil he is! -- why then I must consign my intended to him for one
more night, and persuade my Lord to delay our seizure till morning; -- for, to
meet with him would certainly produce an agreement of all parties, and a
marriage which would never enroll my name in the family-pedigree or governor's
will. Exit.


SCENE, Cecilia's Dressing Room. Candles burning, and her Clothes scattered.
Enter Woodville. Thanks to that dear lawyer's lucky absence, I have a few happy
hours, my love, to spend with thee -- [looks at her clothes] already retired?
sure I have not left my key in the garden gate. -- No, here it is [rings the
bell and takes off his sword, then throws himself into a chair.] Nobody answer
-- I don't understand this. -- Perhaps I shall disturb her, -- I Will steal into
her chamber -- [goes off and presently returns disordered] not there! -- her
clothes too, the same she had on last! -- oh, my heart misgives me! -- but
where are all the servants? [rings very violently, calling at the same time,]
Bridget! Robert! Jacob!]

Enter Bridget, with her Hat on. -- Bridget! what is become of your Lady?

Brid. Really, Sir, I cannot say; -- don't you know?


Wood. If I did I should n't have asked you.


Brid. (After a little pause) Why, sure Sir, my Lady has not run away? and yet
something runs in my head, as if she had. -- I thought that spark came for no
good today.


Wood. What spark, girl?


Brid. Why, just after you went away, comes a young man, a monstrous genteel
one and very handsome too, I must needs say; with fine dark eyes and a fresh
color.


Wood. Damn his color! tell me his business.


Brid. So he axed for my Lady, and would not tell me what he wanted: I came
with her, however, but she no sooner set eyes on him than she sent me out;
which argufy'd no good, you will say; and, before I could possibly come back,
though I ran as fast as ever my legs could carry me, he was gone, and she
writing and crying for dear life; -- but that was no news, so I did not mind
it: and, when she gave me leave to go to the play, thought no more harm than
the child unborn.


Wood. It must be a scheme beyond all doubt, and I am the dupe of a
dissembling, ungrateful -- oh Cecilia! (throws himself in a chair)


Brid. (Softening her voice and setting her dress) If I was as you, Sir, I
would not fret about her: -- there is not a lady in the land would slight a
gentleman so handsome and sweet tempered -- I scorns to flatter, for my part.
-- Inferials must'nt direct their betters: but, had I been in my Lady's place,
a King upon his throne would not have tempted me. -- Handsome him that handsome
does, say I; and I am sure you did handsome by her; for, if she could have eat
gold, she might have had it. -- He might take some notice truly


Aside. Wood. (Starting up) Where was she writing?


Brid. In the little drawing room, Sir.

Exit Woodville. Bridget alone. This ridiculous love turns peoples brains, I
think. -- I am sure, I said enough to open his eyes: -- but, maybe, I don't
look so handsome, because I am not so fine. -- Hey, -- a thought strikes me! my
Lady is gone, that is plain. -- Back she will not come, is as plain. (Gathers
together Cecilia's elegant clothes.) I Will put on these, and he will think she
gave 'em to me: -- then he may find out, I am as pretty as she: if not -- he
and I are of very different opinions. Exit.


Re-enter Woodville, more disordered. Wood. Cruel, ungrateful, barbarous girl!
-- to forsake me in the very moment I was resolving to sacrifice every thing to
her! -- but it is just. -- First dupes to the arts of man, the pupil soon knows
how to foil him at his own weapons. -- Perhaps the discov'ry is fortunate. In a
short time, I must have borne the whole disgrace of her ill conduct, and my
father's resentment had the bitterest aggravation. -- But, is she indeed gone?
and will continual to-morrows come, without one hope to render them welcome?


Enter Jacob. Wood. Villain! where is your Lady?


Jac. Alas a deazy, how can I tell, zur?


Wood. Where are all your fellows?


Jac. Abroad, meaking halliday.


Wood. When did you go out? who gave you leave?


Jac. My Leady, her own zelf; and I Will tell you how 'tware. -- After dinner I
geed her a noate; and, when zhe had red un, zhe axed me if zo be as how I ever
zeed the lions? zoa I told her noa; nor nomour I never did. -- Zoa zhe geed me
half a crown, and bid me goa and make myself happy. I thought it ware desprate
koind of her; zoa I went and zeed the huge creturs; and ater, only stopped a bit
to peap at the moniment, and hay my fortin told by Conj'rer in the Old Bailey;
and aw zaid --


Wood. What the devil does it signify to me what he said? -- Hark'e, sir, I see
in your face you know more of your mistress?


Jac. Dang it, then my feace do lie hugely!


Wood. Tell me the whole truth villain! or I Will stab you to the heart this
instant. (Draws his sword.)


Jac. (kneels) I wull, zur, indead I wull: doan't ye terrify me zo! I do forget
every thing in the whole world.


Wood. Be sincere, and depend on my rewarding you.


Jac. Why, I wish I meay die this maument, if conj'rer did not zeay I should
lose my pleace! nay, aw do verily think aw zaid zomething of my being put in
fear of my loife. Loard knaws, I little thought how zoon his words would come
to pass.


Wood. Will you dally?


Jac. Zoa, as I zaid, zur, when I com'd huome again, I found all the duors
aupen, and not a zoul to be zeed.


Wood. (aside) This fellow can never mean to impose on me, and I must think
this a planned affair' -- While I was in the country, Jacob, did your mistress
see much company?


Jac. Cuompany? -- noa, not to speak of, -- not gentlewomen.


Wood. Gentlewomen? blockhead! why had she any male visitors?


Jac. Anan!


Wood. I must brain thee at last, booby! Did any men come to see her then?


Jac. Oh yes, zur, yes -- two gentlemen com'd almost every deay.


Wood. How, two gentlemen? I shall run distracted! Young, and handsome?


Jac. Not auver young, zur, nor auver handsome; but (...) foine.


Wood. So they came almost every day? -- very pretty indeed, Miss Cecilia! --
was you never called up while they staid? -- did they come together or alone?


Jac. Aloane.


Wood. I thought as much; yes, I thought as much. But was you never called up,
Jacob?


Jac. Yes, zur, when one aw um ware here one deay, I ware caal'd up for
zomething or other.


Wood. Well? why don't you go on? I am on the rack!


Jac. Doan't ye look zo muortal angry then!


Wood. Well, well, I will not, my good fellow! -- there is money for thy honesty.


Jac. Well; -- there aw ware --


Wood. Speak out freely? you can tell me nothing worse than I imagine; you
will not shock me in the least; not at all.


Jac. Well; there aw ware pleaying on that there music-thing like a cuoffin,
and madam ware a zinging to un like any blackbird.


Wood. A music-master -- Is that all, booby?


(pushes him down.) Jac. Yes; but the other, zur --


Wood. Aye, I had forgot; -- what of him, good Jacob? what of him?


Jac. I ware never caall'd up while aw steay'd; zo (I cannot but zeay, I had a
curosity to know what brought he here,) one deay I peap'd through the keayhole,
and zeed un -- (titters) -- I shall never forget.


Wood. Tell me what this instant, or I shall burst with rage and suspense.


Jac. Screaping on a leetle viddle, no bigger than my hand; while madam ware a
huolding out her quoats, and dancing all round the room zoa -- (mimicks the
minuet aukwardly.)


Wood. Why, I believe the impudent bumpkin dares to jest with my misery! and
yet I have no other avenue: for the rest, I fear, are knaves, and he seems only
a fool -- and are these all that came, Jacob?


Jac. Noa, there ware one moare, zur; a leetle mon in a black quoat, -- but he
only com'd now and tan.


Wood. A disguise, no doubt? Yes, yes, they were artful enough.


Jac. And zoa, ater he had done wi' my Leady, aw did shut his self up wi'
Bridget; and zoa I axed her all about un, and zhe zaid as how aw com'd to teach
madam to turn themmin great round balls all blue, and red, and yellow, that do
stand by the books, and larned she to wroite.


Wood. Yes, yes; Mrs. Bridget was in all her secrets, I don't doubt. If that
fellow in black comes here again, keep him, if you value your life, and send
for me. I know not what to do or think, and must renew my search, though hopeless
of success. Exit.


Jacob alone. Jac. Dang it! but he is in a desprate teaking! -- Rabbit me, but I
ware muortally afeard aw un too, for aw flourished his zword as yeazy as I
could a cudgel: -- and I do think conj'urer might as well ha tuold me madam
would have run away, while aw ware about it, and then I moight have run away
furst. Exit.


Enter Gray. Gray. At length I have gained entrance into the house of shame,
which now, alas! contains my darling Cecilia, -- plunged in vice, and lost to
every sentiment, I spent so many anxious years in implanting. This does not
seem to be the abode of pleasure, nor have I met a single being.


Woodville entering behind, sees Gray, and, drawing his sword, flies at and
seizes him. Wood. Ha! a man! and in black, as Jacob said! Villain, this moment
is your last.


Gray. (turning suddenly upon him) Yes, young seducer, add to the daughter's
ruin the father's murder! Stab my heart, as you already have my happiness.


Wood. Alas, was this her visitor? I dare not speak to him!


Gray. Embosomed by affluence, exalted by title, peace still shall be far from
thy heart; for thou, with the worst kind of avarice, have by specious pretenses
wrested from poverty its last dear possession, -- virtue.


Wood. Plerced to the soul, as I am by your reproaches, I dare appeal to
Cecilia herself for a testimony of my contrition! How shall I convince you?


Gray. Hardly by a life of repentance. But I debase myself to exchange a word
with you. Give me back my Cecilia! -- Ruined as she is, I yet would recover
her: -- give her back then to a father you first taught her to fear, and an
habitation, too humble for any but the good to be happy in.


Wood. Alas, Sir! can you trifle with my misery? do you give her back to the
wretch who cannot survive her loss! -- let me owe her hand to your bounty, though
her heart to her own! -- did you know what this elopement of here is has cost me
--


Gray. Oh, most accomplished villain! -- but think not to dupe me too.


Wood. Who but you can have robbed me of her since morning?


Gray. Shallow artifice!


Wood. Hear me, Sir! and even believe me, when I solemnly swear I have deeply
repented my crime, and offered her all the reparation in my power; -- but,
since then --


Gray. What since then?


Wood. Either by your means, or some other, she has fled!


Gray. Impossible.


Wood. It Is too true, by heaven!


Gray. Perhaps, while you are thus ingeniously deluding me, she indeed flies.
-- Study some other deception, while I examine the whole house, for nothing
else can convince me. Exit.


Woodville alone. Surely this injured venerable man was sent by heaven to
complete my misfortunes! -- my passions subside, but only into a vague horror
and despondency, even more dreadful: -- if with rash hands she has shortened
her days, what remains of mine will be, indeed, all her father predicts!
(walking by the toilette) ha, a letter!


Re-enter Gray. Gray. A total loneliness in the house!


Wood. Now, sir, be convinced! -- I have just found a letter from her.


Gray. This cannot be the invention of a moment: -- let me read it -- it is,
indeed, her hand. (Opens, and reads it)

Receive this as my last farewell. -- Providence has unexpectedly sent me a
friend, whose protection I dare accept; and time may perhaps subdue a passion,
which seems interwoven with my being. -- forget me, I entreat; and seek that
happiness with another, I can never hope to bestow or partake. -- Consoled only
by reflecting, that the grief, my error occasions, is inferior to that I should
have felt, had I, by an ungenerous use of my power, made you, in turn, my
victim. -- Once more, adieu! -- all search will certainly be fruitless.

P. S. In the cabinet you will find your valuable presents; and the key is in a
dressing-box.





(Woodville snatches the letter, and bursts into tears) Gray. Cecilia! I may
say, with tears of joy, thou art, indeed, my daughter! more dear (if possible)
than ever! a daughter monarchs might contend for, though thy weak father
abjures thee! -- may the friend you have found have a heart but like your own!
for you, young man! -- but I leave you to your anguish; the loss of such a
woman is a sufficient punishment.


Wood. Stay, sir! (rises) by your holy profession, I conjure you, stay! --
plunge me not into total despair! -- though without a clue to her asylum, I
would fain believe my heart will lead me to it; and let me then hope you will
bestow her on me?


Gray. There is a something in your manner, young gentleman, that affects me;
-- I have been young, wild, and extravagant myself; and, what is more strange,
have not forgot I was so: my own experience proves reformation possible; act up
to her, and atone your error.


Wood. I will endeavor it, sir! and, oh could those who yet but waver, feel
what has passed in my heart, during the last hour, who would dare to deviate?
Exeunt.


END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE, Cecilia's House. Bridget dressed in Cecilia's Clothes, mixed with every
thing vulgar and tawdry. Brid. SO, -- I am ready against our gentleman comes.
-- Deuce on him to run away last night, the moment I was dressed -- and with an
inferial fellow too! -- Lard, how can people of quality demean themselves by
keeping company with inferials! -- however, one thing I am sure of, he is too
much on the fidgets to stay long away from our house; and, in the mean while, I
can entertain myself extremely well. (Sits down to the toilette)


Jac. (Without) I tell ye, my leady's not at huome.


Gov. I tell you, I will not take your word for it; -- so come, my Lord, and see.


Brid. Heyday, my Lord! -- what is the news now, I wonder?


Enter Lord Glenmore and the Governor; both stop short. Gov. Oh, I thought
madam had learnt enough of the ton to lie by proxy.


Brid. Dear heart! -- I am all of a twitteration! -- who can these be? --
that is my Lord, for certain!


L. Glen. The vulgarity of the wench is astonishing!


Gov. -- Um -- why, a little gawky, or so, -- there is no denying it. -- (aside)
Here Is a pretty discovery, now, after all my projects! -- thank fortune, the
secret is yet my own though.


L. Glen. (Advancing to her) I ought to beg your excuse, madam, for so abrupt
an intrusion; but the opportunity and so fair a temptation will, I flatter
myself, be a sufficient apology.


Brid. (aside) He takes me for my lady, that is a sure thing! -- oh, this is
charming! -- you need not make no 'poligy's, my Lord; -- inferials never knows
how to suspect people of quality; but I understands good breeding better.


L. Glen. (aside) Why, what a Barn-door Mawkin it is! your politeness, madam,
can only be equalled by your beauty.


Brid. Dear heart, my Lord, you flatter me! -- will not you please to sit? --
(waits affectedly 'till they consent to seat themselves)


L. Glen. ( to the Governor) Surely, by using my title, she knows me!


Gov. Zounds, I have a great mind to make her know me! -- od, I shall never be
able to contain.


L. Glen. I was afraid, madam, I should prove an unwelcome guest; -- but
beauty, like yours --


Brid. Does your Lordship think I so very handsome, then? -- Lord, how lucky
was my dressing myself!


L. Glen. (Aside) Affected idiot! -- I was afraid, Madam, too of meeting
Woodville here -- (aside) I know not what to say to her.


Brid. He has not been here this morning; but, if he had, he knows better than
to ax ater my company, I do assure you, my -- Lordship.


L. Glen. I have been told he intends marrying you; what a pity to monopolize
such merit!


Brid. If he has any such kind intention, it is more than I knows of, I assure
you.


L. Glen. His keeping that wise resolution from you, is some little comfort,
however.


Brid. But, I promise ye, I shall make a rare person of quality -- for I loves
cards, coaches, dancing, and dress, to my very heart; -- nothing in the world
better -- but Blindman's Buff. I had some thoughts of taking a trip to Sadler's
Wells or Fox Hall, but they don't begin till five o'clock.


Gov. (Aside) Ha, ha! though she can hardly spell out the Ten Commandments, she
could break every one with as much ease and impudence, as if she had been bred
in the circle of St. James's.


L. Glen. But, Madam, you know, allowing Woodville willing to marry you, it is
not in his power while his father lives, without forfeiting his fortune, the
value of which you doubtless understand?


Brid. Oh, yes, yes, for sartain, my Lord.


L. Glen. Who knows too, how far an incensed parent may carry his resentment!
-- he might find means to entrap and punish you.


Brid. Ha, ha, ha! -- he entrap me! -- that would be a good jest! -- no, no, I
have more of the lady of quality than to be so easily caught.


Gov. (mimicking her) He, he, he! that is the only particular in which you have
nothing at all of the lady of quality.


L. Glen. With me you may share a higher rank and larger fortune without those
fears -- I am of an age.


Brid. Yes, one may see that without being a conjuror -- why, will you marry
me, my Lord?


L. Glen. Convince me that you don't love this Woodville, and I know not how
far my passion may carry me.


Brid. Love him? do you think I know no more of high life than that comes to?
-- To be sure, he is a sweet pretty man, and all that; -- but, as to love, -- I
loves nobody half so well as myself.


L. Glen. Upon my soul, I believe you; and wish he had the whole benefit of the
declaration: [to the Governor] her ingratitude is as shocking as her ignorance,
and Bridewell too gentle a punishment.


Gov. Then build a bridewell large enough to contain the whole sex; for the
only difference between her and the rest is, -- this Country Mawkin tells what
the Town-bred Misses conceal.


L. Glen. Why, Governor! you are as testy as if you had had the care of her
education.


Gov. I the care? -- zounds, what I say is merely from friendship to your
Lordship. -- I hate to see you deceive yourself. -- (Aside) Surely he can never
suspect! (Bridget is employed in cramming trinkets from the dressing-table into
her pockets.)


Brid. Now I am ready to go, my Lord.


L. Glen. Reflect, Madam! -- it would hurt me to have you say I deceived you --
if you should repent -- I am much afraid you will --


Brid. What, when I am a Lady? -- oh, I Will venture that, and attend you.


Gov. (roughly snatching her other hand) To where you little dream of, you
vain, affected, presuming, ignorant baggage!


Brid. Hey-day! -- my Lord?


L. Glen. Appeal not to me, base woman! -- know, I am the father of that poor
dupe, Woodville.


Brid. Dear heart! be ye indeed? -- what will become of me then?


L. Glen. And, as a moderate punishment for your hypocrisy, ambition, and
ingratitude, sentence you to be shut up for life in a monastery.


Brid. Oh Lord! among monsters?


Gov. No, Ignoramus! no; -- among Nuns: -- though they are but monsters in human
nature either.


Brid. What, where they will cut off my hair, and make me wear sackcloth next to
my skin?


Gov. Yes, if they leave you any skin at all.


Brid. Oh dear, dear, dear! (sobs and groans) upon my bended knees, I do beg
you will not send me there! -- why I shall go mallancholly -- I shall make away
with myself for certain; and my ghost will appear to you all in white!


Gov. All in black, I rather think; for the devil a speck of white is there in
your whole composition.


L. Glen. Your conduct, wretch! justifies a severer sentence -- to seduce him
from his duty, was crime enough.


Brid. Who, I seduce him? I did not, my Lord -- indeed I did not.


L. Glen. Have you not owned --


Brid. No, indeed, no; that I wished to take my Lady's place, I believe I did
own: --


Gov. Ha, ha, ha! very prettily devised, faith, for a young beginner! -- come,
come, (chucking her under the chin) we must give you credit for this, Miss --
your Lady? ha, ha, -- ha!


L. Glen. Shallow subterfuge! Enter Vane and the Slaves. Vane, is all ready? --
seize this woman, and observe my orders!


Brid. Ah dear heart! I shall die away if the blacks do but touch me -- indeed
you do mistake! -- I be no Lady -- I be only Bridget.


Gov. I would give ten thousand pounds that you were only Bridget, you artful
puss! -- Zounds, though I could one moment strangle the pug's face in her own
necklace, yet the next I can hardly prevail on myself to punish her -- what the
devil had I now to do in England? or what the devil had I ever to do in Wales?
-- Phew! I could dethrone fifty Nabobs without half the fatigue and anxiety of
this moment. -- Take her away, however! and let us try how Miss likes riding
out in her own coach.


Vane and the Slaves seize her; she screams out, and catches Lord Glenmore' s
coat, falling on her knees. -- Jacob enters, her back to him. Jac. Why, what a
dickens be ye all at here? -- Zoa, what is my Leady there?


L. Glen. See there now, -- Oh the artful Jezebel!


Brid. Oh, Jacob! Why don't ye see I am Bridget? -- Pray satisfy my Lord here.


Jac. Why, be ye Bridget? -- Never trust me else!


Gov. Here a fool of the other sex now, can hardly take a hint though so plainly
given him! -- Thanks to the natural difference, for art is nature in woman. --
( L. Glen. draws him aside.)


Jac. Auh Bridget, Bridget! Where did thee get thee sum foine claws? -- Noa,
noa, as thee'st brewed thee meayst beak.


Brid. Oh, do ye take pity on me! -- Why they be going to carry me to some
outlandish place, and make a nun of me!


Jac. A nun? what is that? any thing Christin? well, if I do spoke to um, will
ye hae me?


Brid. Oh, yes, yes, yes!


L. Glen. Brother! I shall leave you to the completion of this affair; I am
sick to the soul of the gawky --


Gov. Yes, yes; I don't doubt it, -- I don't doubt it.


L. Glen. (To Vane.) Convey her to my house, and lock her up in one of the
lofts over the stables; -- go the backway, and even the family need know
nothing of the matter. The Chaplain will provide a license, and be ready --
Courage, my lad, and depend upon my gratitude! Exit.


Gov. Will you take her, or no? -- I shall never be able to stifle my
agitation; and burst with rage if I show it. --


Jac. Why, zure, zure, ye will not carr' away our Bridget?


Vane. Ha, ha, ha!


Gov. Oh, she has beat her meaning into thy thick scull a last? -- Pr'ythee,
keep thy block- head out of my way, if thou mean to keep it on thy own
shoulders.


Jac. Why, be ye in arnest then? dear heart alive! why this is cousin Bridget!


Brid. Only send for Mr. Woodville?


Gov. Prettily devised again! ha, ha, ha! do think, my little dear! we have
lived three times as long as your Ladyship to learn a quarter as much? -- Send
for Mr. Woodville, hey? -- No, no; you will not find us quite so simple.


Jac. Oh doan't ye, doan't ye, carr' off zhe, or if ye wull, do pray take I.


Vane. Yes, you would be a choice piece of lumber truly.


Gov. Drag her away this moment.


Brid. Oh dear, oh dear! to be hanged at last for another's crime is all that
vexes me.


They carry her off, Governor follows. SCENE, Miss Mortimer's Apartment.
Cecilia enters, and sits down to embroidery. How fond, how weak, how
ungrateful, are out hearts! -- mine still will presumptuously fancy this house
its home, and ally itself to every one to whom Woodville is dear.

Lord Glenmore enters. Cec. Oh heaven's, my Lord! -- how unlucky! -- if I go,
he may find the Captain with Miss Mortimer.


L. Glen. You see, madam, you have only to retire to engage us to pursue you,
even to rudeness. -- But, tell me, can it be your own choice to punish us so
far as to prefer solitude to our society?


Cec. I know myself too well, my Lord, to receive distinctions of which I am
unworthy; -- yet think not, therefore, I fail in respect.


L. Glen. But, is that charming bosom susceptible of nothing beyond respect?
why is it capable of inspiring a passion it cannot participate?


Cec. Your goodness, my Lord -- my profound veneration, will always attend you
-- but, the more generously you are inclined to forget what is due to yourself,
the more strongly it is impressed on my memory.


L. Glen. Were what you say true, the bounties of nature atone amply to you for
the parsimony of fortune; nor would your want of every other advantage lessen
your merit, or my sense of it.


Cec. (aside) Had he thought thus a few months since, how happy had I now been!
-- Your approbation at once flatters and serves me, by justifying Miss
Mortimer's protection of me.


L. Glen. Her partiality for you, does her more honor, than it can ever do you
advantage. But, you must tell me, how she gained first the happiness of knowing
you?


Cec. My -- my Lord, by a misfortune so touching --


L. Glen. Nay, I would not distress you neither; yet, I own, madam, I wish to
make a proposal worth a serious answer; but ought first to know, why you affect
a mystery? Tell me then, my dear, every incident of your life, and I will raise
you to a title, I may without vanity say, many have aspired to!


Cec. You oppress my very soul, my Lord! But, alas! unconquerable obstacles
deprive me for ever of that title. Neither would I obtain it by alienating such
a son from such a father.


L. Glen. Put him entirely out of the question; the meanness of his conduct
acquits me to myself. Do you know, madam, he has resolved to marry a creature
of low birth, illiterate, vulgar, and impudent? and, to complete her
perfections, she has been his mistress at least.


Cec. Surely he knows, and purposely shocks me thus. (Aside.)


L. Glen. But your integrity does not render you less amiable in my eyes; it
greatly enhances every other merit. As to his wretch, I have her in my power,
and shall make her dearly repent.


Cec. Then I am lost indeed! (aside) You have, my Lord; though I know not how,
discovered. -- (Rises in confusion.)


L. Glen. (rises, taking snuff, without looking at her) Oh, nothing more easy,
madam; I had him carefully traced to her house; and, during his absence, took
servants and forced her away.


Cec. (aside) That, however, cannot be me; every word seems to add to a mystery
I dare not enquire into.


L. Glen. But why waste one precious moment on such an animal? what are these
unconquerable obstacles?


Cec. Spare me, my Lord; your indulgence induces me to try again to soften your
resolutions respecting your son: deprived of the weak, the guilty, the
miserable wretch you justly condemn, a little time will (no doubt) incline him
to his duty. I should have your pardon to solicit, my Lord, but that your own
openness authorizes mine.


L. Glen. But, can you, who so powerfully plead the cause of another, be deaf
to the sighs of a man who adores you? who offers you a rank --


Cec. Be satisfied, my Lord, with knowing I have all that esteem your merit
claims; which influences me beyond every casual advantage.


L. Glen. But, madam --


Cec. Alas, my Lord! -- (bursts into tears aside) -- Be silent, if possible,
both pride and virtue. I have deserved, and will submit to it -- yet surely the
bitterness of this moment expiates all past offenses. Exit.


L. Glen. Amiable creature! what an amazing elegance of mind and person! Tears
were her only answers to my questions, and blushes to my looks: yet these only
heighten a curiosity they have softened into love. Exit.


Woodville's Apartment. Woodville alone. Wood. No intelligence of my Cecilia
yet! -- were I only assured of her safety, it would be some consolation.


Enter Jacob. Jac. Zur, Zur! -- I do meake so bowld as to ax to spoke to you.


Wood. Jacob! my honest fellow, the very sight of thee revives my hopes, and
sets my heart in motion! -- well, what is the news?


Jac. Zurprizing news indeed, zur! -- Loord, I thought I should never meat
wi'ye; -- I com'd to your lodgings twice, and ye warn't up.


Wood. Up! 'sdeath, you ignorant Booby! why didn't you order them to rouse me
that moment?


Jac. Loord, zur! why, your gentleman (as they do caal un) were so terrable
foine, I ware afeard of affronting un!


Wood. Plague on the stupidity of both, say I! -- But what is all this to the
purpose? the news? the news?


Jac. Las-adeazy! mourtal bad news, indeed! --


Wood. You tedious blockhead! is your lady returned?


Jac. Noa, Zur. (Shaking his head very mournfully.)


Wood. (aside) The horrid forebodings of my heart recur; yet, surely she could
not be so desperate! -- shocking as the suspense is, I more dread the
certainty. -- Speak, however, my good fellow! (Jacob wipes his eyes) -- I shall
ever value your sensibility. -- Tell me, then, the simple truth, whatever it
may be? --


Jac. I wull, Zur, I wull. -- There has com'd two foine gentleman, wi zwords by
their zides, just for all the world like yourn.


Wood. Well, and what did these gentleman say?


Jac. Why, they went up stears, willy nilly, and carr'd off -- our Bridget.
(Bursts out a crying.)


Wood. You impudent, ignorant clown! I Will give you cause for your tears.
(Shakes him.)


Jac. Loord! Loord! -- do ye ha a little Christin commiseration -- well, if I
ever do coume nigh ye again, I do wish ye may break every buone in my zkin.


Wood. (Walking about in a rage) To insult me with your own paltry love
affairs! these great and mighty gentlemen were only constables I dare swear,
and your fears converted their staves to swords.


Jac. Ay, but that a'nt the worst nither. I do verily think my turn wull cuome
next; -- cant zleep n my bed for thinking on it, nor enjoy a meal's meat: -- zo,
except you do bring your zword, and coume and live in our houze, I wull guo out
on it, that is a zure thing; for I had rather sceare craws at a graat a deay all
my loife long, than bide there to be so terrified.


Wood. Sceare craws truly? why, the craws, will sceare you, ye hen-hearted
puppy! -- there, teake that, (gives him money) and guo huome, or to the devil,
so you never fall in my way again.


Jac. Zome faulk that I do know wull zee the black gentleman first, it is my
belief -- zoa I had best keep out o his woiy too.


Enter Harcourt. Har. Woodville, what is the matter? why you will raise the
neighborhood.


Jacob returns. Jac. Here Is a peaper housemaid do zend you, wi her humble duty;
but, if zo be it do put ye in another desperate teaking, I do huope ye wull
zend for zhe to beat, and not I. -- Loord! Loord! what wull becuome of me in
this woide world of London! (Exit Jacob.)


Har. Ha! ha! ha! he is a choice fellow!


Wood. A heart, oppressed with its own feelings, fears every thing. I have
hardly courage to open a letter without an address.


Har. Come, come, give it me then? -- hey, what? confusion! -- was ever any
thing so unlucky? (attempts to tear it.)


Wood. (snatches it from him) Ha! it is important then?


Har. Why will you invent torments for yourself? (Aside) -- My own letter by
every thing careless -- here is a stroke --


Wood. (reads in a broken voice and manner) Woodville on the brink of marriage
-- you will be disengaged -- a nobleman -- (damnation!) -- heart and fortune at
her feet -- (I Will let his soul out there) hell and furies! -- but I will find
him, if money -- never will I close my eyes till -- Oh Cecilia -- (throws
himself into a seat.)


Har. This is the most unforeseen -- I know not what to say to him -- prithee,
Woodville! do not sacrifice so many reasonable presumptions in her favor, to a
paper that may be a forgery, for aught you know!


Wood. Oh Charles! that I could think so! -- but I have seen the villain's
execrable hand somewhere! Did you never see the hand?


Har. Um -- I cannot but own I have, -- what the devil shall I say to him --
Aside.


Enter the Governor. Gov. Woodville, my dear boy! I am come to have a little
talk with thee. -- Charles! don't run away! -- you are in all your cousin's
secrets.


Wood. What should possess this tiresome mortal to come here? -- I should have
waited on you, in half an hour, Sir.


Gov. Ay, and that is what I wanted to avoid: -- The more I talk to your father,
Frank, the more I find him fixed on the match with his Miss Mortimer! Nay, he
tells me, he will have you married this very day.


Wood. That Is mighty probable, in the humor I am in.


Gov. Ah, Frank! the girl I offer thee --


Wood. Is no more agreeable to me than her you despise.


Gov. How do you know that, peppercorn? -- how do you know that? -- od, I could
tell you --


Wood. And, to tell you my full mind. Sir, I had rather make myself a wretch to
gratify my father, than any other man.


Gov. Od! thou art so obstinate, boy, there is no disliking thee. -- (Aside) I
don't see why I am obliged to know his Miss is my daughter -- I have a great
mind to own what we have done with her; and, if he will marry, even take care
nobody hinders him! then, trump up a farce about forgiving them; -- and yet, it
goes against my conscience to punish the puppy for life, though he has punished
me pretty sufficiently, by the Lord Harry.


Har. I don't like this affair at all, and tremble for my Sophia, when I see
this odd soul so inveterate against her.


Gov. (to Woodville) Well, my lad! do you know I am as deep in all your secrets
as your favorite valet de chamber?


Wood. I don't understand you, Sir.


Gov. Pho, pho, pho! keep that face till I show thee one as solemn as my
Lord's. Why should not you please yourself, and marry your Miss, instead of
your father's?


Both. Astonishing!


Gov. Od, if you turn out the honest fellow I take you for, I know a pretty
round sum, an onion and a black coat may one day or other entitle you to; so
never mind Lord Gravity's resentment.


Wood. I act from better motives, Sir, and were unworthy your wealth could it
tempt me to disobey the best of fathers.


Gov. (passionately) Why then, marry Miss Mortimer, and oblige him: take a back
seat in your own coach, get a family of pale-faced brats, born with
ostrich-feathers on their heads; and hate away a long life with all due
decorum! -- Zounds, here is a fellow more whimsical than -- even myself. --
Yesterday you would have the puss spite of every body; but, you no sooner find
it in your power to oblige your bestfriend, by humouring your inclinations,
than, lo! you are taken with a most violent sit of duty and submission! -- Od,
you don't know what you have lost by it! -- but, since you are bent on crossing
me, I Will cross you, and once for all too. -- My secret shall henceforth be as
impenetrable as the philosopher's stone. -- Ay, stare as you please, I Will give
you more years than you have yet seen days to guess it in. Exit.


Har. What this uncle of ours can mean is quite beyond my guess!


Wood. What signifies seeking to expound by reason, actions in which it had no
share? -- his brain is indubitably touched! -- but Cecilia lies heavy on my
heart, and excludes every other thought.


Har. Time may explain the secret of that letter, which, I will lay my life,
she despises: -- a woman who did not, would have kept it from your hands.


Wood. That Is true, indeed! -- if I wrong her, and this was but an insult, --
there is a noble sincerity in her own letter which sets suspicion at defiance.
-- If he stumbled on one word of truth during this visit, the crisis of my fate
approaches. -- Oh, wherever thou art, if the exalted being I will still hope my
Cecilia, thou shall I know I have at least deserved thee! Exeunt.


END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE, A mean Room; Boots, Bridles, etc. hanging all round. Bridget fitting
very mournfully, her fine Clothes in great Disorder; -- a Table by her, with a
small Roll, a Glass of Water, an old dog's-ear'd Book, and a Bit of
Looking-glass. Brid. DEAR heart! dear heart! what a miserable time have I
passed! and, where I be to pass my whole life, my Lord here only knows! -- I
have not much stomach indeed; -- neither have I much breakfast. (Eats a bit of
Bread and bursts into tears.)


Enter the Governor. Gov. Had I more sins to answer for than a college of
Jesuits, I surely expiate them all, by going through a purgatory in this life
beyond what they have invented for the other. -- This vulgar Maux of mine
haunts my imagination, in every shape but that I hoped to see her in; -- I dare
hardly trust myself to speak to her! -- od, I would not have the extirpation of
the whole female sex depend upon my casting-vote while I am in this humor.


Brid. Mercy on me! here is that cross old gentleman again! what will become of
me? -- do, pray, strange sir! be so generous as to tell me what is next to be
done with me?


Gov. Why, just whatever I please, you audacious baggage! -- (Aside) od, now I
think on it, I have a great mind to try a few soft words, and dive into all the
secrets of the little ignoramus. -- Come, suppose I had a mind to grant you
your freedom, how would you requite me?


Brid. Dear heart! why, I Would love you for ever and ever.


Gov. 'dzounds, that is a favor I could very readily dispense with; -- and yet
it is natural to the poor wench: -- ah! if thou had been a good girl, thou
had been a happy one. -- Hark'ye, miss! confess all your sins, that is the
only way to escape, I promise you! and, if you conceal the least, I Will -- od, I
don't know what I Will do to you.


Brid. I will; I will, sir, indeed, as I hope to be married.


Gov. Married, you slut! bad as that is, it is too good for you: -- come, tell
me all your adventures? -- describe the behavior of the young villain who
seduced you; -- where did you see him first?


Brid. Ugh, ugh, -- At church, sir.


Gov. At church, quotha? -- a pretty place to commence an intrigue in! -- and
how long was it before you came to this admirable agreement?


Brid. Umh? -- why -- Sunday was Midsummer-eve, -- and Sunday ater was madam's
wedding day, -- and Monday was our fair, and --


Gov. Oh, curse your long histories! -- and, what then said Woodville?


Brid. Oh Lord, nothing at all -- why, it warn't he. --


Gov. No. -- (ready to burst with passion) Who, who, who? tell me that, and
quite distract me!


Brid. Timothy Hobbs, Squire's gardener.


Gov. An absolute clown -- (walks about half groaning with rage and
disappointment) who, oh! who would be a father? -- I could laugh, -- cry, --
die, -- with shame and anger! -- since the man, who corrupted, left her only
one virtue, would he had deprived her of that too! -- oh, that she had but
skill enough to lie well!


Brid. Whether I can or no, I Will never speak truth again, that is a sure thing!
-- what do I get by it, or any poor souls of the female kind?


Gov. I am incapable of thinking; -- every plan, every resource thus
overturned; -- I must be wiser than all the world? -- This fool's head of mine
must take to teaching truly! as if I could eradicate the stamp of nature, or
regulate the senses, by any thing but reason -- don't pipe, baggage! to me; --
you all can do that, when too late: -- when I have considered whether I shall
hang myself or not, I Will let you know whether I shall tuck you up along with
me, you little wretch, you! Exit.


Bridget alone. Brid. Well, sure I have at last guessed where I am shut up! --
it must be Bedlam; for the old gentleman is out of his mind, that is a sure
thing!


Enter Vane. Van. Ha, ha, ha! my future father-in-law seems to have got a
quietus of my intended; and, faith, so would any man who was not in love with a
certain forty thousand; -- to be sure, in plain English, she is a glorious
mawkin! -- (to her) -- well, madam, how are you pleased with your present mode
of living?


Brid. Living, do you call it? -- I think, it is only starving. -- Why, I shall
eat my way through the walls very shortly.


Van. Faith, Miss, they use you but so so, that is the truth on it; and I must
repeat, even to your face, what I said to my Lord, that your youth, beauty, and
accomplishments, deserve a better fate.


Brid. Dear heart! Bedlam, did I say, I was in! why, I never knew a more
sensibler, genteeler, prettier sort of a man in my life. (aside) -- I am sure,
Sir, if I was to study seven years, I should never know what I have done to
discommode them, not I.


Van. Oh Lard, my dear! only what is done every day by half your sex without
punishment -- however, you are to suffer for all, it seems? -- you see your
fare for life! -- a dungeon, coarse rags, and the same handsome allowance of
bread and water twice a day.


Brid. Oh, dear me! -- why, I shall be an otomy in a week!


Van. And an old black to guard you, more sulky and hideous, than those in the
Arabian Night's Entertainments.


Brid. Why, sure they will let you come and see me, Sir? I shall certainly
swound away, every time I look at the nasty old black.


Van. This is the last time your dungeon (which your presence renders a palace
to me) will ever be open to one visitor -- unless -- unless -- I could contrive
-- but no, it would be my ruin: -- yet who woud'nt venture something for such a
charming creature? you could endear even ruin. -- Tell me, then, what reward
you would bestow on a man who ventured all to give you freedom?


Brid. Nay, I don't know; you're such a dear sweet kind soul, I shall not stand
with you for a trifle.


Van. Ahey! Miss will be as much too complying in a minute. -- Well, then, my
dear! I must marry you, or you will still be in the power of your enemies.


Brid. Hey? -- what? do I hear rightly? marry me? -- (aside) -- why, this will
be the luckiest day's work I ever did! -- nay, Sir, if you should be so
generous, I hope I shall live to make you amends!


Van. (aside) The only amends you can make me, is by dying -- and now, my dear!
I will own to you, I have the license in my pocket; and my Lord, as eager as
myself. -- Our chaplain will do us the favor with more expedition than he says
grace before meat! -- Well done, Vane! egad, thy lucky star predominates! --
(Aside -- takes her arm.)


Brid. Surely my locking up does end very comical. Exeunt arm in arm.


SCENE, -- The Drawing Room. Miss Mortimer and Captain Harcourt. M. Mor.
Woodville is now with his father, and both in the decisive mood. -- Oh,
Charles! as the moment approaches nearer, your influence becomes insensibly
less powerful: -- the frantic fits of the Governor; the solemn absurdity of my
Lord -- but, above all, the behavior of Woodville, hurts and alarms me! --
still cautious not to offend his father, he has tried every way to extort the
refusal from me; but, by a pardonable equivocation, I left him hopeless, and
assured him I should, to the utmost of my power, obey my benefactor. -- Why,
why did you marry one, who could give you nothing but her heart?


Har. I shall not answer, till you can name me an equivalent -- trust to my
management, my dear Sophia. -- I still flatter myself, one storm will settle
the tenor of our lives -- if not; while acquitted to Heaven, the world, and
ourselves, we may struggle with spirit against fortune; and sometimes owe our
dearest enjoyments to her fluctuations.


M. Mor. By sentiments like these you won my very soul; and to retain for ever
a heart so invaluable, I have ventured the displeasure of my benefactor: but
our hearts will not always follow the lead of our reason, nor, when I consider
the cause, can I repent the deviation of mine.


Har. Think, if you pity yourself, what you can give to Cecilia; and fortify
her mind against too strong a sense of her frailty. For my part, I must watch
whatever is going on.


M. Mor. So, you leave me out of the plot? -- well, if it ends happily, I shall
be contented; and, like the world, measuring your merit by your success, will
declare you a most inimitable schemer. -- Adieu!


Har. Nay, stay a moment!


M. Mor. Not for the world; for here comes your uncle, with a face more
petrifying than Medusa's. Exit.


Enter the Governor, musing. Gov. I have lived fifty eight years, five months,
and certain odd days, to find out I am a fool at last; but I will live as many
more, before I add the discovery that I am a knave too.


Har. What the devil can he be now hatching? -- mischief, I fear?


Gov. Dear fortune! let me escape this once undiscovered, and I compound for
all the rest. -- Charles! the news of the house? for the politics of this
family are employment for every individual in it.


Har. Bella, horrida bella, Sir! -- my Lord is determined to bring his son's
duty to an immediate test, -- (aside) thanks to his friend's schemes and his
mistress's beauty.


Gov. What poor malicious wretches are we by nature? -- Zounds, if I could not
find in my heart to rejoice at thinking every one here will be as mortified and
disappointed as a certain person that shall be nameless. -- So, so; here they
come, faith, to argue the point in open court.


Enter Lord Glenmore followed by Woodville. L. Glen. Without this proof of your
obedience, all you can urge, Sir, is ineffectual.


Wood. While obedience was possible, I never swerved, my Lord; but, when you
command me to make myself wretched, a superior duty cancels that: -- already
bound by a voluntary, an everlasting vow, I cannot break it without offending
heaven, nor keep it without offending you.


Gov. (aside) What Is this? chopped about again!


Wood. Did you once know the incomparable merits of my love, even your
Lordship's prejudices must give way to your reason.


L. Glen. Mere dotage. -- But, had she more than any one woman ever yet
possessed, does not her conduct equally evince her folly and depravity?


Wood. Covered, as I ought to be, with confusion and remorse; I will own she
was seduced and deceived.


Gov. (aside) Ah, poor boy! -- one of the two was woefully deceived sure enough.


L. Glen. Oh, your conscience may be very easy on that account; it could not
require much art to deceive such an idiot.


Gov. No, no, my Lord; why paint the devil blacker than he is? not an idiot
neither.


Wood. Sir, my father's freedom of speech I must endure; -- but yours --


Gov. You must endure too, young Sir, or I shall bite my tongue off.


Wood. But, my Lord! that dear unhappy girl is no longer a subject of debate,
-- she evidently proves her merit by her flight.


L. Glen. Would you make a virtue from not doing ill, when it is no longer in
your power? -- Woodville! I was once weak enough to believe indulgence the
surest way of obtaining your duty and esteem. -- My eyes are at last opened, --
Miss Mortimer is worthy a better husband; but you are here is, or no son of mine.
-- I solemnly promised this to her dying father, and will acquit myself at all
events.


Wood. Can you resolve to sacrifice me to a promise made before we could judge
of each other? -- You never felt, Sir, the compulsion you practice; -- will you
dissolve the first band of morality, and see your highly-estimated title end in
me? for never will I on these terms continue it.


L. Glen. I almost wish I never had continued it. -- (Walks in anger.). I am
determined, Woodville! and nothing but Miss Mortimer's refusal can break the
match.


Wood. I shall not put that in her power, my Lord? Permit me to tell you, no
son was ever more sensible of a father's kindness: but, if I can purchase its
continuance only with my honor and my happiness, it would be too dearly bought.


L. Glen. It Is well, sir. -- I have listened to you sufficiently. Now hear ME.
Know, this worthless wretch, you prefer to your duty, is in my power; nay, in
this house.


Har. (aside) The devil she is! how in the name of ill-luck should he find that
out? -- my fine scheme entirely blown up, by Jupiter!


Wood. Why play thus upon me, my Lord? -- her letter --


L. Glen. What, has she wrote to you? -- that I was not aware of, nor indeed
suspected she could write.


Gov. No, not so ignorant as that neither. I ordered she should write too!


L. Glen. You ordered she should write? -- let me tell you, sir, it was
wronging my confidence!


Gov. No, I did not order she should write; -- I mean, -- I mean, -- zounds! I
don't know what I mean!


Wood. So it seems, indeed; since hardly half an hour ago my uncle himself
persuaded me to marry my love.


Gov. Here Is a cursed affair now!


L. Glen. Can this be possible? Let me tell you, Governor, if, presuming upon
your wealth, you play a double part in my family --


Gov. Zounds! nobody knows his own part in your family, that I see! and this
fellow, too, to teize me, whom I loved above all in it Why, I spoke entirely
from regard to him. If, since then I have discovered a bumpkin was beforehand
with him in the possession of his miss --


Wood. If any one, beside yourself, sir, durst tell such a falsehood, it would
cost a life.


Gov. Yes; and, if any one beside myself durst tell me such a truth, it would
cost a soul perhaps.


Exit. Har. This is more unintelligible than all the rest.


L. Glen. To end these altercations; -- upon yourself, Woodville, shall depend
the fortune of this wretch, to whom you have been so gross a dupe as to justify
the imputation of folly. Why, even without knowing me, she ridiculed your
passion, and offered to leave you.


Wood. Impossible!


L. Glen. Dare you disbelieve me, sir? -- nay, she shall be produced, and
obliged to confess her arts; -- then blush and obey! Here, Vane! Governor, the
keys! Exit.


Woodville walks behind, in great agitation. Har. Now could I find in my heart
to make this story into a ballad, as a warning to all meddling puppies; and
then hang myself, that it may conclude with a grace. Zounds, he must be endued
with supernatural intelligence. Just when I was saying a thousand civil things
to myself on my success, to have my mine sprung before my eyes by the enemy;
and, instead of serving my friend and myself, become a mere tool to old
Gravity's revenge! 'Pshaw! however, we must make the best of a bad matter. --
Woodville, what do mean to do, man?


Wood. Let them produce my Cecilia! -- then seize, and protect her to the last
moment of my life.


Har. And I will assist you to the last moment of mine.


Wood. My generous cousin! this is indeed friendship.


Har. Not so very generous, if you knew all.


Re-enter Lord Glenmore and the Governor, with Bridget holding a handkerchief
to her eyes, Vane following; Woodville flies and clasps her in his arms;
Harcourt takes her hand. Wood. My love! my life! -- do I once again behold
thee? -- fear nothing! -- you here are safe from all the world! -- will you not
bless me with one look?


Brid. (looking at him and Harcourt with ridiculous distress) oh, dear me!


L. Glen. I have put it out of your power to marry, Sir, otherwise you may take
her.


Wood. Take her! -- what poor farce is this?


Har. Hey-day! more incomprehensibilities.


Van. Aside Now for the eclaircissement -- since, if the Governor does not
acknowledge her in his first rage and confusion, I may never be able to make
him! -- I humbly hope, Mr. Woodville will pardon me, if, with her own consent
and my Lord's, I this morning married this young lady.


Gov. Zounds, you dog, what is that? -- you married her? -- why, how did you
dare -- and you too, my Lord! -- what the devil, did you consent to this?


Vane. Believe me, sir, I didn't then know she was your daughter.


L. Glen. Daughter!


Gov. So, it is out, after all: -- it is a lie, you dog! you did know she was my
daughter; -- you all knew it; -- you all conspired to torment me!


All. Ha, ha, ha!


Gov. Ha, ha, ha! confound your mirth! -- as if I had not plagues enough
already. -- And you have great reason to grin too, my Lord, when you have
thrown away my Gawky on your impudent valet.


L. Glen. Who could ever have dreamt of -- ha, ha, ha -- of finding this your
little wonder of the country, brother?


Har. Nay, my Lord, she is the little wonder of the town, too.


All. Ha, ha, ha!


Gov. Mighty well, -- mighty well, -- mighty well; pray, take your whole laugh
out, good folks! since this is, positively, the last time of my entertaining
you in this manner. -- A cottage shall henceforth be her portion, and a rope
mine.


Brid. If you are my papa, I think you might give some better proof of your
kindness; -- but I shall not stir; -- why, I married on purpose that I might not
care for you.


Gov. Why, thou eternal torment! -- my original sin! -- whose first fault was
the greatest frailty of woman; and whose second, her greatest folly! do
thou, or the designing knave who has entrapped thee merely for that purpose,
imagine my wealth shall ever reward incontinence and ingratitude? -- no; go
knit stockings to some regiment where he is preferred to be drummer! -- warm
yourself when the sun shines! -- soak every hard-earn'd crust in your own
tears, and repent at leisure. Exit in a rage.


All. Ha, ha, ha!


L. Glen. He to ridicule my mode of education! -- but, what is the meaning of
all this?


Wood. Truly, my Lord, I believe it would be very hard to find any for either
my uncle's words or actions! -- I am equally at a loss to guess as to Bridget
here.


Vane. Hey, what? Bridget, did you say, sir? why, you little ugly witch! are
you really Bridget?


Brid. Why, I told ye so, all along; but you woud'nt believe me?


All. Ha, ha, ha!


Brid. Oh dear heart! -- I am now as much afeard of my new husband as father.


L. Glen. For thee, Wench --


Brid. (Pops upon her knees) Oh, no more locking up, for goodness sake, my
Lord! -- I be sick enough of passing for a lady: but, if old Scratch ever puts
such a trick again in my head, I hope -- your Lordship will catch me! that is
all. Exit.


Vane. I shall run distracted! have I married an -- and all for nothing too?


L. Glen. A punishment peculiarly just, as it results from abusing my
confidence. -- Hence, Wretch! nor ever, while you live, appear again in my
presence. Exit Vane, looking furiously after Bridget.


L. Glen. It Is time to return to ourselves. We shall soon come to an
eclaircissement, Woodville! -- Since you will not marry, I will.


Wood. My Lord!


L. Glen. And you shall judge of my choice. Exit.


Har. Now for it; -- whatever devil diverts himself among us today, I see he
owes my sagacious Lord here a grudge, as well as the rest; and I foresee that
his wife and the Governor's daughter will prove equally entertaining.


Enter Lord Glenmore leading Cecilia, followed by Miss Mortimer. L. Glen. This
lady, Sir, I have selected; -- a worthy choice.


Wood. I dream, surely! -- that lady your choice? -- yours.


L. Glen. Ungrateful son! had such been yours --


Wood. Why, this very Angel is mine, my Cecilia, my first, my only love!


L. Glen. How! --


Cec. Yes, my Lord! -- you now know the unhappy object at once of your
resentment, contempt, and admiration! -- my own misfortunes I had learnt to
bear, but those of Woodville overpower me! -- I deliver myself up to your
justice; content to be every way his victim, so I am not his ruin.


L. Glen. But to find you in this house --


Cec. Your generous nephew and the amiable Miss Mortimer distinguished me with
the only asylum could shelter me from your son!


L. Glen. They distinguished themselves! -- Oh, Woodville! did I think an hour
ago I could be more angry with you? -- How durst you warp a mind so noble?


Wood. It is a crime my life cannot expiate, -- yet, if the sincerest anguish
--


L. Glen. I have one act of justice still in my power; -- my prejudice in
favor of birth, and even a stronger prejudice, is corrected by this lovely
girl: -- of her goodness of heart, and greatness of mind, I have had
incontestible proofs, and, if I thought you, Frank --


Cec. Yet, stay, my Lord! nor kill me with too much kindness. -- Once your
generosity might have made me happy, now only miserable. -- My reason, my
pride, nay even my love, induces me to refuse, as the only way to prove I
deserve him! -- he has taught me to know the world too late, nor will I retort
on him the contempt I have incurred: -- Mr. Woodville will tell you whether I
have not solemnly vowed --


Wood. Not to accept me without the consent of both fathers; and, if mine
consents, what doubt --

Governor without. Stop that old man! stop that mad parson! stop him!

Gray without. Nothing shall stop me in pursuit of my -- (enters) Ha! she is --
she is here indeed! providence has at length directed me to her ( runs to
Cecilia.)


Cec. My father! covered with shame let me sink before you.


L. Glen. and Har. Her father!


Enter Governor. Gray. Rise, my glorious girl! rise purified and forgiven! rise
to pity with me the weak minds that know not all thy value, and venerate the
noble ones that do.


Gov. Hey! is it possible! Gray, is this my --


Gray. Yes, Sir; this is your Cecilia, my Cecilia, the object of your avowed
rejection and contempt!


Gov. Rejection and contempt! stand out of the way -- let me embrace my
daughter -- let me take her once more to my heart -- (runs and embraces her.)


L. Glen. His daughter!


Gov. Yes, my friends, this is really my daughter -- my own Cecilia, as sure as
I am an old fool after being a young one, this good girl has a right to call me
so by the name of father. -- Hasn't she, Gray? -- why, my Lord, this is the
very parson I told you of! -- (taking Cecilia's arm under his) and now, young
Sir, what do you say to your uncle's freaks?


Wood. Say, Sir, that had you ten thousand such I would go through a
patriarchal servitude, in hopes of Cecilia's hand for my reward.


Gov. And, had I ten millions of money, and this only girl, thou should have
her, and that, too, for thy noble freedom. -- And what says my Cecilia to her
father's first gift?


Cec. Astonishment and pleasure leave me hardly power to say, that a
disobedience to you, sir, would only double my fault: nor to worship that
Heaven, which has led me through such a trial to such a reward! -- take all I
have left myself to give you, Woodville, in my hand -- (Woodville kisses first
her hand, and then herself)


Gray. Now, let me die, my darling child! since I have seen thee, once more,
innocent and happy.


Gov. And now, kiss me, my Cecilia! -- kiss me! -- od, Miss Mortimer shall kiss
me too, for loving my poor girl here! -- kiss me, all of you, old and young! --
men, women and children! -- od, I am so overjoyed, I dread the consequences. --
Do You hear, there? -- fetch me a surgeon and a bottle of wine! -- I must both
empty and fill my veins on this occasion -- zooks, I could find in my heart to
frisk it merrily in defiance of the gout, and take that cursed vixen below,
whoever she is, for my partner!


L. Glen. Methinks all seem rewarded, but my poor Sophia here? and her
protection of Cecilia deserves the highest recompense: but whenever, my dear,
you can present me the husband of your choice, I will present him with a
fortune fit for my daughter.


Gov. Protect Cecilia! od! she is a good girl, and a charming girl, and I
honor the very tip of her feathers now! -- if she could but fancy our Charles,
I Would throw in something pretty on his side, I promise you.


Miss Mor. Frankness is the fashion. -- What would you say, Sir, and you, my
Lord, if I had fancied your Charles so much, as to make him mine already?


Gov. Hey day! more discov'ries! how is this, boy?


Har. Even so, Sir, indeed.


L. Glen. It completes my satisfaction.


Gov. Od, brother! who'd have thought you in the right all the while -- we'll
never separate again, by the Lord Harry! but knock down our Welsh friend's old
house; and raise him one on the ruins, large enough to contain the whole family
of us, where he shall reign sole sovereign over all our future little
Woodvilles and Cecilias.


Cec. Oppressed with wonder, pleasure, gratitude, I must endeavor to forgive
myself, when heaven thus graciously proves its forgiveness, in allying me to
every human being my heart distinguishes.


Gray. Yes, my Cecilia, you may believe him, who never gave you a bad lesson,
that you are now most truly entitled to esteem; since it requires a far greater
exertion to stop your course down the hill of vice, than to toil slowly up
toward virtue.


THE END.

