AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF The Honorable Sir WILLIAM JONES, A JUDGE OF THE
SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE IN BENGAL, AND PRESIDENT OF THE ASIATIC SOCIETY.

BY WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQUIRE.

TE PIETAS OBLITA VIRUM, REVOCATAQUE COELO
JUSTITIA, ET GEMINA PLANGET FACUNDIA LINGUA,
ET PALLAS, DOCTIQUE COHORS HELICONIA PHOEBI;
--
OMNIA NAMQUE ANIMO COMPLEXUS, ET OMNIBUS AUCTOR
QUA FANDI VIA LATA PATET; SIVE ORSA LIBEBAT
AONIIS VINCIRE MODIS, SEU VOCE SOLUTA
SPARGERE, ET EFFRENO NIMBOS AEQUARE PROFATU.
STATII SYLVARUM, Lib. ^. LONDON: Printed for T. CADELL, Jun. and W. DAVIES
(Successors to Mr. CADELL) in the Strand.

M. DCC. XCV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IN the very moment, when I was concluding the Notes to this Elegy, I received
an Elegiac Poem on the same subject, by a Gentleman, whose extensive knowledge
of Indian Literature, and whose acquaintance with its lamented Patron, induced
me to peruse his Publication with peculiar eagerness. There is so much poetical
merit in the animated and graceful tribute, which Mr. MAURICE has paid to the
memory of Sir WILLIAM JONES, that, had I seen it before the completion of these
Stanzas, it might have induced me to relinquish a subject preengaged by a
Writer so peculiarly qualified to treat it with success. Yet the literary
excellence of Sir WILLIAM JONES appears to require some kind of homage from
every man of letters; and by the spirit of Mr. MAURICE'S performance, I am
persuaded, that our common regard for the Character we commemorate, is so
sincere and ingenuous, that we must rejoice in a multiplicity of offerings to a
name so entitled to universal praise.

ELEGY, etc.
I.
SCIENCE of late, with quick maternal eye,
Pensive and kind, with Glory by her side,
Watched every sail from INDIA, to descry
That Son's return, whose talents are her pride.
II.
Sudden across the tutelary Queen
Death's Angel passed, and shook his potent dart:
Then, in stern triumph, said, Behold a scene
At once to wound, and to console thy heart!
III.
Far off she finds her darling JONES inurn'd;
INDIA'S mild sages, dropping many a tear,
With admiration into anguish turned,
Mourn that enlightened Judge they joy'd to hear.
IV.
The Fane, he reared to ASIATIC lore,
On which his mind immortal luster shed,
Echoing the liberal voice of friendly SHORE,
Sounds the sweet praises of the hero dead;
V.
The Hero! who, in fields of highest fame,
Beyond his peers the dart of conquest hurled;
Surpassed ambitious AMMON'S weaker aim,
And nobly grasped the intellectual world.
VI.
Through every province in that spacious sphere
His dauntless thoughts exulting Genius led;
At whose bold march, through deserts deep and drear,
Darkness dispersed, and Difficulty fled.
VII.
O most accomplished of the favored few,
Who to the heights of Learning's empire climb,
Sharing with her, in prospects ever new,
A calm dominion over space and time!
VIII.
Early to thee obedient Language brought
Her keys, commanding many a secret store;
Youth, of ingenuous and aspiring thought,
It Is thine, she said, these treasures to explore;
IX.
To thee, reserved in ASIA'S richest spoil,
Fancy and Wisdom will their wealth impart;
Deck with their jewels, won by lettered toil,
The throne of Virtue in thy steadfast heart!
X.
Glowing with youthful joy in Learning's seats,
Thy mind embraced the glorious lot prescribed;
And richly redolent of classic sweets,
The mental persumes of the East imbibed.
XI.
As spicy gales waked, with delicious power,
The pride of joy in GAMA'S gallant frame,
When to his fervid hope, in happy hour,
They seemed an earnest of eternal fame;
XII.
So, and with stronger breathings of delight,
The Muse of ASIA'S balmy flowers and fruit
Raised thy young spirit to pure Rapture's height,
And promised Glory to thy keen pursuit.
XIII.
How patient Toil and eager Transport joined,
When Eastern bards awaked thy kindred fire,
And EUROPE saw thee, with a skill refined,
Adapt to ASIAN airs an ATTIC lyre!
XIV.
How (ere thy mind could rest on Duty's rock)
Thy early vigils patriot zeal evince!
When thy free hand disdained not to unlock
A PERSIAN casket for a NORTHERN Prince:
XV.
But from thy spirit, with just pride elate,
What generous plaints of indignation burst,
When Wisdom bade thee mark the scholar's fate,
The child of Fancy, by Delusion nursed!
XVI.
The quicksand, covered by a tempting tide,
Thy piercing eyes perceived; that latent snare,
Where many a son of lettered fame has died,
Dupe of Delight, and victim of Despair!
XVII.
Thou saw, that often, with insidious song,
Sweet Learning, to indulge a Syren's joy,
Lures her fond slave from life's more active throng,
Smiling to cheat, and charming to destroy.
XVIII.
Thy genius soared the softening spell above,
With manly vigilance, with noble spleen;
And gave the Muse thy secondary love,
Proclaiming Law thy life's acknowledged queen.
XIX.
Thou would be vassal only to the power,
Who bears immutable Dominion's rod,
Ruling the least and loftiest; peace her dower,
Her throne the bosom of her parent, GOD.
XX.
She, awful patroness! with love sincere,
Blessed her young champion from sweet snares released;
And sent thee to ennoble and endear*
Her ENGLISH empire in the radiant EAST.
XXI.
The sciences, the arts, and every power,
That holds over earth beneficent control,
Hailed thee so entering, in their happiest hour,
A scene adapted to thy fervid soul.
XXII.
With pensive zeal, and exultation just,
Over that new scene thy active spirit ran,
From Heaven receiving, as a glorious trust,
The bright occasion of befriending man.
XXIII.
Thy country sent thee forth with joyous pride,
Mixed with maternal fears, and fond concern:
Of mental wealth, Hope's sparkling eye descried
The richest freight in thy remote return.
XXIV.
Illusive vision! He whose ample mind
Embraced the treasury of ASIAN thought,
He, to whom Science her rich depths consigned,
He dies, untimely, in the mine he wrought.
XXV.
No more can Fancy, whom he used to cheer,
Take from his hand her scattered pearl new strung,
Or Love, or Friendship, hope again to hear
Their songs of sweetness, sweeter from his tongue.
XXVI.
Kind Heaven yet bids them not too wildly grieve,
Or deem too short the mortal path he trod;
Did he not live to merit, and receive,
Praise from the world, and recompense from God?
XXVII.
Let tender Truth, to temper selfish Grief,
Count the heaped measure of his merits over;
Nor blame the term of harvest as too brief,
When Heaven with plenitude has blessed the store.
XXVIII.
Few were thy years, to count their real date,
And quick thy exit proved, thou early sage!
But from thy toil's variety and weight,
Thou seem to have enjoyed the longest age.
XXIX.
In thy career, though short, all powers we trace
This course of transient being can display;
And no appropriate charm has failed to grace
The morn, or noon, or evening of thy day.
XXX.
Thy life, a scene with pleasing wonder viewed!
A perfect garden on a narrow plot!
Whose bounds unseen the busy thought elude,
While sweet Deception magnifies the spot.
XXXI.
What bright diversities that garden bore
Of all that Art can raise, or Nature grant;
There grew the palm, that conscious virtue wore,
There the Bard's laurel, as an humbler plant.
XXXII.
Oh, all-accomplished JONES! how sweet, how strong
Thy streams of music from the Muses' hill!
Thine the loud torrent of her Epic song,
And thine the murmur of her softest rill.
XXXIII.
Love's tender force, and Fancy's sportive fire
Conspired to decorate the nuptial strain,
When, fondly re-assum'd, thy rapturous lyre
Ushered young ALTHORP into HYMEN'S fane.
XXXIV.
Alas! mild SPENCER! Learning's favorite friend!
In this, her public loss, how large thy part;
Early 'twas thine to value and commend
The Poet's genius, and the Judge's heart.
XXXV.
For long ere THEMIS gave his glory birth,
Or Eastern Muses idolized his name,
Thy well-train'd youth attested all his worth,
Thy friendship was the herald of his fame.
XXXVI.
Largely have thou thy noble mansion graced
With volumes minist'ring to mental health;
Thy treasury of books proclaims thy taste
Magnificent in literary wealth.
XXXVII.
And thou, whose mental eye on Nature looks,
Have learned, in busy life's contentious state,
To read those rare illuminated books,
The virtuous bosoms of the truly great.
XXXVIII.
But of the authors, that adorn thy seat,
And of the living hearts, which thou have read,
In talents and in worth, thou can not meet
Superiors to thy friend, so early dead.
XXXIX.
Will thou not, SPENCER, whose exalted mind
Delights to animate each graceful art,
That triumphs over time (by toil refined,
Enshrining genius in Affection's heart),
XL.
Command chaste Sculpture, with her marble scroll,
Oblivion's torrent for that friend to stem?
Or bid his form, expressive of his soul,
Speak through all ages in the deathless gem?
XLI.
Mem'ry's fond tribute, howsoever paid,
Must please his spirit, from a heart sincere;
But his fame rests upon no single aid,
Not even on thine, which taste and truth endear.
XLII.
Behold, in regions bright with Fancy's beam,
Two more than mortal shapes, by justice swayed;
Shapes like the two, that in ATOSSA'S dream,
The daring hand of AESCHYLUS portrayed!
XLIII.
First, ASIA, mighty queen of gorgeous charms!
Of Art, of Science, the primaeval nurse!
Who gave to Eloquence her earliest arms,
And first saluted Heaven with sacred verse.
XLIV.
Next, with a younger sister's softer air,
With eyes more piercing, though of calmer mien,
EUROPE, of simpler grace, more chastely fair,
Benign improver of each earthly scene!
XLV.
These kindred powers in kind contention vie
To honor their lost darling, doubly dear;
Each owns his merits with a mutual sigh,
And rival monuments of grief they rear.
XLVI.
Magnific ASIA to her JONES'S name
Bids high in air the mausoleum spread,
And, by its various ornaments, proclaim
The varied powers and virtues of the dead.
XLVII.
See! where in sculptured pomp, poetic forms!
The Muse of ARABY, the PERSIC Muse,
The Eastern quire, whose blaze of beauty warms,
Lament the sweet interpreter they lose.
XLVIII.
Mark where, like stars of richly blended fire,
The seven selected bards of MECCA stand,
Mourning their western brother of the lyre,
Who raised to new renown their social band.
XLIX.
The SUFI tribe, in fond Devotion's trance,
(Poets, whose higher lays to Heaven belong!)
Weep their lost friend, whose penetrating glance
Pierced the deep moral of their mystic song.
L.
Behold, with mental dignity elate,
Elders of solemn air, and gentle mien!
One sage as SOLON, one as SHAKESPEARE great,
MENU and CALIDASA grace the scene.
LI.
The bard, whom ASIAN age and wisdom cite,
Seems to his heart a foreign book to press;
Caressing, with a parent's proud delight,
His SACONTALA in an ENGLISH dress.
LII.
In triumph see the Legislator stand,
With such grief-temper'd pride, such fond applause,
Viewing the luster that an ENGLISH hand
Gave to the code of his benignant laws!
LIII.
To JONES alike they boast their pleasing debt,
Skilled equal fame from different founts to draw!
Him Art and Science must alike regret;
His language poetry; his conduct law.
LIVE.
Our light is sunk, the mourning INDIANS say;
Protection perished with his parting breath;
His fost'ring care was like the beam of day,
And Knowledge dies by his untimely death.
LV.
But hark! Imperial ASIA, who presides
Over all the attendants at his Eastern tomb,
In her own voice, that warm Devotion guides,
Thus speaks her feelings on her darling's doom.
LVI.
JONES was a pearl, that might have decked a throne,
Pure as the eye of judgment ever explore'd:
But GOD, who deemed its worth not duly known,
Soon to its parent shell the gem restored.
LVII.
So ASIA mourns. -- With sorrow more intense,
EUROPE, in love more tenderly sublime,
Of her deep loss to show a mother's sense,
Calls her accomplished sons from every clime.
LVIII.
These who may count? -- Yet one to Friendship known,
Whom favoring Art will fix on Glory's roll,
One whose firm studies have, like JONES'S, shown
Genius and virtue blended in his soul;
LIX.
One even here (forgive me, modest friend!)
My truth-devoted verse delights to name;
Pleased the congenial sculptor to commend,
As fit to minister to JONES'S fame!
LX.
FLAXMAN! thy energy of thought benign,
Thy feelings, tender as the mournful dove,
Teach stone to breathe those charms of chaste design,
That best may soothe the pangs of widowed love.
LXI.
In Fancy's fond anticipating eyes,
Marble already, by thy quickening touch,
Appears the man we mourn; and Nature cries:
"Such his endearing form! his spirit such!
LXII.
"So justly social, and benignly sage,
"He searched what INDIAN wisdom could produ^^*
"So hoards of knowledge from the lips of Age
"He drew, and fashioned for the public use."
LXIII.
But scarce, excelling friend! can all thy skill,
Or Sculpture's self, with all her fondest care,
Image his mind, and what conspired to sill
So rich a temple of endowments rare.
LXIV.
His were those graces, who to life impart
A luster like the star that gilds the pole;
Freedom, the prime ennobler of the heart!
And Piety, the guardian of the soul!
LXV.
What power, that strengthens, or adorns the mind,
Its settled passion, or excursive sport,
Awake to excellence of every kind,
Did his unwearied spirit fail to court?
LXVI.
That spirit, wreckless of unfriendly time,
Clasped a new science with a lover's zeal;
When the hurt body, by the sickly clime,
Was doomed a load of languid pain to feel.
LXVII.
Bright Genius! worthy of unclouded Health!
Thou should have lived upon her favorite hills,
Where genial air, kind Nature's genuine wealth,
Annihilates the train of nervous ills.
LXVIII.
Fond, fruitless thought! is there on earth a spot
Where Sickness never strikes, who strikes around?
And has thy mourner escaped, whose humbler lot
Heaven kindly cast on this fair ENGLISH ground?
LXIX.
In these dear native scenes, to Pain a prey,
Year after year he drew unvalue'd breath;
And viewed the vital spark in dull decay,
On a drear confine betwixt life and death.
LXX.
Weak in his frame, as a dismantled tower,
And his crushed mind (a partner in the fall!)
Robbed of its little luster, use, and power,
A broken dial in a mouldering wall!
LXXI.
But in o'erclouded Health's uncertain light,
When for her suffering votary alarmed,
My silent Muse was banished from my sight,
Thy numbers cheered me, and thy spirit charmed.
(...) LXXVI.
Thou feeling Daughter of a sainted sire!
Meek heir of mitred SHIPLEY'S modest worth!
In its probation for the Seraph quire,
Thy soul must bear the sharpest pangs of earth.
LXXVII.
Yet even in sorrow there is a virtuous pride,
Tempering its anguish, that would else destroy;
The very pangs, by which thy soul is tried,
Thou would not change for apathy or joy.
LXXVIII.
Thou feel'st, that Heaven thy gratitude may claim,
That thou have lived a blameless happy wife,
The cherished partner of as clear a name,
As ever won glory in the toil of life.
LXXIX.
For him, if darkling mortals may presume
To judge the feelings of the blessed above,
Even there, he deems thy heart his richest tomb,
His sweetest eulogy thy lasting love.
LXXX.
There, Heaven's tried servant, and in service pure,
His God he blesses for a kind decree,
That makes him still thy guardian, and secure
To share his bright beatitude with thee.
LXXXI.
Just mourner! if too weak this plaintive song
Duly to honor whom our grief reveres,
Pardon! -- I add, as conscious of the wrong,
To failing language more expressive tears.
FINIS.
NOTES TO THE ELEGY.
NOTE 1. STANZA IV.
"Echoing the liberal voice of friendly Shore."
THE honorable Sir JOHN SHORE, who succeeded Sir WILLIAM JONES as president of
the Asiatic society, delivered, in his first address to that assembly, a very
just and eloquent eulogium on his accomplished predecessor. -- Some lines in
the preceding stanza allude to the following passage in the discourse of Sir
JOHN SHORE.

The Pandits, who were in the habit of attending him (Sir WM. JONES) when I saw
them after his death, at a public Durbar, could neither suppress their tears
for his loss, nor find terms to express their admiration at the wonderful
progress he had made in their sciences.

I shall embrace with pleasure every opportunity of illustrating this poem, and
of honoring the justly lamented personage, whom it aspires to celebrate, by
unreserved quotation of the manly and graceful panegyric, from which I have
transcribed the preceding paragraph.

NOTE 2. STANZA VIII.
"Early to thee obedient Language brought."
THE erudition of Sir WILLIAM JONES was admirable not only from its
extraordinary extent, but from having been acquired, to an astonishing degree,
at a very early period of life. Before the expiration of his twenty-second year
(says his friend and eulogist) he had completed his Commentaries on the Poetry
of the Asiatics, although a considerable time afterward elapsed before their
publication. Sir JOHN proceeds to commend this work very justly, as a complete
proof of the Author's consummate skill in a variety of languages, and as a
juvenile monument of taste, talents, and application, without example. Let me
add, that this early production discovers also a heart full of gentle
affections, and a mind that already conceived and expressed its ideas with
singular energy and freedom. I allude particularly to the very pathetic tribute
of gratitude and praise, which the Author paid, in his Prooemium, to his friend
and instructor, then recently deceased, (ROBERT SUMNER, the master of Harrow
school) and to the two following passages of the book; in the first he is
speaking of satire, in the second of heroic poetry. Atqui ut aperte dicam quod
sentio, valde invitus in poetarum chorum satyricos, ut vocantur, ascribo. Nolo
mansuetiarum musarum desiderari benevolentiam. Poeseos Asiat. Comment. cap. 17.

Quid de legibus poeticis sentiam, quibusque causis adductus eas pro nihilo
putem, commodiorem inveniam exponendi locum. cap. 12.

NOTE 3. STANZA XI.
"The pride of joy in Gama's gallant frame."
WHEN the Portugueze Admiral, VASCO DE GAMA, was proceeding on his great
enterprise, the discovery of the East Indies, after he had weathered the
tremendous storms, that assailed him near the Cape, he is said to have exulted
in that omen and assurance of success, which he found in the odours wafted to
him from an invisible shore; odours thus finely described by Milton with local
exactitude:

To them who sail
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past
Mozambic, off at sea north-east winds blow
Sabean odours from the spicy shore
Of Araby the Blessed; with such delay
Well pleased they slack their course; and many a league,
Cheered with the grateful smell, old Ocean smiles.
Paradise Lost, Book IV. ver. 159.
NOTE IV. STANZA 14.
"A Persian casket for a Northern Prince."
THE life of NADER SHAH, an Eastern Manuscript, brought to England by the King
of Denmark. It was translated into French, at the request of that monarch, by
Sir WILLIAM JONES, who at first declined the task, alleging for his excuse the
length of the book, the dryness of the subject, the difficulty of the style,
etc.: but he was at last induced to undertake it by the most liberal motives;
and chiefly by the following consideration, expressed in his own words, That it
would be a reflection upon this country, if the King should be obliged to carry
the manuscript into France. The French version, executed by our incomparable
linguist, was published in 1770, when the translator had attained only his 24th
year.

NOTE V. STANZA 15.
"What generous plaints of indignation burst."
THIS verse alludes to the following passage, toward the close of an admirable
Preface to the Life of NADER SHAH, new modelled for the benefit of the English
reader, and published in 1773:

It is a painful consideration, that the profession of Literature, by far the
most laborious of any, leads to no real benefit or true glory whatsoever.
Poetry, Science, Letters, when they are not made the sole business of life, may
become its ornaments in prosperity, and its most pleasing consolation in a
change of fortune; but if a man addicts himself entirely to learning, and hopes
by that either to raise a family, or to acquire, what so many wish for, and so
few ever attain, an honorable retirement in his declining age, he will find,
when it is too late, that he has mistaken his path; that other labors, other
studies are necessary; and that unless he can assert his own independence in
active life, it will avail him little to be favored by the learned, esteemed
by the eminent, or recommended even by kings. These reflections can hardly be
suggested too frequently to the consideration of those ingenuous youths, who
happen to have conceived a very ardent passion for literature. It was happy for
our great Orientalist, that his own peculiar energy of mind enabled him to form
such reflections at an early period of life, before the gates of professional
prosperity were barred against his laudable ambition; otherwise it is but too
probable, that with unexampled hoards of erudition, united to a most benevolent
temper, he might have pined in a state of neglect and mortification, instead of
rising to be one of the most conspicuous and most useful characters in the
polished age, which his writings have contributed to enlighten and adorn.

I cannot close this note without remarking, that the Preface to the English
Life of NADER SHAH, which gave rise to it, contains many excellent remarks on
historical writing. It was the custom of our universal scholar to delineate, in
a philosophic and masterly survey, the province of literature, to which the
object of his immediate labor belonged. Thus to his volume of Asiatic Poems he
has added two admirable Essays on Poetry; and his translation of ISAEUS is
elucidated by a prefatory discourse, and a commentary replete with legal and
classical information. As a writer, both of verse and prose, his consummate
knowledge of languages enabled him to vary and adapt his style to his subject
with all the graces of exquisite propriety.

NOTE 6. STANZA XVIII.
"Proclaiming Law thy life's acknowledged Queen."
AN allusion to the following elegant Latin verses, in which Sir WILLIAM JONES
bade adieu to the Muse, and devoted himself to his profession.

Vale, Camena, blandacultrix ingeni,
Virtutis altrix, matter eloquentiae,
Linquenda alumno est laurus et chelys tuo.
At, O dearum dulcium dulcissima,
Sea Suada mavis, sive Pitho dicier,
A to receptus in tua vivam side:
Mihi sit, oro, non inutilis toga,
Nec indiserta lingua, nec turpis manus.
An interesting address! which proved, as Sir JOHN SHORE affectionately
observes, most truly prophetic!

NOTE 7. STANZA XIX.
"Her throne the bosom of her parent, God."
THE ideas and language of this stanza are partly borrowed from the sublime
panegyric on law, with which the celebrated HOOKER concludes the first book of
his Ecclesiastical Polity.

NOTE 8. STANZA XXII.
"With pensive zeal, and exultation just."
THESE lines allude to the following very pleasing description, which Sir
WILLIAM JONES has given of his approach to India, in his first public discourse
as President of the Asiatic Society.

"When I was at sea last August, on my voyage to this country, which I had long
and ardently desired to visit, I found one evening, on inspecting the
observations of the day, that India lay before us, and Persia on our left,
while a breeze from Arabia blew nearly on our stern. A situation so pleasing in
itself, and to me so new, could not fail to awaken a train of reflections in a
mind, which had early been accustomed to contemplate with delight the eventful
histories, and agreeable fictions of this Eastern world. It gave me
inexpressible pleasure to find myself in the midst of so noble an amphitheatre,
almost encircled by the vast regions of Asia, which has ever been esteemed the
nurse of sciences, the inventress of delightful and useful arts, the scene of
glorious actions, fertile in the productions of human genius, abounding in
natural wonders, and infinitely diversified in the forms of religion and
government, in the laws, manners, customs, and languages, as well as in the
features and complexions of men; I could not help remarking how important and
extensive a field was yet unexplored, and how many solid advantages
unimproved." -- Asiatick Researches, vol. i. p. 9.

These reflections led Sir WILLIAM, by degrees, to the foundation of the
Asiatic Society, and never was a man more happily qualified, by nature and
education, to be the founder and the guide of such a respectable institution;
since, in addition to his own singular talents for the rapid acquisition and
ready communication of knowledge, he was distinguished by such engaging manners
as enabled him most happily to call forth and encourage the faculties of all
around him. His unrivalled erudition was so far from rendering him dogmatical
or repulsive, that no man ever spoke with more genuine modesty of his own
merit; no man could exert more candor and liberality in estimating the merit
of others. In his writings, the rare extent of his knowledge is always
accompanied by an equally rare sweetness and generosity of spirit, which give a
peculiar charm to his composition, whenever he has occasion to mention an
author distinguished in the branch of literature immediately before him. A
striking instance of this spirit occurs to my recollection in his Essay on the
Law of Bailments, where he describes the legal treatises of a venerable French
professor and judge, M. Pothier, in a strain of applause uncommonly animated
and graceful.

NOTE 9. STANZA XXVIII.
"But from thy toil's variety and weight."
A YOUNG Student may find a most pleasing incentive to mental exertion, in
contemplating the very wonderful literary acquisitions and achievements of Sir
WILLIAM JONES; a regular and minute enumeration and estimate of these we may
hope to see from the leisure of some accomplished individual among his many
Asiatic friends, whom an intimate acquaintance with his extensive labors, and
an equal affection for his endearing virtues, may engage in the office of his
Biographer. The Memorial of Sir JOHN SHORE is an excellent prelude to such a
work. Sir JOHN, after mentioning his predecessor's most remarkable productions,
inserts in his discourse a paper entitled "Desiderata," a list of 23 curious
and important projected works, relating to India, Arabia, China, and Tartary.
On this paper of his departed friend he makes the following observation:

"We are not authorized to conclude, that he had himself formed a determination
to complete the works which his genius and knowledge had thus sketched; the
task seems to require a period beyond the probable duration of any human life;
but we, who had the happiness to know Sir WILLIAM JONES, who were witnesses of
his indefatigable perseverance in the pursuit of knowledge, and of his ardour
to accomplish whatever he deemed important: who saw the extent of his
intellectual powers, his wonderful seize in literature and science, and
the facility with which all his compositions were made, cannot doubt, if it had
pleased Providence to protract the date of his existence, that he would have
ably executed much of what he had so extensively planned.

It cannot be deemed useless or superfluous to enquire, by what arts or method
he was enabled to attain to a degree of knowledge almost universal, and
apparently beyond the powers of man, during a lise little exceeding forty-seven
years.

"The faculties of his mind, by nature vigorous, were improved by constant
exercise, and his memory, by habitual practice, had acquired a capacity of
retaining whatever had been once impressed upon it. To an unextinguished ardour
for universal knowledge, he joined a perseverance in the pursuit of it, which
subdued all obstacles; his studies began with the dawn, and during the
intermission of professional duties, were continued throughout the day.
Reflection and meditation strengthened and confirmed what industry and
investigation had accumulated. It was a fixed principle with him, from which he
never voluntarily deviated, not to be deterred, by any difficulties that were
surmountable, from prosecuting to a successful termination, what he had once
deliberately undertaken.

"But what appears to me to have enabled him to employ his talents so much to
his own and the public advantage, was the regular allotment of his time to
particular occupations, and a scrupulous adherence to the distribution which he
had fixed; hence all his studies were pursued without interruption or
confusion. Nor can I here omit remarking, what may probably have attracted your
observation as well as mine, the candor and complacency with which he gave his
attention to all persons, of whatsoever quality, talent, or education: he
justly concluded, that curious or important information might be gained from
the illiterate; and wherever it was to be obtained, he sought and seized it."

In the very brief list of eminent men, who have completely united the opposite
advantages arising from a life of business and a life of meditation, perhaps
Cicero is the personage, who may be most properly compared with Sir WILLIAM
JONES. The great Roman has been often considered as without a parallel in the
diversity and magnitude of his mental accomplishments; yet who will now
hesitate to declare, that, in extent of erudition, in elegance and energy of
mind, and above all in the tenderness and integrity of his private and public
life, he was far from being superior to our accomplished countryman.

NOTE 10. STANZA XXXII.
"Thine the loud torrent of her Epic song."
THE commentaries on Asiatic poetry contain a very spirited Latin version of a
passage from the Persian Heroic Poem of FERDUSI, whom the poetical Commentator
describes as a rival of Homer. Nullum est ab Europaeis scriptum poema, quod ad
Homeri dignitatem et quasi caelestem ardorem proprius accedat. A large portion
of FERDUSI has since appeared in an English dress, but, I fear, without
obtaining in England, either for the Persian Homer, or the English Poet his
translator, the admiration due to original genius, or the just recompense of
elegant labor. Let me add, however, that JONES'S specimen of the Persian Epic
Poetry attracted the notice, and obtained the praise of learned foreigners: it
is inserted by the Abate TODERINI, in his copious and entertaining work,
entitled, Letteratura Turchesea, with the following commendation:

"Ferdusi maraviglioso poeta epico, onor della Persiana poesia, nel suo libro
Sha Nama eroicamente descrive le geste degli eroi ^ dei re Persiani. Il Jones
ne tradusse un lungo tratto Omeriano ^ bellissimo in versi Latini, che sentono
della maniera Virgiliana; con cui adorno questo mio libro." -- Toderini, tome
1, p. 213.

NOTE 11. STANZA XXXIII.
"Ushered young Althorp into Hymen's fane."
A SPRIGHTLY and graceful ode, entitled "The Muse recalled," occasioned by the
nuptials of Lord Viscount ALTHORP (the present Earl SPENCER) and Miss LAVINIA
BINGHAM, eldest daughter of CHARLES Lord LUCAN, was printed at Strawberry Hill
1781.

NOTE 12. STANZA XXXV.
"Thy well trained youth attested all his worth."
IN addressing his noble young friend on the most joyous occasion, the high
toned spirit of the Poet led him to blend indignant sentiments of public virtue
with the gaiety of a nuptial song. The ode contains a manly strain of freedom,
united to the elegance and delicacy with which it celebrates the peculiar
talents of the lovely bride --

"Each morn, reclined on many a rose,
"Lavinia's pencil shall disclose
"New forms of dignity and grace,
"The expressive air, the empassioned face." etc.
May I be allowed to express a wish, that the pencil so justly praised may
employ itself in honoring the memory of him, who spoke in these friendly
verses his perfect sense of its power?

NOTE 13. STANZA XLII.
"The daring hand of Aeschylus portrayed."
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
Aeschili Persae, ver. 181.
Methought two women stood before my eyes
Gorgeously vested; one in Persian robes
Adorned, the other in the Doric garb;
With more than mortal majesty they moved:
Of peerless beauty, sisters too they seemed,
Though distant each from each they chanced to dwell,
In Greece the one, on the Barbaric coast
The other --. Potter's Translation.
NOTE 14. STANZA XLVIII.
"Who raised to new renown their social band."
THE seven Arabian Poems, which were suspended on the Temple at Mecca, were
translated and published by our Author in 1783, with an argument to each poem,
and the original annexed in Roman letters. This publication is peculiarly
endeared to those who love the memory of Sir WILLIAM JONES, by containing his
portrait, well engraved by HALL, from a picture of REYNOLDS.

NOTE 15. STANZA XLIX.
"Pierced the deep moral of their mystic song."
IN the third volume of the Asiatic Researches, the President inserted an
admirable Dissertation on the Mystical Poetry of the Persians and Hindus.

NOTE XVI. STANZA 50.
"Menu and Calidasa, grace the scene."
FROM an ardent and truly noble desire to befriend the natives of that country,
where he was appointed to administer justice, Sir WILLIAM JONES was led "to
suggest to government a work of national utility and importance, the
compilation of a copious digest of Hindu and Mahommedan laws, from Sanscrit and
Arabic originals, with an offer of his services to superintend the compilation,
and with a promise to translate it. -- To the superintendance of this work,
which was immediately undertaken at his suggestion, he assiduously devoted
those hours, which he could spare from his professional duties.

"During the course of this compilation, and as auxiliary to it, he was led to
study the works of MENU, reputed by the Hindus to be the oldest and holiest of
legislators, and finding them to comprize a system of religious and civil
duties, and of law in all its branches, so comprehensive and minutely exact,
that it might be considered as the institutes of Hindu law, he presented a
translation of them to the government of Bengal." -- Sir John Shore's Discourse.

When Sir WILLIAM JONES enquired of "a very sensible Brahman which of the
Indian dramas was most universally esteemed, he answered without hesitation
Sacontala, supporting his opinion, as usual among the Pandits, by a couplet to
this effect:

"The Ring of Sacontala, in which the 4th act, and four stanzas of that act are
eminently brilliant, displays all the rich exuberance of Calidasa's genius."

This circumstance induced our great Orientalist to peruse and translate
Sacontala, which he has given to the public, to use his own very just
expressions, "as a most pleasing and authentic picture of old Hindu manners,
and one of the greatest curiosities that the literature of Asia has yet brought
to light." I presume most English readers are familiar with the merits of this
singular and admirable drama, as it has lately been reprinted in a pocket
volume.

NOTE XVII. STANZA 56.
"Soon to its parent shell the gem restored."
THIS stanza is a free translation of an Asiatic eulogy on a celebrated Vizir,
of whose benevolent and philosophic character the reader may find a pleasing
anecdote in POCOCK'S edition of ABUL FEREGE. -- In the Commentaries on Asiatic
Poetry this little specimen of Eastern elegy is thus rendered in Latin verse:

Illustris fuit ille margarita
Pura luce nitens, color puro,
Quam, gemmae pretium latere questus,
Conchae restituit Deus parenti.
THERE is, I trust, no impropriety in applying to Sir WILLIAM JONES an Oriental
encomium, which he particularly admired, and which, I believe, no individual,
in any quarter of the globe, could more truly deserve.

NOTE XVIII. STANZA 62.
"He drew, and fashioned for the public use."
I HAVE presumed, without the knowledge of my friend, to allude in this stanza
to a monumental drawing of Mr. FLAXMAN, in which he has represented Sir WILLIAM
JONES collecting information from the Pandits to settle the Digest of Hindu and
Mahommedan Law.

NOTE XIX. STANZA 66.
"Clasped a new science with a lever's zeal."
"HIS last and favorite pursuit (says Sir JOHN SHORE) was the study of Botany,
which he originally began under the confinement of a severe and lingering
disorder, which with most minds would have proved a disqualification from any
application. It constituted the principal amusement of his leisure hours. In
the arrangement of Linnaeus he discovered system, truth, and science, which
never failed to captivate and engage his attention, and from the proofs, which
he has exhibited of his progress in Botany, we may conclude that he would have
extended the discoveries in that science. The last composition, which he read
to this Society, was a description of select Indian plants."

NOTE XX. STANZA 69.
"On a drear confine betwixt life and death."
A WRITER, who has experienced great favor from the public, may be thought, I
hope, to discover more of gratitude than of vanity in thus touching upon a
personal misfortune, that condemned him to a long period of mental inactivity.

NOTE XXI. STANZA 72.
"I fondly greeted with fraternal praise."
MAY I be permitted to remark, that the Essay on Epic Poetry, first published
in 1782, contains the lines relating to the ever esteemed subject of this
publication:

O thou bright Spirit, whom the Asian Muse
Had fondly steeped in all her fragrant dews*
And over whose early song, that mental feast,
She breathed the sweetness of the rifled East,
Since independent honors high control
Detached from poesy thy ardent soul,
To seek, with better hopes, Persuasion's seat,
Blessed be those hopes, and happy that retreat,
Which with regret all British bards must see,
And mourn a brother lost in losing thee.
NOTE XXII. STANZA 74.
"Tempered the judge, and dignified the bard."
A MILD and rational piety may be regarded as the crowning excellence of a
character completely accomplished. This excellence was possessed, in a very
happy degree, by the incomparable personage, to whose honor this imperfect
memorial is affectionately devoted. I cite with peculiar pleasure, on this
article, the testimony of his intelligent and worthy eulogist (Sir JOHN SHORE)
who, having mentioned the mavelous variety and extent of his predecessor's
mental powers, observes, that "from the most renowned poets and philosophers of
Greece, Rome, and Asia, he could turn, with equal delight and knowledge, to the
sublime speculations of BARROW and NEWTON. With them also he professed his
conviction of the truth of the Christian religion; and he justly deemed it no
inconsiderable advantage, that his researches had corroborated the multiplied
evidence of revelation, by confirming the Mosaic account of the primitive
world."

Let me add, that it is possible he may have rendered infinitely greater
services to religion by the admirable suggestion in the close of his Discourse
on the Gods of Greece, Italy, and India. He there points out what occurred to
him as the only promising mode of converting the Musulmans and Hindus to
Christianity; and perhaps the most worthy honor, which the Asiatic Society
could pay to the memory of Sir WILLIAM JONES, would be to resume and realize
his idea: the experiment is easy, and should it succeed in any degree, that
success will form the noblest eulogy of the beneficent spirit, by whom it was
suggested.

FINIS.
New Editions of the following have been lately published by CADELL, Junior,
and DAVIES.
1. POEMS and PLAYS, by WILLIAM HAYLEY, Esquire. in six Volumes Price L. 1. 1 s.
bound.

2. A Philosophical, Historical, and Moral ESSAY on OLD MAIDS -- By a FRIEND to
the SISTERHOOD. Three vols. with Frontispieces, 10 s. 6 d. in boards.


