A Challenge of Peace, Addressed to the Whole NATION.

WHereas there is a Spurious Collection of the Writings of Mr. De Foe, Author
of The True Born Englishman, which contain several Things not writ by the said
Author, and those that were, are full of Errors, Mistakes and Omissions, which
invert the Sense and Design of the Author. This is to give Notice, That the
Genuine Collection, Price 6 s. is Corrected by himself, with Additions never
before Printed, has the Author's Picture before it, curiousty Engraved on
Copper by M. Vandergucht; and contains more than double the Number of Tracts
incerted in the said Spurious Collection.

* The Sincerity of the Dissenters Vindicated from the Scandal of Occasional
Conformity, with some Considerations on a late Book, entitled, Moderation a
Virtue, Price 6 d.

The Shortest Way to Peace and Union. By the Author of the Shortest Way with
the Dissenters, Price 6 d.

* More Reformation. A Satyr upon himself. By the Author of The True Born
Englishman, Price 1 s.

A Challenge of PEACE, Addressed to the Whole Nation.

WITH An Enquiry into WAYS and MEANS for bringing it to pass.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1703.

To the QUEEN.
MADAM,
AS the whole Nation are happy in the Things You Do, so they are particularly
Attentive to what You Say. The Speeches your Majesty is pleased to make in
Parliament, are looked upon as Words spoken to all the Kingdom, and their
Influences are accordingly Universal.

Of all the Expressions that ever passed from Your Royal Lips, I humbly
presume, none ever sounded in the Ears of Your Protestant Subjects with so
General Applause, as Your Royal Invitation to Peace and Union among themselves.

Your Majesty has, by this one Step, let all the World know, that You not only
Seek, but perfectly understand, the General Good of your People, and the Only
way to make them Invincible.

It remains to your Subjects, to Accept your Royal Proposal, and look upon it
as the most binding Obligation, since when Princes stoop to Invite their People
to what was before their Duty, it carries with it the double Force of a Command.

Your Subjects, Madam, who wish for Peace, are Encouraged to seek and pursue
it, while they are now satisfied, that so long as they follow the Natural
Dictates of their own Reason, they also Concur with the Judgment, and obey the
obliging Commands of their Sovereign.

Those unhappy People, who either from the Severity of their Principles; or
really for want of Principles, are Otherwise Cnclin'd, that are for Suppressing
their Protestant Brethren for Opinions in Religion, or for Oppressing their
Neighbors for Interest and Parties, may now be satisfied, that while they
pursue that Unchristian and Impolitick Method, they not only weaken, but
disoblige your Majesty, and Your real Interest.

And by this your Majesty will plainly see who are Your best Subjects, those
who willingly embrace the Peace, and General Charity of Christians and
Englishmen, according to your Majesty's obliging Exhortation, or they, who, by
keeping up the Differences of your Subjects, and by continual Reproachings and
Reflections, endeavor to Represent Your peaceable People as Enemies to your
Person and Government, though they are, and ever have been, as Dutiful and Loyal
as themselves.

Such may see their Practices discouraged by your Majesty's healing Example,
and would do well to consider, that their peculiar Duty to your Majesty lies
not in Recriminating upon the Infirmities of others, but in Correcting their
Own.

Your Majesty has this complete Satisfaction concerning all your Subjects, that
the principal part of their Contention is, which Party are most Loyal to your
Government; and among those who Dissent from the Church, None of them Dissent
from your Interest; and those Gentlemen who would fain persuade the World, that
Those who Dissent from the Ecclesiastic Establishment, are also Enemies to the
Civil, have been driven to a Necessity of a supposed Extending the Civil Power
beyond the Limits of the Laws, to bring those People they would Expose, to so
much as a Temper of Objecting against it. -- This is a Method so grossly
Injurious to your Majesty, as well as to your Subjects, that it has been long
earnestly wished You would, on some Occasion or other, let them know how ill
pleasing it was, and how ill it Corresponded, both with your Majesty's
Principle as well as Practice, in all the parts of Your Government.

It Is an unhappy Violence these Men offer to Your Majesty's Character, that
they would be content to have your Majesty become a Tyrant, so they might but
be capable to prove the Dissenters Disloyal to your Government.

But as we bless God that your Majesty has resolved to regulate your
Government, by the great Foundation of all Government, the Laws; so we cannot
think we offend your Majesty in saying, that in a full Obedience to your
Government, and the Laws, none of your Subjects have exceeded in Loyalty more
than those that have, at the same time, Dissented in some Point of Religion
from the Established Church.

And among those who thus Dissent, they whose Principles are Honest, have
always regarded the Church of England, with a Temper both of Charity and
Respect; and it is to them a matter of no difficulty to entertain a Proposal of
Union in Affection and Interest, and to give all the Defference and Distinction
in Government, to the Established Church.

From whence, and your Majesty's most Generous Invitation to Peace, which, on
all occasions, they most readily Embrace, they humbly hope the Heats and
Animosities of those Gentlemen, who Charge them with Disloyalty of Principles,
will, in Obedience to your Most Gracious Speech to your Parliament, be Buried
and forgotten, that they may Enjoy, together with all your Loyal Subjects, the
public Favor and Protection of their Sovereign, till they give your Majesty
some just Cause, which God forbid, to withdraw it from them.

And if this cannot be obtained, your Majesty, and all the World will be
Witnesses to their sincere Desires, and forward Endeavors after the General
Union of your Subjects, and will be effectually satisfied at whose Doors the
black Charge will lie, and to whom we Owe all the unhappy Divisions of the
Nation.

Your Protestant Subjects, Madam, who, as Your Majesty once observed, have the
misfortune to Dissent from the Established Church, have yet a greater
misfortune than that, Namely, to be Misrepresented to Your Majesty as Enemies
to Your Person and Government; but among all their Unhappiness, they Esteem
this as a Blessing from Heaven, that they have now an Opportunity offered them
to Convince Your Majesty of the honesty of their Principles, by being the
forwardest to close with Your Invitation of Peace and Union, as the Thing in
all the World which most suites both their Practice and Inclination.

Humbly assuring Your Majesty, that as with the greatest Thankfulness they
receive the Expressions of Your Earnest Defires for the Peace and Union of all
Your Subjects, so, with a steady Application, they resolve to be the first who
shall publicly Practice it, and endeavor to Express their Zeal for the
Public Good, and Your Majesty's Glory, by heartily complying with what they
were always Inclined to by their Principles and Inclinations, but much more by
the Obedience their Duty Calls for to Your Majesty's Commands of Peace and
Union.

The Humblest of your Subjects, Madam, would have Subscribed his Name to a
Petition of Pardon, for the Presumption of this Dedication; but that when he
compares his Despicable Character with the Glorious Subject he has attempted to
Advance; he cannot prevail upon himself to let the Cause suffer by the Meaness
and Unworthiness of the Advocate, and only Craves leave to assure Your Majesty,
that however he may have been Represented, he is a passionate Admirer of Peace,
an Earnest Petitioner for the Prosperity of Your Majesty, and this Kingdom, and
the entire Union of all Your Subjects.

Amen.
A Challenge of PEACE, ADDRESSED, To the whole NATION.
With an Enquiry into Ways and Means for bringing it to pass.
WHEN her Majesty in her Speech to the Parliament pressed the House to Union
and Peace, I believe 'twas Included, in her Royal Intentions, that we should
all Understand her speaking to the whole Nation, and that her Majesty would
have all her Subjects study Concord and Unanimity among themselves in their
Neighborhood and Converse, as well as in the Councils and Debates of their
Representatives in Parliament.

I cannot suppose her Majesty should mean a Union of Opinions in Religion, for
though I ought to believe her Majesty Wishes all her Protestant Subjects were of
one mind with her self, and followed her Majesty in the same path to Heaven,
yet, I cannot believe her Majesty sees it so probable as to expect it. But I
suppose her Majesty to mean that they should all Unite in Affection, where they
differ in Opinion; Unite in Interest, and Concur in their Obedience to the
Established Government; Unite in a Unanimous Agreement of Management, and Unite
as to Parties and Factions; Unite as Englishmen, as Christians, and as
Protestants. This every good Christian would be glad to see, and this every Man
ought to suppose himself Invited to in her Majesty's Speech.

If I am mistaken, as I believe I am not, let any Man give me a Construction of
her Speech more Genuine if they can.

These Sheets are designed as a Comment upon this Glorious Text, and further,
to explain the Subject, and, if possible, both describe the Sense, and remove
the Obstructions.

It Is a most fatal unhappy Circumstance that every Body is for Peace, and yet
no Body will bring it to pass; all Men agree that Peace is a Blessing from on
High, that the want of it among our selves Undoes us, Ruins our Preparations at
Home, and our Expeditions Abroad, fills us with Fatal Parties, Factions and
Animosities; makes our Councils Confused; Our War Tedious; Our Designs
Abortive, and our Felicity Precarious; want of Peace and Unity among our selves
makes our Arms less Feared, our Friendship less Courted, and, in short, is the
only thing in the World can ever Ruin us.

I am persuaded there is not a Man in the Nation but concurs in these Generals;
but when you come to speak of the particular Steps to be taken to obtain this
Blessed Article of the Nation's Happiness, all Men are for having their
Neighbors stoop to their Opinions, but wont yield a jot of their own; they are
for making Abatements for other Men, but admit of none for themselves.

To come directly to the Point concerning this Union of Parties, I think it is
necessary a little to Examine the Negatives, which are not the ways to obtain
this Blessing. As

First, Sacheverell's Bloody Flag of Defiance is not the Way to Peace and
Union, the shortest Way to Destroy, is not the shortest Way to Unite,
Persecution, Laws to Compel, Restrain, or force the Consciences of one another,
is not the Way to this Union, which her Majesty has so earnestly Recommended.

Secondly, To Repeal or Contract the late Act of Tolleration, is not the Way
for this so much wished for Happiness; to have Laws revived that should set one
Party a Plundering, Excommunicating and Unchurching another, that should renew
the Oppressions and Devastations of late Reigns, this will not, by any means,
Contribute to this Peace, which all good Men desire.

New Associations and Proposals to divest Men of their Freehold Right for
Differences in Opinion, and take away the Right of Dissenters Voting in
Elections of Members; this is not the way to Peace and Union.

Railing Pamphlets buffooning our Brethren as a Party to be suppressed, and
dressing them up in the Bare's Skin for all the Dogs in the Street to bait
them, is not the way to Peace and Union.

Railing Sermons, exciting People to Hatred and Contempt of their Brethren,
because they Differ in Opinions, is not the way to Peace and Union.

Shutting all People out of Employment, and the Service of their Prince and
Country, unless they can Comply with indifferent Ceremonies of Religion, is far
from the way to Peace and Union.

Reproaching the Succession, settled by Parliament, and Reviving the Abdicated
Title of the late K. James, and his supposed Family, cannot tend to this Peace
and Union.

Laws against Occasional Conformity, and Compelling People who bear Offices to
a Total Conformity, and yet Force them to take and serve in those public
Employments, cannot contribute to Peace and Union.

These are some of the Negativae, some of the immediate Contraries, the
Opposites to this blessed Peace and Union, which her Majesty has Recommended to
the whole Nation; while these things are practiced or allowed, I doubt her
Majesty will be defeated of the Expectation She has from the Exhortation She
has been pleased to make. The Breaches are too wide, the Wound too deep, and
ranckl'd almost to a Gangreen, and if it goes long without a Cure, will
certainly come to Amputation of Members, or to a Mortification of Parts. The
Breaches of Parties, if not ended in a healing Agreement, will certainly end in
the Suppression, if not the Destruction, of one Party, if not of all.

The Ways and Means for this Nation's Destruction are very plain and obvious;
they are all within our selves; they are begun, and carried on, by our Selves;
We dig the Grave of the Commonwealth with our own hands; the fire of Discord
will burn up the very Bowels of the Nation, and Consume us insensibly, and all
owing to the civil Fury of contending Parties. No Nation can destroy England
but it self, and if the Feuds, and Heat of Parties continue, no Nation can
prevent our Destruction.

Her Majesty sensible of the evil Consequence, has given a large and very
seasonable Caution, and solemnly Invites all the Nation to lay aside the
Contention of Parties, to embrace Peace, Love, Unity, and Conjunction of
Interests, that uniting Hearts and Hands in the common Defense, the whole
Government may be strengthened, her Majesty the more cheerfully Assisted, and
the Public Burden sustained.

To these blessed Ends all good Protestants ought to Contribute, as far as in
them lies; but as all Parties must yield part of their present stifness to the
great Conjunction her Majesty desires, I thought it might not be improper to
let all Sides see some necessary Steps, which they not only should, but must,
and ought, to take, in order to make this Heavenly Work possible.

I humbly conceive all the present Discord of this Nation may be comprehended
in these Two, Differences in Religion. Differences in Interest.


One concerns the Conscience, and the other the Estate, but both are so twisted
together, that it seems as if there were no Broil but about Religion, and that
the Church was the only Bone of Contention.

But as they have generally Least of Religion who Contend most about it, so in
the public Strife of Parties, there seems to be a Color of Religion placed
upon the General Contention, but really, at the bottom, the whole Quarrel is
guided by the Interests of Parties, Places, Preferments, to get Some in, and
Some out, this seems the main Thing in hand.

Parties Contend to get into the Executive Power, that they may put all their
Friends into the great Places, and Offices of the Crown.

Some would have such a King, or such a Family to Succeed to the Crown, and
why? Not so much because this King, or Prince, or Family, is of this, of that
Religion, but because they are of such, or such a Party, and then such and such
Friends get into Employment.

I don't say it is impossible to reconcile Parties, wave Differences, and bring
all to a Temper of Peace, but there is so much to be done, so much Self-Denial
of Practice required, that I dare not say, I hope to see it brought to pass;
and yet I shall not descend to Particulars, in order only to show the
Difficulty, and so Discourage the Work; but to let you see, that though it may be
Difficult, it is not Impossible.

The first Article of Ways and Means to this Peace must be found in the general
Temper of the Nation. There must be a Propensity, a general Inclination to
Yield and Bend to one another. It Is Nonsense to talk of Particulars, if the
general Bent of Men's Thoughts are not first brought to Love, Seek, and Desire
Peace; and were this once produced, Could any probable Steps be taken in this
part, Could there be but an appearance of a Peaceable Temper in the Nation, the
rest of the Work would be found easier than we imagine; all Differences would
vanish, did but the Inclination to Difference vanish; did the wrangling Temper
cease, were but the Spirit of Contention taken away, the Causes of Contention
would not be so eagerly embraced: This is the Tinder of the Nation, which is so
ready to catch hold of the Fire of Dissension; this unhappiness of Temper has
been an Old and Epidemick Disease, and has got such ground among us, 'twill be
very hard to have any thing but some public Calamity to Cure it; Affliction
reconciles Friends, Common Dangers unite Nations, and Settle disjointed
Parties; All are obliged to join in Common Defense.

But it is very hard, as well as unkind to our Selves, that we can never be in a
Condition to be Reconciled to one another, till we are just at the Door of
being ruined; That nothing but Enemies can persuade us to be Friends, and the
more violent our Assaults are from Abroad; the more forward our Peace is at
Home; from whence that Verse seems to be verified of the English, and by far,
Harder to Rule in Times of Peace than War.


Now seems a prevaling Juncture to reduce us to a Temper of Peace; foreign
Wars, though we feel them not in our own Bowels, yet one would think they have
presented a Field spacious enough to vent all our Gall and ill Temper in, though
the War has not been so Considerable, as to put us out of our Selves for fear,
yet it has not been so inconsiderable, as not to afford us sufficient Reason
for Unity, Union of Councils, Union of Purses, Hands and Hearts are all little
enough.

But it is in vain to talk of Union till the Temper of Disunited Parties is
brought over to desire it, we may Unite in Words, but we shall never do it in
Affection, till all People are willing; Pretenses of Union tend but to the
widening the Breach, and is like Hypocrisy in Religion, Represented in
Scripture, by Drawing near to God with the Mouth, when the Heart is far from
him. He that presses his Argument for this Temper, should direct his Speech to
all Parties, and to all such I freely say, they who have not this Temper of
Peace, who do not incline to Union of Interest, and Union of Affection, are
blind to the public Benefit of their Native Country, Enemies to the present
Government, Disrespectful and Disloyal to her Majesty, and Underminers of their
own Posterity.

It may be expected very rationally, that I should enter into the particulars
of Parties, and Examine who have most need to be Exhorted to Union and Peace;
and though I would not be Partial to Parties, yet I cannot help advancing this
general Head, that the main Article of Dissension, Strife and Contention, lies
now on those Gentlemen who call themselves High-Church-Men. Who can the
Invitation to Peace mean, but those People who want the Hint. It Is plain
neither the Moderate Churchmen, nor the Dissenters, can be meant. For they are
desirous of Peace; it is their Interest, their Principle, and their
Inclination; the Temper seems to be plainly seen there.

The High Churchmen say, they are for Peace; but they are for Peace without
Union; they are for the Peace of Subjection; they would have all be Peace, that
is, their feet on the Necks of their Enemies: But it is Peace and Union the
Queen has Spoke for, and it is to these Gentlemen the Speech is directed, for
they chiefly stand in need of the Exhortation.

These are the Men who carry the heat of their Arguments out to the Extreme of
Reproach, and the Indecency of Contempt; these are the Men that Print, Preach,
and Cry up all Modern Discontents that strive to blacken their Brethren with
Marks of Distinction; these are they that have Stigmatized all the Men of
Moderation, with the Brand of Low-Church-men, and all other Writings Represent
them as Traitors to their Friends, to the Church, and to their own Principles,
worse than Dissenters, Fanatics or Schismatics; and yet all I can find these
Gentlemen Charged with, is, that they are not for tearing People to pieces for
Religion, and ruining their Dissenting Brethren the Shortest Way.

These are the Gentlemen who have lifted up the Bloody Flag against their
Protestant Neighbors, and declared, that all the True Churchmen are bound to
List in the New Crusado of the Church.

These are the Gentlemen who are for Confounding, and not Converting, their
Friends the Dissenters, and instead of desiring them to Conform, are for
preventing that Occasional Communion they can comply with in order to keep them
out of Places; so that they had rather keep up the Schism in the Church, than
obtain a Union at the Price of their temporal Advancement, discovering a true
Christian Spirit in being neither willing to let us Dissent, nor Conform.

These are the Gentlemen that have the most need to learn the Doctrine of Peace
and Union, since, if they pleased, we might be soon removed from the most
Contentious divided Nation in the World, to an universal Family of Love and
Christian Charity, endeavoring to win and engage one another by Mildness and
Temper, and struggling to fortify our Opinions by the Christian Emulation of
Love and good Works.

The Charge seems great, but might easily be made out, that this Party only are
the Agressors in Contention.

The Low Churchmen, as they call them, are Men of Moderation and Peace, and
hated by these because they are so; they are neither for oppressing the
Property, nor Imposing upon the Conscience; a large Charity for their fellow
Christians, aversion to Persecution, tenderness of Property and the Laws, are
their peculiar Character.

To these there is no occasion of speaking a word, for they are with her
Majesty Heart and Hand for Peace and Union.

To these we owe the Act of Toleration, and the quieting the uneasy
Consciences of the People.

To these we owe the Restoring of Parliaments to their due Power, and that
Power to its frequent exercise.

To these we owe the Disarming the Ecclesiastical Harpies, and paring the
Talons and Claws of the Church Vultures, who were always tearing to pieces, and
preying upon their Neighbors.

To these we owe the Currency and Supremacy of the Laws, and the Just
Concession of Right made to the People.

To these we owe the late Revolution, Deposing the Dispensing Arbitrary Will of
approaching Tyranny,

To these we owe the securing our Posterity in the possession of their
indubitable Rights, under a Protestant Succession, and removing the Nation's
Fears from a precarious unsettled futurity. What have not these men of Peace
done for us.

These are the Center to which all Parties, if they will have peace, must
incline.

To these the Dissenters freely and cheerfully remit the Trust of Government,
and the Conduct of Constituted Right.

These are the Men whom the Dissenters are universally willing should Reign
over them, and from among whom, if it was in their Choice, they would demand a
King.

With these Liberty, Property, Conscience, Law, Justice, and all the parts of
the Constitution are secure; their end is Peace, and their mean Justice and the
Laws.

The Dissenters and these have but One Interest, and there never was a Man of
these in Post of Trust or Honor in the Nation, who kept Close to this Honest
Principle, but the Dissenters loved him, stood by him, voted for him, and in
all Cases needful Vindicated and Encouraged him.

Nor do the Dissenters stand in so much need of this Peaceable hint relating to
the public; for they have never been found embroyling the State, or breaking
the public Measures; they have been misrepresented as Engrosing and Possessing
the places of Trust and Profit in the last Reign, but the Case remains
unprov'd; and in all the black Roll of Mismanagement represented to her
Majesty, in the Address of the House of Commons, I fairly Challenge any Man to
show me the Name of One Dissenter; they have suffered in the Calamities
Occasioned by those miss-Conducts, they have born the share of Taxes
misapplied, and Deficiencies of Funds; but they can never prove upon them, that
any Dissenters were either Personally or Occasionally Instrumental in those
Defects, your Ran -- s your Sr. John M -- Sr. R -- G --. W -- and J -- were
none of them Dissenters, the Frauds and Treacheries of the late Reign cannot be
laid at their Door.

All their Grievances are, that they suffer by other Men's Knavery, that they
are threatened with the Repeal of the Tolleration, blackened with slanders, and
bullied with bloody Flags, Defiances, and Billinsgate Language, from the Press
and from the Pulpit, their Meeting Houses represented as Houses of Sedition,
and the World asks this insolent Question in Print. Whether is worse or more
pernicious to the Government, a Meeting House or a Playhouse? They are daily
suffering the Indignities of hair-brained Priests, buffooning Poets, and Clubs
of insolent Pamphleters; and 'twould be endless to quote the Bear-Garden
language thrown upon them in a rapsody of prints, which they suffer with
Regret, but have always born with patience.

These things being removed, the Dissenters are naturally at ease; the Liberty
of their Persons, safety of their Properties and Birth right, and the
Tolleration of their Consciences are the full of all their demand; and these
being secured, we may safely defye all the Power of Malice to charge upon them
the breach of the Publick-quiet, or any Encroachment upon the Government, their
Neighbors, or the Laws.

The Assaults of their intemperate Adversaries may have filled them with just
Apprehensions, that the sub. version of their Liberty is designed, and they
will perhaps be ready to say they have good Reason for it; but as her Majesty
has always Comforted them with the full Assurance of her Royal Word in that
Case, they have always behaved with Duty and Deference to her Majesty, and
every part of her Government; and let those who have so openly attempted to
prove the Dissenters fatal to the English Constitution, and consequently have
proposed to have them deprived of their Birthright as Freeholders, let them
give an instance of One Act of disloyalty which they have been Guilty of to her
Majesty, to merit so much her Royal displeasure.

The Dissenters therefore do not come in as the immediate Subjects of this
Exhortation to Peace, their Circumstances, their Interests, their Number, their
Estates oblige them to Peace, and they cannot be Fomenters of our Breaches and
Divisions, without being Fools and Madmen, blind to their own happiness, and
Thieves to their Posterity.

If this blessed Motion of peace affects the Dissenters at all, it must be as
it respects the Conduct of themselves to themselves; the infinite Feuds,
Divisions and Animosities harbored among their separate Parties, and daily
expressed against one another, is too much a scandal upon them as Christians, and
too much reproaches their Morals as Men: And here it is to be acknowledged they
deserve reproof, and cannot defend themselves, wherefore they are most justly
called upon by her Majesty's Speech, and by the whole Nation to hearken to
Peace.

Their Character as Christians, their Pretenses of more than Common
Reformation, their Interest as a Party, their Profession, their God and their
Queen all call upon them to Peace and Union; Union of Affection, if not Union
of Profession; Union of Practice, if not Union of Principle.

Having thus run through the Parties who are concerned in this matter, it leads
me to repeat to my Reader, that were the temper of peace, were the propensity
to a general Union, fixed in the Breasts of these Parties, there might be some
hopes that a further progress might be made; but there must first be an
inclination to Peace, before there can be any real Foundation to hope for it: I
know nothing in the World could have been a greater step to form this
inclination in the Minds of all Parties, than the vehemence with which her
Majesty has been pleased to recommend it in her Speech; It Is a call from Heaven
by the Mouth of the Queen, and doubtless her Majesty was inspired from thence,
to move that particular Article of her Speech with so much uncommon
earnestness, that those whoever entertained any thoughts of her Majesty's being
b^ast by a Party, might see their mistake; that the Party themselves, who began
too much to depend upon her Patronage in their ill Designs, might be
discouraged, and that all her People might see her Majesty was entirely engaged
in the general Interest of her People's good, without respect to Parties, to
Faction, or the private projects of designing People about her.

For my part, I confess my self surprised with Joy, to find her Majesty's Eyes
open to the general Happiness of her People, and should take it for a Judgment
upon the Nation, if the Peoples Eyes should remain shut to their own felicity,
and that Feuds and Parties should have run us to that extreme, that even a
healing Monarch cannot Unite us.

It has not been a common thing for the Nation to be Summoned to Unity and
Peace from the Throne; evil Princes have been shye and jealous of the Union of
their Subjects, and maintaining and keeping up the Jealousies and Animosities
of Parties, has been thought a needful policy to protect the Crown. But this
Practice has been a just Satyr upon those Princes that allowed it, as a certain
Demonstration they had something to impose, which nothing but the private Feuds
of Parties could bring them to consent to.

The Union of Subjects is the Dread of Tyrants; for no People in the World
would bear the Insults and Cruelties of Encroaching Arbitrary Princes, were not
the People themselves divided in Interests, Parties, Factions and Designs. It
is a token for good to the People of England, that the Queen, however by a sort
of men she has been misrepresented and abused, has yet this Testimony to give
the World of her Justice, and the Integrity of her Designs, that she covets
that Peace among all her People, which some of her Arbitrary Ancestors have
been afraid to bring upon the Stage.

Instead of being afraid of the Union of her Subjects, she is of nothing more
desirous than to bring out that blessed Article, to see all her Subjects
practicing Charity and Kindness one to another. The Reason is plain, her
Majesty having regulated her Conduct by the Laws, and confined her Desires to
the Happiness of her People, she can give no Testimony of it like this, that
she covets to see them United in the Bonds of Love, and walking Hand in Hand in
her Service.

None but Tyrants covet to be feared, Just Princes value themselves upon the
Love of their People.

The Hearts of Subjects are the Strength of Kings. Now it is impracticable to
have all the People join in Duty and Affection to their Prince, while they are
embroiled with heat and passions one with another; universal Love, makes
universal Loyalty: No Subjects are so true to their Prince, nor so hearty to
his Cause, as those who are United among themselves, and Unanimous in their way
of living.

While therefore her Majesty invites all her Subjects to Union and Peace, it is
a certain Indication of her resolved Design to Govern this Nation by the Laws,
and preserve the Rights and Liberties of her Subjects: She would else be very
unwilling the People should have any endearing Conversation among themselves,
least one time or other they should open their Eyes to see the way to Liberty,
and cast off the yoke of their intended Slavery. But if her Majesty calls us to
Peace, she calls us to Freedom, and lets us know She is far from encouraging
the mischievous Designs of those who strive to bring in destruction at the door
of Contention, and who are willing to keep up the strife of the People, that
they might not agree in their own deliverance.

I confess my self surpised at this discovery of the Royal intentions to Peace
and Union, and that I expected not her Majesty had yet seen far enough into the
malicious Designs of that Party, who designed to engage her on one part of her
people against the other, and have had many a melancholy Prospect of the
consequences of a Nation divided against her self: Nor do I know any way in the
World to have given that hot Temper so Universal an overthrow, as her Majesty
has now taken, viz. To let them know that what ever they may expect from her,
how much soever they may fancy they please her in running down One Party to
raise and establish another, her Majesty is not of their Mind. The Queen knows
a better way to hold the Balance of Parties, than to erect any One upon the
destruction of another; what ever the Opinions in Religion are, they are all
her Majesty's Subjects, they have all a Title to her Protection, while they
behave themselves Dutifuly to her Person and Government; reconciling their
Plrinciples is none of her Majesty's Province as Queen, and if it were, seems
but too impracticable; but to reconcile their Persons, make them useful to her
self, conversible to one another, quiet and obedient to the Laws and her
Government, this her Majesty professes to Desire, is Her Resolution, and all
her People's advantage.

In Concurrence with this Design, it is our Business to strive who is the
forwardest for Peace, that her Majesty may be convinced who are the
Incendiaries of the Nation; Mark such as sow Divisions: let us Mark our selves
for Visible Healers of Divisions, and the Contrary will mark the Wideners of
Our Breaches.

As I have Undertaken to advance in the behalf of the Dissenters, that they are
the forwardest to Embrace this Universal Peace, so I hope I shall not be
ashamed to affirm, That both their Interest and their Principles Concur to
press them to it, and I yet hope their Practice will not let me, nor any One
who Undertakes the Vindication of their Cause, be ashamed of being their
Advocate.

They cannot be Enemies to this Reconciliation of Parties, unless at the same
time they have lost their Senses, and are qualifying themselves for Bedlam; and
I am of the Opinion, that had a General Assembly of all the Dissenters in this
Nation been met together, to Consider what they would Desire her Majesty to do
for them, I mean for them particularly as Dissenters, they could have thought
of nothing more material to them and the whole Nation, than a Cessation of this
Party Strife, and a Civil Union with all the rest of her Majesty's Subjects.

What else had they to ask? Their Properties are secured by the Law, their
Religion by the Tolleration, and both reassur'd by the Queen's repeated
Promises to Continue them. They Could have nothing more to ask, but that her
Majesty would do what in her Wisdom she should find Conducing to a general
Peace and Union of Affection, between them and those People from whom they were
obliged to Dissent in Point of Religion.

This her Majesty has done without their Application, and I think the
Dissenters cannot answer it to the Sense of their Own Interest, if they do not
make public acknowledgment to God and Her Majesty for so remarkable a Mercy.

Had we Beaten the French Fleet at Sea, or had any more than Ordinary Advantage
over the Nation's Enemies been Obtained; We should, and reason good, have made
a Day of public Rejoicing and Thanksgiving to God for so great a Blessing, and
by Addresses of Congratulation Complimented her Majesty upon that head.

This is a Victory over the worst Enemy the Nation has, an Enemy the most Fatal
and most Formidable of any in the World; Contention is the Devil's
Generalissimo, that has always led on the Infernal Troops to Invade the Peace
of this Unhappy Nation; Her Majesty has given an Overthrow to the Grand Army of
Hell, and Dispersed the Numerous Squadrons that were Embatteling themselves
against the general Quiet, and who verily thought they had the Queen on their
side.

It remains for all Her Subjects to pursue the flying Troops of this Defeated
Army, and to destroy and remove all the little Foundations of Party Feuds,
Fears, Jealousies, Reproaches, and Raillery that blow up the Grand Flame of
Discord in the Nation.

Would all Parties fall in heartily with Her Majesty's Command, a General Kiss
of Friendship and Reconciliation would pass through these three Kingdoms, the
Wolf and the Lamb would lie down together, Peace would smother all the remains
of Enmity, and the Seeds of Dissension would Dye in the Earth, and spring up no
more.

And that I may not seem to press my Readers to think of what I cannot direct
them how to do. I think it not improper to say, this Work is not Difficult,
it is easier to agree than to fall out, if Men were all inclined to Peace.

I shall not pretend in the short Compass of these Sheets, to draw a full
Scheem of a Project of Peace among the General Parties, nor unless I were
Directed would I engage in any thing so Nice, having no need to feel the
further Resentment of those who may no more be pleased with the Project, than
they are with the Person. But I will Venture to touch the Preliminaries, and
tell the People of England how they may begin, I Will put them into the Road, in
which if they please but to go on straight forward, as they say, they cannot
fail to arrive at the Port of Peace.

Not at all to concern matters of Religion and Opinions about worshipping God
with our Civil Affairs, and common Charity, leaving all People freely, as now
the Laws do, to the dictates of the Spirit, and the conduct of their
Consciences.

Religion is a matter of Peace, the ways of God are ways of Pleasantness, and
all his Paths are Peace, which though it means speculative Peace, yet I may apply
it here; there is nothing in Religion which has a tendency to sour our
Tempers, ruffle our Conversation, or disorder our Lives. As to Converting one
another, the Scripture is full of Rules to direct us to act in that by the
Power of Persuasion; even Reproof is to be done with the Spirit of Meekness,
says the Apostle and Rebuking one another in Love, and provoking one another to
Love and to good Works; and if the Scripture were silent in the case, the
Reason and Nature of the thing seems to imply, that all coercive Methods are
vain as well as unlawful, as to Conscience.

Experience might convince those Sons of Violence who are for Persecution of
their Neighbors, that it has been a fruitless War; and if we were to examine
how many Converts to the Church have been made by such Measures, I doubt they
can give but a slender account of the Fruit of that Method whereof the whole
Church is now ashamed. I say ashamed, for that In the Preamble to a late Bill
for the preventing Occasional Conformity, it is there owned, that Persecution
for Conscience is Contrary to the Principles of the Christian Religion, and to
the Doctrine of the Church of England.

I avoid all the just Examples I could give of the Irregularities and
Oppressions the Dissenters have suffered under on this head; that I may begin
with my self, and bury the remembrances of Violences and ill Usage, in this new
Resolution of Peace which we are all invited to by her Majesty, and which I
hope all the Dissenters in the Nation will be the most forward to accept.

But as to future Conduct let matters of Religion be things of serious Choice,
but not of Violence and Debate, we may Differ but not Quarrel; we may Dissent,
without Censure and Uncharitableness; they may Conform, without Envy and
Reproach; Honest Men should agree with honest Men, of whatsoever Opinion they
may be, and not with Knaves whatsoever Party they take. A little Charity sown
on good Land would produce a huge Crop of Peace. And even Grace it self,
planted in a soil barren of Charity, sours and grows morose.

What has Religion to do with Politics? Honest Men of all Persuasions are
honest Men, and Knaves are the worse, the more pretense they make to Religion;
we should not have a tenth part of the Differences in State Affairs, did not
Church Matters and State-matters mingle so much together.

The Law has placed the Administration in the hands of the Church, and though
there has been a thousand reviling Pamphlets that have accused the Dissenters
of repining at it, yet not one Dissenter can be charged with a Design to alter
it; let but Peace and moderate Principles possess the Men of Government, the
Dissenters were always content, and ever will be pleased to have the Power rest
in the hands of the Church; and where this Peace and Moderation is not, I
believe all men will grant me that the principal Qualifications for Government
are wanting.

It Is nothing but the want of this Peace and Moderation, which has made the
matters of Religion and Government Clash, and the whole Nation fall out about
them; and if any Man shall attempt to prove that this contentious Spirit has
been on the side of the Dissenters, I think I may not be taxed with Arrogance,
if I say I can easily consute him.

But however it has been, for Peace never Recriminates, I shall adventure in
the Name of the Dissenters, presuming upon their universal Consent, and with
the Consent of some of the most Judicious among them, to make their Adversaries
this fair Challenge.

Let the sincerity of the peaceable Spirit be tried by the Consequence: The
Queen has made a general Invitation to Peace and Union, and we accept it; let
her Majesty now see who are her most Loyal Subjects, who are greatest Friends
to the general Interest, and the truest Lovers of their Country, by
distinguishing among them who have most regard to her earnest Recommendation,
and who are really and unfeignedly of peaceable Tempers and Principles, and who
are not; who are most for Peace and Union, who readiest to obey their
Sovereign's Command, who honestest to their own Pretenses, the High Churchmen
or the Dissenters.

If this Challenge would be accepted, if persons deputed by both Parties were
to meet, how easy would it be to settle Conditions of mutual Society,
agreement of Parties, and general Charity in the whole Nation, which whoever
would break, should be hist out of all Conversation, contemned by all sides,
and no body care to speak to him.

All this might be done, and Religion never be concerned in the matter, the
Concerns of Conscience would be a Class by it self, and never make a rupture in
our Civil Society; Men would be Gentlemen as well as Christians, and the Union
of Conversation and Interest would make a little Heaven in the Nation.

We should no more be cutting of Throats about Religion, and sending one
another to the Devil for not going to Heaven our own way.

This would be the Shortest way with the Dissenters, and Sachavrell's bloody
Flag would be a Fool to it.

This would make us be Dissenters and no Dissenters, and there would be a
Conformity in Civil Ceremonies, though there was none in Religious.

This would bring the Christian and the Englishman to understand one another,
who have been a long while at variance.

This would make the Devil out of Love with the Climate, and People would get
to Heaven with the less interruption.

In a word, 'twould be a Strength to our Millitary Power, a Glory to our Civil,
and a Luster to our Religious. 'Twould make the Nation Invincible, the Laws
Impregnable, Trade Increase, Religion Flourish, the Queen Victorious, and the
People Happy.

FINIS.

