AN EPISTLE FROM A Lady in ENGLAND; TO A GENTLEMAN at AVIGNON.



LONDON, Printed for J. Tonson, at Shakespear's-Head overagainst
Katharine-street in the Strand. 1717.

AN EPISTLE FROM A Lady in ENGLAND; TO A GENTLEMAN at AVIGNON.
TO Thee, dear Rover, and thy vanquished Friends,
The Health, she wants, thy gentle Chloe sends:
Though much You suffer, think I suffer more,
Worse than an Exile on my Native Shore.
Companions in your Master's Flight you roame,
Unenvied by your haughty Foes at home;
For-ever near the Royal Outlaw's side
You share his Fortunes, and his Hopes divide,
On glorious Schemes, and Thoughts of Empire dwell,
And with Imaginary Titles swell.
Say (for thou know I own his sacred Line,
The Passive Doctrine, and the Right Divine)
Say, what new Succors does the Chief prepare?
The Strength of Armies? Or the Force of Prayer?
Does he from Heaven or Earth his Hopes derive?
From Saints Departed? Or from Priests Alive?
Nor Saints nor Priests can Brunswick's Troops withstand,
And Beads drop useless through the Zealot's Hand;
Heaven to our Vows may Future Kingdoms owe,
But Skill and Courage win the Crowns below.
E're to thy Cause, and Thee, my Heart inclined,
Or Love to Party had seduce'd my Mind,
In Female Joys I took a dull Delight,
Slept all the Morn, and Punted half the Night:
But now, with Fears and public Cares possessed,
The Church, the Church, for-ever breaks my Rest.
The Post-Boy on my Pillow I explore,
And sift the News of every foreign Shore,
Studious to find new Friends, and new Allies;
What Armies march from Sueden in Disguise;
How Spain prepares her Banners to unfold,
And Rome deals out her Blessings, and her Gold:
Then over the Map my Finger, taught to stray,
Cross many a Region marks the winding Way;
From Sea to Sea, from Realm to Realm I rove,
And grow a mere Geographer by Love.
But still Avignon, and the pleasing Coast
That holds Thee banished, claims my Care the most,
Often on the well-known Spot I fix my Eyes,
And Span the Distance that between us lies.
Let not our James, though foiled in Arms, Despair,
Whilst on his Side he reckons half the Fair:
In Britain's lovely Isle a shining Throng
War in his Cause, a thousand Beauties strong.
The unthinking Victors vainly boast their Powers;
Be Theirs the Musket, while the Tongue is Ours.
We Reason with such Fluency and Fire,
The Beaux we baffle, and the Learned tire,
Against her Prelates plead the Church's Cause,
And from our Judges vindicate the Laws.
Then mourn not, hapless Prince, thy Kingdoms lost,
A Crown, though late, thy sacred Brow may boast;
Heaven seems through Us thy Empire to decree,
Those who Win Hearts, have given their Hearts to Thee.
What Dames! what Doctors in thy Cause combine!
What Petticoats in Either Sex are Thine!
Have thou not heard that, when profusely gay
Our well-drest Rivals grace'd their Sov'raign's Day,
We stubborn Damsels met the public View
In loathsome Wormwood, and repenting Rue?
What Whig but trembled, when our spotless Band
In Virgin Roses whitened half the Land!
Who can forget what Fears the Foe possessed,
When Oaken Boughs marked every loyal Breast!
Less scared near Medway's Stream the Norman stood,
When cross the Plain he spied a marching Wood,
'Till, near at hand, a Gleam of Swords betrayed
The Youth of Kent beneath it is wandering Shade.
Those, who the Succors of the Fair despise,
May find that we have Nails as well as Eyes.
Thy Female Bands, O Prince by Fortune crossed,
At least more Courage than thy Men may boast:
Our Sex has dared the Mugg-House Chiefs to meet,
And purchased Fame in many a well-fought Street.
From Drury Lane, the Region of Renown,
The Land of Love, the Paphos of the Town,
Fair Patriots sallying often have put to flight
With all their Poles the Guardians of the Night,
And bore, with Screams of Triumph, to their Side
The Leader's Staff in all its painted Pride.
Nor fears the Hawker in her warbling Note
To vend the discontented Statesman's Thought.
Though red with Stripes, and recent from the Thong,
Sore smitten for the Love of sacred Song,
The tuneful Sisters still pursue their Trade,
Like Philomela darkling in the Shade.
Poor Trott attends, forgetful of a Fare,
And Hums in Concert over his Empty Chair.
Mean while, regardless of the Royal Cause,
His Sword for James no Brother Sov'rain draws.
The Pope himself, surrounded with Alarms,
To France his Bulls, to Corfu sends his Arms,
And though He hears his Darling Son's Complaint,
Can hardly spare one Tutelary Saint,
But lists them all to guard his own Abodes,
And into Ready Money coyns his Gods.
The dauntless Suede, pursued by vengeful Foes,
Scarce keeps his own hereditary Snows;
Nor must the friendly Roof of kind Lorrain
With Feasts regale our Garter'd Youth again:
Safe, Bar-le-duc, within thy silent Grove
The Pheasant now may perch, the Hare may rove:
The Knight, who aims unerring from afar,
The Adventurous Knight, now quits the Sylvan War:
Thy brinded Boars may slumber un-dismay'd,
Or grunt secure beneath the Chestnut Shade.
Inconstant Orleans (still we mourn the Day
That trusted Orleans with Imperial Sway)
Far over the Alps our helpless Monarch sends,
Far from the Call of his desponding Friends.
Such are the Terms to gain Britainnia's Grace!
And such the Terrors of the Brunswick Race!
Was it for this the Sun's whole Luster failed,
And sudden Midnight over the Noon prevailed!
For this did Heaven display to Mortal Eyes
Aerial Knights and Combats in the Skies!
Was it for this Northumbrian Streams looked Red!
And Thames driven backward showed his Secret Bed!
False Auguries! the insulting Victor's Scorn!
Even our own Prodigies against us turn!
O Portents construed on our Side in vain!
Let never Tory trust Eclipse again!
Run clear, ye Fountains! be at Peace, ye Skies!
And, Thames, henceforth to thy green Borders rise*
To Rome then must the Royal Wanderer go,
And fall a Suppliant at the Papal Toe?
His Life in Sloth inglorious must he wear,
One half in Luxury, and one in Prayer?
His Mind perhaps at length debauched with Ease
The proffered Purple and the Hat may please.
Shall He, whose Ancient Patriarchal Race
To mighty Nimrod in One Line we trace*
In solemn Conclave sit, devoid of Thought,
And poll for Points of Faith his Trusty Vote!
Be summoned to his Stall in time of Need,
And with his casting Suffrage fix a Creed!
Shall He in Robes on stated Days appear,
And English Heretics curse once a Year!
Garnet and Faux shall He with Prayers invoke,
And beg that Smithfield Piles once more may smoke!
Forbid it Heaven! my Soul, to Fury wrought,
Turns almost Hanoverian at the Thought.
From James and Rome I feel my Heart decline,
And fear, O Brunswick, 'twill be wholly Thine;
Yet still his Share thy Rival will contest,
And still the Double Claim divides my Breast.
The Fate of James with pitying Eyes I view,
And wish my Homage were not Brunswick's Due:
To James my Passions and my Weakness guide,
But Reason sways me to the Victor's Side.
Though grieved I speak it, let the Truth appear;
(You know my Language, and my Heart, sincere.)
In vain did Falsehood his fair Fame disgrace;
What force had Falsehood, when He showed his Face!
In vain to War our boastful Clans were led;
Heaps driven on Heaps, in the dire Shock they fled:
France shuns his Wrath, nor raises to our Shame
A second Dunkirk in Another Name:
In Britain's Funds their Wealth all Europe throws,
And up the Thames the World's Abundance flows:
Spite of feigned Fears, and artificial Cries,
The Pious Town sees Fifty Churches rise:
The Hero triumphs as his Worth is known,
And sits more firmly on his Shaken Throne.
To my sad Thought no Beam of Hope appears
Through the long Prospect of succeeding Years.
The Son, aspiring to his Father's Fame,
Shows all his Sire: Another and the Same.
He, blessed in lovely Carolina's Arms,
To future Ages propagates Her Charms:
With Pain and Joy at strife, I often trace
The mingled Parents in each Daughter's Face,
Half sickening at the Sight, too well I spy
The Father's Spirit through the Mother's Eye:
In vain new Thoughts of Rage I entertain,
And strive to Hate their Innocence in vain.
O Princess! happy by thy Foes confessed!
Blessed in thy Husband! in thy Children blessed!
As They from Thee, from Them New Beauties born,
While Europe lasts, shall Europe's Thrones adorn.
Transplanted to each Court, in times to come,
Thy Smile Celestial and un-fading Bloom
Great Austria's Sons with softer Lines shall grace,
And smooth the Frowns of Bourbon's haughty Race.
The fair Descendents of thy sacred Bed
Wide-branching over the Western World shall spread,
Like the famed Banian Tree, whose pliant Shoot
To Earthward bending of it is self takes Root,
Till, like their Mother Plant, ten thousand stand
In verdant Arches on the fertile Land;
Beneath her Shade the tawny Indian roves,
Or hunts at large through the wide echoing Groves.
O Thou, to whom these mournful Lines I send,
My promised Husband, and my dearest Friend;
Since Heaven appoints this favored Race to reign,
And Blood has drenched the Scottish Fields in vain;
Must I be wretched, and thy Flight partake?
Or wilt not Thou, for thy loved Chloe's sake,
Tired out at length, submit to Fate's Decree?
If not to Brunswick, O return to me!
Prostrate before the Victor's Mercy bend:
What spares whole Thousands, may to Thee extend.
Should blinded Friends thy doubtful Conduct blame,
Great Brunswick's Virtues will secure thy Fame:
Say, these invite thee to approach his Throne,
And own the Monarch, Heaven vouchsafes to own.
The World, convinced, thy Reasons will approve,
Say this to Them; but swear to Me 'twas Love.
FINIS.

