THE ENTHUSIAST: OR, THE Lover of Nature.

A POEM.

(Price One Shilling.)

THE ENTHUSIAST: OR, THE LOVER OF NATURE.

A POEM.

Rure vero barbaroque laetatur.
MARTIAL. -- Ut! mihi devio
Rupes, and vacuum Nemus
Mirari libet! --
HORACE. TULLY.



LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY at Tully's Head in Pall Mall; and sold by M.
COOPER in Paternoster Row.

M.D.CC.XLIV.

THE LOVER OF NATURE, etc.
YE green-rob'd Dryads, often at dusky Eve
By wondering Shepherds seen, to Forests brown,
To unfrequented Meads, and pathless Wilds,
Lead me from Gardens decked with Art's vain Pomps.
Can gilt Alcoves, can Marble-mimic Gods,
Parterres embroidered, Obelisks, and Urns
Of high Relief; can the long, spreading Lake,
Or Vista lessening to the Sight; can Stow
With all her Attic Fanes, such Raptures raise,
As the Thrush-haunted Copse, where lightly leaps
The fearful Fawn the rustling Leaves along,
And the brisk Squirrel sports from Bough to Bough,
While from an hollow Oak the busy Bees
Hum drowsy Lullabies? The Bards of old,
Fair Nature's Friends, sought such Retreats, to charm
Sweet Echo with their Songs; often too they met,
In Summer Evenings, near sequestered Bowers,
Or Mountain-Nymph, or Muse, and eager learnt
The moral Strains she taught to mend Mankind.
As to a secret Grot Aegeria stole
With Patriot Numa, and in silent Night
Whispered him sacred Laws, he listening sat
Rapt with her virtuous Voice, old Tyber leant
Attentive on his Urn, and hushed his Waves.
Rich in her weeping Country's Spoils Versailles
May boast a thousand Fountains, that can cast
The tortured Waters to the distant Heavens;
Yet let me choose some Pine-topt Precipice
Abrupt and shaggy, whence a foamy Stream,
Like Anio, tumbling roars; or some bleak Heath,
Where straggling stand the mournful Juniper,
Or Yew-tree scath'd; while in clear Prospect round,
From the Grove's Bosom Spires emerge, and Smoke
In bluish Wreaths ascends, ripe Harvests wave,
Herds low, and Straw-rooft Cotts appear, and Streams
Beneath the Sunbeams twinkle -- The shrill Lark,
That wakes the Wood-man to his early Task,
Or lovesick Philomel, whose luscious Lays
Sooth lone Night-wanderers, the moaning Dove
Pitied by listening Milkmaid, far excel
The deep-mouthed Viol, the Soul-lulling Lute,
And Battle-breathing Trumpet. Artful Sounds!
That please not like the Choristers of Air,
When first they hail the Approach of laughing May.
Creative Titian, can thy vivid Strokes,
Or thine, O graceful Raphael, dare to vie
With the rich Tints that paint the breathing Mead?
The thousand-colour'd Tulip, Violet's Bell
Snow-clad and meek, the Vermil-tinctur'd Rose,
And golden Crocus? -- Yet with these the Maid,
Phillis or Phoebe, at a Feast or Wake,
Her jetty Locks enamels; fairer she,
In Innocence and homespun Vestments dressed,
Than if coerulean Sapphires at her Ears
Shone pendant, or a precious Diamond-Cross
Heaved gently on her panting Bosom white.
Yon' Shepherd idly stretched on the rude Rock,
Listening to dashing Waves, and Sea-Mews Clang
High-hovering over his Head, who views beneath
The Dolphin dancing over the level Brine,
Feels more true Bliss than the proud Ammiral,
Amid his Vessels bright with burnished Gold
And silken Streamers, though his lordly Nod
Ten thousand War-worn Mariners revere.
And great Aeneas Aeneid VIII.
gazed with more Delight
On the rough Mountain shagg'd with horrid Shades,
(Where Cloud-compelling Jove, as Fancy dreamed,
Descending shook his direful Aegis black)
Than if he entered the high Capitol
On golden Columns reared, a conquered World
Contributing to deck its stately Head:
More pleased he slept in poor Evander's Cott
On shaggy Skins, lulled by sweet Nightingales,
Than if a Nero, in an Age refined,
Beneath a gorgeous Canopy had placed
His royal Guest, and bade his Minstrels sound
Soft slumb'rous Lydian Airs to sooth his Rest.
The Author has ventured to take some Hints in the following Lines, from
Lucretius's Description of the uncivilized State of Man; which is one of the
finest Pieces of Poetry extant. Glandiferas inter curabant corpora quercus --
Quod sol atque imbres dederant, quod terra crearat
Sponte sua, satis id placebat pectora donum --
Glandiferas inter curabant corpora quercus --
Et nemora, atque cavos montes syloasque colebant,
Et frutices inter condebant squalida membra,
Verbera ventorum vitare, imbresque coacti.
Lib. V. 940, etc.
Happy the first of Men, ere yet confined
To smoaky Cities; who in sheltering Groves,
Warm Caves, and deep-sunk Valleys lived and loved,
By Cares unwounded; what the Sun and Showers,
And genial Earth untillag'd could produce,
They gathered grateful, or the Acorn brown,
Or blushing Berry; by the liquid Lapse
Of murmuring Waters called to slake their Thirst,
Or with fair Nymphs their Sun-brown Limbs to bathe;
With Nymphs who fondly clasped their favorite Youths,
Unawed Tum, quibus aspirabat amor, praebebat aperte
Mitis in umbrosa gaudia valle Venus.
Nullus erat custos, nulla exclusura volentes
Janua --
TIBULLUS.
by Shame, beneath the Beechen Shade,
Nor Wiles, nor artificial Coyness knew.
Then Doors and Walls were not; the melting Maid
Nor Frowns of Parents feared, nor Husband's Threats;
Nor had cursed Gold their tender Hearts allured;
Then Beauty was not venal. Injured Love,
O whither, God of Raptures, art thou fled?
While Avarice waves his golden Wand around,
Abhorred Magician, and his costly Cup
Prepares with baneful Drugs, t'enchant the Souls
Of each low-thoughted Fair to wed for Gain.
What though unknown to those primaeval Sires,
The well-arch'd Dome, peopled with breathing Forms
By fair Italia's skilful Hand, unknown
The shapely Column, and the crumbling Busts
Of awful Ancestors in long Descent?
Yet why should Man mistaken deem it nobler
To dwell in Campestres melius Scythae,
Quorum plaustra vagas rite trahunt domos,
Vivunt, and rigidi Getae:
Immetata quibus jugera liberas
Fruges, and Cererem ferunt.
HOR. Lib. III. Od. 24.
Palaces, and high-rooft Halls,
Than in God's Forests, Architect supreme!
Say, is the Persian Carpet, than the Field's
Or Meadow's Mantle gay, more richly wov'n;
Or softer to the Votaries of Ease,
Than bladed Grass, perfumed with dew-dropt Flowers?
O Taste corrupt! that Luxury and Pomp
In specious Names of polished Manners veiled,
Should proudly banish Nature's simple Charms.
Though the fierce North often smote with Iron Whip
Their shivering Limbs, though often the bristly Boar
Or hungry Lion 'woke them with their Howls,
And scared them from their Moss-grown Caves to rove,
Houseless and cold in dark, tempestuous Nights;
Yet Lucretius, after beautifully describing the Evils that attended the
barbarous State of Man, proceeds to speak of their Advantages, in the following
Lines, which are attempted to be translated. At non multa virum sub signis
millia ducta,
Una dies dabat exitio, nec turbida ponti
Aequora laedebant naves ad saxa virosque.
Nec poterat quenquam placidi pellacia ponti
Subdola pellicere in fraudem ridentibus undis:
Improba navigii ratio tum caeca jacebat.
Tum penuria deinde cibi, mortalia letho
Membra dabat; contra tunc rerum copia mersat;
Illi imprudentes ipsis sibi soepe venenum
Vergebant: nunc dant aliis solertius ipsi.
Lib. V. 997.
were not Myriads in embattled Fields
Swept off at once, nor had the raving Seas
Overwhelmed the foundering Bark, and helpless Crew;
In vain the glassy Ocean smiled to tempt
The jolly Sailor, unsuspecting Harm,
For Commerce was unknown. Then Want and Pine
Sunk to the Grave their fainting Limbs; but Us
Excess and endless Riot doom to die.
They cropped the poisonous Herb unweetingly,
But wiser we spontaneously provide
Rare powerful Roots, to quench Life's cheerful Lamp.
What are the Lays of artful Addison,
Coldly correct, to Shakespeare's Warblings wild?
Whom on the winding Avon's willow'd Banks
Fair Fancy found, and bore the smiling Babe
To a close Cavern: (still the Shepherds show
The sacred Place, whence with religious Awe
They hear, returning from the Field at Eve,
Strange Whisperings of sweet Music through the Air)
Here, as with Honey gathered from the Rock,
She fed the little Prattler, and with Songs
Often soothed his wondering Ears, with deep Delight
On her soft Lap he sat, and caught the Sounds.
Often near some crowded City would I walk,
Listening the far-off Noises, rattling Carrs,
Loud Shouts of Joy, sad Shrieks of Sorrow, Knells
Full slowly tolling, Instruments of Trade,
Striking mine Ears with one deep-swelling Hum.
Or wandering near the Sea, attend the Sounds
Of hollow Winds, and ever-beating Waves.
Even when wild Tempests swallow up the Plains,
And Boreas' Blasts, big Hail, and Rains combine
To shake the Groves and Mountains, would I sit,
Pensively musing on the outrageous Crimes
That wake Heaven's Vengeance: at such solemn Hours,
Demons and Goblins through the dark Air shriek,
While Hecat with her black-brow'd Sisters nine,
Rides over the Earth, and scatters Woes and Deaths.
Then too, they say, in drear Egyptian Wilds
The Lion and the Tiger prowl for Prey
With Roarings loud! the listening Traveller
Starts Fear-struck, while the hollow-echoing Vaults
Of Pyramids increase the deathful Sounds.
But let me never fail in cloudless Nights,
When silent Cynthia in her silver Car
Through the blue Concave slides, when shine the Hills,
Twinkle the Streams, and Woods look tipped with Gold,
To seek some level Mead, and there invoke
Old Midnight's Sister Contemplation sage,
(Queen of the rugged Brow, and stern-fixt Eye)
To lift my Soul above this little Earth,
This Folly-fetter'd World; to purge my Ears,
That I may hear the rolling Planets Song,
And tuneful-turning Spheres: If this debarred,
The little Fayes that dance in neighboring Dales,
Sipping the Night-dew, while they laugh and love,
Shall charm me with aerial Notes. -- As thus
I wander musing, lo, what awful Forms
Yonder appear! sharp-ey'd Philosophy
Clad in dun Robes, an Eagle on his Wrist,
First meets my Eye; next, Virgin Solitude
Serene, who blushes at each Gazer's Sight;
Then Wisdom's hoary Head, with Crutch in Hand,
Trembling, and bent with Age; last Virtue's self
Smiling, in White arrayed, who with her leads
Fair Innocence, that prattles by her Side,
A naked Boy! -- Harrass'd with Fear I stop,
I gaze, when Virtue thus -- 'Whoe'er thou art,
' Mortal, by whom I deign to be beheld,
' In these my Midnight-Walks; depart, and say
' That henceforth I and my immortal Train
' Forsake Britannia's Isle; who fondly stoops
' To Vice, her favorite Paramour.' -- She spoke,
And as she turned, her round and rosy Neck,
Her flowing Train, and long, ambrosial Hair,
Breathing rich Odours, I enamored view.
O who will bear me then to Western Climes,
(Since Virtue leaves our wretched Land) to Shades
Yet unpolluted with Iberian Swords;
With simple Indian Swains, that I may hunt
The Boar and Tiger through Savannah's wild?
There fed on Dates and Herbs, would I despise
The far-fetched Cates of Luxury, and Hoards
Of narrow-hearted Avarice; nor heed
The distant Din of the tumultuous World.
So when rude Whirlwinds rouse the roaring Main,
Beneath fair Thetis sits, in coral Caves,
Serenely gay, nor sinking Sailors Cries
Disturb her sportive Nymphs, who round her form
The light fantastic Dance, or for her Hair
Weave rosy Crowns, or with according Lutes
Grace the soft Warbles of her honied Voice.
FINIS.

