ENGLISH READINGS; A COMIC PIECE, IN ONE ACT.

INSCRIBED TO GEORGE COLMAN, ESQUIRE.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR C. DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. M.DCC.LXXXVII.

AMONG the Performers to whom the Author of the following Dramatic Sketch
esteems himself obliged for their endeavors to promote its success, MR.
BANNISTER, Junior, MR. WEWITZER, MR. MOSS, and MRS. WEBB, are entitled to his
particular thanks.

Mr. COLMAN'S conduct respecting this little Piece is its own panegyric. The
first scenes were sent to that gentleman anonymously: he deemed them not
destitute of merit, and therefore encouraged the Author to complete the rest.
Mr. COLMAN has since devoted the utmost care and attention to prepare the Piece
for representation; and, in short, has interested himself warmly in its
success, though the Author remains unknown to him.

Dramatis Personae.
BOOTEKIN Mr. MOSS. BOB BOOTEKIN Mr. BANNISTER, Jr. STATELY Mr. WEWITZER.
SPATULA Mr. JOHNSON. DISMAL Mr. BARRETT. Captain WILMOT Mr. LAWRANCE.
Mrs. POPLIN Mrs. WEBB. CHARLOTTE Miss FRANCIS. KITTY Miss BRANGIN.
N.B. The passages marked with double inverted commas, thus " ", are omitted in
the representation.

ENGLISH READINGS; A COMIC PIECE.
SCENE. A Room in BOOTEKIN'S House.
KITTY and Capt. WILMOT. Kitty. PRAY let me alone, Captain Wilmot -- you forget
that you are making love to me instead of my mistress.


Capt. Wilmot. "Why faith, Kitty, your beauty is so much a type of my dear
Charlotte's, that, like a Roman Catholic, I almost adore the image for its
likeness to the saint."


Kitty. "Well," let us leave fooling -- and consider how you are to secure Miss
Charlotte -- You find her father, old Bootekin, is resolved to marry her to his
nephew Bob.


Capt. Wilmot. I think I have a scheme to prevent that. -- But tell me, Kitty,
how did this rage for English Readings reach a town so far from London?


Kitty. Mrs. Poplin, the Irish mantua-maker, who came down from London,
introduced it -- You know from the moment that my master quitted business, as a
shoemaker in town, and came down here to live on his means, Mrs. Poplin and he
could never set their horses together.


Capt. Wilmot. "I think they quarreled who should have the best pew at church."


Kitty. "And ever since have been at open war. -- Mrs. Poplin took the field by
giving a ball; and though old Bootekin hates the sound of a fiddle, he let all
the heavy-heel'd rustics in the neighborhood right hand and left in our hall,
till they made the house shake to its foundation. -- Next, the lady had
card-parties; -- determined not to be behind-hand, the old man quitted his pipe
and bottle for Loo and Pope Joan."


Capt. Wilmot. And now the whim of burlesqueing a rational and elegant
amusement -- giving Readings, has seized her ladyship -- he is to have the same
on a more extensive scale of absurdity -- "as if resolved that all his follies,
like the shadows of here is, shall not only keep pace with, but become larger
than their originals."

Enter CHARLOTTE. Well, my dear Charlotte, what news?


Charlotte. My father has just told me that I am to marry my hopeful cousin,
Bob Bootekin, next week.


Capt. Wilmot. How unfortunate!


Charlotte. How fortunate you mean -- if he had left my choice free, ten to one
if I should have come to a resolution for this twelvemonth; but an attempt to
force my inclinations drives me to a determination at once.


Capt. Wilmot. "Charming Charlotte!"


Kitty. "Take her at her word, Sir. -- The captain has got a ring and license
in his pocket, ma'am."


Charlotte. "Aye -- but then I shall be so closely watched."


Capt. Wilmot. I Will contrive to put them off their guard, and make this scheme
of the Readings turn to our advantage -- "if we can but persuade your father to
alter the place of exhibition from his own house to the large room at the
George Inn."


Kitty. Hush! -- Lud, Miss Charlotte, here comes your father -- and that booby,
Dismal.


Capt. Wilmot. Then I must even quit the field -- but while I can carry off so
charming a prize, retreat is victory.

[Exeunt.
Enter BOOTEKIN and DISMAL. Bootekin. Hold your tongue, sirrah! -- and don't
contradict me -- you know I cannot bear opposition.


Dismal. Well, master, I have done -- I Will say no more.


Bootekin. But what signifies your saying no more -- your cursed inflexible
countenance has contradiction in every feature. -- When I lived in London, I
dreaded your appearance in the shop -- the very sight of you put my customers
in ill humor -- and they then were sure to swear their shoes did not fit 'em.


Dismal. Oh Lud! Oh Lud!


Bootekin. "How often have I strapp'd you round the shop to cure your sour
aspect?"


Dismal. "I remember it as well as if it was yesterday."


Bootekin. "And yet, egad, let me strap you ever so often, I could never make
you look pleasant -- But" pray now let us know, good Mr. Dismal, what are your
objections to my Readings?


Dismal. For my part I never knew, till now, that you was so given to reading.


Bootekin. No more I an't -- I never read but two books in my life -- my
cash-book, and my journal -- but I Am resolved to like reading now, from mere
opposition -- What the devil, an't I a better gentleman, by a hundred a year,
than any man in the neighborhood? -- and shall a paultry mantua-maker -- a
walking pincushion -- a remnant of old tabby, pretend to give Readings, when I
hardly know whether I can read or not?


Dismal. "She Will be too many for you yet -- she vows she will have the best pew
at church to herself."


Bootekin. "I tell you she shall not. -- What a provoking dog it is!"


Dismal. The first time she can catch you absent from church, depend on it
she will fill the pew with her own family, and hang her footboy's hat upon your
peg.


Bootekin. I will not be absent, I tell you.


Dismal. Suppose you should be taken ill.


Bootekin. But I will not be taken ill.


Dismal. "But how can you help it? -- She will certainly have the pew."


Bootekin. "'Sblood! I Will go to church on Sunday-morning and afternoon, besides
pray'r-days, I Will be damned if I don't."


Dismal. Well -- well -- I hope all will turn out for the best -- but suppose
--


Bootekin. Zounds! I Will suppose nothing -- Out of the room directly. [Pushing
him.


Dismal. Perhaps you will think of my words.


Bootekin. [pushes him out] Not if I can help it -- they always give me the
vapors.


Enter KITTY. Kitty. Sir, there is Mr. Stately, the great lawyer, come to pay
you a visit -- he is just getting off his horse.


Bootekin. Odd's so, Mr. Stately! -- show him up directly -- Bless me, I Am
vastly glad he is come. -- [Exit Kitty] A formal old prig -- has a scull with
nothing in it but pride -- and yet thinks all the world fools but himself --
However, I expect something at his death, and so I must not quarrel with him.


Enter STATELY. Stately. Mr. Bootekin, I rejoice to see you look so well --
though indeed I don't wonder at it -- when I consider that you take so much
exercise -- it will do you good -- you have been used to it -- being a working
man, I mean to say.


Bootekin. My dear friend, I heartily thank you for what you mean to say. --
Well, and how do you do? -- I suppose you are pretty well -- I Am heartily glad of
it -- and so much for compliments. -- Now, my dear Mr. Stately --


Stately. "Perhaps I did not explain myself for you to understand me."


Bootekin. "Yes, you did -- and so let us proceed to business."


Stately. Mr. Bootekin, your ideas are confused -- though, indeed, how should you
have ideas -- do you know what an idea is? -- it is -- I Will tell you another
time what it is -- I studied the noble science of the law -- it was at the bar
I learnt to think.


Bootekin. Yes, you had leisure enough for thinking then -- I believe you never
had the trouble to speak at the bar in your life.


Stately. Explanation was always my motto.


Bootekin. [Aside] "And it suits you just as badly as many other mottos suit
those who adopt them." -- I suppose you have heard how Mrs. Poplin has crow'd
over me, because, forsooth, I cannot jabber gibberish out of a printed book as
fast as she can -- now is it not --


Stately. Permit me to interrupt you -- Reading you know -- indeed I need not
say you know -- but I know -- that reading --


Bootekin. Permit me to interrupt you -- I only wish to ask you if my case is
not a cursed hard one. -- After working like a horse to get a fortune, I
quitted business, and came down "here to smoke a comfortable pipe -- walk about
the green fields -- look at the trees, and enjoy the pleasure of doing nothing
-- Well, down I came," and bought a large estate here, to make myself respected
-- and respected I was -- "was complimented by being made churchwarden
immediately on my arrival, and gave a feast to the parish" -- the parson
declared I spoke monstrous well at the vestry, and liked my company so well
that he has dined with me three or four times a week -- all my letters came
directed to Robert Bootekin, Esquire -- and the member for the county shook me
by the hand last election, when he came round to canvas. -- "Nay, Sir Charles
Courtly came down from London the other day to dine with me, and apologize for
not paying two hundred pounds he owes me." -- Now I call this being respected.


Stately. You may call it so, Mr. Bootekin -- you have not much idea of respect
-- He! He! He! -- I don't mean to offend you -- but give me leave to explain to
you -- it is my opinion --


Bootekin. Zounds! my dear friend, when you were in the law did you give
opinions before the case was stated? -- I was going to tell you, that since
this Irish woman has set it about the town that I Am a vulgar dog, egad things
begin to change -- fellows in carters frocks and hobnail'd shoes contradict me
at the vestry -- the parson had the impudence to preach about the badness of my
wine at my own table -- and, egad, nobody in the place bow to me now but old
women and children, and that is only when I give them halfpence -- all because,
forsooth, I Am a vulgar fellow. -- Zounds! how can a man be vulgar with L.20,000
in his pocket?


Stately. Look ye, Mr. Bootekin -- I knew you in London -- you made shoes for
me many years -- you are a well-meaning man, and I have a regard for you -- but
you have been brought up in a low way -- and your ideas are confined -- He! He!
He! "Your arguments are loud and heavy, like a lap-stone dropped in a pond --
they make a noise for a moment, and then sink in the mud -- He! He! He! -- sink
in the mud" --


Bootekin. "First raising circles in the pond, which, like your round-about
explanations, become wider of the mark every moment, 'till at last they leave
no trace of what occasioned them." He! He! He! [Imitating him.]


Stately. Mr. Bootekin, you are ignoramus, as we say in the courts, and
therefore --


Bootekin. I beg pardon, Mr. Stately -- I was too warm. -- [Aside] Egad I shall
lose the legacy. -- [To him] I thank you much for the honor of this visit --
this afternoon I give my Readings -- I Will convince you and all the world that I
am not a vulgar fellow.


Stately. I shall be very happy to see it, Mr. Bootekin, He! He! He! -- Pray,
do you read yourself? --


Bootekin. No, -- my nephew, Bob, to whom I gave my business, will read -- he
is a smart lad, I assure you -- and very much of a gentleman, though I say it.
-- [Enter Kitty.] -- Is Bob come home?


Kitty. This very moment, Sir -- he desires to speak to you.


Bootekin. I Will introduce him to you, Mr. Stately, you will be vastly pleased
with him.

[Exit.
Stately. [Aside] A mighty pretty girl, in faith! -- My dear, you seem in a
hurry.


Kitty. Had you any thing to say to me, Sir?


Stately. Why, yes, my dear, I should like to have something to say to you. --
[Aside] If I could but tell what -- but these girls are so apt to laugh at a
middle-aged man, when he makes love to them, that I am half afraid to venture.
-- [To her] I suppose you have a sweetheart, my pretty maid?


Kitty. Dear Sir, what should there be about me for people to fall in love with
me?


Stately. Oh! ho! -- it will do. -- [To her] Fall in love with you! -- why, who
could help it? -- Come here, child -- don't be afraid of me.


Kitty. Oh dear -- no, Sir, I am not at all afraid of you -- Ha! ha! ha!


Stately. [Aside] There -- now it will not do -- she begins to laugh --


Kitty. I am sure, Sir, you are too good-natured a gentleman.


Stately. Yes, my dear, you will find me so. -- [Aside] Egad, it will do after
all. [To her] My sweet little Kitty, will you favor me so far as to -- to --
[Enter Bootekin and Bob Bootekin, who runs up to Stately, and shakes him by the
hand] -- to tell 'em to give my horse some corn? -- do, my dear, go directly --
[Exit Kitty.] -- [Aside] To be interrupted in such an interesting situation!


Bob. Sir, I have the honor to be your most obedient, devoted, very humble
servant.


Bootekin. Mr. Stately, this is my nephew, Bob.


Stately. Young man, I hear you are an orator, I suppose you have classical
learning.


Bob. Classical learning! -- Ho! ho! ho! Bless your ignorance -- why I went
through all the classes -- but my genius was too great to remember any thing I
learnt at school.


Stately. I must explain to you, that without classical learning genius is but
a kind of -- a -- a --


Bob. Aye, aye -- you mean to say it is all my eye.


Stately. All my eye!


Bob. Nay, if you like it, I Will take the other side of the question -- it is all
the same to me -- I Will engage to speak on any thing for a quarter of an hour at
least -- what say you to that, old gentleman?


Bootekin. Mr. Stately, pray excuse my nephew's freedom of speech, he! he! --
[Aside to Bob] At him again, Bob.


Bob. I perceive, Sir, you have resided in the country lately -- you must come
to town and visit our disputing society -- we have questions to suit every
body, and I speak upon all questions.


Stately. No doubt, and with equal ability -- but, pray Sir, don't you find it
necessary, sometimes, to understand your subject.


Bob. Not at all, Sir -- I am a natural speaker -- never study, but say
whatever comes uppermost; -- my opinion is, that a speech is a speech, if there
are but words enough in it -- and I am allowed to have the (...) of saying more
in a given time than any speaker in the society.


Stately. I suppose you talk faster.


Bob. Exactly so, Sir. -- But, a-propos, I can give you a specimen or two of
our questions -- Let me see, where are my memorandums -- Oh, here! The
questions to be debated, as they stand in order on our list, are; First -- Is
war or peace best for this country? -- we were favored with this question by a
navy agent, and we expect it will produce a warm debate. -- Second in the list
stands the question, Whether the lady who has black, blue, or gray eyes, is
likely to make the best wife? --


Stately. A very instructive and amusing speculation --


Bob. -- Upon Charlotte's first introduction to Werter, did not she behave
rather ungenteelly, in not offering him a dish of tea?


Stately. Very material to be ascertained.


Bob. The next -- no, faith, the next question was debated last week, out of
its turn, on account of its peculiar importance, and at the desire of several
respectable members --


Stately. What may that be?


Bob. Is the tinker, the tailor, or the lamplighter, the most useful member of
society?


Stately. "And how might it have been determined?"


Bob. "Why, Sir -- as our advertisement in the newspapers next day very
properly stated -- this question gave rise to a most important and interesting
debate, in which instruction was mingled with amusement. -- The arguments were,
from time to time, enlivened by the most brilliant flashes of wit and humor
from several gentlemen of the first-rate abilities, who honored the question
with their attention -- (by the bye, I was prodigiously great that night) --
with their attention. -- But the variety of material points which presented for
discussion protracting the debate to an unusual length, and the friends of the
lamp-lighter ( I supported him) -- the friends of the lamp-lighter wishing for
an opportunity of answering the arguments of their opponents, the debate was
adjourned till next week."


Stately. And, pray, young Mr. Bootekin, do you never touch on politics?


Bob. Oh, yes, Sir, -- politics are my forte -- we had a most glorious debate
the other day -- Whether some great men ought not to lose their heads for not
doing something? -- but, egad, I forget what -- however I supported the
question, and beat Dick Dab hollow, though he sported a dozen Latin mottos,
which he stole from the Spectators and Tatlers the day before -- I sat down
amidst a thunder of applause from hands, feet, and sticks: -- in short, the
minister tottered -- when, within ten minutes of the debate closing, in came a
posse of treasury-runners, as we suspect, who by dint of coughing, laughing,
and hooting, put a stop to the debate -- a battle ensued between two ladies --
the moderator flew into a violent passion -- constables were sent for -- and
the debate ended --


Stately. As most political disputes end -- neither party giving up the point.
-- Well, I must go and pay a few visits to some of my old acquaintance -- and
--


Bootekin. You Will be back time enough for our Readings -- what d' ye think of
Bob -- is not his conversation vastly amusing?


Stately. Oh, yes -- like the bells of a team of horses, it makes a pleasant
jingling noise, though there is no meaning in it -- He! he! he! -- I don't mean
to be severe, I assure you.

[Exit.
Bob. A stupid old put!


Bootekin. Stupid indeed! -- I never knew him do but one sensible thing in his
life -- and that was putting my name down in his will. -- But, Bob, you have
not told me what preparations you have made for our Readings.


Bob. I have got you plenty of company, however -- and that is the principal
part of the business.


Bootekin. So it is -- Well, and who are we to have, eh, Bob?


Bob. Faith, I don't know -- they are of all sorts, like the county militia --
however, you will have enough of 'em -- our great parlour will be so crammed that
we shall not have room to stir.


Bootekin. Odd's my life, that will be comfortable -- "we'll show old Mother
Poplin what a rich man can do, though he is a vulgar fellow."


Bob. "Nay, what is more, I have engaged Sam Scrape, the fiddler, to touch up
his catgut a little between the Readings -- and his son will sing."


Bootekin. "Thank ye, my dear Bob! -- Odso, I am so overjoyed" -- But what will
you read to them? -- suppose you give them a touch from Burn's Justice, or the
Parish Laws.


Bob. Oh Lord, no, uncle; -- here, I have made out a bill of the evening's
entertainment.


Bootekin. Let Us see it -- why, what the devil is all this? -- Overture for two
orchestras -- Sam Scrape. -- John Gilpin from Stern, by Mr. Bootekin. -- 'He
gave them hailstones for rain' -- Grand chorus -- by a young gentleman,
accompanied on the fiddle by Sam Scrape. -- Zounds! Bob, what the devil is this?


Bob. Fashion, Sir, fashion.


Bootekin. Fashion! -- But what is the reason?


Bob. Oh, Lord, Sir -- reason has nothing to do with fashion.


Enter WILMOT. Wilmot. Mr. Bootekin, your most obedient -- I have great
pleasure in waiting on you, with a message from a fair Lady -- your neighbor,
Mrs. Poplin.


Bootekin. A fig for Mrs. Poplin! -- here is Bob shall read with her for fifty
pounds; aye, and spell any word in the dictionary.


Wilmot. "I don't doubt it, Sir -- I have every respect for the gentleman's
abilities; and, I am sure, Mr. Bootekin, your candor and goodsense will lead
you to adopt a scheme which will show Mr. Robert Bootekin's superior talents to
advantage."


Bob. "Upon my soul, uncle, he seems to be a mighty civil man."


Bootekin. [Aside to Bob] "Aye, Bob -- and talks very sensibly too." -- [To
Wilmot] "Well, Captain Wilmot."


Wilmot. "In short, Sir," Mrs. Poplin wishes to enter into a treaty of amity
with you, and has named me her ambassador.


Bootekin. And so she has chosen you to negociate a peace, because your trade
is war -- a devilish good choice of hers, and worthy of an Irish woman.


Wilmot. "Vastly well, indeed, Mr. Bootekin -- I am really charmed with your
wit."


Bootekin. "Aye, but you must dine with me, to taste my wit in perfection -- I
am told I shine prodigiously at the head of my own table -- and, egad, I
believe it is so, for people never laugh at my jokes half so much as when they
dine with me" -- but I beg pardon, I interrupt you.


Wilmot. In a word, Sir, you know Mrs. Poplin gives Readings this evening in
the great room at the George -- she is willing to have a friendly trial of
skill with your nephew; "and if he and you are equally desirous of it, she
invites you to meet her there, and to bring all your friends with you" -- the
room is large enough to contain us all, and --


Bob. A devilish good thought, in faith -- I Will meet the lady, Captain -- let
her choose her subject, from Johnny Gilpin up to Milton -- prose, rhyme, or
blank verse, all the same to me -- I read 'em all alike. -- Pray now, my dear
uncle, consent.


Bootekin. Well, Bob, please yourself, and you will please me.


Bob. I Will do more, I Will please the whole company. -- Captain, we'll be with
you -- give me your hand!


Wilmot. I see you are a lad of spirit -- you will live to be a great man -- I
see that.


Bob. What a glorious triumph! -- I long for the engagement: -- the men will
applaud me -- the women -- I mean the ladies -- will be in raptures -- such
acclamations and bravoing, and encoring, from those who do understand me, and
those who don't understand me! --


Bootekin. Hey day, Bob! --


Bob. Such a delightful confusion -- every body clapping as if the devil was in
'em -- and nobody hearing a word I say -- whilst I -- bowing, and out of breath
--


Bootekin. Zounds! I wish you were out of breath.


Bob. Come along, uncle! -- To the attack! -- upon them! -- charge! -- the word
St. George for England -- huzza!

[Exeunt.
SCENE changes to a Room at the George Inn -- Servants are setting up the
Benches, and lighting the Candles.
MRS. POPLIN, WILMOT, and SPATULA. Mrs. Poplin. And so this conceited vulgar
crature will attempt to rade with me, and make himself ridiculous! -- I, who
know these things! -- faith and troth it will be mighty pleasant -- and I am
extremely obligated to you, Captain Wilmot, for procuring me the entertainment.


Wilmot. My dear Mrs. Poplin, you owe me no thanks -- the service is its own
reward.

[Exit.
Mrs. Poplin. The sarvice its own reward -- Faith, and so it seems, by our
being bother'd so with the wooden-legged gentry -- plaguing one at every corner
for a tirteener. -- What the divil are you so busy about there, Mr. Spatula?


Spatula. Fair idol of my soul, I am only snuffing the candles -- you know they
are my patients at present -- you have put them under my care.


Mrs. Poplin. Mind you don't sarve 'em as you do some of your patients, Mr.
Spatula -- make a mistake, and snuff 'em out -- However, I shall not want much
light -- whatever I am to read, I always larn first by heart; becase, d' ye
see, there is no reading well while one looks at the book.


Spatula. "True, thou matchless work of nature. -- [Aside] She Is in a devilish
good humor -- now is my time to renew the attack. -- [To her] May I hope,
divine essence of beauty, that my love may kindle up a passion in your breast?"


Mrs. Poplin. "You may believe that, Mr. Spatula -- you will kindle up a divil of
a passion in my breast presently, if I hear any more of your stuff."


Spatula. "I hope not, bright excellence -- you are all mildness and
condescension -- conserve of roses and milk of sweet almonds -- thou cataplasm
to my aching bosom -- thou styptic to my bleeding heart -- thou sal volatile to
my fainting spirits."


Mrs. Poplin. "What!"


Spatula. "You are a mixture of beauties, compounded with perfection's best
pestle and mortar -- a choice bolus of nature, gilded with the accomplishments
of art."


Mrs. Poplin. "A bolus!"


Spatula. "Your charms comprehend the whole circle of Cupid's materia medica --
and in short you are a walking dispensary of love."


Mrs. Poplin. "And, I suppose, you think this mighty fine, now?"


Spatula. "Your person -- "


Mrs. Poplin. "You had better let my person alone, Mr. Spatula."


Spatula. "Madam, I beg pardon, I only meant to say, that, judging by the
symmetry and beautiful proportion of your person, I should presume you would be
-- a -- fine subject -- "


Mrs. Poplin. "For what, Sir?"


Spatula. "A fine subject for a lecture."


Mrs. Poplin. "Why, you old broken gallipot -- you bit of dry lint -- you scrap
of an apothecary -- who have killed more people in the parish than ever lived
there -- how dare you bother me with your nonsense? -- Anatomize me! -- Look
ye, Mr. Spatula, if you ever dare even to think about my bones again, take care
of your own -- you old animal!"


Enter STATELY. Stately. Hey day, Mrs Poplin! -- why you seem to be rehearsing
with a great deal of animation.


Mrs. Poplin. I hope, Sir, I never want animation, when a proper subject
presents itself.


Spatula. "The best subject I ever remember was at Surgeon's-Hall -- it was a
case the most extraordinary -- in the year -- "


Mrs. Poplin. "What signifies the year? -- I Will not stay an hour in the room if
you don't quit it immediately."


Spatula. "It was a case of murder -- but, thou killing creature, I obey."

[Exit Spatula.
Stately. And now, Mrs. Poplin, you must soon give us a proof of your animation
-- some of your audience are below, strutting about among a groupe of gaping
rustics, in all the encumbrance of their best suits, like so many court cards,
distinguished from the rest of the pack by their awkward finery! He! he! he! --
by their awkward finery!


Mrs. Poplin. Ah now, that is pity -- I told 'em to come quite undressed, with
nothing but their every-day clothes on.


Stately. With respect to the choice of your subject, you will not take my
advice ill -- but --


Mrs. Poplin. Take it ill! -- Oh no -- It Is ten to one if I take it at all --
You must know I like to choose for myself, Mr. Stately. -- The pathetic is my
forte -- A sentimental story makes one so charmingly miserable. -- Oh, I love
to touch the feelings -- and my voice has power, Mr. Stately.


Stately. Great power, indeed, Madam -- you must have improved it by constant
exercise.


Mrs. Poplin. Stern is my favorite author -- if you were to hear me read his
story of Maria -- and then his tale of Le Fevre -- and then his Uncle Toby --
Oh, how I dote upon his Toby!


Re-enter SPATULA. Spatula. Cruel beauty! -- The neighbors are come to have a
dose of your reading. -- [Enter a number of Country People whimsically dressed.]


Mrs. Poplin. Ladies and gentlemen, your most obedient. -- Mr. Gewgaw, I am
mighty glad to see you -- and you too, neighbor Furrow. -- Ah, my dear Miss
Figg. -- Mr. Rushlight, many thanks for this favor. [They converse in dumb
show.] -- [Enter Bootekin, Bob Bootekin, Wilmot, Charlotte, and Kitty, followed
by a number of Bootekin's friends, dressed as ridiculously as the others.]


Bootekin. Your servant, Madam -- Here we are come to hear you and my nephew
Bob knock the hard words about. -- Bob, this is Mrs. Poplin.


Wilmot. Now is your time, my dear Charlotte, you see your father's attention
is engaged -- slip into the next room, and I Will follow you -- [Exit Charlotte.]
-- "Our sole dependence is on you, Kitty -- keep the old man from following us
-- and in case he should be very troublesome, remember what we have agreed
upon. -- Now kind fortune smile but for once!"

[Exit.
Bootekin. Come, let us lose no time -- let us have the Readings first, and Sam
Scrape may give us 'hail-stones' bye-and-bye. -- Bob, are you sure your pipe is
in order -- suppose you suck an orange. -- Make room there, they are just going
to begin.


Mrs. Poplin. And pray, Sir, of what author do you mean to give us a specimen?


Bob. It Is perfectly the same to me, Ma'am -- all subjects, and all styles, are
alike to us public speakers.


Bootekin. Suppose, Bob, you give us that speech out of Romeo, which made your
cousin Charlotte cry last night -- Egad -- suppose, Mrs. Poplin and you give us
a scene -- a confab between Romeo and Juliet -- a bit of love discourse, eh? --
What say you, Mrs. Poplin?


Bob. I have no objection, if the lady has none.


Mrs. Poplin. Oh dear, no, Sir. -- [Aside to Stately] -- I am quite at home in
Juliet -- I used to perform the character to a few select friends -- and was
told I did it to a miracle.


Stately. I dare say it was a wonderful performance. --


Bob. Here, Madam, is an edition of the play, in which I have obliterated many
of the less important passages -- taken out all the nonsense of Shakespeare.
[Mrs. Poplin and Bob seat themselves.]


Bootekin. Silence there! -- Now for it, Bob.


Mrs. Poplin. Shall I begin, Sir?


Bob. No, Ma'am -- I begin, if you please. --

' But soft! what light through yonder window breaks?
' It is the east! -- and Juliet is the sun!
' Oh! that I were a glove upon that hand,
' That I might touch that cheek!'

Bootekin. Bravo! bravo! -- there, Mr. Stately! there is power -- did you ever
hear any body read so loud in your life? "What d' ye say to that, Charlotte?"
-- [Turning round to look for Charlotte, Kitty stops him.]


Kitty. "Hush, my dear Sir -- you will interrupt Mrs. Poplin."


Mrs. Poplin. [Reading] ' Ah me!'


Spatula. O dulcissime!


Bob. [Reading] ' She speaks!

' Oh speak again, bright angel -- for
' Thou art as glorious to this sight, being
' Over my head, as is a winged messenger
' From heaven unto the white, upturned
' Wondering eye of mortals, that fall
' Back to gaze on him, when he
' Bestrides the lazy pacing clouds,
' And sails upon the bosom of the air.'

Mrs. Poplin. [Reading] ' Oh Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo? -- Deny'
--

Bob. [Reading, and interrupting her] ' Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at
this?'

Mrs. Poplin. Hear more! -- Aye to be sure. -- Why, Sir, I have not half
finished the speech --


Bootekin. "But where the devil is Charlotte?"


Kitty. "I tell you, Sir, you will interrupt the Readings -- there is your nephew
beginning."


Bob. Let me go on, Ma'am. -- [Reading]

' I take thee at thy word,
' Call me but love, and I Will be new baptized,
' Henceforth I never will be Romeo.'

Stately. "A very judicious resolution, egad!"


Mrs. Poplin. Upon my word, young gentleman, this is mighty pretty -- you have
scratched out all Juliet's speeches -- you have all the reading to yourself --
if this is a dialogue, it is a dialogue where only one person speaks.


Bob. [Aside] She is nettled at the applause I have received.


Mrs. Poplin. [Reading] ' Thou know the mask of night is on my face,
' Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
' For that which thou have heard me speak tonight;
' Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
' What I have spoke -- but farewell compliment' --

Bob. A farewell compliment! so it seems, indeed. -- You see, Ma'am, the author
--


Mrs. Poplin. Sir, I don't care for the author nor you neither -- here are my
friends come to hear me read, and they shall not be disappointed.


Bootekin. "Charlotte gone, and Captain Wilmot gone too! -- Oh, Lord, my mind
misgives me. -- [to Kitty] Let me alone, hussy, I will find her."


Kitty. [Aside] "Then I must even put our scheme in practice."

[Exit.
Mrs. Poplin. Sir, I say I will go on. [To Bob.]


Bob. Nay, Ma'am, if you come to that, so will I. -- Now, lungs, do your
office. [both reading together.]


Bootekin. Confound ye both -- cannot ye be quiet for a moment -- I have lost my
daughter! -- "Come here, Bob -- and let us go."


Enter KITTY. Kitty. "Aye, Sir, you will go -- before a justice presently -- here
are a posse of constables, with a warrant to apprehend us all for reading in a
public house." -- [Two or three constables come in, and seize Bootekin and Bob
-- Stately, Spatula, and country people go off in the utmost confusion.]


Bootekin. "Oh! my unlucky fortune -- at these years to be taken up before the
justices! -- I, who was in hopes to have made one of the quorum!"


Mrs. Poplin. "A fig for the justices! -- To interrupt one's Readings in this
manner!"


Bootekin. "Oh, a plague on your Readings! -- I don't believe I shall ever bear
the sight of a book again -- there is my daughter Charlotte lost."


Enter CHARLOTTE and WILMOT. Wilmot. Pardon me, Sir -- here is your daughter,
and my wife.


Bootekin. Your wife?


Wilmot. [To the constables.] "You may retire -- I have settled this matter
with the justices." -- In short, Sir, this lady and myself have finished our
English Readings in the next room, from the Chapter of Matrimony.


Mrs. Poplin. I give you joy, Mr. Bootekin, of your English Readings -- a
pretty spot of work you have made of it! -- in faith, if you had been born on my
side of the water, and learnt to blunder from your infancy, you could not have
done it more naturally.


Bootekin. [Aside] "I cannot bear to be taunted by her. -- [To Bob] You careless
dog, 'twas all your fault -- "


Bob. " My fault!"


Bootekin. "Don't mutter, sirrah -- though, on second thoughts, I Would have you
make a speech on the subject -- "


Bob. "Not I, indeed, uncle -- I am one of those orators who always speak best
when they don't care a straw about their subject."


Enter SPATULA and STATELY. Mrs. Poplin. "Well, Mr. Spatula, I suppose you have
heard the whole story."


Spatula. "Yes, I find that young couple have agreed to take a compound of
Hymen's comforts -- Ah, Madam, if you would but suffer your humble servant to
make up a draught of ditto for you."


Mrs. Poplin. "Whenever I take that medicine, Mr. Spatula, you may depend upon
not being my apothecary."


Stately. "Never mind 'em, Spatula -- you can still be Romeo's apothecary. --
You had better go on with the play, and sell the poor lad some rats-bane. --
Ah, Bootekin, if you had not been a vulgar man, this would not have happened to
you."


Bootekin. [To Wilmot] And you promise to make a gentlewoman of Charlotte, and
that she shall take place of Mrs. Poplin?


Wilmot. Sir, I Will introduce your daughter to all the people of rank in the
country -- "she shall dance with a peer at the next race ball; and make such a
figure that Mrs. Poplin shall break her heart with vexation in a fortnight."


Bootekin. Give me your hand. -- Here, Charlotte -- I forgive all that is past.
-- Bob, you're a blockhead -- Mother Poplin, I begin to think you are a cursed
low woman -- Old Spatula, you shall dine with me now and then, I shall want
somebody to laugh at. -- As for you, Jack Stately, I Am resolved to unburthen my
conscience -- you are a d -- d fool -- I Have longed to tell you so for ten years
past, and now I have done it -- so you may leave my legacy to the parish.


Bob. And what is to become of me, uncle?


Bootekin. Go to town, and make speeches.


Bob. Faith I Will take your advice, and strive to lose my disappointment in the
sweet intoxicating draught of public approbation. -- Those who, like me, have
been honored with its genial influence, can alone judge of the feelings
excited by the applause of an audience.


THE END.

