CHEAP REPOSITORY.

DAN and JANE; OR FAITH and WORKS.

A TALE.



Sold by J. MARSHALL, PRINTER to the CHEAP REPOSITORY for Moral and Religious
Tracts) No. 17, Queen Street, Cheapside, and No. 4, Aldermary Churchyard,
London.

^y S. HAZARD, at Bath: J. Elder, at Edinburgh, and by all Booksellers,
Newsmen, and Hawkers, in Town and Country.

Great Allowance will be made to Shopkeepers and Hawkers.

Price ONE HALFPENNY, Or 2s. 3d. per 100. -- 1s. 3d. for 50. -- 9d. for 25.

A cheaper Edition for Hawkers.

[ Entered at Stationers Hall.]

DAN and JANE, etc.
GOOD Dan and Jane were man and wife,
And lived a loving kind of life;
One point, however, they disputed,
And each by turns his mate confuted.
'Twas Faith and Works -- this knotty question
They found not easy of digestion.
While Dan for Faith alone contended,
Jane equally Good Works defended.
"They are not Christians sure, but Turks,
"Who build on Faith and scoff at Works."
Quoth Jane -- While eager Dan replied,
"By none but heathens Faith's denied.
"I Will tell you wife," at length quoth Dan,
"A story of a right good man.
"A Patriarch sage, of ancient days,
"A man of Faith, whom all must praise.
"In his own country he possessed,
"Whatever can make a wise man blessed;
"His was the flock, the field, the spring,
"In short, a little rural king.
"Yet, pleased he quits this native land,
"By Faith in the Divine command.
"God bade him go, and he, content,
"Went forth not knowing where he went.
"He trusted in the promise made,
"And, undisputing, strait obeyed.
"The Heavenly word he did not doubt,
"But proved his Faith by going out."
Jane answered with some little pride --
"I Have an example on my side;
"And though my tale be somewhat longer,
"I trust you will find it vastly stronger.
"I Will tell you, Daniel, of a man,
"The holiest since the world began;
"Who now God's favor is receiving,
"For prompt obeying, not believing.
"One only son this man possessed,
"In whom his righteous age was blessed;
"And more to mark the grace of Heaven,
"This son by miracle was given.
"And from this child the word Divine
"Had promised an illustrious line.
"When lo! at once a voice he hears,
"Which sounds like thunder in his ears,
"God says -- Go sacrifice thy son!
" -- This moment, Lord, it shall be done.
"He goes, and instantly prepares,
"To slay this child of many prayers.
"Now here you see the grand expedience,
"Of Works, of actual sound Obedience.
"This was not Faith, but act and deed,
"The Lord commands -- the child shall bleed.
"Thus Abraham acted," Jenny cried;
"Thus Abraham trusted," Dan replied.
"Abraham," quoth Jane, "why that is my man,
"No, Abraham's him I mean," says Dan.
"He stands a monument of Faith;" --
"No, it is for Works the Scripture says."
"'It Is for his faith that I defend him:"
"'It Is for obedience I commend him."
Thus he -- thus she -- both warmly feel,
And lose their temper in their zeal;
Too quick each other's choice to blame,
They did not see each meant the same.
"At length, good wife," said honest Dan,
"We Are talking of the self same man.
"The works you praise I own indeed,
"Grow from that faith for which I plead;
"And Abraham, whom for faith I quote,
"For works deserves especial note:
"It Is not enough of faith to talk,
"A man of God, with God must walk:
"Our doctrines are at last the same,
"They only differ in the name.
"The faith I fight for is the root,
"The works you value are the fruit.
"How shall you know my creed's sincere,
"Unless in works my faith appear?
"How shall I know a tree's alive,
"Unless I see it bear and thrive?
"Your works not growing on my root,
"Would prove they were not genuine fruit.
"If faith produce no works, I see,
"That faith is not a living tree.
"Thus faith and works together grow,
"No separate life they ever can know:
"They Are soul and body, hand and heart,
"What God has joined, let no one part.
Z.

THE END.
A List of the Tracts published during the Year 1796,
HISTORIES.
The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain. Part I. and II. Tom White the Postilion. Part
I. and II. Two Shoemakers. Part I. Life of William Baker, with this Funeral
Sermon by the Reverend Mr. Gilpin. The Two Soldiers. The Plague in London,
1665. The Lancashire Collier Girl. The Two Wealthy Farmers; or, History of Mr.
Bragwell. ^art I. and II. The Good Mother's Legacy. Sorrowful Sam; or, the Two
Blacksmiths. True Stories of Two Good Negroes. Murders. The Happy Waterman. The
Shipwreck of the Centaur.
SUNDAY READINGS.
Husbandry Moralized. On the Religious Advantages of the present Inhabitants of
Great Britain. The Beggarly Boy, a Parable. Daniel in the Den of Lions. Noah's
Flood. Hints to all Ranks of People on the Occasion of the present Scarcity.
The Harvest Home. The Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard. The Troubles of
Life; or, the Guinea and the Shilling,
POETRY.
Divine Songs, by Dr. Watts, for Children. New History of a True Book. The
Carpenter; or, Danger of Evil Company. The Gin Shop. The Riot. Patient Joe. The
Execution of Wild Robert. A New Christmas Carrol, called the Merry Christmas,
or happy New Year. The Sorrows of Yamba; or, the Negro Woman's Lamentation.

