THE DRAMA, A POEM.

LONDON: Printed for J. WILLIAMS, (NO. 39) Fleet Street. M.DCC.LXXV.

DEDICATION. To ARTHUR MURPHY, Esquire
SIR,
THOUGH I cannot boast the Honor of a personal acquaintance with you, yet it
would be passing the severest Censure on myself, to declare I had not that
intellectual one, which the world, in general, claim with Men of distinguished
Abilities. I will not trespass on your Delicacy, by giving Vent to the Fullness
of my Admiration, or by repeating what is already universally known and
acknowledged. I only solicit your Patronage for the feeble Offspring of a
friendless Muse, conscious I cannot lay it before a better Judge than you, Sir,
whose Writings have been so long the Prop and Ornament of the DRAMA; and that
if any thing can give it shelter, it must be the protecting Influence of your
Name.

I have the Honor to remain, SIR, Your most humble and obedient Servant, THE
AUTHOR.

THE DRAMA.
SEVERE his task in these degenerate days,
Who rashly dares to grasp one sprig of Bays;
The frown of censure, and pale envy's blight,
Long damp his ardour, and retard his flight.
In form of critic, lo! where linked they stand,
With pride and dullness fixed on either hand,
Pointing with rugged thorns the painful steep,
They never ascend, though round it doomed to creep.
Not so, when Greece and Rome aspired to fame,
Then critic, and sound judgment were the same;
The poet sought the generous critic's aid,
And the same laurel gave them both a shade;
With all the terrors beating at my heart,
A novice feels in first essays of art,
With greatest homage for superior powr's,
Trembling I seek the muse's sacred bowers;
Sentenced in fancy, ere my fate be known,
As Churchill's theme I Have rashly made my own.
Mistaken zeal, with folly at her side,
Often has the Drama and its sons decri'd;
Gave the profession faults which nature knew,
And judged the many from an erring few.
Strictures like these for laughter only call,
From their own weakness they must quickly fall.
Let railing bigots, and let pedant fools,
Of morals prate, and precepts taught in schools,
Such clouds dissolve at merit's dazzling ray,
As mists are melted by the eye of day:
Shall he, whose quickening, animated frame,
Electric like, collects the poet's flame?
Whose glowing breast feels every passion roll,
And yields a body to great Shakespeare's soul;
Gives him each ornament of art and grace,
And holds his mirror up to nature's face,
Not gain the meed of well-earn'd honest fame?
GARRICK, step forward, and assert your claim.
Here charmed attention could for ever wait,
Fixed on thy beauties, unconfined as great,
And wrapped in visions of thy magic skill,
Indulge the transports which my bosom fill.
But what, though language were to feeling true,
Expressing strongly all in thought I view,
What could it add, O GARRICK, to thy name,
Already foremost on the lists of fame?
Warmed, I may tell, as different masks he wears,
We shake with laughter, or dissolve in tears,
Dwell on his spirit, judgment, taste, and grace,
And the keen lightenings flashing from his face;
But once behold the wonders of his art,
You Will find those drawn by nature on your heart;
To point his excellence, or speak his praise,
But stamps fresh value on the poet's lays.
Next on the line, yet distant, BARRY stands,
And takes precedence of the tragic bands.
Nor does presumption only prop his claim,
Once genius warmed him with her finest flame.
In love's soft transports, or its wasting care,
I feel each rapture, every pang I share;
If in the Moor, by wildest passions pressed,
Who does not find the storm assail his breast?
Now worn with years, and almost quenched his beam,
He faintly glimmers like the embers gleam;
Yet in the sparks of his expiring light,
Proves that the blaze which fired him once was bright:
Thus the grand column, or majestic dome,
Reared in the splendour of old Greece or Rome,
Though broke with tempests, and by time decayed,
Retain a greatness, even in ruins laid.
Though weak the million, and to judge unfit,
Still custom dubs them arbiters of wit;
Their breath alone it is swells the trump of fame,
And sounds the poet's or the sage's name.
Severe decree, and most the actor's bane,
Whose art is tried by folly's giddy train.
This MACKLIN felt, though merit's sterling seal,
Long passed him current in theatric scale.
Grant him unequal to his daring aim,
Did former service no indulgence claim?
Too high ambition might have soared for praise,
But yet 'twas mingled with a wish to please:
Thus far humanity and justice plead;
Now let us speak as taste and candor lead.
Dark was his col'ring, but conception strong;
If hard his manner, still it never was wrong.
Warmed with the poet, to the part he rose,
His anger fired us, and his terror froze;
And more; where quaintness shut out meaning's day,
MACKLIN threw light with fine discernment's ray:
If these are truths, which envy's self must breathe,
Applause should crown him with her greenest wreath.
Where, on her native quarry next to light,
Shall the muse bend her melancholy flight?
Now half her sons are swept by death's fell power,
And scarce a gleam of hope remains of more.
O, sacred fire! which once with active heat,
In POWELL's and in MOSSOP's bosoms beat,
Where art thou fled? or do thou only rest
In GARRICK's and in BARRY's feeling breast?
No, replies genius; I have found a part,
A favorite mansion in a female heart,
Where steady judgment and fine taste prepare
Their richest offerings, to detain me there;
Behold, where beauty, in the shape of grace,
With sweetness beams from BARRY, form and face;
There I reside, enamored of the seat,
Heedless of envy or ambition's cheat,
And never will quit her, 'till my rival time,
Shall ravish life, as well as youth and prime.
A handsome figure, with an easy mien,
Are all SMITH's requisites to fill the scene;
Flat, without compass, drawling on the ear,
In one dull tone th'unvaried voice we hear;
No flame of passion ever yet he knew,
Or, changing character, appeared once new;
Person alone first gave him to the stage,
And habit guards him in this easy age.
REDDISH wants power, th'emotion strong to raise,
But his attention gains, and merits praise;
Though voice and feeling small assistance lend,
He often has pleased, and seldom does offend;
Unless, when folly fain would have him great,
And rant and stare usurp expression's seat.
O, how it moves me to the taunting jibe,
To hear some groundling of th'itin'rant tribe;
York, Bath, or Norwich, rank with DRURY's scene,
Now Frodsham's gone, and Inchbald has been seen.
What, though their Lee boasts some faint strokes of art,
Does he ever touch with sympathy the heart?
Where is that grace, that station which commands,
Applause's tribute with her hundred hands?
His person's vulgar, his deportment's bad,
And tame correctness all he ever had.
Hibernia, whence the stage recruits her force,
Has just sent LEWIS to the Thespian course;
Blessed with those happy requisites to please,
A person, spirit, elegance, and ease.
How cold shone Belcour before LEWIS came;
'Twas he restored him to the poet's flame:
Passions like his, such genuine active fire,
May claim, indeed, the god of day for sire.
BENSLEY has little, save what art supplies,
For step-dame nature almost all denies;
Gloom shades his aspect, discord's in his tone,
His joy's as grating as his tragic moan.
Yet such a charm can industry impart,
Aided by worth, and merit of the heart,
That he stands higher on dramatic line,
Than he, whose talents, more than virtues, shine.
Of all her suitors in the Thespian art,
Thalia holds KING nearest to her heart;
Fixed in his eye, the smiling goddess sits,
And thence deals laughter with its loudest fits.
Ease and indulgence often at merit's throne,
Preferred their plea, and claimed him as their own;
Their wish obtained, Thalia then appeared,
Struck with a danger which she long had feared;
Her sister's sables, and her tears she wore,
To woo the truant to her arms once more:
Subdued, the lover's fondness stood confessed,
And clasped his weeping mistress to his breast;
Vowed to be constant to the suppliant maid,
Till death dissolved the union nature made.
That part, an actor in the bloom of life
Plays with success, he takes to him for wife,
Simpers and ogles with a withered face,
And trips the beau with antiquated grace.
Though WOODWARD once might boast of sprightly ease,
And every frolic wantonness to please,
Why must he gambol after youth is fled,
And winter scatters hoar upon his head?
Still there is a cast his talents to employ,
Razor or Bobadil can never cloy.
When partial nature gifts a favorite son,
With more than toiling art had ever won,
Should not the muse, if sloth the bounty mar,
Censure the culprit who neglects her care?
SHUTER, though blessed with humour's richest vein,
And skill to reach the highest comic strain,
Forgets his patroness, and slights her boon,
And, when he wants his part, becomes buffoon.
As folly's offspring sport in fashion's glare,
Fluttering in silks, with well-bred shrug and stare,
The insect tribe DODD paints with nicest art,
And gives a double edge to satire's dart.
Nature has dealt to CLINCH with liberal hand,
Talents, which cultured, might applause command;
But vain the grant, and slow must rise his fame,
Unless the manager will fan the flame.
BRERETON has person, is not void of grace,
But wants the energy of voice and face;
In gay description, or in polished ease,
His taste and judgment never fail to please.
And when by time he is ripened on the bow,
He Will merit that success he wishes now.
Let those whom pride attract, not sense and choice,
Expire in raptures at an eunuch's voice,
And feigning transports which they never felt,
At unintelligible nonsense melt.
For me, a plain, rough, honest Briton bred,
Who often have erred, but by my heart was led,
Who, though a monarch should his favors heap,
Dare spurn at folly, and at op'ra sleep:
I call on VERNON, if a sound must feast,
To stamp it with the currency of taste.
Few can, like BANNISTER, with humor strong,
Do equal justice both to wit and song;
And could the muse award the mimic praise,
FOOT would not stand much higher in her lays.
Faint as a shadow CAUTHERLEY glides by,
And melts without impression on the eye.
When DIBDIN's boast was a composer's name,
He stood the rival of the author's fame,
Till seized with madness, not poetic fire,
He rashly dared himself to touch the lyre,
When Phoebus, shocked at discord not his own,
Gave him to censure with her hiss and groan.
A greater bard, on MOODY's brow has placed
A wreath with which it ever must be graced;
Conscious I cannot give increase of bays,
I Will add, at least, my humble meed of praise.
QUICK wants not parts, but SHUTER is the sun
Round which he moves, and borrows all his fun.
In the harsh parent, or the rustic boor,
DUNSTALL and PARSONS show strong comic power.
PALMER gives spirit to the sprightly scene,
By gay deportment and a pleasing mien:
But when he woos the tuneful queen of tears,
His accents wound the muse's finer ears;
Shocked at the sound, we scarcely can believe
That the same man could ever pleasure give.
Without an effort, WESTON gains applause,
Nature has made him what the poet draws:
Others, with trick, and stage maneuver aim,
To strike the groundlings, and their clap obtain;
Show Johnson's Drugger, skilled in Broughton art,
And Scrub, instead of fool, a downright smart:
But he, superior to such paltry aid,
Never makes a jest but what his author made;
True humor, free from taint of low grimace,
Or wild distortion, sits upon his face:
Though laughter shake, unconscious he receives
The echoing plaudit public favor gives.
JEWS, in Marlow, makes his audience feel,
That he has head and heart as well as heel.
The needy emigrant from Gallia's shore,
The butt of ridicule since time of yore,
Who struts in frippery and tinsell'd stuff,
And jabbers nonsense, as he scoops up snuff;
BADD'LY, with humour's pencil, strongly draws,
And meets, as he deserves, with warm applause.
Cold, and unmeaning, AICKIN fills a part,
And never gains the head, or moves the heart.
With jointed sound, proceed his jarring tones,
Like currents harsh, and broke with beds of stones.
His acting's vappid, it wants feeling's soul,
To warm and quicken, into life the whole.
HULL's always perfect, and displays an aim,
To catch the poet's spirit, and his flame;
At times, he soars beyond chill medium's line,
And shows some sparks of excellence that shine.
What numbers censure, but how few judge right,
On subjects, which demand the soul's keen sight;
Each puny witling, from stark folly vain,
Dares JOHNSON's talents, or a SWIFT's arraign,
Merit by malice, not with taste they scan,
And damn the art, because they hate the man.
It Is certain MELMOTH has not gained that height,
On which perfection seated, drops her flight.
His person too wants weight, but then his heart,
Springs in his words, and animates each part.
Apollo pleads his cause; and dare the muse,
To hear her prince, and patron's voice refuse?
WROUGHTON has person, and conception just,
But wants strong feeling to be ranked as first.
A happy aspect, and a wish to please,
Deserve at least, if not extort our praise.
When surly winter with his felon train,
Flies to some cavern on the howling main,
And blooming summer leads the sprightly hours,
Then FOOT collects his vagrant sactter'd powers,
Poet and manager, at once he stands,
And starts upon the town his motley bands.
It Is rash to censure, where the public praise
Gives to the actor, and the author bays.
But sure applause, should never be his meed,
Who sports with faults which weyward fate decreed,
Who breaks that tie, which binds each noble breast,
And stabs his friend before he will lose his jest.
Success is giddy, as the veering blast,
And when it is not just, can never last.
Though now the senseless rabble may esteem,
The home-felt col'ring of his time-wrought scene,
Ages to come, where poets should appeal,
Will never laugh at what they cannot feel.
Person and elegance are YATES's claim,
They Are her chief passports, to the court of fame.
Her action's molded into grace, and ease,
And plaudits from the nicest judgment raise.
Kindling she glows with all the po^^s' fires,
And strongly feeling every heart inspires.
Still with a sigh, too clearly we behold,
The greatest spirit must with years wax cold.
YOUNG's speaking's just, her action too is right,
Yet seem like nymphs in boddice laced too tight,
What need so often, the close joined hands to raise;
Or bow like Bramin in his idol's praise.
And then that stalk, which Zanga well befits,
But never with grace on female softness sits.
Yet spite of all her faults, her merits shine,
And prove her YATES's rival on the line.
How shall I treat thee, HARTLEY, to preserve,
That homage, candor and the fair deserve?
For sure if Venus chose a mortal mould,
The radiance of her charms divine t'enfold,
HARTLY had been, the sacred, envied seat,
To which a goddess may indeed retreat.
Beauty, like charity, a charm spreads wide,
Veiling a multitude of faults beside.
Spirit, and grace, BARSANTI I allow,
And hope to see her what a POPE is now.
MACKLIN has judgment solid, taste refined,
With every bright embellishment of mind;
No charm, or spells, within her dimples lie,
Or fluttering cupids, ambush in her eye,
Sheer merit only, and the force of skill,
First gained her trophies, and maintain them still;
No touch of harmony can strike the heart,
With half that magic CATLEY's strains impart;
But folly, as if envious of her fame,
With gesture vulgar, and uncouth, proclaim,
That acting in a female should have grace,
Or modesty, at least, to fill it is place.
Of sterling humor, GREEN has ample store,
Perhaps even CLIVE was never blessed with more.
Mark where in Heidleberg, the extremes of life,
Like Groom, and Peer, are constantly at strife;
Or else when Termagant, with luckless hit,
Stumbles on nonsense, in her search for wit.
And if a STANHOPE's precept have no weight,
You Will own by laughter; that her merit's great;
No woman without beauty, or great skill,
Can, or could ever, on the stage excel.
That prop alone, supports a MELMOTH's name,
While the sad want prevents a MATTOCK's fame.
If music's voice, the throbbing breast can move,
Or melting softness, wake the soul to love;
If mild expression, beaming from a face,
Where sweetness revels with resistless grace,
Can cold attention into rapture warm,
Behold in BADD'LY every power to charm.
What CLIVE was once, POPE is, as Churchill told,
'Ere ripening time her talents could unfold:
Late may the stage lament her absent aid,
And never, till with equal genius paid.
How few can ever reach that happy line,
Where sense, and spirit, by their union shine;
And softened into ease, with nicest art,
Assail at once, the judgment and the heart.
That rarest talent, ABINGTON alone,
Possesses in perfection, all her own.
What woman else, with such a grace displays
The courtly manners, and true polished ease.
Her skill gives sanction to vain fashion's stare,
And makes the critic even folly bear.
Fresh crowds press forward on the muse's sight,
But pass like shadows at the approach of night.
So when the Trojan, future time t'explore,
Sought the dusk limits of the Stygian shore,
The Ghosts in throngs beset the Hero round,
With feeble clamours, and a shrieking sound;
But when he stretched, the fading forms to chase,
Their bodies melt, he grasps the vacant space.
Yet still these nothings, insolent and vain,
Expect proud reason's sentence to obtain.
Then mark my tale, and weigh the moral well,
If right conceived, 'twill folly's rudeness quell.
The vain Florella once, at pride's command,
Sat for her portrait to a famous hand:
The painter tried the utmost of his skill,
But found it baffled by the object still.
No trace of character, or glow of heart,
Flushed on her face, to strike the glance of art.
In fruitless toil, he saw his work must end,
When mind, and soul no inspiration lend.
Then bade the fool, some other artist try,
Sick of the task, and laid his pencil by.
FINIS.

