THE CONTRIVANCES; OR, More Ways than One. As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL
IN DRURY LANE.

LONDON: Printed for W. Mears at the Lamb, and J. Brown at the Black Swan, both
without Temple Bar. MDCCXV. [Price 6 d.]

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Argus, Father to Arethusa, Mr. Norris. Hearty, Father to Rovewell, Mr.
Shepard, Rovewell, Mr. Quin. Robin, Servant to Rovewell, Mr. Miller. Constable,
Mr. Cross. First Mob, Mr. Weller. Second Mob, Mr. Pendroy. Third Mob, Mr. Cole.
Woman Mob, Mr. Wright. Servant, Mr. Harris. Boy, Young Norris.
WOMEN.
Arethusa, Miss Willis. Betty, Mrs. Baker.
SCENE, London. THE Contrivances, etc.
SCENE the Street. Enter Robin. Rob. WELL! though Pimping is the most honorable
and profitable of all Professions, it is certainly the most dangerous and
fatiguing; but of all Fatigues, there is none like following a virtuous Mistress
-- There Is not one Letter I carry, but I run the Risque of kicking, caning, or
pumping, nay often hanging -- Let me see, I have committed three Burglaries
already to get one Letter to her -- Now if my Master should not get the Gypsy
at last, I have ventured my sweet Person to a fair Purpose: He has nothing left
but the Name of Captain and his Half Pay; which is as much as to say, that I
his faithful Servant, and so forth, must come off with no Pay, or trust 'till
Doomsday -- My Pockets are so empty, that old Nick may securely dance there,
for there is not one Cross left to frighten him away -- Ah! it was not so in
Flanders, when the French Wine and French Money tumbled about as if it would
never be Night -- But Basta! here comes my Master and his Friend Mr. Hearty --
I must haste and get our Disguises --

And if Dame Fortune fails us now (to win her)
I Will say no more, but think the Devil's in her.
[Exit.
Enter Rovewell and Hearty. Hear. Why so melancholy, Captain? Come, come, a
Man of your Gaiety and Courage should never take a Disappointment so to Heart.


Rove. 'Sdeath, to be prevented when I had brought my Design so near
Perfection! an old subtle cross-grained Hunks -- But have her I must and will,
or I am resolved to burn the old Drone out of his Hive, and carry the Honeycomb
away in Triumph.


Hear. A very conscientious Resolution truly -- But, Captain, would you be less
open and daring in your Attempts, you might hope to succeed -- The old
Gentleman, you know, is cautious to a Degree; his Daughter is under a strict
Confinement; and would you use more of the Fox than the Lion, Fortune may
perhaps throw an Opportunity in your Way -- But you must have Patience.


Rove. Who can have Patience when Danger's so near? Read this Letter, and tell
me then what Room there is for Patience.

Hearty reads. To Morrow will prevent all our vain Struggles to get to each
other -- I am then to be married to my eternal Aversion -- You know the Fop, it
is Cuckoo, who having a large Estate, is forced upon me; but my Heart can be
none but Rovewell's -- Immediately after the Receipt of this, meet Betty at the
old Place: There is yet one Invention left; if you pursue it closely, you may
perhaps release me, who would be your Arethusa.



Rove. Yes, Arethusa, I will release thee or dye in the Attempt. Dear Friend,
excuse my Rudeness, you know the Reason.

[Exit.
Hear. Well, go thy Ways and get her, for thou deserve her -- I find a
Soldier's never idle -- as soon as he has done with his Enemy he attacks his
Mistress, and seldom fails to conquer.

When true-bred English Courage takes the Field,
The Frenchmen and the Ladies quickly yield.
[Exit.
SCENE a Chamber. Enter Argus and Arethusa. Arethusa reads. See! smiling
Cynthia, now begins to rise,
And add transparent Glories to the Skies.
Hail beauteous Rival of the dark some Night,
Whose Glooms give way to thy superior Light!
Thy lucid Charms afford a second Day,
And guide the weary Pilgrim in his Way.

Arg. Pray, Daughter, what Linguo is that same that you sputter out at this
Rate?


Are. English, Sir.


Arg. English, quotha'! adad, I took it for Nonsense.


Are. It Is an Hymn to the Moon.


Arg. A Hymn to the Moon! a Hymn to the Devil, you Jade you -- I Will have none
of your Hymns in my House -- Give me the Book, Mistress?


Are. I hope, Sir, there is no harm in reading a harmless Poem.


Arg. Give me the Book, I say, Huswife -- Poems with a Pox, what are they good
for? But to blow up the fire of Love, and make young Wenches as hot as the
Devil -- but I have taken care of you, Mistress, for to Morrow you shall have a
Husband to stay your Stomach, and no less a Person than Squire Cuckoo.


Are. You will not be so cruel to marry me to a Man I cannot love?


Arg. But you must and shall love him, Huswife: What! you hone after a red Rag,
I warrant you: Nothing less than a Captain will go down with you, forsooth; a
disbanded Captain -- Such a Fellow deserves Twelve Thousand Pounds to squander
away, does he? But I have put a Spoke in his Wheel -- for to Morrow you shall
be bound Apprentice for Life, and then your disbanded Lover may even hang
himself.


Are. For Heaven's sake, dear Sir, give me a little time to consider: Marriage
is a Concern of the utmost Consequence -- put it off for one Month, that I may
endeavor to make my Duty and Desires go together.


Arg. Do you your Duty, and a Fig for Desires -- No, no, Mistress; Delays are
dangerous in these Cases -- Mr. Cuckoo is a brisk young Fellow, and a little
Feather-bed Doctrine will soon put the Captain out of your Head -- and to put
you out of his Power, you shall be given over to the Squire to Morrow.


Are. Pray, Sir, consider -- put it off for a Week, let me have time to make
the necessary Preparations.


Arg. What, to run away with the Captain, Mistress? -- no, no, to Morrow is the
Day.


Are. Surely you will at least defer it one Day?


Arg. No, nor one Hour -- to Morrow Morning at eight of the Clock precisely --
In the mean time, take Notice that the Squire's Sister is hourly expected, a
good plain Country Girl, but a great Fortune -- I believe it will be a Match
between her and your Cousin Frank -- the old Folks have almost agreed about the
Matter -- so pray do you be civil and sociable with her, and let me have none
of your Pouts and Louts, as you tender my Displeasure.

[Exit.
Are. To Morrow is but short Warning -- but we may be too cunning for you yet,
old Gentleman.

Enter Betty. O Betty! welcome a thousand times over, What News -- have you
seen the Captain, Betty?


Bet. Yes, Madam, and if you were to see him in his new Rigging, you would split
your Sides with laughing -- such a Hoyden, such a piece of Country Stuff, you
never set your Eyes on -- but the Petticoats are soon thrown off, and if good
Luck attends us, you may soon conjure Miss Malkin, the Squire's Sister, into
your own dear Captain.


Are. But when will he come?


Bet. Instantly, Madam, he only stays to settle Matters for our Escape, he is in
deep Consultation with his privy Counselor Robin, who is to attend him in the
Quality of a Country Putt -- They Will both be here in a Moment, so let us in and
pack up the Jewels, that we may be ready at once to leap into the Saddle of
Liberty, and ride full speed to your Desires.


Are. Dear Betty, let us make haste, I think every Moment an Age 'till I Am free
from this Bondage.

When Parents obstinate and cruel prove,
And force us to a Man we cannot Love,
It Is fit we disappoint the sordid Elves,
And wisely get us Husbands for our selves.
[Knock here.
Bet. There they are -- in, in.

[Exeunt. [Knock again.
Enter Argus. Arg. You're woundy hasty methinks, to knock at that rate -- this
is certainly some Courtier come to borrow Money, I know it by the saucy rapping
of the Footman -- Who Is at the Door?


Rob. without.] Tummos.


Arg. Tummos! who is Tummos? Who would you speak with, Friend?


Rob. With young Master's Vaather-in-Law that mun be, Mr. Hardguts.


Arg. And what is your Business with Mr. Hardguts?


Rob. Why young Mistress is come out of the Country, to see Brother's Wife that
mun be, that is all.


Arg. Odso; the Squire's Sister -- I Am sorry I made 'em wait so song.

[Opens the Door. Enter Rovewell dressed like a Country Gentlewoman, and Robin
like a Country Clown. Save you fair Lady, you're welcome to Town: [Salutes
him.] A very modest comely Maiden truly. How long have you been in Town, Lady?


Rob. Why an Hour and a bit, or so -- we just put up our Horses at King's-Arms
yonder, and staid a crum to zee poor things feed or so, for your London Ostlers
give little enough to poor Beasts, and you stond not by 'em your zel, and zee
'em fed, they will cheat you to your Face.


Arg Why how now Clodpate? Are you to speak before your Mistress? With your Hat
on too? Is that your Country breeding?


Rob. Why an it is on, it is on, an it is off, it is off -- what cares Tummos? for
your false-hearted London Compliments -- an you would have an answer from young
Mistress, you mun look to Tummos -- for she is so main bashful, she never speaks
one Word but her Prayers, and thosen so softly that no Body can hear her.


Arg. I like her the better -- for Silence is a heavenly Virtue in a Woman --
but very rare to be found in this wicked Place -- Have you seen your Brother,
pretty Lady, since you came to Town? [ Rovewell Curtsies.] O miraculous
Modesty! would all Women were thus? Cannot you speak, Madam?

[Curtsies again.
Rob. An you get a Word from her, it is more than she has spoken to us these
fourscore and seven long Miles -- but young Mistress will prate fast enough an
you set her amongst your Women Volk, or so, when she is once acquainted.


Arg Say thou so, honest Fellow, then I Will send her to those that have
Tongue enough I Will warrant you -- Here Betty.

Enter Betty. Take this young Lady to my Daughter, it is Squire Cuckoo's Sister;
and do you hear? make much of her, I charge you.


Bet. Yes, Sir -- please to follow me, Madam.

[Ex. Betty and Rovewell.
Arg. Well honest Friend, and where is the Squire?


Rob. Why one cannot find a Mon out in this same London, there are so many
Taveruns and Chockling-Housen, you may as well seek a Needle in a Hay Fardel,
as they sayn in the Country -- I was at Squire's Lodging yonder, and there was
no body, but a prate a pace whoreson of a Footboy, and he told me Master was at
Chockling-House, and the while the Vixen did nothing but taunt and laugh at me,
or so -- I Cod I could have found in my Heart to have given a good wherrit
in the Chops, so I could -- so I went to one Chockling-House, and Squire was not
there, and so I went to the other Chockling-House, and the other, 'till I was a
weary, and I could see nothing but a many People supping hot Suppings, and
reading your Gazate Papers so we came away here and please you, but we had much
ado to find out your Worship's House, the vixen Boys set us a thick a side, and
a thack a side, that we were almost lost -- an it were not for an honest Fellow
that came and showed us the right way.


Arg. It Is a pity they should use Strangers so -- but as to your young
Mistress, does she never speak?


Rob. Adod, Sir, never to a Mon, why she wo'not speak to her own Father, she is
so main bashful or so --


Arg. That Is strange indeed -- but how does my Friend Sir Roger? -- he is well,
I hope.


Rob. Hearty still, Sir -- he has drunk down six Fox-hunters sin last Lammas --
he holds old course still; twenty Pipes a Day, a Cup of Mum in the Morning, a
Tankard of Ale at Noon, and three Bottles of Stingo at Night -- the same Mon
now he was thirty Years ago, or so.


Arg. Good now, good now! but would drink, honest Friend?


Rob. I don't care an I do a bit or so, for to tell you the truth, I Am main dry.


Arg. Here, John.

Enter Servant. Take this honest Fellow down, and make him welcome -- when your
Mistress is ready to go, we'll call you.

[Exeunt Robin and Servant. These Country Fellows are very blunt, but very
honest -- I would fain hear his Mistress talk -- he said she would find her Tongue
when she was amongst those of her own Sex -- I Will go listen for once, and hear
what the young Tits have to say to one another.

[Exit.
SCENE a Chamber. Enter Rovewell, Arethusa, and Betty. Rove. Dear Arethusa!
delay not the time thus -- your Father will certainly come in, and surprise us.


Bet. Let Us make Hay while the Sun shines, Madam, I long to be out of this
Prison.


Are. So do I, but not on the Captain's Conditions, to be his Prisoner for Life.


Rove. I shall run mad if you trifle thus -- name your Conditions -- I sign my
consent beforehand

[Kisses her.
Arg. listening.] So, so, this is as it should be -- they are as gracious as can
be already -- how the young Tit smuggles her -- adod, she kisses with a hearty
good Will.


Are. O the great Romp, he takes one's Breath away -- how could you pass upon
my Father? I never saw such a hoyden masculine Monster in my Life.


Rove. Let Us once get out I Will tell you the whole Story -- this is no Time or
Place for Particulars -- if you loved me, or valued your own Happiness, you
would not trifle away this Opportunity.


Are. Indeed Captain, I Am afraid to trust you.


Arg. Captain! how is this -- bless my Eyesight -- I know the Villain now, but
I Will be even with him.


Bet. Dear, dear Madam, don't trifle so, I long to see you both between a pair
of Sheets -- the Parson's at the very next Door, you will be tackt together in
the twinkling of a Bedstaff, and then I Will trust you to come back to your Cage
again, if you can do it with a safe Conscience.


Arg. Here Is a treacherous Jade! I Will do your Business for you, Mrs. Jezabel.


Bet. Consider, Madam, what a Life you lead here, what a jealous, ill-natured,
watchful, covetous, barbarous, obstinate old Cuff of a Father you have to deal
with -- what a glorious Opportunity this is? And what a sad, sad, very sad
thing it is, to die a Maid.


Arg. A Whore, I could slit her Nose.


Bet. In short, Madam, if you stay much longer, you may repent it every Vein in
your Heart -- the old Hunks will undoubtedly pop in upon us, and discover all,
and then we are undone for ever.


Arg. You may be damned for ever, Mrs. Impudence.


Are. Well, Captain, if you should deceive me --


Rove. If I do, may Heaven --


Are. Nay, no swearing Captain, for fear you should break your Oath.


Rove. How can you doubt me, Arethusa, when you know how much I love --


Arg. Ah wheedling Dog! but I Will spoil his Sport anon.


Bet. Come, come away, dear Madam -- I have the Jewels -- but stay, I Will go
first to see if the Coast be clear.

[Going out, Argus stops her.
Arg. Where are you going, pretty Maiden?


Bet. Only do -- do -- down Stairs, Sir.


Arg. And what have thou got there, Child?


Bet. Nothing but Pi -- Pi -- Pins, Sir.


Arg. Here, give me the Pins -- and do you go to Hell, Mrs. Minx, do you hear?
Out of my House this Minute, or expect the dreadful Issue of my righteous
Indignation. [Thrusts her out.] O Tempora! O Mores! what an Age is this? Get
you in forsooth, I Will talk with you anon -- So, Captain, are those your
Regimental Clothes? I Will assure you they become you mightily, if you did but
see your self now, how much like a Hero you look. [Laughs.] But, Captain, an't
you an impudent Dog now, an't you? -- must no Body serve your Turn but my
Daughter? nothing less than twelve thousand Pounds? Well, I find you Soldiers
rate your selves high -- but you deserve it in Truth: you work your Brains, you
try Stratagems, you transform into a thousand Shapes to catch a Fortune -- Ecce
Signum, ha, ha.


Rove. 'Sblood and Fury, stop your Grinning, or I Will stretch your Mouth with a
Vengeance.


Arg. Nay, nay, Captain Bellswagger, if you're so passionate it is high time to
call Aid and Assistance: Here Richard, Thomas, John, help me to lay hold on
this Fellow; you have no Sword now, Captain, no Sword, do you mark me, ha, ha, ha.


Enter Servants and Robin. Rove. But I have a Pistol, Sir, at your Service.

[Claps a Pistol to his Breast.
Arg. O Lord! O Lord!


Rove. And I Will unload it in your Breast, if you stir one Step after me.


Arg. A bloody-minded Dog.


Rob. And see here, Gentlemen, here are two little Bull-dogs of the same Breed,
they are wonderful Scowrers of the Brain -- So that if you offer to molest or
follow us -- you understand me, Gentlemen, you understand me.

[Ex. Rovewell and Robin.
1st Serve. Yes, yes, we understand you with a Pox.


2d Serve. The Devil go with 'em, I say.


Re-enter Rovewell and Robin. All. O Lord! O Lord!


1st Serve. Indeed, Sir, we did not follow you, we didn't indeed, Sir.


Rove. Do You hear, old Gentleman, I Will have your Daughter, if I wade to her
through the Blood of you and your whole Generation; and so good-bye to ye, old
Goose-Cap.

[Exit.
Arg. Ay, ay, good-bye to ye in the Devil's Name -- a terrible Dog! What a
Fright he has put me in! I shall not be my self this Month -- And you, ye cowardly
Rascals, to stand by and see my Life in Danger -- Get out, ye Slaves, out of my
House I say.

[Drives them out. What a murdering Son of a Whore is this? but I Will prevent
him -- he shall eat Brick, and Stone, and Iron to get at her again, I Will
warrant him -- But to Morrow she shall be married certainly, and then my
furious Gentleman can have no Hopes left -- A Jezabel, to love a Red-Coat
without any Money -- Had he but Money, if he wanted Sense, Manners, or even
Manhood itself, it mattered not a Pin -- but to want Money is the Devil -- Well,
I Will secure her under Lock and Key 'till to Morrow; and if her Husband cannot
keep her from Captainhunting, even let her bring him home a fresh Pair of Horns
every time she goes out upon the Chase.

[Exit.
SCENE a Chamber. Arethusa sitting melancholy on a Couch, enter to her Argus.
Arg. So Lady, you're welcome home -- See how the pretty Turtle sits moaning the
Loss of her Mate -- What, not a Word, Thusy! not a Word, Child! Come, come,
don't be in the Dumps so, and I Will fetch the Captain, or the Squire's Sister,
perhaps they may make it prattle a bit. Ah, ungracious Huswife! is all my Care
come to this? Is this the Gratitude you show to your Uncle's Memory! to throw
away (what he bustled so hardly for) at so mad a Rate! Did he leave you twelve
thousand Pounds, think you, to make you no better than a Soldier's Trull, to
follow a Camp, to carry a Knapsack? This is what you would have, Mistress, is it
not?


Are. This, or ten thousand times worse, were better with the Man I love, than
to be chained to the nauseous Embraces of one I hate.


Arg. Very well, Mrs. Termagant, very well! this is the way you answer your
Father, is it?


Are. You never found me guilty of this Language, Sir, 'till now your Usage
forced me to it -- My Uncle left my Portion entirely at my own Disposal,
knowing your Covetousness would prompt you to force me against my Inclinations
-- Mr. Cuckoo is a Fop, whose Affectation and Ignorance I abhor -- Captain
Rovewell has Merit, Sense, and Courage -- I love him, and can be happy in no
other, and no other will I have.


Arg. So! so! very pretty! very pretty indeed! I tell you, Mrs. Snapdragon, you
shall have Squire Cuckoo, and no other, or the Devil a Penny shall you have of
mine; mark that.


Are. My Uncle, Sir, has left me enough to make my self happy; and you are free
to dispose of your own as you please -- but me you never shall against my
Inclinations.


Arg. A very dutiful Lady indeed! I Will make you sing another Song to Morrow,
Mistress; and 'till then I Will leave you in Salva Custodia to consider -- bye
Thusy.

[Exit.
Are. How barbarous is the Covetousness and Caution of ill-natured Parents;
they toil for Estates to make Posterity happy, and then by mistaken Prudence
they match us to our Aversion -- Thus while they measure Happiness by Riches,
they only seek to make their Children miserarable -- But I am resolved not to
suffer tamely however -- They shall find, though my Body's weak, my Resolution's
strong; and I may yet find Spirit enough to plague 'em.

Sooner than I Will forego the Man I prize,
I Will brave 'em, though I fall a Sacrifice.
[Exit.
SCENE the Street. Enter Hearty. Hear. OF my Conscience I think this young
Fellow will run mad -- So many Enterprises and Disappointments upon the Back of
each other should pall him methinks -- but yet he holds out courageously, and
is still as vigorous as ever -- What he is upon now I know not, but he swears
he will carry her -- I wish he is not balk'd, for the old Fellow is more upon his
Guard now than ever.

How have I been deceived in this Boy! I find him the very Reverse of what his
Stepmother represented him -- and am now sensible it was only her ill Usage
that forced my Child away -- His not having seen me since he was five Years old
renders me a perfect Stranger to him -- under that Pretense I have got into his
Acquaintance, and find him all I could wish -- Here he comes, big with another
Plot -- but if it fails, I believe my Money must buy him the Girl at last.


Enter Rovewell. Rove. So, my dear Friend here already; this is kind.

[Draws his Sword, and makes a Signal. Enter Boy. Is your Mistress locked up,
say you?


Boy. Yes, Sir, and Betty's turned away, and all the Men Servants; and there is
no living Soul in the House but our old Cookmaid, and I, and my Master, and
Mrs. Thusy, and she cries, and cries, and cries her Eyes out almost.


Rove. O the tormenting News! If the Garrison is so weak, the Castle may be the
sooner stormed -- But how did you get out?


Boy. Through the Kitchin-Window, Sir.


Rove. Show me the Window presently.


Boy. Alack-a-day, it will not do indeed, Sir, that Plot will not take.


Rove. Why, Sirrah?


Boy. You are something too big, Sir.


Rove. I Will try that however.


Boy. Indeed, Sir, you cannot get your Leg in, but I could put you in the Way.


Rove. How, dear Boy!


Boy. I can lend you the Key of Mrs. Thusy's Chamber -- if you can contrive to
get into the House -- but you must be sure to let my Mistress out.

[Gives a Key.
Rove. How coud'st thou get it? This is almost a Miracle.


Boy. I picked it out of my Master's Coat-Pocket, Sir, this Morning, when I was
a brushing him.


Rove. That Is my Boy -- there, there is Money for you.


Boy. My Master will miss me, Sir, I must go, but I wish you good Luck.

[Exit.
Enter Robin, and four Soldiers. Rove. So my Hearts of Oak, are you all ready?


All. Yes, Sir, yes, and it please your noble Honor.


Rove. You know your Cue then -- Sergeant to your Post.

[Places the Soldiers out of sight, then knocks loud.
Rob. What, are you all asleep, and dead, in this House, that they cannot hear
one knock?


Enter Argus. Arg. You are very hasty, Sir, methinks.


Rob. My Business, Sir, requires haste!


Arg. Your Business! pray what is your Business, Sir?


Rob. My Business, Sir, is to borrow a thousand Pound of you.


Arg. Very concise indeed! but upon what Security, Sir.


Rob. Upon what Security! upon my own, Sir.


Arg. Sir, your most humble Servant, you must excuse me, I don't lend Money at
that rate -- a thousand Pound upon thy Security, ha, ha, ha, did ever see a
thousand Pence of thy own -- pray, Sir, what Countryman are you?


Rob. 'Sdeath, Sir, do you mean to affront me?


Arg. O by no means, Sir; only to shut the Door, and keep the thousand Pound to
my self.


Rob. Sir, I must have Satisfaction.


Arg. Get you gone Fellow, you want to rob me, do you?


Rob. 'Sblood, and Fire, and Fury!

[Lays hold of him, and pulls him out of the House, the Soldiers seize him,
blindfold him, and gag him, and stand over him with drawn Swords: Robin and
Captain go in and bring out Arethusa, and carry her off -- then the Soldiers
ungag Argus, and run off.
Arg. Thieves, Thieves.

[Pulls off the blindfold.
Enter Mob. Mob. What Is the matter, what is the matter!


Arg. O Neighbors I Am robbed, and murdered, ruined and undone for ever.


1 Mob. Why what is the matter, Master?


Arg. There Is a whole Legion of Thieves in my House, they gagged me, and
blindfolded me, and offered forty naked Swords at my Breast -- I beg of you to
assist me, or they will strip the House in a Minute.


2 Mob. Forty drawn Swords, say you, Sir?


Arg. Ay, and more I think on my Conscience.


2 Mob. Then look ye, Sir, I am a married Man, and have a Family, and I would
not venture amongst such a parcel of Bloodthirsty Rogues for the World; but if
you please, I Will run and call a Constable.


Omnes. Ay, ay, call a Constable, call a Constable.


Arg, I shall not have a Penny left, if we stay for a Constable -- I am but one
Man, and as old as I am, I Will lead the way if you will follow me.

[Exit.
Omnes. Ay, ay, in, in, follow, follow, Huzzi!


1 Mob. Prithee Jack do you go in, and see what is the matter?


3 Mob. Nay, do you go in, and you come to that.


1 Mob. I go in, what should I go in for? I have lost nothing.


Wom. What, no body to help the poor old Gentleman? If I was a Man l'd follow
him my self.


3 Mob. Why don't you then? What occasion have I to be killed for him, or you
either, ha!


Enter second Mob and Constable. Omnes. Here Is Mr. Constable, here is Mr.
Constable.


Con. Silence, in the King's Name.


Omnes. Ay, Silence, Silence!


Con. What Is the meaning of this Riot, who makes all this Disturbance?


1 Mob. I Will tell you, Mr. Constable.


3 Mob. And please your Worship, let me speak.


Con. Ay, this Man talks like a Man of Parts -- What Is the matter, Friend?


3 Mob. And please your noble Worship's Honor, we are his Majesty's Liege
Subjects, and were terrified out of our Habitations and dwelling Places by a
Cry from abroad; which your noble Worship must understand was occasionable by
the Gentleman of this Houfe, who was so unfortunable as to be killed by
Thieves, who are now in his House to the Numbration of above sorty, and please
your Worship, all completely armed with Powder and Ball -- Backswords, Pistols,
Bayonets, and Blunderbusses.


Con. But what is to be done in this Case?


3 Mob. Why and please your Worship, knowing your noble Honor to be the King's
Majesty's noble Officer of the Peace -- we thought 'twas best your Honor
should come and terrify these Rogues away with your noble Authority.


Con. Well said, very well said indeed -- Gentlemen, I am the King's Officer,
and I command you in the King's Name to aid and assist me to call them Rogues
out of the House -- Who Is within there? I Charge you come out in the King's
Name, and submit your selves to my Royal Authority.


Enter Argus. 2 Mob. This is the Gentleman that was killed, and please your
Worship.


Arg. O Neighbors! I am ruined and undone for ever -- they have taken away all
that is dear to me in the World.


1 Mob. That Is his Money -- it is a sad covetous Dog.


Con. Why what is the matter? What have they done?


Arg. O they have taken my Child from me, my Thusa.


Con. Good lack!


3 Mob. Marry come up -- what Valuation can she be -- but have they taken
nothing else?


Arg. Would they had stripped my House of every Pennyworth, so they had left my
Child.


1 Mob. That Is a Lie, I believe -- for he loves his Money beyond his Soul, and
would sooner part with that, than a Groat.


Arg. This is the Captain's doings -- but I Will have him hanged.


Con. But where are the Thieves?


Arg. Gone, gone, beyond all hopes of pursuit.


3 Mob. What, are they gone then -- come, Neighbors, let us go in, and kill
every Mother's Child of 'em.


Con. Hold, I charge you to commit no Murderation -- follow me, and we'll
apprehend 'em.


Arg. Go Villains, Cowards, Cuckolds, Scoundrels, or I shall suspect you are
the Thieves that mean to rob me of what is yet left -- how brave you are now
the Danger's over --

[Drives 'em off.
Enter Rovewell, Hearty, and Arethusa. Arg. Bless me! who have we got here? O
Thusy! Thusy! I had rather never have seen thee again, than to have found thee
in such Company.


Are. Sir, I hope my Husband's Company is not criminal.


Arg. Your Husband! who is your Husband? Huswife? That Scoundrel, that
No-Captain -- out of my sight thou ungracious Wretch -- I Will go make my Will
this Minute -- and you you Villain, how dare you look me in the Face after
this? I Will have you hanged; I will, Sirrah.


Hear. O fie, Brother Argus, moderate your Passion -- you don't do well to
abuse your Son-in-Law at this rate -- It ill becomes the Friendship you owe Ned
Worthy, to villifie and affront his only Child, and for no other Crime than
improving that Friendship which has ever been between us.


Arg. Ha! my dear Friend alive! I heard thou were dead in the Indies: And is
that thy Son! and my Godson if I am not mistaken!


Hear. The very same -- the last and best Remains of our Family -- forced by my
Wife's Cruelty and my Absence to the Army -- my Wife is since dead, and the Son
she had by her first Husband, whom she intended to Heir my Estate -- but
Fortune guided me by Chance to my dear Boy, who after twenty Years absence, and
changing my Name, knew me not -- 'till I just now discovered my self to him,
and your fair Daughter, whom I will make him deserve by thirty thousand Pound,
which I brought from India -- beside what Estate I may leave him at my Death.


Arg. And to match that, old Boy -- my Daughter shall have every Penny of mine,
besides her Uncle's Legacy. Ah you young Rogue! had I known you before, I would
not have used you so roughly -- but now you have won my Girl so bravely, take
her and welcome -- but you must excuse all Faults -- the old Man meant all for
the best -- you must not be angry.


Capt. Sir, on the contrary, we ought to beg your Pardon for the many Disquiets
we have given you -- and with your Pardon, we hope for your Blessing.

[Kneels.
Rob. Sir, I hope you will forgive me too, for truly, Sir, if my Master's
Necessity had not obliged me to it, I had never troubled your Worship for a
thousand Pound at once, but the next time I do (being you doubted my Word) I Will
give you my Bond for the Payment.


Arg. And I Will give you my Bond that you shall be hanged if you do. But I Will
forgive you, you Rogue, though you don't deserve it, Sirrah -- Well, bless you
both my dear Children -- ah the little Rogues, how pretty they look -- come,
buss and Friends.


Hear. Heaven's bless you together -- now old School-fellow, what say to a
Grandson?


Arg. Ay, that would be somewhat indeed -- but who doubts it -- the young Rogue
looks vigorous, he has it in him, I Will warrant him: But, Brother Worthy, how
came alive again? -- I heard for a Certainty you were dead.


Hear. I was very near Death, it is true -- but Fortune protected me -- every
Ship in the Fleet was lost but mine -- which though it was deeply laden, escaped,
and brought me Home safe with a Cargo, worth thirty thousand Pounds, which
shall be settled on my Boy to Morrow.


Arg. My Thusy, Sir, shall not be behind hand -- But Hussy, what makes you in such
a brown Study? Why don't you kiss your old Father -- adod, I am so transported,
I cannot tell whether I Am alive or dead.


Are. May your Joy be everlasting.


Arg. It will, you Jade, -- Come Son, you must make my House your own -- for
the future: Brother Worthy, you shall lodge here too: Come, let us in.


In vain we strive to force a Woman's Will:
Do what we can, they will get the better still.
FINIS.

