CRAIGMILLAR CASTLE. AN ELEGY.

-- (...)
(...)
HOM. Without the Gods, how short a period stands
The proudest monument of mortal hands!
POPE. EDINBURGH: Printed for the AUTHOR, and sold by all the Booksellers.

M.DCC.LXXVI.

TO JAMES BEATTIE, LL. D. PROFESSOR OF LOGIC, AND MORAL PHILOSOPHY, IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF ABERDEEN, THIS ELEGY IS INSCRIBED, AS A MARK OF THE GREATEST
ESTEEM BY

THE AUTHOR.

CRAIGMILLAR CASTLE, AN ELEGY.
WROTE IN SEPTEMBER M,DCC,LXXV.
THE Sun, declining over the western sky,
In roseat splendour closed his circling course,
And tinged the clouds with many a varied dye,
When, following Fancy's ever-flowing source
Of cool poetic joy, I bent my way
Towered a majestic Castle's ruins wide;
Within whose gates once royalty bore sway,
And for a season laid its cares aside.
The bleating flocks were pent within the fold;
The jovial reapers long had left the vale;
The plowman at his cheary fireside told
The merry story, or the mournful tale.
Now SOL had gone to other worlds to rise,
And all the place to silence was resigned;
While on the ruin fixed were my eyes,
A pleasing melancholy filled my mind.
Comparing present things with past, a tear
Starting from either eye down gently stole;
Though from my heart wrung by reflection drear,
A tear which pity wished not to control!
While yielding thus to lenient grief, I deemed
A rushing noise I heard, and looking round,
A sudden light effulgent on me beamed,
And all my soul in admiration bound.
Upon the hill descended from on high,
A BEING far transcending human kind:
I gazed upon him as he glided nigh,
His form engaging all my pensive mind.
An azure robe, of a celestial dye,
Around him wildly wantoned in the breeze:
Bare were his feet; his looks did seem to vye
With new-fall'n snow that tips the aged trees.
Placid and mild his look, yet conscious seemed
Of majesty, and piercing was his eye,
That flashing with a heavenly ardor gleam'd,
As formed with ease to scan earth, sea, and sky.
His decent footstops with a silver wand
Were guided, as majestically slow
Towered me he calm advanced, and took his stand
Beside me, lost in Pity's balmy woe.
"AH, mortal! (said he) thou art moved in vain
"To see all human grandeur yield to Fate,
"When from its fall thou should essay to gain
"Instruction, not bewail its fallen state.
"'It Is my delight, at fall of dewy eve,
"To visit and converse with mortals good,
"My heavenly dictates who with joy receive
"In the low cot, or 'mid the shady wood.
"The vain magnificence of man may prove
"My present mournfully instructive theme,
"Whose fate observed, might even the proudest move
"To own all earthly pomp a fleeting dream."
Thus, while he spoke, I recognized the power
Of CONTEMPLATION, radiant son of Truth;
When empty joys invite, or sorrows lowr,
The comforter of age, the guide of youth.
For often he my lone sequestered cot
Had deigned to visit, where he taught my soul
Tranquilly to enjoy life's checkered lot,
And each impetuous passion to control.
"Behold (he thus resumed) yon turrets high,
"The once proud ornaments of that strong tower;
"Now rent and shattered by the inclement sky,
"Scarce rests the vestige of their former power.
"The approaching foe by no portcullis dire,
"Nor bar of massy iron, nor steady gate,
"Would now be forced disdainful to retire,
"And leave a strength unworthy of his hate.
"Upon this moat, once as a sea profound,
"Which erst no daring footstep ever trod,
"The wanton infant now may sportive bound,
"And harmless lambs choose a secure abode.
"The room where arms in horrid order placed
"A glimmering light reflected to the eye,
"Is now with instruments of labor graced;
"There sword to sickle changed thou may descry.
"That chamber, where the Queen, whose charms divine
"Made wondering nations own the power of love,
"Often bathed her snowy limbs in sparkling wine,
"Now proves a lonely refuge for the dove.
"Yon hall capacious, where the flowing bowl
"Inspired convivial mirth, unblam'dly free,
"Unfolded all the secrets of the soul,
"And whelmed each care in heart-enliv'ning glee.
"Where the love-kindling lute, and sounding lyre,
"Rapt all the mind, or in soft pleasure drowned;
"Where the hoarse trumpet rouzing martial fire,
"Made vaulted roof and rocky walls resound.
"There sullen silence reigns, and there the owl
"Makes her abode that loves the gloomy night;
"Thence not the least noise rises, save the howl
"Of bats, and beasts obscene that shun the light.
"Yon mouldering chapel, which in days of yore
"To some romantic saint was sacred made,
"Where the early priest his matins murmured over,
"And said his numerous masses for the dead;
"There now each noxious animal and weed
"In baleful darkness dwells: And where the cross
"Was placed, the henbane spreads a deadly shade;
"And the foul toad concealed lies in the moss.
"See over the place deep melancholy reigns
"Where splendour once diffused its brightest day;
"And of a palace even these poor remains
"Will soon to nameless ruin drop a prey.
"Such fate awaits all sublunary things,
"Save those that rest on VIRTUE'S firm support;
"She aid alone against Time's fell ravage brings,
"And smiles secure at Fortune's cruel sport."
Thus while he spoke, his robe expanding wide,
Majestic as a cherub still he stood;
Then through the liquid air was seen to glide,
And, swift ascending, gained his blessed abode.
I silent turning from the eastern seas
Behold the full-orb'd moon refulgent rise;
No fluttering zephyr fans the yellow trees,
Each breathe in gentle cadence softly dies.
The strepent horn no more the hills rebound,
But all the air is wrapped in stillness mild,
Save where the far-off curfeu's solemn sound
Steals on the ear, melodiously wild!
Fair CYNTHIA'S ray, swift-gliding as she rose,
First marked the place where a proud vessel lay,
Which in the lulling calm seemed to repose,
While not a gale its slagging sails did sway.
Then slow that towering hill to view disclosed,
At whose wide base a princely palace stands;
And by it, to each ruthless storm exposed,
A sacred ruin; -- shame of modern hands!
Sure SCOTIA'S kings august, and heroes brave,
Claim the most splendid honors of the tomb;
To them their country who but lived to save,
No longer be denied the grateful dome!
Soon all EDINA'S glories rose to sight,
Her lofty spires, her castle proudly strong;
The distant Forth reflecting the pale light,
As slow he flowed the laughing fields among.
Autumn her golden mantle over the land
Had cast; each sound was hushed in silence still,
Save where the rivulet murmured through the sand;
The snowey moonlight sleep'd on every hill.
A scene so sweetly solemn Fancy's eye
Surveyed with rapture and tranquil delight;
But while she softly breathed a parting sigh,
Resigned its beauties to the silent night.
THE END.
NOTES.
Stanza II. 3. Royalty bore sway, etc.]
QUEEN MARY resided at Craigmillar Castle in the month of November 1566, during
the time that preparations were made for baptizing her son JAMES VI. at
Stirling. Knox, Buchan. lib. 18. etc. -- It appears from the letters supposed
to have been wrote by her to Bothwell, that she intended to have brought her
husband Henry Darnly to the bath at this place; but he not choosing it, and
proceeding to the Kirk of Field, was there murdered. Goodal, vol. II.

Page 7. St. IV. 3. Whose fate, etc.]
Muoiono le citta* muoiono i regni,
Copre i fasti e le pomp arena, ed herba.
E l' huom d' esser mortal parche si sdegni:
O nostra mente cupida e superba!
TASSO. P. S. St. V. 3. Often hath'd, etc.]
It was a custom of this beautiful Princess to bathe herself in white wine, as
a preservative of her charms. In this she was not singular, it being frequent
with the Ladies of that age, when the progress of the liberal arts began to be
attended with proportional refinements in luxury. Jaques du Fouilloux, one of
the Beaux Esprits of that period, enumerating the arts with which a country
girl, of whom he was enamoured, disdained to improve her person, particularly
mentions this: Point ne prenoit vin blanc pour se baigner. L' Adolescence de
Jaques du Fouilloux.

P. 9. St. V. 1. See over the place, etc.]
Haec sunt quas merito quondam est mirata Vetustas
Magnarum rerum magna sepulchra vides.
C. LABERIUS de ruinis Athen. St. penult. l. 4. Snowey Moonlight.]
Quo solet et niveae vuttum confundere lunae. OVID. Ib. Moonlight sleep'd.]
This bold figure is taken from the Poet of Nature: How sweet the moonlight
sleeps upon this bank! Merchant of Venice, Act V. Sc. 1.

FINIS.

