THE Countess of Salisbury.

A TRAGEDY.

As it is performed at the THEATER ROYAL IN THE HAY-MARKET.

BY HALL HARTSON, ESQR.

LONDON: Sold by W. GRIFFIN, in Catharine-Street. 1767.

[Pr. 1^. 6d.]

TO ELIZABETH, COUNTESS OF MOIRA.
MADAM,
THE attention you have vouchsafed to the Countess of Salisbury and the Author,
ever since they have had the honor of being known to your Ladyship, persuades
me that you will take pleasure in hearing it has been favorably received on
the English Theater. Stripped now of all stage decoration, and the assistance
which it has hitherto received from the most animated performance, it is to
undergo a stricter scrutiny, that of the closet; a scrutiny for which it is
indeed but little provided. I know your Ladyship will make a tender allowance
for want of experience in the Author, and such errors as are incident to human
inperfection; but this is an indulgence, which I doubt the critic will not so
readily show him. But however he may censure, I must ever think myself happy in
having already acquired your Ladyship's good opinions. I am also flattered, as
often as I think of the near resemblance my Heroine has of your Ladyship. Had I
been earlier honored with your Ladyship's acquaintance, I think I could have
much enlarged the character. And yet there are many virtues, many delicacies,
which it would have been impossible for me to have preserved in the picture, of
which those only can be truly sensible, who have the happiness of being
acquainted with the Original.

Please, Madam, to accept the following attempt, as an offering of my gratitude
for many favors; an imperfect indeed, but honest proof, of the esteem, which
is due from,

MADAM, Your LADYSHIP's Most respectful, Most obliged, Humble Servant, H.
HARTSON.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE COUNTESS OF SALISBURY made her appearance about two years ago in Ireland,
where she was received with very singular marks of favor; the Author there had
many friends, and with all the partiality they might be supposed to have for
him, those friends did not hesitate to declare, that the excellent performance
of Mrs. Dancer and Mr. Barry, contributed largely to the success of the Piece:
written in his early youth, without having much knowledge of the stage, or
dramatic performances, the Author is sensible what his Tragedy must be,
notwithstanding the smiles with which it has been indulged. England, agreeable
to the character of good nature and generosity which it has established through
all the world, has kindly followed the example of its sister nation, and
received with an indulgence the attempt of a young Writer, who is indeed
ambitious of pleasing, but dare not aspire to excellence. He attributes, in
great measure, his good fortune now, to what his friends attributed it before,
the animated performance of Mrs. Dancer and Mr. Barry: it is theirs to
endeavor to support a reputation already gained, his to aim at improvement, in
order to acquire one.

PROLOGUE, SPOKEN BY Mr. WESTON, in the CHARACTER of a TEAGUE.
MY jewels, I Am come to spoke in the behalf --
Hoot, Devil burn you all, you makes me laugh,
Upon my soul now I don't take it well in you:
Arra, be easy, till I Am after telling you:
Smit with the love of glory and of pelf,
To night, a bard from Dublin its ownself,
Has brought a play here for your approbation,
A very pretty thing by my salvation --
If you will trust Irish evidence I mean --
I cannot the story very well explain;
But it is about a Countess and an Earl,
The Countess is a mighty honest girl;
But there is a villain with a damned cramped name,
Makes such proposhals -- it is a burning shame --
Another too -- a Knight -- bekeys as why --
But hold you know, you will see it by and by,
And then it is time enough to tell the plot.
O, but that is true, I Would like to have forgot,
The dresses -- 'Pon my conscience in my days
I never saw their peer, they are all a blaze.
Then there is a child, the sweetest little rogue --
Only excuse a trifling spice of brogue --
He Will make you cry your eyes out, I Will be bound --
It Is Ireland is the true poetic ground.
The Muses -- Phoebus, heathenish cant I loath!
What Is Mount Parnassus to the Hill of Howth?
Or all the scenes each foolish poet paints --
O bub bub-boo! give me the Isle of Saints.
Turn up your noses, cavil now and carp --
Musha, I Am sure our emblem is the harp.
But stop, the bell rings. Fait they will soon begin;
It Is time for me to be a going in.
I take my lave then -- but dear craters mind --
Pray to our Irish poetry be kind:
It Is a new manufacture in effect --
And yours, my sowls to encourage and protect;
No critic custom then exacted be,
Pass it like Irish linen, duty free.
EPILOGUE, Spoken by Mrs. DANCER.
THIS virgin author's such a blushing rogue --
What! no gay, lively, laughing epilogue!
"Madam (says he, and looked so wise) in Greece" --
(Greece; that is their cant) "no jesting closed the piece.
"Play, epilogue and all were grave and solemn" --
Then, Sir, the town were fools that did not mawl 'em.
No -- let your heroine, in this laughing age,
Come thus (as Bays says) souse upon the stage;
Then with a jaunty air, half smile, half grin,
Curtsey quite round the boxes, and begin.
A spark from court, and no one to detect him!
A pretty fellow too, and yet reject him! --
Now, Ladies, let me die but it was silly --
You Will not approve such horrid prudery -- will ye? --
I should have blessed the occasion, and received him!
He should have kneeled and vowed, and I -- believed him;
Laughed, danced and sported it till spouse came over,
Then kissed my dear -- while Betty hid my lover.
But here again our Poet checks my flight,
"Nay, Madam, you mistake the matter quite.
"My heroine lived in ancient, honest times;
"Cards were unknown, and gallantries were crimes" --
'Psha! what if females then were seldom rovers?
Husbands -- (aye, there is the cause) were warm as lovers.
Their warlike days indeed were spent in killing;
But then, at night -- no turtles were so billing.
Well -- though he gives me no smart things to say,
I wish this begging face may save his play:
The thing may mend, and learn to please you better --
Do then -- nay, pray you show him some good nature.
Persons of the Drama.
Alwin, Mr. Barry. Raymond, Mr. T. Barry. Gray, Mr. Sowdon. Morton, Mr. Palmer.
Sir Ardolf, Mr. Bannister. Leroches, Mr. Gardner. Lord William, Miss Palmer.
Eleanor, Mrs. Burden. Countess of Salisbury, Mrs. Dancer. Knights, Peasant,
etc.
Scene Salisbury Castle, and the Country about it.

THE Countess of Salisbury.
ACT I. SCENE I.
An Avenue leading to a Gothic Castle. Enter GRAY, and FIRST KNIGHT. GRAY. A
Messenger dispatched by lady Salisbury!

KNIGHT. And in the specious guise he wore, had passed
Unquestioned, had not I, in happy season,
Approached, even as the unwary sentinels
Half opened the gate. By threats o'eraw'd in part,
In part through hope of favor won, he owned,
At length, by whom employed, whither bent,
And for what purpose.

GRAY. Say --

KNIGHT. Strait to repair
To Marlborough; where now, as fame reports,
Our king resides, with all his peers; and there
To seek the lord de Warren; to what end
This paper will, as I suppose, inform you --
I was about to bear it to lord Raymond.

GRAY. That care be mine. Henceforward it concerns
Us near, our vigilance be doubly firm.
[Exit KNIGHT. GRAY reads. The countess of SALISBURY, to her illustrious
Friend, the lord de WARREN.

I have lost my husband -- Me and my lands lord Raymond claims, as by royal
grant assigned to him. He has banished my train, encompassed me with his
creatures, and holds me a prisoner in my own castle. If the memory of thy noble
friend be dear to thee, haste and rescue the afflicted

ELA.


How near was Raymond's hope, the beauteous hope
He tended with unceasing care, how near
My r^sing fortunes marred -- I like not this:
Her, and her rich domains he would possess;
Yet in his breast there lives that kind of heart
Withholds him from the path that is nearest -- He,
That would be great, must first be bold.
I hate those motley'd characters;
Something, I know not what, 'twixt good and ill,
Yet neither absolute: all good, all ill
For me -- That day, says he, that happy day,
Which sees the countess mine, shall amply pay
Thy services: a doubtful balance this
Whereon my fortunes hang -- This way he moves;
And, by his gait and gesture, ill at ease --
We must be firm;
My hopes demand it, and the time admits
No weak, no scrupulous delay --
Enter RAYMOND.
RAYMOND. To sue,
But ever without grace to sue -- oh Gray!
I am even weary of the vain pursuit.

GRAY. It is, in truth, my lord, an irksome labor.

RAYMOND. But now I cast me at the fair one's feet;
Pleaded my passion with whatever arts
Might best the gentle purpose aid; but she,
Instead of such return as I might hope,
Repaid me with an eye of cold contempt.
Of her late gallant lord she spoke; his merits
In opposition hateful placed to mine.
Urged, then, with recollection of her wrongs,
Like the loud torrent, with steep winter rains
O'ercharg'd, in all the loose, ungoverned sway
Of wrath and indignation, she assailed me.

GRAY. And did my lord, in this unseemly fashion,
Hear all with equal temper? Waked he not
With such a peal?

RAYMOND. Thou know not what it is
To love like me -- Long time (for passion now
Had shed over all her charms a brighter glow,
That like Jove's daughter most she looked, severe
In youthful beauty) long I lay, o'eraw'd
And silenced as by some superior being;
Till waked by pride, quick from the floor I sprung;
Warned her how she provoked my power;
'Twas great, 'twas now within these walls supreme:
I long had gently wooed her, but that love,
Though patient, would not always brook disdain.

GRAY. 'Twas well: and what ensued?

RAYMOND. Silence at first,
Then tears; bright drops, like May-morn dews that fall
From the sweet blossomed thorn. Back in her chair
She sunk -- Oh! had you seen her then, dissolved
In all the soft, the lovely languishment
Of woe; while at her knee, with countenance
Most piteous stood her beauteous boy, and looked
As if each tear, which from his mother fell,
Would force a passage to his little heart --
I fled; else had I kneeled, and wept myself
As well as she.

GRAY. O shame to manhood! -- suits
Such weakness with our hopes?

RAYMOND. She must, she must,
Yes, Gray, she must be mine -- and yet -- yet fain
Would I persuade the fair one, not compel.

GRAY. Say to what purpose then was seizd her castle?
When she your suit rejected, then perforce
To claim her as the gift of royal favor!
To lord it here so long, and now to falter --
My lord, my lord, the mound is overleapt,
What now forbids but without further pause
To crop the rich, the golden fruits within?

RAYMOND. Ungracious is the love reluctance yields;
And cold, cold even as marble is the maid,
Who comes unwilling to another's arms.

GRAY. In brief, would you partake the lady's bed?

RAYMOND. What means the question?

GRAY. Look on that, my lord:
Better reluctant come, than not at all.

RAYMOND. -- How came this to your hand?

GRAY. By one whose cares
Of thee demand no trivial recompense.
His wakeful eye it was descried the bearer;
Else had the watch with all their vigilance
Proved insufficient.

RAYMOND. My better angel interposed.

GRAY. Had this it is purposed scope attained -- my lord,
Were this but whispered in our Henry's ear --
He gave the royal nod you say: true, he
Permitted, but thus far; that you should woo
The lady, and her choice approving, wed;
No more. By us the public ear is told
She has approved: our artifice has spread
The rumor; and with some it is received
That she is now your full-espoused consort:
But truth, my lord, long cannot rest concealed;
It will abroad, of that be sure, in spite
Of all our studied wiles.

RAYMOND. What Is to be done?

GRAY. It Is critical; and must be managed nicely --
But see, with Eleanor the countess comes;
And in her hand the young lord William. Here
Her custom is to walk: retire we now;
And thou observe the counsels of a friend.
[Exeunt ambo.] Enter Lady SALISBURY, Lord WILLIAM, ELEANOR.
Lady SALISBURY. Talk thou of patience? What! the very roof,
That should protect and shelter me, become
My prison! Awed, and threatened, as I am,
By this intruder! -- Cruel destiny!
Had I not more than common griefs before?

ELEANOR. In evil hour thy hospitable gates
Were opened to receive him.

Lady SALISBURY. Unguarded that I was! -- But who could then
Foresee the purpose of his coming?

ELEANOR. Who
Can think even yet, that once repulsed, he ever
Would thus presume?

Lady SALISBURY. Is there no succor then?
No generous hand to vindicate my wrongs? --
Oh Salisbury! Salisbury! why, if yet thou liv'st --
Fond hope! he lives not, else with speed of thought
Would he repair to his afflicted Ela.

ELEANOR. Why, dearest lady, will you yield you up
A prey to purposed sorrow? Time is fruitful;
And the next hour perhaps may bring thee comfort.

Lady SALISBURY. Day after day I have watched the joyless hours;
Night after night, when some fleet courier sent
Before perchance, or letter fraught with sweet
Assurance of his safety might appear;
Five tedious moons have passed since first were told
The dismal tidings; no fleet courier sent
Before, alas! nor letter with such sweet
Assurance vet appears -- He Is gone, he is lost!
And I shall never, never see him more.

ELEANOR. Ah! suffer not the leaden hand of cold
Despair thus weigh thee down; I yet have hope --

Lady SALISBURY. Away with hope, away. No, no; full loud,
As I remember, and outrageous blew
The storm, that even the solid fabric shook
Of yonder walls; deep-rooted oaks gave way;
Churches and spires were overturned; nor even
The peasant's humble roof escaped that hour.
The fl^et, save only one, one luckless ship,
Have all returned; my lord nor has been seen,
Alas! nor ever heard of since the storm.

ELEANOR. Heaven visit her affliction, and bestow
That patience which she needs.

Lady SALISBURY. No, Eleanor: no more shall he
To these deserted walls return. No more
Shall trophies, won by many a gallant deed,
Through the long hall in proud procession move;
No more fair Salisbury's battlements and towers
Re-echo to the approaching trumpet's voice.
Never, oh! never more shall Ela run
With throbbing bosom at the well-known sound,
TO unlock his helmet, conquest plumed, to strip
The cuishes from his manly thigh, or snatch
Quick from his breast the plated armor, wont
TO oppose my fond embrace -- Sweet times farewell,
These tender offices are now no more.

Lord WILLIAM. Mother, why do you speak so? You make me sad.

Lady SALISBURY. It is too soon, my child, for thee to know
What sadness is.

Lord WILLIAM. Will not my father come home soon? Eleanor told me he would: she
would not tell a lie.


Lady SALISBURY. No, love.

Lord WILLIAM. Then he will come.

Lady SALISBURY. Sweet innocence! I fear he will not.

Lord WILLIAM. I hope he is not sick.

Lady SALISBURY. -- Go, lovely pratler, seek thy toys; go, go.

Lord WILLIAM. I will, good mother; but don't be sad, or I shall be so too.

[Exit.
Lady SALISBURY. Sweet state of childhood! unallay'd with cares;
Serene as springtide morn, new welcomed up
With bleat of lamb, with note of woodlark wild.
With riper years come passions turbulent
And rude, a baleful crew, unnumber'd as
The forest leaves that strew the earth in autumn.
When happiness is round thee, when thou art on
The lap of downy ease, when thou art cherished
In the fair bosom of unruffl'd joy,
Comes a fell hand, dashes thee rudely down,
And leaves thee to despair.

ELEANOR. Cease,
Cease, lady, to afflict thee: Raymond may,
I trust he will, ever long retire, and give
Thee ease again -- But hither comes his minion:
Much with his lord he can; and, as he lists,
To purposes of good or ill o'er-rules
His mind: if he accost thee, speak him gently.
Enter GRAY. As you are fair above all other women,
So may you lend to that I would implore
A gracious ear.

Lady SALISBURY. Without more preface, briefly speak thy suit.

GRAY. To love, but never to reap of love the sweet
Returns, is sure the worst of ills,

Lady SALISBURY. And what of that?

GRAY. Though love denied, yet pity may do much
To soothe the wound that beauty gives -- In brief,
Thou much-rever'd! my suit is in behalf of Raymond.

Lady SALISBURY. Then I will spare us both some cost
Of words -- In brief, I love him not, nor pity:
So tell thy lord -- I would be private -- hence.

GRAY. Your words are brief indeed; but of that kind
I dare not, must not bear my lord.

Lady SALISBURY. Must not!

GRAY. It Is cruel toward the man who loves so fondly.

Lady SALISBURY. Does he assume the specious name of love?
Love is a bright, a generous quality,
Heaven gave to noble minds; pure, and unmixed
With every grosser stuff; a goodly flower,
Shoots up and blossoms in great souls alone.

GRAY. The mind, the exalted soul thou nam'st, is his.
Lives there a youth more gentle of condition,
In fair accomplishments more graced, admired?
If beauty sway thy fond regards, if wealth,
I know not in fair England one with him
Can vie.

Lady SALISBURY. Is then the star, the peerless star,
That late was gazed on, quite obscured? What though
He may have set, has he not left a train
Of glory in the skies? -- The illustrious name
Of Salisbury yet survives -- If wealth -- but mark me;
Were he of all the wealth possessed from where
The East Indian bids the sun good morrow, to where
The Atlantic in her wide-extended lap
Receives him setting; could he in each hand
A thousand sceptres place, not all should bribe
Me to his bed -- No, Salisbury! thou have been
The husband of my early love; with thee,
That love was all interred; and when I pluck
It forth again, gape wide that earth wherein
Thou lie, quick snatch me from the light of Heaven,
And swallow me within her lowest prison!

GRAY. For pity's sake yet soften; for, oh sure
No former love could ever equal this;
No bosom boast the generous flame wherewith
Lord Raymond glows for thee, admired fair!

Lady SALISBURY. Hear this, ye Heavens, and grant me patience, -- where is
My people? where the freedom that I late
Was blessed with? Wherefore is my palace thronged
With strangers? Why, why are my gates shut up
And fortified against their rightful mistress?

GRAY. Madam --

Lady SALISBURY. Is this the love he boasts?
Is this the fair-accomplish'd, this the gentle youth?
Must I recall to mind -- Came he not then
Even while the memory of my dear loved lord
Was green; while sorrow yet was in mine eyes?
-- Tears! ye will choke me -- Came he not even then,
And broke in on my sorrows? Like a spoiler
He came, heaped up the measure of my woes,
Added new anguish to the afflicted heart,
And swelled the current of the widow's tears.

GRAY. Madam, where he that spoiler thou proclaim'st,
He need not now thus humbly sue for that
His power long since, unasked might have extorted.

Lady SALISBURY. Ha! -- what art thou that thus presum'st to threaten?
Extorted! -- Hence thou rude one, bolder even
Than him who calls thee slave.

GRAY. Madam you speak
As though you knew me not.

Lady SALISBURY. I know thee well --
To what concerns lord Raymond I have spoke,
My final purpose fixed:
For thee, I charge thee shun my presence; hence,
And learn the distance that befits thy calling.

GRAY. Not ere I speak more fully to the cause --
Nay, lady, look not on me with so stern
An eye, but give me patient hearing --

Lady SALISBURY. No more; I Will hear no more.

GRAY. Not hear! -- When next we meet -- I will be heard.
[Exit.]
Lady SALISBURY. What meant he, Eleanor? -- I will be heard.

ELEANOR. Alas! I know not: but a soul he has,
Prompt and alert to acts of desperate thinking.
Hardly thou art beset; O lady, lend
An ear to what thy Eleanor would counsel.
When next he come (for that he has obtained
Of Raymond leave to woo thee to his will,
I know) assume a gentler carriage. Seem
As though you may hereafter to his suit
Incline. Be ruled: necessity often lends
A sanction to deceit. Demand a pause:
My lord of Salisbury's fate yet unconfirm'd
Shall add thereto a seeming color. Chance,
Mean time, that comes or soon or late to all,
To thee may come with unexpected succor.

Lady SALISBURY. -- Sincerity,
Thou spotless as the snowy-vested hill,
Forgive me, if by lawless power constrained,
I turn this once from thy long-trodden path;
It must be so --
Oh Salisbury! Salisbury! thou lamented shade!
Descend from those pure mansions, where thou sitst
Exalted; hover over me; and as thou
Were wont, support me in this hour of trial.
[Exeunt ambo.]
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE within the Castle. Enter RAYMOND and GRAY. GRAY. AWAY, my lord, away
with every care;
The conflict's past, and fortune is our own --
Defeated once, again I sought the fair;
I sought her, and prevailed.

RAYMOND. By all the joys, the nameless joys, that on
The precious hour of soft compliance wait,
I will requite thee nobly. Say, for much
My wonder's moved, how have thou found
Such grace? how wrought this change, thus sudden thus,
Unhop'd from her late bearing?

GRAY. Uncertain is the sex -- but that imports not.
It now remains, that proof, such proof be sought
Of Salisbury's fate, as by minute detail
Of circumstance shall with the lady gain
Prompt credence -- Hear what I have devised, if you
Approve --
Enter a KNIGHT.
KNIGHT. My lord, two strangers I have brought,
Within the precincts of the castle found.

RAYMOND. Say thou? two strangers? of what quality?

KNIGHT. With me they were of speech not over-prompt;
But by their outward guise they would seem men
As with some pious purpose charged. Severe
The younger seems, but of excelling form;
And wishes to recruit his wearied limbs
Beneath the friendly covert of this roof.

RAYMOND. Conduct them to our presence -- [Exit KNIGHT.] I were loath,
The weary traveller to dismiss my gates,
Unhospitably rude; yet none I wish,
While we are yet suspended at the nod
Of peevish and uncertain chance, approach
These walls.
Re-enter KNIGHT, with STRANGERS. Whence, and what are you?


FIRST STRANGER. What we are,
These weeds, though we were silent, might unfold.
Alwin I am called, my fellow-traveller
Leroches. Our way was bent for Canterbury,
With purpose of a pious vow: o'erta'en
By weariness from travel, and desire
Of food, we journey'd hitherward, in hope
The lord of these fair turrets, first descried
At close of evening, might befriend our toils.

RAYMOND. Whence have you come?

ALWIN. From France, not many days.

RAYMOND. Say, what occasion may have called you thither?

ALWIN. To aid (Heaven prosper long) my country's weal.

RAYMOND. You ara a soldier then?

ALWIN. I have been such;
And to be such was my most dear inclining;
Smit with the love, even from my greenest youth,
Of honest arms. Some share of fame I too
Achieved -- But ill the soldier it beseems
To trumpet his own praises.

RAYMOND. Cease not so.
Though in the school of war untutour'd, much
It pleases me to hear the brave man's labors.

ALWIN. None but have heard how some time since was sent
(To claim of Lewis certain lands usurped)
A puissant force --

RAYMOND. Were you therein employed?

ALWIN. Beneath the royal banner I enrolled,
As was my bent, in quest of fame.

RAYMOND. Indeed!
Lord Salisbury then perchance of thee was known?

ALWIN. I knew him well; our liege's near ally,
And second to duke Richard in command.
Fast by his side was my allotted post
Upon the marshaled field: by him I fought,
For him had died.

RAYMOND. Of him fame loudly speaks,
That in those wars he was a gallant man.

ALWIN. He was not wont, while others bravely fought,
To look unactive on.

LEROCHES. A foe like him
France never knew, of all that warrior host,
Which like an inundation England poured
On her affrighted shores --

RAYMOND. But what
Have proved his latter fortunes I should wish
To learn -- Say, courteous stranger, if thou can.
Of this renowned lord a rumor has
Long since prevailed, that he on Gallia's coast
Was wrecked with all his crew.

ALWIN. What cause there was
For such report, alas! these eyes have seen;
How true in part it is, too sure this tongue
Can testify.

RAYMOND. I pray you let us hear.

ALWIN. -- O'ercharg'd with human prey, fell war had ceased
To walk his wasteful round; well pleased we turn
Us from the blood-stained field; exulting each
With some rich spoil, trophies by valiant dint
Of arms achieved. Forthwith the eager host
Embark.
And now the chalky cliffs on Albion's coast
TO our straining view appeared; the exulting crew
With peals redoubled greet the well known shores --
Ill-fated men! -- in vain the anxious dame
Often mounts the high-rais'd tower, thence earnest looks
Happily if her wished for lord may come; in vain
The prattling boy often asks her of his sire,
That never, never shall return.

RAYMOND. Proceed,
Good stranger; what was the event?

ALWIN. Anon
The winds began to shift; up rose a storm
And heaved the bosom of the troubled deep.
On the swollen billow sits enthroned grim Death,
And shakes his fatal dart -- The fleet, which late
In such fair order sailed, is now dispersed.
Before the wind we drove, left to the mercy
Of the wild waves, and all-disposing Heaven --
Oh my loved friends! associates of my toils!
Rescued in vain from War's wide-wasteful arm,
Here end your labors; here sweet life forsakes you.
For me, a slender plank, next to the hand
Of some good angel, bore me to the shore.
Of full five hundred gallant lives, which late
Embarked, not one that fatal hour survived.

RAYMOND. Save only thee.

ALWIN. Save only me.

RAYMOND. Speak now secure, for nearly it concerns
My quiet, speak -- was, Salisbury of your crew?

ALWIN. Alas! too sure.

RAYMOND. Enough -- Thy courtesy
Of us may well, and shall be well requited.
Of this our friend accept mean time his prompt
Regards; anon we shall be glad to hold
Some further converse with you.
[Exit ALW. LERO. and KNIGHT.
GRAY. Of this stranger
What thinks my lord?

RAYMOND. As of an angel, sent
To waft me on his wings strait to the summit
Of all my wishes -- With what a gallant grace
He bears him! -- Much I wish to hear him speak
Again; to hear the battles he has fought,
And all the story of his life and fortunes.

GRAY. That we shall learn hereafter: but it is meet
That he to lady Salisbury first unfold
The sum of what he has reported.

RAYMOND. Methinks
I now behold her, like some full-blown flower,
The fairest of the garden, late o'ercharg'd
With showers, her head declining sad, whilst he
Recounts the story of her Salisbury's fate.
Would she were mine without a tear;
Without a sigh! -- But she must weep; she must;
Thereon my all depends -- Oh wayward sorrow!
That wounds, yet wounding heals the lover.
[Ex. amb. Scene changes -- Lady SALISBURY reclining on a couch. Enter ELEANOR.
ELEANOR. Grief, that of time's fixed periods for repose
Takes small account, has lulled her wearied senses --
Wherever thou dwell'st, O Peace, with azure eye
Serene; or if in stately-structur'd dome,
Or thatch-roof'd cottage low, or in cool grot
By fountain clear thou sitt'st, or if perchance
Along the silver brook's green liveried verge
Reclined, approach thou rosy-dimpled fair;
Leave thy sweet haunts a while; and with that balm
Which so ths the woe-struck heart, await her slumbers.
The hour approaches, when, as is her custom,
She seeks the hallowed shrine, and pious wakes
The voice of pure devotion to high heaven:
I Will thither, and expect her -- but she wakes --
How fares the mistress of my best regards?
Proved her slumbers sweet as were my wishes?

Lady SALISBURY. Sweet, sweet, my Fleanor, so sweet, oh! would
I never had waked. I dreamt, as wont on him
To dream, that I beheld his gracious form,
My bosom's lord; a while he stood, and seemed
On me to smile; then flew to my embraces. --
Ah fleeting extacy! 'twas but a dream:
Enter a KNIGHT.
KNIGHT. Thy favor, lady; I am charged with news,
That much imports thy hearing: summon up
Thy powers; two strangers late have come, of whom
One brings assured tidings of thy lord.

Lady SALISBURY. -- My lord -- what -- speak --

KNIGHT. He says he knew my lord
Of Salisbury well; that he was of his crew;
And with that peer embarked from France.

Lady SALISBURY. -- But -- well -- from France --

KNIGHT. Lady, all must have
Their sorrows. Strait up rose a mighty tempest,
Dispersed the fleet over all the seas --
The storm -- the fatal wreck -- of all
The stranger gives most circumstantial proof.
[Exit.]
ELEANOR. Alas the tidings! -- Dearest lady, give
Thy sorrows vent; thy bosom's overfraught,
And will find ease by letting loose its woes.

Lady SALISBURY. -- Well, well --
Then he is lost, and all, all is despair.
Though languid, yet was hope not quite extinct --
Where, where is the stranger? Seek him, haste; that I
May hear him fully speak of all. [Ex. Knt.] Methinks
'Twill be a desperate sort of soothing; to hang
Upon each sound, catch every circumstance
Of the sad story, and wring my aching heart
Till I am even surfeited with sorrow.

ELRANOR. Behold, the stranger comes --
Enter ALWIN.
Lady SALISBURY. Bear, bear me up, good Heaven!
That I may give full measure to my sorrow.

ALWIN. -- Thy angel hover over thee, and support thee.
[In an under voice.]
Lady SALISBURY. -- The dead ere now
Have burst the prisons of the close pent grave,
And apparitions strange of faith appeared;
Perhaps thou too art but a shadow; let
Me grasp thee, for, as I have life, I think --
It is, it is my Salisbury! O my lord!

Lord SALISBURY. My bosom's joy!

Lady SALISBURY. -- And do thou live indeed?
Amazing Providence! He does! he does!
Look! look! behold him, Eleanor! behold
The gracious form! the vision was not vain.
[Eleanor goes aside.]
Lord SALISBURY. -- And art thou, art thou then --

Lady SALISBURY. -- O my full bosom!

LORD SALISBURY. The same, by time or circumstance unchanged?

Lady SALISBURY. Unhop'd reverse! -- Hence, hence all former woes --
My lord! my life! hence, hence, be swallowed up
All griefs, and lost in this most blissful hour.

Lord SALISBURY. Thou art, I see, thou art the same, thou must;
Thou have not yielded to another lord?

Lady SALISBURY. Another lord! -- And could you, did you think
'Twas so?

Lord SALISBURY. Thus spoke loud rumor on my way:
Indeed I scarce could think it.

Lady SALISBURY. Oh! 'twas foul!
Indeed thou shoud'st not think it --

Lord SALISBURY. Ever dear!
No more; my soul is satisfied, and thinks
Of nothing now but happiness and thee.

Lady SALISBURY. Say then, thou wanderer -- Oh! I have much
Of thee to ask, thou much to hear: how is it
I see thee, see th^e thus? Where have thou been?
What secret region has so long detained thee?

Lord SALISBURY. O thou! whose image, ever in my view,
Sustained me angel-like against the rough
And rapid current of adversity,
Should I recount the story of my fortunes,
Each circumstance, beginning from that day
We parted, to this hour, thine ear would be
Fatigued; the stars, ere I had ended, cease
To twinkle, and the morning's sun break in
Upon the unfinished tale; suffice it thee
To know the sum.
For England we embarked, when, black and foul,
A tempest rising, quick upturn'd the seas,
And cast me forth upon an hostile shore.
Why need I tell thee, love, how, in disguise,
On foot, alone, I Have toiled my weary way,
Through dreary vale, over mountain wild; my bed
Often of the blasted heath, whilst over my limbs
Dank night has shaken her cold, dewy wings,
And the chill northern gale has spent his breath
On my defenseless head?
Through what variety of strange events
I Have come, Heaven-guided, to behold, once more,
My wife? -- But, ah! my son! our only hope!
My boy! what, what of him?

Lady SALISBURY. Dear to these eyes
As is the newborn light of Heaven! he lives;
Is well -- But say, my lord, what would thy coming,
Thus unattended, thus disguised!

Lord SALISBURY. How I escaped from had captivity,
And Gallia's coast, more leisure shall inform you.
My friend sir Ardolf had but just embraced me,
(The first glad transports of our meeting over)
When, with an honest tear, the good old man
In brief disclosed what fame had now reported;
That thou were soon, or had, ere this, espoused
Earl Hubert's nephew, and sole purposed heir --

Lady SALISBURY. Oh most unhallowed, thus to abuse
My unattainted love! -- And could my lord --

Lord SALISBURY. Yet hear me -- Strait I grasped my sword;
And, single as I was, had sallied forth,
Had not my friend's sage counsels interposed.
By Ardolf swayed, I veiled me as thou see;
And, with a sharer in the dark intent,
Set forward on my way for Sal'sbury castle:
A simple hind's low cottage, not far hence,
Received us. Here, fast by the green-wood side,
We lodged; resolved, ourselves unknown, to prove
What doubtful rumor only had proclaimed.
With this intent, at dusk of evening, we
Forsook the cot --

Lady SALISBURY. There needs no more: Heaven saw
Me, and was touched with pity -- What a change
This hour! Sequestered as I was, even like
The votarist; perhaps the destined prey
Of rude desire --

Lord SALISBURY. O for tomorrow's slow-returning night!

Lady SALISBURY. Say, what of that, my lord?

Lord SALISBURY. Revenge, revenge!
I Will tell thee -- Soon as dark usurping night
Shall chase to morrow's sun adown the skies,
Know, Ardolf, with a chosen troop of friends,
To that same cottage, armed shall come --
Enter ELEANOR.
ELEANOR. My lord, I hear the approach of hasty steps.

Lord SALISBURY. Farewell, my best:
Nor peace nor sleep shall visit me, till I
Have given thee freedom, and revenged our wrongs.
Enter a KNIGHT.
KNIGHT. Lord Raymond, sir, forthwith expects your coming.

Lord SALISBURY. I will attend him. Lady, fain would I
Have told thee less ungracious things; but all
Have their appointed trials. Learn to bear;
Convinced, the hand Heaven, when it inflicts,
Prepares us often for some superior good.
[Exeunt omnes.
END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE within the Castle. Enter RAYMOND and GRAY. RAYMOND. I SEE nor cause my
joys to check, nor boast
As yet securely.

GRAY. Think, that Hope, the young,
The merry-minded fair, exalts us often,
To make our fall the greater.

RAYMOND. Why this cold,
This prudent maxim? --

GRAY. Mark the wary falcon;
Forward he shoots his piercing eye, and kens
The quarry from afar; like his be thine --
Perhaps, my lord, mine are but nicer fears,
Waked in a heart over anxious of thy welfare;
Yet has the younger of those strangers raised
In me suspicions of alarming hue,
Lest, underneath this honest guise, there lurk
Some subtle mischief. Lady Salisbury saw him:
Their conference, as 'twas long, so was it held
In secret; would we had been present.

RAYMOND. Granting
Our presence had been seemly, wherefore spoke
You not this counsel ere they met?

GRAY. I saw not then the danger.
His honest carriage, and the recent change
Within her mind had lulled each nicer fear.

RAYMOND. 'Till now unmoved, say what has waked suspicion?

GRAY. I know not well -- would she were firmly thine,
Beyond the reach and grasp of wayward fortune.
The knight, whose office was to introduce
Him to the countess, he dismissed ere they
Approached the apartment.

RAYMOND. Indeed!

GRAY. This, too -- Is it not strange, though night, and this
Thy proffered roof, invited his sojourn,
He would not wait the approach of morning?

RAYMOND. Are they gone?

GRAY. Amid the unguarded joy
Which held us, they escaped unheeded.
Enter SECOND KNIGHT.
KNIGHT. My lord,
Two strangers, it is said, in Palmer's weeds
Attired, have lodged since morning in a hut;
You may have marked it in the darksome glen,
Near to the forest of wild oaks, just where
The stream white rushes down the shelving cliff.

RAYMOND. Since morning say thou?

KNIGHT. Further I have learned,
Their guise, as does appear from certain words
O'erheard, is borrowed with design to mask
Some secret purpose.
[Exit.]
GRAY. It must be so;
Their close-concerted arts have foiled our caution.

RAYMOND. They scarce have measured half the precincts yet,
Send forth my knights, we will pursue them.

GRAY. No: one way there is, and onl^ one -- But hence,
I hear the countess -- She loves lord William well;
And much, much will a pious mother sure,
To save an only son.
[Exeunt ambo.] Enter Lady SALISBURY and ELEANOR.
Lady SALISBURY. In spite of this event, this blessed event,
That has restored the lord of this fond bosom,
Yet is my mind with doubts and fears disturbed;
With images and wild conceits, of form
Unsightly; such as hover often in dreams
About the curtains of the sick -- Alas!
Whilst others joy within the friendly roof,
Of night regardless and the storm that beats
Without, he struggles hard; or hies at best
To the dank shelter of the dripping wood.
Besides what unknown perils may assail him,
Unnaided thus against whatever ill --
Would he had waited the return of morn.

ELEANOR. The night is dark indeed, the tempest high;
But hear me, lady, hear a pious lesson,
Which thy own lips to me have often repeated:
There is a Power unseen, whose charge it is,
With ever wakeful eye to watch the good;
And peaceful ever is that breast, which trusts
In his angelic guard -- The hand
Of Heaven, that hitherto has been his shield,
Will minister safe convoy to his steps,
Though night and darkness shed their thickest gloom.

Lady SALISBURY. Misdeem not of my fears; or think I speak,
As over diffident of that same power
Thou nam'st, whose all surveying eye wakes ever;
Clear, unobstructed, either when the sun
Shrowds in night's shadowy veil, or when at noon
He shines revealed on his meridian throne.
But where is the bosom throbs not, if it hope?
Hope ever is attended with a train
Of wakeful doubts; and where the sweet nymph harbors,
There flutters also her pale sister Fear --
But hence, as was our purpose, to the shrine;
Where, as is meet, for my dear lord restored
I will with grateful adoration --
Enter Lord WILLIAM.
Lord WILLIAM. Mother -- I fain would know that stranger, who he is that just
now met me.


Lady SALISBURY. And wherefore would thou know him, love?


Lord WILLIAM. Gentle he was, and mild, not like those grimfac'd ones I see
here every day: and such kind things he did, as make me love him dearly.


Lady SALISBURY. Say, what were they?


Lord WILLIAM. He kissed me, strok'd my head, and patted me upon the cheek, and
said --


Lady SALISBURY. What said, he, sweet?


Lord WILLIAM. He said -- Heaven bless thy beauteous head, sweet boy!

Enter GRAY.
GRAY. Permit me, honored dame, I have a word
Or two, that claims thine ear.

Lady SALISBURY. Then but a word;
My present cares ill brook long interruption.

GRAY. Behold the blossom of the spring, how fair!
Yet in his velvet bosom lurks the worm,
And hourly wastes him of his choicest sweets;
Not less a foe is slow-consuming grief
To beauty --
You may remember when we last conferred
The gracious purport of your words to what
Concerned lord Raymond, when you taught his suit
To hope a prosperous issue; thus by me he speaks:
In the recesses of the hallowed shrine,
Where with him stands the sable-vested priest,
He waits thy coming; there with pious vows
Exchanged even now to consecrate thee his.
May every rose lip'd son of light look down,
And smile propitious on the joyful hour!

Lady SALISBURY. Is this a season meet for a such a theme?

GRAY. For gracious acts all seasons should be meet;
Heaven shows the bright example; ever prompt
TO incline when virtue lifts her suppliant eye.
But say, that for the present he forbore
His earnest suit, say, shall tomorrow make
Him happy? or tomorrow's night perchance?
Or -- what shall be the bright succeeding day?

Lady SALISBURY. I know not: nor will I submit me or
To promised league or tie; no, though thou shouidst plead
Even with an angel's tongue.

GRAY. You will not, lady!
Know then -- this night, this hour must make thee his.

Lady SALISBURY. This night! this hour! who will make me his this hour?

GRAY. A power, my lady, thou shall learn to fear:
Force, force superior, that with giant hand
Plucks even the monarch from his throne; disrobes
The virgin of her honor, while distress
With streaming eyes and loose disheveled hair
Holds forth her supplicating hands in vain.

Lady SALISBURY. I know the monster thou would fright me with,
But I despise his power -- Have thou never heard?
Learn then of me a truth, a golden truth,
Engraved on the register of hoary Time:
Virtue, with her own native strength upheld,
Can brave the shock of ruffian force, unmoved
As is the rock, whose firm-set base not all
The tumult of the western surge can shake,
Though the fierce winds uplift him to the stars.

GRAY. This is a truth indeed may hold a place
On fancy's tinsel page, what will avail
Thy virtue's boasted powers when thou shall see
Torn from thy feeble arms all thou hold'st dear?
Yes, lady, thy lord William, thy loved son.

Lady SALISBURY. -- Ha! save him Heaven! -- He dare not sure -- and yet --

GRAY. Think, lady, think upon thy son.

Lady SALISBURY. Protect
Him, O ye powers celestial, angels watch
His steps, and hover round his harmless head!

GRAY. Say, will you to the altar, lady?

Lady SALISBURY. Sooner to my grave.

GRAY. Thy obstinacy on his head -- Who waits?
Enter a RUFFIAN.
Lady SALISBURY. What would thou here? Hence, execrable wretch!
Thou make my blood run cold.

Lord WILLIAM. Oh mother! I am frightened.

Lady SALISBURY. Dearest lamb!
Have thou no terrors for thyself? -- Oh Salisbury! --
Have thou no fears? -- Oh! I could tell thee what
Like thunder would apal thy hearing, shrink
Up every nerve within thy blasted frame,
And make thee nothing -- Fear not, love.

GRAY. Think not
With empty sounds to shake our purpose, say,
Will you comply?

Lady SALISBURY. My little innocent!
Thou dare not, fell as is thy nature -- my love!
My life!

GRAY. Convey lord William hence.

Lord WILLIAM. Oh! save me, mother, save me.

Lady SALISBURY. Forbear your impious hands, forbear.

GRAY. Or to the altar, or by all therein
I swear, this moment wrests him from thy view.

Lady SALISBURY. In human that thou art! can nothing move
Thee? -- Oh! those little harmless looks would preach
Even to the hungry lion, make him pause,
And turn his rage to pity.

GRAY. Nay, madam --

Lady SALISBURY. Forbear, and I will go, -- whither?
Distraction! I will rouse
The castle -- help -- my cries shall tear the roofs.
Help, help, Oh help! -- the mother and the son*

GRAY. Your cries are vain --
Enter Lord SALISBURY.
Lord SALISBURY. Hold! -- what is it ye do?

GRAY. He here again!

Lord SALISBURY. Speak, lady, would these men have wronged thee?
Pale fear is on thy cheek --
[Eleanor removes lord William. Exit Gray and Ruffian.]
Lady SALISBURY. Cold horror has overcome me.

Lord SALISBURY. Ever loved!
Sure thou were sore distressed, I heard thee cry.

Lady SALISBURY. Ah sore distressed indeed! the hand of peril
Was on me; violence and murder star'd
Me full in all their hideous forms!

Lord SALISBURY. Gracious powers! my fear, my fear, new-wak'd
For thee it was, as Heaven decreed, that urged
Me back, and brought me to thy timely rescue.

Lady SALISBURY. 'Twas Heaven indeed that brought thee hither now!
Yet I have wondrous fears: thou art but one
Surrounded by a legion of those fiends.
Enter RAYMOND, GRAY and armed KNIGHTS.
RAYMOND. Where is the audacious man that has presumed
To question with such bold intrusion?

Lord SALISBURY. If him you mean
Who took the part of feeble innocence
Against the ruffian's arm, -- he is here.

RAYMOND. Which of you, slaves have suffered him to enter?

KNIGHT. My lord, he bad us to unbar the gates,
Driven by the tempest, as he said, to seek
The proffered shelter he had late declined:
Pardon, if deeming him your honored guest,
We answered him with prompt compliance.

RAYMOND. Say what dark purpose is it has brought thee hither?
Confess thee true, or by the blessed Saints
Thou shall have cause to mourn the hour which moved
Thee, daring as thou art, to approach our castle.

Lord SALISBURY. To other regions, other climes with threats
Like these, where proud oppression lords it: here
The freeborn subject knows not what it is
To be in awe of arbitrary power.

RAYMOND. I will know what thou art.

Lord SALISBURY. Even what thou see
Am I; a man not prompt to offer wrong,
Yet of that frame, I brook not to behold
A noble lady made the prey of ruffians.

RAYMOND. Intruder bold as thou art officious! wherefore
Should thou concern thee in this lady's cause?

Lord SALISBURY. The cause of innocence should be the cause
Of all -- Confess thee, lord, was it nobly done,
To let those bold, those rude assailants loose,
And give a sanction to such foul proceedings?

RAYMOND. Pilgrim, have thou forgot thee? Who am I?

Lord SALISBURY. Who art thou! Ask, ask thy deeds,
And they will answer. The breath of fame has told
How base they have been; they are gone abroad,
And the pure air is tainted with their foulness.

RAYMOND. Presuming slave! whoever thou art, for thy
Unlicenc'd bearing dearly shall thou answer.
Hence with the bold defamer; bind him fast;
Be instant death his lot should he resist --
Seize him, I say.

Lady SALISBURY. Oh spare him, spare --

Lord SALISBURY. Out servile ministers!
Ye know not who it is ye would attempt --
Oppressive lord! whom nor the sacred bond
Of justice, nor of hospitality
Controls, regard me: while with sight
More dire than ever of Gorgon feigned, I strike thee --
Now, Raymond, if thou have of noble fire
One spark within thee, draw thy sword; come on,
And meet my arm; wake all that is man within thee.
Come on --
It Is Salisbury, Salisbury, calls thee to the strife.
[Flings off his disguise.]
Lady SALISBURY. Heaven shield my dearest lord!

RAYMOND. -- Salisbury! -- then what am I? --

Lord SALISBURY. Vengeance at length is armed; thy fate cries out,
And honor, injured honor claims aloud
Her victim.

RAYMOND. -- Secure thou seem of fate, but fall who will
A victim, let the sword --
[Drawing.]
GRAY. What would you do? --
[Aside Holding his arm.] Look not to know him, all may yet be well --
Be not abused, my lord: this is a plot,
Devised with purpose to effect thy ruin.

Lord SALISBURY. Ha! what do say?

GRAY. Believe him not, my lord. He! he lord Salisbury!
It Is all a trick, an artful cheat, and he
A liar traced --

Lord SALISBURY. Nay then my sword --
-- Dishonest knights!
[Going to attack Raymond, he is disarmed.]
Lady SALISBURY. Now by these tears do him no violence;
He is, he is my husband.

GRAY. Regard her not:
He has conspired against thee, and demands
The hand of justice.

Lord SALISBURY. Will ye not open ye heavens, and instant send
Your thunder to my aid? -- Unhand me villains,
Or, by the powers of vengeance, I will dash
You piecemeal.

RAYMOND. Bear the traitor hence, and bind
His stubborn arms: bestow the lady safe
Within her chamber.

Lady SALISBURY. I will not part my husband -- Hold your hands --
They overpower me -- Barbarous, barbarous men!

Lord SALISBURY. Ruffians forbear your more than impious hands.

Lady SALISBURY. Yet hear me, Raymond -- by these streaming eyes
Oh! hear me yet --

RAYMOND. Away --

Lord SALISBURY. Slaves! murderers!
[They are forced off severally.]
RAYMOND. Away with him, away -- honor is lost,
And shame must henceforth be my only portion.
[Exeunt omnes.]
END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
Enter RAYMOND and GRAY. GRAY. MY lord, you waste the precious hours in cold
Irresolute delays: nor circumstance
Nor time admit of long deliberation.

RAYMOND. -- Would I had never seen this fatal mansion!

GRAY. A sorry wish, my lord. Behold the fierce,
The lordly ranger of the desert wild;
No sluggish fears he knows; he pauses not,
Nor looks behind, but onward speeds him till
He gripes the trembling prey: be ever thus
The youth, whom thirst of love and beauty fires.

RAYMOND. -- Away; call forth my train -- nay murmur not:
Command that ere the lark proclaim the morn
They hold them each prepared. Here I will rest,
If rest I can, this night; tomorrow's sun
Shall see me fled for ever from these walls.

GRAY. -- Go -- I detain thee not.
Summon thy train, mount the swift steed, away;
The gates shall open to thy flight -- but know,
That shame and scorn shall follow at thy heels.
Yet worse; the insulted baron next pursues thee:
Nor rocks, nor mountains, nor opposing seas
Shall stay him, but with more than mortal rage
He shall assail thee.

RAYMOND. -- Are there no other means?

GRAY. None.

RAYMOND. No other way but murder? Horrid thought! --
Oh Gray if ever the dagger's drawn I feel
Such perturbation here, what then, oh what
Shall prove my portion when it is steeped in blood?
The drops can from the point be wiped away,
But never from the mind.

GRAY. Lift, lift thine eye,
And let it gaze upon the bright reward.
Riches and honors grace the swelling act,
While beauty, like the ruby-crowned morn,
When first she peers upon the mountain top,
Comes smiling on to meet you -- These are objects,
My lord, would irritate the palsied arm
Itself of fear; excite the lagging blood,
And spur it on to acts of noble daring.

RAYMOND. What would you do? -- Think -- Salisbury is a name
Of all beloved, of more than vulgar sway
Through out the land; a deed unauthoriz'd
As this shall never 'scape the arm of justice.

GRAY. Such wary counsels shall our steps o'er-rule
As may deride suspicion -- One there is,
A knight among thy vassal train perhaps
Unnoted: soft of speech he is, and fair;
But of a heart that mocks at human feelings:
Him I have sounded with reserve; and find
Him not unapt to this our secret purpose --
But say, what recompense, what high reward
A waits the man, whose arm for thee enacts
Such signal service?

RAYMOND. Half my fortunes, all
Would I on him bestow, whose prosperous arts
Should make the fair one mine.

GRAY. She shall be thine.

RAYMOND. But say, my friend, what tale, what rare device
Should fruitful art explore that might amuse
Her just suspicions?

GRAY. Innocence, the mask
Of innocence, and counterfeited sorrow --
Enter ELEANOR.
ELEANOR. If beauty in distress, if dignity
Now sinking into ruin can assail
Thy pity, come, oh! come, and weep to see --.

GRAY. The countess, I suppose.

ELEANOR. My lord, my lord,
'Twou'd melt the savage into human softness,
And make him howl forth pity to behold her --
Did you behold her, pale, disordered as
She runs, now calling wildly on her lord,
Again upon her son, again on thee.
Sometimes, alas! she beats her beauteous bosom;
Anon in frantic mood tears from her head
The silken hairs, which fall in heaps unheeded;
Wrings her white hands, and weeps and raves by turns,
Till nature spent and wearied gives her pause.

RAYMOND. Away -- we will speak comfort to her sorrows.
[Exit Eleanor.] -- Wretch that I am! -- But I will yield them up;
Son, husband, all I will resign, if so
I may appease her phrenzy.
[Going, is detained by Gray.]
GRAY. Be not rash.
Short is the date of every stronger passion;
Unstay'd the mind of woman; by a breath
Often agitated, by a breath composed --
Yield them, my lord! it would be madness, ruin.

RAYMOND. Which ever way I turn, it is destruction.

GRAY. Overcast with fear, thine eye takes nothing in
But fancies of the sickliest hue -- For shame,
Rouse, rouse my noble lord; awake, shake off
This weakness. Pleasure must be wooed with toil.
Go to her, solace her; if that should fail,
Permit her as by stealth to visit Salisbury;
At sight of him this tumult shall subside.

RAYMOND. With love and pity I am torn. In vain
I strive; too far I am advanced in error.
Oh! will no hand disclose a path whereby
I may return? -- Accursed be thou, myself;
And doubly be accursed that fatal hour
I turned mine ear to thy destructive counsels.
[Goes out in great agitation.
GRAY alone. -- My hopes begin to totter.
If he resign them, Salisbury is appeased,
And he retires: what then becomes of Gray?
On me, on me of course the tempest falls.
That must not be -- He goes to see her now --
Who knows what new-sprung hope may follow thence?
There is a charm in soft distress, that works
Upon the soul like magic; causing love
Often times, as often exciting loose desire --
It is most apt. I will, before he goes
To her, explore each access to his heart;
Attack each avenue that leads to virtue;
Try every mining art that may assist
The loose contagion: Should he seize her beauties,
Farewell remorse; then dies the injured husband.
[Exit. Scene opening, discovers lord SALISBURY on the ground, in chains. Enter
LEROCHES.
LEROCHES. Alas! on the cold ground. I fear his wrongs
Have made him mad; I heard him rage -- My lord --
Rise, rise, my lord, and speak to thy Leroches.

Lord SALISBURY. -- Thou art unkind.

LEROCHES. Oh! would to Heaven that I could ease thy troubles!

Lord SALISBURY. I had in sweet oblivion lost myself
And every care; why have thou called me back
To hated recollection? -- O my wrongs!
My wrongs! they now come rushing over my head --
Again, again, they wake me into madness.

LEROCHES. Thy wrongs shall be revenged.

Lord SALISBURY. Torn from them both!
-- Let me not think.

LEROCHES. Think on our friends, my lord:
Perhaps even now they are at hand; and soon
Will thunder at the gates.

Lord SALISBURY. Is It possible?
Or do my eyes but false persuade me to it? --
In trammels! and within my walls! beneath
That roof where I am sole-invested lord! --

LEROCHES. Look, behold.

Lord SALISBURY. I see; thou art dishonored.

LEROCHES. It Is the will
Of Heaven, and I submit me to my fortunes.

Lord SALISBURY. How came thou hither?

LEROCHES. By command, as I
Suppose, of -- but I will not name him.

Lord SALISBURY. Blasts
Upon him! -- Did thou see my wife?

LEROCHES. No, my lord.

Lord SALISBURY. Nor my son?

LEROCHES. My lord I saw not either.

Lord SALISBURY. Nor of either heard?

LEROCHES. No, my good lord, I trust that they are safe.

Lord SALISBURY. Hear me, sweet Heaven! ye throned powers above,
Dread arbiters of mortal doings, hear --
Dry not instant up the springs of life,
But grant me measure of revenge. Unbind,
For pity these dishonored limbs unbind,
And give this monster to my willing arm:
If I not firmly gripe, if I not tear
With more than savage force his hated form --
Enter a KNIGHT. Traitor!
What have thou done? Bring forth my honored dame --
Haste, bring her instant; give her to my arms,
Uninjur'd, undefiled, or by the souls
Of the most holy and unspotted saints --
Spare me, good Heaven -- I am, I am to blame --
Imports thy coming aught with me?

KNIGHT. Behold
In me thy better angel, come to warn
Thee of unguarded danger -- Oh my lord!
My lord! beware of horrid treachery --
Whatever knight thou not'st, that traitor like
Approaches thee with smiles; that with the charm
Of honey'd speech would practice on thy hearing,
Of him beware -- They seek thy ruin; chance
Betrayed their purpose; I was touched with pity.
[Going.]
Lord SALISBURY. Nay, go not yet.

KNIGHT. Suspicion's on the watch;
My thoughts are scarce my own.

Lord SALISBURY. It is for guilt,
Not conscious honesty to taste of fear.

KNIGHT. Know then, my lord, though strict necessity
Enrolls me in the list of Raymond's train,
Yet does my soul abhor the unhallowed service.

Lord SALISBURY. Be thou but faithful, and discover all
Thou know, so shall thou thrive in Salisbury's favor.

KNIGHT. Fear not my faith. But shall lord Salisbury prove
A friend indeed? for I shall need thy arm
And interest both against so great a foe.

Lord SALISBURY. Now by my honor, ever yet held dear,
I will protect thee against whatever foe.

KNIGHT. Morton desires but this -- Know then, that late
As by the western porch I stood, my ear
Was met by certain voices: strait I turned;
And through the crevice of the adjoining door
Was known that same insidious knight and Gray,
In low, but earnest converse. Thee they named:
And I could hear the latter, whilst he said,
"A dagger is the best. With honest smiles,
"And fair-instructed speech you must essay him.
"Thy peace and fortunes on this feat depend."

Lord SALISBURY. I thank thee for this warning; and ere long
Shall recompense thy love.

MORTON. Had I the power
To serve thee, as the will, thou should not wear
Those marks of shame -- But oh! the unhappy countess!

Lord SALISBURY. What, what of her?

MORTON. Alas! to think the pangs
She feels this moment, torn as she has been
By rude barbarians from her lord and son.

Lord SALISBURY. But is she safe? has not dishonor reached her?

MORTON. Oh may she never know dishonor! -- Yet
Lord Raymond --

Lord SALISBURY. Perish the detested name
For ever! for it makes my blood outcourse
The wholesome speed of nature.

MORTON. It is true,
He holds her in his power --

Lord SALISBURY. He does, he does;
And I do live to know it.

MORTON. But I trust
He will not use that power -- Farewell, my lord;
I will away, and gather all I can
Of their condition.

Lord SALISBURY. Thou shall win my love.
See, see my wife, oh! see her if thou can:
Speak comfort to her. Say the only pangs I feel
Are for her safety. Bid her hope for timely aid;
But to remember still, the virtuous mind
Will welcome death itself before dishonor.

MORTON. To see her, is a task I fear will foil
My utmost; but no art shall be untried.
[Exit MORTON.
Lord SALISBURY. Is there no way to freedom? -- Oh my friends!
My friends! Haste, Ardolf, haste to my revenge.

LEROCHES. Thy fierce impatience, thy untoward will
It is, my lord, that has betrayed our safeties.
To Ardolf deaf, thou would not wait his succors;
Deaf too to me, thou would approach the castle.

Lord SALISBURY. Fear not: this stranger, like Heaven's brighter star,
Has risen propitious -- Heavens! but what of that?
My wife! -- perhaps even now within the gripe
Of fell incontinence she struggles -- Beware
That thought -- down, down, or I shall rage to madness.

LEROCHES. My lord, he would not --

Lord SALISBURY. Hark! --

LEROCHES. He would not, dare not, sure: or if he dare,
Her inborn dignity, her virtue --

Lord SALISBURY. Peace! --

Lady SALISBURY. Hold off your brutal hands!
[from without.
Lord SALISBURY. It Is she! it is she!
The slave assails her -- Let me forth --
Slaves! murderers! instant let me forth, or I --

Lady SALISBURY. Have thou no touch of pity?

Lord SALISBURY. Horror! horror!
Out hair! out by the roots! nor let a grain
Be left to tell there grew such honors there.

Lady SALISBURY. O my lord! my lord! --

Lord SALISBURY. By Heaven I will not be restrained --
[LERO. strives to stay him. Nor all your bolts, nor barriers, all the powers
Of hell united shall withhold me from her --
[Exit.
LEROCHES. Preserve him, Heaven! I fear
Some act of horrid import -- Oh! she comes!
Wild, wild as the rough ocean vexed with storms.
Enter Lady SALISBURY, ELEANOR, MORTON.
Lady SALISBURY. I will have vengeance. Such an outrage -- No,
I will not weep. They think I have no means:
It Is false: I will resume a spirit.

ELEANOR. Alas! alas!

Lady SALISBURY. I had a son; sweet William! thou have heard
Him prattle: there was music on his tongue.

ELEANOR. Can Heaven behold such crimes, and not awake
It Is thunders?

Lady SALISBURY. Weep'st thou? I can weep myself;
I have some cause -- He is my husband, who
Will part us? -- Cold, cold, cold. The rains beat sore,
And the winds make a noise; it is a rough night;
No little star to guide his darkling steps --
The Heavens do rain down pity for me.

ELEANOR. Rave
Not thus, dear lady; oh! be comforted.

Lady SALISBURY. Yes, yes; I know: these trifles have disturbed me.
The bird is rifl'd.
Poor flutterer! oh! it was naught to spoil
Her of her little hope -- Did thou not see
Her valiant mate, how fierce he shook his plumes,
And peck'd at them? Did he not? -- He had saved
His mistress from the spoilers, but they snared him.

Lord SALISBURY entering. Where is the slave? I will not brook delay.

Lady SALISBURY. He Is come! he is come -- Now, ruffians, I have found
Him, we will die together ever you part us.

Lord SALISBURY. Hell! what are your blackest horrors to this?

Lady SALISBURY. We will have justice -- Bury Gray alive.

Lord SALISBURY. She Is lost!

Lady SALISBURY. Say you! -- Put Raymond to the torture.

Lord SALISBURY. I will tear him joint by joint.

Lady SALISBURY. But they will part us --
They come -- You shall not -- no; no power on earth
Shall force me -- Now they pull -- Hold, hold, my lord --
Yet closer -- now, now, now.

Lord SALISBURY. My wife, my Ela!
Lost as thou art, oh! do not leave me.

MORTON. Distressful sight! -- Oh most inhuman Gray!

ELEANOR. Nature, my lord, unequal to the conflict,
Has for a space retired within herself;
But shortly to return. This interval
Of death-like quiet will, I trust, recall
Her safer senses -- She revives.

Lady SALISBURY. But this is strange --

ELEANOR. My lord,
Speak to her; sooth her, and she will be calm.

Lord SALISBURY. Speak to her, sooth her -- what have I with her? with thee?
Oh agonizing hour! Had I but perished
In the same wave that buried my loved friends,
It had been well -- 'Twas cruelty to save me.

Lady SALISBURY. Am I indeed awake? -- Let me stand up --
What is the matter?

Lord SALISBURY. My poor, injured wife!

Lady SALISBURY. Nay, but inform me, I am overdoubtful;
I would believe, I know -- if what I now
Behold, be not a dream, you are my husband.

Lord SALISBURY. The wretch that was so called.

Lady SALISBURY. Alack! alack!
Sure I have been afflicted sore -- My lord!
My life! -- why do thou start from me? -- Oh take
Me to thy arms! for I have need of comfort.

Lord SALISBURY. Art thou not undone?

Lady SALISBURY. Indeed I have wept.

Lord SALISBURY. Lost, stained, dishonored by a villain?

Lady SALISBURY. How,
My lord! Think thou that I have other wrongs
To weep than thou have seen?

Lord SALISBURY. I heard thee cry.

Lady SALISBURY. I know not what I did -- Dishonored! -- O!
The thought wakes every pulse to indignation.

Lord SALISBURY. What! did he not assail thee?

Lady SALISBURY. No -- Assail me!

Lord SALISBURY. Then art thou safe, thy honor unassay'd?

Lady SALISBURY. So witness Heaven!

Lord SALISBURY. The God of Heaven be praised!

Lady SALISBURY. -- And coud'st thou think so meanly of me? -- Oh!
I had let the lifeblood from this bosom forth
Ere I had brook'd dishonor.

Lord SALISBURY. Best of thy sex! -- Thy cries like daggers pierced me;
And fearful fancy pictured such a scene
As hurried me to madness -- But thou art safe,
My wife is safe! and I am blessed again.

Lady SALISBURY. My heart o'erjoys -- Yet wherefore do I fear?

Lord SALISBURY. I had forgot -- my son; for him thou fear.

Lady SALISBURY. Not only for my son, but for thyself,
Thy precious self I tremble -- Oh this fiend!
The slaves and agents of destruction, black
And bold, are station'd round him, and but wait
Their master's nod.

LEROCHES. Would we were safe bestowed
Without this fearful prison!

Lady SALISBURY. Would we were! --
Think, think, my lord, is there no way to flight?

Lord SALISBURY. Thou have recalled to my remembrance what,
If seconded by this our plighted friend,
May claim a serious and attentive hearing.

MORTON. Small is the service I can boast my lord;
In all my best I shall be prompt to aid you.

Lord SALISBURY. Hear then -- Deep underneath this vaulted ground,
Curious and close, by our forefathers scoop'd,
I do remember me there is a dark,
And secret mine, which leads by many a maze
Without the castle. Not far thence there stands
Within the bosom of an aged grove,
An house for pious uses set apart,
The hallowed seat of godly brethren: there
I fear not we shall rest secure of ill.

Lady SALISBURY. Most opportune as could our wishes frame --
But oh! our little hope! our younger care!

MORTON. My life shall answer for lord William's safety*

Lady SALISBURY. Then let us forth.

MORTON. The night is over young;
The castle's yet awake, and would but mock
The attempt.

Lord SALISBURY. Say, what shall be the appointed hour?

MORTON. Some three hours hence, my lord; or ere the clock
Perchance have told the second watch -- And now
That squint suspicion mar not, let us part.

Lady SALISBURY. Then must we part? -- But it is to save us all.
Three hours -- farewell! -- Oh! they will be three long
Long hours to me.

Lady SALISBURY. Farewell my best! -- Mean time
Leroches, we will rest us here apart -- Farewell,
Farewell! thou soother sweet of every care!
The god, that loves the unsullied mind, descend,
And be thy guardian till we meet again.
[Ex. omnes.
END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE a Forest, and Cottage. Enter ARDOLF and a KNIGHT. ARDOLF. THE storm is
laid; and from the parting clouds
See where the moon steps forth, pale goddess,
Chearing the dark dull brow of haggard night --
This is the forest, that the Cottager's,
Or I do err, the appointed place of meeting.

KNIGHT. It is: behold the rock, as was described,
The torrent foaming down his rugged side.

ARDOLF. See, the bright harbinger of morning climbs
The steep of Heaven: they are in the first repose --
Wake, peasant, wake -- How balmy sweet the sleep
Of him, who stretches under rustic roof!
His task of labor over, content he lays
Him on his rushy couch; nor elves, nor goblins,
The coinage of swol'n surfeit or of guilt,
Approach his peaceful pillow -- Wake, I say;
Peasant, awake.
Enter a PEASANT from the cottage.
PEASANT. Who calls?
What is your business, that at this late hour
You make the forest echoe with your cries?

ARDOLF. Peasant, are there not certain travelers
Within thy cottage?

PEASANT. No.
What! saw you not
Two stranger pilgrims pass this way?

PEASANT. I did.
Two such arrived ever the lark had risen
From her moss cabin, or the cock
Gave note of morn.

ARDOLF. Say, gentle cottager,
Where may they now be lodged?

PEASANT. Nay, stranger, that
I know not. They went hence about the time
The bat begins her twilight play.

ARDOLF. It Is strange
They should depart -- Left they no message?

PEASANT. None.
They said, they wished to see the neighboring abbey;
But would tonight partake our homely fare.
[Returns into the cottage.
ARDOLF. We now are in the precincts of the castle;
But whether to proceed, or wait, perchance
If they return, I know not -- Hark! some one
Approaches -- who is there?
Enter LEROCHES. Leroches!

LEROCHES. Happily met -- where are your friends?

ARDOLF. At hand; and well appointed each -- where is my Lord?

LEROCHES. In chains; in his own castle basely bound;
Torn from his wife and son -- How I escaped --
But haste; time is too precious now for more:
His life hangs upon each eventful moment.

ARDOLF. In chains! his life in danger! -- Ho! my friends!
To horse, quick; we will rescue him, or perish.

LEROCHES. Ardolf, pursue the eastern causeway you;
I with a chosen few will trace the path,
Which led me from the postern.

ARDOLF. Wisely cautioned:
Divided thus, we wage an easier war.
[Exeunt omnes. SCENE within the Castle. Enter GRAY and MORTON.
GRAY. My trusty Morton! well have thou repaid
The nicer hope which I reposed in thee.
-- Their unprovided rest outrunmy wishes.

MORTON. Fools! not to see through my hypocrisy:
That in the borrowed guise of honest friendship,
I studied but to lure them to my toils --
Concealed from upper light, it yields a safe
Retreat; through that they purposed their escape.

GRAY. Within the secret womb of that same vault,
When all the castle's hushed, their bleeding trunks
We will deposit.

MORTON. Yes -- we will be bloody.

GRAY. Here is the weapon -- Be firm, and prosper.
[Morton receives a dagger and goes out. -- Thou too, unthinking fool, must
this hour bleed --
Would it were over -- they may chance to wake --
Thou Sleep! still child of sable-hooded Night,
Befriend us. From thy dark Lethean cell
Upconjure all thy store of drowsy charms;
Lock fast their lids, o'erpower each torpid sense,
That they awake not ever the deed be done --
[Bell tolls. -- The second watch; and like death's curfew, deep
And dismal verberates the solemn knell.
Enter a KNIGHT.
KNIGHT. A stranger, sir, who calls him Oswald, waits
Without the castle, and would speak with you.

GRAY. Oswald! He is our friend.

KNIGHT. I have not learned
His errand, but as it would seem, he comes
With news that much imports thy present hearing.

GRAY. I Will speak with him anon.

KNIGHT. I know not what
Their purpose, but even now, as on the tower
I stood, which high o'erlooks the eastern causeway,
Methought I heard the distant sound of horse,
As hither bent in full career.

GRAY. The sound
Of horse! -- Look out; call up our knights; away.
[Exit KNIGHT. -- What can delay him? -- Should my present hopes
Miscarry, I will bear the lady hence,
And make her hostage for my safety; nay,
Perchance, what I have some incentives to,
Supplant them both, the lover and the husband --
He comes! --
Re-enter MORTON.
MORTON. Oh! that the earth would yawn and cover me!
Or that Heaven's quick-devouring fires had shrunk
And withered up this arm when it was raised --
Eyes; eyes! why closed you not ever you beheld
The ghastly ruin?

GRAY. Speak direct; are they disposed?

MORTON. Away -- thou have destroyed my peace for ever --
Had you beheld him as he lay, struggling
In the cold gripe of death; his cheek overspread
With livid pale; those eyes, that late shot forth
So radiant, now quite sunk; their burning lamps
Extinct; while from the deep-mouthed wound,
As from a copious fountain, issued forth
Life's purple springs --
I would have fled, but horror for a space
Suspended every power.

GRAY. It Is well --
Have thou then slain Lord Salisbury?
At thy own peril be it -- Help! he has slain
The innocent!
They Are murdered, foully murdered by a slave.
[Exit.
MORTON. The earth has teemed with prodigies, this sure
Out-monsters all.
Enter RAYMOND, hastily, with a sword in his hand.
RAYMOND. On what purpose art thou here?

MORTON. Lord Raymond cannot be a stranger sure.

RAYMOND. A dagger! -- what have thou done?

MORTON. Did not my lord approve the deed?

RAYMOND. What deed?

MORTON. How Is this? -- My lord,
I had your sanction, ratified by Gray,
With promise of high recompense the hour
When Salisbury should expire.

RAYMOND. Accursed be he that told thee so, and thou
That gav'st him credit!

MORTON. This is strange!

RAYMOND. Approve!
I did not; by the powers of Truth I did not --
Remorseless villain! -- Where, where shall I hide
Me? whither shall I fly? -- Oh deed of horror! --
Thy blood, detested hireling, shall in part
Compensate --

MORTON. Hold -- He cannot sure dissemble --
Wish you, my lord, this deed were yet undone?

RAYMOND. What would the monster? -- Oh! could I recall
His life by killing twenty thousand slaves
Like thee, it were a comfort.

MORTON. I believe
That you are innocent; know then, my lord --
He lives -- he sleeps; and sleeps secure of harm.

RAYMOND. Take heed thou do not trifle.

MORTON. I will confess
Me true, and Heaven forgive my foul intent!
I undertook to slay this innocent;
Approached him as a friend -- I saw his sufferings;
Saw his distracted wife: at length I cursed,
And in my heart abjured the wicked purpose.

RAYMOND. Had thou the goodness? Then, perhaps --

MORTON. I thought
Happily that you yourself might soon relent.
This instrument of purposed cruelty,
I took; and with a fair-devised tale
Of Salisbury's death, amused the guilty wretch
That would ensnare your quiet.

RAYMOND. Is this honest?

MORTON. Approach, my lord, approach, and let your eye
Be witness of my truth -- In doing thus,
I thought I should be deemed Lord Raymond's friend.

RAYMOND. Thou were the best of friends! -- Retire thou now --
[Exit MOR. One way there yet remains to reconcile
This double war, and heal my tortured bosom --
Thou, that so soundly sleep'st, unguarded thus
[going toward the side scene. Against whatever ill that may approach thee,
Awake! rouse from the bed of listless sleep,
And see who comes to greet thee.
Enter Lord SALISBURY.
Lord SALISBURY. -- Do I dream?
Or am I in the regions of the unblest,
Beset with monsters? -- Though thou art a fiend,
I will attempt thee.

RAYMOND. Rush not on my weapon.
I have sought thee on a cause which honor loves,
And would not have thee mar my soul's fair purpose.

Lord SALISBURY. Inglorious! base! O shame to manhood! -- Dearly
Shall thou atone the accumulated wrongs
That I do bleed withal. Nor sea, nor earth,
Though thou should traverse her remotest climes,
Shall shelter thee from my determined fury.

RAYMOND. Think not that I shall fly thee; or that I
Have sought thee now, but on such terms as even
May challenge thy applause. I come a foe
Indeed, but I do come a generous foe.

Lord SALISBURY. A generous foe! -- The brave indeed aspire
To generous acts; their every thought looks up,
And honor's dictates are their only function:
But thou! -- what terms would thou propose? What act
Of that essential virtue, that may raze
The ignoble stains wherewith thou art polluted?

RAYMOND. The ignoble* and the brave alike have erred;
And he, that re-ascends to virtue's height,
D^e^ often snatch a wreath, which never bloomed
On safer wisdom's brow -- First let me loose
Those ignominious bonds, which have indeed
My own dishonored, not the wearer's arm.
[Takes off his chains.]
Lord SALISBURY. -- Say, to what purpose tends this honest seeming?

RAYMOND. That I have wronged thee, I confess -- take this.
Gives him a sword, and draws another.] The only restitution I have left.
I know thou never can forgive, nor I
Forget; the sword then judge between.

Lord SALISBURY. -- Indeed!
Lives there so much of honor then within thee?
Spite of the mighty wrongs which thou have done
Me, I do thank thee --

RAYMOND. Now Fortune mark her favorite! --
[Loses his sword in the encounter. Then she is partial, and I must submit.

Lord SALISBURY. Take up thy sword again; my fair revenge
Disdains too cheap a conquest.

RAYMOND. It Is too much.
Oh! generous! generous even to cruelty! --
Some way I would repay thee -- Oh! that I
[Takes up his sword. Had never seen thy wife! -- It may not be --
Then let me tear for ever from my breast
The guilty passion: thus I thank thee -- thus
[Wounds himself. Atone the mischiefs, that -- oh --
[Falls.
Lord SALISBURY. This indeed
Atones for all. Thou much-misguided youth!
What tempted thee to stray so wide from honor?

RAYMOND. Ask, ask that villain; he will answer all --
That villain Gray! whose wicked arts seduced me --
Forgive -- -- I die, I die; a dreadful proof
What ills await the wretch, who gives his ear --
To vicious counsels --

Lord SALISBURY. Dreadful proof, indeed! --
I do forgive thee, so forgive thee Heaven!
Re enter MORTON. Now where is my wife? where is my friend Leroches?

MORTON. My lord, by my assistance he has fled.
I saw how vain your purpose to escape;
His single flight was unobserved -- your friends
In quest of whom he hasted, are arrived;
[A trumpet is heard. That trumpet speaks it.

Lord SALISBURY. It is, it is sir Ardolf! -- See! he comes.
Enter ARDOLF, and KNIGHTS.
ARDOLF. My noble friend! -- safe! crowned with conquest too!

Lord SALISBURY. Saw you Leroches?

ARDOLF. My lord,
He sought the castle by a private path;
I thought he had been here by this.

Lord SALISBURY. It Is well.
But where is my wife? my son? my soul is maimed
Of half it is joys till I Have again embraced them.
Enter ELEANOR.
ELEANOR. My lord! my lord! the countess and lord William --
Send, send and save them from destruction.
With horses that outstrip the winds, the villains
Have borne her from the castle.

Lord SALISBURY. Ravished by villains! -- Mount your horses, haste --

ARDOLF. Say, which way have they fled?

ELEANOR. West of the castle:
Heaven grant their swiftness mock not your best speed!

ARDOLF. Now good my lord, if I might speak --

Lord SALISBURY. Speak not
To me, but forth and scower the country --

ARDOLF. Hark!
Methought I heard a voice --

ELEANOR. And I, methought --
Perhaps Heaven has been kind; perhaps it is she.

Lady SALISBURY entering. Now hushed be every fear -- Where, where is my hero,
That I may once more hold him to my bosom.
Enter Lady SALISBURY and Lord WILLIAM, conducted by LEROCHES.
Lord SALISBURY. It Is she! it is she! --
My wife is in my arms again! -- Speak, speak;
O! whence this precious, this unlooked event?

Lady SALISBURY. When the fell ruffian,
When Gray with impious hands had snatched us hence,
Then came my guardian angel, came your friend,
And rescued us from ruin.

LEROCHES. Happy hour!
I took the path which brought me to their rescue!
The atrocious villain fell beneath this arm.

Lord SALISBURY. My wife!
My son! my friend! my God! my guardian God!

ELEANOR. O joy! that they are here again!

Lord SALISBURY. They Are here! they are here! my wife and son are here! --
Proclaim it, O ye sons of light! spread wide
Your starry pin^ons, angels, spread them wide,
And trumpet-loud throughout the unmeasured tracts
Of highest Heaven, that virtue is made happy.

Lady SALISBURY. Let the Sun cease to snine, the Planets cease,
Drop every star from his ethereal height,
Ever I forget thee, source of every good!

Lord SALISBURY. Friends, I am much beholden to you all.
My love! the gloom, that overspread our morn,
Is now dispersed; our late mishaps
Recalled, shall be the amusing narrative,
And story of our future evening, often
Rehearsed. Our son too -- he shall hang upon
The sounds, and lift his little hands in praise
To Heaven; taught by his mother's bright example,
That, to be truly good, is to be blessed.

FINIS.

