AN ESSAY On the present Epidemic Fever.

AN ESSAY Pointing out the Cause, Effects and Method of treating the present
Epidemic Fever.

In a LETTER to a Young PHYSICIAN.

Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: si non, his utere mecum.
SHERBORNE: Printed for the AUTHOR in the Year 1741.

THE PREFACE.
THE following attempt to account for the Cause of the present Epidemic Fever
which has raged in the western parts of this kingdom this summer, was drawn up
at the instance of some friends; and not with any direct intention to be
published; but the frequent alarms from all quarters, and the terrors some had,
on account of the supposed danger of receiving infection, determined me to lay
my thoughts on this important affair before the Public.

As I really thought peoples fears on this account were groundless and without
the least Foundation, so I endeavored to account for things in regard to the
present Epidemic, in a way familiar and obvious to almost every ones capacity,
and to common observation.

I know it is commonly objected, how easy a matter it is to lay down an
Hypothesis, and deduce and spin out Consequences, to make every Phenomenon,
every Symptom of a disease to be accounted for by that Hypothesis. But the
following Remarks at least as I imagine are founded upon matters of fact, every
ones experience, the known laws and properties of matter and motion in regard
to the solids and fluids of our bodies.

If there be any thing in them materially wrong, whereby it shall appear to any
candid Person, that I have been mistaken, I shall think myself obliged to him,
if he will take the trouble to give me better information, and set me right. But
as for any little conceited nibler and dealer in small wares, who will be
snarling and finding fault when he has neither will nor capacity to instruct us
better, who pretends to have wit, when he has scarce common sense; or any one
who will hint his dislike without offering to give us a better account, or who
will sententiously condemn, because he would be looked upon as shrewd; as for
those or such like I heartily despise.

As for the Gentlemen of the Profession who are of any standing, and such as
really deserve that name, these Remarks are not intended to offer them any
thing that is new or uncommon; these things must have fallen under their
reflection: and if there be any thing that may be deemed too presumptive or
indecent in regard to the Censure past upon the recommendation of the use of
vinegar by the College of Physicians to our Sailors in the West Indies, I hope
it will give them an opportunity of reconsidering that affair since a
recommendation of the general use of it cannot but be of ill consequence in a
state of the fluids already too much coagulated and stagnant, as I think I have
proved in the following Sheets.

In jugularem Canis injeci aceti uncias duas. Cordis contractio paulo
frequentior; quoad caetera nulla in Cane mutatio. Deinde iterata injectione ad
uncias, itidem duas, Respiratio difficilis and laboriosa; quae tamen, secta
arteria iliaca (unde exiit plurimum sanguinis nonnihil grumosi) ad consuetam
normam redacta est. Injectis tandem ulterius unciis duabus, expiravit Animal.
Aperta vena Iliaca, erupit sanguis craffissimus, and in massam densatus: in
venis caeteris, uti and arteriis, leviter concretus; in cord, praesertim in
sinistro ventriculo, aliqua ex part fortiter coagulatur.

Thus far the late ingenious and learned Dr. Friend Vid. Friend's Emmenalog.
.

"I injected, says he, into the jugular vein of a Dog two ounces of Vinegar,
whereupon the heart was contracted a little more frequently, otherwise there
was but little alteration in the Dog; then I injected two ounces more, upon
which respiration became difficult and troublesome, but upon opening the Iliac
Artery, from whence was taken, a good deal of grumous blood, he breathed pretty
well again. Then I injected two ounces more, whereupon the Animal expired.
Opening the Iliac Vein, the blood was very thick, and congealed into a solid
Mass: in the rest of the veins and arteries 'twas somewhat concreted, in the
heart, especially in the left Ventricle the blood was strongly coagulated."

Here seems to be a pregnant instance of the coagulating nature of vinegar when
mixed with blood in the body, and notwithstanding any other properties may
lavishly have been bestowed upon it, and ascribed to it, and that by the
greatest Names; such as that of attenuating, stimulating, abstersive,
antipestilential, preventing, and resisting corruption and putrefaction and
such like, yet as facts and experiments are stubborn, and irresistible, and
will not give way to the greatest authorities; and that we have no reason to
distrust or call in question the veracity or the skill of the late Dr. Friend
in his relation and his making the above experiment, so I think we may safely
conclude, that vinegar is not discriminately on all occasions and in any
quantities to be thrown into the body.

AN ESSAY On the present Epidemic Fever.
SIR,
SINCE you were pleased to signify your desire of knowing what my sentiments
were concerning the present Epidemic Fever, and what my method of treating it,
to your Candor I submit the following observations.

I would remark to you in the first place, that notwithstanding the many
outcries we have had from all parts of the Country of the malignancy and
contagious nature of the reigning Fever, there is nothing very particular or
uncommon in it, any more than that a particular constitution of Air may be
productive of a particular disorder, and may induce what we call an Epidemic
Disease.

But properly speaking we know of but three contagious or infectious Diseases,
viz. the Plague, Smallpox, and the Measles, all which, as far as we know, have
Africa for their original, if at least we except some few which are
communicated by contact.

If we consider the violent heats of the present summer after an excessive cold
spring, we need not, I think, be at a loss in accounting for the present
reigning Fever, since every one knows, who is ever so little versed or engaged
in observations of this kind, what an effect an Eastern or Northern Air has in
bracing up our fibers, and rendering them rigid and elastic, and how on the
contrary a Southern or South-western Air, with excessive hot weather, relaxes
them. The very great change from excessive cold to excessive hot weather, and
by so suddena transition, could not but make a very great alteration in the
temper of our bodies. Hypocrates, who lived two thousand Years ago, and who was
the most diligent observer of the causes and effects of diseases either before
or after him that lived in the World, told us, that the change of the seasons
was the principal Parent of diseases; and no wonder, since we observe at
different times and seasons of the year, the difference of the spring, weight,
heat, cold, and moisture of the Air. The blood and humors which were before by
the elastic force of the solids comminuted and rendered fit for their several
secretions, are now by their sunk and relaxed state, become heavy and too
abounding, and want that spur which is necessary to carry off the recrements,
and prevent a tendency to a stagnation and putrefaction. The blood's viscidity
continually increasing by the heat's exhaling the finer and more fluid parts of
it, and the vis a tergo growing less and less by the relaxation of the fibers,
obstructions must necessarily arise, and consequently there must be brought on
an inactive putrid state of the fluids; from hence I think may be accounted
for, the variety of symptoms, and the frequency of the present Epidemic Fever,
without having recourse to any particular taint or infection communicated and
brought to us from the West Indies, as has been idly suggested.

From the same way of reasoning we may account for the sickness and mortality
of our men in the West Indies, having passed from a Northern to a Southern
Climate, from a cold to a hot air, and great moisture, occasioned by their
heavy rains at particular seasons, which contribute exceedingly to the
relaxation of the fibers, and to the inducing that putrid and accumulated state
of the fluids which has been described: and if our Sailors were to bleed, and
afterward bath in the sea water, which they have such good opportunities for,
at their arrival in the West Indies, it would contribute very much to the
raising the elastic force of the solids, and preventing that viscid, stagnating
and putrid state of the fluids.

Here I cannot but take notice, that if this way of reasoning be just, how
injurious the use of vinegar must be in this state of the blood, from the known
properties of acids coagulating the mass.

With humble deference to the Judgment of so learned a Body as that of the
College of Physicians I would submit it to them whether they were not a little
too hasty in recommending the general use of vinegar to our men in the West
Indies, for though a tendency of bracing the fibers may be urged in its favor,
yet its coagulating stagnating property must be injurious to a blood already
too coagulated and stagnant, according to the foregoing Theory. And now I am
upon the story of vinegar, I cannot help taking notice of the use has been made
of it since its recommendation from the College. Some are not contented with
the great benefit they imagine they receive from its internal use, but look
upon it as having something of a charm with it to keep off and prevent
infection, and the unfriendly taint of this Epidemic fever; and for this reason
they sprinkle with vinegar walls, floors and bed-posts, which have contracted
this taint; and which they have been told was a practice during the raging of
the Plague in England.

Whether there be any thing in vinegar opposite to the principles, nature, or
effects of that direful and contagious disease, it is not my business at present
to enquire into, but that it has any good effect either in promoting, or
especially in curing the present Epidemic Fever, I think is far from being
demonstrable.

Our Jayl, Bridewell and Workhouse Fevers, of late so mortal, have not only
the peculiar constitution of air already described for their cause, but to that
we may add confinement, want of exercise, numbers and nastiness, and a want of
proper and sufficient nourishment and support through the excessive dearth and
scarcity of provisions, all which have a prodigious tendency of sinking the
solids beneath their natural standard, of producing a depauperated, viscid,
stagnating and corrupted state of the blood and juices of the body.

If a great Man's definition of a Fever would in all cases hold good, viz.
aucta circulatio sanguinis, perhaps acids and vinegar might be of some service;
but in the present Epidemic Fever is most commonly found, a depressed pulse,
occasioned, as I imagine, by too great a quantity of fluids in proportion to
the strength and elasticity of the solids, from whence obstructions arise, and
from whence may be deduced and accounted for that variety of threatening and
oftentimes fatal symptoms we meet with in this disease; and though no Epidemic
does or ever did appear exactly in the same shape (very far from it) on account
of different constitutions, different formation of parts, men's different
passions and different ways of living, etc. yet the same constitution of the
air, the same properties of the air they in common breathe in, and the same
properties of the food they in common feed on, will produce in some measure the
same sort of disease, though differing in some, perhaps in several circumstances,
and this is what we call Epidemic, from (...) among the people.

I shall not undertake to give a very particular account, and enumerate all the
several symptoms attending this Fever, since they appear different in different
constitutions, ages, sexes, etc. give me leave to point out a few, and which
seem to be the principal ones. Most commonly we find a low depressed pulse from
a plenitude of fluids and want of proper force in the solids. No very great
thirst, or very foul tongue, an heavy pain of the head, an oppression on the
breast, the Urine pretty high colored, though sometimes pale and without a
sediment. No very great complaint of heat, a faintness, prostration of
strength, sweats, which give very little relief, because not critical, a
Diarrhoea, or a Delirium, I say, or a Delirium, because if a Diarrhoea comes on
toward the beginning of the Fever, it prevents most commonly a Delirium.

These are the principal circumstances which I have observed attending this
Fever; and though a variety of appellations have been given to it, but chiefly
that of a malignant pestilential, which I apprehend those who give it that
name, have scarce any fixed and determinate meaning and Ideas of; yet the
principal thing to be regarded is, what the disease itself is, and how it is to
be treated; and since we have laid it down as a great and prime Cause of this
Fever, viz. the immoderate heats of the summer setting in after an unseasonable
winter, and very cold spring, so affecting the solids of our bodies, whereby
they were sunk beneath their natural Standard, by which means there became an
accumulation or too great a load of humors; hence the obstructions,
viscosities, stagnations, putrefactions, and the direful train of symptoms
observable in the present reigning disease we need not I think have recourse to
(though that cannot be demonstrably disproved) a particular deleterious quality in
the Air to account for them, since we know very little or nothing about this
deleterious quality, or can find out any thing specific or alexiterial to
oppose and counteract it.

The method of cure then must in a great measure depend upon Evacuations of
some kind or other, to remove the accumulation and load which oppress and
overbalance the solids, to bring down and diminish the quantity of fluids that
they may bear a proportion to the relaxed and sunk state of the solids; and
then by proper gently stimulating and attenuating medicines to raise the force
and elasticity of the fibers to such a pitch as shall be sufficient to remove
the remaining obstructions, temper the viscidity, put in action the stagnating
and putrid Mass, and dispose the humors for their several excretions, and
prevent the like state arising.

It frequently happens in this Fever that nature sets up a method of cure
herself; so we should take care how we counteract her, for instance, if we find
a Diarrhoea coming on in the beginning, which we very often find, the Patient
will need scarce any other evacuation, bleeding will be then unnecessary, and
'twould be preposterous to endeavor by astringents to put a stop to it, it is
an effort of nature to relieve herself, the blood throws off its enemy in
plentiful streams through the intestinal glands; and it has been observed, that
when it has been stopped by a too officious hand administering astringents, or by
any other accident, fatal have been the consequences; the patient has fallen
into a Delirium thereupon, or into some other circumstances by which he has
been carried off.

During this struggle, this plentiful discharge, it is needless to remark, that
Nature must be supported from time to time with some generous cardiacs.

Since this is a method that nature frequently takes to relieve herself, we may
without absurdity ask, why the Physician neglects this Method; and though
purging in Fevers has been looked upon by some as preposterous, and going
against the rules both of nature and of art, as raising too great a commotion
where there was but too great a struggle before, yet I think that affair is not
carried so far now as it has been formerly, and that in most kinds of Fevers
some or other of them we see it necessary to use this evacuation, but nature in
this, as in all other cases, must be attended to, her motions narrowly watched,
and carefully observed, that the Physician who is her servant, does not look
one way whilst she points out another.

Bleeding is another method Nature takes to relieve herself, as we frequently
find by the plentiful Haemorages at the nose in this disease. Opening a vein in
that case is advisable, because relief will be the sooner obtained, and in most
of the cases in this fever we find a necessity of this discharge, to take off
the Plethora, and bring the blood to an Equilibrium with the Fibers: But it is
not the least part of the skill of the Physician to determine upon the quantity
of blood which is to be taken off; and here I apprehend are many mistakes made,
here is the rock which many Pretenders to the art medical split upon, and
shipwreck the poor patient, though they themselves, the more is the pity,
escape; here if they draw blood with an undistinguishing hand, not discerning
what proportion the strength of the Fiber bears to the quantity of fluid in the
vessels, irretrievable mistakes are committed; and here I cannot but observe
how many ignorant conceited Coxcombs ride out under a show of business with
their lancet in their pocket, and make diseases instead of curing them, drawing
their weapon upon every occasion, right or wrong, and upon every complaint ery
out, E-gad I must have some of your blood, give the poor wretches a disease
they never might have had, draining the body and the purse, torment them in
this world, and send them perhaps to another before their time, to keep
themselves the longer from that day of reckoning where they must account for
the quantity of innocent blood they have shed in this World.

The Evacuation by vomiting is often a very necessary one, especially where a
Nausea or an inclination to vomit appears, but it is not to be ventured upon at
all hazards, or with all sorts of Patients, many circumstances may forbid its
use, and plainly contraindicate it, or it may be necessary previously to lessen
the quantity by bleeding, after which by the action of vomiting the stomach is
not only discharged of its disagreeable load, but by the universal shock it
gives to the solids, it raises their action, attenuates the fluids, drives
through obstructions, and sits and prepares the humors in general for their
several secretions.

Another Evacuation in the disease under consideration is blistering, and which
is frequently of very great use, not so much on account of the discharge, as
its property of stimulating and adding to the force of the fibers, its
tempering the viscidities, and separating the preternatural cohaesions; it
makes a revulsion of the humors from a particular part, viz. from the brain,
by which a Delirium or perhaps a Phrenzy, not uncommon in this Fever, is either
prevented or taken off. But pointing out geral rules for the use of blisters
will not do for particular cases, nor is it safe upon all occasions to lay on
blisters before Evacuations of other kinds have prepared the humors in some
measure and paved the way to them; and I believe it has often been a case,
whereby an unskilful management of blisters instead of relieving the brain, by
the great stimulation upon the solids, the blood and humors have been thrown
in upon its tender vessels with such a force, as they have not been able to
bear, especially if the blisters have been accompanied as they often, I may
say, almost always are, with other violently warm stimulating medicines.

The Evacuation by sweating, I mean that artificially made, demands our
consideration in the next place, its being attempted at all adventures, and
without good reason is often of the worst consequence to the Patient.

If the present Epidemic Fever has for its Cause an accumulation of fluids in
too great proportion to the lessened elastic force of the solids, and those
become an heavy sizey putrid and inactive mass, and peculiarly viscid through
the great exhalations of their siner and more fluid parts by the extreme heats
of the season, who is there but sees how preposterous it is to be flinging in
violently hot sudorifics, in this present state of the fluids thus unprepared
for them? Hence Petechiae, spots and eruptions of several kinds, if not before
by nature made, are now by this method propell'd and distributed to the surface
from a stagnating putrid mass; hence the Deliria we frequently meet with among
these Patients. But that such medicines as these may not with safety be made
use of in some time or other of the distemper cannot be asserted, but it must
be at a time that the fluids are properly prepared and fitted for this
particular excretion.

So much for general visible Evacuations. It may be expected perhaps I should
give a detail of the materials or medicines which are to be made use of in the
foregoing described cases, but that was not in my intention, as thinking the
giving Recipe's and strings of medicines can be of no use to the real
Physician, so it might be of ill consequence, and made an ill use of by the
Pretender; I apprehend I have given such hints, and made such observations
through the course of these Papers, as to lay down a foundation for a rational
method of cure in the present Epidemic Fever. I must observe, as I hinted
before, in the affair of bleeding, that a disease is often brought on a patient
by an officious ill judging, ill-timing hand, rather than any present one
removed, in like manner it falls out, that by the administration of many
medicines improperly and unskilfully applied, the disease is made a new one,
and quite changed from what it was at first; and we need not wonder at the ill
success that is observed from the variety and great quantities of Alexipharmacs
(as they are termed) poured down the throat in an undistinguishing manner,
perhaps more for the sake of the Apothecary than the Patient, I say we need not
be surpised to see the Patient yield to the burden, and fall a victim to the
disease of Medicine.

Since we have pointed out a method of cure, and of relieving the Patient in
this Epidemic Fever, it will not be displeasing I imagine, to recommend a
method of prevention; and as we have proved, that health in a great measure
depends upon a due balance, and just proportion between the solids and fluids
of our bodies, that is, between the force or strength of the former, and the
quantity or quality of the latter, so it is our highest concern, and ought to be
our principal Care, to endeavor as near as we can to keep to this standard.
Since the immoderate heats of the present season, as we have reason to think,
have so constituted the air, whereby it has a tendency of taking off that
Equilibrium we have been describing, and which is absolutely necessary for
health, by sinking the solids, and increasing the quantity of fluids, so it
seems to be highly necessary, we should lessen this quantity, and raise that
force. And in these circumstances there seems to be no safer or speedier method
of prevention than previously to empty the vessels by losing some blood, and
then to use the cold bath, which has unspeakably good effects, in giving force
to the fibers, whereby the blood is enabled to drive through all obstructions,
to scour the Glands, to attenuate the viscidities, and prevent a stagnating
putrid state, the cause, nay the very essence of the disease itself.

Gentle exercise, such as riding on horseback, or in a Coach, or walking at
proper seasons, not to sweat much, a temperate way of living, though not too low,
but indulging now and then in a glass of some generous liquor, all contribute
to keep up an Equilibrium, and prevent the reigning distemper. In a word, a due
and regular use and application of the non-naturals is the most likely means to
preserve health, such as calming the Passions and Affections of the mind,
proportioning our exercise and use of the Air to our strength, and the Food we
take in, not watching over much, but taking our usual moderate hours of sleep,
and above all, taking care the natural Evacuations of every kind be not
immoderate and to excess.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.

FINIS.

