THE FATE OF SPARTA; OR, THE RIVAL KINGS. A TRAGEDY. AS IT IS ACTED AT THE
THEATER ROYAL, IN DRURY LANE. BY MRS. COWLEY.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON, PATERNOSTER ROW. MDCCLXXXVIII.
[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

TO JOHN COWLEY, ESQUIRE.
WHEN letters were in their insancy, and when knowledge and the arts were
groping their way through seemingly impervious mists, some splendid name was
necessary to give an author celebrity -- hence the custom of DEDICATIONS; hence
those f^oods of adulation, which poured from the press, and outraged the
feelings of the addresser and the addressed.

But now, when poets and writers of every denomination, accept patronage only
from the public, and when fame is to be obtained only by deserving it, the
custom of dedicating can be continued, only, as a medium through which to
convey personal respect. It is delightful to make an offering to those we love,
when that offering has had a value stamped on it, by the voice of the world.
Thus THE FATE OF SPARTA wreathed with laurel^, seeks you in the recesses of a
counting house; and whilst you are engaged in supporting our ^^tional
manufactures, and invoking commerce from her di^^ant abodes, solicits your
attention to the MUSES.

When I hinted an intention to address this Tragedy to you, you shrunk from the
idea, and desired me to choose a worthier name. My dearest Brother, where shall
I turn to find it? THIS shall not be an address of adulation, therefore I shall
only observe, that those to whom you are known, will acknowledge that I am
justified in the choice I have made of a patron; and those who know you not,
will do my pride the credit to believe I should not have selected for that
patron, a man whose name and whose situation did not reflect honor on me.

There is yet another motive for using my poetic wand to call your shade before
posterity. As your regard has been one of the chief blessings of my life, I
wish those who succeed us to know how much I hold myself indebted to it: I wish
my own children and yours to feel the sweet inf^uence of our mutual friendship;
and as they will carry in their veins the same blood, to cherish in their
hearts the same attachment. DEAR Children! who will wander again and again over
this page, after the hand which traces it moves no more, after the heart to
which it is addressed, has ceased to beat!

I was going to conclude with this pensive idea, but I recollect that I have
not yet mentioned in d^dicatory form, the work dedicated. The following Tragedy
then, Sir, is in its fable and events, all invention -- except in the conduct
of Chelonice, and the scene in the Temple; -- and with the circumstance on
which that is founded, I have taken some liberties. Other deviations from
history will strike you, but if I have altered circumstances, I have (...) by
CHARACTER. Leonidas at Drury Lane, as in Sparta, is artful, tyrannic^^, and
doats on his ^aughter. The impetuous and crafty Amphares, who had destroyed
Agis, continues his system. Cleombrotus, ambitious and tolerably obstinate, is
yet sensible to the merits of his wife. He, though my hero, is not "a faultless
monster;" -- if the lady should be too perfect, I appeal to the grave authority
of Plutarch, who I believe is not suspected of writing fictions to compliment
women.

Struck with admiration at the slight yet powerful touches, with which that
biographist had sketched the character of CHELONIS In his Life of Agis.
, I wondered such a character had never been brought on the Stage, to do honor
to her sex; -- yet I had joy in reflecting, that this was precisely the age in
which it ought to be done, for this age boasted a Mrs. SIDDONS.

How much the FATE OF SPARTA has been indebted to that lady, and to some of the
other performers, the public prints bear testimony -- and I gratefully record
it: because it is a circumstance highly flattering to myself, and because I
wish the present I thus offer you, to be surrounded with every appendage that
can make you feel it inestimable.

With the best wishes and affection, I have the honor to be, Your devoted
humble servant, H. COWLEY.

PROLOGUE;
WRITTEN BY MRS. COWLEY.
SPOKEN BY MR. WROUGHTON. TO ask your favor, we are by custom bound --
Thus Prologue bows before you to the ground.
But interchange of favors, we are told,
Is a choice method to make friendship hold.
My gift is this; -- those chilly wintry nights,
Whilst the frost glitters, and the north wind bites,
I Will waft you to the gentlest summer skies,
Where rose-buds swell, and the soft zephyr flies;
Where the bright sun, with scarce diminished ray,
November's month bids charm like florid May;
Where, beneath myrtle shades the lover dies,
Whilst gales, with fragrance fraught, perfume his sighs --
To GREECE I welcome ye from Drury Lane,
Where taste, and arts first reared the immortal fane.
You Have heard of Spartan boys, who let young foxes
Feed on their blood, placid as beaus in boxes
Sans shriek, or groan. You Have heard of sable broth
More prized than rich ieed creams, and luscious froth;
With many other monstious -- noble things,
At which more naughty times have had their ^^ings.
But long posterior to that virtuous day,
The events were born on which we found our play.
Sparta conceived a whim to be polite,
Black broth, and bosomed foxes took their flight;
Then luxury her floodgates opened wide,
And fashion onward rolled its heady tide;
Plain dress and frugal meals soon dropped their yokes,
And GODLIKE SPARTANS -- lived like other folks;
Turned fiddlers, brokers, merchants, gamed and betted,
This boasting what he won -- this what he netted.
Ladies their Op'ra -- Boxers had their stage,
And Spartan Humphries' soon became the rage;
Their placemen sinecures could never refuse,
And zeal-infected Lords, at times turned Jews.
Their Doctors sage then hit upon a plan,
To mend the weak degenerate creature Man.
They bad two monarchs wear the splendid crown,
Castor and Pollux like -- this up -- that down? [In another voice
Oh no, they both at once must mount the throne,
And subject slaves, in double slavery groan.
'Twas wise, no doubt -- yet this too passed away,
But first burst forth the deeds which fill our play.
The groundwork true -- a little fancy grant,
Where FACT had in its bounties been but scant.
Poets will fib, all nations have allowed it;
And ours with blushing terror has avowed it.
Oh pardon where you can, and if YOU please,
This anxious hour precedes a night of ease.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Leonidas (King of Sparta) Mr. BENSLEY. Cleombrotus (the deposed King) Mr.
KEMBLE. Amphares, Mr. BARRYMORE. Nicrates, Mr. WHITFIELD. Mezentius, Mr.
WILLIAMS. Corex, Mr. STAUNTON. Sarpedon, Mr. PHILLIMORE. Attalus, Mr. BENSON.
High Priest, Mr. CHAPLIN. Priest, Mr. WILSON. Officer, Mr. BATES. Chelonice,
This name, on the stage, is pronounced as four syllables. It was thought
necessary to observe this, as the measure hardly any where fixes it.
Mrs. SIDDONS.


THE FATE OF SPARTA; OR, THE RIVAL KINGS. A TRAGEDY.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A Forest. In the back ground a Camp, before the Walls of Sparta, Enter
MEZENTIUS and COREX. COREX. THE conflict of the elements is past,
The tempest which so lately seemed to shake
The crystal walls of heaven, is appeased,
And agitated nature sinks to rest.

MEZENTIUS. Rather she bids the elements be still
That other conflicts may unfold their rage.
Her war is past; -- and now the war of men,
The rush of armies, and the shouts of death,
Will shake this azure vault; where rolling thunders
Hurrying but now, the crooked lightnings on,
Hailed with grand horrors the devoted night.

COREX. No wonder that Olympus should take part,
When EMPIRES vibrate in the scales of fate.
Not more illustrious was the hour, in which
Enthroned Gods hung over the fate of Troy,
And granted to celestial Juno's hate,
A people's ruin.

MEZENTIUS. The avengeful Gods
Look so on Sparta, and its hoary tyrant!
But where is Cleombrotus? The trumpets sound,
Yet sound to arms in vain! Is this the leader
Who from the fields of Thrace and proud Iberia,
Brought us to reap the richer spoils of Sparta?
Where is the courage which should lead us on,
And rouse the tardy valor of his soldiers?

COREX. Suspect his courage! Oh his daring mind
Spurns at all dangers, and his well-earn'd fame
Repels each hovering doubt. -- Pierce thou the wood
Where yonder cypress hides the dazzling moon; --
I Will this way bend my steps to seek the prince,
For it is within these glades he shuns the camp,
And to reflection gives his hours of glory.
(going). [Trumpets sound. He hears Bellona's voice; its powerful charm
Will break the spells of gloomy solitude,
And give us back the warrior and the hero!

[Exeunt opposite sides. Enter CLEOMBROTUS. CLEOMBROTUS. Resistless sounds! ye
chase my lethargy,
And rouse the soldier in my languid heart --
I Will yield -- I Will yield it to the glorious impulse!
O moon! whose silver beams shed their pale splendour
On those proud spires, adorning them for sacrifice --
Shine on! Ride cloudless through the etherial plains,
That when gigantic war strides over yon battlements,
And prints in every street its sanguine steps,
Guided by thee, his iron arm may spare
All, who invoke its mercy! Thy chaste light
Shall lead the matron, and the trembling maid
Inviolate to safety. -- Me it guides
To Chelonice; the fell tyrant's daughter,
Yet my loved wife. -- Dian! avert from her,
And from my beauteous boy, each hovering ill,
That to this melting heart I yet may press them,
And charm their terrors with the voice of love!

Enter MEZENTIUS. MEZENTIUS. At length then, prince! I Have traced thy wandering
steps.
The impatient soldiers seek thee through the camp;
Even the hired mercenaries, now, boast ardors;
And thou, whose all depends on this grand moment,
Retir'st to shades, wrapped cooly in reflection.

CLEOMBROTUS. Not cool, Mezentius, though alone, and thoughtful --
For oh! my throbbing breast is torn with feeling.
The mercenary's heart expands with joy
For the rude hour of plunder; mine, my soldier
Contracts with fear, lest that wished hour should grasp
In undistinguished ruin, her I love,
With him, who though her father, I must hate.

MEZENTIUS. These are a lover's fears.
[Contemptuously.
CLEOMBROTUS. They are a husband's!
When I consider -- in the rage of battle
What various ruins stalk beneath its banners,
Not to be agoniz'd, is not to feel.
The engines which must level yonder towers
May, as they play, form Chelonice's grave!

MEZENTIUS. She has forsaken thee. -- This wife so loved,
Has left thy bosom for a tyrant father's,
Who seeks thy life, and robs thee of thy crown --
And if I woman know --

CLEOMBROTUS. Thou know not her!
Here Is is no common heart. -- Melting with love,
Alive to nature's softest impulses,
Tenderest of all the tender faithful sex,
Yet where her duty bids, she has a mind
Firm and unbending, as the laws of truth.

MEZENTIUS. Erring report, has spoke of her with honor.

CLEOMBROTUS. With highest honor it shall speak yet err not.
When the Ephori bestowed on me the crown,
Making me colleague with her faithless sire,
Thou'st heard how soon his lust of power impelled him
To seek my ruin, and to reign alone.

MEZENTIUS. His faction sunk, and you became triumphant!

CLEOMBROTUS. 'Twas then Leonidas, wrapped in despair,
Fled to Minerva's altar. -- Chelonice
Followed him there, leaving a splendid throne
And all the joys that wait on royalty,
To weep, and watch upon the dewy pavement,
Where stretched, she found an abdicated father.

MEZENTIUS. Let Sparta's daughters then be named with reverence,
And proudly boast amongst the Grecian maids,
They breathe the air which nourished Chelonice!
Have you not since often wooed her to your arms?

CLEOMBROTUS. Oh yes, and there to fold her, would be transport!
But in her heart the filial principle
So strongly burns, that easier 'twere to woo
The murmuring ring-dove from her unfledged brood
Than her, from him, who gave the charmer life.
She thinks his safety, too, hangs on her presence --
Oh, can I blame the cruel, lovely duty,
Which thus, unwilling, holds her from my arms?

MEZENTIUS. Fortune! benignant look upon this night,
And a few hours shall see thee king, and husband!

CLEOMBROTUS. Dear! glorious titles! how my soul will grasp ye!

MEZENTIUS. The soldiers all in arms, await the signal.

CLEOMBROTUS. First, let the altar's blaze propitiate heaven.
Mars and Bellona, guide me in the battle!
Precede my chariot, nerve afresh my arm,
And give me ardors to command my fate!
The generous transport labors in my breast,
And conquest beams already on my helmet.
See! -- Victory bends from yonder starry seat,
And waves her flag triumphant to the town --
Goddess! I come!

[Exit drawing his sword. Scene changes to the Palace of Leonidas. Enter
AMPHARES and NICRATES, meeting. NICRATES. Oh my Amphares! what an hour for
Sparta!

AMPHARES. The hour indeed is busy, and important.
See how the streets are thronged! Each house pours forth
Its fearful inmates; whilst the eager hum
Of the enquiring multitude, that breaks
Like distant surges on the invaded ear,
Tears the repose, of balmy night's still sabbath.

NICRATES. How wide the event from the unblest design!
When Agis, the first colleague of our prince,
Lost by ambitious arts his crown and life,
The Ephori adjudg'd his vacant throne
To Chelonice's Lord; -- uniting thus
The father and the son, they hoped to bind
The fate of Sparta, in the wreathes of peace.

AMPHARES. Weak short-lived hope! for mutual jealousies
Soon sprung in either breast, which nursed by faction,
Grew strong, and shook the unwieldy fabric down.
Whence are the king and princess?

NICRATES. From the temple;
Where vows and tears, and immolated victims,
Yet strive to smooth the sullen brow of fate.

AMPHARES. Stern Fate demands far other immolations.
Cleombrotus leads armies fleshed and keen,
As morning hounds, when through the dew they course
The lightning footed stag! who can preserve ye?

NICRATES. The king himself! let him invest Cleombrotus
With the disputed scepter; with the crown
Sparta adjudg'd him, and his fathers wore.
Surely your eye, Amphares, speaks a language
Too gayly placed for so sad a moment.

AMPHARES. Brother! my spirit was not made for peace.
The burnished raven loves not more the tempest
In which he sails up-borne by warring winds,
Than I, the tempest of contending states:
It Is in such storms superior natures rise,
And find a station, niggard Fate denied them.

NICRATES. Kindred, yet uncongenial, are our souls!
Had thou possessed a mind less turbulent,
Cleombrotus upon a steady throne
Had now been fixed; and Lacedemon's hopes
Nourished, and blooming, in the lap of peace.

AMPHARES. Never; for spite of old Lycurgus' law,
Which doomed us to be ruled by double tyranny,
A biarchy beyond each mode of slavery,
Mad power ever framed to gall a nation's neck,
Is that which least admits of peace, or rule.
'Twas therefore I dethroned Cleombrotus;
But with such secret and coercive skill,
That he believes me yet his friend.

NICRATES. Leonidas
And he together reigned, together swayed
The Spartan scepter; nor did hell-born discord
Disturb, through six autumnal suns, their peace.
Ten months Leonidas has reigned alone,
And all is anarchy, distress and war.

AMPHARES. And all shall so remain, 'till I have worked
Through all these tempests, for myself, a day
Glowing with brightness, and unceasing luster. --
I would unfold my heart yet more, but see!
The king and beauteous Chelonice come.

Enter LEONIDAS and CHELONICE, with Guards and Attendants. LEONIDAS. Let all
the troops be gathered on the ramparts --
The troops!
Let every man whose arm can wield a sabre,
Let beardless boys and indolent old age,
Rouse at the call! -- Those leave their darling sports,
And these forget their aches; -- let all unite
To crush the hopes and arms, of proud Cleombrotus.

CHELONICE. Oh! --

LEONIDAS. Why sigh'st thou, Chelonice? -- Can thy heart,
Say, dares it feel one evanescent pang,
That a rebellious foe shall be opposed,
And perish?

CHELONICE. That foe is Chelonice's husband.

LEONIDAS. Grant that he is; is not his foe, thy father?
Oh speak! would have me be his slave or conqueror?
(pausing) Unduteous silence! which too strongly speaks.
Thou would behold me dragged beneath this dome;
My aged limbs embraced by iron shackles,
My time-blanch'd head dashed on the marble floor,
Because the perpetrator of those ills,
Is the loved husband, of my only child!
[sneeringly.
CHELONICE. That he is the husband of thy only child,
Heaven, and thyself does know. -- But when that child
Forgets amidst her griefs that you are her father;
When she forsakes thee in the hour of sorrow,
Or owns a duty to thy conqueror --
Then may the Gods be deaf to all her prayers,
And shame and infamy weigh down her name!

LEONIDAS. Then, daughter, banish from your brow these clouds
Which boldly censure, whom thy speech yet spares.
Enter ATTALUS. Hasty thy steps! -- thy news?

ATTALUS. One from the camp,
Seized and impelled by tortures, has confessed,
Cleombrotus, this night triumphant means
To fix his standards on thy palace gates.
His mercenary army mad for plunder,
And all the various rapines claimed by victors,
Urge on our fate. -- The miners now beneath us,
Form, for the quick, a wide capacious grave;
The batt'ring rams already rear their heads,
Threatening our walls, with sudden dissolution.

LEONIDAS. Why then let ruin come! -- it is my election.
Near twenty years I Have borne the Spartan scepter;
And shall I, at his bidding, fling it from me
Like a light toy, of which possession cloys me?
No, I Will reign still -- and still alone will reign,
Or give up life, and sovereignty together.

ATTALUS. Unhappy Sparta! then thy fate is fixed.
TO oppose is vain; let us stand aloof, and watch
The gathering cloud, which bursting will destroy us.

LEONIDAS. How slave! what, murmur at my will! Dispute
His word, whose breath annihilates thy race!
What are ye all, but creatures of my breath?
I doom ye life -- rejoice! I bid ye die --
Sink silent to your graves!
Now Chelonice,
Prepare thy mind for this night's great event!
For ere its circling minutes have been numbered,
Thou Wilt in thy father's blood walk to his throne,
Or see thy husband welt'ring at my feet.
Thy heart must make a choice. -- For one of us
Thy prayers must mount to heaven. -- Tell me not which,
Lest this old heart's last pangs be rendered stronger;
Lest thy fierce husband's sword within my breast
Should bite more keen -- knowing that there 'twas sped,
By a loved daughter's wishes!

[Exit, followed by all but Nicrates. NICRATES. (observing Chelonice.) Fixed
and mute,
She gives to grief, a force, beyond the storm
Of common female woes. -- Pardon me, Princess!
Oh break a silence, which too strongly speaks.
Flow, precious tears, and give her sorrows vent!

CHELONICE. Tears, Nicrates! do think such woes as mine,
Can melt in tears? -- Bid lighter sorrows weep!
Mine shall be cloistered in my sickening heart.

NICRATES. All-judging Heaven! What then are power and beauty?
What, all the virtues which adorn the mind,
Since all united, cannot ensure repose?

CHELONICE. My soul has fortitude, but oh, its griefs are keen!
How shall I shape its wishes? how my heart
Compel to prayer? when every hope it scrms --
Such is my horrid fate! must be a crime
Either against my father, or my lord.

NICRATES. Oh! that I Would words --

CHELONICE. This is a night of deeds.
Such deeds! -- And cannot I -- oh cannot I,
Whom most those deeds concern, by one bold act
Turn from my fated race, the ills which threaten?
Hear me, Olympus! -- Regal Juno, hear!
Inspire your suppliant -- send a ray of light,
To guide me, in the darkness which surrounds me!

NICRATES. The last sad ray, thy father has extinguished.
Since you cannot move his purpose, all is lost.
Even whilst we speak, destruction hastens on;
This very hour, your husband leaves the camp. --

CHELONICE. (eagerly.) Enough! thou'st said it -- Heaven speaks through thee.
My husband, and the camp! -- yes, to the camp
I Will bend my lonely and adventurous steps;
There, to his heart I Will plead my father's cause,
Wrest from his strong resentments all I ask,
And bring back strength to Sparta's tottering walls.

NICRATES. Oh Princess! it is the sudden thought of frenzy.
The camp! -- think on the dangers --

CHELONICE. Oh! what are dangers, when such duties call?
The spirit of my ancestors is on me;
A sacred fervor seizes on my soul,
A fire unknown, glows in my trembling veins,
And chases from my heart, each female weakness.

NICRATES. Heroism!
How false to say, you are only made for man!

CHELONICE. My father, and my country! Oh for these,
Fearless, I Would lead an army to a breach,
Scale hostile walls, and leap like him of Macedon
Amidst the foe; and whilst the whizzing deaths
Sighed round my head,
Scorn their mock terrors, and their painless wounds.

NICRATES. Prudence avaunt! -- Strong ardors in a cause
Righteous as this, seem the still voice of fate,
That thus in secret whispers, urges on
To perfect its decrees.

CHELONICE. -- Yet I Will not slight
The sage precautions prudence would suggest.
These royal weeds ill suit a wanderer's speed; --
The habit of a priestess thall conceal me.
Hallowed, beneath that sacred robe I pass,
Nor friend, nor foe, presume to know my errand; --
That errand sanctify, all ye, who rule
The actions of mankind! However designed,
However begun our deeds, yours is the end.
We mark the goal, and blind begin our race,
In paths diverging from the happy place;
It Is ye who guide us in the way unknown,
The motive ours, the events are all your own!

END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II. SCENE I.
The Tent of Cleombrotus. Cleombrotus surrounded by Generals, etc. CLEOMBROTUS.
(rising.) To the north bastion, Perdicas, lead you
The Iberian troops; and Menecrates, you,
Support the Thracians at the eastern gate.
I will myself lead on my loyal Spartans;
Then if I fall, I fall 'midst those, whose rights
I should too cheaply purchase with my life; --
If I am conqueror, with them to conquer,
Will add to victory a sweeter sense,
And make my laurels dearer than my crown.

COREX. Live, prince! -- live ever on the throne of Sparta!

CLEOMBROTUS. He only lives a prince, who lives a patriot;
And he who loves not those, he is raised to govern,
Is not their monarch, but their scourge.

MEZENTIUS. The night wears on, and thy devoted army
Demand to place thee, ere its noon be past,
Upon that seat, thou know so well to fill.

CLEOMBROTUS. Instant I Will join, and lead them to the battle.
Their force superior, and their honest cause
Must doubly act upon our fear-struck foes,
And bid them spare the horrors of a carnage.
Enter Officer. Thy face has tidings!

Officer. From the town a priestess,
With hasty steps, and accents that breathe music
Sweet, and resistless as the golden lyre
Of beamy-hair'd Apollo, seeks thy tent
Royal Cleombrotus!

CLEOMBROTUS. A priestess! say thou?
Surely of magnitude must be the errand
Which asks a messenger so pure, and holy.
Retire, my friends; it is due to rank like here is.
In a few moments he who bids you go,
Shall bid ye follow!
Nor will he stop, 'till his glad voice shall hail you
Victors, in Sparta. (they go). Now attend the virgin.
(The officer goes out and reenters with CHELONICE.) Thus, holy maid! lowly
and wondering,
I greet your presence. -- Oh what great behest,
Can have impelled thee from thy hallowed couch,
To seek amidst the hurry of a camp
A care-worn soldier?

CHELONICE. Couch, Cleombrotus?
Do thou then think within the mournful walls
These feet have left, that one unfeeling wretch
Can seek a couch, or meditate repose?
Thou have our sleep. -- Our balmly rest lies tenter'd,
On the sharp points thou'st levelled at our hearts.
Restore our rest! bid the soft God of sleep
Again revisit our long watchful lids!
It is for this I seek thee in thy camp;
For this that humbly in the dust I bend,
Asking thy pity, for our wretched Sparta.

CLEOMBROTUS. But that I dare not touch thy sacred form,
Thou should not humbly bend. -- Oh, Priestess, rise!
[She rises. If this thy errand to our martial plain,
'T were well the fire that burns within your temple,
Yet felt your feeding hand. -- Your altars, virgin!
They are the places for your prayers to rise from;
There, mixed with incense, they might reach Olympus,
But here, alas! they fall on sterile earth --
Or must return, unanswered, to your bosom.

CHELONICE. Oh, is it possible! Can thou who own'st
A soldier's generous feelings, think a moment
On the dread horrors of this waning night,
And yet resolve to pull those horrors on us?

CLEOMBROTUS. Bid your own sovereign save ye! Oh, Leonidas,
How wretched is this art! Yield me my crown!
And not descend to seek the aid of women
To deprecate the vengeance thou provok'st!

CHELONICE. Oh, by the flame that burns to chaste Minerva,
Leonidas stoops not to supplicate;
Knows not the step that I unprompted take!
Well do thou know his haughty, princely soul,
That lighter holds the heavy ills you are charged with,
Than to submit and invocate thy pity.

CLEOMBROTUS. It Is well; his firmness shall be firmly met.
Return then, priestess! let your king prepare
His roughest welcome for unbidden guests.
His roughest welcome we have sworn to merit;
And not a heart within this banner'd field,
But will sustain the arm his oath has bound.

CHELONICE. Oh! for a voice to perjure them --
'Twere a celestial crime! Cleombrotus,
Is there not one voice -- Stubborn! ask thy heart,
Is there not one could move thee? Chelonice!

CLEOMBROTUS. Oh, name her not; her image ruins me!
Her form, her supplicating look -- resist her!
Oh, she could drag me from the arms of glory,
And bid me stop, with victory on my sword.

CHELONICE. Blessed be that form! -- it is henceforth immortal --
It saves my country! -- Now -- now then, Cleombrotus
[Unveiling. See her before thee! See her at thy feet!

CLEOMBROTUS. Oh, Gods! Why's this? Shall I upbraid, or bless ye?
[gazing on her. Oh bless ye ever -- it is my Chelonice!
[Raising her. Now rage -- rage on ye furies of the War!
Bear your bold thunders to the tyrant's gates --
My treasure's safe! I hold her to my heart!
Fearless begin the attack; for Chelonice
Breathes not within his walls; -- it is my arms
Which press and guard her.
[Voices without. General! Cleombrotus!

CLEOMBROTUS. Hear the impatient soldiery! Lead on!
I Will follow with an arrow's swiftness. -- Spare!
Spare me one moment. -- Mars! it is thus thou hang'st
(clasping her) Upon the breath of Venus; thus anticipat'st
The dear reward of Victory; then dart'st
Amidst thy foes, and, by her touch inspired,
Hurl'st thy bright vengeance over the insanguin'd field!

CHELONICE. Do thou deceive me? this the power of Chelonice?
[Goes to the wing. Stay your rash speed! your prince commands ye -- Stop!
Stir not 'till he shall lead ye to your spoil!
Yes; lead them to their spoil, thou mighty General!
Guide your keen hunters where the timorous deer
In their enclosures herded, wait their fate; --
The conquest will be worthy them and thee!

CLEOMBROTUS. Oh, my beloved, be worthy of thyself,
And of the fate with which the moment teems!
I wrest this night my crown from usurpation,
To place it on thy brow --

CHELONICE. To decorate my bier!
Never shall the crown, torn from Leonidas,
Circle his child. -- But go! lead on your army.
Here will I patient wait your cries of victory --
The signal of my death!

CLEOMBROTUS (as to himself). Oh, woman!

CHELONICE. It Is not a woman's, but a SPARTAN's threat.
The hour in which thou vanquishest Leonidas,
Prepare the pile, to flame around his daughter!

CLEOMBROTUS. Princess! thou do mistake thy duty. -- Spartan,
And daughter of Leonidas, are titles
Dearest to thee --

CHELONICE. Mistake my duty, said thou?
When at a husband's feet I ask a father's life,
Do I mistake my duty? -- If I do,
I Will ever so mistake, and boast my error!
Yes, 'till Leonidas sits throned in safety,
His daughter shall forget she is a wife; --
Tear from her heart each trace of long past fondness,
And own no ties, but those first awful ones
Stamped there by nature.

CLEOMBROTUS. Wife of Cleombrotus!
Thy honor and thy fame's derived from him;
Thy happiness from the same source should flow.
How dear those hours -- for sure such hours have been,
When thou disclaim'st all joys, but in my love.

CHELONICE. Had thou found bliss in love --

CLEOMBROTUS (smiling). I Would not sought bliss on thrones.
Thus, as a lady would you chide, and this
Let all the subject world receive as law.
Let them be taught that in the humble shade,
Far from the reach of proud ambition's eye,
Felicity has raised her grassy seat,
And wantons there with love.
But, madam, I was born to reign!
And he so born, feels fires that vulgar souls
Could not endure. -- Felicity to us,
Is not a nymph in humble russet clad,
Sipping the dew-drops from the silver thorn,
Or weaving flowers upon a streamlet's brink --
Oh, no! she is SCEPTERED, and her gifts are CROWNS!

CHELONICE. I have a soul, to taste her gifts, like thine.
I have a mind that grasps sublimer cares
Than cottage nymphs can know; I would be great
And bear the cares of thousands. -- But ambition,
And every lofty sentiment it gives,
Sinks to the earth, when weighed against his life
From whom I drew my own.

CLEOMBROTUS. Were I disposed
To grant thee all, and sink again to nothing,
Yet am I bound to lead my forces on.
It is not glory, nor the hope of same
The mercenary feels -- his God is plunder.
Should I protract their promised hour of harvest,
Disgust and mutiny would fill their ranks --
I cannot, dare not, yield to thee.

CHELONICE. Farewell!
I Will be the herald of thy near approach.
The child shall bid the father bare his bosom
To her lord's sword; -- shall bid the citizens
Throw wide their portals to admit the conqueror.
Then, whilst my Spartans bow their necks beneath thee,
And from a parricide receive their chains,
Then shall the last sad sighs of Chelonice,
Mixed with the shouts of victory, proclaim
Her murderous husband, Lacedemon's king!
[going.
CLEOMBROTUS. The last sad sighs of Chelonice -- Oh!
[following, and leading her back. Sweet, cruel tyrant, who is victor now?
Nature! in mockery thou stil'st us LORDS,
And bidst us govern, in this turbid world.
The historic page, recording all the acts
That stand the loftiest in an empire's annals,
Reports but WOMAN's will!

CHELONICE. Then thou do yield!
How my soul thanks thee, peaceful hours shall tell.
Now, on joy's swiftest pinions let me bear
The grateful tidings to the gates of Sparta.
Oh filial duties, be ye ever crowned
With joy as pure, as blesses Chelonice!

[Exit, led by Cleombrotus. Enter MEZENTIUS and COREX. MEZENTIUS. The
conf'rence thou have heard. -- Where now the hopes,
The high raised hopes, we brought with us from Thrace?

COREX. They must exist no more. -- She who could win him,
To spare her Lacedemon but an hour,
Now when the impatient soldiery pant for conquest,
And every breast glows with portentous ardor,
Next, may like Omphale transform her Hercules
To story in the loom his bloodless siege.

MEZENTIUS. But Thrace boasts warriors of more stubborn nerves;
They neither know to yield to woman's threats,
Or man's defiance. The laconic prince
Enticed us from our native fields, to curb
Those rebel citizens, who yet disown
His rights in Lacedemon; our reward
Their herds, their jewels, and their treasured wealth;
Must we forego the riches he affianc'd,
Because his Chelonice begs forbearance?

COREX. No --
The wages of our labor are at hand;
Our troops obedient; why then not assault
The city we came hither to reduce,
And gather for ourselves the promised blessings?

MEZENTIUS. Our country's genius, Corex, speaks in thee!
Astrea, throw thy useless balance by,
Thy sword is all we ask; -- he who bears that,
Can right himself, and punish his deceivers.

COREX. Let caution guard her sword! Cleombrotus,
Supported by the Iberians, may prevent
The glorious perfidy we meditate.
Revolt seems ripe. -- See how resentment burns
[Looking through the wing. Amongst the troops, whilst he unfolds his will
To spare Leonidas for this one night,
The pain to be unking'd.
[Contemptuously.
MEZENTIUS. Let us assist,
Fanning with secret breath the struggling flame;
And then this woman's soldier shall be taught,
Those grand events which mark the fate of empires,
And stand, protruded, to instruct the world,
Are not the coin of female artifice,
But struck by genius, from a bolder dye!

[Exeunt. Scene changes to the Palace. Enter LEONIDAS and AMPHARES. LEONIDAS.
Forsaken by my child! It should be so.
This is an hour of congregated woes,
And the barb'd point of that should not be wanting.
Does the enemy advance? -- Left by my daughter!
Left for a rebel husband! -- They are too tardy.
Destruction! slow of foot, to those who'd meet thee,
Quicken thy pace!

AMPHARES. Destruction hastens on.
The princess fled, and longing for thy crown,
Urges her husband to the unnatural conquest.

LEONIDAS. I do not curse -- mark me! I do not curse them.
Leonidas and cruelty are sounds
That in the mind of Greece combine, and live,
Like pestilence, and its funereal urns.
Am I now cruel? Those late turbid veins,
In which such raging fires have cours'd each other,
Have now no pulse for cruelty. Yet should I --
Oh, the thought rouses all my latent fury --
Should I, amidst the battle, meet those pelicans!
Gods! grant me such a moment, that my life
In that last closing act, may end more blessed,
Than crowns, and vengeance ever made its progress!

NICRATES. (without.) Where is the king?
(enters.)
LEONIDAS. Here Is he, who in an hour
Shall be the king no more.

NICRATES. Not so, Leonidas!
The enemy, whose late deserted camp
Poured all its eager troops upon the plain,
Are housed again beneath their tented roofs;
Their banners closed; their spears' bright gleams extinguished.

LEONIDAS. How is this known?

NICRATES. Cloudless, the full orb'd car
Of the nocturnal goddess, glides along,
Giving each object perfect and distinct;
The crowded ramparts blessed the favoring light,
Which showed their foes, retiring, and unarmed.

AMPHARES. This is some subterfuge. The subtle princess
And her ambitious lord, have framed the artifice,
To lull thee, valiant prince, in false security.

LEONIDAS. Well have thou spoken what thy King conceived;
But who shall speak the father's mad despair?
Oh, Isis! when thou threw'st the unfeeling flints,
And bade them rise to animated man,
They disobeyed thee; -- woman's was the form
In which they sprung to life; in which they yet
Cumber the earth -- our cherished bosomed plagues!

NICRATES. Oh, sir, forbear! the virtues of the princess --

LEONIDAS. Mention her not! henceforth to name the rebel
But with the curse of parricide, is fatal
To him who speaks. -- Fly to your several stations,
The cred'lous citizens have lost their fears,
But I Will restore and fix them in their hearts.
To live a sovereign but one added day,
Is worth the labor of an untir'd Hercules.

[Exit. NICRATES. Stay my prompt brother! you may snatch a moment
From duty so imposed. -- Yours is the storm,
Which rages in his heart, against his daughter.

AMPHARES. I know I raised the storm, and there will feed it.

NICRATES. Hah! to what end -- what purpose?

AMPHARES. I Will reveal it;
Not to that air of menace, which I scorn,
But to thy love fraternal, which insures me
Ready attention, and if needful, help.

NICRATES. One bosom fed us with it is lucid stream,
One father gave to us a dear existence,
And in my heart I prize each sacred bond.
Yet not those bonds; the father whom we loved,
Not the chaste mother at whose breast we clung,
Shall bribe me to forget superior duties,
Or aid thee in a cause disclaimed by virtue.

AMPHARES (sneeringly). Warm from the schools, and prompt in declamation!

NICRATES. Not so.
The plain simplicity of Spartan schools
Disclaims, and abrogates misleading eloquence.
You, bred in Athens, -- where the polished virtues
Luxuriantly repose; giving their documents
In marble palaces, and robes imbued
With every gaudy stain that paints their fields --
It Is you, who boast the unthrifty charms of rhetoric,
Which makes a shadow seem substantial good,
And clothes with glowing periods crippled morals.
-- Yet let me know why thou inflam'st the king,
Against the paragon of female excellence?

AMPHARES. A Paragon I thought her; and her birth
Which called her dower, a kingdom, fixed me here is.
Our line, a scion from that root, whence sprung
Leonidas; -- which justified my hopes.
In Athens 'twas I learned Cleombrotus
Was made her husband, and coequal king.
Had I been here, the Hymen of that day,
Had dipped his saffron robe, in sanguine dies.

NICRATES. But now --

AMPHARES. But now my hatred is in youthful vigor,
And I have sworn their ruin.

NICRATES. Sworn their ruin?

AMPHARES. Interrogative brother! yes -- their deaths!
Were they no more, then Lacedemon's free;
And who could stand 'twixt me and royalty,
But a weak boy? whose tender bud of life,
Fatality, or accident may nip.
What! do thou mutter spells, with eyes thus fixed?

NICRATES, (steadily). Nor spells, nor prayers, for surely they were lost!
Nor shall I reason on thy wicked hopes,
Nor bid thee dread the vengeance of the Gods;
For to a mind that such designs can cherish,
Reason, religion, urge their truths in vain!
Then fear not these, but fear my vigilance;
Go on! spread all thy toils, prepare thy snares,
And I will watch, observe, and counteract thee!

[Exit. AMPHARES. Oh insolent, and vain! oppose me not!
Counteract him, who struggles for a crown?
Him, who dares raise his hopes to Sparta's princess?
Thy gentle breath might hope as well, good brother,
To puff a mountain from its solid base,
As to move me from purposes so grand.
Thou talk of virtue -- I behold a THRONE!
Thou bidst me fear -- I think on CHELONICE!

END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III. SCENE I.
The Tribunal. Enter LEONIDAS, AMPHARES, SARPEDON, ATTALUS, and others.
LEONIDAS. YES, the bright sun beholds me yet a king --
Cleombrotus is yet without our walls!
For this let every altar blaze with sacrifice,
And hallowed victims pour the sanguine stream.

AMPHARES. In vain shall hallowed victims pour their life,
And blood of hecatombs bedew our altars,
Whilst treason, deep veiled, spreads out her silent snares.

LEONIDAS. Her veil shall be removed, her snares develop'd.
Here, in this awful seat, where great Lycurgus
Wooed justice from her high Olympian court
And bade her rule, unsway'd by human ties --
Here shall Leonidas his glory emulate
And rise above the pleaded bonds of nature.
Say! did thou find the princess bathed in sorrows?

SARPEDON. Not lost in tears, but in more stately griefs
Her virgins tell, she passed the sleepless night,
Denied to vindicate her secret visit.

AMPHARES. Whether in tears, or sorrows more reserved,
Women express their passions, or their will,
They Are each resistless arms, whose edge is bluntless.
But sir! you're guarded.

LEONIDAS. To a test I Will bring

Her vaunted duty; if it shrinks from that,
Hence tears, and feigned submission! Not a child,
But a false traitor, will she stand before me;
And lose a sire in the offended prince.

[He seats himself. AMPHARES. See, she advances, with her wonted grandeur!
Yet so composed and calm, as if prepared
Not to receive, but grant a gracious pardon.

(Enter the Princess, attended by Nicrates, guards, etc.) LEONIDAS. Ill
daughter suits it with such acts as yours,
To come with looks, thus unimpress'd, before us;
Repentant tears, and cheeks tinged deep with shame,
Would best become your guilty disobedience.

CHELONICE. Oh may my cheeks indeed be tinged with shame,
And tears repentant, yet unheeded flow
When guilt or disobedience mark the life
Of wretched Chelonice! -- Oh, my father!
Whence are those charges?

LEONIDAS. From the mouth of Sparta,
Who styles those traitors, that support her foes.
Princess of Sparta! know, this charge is thine.

CHELONICE. If I Have incurred it, may the death she dooms
To traitors fall on me! -- Not daughter now,
But subject, and arraigned, I bend before thee; --
Not to a father pleading, but a judge.

LEONIDAS. It Is Lacedemon calls thee to the trial.

CHELONICE. Nay, but all Greece will turn their eyes toward thee,
And as thou act'st at this important hour,
Will load thy name with honor or dispraise.
Beware of weakness then -- with rigor try me!
And if the crime imputed, should be mine,
Then, Agamemnon like, devote thy child
A sacrifice, to your immortal fame!
The world demands such lessons. -- Oh, suppose not,
I should disgrace the glorious part assigned me --
The daughter of Leonidas cannot fear to die.

LEONIDAS. Such firmness should by innocence be sanction'd.
Last night, disguised, you passed our sentinels,
Bending your steps, where your rebellious husband
Plots Lacedemon's ruin. -- It Is your motive,
To this mysterious visit, we demand.

CHELONICE. Behold it in your undemolish'd walls!
Behold it, Sparta, in thy lofty spires,
Which yet, triumphant, catch the sailing clouds!
See it, ye mothers, in the tender babes
Reposing safely on your matron bosoms!
And you, ye husbands, in whose sheltering arms
Your wives yet live, inviolate, and pure!
Those were the motives of my secret visit.

LEONIDAS. Do Sparta's welfare, and her matrons' honor,
Hang on a thread so slender? Do her battlements,
Her long enduring walls, and brazen gates,
Resist destruction at a woman's bidding?

CHELONICE. Forgive the seeming boast! Yet had not Chelonice,
Last night, stole secret to her husband's camp,
And there with every art love makes resistless,
Won him to change the purpose of the hour,
This roof, beneath whose dome she stands accused,
Had now resounded with the shrieks of death;
Whilst through our gates, Thrace and Iberia poured,
With mercenary hand, their slaught'ring troops.

LEONIDAS. If such thy purpose, and if such the event,
Then, daughter, Lacedemon owes to thee
That she enjoys one added day in safety.
Short respite, from impending woes!
Were 't in thy power to prolong her safety,
And banish from her skies those hovering locusts --
Oh! could thou, for an end so sanctified,
Boldly resolve to be a Spartan daughter,
And tear unworthy weakness from thy heart?

CHELONICE. My heart itself! What is there can exist,
That I Would not sacrifice to save my country,
And bid my father live?

LEONIDAS. (rising.) Glorious the moment! 'twould be fame immortal!
The name of Chelonice shall be heard
Wherever female acts of worth, and daring
Rescue the sex, and make them shine over man.
-- Thy worthless husband! ceased he to exist,
Thrace and Iberia would withdraw their troops,
And Sparta rest from cursed intestine wars.
Invite him from his camp -- propose this night
To meet him in the grove -- he shall be met
By arms less tender than my Chelonice's.

CHELONICE. Horror!

LEONIDAS. Do shrink? -- are those thy boasted fervors?

CHELONICE. It was my father! 'twas my father spoke it --
I have no answer.

LEONIDAS. Rebel! thy answer's made;
For now I know 'twas but a false pretense
With which thou'st gloss'd thy visit to the traitor --
Traitor thyself! and leagued with Sparta's foes.

CHELONICE. O! filial goddess, teach me to submit!

LEONIDAS. Submission, now, is all the duty left thee,
And thou shall learn to practice it in chains.
Bear her to prison, as a rebel guard her,
And let her son be captive with his mother.

CHELONICE. That Is mercy yet! amidst the judge's firmness
The parent's love steps in, to chase despair.
Bring here my chains.

[They bring and put them on. AMPHARES. (to Leonidas.) The opposing principles
Of filial duty, and connubial love,
Summon their forces in her heart, and one must yield.
Forgive! if in the conflict filial duty fails,
And gives the dear-bought triumph to a husband.

CHELONICE. Who told thee that those principles oppose,
Or that one yields? Has nature then, improvident,
So narrow formed the heart, that only one
Of all the various duties she commands,
Can live there? Know, misjudging reasoner,
The duties of the wife and child, may each,
Without opposing, warm the heart. -- In mine
They both exist -- both flaming!

Spartan. Spare the princess!

Second Spartan. Leonidas! oh hear us.

Third Spartan. Spare thy child!

NICRATES. O spare the princess! see the astonished citizens,
With supplicating looks, bending before thee!
Shall they implore in vain? They ask a sire
To breathe forth mercy on a sorrowing child;
O! hear their prayers -- Mine is the voice of Sparta!

CHELONICE. Plead for a rebel! Pity how misplaced!
[addressing the citizens. Should I be spared, the door for treason's opened,
Nor could your prince dare punish in another,
The crime his child, unforfeited, commits.
He wisely acts, and thus I clasp my chains,
Calling the gods to witness they are dear to me;
For they are a father's gift -- perhaps his last.
Lead to my prison! murmur not; be proud
That in your sovereign you have found a hero!
Who Will punish those most precious to his heart,
When crimes against your rights call down his vengeance.
Lead on!

[Exit with guards, etc. AMPHARES. See! self-arraign'd the princess goes,
Acknowledging the justice which condemns her.
[To the citizens.
LEONIDAS. She may be innocent; yet to refuse
A sacrifice which patriotic love
And filial duty, equally demand,
Is in itself a crime to merit chains.
Amphares, speak! is there no way? Cleombrotus
Would come as General, with a train too costly
For the charge of Sparta. -- Is there no way,
To gain a private, solitary visit?
By Heaven the man who should perform such service,
I Would rank for ever next my crown and life.

AMPHARES. Swift execution ever should attend
The will of princes, when that will's revealed.
Methinks there might be found a man in Sparta,
Who, brided thus highly, would despise the danger;
And call it glory, so, to save his country.

LEONIDAS. If such a man there be -- thou know the rest!
Time presses hard, my friend, and fate allows
But a few hours, for acts, whose fame shall live
Through ages yet unborn. -- I Will leave thee now.
Genius of Sparta! aid the unripe design!

[Exit. AMPHARES. (contemptuously.) "Genius of Sparta!" Do think me to cozen
With patriotic flames; or that I see not
It Is thy ambition, which assumes its port?
No matter; know they are my designs thou nourishest,
And whilst I seem but to obey, I rule.

[Exit. Scene changes to the Tent of Cleombrotus. Enter CLEOMBROTUS followed by
MEZENTIUS. CLEOMBROTUS. By Heaven, the man who stirs toward the town,
With hostile views, shall find his death, not there,
But from my arm. Nor will I bear these murmurs.
Lead back your madd'ning Thracians, who appear
Like midnight wolves, snuffing the air for prey,
Rather than soldiers, bravely met, to right
An injured king.

MEZENTIUS. So think them! Midnight wolves
Will not retire without their scented prey;
Resolve then to dismiss, or lead them on.

CLEOMBROTUS. I can do neither. I am bound by oath --
An oath revered by him who shakes Olympus,
Not to begin the attack 'till this day's sun
Resigns the race to him, who gilds tomorrow.

MEZENTIUS. What forced thee to the binding oath?

CLEOMBROTUS. To tell thee,
Obdurate Thracian! were to give thee words,
Whose foreign sounds would vibrate on thy ear,
But could not raise ideas in thy mind.
What do thou know of all the sacred charms
Which hang on love connubial? Why tell thee
Of the sweet philtres, on the rosy lips
Of chaste, yet tender beauty? Ears like thine
Would find no music in the tale; nor own
'Twas a sweet madness, so, to be undone!

MEZENTIUS. Undone, indeed!

CLEOMBROTUS. Yet not undone. -- My promise
Binds me but a few hours. -- Ere the blue heavens
Shall in its present station see again
You radiant orb -- by arms, or peaceful terms,
I shall be king in Sparta.

MEZENTIUS. Hopes of coward peace
Were not the prospects thou held'st forth, to draw us
From our dear homes.

CLEOMBROTUS. True; war and victory
Seemed then the road to lead me to my throne.
But should Leonidas propose those terms
On which I must consent to raise the siege,
Then rich rewards shall gratify your troops,
Without the crimson labor which they pant for.

[Going to one of the upper wings. MEZENTIUS. Our troops will not accept a
largess, prince!
Where they can claim a right; and on thyself
Rest all the mischief of thy broken faith!

CLEOMBROTUS. Behold the messenger of peace approaches! --
What humbler cause could make Amphares messenger?
His rank exalted, and his skill in arms,
Render him precious to the town besieged.

MEZENTIUS. You wish the conference private. -- May the event
Be happier, prince! than that of yester even;
When a false priestess could entice a victory
From you -- Oh shame! whilst grasping at its laurels.

[Exit. CLEOMBROTUS. Unfurl your banners! why breathe not the trumpets?
Receive that Spartan Lord with the salute
You give your generals, and conduct him hither.
(Enter Amphares.) When last we met, 'twas not a camp, Amphares!
That witnessed our embrace.

AMPHARES. Oh, no, Cleombrotus.
We met, thou know, beneath a festive dome,
Whose echoes fed on music's sweetest sounds;
Whilst sparkling beauty lent its powerful spells
To gild the hour, and make its joys sublime.

CLEOMBROTUS. Such hours yet wait us, in the lap of peace.
Leonidas, I trust, has now resolved
To spare the bosom of his native city,
Nor drain her veins, to justify his crimes.

AMPHARES. Secret his counsels, prince! nor do I know
Whether the gloomy tyrant waits your sword,
Or means to yield your crown without compulsion.

CLEOMBROTUS. Art thou not come the ambassador of peace?

AMPHARES. Oh, no!

CLEOMBROTUS. Ill founded hope!
[with anger.
AMPHARES. Had thou such hopes?

CLEOMBROTUS. Or know this hour, Amphares, were not his
To waste in insolent deliberation.
But if not peace, what cause --

AMPHARES. I know thy question.
Though on no public errand I approach you,
Yet will you think the cause not less important,
Than if an empire's fate hung on my breath; --
An empire did I say? What then are empires?
What, all the mighty nothings which embroil,
From age to age, the sons of mad ambition --
Compared to those soft interests of the heart,
Which though in name less splendid, have a power,
That all the grander impulses must stoop to?

CLEOMBROTUS. Then you are ambassador from Chelonice!
What says my most beloved? What fragrant message
Breathed her sweet lips, to him, whose fate she rules?

AMPHARES. No message bear I, prince! for unsolicited
Amphares comes, and perhaps returns unthank'd.

CLEOMBROTUS. Forbid it courtesy! what urged this visit?

AMPHARES. Say rather what urged thee, to sleep last night
Within thy camp, whilst every Spartan citizen
Kept wakeful, to salute thee once more king?

CLEOMBROTUS. What but the powerful influence thou have named,
My Chelonice!

AMPHARES. Hah! was she the destiny
Who snatched thy scepter from thee?

CLEOMBROTUS. Why, Amphares,
This sudden flashing of thy eye? this scorn?
Her filial heart was agoniz'd; it asked --
Could I refuse? She kneeling, asked one day
For Sparta, and her sire.

AMPHARES, (with contempt.) For Sparta, and --
But I Will not add the name; your eyes shall witness
For whom she knelt, and asked you to withhold
The impending sword.

CLEOMBROTUS. For whom! for whom say thou?

AMPHARES. Why should I speak? Such tales are met ungraciously.
Hard to excite belief, of what to yield to,
Is to embrace the keenest agonies
Fate has prepared for man.

CLEOMBROTUS. Heed me, Amphares!
The charge thou would lead to, cannot be mistaken.
I see you are come to raise suspicion here,
Where yet suspicion never knew to live;
But least to live, when pointed at my wife!

AMPHARES. Thus should it be. -- This is the magic philtre
Bestowed by Hymen in the brieal cup;
Which when once swallowed, makes a man -- a husband.
[sneeringly.
CLEOMBROTUS. What is a husband?
[angrily.
AMPHARES. What his wise shall please;
Credulous, doting, disbelieving, blind!

CLEOMBROTUS. Were I of that quick temperament, which flames
And blazes at a touch, thou'st said enough
To raise a fire unquenchable, in which
Thou, its first victim, should be sacrificed.
Yet though my passions do but slowly mount,
They Are overbearing as the self-willed ocean,
Which, in its anger, dashes at the sky; --
Beware!

AMPHARES. I Am cautioned; -- from regard, not fear.

CLEOMBROTUS. I know thou fear not, nor can I suspect.
Six yearly suns have belted round the world,
Since Chelonice at the altar vowed,
The duties of connubial love to me.
Her heart I Have studied; watched each turn of temper;
Nor ever saw caprice inhabit there.
Her virtues, though chastis'd by female softness,
Are of the grand and stubborn sort,
Which self-collected, smile upon temptation.
O! shall the rooted confidence of ages
Break from its stem, and be the sport of whispers?
No, Amphares; the husband of Chelonice
Can have no fears, but for his own demerits.

AMPHARES. All then is well.

CLEOMBROTUS. Not so; for though no doubts
Can reach my heart, that would dishonor her,
To justify her fame, I must know all
That malice dares suggest.

AMPHARES. If to the grove,
Which bounds the palace gardens, and extends
Its love-inviting shades toward your camp,
You Will bend your evening steps, you will there behold
Whom I forbear to name. -- These ears imbibed
The whispered assignation, as unseen
I loiter'd near. -- The impulse of the moment,
Bade me convey to thee the ungrateful secret.
If I did wrong, forgive me for the motive!

CLEOMBROTUS, (eagerly.) Amphares! -- I Will be calm. -- Yet I Am not touched.
Who is the villain? tell me that. -- His name!
[impetuously.
AMPHARES. You Will know --

CLEOMBROTUS. Trifle not! By heaven it were more safe to tread
Upon the burnished adder, than to halt
An instant on my roused suspicion. -- Tell me!

AMPHARES. Thou know Cephisus; on whose downy cheek
The half-blown blossom spreads its doubtful red;
His tuneful voice seems the first notes of love,
And his light form bespeaks a Sylvan god.
Him will thou find --

CLEOMBROTUS. Enough! adieu Amphares!
Think not I harbor doubts; but I will prove --
For Chelonice's sake, I Will prove this night --
Farewell! escort this stranger to the walls.

AMPHARES. Evening's first shades is the appointed period.
This, and the watch word, Ceres, let us you pass.
[giving a jewel.
CLEOMBROTUS. I will be there before it is shades.

AMPHARES. Farewell!

[Exit. CLEOMBROTUS. The air's too close. -- Now I can breathe again.
His presence seemed to oppress me, and prevent
The act of respiration. -- Yet I Am not well.
Can this be jealousy -- suspicion? What?
Of Chelonice? Oh my beloved! sooner
Could I suspect that -- but he heard the whisper.
Whisper -- who whispered? not my Chelonice.
No ear but mine ere drank the 'witching murmurs
Of her chaste lips; or if there has -- Oh Gods!
The tortures of whole ages are comprised
In that one thought. -- If there has! --
My brain seems splitting. -- Oh thou sooty night!
Hasten thy ebon shades; enwrap the world
In tenfold darkness! not a glimmering star
Suffer to throw it is beams from thy thick mantle,
That quick on my dishonor, my revenge
May dart with light'ning's certainty, and blast them!

END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
The Palace. Enter Amphares hastily, followed by Nicrates. AMPHARES. Suspicious
brother!
[petulantly.
NICRATES. True; I am suspicious.
Your hasty visit to Cleombrotus,
Whom you profess to envy, and to hate;
The impatient steps with which you seek the king;
That fiery thoughtfulness within your eye,
Which ever indicates some fostered evil --
Give my suspicions life. -- Thus your eye rolled
Whilst planning death for the immortal Agis;
And such the brow you wore, this early day,
When by your arts possessed, the wretched king,
Instead of blessings, gave his daughter chains.

AMPHARES. If thou believ'st, that I have power, and will,
To crush to earth the beings who offend me,
Why so licentious in reproof? If Agis
Throned as he was within his people's hearts,
Was from their bosoms dragged; if Chelonice,
Beloved to dotage by her tyrant father,
Seeks at my bidding, patience in a prison --
What fate waits thee? Why urge the venomed sting,
Fatal to Agis, and to Chelonice?

NICRATES. Thy threat appalls me not; thy venomed sting
May reach my heart, but shall not shake my virtue.
I Have not been taught to fear to give reproof
For evil deeds, though acted by a brother;
And should thou dare to skreen thy guilty brows
Within the awful circle of a crown,
Then my reproofs shall glow with new found bitterness,
And what the brother scorns, shall pierce the king.

AMPHARES. Accept my caution, and beware! Thou speak
In words, good brother! Monarchs speak in deeds.
Leonidas approaches.
[He enters.
LEONIDAS. Oh Amphares!
Thy rapid steps were winged by my desires --
So short the time they have asked! Leave us, Nicrates;
Secrets of state demand this hour in privacy.
[Exit Nicrates. When expectation pants, the form of questions
Appears too cold to suit its ardors. Speak.
Amphares, speak to my impatient thoughts!

AMPHARES. Should all your hopes be met with the success
Which crowned my embassy, 'twould rank Leonidas
Most fortunate of kings.

LEONIDAS. Is the wolf snared?

AMPHARES. Not snared, but rushing eager to the toils.

LEONIDAS. Come to my heart! Shall he escape the toils?

AMPHARES. Yes, as the dove escapes the eagle's pounce,
When borne aloft, she trembles in the clouds.

LEONIDAS. What can reward thee? But explain, Amphares;
Unfold the arts, which triumphed over his caution.

AMPHARES. It Is known, Cleombrotus, though bold as soldier,
Bears all the lover's weakness in his heart --
Doting to excess on charming Chelonice.
Excess of love -- how easy to make jealous!
I talked of rivals, named the fated grove,
As the dear spot where lawless cupids reign,
And sing their wanton paeans to dishonor.

LEONIDAS. (eagerly.) He will be there?

AMPHARES. Yes, with night's earliest shades.

LEONIDAS. And thou will meet him there?

AMPHARES. Is It your command?

LEONIDAS. It is my earnest wish, my ardent hope.
Are these not srong enough, to urge thy arm?
Then think of thy reward -- it is Chelonice.
Her widowed bed shall know no lord but thee,
Son of my choice, and partner of my throne!

AMPHARES. Hear, Jupiter! bear witness to the vow!
And now by Sparta's guardian god I swear
Not to behold thee, 'till this loyal arm
Has rooted from the earth the thorn which wounds thee.

LEONIDAS. Oh time! compress each intermediate hour
Into a point, that I may leap at once
Over the wide chasm of anxious expectation,
Into the hour of triumph, or despair!

AMPHARES. Not hours, but minutes, form the dreaded chasm.
The sun already has his axle quenched
Beneath the turb'lent flood; and when he next
Shall spread his gorgeous mantle over the skies,
Thy foes, Leonidas, he shall behold
Melt like the silver drops his ardent beam
Draws from the earth, then dissipates in air.

LEONIDAS. I rest me there! farewell! remember Chelonice!

[Exeunt. Scene changes to the Prison. CHELONICE enters from the Flat. The
child asleep on a Pallet. She goes to him. CHELONICE. Still press thy poppies
on his humid brow,
Sweet sleep! Blessed in thy arms, nor prison walls,
Nor chains, nor parent's cruelty, have power
To give one pang. It Is to reflective minds,
To sense awakened in the madd'ning soul,
That misery appears, in all its fullness.
Celestial powers! Ye know why we were called
From senseless nothing, into conscious life;
Ye know, why ye bestowed the nerve to agonize,
The heart to rend; and those contending passions
Which restlessly oppose, and vex each other!
What are those chains that bind my passive arms,
Compared to those which hold my mind enslaved?
They say the mind is free -- mistaking casuists!
Must it not mourn, rejoice, regret, despair,
Even as our PASSIONS please? those lordly passions,
Who, spite of vaunted reason, hold the scepter,
And keep the obedient soul in close subjection. --
My sweet one wakes! How now, my lovely boy?
Art thou refreshed? thy slumber has been long.

CHILD. Would it were longer! for I Have had such dreams,
Such pretty dreams! that I am grieved to wake.
I thought, dear mother! that this gloomy place
Became a palace; and those wicked chains
That make me cry to look at them, dropped off.
Oh, let me tear them off! -- Were I a man,
I should be strong enough, but now they mock me.

CHELONICE. Regard them not, my love! -- The chains of gold
Upon the neck of power, or those of steel
Upon the captive's arm, are yet but chains;
And neither, mark the happiness within.

NICRATES. (without.) Oppose me not; admittance I must have --
I Will answer't to the king.

CHELONICE. Who then is this,
That spite of opposition makes his visits
To the sad inmates of a dreary dungeon?

NICRATES. (entering.) Oh Princess!

CHELONICE. It Is Nicrates! generous youth;
Why will you risk offense, to speak your pity,
Where pity's tenderest drops must fall in vain?

NICRATES. Alas! it is not to pity that I come;
Though thus to see you, royal, virtuous lady!
Would force a sigh from bosoms strange to pity.
I come to ask your counsel; to inform you
Of things so dreadful, that they will demand
All the tried firmness of your noble mind,
To bear with calmness.

CHELONICE. Hold! forbear a moment!
What may this evil be? -- breathe not a sound!
Yet -- yes, now I am firm. -- Speak then, my friend,
Whilst I lift up my heart to heaven, for fortitude!

NICRATES. Oh that in gentle terms, and soft gradations,
I might unfold the torturing tale! But time
Too closely presses; for this very hour,
Unless the guardian genius of thy husband
Should grant to thee some sudden inspiration
By which to save him -- Oh, look not thus wildly!
Your apprehensive mind perceives the ill --
Command me how to act.

CHELONICE. Where is my husband?
[Breathless.
NICRATES. Advancing to the snare, my brother's hand
Has spread to catch him. -- Deceived into belief
That you are unchaste; and that the grove --

CHELONICE (shrieks). The grove!
I see it all -- oh murderous perseverance!
These chains -- I Will instant fly -- tear off those chains!
Have I -- oh proud of heart! contemned them? Now,
Yes, now I feel their weight -- they hold me here;
They Are fate -- they are fate to my Cleombrotus!

NICRATES. Oh, princess! recollect --

CHELONICE. I Will pass the guards;
They cannot, dare not --

NICRATES. The attempt is fruitless.
Their lives must answer should they let you pass;
Judge then if this heart-piercing agony,
Or all the eloquence inspired by grief,
Can tempt their disobedience to the king?

CHELONICE. Insensate stones! burst from your cement ribs.
Ye bars, ye flints, have ye no ears for grief?
Oh, for one little breach, through which to force
This wretched frame. -- Vain -- it is in vain! here fixed
Here tortured, I must stay! But where is my father?
[Eagerly. My father, did I say -- oh, filiacide!

NICRATES. He and Amphares -- brother, he is no more!
Parted but now. -- I Would orders to avoid them;
Yet stayed within the ear of all that passed,
Then hastened to your presence.

CHELONICE. To the grove!
Hence! fly from me, and bend your eag'rest steps,
To where the murderer lingers for his prey.
Save my Cleombrotus! show him his danger;
But oh, be tender to a father's name!

NICRATES. I will obey you.

CHELONICE. He has been deceived.
Amphares is ambitious, and his arts
Leonidas's noble mind has bowed to;
Remember this! nor let my husband's heart
Too deeply feel the errors of my father!
Oh come, my son! within our dismal cell,
Prone on the earth we'll supplicate the Gods.
The sacrifice must be heart-rending groans;
And for libations -- surely from our eyes
Such sorrowing streams will flow, that though unhallowed
The pitying heavens shall accept the waste,
And scant our measure of increasing woes!

[Exeunt. Scene changes to the Grove. Enter CLEOMBROTUS. CLEOMBROTUS. Oh ye
mild Zephyrs, why so sweetly breathe?
Why gently undulates the scented air?
To such a tortured wretch ye should be hurricanes!
These glades, with agonizing fear, I tread;
Pursue their mazes with such powerful horror
As the mad priestess feels, when to her soul
The Demon whispers forth unknown events.
The day yet lingers; but within these woods
Where eager night imprints her earliest steps,
Adult'rous love, should fearless seek it is mate
It may be slander. -- Oh! to be assured,
The gew-gaw crown of Sparta, the dominion
Of the wide Universe -- what sound is that? --
Again! be faithful then my ear, and guide me!

[Exit. Enter AMPHARES. AMPHARES. These gloomy shades forestall the night, and
jealousy
Ever this, has brought my prey within my grasp.
Now then, Cleombrotus, I do forgive thee;
Forgive thy glorious fate that pushed thee on
To regal power, and chained me down, thy subject.
This hour, thy crown, thy wife, thy life, are mine!
Why linger then, to seize my bright rewards?
In which embower'd recess, does fate ordain
The earth shall drink his blood? This way, I Am drawn.
By heaven I Would missed him! if my eyes are true,
The base of yonder statue is his rest --
A statue, now, himself!
[Exit, following Cleombrotus. (After a pause AMPHARES reenters.) Fate, thou
art just!
And from my reeking point, accept the drops
Which flowed a moment since, in kingly veins!
(A groan) A groan! then it is his last, for sure I am,
This crimsoned steel was in his vitals buried.
Why dread then to provoke the arm, Leonidas,
Thou'st taught to murder!

[Exit. Enter NICRATES, wounded, and leaning on bis sword. NICRATES. Stay! oh
stay thou fratricide!
He Is gone, and thinks his villainy complete.
I cannot further.
(sinks down) 'Twas a sure aimed blow,
Though not within that heart he purposed. -- Oh!

Enter CLEOMBROTUS. CLEOMBROTUS. Those are the moans of death, and not of love.
What wretch art thou?

NICRATES. Art thou Cleombrotus?

CLEOMBROTUS. I am.

NICRATES. I then have saved thee -- sent by Chelonice
To warn thee of approaching death, which now
Has seized on me; and I rejoice my prince,
That -- oh --

CLEOMBROTUS. Stop not dear youth, whoever thou art;
And who thou art, this failing light denies me.

NICRATES. I am his brother by whose arm I dye;
He loves the princess and would reach thy crown.
Here he appointed thee to meet his sword --
But plunged it happily, in a meaner bosom.
Oh fly this spot -- it is Nicrates bids thee.

CLEOMBROTUS. The brother of Amphares! -- mighty Gods!
His arm that pierced thee thus?

NICRATES. It was Amphares!

CLEOMBROTUS. Stiff'ning with horror, scarcely can I question thee --
-- Yet breathe one word -- O! where is Chelonice!

NICRATES. Chained and imprisoned by -- oh --

CLEOMBROTUS. Chained and imprisoned! oh distraction! speak!
Yet let thy fleeting spirit stay! oh tell me --
Alas his spirit is already fled,
[Taking his hand. And I can know no more. -- What would I know?
Do I not know Amphares for a villain?
Do I not know my Chelonice's spotless? --
My heart must drink that charming transport in,
Though it is soft object sighs within a prison.
Oh hapless youth! -- but I Have no time to mourn --
Where seek Amphares? Where shall vengeance find
It Is proper object? Shall I seek her dungeon,
Or her traducer's heart? -- Oh my roused spirits!
Blindly I Will follow to fulfill my fate,
Where ever your impulse leads. -- Guide me to vengeance,
Or to Chelonice!

END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V. SCENE I.
The Prison. Enter Leonidas and Amphares, followed by an an Officer. LEONIDAS.
(to the Officer.) Inform the princess, that her father comes
To break her chains, and clasp her to his bosom.
[Exit officer through the flat. I dread the mighty tumults of her grief,
When on her widowed heart, the woe shall burst.

AMPHARES. Surely not sudden, should the tale of woe
Be trusted to her heart. -- Let her first, taste
The blessings of your love. -- By soft degrees
Prepare her for her loss, and for the vows,
My raptured pulse beat eagerly to pay.

LEONIDAS. My tenderest cares shall soothe her to repose;
For well, Amphares, do thou know my soul
Delights in Chelonice. -- Now farewell
To those keen jealousies, which have so long
Poisoned the tender flow of love parental!
Cleombrotus is now no more my rival;
And Chelonice now no more shall know
The soul-felt anguish of her father's frowns.
(Chelonice enters, looking wildly.) Oh my loved child! the bonds the king
commanded,
Thy father, thus impatient, bursts asunder!

CHELONICE. (to Amphares.) Where is my husband? Murderer! say where?
Why start'st thou thus?

AMPHARES. Why question me, fair princess?
Is not Cleombrotus before our walls,
Leading the army which will level them?

CHELONICE. Is he? is he not in the grove? say pale one!
Oh that hue! guilt speaks loudly in thy cheek --
I go to seek him!

[Exit. LEONIDAS. Amazement! the grove --
Cleombrotus! --

AMPHARES. Betrayed! but it is impossible!
Some deity's against us, or the dreams
Philosophy has blown about the world
Are true. -- The soul survives its humbler part,
And his must have revealed our sacred secret.

Enter SARPEDON. SARPEDON, (to Leonidas.) Pardon, that thus unbid, I rush
before thee!
Amphares, thee I sought; -- murder's discovered.

AMPHARES. What murded? Why to me are all the tales
Of murder pointed? Cannot Spartan bleed,
But strait the public eye is bent on me?

SARPEDON. Forgive me!
[going.
LEONIDAS. Stay! whose death would thou discover?

SARPEDON. That of Nicrates.

AMPHARES. Nicrates! -- what -- my brother?

SARPEDON. It is too true; for Lacedemon boasts not
A nobler gifted youth.

LEONIDAS. Well have thou said,
Whose is the guilt?

SARPEDON. The assassin's fled unknown.

AMPHARES. Unknown, and fled. -- Then follow him, ye gods,
Whatever land his guilty feet shall press!
Where fell my brother?

SARPEDON. As I searched the grove,
My evening duty -- I observed the base
Of Phocion's statue, reeking with warm blood.
I traced the sanguine steps, and found too soon,
The lifeless body whence the blood had flown.

AMPHARES, (wildly.) The body was not his -- say, art -- impossible!
Nicrates bled not there!

SARPEDON. Alas! full well
Those eyes each feature knew, whilst from his neck
This honored badge I took, given him by Agis.

AMPHARES. Go! thou'st done well.

[Exit Sarpedon. LEONIDAS. Why breathless now, Amphares?

AMPHARES. Why breathing now, thou rather should enquire:
I Have slain my brother.
[groans.
LEONIDAS. Slain him!

AMPHARES. I Am his murderer.
Start not at that. -- Leonidas! our enemy
Yet lives. -- Curse the deluding night! The base
Of Phocion's statue, was the spot, where I
Discerned him as I judged; and where this arm
Plunged in his heart the instrument of death.

LEONIDAS. Thou pray'dst the Gods to curfe thy brother's murderer;
The prayer was just -- speed it, ye winds, to heaven.
Fool! this the end of all thy perfidies?
Thou, he to wear a crown, and wed my daughter!
Avoid my sight, ill-fated man, and bid
Ambition quit a mind whose faculties
Are suited to the humblest state; nor dare
To loose thy thoughts, again, toward a throne!

[Exit. AMPHARES. Revenge! come thou; absorb those humble faculties!
Ambition, and my hatred both are crossed;
Revenge be now the passion of my heart!
Oh! I will cherish it, as the mad lover
Nurses the passion which undoes his peace.
It shall be mistress, and my soul's dear tyrant;
I Will own no thought, that is not inspired by her,
And to her bidding, dedicate my life --
A short one perhaps; yet shall its aim be glorious!

[Exit. Scene, a Colonade in the Palace. Enter SARPEDON, followed by others.
SARPEDON. (speaking as he enters.) Pursue not me! haste through each avenue
And every street; where wrapped in false security
Our citizens repose. -- I Will to the prison,
Where but a moment since I left the king --
Alas! that prison may be soon his home!

[Exit. Enter CLEOMBROTUS. CLEOMBROTUS. Oh well known haunts, vainly I trace
your bounds!
The cursed Amphares does not meet my eyes;
Nor can I know what gloomy tower withholds
From their fond gaze, the object of his slanders.
Hah! sure it is she, who moves at distance hither.
It cannot be -- how has she gained her freedom?
It is -- it is she! that graceful form, that step,
That interesting air, distinguish her
Alone! Shall I await her here? oh no;
As eager zephyrs fly to kiss the rose,
I, to the sweeter bosom of my love!
[Exit, and after a pause reenters with Chelonice. Thy father broke thy
chains, thy husband gives thee
New ones! gives thee a living prison! Oh
My Chelonice! thus enchain'd, imprisoned,
Thou shall for ever dwell, nor wish for liberty!

CHELONICE. O! my Cleombrotus, I scarce believe
That it is thy arm enfolds me. -- My dear lord!
Thy Chelonice's steps even now were bent
Toward a spot where my sad heart foreboded --
I cannot bear the image!

CLEOMBROTUS. Oh my soft love!
How much thy tenderness o'erpays my wrongs!
Here Is one approaches.

CHELONICE. Then retire, my lord!
It were not safe, he should behold thee here.

[Exit Cleombrotus. Enter SARPEDON. SARPEDON. Where, Madam, is the king?

CHELONICE. Whence is thy haste?

SARPEDON. Part of the army of Cleombrotus
Beset our walls; -- they have begun the attack,
And with a fury, which bespeaks strong confidence
That our resistance will be short. -- The rest
Advance not yet. -- Princess, forgive my haste!
I seek Leonidas.

[Exit. CHELONICE. Can I forgive thy tidings?
Approach, thou false one! Is it thus, the man
[Enter Cleombrotus. Aspiring to be king, observes his oaths?
Is It thus thou have preserved thy vowed suspension?
Stealing, like midnight ruffians, to the hoard,
From whence the conscious day had kept ye, trembling!

CLEOMBROTUS. Well do thou chide, were thy dear chiding just.
By Heaven the wretch who has infringed the oaths,
Which bound the promise thou extorted'st from me,
Shall by my sword be taught, how I detest
So black a perfidy. -- It had never been,
Had not Amphares' arts seduced me hither.
This moment in my camp, I had, impatient,
Waited those terms of peace thou bid'st me hope.
Mezentius is the man. -- I Will instant seek him.
(going.)
CHELONICE. Go then -- yet stay! --

CLEOMBROTUS. Boundless as is thy power,
In such a cause I can resist thy prayers,
Thy tears, thy love! -- Thou have a rival here;
The only rival thou can ever dread --
It Is HONOR; and what she suggests, my soul
Has never dared debate on. Her behests
Are not confined to rules -- they are sacred impulses,
The spirit of morality, sublimed;
Which, if we stay to analize, is lost.

[Exit. CHELONICE. Go then, obey her impulse, and chastise --
My father here?

[Enter Leonidas, speaking. LEONIDAS. Fly then, and bid Demophilus
Lead his battalion quickly to the breach;
I Will follow with my own. -- Who was it, daughter,
Abruptly parted hence, as I appeared?

CHELONICE. My father!

LEONIDAS. Nay, why do thou hesitate?
Why not confess it was my mortal foe?
'Twas he, whose troops, even at this living instant,
Beset thy aged father -- 'twas Cleombrotus.
He whose keen sword is levelled at my bosom,
This instant left my daughter's.

CHELONICE. Harsh reproach!
He knew not of the attack his troops have made,
And left me, but to punish their rash leader.

LEONIDAS. Do thou believe him? Oh, thou easy one!
His troops beset our walls, without command!
(contemptuously.)
CHELONICE. So he, in truth, has sworn.

LEONIDAS. And what men swear,
The fate of women binds them to believe.
What wilt believe, when thou shall see him here,
Staining those pillars with my blood?

CHELONICE. Oh Heaven!

LEONIDAS. How will thou greet my murderer?

CHELONICE. As my foe;
As him I Am bound to curse; and then I Will join thee,
Bleeding, and breathless, on thy funeral pile.

LEONIDAS. Oh my dear child! come once more to my arms!
And hear me, whilst I swear in this sad moment,
-- Perhaps the last we ever shall taste together --
That the vast ruin which this hour marks out,
The loss of empire, liberty, and life,
Do not afflict my soul with half the anguish
Thy disobedience would bestow. Thy love,
Thy filial tenderness, is the sole cordial
Of my declining days. Cruel I Have seemed,
Yet oh, parental love has never one instant
Lost its sweet influence in this beating heart.

CHELONICE. Oh, how do I survive this moment?
Is this our parting moment? If it be,
Bear witness to my often repeated vow,
Thy conqueror shall never be my husband;
This bosom never shelter him, whose sword
Shall pierce my father's! Bless me now -- oh bless me!
A power unknown, seems to bear down my mind --
Heaven grant, it be not madness!

LEONIDAS. I do bless thee;
My soul, my child, does bless thee. -- Now retire.
[She goes, he gazes after her. I Would fain indulge my eyes a little longer,
Lest they should shortly shut her out for ever.
What can this be, which cruel! thus unnerves me?
Why loiter here? all energies are lost.
Where are the feelings of the king and soldier?
[A violent crashing and noise. That noise, which speaks our wall's demolishing,
And Sparta's ruin, cannot rouse my blood.
Oh age, thou curse of nature! in ill hour
Thou do evince thy power.

Enter SARPEDON, and Citizens. SARPEDON. Joy, great Leonidas!

LEONIDAS. Joy! and to me?

Citizen. The enemy's repulsed;
They fly before thy arms.

LEONIDAS. How!

SARPEDON. Oh! listen yet --
Cleombrotus himself opposed his soldiers,
And forced his conquering troops back from the breach.

LEONIDAS. Thou deal'st in wonders! he force back his troops!

SARPEDON. They were his Thracian band, led by Mezentius,
Who fell beneath Cleombrotus's arm.
Soon as they saw their leader prone, they fled.

LEONIDAS. They fled! Oh, had Cleombrotus but staid,
The fortune of the hour had been complete.

SARPEDON. Still are thy wishes prosperous! Cleombrotus
Beheld Amphares, and strait rushed toward him,
But instant was closed in; -- when like the fork
The lightning darts, which cleaves the stubborn rock
And naught resists, so pierced his way, Cleombrotus,
And fled for shelter to Minerva's temple.

LEONIDAS. Gods, ye are just! Astrea has not fled
Back to her native heaven! Mark'st thou, Sarpedon?
Scarcely ten full-orb'd moons have over our fields
Thrown their nocturnal brightness, since myself,
Driven by his faction, fled for sanctuary
To that same temple, which now shelters him.

SARPEDON. I do remember't well.

LEONIDAS. It makes my blood
Flow warm again within my veins. -- I thought
A moment since, the curse of age, chill cowardice
Had seized upon my heart; but now I find
It was despair, pouring her torpid urn
Through every pulse. -- Bright hope has chased her hence,
I feel again the animating fires
That have so often consumed the foes of Sparta.
Let us away -- one foe does yet remain,
When he is no more, Leonidas will be immortal!

[Exeunt. Scene the Temple. Present, the High Priest and others. HIGH PRIEST.
Who knocks so loud; claiming the sanctuary
Of our bright goddess?

A PRIEST, (entering.) It Is Cleombrotus;
He who was late our prince, now seeks a refuge
Beneath this hallowed dome.

HIGH PRIEST. Oh the vicissitudes
Of human fate! they lift men now aloft,
Then dash them down, overwhelmed with bitter ruin.
Hither advance, Cleombrotus, nor fear thy foes,
The altar of Minerva will protect thee.

CLEOMBROTUS, (enters.) I bend to thee, great Pallas! and to thee,
Her sovereign Pontiff. -- Father! late thou saw
My feat a throne; now thou beholdest me
Flying unarmed, before the slaves I governed,
And seeking refuge in your temple.

HIGH PRIEST. Son!
It Is not to vulgar minds, the gods decree
Such strong reverses. -- When they form a soul
To taste and bear the extremes of human fortune,
It Is formed of fortitude! of wisdom! virtue!
Adore those then, who thus have formed thy soul,
Nor grudge tne tasteless ease bestowed on men
Of lower faculties, and meaner virtues.

CLEOMBROTUS. Father! I Am taught.

ATTALUS. (without.) Make way -- way for the king!

CLEOMBROTUS. Hah! my foe.

HIGH PRIEST. Prince! beneath this sacred roof
Foes lose their stings, and enmity its scourge; --
Even to menace, in this place, is sacrilege.

Enter LEONIDAS. LEONIDAS. Have I then found thee?

CLEOMEROTUS. Have I met thee here?
Would 'twere another place!

LEONIDAS. The place is fortunate.
The rights of kings are sacred, and unbounded;
Vicegerents from the gods, their power is delegated,
And their temples ours. -- Yet I Will not imbue
The sacred pavement with thy rebel blood; --
Bear him away! and instant on the block
Sever his head.

HIGH PRIEST. He claims the sanctuary.

LEONIDAS. Bold priest, retire; and with thee all thy hirelings!
[Exit priests. Soldiers! your duty; -- why advance ye not?

ATTALUS. The altar grants him its protection.

LEONIDAS. Fools!
Shall I throw back the fortune of this day
Because you are scruple bound. -- Now by my fate
Cleombrotus I swear, I Will be the priest
To offer thee a sacrifice to Pallas!

CLEOMBROTUS. Nay then! -- forgive me goddess! from thy altar
[flying to the altar. I seize the sacred knife; and with it guard the life
Thy temple has protected.

Enter Chelonice, followed by Attendants with the Child. CHELONICE. Armed!
Against my father!
[Snatches the knife.
LEONIDAS. Bless my Chelonice!

CLEOMBROTUS. Oh, was this well?
[Sternly.
LEONIDAS. Now bear him to his death.

CHELONICE. His death, my father! Oh, remember now,
If I Would ever power within thy soul, remember!
How, on this sacred spot, where now we stand,
Successive days and nights, beneath thy feet,
I wept, and watched and poured my soul in prayer;
When hither thou were driven by the Ephori,
Who made my husband king. -- I left his throne,
I scorned his splendid diadem, and here
For ever I had staid, had not thy Fate
Again restored thee to thy royal feat.

LEONIDAS. Oh my Chelonice, know I not thy worth,
Thy piety, thy unexampled love!

CHELONICE. If they are dear to thee, grant this one boon!
Spare me my husband's life!

LEONIDAS. Impossible!

CHELONICE. Receive me Goddess! at thy shrine!
For here forever I Will remain, nor quit,
So bless me Pallas! as --

[Goes toward the altar. LEONIDAS. Cease thy rash vow!
Without thee, what is royalty? thus then
I will reward thy long-tried filial goodness --
Accept thy husband's life, but be he banished; --
Banished to the utmost island in our realm,
There guarded, and immured --

CLEOMBROTUS. I scorn thy mercy -- give me instant death!

CHELONICE. Oh thou, ungrateful! Thus I bend, to bless thee.

LEONIDAS. But that is not all -- bring here the diadem!
(They bring it, he places it on CHELONICE 's head.) Bow to your Queen!
Henceforward, sovereign
She reigns with me. -- Ye who would bounties ask,
Or mercies taste, it is through your Queen alone
You can know either. -- Hail, Queen of Sparta!
A flourish of trumpets; attendants repeat, Hail, Queen of Sparta!

CHELONICE. Oh my dread father! lend me to express
The joy and gratitude my heart distends with!
I see thee safe; thy enemies are fled,
And thou secure upon thy throne! -- Oh Gods!
And I -- I too am Queen; crowned, and hailed sovereign!
And what is he yonder?
(With something of scorn) A poor exiled man!
Homeless, friendless, without a comforter,
Banished from Sparta. -- Off thou vile toy!
[throwing away the crown. My homeless, friendless, banished love, I Am thine!
I Will follow thee to desert lands, or sun-dried meads;
My arm shall pillow thee, my bosom rest
Thy aching head, and lull thee to repose.

Child. What, will you not be Queen?

CHELONICE. No, I Am an exile;
And so art thou. -- Come, lead us to the port,
From whence we bid adieu to Lacedemon.

[Leading the child and holding by her husband. CLEOMBROTUS. Thou matchless
woman!

LEONIDAS. Most ungrateful daughter
Wilt leave me then to solitary age?
Abandon him who lived to cherish thee!

CHELONICE. Not for whole worlds, were thou not king again.
But how could I give joy to thee, myself
A wretch? My heart would still be cold and joyless --
A wanderer, within my father's palace.
This is my home -- my resting place, and here
Will I forever dwell.

[Leaning on her husband's bosom. LEONIDAS. Go then, thou ingrate!
And with thee take thy father's curse. -- May he
For whom thou sacrific'st so much, reward thee
With scorn, neglect, and hatred! may he wring
Thy heart, and thus revenge my bitter pangs,
On thee who giv'st them!

[Exit. CHELONICE. Oh! Cleombrotus,
Can thou be this? Oh no! I read thy soul;
Through the soft dazzling-circle of thy eye
It speaks immortal love!

CLEOMBROTUS. Well have thou read!
And in that volume thou shall read forever
Thy sparkling virtues; -- yes, they will illume
These fading orbs, though time should dim their beams,
Or quench the brighter flames that live in thine.
And when in some ambitious hour, my soul
Sickens for sceptres, and revolves on crowns,
The alluring phantoms I will bid avaunt;
And seek the dearer empire of thy heart! --
There I will reign in arbitrary pomp,
And rule with all the tender tyranny of love.

CHELONICE. Oh father, hear thou? what a blessed banishment
Thou have decreed us! Instant we'll begin
To taste those joys, the marble colonades
Of regal domes, were never known to house.
Come my sweet boy! thou will not learn in exile
The graceful arts of courts, but thou shall learn
The highest art -- the art to emulate
The deeds of dignity; the art to scorn
A vulgar act, though clothed in ermin'd robes,
Or sweeping the proud train of distant state!

CHELONICE, supported by CLEOMBROTUS, leads her child. -- They go to the wing,
followed by guards, etc. A noise without -- they turn. CLEOMBROTUS. Whence
those deep groans? -- surely the cry was death.

CHELONICE (shrieks). Oh Nature shield me in this horrid moment!
My father bleeding flies before Amphares --
Now, now Cleombrotus be true to Virtue
And save a parent!

LEONIDAS enters reeling, then sinks and drops his sword. CHELONICE supports
her father -- CLEOMBROTUS snatches the sword and meets AMPHARES. CLEOMBROTUS.
Stay! behold a bosom
More meet than his, to arrest thy murderous sword;
An arm more fit to give due chastisement
To vices black as thine!

AMPHARES. Within his bosom
My sword already has engraved revenge;
And when from thine its quivering point has drawn
The ruddy stream, the crown of Lacedemon
Will glitter on the brow of scorned Amphares.

(They fight -- AMPHARES falls.) CLEOMBROTUS. Thy brow must find its diadem in
dust.
Leonidas's sword, urged by my arm
Has worked a double vengeance. -- This alone,
Could expiate thy crimes against the princess;
The blood now rushing from thy heart
Obliterates the stains, thy tongue imbued.

AMPHARES. Oh, had my erring sword -- but it is too late --
Thy fortune triumphs -- if my breath would hold
To utter all the curses that I -- oh --

[Dies. CHELONICE. Look up my father! stretched beneath thy feet
Amphares lies. -- Cleombrotus -- my husband. --
With grateful pride I will repeat the sound --
My husband has revenged thee on thy foe!
On then be cheered, and through long years to come. --

LEONIDAS. Alas! nor years, nor instants, now remain.
The villain has -- oh Chelonice --
Yet, yet support me! with my dying breath
I came to bless thee; to my closing eye
Be thou the last dear -- oh those bitter pangs!
Ascend my throne. -- Thy husband has revenged me --
The crown of Lacedemon and thy heart,
His rich rewards! -- oh may ye --

[Dies. CHELONICE. The unfinished blessing sinks upon his lips,
But wafts his soul to heaven. -- O! awful hour,
I have no more a father!

[Groans. (Continues knceling behind the body and bending over it.)
CLEOMBROTUS. Cherish thy tears, and be thy sorrows sacred!
The voice of consolation, now were gross --
But SPARTANS bear ye witness to my life!
Your glory, and my Chelonice's bliss
Are the sole objects which shall hence engross it.
Bear ye the bleeding body to the palace,
And screen it from the insults of the crowd,
Who now will triumph with indecent joy
Over him whose nod a moment since, they worshipped.
Ere I depart I Will sacrifice to heaven;
And prostrate will adore the invelop'd will,
Which thus through darkness works our brightest days,
And darts his glory, over our thorny ways.

THE END.
EPILOGUE
WRITTEN BY MRS. COWLEY.
SPOKEN BY MRS. SIDDONS. THINK you our Author copied from the life
In drawing such a daughter -- such a wife?
Judging from what we know -- (archly) -- I Am half afraid
The Piece is fancy -- yet I ask your aid
To fix my judgment. Fairly try the cause,
Try it, by that sublimest of all laws
An English Jury! -- I recall the word --
Ha, ha, was ever mortal so absurd?
'Twou'd half annihilate even me, with fears,
What! -- try a Poet by his scribbling Peers?
Oh let the Court "take any other form,
"And my firm soul shall 'bide the pitiless storm!"
Resolve yourselves to a Committee of the House
And prosecute -- yet ah! no palpitating mouse
Would tremble more at stern Grimalkin's fury
Than I -- should brother bards compose our Jury,
No Wit could save us, and no hope would cheer,
Our Crimes would be SO PLAIN, the case SO CLEAR The words printed in capitals
are spoken in a grave sonorous tone.
;
Mercy thrice blessed! her power would vainly try,
And GUILTY! -- GUILTY! -- DEATH! would be the cry.
Well then, I Will make you all my Jury as you lit,
Ye dear Celestials! Gallery! Boxes! Pit!
I Am now a Pleader -- Mark me pray -- the same. Hum.
COUNSELOR SIDDONS -- do you know the name!
I have no Brief (sighing and looking at her hands) it is true, but there my Case
By many a LEARNED Brother's, kept in face.
How many a white clear band, and powdered tie,
That with the blossoms of the hawthorn vie,
Parade the Hall, and nod, and smile in vain; (nodding, smiling, etc.)
Attorneys smile again -- but don't retain.
Whilst the Leviathans of laws rough ocean,
Distend their jaws, and gobble every motion.
But all this while I have forgot to plead; --
If your sweet eyes speak truth, I Have now no need.
Our trembling hopes in their bright beams shall bask,
You seem prepared to grant, all they can ask; --
Your hands they ask -- such thunders do not fright;
Repeat the peal once more, and then good night.
The following NEW PIECES, writ by Mrs. COWLEY, may be had of Messrs.
ROBINSON, Paternoster Row.
1. The RUNAWAY, a Comedy, Price 1s. 6d, 2. ALBINA, a Tragedy, 1s. 6d. 3. WHO IS
THE DUPE? a Farce, 1s. 4. BELLE'S STRATAGEM, a Comedy, 1s. 6d. 5. WHICH IS THE
MAN? a Comedy, 1s. 6d. 6. BOLD STROKE FOR A HUSBAND, a Comedy, 1s. 6d. 7. MORE
WAYS THAN ONE, a Comedy, 1s. 6d. 8. A SCHOOL FOR GREYBEARDS, a Comedy, 1s. 6d.
9. First Part of THE MAID OF ARRAGON, a Poem, 4to. 2s. 6d. 10. The SCOTTISH
VILLAGE, a Poem, 4to. 2s.

