THE FALL OF EGYPT: AN ORATORIO. As it is performed at the THEATER ROYAL In
DRURY LANE. Written by the late JOHN HAWKESWORTH, LL.D. And Set to MUSIC by
JOHN STANLEY, M.B.

LONDON, Printed: And Sold by Mr. CONDELL, in Cross-Court, Bow-Street,
Covent Garden. MDCCLXXIV. [Price One Shilling.]

Dramatis Personae.
EGYPTIANS.
PHARAOH King of Egypt. SEPHRES his Son. MENYTIS Sister to Pharaoh. Officers of
the Court, Chorus of Egyptians, etc.
ISRAELITES.
MOSES. First and Second Israelite. Chorus of Israelites.
THE FALL OF EGYPT: AN ORATORIO.
PART I.
SCENE I.
The Land of Goshen; an Israelitish Man and Woman. RECITATIVE. Man. Again the
Tyrant, cruel and perfidious,
Retracts his Promise, and defies the Almighty;
In vain successive Wonders plead our Wrongs,
And desolated Egypt groans in vain.

Woman. Yes, Pharaoh's ruthless Hand, that has so long
Bowed Israel's Neck to stern Oppression's Yoke,
Now wastes, with various Plagues, his own Domains,
And spreads over Egypt, Want, Disease, and Death.

AIR, by the Man and Woman alternately. Woman. The gliding Stream, whose silver
Wave
To thirsty Lips Refreshment gave,
The thirsty Lip refreshed no more,
But stained with Blood its wondering Shore.
Flocks, Herds, and Fields, and Men complain,
All Nature mourns, but mourns in vain.

Man. The faithful Steer untimely died;
The Morn her genial Dews denied;
And Wrath ordained the Skies to pour,
Of Flame and Frost a mingled Shower:
Flocks, Herds, and Fields, and Men complain,
All Nature mourns, but mourns in vain.

Woman. The Hind looks round with boding Fears,
The rising Corn his Anguish cheers;
The Locust comes, his Hopes are fled,
And unavailing Tears are shed.
Flocks, Herds, and Fields, and Men complain,
All Nature mourns, but mourns in vain.

RECITATIVE. Man. These Plagues are past, and now, tremendous Sight!
Where late the golden Spires of haughty Memphis
With dazzling Brightness sparkled to the Eye,
Darkness alone is visible; there seems
A Wall of Darkness raised from Earth to Heaven! --
It looks like Nature's Limits, and beyond
The affrighted Fancy, feigns the waste Dominions
Of Chaos and of Night.

Woman. Now let us fly;
What now forbids, that, careless of his Will
Whom Darkness binds, and Hunger must destroy,
We quit for ever this detested Land,
And seek the promised Heritage of Heaven?

Man. What can forbid! and lo! in happy Hour
The hoary Elders of our Tribes approach.

AIR by the Man. Freedom's Charms alike engage,
Blooming Youth, and hoary Age;
Time itself can never destroy
Freedom's pure and lasting Joy:
Love and Friendship never gave
Half their Blessings to the Slave;
None are happy but the Free,
Bliss is born of Liberty.

Enter the Elders of Israel. RECITATIVE. Man. O! Fathers! wherefore should
these golden Hours
Serve but like common Time to measure Life?
Why not improved to bless that Life with Freedom?

1st Elder. Taught from above the Prophet is our Guide;
Him let us follow, patient and resigned:
So shall the Simple, and the Weak, be found
Strong in his Strength, and in his Wisdom wise.

2d Elder. Behold he comes: with Joy and Reverence greet
The Friend of Israel, and the Sent of Heaven.
CHORUS.
Hail! beloved of Man and God!
Born to sway the mystic Rod!
Born proud Tyrants to abase,
Still befriend thy kindred Race!
Glorious, where thy Life began,
Hail! beloved of God and Man!

Moses. Cease, or the Strains from Gratitude that flow
Direct to Heaven, and give JEHOVAH Praise.

1st Elder. For thee we praise him; in his chosen Hour,
And sure that Hour is come, we follow thee;
Will thou not lead us forth while now the Tyrant,
Involved in Darkness, knows not what we do?

Moses. Not yet; this Hour the dreadful Glooms disperse,
And Light returns to Pharaoh.

Woman. Ah! not so --
Revenge will then make Tyranny more dreadful;
Waste not the Lives one Day's Delay may cost,
Nor add one Day to Bondage worse than Death!
Though Time has crowned thy hoary Brow with Wisdom,
Still let thy Pity feel for Youth and Beauty!
AIR. In blooming Youth the gentle Maid,
For tender Joys and Cares designed,
Is doomed by rudest Toils to fade,
By Summers Suns, and Winters Wind:
Those Eyes in silent Tears are drowned,
Where Love should light his constant Flame,
And pale the languid Cheek is ^ound,
Which Pleasure's rosy Hue should claim.

RECITATIVE. Man. Think of our Youth who waste their early Strength
In sordid Labors, and scarce reach to Manhood:

Woman. Think of the Babe whose Tears in vain require
The Hand that, driven to other Toils, fulfils
A Mother's Duty with Delight no more:

1st Elder. Think of the hoary Heads that bow beneath
Opprobrious Burdens; think of wasted Egypt,
Her suffering Children, cruel by Compulsion,
Like us the Victims of a Tyrant's Crimes.

Moses. What mean your Words? what would ye that I do?


2d Elder. Prolong this Darkness till our Tribes escape.


Moses. Forbear -- Alas! ye know not what ye ask!
The stubborn Will of Egypt's haughty Prince
Must stand subdued, and his own Word dismiss ye:
This Land of Bondage shall ye quit with Glory,
And pass in Triumph by the Gates of Memphis.
I go to prove him; trust in Heaven, and live.
CHORUS.
We hear thee, and with Transport trust,
Thy Rod shall make the Tyrant just,
And all our Wrongs atone;
Wherever the circling Sun displays
His rising or his setting Rays,
Our Triumph shall be known.

SCENE II.
The Palace at Memphis, during the Darkness. Pharaoh, Sephres, and Attendants.
RECITATIVE. Pharaoh. If there be any near me let him speak;


Sephres. May Pharaoh live for ever!


Pharaoh. O, my Son!
Ill suits such greeting with this dreadful Gloom;
This Gloom, impervious to the Noontide Beam,
If the blessed Sun still rises on the World --
Speak yet again, that I may hear thy Voice,
And Darkness may be Solitude no more.

Sephres. I speak, but yet my Voice almost affrights me,
Three Times the circling Hours have brought the Morn
To other Realms, if other Realms there are
Which yet the Morn revisits, since these Eyes
Were blessed with cheerful Light; nor yet has Sound
Divided once the long, deep, death-like Silence.

AIR, by Pharaoh. O Darkness! dreaded not in vain,
My Soul admits thy awful Train;
With me thy kindred Terrors dwell,
And Joy, and Peace, and Hope expel.

AIR, by Sephres. O chearing Light! of Life and Joy
Fair Emblem! will thou never return!
No more thy golden Shafts employ!
No more with genial Radiance burn!

RECITATIVE. Pharaoh. This Darkness is to Death. -- Great Nature dics,
And we but perish with her -- Hark!
A Symphony, a confused Expression of Joy, as of Shouts at a Distance. Again --

Sephres. It seemed a distant Shout -- behold the Cause!
Transporting Sight! a dim, but bright'ning Ray
Shoots Eastward hence, and struggles through the Gloom.

Pharaoh. It does! increasing and prevailing still!


Sephres. A wild tumultuous Joy throbs at my Heart,
From Terror scarce distinguished; still I tremble.

Pharaoh. I am again myself, and scorn the Fears,
The vain fantastic Fears, that Darkness breeds;
Let the loud Trumpets sound, that if the Sun
Still combats with a Foe not yet subdued,
The Sound may lend him Aid, and let your Song
Conjure the Powers of Darkness from the Sky.
SONG and CHORUS.
Hence! ye Powers of Death and Night!
Hence! the Living claim the Light!
By your dreary Realm that lies
Stretched beneath infernal Skies,
By the Ghosts that own your Sway,
Ghosts that hate the cheerful Day,
Hence! ye Powers of Death and Night!
Hence! the Living claim the Light.

Enter Moses. RECITATIVE. Pharaoh. Enter not here, thou Enemy of Man.

Moses. Here I must enter, for again commissioned
By him whose Hand has been so ost upon thee,
I come to claim an injured Nation's Freedom.

Pharaoh. Dare thou again, with that ill-omen'd Voice,
Urge thy Demand, and tempt again my Mercy!

Moses. What should I fear from thee! I trust in God.
Sever these Limbs in Fragments small as Dust,
And give them scattered to the Winds of Heaven,
If he commands, united in a Moment,
Again, as now, they shall appear before thee,
To work his Pleasure, and denounce his Vengeance.

Enter Menytis. Menytis. O Friend! O Brother! wherefore are ye thus?
Change these fierce Looks of Anger and Defiance
For such as heretofore ye took and gave --
Remember, Pharaoh, he who stands before thee
Our Father's Sister cherished as her child;
Remember, Moses, what thou wast to Pharaoh,
His Friend, the favored Brother of his Choice --

AIR, by Menytis. Friendship is the Joy of Reason,
Dearer yet than that of Love;
Love but lasts a transient Season,
Friendship makes the Bliss above:
Who would lose the sacred Pleasure
Felt when Soul with Soul unites!
Other Blessings have their Measure,
Friendship without Bound delights.

Pharaoh. In vain you urge me, outrag'd and defied --
Henceforth the Wretch shall see my Face no more.

Moses. Well have thou said; this Object of thy Scorn
Henceforth indeed shall see thy Face no more.

DUET. Pharaoh and Moses. Phar. Fly, and see my Face no more;


Moses. I will see thy Face no more:


Phar. Dread my Rage,


Moses. Thy Rage I scorn,
Dread thyself the rising Morn:

Phar. Vain thy Menace -- hence! away --


Moses. Tyrant, I disdain to stay.

CHORUS.
Hence! and try thy Arts again,
Vain the past, the future vain;
Pharaoh shall thy Power defy,
And with Glory live, or die.

PART II.
SCENE I.
Goshen; the Time, Evening. First and Second Israelite, and Chorus. RECITATIVE.
1st Israelite. When shall our Labors and our Wrongs be past!
The Rising Sun beholds our Toils commenced,
The Setting comes, and sees them still unfinished.

2d Israelite. O! that untroubled by deccitful Hopes
Content still sweetened Toil, and welcome Rest
Still crowned our Evening when the Day was past!

Enter Moses. Moses. Cease to repine, nor with ungrateful murmurs
Accuse the wise Benevolence of Heaven.

1st Israelite. It Is not in Mortals to endure the Pains
That Rage now adds to Bondage, and be silent.
AIR. At early Dawn the laboring Hind
With rustic Song his Toil beguiles,
Who hopes at dusky Eve to find
In homely Cot domestic Smiles.
But he whose sad Reward is Pain,
Whom Sorrow meets at his Return,
Can never the Load of Life sustain,
To hide his Anguish never can learn.

RECITATIVE. Moses. Mark me; by me your Strength JEHOVAH speaks,
Ever yet Tomorrow's Dawn shall tinge the Skies,
The Sons of Israel shall depart from Egypt.

2d Israelite. If this were certain, all our Toils and Pains
Would in a Moment be, like Dreams, forgotten.

Moses. That this is certain, let the Signs attest,
Which he who speaks by me, by me has wrought.
AIR. By Doubts and Fears no more deprest,
To Hope we give the joyful Breast,
To Hope and all her smiling Train;
Great Nature's Lord, our Guard and Guide,
Our Hearts in Nature's Lord confide,
And Egypt's haughty Power disdain.

SCENE II.
The outward Court of the Palace at Memphis: the Time, two Hours after
Midnight. An Officer of the Guard. To him another Officer of the Palace.
RECITATIVE. 2d Officer. Thy Looks are wild, and Terror's in thy Eye:
What of this dreadful Night upon thy Watch
Has Rumor brought thee?

1st Officer. Nothing have I learnt;
What my own Thoughts suggest I fear to tell thee.

2d Officer. What have thou heard or seen while others slept?


1st Officer. As here I kept my Watch, some two Hours since,
At Depth of Midnight, when the World around
Was hushed in awful Silence, next to Death,
A sudden Blast, impetuous from the South,
Shook the proud Palace to its Base, and soon
A general Groan on all Sides coho'd round me;
Loud Shrieks of Terror, and the languid Moans
Of Grief succeeded; ever and anon
A ghastly Face rushed by me, full of Haste,
And Terror and Distraction: Often I asked
What had befallen 'em, but gained no Reply,
Save broken Words and frantic Exclamations.

2d Officer. Where will Destruction stop! the eldest Hope
Of every House, as far as yet we learn,
This Night expired; and Egypt's proudest Boast,
Heir to her Empire, now lies cold in Death.
AIR. Death wherever we turn we meet,
Death has broke through Nature's Bounds,
Death the sighing gales repeat,
Death from every Echo sounds.

RECITATIVE. 1st Officer. See where the Sister of our King approaches,
With all the weeping Virgins of her Train!

2d Officer. They hoped to grace the Nuptials of the Prince:
A softer Band had bound him, had not Heaven
Given up our Land to Darkness and to Death.

Enter Menytis, and a Chorus of Egyptian Virgins. AIR by Menytis. Alas! in
blooming Youth he died,
Ever hallowed Love his Virtue blessed;
When conscious Blushes warmed the Bride,
And tender Tumults filled her Breast:
Ye Virgins now no Myrtles twine,
No Roses for his Bed prepare;
In Silence over his Grave incline,
And strew the sading fragrance there.
CHORUS.
No more our Hands shall Myrtles twine,
Nor Roses for his Bed prepare;
Our Heads shall over his Grave incline,
And fading sweets be scattered there.

RECITATIVE. Menytis. O! that my Tears had yet in Time prevailed,
And Israel's Tribes had been dismissed from Egypt!

1st Virgin. What unknown Woes may Pharaoh yet incur,
If yet he grants not the Demand of Moses!

Menytis. Your Fears, if yet there can be ought to fear,
Are vain, for all that Israel asks is given:
Now on their March they leave this wasted Land,
And shake the Dust of Egypt from their Feet;
So willed the King, who, deaf to Comfort's Voice,
On the bare Earth lies stretched in silent Sorrow.

AIR, by Menytis. How vain is Grandeur's purple Pride!
And Guards and Roofs of Gold how vain!
Through circling Guards can Sorrow glide!
And golden Roofs are claimed by Pain.
Give me, ye Powers, unknown to dwell,
Remote from Pomp, and Care, and Strife,
Secure from Passions that rebel,
And sheltered from the Storms of Life.

RECITATIVE. 1st Officer. But see the King -- Contending Passions shake him.


Enter Pharaoh. Pharaoh. Accursed Sorcerer! -- But in vain I curse him;
I am myself the Murderer of my Child! --
Why did I fear to take a forfeit Life!
A Life twice forfeit! -- He was once an Outcast
Of a vile Slave, preserved with erring Pity!
And once a Murderer, flying unpursu'd.
My Thoughts are wilder than a Whirlwind's Rage --
Yes, I will follow him to Nature's Verge,
And would to bottomless Perdition's Gulf
Leap after him. --

Menytis. My gracious Lord!


Pharaoh. No more. --


DUET. Menytis and Pharaoh. Men. O! let my Voice Attention gain!


Pha. Thy Suit the World should urge in vain:


Men. Let then my Tears thy Pity move!


Pha. Thy Tears, though Blood, would fruitless prove.


Men. O! for thy Life --


Pha. Forbear --


Men. O! stay --


Pha. My Life I scorn --


Men. For mine! --


Pha. Away. [Exit Pharaoh, the rest following.


SCENE III.
The Borders of the Red Sea. Moses and the Israelites on their March.
RECITATIVE. 1st Israelite. The Joy of sudden Freedom is too great;
The expanding Heart is pained to give it Room.

2d Israelite. My Spirits all mount upward, and I feel
As I could tread on Air; even Nature's Wants
Almost I could forget, and Toil, and Hunger,
Lose their Effects upon me as I march.
AIR. Less are youthful Charms to Love,
Less is Danger to the Brave,
Less to Misers Gold must prove,
Less than Freedom to the Slave.
CHORUS.
This is sacred Truth's Decree,
Truth, the Friend of human Race;
Death is Honor to the Free,
Life is to the Slave Disgrace.

Enter Messenger. RECITATIVE. Messenger. Cease the loud Triumph of your joyful
Strains:
Egypt's stern Tyrant, dreadful and resistless,
As the blue Pestilence that rides the Wind,
Enraged pursues us with prevailing Speed;
The rapid Chariot plows the smoking Ground,
And the proud Courser scorns our tardy flight.
CHORUS.
O! Words of Horror! dreadful Sound!
A thousand Deaths beset us round!
Our Hope is vain, and vain our Prayer,
It Is Anguish all! it is all Despair.

Enter Moses. RECITATIVE. Moses. So soon, ye Faithless! can ye sear so soon!
Turn not your Eye to yonder idle Pomp
Of mortal Foes, the Children of the Dust;
But look before ye, where the cloudy Pillar,
That marks your destined Way to Peace and Safety,
Veils the dread Power who from himself began,
And fills Eternity! before whose Eye
All Nature stands rebuked.

1st Israelite. Forgive the involuntary Fears that rise
From Dangers such as these, so great, so sudden;
Behind us drives the Foe, whose Iron Hand
Our suffering Tribes have felt, and mourned so long;
Before us, with inexorable Wave,
The Sea, far sounding, beats the sullen Shore.

Moses. Let me, while thus I lift my Hand to Heaven,
Teach ye, once more, to trust eternal Truth.
[As he lifts up his Rod, the Sea is supposed to be suddenly divided.
A Symphony expressing the Commotion of the Waters.
CHORUS.
It parts! it parts! the liquid Walls behold,
Of Wave on Wave in foaming volumes rolled!
In Terror fixed, the Sea forgets to flow,
And leaves unveiled the hoary Gulf below;
In Safety pass, ye chosen Tribes, along,
And let the parted Deep resound your Song.

PART III.
SCENE I.
The Red Sea; the Israelites passing on before the Egyptians. First and Second
Israelite. RECITATIVE. 1st Israelite. Still I rejoice with trembling; when I
gaze
On this stupendous Precipice above,
And pass this yet untrodden Gulf below,
My Heart dies in me, and my Fears prevail.

2d Israelite. Fear not; the Hand that guides us, will protect,
Till we have passed in Safety to the Shore:
In Times to come, when we shall rest in Peace,
Beneath the Shade of our own Vine and Fig Tree,
Rememb'rance of our Dangers past will raise
Repose to Pleasure, Pleasure to Delight.
AIR. How blessed is he whose tranquil Mind,
When Life declines, recalls again
The Years that Time has cast behind,
And wins Delight from Toil and Pain!
So, when the transient Storm is past,
The sudden Gloom, and driving Shower,
The sweetest Sunshine is the last,
The lov'liest, is the Evening Hour.

RECITATIVE. 1st Israelite. But see our Foes pursue us --


2d Israelite. Far behind
Discomfited they linger, and from hence
Not even their glittering Armor is descried.

1st Israelite. Their Arms we see not, for the guiding Cloud
That led our Van now guards us in the Rear.
The Way grows sleep; ascending from the Abyss
Behold the Thousands that pass on before us;
A moving Column, rising Rank over Rank,
Swarm on the Ascent, and quicken all the Way!
CHORUS.
It Is done! the wondrous Journey's over!
They quit the deep! they gain the Shore!
They view with Joy the Path they trod,
And hark! their Shout ascends to God!

SCENE II.
The Borders of the Red Sea in the Desert. The Israelites as just landed on the
Coast. RECITATIVE. 1st Israelite. Still stands the Deep divided, still our Foes,
For now I see their glittering Arms advance. --

2d Israelite. Stand back! -- behold the Prophet! -- give him Way --


Enter Moses. Moses. Fear not the Hosts that now enraged pursue;
Though now ye see them, ye shall see no more.
Ye Waters, who at his Command, whose Voice
First called ye forth from Nothing, left disclosed
The World's Foundations, now again return,
And at his Bidding in your Channel flow.
AIR. Again the Voice of GOD is heard,
Again the rushing Waters meet;
The Waters, that beheld and scared,
Now pay their Homage at his Feet!

RECITATIVE. Israelite. Behold where boasting Egypt lies overwhelmed!
Over rattling Chariots and the shouting Host,
Flows the calm Wave now silent and at rest:

Moses. Thus over the Race of Man, and all his Works,
The Stream of Time, divided for a Moment,
Shall close for ever; but supreme over all
GOD still remains, eternal and unchanged! --
To him with humble Adoration bend,
And, while ye triumph over the Sons of Egypt,
Let Pity still remember they were Men.

AIR. Israelite. O God of Hosts! to Thee we raise
With humble Hearts our Songs of Praise;
A weak, alas! and guilty Race,
Our Merit claims no partial Grace;
No partial Grace thy Judgments show,
The Father thou of all below!
And Life, and Death, alike proclaim
To Man, the Glorics of thy Name.

RECITATIVE. Moses. But see the Deep returns the lifeless Corse,
And spreads the Shore with Trophies of the Dead:
These were our Foes: -- but Enmity and Life
Should cease together: -- in the silent Grave
All is unbroken Peace; the Oppressor there
From troubling ceases, and the Weary rest.

1st Israelite. Far, far from us be unrelenting Rage,
Revenge, and all the Furies of the Mind!
If God, long suffering, shall chastise our Foes,
Let us, thus warned, rejoice with Fear before him;
In just Displeasure if our Crimes are punished,
Not vainly chasten'd, let us kiss the Rod. --
To these, whatever from Pity they can take,
Let Pity give, for Man is born to Woe.
AIR. With generous Tears the Dead deplore,
They wake to Love, or War, no more,
No longer now destroy or save;
The Dead, alas! no more are Foes;
With pious Hands their Limbs compose
And give, what all must want, a Grave.

RECITATIVE. Moses. To God this Sacrifice of Love is pleasing,
For God is Love! -- stupendous are his Ways!
Ye cannot fathom them -- the Depth and Height
Surpass your utmost Reach of Thought, to me
By Parts disclosed, through Clouds, and dimly seen:
Yet know these Wonders are not for this Age,
Nor you, ye chosen from the Nations, wrought;
These are but Types, the Substance is to come: --
The Prince of Peace, who though from Jacob sprung,
Was yet ere Abra'ms Day; he from worse Bondage,
Shall, like a Shepherd, lead his chosen Race
To yet a better Canaan, there to quaff
The Streams of Life, and taste immortal Fruit.
CHORUS.
Praise to the Lord who reigns supreme above!
Praise to the mystic Wonders of his Love!
Renew the grateful Song of Ages past,
The Song through Heaven's eternal Year shall last.

THE END.

