THE LADY's REVENGE: OR, The ROVER Reclaimed. A COMEDY. As it is Acted at the
THEATER ROYAL in Covent Garden.

Interdum tamen, and vocem Comaedia tollit.
HOR. de Art. Poet. LONDON: Printed for J. BRINDLEY at the King's-Arms, New
Bond-Street, Bookbinder to her Majesty, and his Royal Highness the Prince of
Wales. And Sold by A. DODD, without Temple Bar; J. ROBERTS, in Warwick Lane; J.
WILFORD, behind the Chapter House, St. Paul's Churchyard; and E. NUTT, at the
Royal Exchange. M.DCC.XXXIV.

TO His ROYAL HIGHNESS The PRINCE.
SIR,
THE Advantage, which a Nation reaps from an Encouragement given, by Princes,
to Letters in general, cannot be unknown to your Royal Highness, whose
extensive Knowledge in all Parts of History, would make it the highest Piece of
Presumption in me to pretend to quote Authorities to show, what Alterations the
Study or Neglect of Letters have caused in the same People.

Your Royal Highness's Goodness in being graciously pleased to accept the
Dedication of the following Scenes, shows not only how much your Royal Highness
has at Heart the Advancement of Learning in general, but of that Branch in
particular, whose End is to expose the Vices, and ridicule the Follies of
Mankind.

I could have wished this first Attempt had been an Offering more worthy of the
high Protection it receives from your Royal Highness's Name. But Comedy, though
not the noblest Production of the Mind, is not the least unuseful; and it is
sufficient if there is a Tendency toward doing Good, in any Work, to make that
Work appear deserving in your Royal Highness's Eye.

This being the only Merit I pretend to, I beg Leave, as the most grateful
Heart always feels more than it can express, to be allowed to return my most
dutiful Acknowledgments by an inward Consciousness of that profound Truth,
Respect, and Gratitude, with which I am,

SIR, Your Royal Highness's Most Obliged, Most Dutiful, and Most Devoted humble
Servant, W. POPPLE.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE discontinuing the acting of a Play, that has been well received by the
Town in general, at a Time when it might have gone on, makes it necessary to
give some Account of what has past since the first Night of its Representation,
and of the Motives that made the Author put a Stop to its Run.

A Report having been maliciously raised, and industriously spread all over the
Town, that the Play was a Party Play, and supported by the Court, and therefore
to be opposed, Numbers of Persons came into the House with an Intent, (as the
Term is) to damn it at all Events.

Thus determined, they took hold of every little Slip that, -- Aut Incuria fudit
Aut humana parum cavit Natura --
and were very clamorous: However, the Play having had a fair Hearing, went off
with infinitely more Applause than Blame.

The Second Night the particular Things objected to, being taken out, the Play
was acted from Beginning to End, without one single Mark of Displeasure in the
Audience.

The Third Night it went off in the same Manner, to the most numerous and
splendid Audience that could be seen.

The Fourth Night a Set of about eight or ten young Fellows went to the Bedford
Coffee-House in the Piazza, and declared publicly that they came purposely to
damn the Play, and would not leave the Playhouse till they had compassed their
Ends. The same Declaration they repeated when in the House to some Gentlemen
that wero there, Friends (but unknown to them) to the Author.

Accordingly Mr. Ryan coming on to speak the Prologue, they began their Uproar,
but were soon silenced, and the Prologue was heard with Applause: The Play
beginning, they began again, and were so loud that Mr. Ryan acquainted them,
that as he could not imagine there was any thing in the Play they could except
against, he was apprehensive he had the Misfortune to displease them. Mr. Quin
then came on, and told them he found the House was divided, and as the Majority
was for hearing the Play, he hoped those who were not, would go out. The House
on that were unanimous, and cried, Turn them out, Turn them out, but they saved
the Audience the Trouble of doing it, and retired under the general Hiss of
every Person then present: After which the Play went on without the least
Disturbance.

The Author having reflected that Malice, though it could do the Play no Hurt,
might affect Mr. Rich, by keeping Persons from the House, who have no great
Relish for Noise, chose rather to discontinue the further acting of the Play,
and to refer himself to the Judgment of every impartial Reader, to whom he
freely commits it, being determined as frankly to acknowledge any real Fault
found with it, as to justify it, if censured without Reason.

The Author cannot conclude, without declaring how much he thinks himself
obliged to every Actor for the Care taken in the acting it, and more
particularly to those who having the principal Parts to perform, had an
Opportunity to exert themselves, as they did, in the most satisfactory Manner.

PROLOGUE.
By AARON HILL, Esquire
WHEN Love's taught Dangers animate the Stage,
Your Ears, ye Fair! let the soft Scenes engage:
Let each bright List'ner mark the Wiles we show,
And catch dumb Caution, from the pictured Woe.
-- Guiltless of Farce, to Night, the meaning Player
Courts not your Laughter -- but, alarms your Care.
Man, the Deceiver! veils his cruel Art:
And skreens himself, within the attempted Heart.
There, to ungenerous Empire, climbs, ere long:
Helped by the Confidence, he means to wrong!
-- This, to detect, we act his Falsehood over:
And, the Deluder, known, betrays no more.
Such, the best Business of the Comic Muse!
Love has a thousand Lessons, to infuse:
-- Not always Lightness should ungrace the Scene. --
To laugh at Folly, but indulges Spleen.
Coxcombs, and Fops, in harmless Error stray:
And trip, undangerous out of Passion's Way.
Misers, and Sots, less, Mirth, than Pity, move:
And, Dullness brings an Antidote, for Love.
-- But, there is a Traitor, armed, in amorous Mail!
Born, to attempt, and, fashioned to prevail!
Disguised in Softness -- by deep Arts endeared:
And, always dangerous -- because, never feared.
Him, in our Glass of Life, to Night, we show:
Nor stoop the condescending Scene, too low.
Hence, if too grave, for Comedy, we seem,
Think us but suited to our serious Theme. --
-- It Is no light Loss, when charming Woman falls!
On our Defense, the Sex's Merit calls. --
We, who the Pictures of a World impart,
Neglect not what concerns its fairest Part.
All Danger, to that Sex, thus frankly shown,
At the same Time, does Honor to our own.
Nor let Neglect of Laughter move the Pit,
To dread, in Consequence, a Dearth of Wit.
Unmeaning Mirth may live, in empty Noise:
But, solid Converse swells our softer Joys.
-- Once, in an Age of Tumbling, Dance, and Song,
Suppose not two short Hours of Sense, too long!
-- Not even the Fashion Change of Taste denies!
Often MERRY here, -- let us be, sometimes -- WISE!

EPILOGUE.
By AARON HILL, Esquire
Balked, as I am, -- my Heart's best Hope, miscarried,
Tried, cast, and sentenced to be hanged; -- that is married!
Ere I Am turned off, I think it but my Duty,
To warn, in my last Speech, fast-falling Beauty.
First, Maidens! let my sad Example teach ye,
To put no Trust in Man -- 'till he can reach ye.
For, should you strive, too near, his Strength so mighty,
That, down you come, at once -- and, then -- Good Night to ye!
Next, O ye Wives! trust not in Beauty's Merit:
But, to your Body's Influence, add your Spirit.
With your Eye's Lightning, mix a Tongue, that thunders:
Believe me -- Love, so double-arm'd, works Wonders!
-- Yet, if nor Charms, nor Eloquence, can save ye; --
But, your good Man will break the Faith he gave ye:
Be you beforehand with him. -- That Reproving
Will make him own there is Guilt, in too light loving.
And for you, Widows, -- you're too wise, sor teaching,
But, suffering Malefactors must be preaching.
So, take one Word of Council, in your Calling:
Though you're too brave, I know, to fear a Falling.
-- From your old Yoke, set free, admit no new one,
Unless with some, poor, brisk, young, kind, and true one. --
The conscious Youth, long, mindful of your Favor,
Will make up all Defects, with good Behavior. --
Loath, that his Wants his Gratitude should smother;
What he cannot bring you, one Way -- comes another.
And, now, good People! what I Have, more, to say to ye,
Should be, a doleful Tune, and sigh, and pray to ye.
-- But, doleful Tunes, of late, are grown so common,
They move more Sorrow, than a dying Woman!
And, Sighs, and Prayers, are best, when made in private,
As you all know, who have good Ends to drive at.
What shall I do, then? -- shall I hang, and tarry?
Or, bold, in saving Faith, go on, and marry?
It Is, both Ways, bad! -- But, I Have, at once, bethought me,
Of a sweet Lesson, dear Revenge has taught me!
-- I Will stay, and see Sir Harry in his Fetters:
Nor be so rude, to swing, before my Betters.
Pass but his Honey-moon of Sunshine Weather,
And He, and I, may, then, go, hang, together!

EPILOGUE
Sent by an unknown Hand, the Third and Fourth Night.
Spoken by Mrs. YOUNGER. WHAT odd Conclusions senseless Poets make;
Half-witted Rogues, so grossly to mistake!
Grant, that, to lay the Scruples of my Betters,
'Twas right to marry off us tender Creatures:
But why thus sent away from charming London!
Where Folks can thrive -- after they have once been undone.
How many Men raise Fortunes by their Fall!
Compound their Debts, and get the Devil and all.
And Women too, as some among you know,
Often from their Fall receive the rising Blow.
Buried alive with Creatures underbred,
I must do filthy Things to get my Bread.
These Hands, that used to pat Sir Harry's Cheek,
Must milk a Cow, at least ten Times a Week.
These Feet that hardly could the Pavement bear,
Never more shall be relieved by Coach or Chair;
This Face, no longer guarded by a Fan,
The scorching Sun, and Oven's Blaze must tan.
I that till Ten, in Bed each Morning lay,
Must feed my Husband's Lambs by Break of Day;
Born for Intrigue, my Talent I must bury,
Employed between my Kitchen and my Dairy.
Be dressed but once a Week, and if I should
Meet with some young Fox-hunter in a Wood,
Tom, who knows all my Tricks, would spoil our Game,
Thrash me, perhaps; and call me -- what I am.
The Farm be hanged. -- A Woman of my Spirit
Confined to dirty Work! -- I cannot bear it.
I Will even stay here. -- My Beauty, or my Wit
May get a Keeper Lord, or Husband Cit.
At worst, I Will be a Court-end Milliner;
A Shop, and a First Floor, cannot fail me there.
Where Beaux may find, if they are for Lace or Love,
Myself below -- and a clear Stage above.

Dramatis Personae.
Sir Harry Lovejoy. Mr. Ryan. Heartly. Mr. Walker. Sir Lively Brainless. Mr.
Chapman. Tom. Mr. Salway.
Lady Traffic. Mrs. Hallam. Angelina. Mrs. Buchanan. Laetitia Lovejoy. Mrs.
Bullock. Betty. Mrs. Younger. Jenny. Miss Norsa.
Scene, London. Time, from Morning to Evening. THE LADY's REVENGE: OR, The
ROVER Reclaimed.
ACT I.
Sir Harry discovered, drinking Tea. A Lovely Morn! How gay the Prospect from
this Window! The Park is now in all its Glory. How sweet the Air! Methinks, I
feel myself renewed. Let me indulge a while. This vernal Breath awakes my
Senses, gives Vigor to my Understanding. O Joy, thou necessary Friend to Human
Minds! Without thee, what were Life, attended even with all its Sweets! And yet
how small a Part of Life do thou fill up! [Pauses, and sips Tea]. What a
subjected Thing is Man! -- How soon he changes? A Breath of Wind too hot or
cold; an ill-digested Meal, a Wish unsatisfied, in a Moment shall destroy this
happy Turn of Mind. -- And then -- the Morn no longer lovely, the Prospect dull
-- tasteless the Air! -- If it was not for dear Woman.


Enter Tom. Tom. Sir, Mr. Heartly is come to Town, and desires to know when he
may wait on you.


Sir Har. Ha! Heartly come to Town! I am glad on it. Here, Tom, my Service, and
tell him the sooner he comes the better. -- An honest Fellow, this Heartly, but
a little too scrupulous. He denies himself the Pleasures of Life, from a
Notion, that unless the Law has prescribed the Manner of using them, they ought
not to be enjoyed.


Enter Laetitia. Laet. Good Morrow, Brother; I want some Discourse with you:
But you are so eternally taken up, there is not an Hour free, to give Audience
to a Sister. I come to talk with you, about your Behavior of late.


Sir Har. Pr'ythee, Laetitia, don't affect Gravity. It becomes you as ill --


Laet. As it does you. But this is an Affair that requires a serious Answer,
which I desire therefore you will give me. What do you mean by your Addresses to
Angelina? Do you really love her; or is it mere Gallantry?


Sir Har. Before I give you a serious Answer, I must desire to know the Reason
of your asking.


Laet. I will not tell him Angelina has discovered her Passion for him to me; that
would be unfair; nor should I like to be served so myself. [aside.] -- Nay,
nothing but Curiosity. You seem, of late, contrary to your usual Custom, to be
very particular to her, among other Ladies; and I own I love her so, that I
could wish our Friendship were cemented yet closer. That Is all.


Sir Har. Well, Sister, to deal frankly with you, as much as I can love, I love
Angelina. She has Youth, Beauty, good Sense, and Fortune; but so have a
thousand other Women. Now whether these will always please in Angelina, as much
as they do now, or whether I shall not want to try, if these Perfections will
not please more in other Women, -- Gad, I cannot tell. -- I Am of such a
fluctuating Temper, I cannot answer for myself long. -- At present, I own I see
her with a Lover's Eye.


Laet. Well, that is enough for me! It Is Angelina's Business to keep you
constant, when once she gets you.


Sir Har. I hope then you're satisfied. And now, Sister, give me Leave in my
Turn to question you. -- But first I must tell you Heartly is come to Town.


Laet. [aside] What does he mean? -- Brother, I cannot stay now: Some other
Time. I must dress myself to meet Angelina. We are to go to the Auction
together.


Sir Har. Nay, I shall not keep you long: I Have only one Question to ask you.


Enter Tom. Tom. Sir, Mr. Heartly's below.


Sir Har. Show him up.


[Exit Tom. Laet. Let me be gone. I would not for the World he should see me
thus.


Sir Har. Methinks, you're well enough dressed.


Laet. O fie, how can you say so?


Sir Har. Ah, Laetitia, this Delicacy discovers what you would conceal.


Laet. I don't care what it discovers, so I get away. O Lud, I hear him coming.
I will not stay one Moment.

[Exit.
Enter Heartly. Sir Har. My dearest Heartly, I am overjoyed to see you.


Hear. I do assure you, Sir Harry, I thought the Time long on many Accounts.
But will you forgive me an abrupt Question? Was not that your Sister that left
you, as I came up? I got a Glimpse as she shot along, and thought it was that
dear Figure, whose Resemblance, still fresh in my Memory, during my Retirement,
ever kept me Company.


Sir Har. It was indeed. But she was not well dressed enough; she wanted a Pin,
or a Patch, I suppose, or some such important Matter. A foolish Maxim in the
Sex, Ned, always to appear to the best Advantage before Marriage. It makes the
Difference but too sensible after, when we see and feel the Neglect.


Hear. The Reason of her going was however kind. But tell me, Sir Harry, are
you a little more reconciled to old England than you was, when we last parted?
Have our pretty Countrywomen made any Impression on your Heart?


Sir Har. My Heart, Ned, was ever soft, and will, like Wax, as easily take as
lose an Impression. But I Am such a Convert to my Countrywomen's Charms, that I
think they want nothing but a little more Gaiety and Life to make them as much
more agreeable, as they are already more beautiful than those of other Nations.


Hear. This is something. I am pleased to see you can do Justice to your own
Country.


Sir Har. Pr'ythee, dear Ned, for once lay aside thy Partiality to thy own
Country. Look upon thyself as a Foreigner. That done, observe our charming
Countrywomen, at a Visit or a Play; see how they sit with their Hands rivetted
to their Fans, and placed just in the Center of their pretty Persons;
motionless, unless it be to display the Furbelows of that little Engine, and as
silent.


Hear. You are the first that ever complained of that.


Sir Har. I Would have 'em speak in every Gesture. Give me a Woman, whose very Air
and Manner speak, and are a tacit Confession that they have --


Hear. Have -- what?


Sir Har. What? Why as much Inclination as Power to charm.


Hear. And have you found none such? How did Sir Peregrine's Lady prove? I
think I left you hot in that charitable Pursuit. I don't expect to find you so
now?


Sir Har. Why faith, Ned, it would be odd if you did. A beautiful Woman is like
a well-wrote Book, every Leaf you turn over, at first affords new Pleasure; but
when you're forced to read it daily, from one End to the other, you will find but
little Inclination to begin again.


Hear. You're witty, Sir. But is this Argument only to hold good for the Men?
Have not Women the same Plea for Inconstancy?


Sir Har. Ah, Friend! That it was but so! How happy should we be! But there is a
Fatality in the Way of loving, of the two Sexes, that renders both miserable.
Enjoyment lessens our Passion, and increases theirs.


Hear. Then you was successful? And now, like a restless Tyrant, despise your
Conquest, and seek for new Acquisitions.


Sir Har. Successful! Ay, that I was, to tell you a Secret, long before honest
Sir Peregrine took a Bargain off my Hands, that began to puzzle me a little how
to dispose of.


Hear. How, Sir Harry!


Sir Har. In few Words then, thus: Lady Traffic, then Lucia Bellfast, old
Colonel Bellfast's Daughter, was very pretty, I very amorous. Our Neighborhood
gave me many Opportunities of seeing her, which I improved, till at last I
found myself tenderly beloved. I caught the Infection too, and doated on her;
promised Marriage; which I intended to execute. The Saints in Heaven, and her
Maid, were Witnesses to my Vows. Lucia thought the Security good, and delivered
into my Arms the loveliest Person they had ever held. With Joy we often met,
and with Reluctance parted, cursing the Day that came so soon, and obliged me
to disappear, before any of the Family was up, but the trusty Maid. Much about
this Time Sir Peregrine came down to Lucia's Father, fell in Love with the
Daughter, asked her of him, and obtained her. She would have declared our
Affair, to avoid a Match she hated, and to have been mine, as I had promised;
but having no great Stomach to the Match, and finding she would not suffer in
her Reputation by the Affair, I advised her to accept the Gentleman's Offer, in
such a Manner, that she saw she must, or be undone. I own 'twas unkind. -- She
did not see me for a long Time after she was married, and, I believe, never
would, had not her Husband's Affairs called him abroad.


Hear. And so, not content with forcing this fond Creature to give her Vows to
a Man she hated, you forced her too, to violate those very Vows, and --


Sir Har. Hold, Ned, not so fast. I did all I could, indeed, but she was
obstinate, and never would. It was in vain to allege former Intimacies; she
wept, and answered me with her Husband, her Husband, at ever Word. Is it not
odd, Ned, a Woman should be constant to a Man she hates, and refuse one she
loves?


Hear. It may seem so to you. But People that think there is something beside
Passion, that ought to be listened to, may, perhaps, be of a different Opinion.
But now you mention her Husband, pray what is become of him?


Sir Har. Gone.


Hear. Gone! What do you mean, Sir?


Sir Har. Why gone -- Gone to Heaven, Man.


Hear. What dead!


Sir Har. Ay, Sir. -- And the generous, goodnatur'd Creature, left his Widow
all he had: If he had not, it would have been a heavy Tax on me.


Hear. 'Twas generous indeed. I heard he was a worthy Man.


Sir Har. Yes, faith, too worthy to make a Cuckold of.


Hear. Pr'ythee, be serious.


Sir Har. Why then, in few Words, -- her Husband, Sir Peregrine's private
Affairs, obliged him to go to Leghorn. These very private Affairs obliged him
to leave that Place soon after, and make a short Voyage. Short, indeed, it was;
for the Ship and Crew were all cast away on the Coast of Barbary, near Sallee.
Like a prudent Man, he had made his Will before he went, and thus my Lady
Traffic became a young and rich Widow. Now, Ned, you know a Woman cannot hold
out for ever against a Man she loves. Her Husband's Death left her without any
Excuse, and her own Heart pleaded strongly for me. Then she hoped too to make
me more than ever fond, and like a fond Fool marry her. She took the wrong
Method. -- However our Commerce, which now I am very sorry for, was renewed
again; again she trusted me, and was again deceived.


Hear. So soon cool!


Sir Har. I should be tired of an Angel, unless she could vary her Form. Like
Ovid, I Am for the black, the fair, the plump, the lean, the tall, the short.
All, all. -- To be plain, I never saw a Woman, but had something pleasing in
her.


Hear. Still wild and inconstant!


Sir Har. Ay, faith. And when I grow otherwise, it must be for a very bad
Reason. Why, Sir, to show you what a Man of Business I am, I have at present an
honorable Affair upon my Hands, which does not hinder me from amusing myself
with my Mistress's Woman.


Hear. Thou art a bold Lover, faith.


Sir Har. Psha, psha, Women don't like one the worse for that.


Hear. But who is it that has kindled this honorable Flame in your Breast?


Sir Har. One that might warm a Hermit's frozen Breast. Angelina.


Hear. My Lord Lovewell's Daughter. I think she is an only Child. She must be
rich.


Sir Har. Ay, Sir, she wants for nothing. Then, Sir, I have, which with all my
Soul I wish I had not, this Lady Traffic, as troublesome as a Dun. when a Man
has nothing to pay. -- But this does not hinder me from laying close Siege to
another, who is on the Point of dropping into my Arms, Young and pretty as an
Angel.


Hear. But can this Angel vary her Form?


Sir Har. Time enough for that yet. She Is a Virgin. O Ned, there is something so
charming in the first Struggles of a young and yielding Heart! -- We quarrelled
last Night, which I am confident will advance my Affair more than the most
favorable Opportunity would.


Hear. Well, Sir, you are an Adept in the Mystery of Love. For my Part, I have
but one Heart, and find one Mistress fills it quite up. Your Sister, Sir Harry,
holds me at full Play. I came to Town once more, in order to try my Fate.


Sir Har. I wish you Success with all my Heart.


Enter Tom. Tom. Sir Lively, Sir, come to wait on you.


Sir Har. Could the Coxcomb take no other Time? I would enjoy thy Company now.
Well, show him up. Do you know him, Heartly?


Hear. I had some small Acquaintance with him before he went abroad.


Sir Har. A traveled Coxcomb, with great good Nature, and very little Sense,
by which you may judge of the Improvement he has made. A Scrap of a French
Song, and a Coupee after Marcels, sum up his whole Character. Oh, here he is.


Enter Sir Lively, singing. Sir Lively. Vive le Printems,
Il rend le Coeur gay:
Le Mois des Amans
C'est le Mois de May.
Good Morrow, Knight. Mr. Heartly -- This Rencontre is indeed fortunate. Sir, I
am totally yours. -- Hey, what is the Matter? Sir Harry, you look out of Sorts,
discomposed, or, as one might say, Pique.


Sir Har. Pique.


Sir Live. Ay, pique. Why, I own, I was a little severe upon you last Night
before your Mistress; nay, and with her too. Angelina and I jok'd away. Ah
Knight! It Is a witty Rogue.


Sir Har. Ay, Sir, so it seems, by the Choice she made of you to be witty with.


Hear. 'T was prudently done. She Would a Mind to have all the Wit to herself.


Sir Live. Prettily said! Now, by this Light, though he calls one Fool, I cannot be
angry with him. [aside] Heartly, thou have Wit too. Well, I think there are not
three prettier Fellows in England. Pr'ythee let us from a Triumvirate together,
and proscribe. I love proscribing dearly. We'll banish all Coxcombs out of the
Mall.


Hear. Not all, Sir Lively.


Sir Live. Thou shall save a Friend, or so. All else.


Hear. And the Women! What will you do with them, Sir Lively?


Sir Live. Sir Harry shall take Care of them. He has made the Sex his Study. He
is a great Connoisseur that Way. He knows a Whore from a modest Woman, by her
Looks only. Now, I am not so deep learned; for I think there is nothing so like
a modest Woman as a Whore; and I am very apt to mistake one for the other.


Sir Har. 'Twas a cursed Mistake, Sir Lively, you made at Paris.


Sir Live. Mum for that, dear Knight; spare your Friend. [Aside.


Hear. Nay, no whispering, Sir. Come, come, what was that Mistake, Sir Harry?


Sir Har. Psha, a mere Trifle. A Lady of Quality in France, that was deeply in
Love with Sir Lively, desired him to walk thro'a Common Sewer at Midnight, in
order to skreen him from the Fury of an incensed Husband, who unluckily
returning from Versailles, had like to have surpised him dans la Ruelle de
Madam.


Hear. 'Twas unlucky indeed. But I hope, Sir Lively, you had been beforehand
with him, and ha -- ha -- ha Rogue!


Sir Live. Why faith, Ned, she was kind! 'Twas a dear Wench, split me.


Sir Har. The Knight says true. What with the Loss of his Clothes, and Purse,
and Surgeon's Bill, I believe it might have cost him about -- let me see, --
How many hundred Livres was it, Sir Lively?


Sir Live. S'life, he will tell all, and I shall lose my Reputation with Heartly.
-- Her Husband was a damned Debauchee, a Man of Quality! A Wife that has such a
Husband, you know, is never safe. Faith, she made me weep to see the Concern
she was under on my Account. She never minded herself, not she.


Sir Har. That I dare swear. She was too well seasoned.


Sir Live. Well, well, you will have your Jest. Nay, I can bear a Jest from a
Friend. Sir Harry, where do you dine to Day?


Sir Har. Come, come, that shall not save you. Heartly shall know all. This Lady's
Husband, this Man of Quality, this damned Debauchee --


Sir Live. Pox on him, I shall be quite undone, quite ruined.


Sir Har. Appeared in the Tuilleries the next Day, in the very Suit this
jilting Whore, this Lady of Quality, I mean, had robbed Sir Lively of, and was
mistaken for him, by all the English of his Acquaintance.


Hear. How Is this, Sir Lively!


Sir Live. False, by this Light. Sir Harry's a Railleur, and is angry with me,
because I Am better with Angelina than he. But I Will be even with him. I know
what I know. Are you for a Turn in the Park this Morning, Gentlemen.


Hear. I would with all my Heart. But Sir Harry and I have some little Business.


Sir Live. Your Pardon, for having been thus long troublesome. We shall meet
anon at Angelina's. Sir Harry, I intend to dine there. I am welcome at all
Hours. I receive vast Encouragement from her. But I will not teize you longer.
Adieu. -- Nay, you shall not stir.


Sir Har. I Will but wait on you to the Door.


Sir Live. Not a Step -- by my Soul's soft Passion. -- Adieu, my Dears.

[Exit.
Sir Har. At length we have shook off this Coxcomb. But he has staid so long, I
have not Time to enjoy thy Company now. I must to Lady Traffick's, who keeps me
to as strict Attendance, as if, before Gad, I was her Husband.


Hear. And pray, Sir Harry, how do you intend to dispose of this Lady?


Sir Har. Why, faith, Ned, I am a little puzzled as to that, I have not
Ill Nature enough to forsake her, nor Complaisance enough to forsake my
Pleasures for her. She knows my Love is at its lowest Ebb; and that there is
little left but Gratitude to keep it alive. And since that Time, what have I
not suffered? To give you a Sketch of my Life with her, Each Day I see her, and
each Day am regularly entertained with the same Reproaches. -- I hear myself
accused as Author of her Ruin; my own Words, Words, which at certain Moments in
my first Passion's Heat, or when compelled by the fond Question, Do you love,
and will you ever love me? -- Words, which, indeed, I may have said, quoted
back and retorted as so many Proofs of my Inconstancy. In short, my Temper's
quite broke, quite wearied out with struggling. Neither Company nor Friends
divert me. Were I to consult her Humor, I should never be from her. When I but
miss a Day, there is no End of her upbraiding. A Recapitulation of all that has
passed, from the first Moment of our Acquaintance, as surely follows, as such
Recapitulation is followed by Tears, Threats, Passion, Hope, Despair, each in
their Turn.


Hear. But I think you mentioned a Promise of Marriage. Her Husband's Death
leaves that Promise still open, and renews the Justice of her Claim.


Sir Har. You would advise me, then, to marry my --


Hear. I know your Meaning -- your -- Give me Leave to ask you one serious
Question.


Sir Har. Let it be a short one.


Hear. Does your Conscience never reproach you?


Sir Har. Hold, Friend. If you love me, touch not that String. It founds harsh.
I myself avoid to touch it.


Hear. I Have done. Time, and your own good Sense, will make you reflect.


Sir Har. Ay, ay, Time's the best Remedy for Distempers of this kind. Age and
Impotence is your only Specific for an Amorous Constitution. But I must leave
you now, Friend. It will be Evening before I can see you. Till then adieu. At
Angelina's.


Hear. I Will meet you. Adieu, Sir Harry.

[Exeunt.
END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
Angelina's House. Angelina rising from her Toilet, Betty standing by. Ang. NO
News of Laetitia yet? She promised to come before this Time. Betty, what is of
Clock?


Bet. Mem, you have your Watch by your Side.


Ang. Lord, that is true. I forgot it, I protest. Well, I Have the strangest
Memory!


Bet. Ah, Mem, our Memory's very apt to leave us, when something pertic'lar
takes up all our Thoughts.


Ang. Something pertic'lar! [Mimicks her.


Bet. Nay, Mem, I beg your Ladiship's Pardon. I Am but a Servant; and Servants
should see no farther than their Mistresses please: but they will make Remarks
sometimes.


Ang. They will so, ha? And -- what may your wise Remarks infer, if I may be so
bold?


Bet. Why, Mem, when your Ladyship spills your Tea, and scalds your Fingers, or
beats your Dog for not making a Noise; when your Ladyship sighs, looks pensive,
and talks to yourself, I conclude your Ladiship's in Love.


Ang. A very wise Conclusion, truly. And pray, Mem, has not your penetrating
Brain discovered the Object of my Affections?


Bet. O dear Mem! But will your Ladyship forgive me if I tell my Conjectures?
Well, he is the sweetest and most insinuating Gentleman; he is a Man for my Money.


Ang. He! What He? Whom does the Creature mean?


Bet. Mean, Mem! Who can I mean, but Sir Harry.


Ang. Sir Harry! -- The Wench makes me uneasy. I don't know what to think of
her Talk. -- You seem mighty well acquainted with his Merit.


Bet. Better than she imagines. She Would be glad to know as much of him as I do,
for all her demure Looks. Well, I Am resolved I Will make her tiff a little, for
refusing me her cast-off quilted Petticoat. [aside] -- O law, Mem, I mean no
Harm. He only romp'd with me a little, and thrust his Hand --


Ang. You are very free with Gentlemen, methinks.


Bet. Nay, Mem, 'twas only down my Bosom a little: but it was to admire better
the Fineness of the Edging of the last Tucker your Ladyship was pleased to give
me. O Gemini, how my Heart did beat, and my Bosom swell! I Am sure if he had not
pressed it down with his Hand, 'twould have burst my Stays. I was never in such
a Taking before. I trembled every Joint of me. -- Would he had stopped there!

[Sighs, aside.
Ang. What Is that you mutter between your Teeth?


Bet. Nothing, Mem, only Sir Harry told me he had some pretty French Trinkets,
and if I would call at a Place I know, I should take my Choice.


Ang. So, and you went, be sure, Minx?


Bet. No indeed, Mem. -- Would I had not. I had not then lost in one Minute,
what I had been Years keeping, with much Pain and Difficulty, the Lord knows.

[Sighs aside.
Ang. Fetch me my Mantille.

[Walks about angrily.
Bet. Yes, Mem. -- She Is rarely vexed. -- I Am afraid I Have said too much. If she
should really suspect me. [Aside.


Ang. Stay. Is my laced Head come back from Mrs. Darnwell's yet?


Bet. No, Mem.


Ang. And why did not you go fetch it? You're strangely heedless of late.


Bet. Mem, I did go, upon my Honor.


Ang. Your Honor! Hold your Prating, and get yourself ready. I Will walk to
Laetitia's. [Exit Bet.] This Wench has been seduced too by that deceiving Man.
So near me! Sure this would cure another Woman. May be so: But it will not cure me
for all that. I have in me that Principle, which has ruined, and will for ever
ruin those of our Sex, that trust in it. I Have Vanity enough to think I can
reclaim him. Fame speaks of him, as a Man that yields to none in Knowledge or
true Worth; but all lies buried and absorbed in that wild Bent his Temper has
taken. Why then, foolish Angelina, do thou love him, yet know him thus?


Enter Betty. Bet. Mem, Mrs. Laetitia to wait on your Ladyship.


Enter Laetitia. Laet. My dearest Angelina!


Ang. My wild Friend!


Laet. You seem disturbed. What Is the Matter, my Dear?


Bet. O nothing, Mem, only my Lady is tiff'd a little at something I told her
about your Ladiship's Brother.


Ang. Peace, Impertinence, and leave the Room. This Girl is grown so confident,
there is no enduring her. Well, my Dear, and how stands your Heart affected to
your old Lover Heartly? He came to Town last Night, I hear.


Laet. Lover do you call him! It Is the coldest I ever saw. So grave a Lover
must make a very stayed Husband. I shall never endure him.


Ang. Oh, he will mend upon your Hands. Would your wild Brother had some of his
Staidness. I should like him the better for it.


Laet. Faith, so should not I. Give me a Husband, whose Behavior would make me
mistake him for a Lover. I hate those grave, matrimonial Fops, that take away
one's Liking to Marriage, by preaching up the Solemnity of it.


Ang. Fie, my Dear, you make me blush.


Laet. Pretty Angelina, how that Blush becomes you!


Ang. Laetitia! [Smiling.


Laet. Oh, that Smile! There fell ten thousand Lovers; or would have fallen,
had they been here.


Ang. You're strangely Romantic today, my Dear.


Laet. Ay, full of Life and Spirits. Are you for the Auction or the Park?


Ang. Which you will. You may there get rid, perhaps, of this Flow of Spirits.


Laet. Rather acquire more, from the Variety of Objects we shall meet there.
Nothing so raises the Spirits, as a Crowd of gay Creatures fluttering about one.


Ang. You Will some time or other alter this wild Way of thinking, and find more
Pleasure in the Conversation of one Man of Sense --


Laet. Pr'ythee, Angelina, don't be so very wise. I tell you, the solemn Talk
of one Man of Sense, is sometimes more tiresome than the Tittle-tattle of ten
Fools.


Ang. Yes, in the Opinion of such a giddy Girl as you.


Enter Betty. Bet. Mem, Mr. Heartly's below to wait on your Ladyship, and you,
Madam, too.


Ang. Conduct him up.

Enter Heartly. Mr. Heartly, you're welcome to Town.


Hear. Your most obedient humble Servant, Ladies. I ought, Madam, to make some
Apology for this Visit. For, to be sincere, the whole of it was not designed
for you. [To Angelina.


Ang. Lovers need make no Apologies. I take as much of it as was intended me.


Hear. [to Laet.] Madam, I would have done myself the Honor of waiting on you
last Night, but it was so late when I arrived, I feared my Visit might have
been unseasonable.


Laet. It Is as well as it is. All Times are equal to me.


Hear. To the Indifferent all Times, indeed, are equal. But you affect so total
an Indifference, it scarce seems natural.


Laet. You may, perhaps, find it is, though. -- I Have a good mind to use him ill,
for daring to think otherwise. [Aside.


Hear. I have just now parted with Sir Harry, whom I find the very same I left
him, as well as you, Madam. [To Laet.


Ang. Mrs. Laetitia and I were just talking of going to the Auction. Will you
go with us? We'll conclude with a Turn in the Park, and come home and dine at
my House.


Hear. With all my Heart, Madam. But I believe it is too late for the first.


Ang. We can but see. If it is, we'll take up with the Park. Come, my Dear,
shall we go? Betty,

Enter Betty. Do you stay at home.

[Exeunt.
Bet. Yes, Mem. If I am not mistaken, my dear Mistress, Sir Harry will cut you
out Business enough. Well, I shall have a happy Time on it, if they come
together. I Am sure he likes me; and there is a secret Pleasure in rivalling
one's Mistress. When my Lady's out of Humor, and scolds Betty, my Master,
behind her Back, caresses Betty, and comforts her with kind Words, and
something else. Oh the Sweets of such Revenge! Would she would scold me every Day.
Well, I think a Lady's Woman, that is great with her Master, is the happiest
Condition in Life. I promised him to call at Mrs. Darnwell's after Dinner. I
know what he wants. I Am ready enough to go. It Is but the first Step that costs
dear. When a Woman has once given up --


Enter Servant. Serve. Mrs. Betty, your Lady wants to speak with you. She Is
waiting in her Chair, at the Door.

[Exeunt.
Lady Traffick's Lodgings. Lady Traffic sola. Not yet come! How slow we move
when Inclination does not lead us! Can I remember with what Eagerness he used
to fly to see me, and can I bear his Slowness now! Oh Love, fantastic Deity, or
rather impotent and weak! Thou yield'st to every different Temper, and
appear'st, not what thou art, in thy true Nature, but what Man's various Humor
makes thee. When first our Bosoms take thee in, thou seem, indeed, what
flattering Poets call thee, gay, smiling, full of Tenderness and Truth. We
promise ourselves thou art a Deity indeed, and, as a Deity, immortal and
unchangeable: but soon, too soon, alas! thou sicken'st, the pleasing Warmth
decays. Possession, thy proper Food, that which should nourish thee, kills
thee. [Pauses, and looks out impatiently.] Not yet come! What can stay him! --
What? -- The first fair Face he meets. And yet he knows that I expect him;
knows too that I Am distracted when he outstays his Time, or disappoints me.
[Knocking without.] Ha, is not that he? It is. Now cannot I forbear to tell him
how impatient I have been, though I know it will draw on some angry Words.

Enter Sir Harry. You would be sorry, Sir Harry, to come a Moment before your
Time. [In a kind Tone of Voice.


Sir Har. So, sits the Wind thus? -- And you, Madam, to lose an Opportunity of
making me some Reproach.


Lady Traf. The Reproach is rather kind than disobliging. -- Another would be
pleased to be so reproached. [Soft.


Sir Har. Perhaps so.


Lady Traf. Perhaps so! Nay, it is so. Fie, fie, can you be angry that I long to
see you? [Soft.


Sir Har. No, Madam. -- Now shall I be persecuted with so much Fondness, that
my Temper will never bear it, and I shall fly out. [Aside.


Lady Traf. That I bear your Absence with Pain, and that I wish to pass each
Moment of my Life with you, I know it is a foolish Wish: But I must make it,
though I know it should offend you; and yet I am miserable when you are
displeased.


Sir Har. Why all this Tenderness for me! Unhappy Lucia, would I could love
thee as thou deserve. [Aside.


Lady Traf. Whence this Silence? You seem uneasy. Shall I not share your Pain!


Sir Har. Uneasy, Madam!


Lady Traf. Why do you echo thus my Words? and with such cold Formality?
Uneasy, Madam! Have I no other Name, no softer Appellation? There was a Time I
had. -- Then 'twas dearest Lucia, my Life, kind Lucia. -- Such Words, and such
a Tone of Voice, -- an Angel would have fallen.

[Turns her Head aside, and holds her Handkerchief to her Eyes.]
Sir Har. She weeps! -- Nay, give not Way to such a Weakness. You hurt
yourself. In what am I changed? Have I not still the same Regard I ever had? Is
there a Person I esteem like you?


Lady Traf. Regard, Esteem! And is that all? Is there no Love left? [angrily]
Keep your Regard and your Esteem, and give 'em to your Friends; [softly] your
Mistress ought to share your softer Sentiments. And I have quitted all, to
share those softer Sentiments, and would, were it to do again. -- Will you then
rob me of the Price of such a Sacrifice, and pay me with Regard, Esteem!


Sir Har. You still misconstrue what I said. Can there be Love without Esteem,
without Regard? We differ but in Words.


Lady Traf. And why not call it Love? Is there any thing frightful in the Word?


Sir Har. Well, call it Love. How weak you Women are? Each idle Fancy swells
into a Truth with you, when some one pettish Humor which you have, is pleased
to show itself. Let a Man act with the most strict Regard, to all the Ties of
Honor and Conscience, fails he but in one little trifling exterior Mark of
Tenderness, (when, perhaps, he is of a Temper not apt to be fond) it is as if he
had done nothing. No Regard is had for what he does. The little he omits, has
only Power to make Impression on your Minds. It Is such a Weakness. -- One of
your Sense, Lucia, should be above those little Follies of your Sex.


Lady Traf. Had you not used me to those little Follies of my Sex, as you call
them, to those trifling Marks of Tenderness, I had never expected 'em; nor felt
the Want of 'em now. But when I think on what you once was --


Sir Har. There it is again. If a Man once fool's away an idle Hour in soft
Caresses and fond Blandishments, in the Beginning of an Amor, or when the
Blood boils high, he must be ever after toying, ever sooling, or there is no
Quiet for him, and he must expect to be baited and reproached as I am.


Lady Traf. False and scandalous Accusation! made only to color your violated
Faith, and Breach of Truth. You accuse us only, when you know yourselves are
false. Because we love with greater Truth, and that our Passions grow, while
yours decrease and lessen by Possession, you cry out with a saucy Insolence,
and Show of Wisdom, Must we be for ever toying, ever fooling? As if those
little Marks of Fondness and Affection that Lovers give and take, were a
Disgrace to your superior Natures, and a Weakness scarce tolerable in ours.
Curse on your false, dissembling Arts! You can employ those little Marks of
Fondness and Affection; you can fool and toy away not Hours, but Days and
Months, when you would inspire us with a Passion for you. How well you act, when
you would seduce us! You are more fond and foolish even than we; or seem so, the
better to deceive us. You fawn like Spaniels, and lick the Foot that spurns
you. Whilst we, pleased with a Show of Tenderness, that flatters our Weakness,
suspect no Guile; receive you as welcome Guests, and cherish you with still
increasing Love.


Sir Har. Proceed, Madam, I hear you.


Lady Traf. Your Empire settled over us, you show yourselves. First you begin
to languish, and grow tired in our Company; you want Diversion to relieve your
Minds. As we love you with unfeigned Affection, and prefer your Pleasures to
our own, we bear your Absence, in that View, with Satisfaction. That Point
gained, you go on farther. A Coolness succeeds. Our Beauties fade in your Eyes,
want Edge for your palled Appetites: Faintly you deny it; and, to excuse
yourselves, you tell us, Love's a Passion that ought not to make the Business
but the Amusement of Life, and should be never suffered to grow serious.


Sir Har. Pray, Madam, go on.


Lady Traf. Our Minds affected by such new and unknown Doctrine, we reproach
you. Our Reproaches, armed with Truth, perplex and gaul you, and at last beget
Aversion in you; which once born, never dies. Your Aversion draws new
Reproaches from us, and our Reproaches strengthen your Aversion; 'till at last,
Love long since fled, Pity forsakes you too. You leave the miserable Wretch,
you made so, to Sorrow and Repentance; to dear-bought Experience, Guilt and
Shame; unable to conquer her Passion, and condemned never to have it repaid.


Sir Har. What a deal of Truth she utters! That so much Sense, and such
Experience, should not be able to get the better of her Passion! [aside.] Well,
Lucia, is there any thing more? I Am attentive.


Lady Traf. No, I Have done. Perhaps I Have said too much. I know such
Plain-dealing is odious to you, and banishes you hence. -- I Am more concerned
at the cool Blood with which he has heard me, than at the Heat he used to show.
[aside.] -- Perhaps you're offended. Come, you must forgive me. It Is much
against my Will; but I am as full of Weakness, as of Love, and merit more your
Pity than your Anger.


Enter Jenny. Jen. Madam, Dinner waits you.


Lady Traf. Come, Sir Harry.

[Exit.
Sir Har. I Will follow you. What can I do? Go on in this uncomfortable Way!
Impossible. -- I Am now so used to her Person, she moves me no more than if I
had lost my Faculties: And yet to an impartial Eye, she has all that Man can
wish in Form and outward Show. The Fault's not on my Side neither; if I cannot
taste her Beauties, it is no Defect of Appetite; a coarser Meal goes down. -- A
pretty Wench, this. How long have thou been here, Child?


Jen. But this Morning, Sir.


Sir Har. Now am I mad for this Wench, and every Wench I see. What strange
Stuff am I made of! [Aside.


Jen. The Gentleman talks to himself; sure he is mad. I Will in and tell my Lady.

[Exit.
Sir Har. This Wench runs strangely in my Mind. I must talk to her a little.

[Turning about, before he is quite turned, he says these Words, as to the
Maid.] Enter Lady Traffic. And so, Child, you came hither but this Morning?


Lady Traf. No, Sir. But my Lady says she will turn me away before Night, for
fear you should ruin me as you have done her.


Sir Har. [starts] Ha, Lucia! -- You see, Child, I was talking to your Maid. I
love to see human Nature in all its Shapes. You know my Humor.


Lady Traf. I Am not to learn it now. But come, Sir Harry, let us go in to
Dinner. Nay, I Will not trust you; you're such a Rover, you must be kept within
Sight.

When once the Heart its native Home forsakes,
And a new Mistress the Possession takes,
In vain we'd call the little Wanderer back,
Like Stars once shot, it leaves no certain Track.

END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
Sir Harry and Lady Traffic rising from Table. Sir Har. You Have entertained me
nobly, Lucia; you grow prodigal.


Lady Traf. To whom then should I lavish what I have but you? Can I too well
receive you? What is there I would not sacrifice for you? I Would part even with
Life, could it procure a Moment's Pleasure to you, or remove a Moment's Pain.


Sir Har. Nay, that would be too much. I am not so voluptuous, though you often
reproach me with my Pleasures; nor so afraid of Pain, as to purchase one, or
avoid the other, at so dear a Price.


Lady Traf. Well, I could give it though. But come, Sir Harry, I know you love a
Song, and I am always happy when I can give you any Satisfaction. My Maid shall
entertain you with one. She has both Taste and Voice.


Jenny sings. Ungrateful Youth, whom still,
Inspite of all, I love;
In vain you use me ill,
My Grief, not Hate, you move.
Love's Dart,
Forced from the Heart,
Behind it leaves unending Smart,
Then gentler Means employ,
Hard-hearted, cruel Boy;
Or give me leave
To love and grieve
And with false Hopes my Pains deceive.
For Hope alone can ease
A Heart that can no longer please.

Sir Har. I need not ask whose Words these are. [Sir Harry looks at his Watch,
then says aside.] The Time of my Appointment's come.


Lady Traf. So soon!


Sir Har. Did not I tell you I must leave you soon?


Lady Traf. Yes. But I did not think 'twou'd have been quite so soon.


Sir Har. Something of Consequence, I cannot neglect, obliges me to go. Heartly,
that Friend I Have often mentioned to you, waits for me at my Lodgings.


Lady Traf. When shall I see you again?


Sir Har. Perhaps this Evening. But Tomorrow without fail. Adieu.


Lady Traf. Will you then go?


Sir Har. I must.


Lady Traf. You shall -- but -- cannot you stay a little longer?


Sir Har. I understand her well, but have another, newer Call at present.
[aside.] For what? That Time gone, you will still ask more, and more. I know you,
you will be as unwilling in an Hour, to let me go, as you are now. You are too
kind.


Lady Traf. No, by Heaven. Stay but a little longer, and I will let you go.


Sir Har. I cannot stay one Moment now, but I Will return this Evening. Upon my
Honor I will.


Lady Traf. Well, go then. Yet I could wish you would stay. Something within me
tells me I Am ruined, lost for ever, if you go.


Sir Har. Fie, such Weakness becomes a Girl. Go to your Harpsichord, and raise
your Spirits. I Will be with you in an Hour.

[Exit.
Lady Traf. [strikes the Chords.] The Strings, like me, are out of Tune. I
cannot play. I know not what it is that sinks me me thus at once. Methinks I am
going to lose him for ever. Ha, what is this! A Letter! directed to Sir Harry! A
Woman's Hand too. -- O my Heart!

[Reads. YOU left me Yesterday in Anger, because I would not ruin myself for
ever. How could you be so barbarous! For well you knew, should I consent, I am
lost for ever.


Lost indeed, if you consent. O Villain! Will not one Victim suffice? But let us
see farther:

I can bear any Thing but your Anger: Though your Smiles are yet more dangerous;
for then it is hard, hard to resist you.


Poor Creature! Thou art on the Brink of Ruin. Thou stand'st upon a Precipice.
Thou see the Danger, yet avoid'st it not:

My Aunt is gone out. I dare not see you at her House in her Absence. Be at
Mrs. Darnwell's, and I Will meet you there. I Will go as soon as this Letter will be
delivered to you. I am, I fear too much yours, Maria.


I fear so too. But hold, I may prevent her Ruin yet. I Will after him, and my by
Presence confound him. -- Perhaps, enraged, he may abandon me. No Matter.
Within -- Jenny.

Enter Jenny. Get me my Things ready, and order my Chair immediately.

[Exit.
Scene Mrs. Darnwell's. Enter Sir Harry and Tom. Sir Har. Sirrah, do you wait
below. [Exit Tom] Whither am I going, and for what? To take Advantage of a
Weakness which a young and innocent Creature has for me. To rob her of the Calm
she now enjoys, and fill her Breast with Tumult and Disorder. To make those
Eyes ere long overflow with Tears, that used to smile in Innocence; and all to
gratify a brutal Appetite, which I could gratify another Way, and without
Prejudice to her. Why what a Villain am I! No sooner will she have given up her
last and dearest Stake, but she will give a Loose to all those warm Desires,
that yet lie smothered in her Breast. Desire fed, grows strong and violent. No
Tie, no Restraint then. Warm -- tender -- fond -- Ha! The Thought transports
me. To see the first hard Struggles 'twixt Modesty and Love! To see her
trembling with Desire, afraid to show it, and yet showing it through all. By
Heaven there is not a Joy in Life that equals such a Scene. But then the
following Scene! To see her drowned in Tears, regretting what she has done.
Hiding her Eyes, not daring to look up, and conscious that she is not what she
was, yet charmed with what she is; for Love will conquer. I will not think
on it. Futurity must answer for itself; the present Time must be passed away.
The Scene of Life must shift, or we sleep; but --


Enter Maid. Maid. Sir, there is a Lady within, that desires to speak with you.


Sir Har. I come. Well, these are the most convenient Houses, a Man could wish
to have. The Thoughts of a private House has brought more young Girls to their
Ruin, than the Fear of being seen in a public one has kept from it.

[Exeunt.
Scene Angelina's House. Enter Angelina and Sir Lively. Sir Live. It Is strange,
Madam, you will not believe me, when I know it so well. I tell you, at this very
Moment he is at a certain Place I can name you, with a Lady.


Ang. What is it to me where he is, [Peevishly] or with whom. -- Yet I long to
know the Truth. [Aside.


Sir Live. If I can but persuade her to go, and do but catch him there, I shall
be revenged of him for this Morning's Raillery. [Aside.] -- Nay, nay, Madam,
you shall go, and surprise him. 'Twill be most excellent Diversion. I cannot
help smiling at the Thoughts of his Confusion. Have you no Curiosity, Madam?


Ang. More than I shall discover to you. [aside] -- That, Sir Lively, our Sex,
you know, never wants.


Sir Live. Then, Madam, to engage you to go, I Will lay a Wager with you. Do You
see this Snuff Box? It cost me forty Loui's at Paris; it is finely fancied, and
most excellently wrought. Look at it, Madam. I Will wager this Box against the
Quadrille Set you bought this Morning, that if we go, we find him Tete a Tete
with --


Ang. You Will lose, Sir Lively.


Sir Live. No matter, Madam, I Will venture.


Ang. Well, if you will be so rash. -- But under what Pretense can we go to
this House, Sir Lively?


Sir Live. Why, Madam, it is only asking Mrs. Laetitia to go with you to Mrs.
Darnwell's to see some Lace. For the rest you must trust to Chance.


Ang. Mrs. Darnwell's! She Is my Milliner.


Sir Live. Lucky, beyond Expectation! Why you may question her the more easily,
and with the less Suspicion.


Ang. Nay, that would seem too curious in me, as it is but to rally that
Indifference he affects, that I should desire to catch him there, too
particular an Inquiry would make him think oddly of me.


Sir Live. Catch him there! I could give you five hundred Instances of it. Why,
Madam, I Have known him been obliged to jump out of a Window five Stories high,
at Paris, on an unexpected Return of a Husband or Lover.


Ang. Five Stories high, Sir Lively! What sort of a Lady must that have been,
that lodged so high?


Sir Live. A Woman of Quality, upon my Honor. A Countess, Madam. In Paris I Have
known many a Countess and Marquise lodge in a Cinquieme, egad, and glad to
lodge there too.


Ang. Fie, fie, Sir Lively, you wrong the French.


Sir Live. Why, Madam, would you believe it; he had the Assurance to rival me --
me, Madam.


Ang. I Am surpised, indeed, Sir Lively, you two should enter into Competition
in any thing.


Sir Live. Ah, Ma -- dam.


Ang. But see, Mr. Heartly and Laetitia; they come a propos to go with us.

Enter Heartly and Laetitia. My Dear, I was going to Mrs. Darnwell's. She sent
me Word she had a fresh Cargo of Lace, just arrived. Will you go?


Laet. Any thing, to get rid of this tormenting Creature. He has so tiez'd me
with Darts, that I shall never see him, but I shall think of the Picture of St.
Sebastian we saw this Morning, stuck all over with Darts.


Hear. With all my Heart, Madam; provided that Thought give Birth to another; I
mean the Recompense for his Sufferings. Nothing less than the Joys of Paradise.


Laet. Come, my Dear, [interrupting] let us go, or I shall be turned into a
Paradise in an Instant, and be claimed by him as a Reward for his Sufferings.
-- Is it not so? -- Nay, don't answer me, for I will not hear it.


Ang. Come, Mr. Heartly, you shall answer her as we go along.


Hear. Mrs. Darnwell's! Ha, is not that a House Sir Harry makes Use of on
particular Occasions? That Rogue, Sir Lively, has been prating; he muttered
something this Morning of what he knew. Hark'ee, Sir Lively, prevent their
going, or by Heaven I Will cut your Throat.


Sir Live. I prevent it! How can I! -- prevent it! -- No, no, I know a Trick
worth two of that.


Hear. Well, Sir, you may repent it though.


Sir Live. All Is one for that, Ned.


Ang. What say you, Mr. Heartly?


Hear. Madam, I Will wait on you. But had not we better first send to Sir Harry?
Perhaps he will go with us.


Ang. Heartly would prevent our going. Nay, then it is true. -- Generous Friend!
-- No, I think we may as well go without him. He does not understand Lace.


Hear. As well as I do, Madam, at least. -- Prevent their going, Madam, [to
Laet.] if possible. I cannot tell you now my Reasons: But be assured, Sir Harry
will thank you, if you do.


Laet. Now I think on it, my Dear, I cannot go, nor you neither.


Ang. I shall not stay. Come, Sir Lively, you and I will go. They want to be left
alone.


Laet. Nay, then we'll all go.

[Exeunt.
Scene Mrs. Darnwell's. Enter Tom and Betty. Tom. I tell you, Child, my Master
is engaged, and you positively cannot see him.


Bet. And I tell you, Sir, that if your Master was ten times more engaged, I
must and will see him. But pray, Sir, how long have you and I been so well
acquainted? [Pulls him by the Sleeve.] Child, is a pretty familiar Expression.
You use no Ceremony, I see, with your Betters.


Tom. Betters! What does the Baggage mean? Because my Master does her the
Honor to take a little Notice of her, she thinks herself exalted a Degree
above one of her own Rank. -- Betters, Mrs. Betty! Why, I don't know, but
methinks there is no such great Difference between us. I Am Valet to a very fine
Gentleman, and Inheritor of all his Vices, you Waiting Woman to a very fine
Lady, and Possessor in full of all her Follies and Affectations. So that as our
Rank in Life is equal, and our Qualifications pretty much the same, I own I
want Eyes to see the wide Difference you would put between us.


Bet. The Fellow says true. A good genteel Person. But then he is a Footman.
Foh, how rank that smells! A Girl that has once tasted of Gentility, can never
sink down to the mottly Tribe; at least it ought to be the last Stake she
plays. -- Well, Sir, will you be pleased to tell your Master I have something
to communicate to him.


Tom. Communicate to him! How eloquent an Intrigue with a Gentleman makes a
Chambermaid.


Bet. You grow saucy, Friend.


Tom. Come, come, Mrs. Betty, for once hear Truth, however disagreeable it may
sound. What can you propose by being acquainted with a Gentleman? If you mean
no Harm, it is playing with edged Tools. You may hurt yourself, though but in
Play. And if you should, as insensibly you may go too far, the utmost you can
pretend to rise to, is to be his -- And for how long Time? A Month, two, three,
a Year, suppose. At the End of which he leaves you, perhaps, with Child. Return
to Service! No. You're above it. You change Masters till you have served all the
Town, and your Wages are Infamy and Diseases. -- Nay, Mrs. Betty, it is
wholesome Physic, and, if you take it, may make you well again.


Bet. I could cry for Madness. But I don't care; I Will never mend, when I Am told
of my Faults in so gross a Manner.


Tom. Whereas, if you give Way to a Passion with one of equal Rank with you,
his Designs, at least, are honorable. He will not presume above what he may
reasonably expect. He Will court you for a Wife; and if he has deserved well of
his Master, and you of your Mistress, they will make you a Present that may
enable you --


Bet. To set up a Chandler's Shop, and live upon selling of Half Pennyworth's
of Small-Beer, and Quarters of Ounces of Tea. Foh, What a Life! But before we
arrive to this charming State, this envied Period of Servitude; what Dangers do
we not run through? If our Masters or Mistresses discover we are married, Warning
is immediately given, and we must provide for ourselves. If they know nothing
of it, we find so many Excuses to get out to see each other, and stay so long
when we are sent on Errands, that we are sure to be turned away. And then
farewell all Hopes of this noble Settlement. We live in a Garret, breed like
tame Rabbits, wear out the Clothes we got in Service, and having no Money to
buy more, stink in coarse Rags, and mutually curse each other, to the melodious
Concert of half a Dozen squaling Brats about our Ears.


Tom. Well, Mrs. Betty, you may be as witty as you please, but give me leave to
tell you --


Bet. I have not done yet. I heard you out, now hear me. I Will grant you, a
Chambermaid loses her Character the other Way; but if she has any Beauty, and
Wit to make the most of it, it will go hard if she do not make it worth her
while. And Money, Mr. Thomas, you know, hides a great many Faults. Then the
Elegancies of Life wipe away a Spot in one's Character; or at least make one
bear with it. Good Clothes, Meat, Drink, Diversions! To rise from a low State
to an Affluence of Fortune and Pleasure, at least to her. Oh! the Joy's not to
be described, one must feel it. After all, one can at last match with one's
Equal. He Will be glad to have us, if we bring our Welcome with us. He will not be
so nice as to refuse a handsome Suit of Clothes, because it has been a little
soiled; and we may, perhaps, be enabled to carry on a genteeler Profession than
a Chandler's Shop.


Tom. Well, Mrs. Betty. -- [Bell rings] Oh, my Master rings. If you will step in
here, I Will tell him you're below.

[Exit.
Bet. I follow you. I can but take up with this Fellow at last. I Will try first
what I can do with the Master. For to own a Truth, I have Ambition in me, and
that is as difficult to be laid. -- O lud, what am I going to say.

[Exit.
An upper Room in Mrs. Darnwell's House. Enter Sir Harry, speaking as he comes
on. Sir Har. Adieu, my dearest Angel. Our Absence shall not be long. -- So that
Affair's over, and now, with the Poet, I may say;

Round my gay Temples the wreathed Laurel twine,
For I have conquered, and Corinna's mine.
God's Death, what a Beauty it is!

Enter Tom. Well, Sir.


Tom. Sir, Mrs. Betty, Lady Angelina's Woman, is below, and desires to see your
Honor.


Sir Har. And you told her, I suppose, my Honor was here.


Tom. I thought you expected her.


Sir Har. Why so I did, Rascal, but something has intervened. I will not see
her.


Tom. I Will tell her so.


Sir Har. Tell her what you will, and leave me.

[Exit Tom.
Re-enter Tom, followed by Betty. Tom. Sir, I met her coming up, and she would
not take my Answer.


Bet. [after standing a while, looking at Sir Harry.] And so, Sir, you are not
at Home for me. I suppose that Flirt that went from hence in a Chair, is the
Cause of your using me so. But I Will be even with her. If I ever meet her again,
I Will tear her Eyes out, proud Minx.


Sir Har. Don't be in a Passion, Child, 'twill spoil your pretty Face.


Bet. Stand off, I hate you.


Sir Har. You lie, Hussy, you don't.


Bet. I do. I Will never see you more.


Sir Har. One Kiss at parting. [In an affected Tone.


Bet. Psha, let me alone, be quiet.


Sir Har. Another. -- God's Death how she fires me! Will nothing tame me?


Bet. I protest I Will cry out.


Sir Har. You Would be sorry any Body should hear.


Bet. Lard, there is such a Wind comes in at that Door.


Sir Har. I Will shut it.


Bet. No. -- [Looking toward the Bedchamber.


Sir Har. Oh, I understand her. [aside.] We shall be warmer in the inner Room,
Child.


Bet. Is there a Fire there?


Sir Har. Ask no Questions. Go see. [Exit Betty.] What unnecessary Business I
bring upon myself! Oh, for some lucky Interruption! -- I would not lose her
neither. She Will serve for idle Hours.


Enter Tom. Tom. O Sir, undone, ruined!


Sir Har. What Is the Matter?


Tom. Lady Traffic, Sir!


Sir Har. And what of her, Blockhead?


Tom. Is just getting out of her Chair, and is now coming up Stairs. I hear
her, Sir.

[Exit.
Sir Har. Hell and the Devil! What can be the meaning of her coming? Some Fit
of Jealousy. I Will carry it with a high Hand. This is an Interruption with a
Vengeance.

Enter Lady Traffic. Madam, you expose yourself too much.


Lady Traf. I know it, Sir.


Sir Har. Why then do you do it?


Lady Traf. Because I care not what I do.


Sir Har. You know it is of Consequence that our Affair should be concealed.
There was a Time when you had some Regard for me.


Lady Traf. There was a Time when you deserved it.


Sir Har. What means this Change of Humor? I left you in good Temper.


Lady Traf. You did so; but left something that soon destroyed it.


Sir Har. I understand you not. I Am tired of these cross Purposes. Would you be
plain, I should know what to answer.


Bet. [within] Sir Harry, Sir Harry!


Sir Har. So, damned Schriech Owl!


Lady Traf. Pray, Sir, go in. -- Cruel Conviction! [Aside.


Sir Har. My Sister's Maid, Mrs. Darnwell's her Milliner. She sent her for
something she wanted, I suppose. An impertinent Jade to name me.


Lady Traf. Why, what an enormous Villain you are! I hope I shall despise you
ever I go from hence.


Bet. [within] Why, Sir Harry, will you come?

[Enters, and starts.
Sir Har. Well, Child, have you got what you wanted?


Bet. What I wanted?


Sir Har. Ay, ay, what you came for.


Bet. No, I have not got what I came for, nor am I like, there are so many
Pretenders.


Lady. Traf. Hence, trifling Wretch! Though I despise you, you are scarce safe.


Bet. Who are you, pray? [Pertly.


Sir Har. Be gone, Child. Some other Time I Will satisfy you. You see the
Occasion is not favorable.


Bet. Well, I Will go. But if ever I come again, you sha'n't serve me so.

[Exit.
Lady Traf. Do, tell her some kind Thing, to sooth her in her Disappointment.
How many miserable Hours have you made me pass, and not one kind Word or Look
to make Amends. What a Monster of Ingratitude are you? Am I distinguished but
by harder Usage? Cruel Comparison! It Is more than I can bear.


Sir Har. What mean you? It Is more than you can bear! Supposing all that you
suspect were true, can such a trifling Creature make you jealous?


Lady Traf. No. But she that wrote this can.

[Gives a Letter.
Sir Har. Ha, cursed Negligence! Nay, then our Rupture's sure. -- No matter.
[Aside.


Lady Traf. What have you now to say? Boast, boast your mighty Conquest! Tell
me, how you have seduced a Virgin Heart, already undermined by natural
Softness. Say, I am come too late to prevent her Ruin; say, she has yielded up
all. I know she has; I see it in your Eyes. They triumph in your cruel Victory.
Base, base Man! I can forgive your wronging me. By Heaven, I do forgive it.
Time and Use have made unhappy me disagreeable, and plead Excuse for wronging
me. But her! -- Your Breast still warm, your Eyes still languid, just rising
from her Arms, that pressed you (I know it by myself) with killing Fondness! In
such Circumstances as these, and the next Moment too, false to her! And with
whom? A little lewd Chambermaid.


Sir Har. How her Words sting me! How hateful I must needs appear. But I must
not let her see it. She will insult too much. [Aside.] -- Well, Madam, you see
there are Women in the World, young and handsome too, that like me with all my
Faults.


Lady Traf. It Is false; they know you not. You appear an Angel to them, while
in Fact you are a Devil. You show not your true self at first. You would not
then be able to deceive so many. [Sighs.] Some, indeed, even then you might
deceive. But you are more cunning than to trust to that. You make your Conquest
sure, then show yourself. The humble, fearful, modest Suppliant, at last
becomes a haughty and imperious Tyrant. Not the least Humor of this mighty
Monarch must be thwarted then. His very Caprices must be respected. Ill Usage
must be returned with Cheerfulness; nay, we must not sigh nor weep, though our
Hearts break. Should we or sigh or weep, he flies, he will not see us; or, if
he condescends to see us, it is not to look with Pity on our Weakness or our
Sufferings, it is to behold 'em with a stony Heart, and barbarously urge us with
unrelenting Obstinacy, that our Passions growing too violent for our weak
Frames, we sink beneath the killing Weight.


Sir Har. Why then do you love this cruel Tyrant?


Lady Traf. Why, indeed! Oh give me Patience! The Question well becomes you:
but it is the Weakness of our Nature. I Will tell you, Sir; we cannot confine our
Thoughts to what we suffer with you; that indeed might cure us. But we let 'em
loose, and they bring back to our charmed Senses former Scenes of Joy. There,
there we fall. Our Passions catch the Alarm; we wake from present Misery, by
reflecting on past Happiness. Our Passions prompt us to believe, that Happiness
may still return. We credit what we wish; the fond Delusion charms us, and we
still love on.


Sir Har. But when you know it is in vain.


Lady Traf. I understand you, Sir. I know it is in vain. Insulting Man! You
might have spared me that Knowledge. -- Where Is that Pride that so becomes a
Woman!


Sir Har. Hold, Madam, hear me in my Turn; I loved you, by Heaven it is true. I
loved you with Sincerity. Your Person and your Mind engaged me wholly. I
thought I could for ever love you, and none but you. I deceived myself as well
as you.


Lady Traf. You may spare the rest. It is enough you slight me. I ask not why.
I can dispense with the ungracious Tale. You Will tell me I have been too fond; I
know I have; but hate to hear it, since it is so ill repaid. Would I had never
shown it.


Enter Tom with a Letter, which Lady Traffic snatches from him. Sir Har. Hold,
Madam, ere it be too late. If you read it, I Will never see you more.


Lady Traf. I care not.


Sir Har. Yet be advised.


Lady Traf. Never.


Sir Har. Then hear me, Madam. Such Usage as this, had I ruined you a thousand
times, as you are pleased to call it, I would not bear. All friendly Offices
you may expect from me, but no more Love. Your Fame and Person I Will protect
from Scandal and from Violence. Farther, Madam, though you should repent this
Indiscretion, it is in vain henceforth to hope from me.

[Exit.
Lady Traf. Ha, gone! I know he wants but an Opportunity to break with me. Why
let him take it. I can never regain his Love, and to share him with another, or
see him kind to me out of Compassion! -- Death, how contemptible that Thought
makes me. Revenge is yet within my Power, and I will push it as far as Woman's
Malice or Disappointment can carry me.

[Reads. Dear Sir Harry,
SOme Moments since I thought myself the happiest of my Sex: But how uncertain
is our Fate! I Am now the most wretched. I Have just received a Letter from my
Father, by which I find I am to be disposed of to another. Assist me with your
Counsel, and if you love me, free me from this hated Match; for I can never be
any thing but yours,

Maria.


Poor Innocence! Read here your Fate. In me behold what you will be. But this
is no Time for such Reflections. Here I Will begin my Course of Revenge. I Will
undeceive her first. Let him change as often as he pleases, I Will cross him in
all his Amors, and pursue him like his evil Genius. He shall not enjoy one
easy Moment. If he ever thinks of Marriage, I Will renew my Claim there too, and
have at least the Satisfaction to render his Love as unsuccessful as my own.
[Going.

Enter Betty. This Creature here! -- Hold, she may be of Service.


Bet. I must dissemble, though I hate the Sight of her. [Aside.] -- Mem, I beg
you would forgive the Boldness of my Intrusion; but I hope the News I have to tell
you, will plead for my Excuse.


Lady Traf. Speak.


Bet. Your Pardon, Madam, if before I go on, I take the Liberty to suppose Sir
Harry is something to you.


Lady Traf. Proceed, Child, and don't be afraid.


Bet. Base Man, to wrong so good a Lady! You must know then, Madam, that I am
Woman to Lady Angelina. -- You have heard of her.


Lady Traf. Yes. But what does all this signify to me?


Bet. Have Patience, Mem, and you shall know. The Intimacy Sir Harry's Sister
has with my Lady, brought him first to our House. As he is a very agreeable
Gentleman, it was not long before I perceived my Lady grew uneasy and restless,
averse to Company, which she used to like, and, in short, never pleased but
when she was talking of him, or else in his Company. Not to detain you longer,
he makes honorable Love to her, and I believe 'twill be a Match. Now, Mem, if
Sir Harry is engaged to you, it is base in him to pretend Love to my Lady, and
deceive you. As I hate false Men, and could not bear to be deceived myself, I
came to acquaint you how wicked a Man he is, and give you a Caution against his
flattering Tongue.


Lady Traf. Ha, 'twill be a Match, say you?


Bet. Yes, Mem. -- It works sweetly. I Will teach him to serve me so. [Aside.] --
Mem, have you any farther Commands for me?


Lady Traf. Hold, let me think.


Bet. It will be rare Sport! [Aside.


Lady Traf. Could you step home with me to my Lodgings, and carry a Letter to
your Lady for me? you would do a Piece of Service to us both.


Bet. And to myself too, or I Would see you and your Letter far enough. [Aside] --
Mem, I Will wait on you. You Will pardon my Freedom; but the Zeal I have to serve
you --


Lady Traf. I Am obliged to you.


Bet. You would not say so, if you knew my Intention. [Aside.


L. Tr. Thus for Relief hard Remedies we try,
And from one Passion to another fly,
Forgetting Love, while our Resentment's high.
[Exeunt.
END of the THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
Angelina's House. Betty with a Letter. IF I forgive him, I wish I may be
deceived by every Man I trust to; and that is the greatest Curse that could
happen to me. So far it is well. I Am secure of Lady Traffic; if I can but work
upon my own Lady as well, I may make 'em all quarrel, and then I may, perhaps,
get him to myself. I Am sure he likes my Person, and that is the best Hold.
People may talk of Sense and Virtue, and all that. They may be good in a formal
Wife, but in a Mistress, let her but have an agreeable Temper, and a pretty
Person. -- Heyho! I Am melancholy all of a sudden. Would Sir Harry was here. Yet
I ought not to wish that neither, for one kind Word from him, would make this
Letter drop out of my Hands, and at once destroy my Plot. Bless me, he is here!
I Will hide the Letter though, and stand aside. [Puts it in her Bosom.] Perhaps I
may discover something.


Enter Sir Harry. Sir Har. Was ever Man so justly punished! How barbarous am I
to that unfortunate Creature, who owes her Ruin twice to me. Yet what can I do?
I can never marry her, though she has my Promise. I ought then at least never to
think of any else. Yet if I remain unfix'd, so strong are my Passions, I shall
never conquer 'em, and I may make more Victims still. Angelina, I think, has
Charms enough to keep me to herself, and till I am fixed, I fear I shall still
be unjust. -- It shall be so. I Will stop my Ears against Reflection, till I have
extricated myself.


Bet. Say you so? I may, perhaps, involve you more.

[Comes forward.
Sir Har. Is your Lady at home, Child?


Bet. My Lady, forsooth! Will nothing but my Lady go down? I Am resolved not to
give him the Letter for this. [Aside.] -- No, Sir, but I believe she will
presently. They went, my Lady and your Sister, with Mr. Heartly and Sir Lively,
to Mrs. Darnwell's.


Sir Har. Mrs. Darnwell's! Death and the Devil! For what? -- Speak.


Bet. I cannot tell. [In a loud Tone.] To see some Lace was the Pretense; but --


Sir Har. But, what?


Bet. [Laughing] The real Cause was --


Sir Har. Will you speak, Hussy? [Taking her round the Neck to squeeze her
Throat, sees the Letter.] Ha, what Letter's that?


Bet. It Is, it is, it is --


Sir Har. What is it? Give it me this Instant.


Bet. I will not. -- It Is from my Sweetheart.


Sir Har. Nay, then I will have it.

[Whilst he struggles, knocking without.
Bet. O Lud, Sir, for Heaven's sake have done. It Is my Mistress. I Will give it
you by and by. Upon my Honor I will.


Sir Har. Give it me this Instant. I Will not trust you.


Bet. There, take it. But for Heaven's sake step out the Back-way, and come in
again. If my Lady should see you --


Sir Har. Well, I Will go. But hark'ee, Mrs. Minx, no more Sweethearts.

[Exit.
Bet. No, indeed. -- O lud, what shall I do? He has got the Letter, and my Lady
will never believe me. Besides, what Work shall I have with him! The Devil take
me for being such a Fool to put it in my Bosom, if I intended to keep it from
him. Well, I Will go back to my Lady Traffic, and tell her all. O lud, here is my
Lady, and Madam Laetitia with her. I Will retire before they see me.

[Exit.
Enter Angelina and Laetitia. Ang. We Have lost Sir Lively and Mr. Heartly.


Laet. They are but stepped into my Brother's to bring him here. They Will be soon
enough, never fear. They Will not give us too much breathing Time.


Ang. You Will want it, I Am sure; you have run so fast, one would think you were
going to meet a Lover.


Laet. Rather, as if I were flying from one. Sure nothing's so detestable as a
Man of Sense, that pretends to be a Lover. Love is a quite different Thing in
him, than in other Men.


Ang. Only so much the more agreeable.


Laet. Agreeable! O gad, how can you think so? Well, I shall hardly be able to
bear any Lover this Month, I Am sure. I have been so pestered by my sensible
one. --


Ang. I rather think you will be able to bear none but him. It Is a sure Sign when
a Woman is uneasy with what her Lover says; she wishes, at least, he would talk
in another Manner; and that, my dear, is one Step toward wishing for something
else.


Laet. Something else! What, pray?


Ang. Why to like what he does say.


Laet. Lud bless me, you're strangely positive. You would fain make me believe
--


Ang. What, if I am any Judge, you will very soon own.


Laet. Own what?


Ang. That you love him.


Laet. Him! Whom?


Ang. Heartly, Heartly. Come, come, Child, all this affected railing --


Laet. Nay, then we must change the Discourse. How do you think the tedious
Creature entertained me at the Auction this Morning?


Ang. So, this is changing the Discourse. -- Nay, the Lord knows. I Am sure, in
the Humor you are, 'twas fifty to one any thing he said could please you.


Laet. Why by expressing his Pleasure at the beautiful Appearance the Company
made, by remarking the Variety of Tastes, that reigned in the Choice of
Clothes, and by drawing Conclusions from the Singularity of some Dresses, of
the Sense and Understanding of their Wearers. The Wretch did not say a Word of
me all the while, and scarce looked at me. But I was even with him.


Ang. Oh, I don't question that. But how pray?


Laet. Why, in the Midst of these wise Remarks, which he thought I took as much
Pleasure to hear, as he did to make, Sir Lively Brainless came running from the
other Side of the Room, and desired me to look at a young Lady that stood close
by me. Madam, said he, would you believe it? This young Lady I met at the other
End of the Room, and thought her one of the most beautiful Creatures I ever
saw; but when she came and stood by you, she appeared to me so eclipsed and
dimmed, that I came to see if it was the same Person. I did not know her again,
I vow to gad. Lord, Sir Lively, said I, you have so pretty a Way of laughing at
one, that one cannot be angry. This drew a Repartee from him, and that another
from me; so that Heartly, I suppose, finding our Dialogue too long, very
civilly took his Leave, and I very civilly let him go. Ha, ha --


Ang. Barbarous Creature! How could you use him so?


Laet. Would I could use him ten times worse. But come, my Dear, shall we go to
--


Ang. Go! Whither would you go, Child? Why they will be here this Instant.


Laet. Nay, if you have a mind to stay, I am very willing to keep you Company.


Ang. No, my dear, I Would as lieve go.


Laet. So had I too; but I don't know, it would look odd to go, would it not?


Ang. I don't know if it would look odd; but I perceive you think it would.
Hark, I think I hear 'em in the next Room. Come, my dear, you are very
unwilling now, are you not? [Laughing.


Laet. Psha.

[Exeunt.
Lady Traffick's Lodging. Lady Traffic and Betty. Lady Traf. And so he forced
the Letter from you?


Bet. Yes, Mem.


Lady Traf. Is your Lady at Home now?


Bet. I left her there, Madam.


Lady Traf. Could you procure me Means of speaking to her?


Bet. Yes, Mem. -- This is rare. [Aside.


Lady Traf. Come then, I Will prepare myself: Let Us step into the next Room.
Jenny.


Enter Jenny. Jen. Madam.


Lady Traf. If Sir Harry comes, I am gone out. Be sure you deny me, if he
should come before I am gone.


Jen. Yes, Madam. [Ex. L. Traffic and Betty.] What can the Meaning of this be?
The Doors used to fly open at his Approach. Well, it is not my Business.


Enter Sir Harry. Sir Har. This was lucky. That cursed Jade Betty to enter into
a Plot against me! As to my Lady Traffic, her Wrongs, indeed, might stir her
to Revenge. I must go to her, and try if I can calm her. My Promise of Marriage
to her, and her Knowledge of my Affair with Louisa, both fairly stated in this
damned Letter, would have done my Business with Angelina. -- Is my Lady
Traffic above?


Jen. No, Sir, she is just gone out.


Sir Har. Gone out! Whither?


Jen. I really cannot tell; but she went out with Mrs. Betty, Lady Angelina's
Woman.


Sir Har. So! Damnation! Gone to Angelina's, I suppose. Hold, I may, perhaps,
get thither before 'em. [aside.] -- How long is it since they went?


Jen. The Moment before you entered. Sir Har. It Is well. I yet may overtake
them.

[Exeunt severally.]
Angelina's House. Enter Angelina, Sir Lively, Laetitia and Heartly. Ang. We
were too late, Sir Lively, you have lost.


Sir Live. I do confess it, Madam. The Bird was flown, but we'll cage him yet.
However, Madam, I hope what Mrs. Darnwell said was sufficient to satisfy you in
the main.


Laet. Angelina, is it fair to engross Sir Lively thus!


Sir Live. I protest and vow, Madam, I ask Pardon. But I thought, Ned there
could entertain a Lady for a Quarter of an Hour, without tiring her. I had
something of Consequence to tell this Lady. -- I hope, Madam, what I have
already discovered merits some Consideration. [To Angel.


Ang. But I must have stronger Proofs, Sir Lively.


Sir Live. You shall, Madam, or may I be blasted by your Frowns, like a too
forward Tree by the Wind.


Ang. This Fool will make me discover how much I despise him, before I Have made
the Use I intend of him, if I don't render the Discourse more general. -- Mr.
Heartly, Laetitia, methinks for two Persons that are always quarrelling, in
Company, you agree very well by yourselves.


Laet. I protest, my dear, you are as full of Malice, as an old Maid; and
bestow it as often on your Friends. -- Oh, here is my Brother!


Enter Sir Harry. Sir Har. I see no Marks of Lady Traffick's having been here
yet, in Angelina's Looks. [aside] -- Madam, your Servant.


Ang. Your Servant, Sir Harry.


Laet. I believe, my Dear, we are beholden to you for his Company. I never see
him, but here.


Ang. You would give me an ill Opinion of your Brother, Laetitia.


Sir Har. He that gets her good Word, Madam, must have more Complaisance for
her Humors than falls to the Share of a Brother. If you, Madam, but think
favorably of me, I shall not concern myself much how I stand in her whimsical
Judgment.


Hear. You see, Madam, what an Opinion your Brother has of you.


Laet. I would advise you, Sir, to take the Model from him. [Gravely.


Sir Live. If I judge right, Sir, a Sister can best tell.


Sir Har. But you do not judge right, Sir, and never will. That Is more.


Sir Live. Ah, le Brutal! He Is jealous; I Will plague him a little. -- Sir Harry,
Madam, is so taken up with his own Thoughts, that he has no Taste for the
Conversation of the Beau Monde. Your Men of Sense are always the dullest
Animals in Company. Take 'em from their Books, and their highspun Notions,
which they do not understand themselves, and you may fall asleep for want of
Conversation.


Sir Har. And let me tell you, Sir, it is an Advantage to sleep in some
Companies. Your Body's refreshed, and your Mind not tired.


Sir Live. Politely said. The Ladies are obliged to you.


Ang. Believe me, Sir Lively, there are Charms in a Man of Sense, a Woman
thinks can never be too dearly purchased. Your Sister and I, Sir Harry, though
very good Friends, differ a little in our Opinions: At least she would be
thought to differ with me.


Hear. What was the Subject of your Dispute then, Ladies?


Laet. A mere Trifle, Sir, a Man.


Hear. 'Twas a happy Trifle, however.


Ang. I did not expect less from so polite a Man as Mr. Heartly. But we were
disputing, at least coming to it, which would make the most agreeable Companion
for Life, a Man of Sense, or a pretty Fellow.


Sir Live. [Shrugging] Ah, Madam! -- How she eyed me! She Is taken. Nay, I never
doubted these Parts. [Aside.


Sir Har. Well, Madam, and how did you determine the Point?


Sir Live. Hark'ee, Sir Harry, don't press this Matter farther, for your own
sake. You may hear something you may not like.


Sir Har. Pert Coxcomb! [Aside.


Ang. Why, truly, Sir Harry, you came in before we determined any thing about
it.


Sir Har. Then, Madam, we are not too late to hear it.


Sir Live. Ay, ay, Madam, let us hear it. Pronounce, -- decide.


Ang. Why really, Sir Lively, my Opinion is, a Man of Sense can never make a
bad Husband, unless he has a bad or foolish Wife. He may rob his Wife of many
tender Moments, and bestow them on underserving Creatures. If she has but
Prudence, she will conquer.


Sir Live. Gad, I don't like that, though. [Aside.


Sir Har. A Woman, Madam, that thinks as you do, brings too much Happiness
along with her, not to prevent any Man's seeking it elsewhere.


Ang. That Is more than I know, Sir.


Sir Live. Oh, I thought she would come about again. [Aside.] A Man of Sense,
Madam, will expect so many Things in a Wife, that it will be impossible for her
to satisfy him. Now, a pretty Fellow, Madam, is easier, and has always
something light and gay to entertain her with.


Ang. Very true, Sir Lively. Yet if I loved him, I think I could not have too
much of his Company; if not, too little.


Sir Har. How delicate her Sentiments are, and yet how tender!


Sir Live. I don't know what to make of this, though. -- Nay, Madam, if you will not
take what I say for granted, I have done. I never prove any thing; I only
assert. If it hits right, well: If not, it gives me an Opportunity to pay a
Compliment to a Lady's Understanding, by retracting what I assert, and owning
myself convinced by her superior Sense.


Ang. I Am afraid, Sir Lively, the Ladies are more obliged to their Sex, than
Sense, when they bring you over. But let us change this Discourse. We grow too
serious.


Enter Servant, whispers Sir Lively. Sir Live. A Servant at my House, say you,
from my Uncle?


Serve. Yes, Sir, and he says he must see you immediately.


Sir Live. I come.

[Exit Serve.
Ang. We shall not lose you, Sir Lively!


Sir Live. [aside] Kind Soul! She cannot be a Moment without me. -- No, Madam,
I Will but just receive the old Gentleman's Commands, and return, swift as my own
Wishes -- or yours.

[Exit.
Sir Har. This Opportunity is lucky. Draw off my Sister. [To Hear.


Hear. [to Laet.] Madam, you promised to show me the fine Screen you bought for
Lady Angelina this Morning.


Laet. That Is true; it is but in the next Room. Come, Mr. Heartly, follow me,
and I Will show it you. It Is exceeding pretty.


Hear. I don't doubt it, Madam, if it be your Taste.


Ang. Where are you gadding now?


Laet. But into the next Room. -- My Brother will be glad of this Opportunity.
[Aside.

[Exit Laet. and Hear.
Ang. If you stay there, I Will follow you. -- What do they mean by leaving me
alone! [Aside.


Sir Har. I don't know how to begin. I never was at a Loss before. [Aside.


Ang. What shall I say to him? This Silence is worse than any thing I can say.
I don't know what to talk of. [Aside.] -- Methinks, they stay -- very long, --
Sir Harry.


Sir Har. [confus'd] I can never think the Time long, Madam, that furnishes me
with an Opportunity of being alone with a Woman whose Conversation has equal
Charms with her Person, and whose Person --


Ang. S -- ir.


Sir Har. I Am dumb. I never put the honorable Question before, and am as
awkward at it, [Aside.] -- I say, Madam, there is something so soft in the
Society of a Woman of Sense and Beauty, that a Man, blessed by Fortune in other
Respects, wants nothing but to pass his Life with such a Companion, to be
completely happy.


Ang. You differ very much, Sir Harry, from the fine Gentlemen of the Age, who
seem not to think Sense in a Woman so essential to the married State.


Sir Har. Experience, Madam, is the Mother of true Judgment. Those fine
Gentlemen you mention, are either too young to judge right, or too much hurried
by their Passions, which Fortune enables 'em to indulge to Excess, to follow
what is right.


Ang. It must, however, give a thinking Woman some Pain, to find even Men of
Sense cannot value them as they ought, till they are sated with Pleasures, and
have lost their Relish for them.


Sir Har. The Education of our Sex, so different from that of yours, gives us
such early and unbounded Liberties, that a thinking Woman must look with
Indulgence on our early Failings; especially, since we are the principal
Sufferers, in neglecting real Happiness to follow the Phantom.


Ang. Come, come, Sir Harry, this Apology ought not to pass for the sensible
Part of your Sex, who stray in full Daylight.


Sir Har. Then, Madam, let me throw myself at your Feet, and acknowledge my
Faults. Give me leave to thank you for putting me in the right Way, and allow
me to conduct my future Steps, by your better Judgment.


Ang. What does he mean? -- You rally me, Sir Harry.


Sir Har. Well may you think it so, Madam. The Looseness of my former Life,
which I Have wanted even Discretion to hide, may make you call in question my
present more serious Resolutions.


Ang. I must not hear you, Sir Harry. [Going.


Sir Har. Forgive me, Madam, if I detain you against your Will. Let me be still
more plain; talk to your Sense, and not your Sex. There never was any Person,
how wild soever he may have been, but in his more serious Moments has formed
some Scheme of Happiness for Life. How often, though perhaps you will not believe
it, have I pleased myself that the Time would come when I should arrive at that
happy Calm that fits one for such a Life. Hitherto my Joys, however great, have
been imperfect. Reflection will be heard, and lead, soon or late, to a right
Way of Acting. What I have been, I would have every body forget; as much as I
myself shall avoid henceforth to be. What I shall be, depends not on myself.
The Scheme of Happiness I now propose --


Ang. I must interrupt him, or he will go too far. [Aside.] -- If that Scheme be
a virtuous one, Sir Harry, I wish you Success in it with all my Heart.


Sir Har. Bare Wishes, however kind, cannot complete my Happiness.


Ang. When Wishes are all we have --


Sir Har. There, Madam, I must contradict you.


Ang. What is he going to say! [Aside.


Sir Har. The Scheme of Happiness which I propose, is founded on that tender
Friendship which the married State alone can entertain.


Ang. How I tremble! [Aside.


Sir Har. But a Youth so inconsiderately spent as mine, scarce gives me Room to
hope I shall be credited, when I assure you, I have long concealed a Passion, I
scarce dare even now discover. Be not surpised at this Confession, Madam;
however strange my Conduct may appear, it may, perhaps, hereafter be explained,
could I but flatter myself that I should find in you a Judge inclined to hear
me with a favorable Ear.


Ang. Press me no further, Sir Harry. One can never think too much on that,
which must make one's future Happiness or Misery. Let it suffice, for this
Time, I can see your good Qualities, through the Cloud of Passions that overcast
them.


Sir Har. Then, Madam, be you the Sun, whose genial Warmth shall ripen them
into Virtues. This is the Crisis of my Fate.

Enter Betty, whispers Angelina. I little thought I spoke so true. Damned Jade!
This must be some Message from my Lady Traffic. [Aside.


Ang. A Lady, say you, desires to speak with me, on something that concerns me
nearly!


Sir Har. Ay, it is so. The Devil! [Aside.


Ang. What can this be? Something, I dare say, that relates to his Youth, too
inconsiderately spent, indeed. Pray Heaven no body claims a Right to him.
[Aside.] -- Conduct her to my Closet, I Will come instantly.


Bet. I shall be revenged now. [Sir Har. frowns.] No matter for that.

[Exit.
Ang. Sir Harry, I must beg your Pardon for a little while, a particular Reason
obliges me to leave you for a Moment. In next Room you will find Mr. Heartly and
your Sister. I shall not stay.


Sir Har. Let me beg you would not leave me, quite uncertain of my Fate. One
Word might make me the happiest of my Sex. Give me but Leave to hope.


Ang. Why should I hide my Sentiments any longer? I do love him, and wish him
mine. [Aside.] -- Well, Sir, I give you Permission to believe as you wish.


Sir Har. [Kneeling, kisses her Hand] On my Knees let me thank you. My Heart is
easy now; I feel a Flow of Joy! -- Oh Angelina, may I then hope to call you
mine!


Ang. I Am sure my Heart is easier than it was. [aside.] -- Well, will you let
me go now?


Sir Har. Yes, if you will return quickly.


Ang. Well, well.

[Exit.
Sir Har. I think I Have nothing to fear now.

At length my Bosom feels returning Rest,
Love pleads my Cause in Angelina's Breast.
[Exit.
END of the FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
Enter Heartly and Laetitia. Laet. MR. Heartly, you have been taking a great deal
of Pains to convince me of a Thing I never can believe.


Hear. What Is that, pray, Madam?


Laet. Why, Sir, that you are capable of being in Love.


Hear. That Is very hard, Madam. To be denied the Privilege of feeling what the
meanest of my Sex feels, is something tyrannical.


Laet. The meanest of your Sex! Profane Creature! Can Love harbor in mean
Breasts?


Hear. Love, Madam, knows neither Birth nor Fortune. Where it finds a Soul
capable of receiving it, it lodges, and is as pleased to warm the meanest as
the noblest Breast.


Laet. I don't know what Love you talk of.


Hear. The Love I talk of, Madam, is that Passion that fills us with generous
Sentiments in Behalf of the Person we like; and if the meanest Artisan, in
Proportion to his Sense and Understanding, feels such Sentiments, he feels Love
in its greatest Delicacy.


Laet. You talk like an Oracle, Sir, I shall improve.


Hear. May I flatter myself, Madam, the Improvement will be to my Advantage? It
is but just, since you are pleased to own it will come from me.


Laet. Sir, you seem too interested in your Wish, to be capable of those
generous Sentiments you require in a Lover.


Hear. If to wish to possess a Woman, who, to an agreeable Person, joins a
superior Understanding and Temper, framed to please and to be pleased, be to be
interested, I own I am so, and glory in it. And if to these happy natural
Circumstances, I add the Consideration that she is Sister to my Friend, nothing
is wanting to complete the Fullness of my Joy; but --


Laet. But -- but -- what, Sir?


Hear. I would read it in your Eyes, [takes her Hand, she turns away] but you
withdraw 'em from me. It Is kindly done, if armed with Anger, not to let me see
'em; but unkind, if --


Laet. If -- if -- Lord, what are you going to say? Well, say what you will. I
am not in a Humor to contradict you. There, now read. [Looks at him.] Well --
nay, if you're so tedious.


Hear. Tedious! O, I could read for ever here. My Joy's too great for Words to
give it Vent.


Laet. I have betrayed myself; he sees too much. [Aside.] -- Come, Mr. Heartly,
let us go to my Brother and Angelina. What will they think of us?


Hear. I believe, Madam, they have thought as little of us, as we of them. [Going.


Enter Sir Harry. Sir Har. O Sister, O Friend! If you refuse me your Assistance
now, my Peace of Mind is gone for ever.


Laet. What do you mean, Brother? I never saw you thus before. You seem too
concerned not to command our utmost. Speak!


Sir Har. Heartly, you remember the Story I told you this Morning. You Will
explain it to my Sister. I have no Time to lose now. That Lady is now with
Angelina; Revenge has pushed her to destroy my Hopes in her, whom I had just
before brought to confess a Regard for me. I found a growing Passion in every
Word and Look -- but fear shall never see it more. She, by this, knows all my
former foolish Engagement; and I know her Virtue is too delicate ever to
consent, were there but the Shadow of a Promise extant against me.


Hear. This is unfortunate, indeed. But I would advise you to join them
immediately. I Will but prepare your Sister, and we'll follow you, Time enough,
perhaps, to save you.


Sir Har. O Friend, I cannot stir. My Conscience weighs me down; I can never
face that injured, guiltless Woman, not dare behold the aweful Severity of
Angelina's Looks. My Heart is torn betwixt conflicting Resolutions. Virtue and
Passion move me with such equal Force, I can yield to neither; and to live
divided thus --


Hear. Come, come, you must go. The Presence of what we love, often weakens the
strongest Argument against us.


Laet. [aside] There is some Truth in that. Come, Brother, Mr. Heartly advises
well.


Hear. Nay, I will be Master now.

[Forces him out.
Another Apartment of Angelina's. Enter Angelina and Lady Traffic. Lady Traf.
You Have heard my Story, Madam.


Ang. I Have heard, indeed, too much. [Aside.


Lady Traf. What can you expect from one so void of Honor and of Truth?


Ang. What, indeed?


Lady Traf. It Is true, I cannot force him to marry me; but till I have
disengaged him from his Vow, he cannot be another's.


Ang. Oh, no! If what you say is true; and there is but too much Reason to
believe it, though I loved him better than ever Woman yet loved, I never would be
his: Nor will I build my Happiness on your Misfortune.


Lady Traf. I thank you, Madam, I expected no less from you. [ Angelina walks
about concerned.

Enter Sir Harry. Ha, he is here. Be firm, my Heart, and let me speak my Wrongs,
though I should lose him quite, and be for ever miserable.


Sir Har. It Is she! Confusion! I read my Fate in Angelina's Looks.


Lady Traf. Here, Madam, he is, be you my Judge. If he denies a Word of what I
say, let me be still more wretched, if possible, than I am. -- Sir -- I cannot
look at him, and speak, -- yet I must. -- Sir, it is to you I speak; answer me.
Did you not rob me of my Innocence, under the solemn Promise of Marriage? Were
not our Vows exchanged, and mutually plighted to each other? Did you not break
these Vows, almost as soon as made, and force me (though my Tears and faithful
Love to you spoke my Reluctance) to give myself to another? Did you not even
tempt me to violate the very Vows which you compelled me to make? I was not
quite so lost to Virtue: Can you deny all this? -- No. Your Silence justifies
the Charge.


Ang. I see too plain it does, I want no other Proof. -- Madam, believe I feel
your Wrongs, as if they were my own. Compassion is the Glory of our Sex, and
well becomes its Softness. -- It Is now too late, Sir Harry, to deny I had
harbored some favorable Sentiments of you. But though I have a Soul that can
love, know it can combat any Sentiment which wrongs another or itself. You see,
Sir, the Reason of my Conduct, and cannot censure my Justice.


Sir Har. I cannot indeed. Your Sentence, Madam, is just. The Wrongs I Have done
this Lady, whose only Fault was loving me too tenderly, merit the severest
Punishment. You have it in your Power, and do inflict it. I Have made one
miserable, (would there were but one) it is just I should be so myself. Lucia,
you seem to be surpised to see me with so calm a Look. Know, that I Am ashamed
of my inhuman Usage of you, and will make any Amends within my Power. You
sought Revenge, you have it, and I blame you not. Could Love once fled return,
even that I Would give; for I have been a Savage to you, and wanted even Humanity
to pity you.


Lady Traf. These Words, Sir Harry, at another Time, had made me the happiest
of my Sex; but now they serve to make me the most miserable. I see, by sad
Experience, I render both myself and you unhappy. But I will tear this Tyrant
Love, from my fond Bosom, since it can meet with no Return from yours.


Sir Har. Let me but tell you what Return you may expect.


Lady Traf. What would you tell me! I know you cannot love me. Were it in your
Power, I do believe you would. I know you are human, tender and good-natured:
But wild Desires, and unruly Passions tear up all that is generous in you, and
leave you to a considering Mind, an Object of Compassion, even more than me.


Ang. Who could wrong such Goodness! [Aside.


Lady Traf. Hear me, Sir Harry; it is, perhaps, for the last Time. I can never
hate you. Hate you, did I say? -- Ah no! I must for ever love you, spite of
myself. It Is equitable too I should. Thus, wise Providence will make my Crime
my Punishment.


Sir Har. Call it not so. 'Twas I deceived you. You believed me lawfully yours,
and indulged a Fondness that well became your Youth and Passion. Add not to
your unhappy Fate, a Crime you were not guilty of.


Lady Traf. No more of that. For my own Peace I will avoid seeing you more. I
give up all those flattering Thoughts of Happiness, with which I fed my poor
deluded Heart! A Happiness that was so great, it stifled all the Cries of
Conscience and of Honor. My future Care shall be to make my Peace with Heaven,
and lead a Life, if possible, without Misery.


Sir Har. How contemptible do I appear to her superior Merit!


Lady Traf. I came hither with a Design to revenge myself on you; but I have
since reflected, I could not punish you, without involving more than the
Guilty. Nay, I find I cannot have the Heart to punish you.


Ang. Generous Creature! [Aside.


Lady Traf. Hear me. Whilst you continue free, and disengaged, I shall still
think I have some Right to you; and, perhaps, indulge some fond Wishes that
will only make me miserable. Were you engaged, the Knowledge that you cannot be
mine, would strengthen my Reason, and free my future Life from Conflicts,
dangerous to my Peace of Mind.


Ang. Ha, what is that? [Aside.


Lady Traf. Madam, it is to you I now speak. I told you of a Promise of Marriage
from Sir Harry to me, made in early Youth. As we were both too young to judge
of Happiness when that Vow was made, I here acquit him of his Promise, and
withdraw my own. He is now free.


Ang. This is too much; I Will never be outdone in Generosity.


Sir Har. Lucia, you have indeed revenged yourself. This generous Action will
never be forgot, nor ever be remembered, but with Pain.

[Turns to Ang.
Ang. Hold, Sir. True Happiness must be without Alloy. I shall never think of
this Lady, but I shall look upon myself as a Bar to her Peace of Mind. And though
through Excess of Goodness, which very Goodness should confound you, she can give
up her Happiness to procure that of the Man by whom she is ruined, I never can
consent, and never will. Your Reason, Sir Harry, points the Path you have to
follow, mine, which I am to avoid.


Lady Traf. The Sentiment, Madam, is kind and generous. But my Misery or
Happiness must henceforward depend upon myself alone; and I, Madam, will never
be his. He is free. -- Here, Sir Harry, is your Letter. I could almost wish I
had never seen it; but since I have, let me beg you never to see that Person
more. Her Passion is but young; she yet may conquer it, if you avoid seeing her.


Sir Har. I never will.


Ang. Take Comfort, Madam. There are but few that know this fatal Secret.
Believe me, Madam, as delicate a Sense of Virtue as I have, I do acquit you.
Have Patience, you may yet be happy.


Lady Traf. I will be governed by you. Your Leave, Madam, at present to retire.
I am unfit to stay.


Ang. Yet more unfit to go. Make my House your Home, till you are more
recovered. Betty, conduct the Lady out, I Will follow soon.

[Exit Lady Traf. with Betty.
Enter Heartly and Laetitia. Laet. Poor Lady! she well deserves a better Fate.
-- We Have overheard all. And now, my Dear, [to Ang.] I hope there remains
nothing that may affect my Brother's Interest in your Heart.


Enter Sir Lively, running. Sir Live. Pity me, my Dearest. Ladies, pity me, or
wish me Joy, or both: For by this Light, I don't know whether I should be glad
or sorry.


Ang. Why, what is the Matter, Sir Lively?


Sir Live. Nay, no great Matter. -- You must not think of having me, Madam.


Ang. How, Sir Lively, why you are not married!


Sir Live. Not positively. But it looks very like it. Sir Harry, do you know my
Uncle's rich Ward?


Sir Har. His Ward!


Sir Live. Ay, his Ward. What do start at?


Ang. Do you mark your Brother's Surprise? I Will be hanged if this Spouse of Sir
Lively is not the other mentioned just now. [Aside to Laet.


Sir Har. So -- And you have been there already?


Sir Live. Ay, that I have. Egad, I flew thither, Hark'ee, she is a fine Woman,
faith.


Sir Har. Well, and you saw her?


Ang. How he questions him! [Aside.


Sir Live. Ay. But such a Sight! I found her all in Tears, just recovered from a
fainting Fit. I suppose her Father's Letter, with the News of her sudden
Happiness, disordered her.


Sir Har. [aside] I fancy I could give a better Reason for it.


Sir Live. But, egad, I never minded that. I made my Speech; and 'twas a pretty
one, upon my Honor.


Sir Har. I believe you, Sir.

[Turns away.
Sir Live. So cold! Perhaps, Sir, you are some secret Rival?


Sir Har. No, faith, Sir: And to prove that I have no Pretension to her, if
this Lady, since you have told her she must not think of you, were inclined to
believe she has Charms enough to reclaim me --


Ang. I don't know whether I ought to venture. It Is a great Risque, when
Happiness lies at Stake. But come, Sir Harry, it is too late now to go back.
Here Is my Hand. If I have Reason to repent, I can blame none but myself.


Sir Har. I dare venture to assure you, you will have none.


Hear. Must we be idle, Madam? [To Laet.


Laet. Is there so much haste?


Hear. Madam, I Will wait your Leisure.

[Affecting Gravity
Laet. Do You hear the Creature! Well, I Will punish you, I Am resolved, and consent
at once Here, Sir, my Hand. Nay, take it, while I an in the Humor.


Hear. And not your Heart!


Laet. A Hand is easily recalled, but a Heart once gone, is gone for ever. --
But come, Sir, you seem to look as if you thought they both go together.


Sir Live. If they don't, Ned, it is no great Matter. If one comes first, the other
will soon follow. Poor Rogues, they cannot keep their Hearts long from us, when
they have once made us Masters of the Key to them. Ha, ha.


Enter Betty. Bet. I Am impatient till I know what is done. I Will venture in. --
Madam, did your Ladyship call?


Ang. No.


Bet. Has your Ladyship any more Commands?


Sir Har. No, Child, but I have. With your Leave, Madam.


Ang. You must command now.


Sir Har. I have a Man that has served me long and faithfully. The Way of Life
I am now going into, renders his Service useless to me. I long intended him a
Farm of forty Pounds a Year. But as he will want a neat and clean Housekeeper,
to share the Management of it, I have fixed my Eyes on Mrs. Betty, your Woman,
who seems to be cut out for an excellent Housewife.


Bet. Are all my Hopes come to this!


Sir Har. Here, Tom.

Enter Tom. Sirrah, what say you to a Farm of 40 l. a Year, and a pretty Wife?


Tom. And a Child already got, I suppose. -- Sir, for the Farm I return you my
most grateful Acknowledgements, for that cannot but turn out a real Good and
Advantage to me. How this other Freehold may prove, I cannot tell. -- But it is
no Matter. -- I Will venture to take a Lease for Life. But hark'ee, my Dear, no
Husbandman but myself, do you hear, no Labourer to help me to do my Work. I Will
warrant thee, Girl, I Will keep thee in good Order myself.


Bet. Well, Tom, if thou art but as good as thy Word, I promise thee thou shall
reap the Fruits of No-body's Labor but thy own. But take heed. If like a lazy
Lubbard you grow idle, and lee good Land run into Common, for want of enriching
the Soil as it ought, it will fall to the Lord of the Manor again, and then,
you know, he has a Right to turn his own Cattle a grazing there.


Sir Har. Come, Madam, we are now engaged in a Voyage for Life. It Is for both
our Interests to make it agreeable and happy. I shall do my Endeavor to give
you no Uneasiness. Let Us forget the past, and look forward.

When Passion governs with despotick Sway,
And its enchanting Dictates we obey,
Our Spirits, lifted up, a while we sail,
And plough Love's Ocean with a prosperous Gale:
Till, like a Tempest, Vice, at last, appears,
And full on Rocks and dangerous Quicksands bears.
If then some Pilot, with unerring Hand,
Oe'r the lost Barque deigns but to take Command,
The Rocks we dreaded most, with Ease, be shuns;
And safe to Port the sinking Vessel runs.
[Exeunt Omnes.
END of the FIFTH ACT.

