HUMANITY.

PRICE FIVE SHILLINGS.

HUMANITY, OR THE RIGHTS OF NATURE, A POEM; IN TWO BOOKS. BY THE AUTHOR OF
SYMPATHY.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, STRAND.

1788.

PREFACE.
THE Reader is requested to consider this Performance as a GENERAL OUTLINE,
with here and there some sketched features, of a Work, the nature of which, is
frequently alluded to in different parts of the Poem, and the Title is
specified on a separate leaf at the end.

What I ventured abroad some years since under the title of SYMPATHY -- a poem,
which on account of the interests created in the Heart, by the subject itself,
was received by the Public with so much generous warmth -- was intended to
serve as a Preliminary to what I had farther to observe on SOCIETY, or a
Prospect of the HUMAN RACE, under the combined influences of CLIME and
GOVERNMENT, RELIGIONS, LAWS and LIBERTIES -- From these, the transition to
TYRANNY was natural and strongly in connection; and from TYRANNY, I felt myself
called upon by all the awakened emotions of HUMANITY, to consider SLAVERY; but
not only that species of it which consists in buying and selling our
Fellow Creatures in Africa -- BUT EVERY OTHER KIND, in EVERY OTHER PLACE.
Views, therefore, of FREEDOM and BONDAGE, throughout the different parts of the
globe, have been taken, as well from experience, as the best historical
evidence.

In the order of my Poem on SOCIETY, perhaps the part which relates to the
Inhuman Treatment of Negroes (for the Treatment appears to me more criminal
than the Traffic) might not have taken the lead; not from any idea that these
unhappy Beings are less entitled to the Rights of Nature, or the Regulations of
Society, then any other parts of the HUMAN SPECIES; but, because, according to
the series I meant to observe, the Prospect of the quarter of the Globe where
this Trade principally subsists, would have been out of time and place. This
objection being done away by the emulative Benevolence which is now excited in
the Empire on this subject, it affords me the greatest pleasure that, by an
anticipation of so much of what I had to remark on AFRICA as is confined to the
Slave Trade (which, however, by no means exhausts what remains yet to be said
in that division of my future work) I have a fair opportunity, and at a
seasonable moment, to enforce the appeals of those who have the strongest
claims on HUMANITY, in a performance devoted to its general interests.

How far the entire Abolition, so warmly contended for by the supporters of
this measure, may be consistent with human policy, it is not my purpose
particularly to enquire. It is not the name of Slave in itself, which produces
the great mischief. An hired servant in Eu^ope may be as little at his own
command, and destined to as hard labor as a purchased Negro in Africa; but the
essential difference consists in the one being guarded by the laws of the land,
which spread before his person and his property a shield that defends him from
every abuse of power; and the other is left naked and defenceles to the
"insolence of office."

HUMANITY requires that the RIGHTS OF NATURE should be enjoyed by every Human
Being. It is therefore against the shocking barbarity, I am glad, however, to
have it in my power to observe, that we have not suffered the HUMANITY of the
French and other nations to surpass our own, at least in one of our islands, a^
the following authentic extract from the Jamaica Councils will attest, dated
November 20th, 1787.

"This day the House of Assembly went into a Committee on the Consolidated
Slave Bill, and continued sitting upwards of three hours; we understand, that
by this Bill the whole system of the law respecting Negroes, is entirely
changed, a Council of Protection is established in each parish, and many humane
provisions are introduced for rendering their condition easy and happy; it is
also made felony, without benefit of clergy, to murder a Slave, a clause,
which, to the great honor of the House, passed without a single dissenting
voice.


the unquestionable cruelty, and the too well-attested horror, growing out of
these, that I contend. -- An abolition of these enormities is absolutely
necessary. For the rest, whether the commerce flourishes or falls, is a matter
of no moment to the Philanthropist: without engaging in the heats of political
controversy; without attending to the pleas of interest on the one side, or the
sallies of enthusiastic zeal (though generous in its excesses) on the other, it
is sufficient to Him that the happiness of the species in general, is made
independent on the tyranny of particular individuals, -- that the laws of
subordination, in the different classes of SOCIETY, should not violate the laws
of humanity, -- and that so much of liberty should be allowed to every man, a^
to feel a consciousness of his being a link in the great chain of the
community; and that till by some act of his own it is necessary for the good of
the whole that he should be considered as an outcast of society, he is, by the
Rights of nature and of Reason, entitled to protection from insult, misery and
death. -- So far as the wealth, can be reconciled to the happiness, of nations,
and the Establishments of Civil Society to the Rights of Nature, every lover of
his country must subscribe: at the fame time, as the wealth of worlds cannot
justify the least wanton infraction of the laws of Humanity, whoever vainly
attempts to support an argument for the one, at the expense of the other,
erects a building which has its foundation in the sands, and which must tumble
into ruins at the slightest touch of Reason and of Truth.

Under this plain Conviction, I have felt and written, and shall continue to
feel and write, upon Liberty and Slavery, Humanity and Nature; and I now submit
my Sentiments to the candid, consideration of the Public, without any undue
considence of success, or unmanly dread of miscarriage. -- I have not thrust
upon the world, what I wish it to honor with notice, without the previous
approbation of some great, and good minds; but (very contrary to the case with
which in earlier life I used to reconcile myself to hasty publication) were I
not now to go to press till I was satisfied with my own performance, those
whose partiality disposes them to praise, would blame me for unreasonable
delay; and those, who are more prone to censure, would no more be indebted to
me for furnishing them with subject for the exercise of their favorite talent.
On every great and national occasion, however, our country has a claim on the
best services we have to offer; and wherever they fall short of our wishes, or
even of our own conceptions, the proverbial apology, that the Intention
sanctifies the Deed, ought to operate in our favor. Should the deed, in any
measure, do justice to the intentions, in the present instance, applause will
not be withheld, but it will only serve to animate my future exertions, to
prove more deserving of it.

[FOR THE ERATTA SEE LAST PAGE.]

HUMANITY.
BOOK I.
FROM vernal blooms and many a fragrant bower,
The red'ning blossom and unfolding flower,
From breezy mountains and the covert vale,
The gliding water and the whispering gale,
From gayer scenes where careless Fancy strayed,
Bask'd in the sun, or frolick'd in the shade,
Ambitious grown, and touched by generous praise,
Now turns the MUSE to more adventurous lays;
No more she paints the tints of blushing morn,
Nor hangs the dew-drop on the trembling thorn;
No more the brook runs murmuring in her line,
No more fair Spring, her florid verse is thine;
Farewell, a long farewell, to founts and flowers,
Far loftier themes demand her thoughtful powers.
Wherever, sublime SOCIETY expands,
By art or nature formed, thy potent bands,
Through realms of heat, where faints the expiring breeze,
Or piercing climes, where the sun seems to freeze;
In darksome caverns, on tremendous steeps,
The embow'ring forest, or the billowy deeps;
Where roars the gulf, or where the streamlets flow,
Or dazzling mountains rise of endless snow,
Soon shall she dare to wing the vast domain,
THY awful power the subject of her strain.
But, ah! first kneeling at Compassion's shrine,
Her opening lay, HUMANITY, be thine!
For thou her guardian, patroness, and guide,
She owns with rapture, and obeys with pride!
Thee she invokes, oh! soother of distress,
Who with our kindness wove our happiness;
For as thy circling virtues round us move,
From their best deeds thy brightest joys we prove;
Often as our neighbor sinks in sudden grief,
Thou wak'st as sudden to afford relief.
Often as the stranger's bosom heaves with sighs,
The soft responses in our bosoms rise:
The cries of terror and the throes of care,
The groan of misery, and distraction's glare,
Sickness that droops, disease that gasps for breath,
The howl of madness, and the shrieks of death,
Deep sounds of agony that most affright,
Dread views of horror that most blast the sight,
Dire as they are, like wondrous magnets draw,
And own, HUMANITY, thy sacred law.
And oh! it is THINE, when vital breath seems fled,
To seek the awful confines of the dead;
Drag the pale victim from the whelming wave,
And snatch the body from the floating grave;
Beneath the billow, though entombed it lies,
Thy dauntless zeal the roaring main defies;
Inspired by HIM, whose hallowed touch restored
The darling babe the widow's soul deplored,
Her matron bosom eased of dire alarms,
And gave the child to her despairing arms,
It Is THINE to plunge into the bloating flood,
Clasp the swol'n frame and thaw the frozen blood;
Breathe in the lips reanimating fire,
Till warmed to SECOND LIFE, the DROWNED respire.
Hark! as those lips once more begin to move,
What sounds ascend of gratitude and love!
Now with the GREAT REDEEMER's praise they glow,
Then bless the Promoters of that glorious Institution the HUMANE SOCIETY.
agents of his power below;
New sprung to life, the renovated band,
Joyful before their second Saviors stand;
And oh far sweeter than the breathing spring,
Fairer than Paradise, the wreaths they bring!
The blissful homage rescued friends impart;
The enraptured incense of a parent's heart,
Oe'r-aw'd, and wondering at themselves, they see
And feel the power of soft HUMANITY!
When sovereign Reason from her throne is hurled,
And with her all the subject senses whirled,
From sweet HUMANITY, the nurse of grief,
Even thy deep woes, O PHRENZY! find relief;
For though the tresses loose and bosom bare,
And maniac glance thy hapless state declare,
With gentle hand she still supports thy head,
Beguiles thy wandering wit, and smoothes thy bed;
Assists thy roving fancy in its flight,
To crown thy airy sallies with delight;
An healing balm to thy warped sense she brings,
Till from her softness magic comfort springs,
And joys which reason with a frown denies,
Her tender pity with a smile supplies;
Even in thy prisonhouse she bids thee draw
From the rush scepter, and the crown of straw,
The mimic truncheon, and the love-knot true,
Full many a transport Reason never knew;
And at thy grated cell she often appears,
She culls thee flowers, and bathes them with her tears;
The perfumed violet and the blooming rose,
On thy hurt mind a transient bliss bestows;
Into a thousand shapes the garlands change,
As fairy fancy takes its antic range;
Then as thy brows the fragrant wreaths adorn,
The roses seem to bloom without a thorn.
Yet not to woes confined, for pleasure's song,
The reckless frolics of the village throng;
Even as we pass them by in distant lands,
THOU make our own, and often we join the bands;
The sudden sounds of happiness we hail,
And swell the chorus echoing in the gale;
Gladly we pause, then blythe pursue our way,
While brighter sunshine seems to gild the day;
For from the jovial groupe as we depart,
THY richer sunshine beams upon the heart;
Thus bliss is doubled, and thus pain can warm,
From thee, HUMANITY, both boast a charm;
We cheer, are cheered, now grant and now receive,
And need, in turn, the comfort which we give.
Thus thy fair streams spread plenty where they run,
Yet bless the fountains whence those streams begun;
Like the rich NILE thy sources never are dry,
Although a thousand channels they supply.
But Thou from whom these bosomed comforts flow,
HUMANITY! thou friend to joy and woe,
Have still ordained, that grief to crimes belong,
And that keen anguish shall attend on wrong;
Pride, hate, revenge, and tyranny, and strife,
As they mix poisons in the bowl of life,
Dash their own cup, and impotently try
To break, unpunished, nature's social tie:
Good, is of good productive, ill, of ill,
Conscience over both exerts her empire still,
And this great truth shall every tyrant know,
THE WOE HE GIVES, SHALL BE REPAID BY WOE.
Is there a land where echoing Fame extends,
From her proud cliff to earth's remotest ends,
Where gently slop'd the teeming vales are seen,
Adorned like Eden's with eternal green,
Where every village glows with every wealth,
The showers are riches, and the breezes health;
Where the sun gives serene his tempered ray,
But never scourges with excessive day;
Where female beauty sheds her fairest blooms,
And lovliest feature, loveliest grace assumes;
Darts strongest magic from the potent eye,
Breaks in the blush, and shoots along the sigh;
Where every scene is prodigal of charms,
True courage kindles, and true glory warms,
Where brave resistance lifts the conquering arm,
And social blessings lend their softest charm;
Where reared to Virtue, Christian temples tower,
And melting Charity chastises power,
Conducts the naked stranger to her dome,
And grants the houseless wanderer an home,
Where equal laws such genial mildness show,
They beam sweet mercy on a captive foe?
O native Britons! here assert your claim,
Boast of your ISLE and justify her fame!
Tell, how her youth by sacred science led,
To all the softening charities are bred;
How second childhood, like the first, receives,
From her the cradle which compassion gives!
Tell, how her palaces of mercy rise,
Large though the wants still larger the supplies;
How, her kind Vide his Bill for the Relief of the Poor.
GILBERT frames protective laws,
A faithful champion in the poor man's cause;
How, even now, intent on god-like deeds,
Thy wants and woes, O! POVERTY, he pleads:
Earnest thy oft-invaded rights to spare,
From the hard hand that would thy pittance tear,
Even from thy lip, nor heed thy tear-dimm'd eye,
Thy spectre form, and pity-moving cry:
Tell how her This Lady is Author of a Benevolent Project on the same Subject.
BIRCH, whose heart is formed to bless,
The sad to succor, and the wronged redress;
The ravished morsel of the poor to save,
The work to crown her warm assistance gave.
Tell how her The excellent Translator of ESCHYLUS, EURIPIDES, and now of
SOPHOCLES, took an active Part in instituting and regulating an House of
Industry in his own County.
POTTER aids the generous plan,
As bard her pride, her nobler boast as man:
Tell, how her HOWARD's sympathizing soul,
Extends the Saviour-arm from pole to pole:
Crutch to the lame, and vision to the blind,
Tell, how she sooths the ills that scourge mankind:
All this proclaim, till nations bless the zone,
And happy Albion marks it for her own!
Just is the boast! yet why to home confined
Are the soft mercies of thy Albion's mind?
Why, at her bidding, rolls the crimson flood,
To deluge AFRIC in her children's blood?
Why torn from Sire, from children, and from wife,
Dragged at her wheels, are captives chained for life;
And why do hecatombs each day expire,
Smote by her mangling whip and murderous fire?
Those stripes, those yielding shrieks that rend the air,
Ill fated AFRICA, thy wrongs declare?
Blush, Britain blush, for thou, it is thou have sold
A richer gem than India's mines can hold;
Traffic'd thy soft HUMANITY away,
And turned her strongest objects into prey!
Thy generous sons upon that fatal shore,
Their nature lose, and harden into ore:
There greedy avarice, rears his venal throne,
'Midst seas of blood that float the sultry zone;
With wiry lash and iron rod he sways,
The tyrant orders, and the slave obeys;
Havoc and horror rage at his command,
And dissolution covers all the land!
O! that my Muse could mount on Nature's wing,
Soar like her "darling," her loved Shakespeare, sing!
Then every word should "harrow up the soul"
And Afric's wrongs resound from pole to pole!
Thrice humble HOWARD, ah! do thou inspire
And breath thy Godlike spirit in my lyre,
For, all accustomed as thou art, to see
The direst scenes of human misery,
To go where nature scourges with disease,
" The lines with inverted commas are from the Triumph of Benevolence, written
by the author of this Poem, in honor of Howard.
And spotted deaths load every tainted breeze;
Where even the strong Antipathies assail,
Haunts of the filth-fed toad, and slimy snail,
The noxious caverns, and abhorrent caves,
Where wretches pace alive around their graves:
While hollow echoes ring their endless knells
Through deep-scoop'd vaults and slow-consuming cells;"
Never did thy eyes such marks of horror trace,
As hourly agonize the Negro race!
Prove then the prisoner and the mourner's friend,
And once again thy virtuous influence lend;
"So raptured notes, as if by Angles given,
Once more shall peal the harmonies of Heaven:"
Again the virtues that revere thy name,
Wide over the realm, shall spread the ingenuous flame,
Pity's high priest the righteous cause shall plead,
And shouts of joy to cries of blood succed;
HOWARDS unnumber'd shall the truth embrace,
"And feel akin to all the human race:
Again, shall Avarice suspend his art
And feel again, subdued, his rugged heart;
His bosom loosened from the sullen ore,
The rock shall gush in blessings to the poor.
Would thou the map of slavery survey,
And the dire circuit of the trade display,
Dart thy astonished eye over distant lands,
From Senegal to Gambia's burning sands,
Pursue the blushing lines to Congo's shore,
Then traverse many a league, Benguela over,
Career immense! over which the merchant reigns,
And drags reluctant MILLIONS in his chains!
COMMERCE! thou sailest on a sanguine flood,
On a red sea of Man's devoted blood;
Thy pompous robe, though gemm'd as India's store,
Proud, though it flows, is died in human gore.
The tears of millions bathe thy fatal cane,
And half thy treasure springs from human pain,
And not an idol on thy altars shine
But human victims stain the crimson shrine!
And thou, O INTEREST! dark, insidious power,
Whose sanction'd arts waste nations in an hour;
Whose mining frauds, more fatal still, destroy
Hope's tender blossom, and the fruits of joy;
Thou, to whom all the coward slights belong,
Thy heart too cruel for a generous wrong,
For fierce Revenge, that fever of the soul,
Hate that defies, and Love that spurns control,
Or mad'ning Jealousy when Reason bends,
Or Zeal, extravagant to liberal ends,
Thou, who, for noble faults like these, too cold,
Whose vices never aspire, but stoop to gold,
That grovelling passion of the sordid breast,
Like Aaron's serpent swallowing up the rest;
Theft, rapine, plunder, fraud, and murder, stand,
Fell ministers! to wait thy dire command.
Yes thou, the founder of this impious trade,
Made him a slave, that nature never made,
Tore the poor Indian from his native soil,
And chained him down to never-ending toil.
Ah! luscious mischief, slave-creating CANE,
Of every soft HUMANITY the bane:
Thy venomed sweet, whose soul-polluting art
Like some masked poison, eats into the heart,
Sweet though thou art, an aspic sting is thine,
And into shambles, Christians turn thy shrine:
Thou, like vile Gold, from the embowel'd earth,
By avarice dragged reluctantly to birth,
To taste thy charm are groaning nations bound,
And half mankind in kindred blood are drowned!
Say, MUSE, from whence the unnatural mart began,
The sordid merchandise, and sale of man?
From Egypt first the Ethiop traffic came,
But dawned so mild, that slavery was not shame;
While nature yet preserved some generous right,
The yoke was easy and the burden light;
And here the patriarch law each wrong restrained,
And "eye for eye, and tooth for tooth" ordained.
Soon over the Aegean waves the trade was brought,
Traveled to GREEce, till ROME the infection caught;
Yet temperate still, no tyranny arose,
Till baneful LUXURY marshalled all her woes;
Conquerors, their captives, with a smile received,
And whom the brave embraced they never deceived;
The battle over, they bade contention cease,
And foes in war were humble friends in peace,
The pledge was solemn, and the vow sincere,
The union sacred, and the compact dear.
But oh! fair ATHENS, when the commerce drew
To thy loved shore, the bonds yet gentler grew,
The slave could boast a guardian in thy laws,
And summon justice to support his cause,
Even to thy holy altars might repair,
Assert his claims and find them honored there:
In rosy fetters were thy prisoners bound,
And in captivity with freedom crowned;
Wisdom in peace, or valor in the war,
The faithful counsel or the glorious scar,
Attachment proved, and servitude sustained
With manly zeal, their liberty regained;
With his own hand the master loosed the yoke,
But the slave scarce perceived the bonds were broke,
So soft the texture, he never felt their weight,
Nor changed his master though he changed his state:
Captive no more, he still pursued his toil,
And grateful vowed allegiance to the soil.
Yes, classic ATHENS, nurse of generous arts,
Thine was the throb HUMANITY imparts;
To freemen rose thy slaves, and then aspired,
To all thy sons, to all thy state required;
Even to Athenian loyalty they grew,
Till scarce thy citizens a difference knew;
While shameless SPARTA butchered half her slaves,
Convulsive shook, and dug untimely graves.
Despised, abhorred, and dreaded was their sway,
To all a tyrant's guilt and fears a prey:
Thou too, lost ROME, how galling was thy chain
In those dire times, when mercy su'd in vain;
When cut to atoms was the debtor's heart,
That each hard creditor might claim his part!
And oh! degraded GREECE, how fallen thy state,
Once like thy splendid rival wise and great;
Nor less her rival in thy vices found,
Both soaring now, now sinking to the ground;
How dimmed thy orb, when Sages could ordain,
The sanguine whip, and vindicate the chain:
When thy grave PLUTARCH, wise, discreet, and brave,
Stern in philosophy could stab his slave;
And thy DEMOSTHENES, in thunders urge,
The sovereign virtues of the mangling scourge;
O blind! to think where smiles and kindness fail
To touch the soul, that frowns and stripes prevail!
Hail tender ADRIAN, first on Rome's record,
Who drew distinct the line 'twixt slave and lord;
Who with sweet mercy tempered awful power,
While pity's angel hailed the auspicious hour!
Thou Christian emperor in whose generous breast
The light of pure devotion shone impressed,
That sacred light descending from above,
An emanation of celestial love;
With speed of lightning spread the lambent ray,
Till realms of darkness kindled into day;
From God himself the spark etherial came,
And man adored the soul-illuming flame!
Thou too, just CONSTANTINE, with gentle sway,
Bade all be free and all that God obey;
The fire from Heaven a general luster shed,
And the foul mists of superstition fled;
Fair Faith was crowned, her banner was displayed,
Sunk was the crosier and the cross prevailed.
But ah! once more to stain the bloody shrine
And sell mankind, O PORTUGAL, was thine;
To thee ill-fated Afric owes her pain,
The scourge fresh pointed and the new forged chain;
Thine the base arts the sons of gold applaud,
The smile deceptive, and the snare of fraud,
The extended hand that chases fear away,
The embrace that wins affection to betray,
The league of peace in policy devised,
The compact broken and the oath despised,
To lure the heart all smooth seductions tried,
And the heart gained, disguise's thrown aside:
The plot avowed, the promise boldly broke,
By the harsh driver and the galling yoke.
Accursed GONZALES taught thee first the art,
To six this stigma on his country's heart;
The dire example spread with barbarous rage,
Thrift was the vice, and spared nor sex nor age;
At length the traffic into system came,
The infection flew, till Britain caught the flame;
Detested HAWKINS armed his pirate host,
And wolfe-like prowl'd on Guinea's fated coast;
Force, brib'ry, stratagem, were all employed,
O shame! till twice ten millions were destroyed.
The work of Christians this, whose lawless rage
Taught milder savages foul wars to wage;
Christians taught savages new modes of strife,
And burst asunder all the ties of life;
Christians taught savages to worship gold,
Till, for their idol, sons and sires were sold:
Till sleeping tribes at midnight's hour were caught,
And seized as prey, to public market brought;
Till from the breast the babe was stolen away,
And children kidnapp'd in the face of day.
Next tawny SPAIN the shameful trade pursued,
Theft grew familiar, tyranny ensued;
The tawny slave on his oppressor poured,
And mad with smart, his haughty lord devoured:
Insidious SPAIN! still vanity thy guide,
Thou mixture loathed of penury and pride,
Slothful in dignity, supine in state,
Active alone in cruelty and hate:
Commerce, like this, might well command thy zeal,
O! patron of the agonizing wheel!
From where wild Biscay throws its foam around,
And aids the deaf'ning tempests frantic sound;
Even to the steeps where Pyrenees ascend,
And like a rocky chain their links extend,
The nations shuddered as it sprang to birth,
And throes unwonted shook the laboring earth!
Thou, TORQUEMADA, thy assistance gave,
To fix this engine which the thoughts enslave;
Sedately savage, thou could calm behold,
Men scattered piecemeal, though thy rage was cold:
Quaff'd the warm blood, enforced the torturing power,
And viewed with horrid joy the flames devour.
Schooled in thy climes demoniac arts, could bear
To see the cord inflict, the pincers tear;
Arrayed thy victims in the rich attire,
And danced, like Satan, round thy feast of fire.
Ah! well might SLAVERY thrive in such a hand,
For all are slaves in a despotic land;
Precarious life is passed in trembling awe,
And the proud tyrant owns the breath they draw.
POWER, like a miser, spreads the greedy hand,
Still stepping onward, never at a stand,
A subtle miner working still his way,
In avarice of accumulating sway;
Tools would be statesmen, statesmen would be kings,
And they would mount upon the angels wings;
POWER first advances with a modest air,
But, born a tyrant, quickly learns to dare;
By due degrees he throws each barrier down,
Thinks strength is right, and calls the world his own;
At length grown absolute, assumes the God,
And proves at once a pestilence and rod,
Till, grown incautious, some rash point he tries,
And in the ruin of his project lies.
Behold where fated FLORIDA extends,
His blood-track'd course the fell VELASQUEZ bends,
Launches his guilty bark upon the waves,
To kidnap freeborn men and make them slaves!
See, as he gains the chain-devoted land,
The sable natives hurry to the strand,
His sailing castle on the waves they view,
And gazed with wonder as it near them drew;
But on the deck when human forms appeared,
And peaceful signals smiled, no more they feared;
'Twas MAN they trusted, MAN who spoke them fair,
Cajoled their faith, and lured them to the snare!
And now as guests they land, as guests are led,
Through palmy groves to every Indian shed;
The Spaniards there their glittering stores unfold,
The shining mirror, and the toy of gold;
Each gaudy bauble, cheats the Indian's eyes,
And tricks his passions into fond surprise,
Teaches new luxuries and wants unknown,
Till Europe's vice and folly is his own;
The useless ornaments his senses fire,
And each fresh gewgaw kindles fresh desire;
Fair in the glass another self he sees,
Till harmless wonder swells to vanities;
From lures like these the baneful passions grow,
And what began in pleasure ends in woe:
Frauds heaped on frauds to purchase these were taught,
And every trinket was with bloodshed bought.
But soon as guests, in turn, the Indian bands
Condemned, alas! to quit their native lands
No fraud suspecting, mount the treacherous ship,
Where, as in ambush, lie the chains and whip;
Like nested snakes, whose poisons are enrolled
Midst wreaths of flowers, in many a shining fold;
The faithless Spaniard leaves the plundered shore,
His fraud succeeds, and freedom is no more.
Then over the affrighted waves is heard the yell
Of mingled thousands in their watery Hell,
Shut from the light, unknowing yet their doom,
The vessel proves a prison and a tomb:
In the dark caverns of the bark they lie,
Live to fresh horrors or in bondage die;
While the base tyrant glorying in his snare,
Mocks at the loud rebuke and dumb despair.
Soon as the vessel bore the tribes away,
What horrors seized upon the trembling prey!
Ah! hear the shrieks of kindred left behind,
Roll to the wave and gather in the wind!
Matrons with orphans, sons with sires appear,
But vain affection's shriek and nature's tear:
The Spainsh pirate ploughs the watr'y plains,
And plants his cannon at the thin remains;
The flaming balls the wailing natives reach,
And added slaughter stains the crimson beach;
All, all is lost; but with a generous pride,
Even slaves spurn life, when freedom is denied:
"Free, still be free, loud echoes to the sky,
Dare not to live in bondage, dare to die!"
But oh! ye Christian savages, declare
On what unknown prerogative ye dare?
Peaceful and blessed, where rich Bananas grew,
And nature freshen'd as the sea-breeze blew,
Where harvests smiled without the aid of toil,
And verdure gladden'd the exuberant soil,
Where summer held so bountiful a sway,
Scarce claimed their year, the culture of a day,
The plants at twilight trusted to the earth,
The following morn sprang blooming into birth,
Graced with the bow, the Indians harmless ran,
And undisturbed enjoyed the rights of man:
The rights of man by nature still are due,
To men of every clime and every hue;
Their arrows sought the monsters of the wood,
The chase at once their pastime and their food,
Bower'd by the umbrageous vine, they thought no wrong,
Now wreathed the dance, and carol'd now the song;
And often some sable mistress of the soul,
Prepared the banquet, and partook the bowl:
Shared every bliss that genuine nature gave,
And often owned the vanquished heart a slave.
The willing captive, wore fair beauty's chain,
And pleased, submitted to the tender pain.
If giant POWER confers this wanton sway,
Subdues the strong, and makes the weak obey,
Does power give RIGHT? beware that dangerous plea,
Perchance its tendency thou do not see.
The slave once stronger than thyself, shall stand,
And seize intripid on thy stern command;
Armed with thy iron scepter bid thee toil,
Scar thy white skin, and chain thee to the soil:
Thy spirit fainting in the glare of day,
Shall bid thee naked brave the torrid ray,
Retort thy scorn, retaliate all thy rage,
Wear out thy youth, and murder thee in age;
Tear from thy fettered arms thy child and wife,
And blast the budding promises of life;
Repay, in turn, each stroke thy baseness gave,
And make thee feel what it is to be a slave.
Ah! false as fatal! to the Weak and Strong,
Th'inherent rights of nature still belong:
No partial principles the just impel
To thinking wisely, or to acting well;
For liberty, of all mankind the cause,
Becomes a forfeit only to the laws,
Those sacred compacts which like links sustain,
Connecting parts of the great social chain:
And while, with these, no member is at strife,
As full the right to liberty as life:
Alike the boon of heaven, and never ends,
From sire to son, from son to sire descends;
Avaunt assertors of superior right,
And vain distinctions betwixt black and white.
Firm and immovable on nature's base,
Stands the grand charter of the human race;
For HE who gave us life bade life be free,
And, to enhance his gift, sent Liberty!
Then, whence this wondrous difference in our race?
Come crested Pride, and the distinction trace:
Lo, from the Equator to the northern pole,
Though colors change, unchangeable the soul!
If justly bought the man of deepest die,
By equal laws the next in shade we buy;
So, softening on, till scarce a tint between
The haughty lord and humble slave is seen;
Springs the vain boast from thy superior WHITE,
Vain prepossession of thy partial sight?
Beware, fallacious reas'ner, lest the North
His whiter rival sends indignant forth!
Ah! rather blushing hide thy snowy skin,
For know thy slave paints white the sire of sin;
And darker than himself he draws the POWER,
Which, as his sovereign good his race adore;
Thy cruelty has taught him to despise,
Like hell thy hue, his own like heaven to prize.
NATURE and HABIT, human kind control,
The needle one, and one the attractive pole;
And what, in Europe, we a grace may call,
Is found in Africa no grace at all;
And what abhorred deformity we name,
In many a climate dignifies with fame.
Survey the various globe from shore to shore,
Weigh MANNERS, CUSTOMS, and be proud no more;
Thou, who would fix her to the palest face,
See, how for these even BEAUTY shifts her place:
All, all to nature or opinion bow,
Or fond caprices, which from habit flow;
Here BEAUTY proudly boasts the lengthening head,
There on the shoulders bids it broadly spread:
Here sma^lest gems must grace the fair one's ear,
And there the pendents large as logs appear;
Here see her ask the locks of snowy white,
Yet beg the charm of teeth more dark than night,
Here must the broaden'd eye-brow shade the face,
There softly curv'd must crescent archings grace:
While here those crescent archings must depart,
Stubb'd from the root for painted brows of art:
Here, BEAUTY loves the cheek supremely fair,
There boasts the gash and cherishes the scar.
In Britain, rose and lilly must unite,
While Damian's Isthmus, claims the milky white:
The beard must here even to the girdle flow,
There not a bristle must presume to grow;
Here the swollen body, there the slender waist,
This wrapped in silk, and that in dog-skin graced;
Here BEAUTY triumphs in her wooly hair,
But waves in wreaths, her auburn tresses there:
To grace the dames of Europe, fair they flow,
Long and profuse upon a neck of snow,
In every curl a Cupid seems to lie,
To aid the conquests of the sparkling eye.
The thickest lip here beauty makes her care,
More softly swelled, like dewy rose-buds there;
The dazzling white is in this clime admired,
In that the glossy black is more desired.
Feel humbly then, nor deem all grace thy own,
Nor think that Nature charms in thee alone;
The poorest native of the poorest coast,
Has still his beauty, still his good to boast;
From earth's beginning to its utmost ends,
Proportioned charm, proportioned bliss she sends,
Exact division, but adapted still,
To what in different climes her children feel,
To what, when undebauch'd by man's desires,
Or fancied wants, necessity requires;
Nor sparing, nor yet prodigal her plan,
With poised equality she blesses man:
On the worst soil some heartfelt joy bestows,
Which the glad son, she there has station'd, knows,
And what from us extorts the taunting sneer,
May to his sense an happiness appear,
As the fond gifts which we indulgent deem,
To him an aggravated curse may seem.
Thus kind is nature in her zone serene,
But not more kind than in her torrid scene;
Not less a parent where the frozen Power
Resides for centuries in his icy tower,
Where the hoar monarch in his vest of snow,
Ascends the hills where suns refuse to glow.
Vain all dispute of color, form or size,
In pride, in reasoning pride, our error lies. POPE.
In pride, in pride alone the difference lies;
Whence, then, presumpt'ous man, proceeds thy right,
And by what law does olive yield to white?
Why has not brown, black, copper, equal claim,
Their nature, origin, and end, the same?
All of one species, all of equal birth,
Though shifting colors like their parent earth.
If not in color then, perchance in sense,
In the soul's power, may lie the proud pretense,
Ah no! from Nature's hand all equal came,
Through every clime an helpless babe's the same,
The same frail emblem of our state appears,
A weak and helpless being born in tears!
If cultured climes refine on nature's plan,
They change the mode, but never change the man.
The human passions strongly are impressed,
In the untutored, as the polished breast;
In the swarth African that is bought and sold,
As the fair plunderer that steals his gold,
Heaven formed his eyes to love his native hue,
And pointed all his appetites as true,
Those sable tints, at which with fear we start,
Are the loved colors that attract his heart:
Our polished arts, refinement may bestow,
But often enfeeble nature's genuine glow.
In polished arts unnumber'd virtues lie,
But ah! unnumber'd vices they supply;
Here, if they bloom with every gentler good,
There are they steeped with more than savage blood;
Here, with Refinement, if sweet Pity stands,
There Luxury round them musters all her bands;
It Is not enough that daily slaughter feeds,
That the fish leaves its stream, the lamb its meads,
That the reluctant ox is dragged along,
And the bird ravished from its tender song,
That in reward of all her music given,
The lark is murdered as she soars to Heaven.
It Is not enough, our appetites require
That on their altars hecatombs expire;
But cruel man, a savage in his power,
Must heap fresh horrors on life's parting hour:
Full many a being that bestows its breath,
Must prove the pang that waits a lingering death,
Here, close pent up, must gorge unwholesome food,
There render drop by drop the smoking blood;
The quivering flesh improves as slow it dies,
And Lux'ry sees the augmented whiteness rise;
Some creatures gash'd must feel the torturer's art,
Writhe in their wounds, though saved each vital part.
From the hard bruise the food more tender grows,
And callous Lux'ry triumphs in the blows:
Some, yet alive, to raging flames consigned,
By piercing shrieks must sooth our taste refined!
O power of mercy, that suspends the rod!
O shame to man, impiety to God!
Thou polished Christian, in the untutored see,
The sacred rights of sweet HUMANITY.
Thine is the World, thy crimson spoils enjoy,
But let no wanton arts thy soul employ,
Live, though thou do on blood, ah! still refrain,
To load thy victims with superfluous pain;
Even the gaunt tiger, though no life he saves,
In generous haste devours what famine craves;
The bestial paw may check thy human hands,
And teach dispatch to what thy want demands,
Abridge thy sacrifice, and bid thy knife,
FOR HUNGER KILL, BUT NEVER SPORT WITH LIFE.
Relief appears as the Muse shifts her place,
To where pure manners bless the gentlest race;
Lo, where the BRAMINS pass their blameless life,
Free from proud culture, free from polished strife.
To man, brute, insect, nature's constant friends,
The heart embraces and the hands extends;
See the meek tribe refuse the worm to kill,
No murder feeds them, and no blood they spill;
But crop the living herbage as it grows,
And quaff the living water as it flows,
From the full herds, the milky banquet bear,
And the kind herds repay with pastures fair;
From sanguine man they drive the game away,
From sanguine man they save the sinny prey,
The copious grain they scatter over the mead,
The bird to nourish and the beast to feed,
The flowers their couch, their roof the arching trees,
And peaceful nights succeed to days of ease.
O! thou proud Christian, aid fair nature's grace,
And catch compassion from the Bramin race:
Their kind extremes and vegetable fare,
Their tender maxims, all that breathe to spare:
Suit not thy cultured state, but all should know,
Like them to save unnecessary woe;
Like them to give each generous feeling birth,
And prove the friends not tyrants of the earth.
O sweet HUMANITY! might pity sway,
All, all like Bramins would thy voice obey;
For ah! to heighten joy and solace woe,
All need, alas! thy tender aid below.
One leans on all, for help, not all on one,
What worm so feeble as proud man alone?
The veriest giant, by himself is found,
Frail as the reed that every breeze can wound,
But even the pigmy with associates joined,
Strong as the oak, can brave the rudest wind;
The SOCIAL PASSION opens with our breath,
Pursues through life, and follows us to death.
See, as yon infant lulled in slumber lies,
How the fond mother to its cradle flies,
Soft on her faithful breast reclines its head,
Her faithful breast its banquet and its bed:
Though many a suffering for its sake she bore,
They all but serve to make her love it more,
For soon a kindred passion equal burns,
The parent's tenderness the child returns,
Runs by her side, or struggles to her knee,
And owns the touch of fair HUMANITY:
The child arrived at man, the parent lies,
Sickening at life, in haste her offspring flies,
Explores the chamber, though disease be there,
And hangs with catching deaths the putrid air:
And when, at length, the mother yields to fate,
Stretched round her breathless form the affections wait;
In mute distress, and with uplifted hands,
The child she cradled, at her coffin stands,
Invokes her spirit to assuage the woe,
And teach meek patience to endure the blow;
Blesses the holy shade which gave him birth,
Moves to the grave, and views the opening earth,
A filial shudder through his frame he proves,
As the dust falls upon the dust he loves:
Then, as the time steals on with thief-like power,
And brings to him the all-subduing hour,
Himself, e're this a parent, soon shall prove
The softening offices of filial love,
For those who owe him life shall weeping bend,
And his attracting couch as fondly tend,
Watch his dimmed eye, observe his changing cheek,
And drink his dying breath to hear him speak,
His latest accents in their hearts enshrine,
As sainted sounds of oracles divine;
Thus shall he feel the tenderness he gave,
And equal tears fall fast upon his grave.
Tyrants over brutes with ease extend the plan,
And rise in cruelty from beast to man;
Their sordid policy each crime allows,
The flesh that quivers and the blood that flows,
The furious stripes that murder in a day,
Or torturing arts that kill by dire delay:
The fainting spirit, and the bursting vein,
All, all are reconciled to Christian gain.
In cold barbarian apathy behold,
Sits the slave-agent bending over his gold;
That base contractor for the chain and rod,
Who buys and sells the image of his God.
Callous to every touch that nature lends,
The bond that ties him to his kind he rends,
Robber at once and butcher of his slaves,
Nor grief, nor sickness, age, nor sex he saves,
But plunged in traffic, coldly can debate,
The parent's destiny, the infant's fate;
The teeming mother of her hope despoil,
And poise the gains of childbirth or of toil.
The sighs and groans which spring from both he spurns,
For life or death it is gold the balance turns.
O! Pride and Avarice of deluded fools,
Despotic maxims taught in foreign schools!
Where still the science of a slave is taught,
To check the growth of every generous thought;
Where one proud mortal owns the subjects breath,
Whispers are treason, and a word is death.
Tenets like these to polished France belong,
For all she licenses, is dance and song!
The hands are fettered though the feet are free,
And closed the lips in dread of tyranny:
The poor, proud subject, still is idly gay,
Skips off his thoughts, and hums his cares away;
As the cag'd bird though prisoner till it die,
Will sometimes sing although it may not fly.
Thy tree, O LIBERTY! forbid to taste,
A Frenchman's richest genius runs to waste:
Often are the seeds of freedom in his soul,
But none can spring amid such hard control:
In life's fresh morn if chance they dare to shoot,
The bud scarce peeps ever Power destroys the root:
Nothing can prosper in a slavish soil,
Save stinted shrubs unworthy of the toil,
Like pallid sweets of ineffectual May,
That faintly bloom and wither in a day.
Not so the plants which LIBERTY bestows,
That in our Albion's favored garden grows;
There lifts the oak its top into the skies,
While with glad heart the Briton sees it rise,
Uninjur'd there, for ages shall it stand,
Nor ever quit it but to guard the land:
Then on the deep in gallant pomp it moves,
To serve that freedom which its country loves.
Oh! ever sail, fair Bark, upon thy waves,
Still guard thy England, from a realm of slaves:
Oh! ever flow, fair Sea, to guide our coast,
Still to divide us from yon abject host;
And swell ye Cliffs that canopy our strand,
To frown indignant on that servile land;
That land of mutes, of one proud Lord the prey,
A clime where to be dumb is to obey,
Unheard, unseen, where wretches meet their dooms,
For whom no tear must ever bathe their tombs,
Concealed the parent's pangs, the lover's sighs,
Bastiles for ever frown before their eyes;
Like those they mourn down precipices thrown,
Are all that dare the ties of nature own;
Buried alive, from youth to age they lie,
And even, at last, in agonies they die.
Oh! hailed by men and angels, be the hour,
Which clipped even Britons wing, outstretch'd for power!
Which taught the monarch where his rights should end,
And to what point the subjects should extend:
Bade the encroacher know his proper sphere,
Or for each wrong the meanest subject fear.
Once Kings controlled the law, in infant times,
Plundered at will, nor answered for their crimes,
Our juster system snaps the tyrant's chains,
Curbs his proud nature, and his rage restrains.
Mark by what gradual steps Britannia rose,
As the small acorn to a forest grows;
By what variety of adverse fate,
Terrors of war, and anarchies of state,
What direful griefs by foreign fury bred,
Rivers of blood, and mountains of the dead:
She, past adventurous, e're her wrongs were over,
Complete her triumphs, and confirmed her power.
When, but to look, was treason to the state,
And the King's nod, like thundering Jove's, was fate;
Not now, as in our scribbling James's days,
Plain truth is tortured in the statesman's maze;
Then 'twas that thus the royal nonsense run,
Our word is law, who murmurs is undone.
Behold the painted natives of the isle,
Rough as the coast, uncultur'd as the soil;
Half-naked and half-cover'd see them go,
For sport or war accouter'd with the bow,
The plumy helmet nodding on the head,
And the loose skin across the shoulders spread,
A rude SOCIETY without a plan,
Above the brute, yet scarce arrived at man;
But even here was felt the patriot flame,
And from these sparks our noontide radiance came;
To guard the huts that stretch along the strand,
Armed with the scythe and wicker shield they stand,
The chariot mount, or leap upon the ground,
And shout victorious to the trumpet's sound.
Chains, wounds, and death, the hardy chiefs defy,
For Britain conquer, or for Britain die;
The brave CARACTACUS his squadrons brought,
And with inferior force undaunted fought:
Though rude the race, and savage though the scene,
Freedom called forth Iceni's warlike queen,
A martial band great BOADICIA led,
And even a woman for her country bled.
Revenge and liberty inspired the fair,
And poison saved her in the last despair;
This, from ignoble bondage, set her free,
And all the shame of ROMAN slavery.
Thus, in the earliest hour of Britains morn,
A Briton's haste of tyrrany was born!
Abhorrence sacred, to repel the hand,
That dares to wrong the charter of the land:
Our sturdy ancestors, though often subdued,
But breathed from war, and strait the charge renewed;
Now dressed as victims, now as prisoners bound,
The blood of heroes deluging the ground.
In each extreme our brave forefathers prove,
Their native courage and their country's love;
Fierce for hereditary claims they fight,
And even till death maintains a Briton's right.
Hence rose our liberties, a common cause
To these, succeed, their best support, the Laws;
Bonds, conflicts, murders, massacres ensued,
And many a Saxon, Danish sword embrued
In English blood, and many a monarch's life,
And many a Monk's, submitted to the strife,
Eer Laws were formed, as now sublime they stand,
The shield, the spear, and buckler of the land:
At length bloomed forth, diffusing all their charms,
The arts of peace more strong than those of arms;
Barbaric Ignorance resin'd away,
Like mists dispersing at the dawn of day.
The sword hung up, the trumpet heard no more,
The Lyre essayed its humanizing power,
Religion came with meekness to explode,
The heathen idol and the Saxon God;
In place of Deities with frowns portrayed,
Mild Christianity in smiles arrayed.
Where stood the clay-built hut, see cities rise,
Where altar's blazed with human sacrifice,
Where pagan superstition, horror spread,
And even where Piety misguided led,
In later times, her victims to the flame,
In bloody memory of our Mary's name,
Now see our country share an happier fate,
Discreetly strong and equitably great,
Her power supreme, and yet her reason clear,
In skilful balance, holding hope and fear;
Her force, law-govern'd, knows its proper fence,
Distinct from tyrrany and impotence.
Not fierce to punish, nor so weak to spare
When truth acquires, but justice still her care;
Thus wise and potent, awful and humane,
JUSTICE and LAW, support the guiding rein;
Like kindred powers, each seated at the helm,
They steer that stately bark, the ENGLISH REALM:
And for a moment, should one quit the post,
Like sympathizing twins, the other's lost;
But knit together in connection strong,
This must go right, the other cannot go wrong:
Proud through the waves, though ^oudly roars the gale,
Amid'st the public storm secure they sail;
Unhurt, they bring the vessel to the strand,
Lords of the subject ocean, as the land.
Thus, in our isle, as the proud MUSE shall sing,
In ampler lays, when next she spreads the wing;
Thus, in our isle, her LAWS securely stand,
A guardian fabric of the smiling land;
Prop of HUMANITY, and seen from far,
Bright as the luster of the morning star.
All hail! thou glory of fair England's throne,
Illustrious Prince, this fabric is thy own!
All hail! thou hero of the Saxon line,
Britannia's LAWs, Britannia's FREEDOM thine!
Rich in the varied powers of head and heart,
In every science skilled, in every art,
With prudence, valor, thought, with action joined,
The circling VIRTUES tempered and combined,
The reconciled extremes of Good and Great,
Thine, by a kind felicity of fate;
Ardent in war, in gentle peace serene,
Wise in the public, as the private scene;
Coolness to plan, and vigor to pursue,
And born to mould a rugged state anew,
Whose fancy dazzled, yet whose judgment sound,
Bade every virtue know its proper bound.
Whatever Philosophy has drawn sublime,
Or poet's sung, in all the pride of rhyme;
Whatever history of good has given,
The Boast of nature and the smile of Heaven,
Adorned thy youth, and to complete the plan,
And give the perfect model of a man,
Worthy thy mind, Nature bestowed the grace,
Of princely stature and engaging face,
Then, in the noblest light her work to bring,
In times of trial, stamped thee for a King!
Yes, ALFRED, thou, beheld'st with generous pain,
Blood-spotted Fury, and his demons reign.
Scarce shone the crown upon thy princely head,
Ever rapine paused, and foul disorder fled;
Often as the invaders for the plunder burned,
Thou, warriour-sovereign, to the charge returned,
And when compelled to quit the regal seat,
Still, like thyself, was sought the soft retreat;
Veild by the shepherd cot and clown's attire,
Still glowed within thee all the patriot's fire:
Dismissed the regal pomp, its train resigned,
No fate could sink the monarch in thy mind;
The kingly glories there their state maintained,
There, their sit mansion, all the Virtues reigned,
Expiring LIBERTY engaged thy care,
For her to heaven still breathed thy fervent prayer,
Beneath the humblest shed she filled thy breast,
The humblest shed, ennobled by the guest,
There, while the unconscious neat herd toiled and sung,
The dart was pointed and the bow was strung;
Till, trimmed for death, they twang'd against the foe,
And saved Britannia at one powerful blow;
Like some young lion chained for many a day,
At length let loose, broad Conquest marked thy way,
Thou from the Dane the enchanted standard bore,
And bade fierce Hubba vex the isle no more,
In vain the magic sisters were implored,
The charm-bound raven owned another Lord;
'Twas thine, in new disguises to assail,
Touch the tuned harp and weave the mazy tale,
Then, while thy country's foes reposed supine,
Again in arms confessed they saw thee shine,
As with one soul they dared the martial deed,
For at thy side 'twas victory to bleed;
The invaders soon a Conqueror allowed,
And every haughty tribe to ALFRED bowed!
But, peace restored, 'twas thine to pity foes,
The arrow sped, the guardian shield arose,
Broad over the vanquished multitude they spread
Dead the fierce war, thy enmity was dead;
Now bloomed the arts of peace, the powers of trade,
And towering Cities, towering Fleets were made,
Neglected Science reared again her head,
And Erudition rose as from the dead;
Cheered by thy touch awaked, the tuneful Nine,
For royal hands wove wreaths around their shrine,
To arts as arms thy genius led the way,
Together twined the olive and the bay,
At once the King, the Bard, the Patriot shone,
The muses laurel flourished round the throne!
Of SOCIAL life, thine too, the faultless plan
Foes warmed to friends, and the heart beat to man,
To fair HUMANITY was struck the lay,
And from the tuneful charm what heart would stray?
'Twas then brown Industry began his lore,
And billow-braving Commerce brought his ore.
But chief THE LAWS, Oh! ALFRED, fired thy thought,
For Oh! to those, what hidden truths were brought!
'Twas then even monarchy was happiness,
Power changed his nature, Kings began to bless,
As thy own thoughts thou made each Briton free,
Yet marked the line 'twixt vice and liberty:
Laws fallen structure touched thy kingly soul,
And Phoenix-like from ashes sprang the whole;
From old materials, where the atoms lay,
'Twas thine to call the chaos into day,
'Twas thine, O royal architect! at length,
To give proportion, beauty, softness, strength;
The LAWS OF ALFRED like a temple shone,
All nations bowed to ALFRED'S equal throne,
Truth, power, and confidence support the base,
Beauty, and love, the superstructure grace,
King, subject, alien, the strong arch sustain,
Friends, kindred, neighbors, worship at the fane;
And, while the whole, connected with each part,
The laws of NATURE blessed the laws of ART,
Sanction'd their sway, saw all was fair and good,
A THRONE OF PEACE REARED IN A REALM OF BLOOD.
END OF THE FIRST BOOK.
HUMANITY.
BOOK II.
PROUD of the contrast, with indignant lay,
Once more O Muse, to Gallia bend thy way;
Explore yon Cavern, frowning on the sight,
When one faint lamp sends forth a sickly light!
Through folds of darkness where yon wicket glooms,
Perfidious POWER has scoop'd the living tombs,
Along the filth that oozes from the walls
The slimy snail, with track abhorent crawls,
And often, augmenting poisons, from the top,
With sullen sound, falls slow the withering drop.
The pestilential toad that squats below
Gathers fresh venom as those poisons flow:
Here, many a fathom down, despotic Rage
Hung human victims in the dreadful cage;
Here the poor Captive, torn from child and wife,
From youth to age, groaned out detested life;
Nor nature's sun, nor arts supplying blaze,
E're stole one beam of comfort on his days,
Nor human form, nor human hand was nigh,
To sooth the grief that gathered in his eye,
Save one brief glance of man, as through the hole
His daily bread, the silent jailer stole,
No human voice beguiled the endless night
That cruel shut him from creation's light!
To sooth a mistress wanton Louis gave,
To one who dared be just, this lingering grave,
To one who dare a prostitute pourtray,
And bring his honest Satire into day;
How sinks the heart to pace this gloomy round,
How pants the Muse to leave this tyrant ground!
But ere she turn, to Afric, let her fly,
Where slavery blooms beneath the fairest sky;
Thee, desolated ASIA, once the blessed
In every charm of lavish nature dressed,
Where favored Paradise, heav'n-planted, stood
A scene of wonders rising from the flood,
The holy spot by all the prophets trod,
Seat of the saints, and sojourn of the God,
Where FAITH her Christian temples reared around,
And blood of Martyrs sanctified the ground,
Where even REDEMPTION like a Cherub came,
And REVELATION, spread the enlight'ning flame.
But oh! thou Land, of Heaven itself beloved,
What dire events, what changes have thou proved?
How has time altered every charm of youth,
Since first thou heard'st the oracles of truth!
Forgot the Heavenly claims that once were thine,
Forgot the precepts breathed from lips divine;
Vain all the fathers, all a savior taught,
And God expelled for what the Imposter brought,
A sensual creed by a mock prophet praised,
The sacred BIBLE sunk, the KORAN raised,
Disgraced the truths, which all the Apostles gave,
Thy Prince a tyrant, and Thyself a slave!
Ah! what avails thy medicinal floods,
Thy citron breezes, and thy palmy woods,
What though the Cassia breathes along thy shore,
And trickling manner adds its essenc'd store;
Though gums balsamic in thy valleys grow,
And both the India's in thy region glow,
Thine, though Olympus, dear from classic fame,
And honored Hermon, a more holy name;
Though the tall Cedar decks thy fragrant shrine,
And lofty Lebanon himself be thine,
From fair Euphrates even to Jordan's wave,
Though thy rich Coast the hallowed waters lave,
And though thy fruits, voluptuously, dispense
A keener relish to the invited sense,
Though on thy flowers a bolder bloom prevail
And send more piercing odor to the gale,
And though thy skies, yet salient and serene,
Call fair Hygea to the tempting scene,
All, all these blessings a strong balance find
In one broad curse that seizes on thy kind;
Nor this the pest that often has thinn'd thy plains,
A plague more fatal in thy Tyrant reigns.
Fierce through the East see Despotism run
More fell, more fatal, than the torrid sun,
Frantic before him move a sanguine band,
The ruthless agents of his murderous hand;
Skulking behind, in dumb allegiance wait,
Nursed up in blood, his various tools of fate,
To torture life, and hideous deaths devise
In varied shapes of cruelty they rise!
Dey, Sultan, Signior, Emperor and King,
Chief, Vizier, Cailif, each inferior Thing;
Some do his bidding in the noon of day,
And some at midnight seize upon their prey;
Submission, terror, chastisement, combine,
To sink the abject vassal to the swine,
Reason below degraded instinct falls,
And Man is bound like herds within the stalls,
His spirit dies subdued by hard control,
The useless body moves without a soul;
No spark of heavenly fire the mass can warm,
Nor public virtue touch, nor private charm,
But general cowardice, by horror bred
Courage unstrung, and manly honor dead;
For oh! the dart, the gibbet, and the wheel
Are the least terrors that a slave can feel,
Of these the anguish scarce can rage its hour
Ere Death appears in soft relief of power,
Death, a kind refuge in the last despair,
But long a life of slavery who can bear?
LO PERSIA'S tyrant, with unnatural strife
To please a minion robs a child of life,
With savage rage can blind the firstborn son,
And partial lift a second to the throne;
When the proud Sopha has consigned to death
It Is treason but to beg a parent's breath,
The sentence past, the look that aims to save,
Condemns to equal fate the pitying slave,
Sensual religion aids the tyrants will,
And blood for ever reeks along the steel;
In dire suspense, like Damocles's sword,
By a slight thread hangs life -- a tyrant's word,
Imposts and Edict vex the groaning land,
And even the fountain flows but at command.
In dread MOGUL the laws must all be bought
Ere the case opens must a gift be brought,
The greedy Emperor ope's his craving hand,
And Justice, driven by Avarice, quits the land;
Nay, yet more brief, the Turkish powers decide,
For there the Judge condemns the accused untried,
There turns the suit as wills the proud Bashaw,
Who holds the place of destiny and law;
This god of earth, and brother of the Sun
Breaks up the court before the case be known,
Or strikes the head from some officious slave,
Who at the bloody verdict dares be grave.
Yet here the tyrant's self is insecure,
For no succession to the Crown is sure,
A race of strangled kindred pave the way,
And often the sceptered slave is made a prey;
O Hapless ASIA, whilst such horror reigns,
What BRITISH MUSE will rest upon thy plains?
Yet should she steer again to AFRIC'S sand
There too she sees Oppression lifts his hand,
Within the tropics fiercer than the blaze,
That fires the earth, with iron rod he sways,
Even from the fertile Nile to Niger's waves,
It Is but a change of tyrants and of slaves.
O pride enormous! impudence of man!
But let not Britons imitate the plan,
Frame no false systems and then call them wise,
Or make distinctions where no difference lies,
Alas! full often the European face
Masks a mind darker than the darkest race;
The Negro's heart may be a purer shrine,
For thoughts devout O! haughty White, than thine,
Acceptance find more gracious from its God,
Than the proud master who uplifts the rod,
His prayer to holy KANNO more prevail
To the great SPIRIT whispering in the gale,
His pious vows to QUOJA 'midst the trees
Or high BASSEFO walking in the breeze,
These may more virtue and more truth impart,
Than Christian incense from a savage heart,
And his wild Tambour beat to idol shouts,
To heaven ascend before the organ's notes;
Say, what the pomps of science or of prayer,
If the poor Indian's fervor glows not there?
In different forms though men the God adore,
Shaped as the brute or painted as the flower,
As marble here, and there as feathers seen,
There the birds bone, and here the fishes fin,
Each, as it marks sincerity shall rise,
And welcome find in the recording skies,
Shall more be cherished by the powers of Heaven
Than less true worship where more aids are given,
Than the mock homage of the enlightened train,
For whom a Savior lived and died in vain.
A doctrine this too harsh for human pride,
Resort to facts and be the doctrine tried,
With faithful hand, culled from the historic page,
Proofs throng to proofs might vanquish Christian rage;
Oh! tyrant WHITE, forget awhile thy gold,
And every virtue in thy BLACK behold,
All that is honored, loved, or prized in thee,
In thy scourged Negro blushing shall thou see.
Lo, as the Muse to Anticosta steers,
Midst the wild waves HUMANITY appears!
Escaped the wreck, although their barks were lost,
Whole crews were dashed upon a savage coast;
The coast, though savage, there the Christians find,
Each God-like feeling in an Indian mind,
For touched by cries that pierced the piny wood,
The natives sought the margin of the flood,
Then as the expiring Christians caught their view,
To human grief the generous Indians flew,
The social passion glowing in his face,
Thus spoke a Chieftain of the sable race:
"Haste children haste, behold where brothers lie, --
"Rise strangers rise, the hand of help is nigh:
"Men like ourselves throughout the globe command,
"The sheltering bosom and the aiding hand,
"All, all are kinsimen of a different hue,
"Our faces vary, but our hearts are true;
"Ye poor white wanderers on our bounty thrown,
"Your griefs are sacred and your wants our own."
This said, he gently to his Cottage led,
Smiled on his guests and yielded up his bed;
Then watched till morn, a guardian at the door
Blessed and was blessed -- could a Christian more?
To trace each VIRTUE through the sultry Sands,
Next Negro HONOR all thy praise demands,
In CUJOE'S generous soul it meets the view,
And darts a glory through his tawny hue.
A band of Christian pirates sought the shore,
And many an Indian from their forests bore,
One so, to CUJOE'S cot was seen to fly,
Pierced by a dart, he begged in peace to die;
But soon the Tribes pursue, demand their prey,
"Scalp, scalp that wretch, they cry, in open day!
"CUJOE conceals the Man whose blood is ours,
"'It Is not our rage, it is justice that devours."
Mean time the exhausted Christian gasp'd for breath
When Cujoe rose, and stopped the impending death:
"My Friends forbear, the guilty seek and slay,
"Pursue the race that stole our tribes away,
"May Ocean whelm them in the deepest wave,
"The guilty punish, but the blameless save!
"Of Guest and friend, ah! reverence the ties,
"Lo, this sick Christian on my faith relies,
"Here, in the rights of Friendship shall he rest,
"My arm his buckler, and his shield my breast
"This Cot his Citadel, and ere he die
"Here must your hatchets fall, your arrows fly!"
Honor prevailed, their passions died away,
And safe in CUJOE'S hut the Christian lay.
Next let us speed to yonder sainted plains,
By mountains screen'd and crowned with dulcet canes,
Where the mad Ouragan in phrenzy roars,
Affrights the Isle, and desolates the shores,
While many a rill and flowery vale between,
Smile in the storm and reconcile the scene:
See, there an Hero of the Negro line,
Boasts an high FEELING, Briton, proud as thine.
The faithful QUA-SHI with his master bred
The same their mansion and the same their bed,
Together used in infant times to play,
Their friendship strengthened in life's riper day;
The slave was trusty and the lord was kind,
To QUA-SHI'S care the property assigned,
His labors closed, he took the transient rest,
Then chid the Sun yet loit'ring in the East;
Ere peeped the dawn his daily toils he sought,
And daily wealth to his loved lord he brought.
Envy at length a poisoned arrow drew,
Which winged with mischief to the master flew,
Of dire neglect the accusation came,
And lo, the sentence past for QUA-SHI'S shame,
A public punishment was now decreed,
And the next Morn was QUA-SHI doomed to bleed:
The injured Slave with shudd'ring horror heard,
And at deep midnight sought his barbarous Lord,
Then wrought to agony, these words addressed,
The poignard trembling at his Master's breast.
"O Thou, whom no rememberance can move,
"Nor cradled tenderness, nor boyish love,
"Dare not to think that QUA-SHI'S soul will bear
"The public Insults which thy hands prepare,
"Think not the bloody Morn these eyes shall view,
"Nor think for pardon that these lips shall sue,
"No Monster, no, my soul's above my fate,
"Scorns thy proud mercy as it braves thy hate;
"Thus Tyrant, thus, thy fury I defy,
"Live Thou to Shame, while I in honor die."
He spoke -- the Poignard sluic'd the crimson flood,
And bathed the Master in the Servant's blood.
If thou would Negro TENDERNESS behold,
Seek with the Muse the coast where broods the gold,
A Snelgrave.
Briton there -- immortal be his name,
By pity's Angel marked with endless fame!
A Briton there, an Indian Infant found,
For savage rites by superstition bound,
The Negro King amidst the crowd he sought,
And at the Sacrifice the victim bought,
Then to the Ship his trembling Charge conveyed,
While all the sable train with awe surveyed;
But scarce the Babe was placed upon the deck,
Than loud was heard a female's piercing shriek,
"'It Is he! it is he! it is the babe I bore,
"Whom savage Acqua from this bosom tore,
"Ah! come my own -- resume thy couch of rest,
"And cling once more to this maternal breast,
"Blessed be the hand, by EGHO formed to save,
"Thrice blessed the Hand that led me here a slave,
"Blessed be the Author of these transports wild,
"And blessed the hand which has restored my Child!"
She could no more, but still the speaking eye,
Owned the rich gift of sweet HUMANITY!
But when she heard her infant had been bought,
Even as the flame its tender limbs had caught,
"O Indian God, Oh! God-like White, she said,
While over her sable cheek the crimson spread,
"All that a parent, all a slave can give,
"O God-like White, O Indian God receive!"
Kneeling she wept, then kissed her rescued Child,
While in her jetty arms the Infant smiled;
Dances and Songs of Praise now struck the waves,
And one strong charm like magic touched the slaves,
Through the long voyage obedient they remain,
Nor sounding whip was heard, nor clanking chain.
Touched is thy heart, O Merchant of thy kind,
Does human Softness steal into thy mind?
Roused is the spark, too long repressed by Gold?
Then bend thy heart to what we next unfold:
Now, while perchance the human passions move,
O view the force of Friendship and of Love,
In Negro bosoms see those powers at strife,
Which form the bliss and agony of life.
ZEBRON and ZABOR of the jetty race,
Were first in feature and proportioned grace,
Bright as the Antelope their radiant eyes,
As the proud Palm Tree tower'd their equal size,
Both wore alike the Tyger's speckled spoil,
Brothers in dress, in pastime and in toil;
Slaves though they were, even Slavery had its charms,
For ZEBRON'S comfort was in ZABOR'S arms,
And ZABOR fainting on the arid sand,
Was reared to Joy by gentle ZEBRON'S hand,
By bliss united much, by sorrow more,
A Negro's Fate they softened while they bore;
But Love, at last, a keener pang imparts,
For sable ZELIA triumphed over their hearts;
Her skin of Ebony bestowed a grace,
That far outshone an alabaster face,
So thought the youths, with equal truth inspired,
With all their passion, all their climate fired;
Each scorned to ravish, each refused to yield,
And Love and Friendship both maintained the field,
Devouring torments spread the mutual flame,
But still their friendship, still their love the same;
When beauteous ZELIA in their view appears,
ZEBRON and ZABOR melt in mutul tears,
Often, both embracing, to renounce her swear,
And Friendship seems to link them in despair;
At length their conflicts, big with every grief,
And every passion, sought a dire relief.
At close of day as ZELIA traced the wood,
The Lovers followed and before her stood,
The wandering Maid too fatal in her charms,
Now snatched to ZEBRON'S now to ZABOR'S arms;
The fondest vows that ever Lovers swore,
The deepest groans that ever heaved they pour,
Then, with closed eyes, and heads declined, they dart,
The mutual daggers in her bounding heart;
Speechless she fell, her sobs their shrieks confound,
They clasp the victim, and they kiss the wound,
Then raise the poignards streaming in her blood,
And with their own augment the crimson flood.
Thus Negro Virtues, Negro Frailties shine,
Say, fairer Savage, do they yield to thine!
Their ardent virtues emulate thy own,
Their errors are the errors of their zone;
Art thou then still Supreme of human race,
Still boasts thy Nature the superior grace,
Ah no! without thy cultivating arts,
Worth, greatness, goodness, elevates their hearts,
The towering spirit in their bosoms move,
They hate with vigor, as with force they love,
Together leagued, till death they faithful toil,
And smooth the wrong that chains them to the soil;
Still hand in hand their direful loads they bear,
Divide each joy and mitigate despair:
Vivid as Thine the sense of joy and pain,
Thrills in each pulse, and vibrates in each vein;
When hope inspires, behold, as bright a ray,
Illumes their eyes and over their features play;
When grief assails, the tears as copious flow,
To mark the soft or agonizing woe;
When the lash scourges or the pincers rend,
A shriek as piercing from the heart they send;
Ere the brave spirit of the man is broke,
Even with a Briton's scorn they spurn the yoke,
Love of their native Land, that magic charm,
Against an host has made an handful arm,
They love like Thee the soil that gave them birth,
And treasure up each particle of earth
Fondly embosom'd ere they leave the shore,
And kiss the sacred relic over and over.
Muscians, Poets, too, by nature taught,
A song spontaneous bursting from a thought,
Swift into measure subjects seem to fly,
As transient objects transient themes supply,
Nature to harmony attunes the ear,
And her nice touches over their limbs appear,
Each nerve extatic springs to the rebound,
And every motion seems to paint a sound;
The sweet enthusiasm every grief beguiles,
And the scourged Captive even in anguish smiles,
With thrilling passion every feature glows,
So strong the charm it cheats awhile their woes.
Their Woes, how countless -- ah! ill-fated race,
How shall I paint thy anguish and disgrace,
Ah! think not, WHITE, the Muse from fancy brings
Those woes, which History sanctions what she sings,
Her bloody Annals still does Truth unfold,
Stained with the victims of soul-spotting gold.
Yet, who the Negro's sufferings can relate,
Or mark the varied horrors of their fate;
Where, blushing Truth! shall we their griefs begin,
Or how commence the catalogue of Sin?
Demons of torture! ye who mock at woe,
And smile to see the crimson blood-track flow,
In horrid triumph rise from central Hell,
The inventive pangs of Christian growth to tell,
Oh! aid the shuddering Muse to paint the grief,
Which calls on death for pity and relief;
Oh! powers of Mercy, loose that massy yoke,
Oh! hold that Arm, for murder's in the stroke!
Behold that axe the quivering limb assails,
Behold that body weltering in its wails!
Ah! hear that Bludgeon fall, that lash resound,
Ah! see those wretches writhing on the ground!
See yonder mangled mass of Atoms lie,
Behold that Christian's hands the flames apply,
At the bare feet is laid the sulphurous train,
Climbs to the heart and burns into the brain,
Survey the triple horrors of their state,
Doomed in each change to be the sport of fate,
Torn from their native land at first they come,
And then are thrown into the sailing tomb,
In watery dens like coupled beasts they lie,
And beg the mournful privilege to die;
Than Man, more kind, but Death often brings relief,
Releases one, while one survives to grief;
The living wretch his dead associate sees,
The body clasps and drinks the putrid breeze,
Chained to the noxious corpse till rudely thrown,
In the vexed sea, then left a slave alone.
Ah! wretch forlorn! thy lot the most severe,
Assassination would be mercy here!
Methinks I hear thee cry, "Ah! give me death,
"Give the last blow and stop this hated breath,
"To arm this hand were holy innocence,
"I call on suicide as self defense,
"Oh! for a sword to waft me to the shore,
"Where never Christian White may torture more,
"Curse, curse me not with Being, instant throw
"This loathsome body to the waves below!"
His prayer denied, condemned 'midst slaves to groan,
The cruel Merchant marks him for his own,
The scar by Christian cruelty impressed,
Smoaks on his arm, or blackens on his breast,
The wattled oziers form his rugged bed,
And daily anguish earns his daily bread;
Short food, and shorter rest, and endless toil,
Above the scourge, below the burning soil.
Soon with his sable Brothers must he go,
"Doomed to a sad variety of woe,"
Like harnessed Mules over Afric's dreadful sand,
In slow progression moves the mournful band,
The lengthening files begin their circuit wide,
While on their limbs are galling braces tied;
Fraught with coarse viands, see the straining throng,
Drag the oppressive caravan along,
The massy iron and the direful log,
Their naked bodies even in slumber clog,
An iron collar over each neck is past,
And iron rivets hold the collar fast;
A tighten'd chain across each shoulder goes,
While the dark driver takes his own repose;
At length arrived, the miserable band
Like the stall'd oxen pass from hand to hand.
Ye friends of Man! whose souls with mercy glow,
Swell not your bosoms with this weight of woe?
Fires not the social blood within your veins,
To make the White Man feel the Negro's pains?
Beat not your hearts the miscreant arms to bind,
Of the proud Christian with a savage mind?
Do thou not pant to snap the impious chain,
And rush to succor the insulted train?
From servile bondage, to free the hapless race,
And fix the haughty tyrants in their place?
Make them the weight of Slavery to know,
Till their hard natures melt at social woe,
Nor till they humanize to social men,
Would ye restore them to their rights again!
But Heaven is just, each tyrant in his turn
Is taught the rashness of his pride to mourn,
Often spreads his tortured Slave the secret snare,
And hurls his Master in the last despair,
Far from his couch the balmy slumber flies,
And from his slave unnumber'd poisons rise,
He knows to pest the herd, to blast the soil,
Perish the blossom, and the harvest spoil;
To mix the baneful juice, the fatal flower,
This sudden kills, that boasts a mining power,
He knows to scatter unsuspected fate,
While circling mischiefs on his vengeance wait,
At length he makes the Tyrant's self his prey,
And rushes on him in the face of day,
Or desperate, seizes on the child and wife,
Mad with his wrongs, and takes their forfeit life,
That thus the White man's progeny may groan,
The Tyrant's lot to balance with his own;
Often from the cradle and the breast will tear,
Even his own babes in phrenzy of despair,
With mingled rage and fondness stop their breath,
And give them freedom in the arms of death.
Oh! FREEDOM, sacred Goodess! who inspires
The untutored Savage with sublimest fires,
He, though untutored, rushes to the fray,
Combats for passion, and never fights for pay,
While the bought soldier bargains for his breath,
A mercenary in the trade of death,
The generous Indian from his fetters broke,
Braves every peril to escape the yoke,
Freedom's worst wants prefers to Slavery's food,
And feeds from principle on Christian blood;
Often have the Chiefs over listed troops prevailed,
And Nature's warriors sped where armies failed;
The difference mark t'wixt those who sight for hire,
And those whom Freedom's genuine passions sire,
Nay more, when victors in the hardy sight,
Restored by Conquest to then native right,
Their wrongs are buried when the battle's over,
And so mer injuries are heard no more:
Yet taught distrust, ere they consent again,
With tried deceivers Commerce to sustain,
The appointed Leader of the sable band,
Requires a pledge ere he extends the hand,
The blood must flow from either warriors arm,
And Earth and Water blend to form the charm;
A Vase receives the mixture -- who disdains
To taste the potion no alliance gains,
Both parties drink in sign of mutual trust,
And the proud tyrant's humbled to the dust,
A stipulation vile is forced to crave,
And own, perforce, a Master in the Slave.
What will not FREEDOM'S Heav'n-descended fire,
In cultured, or in savage Souls inspire?
The RIGHTS OF NATURE and of GOD to save,
Men scoop the rock and build upon the wave,
Explore the barren sand, the marshes drear,
And a free Cottage in the desert rear,
Delight in hollow of some cave to dwell,
Or dig through Earth the independent cell.
See where MARINO lifts her craggy brow,
Half hid in clouds, and covered half with snow,
Beyond the Appenines, there Freedom reigns,
And scorns the thraldom of Italian plains;
There see untax'd the small republic grow,
And spurn the bondage of the vales below,
Close on the liberal Heaven behold it stands,
And proud looks down on tributary lands,
What, though those tributary lands display
The blooming fragrance of perpetual May,
Like the coy sensitive each lovely flower,
Still seems to tremble at the touch of power.
Blessed be the good Dalmatian's generous earth,
Which boasts, Oh! Rome, than thine a nobler birth,
Thou but the refuge of a robber band,
But there devotion raised the folded hand,
And many a century this little state
Has stood the storms of Fortune and of Fate,
Whilst thy sunk cities once the boast of Fame,
Have naught to mark them but an empty name:
What though no streams here lave the scant domain
But melting snows and reservoirs of rain;
Though hillocks scattered round the parent hill,
At once thy pride and penu'ry reveal,
A narrow circuit, and a labored soil
Which yields subsistence but to endless toil,
Dear is the grain that decks thy Mountains side,
Beyond the harvest of Italia's pride.
In this small spot is seen one path alone,
Where jealous freedom guides us to the town,
There, entering, arts and arms and trade we view,
For every Citizen's a soldier too;
There laws are formed on patriot Wisdom's plan,
For every Citizen's an honest Man;
There mines no Tyrant, there no Courtiers flock,
All good is common, all is public stock,
For general happiness there all combine,
The one great aim, and all to aid it join.
Oh! sainted founder of this virtuous land,
Sublimely raised, I see thy slatue stand,
Even where the Virgin consecrates the place,
It fills with holy zeal thy generous race,
With freeborn men thy Mount is covered over,
While lost CAMPANIA glooms a desert shore.
Say, what but FREEDOM cheered the Savage bands,
That once overspread CANADIA's conquered lands?
Wild as their woods behold uncheck'd they go,
For sport or food armed simply with the bow,
Save the thin Buffalo over their shoulders crossed,
Their hardy bosoms meet unfenc'd the frost,
The casual chase their banquet and their toil,
They asked no bounty from the sullen soil,
If to their prayer to range at large was given,
They thought unbounded liberty was Heaven;
The gods invoked, their Sylvan wars to aid,
The stag was slain, the board a captive made,
The female hunters journey'd with the men,
And fearless track'd the monster to his den,
And when at eve the warm pursuit was over,
Nor twang'd the bow nor sped the arrow more,
They sprung from light repose ere peep of day,
And through the humid deserts took their way;
Of forest growth their pampered sloth might view,
Nature's brave Caesar's and wise Tullys too,
Active, ferocious, bold, unawed, they stood,
Troops of the lake and armies of the wood,
Versed in no science, lesson'd in no art,
They breathed the eloquence that reached the heart;
Unknown the classic pomp of pedant schools,
Their Oratory rose over colder rules,
It beamed defiance in the flashing eye,
Stormed in the shout and melted in the sigh;
In tranquil hours it gave the smile serene,
In public tumult showed th'indignant mien,
The vivid tone and vital glance expressed
All the strong passions of the warriour's breast.
When the rude Chief his brave harangue began,
The Savage rose to Hero and to Man,
And when the invader tore him from the soil,
Dear scene of all his pride, of all his spoil,
No artificial mockery of woe,
Or taught his cheek to change, his tears to flow;
With pious awe he kneeled to kiss the ground,
And fondly pressed his sorrowing friends around,
"Oh! weeping Brothers! this our place of birth,
"Our fathers Ashes consecrate the earth;
"Should the foe drag us to a foreign shore,
"Those sacred ashes we can guard no more,
"The holy relicts as entombed they lay,
"Some wretch unhallowed may usurp as prey,
"Leave, leave not thus our Sires to Christian rage,
"But ah! with filial wrath the conflict wage."
Thus through the globe in Nature's earliest dawn,
For FREEDOM only was the arrow drawn,
The plain rough ancient at his threshold stood,
And held that freedom dearer than his blood;
Whatever the forest or the lakes bestow,
Fruits of his lance, his angle and his bow,
The fur that warms him or the hut that shields,
The scanty harvest which his culture yields,
Earned by his strength, was by his strength maintained,
He felt his own, what honest labor gained,
Part of himself his liberty he thought,
And reason sanctified what nature taught,
Nor force of bribes nor frauds of gold he knew,
For life and liberty the sword he drew;
Corruption was the growth of later times,
When Avarice reconciled the polished crimes,
A gentle modern of the Christian kind
That rose and flourished as vice grew refined,
An European, which in search of grain,
Taught freeborn men to bear and hug the chain.
See FREEDOM smiling through the realms of frost,
And glow on Labradore's inclement coast,
Though darkness sheds deep night through half the year,
And snow invests the clime, -- that clime is dear,
For there fair LIBERTY resides, and there
At large the native breasts the searching air,
Where blows the arctic tempests icy gale,
And famine seizes on the spermy whale,
The bearded Esquimaux half robbed of sight,
Roves uncontrolled content with FREEDOM'S light,
His country loves, to all its ills conforms,
Endures its caverns and accepts its storms;
For the huge Sea-dog spreads the nimble oar,
Nor sighs for blessings of a softer shore,
No languid Suns unnerve his hardy race,
Which blessed with Freedom range from place to place.
Such too, BRITANNIA, were THY savage Sons,
Through all thy tribes the dread of Slavery runs,
The mild heroic, honest without laws,
They braved each peril in fair Freedom's cause.
But ah! full many an age in Gothic night,
Was veiled the effulgence of their native right;
Though like the rocky Barrier of their coast,
That Freedom now is her sublimest boast,
Full many an age dissension shook her Fane,
From Rome's fierce Caesar to the stormy Dane.
In whelming tides poured in the Saxon clan,
And Normans finished what their rage began;
The savage Briton to his Mountains fled,
Alternate triumphed and alternate bled;
War upon wars, on conquest conquests throng,
Vandal drove Goth, and Goth urged Gaul along;
On human flesh the savage Victors eat,
And mistic Druids shared the sanguine treat;
These to their altars, even while truth they taught,
The trembling sacrifice rapacious brought;
Impostor-priests before their Idols stood,
And talked of Heaven with hands embru'd in blood;
Before their eyes imagined specter glare,
Spirits were heard, and fancied ghosts were there,
Religion, Law, and Government their own,
Bloody their Altars, bloody was their Throne;
Through the vexed Isle the sanguine edict spread
That Heaven demanded mountains of the dead;
In the dark grove which Superstition trod,
Priests hid their spoils, yet commun'd with their God,
And muttering rights within the fearful gloom,
Stab a fresh victim and the feast resume;
Unfelt as yet the softening ties of life,
Deep in the prisoner's breast the ruthless knife
The Female plunged -- could savage man do more!
Then idly prophesied as flowed the gore;
A rage of slaughter then that sex possessed,
Now with each grace of melting Pity blessed.
But soon the Tyrants sought themselves to save,
For soon Invaders pierced the Druid cave;
Forth from the Baltic poured the deathful host,
And trained to havoc, crimsoned all the coast,
The Northern Hive swarmed terrible around,
And every Altar smoked upon the ground,
Fire, sword, and carnage, spotted every hand,
Swelled the gorged tomb and deluged all the land.
Different in mind, and manners, as in face,
The Normans came, an innovating race;
Their power, their passions, and their pride, they brought,
Fierce, bold, and bloody, and with conquest fraught,
From the forced mixture of a foreign breed,
Unnatural customs, laws, and wars succeed;
The Saxon superstition, weak as dire,
In two extremes of water and of fire,
The burning ploughshare and the cauldron hot,
To prove the Culprit innocent or not,
Were lenient mercies to the cruel strife,
That then with horror hung a cloud on life,
Then, by no ties of law or nature bound,
Assassination took its deathful round;
In every grove the lurking stabber lay,
And human bloodshed clotted all the way,
In every street the mangled corpse appeared,
And mutual hate the sanguine standard reared;
In slavish homage to an haughty Lord,
All social joy was broken at the board,
From house to house the Tyrant's edict ran,
And the Feast ended ere the Mirth began,
At the eighth hour tolled out by dread command,
The dreary knell that darkened all the land;
Wisdom, her lessons could no more impart,
Nor Friendship gladden or improve the heart,
Ere to their bliss the genial hours invite,
Oppression shed impenetrable night,
The friendly faggot cheered the heart no more,
And all the softening blooms of life were over;
To ruined Juries the dire sword succeeds,
And at each pore insulted Justice bleeds,
Even rural pastime in that iron age,
No more to jovial sports the youth engage,
The savage beasts, which Nature gave to all,
To glut the insatiate pride of one must fall;
No more the chase, no more the woods were free,
All, all was Hate, -- for all was SLAVERY.
The Lawyer, Clergy too, and Baron proud,
Aping their Prince, struck terror through the crowd;
Next, bigot Priests, the imposing mandate bring,
And yoke the Neck of each succeeding King;
Rome sent her Monks, and superstition reigned,
Freedom in bonds, and even Conscience chained;
Impious as vain, the Pope his terrors laid,
Ignorance was awed and folly was afraid;
Fair Truth in fetters was like Reason bound,
And dread Anathema's were peal'd around,
Pomp of procession, and parade of prayer,
Pardon, and curse, dealt mercy or despair:
The heart was tainted, and the head confused,
And all the attributes of God abused;
People and Prince were in one chaos hurled,
Law, Justice, Order, Virtue, left the World!
Eventful BRITAIN! should the Muse display,
The various blood-tracks which then marked thy way,
Should she pursue the havoc of the sword,
That gash'd thee first, then crouching, called thee Lord,
Or trace the Deluges of Foreign Gore,
That ran in purple torrents through thy shore,
As conquest often her crimson pinion spread,
And different victors different mischiefs bred;
Thy hardiest Sons would tremble but to view,
The fearful picture that her pencil drew:
Then let her pause ere she these deeds rehearse
A subject sacred to her future verse.
Last, and what greater proofs can now remain,
Touch we the border of SURINAM'S plain,
Lo, there the purchased NEGROES may thou see,
Bursting their bonds and daring to be free,
In daring bands from caves and rocks they come,
And wrought to blood like trooping Panthers roam;
The swart Mulattoes to the forests fly,
Resolved to live in freedom, or to die.
Blessed be the man and worthy to be blessed,
Friend of the Wretched, Guardian of the oppressed,
Blessed be the Man -- ye Negroes bow the knee,
And bless him, Thou, Oh! sweet HUMANITY --
Who, scorning interest, thus portrayed the plan,
That gave to Men the awful rights of Man:
"Awake my friends, at mercy's call awake,
"Haste, haste the chains of Slavery to break;
"Oh! Race dishonored, whose sad forms we tear,
"Nor heed our species, heed our kindred there,
"Too long on sordid Altars have ye bled,
"From Christian hearts too long has Mercy fled:
"At length returned, the Goddess brings relief,
"From Heaven she comes to sooth the Captive's grief;
"My brethren rise, the galling chains unbind,
"And give the generous Model to mankind,
"What Avarice seized let Justice now restore,
"Let Negroes serve, but serve as Slaves no more;
"This the new Law -- Let each a shackle rend,
" Till Freedom reigns and Slavery shall end.
" Or if the NAME of Slave must yet remain,
" Strive not for words, so we remove the pain; --
" Strive not for words, so we the rights supply,
" The ravished rights of sweet HUMANTIY!"
The good Man spoke, applauding thousands bowed,
The Hero triumphed, and the Christian glowed,
Unnumber'd Hearts by great example fired
Bent to the Law HUMANITY required
Unnumber'd Manacles that moment broke,
Unnumber'd Slaves were loosened from the yoke,
Unnumber'd Hands were folded up in air,
Unnumber'd Voices breathed a grateful prayer,
Unnumber'd Eyes so lately bathed in woe,
Ah blissful change! with tears of joy overflow:
From God the spark began, to Man it came,
Till all perceiving, all partook the flame
Heaven's fire electric, as one touched the ball,
It struck a second till it spread to all.
Soon generous England, shall thou catch the flame,
And added Laurels shall adorn thy fame,
Soon shall HUMANITY assert her cause,
Soon shall the Slave find shelter in thy Laws,
Those equal Laws that grace thy pregnant Isle
Where all the Bounties and the Blessings smile,
Where rich and poor, and high and low obey
Their gentle rule and amicable sway,
Where Sovereigns view their lofty roofs ascend,
While LAW and LIBERTY the Throne defend,
Where Subjects see their mansions firmly stand,
Nor fear the Rapine of the strongest Hand,
Where the poor Peasant knows his Cot secure,
Humble in size, but on foundations sure;
Where boldly fenced his little Garden grows,
And not a King can rob him of a Rose.
Thus in the crowded Hive, though all agree
To choose a Monarch, all the rest are free
Plebeian Cells, as sacred as the great
And both contribute honey to the State.
Oh launch the Bark, unfurl the impatient Sails,
Swell ye kind Seas, and blow ye fostering Gales,
Oh haste some Angel through the realms of air
To Afric's Sons the rapturous tidings bear!
Thrice happy he who first shall reach the strand
And spread the joys of Freedom through the Land,
His the glad welcome of an Heavenly guest,
His the rich bliss to see "his fellows blessed."
And lo! methinks on Fancy's wing conveyed
The MUSE already gains the palmy shade,
Herself the messenger, to Afric's plains
Ardent she flies to break the tyrant-chains,
Her voice already hails the lift'ning crowd,
And thus she speaks her Embassy aloud,
"I come, I come from sweet HUMANITY
"To sooth the Sad, and set the Captive free
"Heirs as ye are to all that Nature gave,
"Congenial Nature, who never made a slave,
"Whose Minds can reason, and whose Hearts can move,
"With all the joys and agonies of Love,
"Sublime on Nature's scale ye Beings rise
"Equals on Earth, as equals in the skies
"All, all are Men, in Life and Death the same,
"And Virtue only can distinction claim,
"Where Freedom bids, now take your blithsome way
"Yours the fair morn, and yours the closing day,
"Yours is the jocund eve, its sports command
"Or on the cooling wave or barren sand,
"If in your breasts the Patriot passions burn
"To your loved Country, to your Homes return,
"Free, unconfined, wherever your course ye bend,
"Still, still shall LIBERTY your steps attend!"
They hear with dumb surprise, till raptures rise,
And these blessed sounds re-echo to the skies,
"Negroes are Men, and Men are Slaves no more,
"Fair Freedom reigns, and Tyranny is over!"
And now they trace each scene of former love,
Explore each favored haunt, hill, vale, and grove,
And soon the well-remember'd huts they find,
Where faithful Friends and Loves were left behind,
Sudden before her sable lord appears,
The enfranchised wife adorned with faithful tears,
Mothers again their kidnapped babes behold,
Sons clasp their Sires in slavery grown old,
Here their own Niger rises to the sight,
And there their Nile's prolific banks invite;
Far as extend these parent floods they range,
Feel all at large and triumph in the change.
Yet moved by generous deeds their bosoms burn,
To merit freedom by a kind return,
Methinks I see them leave their native plain,
And touched by honor seek their lords again;
Methinks I see them, now no scourge is there,
In willing Tribes to scenes once cursed repair,
Led on by gratitude they stoop to toil,
Double their industry, and bless the soil,
They quit the whizzing dart and twanging bow,
Collect the grass and reassume the Hoe,
Even troops of sable Children brave the sea,
To kiss the hands which set their fathers free.
Blessed expectation! here the MUSE shall pause
And watch, HUMANITY, thy righteous cause,
But soon again shall she the globe survey,
And dare the dangers of her promised lay,
While in procession pass the human race,
Shall boldly view each tinge of mind as face,
With curious eye the gradual change shall mark,
As wondrous Nature shifts from light to dark,
Shall visit tribes beneath the polar skies,
Of shape uncouth, diminutive of size.
Pass to the Tartar of an Olive shade,
Untamed, untutored, and robustly made;
Next move to Asia's dusky-tinctur'd race,
Of foster form, nor destitute of grace;
Then the swarth African and yellow Moor,
Which spread their sable hues along the shore,
Last, wild America's eventful clan,
And European cultured into Man.
These to descry the Muse her course shall bend,
Far as discovered earth and seas extend,
Through the wide universe shall venurous roam,
Nor till the Globe be measured seek her home.
But not content the surface to display,
Hues, habits, manners, customs to pourtray,
Her future song a bolder flight shall try,
And trace the magic powers of clime and sky,
Track Education, and Religion's hand,
And note the law that governs every land;
Observe, if Elements that cloud with strife,
Or smile in peace, most rule the springs of life;
See how from each, at work upon the mind,
Springs the diversity of Human Kind.
Next varying modes of LIBERTY survey,
From where she thrives to where she melts away,
Now proud to claim the independent soul,
Now her tame Spirit passive to control,
For ever weak where tyranny assails,
For ever strong where milder rule prevails,
There like vile oxen stooping to the yoke,
Here gaining sudden freedom at a stroke.
Still will she find, compact in every part,
Is formed the chain that fastens heart to heart,
Millions of links but all arrang'd are seen,
The rivets closed and not a chasm between;
And where they disproportioned meet our eyes;
Or seem of different form, or different size,
Here, if more polished, there more rude they show,
Or colored various as the show'ry bow,
Still one bright zone girds ocean, earth, and sky,
Thy beauteous zone, oh sweet HUMANITY!
Lo, the chain lengthens as the Links are placed,
Amid'st the flowery dale or barren waste,
Some with the whit'ning Billows froth around,
Some bathe in streams that never pass their bound,
Some redd'ning flame on Aetna's burning brow,
And some are covered with Siberian snow,
Some with the brooding Mine in darkness hide,
And some in dazzling floods of light reside,
Some reach the clouded Regions of the North,
Where tawny Zembla pours her Children forth,
Some where keen Lapland bids the freezing train
Chase the fleet reindeer over the icy plain;
Some stretch to milder climes remote from storms,
Where nature rises in her gentler forms,
Still, still through every clime may we behold
The chain but brightens as the links unfold,
Wherever dispersed they spread to every soul,
And God, it is God alone that links the whole.
These shall the Muse with ardent wing explore,
Nor give, at fear's vain threat, the enquiry over.
An awful Task! yet hope the Lyre shall string
And aid the Muse to spread the daring wing.
Ye silken Bards repose in beds of flowers,
And in soft sonnets court the sylvan powers,
Neptune, Diana, Wave, or Wood-nymph woo,
Bid Thrushes sweeter sing, Doves fonder coo,
The lazy Poppy nodding over your Brows,
While at your feet the languid water flows
Silent along, as if afraid to creep,
Lest its unguarded lapse should rouse from sleep,
Ah, sweetly slumber, undisturbed by sense,
Then gently wake to tuneful Indolence,
Crop the pale shrub that even in plucking dies,
But leave the plant that blossoms in the skies:
Nor rash, nor diffident, the Muse shall sweep
From Clime to Clime, and dare the giddy steep;
Still to the Sun aspiring, try the height
Cleave the dense air and hope to gain the light.
Mean time to soothe her speeds a generous throng,
To cheer her labor, and assist her song;
These, while she tries the unattempted way,
Shall bid her soar and animate her Lay;
And though the fiends who dread the Muse should rise,
With Serpent malice hiss her as she flies,
Full many a laurell'd Bard to Science dear
Compose her Terrors, and her Spirits cheer,
And while she droops beneath the growing Toil,
Her Song approve, and give the inspiring smile.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Book I.
Page 40 l. 16 for hands read hand, p. 51 l. 6 for haste read hate. p. 51 l. 16
for maintains read maintain. p. 51 l. 18 a mark of admiration after a common
cause! p. 53 l. 12 for acquires read requires. p. 58 l. 5 a comma after touch,
none after awaked
Book II.
p. 63 l. 3 for Thee read To desolated Asia. p. 67 l. 2 for long life read a
long life. p. 77 l. 4 for hand read power. p. 81 l. 1 for spirit read spirits.
p. 82 l. 16 read for history instead of which. p. 84 l. 7 for Than Man more
kind but Death read But Death more kind than Man. p. 85 l. 14 for progression
read procession. p. 86 l. 17 for bondage read bonds. p. 91 l. 14 for pen'ry
read penury. p. 93 l. 17 for their pampered sloth read there. p. 96 l. 9 for
grain read gain. p. 99 l. 1 for rights read rites.
Books written by Mr. PRATT.
SYMPATHY, a Poem, 8th Edition. EMMA CORBET, 8th Edition, with Angelica
Kauffman's Frontispieces, 2 vol. PUPIL OF PLEASURE, 2 vol. New Editions with
Vignettes. TUTOR OF TRUTH, 2 vol. New Editions with Vignettes. LIBERAL
OPINIONS, 4 vol. New Editions with Vignettes. THE TRIUMPH OF BENEVOLENCE, 3d
Edition. MISCELLANIES, 4 Volumes. LANDSCAPES IN VERSE, 3d Edition. FAIR
CIRCASIAN, a Tragedy, as acted at the Theater Royal Drury Lane, 3d Edition.
SUBLIME AND BEAUTIFUL OF SCRIPTURE, new Edition. Any of the above Publications
may be had of the respective Booksellers.
Preparing for the Press by the same Author, SOCIETY, OR A PROSPECT OF MANKIND,
UNDER ALL THE INFLUENCES OF CUSTOM, COLOR AND CLIMATE, APOEM, IN FOUR PARTS.
DEDICATED TO THE HUMAN SPECIES.

PART the 1st. EUROPE, PART the 2d. ASIA, PART the 3d. AFRICA, PART the 4th.
AMERICA.

With Notes Critical and Explanatory, by the Author and his Literary Friends.
AND VARIOUS DESIGNS AND ENGRAVINGS, DESCRIPTIVE AND HISTORICAL. BY THE MOST
EMINENT MASTERS; PRICE TWELVE SHILLINGS EACH PART.


