THE IRISH WIDOW.

IN TWO ACTS. AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET in the Strand. MDCCLXXII. [Price One Shilling.]

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Sir PATRICK O'NEALE, Mr. MOODY. WHITTLE, Mr. PARSONS. NEPHEW, Mr. CAUTHERLY.
BATES, Mr. BADDELEY. KECKSY, Mr. DODD. THOMAS, Mr. WESTON. FOOTMAN, Mr.
GRIFFITH.
WIDOW BRADY, Mrs. BARRY.
TO Mrs. BARRY.
MADAM,
AFTER returning my thanks to the performers of this Farce, for the great
justice they have done me, I must beg leave to address myself in particular to
you.

As your wishes produced the piece, and your performance has raised it into
some consequence, to whom can it be so properly addressed? You were before
ranked in the first class of our Theatrical Genuises, and now you have the
additional merit of transforming the GRECIAN DAUGHTER into the IRISH WIDOW,
that is, of sinking to the lowest note, from the top of the compass!

Permit me, Madam, like other Coxcombs, to boast some favors I have received
-- You perform the principal character, some newspapers have criticis'd the
Farce, and the audiences have laughed heartily at it. Were not I as sensible as
the severest Critic of them all, that it is a triffle not worth the owning, I
should subscribe my real name, instead of,

MADAM, Your great admirer, And humble servant, The AUTHOR.

THE IRISH WIDOW.
ACT I.
SCENE I. Whittle's House.
Enter BATES and Servant. BATES. IS he gone out? his card tells me to come
directly -- I did but lock up some papers, take my hat and cane, and away I
hurried.


SERVANT. My master desires you will sit down, he will return immediately, --
he had some Business with his lawyer, and went out in great haste, leaving the
message I have delivered. Here is my young master. Exit Servant.


Enter NEPHEW. BATES. What lively BILLY! -- hold I beg your pardon --
melancholy WILLIAM I think -- here is fine revolution -- I hear your Uncle who
was last month all gravity, and you all mirth, have changed characters; he is
now all spirit, and you are in the dumps young man.


NEPHEW. And for the same reason -- This journey to Scarborough will unfold the
riddle.


BATES. Come, come, in plain English, and before your Uncle comes -- explain
the matter.


NEPHEW. In the first place I am undone.


BATES. In love I know -- I hope your Uncle is not undone too -- that would be
the devil!


NEPHEW. He has taken possession of him in every sense. In short he came to
Scarborough to see the lady I had fallen in love with --


BATES. And fell in love himself?


NEPHEW. Yes, and with the same lady:


BATES. That is the devil indeed!


NEPHEW. O Mr. BATES! when I thought my happiness complete, and wanted only my
Uncle's consent, to give me the independance he so often has promised me, he
came to Scarborough for that purpose, and wished me joy of my choice; but in
less than a week, his approbation turned into a passion for her; he now hates
the sight of me, and is resolved with the consent of the father to make her his
wife directly.


BATES. So he keeps you out of your fortune, will not give his consent, which his
Brother's foolish will requires, and he would marry himself the same woman,
because right, title, conscience, nature, justice, and every law divine and
human, are against it.


NEPHEW. Thus he tricks me at once both of wife and fortune, without the least
want of either.


BATES. Well said friend WHITTLE! but it cannot be, it shall not be, and it must
not be -- this is murder and robbery in the strongest sense, and he shall not be
hanged in chains to be laughed at by the whole town if I can help it.


NEPHEW. I am distracted, the widow is distressed, and we both shall run mad.


BATES. A widow too! -- 'gad a mercy three score and five!


NEPHEW. But such a widow! she is now in town with her father, who wants to get
her off his hands; it is equal to him who has her, so she is provided for -- I
hear somebody coming -- I must away to her lodgings, where she waits for me to
execute a scheme directly for our delivery.


BATES. What is her name BILLY?


NEPHEW. BRADY.


BATES. BRADY! is not she Daughter to Sir PATRICK O NEALE?


NEPHEW. The same. She was sacrificed to the most senseless, drunken profligate
in the whole country: He lived to run out his fortune, and the only advantage
she got from the union was he broke that and his neck, before he had broke her
heart.


BATES. The affair of marriage is in this country put upon the easiest footing;
there is neither love or hate in the matter; necessity brings them together;
they are united at first for their mutual convenience, and separated ever after
for their particular pleasures. -- O rare matrimony! -- Where does she lodge?


NEPHEW. In Pall Mall, near the Hotel.


BATES. I Will call in my way, and assist at the consultation; I am for a bold
stroke, if gentle methods should fail.


NEPHEW. We have a plan, and a spirited one, if my sweet widow is able to go
through it -- pray let us have your friendly assistance -- ours is the cause of
love and reason.


BATES. Get you gone, with your love and reason, they seldom pull together
nowadays -- I Will give your Uncle a dose first, and then I Will meet you at the
widow's -- what says your Uncle's privy counselor Mr. THOMAS to this?


NEPHEW. He is greatly our friend, and will enter sincerely into our service --
he is honest, sensible, ignorant and particular, -- a kind of half coxcomb,
with a thorough good heart -- but he is here.


BATES. Do you go about your business, and leave the rest to me. Exit Nephew.

Enter THOMAS. Mr. THOMAS, I am glad to see you; upon my word you look
charmingly -- you wear well, Mr. Thomas.


THOMAS. Which is a wonder, considering how the times go, Mr. BATES, -- they will
wear and tear me too, if I don't take care of my self -- my old master has
taken the nearest way to wear himself out, and all that belong to him.


BATES. Why surely this strange story about town is not true, that the old
gentleman is fallen in love.


THOMAS. Ten times worse than that!


BATES. The devil!


THOMAS. And his horns -- going to be married!


BATES. Not if I can help it.


THOMAS. You never saw such an altered man in your born days! -- he is grown
young again; he frisks, and prances, and runs about, as if he had a new pair of
legs -- he has left off his brown camlet surtout, which he wore all summer, and
now with his hat under his arm, he goes open breasted, and he dresses, and
powders, and smirks so, that you would take him for the mad Frenchman in Bedlam
-- something wrong in his upper story -- would you think it? -- he wants me to
have a pig-tail!


BATES. Than he is far gone indeed!


THOMAS. As sure as you are there, Mr. BATES, a pig-tail! -- we have had sad
work about it -- I made a com-promise with him, to wear these ruffled shirts
which he gave me -- but they stand in my way -- I am not so listless with them
-- though I have tied up my hands for him, I will not tie up my head, that I am
resolute.


BATES. This it is to be in love THOMAS?


THOMAS. He may make free with himself, he shall not make a fool of me, -- he has
got his head into a bag but I will not have a pig-tail tacked to mine -- and so I
told him --


BATES. What did you tell him?


THOMAS. That as I, and my father, and his father before me, had wore their own
hair as heaven had sent it, I thought myself rather too old to set up for a
monkey at my time of life, and wear a pig-tail -- he! he! he! -- he took it.


BATES. With a wry face, for it was wormwood:


THOMAS. Yes he was frump'd, and called me old blockhead, and would not speak
to me the rest of the day -- but the next day he was at it again -- he then put
me into a passion -- and I could not help telling him, that I was an Englishman
born and had my prerogative as well as he, and that as long as I had breath in
my body, I was for liberty, and a strait head of hair!


BATES. Well said, THOMAS -- he could not answer that.


THOMAS. The poorest man in England is a match for the greatest, if he will but
stick to the laws of the land, and the statue books, as they are delivered down
from us to our fore fathers.


BATES. You are right -- we must lay our wits together, and drive the widow out
of your old master's head, and put her into your young master's hands.


THOMAS. With all my heart -- nothing can be more meritorious -- marry at his
years! what a terrible account would he make of it, Mr. BATES? -- let me see --
on the debtor side 65 -- and per contra creditor a buxom widow of 23. -- He Will
be a bankrupt in a fortnight -- he! he! he!


BATES. And so he would, Mr. THOMAS -- what have you got in your hand?


THOMAS. A pamphlet my old gentleman takes in -- he has left off buying
histories and religious pieces by numbers, as he used to do, and since he has
got this widow in his head he reads nothing but the Amorous Repository, Cupid's
Revels, Call to Marriage, Hymen's Delights, Love lies a Bleeding, Love in the
Suds, and such like tender compositions. --


BATES. Here he comes with all his folly about him. --


THOMAS. Yes, and the first fool from vanity-fair -- Heaven help us! -- love
turns man and woman topsy-turvy! Exit THOMAS.


WHITTLE. (without.) Where is he? where is my good friend?

Enter WHITTLE. Ha! here he is -- give me your hand.


BATES. I am glad to see you in such spirits, my old gentleman.


WHITTLE. Not so old neither -- no man ought to be called old, friend BATES, if
he is in health, spirits, and --


BATES. In his senses -- which I should rather doubt, as I never saw you half
so frolicksome in my life.


WHITTLE. Never too old to learn friend, and if I don't make use of my
philosophy now, I may wear it out in twenty years -- I have been always
banter'd as of too grave a cast -- you know when I studied at Lincoln's End,
they used to call me Young Wisdom.


BATES. And if they should now call you Old Folly, it will be a much worse name.


WHITTLE. No young jackanapes dares call me so, while I have this friend at my
side -- (touches his sword.)


BATES. A hero too! what in the name of common sense is come to you, my friend?
-- high spirits, quick honor, a long sword and a bag; -- you want nothing but
to be terribly in love, and sally forth knight of the Woeful Countenance, ha!
ha! ha!


WHITTLE. Mr. BATES -- the ladies who are the best judges of countenances, are
not of your opinion; and unless you will be a little serious, I must beg pardon
for giving you this trouble, and I Will open my mind to some more attentive
friend.


BATES. Well, come unlock then, you wild, handsome, vigorous young dog you -- I
will please you if I can.


WHITTLE. I believe you never saw me look better FRANK, did you?


BATES. O yes, rather better forty years ago.


WHITTLE. What when I was at Merchant Taylor's School?


BATES. At Lincoln's End, TOM.


WHITTLE. It cannot be -- I never disguise my age, and next February, I shall be
fifty-four.


BATES. Fifty-four! why I am sixty, and you always licked me at school -- though
I believe I could do as much for you now, and ecod I believe you deserve it too.


WHITTLE. I tell you I am in my 55th year.


BATES. O, you are -- let me see -- we were together at Cambridge, Anno Domini
25, which is near fifty years ago -- you came to the college indeed
surprizingly young, and what is more surprising, by this calculation you went
to school before you was born -- you was always a forward child.


WHITTLE. I see there is no talking or consulting with you in this humor, and
so, Mr. BATES, when you are in temper to show less of your wit, and more of
your friendship, I shall consult with you.


BATES. Fare you well my old boy -- young fellow, I mean -- when you have done
sowing your wild oats, and have been blister'd into your right senses; when you
have half killed yourself with being a beau, and return to your woollen caps,
flannel waistcoats, worsted stockings, cork soles, and gallochys, I am at your
service again, so bon jour to you Monsieur Fifty-four, ha! ha! Exit.


WHITTLE. He has certainly heard of my affair -- but he is old and peevish --
he wants spirit, and strength of constitution to conceive my happiness -- I am
in love with the widow, and must have her: Every man knows his own wants -- let
the world laugh, and my friends stare; let 'em call me imprudent, and mad if
they please. I live in good times, and among people of fashon, so none of my
neighbors, thank heaven, can have the assurance to laugh at me.


Enter OLD KECKSY. KECK. What, my friend WHITTLE; joy! joy to you old boy --
you are going, a going! a going! a fine widow has bid for you, and will have
you -- hah, friend? all for the best -- there is nothing like it -- hugh! hugh!
hugh! -- a good wife is a good thing, and a young one is a better -- hah --
who is afraid? If I had not lately married one, I should have been at death's
door by this time -- hugh! hugh! hugh! (Coughs.)


WHITTLE. Thank, thank you friend! -- I was coming to advise with you -- I am
got into the pound again -- in love up to the ears -- a fine woman, faith --
and there is no love lost between us -- am I right friend?


KECK. Right! ay, right as my leg, TOM! Life's nothing without love -- hugh!
hugh! -- I Am happy as the day's long! my wife loves gadding, and I cannot stay
at home, so we are both of a mind -- she is every night at one or other of the
garden places; but among friends, I am a little afraid of the damp; hugh! hugh!
hugh! she has got an Irish gentleman, a kind of cousin of hers, to take care of
her; a fine fellow; and so good-natured -- It is a vast comfort to have such a
friend in a family! Hugh! hugh! hugh!


WHITTLE. You are a bold man, cousin KECKSEY.


KECK. Bold! ay to be sure; none but the brave deserve the fair -- Hugh! hugh!
hugh! who is afraid!


WHITTLE. Why your wife is five feet ten.


KECK. Without her shoes. I hate your little shrimps; none of your lean meagre
French frogs for me; I was always fond of the majestic; give me a slice of a
good English surloin; out and come again; hugh! hugh! hugh! that is my taste!


WHITTLE. I Am glad you have so good a stomach -- and so you would advise me to
marry the widow directly?


KECK. To be sure -- you have not a moment to lose: I always mind what the poet
says, It Is folly to lose time,
When man is in his prime:
Hugh! hugh! hugh!


WHITTLE. You have an ugly cough, cousin


KECK. Marriage is the best lozenge for it.


WHITTLE. You have raised me from the dead -- I am glad you came -- FRANK BATES
had almost killed me with his jokes -- but you have comforted me, and we will
walk through the Park; and I will carry you to the widow in Pall Mall.


KECK. With all my heart -- I Will raise her spirits, and yours too -- courage,
TOM -- come along -- who is afraid?


Exeunt. SCENE, the WIDOW's Lodgings.
Enter WIDOW, NEPHEW, and BATES. BATES. Indeed, madam, there is no other way
but to cast off your real character, and assume a feigned one; it is an
extraordinary occasion, and requires extraordinary measures; pluck up a spirit,
and do it for the honor of your sex.


NEPHEW. Only consider, my sweet Widow, that our all is at stake!


WIDOW. Could I bring my heart to act contrary to its feelings, would not you
hate me for being a hypocrite, though it is done for your sake?


NEPHEW. Could I think myself incapable of such ingratitude --


WIDOW. Don't make fine speeches; you men are strange creatures, you turn our
heads to your purposes, and then despise us for the folly you teach us; it is
hard to assume a character contrary to my disposition; I cannot get rid of my
unfashionable prejudices, till I have been married in England some time, and
lived among my betters.


NEPHEW. Thou charming adorable woman! what shall we do then? I never wished
for a fortune till this moment.


WIDOW. Could we live upon affection, I would give your fortune to your Uncle,
and thank him for taking it; and then, --


NEPHEW. What then? my sweet Widow?


WIDOW. I would desire you to run away with me as fast as you can; what a pity
it is, that this money, which my heart despises, should hinder its happiness,
or that for want of a few dirty acres, a poor woman must be made miserable, and
sacrificed twice to those who have them.


NEPHEW. Heaven forbid! these exquisite sentiments endear you more to me, and
distract me with the dread of losing you.


BATES. Young folks; let an old man who is not quite in love, and yet will
admire a fine woman to the day of his death, throw in a little advice among
your flames and darts.


WIDOW. Though a woman, a widow, and in love too -- I can hear reason, Mr. BATES.


BATES. And that is a wonder -- you have no time to lose; for want of a jointure
you are still your father's slave; he is obstinate, and has promised you to the
old man: Now, madam, if you will not rise superior to your sexes weakness, to
secure a young fellow instead of an old one, your eyes are a couple of
hypocrites.


WIDOW. They are a eouple of traitors I Am sure, and have led their mistress
into a toil, from which all her wit cannot release her.


NEPHEW. But it can, if you will but exert it; my Uncle adored and fell in love
with you, for your beauty, softness, and almost speechless reserve. Now, if
amidst all his rapturous ideas of your delicacy, you would bounce upon him a
wild, ranting buxom widow; he will grow sick of his bargain, and give me a
fortune to take you off his hands.


WIDOW. I shall make a very bad actress,


NEPHEW. You are an excellent mimic; assume but the character of your Irish
female neighbor in the country, with which you astonished us so agreeably at
Scarborough; you will frighten my Uncle into terms, and do that for us, which
neither my love, nor your virtue, can accomplish without it.


WIDOW. Now for a trial -- (mimicking a strong brogue) -- fait and trot, if you
will be after bringing me before the old Gontleman, if he loves music, I will
trate his ears with a little of the brogue, and some dancing too into the
bargain, if he loves capering -- O bless me! my heart fails me, and I am
frightened out of my wits; I can never go through it. ( NEPHEW and BATES both
laugh.


NEPHEW, kneeling and kissing her hand. O it is admirable! love himself inspires
you, and we shall conquer; what say you, Mr. BATES?


BATES. I Will insure you success; I can scarce believe my own cars; such a
tongue and a brogue would make Hercules tremble at five-and-twenty; but away,
away, and give him the first broadside in the Park; there you will find him
hobbling with that old cuckold, KECKSY.


WIDOW. But will my dress suit the character I play?


NEPHEW. The very thing; is your retinue ready, and your part got by heart?


WIDOW. All is ready; it is an act of despair to punish folly, and reward merit:
it is the last effort of pure honorable love; and if every woman would exert
the same spirit for the same out-of-fashion rarity, there would be less
business for Doctors Commons: Now let the critics laugh at me if they dare.
[Exit with spirit.


NEPHEW. Brava! bravissima! sweet Widow! [Exit after her.


BATES. Huzza! huzza! [Exit.


SCENE, the Park.
Enter WHITTLE and KECKSY. WHITTLE. Yes, yes, she is Irish, but so modest, so
mild, and so tender, and just enough of the accent to give a peculiar sweetness
to her words, which drop from her in monasyllables, with such a delicate
reserve, that I shall have all the comfort, without the impertinence of a wife.


KECK. There our taste differs, friend; I am for a lively smart girl in my
house, hugh! hugh! to keep up my spirits, and make me merry; I don't admire
dumb waiters, not I, no still-life for me; I love their prittle prattle, it
sets me to sleep, and I can take a sound nap while my sally and her cousin, are
running and playing about the house like young cats.


WHITTLE. I am for no cats in my house; I cannot sleep with a noise; the widow
was made on purpose for me; she is so bashful, has no acquaintance, and she
never would stir out of doors, if her friends were not afraid of a consumption,
and so force her into the air: Such a delicate creature! you shall see her; you
were always for a tall chattering, frisky, wench; now for my part I am with the
old saying,

Wife a mouse
Quiet house;
Wife a cat,
Dreadful that.

KECK. I don't care for your sayings -- who is afraid?


WHITTLE. There goes BATES, let us avoid him, he will only be joking with us;
when I have taken a serious thing into my head, I cannot bear to have it laughed
out again. This way, friend KECKSY -- what have we got here?


KECK. Some fine prancing wench, with her lovers and footman about her; she is a
gay one by her motions.


WHITTLE. Were she not so flaunting, I should take it for -- No, it is
impossible; and yet is not that my Nephew with her? I forbad him speaking to
her; it cannot be the widow; I hope it is not.


Enter WIDOW followed by NEPHEW, three Footmen, and a black Boy. WIDOW. Don't
bother me, young man, with your darts, your cupids, and your pangs; if you had
half of 'em about you, that you swear you have, they would have cured you, by
killing you long ago. Would you have me faitless to your Uncle, hah! young man?
Was not I faitful to you, 'till I was ordered to be faitful to him? but I must
know more of your English ways, and live more among the English Ladies, to
learn how to be faitful to two at a time -- and so there is my answer for you.


NEPHEW. Then I know my relief, for I cannot live without you. (Exit.


WIDOW. Take what relief you plase, young Jontleman, what have I to do with
dat? He is certainly mad, or out of his sinses, for he swears he cannot live
without me, and yet he talks of killing himself; how does he make out dat? If a
countryman of mine had made such a blunder, they would have put it into all the
newspapers, and Falkner's Journal beside; but an Englishman may look over the
hedge, while an Irishman must not stale a horse.


KECK. Is this the Widow, friend WHITTLE?


WHITTLE. I don't know (half sighing) it is, and it is not.


WIDOW. Your servant, Mr. WHITTOL; I wish you would spoke to your Nephew not to
be whining and dangling after me all day in his green coat like a parrot: It is
not for my reputation that he should follow me about like a beggar-man, and ask
me for what I had given him long ago, but have since bestowed upon you, Mr.
WHITTOL:


WHITTLE. He is an impudent beggar, and shall be really so, for his
disobedience.


WIDOW. As he cannot live without me, you know, it will be charity to starve
him: I wish the poor young man dead with all my heart, as he thinks it will do
him a grate dale of good.


KECK. (to WHITTLE.) She is tender, indeed! and I think she has the brogue a
little -- hugh! hugh!


WHITTLE. It Is stronger to day than ever I heard it. (staring.


WIDOW. And are you now talking of my brogue? It is always the most fullest
when the wind is aesterly; it has the same effect upon me, as upon stammering
people -- they cannot spoke for their impediment, and my tongue is fixed so
loose in my mouth, I cannot stop it for the life of me.


WHITTLE. What a terrible misfortune, friend KECKSY!


KECK. Not at all; the more tongue the better, say I.


WIDOW. When the wind changes I have no brogue at all, at all. But come, Mr.
WHITTOL, don't let us be vulgar, and talk of our poor relations. It is
impossible to be in this metropolis of London, and have any thought but of
Operas, Plays, Masquerades, and Pantaons, to keep up one's spirits in the
winter; and Ranelagh, Vauxhall, and Marybone fireworks to cool and refresh one
in the summer. La! la! la! (sings.


WHITTLE. I protest she puts me into a sweat; we shall have a mob about us.


KECK. The more the merrier, I say -- who is afraid?


WIDOW. How the people stare! as if they never saw a woman's voice before; but
my vivacity has got the better of my good manners. This, I suppose, this
strange gentleman, is a near friend and relation, and as such, notwithstanding
his appearance, I shall always trate him, though I might dislike him upon a
nearer acquaintance.


KECK. Madam, you do me honor; I like your frankness, and I like your person,
and I envy my friend WHITTLE, and if you were not engaged, and I were not
married, I would endeavor to make myself agreeable to you, that I would --
hugh! hugh!


WIDOW. And indeed, Sir, it would be very agraable to me; for if I should hate
you as much as I did my first dare husband; I should always have the comfort,
that in all human probability, my torments would not last long.


KECK. She utters something more than monosyllables, friend; this is better
than bargain: She has a fine bold way of talking.


WHITTLE. More bold than welcome! I am struck all of a heap!


WIDOW. What are you low spirited, my dare Mr. WITTOL? When you were at
Scarborough, and winning my affections, you were all mirth and gaiety; and now
you have won me, you are as thoughtful about it as if we had been married some
time.


WHITTLE. Indeed, Madam, I cannot but say I am a little thoughtful -- we take it
by turns; you were very sorrowful a month ago for the loss of your husband, and
that you could dry up your tears so soon, naturally makes me a little
thoughtful.


WIDOW. Indeed, I could dry up my tears for a dozen husbands, when I were sure
of having a tirteenth like Mr. WITTOL; that is very natural sure both in England
and Dublin too.


KECK. She will not die of a consumption; she has a fine full-ton'd voice, and
you will be very happy, TOM. -- Hugh! hugh!


WHITTLE. O yes, very happy. (aside.


WIDOW. But come don't let us be melancholy before the time: I am sure I have
been mop'd up for a year and a half, I was obliged to mourn for my first
husband, that I might be sure of a second; and my father kept my spirits in
subjection, as the best receipt (he said) for changing a widow into a wife. But
now I have my arms and legs at liberty, I must and will have my swing; now I am
out of my cage I could dance two nights togeder, and a day too, like any
singing bird; and I Am in such spirits that I have got rid of my father, I could
fly over the moon without wings, and back again, before dinner. Bless my eyes,
and don't I see there Miss Nancy O'Flarty, and her brother, Captain O'Flarty?
He was one of my dying Strephons at Scarborough. I have a very grate regard for
him, and must make him a little miserable with my happiness (curtseys). Come
along Skips, (to the servants) don't you be gostring there; show your liveries,
and bow to your master that is to be, and to his friend, and hold up your
heads, and trip after me as lightly as if you had no legs to your feet. I shall
be with you again, Jontlemen, in the crack of a fan -- O, I Will have a husband,
ay marry. (Exit singing.


KECK. A fine buxom widow, faith! no acquaintance -- delicate reserve -- mopes
at home -- forced into the air -- inclined to a consumption -- What a
description you gave of your wife! why she beats my Sally, TOM.


WHITTLE. Yes, and she will beat me if I don't take care! What a change is here!
I must turn about, or this will turn my head: Dance for two nights together,
and leap over the moon! you shall dance and leap by yourself that I Am resolved.


KECK. Here she comes again; it does my heart good to see her. You are in luck,
TOM.


WHITTLE. I Would give a finger to be out of such luck.


Enter WIDOW, etc. WIDOW. Ha! ha! ha! the poor captain is marched off in a
fury. He cannot bear to hear that the town has capitulated to you, Mr. WHITTOL.
I have promised to introduce him to you: He will make one of my danglers to
take a little exercise with me, when you take your nap in the afternoon.


WHITTLE. You shall not catch me napping, I assure you. What a discovery and
escape I have made! I am in a sweat with the thoughts of my danger!


KECK. I protest, Cousin, there goes my wife, and her friend Mr. Mac Brawn.
What a fine stately couple they are! I must after 'em, and have a laugh with
them -- now they giggle, and walk quick, that I may not overtake 'em. Madam,
your servant. You're a happy man, TOM. Keep up your spirits, old boy. Hugh!
hugh! who is afraid! (Exit.


WIDOW. I know Mr. Mac Brawn extremely well -- He was very intimate at our
house, in my first husband's time; a great comfort he was to me to be sure! He
would very often leave his claret and companions for a little conversation with
me. He was bred at the Dublin Univarsity, and being a very deep scholar, has
fine talents for a tate a tate.


WHITTLE. She knows him too! I shall have my house overrun with the Mac Brawns,
O'Shoulders, and the blood of the Backwells; lord have mercy upon me!


WIDOW. Pray, Mr. WHITTOL, is that poor spindle legged crater of a cousin of
yours, lately married? ha! ha! ha! I don't pity the poor crater his wife, for
that agraable cough of his will soon reward her for all her sufferings.


WHITTLE. What a delivery! a reprieve before the knot was tied. (aside.)


WIDOW. Are you unwell, Mr. WITTOL? I should be sorry you would fall sick
before the happy day. Your being in danger afterward would be a great
consolation to me, because I should have the pleasure of nursing you myself.


WHITTLE. I hope never to give you that trouble, madam.


WIDOW. No trouble at all, at all; I assure, Sir, from my soul, that I shall
take great delight in the occasion.


WHITTLE. Indeed, madam, I believe it.


WIDOW. I don't care how soon, the sooner the better; and the more danger the
more honor; I spoke from my heart.


WHITTLE. And so do I from mine, madam. (sighs.)


WIDOW. But don't let us think of future pleasure, and neglect the present
satisfaction. My mantua-maker is waiting for me to choose my clothes, in which I
shall forget the sorrows of Mrs. Brady, in the joys of Mrs. Wittol. Though I have
a fortune myself, I shall bring a tolerable one to you, in debts, Mr. WITTOL,
and which I will pay you tinfold in tinderness; your deep purse, and my open
heart, will make us the envy of the little grate ones, and the grate little
ones; the people of quality with no souls, and grate souls with no cash at all.
I hope you will meet me at the Panteon this evening. Lady Rantiton, and her
daughter, Miss Nettledown, and Nancy Tittup, with half a dozen Maccaroonics,
and two savoury vivers, are to take me there, and we propose a grate dale of
chat and merriment, and dancing all night, and all other kind of recreations. I
am quite another kind of a crater, now I am a bird in the fields; I can junket
about for a week together; I have a fine constitution, and am never molested
with your nasty vapors; are you ever troubled with vapors, Mr. WHITTOL?


WHITTLE. A little now and then, madam.


WIDOW. I Will rattle 'em away like smoke! there are no vapors where I come; I
hate your dumps, and your nerves, and your megrims; and I had much rather break
your rest with a little racketting, than let any thing get into your head that
should not be there, Mr. WHITTOL?


WHITTLE. I will take care that nothing shall be in my head, but what ought to
be there: What a deliverance? (aside.)


WIDOW. (Looking at her watch.) Bless me! how the hours of the clock creep away
when we are plas'd with our company: but I must lave you, for there are half a
hundred people waiting for me to pick your pocket, Mr. WITTOL; and there is my
own brother, lieutenant O Neale, is to arrive this morning, and he is so like
me, you would not know us asunder when we are together; you will be very fond
of him, poor lad! he lives by his wits, as you do by your fortune, and so you
may assist one another. Mr. WITTOL, your obadient, 'till we meet at the
Pantaon. Follow me Pompey; and Skips do you follow him.


POMPEY. The Baccararo whiteman no let blacky boy go first after you missis,
they pull and pinch me.


FOOTMAN. It is a shame, your ladyship, that a black negro should take place of
English christians -- we cannot follow him indeed.


WIDOW. Then you may follow one another out of my sarvice; if you follow me,
you shall follow him, for he shall go before me; cannot I make him your
superior, as the laws of the land have made him your aqual? therefore resign as
fast as you plase, you shall not oppose government and keep your places too, that
is not good politics in England or Ireland either, so come along Pompay, be
after going before me -- Mr. WHITTOL, most tinderly yours. [Exit.


WHITTLE. Most tinderly yours! (mimicks her.) 'Ecod I believe you are, and any
body's else; O what an escape have I had! But how shall I clear myself of this
business? I Will serve her as I would bad money, put her off into other hands: My
NEPHEW is fool enough to be in love with her, and if I give him a fortune he will
take the good and the bad together -- he shall do so or starve. I Will send for
BATES directly, confess my folly, ask his pardon, send him to my NEPHEW, write
and declare off with the WIDOW, and so get rid of her tinderness as fast as I
can. [Exit.


END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II. A Room in WHITTLE's House.
Enter BATES, and NEPHEW. NEPHEW (taking him by the hand.) WE are bound to you
for ever, Mr. BATES; I can say no more; words but ill express the real feelings
of the heart.


BATES. I know you are a good lad, or I would not have meddled in the matter,
but the business is not yet completed till Signatum and Sigillatum.


NEPHEW. Let me fly to the WIDOW, and tell her how prosperously we go on.


BATES. Don't be in a hurry young man; she is not in the dark I assure you, nor
has she yet finished her part; so capital an actress, should not be idle in the
last act.


NEPHEW. I could wish that you would let me come into my Uncle's proposal at
once, without vexing him farther.


BATES. Then I declare off; thou silly young man, are you to be dup'd by your
own weak good nature, and his worldly craft; this does not arise from his love
and justice to you, but from his own miserable situation; he must be tortured
into justice; he shall not only give up your whole estate, which he is loath to
part with, but you must now have a premium for agreeing to your own happiness;
what shall your widow, with wit and spirit, that would do the greatest honor
to our sex, go through her task cheerfully, and shall your courage give way, and
be outdone by a woman's? -- fie for shame!


NEPHEW. I beg your pardon, Mr. BATES; I will follow your directions; be as
hard hearted as my Uncle, and vex his body and mind for the good of his soul.


BATES. That Is a good child, and remember that your own and the Widow's future
happiness depends upon your both going through this business with spirit; make
your Uncle feel for himself, that he may do justice to other people. Is the
Widow ready for the last experiment?


NEPHEW. She is; but think what anxiety I shall feel, while she is in danger?


BATES. Ha! ha! ha! she will be in no danger; besides, shall not we be at hand to
assist her; hark! I hear him coming; I Will probe his callous heart to the quick;
and if we are not paid for our trouble, say I am no politician; fly -- now we
shall do! [Exit NEPHEW.


Enter WHITTLE. Well, Mr. BATES, have you talked with my NEPHEW, is not he
overjoyed at the proposal?


BATES. The demon of discord has been among you, and has untuned the whole
family; you have screwed him too high; the young man is out of his senses, I
think, he stares and mopes about, and sighs; looks at me indeed, but gives very
absurd answers; I don't like him.


WHITTLE. What is the matter think you?


BATES. What I have always expected; there is a crack in your family, and you
take it by turns! you have had it, and now transfer it to your Nephew, which,
to your shame be it spoken, is the only transfer you have ever made him.


WHITTLE. But am not I going to do him more than justice?


BATES. As you have done him much less than justice hitherto, you cannot begin
too soon.


WHITTLE. Am not I going to give him the lady he likes, and which I was going
to marry myfelf?


BATES. Yes, that is, your are taking a perpetual blister off your own back, to
clap it upon his; what a tender Uncle you are?


WHITTLE. But you don't consider the estate which I shall give him.


BATES. Restore to him you mean -- it is his own, and you should have given it
up long ago; you must do more, or old nick will have you; your Nephew will not
take the Widow off your hands without a fortune; throw him ten thousand into
the bargain,


WHITTLE. Indeed but I shall not; he shall run mad, and I Will marry her myself,
rather than do that; Mr. BATES, be a true friend, and sooth my Nephew to
consent to my proposal.


BATES. You have raised the fiend, and ought to lay him; however, I Will do my
best for you; when the head is turned, nothing can bring it right again, so
soon as ten thousand pounds; shall I promise for you?


WHITTLE. I Will sooner go to Bedlam myself. [Exit BATES.


WHITTLE. Why I am in a worse condition than I was before! If this Widow's
father will not let me be off without providing for his daughter, I may lose a
great sum of money, and none of us be the better for it: My Nephew half mad;
myself half married; and no remedy for either of us.

Enter Servant. Sir Patrick OF Neale is come to wait upon you, would you please
to see him?


WHITTLE. By all means, the very person I wanted, don't let him wait. [Exit
Servant.

I wonder if he has seen my letter to the Widow; I will sound him by degrees,
that I may be sure of my mark, before I strike the blow.


Enter Sir PATRICK. Sir PATRICK. Mr. WHIZZLE, your humble sarvant; it gives me
grate pleasure, that an old Jontleman of your property, will have the honor of
being united with the family of the OF Neale's; we have been too much
Jontlemen, not to spend our estate, as you have made yourself a kind of
Jontleman by getting one; one runs out one way, and the other runs in another,
which makes them both meet at last, and keeps up the balance of Europe.


WHITTLE. I am much obliged to you, Sir PATRICK; I am an old gentleman, you say
true; and I was thinking --


Sir PATRICK. And I was thinking if you were ever so old, my daughter cannot
make you young again; she has as fine rich tick blood in her veins, as any in
all Ireland. I wish you had a swate crater of a daughter like mine, that we
might make a double cross of it.


WHITTLE. That would be a double cross indeed! (aside.)


Sir PATRICK. Though I was miserable enough with my first wife, who had the devil
of a spirit, and the very moddel of her daughter, yet a brave man never shrinks
from danger, and I may have better luck another time.


WHITTLE. Yes, but I am no brave man, Sir PATRICK, and I begin to shrink
already.


Sir PATRICK. I have bred her up in great subjiction; she is as tame as a young
colt, and as tinder as a sucking chicken; you will find her a true Jontlewoman,
and so knowing, that you can tache her nothing; she brings every thing but
money, and you have enough of that, if you have nothing else, and that is what
I call the balance of things.


WHITTLE. But I have been considering your daughter's great deserts, and my
great age --


Sir PATRICK. She is a charming crater; I would venture to say that, if I was
not her father.


WHITTLE. I say, Sir, as I have been considering your daughter's great deserts,
and as I own I have great demerits --


Sir PATRICK. To be sure you have, but you cannot help that; and if my daughter
was to mention any thing of a fleering at your age, or your stinginess, by the
balance of power but I would make her repate it a hundred times to your face,
to make her ashamed of it; but mum, old gentleman, the devil a word of your
infirmities will she touch upon; I have brought her up to softness, and to
gentleness, as a kitten to new milk; she will spoke nothing but no, and yes, as
if she were dumb; and no tame rabbit or pigeon will keep house, or be more
inganious with her needle and tambourine.


WHITTLE. She is vastly altered then, since I saw her last, or I have lost my
senses, and in either case, we had much better, since I must speak plain, not
come together --


Sir PATRICK. 'Till you are married, you mean -- with all my heart, it is the
more gentale for that, and like our family: I never saw lady O'Nale, your
mother-in-law, who poor crater is dead, and can never be a mother-in-law again,
'till the week before I married her, and I did not care if I had never seen her
then, which is a comfort too in case of death, or other accidents in life.


WHITTLE. But you don't understand me, Sir PATRICK I say --


Sir PATRICK. I say, how can that be, when we both spoke English.


WHITTLE. But you mistake my meaning, and don't comprehend me.


Sir PATRICK. Then you don't comprehend yourself, Mr. WHIZZLE, and I have not
the gift of prophecy, to find out after you have spoke, what never was in you.


WHITTLE. Let me entreat you to attend to me a little.


Sir PATRICK. I do attend, man; I don't interrupt you -- out with it.


WHITTLE. Your daughter --


Sir PATRICK. Your wife that is to be. Go on --


WHITTLE. My wife that is not to be -- Zounds! will you hear me?


Sir PATRICK. To be, or not to be, is that the question? I can swear too, if it
wants a little of that.


WHITTLE. Dear Sir Patrick hear me. I confess myself unworthy of her; I have
the greatest regard for you, Sir PATRICK; I should think myself honored by
being in your family, but there are many reasons --


Sir PATRICK. To be sure there are many reasons, why an old man should not
marry a young woman; but as that was your business and not mine.


WHITTLE. I have wrote a letter to your daughter, which I was in hopes you had
seen, and had brought me an answer to it.


Sir PATRICK. What the devil, Mr. WIZZLE, do you make a letter-porter of me? Do
you imagine, you dirty fellow with your cash, that Sir PATRICK O NALE would
carry your letters; I would have you know that I despise letters and all that
belong to 'em, nor would I carry a letter to the King, Heaven bless him, unless
it came from myself.


WHITTLE. But, dear Sir PATRICK, don't be in a passion for nothing.


Sir PATRICK. What is it nothing to make a penny post-man of me? But I Will go to
my daughter directly, for I have not seen her to day, and if I find that you
have written any thing that I will not understand, I shall take it an affront to
my family, and you shall either let out the noble blood of the O'NALES, or we
will spill the last drop of the red puddle of the WIZZELS. (Going and returns.)
Harkee, old Mr. WIZZLE, WHEEZLE, WHISTLE, what is your name? You must not stir
till I come back; if you offer to ate, drink, or sleep, till my honor is
satisfied, 'twill be the worst male you ever took in your life. You had better
fast a year, and die at the end of six months, than dare to lave your house. So
now, Mr. WEEZLE, you are to do as you plase. (Exit.


WHITTLE. Now the devil is at work indeed! If some miracle don't save me, I
shall run mad like my Nephew, and have a long Irish sword through me into the
bargain. While I am in my senses I will not have the woman; and therefore he that
is out of them shall have her, if I give half my fortune to make the match.
THOMAS!

Enter THOMAS. Sad work, THOMAS!


THOMAS. Sad work, indeed! why would you think of marrying? I knew what it
would come to.


WHITTLE. Why, what is it come to?


THOMAS. It is in all the papers.


WHITTLE. So much the better; then no body will believe it.


THOMAS. But they come to me to enquire.


WHITTLE. And you contradict it.


THOMAS. What signifies that; I was telling Lady Gabble's footman at the door
just now, that it was all a lie, and your Nephew looks out of the
two-pair-of-stairs window, with eyes all on fire, and tells the whole story;
upon that, there gathered such a mob!


WHITTLE. I shall be murdered, and have my house pulled down into the bargain!


THOMAS. It is all quiet again; I told them the young man was out of his
senses, and that you were out of town, so they went away quietly, and said they
would come and mob you another time.


WHITTLE. THOMAS, what shall I do?


THOMAS. Nothing you have done, if you will have matters mend.


WHITTLE. I am out of my depth, and you will not lend me your hand to draw me out.


THOMAS. You were out of your depth to fall in love; swim away as fast as you
can, you will be drowned if you marry.


WHITTLE. I Am frightened out of my wits; yes, yes, it is all over with me, I
must not stir out of my house; but am ordered to stay to be murdered in it for
aught I know; what are you muttering, THOMAS? prithee speak out, and comfort me.


THOMAS. It is all a judgment upon you; because your brother's foolish will
says, the young man must have your consent; vou will not let him have her, but
will marry the Widow yourself; that is the dog in the manger; you cannot eat the
oats, and will not let those who can.


WHITTLE. But I consent that he shall have both the Widow and the fortune, if
we can get him into his right senses.


THOMAS. For fear I should lose mine, I Will get out of Bedlam as soon as
possible; you must provide yourself with another servant.


WHITTLE. The whole earth conspires against me! you shall stay with me till I
die, and then you shall have a good legacy, and I will not live long I promise
you. [Knocking at the door.


THOMAS. Here are the undertakers already. (Exit.)


WHITTLE. What shall I do? my head cannot bear it; I will hang myself for fear
of being run through the body.


THOMAS returns with bills. Half a score people I never saw before with these
bills, and draughts upon you, for payment, signed Martha Brady.


WHITTLE. I wish Martha Brady was at the bottom of the Thames; what an impudent
extravagant baggage to begin her tricks already; send them to the devil, and
say I will not pay a farthing.


THOMAS. You Will have another mob about the door. [Going.


WHITTLE. Stay, stay, THOMAS; tell them I am very busy, and they must come
tomorrow morning; stay, stay, that is promising payment; no, no, no, -- tell
'em they must stay till I am married, and so they will be satisfied, and
tricked into the bargain.


THOMAS. When you are tricked, we shall all be satisfied. [Aside. [Exit THOMAS.


WHITTLE. That of all dreadful things I should think of a woman, and that woman
should be a Widow, and that Widow should be an Irish one; quem Deus vult
perdere -- Who have we here? another of the family I suppose. [ WHITTLE retires.


Enter WIDOW, as Lieutenant OF Neale, seemingly fluttered, and putting up his
sword, THOMAS following. THOMAS. I hope you are not hurt, Captain.


WIDOW. O not at all, at all; it is well they run away, or I should have made
them run faster; I shall teach them how to snigger, and look through glasses at
their betters; these are your Maccaroons, as they call themselves; by my soul
but I would frightened their hair out of buckle, if they would have stood
still, till I had overtaken them; these whipper-snappers look so much more like
girls in breeches, than those I see in petticoats, that fait and trot, it is a
pity to hurt 'em; the fair sex in London here seem the most masculine of the
two; but to business; friend, where is your master?


THOMAS. There Captain; I hope he has not offended you.


WIDOW. If you are impartinent, Sir, you will offend me; lave the room.


THOMAS. I value my life too much not to do that -- what a raw-bon'd tartar! I
wish he had not been caught and sent here. [Aside to his master, and Exit.


WHITTLE. Her brother by all that is terrible! and as like her as two tigers? I
sweat at the sight of him; I Am sorry THOMAS is gone; he has been quarrelling
already.


WIDOW. Is your name WITTOL?


WHITTLE. My name is WHITTLE, not WITTOL.


WIDOW. We shall not stand for trifles -- and you were born and christened by the
name of Thomas?


WHITTLE. So they told me, Sir.


WIDOW. Then they told no lies, fait; so far, so good; [Takes out a letter.

Do you know that handwriting?


WHITTLE. As well as I know this good friend of mine, who helps me upon such
occasions. [Shewing his right hand and smiling.


WIDOW. You had better not show your teeth, Sir, 'till we come to the jokes;
the handwriting is yours.


WHITTLE. Yes, Sir, it is mine. [Sighs.


WIDOW. Death and powder! what do you sigh for? are you ashamed, or sorry, for
your handy works?


WHITTLE. Partly one, partly the other.


WIDOW. Will you be plas'd, Sir, to rade it aloud, that you may know it again,
when you hare it.


WHITTLE (takes his letter and reads.) Madam -- (reads.)


WIDOW. Would you be plas'd to let us know what madam you mean? for women of
quality, and women of no quality, and women of all qualities, are so mixed
together, that you don't know one from the other, and are all called madams; you
should always rade the subscription before you open the letter.


WHITTLE. I beg your pardon, Sir; I don't like this ceremony. (aside.) To Mrs.
Brady, in Pall Mall.


WIDOW. Now prosade -- fire and powder but I would --!


WHITTLE. Sir! -- what is the matter?


WIDOW. Nothing at all, Sir; pray go on.


WHITTLE (reads.) Madam -- as I prefer your happiness to the indulgence of my
own passions --


WIDOW. I will not prefer your happiness to the indulgence of my passions --
Mr. WITTOL, rade on.


WHITTLE. I must confess that I am unworthy of your charms and virtues --


WIDOW. Very unworthy indeed; rade on, Sir.


WHITTLE. I have, for some days, had a severe struggle, between my justice and
my passion --


WIDOW. I have had no struggle at all: My justice and passion are agreed.


WHITTLE. The former has prevailed, and I beg leave to resigs you, with all
your accomplishments, to some more deserving, though not more admiring servant
than your most miserable and devoted, THOMAS WHITTLE.


WIDOW. And miserable and devoted you shall be to the Postscript; rade on.


WHITTLE. Postscript: Let me have your pity, but not your anger.


WIDOW. In answer to this Love Epistle, you pitiful fellow, my sister presents
you with her tinderest wishes, and assures you that you have as you desire, her
pity, and she generously throws her contempt too into the bargain.


WHITTLE. I Am infinitely obliged to her.


WIDOW. I must beg lave in the name of all our family to present the same to
you.


WHITTLE. I am ditto to all the family.


WIDOW. But as a brache of promise to any of our family was never suffered
without a brache into some body's body, I have fixed upon myself to be your
operator; and I believe that you will find that I have as fine a hand at this
work, and will give you as little pain, as any in the three kingdoms. [Sits
down and loosens her Knee-bands.]


WHITTLE. For heaven's sake, Captain, what are you about?


WIDOW. I always loosen my Garters for the advantage of lunging; it is for your
sake as well as my own, for I will be twice through your body, before you shall
feel me once. [She seems to practice.


WHITTLE. What a bloody fellow it is? I wish THOMAS would come in. [Aside.


WIDOW. Come, Sir, prepare yourself, you are not the first by half a score,
that I have run through and through the heart, before they knew what was the matter
with them.


WHITTLE. But, Captain, suppose I will marry your sister.


WIDOW. I have not the last objection if you recover of your wounds; Callagon
OF Conner lives very happy with my great aunt, Mrs. Deborah OF Nale, in the
county of Galloway; except a small Astma he got by my running him through the
Lungs, at the Currough; he would have forsaken her, if I had not stopped his
perfidy, by a famous family kiptic I have here; Oho! my little old boy, but you
shall get it. (Draws.


WHITTLE. What shall I do! -- well, Sir, if I must -- I must; I Will meet you
tomorrow morning in Hyde-Park, let the consequence be what it will.


WIDOW. For fear you might forget that favor, I must beg to be indulged with a
little pushing now; I have set my heart upon it, and two birds in hand, is
worth one in the bushes, Mr. WITTOL -- come, Sir.


WHITTLE. But I have not settled my matters.


WIDOW. O we'll settle 'em in a trice, I warrant you. [puts himself in a
position.]


WHITTLE. But I don't understand the sword; I had rather fight with pistols.


WIDOW. I am very happy it is in my power to oblige you; there, Sir, take your
choice; I will plase you if I can. (Offers pistols.)


WHITTLE. Out of the pan into the fire! there is no putting him off; if I had
chosen poison, I dare swear he had arsenick in his pocket; lookee, young
gentleman, I am an old man, and you will get no credit by killing me; but I have
a Nephew as young as yourself, and you will get more honor in facing him.


WIDOW. Ay, and more pleasure too -- I expect ample satisfaction from him,
after I have done your business; prepare, Sir.


WHITTLE. What the devil! will not one serve your turn; I cannot fight; and I will not
fight; I Will do any thing rather than fight; I Will marry your sister; my Nephew
shall marry her, I Will give him all my fortune, what would the fellow have? here
Nephew! Thomas! murder! murder! (He flies and she pursues.


Enter BATES, and NEPHEW. NEPHEW. What Is the matter, Uncle?


WHITTLE. Murder, that is all; that Ruffian there, would kill me, and eat me
afterward.


NEPHEW. I Will find a way to cool him; come out, Sir, I am as mad as yourself;
I Will match you, I warrant you. (Going out with him.


WIDOW. I Will follow you all the world over. (Going after him.)


WHITTLE. Stay, stay Nephew; you shall not fight, we shall be exposed all over the
town, and you may lose your life, and I shall be cursed from morning to night;
do, Nephew; make yourself and me happy; be the olive branch, and bring peace
into my family; return to the Widow; I will give you my consent, and your
fortune, and a fortune for the Widow, five thousand pounds! do persuade him Mr.
BATES.


BATES. Do, Sir, this is the very critical point of your life; I know you love
her; it is the only method to restore us all to our senses.


NEPHEW. I must talk in private first, with this hot young gentleman.


WIDOW. As private as you plase, Sir.


WHITTLE. Take their weapons away, Mr. BATES, and do you follow me to my study
to witness my proposal; it is all ready, and only wants signing; come along
come along. [Exit.


BATES. Victoria! victoria! give me your swords and pistols; and now do your
worst; you spirited loving young couple; I could leap out of my skin! [Exit
BATES.


THOMAS (peeping in.) Joy, joy to you, ye fond charming pair! the fox is
caught, and the young lambs may skip and play; I leave you to your transports!
[Exit.


NEPHEW. O my charming Widow! what a day have we gone through?


WIDOW. I would go through ten times as much, to deceive an old amorous rogue,
like your Uncle, to purchase a young one, like his Nephew.


NEPHEW. I listened at the door all this last scene; my heart was agitated with
ten thousand fears; suppose my Uncle had been stout, and drawn his sword.


WIDOW. I should have run away as he did; when two cowards meet, the struggle
is who shall run first; and sure I can bate an old man at any thing.


NEPHEW. Permit me thus to seal my happiness, (kisses her hand) and be assured
that I am as sensible, as I think myself undeserving of it.


WIDOW. I Will tell you what, Mr. WITTOL, were I not sure you deserved some
pains, I would not have taken any pains for you; and don't imagine now, because
I have gone a little too far for the man I love, that I shall go a little too
far when I Am your wife; indeed I shall not: I have done more than I should before
I am your wife, because I was in despair; but I will not do as much as I may, when
I am your wife, though every Irish woman is fond of imitating her English betters.


NEPHEW. Thou divine, adorable woman! (Kneels and kisses her hand.


Enter WHITTLE, and BATES. ( WHITTLE stares. BATES. Confusion! (aside.)


WHITTLE (turning to BATES.) Hey day! I am afraid his head is not right yet! he
was kneeling and kissing the Captain's hand. (Aside to BATES.


BATES. Take no notice, all will come about. (Aside to WHITTLE.


WIDOW. I find, Mr. WHITTOL, your family loves kissing better than fighting; he
swears I am as like my sister, as two pigeons: I could excuse his raptures, for
I had rather fight the best friend I have, than slobber and salute him a la
francoise.


Enter Sir PATRICK O'NEALE. Sir PATRICK. I hope, Mr. Whizzle, you will excuse my
coming back to give you an answer, without having any to give; I hear a grate
dale of news about myself, and came to know if it be true; they say my son is
in London, when he tells me himself by letter here, that he is at Limerick; and
I have been with my daughter to tell her the news, but she would not stay at
home to receave it, so I am come -- O gra ma chree my little din ousil craw,
what have we got here? a piece of mummery! here is my son and daughter too,
fait; what are you waring the breeches, PAT, to see how they become you when
you are Mrs. Weezel.


WIDOW. I beg your pardon for that, Sir! I wear them before marriage, because,
I think they become a woman better than after.


WHITTLE. What, is not this your son?


Sir PATRICK. No, but it is my daughter, and that is the same thing.


WIDOW. And your Niece, Sir, which is still better than either.


WHITTLE. Mighty well! and, I suppose you have not lost your wits, young man!


BATES. I simpathize with you, Sir; we lost 'em together, and found 'em at the
same time.


WHITTLE. Here Is villainy! Mr. BATES, give me the paper; not a farthing shall
they have 'till the law gives it 'em.


BATES. We'll cheat the law and give it them now. (Gives NEPHEW the paper.


WHITTLE. He may take his own, but he shall not have a sixpence of the five
thousand pounds I promised him.


BATES. Witness, good folks, he owns to the promise.


Sir PATRICK. Fait I Will witness dat, or any think else in a good cause.


WHITTLE. What, am I choused again!


BATES. Why should not my friend be choused out of a little justice for the
first time? Your hard usage has sharpened your Nephew's wits, therefore beware,
don't play with edge-tools -- you will only cut your fingers.


Sir PATRICK. And your trote too, which is all one; therefore, to make all asy,
marry my daughter first, and then quarrel with her afterward; that will be in
the natural course of things.


WHITTLE. Here! THOMAS! where are you?


Enter THOMAS. WHITTLE. Here are fine doings! I am deceived, tricked, and
cheated!


THOMAS. I wish you joy, Sir; the best think could have happened to you; and as
a faithful servant I have done my best to check you.


WHITTLE. To check me!


THOMAS. You were galloping full speed and down hill too, and if we had not
laid hold of the bridle, being a bad jockey, you would have hung by the horns
in the stirrup, to the great joy of the whole town.


WHITTLE. What have you helped to trick me?


THOMAS. Into happiness: You have been foolish a long while, turn about and be
wise; he has got the woman and his estate, give them your blessing, which is
not worth much, and live like a christian for the future.


WHITTLE. I will if I can; but I cannot look at 'em; I cannot bear the sound of
my voice, nor the sight of my face: Look ye, I am distressed, and distracted!
and cannot come to yet; I will be reconciled if possible; but don't let me see
or hear from you, if you would have me forget and forgive you -- I shall never
lift up my head again! (Exit.


WIDOW. I hope, Sir PATRICK, that my preferring the Nephew to the Uncle will
meet with your approbation; though we have not so much money, we shall have
more love; one mind and half a purse, in marriage, are much better than two
minds and two purses. I did not come to England, nor keep good company, till it
was too late to get rid of my country prejudices.


Sir PATRICK. You are out of my hands, PAT, so if you will not trouble me with
your afflictions, I shall sincerely rejoice at your felicity.


NEPHEW. It would be a great abatement of my present joy, could I believe that
this lady should be assisted in her happiness, or be supported in her
afflictions by any one but her lover and her husband.


Sir PATRICK. Fine notions are fine tings, but a fine estate gives every ting
but idaas, and them too, if you will appale to those who help you to spend it --
what say you, Widow?


WIDOW. By your, and their permission, I will tell them to this good company;
and for fear my words should want ideas too, I will add an Irish tune to 'em,
that may carry off a bad voice, and bad matter.


SONG.
A Widow bewitched with her passion,
Though Irish, is now quite ashamed,
To think that she is so out of fashion,
To marry and then to be tamed:
It Is love the dear joy,
That old fashioned boy,
Has got in my breast with his quiver;
The blind urchin he,
Struck the Cush la maw cree,
And a Husband secures me for ever!
Ye fair ones I hope will excuse me,
Though vulgar pray do not abuse me;
I cannot become a fine lady,
O love has bewitched WIDOW BRADY.
II.
Ye critics to murder so willing,
Pray see all our errors with blindness;
For once change your method of killing,
And kill a fond Widow with kindness:
If you look so severe,
In a fit of despair,
Again I will draw forth my steel, Sirs,
You know I Have the art,
To be twice through your heart,
Before I can make you to feel, Sirs:
Brother soldiers I hope you will protect me,
Nor let cruel critics dissect me;
To favor my cause be but ready,
And grateful you will find WIDOW BRADY.
III.
Ye leaders of Dress and the fashions,
Who gallop post haste to your ruin,
Whose taste has destroyed all your passions,
Pray, what do you think of my wooing?
You call it damn low,
Your heads and arms so, [mimicks them.]
So listless, so loose, and so lazy:
But pray what can you,
That I cannot do?
O fie, my dear craters, be azy:
Ye patriots and courtiers so hearty,
To speech it and vote for your party;
For once be both constant and steady,
And vote to support WIDOW BRADY.
IV.
To all that I see here before me,
The bottom, the top, and the middle,
For music we now must implore you,
No wedding without pipe and fiddle:
If all are in tune,
Pray let it be soon,
My heart in my bosom is prancing!
If your hands should unite,
To give us delight,
O that is the best piping and dancing!
Your plaudits to me are a treasure,
Your smiles are a dower for a lady;
O joy to you all in full measure,
So wishes, and prays WIDOW BRADY.
FINIS.

