A LETTER TO A LADY ON The MODE of conducting herself during PREGNANCY.

ALSO ON THE MANAGEMENT OF THE INFANT.

LONDON: PRINTED BY BAKER AND GALABIN, IN INGRAM-COURT.

M.DCC.LXXVII.

This Book is entered at Stationers' Hall, and whoever pirates it will be
prosecuted.

PREFACE.
I Flatter myself my friends will readily conceive, when first I made the
subsequent memorandums, that they were not designed for the perusal of any
other persons than my two daughters; nor should I have been tempted to have
made them known, had it not been at the earnest request of a young lady, who,
(having the misfortune to lose her parents when very young, and by a late
marriage was removed at a distance from her friends,) reasonably supposing
(from my having been the mother of seven children, she knew I had suckled and
superintended) that experience would have enabled me to give her some
instructions that might be useful to her in her condition; from those
considerations (lest it should please God to call me before my dear children
were settled in life, on whose account I had taken such pains) I determined to
comply with her request, and accordingly sent her the following directions, not
imagining, at that time, she would have desired me to print them; but, as I
presume, there may be some observations worthy the attention of every mother
and nurse, in justice to myself and family I could do no less.

DEAR MADAM,
WHEN I consider how much your present situation demands the advice of a real
friend, I shall exert my endeavors, though I fear inadequate to the
undertaking, to give you such instructions as I am persuaded will tend much to
your relief; you very reasonably imagine, in consequence of the natural courses
incident to our sex not appearing at their regular time, that you are breeding;
from that circumstance, I readily suppose, you have taken particular notice
when nature was last on you; should you continue without any farther
alteration, you may begin to reckon from the tenth day after the last time:
this method my mother taught me with my first child, and I do assure you that
my midwife paid her a very high compliment on the occasion.

Rise at your usual time; and, if you breed sick, (which is usual,) order a cup
of camomile-tea, or pump-water, as soon as you come down stairs in the morning;
that will help to keep your body open. If tea does not agree with you, try
coffee, chocolate, milk, milk-porridge, water gruel, balm-tea, or a calf's-foot
boiled in milk; some one of which, most likely, will.

Perhaps you may have little or no appetite early in a morning; if so, give a
general order to have something brought you at eleven o'clock; should you not
be inclined to eat, let it not be removed, for, though it should not be
agreeable then, it may a little time afterward.

By no means ever go out hungry; from that cause the desire of a person, for
many things they see, or smell, in general proceeds; to avoid being so, I would
wish you to carry a biscuit, or something of that kind, at all times in your
pocket. Should you be so unfortunate as to mark the child, be not discouraged,
as it will not be of any bad consequence, and, in some cases, a See the
receipts at the end of the book.
remedy may be applied.

During your pregnancy, should you chance to meet, or see, any disagreeable
object, such as lame, blind, etc. do not suffer it to make any impression on
your mind, as you may then rest assured it will have no effect on you or the
child.

When you are three months advanced, on no account keep it secret, as many
ladies prejudice themselves thereby; should you be hot, or feverish, and
frequently sick, it is absolutely necessary you should make your condition
known to your midwife, (that he may order you, at that time, to lose a little
blood,) otherwise you may depend upon it you will have sore nipples, or your
navel start; from both those circumstances I suffered much, with my first
child: it therefore behooves you to be particularly careful, to avoid those
inconveniences, and, believe me, you cannot do yourself, or midwife, justice to
conceal from him or her your condition; a gentleman will understand your
meaning at the instant.

Should your body not be regular every day, eat fruit, vegetables, or a few
jar-raisins.

When you are five months advanced, put on jumps, wear very broad bandages to
your upper and under petticoats; sew an eye to the jumps, that they may hook
on; by this method you take the weight off the loins: and at this time you
should engage with a nurse.

When turned of six months, should feverish heats, fixed pains in the side, or
any inflammatory symptoms appear, lose more blood, which will give you
immediate relief. Should you perceive your water warmer than usual, take a
table-spoonful of gum arabic twice a day: be sure, at this time, to have your
childbed linen well aired, and put into a large tin-box, in a warm place, for
fear of a seven-months child, damp linen being particularly hurtful; strictly
observing that napkins are not applied to you, or the child, hot, as they would
occasion a violent inflammation in both.

As you find yourself grow weighty, lie down between the blankets at least
three times a day, to alter the posture; from which you will find great relief.

It is necessary to have two motions a day the two last months; the last
fortnight you should drink a glass of mountain, with a table-spoonful of sweet
oil in it, as it relaxes, and will be of great service in labor.

Should you, my dear madam, find yourself very uneasy the latter-part of your
time, make not yourself unhappy, as it is most probable you will come the
quicker and better for it.

As soon as you are taken in labor, comb your hair smooth, have an inch cut
off behind and before, or you will find it comb off very much at the month's
end. I know several ladies who have lost very fine heads of hair by this
omission. The next thing, put on your nightcap, which will prove very
comfortable: some ladies will not be persuaded to it, and, by that means, are
very much disturbed. Four people about you are quite sufficient, the midwife,
nurse, and two assistants; more only heat the room, create confusion, baulk
your pains, and prevent your taking them as you otherwise would: to prevent
flooding, which is too often the case, or the fatigue of raising yourself up, I
would recommend a silver sucking-spout, by the assistance of which you may
drink without being moved.

A half-shift and body-cloth, with strings, a double napkin to your breasts,
and a single waistcoat, with sleeves, to come as low as your elbows, (made by a
skilful tailor, as soon as your are with child,) are all that are necessary;
when you sit up in your bed, throw a double handkerchief over your neck, and
slip on your bed-gown; lie warm, but not hot.

Providence has so ordained it, that a woman, with her first child, has seldom
or ever any after-pains; if you are well, and can eat a biscuit, or crust of
bread, the minute after delivery, it will keep the wind out of your stomach,
and strengthen you very much. Be sure to have sperma-ceti, sugar, and nutmeg,
and plenty of very weak brandy and water: and, in a few hours afterward, a
half-pint basin of barley-jelly; but no caudle, on any consideration, till the
milk has been at the height, and is quite gone off, so that you have not the
least fever; as, by suppressing the milk at that time, according to
instructions, you will gain strength very fast.

For the first twelve days, take of sugar and sperma-ceti about one-third of an
ounce frequently; and, every or every other day, take a quarter of an ounce of
manna, as you find occasion, one motion a day being sufficient; without which,
in all probability, you will have a fever, owing to confinement.

You may eat part of a boiled rabbit, chicken, or such like food, every day for
the first week; and, about eleven o'clock, in the forenoon, have some good
broth, beef-tea, or calf's-foot jelly, by way of change, with the barley-jelly;
after which time (if you follow my directions) you may live as the family do,
provided they dine at one o'clock.

If your strength will admit, I would wish you to get up the second day, to
have your bed made; about the fourth or fifth put on your jumps, and pin your
gown quite close; by attending to that, it will strengthen your back much; and,
from that day, endeavor to sit up an hour, and so on by degrees, by which
means you will recover your strength sooner than you are aware of: the weak
state, ladies in general are reduced to, arises from lying in bed too long.

The fifth day you may drink half a pint of beer, with a glass of mountain in
it; and, if you have any desire for cheese, at your dinner, eat a piece the
size of a nutmeg, after which drink a glass of port-wine. The seventh or eighth
day you may venture to drink beer alone; in that case, at and after dinner,
drink a glass of port-wine: some time after lie down between the blankets, for
an hour or more; if you can compose yourself to rest, it will be of great
service. In this manner you should proceed the first three weeks; during which
time always breakfast in bed, and lie two hours after; before you rise be sure
to have something warm.

Dine at one o'clock, and by no means drink tea later than five; for, if you
do, it will interfere with the undressing your child and getting your supper.

Between your tea and seven o'clock drink a little warm jelly, or a glass of
wine with a crust of bread; otherwise, undressing your child and suckling will
be too great a fatigue. Sup at nine o'clock, and be in bed by ten; after that
time do not suffer any person to come into your room, as it will disturb you,
and very likely prevent your sleeping.

Avoid seeing much company; for the weak state you may probably be in will not
admit of it: should you be so, attend to this for the first three weeks, by
which means you will regain your strength sooner.

When your month is up, and you are able to go abroad, I earnestly recommend
you to observe, that if, by any means, you have been prevented suckling for
six, eight, or ten, hours, which will sometimes be the case, you will use the
Assistant instead of applying the child; should your exercise have thrown you
into a perspiration, however gentle, make water, put another cloak on, and
drink something warm; the milk then will be fresh and good: should it not have
vented itself in such a number of hours, you will be convinced, by its smelling
offensively, that it must be hurtful to the infant; and without those
preparations the countenance will immediately turn pale, cause it to cry, have
a stool, or perhaps both; and then it is the blood gets foul: by this omission
I lost a fine boy, four months old. As every disagreeable eircumstance injures
the milk; if your breasts are hard, and overful, be assured you have taken
cold, which is impossible to be avoided without great precaution; and thus
numbers of children, by the foulness of the milk, have been thrown into
convulsions.

I have great reason to believe, had I not drawn my breasts at least fourscore
times, with each of my two last children, I should not have been able to have
reared them, from trouble of mind, fatigue, and cold.

THE MANAGEMENT OF THE INFANT.
WITH respect to the treatment of your infant, though it be your request that I
should offer my advice, yet I do not presume to dictate to your midwife, as I
very much approve of their method in general; however, I have no doubt that, by
pursuing the following directions, great advantage will be found.

As to the dress, it should consist of a bellyband, made of a piece of fine
linen cloth, doubled about three fingers wide; when the navelstring is off, put
it single; when quite well, leave it off, as the shirt with strings answers
that purpose; a blanket, a short loose roller, a little gown, and one cap; a
long stay may be made use of, if you think proper, but not continued more than
three weeks, either night or day.

As soon as the child is dressed, I would have you give it of syrup of
marshmallows and oil of sweet almonds two tea-spoonfuls of each, mixed
together, which cleanses more than sugar and butter; as the former sticks to
the mouth, causes sore nipples, and frequently throws children into the watery
gripes.

In the next place, the child should be put to the breast; if the milk cannot
be obtained, let it be fed with beef-tea, without sugar; should it be, even in
that case it must be fed with the tea three times a day, for a sucking-child
requires victuals oftener than you are aware of; if it continues to suck, the
milk will cleanse it sufficiently; should it not, it is necessary to give it
three doses of physic, by your doctor's or apothecary's order; as I I am
persuaded few nurses understand enough of drugs to cleanse it properly.

Should you have overheated yourself, had any uncommon uneasiness during your
pregnancy, or you or your husband have any humors in your blood, lay a blister
on as soon as the child is born. I am well acquainted with an eminent and
skiful midwife who never brings a child into the world without applying one
before it is dressed, and orders gum-arabic, about a tea-spoonful at a time, to
be given discretionally into its victuals or alone.

On the eleventh day, as soon as the child is dressed, to a pap-spoonful of
purifying lotion add six drops of each of the head tinctures, with which the
head, forehead, eyebrows, neck, throat, loins, and knees, should be rubbed
well; it will give spirits and strength to the infant, and may be used with
safety, sick or well; be careful to dry the head, and as soon as done put on
the cap, not using pomatum on any account. Children, in common, have a great
deal of weak hair; by pursuing this method every day, it will either take it
off at the month's end, or give strength and make it grow: it will cleanse an
infant's head in ten days, should it have ever so great a quantity of white or
yellow scurf, without the least hazard of giving the child cold.

The mis-management of childrens heads, in general, induced me to try the
experiment on one of my own, by which means I made the discovery; I therefore
strongly recommend it to you, as I am persuaded it will be of great service to
your child, and will prevent the fever in the head most children are subject to
from improper treatment.

There are two disorders incident to an infant, in the month, viz. the red-gum
and thrush; the latter should be very closely watched for, that it may be sent
through as soon as possible.

If the child is subject to the hicup, which is a species of convulsions, and
proceeds from the wind getting into the stomach, it should be put to the
breast, that it may suck it away; if it neither will nor can, give it some warm
beef-tea.

At the end of three weeks I would have you coat the child, which, with the
stay, should be half a yard in length: the shirt to be one inch longer, and the
frock rather longer than the rest; they should all tie behind, by which means
you may put on the dress in a minute. Feed your child as directed, keep it to
regular hours, and cool in the night; you will then have little trouble, about
that time, Should the child be well, it will then endeavor to step up the
nurse's stomach, and get on her head. Is it not then absurd that it should be
clothed in such a manner as to deprive it of the proper use of its limbs? which
it often is, from the common mode of dressing, at least six months. How did our
first parents shelter themselves from cold? The Scripture tells us they came
naked into the world, and, had they not touched the forbidden fruit, they would
never have known the want of clothing. Nature points out to us to keep
ourselves cool: the great folly of childrens wearing long clothes, I attribute
to a mistaken notion, taken from that passage in the Scripture, where we are
told "Our blessed Savior was wrapped in swaddling clothes, and laid in a
manger, as there was no other room for him in the inn." At that time the reason
was just, being the depth of winter: but surely there can be none given now for
clothing a child so hot, who is confined for the first month, and, for the most
part, a quarter of a year, either to the lying-in room or nursery; which, in
general, may be more properly compared to a bagnio than any other place.

When you take an infant of three weeks old in your arms, sit as upright in
your chair as if at your harpsichord; from that position you will have the full
use of your arms; dance it from thigh to thigh, which you will find gives it a
notion of stepping. That you may not be at a loss after your nurse has left
you, when the child is at the breast, avoid talking loud, as it affrights and
makes it quit it; should you have done so by chance, speak in a low tone of
voice, it will look up in your face, smile, and, in all probability, suck again.

The time of day an infant is dressed, in general, is about eleven or twelve
o'clock, which I look upon to be an improper one; it should be early in a
morning, as it not only tires, but refreshes, and gives it an appetite to its
breakfast: when finished, if not sleepy, send it into the air. I mean at that
season of the year when the shortness of the days, and the inclemency of the
weather, will otherwise prevent its enjoying the benefit of it at a proper time
of day: in summer it is not material.

At six weeks old it should have no other covering, to sleep in, but a shirt,
and a little shift, or bed-gown, half an ell long; should it not be kept cool,
as much strength will be lost in one night as gained in two days.

It is a mistaken opinion that an infant will sleep the first quarter; some
may, but, believe me, it is not natural. The first four months being the time
to give them a notion of their feet; at six weeks, if you suffer the child to
stand on your left thigh, you will find it shove forwards, and put out its fee
to step; you may then with safety put on the Nurse's-Relief, which I have so
contrived, that it takes off the whole weight of the child, and may be worn at
all times. It grieves me to hear parent desire the nurse to take the child; it
is so heavy she cannot hold it. In justice to yourself and it, to which
particular attendance must and should be given for the first twelve months,
which will fully employ the time of any one person; by that means you will, in
all probability, have your child out of arms in that time; on the contrary it
may be almost two years. You will easily judge, by taking it into your arms
occasionally, whether it is properly nursed or not.

Some ladies are so particular that they think a child should not be set on its
feet till expiration of the first eight months, which is a false notion; for,
as I observed before, the first four months the child should exercise its
limbs; after that time (and in many children before) the teeth are shooting
into the gums, and that is often attended with worse consequences than actual
t^^thing itself; because an infant is subject to the strangury; and a parent's
not knowing or considering that circumstance is what occasions children to be
taken off, from the age of four months to three years old; an instance of which
I will give you.

A person who takes in children to nurse, whose house I had occasion frequently
to pass, taking notice of my little boy, then in arms, led me naturally to
enquire after her nursing child, whom I had often seen, and remarked to have
been a fine boy: the poor woman dropped a tear, and said the child was dead.
The agitation of mind she then appeared to be in would not permit me to ask any
other questions; but, as I was passing in the evening, I took the opportunity,
while she was standing at the door, of enquiring if he had been long ill; she
said he had not: and what age he was, about five months; and had two teeth
looked so blue, that she had no doubt would have been cut the next day, which
led me farther to ask concerning the child's water. First, whether she
perceived any stoppage; secondly, if he cried before he made any; and thirdly,
when he did, if it was not extremely hot; really, said the woman, I did not
take sufficient notice. Another person, who occasionally assisted her, and was
then confined to her bed, in the next room, (overhearing the conversation,)
desired I would walk in, when she informed me she recollected that the child
not only cried when it made water, but that the water was so extremely hot it
almost fleed him; but that is common. They then sent for the apothecary, but,
before he could come to their assistance, the child was carried off in a fit,
occasioned by the strangury, which he, being unacquainted with, directly
pronounced it to be occasioned by the two teeth.

As a farther proof, I will give you an instance of a child of twenty weeks
old, I was called ^n by a neighbor to look at, whom I found in a violent fit
of crying, in which it had been about two hours; observing the child's knees
drawn up to its chin induced me to ask if it had made water in that time; I was
told it had not. In about an hour after I looked in again, and found the child
in a sound sleep; upon enquiry, I was told he had been very uneasy before he
made water, but, as soon as he had, it relieved him, and he became composed;
and, as in the case beforementioned, his thighs were almost fleed by the heat
of its water; in consequence of which I advised her to give it some gum-arabic
water, which had the desired effect. The following day she perceived two under
teeth look blue, which I recommended her to rub with a gold ring; she did, and
they came through with great ease, encouraged by the gum-arabic, carrying the
fever off, by urine, incident to those cases. She has continued it ever since
in every thing he eats and drinks; and he is now a fine boy: his grandmother
is of opinion that his life was saved by that means. In order to keep the mouth
cool, when you perceive the child about its teeth, the first thing given it in
a morning should be a tea-spoonful of cold spring water.

Every mother or nurse should constantly feel the child's pulse once every day,
that she may judge whether it is in health or not: for my own part, though I do
not profess any skill, yet, by accustoming myself to this method, feeling the
water, and examining the stools, I am able to sorm a better judgment than most
people would imagine. I am indebted to a very eminent physician for this hint,
and I do verily believe it is a very essential one to any who have the care of
an infant.

If a child's water appears of the color of milk, neglect not to give it the
gum-arabic three or four times a day, as you may be assured it has either
caught cold or is about its double teeth; in either case it has been found of
great use, unless it operates as a purgative, which is very seldom the case; if
it does, omit it a day or two.

Some little time after the foregoing observations, I met a gentleman of the
faculty, (the father of a large family,) whose opinion I asked concerning a
child's having the strangury, and at what age; he said at or about two years
old. The earnest manner in which I put the question to him, I suppose, led him
to ask me whether I had reason, from the experience I had had in attending my
own children, to imagine it appeared before; I evaded the question, as at that
time it did not suit me to make the confession, knowing it would be of great
advantage to every person that purchased a Nurse's-Relief of me, as I then
intended to make a point of convincing them how necessary it is for a parent or
nurse to have the gum-arabic water by them the first three years, as few
children cut all their double teeth sooner.

Should the child frequently heave, when the stomach is oppressed, which is
common from six weeks to four or five months old, send for your apothecary,
that he may order something for its relief; otherwise, by not checking the
disorder in time, you will most likely throw the infant into convulsions.

It is very absurd for any one to imagine the faculty do not understand the
disorders incident to infants: in many instances you will find their opinion
requisite; should that be the case, I earnestly entreat you will make it a rule
to ask in what manner he expects the medicines to operate: they will all
acquaint you; but some, through hurry of business, omit it, by which they are
often under the necessity of attending a second time, to satisfy the doubts and
fears of the nurse, who, from the child's having two or three motions in an
hour, and perhaps frequently sick, alarms herself with apprehension of danger;
though, at the same time, it may be quite necessary, and the infant could not
be relieved without.

I was greatly alarmed in a similar case with my last child, and should have
been more so, had it not been for my mother, who told me the medicine, the
apothecary sent, would take the effect as above mentioned: or, probably, by
means of the fright, I might have lost my milk; instances of which have been
frequent; as soon a^ you have given the medicines, (for they do not always
operate alike,) put a double napkin round its ne^k, and lay it in your lap at
least an hour; it possibly may fall asleep; if so, the better; and it is a
great chance, when it awakes, if it be not sick, or have a motion; perhaps
both: it may otherwise pass off by urine; in which case, should it be a little
convulsed, do not alarm yourself, as it will not be of any bad consequence.

Should the child be in a cold clammy sweat, do not let it make you uneasy.
Apply warm napkins to the neck, face, hands, and bottom; lay your hand on the
navel, and gently rub the stomach, carefully avoiding to overheat the child; as
soon as it is easy it will reward your tender care with a pleasing smile;
endeavor to compose it, and then you may, with safety, put it in the bed or
cradle, taking care not to disturb it on any consideration: should it sleep
five, six, or eight, hours, be sure, in that time, to draw your breasts twice,
as more children suffer by that omission than you are aware of: among the
number, I lost a fine boy of my own, four months old, by that neglect.

When your child is five months old, provided you follow my directions, you may
put it into a go-cart, which I am persuaded will be found very convenient;
after it is in, tie the cart to the leg of a table or chair; continue it thus
for a fortnight, that it may feel its feet properly; it will take great
pleasure in standing so: if you do not observe this caution, but suffer the
cart to run on the floor at first, it may very likely intimidate the child, and
give it a dislike to it. I have given directions for one to be made with a flag
to it, to encourage the child to stand upright; and a chair on a different
construction from those made use of in common, of which I very much disapprove,
as they are too great a confinement.

I have observed by my own children, when ill, that they have frequently taken
a little warm victuals or drink, because the fatigue of sucking has been too
great; but, as soon as a child finds itself easy, it will readily receive the
nourishment from the breast, designed by nature. When you take the child out of
the cradle or off the bed, after sleeping, it should not be set on its feet
immediately, as it is apt to make it cross; the feeble state we ourselves are
in, on our first getting out of bed, plainly shows the utility of the above
caution; you will therefore do well to set the child in its chair, and divert
it for five minutes; after that time it may, with safety, be allowed to go to
play.

I do not approve of a back-string; nor do I allow a child to run alone till it
can get up of itself, after falling: neither do I suffer any body to take it
off the ground, when young; should you accustom them to that, they will ^ie and
scream till you do; on the contrary, if no notice is taken, they will get up of
themselves, go to play, and not mind a fall so much, even if an accident
happened by it.

I hope by these instructions, which you have from under my hand, you will be a
better nurse to your first child than I was to my fifth; that it may prove so,
is the sincere wish of,

Dear madam, Your obedient humble servant,
London, October 22, 1777.
RECEIPTS REFERRED TO IN THE BODY OF THE WORK.
To make Barley-Jelly for a lying-in Woman or sick Person.
UPON a quarter of a pound of pearl-barley pour three pints of spring water;
let it scald: pour that away, then pour three pints of boiling water to the
barely; let it boil till it is very thick, taking care it does not boil over:
strain it through a sieve, and press the barley with a spoon till you leave
little more than the black seed; it will then be quite a jelly. If you have no
dislike put in a blade of mace and a piece of lemon-peal; let it stand to be
cold; and, as you warm it for use, add a tea-spoonful of gum-arabic, with a
little wine, unless you prefer it without. The above I recommend every lady to
drink the first five days to suppress the fever, in general occasioned by
drinking caudle.

The Gum-Arabic Water.
INFUSE three ounces of gum-arabic in half a pint of boiling water; keep it
stirring a few minutes, it will dissolve: put it into a well-glazed pipkin, and
give it a boil up for about five minutes. Then put it into a phial to keep it
clean and fit for use.

To prevent Miscarriage, or for a weakly Person.
TO the white of an egg, well beat up, pour half a pint of milk moderately
warm: sweeten it to your palate, and add a tea-spoonful of rum. Take it an hour
before you rise, at eleven o'clock in the forenoon, and at four in the
afternoon.

To bake a Calf's or Neat's Foot.
CUT the foot in half; put it into a pan with a large rice of ginger; (unless
you have any objection to that spice;) then cover it over with mi^k and water:
tie it over with a brown paper, and send it to the oven, to be put in early in
the morning, that it may soak the longer; when done, take a cup of it warm, and
sweeten it to your taste.

Receipt to take a Mark off a Child.
PUT a pewter plate into a stand, Which is to ^e had of R. Bodker,
surgeons-instrumentmaker, in Lead^nha^ street: likewise the silver
sucking-spout.
and send it to the baker's, that it may be put into the oven as soon as the
bread is drawn: the steam that drops from the plate is to be received in a pint
basin, and then poured into a phial: keep it in a warm place; and with this
bathe the mark, with a feather, at least six or eight times in a day, till it
is quite worn off.

Be^f-Tea for a lying-in Woman.
POUR on a pound of lean beef three pints of boiling water: let it boil till
reduced to a quart: add to it four pepper-corns, four of all-spice, and a
little salt; boil also a crust of bread in it.

Beef-Tea for an Infant.
POUR on a quarter of a pound of lean beef a pint of boiling water; let the
beef boil in it about five minutes; then take it out, and put in a large piece
of upper crust of bread, the staler the better: give it a good boil up; do not
beat it too fine after the first six we^ks: add to it a few grains of salt.

THE END.
ER^ATUM, Page ^, line 1^, als, and a s^irt, after the parenthesis.


