The last Scene of part the 2d. in the Christmas Tale.



A NEW DRAMATIC ENTERTAINMENT, CALLED A Christmas Tale. IN FIVE PARTS. AS IT IS
PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE. Embellished with an Etching, by
Mr. Loutherbourg.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET, in the Strand. MDCCLXXIV. [Price One Shilling
and Sixpence.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE writer of the following Tale begs leave to make his acknowledgements to
the public, for their very favorable reception of it: He hopes that the
success attending this attempt, so well supported by the Scenery, Music, and
Performers, will excite superior talents to productions of the same kind, more
worthy of their approbation.

PROLOGUE.
Music plays, and several persons enter with different kind of dishes. After
them Mr. PALMER, in the character of CHRISTMAS. GO on -- prepare my bounty for
my friends,
And see that mirth with all her crew attends:
To the AUDIENCE. Behold a personage well known to fame;
Once loved and honored -- Christmas is my name!
My officers of state my taste display;
Cooks, scullions, pastry-cooks, prepare my way!
Holly, and ivy, round me honors spread,
And my retinue show, I Am not ill-fed:
Minced pies by way of belt, my breast divide,
And a large carving knife, adorns my side;
It Is no Fop's weapon, 'twill be often drawn;
This turban for my head is collar'd brawn!
Though old, and white my locks, my cheeks are cherry,
Warmed by good fires, good cheer, I Am always merry:
With carrol, fiddle, dance, and pleasant tale,
Jest, gihe, prank, gambol, mummery and ale,
I, English hearts rejoiced in days of yore;
For new strange modes, imported by the score,
You will not sure turn Christmas out of door!
Suppose yourselves, well seated by a fire,
(Stuck close, you seem more warm than you desire)
Old father Christmas now in all his glory,
Begs with kind hearts, you will listen to his Story:
Clear well your minds from politics and spleen,
Hear my Tale out -- see all that is to be seen!
Take care, my children, that you well behave,
You, Sir, in blue, red cape -- not quite so grave:
That critic there in black -- so stern and thin,
Before you frown, pray let the tale begin --
You in the crimson capuchin, I fear you,
Why, Madam, at this time so cross appear you?
Excuse me pray -- I did not see your husband near you.
Don't think, fair Ladies, I expect that you,
Should hear my tale -- you have something else to do:
Nor will our beaux, old English fare encourage;
No foreign taste, could ever digest plumb-porridge.
I have no sauce to quicken lifeless sinners,
My food is meant for To the upper gallery.
honest hearty grinners!
For you -- you spirits with good stomachs bring;
O make the neighboring roof with rapture ring;
Open your mouths, pray swallow every thing!
Critics beware, how you our pranks despise;
Hear well my tale, or you shall not touch my pies;
The proverb change -- be merry, but not wise.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
BONORO, Good Magician, Mr. BANNISTER, FLORIDOR, his Son, Mr. VERNON, TYCHO,
his 'Squire, Mr. WESTON, FALADEL, Gentlemen-Usher, Mr. PARSONS, NIGROMANT, Bad
Magician, Mr. CHAMPNESS. RADEL, Mr. DIMOND, MESSENGERS. Mr. GRIFFITH, Master
BLANCHARD.

WOMEN.
CAMILLA, Mrs. SMITH, ROBINETTE, Mrs. WRIGHTEN.
GOOD and EVIL SPIRITS, in various Characters, by
Mr. HURST, Mr. ACKMAN, Mr. W. PALMER, Mr. WRIGHT, Mr. WRIGHTEN, Mr. COURTNEY,
Miss PLATT, Mrs. JOHNSTON, Mrs. BRADSHAW, Mrs. MILLIDGE, Mrs. SCOTT, etc. etc.
etc.
DANCES.
By Sig. COMO, Mr. ATKINS, Mr. GEORGI, Signiora CRESPI, Mrs. SUTTON, Mrs.
GEORGI, etc.
The SCENERY invented by Mr. DE LOUTHERBOURG.

MUSIC, by Mr. DIBDIN.

A CHRISTMAS TALE.
PART I.
SCENE I. A beautiful Landscape.
Enter ROBINETTE. TYCHO, Tycho! where are you, Tycho? sure the fellow has taken
me at my word, and gone to hang or drown himself -- he threatened both --
Lovers are great bullies, and swear a thousand things, they never intend to
perform; if the poor woman shows any fear, the bullies rave the more, and she
gives up at once that noblest privilege of the sex, making the wisest fools,
and the stoutest miserable -- I have a tongue to be sure that moves quick, and
by out-running my wit sometimes, may encourage young coxcombs to hope too much;
but then my heart all the while, poor thing! knows nothing of the matter, and
feels no more, than my shoe-knots.

SONG.
My eyes may speak pleasure,
Tongue flow without measure,
Yet my heart in my bosom lies still;
Thus the river is flowing,
The mill-clapper going,
But the miller's asleep in his mill.
Though lovers surround me,
With speeches confound me,
Yet my heart in my bosom lies still;
Thus the river is flowing,
The mill-clapper going,
But the miller's asleep in his mill.
The little God eyes me,
And thinks to surprise me,
But my heart is awake in my breast;
Thus boys slily creeping,
Would catch a bird sleeping,
But the linnet's awake in his nest.
Where can this Tycho have hid himself? I Am sure he went this way -- stay, is
not that my gentleman creeping along the side of the canal? It is either he, my
other lover, Faladal, or the monkey in his new livery; I must give him a little
more hope, or we shall have no more sport with him.


[Exit Rob. TYCHO (peeping out of a tree.) There Is a hard-hearted she-devil for
you! -- do I look like a monkey in a new livery? I don't know how love may have
altered me, but I know a few weeks ago, that I had the best face in this
island, or my glass is a deceiver of youth. If I had not so much tenderness in
my composition, I would play the devil among these petticoats -- But here she
comes again, and I cannot say boo! to her for the life of me.


Re-enter ROBINETTE. It was the monkey, and a very pretty fellow he is, now he
is well dressed.

[Tycho sighs in the tree. La! what is that? -- did not I hear somebody sigh? It
must be my lover Tycho! -- where are you, Tycho?


TYCHO. (In the tree, and out of sight.) Here am I!

(sighing.
ROBINETTE. Where?


TYCHO. Here.

(sighing.)
ROBINETTE. Where, I say? Pray show your sweet face.


TYCHO. Here it is. ( peeping out.) When you lose this, you wont get a better.


ROBINETTE. Not 'till I buy a gingerbread one -- What are you doing there?


TYCHO. I was going to hang myself for love; but, having left the cord behind
me, I fell asleep 'till you wakened me -- Pray lend me your garters, for I will
not live, that I am resolved.

(sighing.
ROBINETTE. Come down, and I Will lend you any thing. -- What can I possibly do
with this strange animal.

(aside.
Enter TYCHO. TYCHO. Here am I!


ROBINETTE. What is it you want?


TYCHO. Death or you. -- I must have one of you.


ROBINETTE. Have not I told you often, and I will now repeat it, that I cannot
leave Camilla; let but Floridor, your friend, get the consent of Camilla, my
friend, then I Robinette, her friend, take you Tycho, his friend. -- What would
the fellow have?


TYCHO. (muttering.) Your friend, and my friend, and his friend, and her
friend: then all are friends. -- Is Not it so?


ROBINETTE. To be sure -- Now go about your business.


TYCHO. O bless me! now I am come to myself, I must send Floridor immediately
to his father, upon special matters* I thought to make away with myself, and
quite forgot it.


ROBINETTE. Floridor is as violent in love, as you are melancholy: You must
both mend your manners, or Camilla and I shall look out for others -- No more
melancholy, Tycho, if you love, and would win me.


TYCHO. Am I too melancholy for you?

(sighing.
ROBINETTE. Too melancholy! your face seems preparing for a funeral, instead
of looking out for a wedding: I hate melancholy, and all melancholy people: A
cloudy face betokens a cloudy heart, and I will have neither: Never will I sail
to the port of matrimony but with a smiling sea, and a clear sky -- that is the
way to make a good voyage of it.


TYCHO. And so it is, faith; he! he! he! -- My face will become smiles, as well
as a great deal of thinking: I have studied myself fnto melancholy, but I Will
burn my books, and be as merry as you please to make me. He! he! he!


ROBINETTE. Now you dance about my heart, and will certainly run away with it.


TYCHO. He! he! he! -- But where is Faladel, Robinette?


ROBINETTE. Perhaps sleeping in some tree for love of me, as you did.


TYCHO. If he would do the other thing for you, I should be very happy.

(sighing.
ROBINETTE. Melancholy and jealous too! -- I declare off -- Fie for shame! a
man, a young man, of person, parts, address, and coversation, to be jealous of
an old simpering, swaggering, rhiming gentleman usher, who is as dry as a
mummy, and talks of love; has no strength, and talks of fighting giants; has no
wit, and thinks to gain me! O, Fie, for shame!


TYCHO. It is, indeed, both a sin and a shame -- I Will know myself better, and
be afraid of nobody but you, Robinette: I would say more, but it is time for me
to laugh, he! he! he! is it not?


ROBINETTE. Now you show yourself to advantage -- But, look at the lovers
there! they have had a fresh quarrel, I suppose; go and end it; and take the
hot fool home to his father to cool him.


TYCHO. I Will be melancholy no more -- to please you, Robinette, I will dance
when I am sad; be pert and merry, though I have nothing to say, like other young
gentlemen -- I Will be quite in the mode, more of the monkey, and less of the
man. -- Tol, lol, lol. -- Will that do? bye Robinette. Tol, lol, lol. -- Heigho!

(Dances off, and sighs.
ROBINETTE. I do like this fellow a little, though I plague him so -- and
perhaps I plague him because I like him; -- he is a strange creature, and yet I
like him -- I Am a strange creature too, and he likes me -- he has a hundred
faults -- hold, hold, Signora Robinetta, -- have not you a little fault or two
in the corner of your heart, if your neighbors could come at them? -- O woman,
woman! what an agreeable, whimsical, fanciful coy, coquettish, quick-sighted,
no-sighted, angelical, devilish, jumble of agreeable matter art thou?

SONG.
O the freaks of womankind!
As swift as thought we breed 'em:
No whims will starve in woman's mind,
For vanity will feed 'em;
Teazing ever,
Steady never;
Who the shifting clouds can bind?
O the freaks of womankind! etc.
Quick of car, and sharp of eye,
Others faults we hear and spy,
But to our own,
Alone,
We are both deaf and blind.
O the freaks of womankind! etc.

[Exit Rob. SCENE II.
Camilla's magnificent Garden. Enter FLORIDOR, CAMILLA, and TYCHO. CAMILLA. I
cannot bear your jealousy.


FLORIDOR. My jealousy would have merit with you, if you loved as I did -- but
I have done, madam, and have nothing more to say.


TYCHO. Then go to your father, who has something to say to you.


FLORIDOR. I Will follow you, Tycho.

(walks about in disorder.
TYCHO. What do you stay for, if you have no more to say?


FLORIDOR. I will but say three words, and then I Will come.


TYCHO. If you have three words, the lady will have three thousand; which, at
about two hundred and fifty words a minute, will just take up -- I know my
time, and will be with you again.


[Exit Tycho. CAMILLA. Pray go to your father, I have told you my mind,
Floridor, why will you press me to change it? Don't let an ill-opinion of your
sex mislead you, and injure me! -- I am resolved. -- You have my heart, I
confess it -- it is ungenerous to urge me farther, when you know my greatest
distress is to refuse you any thing.


FLORIDOR. My suspicions, Camilla, are the strongest proofs of my passion.


CAMILLA. Can you suspect me of such falsehood, as to pretend a passion for
you, and secretly indulge one for another.


FLORIDOR. Nigromant, though a wicked, is a powerful magician, and his frequent
visits might alarm a heart less sensible than mine.


CAMILLA. My pride will not let me answer an accusation that reflects the
greatest dishonor, both upon you and myself.


FLORIDOR. How can you suffer me to be tortured with jealousy, when you might
--


CAMILLA. Stop, Floridor! when I might -- what? Scorn a father's commands,
given me with his last breath and blessing!


FLORIDOR. With his last breath, and blessing!


CAMILLA. Upon his death bed he enjoined me, with tears in his eyes, not to
give my hand but to him who could give me proofs of what this enchanted laurel
would unfold.


FLORIDOR. And what are they? -- I conjure you tell me.


CAMILLA. See, and behold!

[The laurel unfolds and discovers the words Valor, Constancy, and Honor, in
letters of gold. You have proved your Love to me, by its unfolding at your
request -- Now read what is more expected from you.


FLORIDOR. (reading.) Valor, Constancy, and Honor! Can the son of Bonoro, and
your lover, be suspected?


CAMILLA. I must not hear you, Floridor: Can you love me, and refuse me these
proofs? -- Marriage, my father added, was too great a stake to venture upon
common security: If your passion is a true one, you will convince me by your
obedience; if it is a common one, I am too proud to accept it, and too grateful
to disobey my father.

SONG.
Woman should be wisely kind,
Nor give her passion scope;
Just reveal her inclination,
Never wed without probation,
Nor in the lover's mind,
Blight the sweet blossom, hope.
Youth and beauty kindle love,
Sighs and vows will fan the fire;
Sighs and vows may traitors prove,
Sorrow then succeeds desire;
Honor, faith, and well-earn'd fame,
Feed the sacred lasting flame!

FLORIDOR. You shall have the proofs from me you desire, and in return, I will
exact but one from you.


CAMILLA. If in my power, you shall command it.


FLORIDOR. Never see that cursed magician, Nigromant, more.


CAMILLA. Do you keep him from me then; how can I avoid him; he is crafty and
powerful; should I enrage him, he would destroy our happiness for ever.


FLORIDOR. You have Spells to protect us.


CAMILLA. You have Valor to protect us; -- it is you Floridor must deliver me
from him; valor, constancy, and honor, may subdue all evil spirits, and it is
by them alone, you can only reach the summit of your wishes.


FLORIDOR. Then I will prepare for the trial.

SONG.
It Is Beauty commands me, my heart must obey;
It Is Honor that calls me, and Fame leads the way!
From nhe soft silken fetters of Pleasure I fly,
With my love I must live, or with honor, will die.
I wake from my trance,
Bring the sword, shield, and lance,
My name shall be famous in story;
Now danger has charms,
For love sounds to arms,
And love is my passion and glory!
(going)
CAMILLA. Stay Floridor! I have something yet to do.


[Exit Camilla. FLORIDOR. (amazed!) What can this mean? -- What now trial for a
heart, so devoted to the object of its passion, that every trifling
circumstance hurries the spirits to it, as if alarmed by approaching danger!


Re-enter CAMILLA, (with a wreath of flowers.) SONG.
O take this wreath my hand has wove,
The pledge and emblem of my love;
These flowers will keep their brightest hue,
Whilst you are constant, kind, and true.
But should you, false to love and me,
Wish from my fondness to be free,
Foreboding that my fate is nigh,
Each grateful flower will droop and die!

End of the first Part.
PART II.
SCENE I. Bonoro's Cell, with Prisons round it.
CHORUS of EVIL SPIRITS, from the Prisons. MIGHTY master, hear our sighs!
Let thy slaves be free!
With folded hands and lifted eyes
We call to thee!
O end the strife!
You grant us life;
Grant us still more -- sweet liberty

BONORO. Wretched, base and blind,
Evil spirits peace!
Your clamours cease;
By guilt confined,
In vain the mind,
Pants for freedom's happy hour;
In pity to your pains,
I loosed your chains,
But circumscribed your power,
In pity to mankind.

BONORO. What can be the meaning my son is not yet arrived? Love is his master
now, and his father must wait, 'till superior commands are obeyed. Tycho! --
Tycho!


Enter TYCHO. TYCHO. Here am I!


BONORO. Where is my son Floridor?


TYCHO. Where I left him -- at the old place.


BONORO. With Camilla?


TYCHO. To be sure!


BONORO. Did you tell him I wanted him.


TYCHO. I did.


BONORO. What said he?


TYCHO. That he would say but three words and follow me. I heard him say a
hundred, and sing a thousand: Lovers are bad arithmeticians.


BONORO. Why did not you return sooner?


TYCHO. I waited for him, to be sure.


BONORO. Have a care, Tycho -- I will sooner forgive your weakness, than your
falsehood -- tell me the truth; Robinette detained you.


TYCHO. I was a little love bound, I must confess.


BONORO. Confess the truth always, nor ever be ashamed of the most natural, if
not the noblest passion.


TYCHO. I am half dead with it, I Am sure. ( sighing.) But I must never be
melancholy again, and that it is that makes me so merry: He! he! he! --
Heigh-ho!

(sighing.
BONORO. Let no passion raise your mind beyond its proper bounds, I knew of
your foolish intentions -- Such actions are the effects either of vice,
cowardice, or poor paltry, mistaken philosophy.


TYCHO. You need not throw away your lessons upon me -- I am in spirits now,
and always a laughing. He! he! he!


BONORO. That may be as foolish the other way; silly minds have have no medium.


TYCHO. There Is no pleasing some folks; full, or fasting.


BONORO. I pity your weakness, and am a friend to your honest simplicity.


TYCHO. I wish you would give me some love powder for Robinette.


BONORO. She is forward enough without it -- If her blood rises above
temperate, you may repent the experiment. -- Here Is my son -- leave us.


TYCHO. With all my heart -- I Will go write to Robinette.

Enter FLORIDOR. I wish you had made a little more haste with your three words.

(aside to Floridor and exit.
BONORO. No excuses for your delay, son -- Your mistress detained you, and your
father ought to wait.


FLORIDOR. I am ashamed of my neglect.


BONORO. I excuse it -- I know the noble resolutions you have made, which have
more than half performed my commands. Camilla is an honor to her sex; deserve
her, son, by your virtues, and my blessing shall attend your union.


FLORIDOR, (kneeling.) Thus let me show my thanks, duty, gratitude and love.

(kissing his hand.)
BONORO. Rise Son, and attend to me -- foam uncommon act of valor is expected
from you. -- Before I obtained your mother's hand, I conquered, and imprisoned
thief evil spirits, ( pointing to the Dens) who molested the world in various
characters: You are now upon your trial -- What can so strongly demand your
valor, as the destruction at once of your rival Nigromant, and the leader of
these evil spirits?


FLORIDOR. Nothing -- may I prove myself the son of such a father!


BONORO. Valor is best attended by faithfulness and simplicity; Tycho shall be
your 'squire -- I will myself with the proper ceremony dip the shield and fword
in the lake of vapors. -- But these incantations will not do alone -- Valor,
Constancy, and Honor, must render all my charms effectual.

AIR VII.
Though strong your nerves to poise the spear,
Or raise the massy shield;
Though swift as lightning through the air,
The sword of death you wield;
It Is from the heart, the power must flow,
To conquer, and forgive the foe.
Though edged by spells, and magic charms,
Your sword may reap renown;
It Is honor consecrates your arms,
And gives the laurel crown!
It Is from the heart, the power must flow,
To conquer, and forgive the foe.

FLORIDOR. As I feel your lessons, it is the best earnest of my executing them
-- but Sir! Father! I find you are informed that I am enjoined by Camilla to
give proofs --


BONORO. I am -- Her father the good Bianco was my friend; his power now
possessed by his daughter* was a limited one; he was oppressed at the end of
his life by the superior arts of the wicked Nigromant, for refusing him her
hand -- New what object can at once so warmly bring forth the proofs required
of you, as so formidable a rival, and detested a monster!


FLORIDOR. My heart pants for the contest!


BONORO. If you conquer, my son, you gain glory and Camilla; if you are
vanquished -- come to my arms -- ( Embraces him) I shall have that melancholy
consolation that you gave the best proofs of your virtues.


FLORIDOR. Your words melt me, and exalt me above myself!


BONORO. I must away to the lake with the sword and shield --


FLORIDOR. Shall I attend you, Sir?


BONORO. No, I must be alone -- Now mark me, son; stay you here, and in my
absence be a guardian of these evil spirits; this wand, should they be riotous,
or endeavor to tear off the talismans from their dens, will defeat their
projects --

[Gives him the wand. To secure your wand, sleep must not close your eyes 'till
my return -- a drowsy watchman is the robber's best friend -- evil spirits have
power only over thoughtless, lazy minds:


Exit Bonoro. FLORIDOR. SONG.
Though honor loudly strikes my ear,
The softer notes of love prevailing,
Every sense assailing,
Swell with hope, or sink with fear!
Who for the goal of glory start,
To love, as honor true,
Would never forbid this trembling heart,
To sigh a last adieu!
I go -- my faith and truth to prove,
Valor never was foe to love;
I will, I must obey the call,
Love's triumphant over all!

FLORIDOR. Tycho!


Enter TYCHO. TYCHO. Here am I.


FLORIDOR. Approach, my 'Squire.


TYCHO. Your father has told me of my advancement, and if a man of honor may
be said to know himself, I will venture to say, that you are not very
unfortunate in a 'Squire.


FLORIDOR. I am convinced of it -- and the first duty I shall put you upon, is
to guard these evil spirits in my absence -- I shall return directly, but I
must see Camilla again --


TYCHO. To speak three words more --


FLORIDOR. I have something to say to her, which unsaid would damp the glory of
any action I might atchieve, and which when said, will lighten, and strengthen
my heart for any adventure.


TYCHO. The moment your father has pardoned one fault, you commit another --
you keep his good nature in fine exercise.


FLORIDOR. I will never again give him the least cause of complaint -- I must
speak with Camilla, and directly,


TYCHO. I have three words too for Robinetta --


FLORIDOR. Don't be a fool, but mind what I say to you.


TYCHO. A Knight may plunge over head and ears, while the poor 'Squire must not
wet his feet.


FLORIDOR. No talking but mark me -- should these evil spirits dare to be
turbulent, this wand will control them -- one caution above all is not to
sleep upon any pretense whatsoever; should the wand drop from your hand, we are
unundone! -- be wise, active, and vigilant!


[Exit Floridor. TYCHO. The young sinner preaches well -- I am forbid talking,
and sleeping, I wonder he did not add eating and drinking too! it is very hard
that I may not take one look at Robinette; I am flesh and blood as well as he
-- am as personable as he -- as jealous as he -- have as fine passions, and am
as much beloved as he -- To divert my melancholy, I will show myself fit for my
office, (it is not every fool in office can do that) and examine these
culprits, sinners, and evil spirits -- I will not get too near 'em though for
fear of their laying a claw upon me -- ( he speaks loud, and with an affected
air) Who are you in this lob's pound here? --


First SPIRIT. Save you, sweet Signior!


TYCHO. Well, well, none of your parlaver -- answer my questions directly, and
keep your paws in your den. -- ( raps his knuckles) What are you?


JESUIT. I am a Jesuit.


TYCHO. The devil you are! -- and how came you here?


JESUIT. Having some cardinal virtues, and making larger strides then they said
became me, they have laid me by the heels, and it is impossible for me to do
any good here.


TYCHO. No, nor any where else -- so draw in your beak, cormorant -- And who
are you with your sharp looks and your claws?


ATTORNEY. I am an Attorney, at your service.


TYCHO. Not at mine, I beg of you -- are you in for your virtues too?


ATTORNEY. A little mistake in practice only.


TYCHO. Then for fear of more mistakes, you shall stay where you are, Mr.
Attorney.


POET. Signior Tycho! -- I beg your ears a moment.


TYCHO. What have you lost your own?


POET. I am a poetical spirit, and here is a satire upon your neighbors, and a
panegrick upon yourself.


TYCHO. I Will touch nothing that belongs to you -- I love my neighbors, and I
hate abuse -- so keep in your fingers, ( strikes them). But who are you that
swell and look so big?


STATESMAN. I am a political spirit, I had a soul of fire, that overleap'd all
laws and considerations -- I was a statesman!


TYCHO. It was time to cool you a little, and spoil your leaping, by keeping
your soul under lock and key -- Who are you, friend? -- and what are those
rattles in your hand?


GAMESTER. A box and dice to divert us in our retirement.


TYCHO. Gamesters, I suppose -- pray, gentlemen, what brought you here?


GAMESTER. We lost good fortunes, by keeping bad company, and to retrieve a
little --


TYCHO. Became bad company yourselves.


GAMESTER. We did take an advantage, I must confess.


TYCHO. So they took an advantage of you, and put you where you are -- I wish
all your family was with you, brothers, sisters, and all!


ACTRESS. Turn your eyes this way, beautiful Sir, and look upon me with an eye
of pity.


TYCHO. O, the females have found me out at last! What are you, a hen Jesuit?


ACTRESS. I was an actress some months ago.


TYCHO. An actress! what spirit's that?


ACTRESS. A spirit to entertain the public, but quitting that for private
practice --


TYCHO. As you like private practcie, I wish you joy of your situation.


ACTRESS. If you would permit me to come forth, and approach you, I would amuse
you with my history.


TYCHO. Many thanks, fair lady; but as I know nothing of acting, we are both
much better as we are. -- Pray who are you, licking your lips, and with your
mouth open?


GLUTTON. I am a luxurious spirit; I loved eating and drinking a little too
much.


TYCHO. O, a city spirit! I hope, friend, there is no great sin in a little
eating and drinking?


GLUTTON. If I was out, good Sir, I would place such savoury dainty dishes
before you!


TYCHO. Hold your tongue, Sirrah; no bribery and corruption! He sets my mouth a
watering already -- this fellow shall be my cook, if I should ever get a good
government.


WOMAN of QUALITY. Turn to me, Signior; I have a right to be heard first.


TYCHO. Then don't lose your right, I beg you -- Who are you, Madam?


WOMAN of QUALITY. A spirit of quality!


TYCHO. And what are you in there for, Madam?


WOMAN of QUALITY. For being a woman of quality.


TYCHO. A woman of bad qualities you mean -- Eye upon you! who ever heard of a
bad woman of quality? this is scandalum magnatum horrendissimum! You are a foul
weed, and ought to be plucked out from the fair garden of nobility! I wish
Robinetta had heard me say that.

(aside.) [A voice is heard accompanied with a guitar] What have you singers
and musicians among you?


ACTRESS. O yes, and dancers, actors, authors, and managers too: We could
entertain you, sweet Sir, if we were at liberty.


TYCHO. No, no, you will sing better in your cage, my pretty birds: Come let me
hear you: (He sits down.) Whistle away -- This is almost more than flesh and
blood can bear: Such sweet looking spirits sure could never hurt one. (aside.)
Come, come, whistle away, my sweet canary birds.


DUETTE.
O hear me kind, and gentle swain,
Let love's sweet voice delight you;
The ear of youth, should drink each strain,
When beauty's lips invite you:
As love and valor warm your heart,
And faith and honor guard you;
From wounded breasts extract the dart,
And beauty will reward you:
Our tear-stain'd eyes, their wish disclose,
Can cruel you refuse 'em?
O wipe the dew from of the rose,
And place it in your bosom.
[As they are singing, Tycho by degrees falls asleep. TYCHO. (half asleep.)
This is melting indeed! Bravo! bravo! Softly my angel; not so loud, I beseech
you -- Sweet Robinetta! encore! encore! sing again, or I Will -- As love and
valor, (sings in his sleep) and beauty's lips. Toll, lol, lal, lal! --
Robinetta -- obinetta -- binetta -- netta -- etta -- ta -- a --


(Falls asleep and drops his wand; upon which, it thunders; the dens burst
open, and various evil spirits of both sexes enter promiscuously, and riotously
express their joy.) CHORUS of EVIL SPIRITS. It Is done! it is done! it is done!
We break the galling chain!
We fly, we sink, and run,
From tyranny,
To liberty!
To liberty -- again!
Revel, riot, dance and play,
Folly sleeps, and Vice keeps holiday!

End of the Second Part.
PART III.
SCENE, Camilla's magnificent Garden.
Enter CAMILLA and FLORIDOR. CAMILLA. WHY would you distress me thus, and
doubly wound me by this rash action? Your father will be incensed at your
disobedience, and hate me as the cause of it; Tycho may be worked upon by the
evil spirits, and undo (...) my heart forebodes too --.


FLORIDOR. Can your heart be mine, and conceive any doubts of me!


CAMILLA. Why should I imagine that I have charms powerful enough to fix you
mine for ever -- change of place may occasion change of sentiment, new objects
may erase former impressions.


FLORIDOR. Indulge not these false alarms; thou art queen of my heart, and
shall reign there for ever, and alone.


CAMILLA. My fancy teems with a thousand apprehensions, all my senses are in
disorder! I heard, or thought I heart strange noises in the air; even now my
eyes are deceived, or this garden, the trees, the flowers, the heavens change
their colors to my sight, and seem to say something mysterious, which is not
in my heart to expound.


[The objects in the garden vary their colors.] FLORIDOR. These are the
phantoms of love and fear.


CAMILLA. O, Floridor! you have taught me love, and love has taught me fear.


DIALOGUE SONG.
SHE. Look round the earth, nor think it strange
To doubt of you, when all things change;
The branching tree, the blooming flower,
Their form, and hue, change every hour;
While all around such change I see,
Alas! my heart must fear for thee!

HE. Blighted and chilled by cruel frost,
Their vigor droops, their beauty's lost;
My cheek may fade by your disdain,
To change my heart, all power is vain;
Look round the earth, the flower and tree
To nature's true as I to thee.

SHE. These two verses are omitted in the representation.
Look up to heaven -- nor think it strange,
To doubt of you, when all things change,
Sun, moon, and stars, those forms so bright,
Are changing ever to the sight!
While, in the heavens, such change I see,
Alas! my heart must fear for thee.

HE. Clouded or bright, the moon and sun,
Are constant to the course they run;
So gay, or sad, my heart as true,
Rises and sets, to love and you:
Look in the heavens, each star you see,
True to its orb, as I to thee.



Enter BONORO hastily. [He stops short, and looks steadfastly upon Floridor, who
starts confounded; while Camilla appears distressed.] BONORO. (after a pause.)
Well you may start and be confounded, son!


CAMILLA. (kneeling.) I am the cause of his disobedience -- let me be punished.


BONORO. Rise, excellent woman! ( raises her.) Your virtues are the best
excuses for his disobedience, which will become its own punishment -- his
labors are trebled by it!


FLORIDOR. My father!


BONORO. Tycho has been overcome by the evil spirits -- they have broken their
chains, and fled to your rival and enemy, Nigromant -- mischief is abroad!


CAMILLA. Then I am wretched indeed!


FLORIDOR. Doubt not of my valor, or my love; -- Increase of danger makes me
more worthy of Camilla.


BONORO. Your spirit charms me, and disarms my anger -- I have disenchanted
from sleep, and forgiven the poor penitent 'Squire; his was an error of
judgment; yours of passion; but it is past and forgot. Tycho waits for you,
with your sword and shield, in the grove by the enchanted lake -- Begone!
remember the words of this divine oracle; may Valor, Constancy, and Honor
guide you -- let no pleasures entice you -- no terrors daunt you -- when once
you see him, never lose sight of your foe; follow him where ever he leads you;
the greatest dangers are only the rugged paths which will lead you to renown,
in the arms of innocence and beauty.

(pointing to Camilla.
TRIO.
BONORO. May heaven's blessing blend with mine!
To crown thy deeds at virtue's shrine,
Be love's best gift, Camilla, thine.

CAMILLA. May every sigh that is heaved by me,
And every wish that is breathed for thee,
Be prosperous gales on fortune's sea.

FLORIDOR. O when my bark the tempest over,
With pilot love, shall gain this shore,
Ambition cannot ask for more!

TRIO. Of every blessing love's the source
Valor but an empty name,
A roving wild, destructive flame,
Till love and justice guide its course,
And then it mounts to fame!

Exeunt.

Enter ROBINETTE. ROBINETTE. So, so, all matters are made up again; and the
confusion, which my poor, simple, melancholy lover, Tycho, occasioned, is all
kindly settled by the benevolence of Bonoro -- I could not help listening to
his fine sayings, not out of curiosity, but it really does one's heart good to
hear a fine preacher of morality, and which is wonderful, see him practice it
too. But the lovers, I see, ( looking out.) are taking their last leave -- the
good man can scarce part them -- their lips are glew'd together -- they will
never be got asunder! -- it makes both my eyes and my mouth water -- I Will look
at 'em no more.

SONG.
Through all our hearts philosophers have taught,
A subtle vapor flies,
Warmed in the veins, it kindles quick as thought,
And sparkles in the eyes.
Be warned, ye fair, and retire,
Fly far from the flash,
You Will repent if you're rash,
O never play with fire!
If a youth comes, with a grace and a song,
Like Phoebus decked in rays,
Then to your heart the fiery atoms throng
And set it in a blaze.
Be warned, ye fair, etc.
But should the youth come, with honor and truth,
Fly not your lover's rays,
His heart in a flame, let yours be the same,
And ma^e a mutual blaze!
From him we need not retire,
When such can be found,
We may stand our ground,
O then we may play with fire.
I don't know what is the matter with me to day, I am full of mischief I believe
-- I am afraid these evil spirits that are got abroad again are a little busy
with me -- it cannot be the loss of Tycho sure that affects me -- I don't love
him so well as that neither -- no matter what it is -- why don't my loving
cousin come back? -- O this love! this love! she cannot leave her dying swain.
-- Why should not I go after mine too? though I am not dying for him, he is for
me -- I Will go toward Bonoro's cell, I Am resolved -- as I have less passion, I
shall appear more generous by looking after my lover in his present situation.
-- I never knew 'till this moment that I was half so good a creature as I
really am.


[Exit Rob.] SCENE, the Outside of BONORO's Cell.
Enter CAMILLA. CAMILLA. Farewell, O farewell! my Floridor! Thou see, but
can not hear with what reluctance I am separated from thee! -- He too with
unwilling steps moves slow along, and turns his head this way, to show that
duty, and inclination, cannot yet be reconciled -- now he stands still, and
with his eyes, and one hand raised to Heaven, pressing his bosom with the
other, he seems to swear eternal love! -- I will ratify that vow, and make it
mutual -- now he seems distressed, and hurries down the hill, and now he is
gone! -- and now -- I Am wretched! -- heigh ho!


Enter ROBINETTE. ROBINETTE. Heigh ho! why he will come again, cousin, depend
upon it.


CAMILLA. May I depend upon his coming again as he goes away, constant and
faithful; his father warned him to let no pleasure entice him -- is not that
alarming?


ROBINETTE. What is it your turn to be jealous?


CAMILLA. Can one love much, and not be jealous a little?


ROBINETTE. Can you be long in doubt, and have supernatural powers to assist
you? --


CAMILLA. The passions of Love counteracts all operations of magic, and levels
us with the weakest -- we can try gold, but we cannot make it -- it is concealed
by nature from the wisest of us.


ROBINETTE. Make a trial of his affections then, by assuming a form, if
possible, handsomer than your own.


CAMILLA. That is not in my power, I can assume a form less agreeable, if
possible, than my own, and with that, and some other circumstance, I am now
going upon the trial.


ROBINETTE. I will attend you.


CAMILLA. No, I shall dispense with your company for some time, I leave you
mistress of my garden, and my castle; see whom you please, and do what you
please; make yourself happy, while I perhaps am seeking to be miserable

(sighs) SONG.
O how weak will power and reason,
To this bosom tyrant prove,
Every act is fancied treason,
By the jealous sovereign Love.
Passion urged the youth to danger,
Passion calls him back again;
Passion is to peace a stranger,
Seek I must my bliss or bane.
So the feaver'd minds that languish,
And in scorching torments rave;
Thus to end or ease their anguish,
Headlong plunge into the wave.

[Exit Camilla] ROBINETTE. Poor creature! -- I would not have her cares for all
her magic, and her grandeur -- mirth has got such possession of my heart, that
I defy all the handsome fellows in the world to take more of it, than I please
to give them. I have two lovers, which I keep as two Monkies to divert me; I
make 'em play me a thousand tricks, can change the very nature of 'em -- if
they grow mischievous, I punish 'em -- if all monkies were served so, there
would be less impertinence in the world -- but mum -- one of 'em (...) here --
this is too old, and too lively, I must make hi^ melancholy or turn him off.


Enter FALADEL. FALADEL. Signora Robinette -- I have followed you to say half a
dozen kind words to you, and vanish; he! he! he! -- by my faith and wand, I
will not encroach upon you!


ROBINETTE. By my faith and fardingale, you may vanish before you have said the
kind words to me if you please! he! he! he! [ mimicks him] well what do you
follow me for? --


FALADEL. I could not help it -- I knew where you was going, I followed you,
and the following little ode came along with me, and is at your service.

ODE.
Alack-a-day!
You would not stay,
I followed gay,
Like faithful Tray,
With you to play,
Or here to stay,
At feet to lay;
For by my fay,
I will obey,
Whatever you say,
By night or day,
Whilst I am clay,
For ever ay,
Take pity -- pray --

ROBINETTE. Upon my word that is very pretty and very moving.


FALADEL. Indeed and alack-a-day, I shall certainly die soon, if you don't cure
me with kindness, he! he! he! I shall indeed for ever and for aye -- he! he! --


ROBINETTE. What is your disorder, pray?


FALADEL. Alack-a-day! I Am troubled with the Tycho -- Signora Robinette, do you
understand me? he! he! by my faith I am! --


ROBINETTE. Jealousy I protest -- and of poor Tycho --


FALADEL. Poor or rich -- I am troubled with the Tycho, and I must either take
steel myself, or make my rival take it -- do you understand me? he! he! he! (
claps his hand upon his sword) it is a serious matter I do assure you -- he!
he! he! there must be blood shed -- he! he! he! by my faith and wand, there
must i


ROBINETTE. I wish you would make it a serious matter, and not be grinning so,
to spoil one of the handsomest faces in the Island.


FALADEL. Alack-a-day! I cannot help laughing for the life of me, I was born so
-- though I Am unhappy all the while to desperation, he! he! he! by my faith and
wand I am!


ROBINETTE. By my faith too, my heart shall never be a prize for the best
grinner; you must show your love to me, by wearing a face of desperation,
indeed.


FALADEL. What kind of face is that?


ROBINETTE. Thus -- your eyes thus -- looking about as it were thus -- or thus
--

(she puts on different faces)
FALADEL. Looking about for what? -- my sweet cruel queen of hearts! he! he! he!


ROBINETTE. For a tree, or a canal to be sure, to put an end to your despair.


FALADEL. To dangle, or float upon! -- I understand you -- he! he! he! -- by my
faith I Will hit your taste, or die for it -- will this do? or this, or this --
he! he! he!

This song is omitted since the first night.
SONG.
By my faith and wand,
Gracing now my hand,
I Am at your command,
For ever and for aye.
Heart within my breast,
Never shall have rest,
'Till of yours possessed;
Heigh ho! -- alack-a-day!
Do you want a Knight?
Ready, brisk, and tight,
Foes and fiends to fight,
For ever and for aye!
If you want a (...)
Whom you will not save,
Send me to my grave,
I Am (...) alack-a-day!
I Will stand by my song for ever and aye.


ROBINETTE. You're at your grinning again.


FALADEL. Alack-a-day! and so I am -- I cannot stop it -- my features run away
with me -- but I Will go and practice a little by myself -- and return again
directly, quite a new creature -- by my faith I will!


[Exit. ROBINETTE. Ha! ha! ha! if every woman before marriage, would but train
up her lovers to her inclination, as she does her birds or her dogs, we never
should have an unhappy marriage; to be too much in love, and to give men their
way, spoils every thing -- But what have we here? my lover, Tycho, and prepared
for battle! -- like master, like man; he comes to take his last adieu -- He
seems very sad and thoughtful; but he sees me, and brightens up into unnatural
smiles -- Ah, Signior Cavaleiro Tycho!


Enter TYCHO. (armed as Floridor's 'Squire.) TYCHO. Here am I! as merry as my
situation will permit me -- I have leave to kiss your fair hand and away. Though
I am made a 'Squire, I have had sad luck since I saw you, ( looking grave, but
recollecting himself.) But it is all over, and I don't mind it now, he! he! he!


ROBINETTE. If I had not taught you to laugh at misfortunes, your last
adventure, with the evil spirits, would have broke your heart.


TYCHO. There was the devil to do! I have not recovered my fright yet, I am
sure, though I put a good face upon it, he! he! he!


ROBINETTE. Sad work indeed! but how was it?


TYCHO. Two she devils throw'd me into a trance, and as I could not help myself
in my sleep, they helped themselves out of their prisons, and left me to pay
the reckoning.


ROBINETTE. And a long one it was.


TYCHO. It was indeed! but our kind old gentleman, gave me a four look, a long
speech, pitied my weakness, and forgave me -- it is a good old soul!


ROBINETTE. Sad work indeed, Tycho!


TYCHO. It was horrible, horrible, and most horrible! He! he! he!


ROBINETTE. But how was it?


TYCHO. You must know I love music vastly, though I don't sing a note -- and two
she angel-devils, sung me so out of my senses, that I fell fast asleep.


ROBINETTE. Ay, ay, your old disorder -- But I am sorry you cannot sing, your
rival, Faladel, who was here just now, sings very prettily.


TYCHO. Yes, he may sing; but he cannot write as I can -- I have wrote a song
upon you; and who knows but you may teach me to sing, as you have taught me to
laugh, he! he! he!

(Endeavors to sing.
ROBINETTE. O pray let us hear it.


TYCHO. (sings.) Sweet Robinette,
Your eyes are jet.
Your eyes are gray, but no matter for that, poets may suppose any thing.

Sweet Robinette,
Your eyes are jet,
And teeth are lily white --
You have a fine set of teeth, and if you had not, I was resolved to give 'em
to you -- I don't love by halves.

Your cheeks are roses,
Lips are posies,
And your nose is --
Wondrous bright!
Let my rival do that if he can -- I wrote it, and set it myself.


ROBINETTE. I don't doubt it -- But, Tycho, I don't know if a bright nose, is
any compliment.


TYCHO. Why not? -- You must have something bright about you: -- but I don't
want for words -- you may alter it to wondrous right -- or white -- or light
-- or tight -- a tight nose, is no bad thing as times go; he! he! he! -- Here
comes my rival; shall I hansel my maiden sword, and lay him dead at your feet?


ROBINETTE. By no means -- Kill him with jealousy! -- See how melancholy he is;
he has lost all his spirit.


TYCHO. And I have got it; he! he! he! -- What a dismal piece of mortality it
is: I am quite ashamed now that ever I wore such a face as his.

(aside to Rob.
ROBINETTE. Now for a curious scene!


Enter FALADEL. FALADEL. I hope I have conquered my foolish nature, Robinette
internally, and externally for ever and aye. But there my rival, ( seeing
Tycho.) shall I sacrifice him to you beauty and my passion?

(claps his hand to his sword*
ROBINETTE. O, by no means! draw your wit upon him; cut him up with that!

(aside to Fall.
FALADEL. You command me. What a simple fellow it is, grinning like an idiot,
without ideas?


ROBINETTE. Did not I tell you so? A smirking face gives me the heart-burn.

(aside to Fall.
TYCHO. What a poor melancholy fool it is -- he has done for himself I see.
Look at old miserable, Robinette; he! he! he!

(aside to Rob. and grinning.
ROBINETTE. What a figure from top to toe! -- Attack him, Tycho.

(aside to Tycho.
TYCHO. Your servant, Signior Faladel. -- I am sorry for your misfortune; he!
he! he!


FALADEL. What misfortune, pray Mr. Merry Andrew?


ROBINETTE. Attack his grinning, Faladel. ( aside to Fall.) Attack his
melancholy, Tycho.

(aside to Tycho.
TYCHO. I verily thought, Don Faladel, that you had put your face into mourning
for some family misfortune; ha! ha! ha!


FALADEL. How can I help being melancholy, when I see how contemptible your
grinning has made you? what a superlative happiness! I would laugh now if I
durst.

(begins to laugh and stops.
ROBINETTE. As you are both my friends, and one of you something more --


TYCHO. A great deal more, I believe.

(aside.
FALADEL. I thought so, poor soul!

(aside.
ROBINETTE. Pray let me introduce you to know each other better --


TYCHO. I have no objection; he! he! ho!


FALADEL. I can have none to your commands.


ROBINETTE. Take hands then -- You must not be rivals, (for I can but love one
of you) and therefore be friends.


[Each of 'em winks at Robinette, which she returns as they are taking hands.]
FALADEL. What a fool she makes of the poor man!

(aside.
TYCHO. How she shows Dismal of!

(aside.
ROBINETTE. Thank you, gentlemen -- I need not say which is my choice.


BOTH. No, no.

(both nodding at her.
FALADEL. It is too plain.


TYCHO. Half an eye may see it.


ROBINETTE. I must, therefore, now take my leave; first of you, Signior Tycho
-- Distressed damsels, imprisoned Knights, and various adventures attend you --
Don't be jealous, Signior Faladel, if I conduct this redoubted and magnanimous
'Squire a little on his way.


FALADEL. Not in the least! -- How she jeers him.

(aside.
ROBINETTE. Come, Don Tycho, the sword is drawn, the lance is couched, and the
Knight is impatient.


TYCHO. Donna Robinette, my sword is thine, my valor thine, my heart is thine,
my blood is thine, and at my return, my body shall be thine -- Signior
Dismallo, farewell! I wish your body joy of its wooden head. He! he! he!


[Exit laughing with Robinette.] FALADEL. By my says and wand, if I had not
been commanded to the contrary -- I would have divided his body, and spoiled
his grinning -- but she hates and detests him for it, as she adores me for the
contrary.

Omitted in the representation
SONG.
Once as merry as the lark
I mounted to the sky,
But now I Am grown a sober spark,
And like an owl,
The wisest fowl,
Will roll a dismal eye;
For Robinette will have it so,
And what she will shall be,
I therefore take to ho! ho! ho!
And turn off he! he! he!
Once as merry as the kid,
I frisk'd it over the ground,
But since I am to laugh forbid,
An ass I am,
A sheep, a lamb,
Shut up in dismal pound.
For Robinette will have it so,
And what she will shall be,
I therefore take to ho! ho! ho!
And turn off he! he! he!

Enter ROBINETTE. ROBINETTE. Poor foolish fellow, he is gone -- he will be a
breakfast for some giant -- I begin to pity him.


FALADEL. Alack-a-day! he does not know his own weakness, and has such a
contemptible figure that he is below your pity, by my faith he is.


ROBINETTE. I like his spirit, of knight errantry -- it becomes him.


FALADEL. Do you? I have a prodigious quantity of it myself, and by my faith
and wand, say but a word and I will be among the dragons, monsters, giants, and
hobgoblins tomorrow morning.


ROBINETTE. Will not that be depriving Camilla of the most complete
gentleman usher, that ever bore wand.


FALADEL. Alack-a-day! all titles and services shall be given up for that of
being your most humble servant and obedient Knight for ever, and for aye!


ROBINETTE. If you will go -- I shall present you with a scarf -- come on, Sir
Faladel.


DUETTE.
BOTH. O the delight!
To be an errant Knight!

ROB. Over mountain hill and rock,
In rain, and wind, and snow,
All dangers he must mock,
And must with pleasure go.
Quivering, and quaking,
Shivering and shaking,
Dismal nights,
Horrid sprights,
Lions roaring,
Monsters snoring,
Castles tumbling,
Thunder grumbling,

BOTH. O the delight!
To be an errant Knight!

ROB. Damsels squeaking,
Devils shrieking,
Clubs and giants,
Hurl defiance,
Night and day,
Lose the way,
Spirits sinking,
Nothing drinking,
Beat and beating,
Little eating,
Broken bones,
Beds of stones,

BOTH. O the delight!
To be an errant Knight!



End of the Third Part.
PART IV.
SCENE I. A dark Wood.
Enter FLORIDOR, (in great distress.) SONG.
Cruel fiends pursue me!
Torment me, and undo me!
My rising hopes are crossed,
My Sword and Shield are lost!
My breast with valor glowed,
Fame her temple showed,
Friends have interposed,
The gates are ever, ever closed!
Away with despair to the wind,
Nothing daunts the noble mind;
Crowned with these flowers I Will take the field,
My foes with this charm I will face,
Love alone shall supqly the place,
Of helmet, sword, and shield!
What a series of distresses, since they broke their prisons, have these evil
spirits prepared for me! they have conveyed my sword and shield from Tycho,
have by their mischievous arts, disturbed and intoxicated his mind, and all my
fair prospect of renown, and possession of the highest earthly bliss with
Camilla is vanished and gone! -- what can I say to her -- what can I plead to
my father? --


TYCHO. (within) Signior Don Floridor, the lost sheep is found!


FLORIDOR. Here comes again the unhappy intoxicated wretch -- where are you,
Tycho?


Enter TYCHO. (drunk.) TYCHO. Here am I.


FLORIDOR. Heve you recovered my sword and shield?


TYCHO. No -- but I have recovered a better thing -- hic -- my understanding!


FLORIDOR. I wish I could see a proof of it.


TYCHO. I wish you had found yours, and then you would not be in such a
passion.


FLORIDOR. Tycho, collect yourself, and answer a few questions.


TYCHO. Do you have all your senses about you, or I shall be too hard for you.


FLORIDOR. Prith'ee, peace -- in the first place, at what time did you perceive
yourself disordered?


TYCHO. As soon as I found that I had lost my senses.


FLORIDOR. How came you to lose your senses?


TYCHO. As other people do -- by seeing a fine woman.


FLORIDOR. What Robinette?


TYCHO. Much handsomer!


FLORIDOR. What did she do? -- answer quickly.


TYCHO. Don't be in such a passion -- thus it is -- Don Tycho, says she
(looking with such sweetness as I do now) I have long admired you, loved or
adored you -- I forget which.


FLORIDOR. No matter which.


TYCHO. I must be -- hic -- exact -- looking sweetly as I said before -- she
stretched out the whitest arm, with the taperest fingers -- thus -- here Don
Tycho take this -- whenever you find yourself distressed in mind -- taste it
and be yourself again -- she gave it me, sighed, wept much, and took to her
heels -- I had just parted with Robinette, who with tears in her eyes, gave me
this scarf -- I seeing the poor creature so tender hearted about me -- I grew
tender hearted a bout her -- sound myself low spirited, very low spirited --
tapp'd the elixir of life, and was enchanted as you saw me.


FLORIDOR. Drunk you mean -- as I now see you.


TYCHO. No, enchanted.


FLORIDOR. Enchanted!


TYCHO. Yes, I say enchanted -- I speak plain sure, I know what drunkenness is
well enough; here is the enchanted vial!

[shews it.
FLORIDOR. It was an evil spirit that deluded you.


TYCHO. Good or evil spirit, it is gone.

[turns up the vial.
FLORIDOR. It was one of the evil spirits, your folly set at liberty, that met
you, tempted, and over came you -- and the consequences have undone us.


TYCHO. I shall know the traitress again when I see her, but don't fret about
your sword and shield -- you shall have mine, and I Will stand by, if I can, and
see fair play.


FLORIDOR. I shall go distracted with my misfortunes!


TYCHO. Here is the evil spirit! -- hold, hold, if it is, she is vastly altered
since I saw her.


Enter CAMILLA, as an Old Woman. CAMILLA. Hold your peace, you intoxicated
fool, or you will repent your presumption.


TYCHO. I am not intoxicated with your person, Madam Nose and Chin.


FLORIDOR. Cease your ribaldry, Tycho -- forgive his folly, he is not himself,
or he would not have given his tongue such license.


CAMILLA. Young Knight, civility should always be rewarded -- what is the
matter with you? can I be of service?


FLORIDOR. Impossible! impossible! my mind will burst with agony!


TYCHO. (to the old Woman) I know you have a charm for the toothache, and a
spell for the ague -- but can you dischant, or unconjure my brains -- that is,
can you with witch elm, crooked pins, a dry toad, or any of your family
receipts, make me as sensible as I was before --


CAMILLA. Very easily -- drink of the water of yonder brook, plentifully, and
rest yourself upon the bank 'till you are called for, and the vapors of your
brain will disperse, and you will be sober again.


TYCHO. As I Am a little thirsty, and a little sleepy, I Will take your
prescription; and if I was not already over head and ears in love, I would take
you too -- kind old lady, yours -- harkee -- If you are his friend too -- give
the Knight a little advice, and bid him take mine, if he would go through life as
he ought to do.


Exit Tycho, staggering. CAMILLA (to Floridor, who walks about distractedly.)
Vexation, young man, will never find your sword and shield.


FLORIDOR. Tormenting me will never cure my vexation -- why will you torment
me, when you cannot assist me?


CAMILLA. Young Knight, you don't know what I might do with kind usage.


FLORIDOR. Unavailing pity, as it wounds our pride, doubles our distress.


CAMILLA. Passion blinds you, and you cannot see your friends.

SONG.
Young man, young man,
Be this your plan,
Wisdom get wherever you can;
See, see,
The humble be,
Draws wealth, from the meanest of flowers,
Then hies away
With his precious prey,
No passion his prudence sours.
Young man, young man,
Be this your plan,
Wisdom get wherever you can:
Wild youth,
Passion and truth,
So opposite never agree;
Be prudent, sage,
Draw wit from old age,
And be wise as the humble be.
Young man, young man,
Be this your plan,
Wisdom get wherever you can.

FLORIDOR. Pardon me, venerable lady -- you have cooled my heated imagination,
and my folly is a convert to your wisdom.


CAMILLA. I will show my wisdom, by asking before hand what reward you will
give me, to recover your sword and shield.


FLORIDOR. You shall command my services, and every thing in my power.


CAMILLA. Shall I?


FLORIDOR. By my sword, and honor of Knighthood!

SOLEMN AIR.
By my shield and my sword,
By the chaplet that circles my brow,
By a knight's sacred word;
What ever you ask,
How dreadful the task,
To perform it, before heaven I vow!

CAMILLA. Will you as a pledge of our compact, give me those trifling flowers
that are tied round your head?


FLORIDOR. Trifling flowers, and give them to you! -- you should sooner take my
head from my body, or tear my heart from my bosom, than have the smallest bud
of my sweet Camilla's chaplet.


CAMILLA. O love's extravagance! -- I may command every thing in your power,
but what you don't choose to part with.


FLORIDOR. Ask my life, and you shall have it -- this wreath is dearer to me
than my life.


CAMILLA. Well, well, I Will take you at your word.

" Whatever I ask,
" How dreadful the task,
" To perform it before Heaven, you vow.
Behold what charms there are, in a young hero's services!


[She waves her stick, the wood opens, and discovers his sword and shield, hung
upon the stem of a tree. FLORIDOR, (runs and takes them down) How delightful to
my eyes, are these instruments of my fame and glory! -- Now task my service and
my gratitude.


CAMILLA. I am not in haste for my reward -- other cares demand your services
-- I shall call upon you in my turn.


FLORIDOR. To whom am I bound in gratitude for ever?


CAMILLA. Grinnelda is my name.


DUETTE.
Remember, young knight, remember,
Remember the words that I say,
Don't laugh at my age,
Nor scorn at my rage,
For though I have past my May,
I Am not not frozen up in December.
Remember, I will remember,
Remember the words that you say,
I honor your age,
Nor scorn at your rage,
And though you are past your May,
Your heart is still warm in December.
SCENE II. The outside of Bonoro's Cell.
Enter BORONO, (in great distress.) BONORO. My heart is agitated and
distressed! the various accidents which have befallen my son, make me tremble
for his youth and inexperience; I am unhappy and perplexed in spite of
supernatural powers; the feelings of the father rise superior to every thing --
Radel, my spirit, Radel!


Enter RADEL. RADEL. Here my lord and master.


BONORO. Fly to my son with a troop of my spirits that he may not be surrounded
and overcome by the evil ones, in his conflict with Nigromant.


RADEL. With the power and virtue you have given me, I fly to execute your
commands.


BONORO. Be swist as my wishes!

SONG.
No power can calm the storm to rest,
No magic charm the father's breast,
Which beats with doubts and fears:
No more for active scenes I burn,
My power and strength to weakness turn,
My manhood melts to tears!
I will not doubt, -- through stormy skies,
My son shall break his way;
Shall cloudless over his errors rise,
And Fame shall hail the day!

Exit Bonoro. SCENE III. A prospect of rocks.
Enter TYCHO and FLORIDOR. TYCHO. Heaven bless her for it say I! -- you have
got your sword and shield, and I my senses -- we are both beholden to her, and
should both do our best to be grateful: She might certainly have had me, had
not Robinette engaged me before hand. But what strange, fine, tremendous,
diabolical, grand palace have we here?


FLORIDOR. This is the domain of Nigromant -- Tycho, should the demons come
upon you, remember they are but phantoms, and will be dispersed by one gleam of
your sword, as vapors before the sun: If free from guilt, you may defy, and
despise them!


TYCHO. Then I am their man!


FLORIDOR. Here will I plant my laurels, or mix my ashes with the dust.


TYCHO. And I as your 'Squire, wall take a slip of your laurels, or slip into
the next world, as other rash 'Squires have done before me.


FLORIDOR. Should I fall, and you survive, Tycho, take this chaplet to Camilla,
tell her, that my love never yielded, though my body did.


TYCHO. And if your unworthy 'Squire drops, and you survive, (which heaven
forbid) tell Robinette, that Tycho was true to the last -- tell her -- that --
that -- But as I hope I shall be able to carry the message myself, let us to
business, and put our loves in our pockets, 'till we have done fighting.


FLORIDOR. Approach the castle gates, Tycho, and sound the horn of desiance --
Call forth the black magician, the wicked Nigromant, to single combat.


TYCHO. To single combat, you're right -- your commands shall be obeyed.

[Tycho sounds the horn; it thunders, the rocks split and discover the castle
of Nigromant, and the fiery lake.] I have waked his devilship! and blown all
his castle about his ears!


NIGROMANT. (within.) Floridor, son of Bonoro, I come!


FLORIDOR. Nigromant, son of darkness and mischief, I attend thee!


NIGROMANT. (within.) Floridor, son of Bonoro, I abhor thy father's virtues! I
hate thee, and thy race! I call to thee, and defy thee! and thou shall feel my
vengeance.


TYCHO. I don't like the sound of his voice.

(aside to Flor.
FLORIDOR. Come forth, thou foul son of darkness! I have experienced the
mischievous hatred of thee, and thy crew -- Come forth from thy lurking places,
face me like an open foe, and I Will forgive thee!


NIGROMANT. (appears in the fiery lake. Here I am!


TYCHO. This must be the cock-devil of 'em all!


NIGROMANT. SONG.
Stripling, traitor; victim of my rage!
Stripling, traitor; offspring of sedition!
Dare thou with Nigromant engage?
Nothing shall my wrath assuage,
But vengeance and perdition!
Triumphant joy, my bosom swells;
Vain are your magic charms and spells,
Revenge that never could sleep,
Her crimson standard rears,
Here on this fiery flood!
Revenge shall soon her laurels steep,
In the son's blood,
And in the father's tears!

FLORIDOR. Thy terrors, threats, and boasts are vain,
Phantoms of a heated brain;
Let all thy fiends surround thee,
The elements conspire,
Through water, earth and fire,
I Will follow and confound thee!
On the whirlwind if you ride,
Through all your spells I Will break,
Confound your guilt and pride,
And plunge into the fiery lake,
With virtue for my guide!

[It thunders, and Floridor plunges into the fiery lake. TYCHO. A good journey,
good master -- your feathers will be singed at least; and if I had followed
him, I should have been ready roasted for the magician's table.

(a flourish of instruments. Here come the demons! but free from guilt, I defy,
and despise 'em!

Here a DANCE of Demons. [During the dance, as often as the demons approach
Tycho, he claps his hand to his sword, and cries out, I defy you, and despise
you; when they vanish he assumes an important air.] I have done their business!
--

(A rumbling noise is heard in the air. Here is more work for me! -- What have
we hear, a feathered monster?


Enter FALADEL, as a large Owl. TYCHO. Evil spirit approach me not -- If you
will fight as a gentleman ought, and come with a sword by your side, I am your
man -- but I am no match for your beak and claws, therefore keep off!

(retiring.
FALADEL. Hoo! hoo! hoo!

(clapping his wings.
TYCHO. I don't understand you, Mr. Owl.


FALADEL. I am no evil spirit, but your rival, Faladel.


TYCHO. Faladel!


FALADEL. By my faith and my wand I am.


TYCHO. Faladel! ha! ha! ha! and they have made an owl of you, ha! ha! ha! I
knew what your melancholy would come to, ha! ha! ha! but how came you so
altered for the better?


FALADEL. I went a Knight-erranting, by the command of Robinette, and the evil
spirits belonging to this castle would not fight me, but, alack-a-day, changed
me into this shape, to divert the ladies of the Seraglio, for ever and for aye!


TYCHO. And a very comical diverting devil you must be, ha! ha! ha! I would not
have Robinette see you thus, she will like you ten times better than before --
Such creatures as you in your human shapes, (if they may be called so) are
neither fish, flesh, or fowl; but now you are something -- you look wise at
least, have a handsomer face, a finer shape, and a much better pair of legs,
ha! ha! ha!


FALADEL. What, you have not left off your grinning I see, though Robinette hates
it so --


Enter MESSENGER, (hastily.) MESSENGER. Are you Don Tycho, 'Squire to the
victorious and magnanimous Floridor, son of Bonoro?


TYCHO. And is he victorious?


MESSENGER. He has conquered and bound Nigromant, and by the assistance of his
father's good spirits, all the evil ones are in chains.


FALADEL. Hoo! hoo! hoo!


MESSENGER. The conqueror has called for his 'Squire to attend his triumphal
entry into the palace and seraglio!


TYCHO. My heart is with him already, and the rest of my body shall follow as
soon as my legs will permit it.


MESSENGER. I fly to let him know it.


[Exit Messenger. FALADEL. Hoo! hoo! hoo!


TYCHO. What makes you so merry?


FALADEL. One touch of the sword, that has vanquished Nigromant will restore me
-- be a generous rival, and present me to him.


TYCHO. Upon my soul you had better take my advice and stay as you are -- but
if you will be restored again from your being something to your former
nothingness, I will present you to him; give me a tip of your wing, and I Will
hand you to your restoration -- come along.


FALADEL. Hoo! hoo! hoo!


[He claps his wings with joy, and Tycho leads him off.] SCENE IV. The Castle
Gates.
The triumphal entry of FLORIDOR, To martial music, With NIGROMANT and EVIL
SPIRITS in chains. Then enter TYCHO, attended with the female Evil Spirits.
TYCHO. Come along -- come along -- you are once more in my clutches, and I Will
take care that you shall never catch me napping again.


Second WOMAN. Magnanimous don Tycho!


TYCHO. O you couple of she devils -- with your sweet lullabys -- it was your
string-tickling, and quavering, that undid me! -- none of your hypocritical
side-looks at me ( they offer to play) dare not to touch those deluding
strings, that poison to the ears of honest men, or I shall forget your sex, and
drag you at my chariot wheels --


BOTH. Have pity upon us, most gracious 'Squire!


TYCHO. I will not be gracious -- I have no pity -- and I will be a severe,
though upright judge -- foul as you are, you shall have a fair trial, and be
assured (for all your ogling and smiling) that I shall find better employment
for your fingers than tinkling men of virtue asleep, that hell may break loose,
and the devils have a holiday.


Third WOMAN. I have a petition to deliver.


TYCHO. Justice is blind and cannot read it -- when I am a governor, all my
judges shall be without eyes, ears, hands, or pockets; no eyes to read
petitions, no ears to hear 'em, no hands to take bribes, and no pockets to hold
them. -- I am an upright judge myself who will not be bribed, and what is still
more wonderful, am not worth a doit: -- silence ye fiends!

Say not a word -- I Have said, and said, is done:
Stop all your tongues, and let the court go on.

Exeunt. End of the fourth Part.
PART V.
SCENE, I.
A grand Apartment in the SERAGLIO. EUNUCHS enter singing the following CHORUS.
TOUCH the thrilling notes of pleasure,
Let the softest, melting measure,
Calm the conqu'ror's mind;
Let myrtle be with laurel 'twin'd,
Beauty with each smiling grace,
The sparkling eye, and speaking face,
Attended by the laughing loves
Around the hero play;
The toil, and danger, valor proves,
Love and beauty, will repay.

Enter FLORIDOR and TYCHO. TYCHO. What a fine refreshment this is after the
hard labor of fighting and trying causes?


FLORIDOR. Tycho! -- has Faladel received the benefit he expected, from the
touch of my sword?


TYCHO. It was wonderfully efficacious! he moulted so fast, that though he made
all the haste he could to his apartment, he left as many feathers in the way,
as if he had been plucked for the spit -- the moment he is picked clean from
the owl, he will resume the monkey again, and appear before your honor, to
pick a quarrel with me; the old bone of contention, Robinette.


FLORIDOR. We shall cool his courage -- bring before us the unhappy beauties,
who have been forced away, and confined for the tyrant's pleasures.


TYCHO, (goes to the door and calls.) Open the female apartments, and let their
treasures be poured down at the feet of the conqueror. -- Those that belong to
the 'Squire, I shall visit privately, and dispose off by private contract --


(The chorus is sung again, during which, many women of the Seraglio, enter
veild, and at last Camilla (who is in chains) and Robinette: They throw up
their veils. FLORIDOR, (flarting) Earth and heaven! Camilla!


TYCHO. Hell and the devil! Robinette!


FLORIDOR. All my laurels are blasted!


TYCHO. Mine are in a sad pickle too!


CAMILLA. [running to Floridor] My life, my love, my Floridor! all my sorrows
vanish in these arms! [ as she runs to Floridor, he turns away] What cold, and
regardless of me?


FLORIDOR. Can I see you here, in the Seraglio of Nigromant, and not have cause
to lament, in the 'midst of my triumph?


CAMILLA. Can you see me here, and in chains, and not find cause for a greater
triumph than that which you have gained! unjust and ungrateful Floridor! -- we
were seized upon by the magician, conveyed here to be the slaves of his
pleasure; but my heart was engaged, my mind was free, I resisted his passion,
scorned his power, and I triumphed in these chains! -- unjust and ungrateful
Floridor!


FLORIDOR. Then I have conquered, indeed! -- and thus I sieze the brightest
reward, that ever conquest was crowned withal!

(after embracing her, he takes off her chains.)
TYCHO. Where are your chains, Robinette?


ROBINETTE. I left 'em behind me.


TYCHO. I believe they slipped easily off -- but did you resist too, Robinette?


ROBINETTE. I will not satisfy you -- don't think that I am like Camilla, to be
suspected one moment, and hugged the next! --


TYCHO. Only say to satisfy my honor, that you came here against your will,
and I Will pass over the consequences.


ROBINETTE. Your honor! -- I prefer one feather of my favorite owl, I have
here, to your whole mind and body.


TYCHO. O ho! Signiora Robinette, have I caught you? what, do you prefer that
owl, Faladel, to me?


ROBINETTE. To all the world at present -- I did like monkies sometime ago --
my mind is changed -- I hate grinning and folly -- I am for wisdom and gravity
-- and so sollow your inclinations, as I shall mine.


[Exit Rob. TYCHO. And so I will; for my inclinations are to follow you -- She
shall either take me round the neck directly, or I Will wring her owl's neck off
before her face -- She has taught me to be merry, and I will not be made miserable
again, if I can help it -- I have not conquered the evil spirits for nothing.


[Exit Tycho after Rob. FLORIDOR and CAMILLA come forward. SONG in DIALOGUE.
CAMIL. The storm shall beat my breast no more,
The vessel safe, the sreight on shore,
No more my bark shall tempt the sea,
Escaped from the rock of Jealousy.

FLORI. Bright are the flowers which form this wreath,
And fresh the odours which they breathe;
Thus ever shall our loves be free,
From cruel blights of Jealousy.

BOTH. With roses and with myrtles crowned,
The conqu'ror, Love, smiles all around,
Triumphant reigns by heaven's decree,
And leads in chains grim Jealousy.



[At the end of the song a Messenger enters.] MESSENGER. For the conqueror,
Floridor!

(delivers a letter.
FLORIDOR. (reads.) By my assistance you recovered your sword and shield, by
which you have conquered Nigromant, and are possessed of his treasures: -- You
are now worthy of my love, and therefore I demand yours:

What ever you ask,
How dreadful the task,
To perform it, before heaven I vow.
GRINNELDA. What a spiteful old hag?


[Flor. stands confounded. CAMILLA. Whence comes that letter, Floridor, which
distresses and confounds you so? -- I beg to see it -- what is the matter? --
You alarm me!


FLORIDOR. Don't be alarmed, indeed it is nothing!


CAMILLA. Then let me see this nothing -- what, more confounded? O, Floridor!
false, false, Floridor!


FLORIDOR. To convince you, how little I value the writer, and regard the
contents -- thus I destroy at once her vanity and your apprehensions.

[He tears the letter; it thunders, and grows dark; flames of fire are seen
through the Seraglio windows; all but Floridor quit the place shrieking.] Is
heaven and earth in league against me? what have I done, to provoke this war of
elements?


Enter TYCHO. (terrified.) TYCHO. The devils are got lose again -- O, Signior
Floridor, what have we done? The palace is on fire, the ladies have lost their
senses, and I have lost both the ladies and my senses, for I saw --


FLORIDOR. What, what? -- where is Camilla?


TYCHO. I thought I saw her carried through the air by the kind old witch, who
sober'd me, and recovered your sword and shield -- but away -- see the flames
are coming upon us! I am no Salamander as you are, and therefore I shall get
into a colder climate.


[Exit Tycho running. FLORIDOR. I will brave it all!

[The Seraglio breaks to pieces and discovers the whole palace in flames.] SONG.
Let the loud thunder rattle,
Flash lightning round my head,
Place me in the front of battle,
By rage and horror led;
Though death in all her ghostly forms appear,
My heart that knows no crime can konw no fear.

[The flames and the ruins of the casile vanish away, and discover a fine
moonlight seen.] FLORIDOR. What can all this mean? by what offense unknown to
me have I brought this complicated distress upon me?


Enter TYCHO (frightened.) TYCHO. What a dreadful combustion is this! -- Where
my Knight is, I cannot tell; and where I am, and how I got here, the fiends
alone who brought me here can tell --


FLORIDOR. Hark! did not I hear a voice -- who is there?


TYCHO. I hear a voice too! I am afraid no friendly one; I expect every moment
to feel feathers upon my skin, and a crooked beak instead of a nose.


FLORIDOR. Who is muttering there? -- art thou a good or evil spirit?


TYCHO. I am neither at present -- and how you Signior Floridor can speak with
so clear a tone of voice in such place as this, and in your condition, puzzles
my philosophy --


FLORIDOR. My conscience upbraids me with nothing, and why should I fear?


TYCHO. My conscience is not quite asleep -- but I hope my playing at
hide-and-seek with the seraglio girls a little, cannot be any great offense,
after Robinette had discarded me --


Enter CAMILLA, (as an old Woman.) CAMILLA. Joy to you, Floridor! joy to myself
-- now I have caught you near my own premises, I shall not let you go till you
have fulfilled your engagements with me --


FLORIDOR. Where is Camilla, pray?


CAMILLA. I have her safe, and very safe -- a pledge for your fulfilling the
conditions of our treaty.


FLORIDOR. My sword is ready to obey your commands.


CAMILLA. Pooh! pooh! I want no assistance of your sword, not I; I must have
your love, young man, and in return you shall have my maiden affections, for
they were never yet bestowed upon any one.


FLORIDOR. What can I do, or say to her, while my Camilla is in danger?


TYCHO. Tell her you will have her -- she cannot live long, and then Camilla may
be yours.

[aside to Flor.
CAMILLA. What are you muttering to him?


TYCHO. I was only wishing him joy of his good fortune, of which he does not
seem quite so sensible as he ought.


CAMILLA. His joy perhaps is so great, he wants words to express it.


TYCHO. What will become of us? -- pray if I may be so bold, what tomb is that?
-- your late husband's?


CAMILLA. No, no, fool! I am yet a virgin: -- that tomb is intended to bury any
ungrateful lover, that may chance to come in my way -- do you see that house
there?

[pointing behind the scenes.]
TYCHO. I see that -- house do you call it? -- I have seen a handsomer pigstye.

[aside.]
CAMILLA. Aye that house, and all its furniture are mine -- go you there, and
prepare for our approaching nuptials.


TYCHO. She Is mad! -- I cant stand upright in the house, unless I put my head
out of the chimney.


CAMILLA. Why don't you do as I order you.


TYCHO. I Will bring it here, if you please?


CAMILLA. If you are insolent -- I shall take another course with you -- do as
I bid you, or --


TYCHO. You Will make me -- I am gone.


[Exit Tycho. DUETTE.
CAMILLA. Take my hand my heart is thine,

FLORIDOR. My hand and heart they are not mine,

CAMILLA. May love and all its joys be thine!

FLORIDOR. Ye gods above!
Are these the promised joys of love?

CAMILLA. These are the raptures called divine!

FLORIDOR. My hand and heart they are not mine,

CAMILLA. May love for many, many years,
Without its doubts, its cares and fears,
Each moment of our life control.

FLORIDOR. What anguish tears my tortured soul?

CAMILLA. Let me, sweet youth, thy charms behold,
And in these arms thy beauties fold.

FLORIDOR. I cannot hold, I cannot hold!

CAMILLA. No more can I, no more can I,
I blush for shame, O fie! O fie!

FLORIDOR. I am all on fire!

CAMILLA. And so am I, and so am I.

FLORIDOR. It burns, destroys,
What can I do?

CAMILLA. I feel it too!
O let us retire,
And hide our loves!

FLORIDOR. Ye gods above!
Are these the promised joys of love?



CAMILLA. Come along, -- come along, -- I must compel you to be happy -- give
me satisfaction, or you will repent it --

[takes hold of his hand.]
FLORIDOR. Draw me, tear me to pieces with wild horses -- my 'ast breath shall
sigh Camilla -- for I am here is -- and here is alone --


[The stage grows light, and Camilla quitting at once the form of the old
Woman, assumes her real character and dress.] CAMILLA. And I am Floridor's, and
Floridor's alone!

Floridor starts and stands astonished.] Behold the reward of thy valor,
constancy and honor! the fire has tried, and proved the value of the metal --
come to my arms, my hero! --


FLORIDOR. Was Grinnelda, Camilla! -- wonderful heaven! let me first return my
thanks there, ( kneels) for inspiring me with that valor, constancy and honor,
that has borne me up against every trial, and completed my glory and happiness,
in the arms of my Camilla!

[runs and embraces her.
CAMILLA. I resign my power, fortune, every thing to love, and be beloved by
thee.

[music is heard.] BONORO, descends in a cloud. But see your father, to perfect
our uinon.


BONORO. SONG.
Clouds that had gathered over the day,
Now leave the heaven's more bright,
Vice before virtue's powerful ray,
Sinks to the shades of night.
Those evil sprights, that late rushed forth,
Are now in darkness bound;
While beauty, valor, matchless worth,
Spread wide their sunshine round.
Enter TYCHO, (frighted.) Am I asleep, or awake, or neither? or both? -- it
must be a dream --


CAMILLA. I forgot poor Tycho -- have you prepared for the nuptials?


TYCHO. I had almost prepared for a long voyage in the air. -- I was luckily
out of the hut to survey it, when a wind took it up like a boy's kite, and it
was soon out of sight -- I wish the old hag had been in it.


FLORIDOR. I must not hear you say a word against Grinnelda, it is through her
that I am in possession of Camilla --


TYCHO. Then heaven bless her for it, say I -- but I see I must be through
somebody, to be in possession of Robinette -- and now is the time --

[draws.
Enter ROBINETTE and FALADEL. FALADEL. By my says and wand, there is my rival,
and he that will not die for you, ought not to live, and so let the stoutest
heart take you for ever, and for aye.

[draws.
TYCHO. You owl, you! come on, I will soon make you look more dismal than you
are!


FALADEL. You monkey, you! -- I will spoil your grinning, and sattle your
features in a moment, by my knighthood, I will --


ROBINETTE. Valiant Dons, a word with both of you, before you fight for that
which you can never obtain -- be assured, what ever liberties, I may have taken
with your folly, that I can never give my heart to an owl.


TYCHO. That Is some comfort -- he! he! he!


ROBINETTE. Nor a monkey --


FALADEL. (...) satisfied, for ever and for aye.

[turns off.
TYCHO. (...) take your scarf again, ( pulling it off) I will not stay to be
laughed at -- if your love-stomach for me returns -- you know where to send for
some plumb cake, this holiday time, and so your servant.


(Exit Tycho. [Bonoro waves his wand, the cloud ascends, and discovers a fine
distant prospect of the sea, and a castle at a distance, with the sun rising.
BONORO. Ye once most wretched of mankind,
By tyrant power and lust consigned,
From vice and slavery free,
Come join our sports, and this way move.
To celebrate their virtuous love,
And your own liberty!

Enter the different characters of the Seraglio, MEN and WOMEN, and join in A
GRAND DANCE. BONORO, FLORIDOR, CAMILLA, ROBINETTE, etc. etc. come forward. SONG.
BON. Honor is to beauty plighted,
Hearts with hands, shall be united,
Hymen comes; his torch is lighted!
Honor, truth, and beauty call,
Attend the nuptial festival.

FLOR. Love in my breast, no storm blowing,
Feels each tide is fuller growing,
And in grateful strains overflowing.
Honor, truth, etc.

ROB. Love in my breast, though a rover,
Calmly sporting with each lover,
Will to day with joy run over!
Honor, truth, etc.

CAME. Love in my breast knows no measure,
Swells and almost bursts with pleasure,
Here to share its boundless treasure.

FLOR. CAME. Love in my breast, etc.

GRAND CHORUS. Let the written page,
Through every age,
Record the wondrous story;
It Is decreed from above,
Her virtue should be crowned with love,
And his with love and glory.



FINIS.

