MARINA: A PLAY OF THREE ACTS. As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL IN
CONVENT-GARDEN. Taken from PERICLES PRINCE of TIRE.

By Mr. LILLO.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN GRAY, at the Cross-Keys in the Poultry, near
Cheapside. M.DCC.XXXVIII. [Price One Shilling.]

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Countess of Hertford.
MADAM,
PErmit me to hope that you will pardon the honest ambition which has
encouraged me to seek a proper Patroness for Marina in your Ladyship; whose
real character gives countenance to the imaginary one, and whose constant
practice is a living example of that steady virtue, and exalted piety, which
the Author of the old Play from whence this is taken, has happily described in
his Princess of Tire.

Conscious of no mean views, and secured by the universal acknowledgment of
your merit from the imputation of flattery, I approach your Ladyship, though a
stranger, and without any previous application, with the less diffidence: If
this Play should appear on perusal to be designed to promote something better
than mere amusement, that will effectually recommend it to the favor of the
Countess of Hertford.

To place merit in the gifts of fortune, and happiness in what an hour may, and
a few years certainly will bring to an end, is the folly and misery of too many
who are reputed wise and great. To be truly so is with your Ladyship to regard
the finest understanding, the most fruitful invention, the happiest elocution,
talents far superior to wealth and dignity, but as they subserve the interest
of truth and virtue, and render the possessors of them, in the midst of
affluence, moderate even in the use of lawful pleasures, humble in the most
exalted stations, and capable of living above the world, even in the possession
of all it can bestow. I am afraid and unwilling to offend. But as universal
benevolence is the perfection of virtue, your Ladyship must suffer your own to
be spoken of, however painful it may be to you, that others may not want a
pattern for their encouragement or reprehension, as they shall improve or
neglect it. A truly great mind discovers it self by nothing more than by a
benign and well placed condescension; of which your Ladyship's known esteem for
the late excellent Mrs. Row, is a noble instance, and an undoubted proof,
amongst many others which you daily give, of the goodness of your heart and
understanding, and cannot be mentioned but to your honor.

I can affirm, and I hope I shall be thought sincere, that what I have said
does not proceed from custom as a Dedicator, but from a mind fully convinced of
its truth in every circumstance, and a heart touched with a character so very
amiable.

That you may long live an ornament and a support of those excellent principles
which you profess and practice, and that your influence and example may do all
the good that you your self can wish, is the earnest desire of,

Your LADYSHIP 's Most obedient Humble Servant, GEO. LILLO:

PROLOGUE.
HARD is the task, in this discerning age,
To find new subjects that will bear the stage;
And bold our bards, their low harsh strains to bring
Where Avon's Swan has long been heard to sing:
Blessed Parent of our Scene! whose matchless wit,
Though yearly reaped, is our best harvest yet.
Well may that genius every heart command,
Who drew all nature with her own strong hand;
As various, as harmonious, fair and great,
With the same vigor and immortal heat,
As through each element and form she shines:
We view Heavens handmaid in her Shakespeare's lines.
Though some mean scenes, injurious to his fame,
Have long usurped the honor of his Name;
To glean and clear from chaff his least remains,
Is just to him, and richly worth our pains.
We dare not charge the whole unequal play
Of Pericles on him; yet let us say,
As gold though mixed with baser matter shines,
So do his bright inimitable lines
Throughout those rude wild scenes distinguished stand,
And show he touched them with no sparing hand.
With humor mixed in your forefathers way,
We Have to a single tale reduced our play.
Charming Marina's wrongs begin the scene;
Pericles finding her with his lost Queen,
Concludes the pleasing task. Should as the soul,
The fire of Shakespeare animate the whole,
Should heights which none but he could reach, appear,
To little errors do not prove severe.
If, when in pain for the event, surprise
And sympathetick joy should fill your eyes;
Do not repine that so you crown an art,
Which gives such sweet emotions to the heart:
Whose pleasures, so exalted in their kind,
Do, as they charm the sense, improve the mind.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
PERICLES, King of Tire. Mr. Stephens. LYSIMACHUS, Governor of Ephesus. Mr.
Hallam. ESCANES, Chief Attendant on Pericles. Mr. Shelton. LEONINE, A young
Lord of Tharsus. Mr. Stevens. VALDES, Captain of a Crew of Pirates. Mr. Bowman.
BOLT, A Pander. Mr. Penkethman.
WOMEN.
THAISA, Queen of Tire. Mrs. Marshall. PHILOTEN, Queen of Tharsus. Mrs.
Hamilton. MARINA, Daughter to Pericles and Thaisa. Mrs. Vincent. MOTHER
COUPLER, A Bawd. Mr. W. Hallam.
Gentlemen, Two Priestesses, Ladies, Officers, Guards, Pirates, and Attendants.

MARINA.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Grove, with a Prospect of a calm Sea, near the City of Tharsus.
Enter Philoten and Leonine. QUEEN. THY oath remember, thou have sworn to do it,
It Is but a blow, which never shall be known.
Kind Nature has been bounteous to thy youth:
Thy graceful person, language and address,
Are almost peerless, and thy steril fortune
Our favor shall improve. But let not conscience,
Which none who hope to rise in courts regard,
Disarm your hand, nor her bewitching eyes
Inflame your amorous bosom.

Leon. I have promised,
And will perform. Yet she is a goodly creature.

Q. The fitter for the Gods. I, while she lives,
Am not a Queen. This poor, this friendless daughter
Of Pericles, the wretched Prince of Tire,
Whom my fond Parents from compassion fostered,
Is more beloved, more reverenced in Tharsus
Than I their Sovereign. And when foreign Princes,
Drawn by the fame of my high rank and beauty,
As suitors, throng my court; let her appear
(Such is the force of her detested charms).
And I am straight neglected; and their vows
And adorations all transferred to her.
Here she comes, weeping for my mother's death:
She had good cause to love her. Let not pity,
Which women have cast off, defeat your purpose:
There Is nothing thou can do, live ever so long,
Shall yield thee so much profit.

Leon. I Am determined.


Enter Marina with a wreath of flowers. Mar. No: I will rob gay Tellus of her
weed,
To strew thy grave with flowers. The yellows, blues,
The purple violets and marygolds
Shall, as a carpet, hang upon thy tomb,
While summer days do last. Ah me, poor maid!
Born in a tempest when my mother died,
And now I mourn a second mother's loss.
This world, to me, is like a lasting storm,
That swallows, piece by piece, the merchant's wealth,
And in the end himself.

Q. Why, sweet Marina,
Will you consume your youth in fruitless grief,
And choose to dwell 'midst tombs and dreary graves?
You harm your self, and profit not the dead.
Give me that wreath, who have most cause to mourn,
And let your heart take comfort. I will leave you
To the sweet conversation of this Lord,
Who has the art of dissipating sadness.

Mar. Pray, let me not bereave you of his service:
I choose to be alone.

Q. You know I love you
With more than foreign heart, and will not see
The beauty marred that fame reports so perfect.
Should your good father come at length to seek you,
And find his hopes, and all report so blasted,
He may repent the breadth of his great voyage,
And blame our want of care.

Mar. You may command,
But I have no desire to tarry here.

Q. Once more be cheerful, and preserve that form
That wins from all competitors the hearts
Of young and old. It Is no new thing for me
To walk alone, while you are well attended.

Mar. I hope you're not offended.


Q. Nothing less.
Farewell, sweet Lady. Sir, you will remember --

Leon. Fear not, she never shall vex your quiet more. Exit Queen.


Mar. I know no cause, yet think the gentle Queen
Went hence in some displeasure. Is she well?
What are your thoughts?

Leon. That she is nor well, nor gentle.


Mar. I Am sorry for it. Is the wind westerly?


Leon. South-west.


Mar. When I was born the wind was north.


Leon. The wind was north you say. I should not hear her,
Lest I relent. The Queen's enamored of me,
She praised my blooming youth, and good proportion;
And shall I lose a crown for foolish pity?

Mar. My Father, as Lychorida has told me,
(My Nurse that is dead) did never fear: but then,
Galling his kingly hands with haling ropes,
And chearing the faint Sailors with his voice,
Endured a sea, that almost burst the deck.

Leon. And when was this?


Mar. I said when I was born.
Never were waves nor winds more violent.
This tempest, and my birth, killed my poor Mother,
I was preserved, and left an Infant here.
Now do you think I ever shall see my Father?

Leon. Never. Come, say your prayers.


Mar. What do you mean?


Leon. If you require a little space for prayer,
That I Will allow you; pray, but be not tedious:
The Gods are quick of ear, and I Am in haste.

Mar. Why will you kill me, Sir?


Leon. TO obey the Queen.


Mar. Why will she have me killed? I never wronged her.
In all my life I never spoke bad word,
Nor did ill turn to any living creature:
By chance I once trod on a simple worm,
But I wept for it. How have I offended?

Leon. I Am not to reason of the deed, but do it.


Mar. You will not do it for all the world, I hope.
You are well favored, and your looks bespeak
A very gentle heart. I saw you lately,
When you caught hurt in parting two that fought:
Good sooth, it showed well in you: Do so now:
If the Queen seeks my life, come you between,
And save poor me the weaker.

Leon. I have sworn,
And will dispatch.

Mar. Yet hear me speak once more. Kneeling.
O do not kill me, though I know no cause
Why I should wish to live who never knew joy,
Or fear to die who ever feared the Gods;
But it is, perhaps, the property of youth
To dote on its new being, and depend,
However deprest, on pleasures in reversion.
You are but young your self: then, as you hope
To prove the fancied bliss of years to come,
Spare me, O spare me now.

Leon. You plead in vain,
Commit your soul to heaven.

Mar. Can you speak thus!
O can you have compassion for my soul;
Yet, at the instant, by a cruel deed,
That Heaven and Earth must hate, destroy your own?

Enter Pirate, and interposes. 1 Pir. Hold villain. Fear not, fair one, I Will
defend thee.


Leon. Slave, how does her defense belong to you?
Who, and what are you?

1 Pir. A man, fool. Alexander the Great was no more. You are a poltron, a
coward, and a rascal, to draw cold iron on a woman.


Leon. I want not courage, base intruding villain,
To scourge thy insolence. fight.

Mar. You gracious Gods!
Must I behold, and be the cause of murder?

Enter second, and then third Pirate. 2 Pir. A prize! A prize!


3 Pir. Half part, Mate, half part.


1 Pir. What, are they quarrelling about my booty!
Hold, Sir.

Leon. With all my heart.
If you increase so fast, it is time to fly.
I know them now for Pirates. Exit Leonine.

1 Pir. Hands off. I found her first.


2 Pir. That Is no claim amongst us.


3 Pir. No, none at all. Every man is to have his share of all the prizes we
take.


1 Pir. Nay, if you come to that, she belongs to the whole ship's company.


2 Pir. Who denies that? But I will not quit my part in her to the Captain
himself: sink me if I do.


3 Pir. Nor I, by Neptune.


1 Pir. This is no place to dispute in. We shall have the city rise upon us:
therefore we must have her aboard suddenly.


Omnes. Ay; bear a hand, bear a hand.


1 Pir. Come, sweet Lady.


2 Pir. None shall hurt you.


3 Pir. We'll lose our lives before we'll see you wronged.


Mar. You sacred powers! who rule the rudest hearts,
Protect me whilst among these lawless Men
From loathed pollution, violence and shame;
And bold blasphemers, who shall hear the wonder,
Shall own you are, and just.

1 Pir. A rare prize, if a man could have her to himself. A pox of all ill
fortune, say I. Exeunt.


Re-enter Leonine. Leon. These Pirates serve the daring ruffian Valdes,
A desperate crew they are. There is no fear
Marina will return. They Will, doubtless, have
Their pleasure of her first; and then, perhaps,
According to a custom long used by 'em,
Sell her where she will never be heard of more:
Then I may take the merit of her death,
And claim the whole reward. It shall be so.
I Will swear to the fond Queen, I have dispatched
And thrown her in the sea. -- A rare device! --
These rogues have saved me from a hellish deed,
And a fair wind attend them. Exit Leonine.

SCENE II. A House in Ephesus.
Enter Bawd and Bolt. Bawd. Sad times, Bolt.


Bolt. Ay, very sad times, Mistress.


Bawd. This new order, so much talked of, for suppressing public lewdness,
will be the ruin of us. All our business will fall into private hands. I must
shut up my doors, I must quit my house, unless we can find some way to evade it.


Bolt. Whip Bawds and Panders! fine doings! rare Magistrates! Let 'em whip
their own lubberly Sons and dough-bak'd Daughters for their idleness, and not
punish people for their industry and service to the public.


Bawd. Nay, nay, if they will turn iniquity out of the highways, they must
expect to find it in their families. Let them keep their Wives and Daughters
honest if they can. The necessities of Gentlemen must be supplied.


Bolt. There are abundance of foreign Merchants and Travelers here in Ephesus,
that used to be our customers.


Bawd. And old Batchelors.


Bolt. And younger Brothers.


Bawd. And disconsolate Widowers.


Bolt. And Husbands that have old Wives.


Bawd. And Philosophers, Lawyers, and Soldiers that have none at all; and all
these must be served.


Bolt. And will, while Women are to be had for money, love, or importunity.


Bawd. Ay, let the Citizens, who spirited up this prosecution against our
useful vocation, think of the consequence, and tremble.


Bolt. Yet, after all, these threats may come to nothing. You have weathered
many such a storm, Mother Coupler.


Bawd. Ay, Bolt, I have had my ups and my downs -- no Woman more -- But I will
not be discouraged, I will not neglect business for a rumor neither. The mart
will fill the town, and we are but meanly furnished.


Bolt. Never worse. Three poor wenches are all our store, and they can do no
more than they can.


Bawd. Thou say true. And those so stale, so sunk, and so diseased, that a
strong wind would blow 'em all to pieces. I must have others, whatever they
cost me.


Bolt. Shall I search the slave market?


Bawd. Those we buy there, are mostly half worn out before we have them. There
was the little Transilvanian you bought last, did not live above three months,
and never brought in half the money she cost.


Bolt. Ay, she was quickly made meat for worms. But there are losses in all
trades, and ours not being honest --


Bawd. Marry come up; I pray, what trades are honest, as they are used? We are
no worse than others.


Enter Valdes, and other Pirates, with Marina. Vald. Where Is Mother Coupler?
Where are you, Bawd?


Bawd. Why, how now, Roister? How now, Captain Thief? Use your Tarpaulin
language to thy own natural Mother; do, Brawn and Bristle, do, Iron face.


Vald. Let any one be judge, whether my chin, somewhat black and rough I must
confess, or thine, that is covered with gray down, like a goose's rump, be the
more comely. Thy face is a memento mori for thy own sex, and to ours an
antidote against the sin you live by. But, see what we have brought you: Here Is
a Paragon.


Bolt. aside the Bawd. Mark the color of her hair, complexion, shape and age.


Bawd. I have noted them all. When Nature formed this piece, she meant me a
good turn.


Vald. Here Is that will repair your decayed arras, and set you up for a Bawd of
condition.


Bawd. I was just saying, what stale, worn out creatures are daily brought to
market; and those who buy of Pirates, must expect as bad, or worse: And then I
have choice enough, and those not blown on.


Vald. Nay, nay, use your pleasure: You have the first proffer of her. If she is
not for your turn, there is no harm done: She Is any one's money.


Bawd. You don't consider the dullness of the times. If men were as they have
been --


Vald. A virgin too.


Bawd. A likely matter, coming from the hands of such a lawless crew!


Vald. You are deceived. We have laws amongst our selves, or I would not have
parted with her. However we are distinguished by titles and office, each man
has a right to his proportion of every prize we take; which all claiming on
the sight of her, and refusing to compound with, or give place to any other,
there ensued such jealousy, such fury and contention, that we were obliged, by
common consent, to leave her untouched, and dispose of her, as soon as
possible, to prevent the cutting of one another throats.


Bawd. Well, what is your price?


Vald. What do you mean ready rigged? She has excellent clothes you see.


Bawd. If I deal for her, I take her altogether.


Vald. I will not bate one doit of a thousand pieces.


Bawd. What shall I give you for your conscience, Valdes?


Vald. Your honesty, Mother Coupler: We will not differ for a trifle.


Bawd. Five hundred pieces, Sir!


Vald. Four times told, Madam.


Bawd. Why, what the Devil, you said but a thousand even now.


Vald. I thought you could not hear but by halves, and was willing to come up to
your understanding.


Bolt. You Will stand haggling till you lose her.


Vald. Look you, I am at a word. But for the reason I just now spoke of, you
should not have had her for twice the sum.


Bawd. Follow me, and you shall have your money. Bolt, take care of my purchase.


Bolt. Never fear, Mistress, never fear.


Exeunt Vald. Bawd and Pirates. Mar. Immortal Gods! to what am I reserved?


Bolt. Come hither, child. You are but young, and may want some instructions.
Though she who has bought you, your Mistress and mine, knows as much as a woman
can know; yet there is nothing like a man to teach you the practical part of
business, take my word for it.


Mar. What are you, Sir?


Bolt. A middle aged person, as you see; and in perfect health, that you may
depend upon.


Mar. Is your mind sound?


Bolt. She Is mighty simple. Ay, ay, as sound as my body.


Mar. The Gods preserve it so. Yet you talk strangely.


Bolt. I thank you heartily for your good wishes. Nay, I am the principal
person in this family, after our Mistress: It may be well worth your while to
make a friend of me.


Mar. I know not, but am sure I want a friend. I am of maids most wretched.


Bolt. I Will quickly ease you of the wretchedness of being a maid. Yet you must
pass for one, and often.


Mar. I understand you not.


Bolt. Such things are common here. But of that, and other needful arts in our
profession, my Mistress will inform you. lays hold of her.


Mar. Why do you rudely lay your hands upon me?
I am not to be touched.

Bolt. Not to be touched! Ha, ha, in troth a pretty jest, and will do rarely
with some young gulls. To seem most fearful when you are most willing, and weep
as you do now, will move the pity of your Inamoratos, and strain their purses
to shower down gold upon you. Your striving will not save you: This is no place
for squeamish modesty: We live by lewdness here, and you were bought to carry
on the trade.


Mar. Hence, thou detested slave, thou shameless villain. Breaks from him.

Enter Bawd. You powers that favor chastity, defend me.


Bawd. Why how now? what is the matter here? what have you been doing with her?


Bolt. Nothing, Mistress, and I am afraid there is nothing to be done with her.
She fights like a she Tiger.


Bawd. Out, you rascal. Is this a morsel for your chaps?


Bolt. Why not? Do you think I Will serve up a delicate dish without tasting it?


Bawd. In your turn, sirrah, in your turn. Let your betters be served before
you.


Bolt. Ay, but a bit of the spit, you know --


Bawd. About your business, and let Gentlemen know how we are provided for
their entertainment. Exit Bolt. Don't cry, pretty one: He shall be made to know
his distance, and his time. While you behave discreetly, child, you shall be
reserved for the better sort of men only. You are fallen into good hands,
depend upon it.


Mar. O why was Leonine so slack, so slow!
Would he had used his sword, and not his tongue!
Or that the Pirates, not enough Barbarians,
Had thrown me in the sea to seek my mother.

Bawd. Come, come, my rose-bud, my sprig of Jessamin, you are all beauty and
sweetness -- you have no cause to grieve -- Heaven has done its part by you.


Mar. I accuse not Heaven.


Bawd. Here you may live, and shall.


Mar. The more's my grief
TO have escaped his hands, who would have given me death.

Bawd. And live with pleasure.


Mar. No.


Bawd. You shall not want variety: you shall have men, and men of all
complexions.


Mar. Are you a woman?


Bawd. A woman! pray, what do you take me for, Madam? I have been thought a
woman, and an handsome woman in my time.


Mar. Of this I Am sure, you are not what you should be:
A woman should be honest.

Bawd. O the Devil!


Mar. And modest, and religious.


Bawd. You're a sapling to talk so to one of my experience. Honest, modest, and
religious, with a pox to you! I Will make you know, before I Have done with you,
that I will not have any such thing mentioned in my house.


Mar. The gracious Gods defend me.


Bawd. What, do you offer to say your prayers in my hearing! Is this a place to
pray in? Don't provoke me, don't. I find I shall have something to do with you.
But you shall bend or break, I can tell you that for your comfort.


Enter Bolt. Bolt. Mistress, here is the lean French Knight, he that cowers in
the hams, and the fat German Count.


Bawd. In good time. Here, take this stubborn fool, and carry her to them.


Bolt. To which of them?


Bawd. To him that will give most first, and to the other afterward. She cost
me a round sum, but don't refuse money. Her blushes must be quenched with
present practice: She Is good for nothing as she is.


Mar. Diana, aid my purpose.


Bolt. Come your ways. What have we to do with Diana?


Bawd. Ay, troop, follow your Leader. We'll teach you honesty, modesty, and
religion with a vengeance.


Mar. If fires be hot, steel sharp, or waters deep,
Unstained I still my virgin fame will keep.

Exeunt. The End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. An Apartment adjoining to a Temple at the Court of Tharsus.
Enter Queen and Leonine. LEONINE. TO bury kneaded earth for dead Marina
Was a most quaint device. The cheated Tharsians
Pierced Heaven with their howlings; but suspicion,
As if Death closed her busy prying eyes
When the fair Tyrian died, still slumbers on.
The monument of Parian marble wrought,
And epitaph in characters of gold,
Were my contrivance too, and now are finished.
I have done all that your resentment asked,
And well secured your safety and your fame:
It Is more than time you listened to my suit.

Q. Can nothing but my person and my crown
Reward your service?

Leon. I deserve them both.


Q. Were I sole mistress of the spacious world,
I Would give it all this murder were undone.
The very Wrens of Tharsus will betray it
To Pericles, who now comes to demand her.

Leon. That Is only in my power: Give me your promise
To be my bride, and seal my lips for ever.

Q. What! wed a murderer!


Leon. Who made me so?
Resolve in time ere ruin overtake you,
Overtake us both. Your flatt'ries drew me in,
You taught me to be bloody and ambitious,
And I will now partake your throne, or perish --
But not alone. You know how popular
The injured Prince of Tire is here in Tharsus.
This City, now the seat of wealth and plenty,
Whose towers invade the clouds, which never stranger
Beheld but wondered at, as all acknowledge,
Had but for Pericles been desolate,
Forsaken, or the grave of its inhabitants,
A den for bats to build and wolves to howl in.
How many thousands, living now, remember,
When, famishing with hunger, Prince and people
Sat down and wept for bread; when tender mothers
Fed on their new born babes, and man and wife
Drew lots who first should die, and furnish food
To lengthen out the life of the survivor.
This our distress brought Pericles from Tire;
Who, bravely scorning to improve the advantage,
And make a conquest of a prostrate land,
Did with a liberal hand supply our (...) wants,
And turn our dying groans to songs of joy.
For this the Tharsians love him as a Father,
And as a God adore him.

Q. Be it so:
I Am still their Queen, and hold 'em in subjection.

Leon. Yes, while they please: As we have seen a Lion
Held with a thread, until some accident,
Or his rash keeper's folly, roused his fury.
They Have some regard for the good line you came of,
And yet are thereby hardly held from outrage:
So hateful have the pride and other vices,
Notorious in you, made you to the million.
But should they hear, or have the least suspicion
Of your foul dealing with the much loved daughter
Of royal Pericles, like flames let loose,
They Would in an instant make this lofty dome
Your funeral pile, and give the winds your ashes:
Or having torn you in ten thousand pieces,
With honest scorn, cast out your loathed remains
For kites and crows to feed on.

Q. It Is too true:
Should this dark deed take light, my reign were ended.
I see I must comply. She who has used
A wicked agent in a shameful act,
Must thenceforth be his slave. You have my word.
Now your ambition's served, teach me to answer
The King of Tire when he demands his child.

Leon. Say she died suddenly, as what is more common?
That you wept over her hearse, and mourn her yet;
Then show the monument and epitaph
Procured at your expense; and her grieved Sire
Shall curse the cruel fates that still pursue him
With plague on plague, but never suspect that you
Have been their instrument.

Q. The deed's not mine. -- Trumpets.
Pericles comes, and I must seem content:
The Traytor's in the toils, and cannot 'scape me.

Enter Pericles, Escanes, Guards and Attendants. Q. Welcome, great Pericles, to
mourning Tharsus,
My royal parents and your faithful friends,
Cleon and Dionysia, are no more.

Per. Entering the port I met the fatal news.
The hot salt tears this unthought loss drew from me,
Are yet wet on my cheeks. O two such friends! --
But I Am a man born to adversity;
No land ever gave me rest, and winds and waters,
In their vast tennis-court, have, as a ball,
Used me to make them sport. -- But to my purpose.
It Is more than twice seven years since I beheld thee
With my Marina, both were infants then.
Peace and security smiled on your birth;
Here Is was the rudest welcome to this world
That ever was Prince's child: Born on the sea,
Hence is she called Marina, in a tempest,
When the high working billows kissed the Moon,
And the shrill whistle of the boatswain's pipe
Seemed as a whisper in the ear of Death:
Born when her Mother died. That fatal hour
Must still live with me -- O you gracious Gods!
Why do you make us love your goodly gifts,
And snatch them straight away? The waves received
My Queen. A sea mate's chest coffined her corpse;
In which she silent lies 'midst groves of coral,
Or in a glittering bed of shining shells.
The air fed lamps of Heaven, the spouting whale,
And dashing waters, that roll over her head,
Compose a monument to hide her bones,
Spacious as Heaven, and lasting as the frame
Of universal Nature.

Esc. Royal Sir,
This sad companion, dull-ey'd Melancholy,
So long carest, should now be cast aside.

Per. O never, never: Do not interrupt me.
In the days glorious walk, or peaceful night,
When grief should seem to sleep, a welcome guest,
She fills my anxious thoughts and broken slumbers
With the loved image of my lost Thaisa,
And prompts me to rehearse the oft-told tale
Of her disast'rous end; and chiefly now
I come to seek the Phoenix that took life
From her dead ashes -- But I Have almost done --
We left my Princess in her watery tomb,
And, as the winds gave way, arrived at Tharsus.
Here to your royal parents I committed
(Whose love I had experienced and deserved)
My only child, to give her education
Suiting her rank, and in some sort supply
Her pious mother's loss. And this the rather,
For that the peace of Tire was sorely broken
By foreign foes, and treasons bred at home:
For I have drank the dregs of all misfortunes.
I vowed too then, though it showed wilful in me,
That all unsister'd should this heir of mine
Remain till she were married. Those commotions,
That long embroiled me, being now composed;
I Am come to pay my thanks, and claim my daughter.

Q. Unhappy Prince! would Heaven have heard my Prayers,
Thy sweet Marina now by my loved side
Had blessed thy longing eyes; but wretched mortals
In vain oppose the powers that rule above 'em:
Should we rage loud as did the winds and seas
When she was born, things would be as they are.
Unfold those doors, and let the care-worn King
Behold the testimony of our love
To our fair foster Sister, and our grief
For her untimely fate.

The Scene draws, and discovers a Temple with the Monument. Per. Reading"Here
lies interred
"Marina, daughter to the Prince of Tire.
O thou who gav'st me reason and reflection,
Eternal Jove, rebuke these swelling thoughts,
That would dispute your goodness or your being:
Bind them in walls of brass: Let me remember
I hold my powers from thee, that earthly man
Is but a substance made for your high pleasure:
Teach me, as fits my nature, to submit
To your thrice kindled wrath.

Esc. Let those who think
They could endure his woes, speak comfort to him;
My soul is faint with terror to behold 'em.

Per. Fire, water, earth, and air in loud combustion
Hareld my lost Marina to the light;
But dumb and speechless sorrow shall attend
Her timeless passage to the realms of death.
From this cursed hour I Will never speak again,
To mock with words unutterable grief;
But make my manners savage as my fortunes,
And be as wretched as the Gods would have me.
Sable shall be the ship henceforth that bears me;
No steel shall touch my face, no water cleanse it,
Nor comb be used to part my matted hair.
If ever I change my raiment, galling sackcloth,
Instead of royal robes, shall gird my loins,
And ashes be my crown. I Will never return,
Never view thy spires again, renowned Tire;
But wander through the world a wilful vagrant,
And never taste comfort more till death relieve me,
Or Jove restore to my unhoping eyes
What his vindictive hand has taken from me.
What I have been I Will study to forget:
Do you so too. Tell who I was to no man;
What I am now, a wretch by heaven devoted
To all distress and by himself abandoned,
Shall evidence it self. Come, my Escanes.

Esc. O woeful, woeful hour! Where shall we go?


Per. I care not, let blind fortune be our guide:
Shun Tire, and every other place is equal.
Fair Queen, adieu. Your kindness to my child
The Gods return you double. Yet consider
And view the frailty of your state in me.
Once Princes sat, like stars, about my throne,
And veiled their crowns to my supremacy:
Then, like the sun, all paid me reverence
For what I was, and all the grateful loved me
For what I did bestow; now not a glowworm
But in the chearless night displays more brightness,
And is of greater use, than darkened Pericles.
Be not high minded, Queen, be not high minded:
Time is omnipotent, the King of Kings,
Their parent and their grave -- Beware, beware --
Let those who drink of sweet prosperity
In flowing cups, mingle their draughts with pity;
And think when they behold the afflicted's tears,
The misery of others may be theirs.

Exeunt Pericles, Escanes, etc. Q. Unhappy Queen! detested Leonine!
O had I tarried but a little longer,
Marina had been gone without my guilt:
Or had you put me by this one bad thought,
In which perhaps I never should have relapsed,
I might have blessed you as my better genius;
But now must curse you as a cruel wretch
Who seeing me unguarded, seized that moment
To blast my fame, and ruin me for ever.

Leon. Were this repentance true, it is now too late:
But if, as I suspect, it is but assumed
(Your purpose being served) to vail your falsehood
(Pretending conscience for your breach of faith)
The cheat's too gross, and you may rest assured,
I shall see through and scorn the thin disguise.

Q. Then here I cast it off. Shall I, who could not bear
The unmeant rivalship of sweet Marina,
Resign my crown, and live a slave to thee?
A wretch whom I detest, a venal villain,
One whom I fixed on as the worst of men,
For the worst purpose.

Leon. Base, ungrateful Queen!
Is this all the reward I Am to expect?

Q. Such a reward as such vile instruments
As you deserve, a murderer's reward,
Thou have already.

Leon. Hah!


Q. Yes, thou art poisoned.
The subtle potion working in thy veins
Is a more certain remedy for talking,
Than all my wealth, or the rich crown of Tharsus.
Not that I fear, now Pericles is gone,
The utmost of thy malice cou'd'st thou live,
As it is most sure thou can not.

Leon. Cursed Harpy!
The loathsome grave is better than thy bed,
And Death a lovelier paramour than thee.
O! I am sick at heart.

Q. The venom works.
How wild he looks? I will be kind, and leave him.

Leon. Assist my feeble arm, ye righteous Gods!
Though I Have offended, do not fail me now.
This cause is yours -- it is well -- my hand is armed --
Now guide my weapon's point to her false heart,
And we shall both have justice.

Q. Thoughtless wretch!
Where are my Guards? I shall be murdered here.

Leon. As sure as you contrived Marina's death,
As sure as you have betrayed and murdered me.
stabs her. I fall, but fall revenged. Now triumph fury.

Enter Guards and Ladies. Q. You come too late: The slave has pierced my heart.


Leon. To wound it deeper, know, Marina lives.
The death intended her by you and me,
By Heaven is justly turned upon our selves.
To will or act is one at that strict audit,
Where we must soon appear -- O Radamanthus -- dies.

Q. Tear out his tongue, let not the traitor speak.


Guard. It need not, Madam; he has spoke his last.


Q. I shall not long survive him -- Bear me hence --
Thou art the care of Heaven, virtuous Marina;
Its outcasts we. The Gods are just and strong;
And none who scorn their laws, ever prosper long.

Exeunt. SCENE II. A House in Ephesus.
Enter Bawd and Bolt. Bawd. Where are the Gentlemen?


Bolt. Gone.


Bawd. Gone!


Bolt. Ay, gone away, and left her untouched. With her holy speeches, kneeling,
prayers, and tears, she has converted 'em to chastity.


Bawd. The Devil she has!


Bolt. They vow never to enter a bawdy house again, but turn religious, and
frequent the Temples: They are gone to hear the Vestals sing already.


Bawd. What will become of me? O the wicked jade, to study the ruin of a poor
Gentlewoman! weeping I Would rather than twice the worth of her she had never come
here.


Bolt. She Is enough to undo all the Panders and Bawds in Ephesus.


Bawd. Pox of her green sickness.


Bolt. Ay, if she would but change one for the other, there were some hopes of
her. But I have good intelligence that the Lord Lysimachus will be here
presently.


Bawd. The Governor?


Bolt. Ay, but he is a great persecutor of persons of our profession.


Bawd. Pho, those are our best customers and surest friends in private. If the
peevish baggage would but hear reason now, we were made for ever. Fetch her.
We'll try once more. Exit Bolt. She must be marble if she don't melt at the
sight of so great, so rich, so young and handsome a man as the Lord Lysimachus.


Enter Lysimachus. Lys. Well, thou grave planter of iniquity,
Whose just returns are full grown crops of shame,
Are you supplied with new and sound temptations?
Such as an healthy man may venture on,
And fear the loss of nothing -- but his soul.

Bawd. I Am proud to see your Lordship here, and glad your honor is so
cheerfully disposed. Venus forbid a Gentleman should receive an injury in my
house. No, Sir, we defy the Surgeons. And for temptation, I have such an one,
if she would but --


Lys. Prithee, what?


Bawd. Your Honor knows what I mean well enough.


Lys. Well, let me see her.


Bawd. Such flesh and blood, Sir! -- For red and white -- Well, you shall see a
flower, and a flower she were indeed, had she but --


Lys. Why do not speak? What is there wanting in her?


Bawd. O, Sir, I can be modest.


Lys. When such as these pretend to modesty,
They are then most impudent.

Enter Bolt, forcing in Marina. Bawd. Now, Sir, what do you think of her?
Would Not she serve after a long voyage? -- Ay, Sir --

Lys. I Am lost in admiration -- Here Is your fee:
Away, be gone and leave us. I came hither,
O who would trust his heart, bent to detect
And punish these bad people; but when sin
Appears in such a form, the firmest virtue
Dissolves to air before it.

Bawd. I pray your Honor let me have a word with her: I Will have done presently.


Lys. Do, I beseech you.


Bawd. First I would have you take notice that this is a man of Honor.


Mar. Grant, Heaven, I find him so!


Bawd. And next, that he is a great man and Governor of this country; and
lastly, one I Am bound to.


Mar. If he is greatly good
And governs well, you're bound to him indeed.

Bawd. Pray use him kindly, or --


Lys. Have you yet done?


Bawd. I Am afraid your Lordship must take some pains with her, but there is
nothing to be done with these unexperienced things without it. Come, we'll
leave his Honor and her together. Exeunt Bawd and Bolt.


Lys. Thou brightest star that ever left its sphere
(For sure you once shone in a higher region)
For low pollution and the depth of darkness,
How long have thou pursued this devious course?

Mar. What course do you mean, my Lord?


Lys. I dare not name it:
For, loving, I am fearful to offend.

Mar. I cannot be offended at the truth.


Lys. How long have you been what you now profess?


Mar. Ever since I can remember.


Lys. Gods! what pity!
Were you a prostitute so very young?

Mar. I never was other -- if I am so now.


Lys. You are proclaimed a creature set to sale
By being here.

Mar. And do you know this house
A place of such resort, yet venture in it?
I Have heard you are of honorable rank,
And govern here.

Lys. O, you have heard my power,
And therefore stand aloof, but without cause;
For my authority shall here be blind,
Or look with kindness on thee. I Have now learnt
What once seemed strange, why rich men grasp at power,
And the poor murmur at restrictive laws.
Passion would have the means to work its ends,
And the fierce tumult of intemp'rate blood
Rages the more the more it is resisted.
I must and will, in spite of vain remorse
And what I have been, feast each aching sense
On thy luxurious charms. Why do thou shun me?
Blushing I speak it, thou shall never find
Amongst the herd whose only joy is lewdness,
A more devoted slave. Is wanton pleasure
What you affect? My youth, yet unimpair'd
By riot or disease, shall meet your wishes.
Art thou ambitious? Power and pomp attend thee.
Or if the love of Gold, that cursed bait
That ruins half thy sex, possess thy heart;
I will descend to gratify a passion
I should detest in any but thy self.

Mar. Could you do thus! O you immortal powers,
What is your influence on the heart of Man,
If every slight temptation wins him from you?
Shall painted clay, shall white and red, less pure
Than that which decks the lilly and the rose,
Seduce you from the bright unfading joys
Your goodness yields! For sure your speech imports,
And I well hope, you have not yet renounced it.

Lys. Thou art so fair, so exquisitely fair,
And plead'st against thy self with so much art,
That had I known thee sooner -- What a thought! --
But sullied as thou art I must possess thee,
Whatever the purchase cost.

Mar. To think me, Sir,
A creature so abandoned yet pursue me,
Is sure as mean and infamous, as wicked.
What! waste your youth in arms that each lewd ruffian
Who pays the price, may fill; lavish your wealth,
And yield your sacred honor to the hand
Of an improvident and wastful Wanton,
Who does not guard her own!

Lys. True, I came hither,
With thoughts like these -- But lead me to some place
Private and dark -- Alas, why do thou weep?

Mar. Dare not come near me.


Lys. By the raging flame
Thy eyes have kindled here, I must enjoy thee.

Mar. Then view my last defense. draws a dagger.


Lys. What do thou mean!


Mar. To die if you pursue your hated purpose,
Vain, rash, mistaken man.

Lys. O hold thy hand:
By Jove she does amaze me. Rest assured
I will not offer violence again
Be who or what thou will -- But let me seize
This threatening steel, that filled my soul with terror
While levelled at thy breast.

Mar. O mighty Sir,
If you were born to honor show it now;
If put upon you, make that judgment good
That thought you worthy of it.

Lys. She Is in earnest.
Here is some mystery I cannot fathom. aside.

Mar. Have pity on a maid, a friendless maid,
By fortune forced to this detested sty;
Where since I came, diseases have been sold
Dearer than physic. Would the gracious Gods
But set me free from this unhallowed place,
Though they did change me to the meanest bird
That flies in the pure air, I should be happy.

Lys. Conviction rises with each word she speaks.
She Is all a miracle, as chaste as fair. aside.
He must indeed have a corrupted mind,
Whom thy speech could not alter. Here Is gold for thee:
Still persevere in the clear way thou go,
And the Gods strengthen thee. As for my self,
The short lived error which thy beauty caused,
Thy goodness and thy wisdom have corrected.

Mar. Now you're a true and worthy Gentleman,
The gracious Gods preserve you.

Lys. Fare thee well.
If I should take thee hence, licentious tongues
May wrong my fair intentions, and thy fame.
Thou art a piece of virtue, and I doubt not
But that thy birth and training both were noble.
A curse upon him, die he, like a thief,
That shall again attempt to wrong thy honor.
If thou hear'st from me, as thou may expect it,
And quickly too, it shall be for thy good.

Enter Bolt. Bolt. I beseech your Honor, one piece for me.


Lys. Avaunt, thou damned door keeper, pander, hence.
Your house but for this virgin that does prop it,
Would sink, and overwhelm you. Exit Lysimachus.

Bolt. I see we must take another course with you; or your peevish chastity,
which is not worth a breakfast in the cheapest country in the universe, will
undo a whole family. Come your ways.


Enter Bawd. Bawd. How now! what is the matter?


Bolt. Worse and worse, Mistress. She has been talking religion to my Lord
Lysimachus.


Bawd. O abominable!


Bolt. She makes our profession stink, as it were, in the nostrels of all who
come near her.


Bawd. Marry hang her.


Bolt. My Lord would have used her as a Lord should use a gentlewoman, for I
over heard 'em; but she sent him away as cold as a snow-ball; saying his
Prayers too.


Bawd. Take her away: use her at your pleasure.


Mar. Hark, hark, you Gods!


Bawd. She Is at her prayers again. Away with her.
I wish she had never entered my doors. Exit Bawd.

Bolt. Come, mistress, you shall along with me.


Mar. O wither would you have me?


Bolt. Into the next room, to take from you by force the jewel you are so
unwilling to part with.


Mar. Pray tell me one thing first.


Bolt. Propose your Question.


Mar. What would you wish to your worst enemies?


Bolt. Why I would wish 'em as infamous as my mistress.


Mar. And yet that wretch is not so bad as thou art,
Since she is thy better as she does command thee.
The place thou hold'st is such that Cerberus
Would not exchange his reputation with thee,
The filthy groom, doorkeeper to a brothel.
Then to the chol'rick fist of every villain
Thy ear is liable. Thy food is such
As has been breathed on by infectious lungs.

Bolt. What would you have me do? Go to the wars! Where a man may serve seven
years for the loss of a leg, and not have money enough in the end to buy him a
wooden one.


Mar. Do any kind of thing but this thou do:
Empty receptacles of common filth,
Serve by indenture to the common hangman,
Or herd with swine, or beg from door to door:
The worst of these is far to be preferred
To what you practice. If no sense of shame,
No fear of laws, no reverence of the Gods
Come near thy heart; let that which does persuade
Millions to evil, bribe thee to be good:
Touch not my honor, help me to escape
This house of shame, and take the shining gold
The good Lord gave me.

Bolt. Nay, I don't see why a man may not as well do a good deed as a bad one,
especially when he is paid for it. And to say the truth, I think you would
freeze the blood of a Satyr, and make a Puritan of the Devil, if they were to
cheapen a kiss of thee. Come, give me the money.


Mar. No, first conduct me to some place of safety.


Bolt. But shall I have it then?


Mar. If I deceive you, take me home again,
And prostitute me to the vilest groom
That does frequent your house.

Bolt. Well, I Will trust you. I Will see you placed --


Mar. But among honest women.


Bolt. Troth, I Have but little acquaintance amongst them. But there is one who
is known to all Ephesus by fame, the holy priestess of Diana's temple: She will
be proud of such a chaste companion, and has besides the power to protect you.


Mar. O the good Gods direct me how to find her!


Bolt. But, hark, I hear my mistress. We must be gone: This way we may avoid
her.


Mar. Jove's virgin-best-loved daughter, bright Diana,
Who shar'st with Sol the skies, chaste Queen of night,
Defend my virtue, and direct my flight.

Exeunt Marina and Bolt. Enter Bawd. Bawd. Bolt, Bolt, Where are you? Secure
Marina. The Governor's officers are searching the house for her: we shall have
her forced away. Why Bolt -- O the Devil! the back door is open: The villain is
run away with my slave, and all the money I paid for her will be lost.


Enter Officers. 1 Off. She Is no where to be found.


Bawd. No, no, she is gone. My man had stole her away before you came, a pox
confound him and you too: I am likely to be brought to a fine pass betwixt you.


Off. Then we must execute our other orders, which are to turn this Beldame out
of doors, and then shut up the house.


Bawd. Turn me out of doors! how must I live?


Off. Do you take care of that. It is a favor, and a great one too, that you
are not sent to prison.


Bawd. Such Governors are enough to make a woman do what she never thought of.


Off. Ay, do -- work -- that is what I dare be sworn you never thought of.


Bawd. No, nor ever will. A Gentlewoman, and work! I Will see you all hanged
first.


Off. Choose, and be hanged your self: You have long deserved it.


Bawd. Have I so, scoundrel? And yet you have been glad of a cast of my office
before now. While such as you are trusted with authority, as sure as thieves
are honest, strumpets chaste, Or priests hate money; this same sinful nation
Is in a hopeful way of reformation.



Exeunt. The End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. A Street in Ephesus.
Enter Bawd. BAWD. IF I could but recover Marina, and make her pliable, I
should do very well still: I could make an handsome living of her in any ground
in Asia.


Enter Bolt, singing. Bolt. Hah, Mother Coupler! How is it with thee, old
flesh-monger? thou quondam retailer of stale carrion, and propagator of
diseases. What, quite broke! no private practice! -- I know you hate to be idle
-- Though your house is shut up, you have some properties, I hope. Why, you will
make a good stroling bawd still. What never a new vamped up wench, just come
out of an hospital, to accommodate a friend with?


Bawd. Villain, traitor, thief, runaway, how dare you look me in the face?


Bolt. I am too well acquainted with your face to be afraid of it -- ugly as it
is.


Bawd. You have the impudence of old Nick.


Bolt. Then I did not converse with you so long without learning something.


Bawd. You seduced my slave.


Bolt. That Is a lie; for she seduced me.


Bawd. You deserve to be hanged for robbing me of my property. What have you
done with her?


Bolt. If I had done with her what you would have had me, we should both have
been hanged: So take the matter right, and you are obliged to me.


Bawd. Not at all: For though it happened as you say, you intended me no good.


Bolt. And pray whom did you ever intend any good to?


Bawd. Where have you put Marina?


Bolt. No where: She was taken from me before we had gone the length of the
street by the Governor's servants.


Bawd. This is your praying Lord, plague rot him for a cheating hypocrite. And
so after all my cost and pains about her to no manner of purpose, he has her
for nothing.


Bolt. No, he has n't her neither.


Bawd. That Is some comfort yet: Then perhaps I may have her again.


Bolt. When she turns strumpet, and you repent.


Bawd. Where is she?


Bolt. Where the air is as disagreeable to a bawd, as the air of a bawdy house
is to her -- in the Temple of Diana.


Bawd. I Am a ruined woman.


Bolt. You can never be long at a loss for a living: It is but removing your
quarters, and beginning your trade again where you are n't known -- if you can
find such a place.


Bawd. You're a sneering rascal. But I hope you did not let Marina go off with
the money the Governor gave her?


Bolt. No, no, I took care to lighten her of that burden.


Bawd. And where is it?


Bolt. Very safe, very safe.


Bawd. Why, you don't intend to cheat me of that too?


Bolt. I don't well understand what you mean by cheating, but am sure I should
deceive you most egregiously if I were to part with a single stiver. No, no, I
shall take care of my self: I shall keep what I have got, depend upon it.


Bawd. But what a conscience must you have in the mean time!


Bolt. Don't you and I know one another, Mother Coupler? Measure my conscience
exactly by your own, and you will find its dimensions to the breadth of a hair.


Bawd. If I ben't revenged, may I die of the pip without the comfort of an
hospital to hide my shame and misery from the world.


Bolt. Or the pleasure of deserving it.


Exeunt different ways. SCENE II. The Temple of Diana, with her statue and
altar. Near them Thaisa is discovered, sleeping; two Priestesses attending, who
come forward.
1 Priest. Sleeps the high Priestess yet?


2 Priest. If the suspension
Of sense without the benefit of rest
Be sleep, she sleeps: She Is greatly discomposed.

1 Priest. Yet trouble in her irritates devotion.
Hence day and night, before her sacred shrine,
She seeks with ardour the celestial maid,
Or watching waits her will; or if by chance
She slumbers, it is, as now, beneath her altar.

2 Priest. You must have known her long?


1 Priest. Ever since that morning,
When from the troubled bosom of the deep
The billows cast her, breathless, on the beach,
That fronts this holy temple. I was present
When the good father of Lysimachus
(And my kind uncle) by his art restored her
From her most death-like trance.

2 Priest. This, though long since
And a known truth, is still the theme of wonder.

1 Priest. I remember, when all supposed her dead,
This learned Lord did from the first affirm,
That death might for some hours usurp on nature,
And yet the fire of life kindle again
The over pressed spirits: And she lived to prove it.

2 Priest. It Is strange none ever discovered who she is.


1 Priest. From the rich robe she would on, and gems found with her,
We judged her royal: All she would disclose
Was that she lost a husband, and with him
All hopes and all desires of earthly joys.
And choosing to devote her future days
To chastity and grief, she here retired;
And took with me, who then was just prepared
To be professed, the habit Argentine.
The sacred dignity she now sustains
Was much against her will conferred upon her,
When sage Euphrion died.

2 Priest. Did you not mark
How in an instant sorrow overwhelmed her,
When news was brought from Cyprus of the death
Of the good King Simonides?

1 Priest. I did.
Her fortune's teeming with some great event.

2 Priest. The perfect likeness too there is between
Her self and sweet Marina, much amazed her.

1 Priest. And must do all that see them. But allow
The difference time must make, and they are the same:
Just what Marina is, Thaisa was
When I beheld her first.

Tha. O Pericles!


1 Priest. Did she not speak? Attend.


Tha. Art thou restored
To the long widowed arms of thy Thaisa! --
Ha! -- rises and comes forward.

1 Priest. Madam, How fare you?


Tha. 'Twas but a dream,
A flattering dream. And what is life it self,
Being justly weighed, but a mere fleeting shadow?
Most like these visions now so frequent with me --
I am troubled, and trouble you, my friends.

2 Priest. Could our best service help you, we were happy.


1 Priest. I fain would hope your present perturbation
May prove the prelude to your lasting peace.

Tha. The lasting'st peace is death: And that, perhaps,
Is what my dreams portend.

1 Priest. The Gods forbid.


Tha. The Gods do all their will: I Have long been learning
A perfect resignation to their pleasure.
My dream was this. Attending on the altar,
The Goddess seemed to animate her statue;
And, as I viewed the prodigy with terror,
Took from my brow the Crescent and Tiara,
The symbols of my office, and then struck
The smoking Censer from my trembling hand.

1 Priest. 'Twas wondrous strange.


Tha. And with a radiant smile
Consigned me to the arms of my loved Lord,
Who stood confessed and living to receive me.
With the surprise I waked.

1 Priest. A fair presage.
Our Goddess visits you as a reward
For your true piety: This dream's from her.

Tha. We doubtless think our selves of more importance
Than the wise Gods allow us.

2 Priest. Sacred Madam,
The Lord Lysimachus -- Enter Lysimachus.

Tha. He Is ever welcome.


Lys. Hail, holy Priestess, whose celestial mind
Adds whiteness to the silver robe you wear,
Have you yet learnt ought of the birth and fortunes
Of that sweet virgin I commended to you?

Tha. No, my good Lord. When ever I question her
Who and from whence she is, she answers not,
But sits her down and weeps.

Lys. I wish I knew.


Tha. Time may reveal it. She Is a miracle:
My eyes never saw her peer.

Lys. O gracious Lady,
She Is such an one that were I well assured
Came of a gentle kind and noble stock,
I Would wish no better choice.

Enter Gentleman. Gent. Most honored Sir,
There is a ship arrived of strange appearance,
The hull, sails, streamers, tackle, all are black;
From whence is in a chaloupe come on shore
A person of a great but mournful mein,
Whose chief attendant asks to be admitted
To see our Governor. What is your will?

Lys. That he have his: I pray you greet him fairly. Exit Gentleman.


Enter Escanes; and others after him, bearing Pericles. Lys. Hail, reverend
Sir: The gracious Gods preserve you.


Esc. And you, t'out-live the age that I am now,
And die as I would wish.

Lys. You greet me well.


Esc. Our vessel is of Tire, our business here,
TO implore Diana's aid for one distressed;
And such an one as in his happier days
Never forgot his duty to the Gods,
Nor let the afflicted sue to him in vain.

Lys. And may she prove propitious.


Esc. Sir, we thank you.
And further would entreat that for our gold,
Your people may supply us with provisions,
Whereof we are not destitute for want,
But weary for the staleness.

Lys. It Is a courtesy
Which if we should deny, the most just Gods
For every graft would send a caterpiller,
And so inflict our province. But inform me,
Who is that melancholy Gentleman.

Esc. He is of note (I may reveal no more)
And was a goodly person, ere disasters,
Too great for human suff'rance, sunk him thus.

Lys. Upon what ground is his distemperance?


Esc. It would be now too tedious to repeat;
But his main grief springs from the timeless loss
Of a beloved wife, and only child.

Lys. Good Sir, all hail: The Gods preserve you, hail.


Esc. It Is all in vain, my Lord; he will not speak
To any one, nor takes he sustenance
But to prolong his grief.

Lys. Yet I durst wager,
We have a maid in Ephesus would win
Some words from him.

Tha. It Is well bethought, my Lord.
She, questionless, with her sweet harmony,
And other choice attractions, would allure him,
And melt his fixed resolves: She is most happy
In form and utt'rance.

Lys. Say, we wish to see her. Exit Gentleman.


Esc. Sure all is effectless: Yet we'll omit nothing
That bears recov'ry's name.

Enter Marina. Lys. This is the virgin.
Thrice welcome, fair one.

Esc. She Is a gallant Lady.


Lys. Lovely physician of distempered minds,
We did send for thee to exert thy skill,
And matchless goodness on a noble patient;
View this majestic ruin, and then judge
By what remains how excellent a pile
Grief has defaced: Absent to all things else,
And self resigned to silence and despair,
See, he appears his own sad monument.
Now, if thy heavenly art, so prosperous
In all attempts, can win him to attention,
And draw him but to answer thee in aught;
Thy sacred physic shall receive such thanks
As thy desires can wish.

Mar. You over rate me.
But I will use my uttermost endeavors
For his recovery.

Tha. Succeed them, Heaven!
What strange unlikelihood assaults my mind!
My wild, ungoverned fancy would persuade
My memory to find some traces there,
In that marred face, yet unobliterated,
Of my long dead, long drowned Pericles. aside.

Lys. Mark, she will try the force of music first.


SONG.
Mar. Let those who are in favor with their stars,
Of public honor and proud titles boast;
While we whom fortune of such triumph bars,
Seek joy in Virtue that we honor most.
Great Princes Favorites their fair leaves spread,
But as the marygold at the Sun's eye;
While ruin in their pride but hides its head:
For at a frown their flattering glories die.
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
After a thousand victories once foiled,
Is from the book of Honor razed quite,
And all the rest forgot for which he toiled.
Then let us bear the malice of our stars,
And make our noble sufferance our boast;
Though fortune every other triumph bars,
Seek joy in Virtue that we honor most.


Tha. Marked he your music?


Mar. No, nor looked upon me.


Lys. She Will speak to him.


Mar. Sir, lend me your attention,
And behold me. Indeed I am a Maid
Who never before invited ears or eyes;
But have been sought too like an oracle,
And gazed on like a comet. Sir, she speaks,
Who, may be, has endured calamities
Might equal yours, if both were justly weighed --
Alas he heeds me not. I would give over,
But something whispers in my ear, Go on.

Per. What Siren have they found to force attention?
I Will steal a look, but not a word shall escape
From forth my lips. -- rises. O you immortal Gods!

Mar. Why do you gaze so eagerly upon me?
Why spreads that burning crimson over your face
But now so pale? If you did know me, Sir,
You would not do me harm.

Per. I do believe thee.
Nay, turn thy eyes upon me -- O how like! --
Such things I Have heard -- Inform me what thou art.

Mar. I am what I appear, a simple Maid.


Per. My long pent sorrow rages for a vent,
And will overflow in tears. Such was my wife,
And such an one my daughter might have been.
My Queen's square brows, her stature to an inch,
As wand-like strait, as silver-voic'd, her eyes
As jewels like, in pace another Juno:
And then, like her, she starves the ears she feeds,
And makes them crave the more, the more she speaks.
Where were you born? and how did you atchieve
Endowments, that you make more rich by owning?

Mar. If I should tell my story it would seem
Like lies, disdaining the disguise of truth,
And found in the reporting.

Per. Prithee, speak.
Thou seem a palace for crowned truth to dwell in:
No falsehood can come from thee. Sweet, begin,
And I will make my senses to give credit
To points that seem impossible. I think,
Thou said thou had been tossed from wrong to wrong,
And that thou thought thy griefs might equal mine,
If both were opened.

Mar. Some such thing I said,
And said no more than what I thought was likely.

Per. Rehearse what thou have born: If that considered
Prove but the thousandth part of my endurance,
I will forego my sex, thou art a man,
And I have suffered like a girl. Yet thou
Do look like patience, gazing on Kings graves,
And wooing with her smiles resolved extremity,
To spare himself, and wait a better day.
My most kind virgin, come and sit down by me.
Recount, I do beseech thee, what is thy name.

Mar. My name, Sir, is Marina.


Per. Rising O! I Am mocked,
And thou by some incensed God sent hither,
To make the world laugh at me.

Mar. Nay, have patience,
Or here I Will cease.

Per. I will, I will have patience.


Mar. That name was given me by a King and Father.


Per. How! a King's daughter too! and called Marina!


Mar. Did you not say you would believe me, Sir?
But not to be a troubler of your peace,
I will end here.

Per. But are you flesh and blood?
Have you a working pulse? are you no spirit? --
Substance and motion -- Well, where were you born?
And wherefore called Marina?

Mar. I was born
At sea, and from that circumstance so named.

Per. Hold, hold awhile. This is the rarest dream,
That ever dull sleep did mock sad fool withal.
How should this be my child? -- Buried and here,
Living and dead at once -- It cannot be.

Mar. 'Twere best I did give over.


Per. Yet give me leave.
Where were you bred? How came you to these parts?

Mar. The King, my father, did in Tharsus leave me,
Till Philoten, the Queen, sought to destroy me;
And having won a villain to attempt it,
A crew of pirates came and rescued me,
Who brought me here.

Per. You Gods! if I Am deceived
Never let me wake again -- Marina! -- O!

takes her hand. Mar. Why do you wring my wrist? Where would you draw me?
Why do you weep, good Sir? what moves you thus?
In sooth, I Am no imposture, but the daughter
Of good King Pericles.

Per. I Will praise the Gods,
Their power, and goodness, ever while I breath.
I Have been a sinful man; but from this hour,
In darkness and distress I Will wait their mercy,
And never distrust them more.

Tha. You mighty Gods!
Whose boundless goodness still delights to triumph
Over our demerits and confirmed despair,
And evidence the wisdom of your counsels,
By showing man the folly of his own;
What are you doing now to raise our wonder!
That voice and person grow familiar to me.
Does my Lord live! has Pericles a daughter!
It cannot, cannot be. Then who are these?
I Am deeply int'rested, yet know not how.
Some God, instruct me what to hope or fear,
To ask or deprecate. Stupid amazement
Obstructs my powers -- When will these clouds disperse,
And day break in on my benighted mind?

Per. But one thing more: Tell me, who was thy mother?


Mar. She was the daughter of the King of Cyprus.


Tha. O let me hear the rest.


Mar. Her name Thaisa:
Who, as Lychorida often told me weeping,
Did end the very moment I began.

Per. You Gods! you Gods! your present kindness makes
All my past mis'ries sport --
I Am Pericles of Tire.

Mar. My royal Father! -- kneels; he raises her.


Tha. You gracious Gods! if now you take me hence,
I shall not taste the joys of your Elysium. faints.

Lys. What! ho! help here: The holy Priestess dies.


Mar. The heavenly powers forbid.


Lys. She did observe
The progress of this strange discovery,
With strong emotions and unusual transports.

Per. I pray who is this Lady?


Lys. A miracle of goodness, sent by Heaven
To make this land most happy. In her bloom,
After a tempest, in the which 'twas thought
All her companions perished, she was cast
Here on our coast.

Per. Near it I lost the mother
Of my Marina.

Tha. Hark, what musick's that?


Per. These very hands did cast into those seas
The treasure of my soul.

Tha. I know it now:
It is the harmony the spheres do make --
Nay do not weep -- I am but overjoyed --
I shall recover strait.

Per. Pray, how long since
Was this strange chance you speak of?

Lys. It Is, I Have heard,
About as many years as your fair daughter
Seems to be old.

Per. I do begin to dote;
And yet the Gods are mighty as they are good.
How was she found?

Lys. Close in a sailor's coffer.
She seemed a breathless corpse; but my good father,
(Now with the Gods) by his superior skill
Did find it was not so, and by his art,
Which equaled his humanity, restored her
To health and vigor.

Tha. Where, O where is my Lord?


Per. Thaisa's voice!


Tha. Yet let me look again:
If he be none of mine, my sanctity
Shall guard me still from his licentious touch --
I Will none but Pericles.

Per. Her face, her stature,
That beauty that nor time nor grief could change --
It is, it can be, none but my Thaisa.

Tha. But dare we trust? --


Per. By Jove, I Would not be kept
A moment longer absent from thy bosom,
Though I were sure as I did press thy lips,
My high wrought spirits would dissolve to air,
And leave me cold and lifeless in thy arms.

Tha. You sons and daughters of adversity,
Preserve your innocence, and each light grief,
(So bounteous are the Gods to those who serve them)
Shall be rewarded with ten thousand joys.

Mar. My heart bounds in me, and would fain be gone
Into my mother's bosom.

Per. See who kneels there, thy Child and mine, Thaisa,
Bought almost with thy life.

Tha. And cheaply purchased.
Blessed and my own! Thou make my joy complete.

Esc. Hail, royal master.


Lys. Happy monarch, hail.


Per. O good Escanes, strike me, noble Sir,
Give me a gash, put me to present pain;
Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me,
Over bear the mounds of frail mortality,
And sweetness be my bane. O come, come both:
Thou whom the boundless ocean gave me back,
O let me bury thee a second time,
And hide thee in my heart; and thou who gave
Him life who did beget thee, come thou too:
There Is endless space, and as repleat with love
As the great deep with waters. Would our voices
Rise with our thoughts, we'd thank the holy Gods
As loud as their high thunder threatened us,
When thou wast born, and thou did seem to die.
This tribute paid not to our will but power,
I do resolve for Tharsus; there to strike
The inhospitable Queen.

Lys. I have advice,
My Lord, that she is slain by Leonine,
One who was poisoned by her.

Mar. That Is the wretch
She hired to murder me.

Lys. It Is added too,
She died in evil fame and unlamented.
Then, mighty Sir, repose your self awhile
After your weary griefs, and make our court
Proud with your presence.

Per. You're a noble host,
And sue to purchase trouble with expense;
Enjoy thy wish.

Lys. Herein I Am highly honored.
But, royal Sir, I Have yet a bolder suit.

Per. Your princely Sire preserved Thaisa's life,
And you are master of as gracious parts
In mind and form, as any I ever noted;
You shall prevail, be it to woo my daughter.

Lys. Thanks, royal Sir. If she accept my vows,
I am the very happiest of mankind.

Tha. And she, sweet maid, most happily bestowed.
O my dear Lord, he has been noble to her;
But that and all we have proved since our sad parting,
We will rehearse at leisure. I have had
From sure intelligence the heavy news
Of my good Father's death, and that our subjects
In peace and loyalty do wait our coming.

Per. Heaven make a star of him. Yet here, my Queen,
We'll celebrate their nuptials; and our selves
Will in fair Cyprus spend our future days,
And to our children leave the crown of Tire.
To cast new light on truth, in us is seen,
Though long assailed with fortunes fierce and keen,
Virtue preserved from fell destruction's blast,
Led on by Heaven, and crowned with joy at last.

The END.
EPILOGUE.
WHEN to a future race the present days
Shall be the theme of censure or of praise,
When they shall blame what is wrong, what is right allow,
Just as you treat your own forefathers now,
I Am thinking what a figure you will make,
No light concern, Sirs, where your fame's at stake.
I hope we need not urge your country's cause,
You Will guard her glory, and assert her laws,
Nor force your ruined race, mad with their pains,
To curse you as the authors of their chains,
We dare not think, we would not fear, you will;
For Britons though provoked, are Britons still.
Yet let not this kind caution give offense:
The surest friend to liberty is sense,
How that declines the drooping arts declare;
Are your diversions what your fathers were?
At masquerades, your wisdom to display,
You make the stupid farce for which you pay.
Music it self may be too dearly bought,
Nor was it sure designed to banish thought.
But, Sirs, what e'er's your fate in future story,
Well have the British Fair secured their glory.
When worse than barbarism had sunk your taste,
When nothing pleased but what laid virtue waste,
A sacred band, determined, wise, and good,
They jointly rose to stop the exotic flood,
And strove to wake, by Shakespeare's nervous lays,
The manly genius of Eliza's days.
Be it an omen of returning sense,
Others adopt our softness and expense:
Well pleased such harmless insults we may bear,
Those follies lost we have numbers yet to spare;
Unquestioned let 'em rob us of our shame --
We need but ask our treasure and our fame.
Printed for J. GRAY, at the Cross Keys in the Poultry, near Cheapside.
I. GEORGE BARNWELL. A Tragedy. Sixth Edition.

II. The Christian Hero. A Tragedy. Second Edition.

III. Fatal Curiosity. A true Tragedy of Three Acts. All three by Mr. Lillo.

IV. The Life and Character of Scanderbeg. Inscribed to the Spectators of the
Christian Hero.

V. A Journey to Bristol: Or, the Honest Welchman. A Farce. By John Hippesly.


