THE LYING VALET. IN TWO ACTS.

THE LYING VALET; In Two ACTS. As it is performed GRATIS, At The Theater in
GOODMAN'S-FIELDS.

By D. GARRICK.

LONDON: Printed for and Sold by PAUL VAILLANT, facing Southampton-Street in
the Strand; and J. ROBERTS, in Warwick Lane. 1742. (Price One Shilling.)

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Gayless Mr. Blakes. Sharp [the Lying Valet] Mr. Garrick. Justice Guttle Mr.
Paget. Beau Trippit Mr. Peterson. Dick Mr. Yates.
WOMEN.
Melissa Mrs. Yates. Kitty Pry Miss Hippisley. Mrs. Gadabout Mrs. Bambridge.
Mrs. Trippit Miss Medina. Prissy Mrs. Dunstall.
THE LYING VALET.
ACT 1. SCENE 1.
GAYLESS'S Lodgings Enter GAYLESS and SHARP. SHARP. HOW, Sir! shall you be
married Tomorrow? Eh, I Am afraid you joke with your poor humble Servant.


Gay. I tell thee, Sharp, last Night Melissa consented, and fixed tomorrow for
the happy Day.


Sharp. It Is well she did, Sir, or it might have been a dreadful one for us in
our present Condition: All your Money spent; your Movables sold; your Honor
almost ruined, and your humble Servant almost starved; we could not possibly
have stood it two Days longer -- But if this young Lady will marry you and
relieve us, of my Conscience I Will turn Friend to the Sex, rail no more at
Matrimony, but curse the Whores, and think of a Wife myself.


Gay. And yet, Sharp, when I think how I have imposed upon her, I am almost
resolved to throw myself at her Feet, tell her the real Situation of my
Affairs, ask her Pardon, and implore her Pity.


Sharp. After Marriage with all my Heart, Sir; but don't let your Conscience
and Honor so far get the better of your Poverty and good Sense, as to rely on
so great Uncertainties as a fine Lady's Mercy and Goodnature.


Gay. I know her generous Temper, and am almost persuaded to rely upon it:
What, because I am poor, shall I abandon my Honor?


Sharp. Yes, you must, Sir, or abandon me: So, pray, discharge one of us; for
eat I must, and speedily too: and you know very well that that Honor of yours,
will neither introduce you to a great Man's Table, nor get me Credit for a
single Beef-Steak.


Gay. What can I do?


Sharp. Nothing, while Honor sticks in your Throat: do gulp, Master, and down
with it.


Gay. Prithee leave me to my Thoughts.


Sharp. Leave you! No, not in such bad Company, I Will assure you! Why you must
certainly be a very great Philosopher, Sir, to moralize and declaim so
charmingly, as you do, about Honor and Conscience, when your Doors are beset
with Bailiffs, and not one single Guinea in your Pocket to bribe the Villains.


Gay. Don't be witty, and give your Advice, Sirrah!


Sharp. Do you be wise, and take it, Sir. But to be serious, you certainly have
spent your Fortune, and outlived your Credit, as your Pockets and my Belly can
testify: Your Father has disowned you; all your Friends forsook you, except
myself, who am starving with you. Now, Sir, if you marry this young Lady, who
as yet, thank Heaven, knows nothing of your Misfortunes, and by that means
procure a better Fortune than that you squandered away, make a good Husband,
and turn Oeconomist; you still may be happy, may still be Sir William's Heir,
and the Lady too no Lofer by the Bargain: There Is Reason and Argument, Sir.


Gay. 'Twas with that Prospect I first made Love to her; and though my Fortune
has been ill spent, I have, at least, purchased Discretion with it.


Sharp. Pray then convince me of that, Sir, and make no more Objections to the
Marriage: You see I am reduced to my Waistcoat already; and when Necessity has
undressed me from Top to Toe, she must begin with you; and then we shall be
forced to keep House and die by Inches. Look you, Sir, if you will not resolve to
take my Advice, while you have one Coat to your Back, I must even take to my
Heels while I have Strength to run, and something to cover me: So, Sir, wishing
you much Comfort and Consolation with your bare Conscience, I am your most
obedient and halfstarv'd Friend and Servant [Going.


Gay. Hold, Sharp, you will not leave me.


Sharp. I must eat, Sir; by my Honor and Appetite I must!


Gay. Well then, I am resolved to favor the Cheat, and as I shall quite change
my former Course of Life, happy may be the Consequences: at least of this I am
sure --


Sharp. That you cannot be worse than you are at present.


Gay. [A knocking without.] -- Who Is there?


Sharp. Some of your former good Friends, who favored you with Money at fifty
per Cent., and helped you to spend it; and are now become daily Memento's to
you of the Folly of trusting Rogues, following Whores, and laughing at my
Advice.


Gay. Cease your Impertinence! to the Door! if they are Duns, tell 'em my
Marriage is now certainly fixed, and persuade em still to forbear a few Days
longer, and keep my Circumstances a Secret for their Sakes as well as my own.


Sharp. O never fear it, Sir; they still have so much Friendship for you, not
to desire your Ruin to their own Disadvantage.


Gay. And do you hear, Sharp; if it should be any body from Melissa, say I am
not at home, lest the bad Appearance we make here should make 'em suspect
something to our Disadvantage.


Sharp. I Will obey you, Sir; -- but I am afraid they will easily discover the
consumptive Situation of our Affairs by my chop-fallen Countenance. [ Exit
Sharp.


Gay. These very Rascals who are now continually dunning and persecuting me,
were the very Persons who led me to my Ruin, partook of my Prosperity, and
professed the greatest Friendship.


Sharp. [without] Upon my word, Mrs. Kitty, my Master's not at home.


Kitty. [without.] Lookee, Sharp, I must and will see him!


Gay. Ha, what do I hear? Melissa's Maid! What has brought her here? My Poverty
has made her my Enemy too -- She is certainly come with no good Intent -- No
Friendship there, without Fees -- She Is coming up Stairs -- What must I do? --
I Will get into this Closet and listen. [ Exit Gayless.


Enter Sharp and Kitty. Kitty. I must know where he is, and will know too, Mr.
Impertinence!


Sharp. Not of me you will not. [Aside.] He Is not within, I tell you, Mrs. Kitty;
I don't know myself: do you think I can conjure?


Kitty. But I know you will lie abominably; therefore don't trifle with me. I
come from my Mistress Melissa; you know, I suppose, what is to be done tomorrow
morning?


Sharp. Ay, and tomorrow Night too, Girl!


Kitty. Not if I can help it. [Aside.] -- But come where is your Master? for
see him I must.


Sharp. Pray, Mrs. Kitty, what is your Opinion of this Match between my Master
and your Mistress?


Kitty. Why, I have no Opinion of it at all; and yet most of our Wants will be
relieved by it too: for instance now, your Master will get a Fortune, that is
what I Am afraid he wants; my Mistress will get a Husband, that is what she has
wanted for some time: you will have the Pleasure of my Conversation, and I an
Opportunity of breaking your Head for your Impertinence.


Sharp. Madam, I Am your most humble Servant! But I Will tell you what, Mrs.
Kitty, I am positively against the Match; for, was I a Man of my Master's
Fortune --.


Kitty. You Would marry if you could and mend it. Ha, ha, ha! Pray, Sharp, where
does your Master's Estate lie?


Gay. Oh the Devil! what a Question was there! [Aside]


Sharp. Lie, lie! why it lies -- faith, I cannot name any particular Place it
lies in so many: his Effects are divided, some here, some there; his Steward
hardly knows himself.


Kitty. Scattered, scattered, I suppose. But harkee, Sharp, what is become of
your Furniture? You seem to be a little bare here at present.


Gay. What, has she found out that too? [Aside.


Sharp. Why, you must know, as soon as the Wedding was fixed, my Master ordered
me to remove his Goods into a Friend's House, to make room for a Ball which he
designs to give here the Day after the Marriage.


Kitty. The luckiest Thing in the World! for my Mistress designs to have a Ball
and Entertainment here tonight before the Marriage; and that is my Business
with your Master.


Sharp. The Devil it is! [Aside.


Kitty. She Will not have it public, she designs to invite only eight or ten
Couple of Friends.


Sharp. No more?


Kitty. No more: and she ordered me to desire your Master not to make a great
Entertainment.


Sharp. Oh, never fear --


Kitty. Ten or a Dozen little nice Things, with some Fruit, I believe, will be
enough in all Conscience.


Sharp. Oh, curse your Conscience! [Aside.


Kitty. And what do you think I have done of my own Head?


Sharp. What?


Kitty. I have invited all my Lord Stately's Servants to come and see you, and
have a Dance in the Kitchen: Will Not your Master be surpised?


Sharp. Much so indeed!


Kitty. Well, be quick and find out your Master, and make what haste you can
with your Preparations: you have no Time to lose. -- Prithee, Sharp, what is the
matter with you? I have not seen you for some time, and you seem to look a
little thin.


Sharp. Oh my unfortunate Face! [Aside.] I Am in pure good Health, thank you,
Mrs. Kitty; and I Will assure you, I have a very good Stomach, never better in
all my Life, and I am as full of Vigor, Hussy! [Offers to kiss her.]


Kitty. What, with that Face! Well, bye, bye, [going] -- oh, Sharp, what
ill-looking Fellows are those, were standing about your Door when I came in?
They want your Master too, I suppose.


Sharp. Hum! Yes, they are waiting for him -- They are some of his Tenants out
of the Country that want to pay him some Money.


Kitty. Tenants! What, do you let his Tenants stand in the Street?


Sharp. They choose it; as they seldom come to Town, they are willing to see as
much of it as they can, when they o; they are raw, ignorant, honest people.


Kitty. Well, I must run home, farewell! -- But do your hear? Get something
substantial for us in the Kitchen -- a Ham, a Turkey, or what you will -- We'll
be very merry; and be sure remove the Tables and Chairs away there too, that we
may have room to dance: I cannot bear to be confined in my French Dances; tal,
lal, lal, [dancing] Well, adieu! Without any Compliment I shall die if I don't
see you soon. [Exit Kitty.


Sharp. And without any Compliment, I pray Heaven you may!


Enter Gayless. [They look for some Time sorrowful at each other.] Gay. Oh,
Sharp!


Sharp. Oh Master!


Gay. We are certainly undone!


Sharp. That Is no News to me.


Gay. Eight or ten couple of Dancers, -- ten or a dozen little nice Dishes with
some Fruit -- my Lord Stately's Servants, Ham and Turkey!


Sharp. Say no more; the very Sound creates an Appetite: and I am sure of late
I have had no Occasion for Whetters and Provocatives.


Gay. Cursed Misfortune! What can we do?


Sharp. Hang ourselves; I see no other Remedy: except you have a Receipt to
give a Ball and a Supper without Meat or Music.


Gay. Melissa has certainly heard of my bad Circumstances, and has invented
this Scheme to distress me and break off the Match.


Sharp. I don't believe it, Sir; begging your Pardon.


Gay. No, why did her Maid then make so strict an Enquiry into my Fortune and
Affairs?


Sharp. For two very substantial Reasons; the first, to satisfy a Curiosity,
natural to her as a Woman; the second, to have the Pleasure of my Conversation,
very natural to her as a Woman of Taste and Understanding.


Gay. Prithee be more serious: Is not our All at stake?


Sharp. Yes, Sir: and yet that All of ours is of so little Consequence, that a
Man, with a very small Share of Philosophy, may part from it without much Pain
or Uneasiness. However, Sir, I Will convince you in half an Hour, that Mrs.
Melissa knows nothing of your Circumstances; and I Will tell you what too, Sir,
she shall not be here tonight, and yet you shall marry her tomorrow Morning.


Gay. How, how, dear Sharp.


Sharp. It Is here, here, Sir! Warm, warm, and Delays will cool it; therefore
I Will away to her, and do you be as merry as Love and Poverty will permit you.

Would you succeed, a faithful Friend depute,
Whose Head can plan, and Front can execute.
I am the Man, and I hope you neither dispute my Friendship or Qualification.


Gay. Indeed I don't. Prithee be gone.


Sharp. I fly. [Exeunt.


SCENE, Melissa's Lodgings. Enter Melissa and Kitty. Mel. You surprise me,
Kitty! the Master not at home! the Man in Confusion! no Furniture in the House!
and ill-looking Fellows about the Doors! It Is all a Riddle.


Kitty. But very easy to be explained.


Mel. Prithee explain it then, nor keep me longer in Suspense.


Kitty. The Affair is this, Madam, Mr. Gayless is over Head and Ears in Debt;
you are over Head and Ears in Love; you will marry him tomorrow, the next Day
your whole Fortune goes to his Creditors, and you and your Children are to live
comfortably upon the Remainder.


Mel. I cannot think him base.


Kitty. But I know they are all base -- You are very young, and very ignorant
of the Sex; I am young too, but have more Experience: you never was in Love
before; I have been in Love with an hundred, and tried 'em all; and know 'em to
be a Parcel of barbarous, perjured, deluding, bewitching Devils.


Mel. The low Wretches you have had to do with, may answer the Character you
give 'em; but Mr. Gayless --


Kitty. Is a Man, Madam.


Mel. I hope so, Kitty, or I would have nothing to do with him.


Kitty. With all my Heart -- I have given you my Sentiments upon the Occasion,
and shall leave you to your own Inclinations.


Mel. Oh, Madam, I am much obliged to you for your great Condescension, ha, ha,
ha! However, I have so great a Regard for your Opinion, that had I certain
Proofs of his Villainy --


Kitty. Of his Poverty you may have a hundred: I am sure I have had none to the
contrary.


Mel. Oh, there the Shoe pinches. [Aside.


Kitty. Nay, so far from giving me the usual Perquisites of my Place, he has
not so much as kept me in Temper with little endearing Civilities; and one
might reasonably expect when a Man is deficient in one Way, that he should make
it up in another. [Knocking without.


Mel. See who is at the Door. [ Exit Kitty] -- I must be cautious how I hearken
too much to this Girl: Her bad Opinion of Mr. Gayless seems to arise from his
Disregard of her --

Enter Sharp and Kitty. So, Sharp; have you found your Master? Will Things be
ready for the Ball and Entertainment?


Sharp. To your Wishes, Madam. I have just now bespoke the Music and Supper,
and wait now for your Ladyship's farther Commands.


Mel. My Compliments to your Master, and let him know I and my Company will be
with him by Six; we design to drink Tea, and play at Cards, before we dance.


Kitty. So shall I and my Company, Mr. Sharp. [Aside.


Sharp. Mighty well, Madam!


Mel. Prithee, Sharp, what makes you come without your Coat? It Is too cool to
go so airy, sure.


Kitty. Mr. Sharp, Madam, is of a very hot Constitution, ha, ha, ha!


Sharp. If it had been ever so cool I have had enough to warm me since I came
from home, I Am sure; but no matter for that. [Sighing.


Mel. What do you mean?


Sharp. Pray don't ask me, Madam; I beseech you don't: Let us change the
Subject.


Kitty. Insist upon knowing it, Madam -- My Curiosity must be satisfied, or I
shall burst. [Aside.


Mel. I do insist upon knowing -- On pain of my Displeasure, tell me!


Sharp. If my Master should know -- I must not tell you, Madam, indeed.


Mel. I promise you, upon my Honor, he never shall.


Sharp. But can your Ladyship insure Secrecy from that Quarter?


Kitty. Yes, Mr. Jackanapes, for any thing you can say.


Mel. I Will engage for her.


Sharp. Why then, in short, Madam -- I cannot tell you.


Mel. Don't trifle with me.


Sharp. Then since you will have it, Madam -- I lost my Coat in Defense of your
Reputation.


Mel. In Defense of my Reputation!


Sharp. I will assure you, Madam, I Have suffered very much in Defense of it;
which is more than I would have done for my own.


Mel. Prithee explain.


Sharp. In short, Madam, you was seen about a Month ago, to make a visit to my
Master alone.


Mel. Alone! my Servant was with me.


Sharp. What, Mrs. Kitty? So much the worse; for she was looked upon as my
Property; and I was brought in guilty as well as you and my Master.


Kitty. What, your Property, Jackanapes?


Mel. What is all this?


Sharp. Why, Madam, as I came out but now to make Preparations for you and your
Company tonight; Mrs. Pryabout, the Attorney's Wife at next Door, calls to me;
Hark'ee, Fellow! says she, Do you and your modest Master know that my Husband
shall indite your House, at the next Parish Meeting, for a Nuisance?


Mel. A Nuisance!


Sharp. I said so -- A Nuisance! I believe none in the Neighborhood live with
more Decency and Regularity than I and my Master, as is really the Case --
Decency and Regularity, cries she, with a Sneer, -- why, Sirrah, does not my
Window look into your Master's Bedchamber? And did not he bring in a certain
Lady, such a Day? describing you, Madam. And did not I see --


Mel. See! Oh scandalous? What?


Sharp. Modesty requires my Silence.


Mel. Did not you contradict her?


Sharp. Contradict her! Why, I told her I was sure she ly'd: for, zounds! said
I, for I could not help swearing, I am so well convinced of the Lady's and my
Master's Prudence, that, I am sure, had they a mind to amuse themselves they
would certainly have drawn the Window-Curtains.


Mel. What, did you say nothing else? Did not you convince her of her Error and
Impertinence?


Sharp. She swore to such Things, that I could do nothing but swear and call
Names: upon which, out-bolts her Husband upon me, with a fine taper Crab in his
Hand, and fell upon me with such Violence, that, being half delirious, I made a
full Confession.


Mel. A full Confession! What did you confess?


Sharp. That my Master loved Fornication; that you had no Aversion to it; that
Mrs. Kitty was a Bawd, and your humble Servant a Pimp.


Kitty. A Bawd! a Bawd! Do I look like a Bawd, Madam?


Sharp. And so, Madam, in the Scuffle, my Coat was torn to pieces as well as
your Reputation.


Mel. And so you joined to make me infamous!


Sharp. For Heaven's sake, Madam, what could I do? His Proofs fell so thick
upon me, as Witness my Head, [shewing his Head plaister'd] that I would have
given up all the Maidenheads in the Kingdom, rather than have my Brains beat to
a Jelly.


Mel. Very well! -- but I Will be revenged! -- And did not you tell your Master
of this?


Sharp. Tell him! No, Madam! Had I told him, his Love is so violent for you,
that he would certainly have murdered half the Attorneys in Town by this Time.


Mel. Very well! -- But I Am resolved not to go to your Master's to Night.


Sharp. Heavens and my Impudence be praised. [Aside.]


Kitty. Why not, Madam? If you are not guilty, face your Accusers.


Sharp. Oh the Devil! Ruined again! [Aside.] To be sure, face 'em by all means,
Madam -- They can but be abusive, and break the Windows a little: -- Besides,
Madam, I have thought of a Way to make this Affair quite diverting to you -- I
have a fine Blunderbuss charged with half a hundred Slugs, and my Master has a
delicate large Swiss Broad Sword; and between us, Madam, we shall so pepper and
slice 'em, that you will die with laughing.


Mel. What, at Murder?


Kitty. Don't fear, Madam, there will be no Murder if Sharp's concerned.


Sharp. Murder, Madam! It Is Self defense; besides, in these Sort of Skirmishes,
there are never more than two or three killed: for, supposing they bring the
whole Body of Militia upon us, down but with a Brace of them, and away fly the
rest of the Covey.


Mel. Persuade me never so much, I will not go; that is my Resolution.


Kitty. Why then, I Will tell you what, Madam; since you are resolved not to go
to the Supper, suppose the Supper was to come to you: It Is great Pity such
great Preparations as Mr. Sharp has made should be thrown away.


Sharp. So it is, as you say, Mrs Kitty. But I can immediately run back and
unbespeak what I have ordered; it is soon done.


Mel. But then what Excuse can I send to your Master? He Will be very uneasy at
my not coming.


Sharp. Oh terribly so! -- but I have it -- I Will tell him you are very much out
of Order -- that you were suddenly taken with the Vapors or Qualms; or what
you please, Madam.


Mel. I Will leave it to you, Sharp, to make my Apology; and there is half a
Guinea for you to help your Invention.


Sharp. Half a Guinea! -- It Is so long since I had any thing to do with Money,
that I scarcely know the current Coin of my own Country. Oh, Sharp, what
Talents have thou! To secure thy Master; deceive his Mistress; out-lie her
Chambermaid; and yet be paid for thy Honesty! But my Joy will discover me.
[aside] Madam, you have eternally fixed Timothy Sharp your most obedient humble
Servant! -- Oh the Delights of Impudence and a good Understanding! [ Exit Sharp.


Kitty. Ha, ha, ha! Was there ever such a lying Varlet? With his Slugs and his
Broad Swords; his Attorneys and broken Heads, and Nonsense! Well, Madam, are
you satisfied now? Do you want more Proofs?


Mel. Of your Modesty I do: but, I find, you are resolved to give me none.


Kitty. Madam?


Mel. I see through your little mean Artifice: you are endeavoring to lessen Mr.
Gayless in my Opinion, because he has not paid you for Services he had no
Occasion for.


Kitty. Pay me, Madam! I am sure I have very little Occasion to be angry with
Mr. Gayless for not paying me, when, I believe, it is his general Practice.


Mel. It Is false! He Is a Gentleman and a Man of Honor, and you are --


Kitty. Not in Love, I thank Heaven! ( curtseying)


Mel. You are a Fool.


Kitty. I have been in Love; but I am much wiser now.


Mel. Hold your Tongue, Impertinence!


Kitty. That Is the severest Thing she has said yet. ( aside)


Mel. Leave me.


Kitty. Oh this Love, this Love is the Devil! [ Exit Kitty.


Mel. We discover our Weaknesses to our Servants, make them our Confidents, put
'em upon an Equality with us, and so they become our Advisers. -- Sharp's
Behavior, though I seemed to disregard it, makes me tremble with Apprehensions;
and though I have pretended to be angry with Kitty for her Advice, I think it of
too much Consequence to be neglected.


Enter Kitty. Kitty. May I speak, Madam?


Mel. Don't be a Fool. What do you want?


Kitty. There is a Servant just come out of the Country, says, he belongs to
Sir William Gayless, and has got a Letter for you from his Master upon very
urgent Business.


Mel. Sir William Gayless! What can this mean? Where is the Man?


Kitty. In the Little Parlour, Madam.


Mel. I Will go to him -- My Heart flutters strangely. [ Exit Melissa.


Kitty. Oh Woman, Woman, foolish Woman! she will certainly have this Gayless:
nay, were she as well convinced of his Poverty as I am, she would have him. -- A
strong Dose of Love is worse than one of Ratifia; when it once gets into our
Heads, it trips up our Heels, and then Good Night to Discretion. Here is she
going to throw away fifteen thousand Pounds; Upon what? Faith, little better
than Nothing. -- He Is a Man, and that is all -- and Heaven knows mere Man is but
small Consolation.

Be this Advice pursued by each fond Maid,
Never slight the Substance for an empty Shade:
Rich, weighty Sparks alone should please and charm ye;
For should Spouse cool, his Gold will always warm ye.

End of the FIRST ACT.
ACT. II.
Enter GAYLESS and SHARP. Gay. PRithee be serious, Sharp. Have thou really
succeeded?


Sharp. To our Wishes, Sir. In short I have managed the Business with such
Skill and Dexterity that neither your Circumstances, nor my Veracity are
suspected.


Gay. But how have thou excused me from the Ball and Entertainment?


Sharp. Beyond Expectation, Sir. -- But in that particular I was obliged to
have recourse to Truth, and declare the real Situation of your Affairs. I told
her we had so long disused our selves to dressing either Dinners or Suppers,
that I was afraid we should be but awkward in our Preparations. In short, Sir,
-- at that instant a cursed Gnawing seized my Stomach, that I could not help
telling her, that both you and myself seldom make a good Meal nowadays once
in a Quarter of a Year.


Gay. Hell and Confusion, have you betrayed me, Villain! Did not you tell me
this Moment, she did not in the least suspect my Circumstances?


Sharp. No more she did, Sir, till I told her.


Gay. Very well; and was this your Skill and Dexterity?


Sharp. I was going to tell you; but you will not hear Reason; my melancholy Face
and piteous Narration had such an Effect upon her generous Bowels, that she
freely forgives all that is past.


Gay. Does she, Sharp?


Sharp. Yes; and desires never to see your Face again; and, as a farther
Consideration for so doing, she has sent you Half-a-Guinea. ( shows the Money.)


Gay. What do you mean?


Sharp. To spend it, spend it, Sir; and regale.


Gay. Villain, you have undone me!


Sharp. What, by bringing you Money, when you are not worth a Farthing in the
whole World? Well, well, then to make you happy again, I Will keep it myself; and
wish Somebody would take it in their Head to load me with such Misfortunes. (
puts up the Money.)


Gay. Do you laugh at me, Rascal?


Sharp. Who deserves more to be laughed at? Ha, ha, ha. Never for the future,
Sir, dispute the Success of my Negociations, when even you, who know me so
well, cannot help swallowing my Hook. Why, Sir, I could have played with you
backwards and forwards at the End of my Line, till I had put your Senses into
such a Fermentation, that you should not have known in an Hour's Time, whether
you was a Fish or a Man.


Gay. Why, what is all this you have been telling me?


Sharp. A downright Lie from Beginning to End.


Gay. And have you really excused me to her?


Sharp. No, Sir; but I have got this Half Guinea to make her Excuses to you;
and, instead of a Confederacy between you and me to deceive her, she thinks she
has brought me over to put the Deceit upon you.


Gay. Thou excellent Fellow!


Sharp. Don't lose Time, but slip out of the House immediately; the Back-way, I
believe, will be the safest for you, and to her as fast as you can; pretend
vast Surprise and Concern, that her Indisposition has debarred you the Pleasure
of her Company here to Night: You need know no more; away!


Gay. But what shall we do, Sharp? Here Is her Maid again.


Sharp. The Devil she is. -- I wish I could poison her; for I Am sure, while she
lives, I can never prosper.


Enter Kitty. Kitty. Your Door was open, so I did not stand upon Ceremony.


Gay. I am sorry to hear your Mistress is taken so suddenly.


Kitty. Vapors, Vapors only, Sir, a few matrimonial Omens, that is all; but I
suppose Mr. Sharp has made her Excuses.


Gay. And tells me I cannot have the Pleasure of her Company to Night, I had
made a small Preparation; but it is no Matter: Sharp shall go to the rest of the
Company, and let 'em know it is put off.


Kitty. Not for the World, Sir; my Mistress was sensible you must have provided
for her, and the rest of the Company; so she is resolved, though she cant', the
other Ladies and Gentlemen shall partake of your Entertainment; she is very good
natured.


Sharp. I had better run, and let 'em know it is deferred. [going]


Kitty. [stopping him] I have been with 'em already, and told 'em my Mistress
insists upon their coming, and they have all promised to be here; so, pray,
don't be under any Apprehensions, that your Preparations will be thrown away.


Gay. But as I cannot have her Company, Mrs. Kitty, 'twill be a greater Pleasure
to me, and a greater Compliment to her, to defer our Mirth; besides, I cannot
enjoy any thing at present, and she not partake of it.


Kitt. Oh, no to be sure; but what can I do? My Mistress will have it so, and
Mrs. Gad-about, and the rest of the Company will be here in a few Minutes;
there are two or three Coachfuls of 'em.


Sharp. Then my Master must be ruined in spite of my Parts.


Gay. ( Aside to Sharp) It Is all over, Sharp.


Sharp. I know it, Sir.


Gay. I shall go distracted; what shall I do?


Sharp. Why, Sir, as our Rooms are a little out of Furniture at present, take
'em into the Captain's that lodges here, and set 'em down to Cards; if he
should come in the mean time, I Will excuse you to him.


Kitt. I have disconcerted their Affairs, I find; I Will have some Sport with
'em. -- Pray, Mr. Gayless, don't order too many Things, they only make you a
friendly Visit; the more Ceremony, you know, the less Welcome. Pray, Sir, let
me entreat you not to be profuse. If I can be of Service, pray command me; my
Mistress has sent me on purpose; while Mr. Sharp is doing the Business without
Doors, I may be employed within; if you will lend me the Keys of your Side-board
( to Sharp) I Will dispose of your Plate to the best Advantage.


Sharp. Thank you, Mrs. Kitty; but it is disposed of already. [Knocking at the
Door.


Kitty. Bless me the Company's come, I Will go to the Door and conduct 'em into
your Presence. [ Exit Kitty.


Sharp. If you would conduct 'em into a Horsepond, and wait of 'em there yourself,
we should be more obliged to you.


Gay. I can never support this!


Sharp. Rouse your Spirits and put on an Air of Gaiety, and I don't despair of
bringing you off yet.


Gay. Your Words have done it effectually.


Enter Mrs. Gadabout, her Daughter and Niece, Mr. Guttle, Mr. Trippit and Mrs.
Trippit. Gad. Ah my dear Mr. Gayless! [ Kisses him.


Gay. My dear Widow! [ Kisses her.


Gad. We are come to give you Joy, Mr. Gayless.


Sharp. You never was more mistaken in your Life. [Aside.


Gad. I have brought some Company here, I believe, is not so well known to you,
and I protest I have been all about the Town to get the little I have --
Prissy, my Dear -- Mr. Gayless, my Daughter.


Gay. And as handsome as her Mother; you must have a Husband shortly, my Dear.


Priss. I Will assure you I don't despair, Sir.


M. Gad. My Niece too.


Gay. I know by her Eyes she belongs to you, Widow.


M. Gad. Mr. Guttle Sir, Mr. Gayless, Mr. Gayless, Justice Guttle.


Sharp. Oh Destruction! one of the Quorum.


Gut. Hem, Though I had not the Honor of any personal Knowledge of you, yet at
the Instigation of Mrs. Gadabout, I have, without any previous Acquaintance
with you, throw'd aside all Ceremony to let you know that I joy to hear the
Solemnization of your Nuptials is so near at hand.


Gay. Sir, though I cannot answer you with the same Elocution, however, Sir, I
thank you with the same Sincerity.


M. Gad. Mr. and Mrs. Trippet, Sir, the properest Lady in the World for your
Purpose, for she will dance for four and twenty Hours together.


Trip. My dear Charles, I am very angry with you, faith; so near Marriage and
not let me know, 'twas barbarous; you thought, I suppose, I should rally you
upon it; but dear Mrs. Trippet here has long ago eradicated all my
antimatrimonial Principles.


Mrs. Trip. I eradicate, fie, Mr. Trippet, don't be so obscene.


Kit. Pray, Ladies, walk into the next Room; Mr. Sharp cannot lay his Cloth till
you are set down to Cards.


Gad. One Thing I had quite forgot; Mr. Gayless, my Nephew who you never saw,
will be in Town from France presently, so I left Word to send him here
immediately to make one.


Gay. You do me Honor, Madam.


Sharp. Do the Ladies choose Cards or the Supper first?


Gay. Supper! what does the Fellow mean?


Glut. Oh, the Supper by all Means, for I have eat nothing to signify since
Dinner.


Sharp. Nor I, since last Monday was a Fortnight. [Aside.


Gay. Pray, Ladies, walk into the next Room: Sharp, get Things ready for
Supper, and call the Music.


Sharp. Well said, Master.


Gad. Without Ceremony, Ladies. [Exeunt Ladies.


Kitty. I Will to my Mistress, and let her know every Thing is ready for her
Appearance. [ Exit Kitty.


Guttle and Sharp. Gut. Pray Mr. what is your Name, don't be long with Supper;
but harkee, what can I do in the mean Time? Suppose you get me a Pipe and some
good Wine, I Will try to divert myself that way till Supper's ready.


Sharp. Or suppose, Sir, you was to take a Nap till then, there is a very easy
Couch in that Closet.


Gut. The best Thing in the World, I Will take your Advice, but be sure to wake
me when Supper is ready. [ Exit Guttle


Sharp. Pray Heaven you may not wake till then -- What a fine Situation my
Master is in at present? I have promised him my Assistance, but his Affairs are
in so desperate a Way, that I am afraid it is out of all my Skill to recover
'em. Well, Fools have Fortune, says an old Proverb, and a very true one it is,
for my Master and I are two of the most unfortunate Mortals in the Creation.


Enter Gayless. Gay. Well, Sharp, I have set 'em down to Cards, and now what
have you to propose?


Sharp. I have one Scheme left which in all Probability may succeed. The good
Citizen overloaded with his last Meal, is taking a Nap in that Closet, in Order
to get him an Appetite for yours. Suppose, Sir, we should make him treat us.


Gay. I don't understand you.


Sharp. I Will pick his Pocket, and provide us a Supper with the Booty.


Gay. Monstrous! for without considering the Villainy of it, the Danger of
waking him makes it impracticable!


Sharp. If he wakes, I Will smother him, and lay his Death to Indigestion -- a
very common Death among the Justices.


Gay. Prithee be serious, we have no Time to lose; can you invent nothing to
drive 'em out of the House?


Sharp. I can fire it.


Gay. Shame and Confusion so perplex me, I cannot give myself a Moment's
Thought.


Sharp. I have it; did not Mrs. Gadabout say her Nephew would be here?


Gay. She did.


Sharp. Say no more, but into your Company; if I don't send 'em out of the House
for the Night, I Will at least frighten their Stomachs away; and if this
Stratagem fails, I Will relinquish Politics, and think my Understanding no
better than my Neighbors.


Gay. How shall I reward thee, Sharp?


Sharp. By your Silence and Obedience; away to your Company, Sir. [ Exit
Gayless.

Now, dear Madam Fortune, for once open your Eyes, and behold a poor
unfortunate Man of Parts addressing you; now is your Time to convince your
Foes, you are not that blind whimsical Whore they take you for; but let 'em see
by your assisting me, that Men of Sense, as well as Fools, are sometimes
entitled to your Favor and Protection. -- So much for Prayer, now for a great
Noise and a Lie. [goes aside and cries out.

Help, help, Master; help, Gentlemen, Ladies; Murder, Fire, Brimstone; help,
help, help!


Enter Mr. Gayless and the Ladies, with Cards in their Hands, and Sharp enters
running and meets 'em. Gay. What Is the Matter?


Sharp. Matter, Sir, if you don't run this Minute with that Gentleman, this
Lady's Nephew will be murdered; I am sure 'twas he, he was set upon the Corner
of the Street, by four; he has killed two, and if you don't make haste, he will be
either murdered or took to Prison.


Gad. For Heaven's Sake, Gentlemen, run to his Assistance. How I tremble for
Melissa! this Frolic of here is may be fatal. ( Aside.


Gay. Draw, Sir, and follow me. [ Exit Gay. and Gad.


Trip. Not I; I don't care to run myself into needless Quarrels; I have suffered
too much formerly by flying into Passions: besides, I have pawned my Honor to
Mrs. Trippet, never to draw my Sword again; and in her present Condition, to
break my Word might have fatal Consequences.


Sharp. Pray, Sir, don't excuse yourself, the young Gentleman may be murdered by
this Time.


Trip. Then my Assistance will be of no Service to him; however -- I Will go to
oblige you, and look on at a Distance.


Mrs. Trip. I shall certainly faint, Mr. Trippit, if you Draw.


Enter Guttle, disordered, as from Sleep. Gut. What Noise and Confusion is this?


Sharp. Sir, there is a Man murdered in the Street.


Gay. Is that all -- zounds, I was afraid you had throw'd the Supper down -- a
Plague of your Noise -- I shall not recover my Stomach this half Hour.


Enter Gayless and Gadabout, with Melissa in Boy's Clothes, dressed in the
French Manner. Gad. Well, but my dear Jemmy, you are not hurt, sure?


Mel. A little with riding Post only.


Gad. Mr. Sharp alarmed us all with an Account of your being set upon by four
Men; that you had killed two, and was attacking the other when he came away,
and when we met you at the Door, we were running to your Rescue.


Mel. I had a small Rencounter with half a dozen Villains; but finding me
resolute, they were wise enough to take to their Heels; I believe I scrat some
of 'em. [laying her Hand to her Sword.]


Sharp. His Vanity has saved my Credit. I have a Thought come into my Head may
prove to our Advantage, provided Monsieur's Ignorance bears any Proportion to
his Impudence. [Aside.]


Gad. Now my Fright's over, let me introduce you, my Dear, to Mr. Gayless; Sir,
this is my Nephew.


Gay. [Saluting her] Sir, I shall be proud of your Friendship.


Mel. I don't doubt but we shall be better acquainted in a little Time.


Gut. Pray, Sir, what News in France?


Mel. Faith, Sir, very little that I know of in the political Way; I had no
Time to spend among the Politicians. I was --


Gay. Among the Ladies, I suppose.


Mel. Too much indeed. Faith, I have not Philosophy enough to resist their
Solicitations; you take me [ to Gayless aside.]


Gay. Yes, to be a most incorrigible Fop, God's Death, this Puppy's Impertinence is
an Addition to my Misery. [ Aside to Sharp.]


Mel. Poor Gayless, to what Shifts is he reduced to? I cannot bear to see him
much longer in this Condition, I shall discover my self. [ Aside to Gadabout.]


Gad. Not before the End of the Play; besides, the more his Pain now, the
greater his Pleasure when relieved from it.


Trip. Shall we return to our Cards? I have a sans prendre here, and must
insist you play it out.


Ladies. With all my Heart.


Mel. Allons donc.


[ As the Company goes out, Sharp pulls Melissa by the Sleeve.] Sharp. Sir,
Sir, shall I beg Leave to speak with you? Pray, did you find a Bank-note in
your Way hither?


Meliss. What, between here and Dover do you mean?


Sharp. No, Sir, within twenty or thirty Yards of this House.


Meliss. You are drunk, Fellow.


Sharp. I am undone, Sir; but not drunk, I Will assure you.


Meliss. What is all this?


Sharp. I Will tell you, Sir: A little while ago my Master sent me out to change
a Note of Twenty Pounds; but I unfortunately hearing a Noise in the Street of,
Damn-me, Sir, and clashing of Swords, and Rascal, and Murder; I runs up to the
Place, and saw four Men upon one; and having heard you was a mettlesome young
Gentleman, I immediately concluded it must be you, so ran back to call my
Master, and when I went to look for the Note to change it, I found it gone,
either stole or lost; and if I don't get the Money immediately, I shall
certainly be turned out of my Place, and lose my Character. --


Mel. I shall laugh in his Face. [Aside.] Oh, I Will speak to your Master about
it, and he will forgive you at my Intercession.


Sharp. Ah, Sir! You don't know my Master.


Mel. I Am very little acquainted with him; but I have heard he is a very
good-natured Man.


Sharp. I have heard so too, but I have felt it otherwise; he has so much
Goodnature, that, if I could compound for one Brokenhead a Day, I should think
my self very well off.


Meliss. Are you serious, Friend?


Sharp. Look'e, Sir, I take you for a Man of Honor; there is something in your
Face that is generous, open, and masculine; you don't look like a foppish,
effeminate Tell-tale; so I Will venture to trust you. -- See here, Sir, [shews
his Head,] these are the Effects of my Master's Goodnature.


Mel. Matchless Impudence! [Aside.] Why do you live with him then after such
Usage?


Sharp. He Is worth a great deal of Money, and when he is drunk, which is
commonly once a Day, he is very free, and will give me any thing; but I design
to leave him when he is married for all that.


Mel. Is he going to be married then?


Sharp. Tomorrow, Sir, and, between you and I, he will meet with his Match both
for Humor and something else too.


Mel. What, she drinks too?


Sharp. Damnably, Sir; but mum, -- You must know this Entertainment was
designed for Madam to Night; but she got so very gay after Dinner, that she
could not walk out of her own House; so her Maid, who was half gone too, came
here with an Excuse, that Mrs. Melissa had got the Vapors, and so she had
indeed violently; here, here, Sir.

[pointing to his Head.]
Mel. This is scarcely to be born. [Aside] Melissa! I have heard of her; they
say she is very whimsical.


Sharp. A very Woman, and please your Honor, and, between you and I, none of
the mildest or wisest of her Sex -- but to return, Sir, to the Twenty Pounds.


Mel. I am surpised, you, who have got so much Money in his Service, should be
at a Loss for twenty Pounds, to save your Bones at this Juncture.


Sharp. I have put all my Money out at Interest; I never keep above five Pounds
by me; and if your Honor would lend me the other fifteen, and take my Note for
it. [Knocking.]


Mel. Somebody's at the Door.


Sharp. I can give very good Security. [Knocking.]


Mel. Don't let the People wait Mr. --


Sharp. Ten Pounds will do. [Knocking.]


Mel. Allez vous en.


Sharp. Five, Sir. [Knocking.]


Mel. Je ne puis pas.


Sharp. Je ne puis pas. -- I find we shall not understand one another, I do but
lose Time; and, if I had any Thought, I might have known these young Fops
return from their Travels generally with as little Money as Improvement. [Exit
Sharp.


Mel. Ha, ha, ha, what Lies does this Fellow invent, and what Rogueries does he
commit for his Master's Service? There never sure was a more faithful Servant
to his Master, or a greater Rogue to the rest of Mankind; but here he comes
again, the Plot thickens, I Will in and observe Gayless. [Exit Melissa.


Enter Sharp before several Persons with Dishes in their Hands, and a Cook
drunk. Sharp. Fortune, I thank thee, the most lucky Accident! [aside.] This
Way, Gentlemen, this Way.


Cook. I am afraid I have mistook the House. Is this Mr. Treatwell's?


Sharp. The same, the same: What, don't you know me?


Cook. Know you! -- Are you sure there was a Supper bespoke here?


Sharp. Yes: Upon my Honor, Mr. Cook, the Company is in the next Room, and
must have gone without, had not you brought it. I Will draw in a Table. I see you
have brought a Cloth with you; but you need not have done that, for we have a
very good Stock of Linen -- at the Pawn-broker's. [Aside.] --

[Exit, and returns immediately drawing in a Table. Come, come, my Boys, be
quick, the Company began to be very uneasy; but I knew my old Friend Lick-spit
here would not fail us.


Cook. Lick-spit! I am no Friend of yours; so I desire less Familiarity:
Lick-spit too!


Enter Gayless, and stares. Gay. What is all this?


Sharp. Sir, if the Sight of the Supper is offensive, I can easily have it
removed. [ Aside to Gayless.]


Gay. Prithee explain thy self, Sharp.


Sharp. Some of our Neighbors, I suppose, have bespoke this Supper; but the
Cook has drank away his Memory, forgot the House, and brought it here; however,
Sir, if you dislike it, I Will tell him of his Mistake, and send him about his
Business.


Gay. Hold, hold, Necessity obliges me against my Inclination to favor the
Cheat, and feast at my Neighbor's Expense.


Cook. Hark you, Friend, is that you Master?


Sharp. Ay, and the best Master in the World.


Cook. I Will speak to him then -- Sir, I have, according to your Commands,
dressed as genteel a Supper as my Art and your Price would admit of.


Sharp. Good again, Sir, it is paid for. [ Aside to Gayless.


Gay. I don't in the least question your Abilities, Mr. Cook, and I am obliged
to you for your Care.


Cook. Sir, you are a Gentleman, -- and if you would but look over the Bill and
approve it [pulls out a Bill] you will ever and above return the Obligation.


Sharp. Oh the Devil!


Gay. [looking on a Bill] Very well, I Will send my Man to pay you Tomorrow.


Cook. I Will spare him that Trouble, and take it with me, Sir -- I never work
but for ready Money.


Gay. Hah?


Sharp. Then you will not have our Custom. [Aside.

My Master is busy now, Friend; do you think he will not pay you?


Cook. No Matter what I think; either my Meat or my Money.


Sharp. 'Twill be very ill-convenient for him to pay you Tonight.


Cook. Then I Am afraid it will be ill-convenient to pay me Tomorrow, so do you
hear --


Enter Melissa. Gay. Prithee be advised, god's death, I shall be discovered. [Takes
the Cook aside.


Meliss. [ to Sharp] What Is the Matter?


Sharp. The Cook has not quite answered my Master's Expectations about the
Supper, Sir, and he is a little angry at him, that is all.


Mel. Come, come, Mr. Gayless, don't be uneasy, a Bachelor cannot be supposed
to have Things in the utmost Regularity; we don't expect it.


Cook. But I do expect it, and will have it.


Mel. What does that drunken Fool say?


Cook. That I will have my Money, and I will not stay till Tomorrow -- and, and
--


Sharp. [runs and stops his Mouth] Hold, hold, what are you doing? Are you mad?


Mel. What do you stop the Man's Breath for?


Sharp. Sir, he was going to call you Names -- don't be abusive, Cook, the
Gentleman is a Man of Honor, and said nothing to you; pray be pacified, you
are in Liquor.


Cook. I will have my --


Sharp. [holding still] Why, I tell you, Fool, you mistake the Gentleman, he is
a Friend of my Master's, and has not said a Word to you -- Pray, good Sir, go
into the next Room; the Fellow's drunk, and takes you for another -- You Will
repent this when you are sober, Friend -- Pray, Sir, don't stay to hear his
Impertinence.


Gay. Pray, Sir, walk in -- He Is below your Anger.


Mel. Damn the Rascal! what does he mean by affronting me! -- Let the Scoundrel
go, I Will polish his Brutality, I warrant you: Here Is the best Reformer of
Manners in the Universe. [Draws his Sword.] Let him go, I say.


Sharp. So, So, you have done finely, now -- Get away as fast as you can; he is
the most courageous mettlesome Man in all England -- Why, if his Passion was
up, he could eat you. -- Make your Escape, you Fool!


Cook. I will not -- Eat me! He Will find me damned hard of Digestion though --


Sharp. Prithee come here; let me speak with you. [They walk aside.


Enter Kitty. Kitty. Gad's me, is Supper on the Table already? -- Sir, pray
defer it for a few Moments; my Mistress is much better, and will be here
immediately.


Gay. Will she indeed! Bless me -- I did not expect -- but however -- Sharp?


Kitty. What Success, Madam? [ Aside to Melissa.


Mel. As we could wish, Girl -- but he is in such Pain and Perplexity I cannot
hold it out much longer.


Kitty. Ay, that not holding out is the Ruin of half our Sex.


Sharp. I have pacified the Cook, and if you can but borrow twenty Pieces of
that young Prig, all may go well yet; you may succeed though I could not:
Remember what I told you -- about it straight, Sir --


Gay. Sir, Sir, [to Melissa] I beg to speak a Word with you; my Servant, Sir,
tells me he has had the Misfortune, Sir, to lose a Note of mine of twenty
Pounds, which I sent him to receive -- and the Bankers Shops being shut up, and
having very little Cash by me, I should be much obliged to you if you would
favor me with twenty Pieces till tomorrow.


Mel. Oh Sir, with all my Heart [Taking out her Purse] and as I have a small
Favor to beg of you, Sir, the Obligation will be mutual.


Gay. How may I oblige you, Sir?


Mel. You are to be married, I hear, to Melissa.


Gay. Tomorrow, Sir.


Mel. Then you will oblige me, Sir, by never seeing her again.


Gay. Do you call this a small Favor, Sir!


Mel. A mere Trifle, Sir -- breaking of Contracts, suing for Divorces,
committing Adultery, and such like, are all reckoned Trifles nowadays; and
smart young Fellows, like you and myself, Gayless, should be never out of
Fashion.


Gay. But pray, Sir, how are you concerned in this Affair!


Mel. Oh Sir, you must know I have a very great Regard for Melissa, and,
indeed, she for me; and by the by, I have a most despicable Opinion of you;
for, enter nous, I take you, Charles, to be a very great Scoundrel.


Gay. Sir!


Mel. Nay, don't look fierce, Sir! and give yourself Airs -- Damme, Sir, I
shall be through your Body else in the snapping of a Finger.


Gay. I Will be as quick as you, Villain! [ Draws and makes at Melissa.


Kitty. Hold, hold, Murder! you will kill my Mistress -- the young Gentleman I
mean.


Gay. Ah! her Mistress! [Drops his Sword.


Sharp. How! Melissa! nay, then drive away Cart. -- All Is over now.


Enter all the Company laughing. Gad. What, Mr. Gayless, engaging with Melissa
before your Time. Ah, ah, ah!


Kitty. Your humble Servant, good Mr. Politician, [ to Sharp.] This is,
Gentlemen and Ladies, the most celebrated and ingenious Timothy Sharp, Schemer
General and redoubted Squire to the most renowned and fortunate Adventurer
Charles Gayless, Knight of the Woeful Countenance: Ha, ha, ha! -- Oh that
dismal Face, and more dismal Head of yours. [ Strikes Sharp upon the Head.]


Sharp. It Is cruel in you to disturb a Man in his last Agonies.


Mel. Now, Mr. Gayless! -- what, not a Word! you are sensible I can be no
Stranger to your Misfortunes, and I might reasonably expect an Excuse for your
ill Treatment of me.


Gay. No, Madam, Silence is my only Refuge; for to endeavor to vindicate my
Crimes would show a greater Want of Virtue than even the Commission of 'em.


Mel. Oh, Gayless! 'twas poor to impose upon a Woman, and one that loved you
too.


Gay. Oh most unpardonable; but my Necessities --


Sharp. And mine, Madam, were not to be matched, I Am sure, of this side
starving.


Mel. His Tears have softened me at once -- Your Necessities, Mr. Gayless, with
such real Contrition are too powerful Motives not to affect the Breast already
prejudiced in your Favor -- You have suffered too much already for your
Extravagance; and as I take part in your Sufferings, it is easing myself to
relieve you: know therefore, all that is past I freely forgive.


Gay. You cannot mean it sure; I am lost in Wonder.


Mel. Prepare yourself for more Wonder -- You have another Friend in Masquerade
here: Mr. Cook, pray throw aside your Drunkenness, and make your sober
Appearance -- Don't you know that Face, Sir?


Cook. Ay, Master, what, have you forgot your Friend Dick, as you used to call
me?


Gay. More Wonder indeed! don't you live with my Father?


Mel Just after your hopeful Servant there had left me, comes this Man from Sir
William with a Letter to me; upon which (being by that wholly convinced of your
necessitous Condition) I invented, by the Help of Kitty and Mrs. Gadabout, this
little Plot, in which your Friend Dick there has acted Miracles, resolving to
teaze you a little, that you might have a greater Relish for a happy Turn in
your Affairs. Now, Sir, read that Letter, and complete your Joy.


Gay. [Reads] Madam, I am Father to the unfortunate young Man, who, I hear by a
Friend of mine (that by my Desire, has been a continual Spy upon him) is making
his Addresses to you; if he is so happy as to make himself agreeable to you
(whose Character I am charmed with) I shall own him with Joy for my Son, and
forget his former Follies. I am, Madam, Your most Humble Servant. William
Gayless.

P.S. I will be soon in Town myself to congratulate his Reformation and
Marriage.


Oh, Melissa, this is too much; thus let me show my Thanks and Gratitude,
[Kneeling, she raises him] for here it is only Due.

Sharp. A Reprieve! a Reprieve! a Reprieve!


Kitty. I have been, Sir, a most bitter Enemy to you; but since you are likely
to be a little more conversant with Cash than you have been, I am now with the
greatest Sincerity your most obedient Friend and humble Servant. And I hope,
Sir, all former Enmity will be forgotten.


Gay. Oh, Mrs. Pry, I have been too much indulged with Forgiveness myself not
to forgive lesser Offenses in other People.


Sharp. Well then, Madam, since my Master has vouchsafed Pardon to your
Handmaid Kitty, I hope you will not deny it to his Footman Timothy.


Mel. Pardon! for what?


Sharp. Only for telling you about ten thousand Lies, Madam, and, among the
rest, insinuating that your Ladyship would --


Mel. I understand you: and can forgive any thing, Sharp, that was designed for
the Service of your Master; and if Pry and you will follow our Example, I Will
give her a small Fortune as a Reward for both your Fidelities.


Sharp. I fancy, Madam, 'twould be better to half the small Fortune between us,
and keep us both single; for as we shall live in the same House, in all
probability we may taste the Comforts of Matrimony, and not be troubled with
its Inconveniences; what say you, Kitty?


Kitty. Do you hear, Sharp, before you talk of the Comforts of Matrimony, taste
the Comforts of a good Dinner, and recover your Flesh a little; do, Puppy.


Sharp. The Devil backs her, that is certain; and I am no Match for her at any
Weapon.


Mel. And now, Mr. Gayless, to show I have not provided for you by halves, let
the Music prepare themselves, and, with the Approbation of the Company, we'll
have a Dance.


All. By all means, a Dance.


Gut. By all means a Dance; after Supper though. --


Sharp. Oh, pray, Sir, have Supper first, or, I Am sure, I shall not live till the
Dance is finished.


Gay. Behold, Melissa, as sincere a Convert as ever Truth and Beauty made. The
wild impetuous Sallies of my Youth are now blown over, and a most pleasing Calm
of perfect Happiness succeeds.


Thus Aetna 's Flames the verdant Earth consume,
But milder Heat makes drooping Nature bloom:
So virtuous Love affords us springing Joy,
Whilst vicious Passions, as they burn, destroy.
FINIS.

