LOVE in the SUDS; A TOWN ECLOGUE BEING THE LAMENTATION of ROSCIUS FOR THE LOSS
of his NYKY.

Dixin' ego vobis, in hoc esse Atticam elegantiam? TER. Oh me infelicem! --
-- quae laudarum quantum luctus habuerint!
PHAED. With ANNOTATIONS and an APPENDIX.

THE FIFTH EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. WHEBLE, PATERNOSTER ROW.

MDCCLXXII.

To DAVID GARRICK, Esquire.
SIR,
THE author of the following Eclogue, having requested my assistance to
introduce it to the world; it was with more indignation than surprise I was
informed of your having used your extensive influence over the press to prevent
its being advertised in the Newspapers. How are you, Sir, concerned in the
Lamentation of Roscius for his Nyky? Does your modesty think no man entitled to
the appellation of Roscius but yourself? Does Nyky resemble any nicknamed
favorite of yours? Or does it follow, that if you have cherished an unworthy
favorite, you must bear too near a resemblance to him? Qui capit ille facit;
beware of self-accusation, where others bring no charge! Or, granting you right
in these particulars, by what right or privilege do you, Sir, set up for a
licenser of the press? That you have long successfully usurped that privilege,
to swell both your fame and fortune, is well known. Not the puffs of the quacks
of Bayswater and Chelsea are so numerous and notorious: but by what authority
do you take upon you to shut up the general channel, in which writers usher
their performances to the public? If they attack either your talents or your
character, in utrumque paratus, you are armed to defend yourself. You have,
besides your ingenuous countenance and conscious innocence; Nil conscire sibi,
nulla pallescere culpa; Besides this brazen bulwark, I say, you have a ready
pen and a long purse. The press is open to the one, and the bar is ever ready
to open with the other. For a poor author, not a printer will publish a
paragraph, not a pleader will utter a quibble. You have then every advantage in
the contest: It is needless, therefore, to endeavor to intimidate your
antagonists by countenancing your retainers to threaten their lives! These
intimidations, let me tell you Sir, have an ugly, suspicious look. They are
besides needless; the genus irritabile vatum want no such personal
provocations; Heaven knows, the life of a play-wright, like that of a spider,
is in a state of the most slender dependency. It is well for my rhiming friend
that his hangs not on so slight a thread. He thinks, nevertheless, that he has
reason to complain, as well as the public, of your having long preferred the
flimzy, translated, patch'd-up and mis-altered pieces of your favorite
compilers, to the arduous attempts at originality of writers, who have no
personal interest with the manager. In particular, he thinks the two pieces,
you are projecting to get up next winter, for the emolument of your favorite in
disgrace, or to reimburse yourself the money, you may have advanced him, might,
for the present at least, be laid aside.

But you will ask me, perhaps, in turn, Sir, what right I have to interfere
with the business of other people, or with yours? I will answer you. It is
because I think your business, as patentee of a theater royal, is not so
entirely yours, but that the public also have some concern in it. You, Sir,
indeed have long behaved as if you thought the town itself a purchased
appurtenance to the theater; but, though the scenes and machines are yours; nay,
though you have even found means to make comedians and poets your property; it
should be with more caution than you practice, that you extend your various
arts to make so scandalous a property of the public.

Again I answer, it is because I have some regard for my friend, and as much
for myself, whom you have treated as ill perhaps as you have done any other
writer; while under your auspices, some of the persons stigmatized by the
satirist, have frequently combined to do me the most essential injury. But nemo
me impure lacessit. Not that I mean now to enter into particulars which may be
thought to relate too much to myself and too little to the public. When I
shall have leisure to draw a faithful portraiture of Mr. Garrick, not only from
his behavior to me in particular, but from his conduct toward poets, players
and the town in general, I doubt not to convince the most partial of his
admirers that he has accumulated a fortune, as manager, by the meanest and
most meretricious devices, and that the theatrical props, which have long
supported his exalted reputation, as an actor, have been raised on the ruins of
the English stage.

In the mean time, I leave you to amuse yourself with the following jeu
d'esprit of my friend; hoping, though it be a severe correction for the errors
of your past favouritism, it may prove a salutary guide to you for the future.
With regard to the mode of its publication I hope also to stand excused with
the reader for thus interposing to defeat the success of those arts, which you
so unfairly practice to prevent, from reaching the public eye, whatever is
disagreeable to your own.

I am, Sir, Yours, etc. W. KENRICK.

LOVE in the SUDS; A TOWN ECLOGUE.
WHITHER away, now, GEORGE The brother and constant companion of ROSCIUS; the
Mercury of our theatrical Jupiter, whom he dispatches with his divine commands
to mortal poets and miserable actors.
, into the city,
And to the village, must thou bear my ditty.
Seek NYKY out, while I in verse complain,
And court the Muse to call him back again.
Boeotian Nymphs, my favorite verse inspire;
As erst ye NYKY taught to strike the lyre.
For he like PHOEBUS' self can touch the string,
And opera-songs compose -- like any thing!
What shall I do, now NYKY'S fled away?
For who like him can either sing or say?
IMITATIONS.
Quo te, Moeri, pedes; an quo via ducit in urbem?
Nymphae, noster amor, Libethrides, nunc mihi carmen,
Quale meo Codro, concedite; proxima Phoebi
Versibus ille facit. --
Quid facerem?

For me, alas! who well composed the song
When lovely PEGGY PEGGY WOFFINGTON, on whom our ROSCIUS, then her inamorato,
made a famous song, beginning with the following stanza: Once more I Will tune
the vocal shell,
To bills and dales my passion tell,
A flame which time can never quell,
That burns for thee, my Peggy
. Time, however, effects strange things, as the poet says, and many have been
the passions which have since agitated, and have been also quelled in the bosom
of ROSCIUS.


lived, and I was young;
By age impaired, my piping days are done,
My memory fails, and even my voice is gone.
My feeble notes I yet must strive to raise;
Boeotian Muses! aid my feeble lays:
A little louder, and yet louder still,
Aid me to raise my failing voice at will;
Aid me as loud as Hercules did bawl,
For Hylas lost, lost NYKY back to call;
While London town, and all its suburbs round
In echoes, NYKY, NYKY, back resound.
IMITATIONS.
-- Saepe ego longos
Cantando puerum memini me condere soles
Nunc oblita mihi tot carmina: vox quoque Moerim
Jam fugit ipsa --
Omnia fert aetas, animum quoque.
-- Musae paulo majora canamus.
-- Hylan nautae quo font relictum
Clamaffeat; ut littus Hyla, Hyla, omne sonaret.

Whom fliest thou, frantic youth, and whence thy fear?
Blessed had there never been a grenadier!
Unhappy NYKY, by what frenzy seized,
Could thou with such a monstrous thing be pleased?
What, though thyself a loving horse-marine, NYKY is a half-pay officer of
marines A horse-marine is a kind of meretricious HOBBYHORSE, modo vir modo
foemina.

A common foot-soldier's a thing obscene.
Not fabled Nymphs, by spleen turned into cows,
Bellowed to nasty bulls their amorous vows;
Though turned their loving horns upon each other,
Butting in play, as brother might with brother.
Unhappy NYKY, whither do thou stray,
Lost to thy friends, over hills and far away?
IMITATIONS.
Quem fugis? Ah demens! --
Et fortunatam, si nunquam armenta fuissent,
Pasiphaen nivei solatur amore juvenci.
Oh, virgo infelix, quae te dementia cepit?
Proetides implerunt falsis mugitibus agros:
At non tum turpes pecudum tamen ulla secuta est
Concubitus: quamvis collo timuisset aratrum,
Et saepe in levi quaesisset cornua front.
Ah, virgo infelix, tu nunc in montibus erras!

Yet to Euryalus as Nisus true,
So shall thy ROSCIUS, NYKY, prove to you;
Whether by impulse moved, itself divine,
Or so I Am bound to call it, as it is mine,
A mighty feat presents itself to view,
Which for our mutual gain I yet will do.
Mean-time do thou beware, while I bemoan,
How far thou trustest seas or lands unknown.
To Tyber's stream, or to the banks of Po,
Safe in thy love, safe in thy virtue, go;
Yet even there with caution be thou kind,
And look out sharp and frequently behind.
But ah, beware, nor trust, though native Mud, NYKY it seems was born and bred in
Ireland; where his christian name was John. How he came by the Jewish
appellation of Isaac is not generally known. Whether it was bestowed upon him
for his resemblance to the chosen people, given him by poetical license, may
possibly be a matter of disquisition for future scholiasts.

The banks of Liffy, or of Shannon's flood;
Or there, if driven by fate, be hushed thy strain?
Nor of thy wayward lot, nor mine complain.
IMITATIONS.
Nisus ait, "Diine hunc ardorem mentibus addunt
Euryale? An sua cuique deus sit dira Cupido?
Aut pugnam, aut aliquid jamdudum invadere magnum
Men's agitat mihi --
Hac iter eft; tu ne qua manus se attollere nobis
A tergo possit, custodi et consule long.

(...) By this most precious relick, here I pledge
Myself to save him from the halter's edge:
And not myself alone, but every friend
Shall all his interest and assistance lend.
Quaint B --, beholding the rude mob with scorn,
Shall tell how Irish bards are gentle born;
Next I, to captivate the learned bench,
Will strait affirm that NYKY writes good French; See the Sessions-paper; in
which this admirableplea is made use of by ROSCIUS to exculpate a culprit
accused of murder.

Thy timid nature JOHNSON shall maintain, See the same; in which this pompous
pseudo-philosopher affects to suppose cowardice incompatible with the character
of an Italian bravo.

In words no dictionary can explain.
Goldsmith, good-natured man, shall next defend,
His foster-brother, So called from having not long since made one in a
poetical triumvirate, which gave occasion to the following verses in imitation
of Dryden's famous epigram on Milton; "Three poets in three distant ages born,"
etc. Poor Dryden! what a theme badst thou,
Compared to that which offers now?
What are your Britons, Romans, Grecians,
Compared with thorough-bred Milesians?
Step into Griffin's shop, he will tell ye
Of Goldsmith, Bickerstaff, and Kelly,
Three poets of one age and nation,
Whose more than mortal reputation,
Mounting in trio to the skies
Over Milton's same and Virgil's flies.
Nay, take one Irish evidence for the other,
Even Homer's self is but their foster-brother.

countryman, and friend:
Shall prove the humbler passions, now and then,
Are incidental to us little men;
IMITATIONS.
Hanc ego magnanimi spolium Didymaonis hastam,
Ut semel est avulsa jugis a matre perempta,
Quae neque jam frondes virides neque proferet umbras,
Fida ministeria et duras obit horrida pugnas
Testor.
VAL. FLAC.
And that the part our gentle NYKY played
Was but philosophy in masquerade. It seems indeed to be growing into fashion
for philosophy to go in masquerade, if there be any truth in the subject of the
following; which lately appeared in the public prints. To Doctor GOLDSMITH, on
seeing his name in the list of the mummers at the late masquerade.
Say should the philosophic mind disdain
That good which makes each humbler bosom vain;
Let (...) taught pride dissemble all it can,
Such Rule things are great to little man.
GOLDSMITH.
How widely different, Goldsmith, are the ways
Of doctors now, and those of ancient days!
Theirs taught the truth in academic shades,
Ours haunt lewd hops, and midnight masquerades!
So changed the times! say philosophic sage,
Whose genius suits so will this tasteful age,
Is the Pantheon, late a sink obscene,
Become the fountain of chaste Hippocrene?
Or do thy moral numbers quaintly flow
Inspired by the Aganippe of Soho?
Do wisdom's sons gorge cates and vermicelli
Like beastly Bickerstaff or bothering Kelly?
Or art thou tired of the undeserved applause
Bestowed on bards affecting virtue's cause?
Would thou, like Stern, resolved at length to thrive,
Turn pimp and die cock-bawd at sixty-five,
Is this the good that makes the humble vain,
The good philosophy should not disdain
If so, let pride dissemble all it can,
A modern sage is still much less than man.
MORNING CHRONICLE.

Let me no longer, then, my loss deplore,
But to his ROSCIUS, Muse, my NYK restore.
IMITATIONS.
Ducite ab urbe domum mea carmina ducite Daphnim.

For who like him will patch and pilfer plays,
Yielding to me the profit and the praise?
Though cheap in French translations MURPHY deals;
For cheap he well may vend the goods he steals;
Though modest CRADDOC scorns to sell his play,
But gives the good-for-nothing thing away;
What though the courtly CUMBERLAND succeeds
In writing stuff no man of letters reads;
Though sense and language are expelled the stage;
For nonsense pleases best a senscless age;
What though the author of the New Bath Guide
Up to the skies my talents late has cried; The compliments passed between
these celebrated geniuses indeed were mutual; Mr. A. commending ROSCIUS for his
fine acting, and ROSCIUS in return Mr. A. for his fine writing. The panegyric
on both sides was equally modest and just; and yet some snarling epigrammatist
could not forbear throwing out the following ill-natured jeu d'esprit on the
occasion. On the poetical compliments lately passed between Mess. G. and A

. When mincing masters, met with misses,
Pay mutual compliments for kisses;
Miss Polly sings no doubt divinely,
And master Jacky spouts as finely.
But how I hate such odious greeting,
When two old stagers have a meeting.
Foh! out upon the filthy pother!
What! men beslobber one another!


Though humble HIFFERNAN in pay, I keep,
Still my fast friend, when he is fast asleep;
Though long the Hodmandod my friend has been,
With the land-tortoise eathed at Turnham-Green: Two amphibious monsters, well
known in the republic of letters as editors of the Critical and Monthly
Reviews. The latter seems to be compared by the poet to a land-torroise buried
in the earth, on account of the slowness of its motion and the clouds of dirt
and dullness with which it is surrounded: the former has been long known by
the above appellation from the following humorous description. LUSUS NATUREAE
TYPOGRAPHUS.
Monstrum horrendum inform ingens cui lumen ademptum. VIRG. I thought some of
Nature's journeymen had made men, and not made them well; they imitated
humanity so abominably. SHAKESPEARE.
In Nature's workshop, on a day,
Her journeymen inclined to play,
Half drank 'twixt cup and can,
Took up a clod which see with care
Was modelling a huge sea bear,
And swore they would make it a man.
They tried, but, bandling ill their tools,
Formed, like a pack of bungling fools,
A thing so gross and odd;
That, when it rolled about the dish,
They know not if 'twere flesh or fish,
A man or Hodmandod.
Yet, to complete their piece of fun,
They christened it Arch Hamilton;
"But what can this thing do?;
Kick it down stairs; the devil's in it
If it will not do to write and print
The Critical Review.
KENRICK.

Though HARRY WOODFALL, BALDWIN, EVANS, SAY, Editors and printers of newspapers,
well known to the public for their impartiality in regard to ROSCIUS.

My puffs in fairest order full display;
Impartially insert each friendly PRO,
Suppressing ever CON of every foe; A recent instance of this must not pass
unnoticed. In the Public Advertiser appeared lately the following quaint
panegyric, suggested probably to ROSCIUS himself by his brother GEORGE the
attorney. Nature against G -- Notice of Process.
Dame Nature against G -- now by me
Her action brings, and thus she grounds her plea.
"I never made a man but still
You acted like that man at will;
Yet ever must I hope in vain
To make a man like you again."
Hence ruined totally by you,
She brings her suit, etc. etc.
B. Solicitor for the Plaintiff.
In reply to this notice, it is said, the defendant's plea would have appeared
in the same paper; but the cause was obliged to be removed by certiorari to an
other court; when it appeared thus:

Nature against G -- Defendant's Plea.
For G -- I without a fee
Against Nature thus put in his plea.
"To make a man, like me, of art,
Is not, it is true, dame Nature's part;
I own that Scrub, fool, knave I Have played
With more success than all my trade;
But prove it, plaintiff, if you can,
That ever I acted like a man."
Of this we boldly make denial. --
Join issue, and proceed to trial.
A. Attorney for the Defendant.


For well I ween, they wot that cons and pros
Will tend my faults and follies to expose:
Though mighty TOM does still my champion prove,
And LOCKYER'S gauntlet be a chicken glove:
Though shambling BECKET, The famous THOMAS A BECKET, feigned by the poets to
have been drowned, when, being half seas over, in claret, he endeavored to
return to land: on which occasion a wicked wit of the town made the following
epitaph for his tomb. Here lies
That shuffling, shambling, shrugging, shrinking shrimp,
Tom Becket, Mammon's most industrious imp!

proud to soothe my pride,
Keeps ever shuffling on my right hand side;
What though with well-tim'd flattery, loud he cries,
At each theatric stare, "See, see his eyes!"
What though he will fetch and carry at command,
And kiss, true spaniel-like, his master's hand;
With admiration NYK never heard me speak,
But pressed the kiss of love upon my cheek; A customary method it seems, of
NYKY'S expressing his admiration of the acting of the immortal ROSCIUS.

Incessant clapped at the end of every speech;
And, had I let him, would have kissed my b --!
Let me no longer, then, my loss deplore,
But to his ROSCIUS, Muse, my NYK restore.
But hah! what discord strikes my listening ear?
Is NYKY dead, or is some critic near?
Curse on that Ledger and that damned Whitehall Newspapers so called, in which
ROSCIUS is not a sharer, and has not yet come up to the price of their silence.

How players and managers they daily maul!
IMITATIONS.
Dacite ab urbe domum mea carmina ducite Daphnim.

Curse on that Morning-Chronicle; whose tale
Is never known with spightful wit to fail.
Curse on that FOOT; who in ill-fated hour
Trod on the heels of my theatric-power;
Who, ever ready with some biting joke,
My peace has long and would my heart have broke.
Curse on his horse -- one leg! but ONE to break!
"A kingdom for a horse" -- to break his neck!
Curse on that STEVENS, GEORGE ALEXANDER STEVENS the lecturer, not the Macaroni
editor of Shakespeare.
with his Irish breeding,
While I am acting, shall that wretch be reading?
Curse on all rivals, or in same or profit;
The Fantoccini still make something of it! What formidable rivals to the
immortal ROSCIUS? Harlequin, Scaramouch, Chimney-sweeper, Bass-viol,
Astrologer, Child, Statue and Parrot! But ROSCIUS having received a formal
challenge from Mr. Punch and his merry family, a pitch'd-battle, for which
great preparations are now making, will be fought between them next winter;
when there is no doubt but the triumphant ROSCIUS will, even at their own
weapons, rout them all. There is the less reason to fear this, as he has
already exceeded even Mr. -- 's activity in King Richard. It is but three or
four years ago since this mockmonarch died so tamely that he was hissed off the
stage; on which occasion the following epigram appeared in the papers. ROSCIUS
REDIVIVUS.
George! did not I hear the critics hiss,
When I was dead? -- "Yes, brother, yes,
"You did not die in high rant."
Nay, if they think a dying king
Like Harlequin convulsed, should spring,
Let -- be hence their tyrant.
ROSCIUS, however, has changed his mind, and acquired new elastic powers; in
so much that the following complimentary verses appeared on the agility, which
he lately displayed in the performance of that character.

Be dumb, ye critics, dare to hiss no more
While crowded boxes, pit and galleries roar.
Who says that Roscius feels the hand of Time,
To blast his blooming laurels in their prime?
With ever supple limbs and pliant tongue,
Roscius, like Hebe, will be ever young.
See and believe your eyes -- did ever you see
So great a feat of pure agility?
Nor Hughes nor Astley, vaulting in the air,
Like Roscius makes the struck spectators stare.
Nor Lun nor Woodward ever gave the spring,
He gave last night in Richard, dying king!
The immortal actor, who can die so clever,
In spite of fate will live to die for ever!


Curse on that KENRICK, A Briton blunt, bred to plain mathematics,
Who hates French b -- gres, and Italian pathics.

with his caustic pen,
Who scorns the hate, and hates the love of MEN;
Who with such force envenomed satire writes,
Deeper his ink than aquafortis The plaintive ROSCIUS seems here to have an
eye to the following lines:

The wits who drink water, and suck sugar candy,
Impute the strong spirit of Kenrick to brandy.
They are not so much out: the matter in short is
He sips aqua-vitae and spits aquafortis.
PUBLIC ADV.
bites.
Stand his perpetual-motion This multifarious genius pretends to have
discovered the Perpetual motion, but it must be a mere pretense; as he is weak
enough to think the public ought to reward him for his discovery, and offers to
disclose it on the simple terms of no purchase no pay.
ever still;
Or, if it move, oh, let it move up hill.
The curse of Sisiphus, oh, let him feel;
The curse of Fortune's still recurring wheel
That upward rolled with anxious toil and pain,
The summit almost gained, rolls back again.
Never shall his FALSTAFF Falstaff's Wedding, a play written in imitation of
Shakespeare; at first rejected, as unfit for the theater, on account of having
so many of Shakespeare's known characters in it; though the manager himself
afterward brought on a pageant, in which were almost all Shakespeare's known
characters; when finding it difficult to make any of them speak with propriety,
he contented himself with instructing them to bite their thumbs, screw up their
mouths, and make faces at each other, to the great edification of the audience.
-- This play indeed was afterward almost entirely altered, and got up for a
performer's benefit, when it was received with the greatest applause. It has
however never since been acted, either for the author's emolument or the
entertainment of the public, although the alterations were made at the
instance of the manager; and under his promise that, if it succeeded in the
representation, it should be permitted to have a run.
come again to life;
Never shall be played again his WIDOWED WIFE; Another comedy, nearly under the
same predicament with respect to the town: having been performed but once since
its first run, though received with approbation; the manager in the mean while
having brought on, and repeatedly acted, the performances of his favorite
play-wrights, to almost empty benches: and yet ROSCIUS has all the while
pretended to have the highest opinion of the talents, and the greatest regard
for the interest of the writer. -- The manager claims a legal right, indeed, as
patentee, to perform what plays he pleases; but though the playhouse and patent
be his property, he has no liberal right to make, at pleasure, a property of
the players, the poets and the public!

Never will I court again his stubborn Muse,
But for a pageant would his play refuse.
While puff and pantomime will gull the town,
It Is good to keep o'erweening merit down;
IMITATIONS.
Aut pefes aut urges ruiturum, Sysiphe, saxum.

With BICKERSTAFF and CUMBERLAND go shares,
And grind the poets as I grind the players.
Curse on that KENRICK, soul of spleen and whim!
What are my puffs, and what my gains to him?
If poor and proud, can he of right complain
That wealthier men and wittier are as vain?
Why must he hint that I am past my prime,
To blast my fading laurels ere their time?
Death to my fame, and what, alas, is worse,
It Is death, damnation, to my craving purse;
Capacious purse! by PLUTUS formed to hold,
(The God of Wealth) the devil and all of gold.
Insatiate purse, that never yet ran over,
But swallows all, and gapes, like Hell, for more.
And yet, alas! how much the world will lie!
They call me miser; but no miser I;
He, brooding over his bags, delighted sits,
And laughs to scorn the jests of envious wits;
If fast his doors, he sets his heart at rest,
And dotes with rapture on his iron chest;
No galling paper-squibs his spirits teize,
But even the boys may hoot him if they please.
IMITATIONS.
Sordidus ac dives, populi contemnere voces
Si solitus: populus me sibilat: at mihi plaudo
Ipse domi, simul ac nummos contemplor in area.

He scorns the whistling of an empty name,
While I am torn 'twixt avarice and fame;
While I, so tremblingly alive all over,
Still bleed and agonize at every pore;
At every hiss am harrow'd up with fear,
And burst with choler at a critick's sneer.
Racked by the gout and stone, and struck with age,
Prudence and Ease advise to quit the stage;
But Fame still prompts, and Pride can feel no pain;
And Avarice bids me sell my soul for gain.
Bring NYKY back, O Muse! by verse divine,
The Trojan-Greeks were once transformed to swine.
By verse divine B -- TTI 'scap'd the rope:
Now love is known, what may not lovers hope!
Even as with Griffins Unnatural monsters, familiar only with the poets.
stallions late have joined
With bloodhounds goats may litter, as in kind;
IMITATIONS.
Ducite ab urbe domum, mea carmina ducite Daphnim:
Carminibus Circe socios mutavit Ulyssei:
Carmina vel coelo possunt deducere lunam.
Nunc scio quid sit amor --
-- quid non speremus amantes?
Jungentur jam Gryphes equis, aevoque sequenti
Cum canibus timidi venient ad pocula damae.

Nay wanton kids devouring wolves may greet,
And wolves with loving lyonesses meet.
By different means is different love made known.
And each fond lover will prefer his own.
Strange lot of love! two friends, my soul's delight,
Men call that M -- r, this a Catamite!
Yet bring him back; for who chaste roundelay
Shall sing, now B -- ST -- FF is driven away?
Who now correct, for modest Drury Lane,
Loose Wycherly's or Congreve's looser vein?
With nice decorum shunning naughty jokes,
Exhibit none but decent, dainty folks? NYKY was employed by ROSCIUS to correct
the Plain-dealer of Wycherly; which he accordingly attempted, and inscribed the
attempt to his patron, "as a tribute of affection and esteem for his many
shining and amiable qualities." "The licentiousness of Wycherly's muse," says
this modern corrector, "rendered her shocking to us, with all her charms: or,
in other words, we could allow no charms in a tainted beauty, who brought
contagion along with her." Of the play of the Plain-dealer, in particular, he
intimates that it had been long excluded the theater; because, to the honor of
the present age, it was immoral and indecent: that on a close examination, he
found in it excessive obscenity; that the character of Manly was rough even to
outrageous brutality; and that he thought it necessary to work the whole
materials up again, with a mixture of alloy agreeable to the rules of modern
refinement! SEE PREFACE TO B -- FF'S PLAIN-DEALER. What a champion for decency
and delicacy, morality and humanity! What improvement may not sterling wit
receive from the mixture of such alloy! What an idea may we not hence acquire
of modern refinement!

IMITATIONS.
Torva leaena lupum sequitur, lupus ipse capellam,
Te Corydon, O Alexis: trahit sua quemque voluptas.

Ah me! how wanton wit will shame the stage,
And shock this delicate, this virtuous age!
How will Plain-dealers A character thus admirably depicted by Wycherly, in the
scene between Manly and Plausible. Manly. I have more of the mastiff than the
spaniel in me, I own it: I cannot fawn, and fetch and carry; neither will I
ever practice that servile complaisance, which some people pique themselves on
being masters of. -- I will not whisper my contempt or hatred; call a man fool
or knave by signs and mouths, over his shoulder; while I have him in my arms: I
will not, as you do --


Plausible. As I do! Heaven defend me! upon my honor! I never attempted to
abuse or lessen any one in my life.


Manly. What! you were afraid?


Plausible. No: but seriously I hate to do a rude thing. No, faith, I speak
well of all mankind.


Manly. I thought so: but know that this is the worst sort of detraction, for
it takes away the reputation of the few good men in the world by making all
alike! Now I speak ill of many men, because they deserve it.



triumph, to my sorrow!
And PAPHOS rise over SODOM and GOMORRAH!
(...) APPENDIX.
A Certain circumstance, Viz. The gross publication of a direct, abominable
charge against ROSCIUS, in the Public Ledger of June 18.
to which the author of the foregoing piece was an utter stranger, having
happened about the time of its publication, and given rise to rumors equally
false and foreign to the writer; it appears that Roscius, or some of his
friends, was pleased to insert the following queries in the Morning Chronicle
of July 2d.

CANDOR presents her compliments to Mr. --, she begs his pardon -- to Dr. --
Kenrick, and desires to ask him a few simple questions; to which, if he be the
Plain-dealer he pretends, he will give a plain and direct answer.

Query I. Whether you are not the author of the eclogue, entitled, Love in the
Suds, as well as of the letter prefixed to it? II. Whether you did not mean,
though you have artfully evaded the law, by affecting the translation of a
classical cento, to throw out the most scandalous insinuations against the
character of Roscius? III. Whether you were not likewise the author of an
infamous, anonymous paragraph in a public paper; for which that paper is under
a just prosecution? IV. Whether you have not openly acknowledged
notwithstanding, that you really entertained a very different opinion of
Roscius? V. Whether any cause of dispute, that might subsist between you and
Roscius, can authorize so cruel, so unmanly an attack? VI. Whether the brother
of Roscius did not personally wait on you to require, in his name, the
satisfaction of a gentleman, which you refused him?
CANDOR.


To these queries, the author judged it expedient to make the following reply
in the same paper of July 4th.

To CANDOR.
MADAM,
Though I think your signature a misnomer, to show that I am no stranger to the
name and quality you assume, I shall not stand on the punctilio of your being
an anonymous querist; but answer your several questions explicitly.

I. I am the author of the eclogue you mention. II. I did not mean to throw out
the most scandalous insinuations on the character of Roscius, nor any
insinuation more scandalous than his conduct. How far that has been so, he
knows best, and is left to make the application. III. An infamous paragraph I
cannot write; and an anonymous one I will not write, to prejudice my greatest
enemy. As to that in question, I have not, to this hour, even seen it. CALUMNY
I detest; but I think vice should be exposed to infamy; nor have I so much
false delicacy as to conceive, it should be treated with tenderness in
proportion as it is abominable. IV. I have not acknowledged that I entertain a
very different opinion of Roscius; on the contrary, I declare, that I entertain
a very indifferent opinion of him. V. As to the cause of our dispute, I should
be very ready to submit it to the public, were I egotist enough to think it
deserved their attention. VI. The brother of Roscius did personally wait on me,
to desire I would meet "him, the said Roscius, who would bring a friend with
him; I being at liberty to do the same;" but as nothing of time, place, or
weapon was mentioned, I did not look on this message as a challenge; nor well
could I, as I never heard of requiring gentleman's satisfaction by letter of
attorney, and the professed end of our meeting turned merely on a matter of
business. -- It is possible, indeed, the messenger, otherwise instructed, might
imagine it such, especially as, it seems, his head has teemed with nothing but
challenges and duels, since his magnanimous monomachy with one of his brother
Roscius's candle-snuffers. -- That Roscius himself, however, did not mean to
send me a challenge, is plain, from his soliciting afterward by letter, a
conference in the presence only of a common friend to both: a request that
would have been complied with, had not he thought proper, in a most
ungentleman-like manner, to make a confidant, in the mean time, of a booby of a
bookseller, who had the folly and impudence to declare that he would, on his
[Roscius's] account, take an opportunity to do me some desperate mischief. --
Lest I should be yet supposed, from the purport of this last query, to have any
fear of a personal encounter with the doughty Roscius, I require only that it
may be on an equal footing. I am neither so extravagantly fond of life, nor
think myself so consequential in it, as to fear the end of it from such an
antagonist; nor, to say the truth, should I have any qualms of conscience, if
nothing less will satisfy him, about putting an end to so insignificant a being
as his: but, as "the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong,"
it is but right to provide against a mishap. Roscius has a large fortune, and
little or no family to leave it to: I have a large family, and little or no
fortune to leave it. Let Roscius but previously settle only half his estate on
my heirs, on condition that he deprives them of a protector, and I will meet
him tomorrow, and engage at his own weapons, not only him, but his brother
George into the bargain. The above pleasantry being misconstrued by some of
Roscius's friends to the disadvantage of the author, the latter thought himself
under the necessity of seriously acquainting the former, of his being ready, as
he is, at any time, to give him such satisfaction as a gentleman, who supposes
himself injured, has a right to require.

And now, Madam CANDOR, give me leave to ask you a question or two, in my turn.

Qu. I. Whether, from many gross instances of misbehaviour, Roscius has not
long had sufficient reason to suspect the detestable character of Nyky.? II.
Whether, therefore, granting Roscius to be himself immaculate, he is excusable
for his notorious partialities to such a character? III. Whether he has any
right to complain of unjust severity, in being ludicrously reproached with such
partialities, by a writer, whom he has treated, even in favor of that very
wretch, with disrespect, with insolence, with injustice.
W. KENRICK.


Instead of heartily replying, however, to the above three queries, a very
difficult task, indeed, to Roscius, he caused the Court of King's Bench to be
moved for a rule to show cause, why leave should not be given him to file an
information against the author for a libel: which being granted of course, the
same was exultingly anounced in the following paragraphs inserted in all the
newspapers:

Yesterday morning Mr. Dunning made a motion in the Court of King's Bench, for
a rule to show cause why an information should not be laid against the author
of Love in the Suds. When the court was pleased to grant a rule for the first
day of next term. The poem was read in court by the Clerk of the Crown, and
afforded no small diversion when it came to that part which reflects upon a
certain Chief Justice, who was present all the time.

Besides Mr. Wallace and Mr. Dunning, who are employed by a greatactor, in his
prosecution of some detestable charges which have been lately urged with as
much folly as wickedness against his character, Mr. Murphy and Mr. Mansfield
are also engaged, and the cause now becomes a matter of much expectation with
the public.

To these paragraphs the author judged it necessary to make the following
reply, in the abovementioned Morning Chronicle; almost all the rest of the
newspapers, by the indefatigable industry and powerful influence of Roscius, a
proprietor in most of them, being shut against him.

The AUTHOR of LOVE in the SUDS to the PRINTER of the MORNING CHRONICLE.
SIR,
In reprehending the faults of other men you should ever be cautious of falling
into the error you condemn. In yesterday's paper you indirectly charge me,
among others, with having "urged a detestable charge with as much folly as
wickedness against a certain great actor." -- What other people have done I
know not, nor does it concern me; but I may safely defy all the Lawyers in
Westminster Hall fairly to deduce such a charge as you hint at from the eclogue
in question. In this respect it is certainly as innocent as the great actor's
Jubilee Ode! But granting it otherwise with any one else, how can you take upon
you to say that such a charge is urged foolishly and wickedly? Can you know it
to be false or groundless? And if not, on what grounds do you charge the
accusers with folly and wickedness? Why does not the CANDOR of the great
actor, reply to the Queries put to him in your paper of Saturday last? But no;
unable to justify himself at the bar of the public, he flies for refuge to the
quirks and quibbles of Westminster Hall; and even this at the latter end of a
term, in order to deceive the town into a notion that the court will
countenance his prosecution. Why was not his motion made sooner, that cause
might have been shown in time, and the futility of it made immediately evident?
Believe me, Sir, before an end is put to this business, the public will be
better enabled to judge on which side the folly and wickedness lies, than you
appear to do at present.

I am, yours, etc. W. K.


THE POETICAL ALTERCATION BETWEEN BENEDICK and BEATRICE. EXTRACTED FROM THE
MORNING CHRONICLE.
K -- K, whom we may justly class in
The envenomed race of Scribes-assassin,
Accosts the celebrated Davy,
With "Sir, your humble -- Phoebus save ye!
"A comedy I Have newly written --
Curse me! if any bard in Britain
Can show you one of equal merit;
Nay, half so full of wit and spirit.
You Will find it, Sir, all air, all life;
Even better than my Widowed Wise.
A piece like this must always please one:
By G -- d 'twill run you half the season!
Therefore, Sir Roscius, pray remember
To have it ready in November."
Garrick refused -- Curse me, cries Ken,
I Will trounce the scoundrel with my pen.
Refuse my piece! I Will make him play't, or
I Will brand him for fair Beauty's traitor.
I Will have him in the Suds -- I Will maul him,
And Bickerstaff's Accomplice call him.
When I have christened him Indorser,
His fame is gone, his acting's over, Sir:
The men in a tumultuous rage
Will hiss and pelt him off the stage;
Nay not one female -- I Will so snap him --
Will even condescend to clap him.
So a young brim in Catharine-street
A man of sober cast will greet;
"Give me," she cries, with luring leer,
"Give me a glass of wine, my dear."
Then grasps his arm with seeming rapture,
In hopes of making him her capture.
But if in prudence he forbear
To venture on her dangerous ware,
Or to her painted beauty cold,
He force the nymph to quit her hold,
The indignant brim exclaims aloud,
TO exasperate the passing crowd;
And, in most diabolic spite,
Pronounces him a Sodomite.
BENEDICK.

To BENEDICK.
G -- K, whom men, of every class, call
A shuffling, avaricious r-sc-l,
For full five years had K -- k fobb'd off,
And his fair name and fortune robbed of;
Allowing Falstaff's Wedding merit,
And sworn to get it up with spirit,
Yet shrinking back, from year to year,
Through meanness, or invidious fear,
Lest any other should be thought
By Shakespeare's genius to be taught,
Prior engagements still pretending,
Which K -- k finding still no end in;
Each mushroom produce of the season
To put off him still made a reason,
Resolved at length its fate to know
He claims an answer, yes, or no:
Bent, as in G -- k there no trust is,
To do himself poetic justice;
To show for whom and what rejected,
A piece approved is thus neglected.
G -- k, who sans equivocation,
Deceit or mental reservation,
Mean subterfuge or sly suggestion,
Never answered yet the plainest question;
Conscious of every partial trick
He others played, for sake of Bick,
Demurs, and threatens life and law,
If K -- k dare his pen to draw;
Who rising G -- k's fair accuser,
Is branded as a base traducer;
By G -- k every odium thrown
On K -- k's name, to save his own.
So the outlawed smuggler, base invader
Of the interests of the honest trader,
His cargo seized, himself in danger,
Addresses every passing stranger;
To bring the officer to shame,
Brands him with an Informer's name.
Informer, vile! he cries aloud,
Informer, echoes through the crowd;
Boys hoot, men cuff, and women scoff;
Meanwhile the miscreant shuffles off:
Thus knaves, supported by the mob,
The private and the public rob.
BEATRICE.

To BEATRICE.
SINCE, Beatrice, you have undertaken
To save a sland'rous culprit's bacon,
(A culprit of guilt's blackest roll, and
Unprincipled as Jemmy Bolland.)
By telling us how, where, and when
Dan GARRICK has ill-treated KEN;
Give me, good dame, I humbly crave you,
A hearing for my favorite Davy;
I Have my objections -- let me start 'em --
The rule is, " audi alteram partem."
Some years ago an honest fellow,
As ever with sheer sack was mellow,
Who long has placed his hopes, his all, in
The gains of histrionic calling,
Who now is journeyman, now master,
(Oh may he never meet disaster!
Was offered, for the truth ask KEN of it --
Jack Falstaff's Wedding for his benefit.
LOVE, who at genius is no scoffer,
Makes KEN a bow, accepts his offer.
The piece was played -- the audience clawed it?
Not they; nor did they much applaud it.
But as it 'scap'd the trial ordeal,
To K -- k's spirits 'twas a cordial.
He bounc'd, looked big, and swelled: his vanity
Was not to be restrained by any tie:
He swore his comedy might claim a
Precedence in the British drama:
Its flights so high, its wit so attic,
'Twou'd crown him king of bards dramatic.
Happy for KEN had Drury's sultan
Esteemed his bantling an adult one!
But -- fatal to the sale of tickets!
He said the child had got the rickets;
Though some few features in it were sprightly,
Yet altogether 'twas unsightly.
However to soften KEN's displeasure,
For disappointed same and treasure,
He charitably stood his patron,
And brought him out the Widowed Matron,
Than Falstaff's Wedding heavier bruited,
Yet to the reigning taste more suited.
Some years elapsed, the doughty KEN
Applies to Drury's Chief again:
He shook his head, and screwed his phyz hard,
(The Widowed Wife stuck in his gizzard)
"Must I, (cries he) place in my list
"A waspish Epigrammatist?
"Accept his trash, and be the cully
"Of such a snarling, scribbling bully?
"I Have had enough of this same squire;
"A burnt child ever dreads the fire."
KEN vowed revenge, made same his Pandar;
Hell shudder'd at the horrid slander.
Thus, Beatrice, have I unfolded
(And fairly too, I will uphold it)
The cause of quarrel literary,
'Twixt Kenrick and renowned Garry.
But were the Manager's behavior
(As you relate) in KEN's disfavour,
Pray could it justify to true sage
Your rancorous friend's informal usage?
In the next term, at least in Hilary,
I hope your friend will grace the pillory:
And, as he has prepared the Suds,
My wish is, the plebean bloods
May recompense the scribbling adder,
By giving him a hearty lather.
BENEDICK.

To BENEDICK.
KEN vowed revenge, made fame his Pandar;
Hell shudder'd at the horrid slander.
BENEDICK.
HA! Benedick! and are you there?
Caught in your own designing snare!
Does K -- k's eclogue say no more
Than common same had said before?
So horrid is it become the crime
To turn the town-talk into rhyme?
To hint in dark and distant terms
What foul-mouthed rumor loud affirms?
Is satire only too severe,
When more is meant than meets the ear?
So cruel is it to speak not out,
But leave avowed report in doubt?
Fame is, we know, a lying strumpet;
And yet the muses blow her trumpet.
Your lines would else not run so glib,
At every second word a fib.
Lying, it is therefore plain, in thy sense,
Is founded on poetic license.
A falsehood all that you relate,
Of Falstaff's Wedding and its fate;
Of G -- k's patronizing charity:
How ill bestowed so great a rarity!
Though K -- k ever had too much pride
To kiss a manager's backside
Shunned, with vile Nyky to be seen,
In G -- k's train, behind the scene;
Yet, not so far the world above
His labor to give up for Love;
His lawful right he still maintains,
To what he claimed as honest gains.
Nor this alone the secret cause
Why K -- k his dread goose-quill draws.
Let others crouch; but, while a man,
He never will forgive, nor can,
'Till full redressed on fair confession,
A bare affront, or base oppression.
Much less will he restrain his pen,
In fear of wretches less than men:
That pen, which truth excites to gall
Both the great vulgar, and the small;
The scourge of guilt, when Justice claims
Its aid against the greatest names.
Much less will he its aid refuse,
Or tamely check his daring muse,
Because a stage-play'r stalks abroad,
Whose antic tricks the crowd applaud;
By his profession dead to shame,
And trusting to theatric fame;
Presumptuous that our English laws
Perverted, to avenge his cause,
The freeborn muse in chains will bind,
Disgraceful unto human kind;
Of ridicule will check the vein,
And satire's wholesome power restrain;
That Vice and Folly, thus set free,
May laugh at future infamy.
No, Sir, next Term indeed, or Hillary,
May bring your Nyky to the pillory;
Securely as you think he is closetted,
And safe from law's pursuit deposited.
But think not the indignant town
Will let his farces still go down;
Or that with such a hateful croney,
You still may share the public money:
Attempt it not; lest, in a rage,
The audience drive thee from the stage.
BEATRICE.

To Dr. K --.
DOCTOR, I have been out of town, or
This packet would have reached you sooner.
Prithee pull off your mask; for no man
Should injure that dear creature, woman.
In Beatrice you give a handle
To fix on the dear sex a scandal.
What lady would take up goose quill in
Defense of such a slanderous villain?
At the word Fame you closely nibble,
And strive, by jesuitic quibble,
TO explain away an obvious meaning;
(An art that Ken was always keen in.)
Thus a Solicitor, who daily
Attends the sessions at Old Bailey,
In fraud deep skilled, to law a nuisance,
Will catch a word, pervert its true sense,
To save a thorough-pac'd, and callous
Offender from his due -- the gallows.
You tax as false what I relate
"Of Falstaff's Wedding, and its fate."
But will a Kenrick's ipse dixit
Blast my report, and falsehood fix it?
No, Doctor; he that knows us both,
Will trust my word before your oath.
The Comedy (however you laud it)
I told you was not much applauded.
Many can witness my assertion
Is truth; not envy, nor aspersion.
Love's friends and yours were all agreed in
The celebration of Jack's Wedding;
Or possibly the critic clans
Had stepped in -- to forbid the bans.
If on the town again you would pushed it
Another audience might have crushed it --
That play, whose only merit lies
In imitation, scarce can rise.
You rail at Bick -- with all my heart:
Think you I mean to take his part?
Think you I would one distich write
T'exculpate a vile s -- e?
No, on him let thy rage be hurled:
No -- lash him naked through the world:
Expose in satire's keenest lays
This skulking, damned, detested race.
Hang up to public scorn each brute
Who dares Love's rites to prostitute:
But never tax, in prose or rhyme,
The guiltless with so black a crime.
Your hints to celebrated Garry
Seem useless and unnecessary.
Davy is -- what? -- a man of prudence:
Now mark what comment I obtrude-hence --
He would deserve a cane, or thicker staff,
To favor in futuro Bickerstaff:
For should a brat the town be sibb'd on,
Fathered by Paul, compiled by Dibden,
The secret could he hope to smother?
No; it would out some time or other:
Then hey! what havoc, rage and fury,
Would reign tumultuous at old Drury!
Down go the boxes! up the benches! --
The scenes are fired! -- how great the stench is --
By h --! each British fair would fly out,
And eager join the general riot:
Wives, widows, maids, turn warlike Knights,
TO avenge their broken Bill of Rights.
'Twere just; for sure no backdoor cub, like
Vile Bick, should profit by the public.
Doctor, I mean this rhyming letter
The last for which you will be my debtor.
In friendship's name I therefore crave you
To make it up with injured Davy.
Your heart of envious spleen a mass call,
And own yourself a sland'rous rascal.
Speak truth for once, and shame the Devil --
Shame, my old Friend? 'twould be uncivil!
Pho! he will excuse you on that score;
You never made him blush before.
You think I Am Drury's stage-director.
Upon my honor, mere conjecture!
I Have put on Benedick's disguise,
To be concealed from critic spies;
And Garrick knows no more than Bick,
Or Ken, the name of
BENEDICK.

To BENEDICK.
THUS costive bards themselves excuse,
And lay the fault upon the muse;
A slattern, rambling up and down,
That, when they are dull, is out of town.
But, come, for once, we'll let it pass,
A witling is sometimes an ass.

