THE MAID OF THE MILL. A COMIC OPERA. As it is Performed at the THEATER ROYAL
IN COVENT GARDEN. The Music Compiled, and the Words written By the AUTHOR of
LOVE IN A VILLAGE.

LONDON: Printed for J. NEWBERY; R. BALDWIN; T. CASLON; W. GRIFFIN; W. NICOLL;
T. LOWNDS; and T. BECKET. MDCCLXV.

TO His Royal Highness WILLIAM, DUKE OF GLOUCESTER.
May it please your Royal Highness,
WHEN I presumed to solicit the honor of laying the subsequent trifle at your
Royal Highness's feet; it was not without a thorough consciousness of the
little value of the offering I was going to make; but I considered, mean as it
was, it would serve as a testimony of my devotion; and to a Prince happy in a
love of the arts, nothing could be unacceptable, which bore the remotest
analogy to them.

How far the Comic Opera, under proper regulations, has a right to be
acknowledged for a junior offspring of the Drama, and as such become candidate
for a share of public encouragement, I shall not pretend to determine; but if
it can be rendered an agreeable amusement, the English Theater has never
scrupled to adopt, what was capable of pleasing there; and though as a work of
genius, it is by no means to be set in competition with good Tragedies and
Comedies, it may, I apprehend, be permitted as an occasional relief to them,
without bringing either our taste or understanding into question.

I need not inform your Royal Highness, that in France, where the stage has
been cultivated with more care, and success, than in any other country; this
species of entertainment is received with very great applause; nor is it
thought any injury to Corneille, and Moliere, that the pieces of Anseaume and
Favart, meet with success.

It is true, among the French, Comic Operas have very often the advantage of
being extremely well written; of which, On ne S'avise jamais de tout, Le Roy,
et le Fermier, and some others are an instance; nor would the best composition
of the greatest master, make a very contemptible poem pass on an audience: I
wish I could assert with truth, that in this respect, we fall nothing behind
our neighbors, and that what I here present to your Royal Highness, might lay
claim to some degree of merit, even in the writing: but though I cannot do
this, permit me to say, I have attempted to render it a little interesting, and
not wholly undiverting, as far as the music, my principal care, would give me
leave.

But I humbly beg your Royal Highness's pardon; in applying to the connoisseur,
I forget that I am at the same time addressing a Great Prince: indeed, there is
a subject, on which I could dwell with the truest pleasure; but I am too well
instructed in your Royal Highness's character, to dare to offend you, with a
language, which forms and custom, too often impose upon princes, a necessity of
hearing; I mean their own praise; to those who are most deserving, ever least
welcome.

I, therefore, subscribe myself, With the profoundest respect, May it please
your Royal Highness, Your Royal Highness's, Most obedient, Most devoted, and
Most humble servant, THE AUTHOR.

THE PREFACE.
THERE is scarce a language in Europe, in which there is not a play taken from
our romance of Pamela; in Italian and French, particularly, several writers of
the first eminence, have chosen it for the subject of different dramas.

The little piece now ventured into the world, owes its origin to the same
source, not only the general subject is drawn from Pamela, but almost every
circumstance in it. The reader will immediately recollect -- the courtship of
Parson Williams -- the Squire's jealousy and behavior in consequence of it,
and the difficulty he had to prevail with himself to marry the girl,
notwithstanding his passion for her -- the miller is a close copy of Goodman
Andrews -- Ralph is imagined, from the wild son which he is mentioned to have
had -- Theodosia, from the young lady of quality, with whom Mr. B. through his
sister's persuasion, is said to have been in treaty before his marriage with
Pamela -- even the gypsies, are borrowed from a trifling incident in the latter
part of the work.

In prosecuting this plan, which he has varied from the original, as far as he
thought convenient, the author has made simplicity his principal aim. His
scenes, on account of the music, which could not be perfect without such a
mixture, necessarily consist of serious and buffoon. He knows grossness and
insipidity lay in his way; whether he has had art enough to avoid stumbling
upon them, the candid Public is left to determine.

This Opera is entered at STATIONERS HALL, and whoever presumes to Print the
Songs, or any Part of them, will be prosecuted by the PROPRIETORS.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Lord Aimworth, Mr. Mattocks. Sir Harry Sycamore, Mr. Shuter. Mervin, Mr.
Baker. Fairfield, Mr. Gibson. Giles, Mr. Beard. Ralph, Mr. Dibdin.
WOMEN.
Lady Sycamore, Mrs. Pit. Theodosia, Miss Hallam. Patty, Miss Brent. Fanny,
Miss Poitier.
SCENE THE COUNTRY.

THE Maid of the Mill.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A rural prospect, with a mill at work. Several people employed about it; on
one side a house, PATTY reading in the window; on the other a barn, where FANNY
sits mending a net; GILES appears at a distance in the mill; FAIRFIELD and
RALPH, taking sacks from a cart. CHORUS.
FREE from sorrow, free from strife,
Oh how blessed the miller's life!
Cheerful working through the day,
Still he laughs and sings away.
Naught can vex him,
Naught perplex him,
While there is grist to make him gay.
DUET.
Let the great enjoy the blessings
By indulgent fortune sent.
What can wealth, can grandeur offer
More than plenty and content.
Fairf. Well done, well done, it is a sure sign work goes on merrily when folks
sing at it. Stop the mill there; and do hear, son Ralph! hoist yon sacks of
flour upon this cart lad, and drive it up to lord Aimworth's; coming from
London last night with strange company, no doubt there are calls enough for it
by this time.


Ral. Ay Feyther, whether or not; there is no fear but you will find enough for a
body to do.


Fairf. What do mutter? is it not a strange plague that thou can never go
about any thing with a good will; murrain take it what is come over the boy? so
then thou will not set a hand to what I have desired thee?


Ral. Why don't you speak to Suster Pat to do something then? I thought when
she come home to us after my old lady's death, she was to have been of some use
in the house; but instead of that, she sits there all day, reading outlandish
books, dressed like a fine madumasel, and the never a word you says to she.


Fairf. Sirrah don't speak so disrespectfully of thy sister; thou will it never
have the tyth of her deserts.


Ral. Why I Will read and write with her for what she dares; and as for playing
on the hapsicols, I thinks her rich good mother might have learned her
something more properer, seeing she did not remember to leave her a legacy at
last.


Fairf. That Is none of thy business, Sirrah.


Ral. A farmer's wife painting pictures, and playing on the hapsicols; why,
I Will be hanged now, for all as old as she is, if she knows any more about
milking a cow, than I do of sewing a petticoat.


Fairf. Ralph, thou have been drinking this morning.


Ral. Well, if so be as I have, its nothing out of your pocket, nor mines
niether.


Fairf. Who has been giving thee liquor, sirrah?


Ral. Why it was wind -- a gentleman guv'd me.


Fairf. A gentleman!


Ral. Yes, a gentleman that is come piping hot from London: he is below at the
Cat and Bagpipes; I cod he rides a choice bit of a nag; I dares to say she would
fetch as good as forty pound at ever a fair in all England.


Fairf. A figgs end for what she would fetch; mind thy business, or by the lord
Harry --


Ral. Why I will not do another hands turn today now, so that is flat.


Fairf. Thou will not --


Ral. Why no I will not, so what argufies your putting yourself in a passion,
Feyther; I Have promised to go back to the gentleman; and I don't know but what
he is a lord too, and mayhap he may do more for me than you thinks of.


Fairf. Well son Ralph, run thy gait; but remember I tell thee, thou will
repent this untowardness.


Ral. Why, how shall I repent it? Mayhap you will turn me out of your service; a
match; with all hearts -- I cod I don't care three brass pins.

AIR.
If that is all you want, who the plague will be sorry,
'Twere better by half to dig stones in a quarry;
For my share I Am weary of what is got by it:
S'flesh! here is such a racket, such scoulding and coiling,
You're never content, but when folks are a toiling,
And drudging like horses from morning 'till night.
You think I Am afraid, but the difference to show you,
First, yonder is your shovel, your sacks too I throw you;
Hence forward, take care of your matters who will:
They Are welcome to slave for your wages that need 'em,
Tol lol derol lol, I have purchased my freedom.
And never hereafter shall work at the mill.

SCENE II.
FAIRFIELD and PATTY. Fairf. Dear heart, dear heart! I protest this ungracious
boy puts me quite beside myself. Patty my dear, come down into the yard a
little, and keep me company -- and you thieves, vagabonds, gypsies, out here,
it is you debauch my son.


Patty. AIR.
In love to pine and languish,
Yet know your passion vain;
To harbor heartfelt anguish,
Yet fear to tell your pain.
What powers unrelenting,
Severer ills inventing,
Can sharpen pangs like these?
Where days and nights, tormenting,
Yield not a moment's ease.

Fairf. Well Patty, Master Goodman my lord's steward has been with me just now,
and I find we are like to have great doings, his lordship has brought down sir
Harry Sycamore, and his family; and there is more company expected in a few
days.


Patty. I know sir Harry very well, he is by marriage a distant relation of my
lord's.


Fairf. Pray what sort of a young body is the daughter there? I think she used
to be with you at the castle, three or four summers ago, when my young lord was
out upon his travels.


Patty. Oh very often, she was a great favorite of my lady's; pray father is
she come down?


Fairf. Why you know the report last night, about my lord's going to be
married; by what I can learn she is, and there is likely to be a nearer
relationship between the families, e're long. It seems, his lordship was not
over willing for the match, but the friends on both sides in London pressed it
so hard: then there is a swinging fortune, master Goodman tells me, a matter of
twenty or thirty thousand pounds!


Patty. If it was a million, father, it would not be more than my lord Aimworth
deserves; I suppose the wedding will be celebrated here, at the mansion house?


Fairf. So it is thought, as soon as things can be properly prepared -- And
now, Patty, if I could but see thee a little merry -- Come, bless thee, pluck
up thy spirits -- To be sure thou has sustained, in the death of thy lady, a
heavy loss; she was a parent to thee, nay, and better, inasmuch as she took
thee when thou were but a babe, and gave thee an education which thy natural
parents could not afford to do.


Patty. Ah! dear father, don't mention, what perhaps, has been my greatest
misfortune.


Fairf. Nay then, Patty, what is become of all thy sense, that people talk so
much about? -- But I have something to say to thee which I would have thee
consider seriously. -- I believe I need not tell thee, my child, that a young
maiden, after she is marriageable, especially if she has any thing about her to
draw people's notice, is liable to ill tongues, and a many cross accidents; so
that the sooner she is out of harm's way the better.


Patty. Undoubtedly, father, there are people enough who watch every
opportunity to gratify their own malice; but when a young woman's conduct is
unblameable --


Fairf. Why, Patty, there may be something in that; but you know slander will
leave spots where malice finds none: I say, then, a young woman's best
safeguard is a good husband. Now there is our neighbor, farmer Giles; he is a
sober, honest, industrious young fellow, and one of the wealthiest in these
parts; he is greatly taken with thee; and it is not the first time I have told
thee I should be glad to have him for a son-in-law.


Patty. And I have told you as often, father, I would submit myself entirely to
your direction; whatever you think proper for me, is so.


Fairf. Why that is spoken like a dutiful, sensible girl; get thee in, then, and
leave me to manage it -- Perhaps our neighbor Giles is not a gentleman; but
what are the greatest part of our country gentlemen good for?


Patty. Very true, father. The sentiments, indeed, have frequently little
correspondence with the condition; and it is according to them alone we ought
to regulate our esteem.

AIR.
What are outward forms, and shows,
To an honest heart compared?
Often the rustic, wanting those,
Has the nobler portion shared.
Often we see the homely flower,
Bearing, at the hedge's side;
Virtues of more sovereign power,
Than the garden's gayest pride.

SCENE III.
FAIRFIELD. GILES. Giles. Well, master Fairfield, you and Miss Pat have had a
long discourse together; did you tell her that I was come down?


Fairf. No, in truth, friend Giles, I did not even tell her I had sent for
thee, but I mentioned our affair at a distance; and I think there is no fear
but what it will go as agreeably, of her side, as we could wish.


Giles. That Is right -- Well, and when shall us? -- You do know I have told you
my mind often and often.


Fairf. Farmer, give us thy hand; nobody doubts thy good will to me and my
girl; and you may take my word I would rather give her to thee than another;
for I am main certain thou will make her a good husband.


Giles. Thanks to your kind opinion, master Fairfield; if such be my hap I hope
there will be no cause of complaint.


Fairf. And I promise thee my daughter will make thee a choice wife. -- But
there is one thing to be considered. -- Thou know, friend Giles, that I, and
all belongs to me, have great obligations to lord Aimworth's family; Patty, in
particular, would be one of the most ungrateful wretches this day breathing, if
she was to do the smallest thing contrary to their consent and approbation. --
I need not tell thee what she owes them.


Giles. Nay, nay, it is well enough known to all the country, she was the old
lady's darling.


Fairf. Well, master Giles, I Will assure thee she is not one whit less obliged
to my lord himself. -- When his mother was taken off so suddenly, and his
affairs called him up to London, if Patty would have remained at the castle,
she might have had the command of all; or if she would have gone any where
else, he would have paid for her fixing, let the cost be what it would.


Giles. Why, for that matter, folks did not spare to say, that my lord had a
kind of a sneaking kindness for her himself: and I remember, at one time, it
was rise all about the neighborhood, that she was actually to be our lady.


Fairf. Pho, pho! a pack of women's tales.


Giles. Nay to be sure, they will say any thing.


Fairf. My lord's a man of a better way of thinking, friend Giles. -- But this
is neither here nor there to our business. -- Have you been at the castle yet?


Giles. Who I! bless your heart, I did not hear a syllable of his lordship's
being come down, till your lad told me.


Fairf. No! why then I Will tell you what you shall do; go up to my lord, let him
know you have a mind to make a match with my daughter; hear what he has to say
to it; and afterward we will try if we cannot settle matters.


Giles. Go up to my lord! Icod if that be all I Will do it with the biggest
pleasure in life.


Fairf. Suppose you were to go this morning.


Giles. This minute an you will; never fear me, I warrant I shall not be shamed
faced -- but where is Miss Pat? might not one ax her how she do do?


Fairf. Never spare it, she is within there.


Giles. I sees her -- odd rabbit it, this hatch is locked now, -- Miss Pat --
Miss Patty -- she makes believe not to hear me.


Fairf. Well, well, never mind; thou wilt come and eat a morsel of dinner with us.


Giles. Nay, but just to have a bit of joke with her at present. -- Miss Pat I
say -- will not you open the door.

AIR.
Hark! it is I your own true lover,
After walking three long miles;
One kind look, at least discover,
Come and speak a word to Giles.
You alone my heart I fix on,
Ah you little cunning vixen!
I can see your roguish smiles.
Addslids! my mind is so possessed,
'Till we are sped, I shall not have rest;
Only say the thing's a bargain,
Here an you like it,
Ready to strike it,
There Is at once an end of arguing:
I Am hers, she is mine;
Thus we seal, and thus we sign.

SCENE IV.
FAIRFIELD; PATTY. Fairf. Get away and finish the business thou art going
about; I warrant we shall not disagree. -- So, this now is just as I would have it
-- Patty, child, why would not thou open the door for our neighbor Giles?


Patty. Really Father I did not know what was the matter.


Fairf. Well, another time; he will be here again presently. He Is gone up to the
castle, Patty: thou know it would not be right for us to do any thing
without giving his lordship intelligence, so I have sent the farmer to let him
know that he is willing, and we are willing; and with his lordship's
approbation --


Patty. Oh dear father -- what are you going to say?


Fairf. Nay child, I would not have stirred a step for fifty pounds, without
advertising his lordship beforehand.


Patty. But surely, surely, you have not done this rash, this precipitate thing.


Fairf. How rash, how is it rash Patty? I don't understand thee.


Patty. Oh you have distressed me beyond imagination -- but why would you not
give me notice, speak to me first?


Fairf. Why have NOT I spoken to thee an hundred times? no Patty, it is thou that
would distress me, and thou wilt break my heart.


Patty. Dear father!


Fairf. All I desire is to see thee well settled; and now that I am likely to
do so, thou art not contented; I am sure the farmer is as sightly a clever lad
as any in the country; and is not he as good as we?


Patty. I don't say to the contrary father, I know I have no higher
pretensions, and you have a right to dispose of me as you think proper.


Fairf. Well then, what harm was there in sending him to his lordship, seeing
one or other of us must have gone?


Patty. It Is very true father; I am to blame, pray forgive me.


Fairf. Forgive thee, lord help thee my child, I am not angry with thee; but
quiet thyself Patty, and thou wilt see all this will turn out for the best.


SCENE V.
PATTY. What will become of me? -- my lord will certainly imagine this is done
with my consent. -- Well, is he not himself going to be married to a lady,
suitable to him in rank, suitable to him in fortune, as this farmer is to me;
and under what pretense can I refuse the husband my father has found for me?
shall I say that I have dared to raise my inclinations above my condition, and
presumed to love, where my duty taught me only gratitude and respect? Alas! who
could live in the house with lord Aimworth, see him, converse with him, and not
love him? I have this consolation however, my folly is yet undiscovered to any;
else, how should I be ridiculed and despised; nay would not my lord himself
despise me, especially, if he knew that I have more than once construed his
natural affability and politeness, into sentiments as unworthy of him, as mine
are bold and extravagant. Unexampled vanity! did I possess any thing capable of
attracting such a notice, to what purpose could a man of his distinction cast
his eyes on a girl, poor, meanly born; and indebted for every thing to the
ill-placed bounty of his family.

AIR.
Ah! why should fate, pursuing,
A wretched thing like me;
Heap ruin thus on ruin,
And add to misery?
The griefs I languish'd under,
In secret let me share;
But this new stroke of thunder,
Is more than I can bear.

SCENE VI.
Changes to a saloon in Lord AIMWORTH's house. Sir HARRY SYCAMORE, THEODOSIA.
Sir Har. Well but Theodosia, child, you are quite unreasonable.


Theo. Pardon me papa, it is not I am unreasonable; when I gave way to my
inclinations for Mr. Mervin, he did not seem less agreeable to you and my mama,
than he was acceptable to me. It is therefore you have been unreasonable; in
first encouraging his addresses, and afterward forbidding him your house, in
order to bring me down here, to force me on a gentleman --


Sir Har. Force you Dossy, what do you mean? by the la! I would not force you
on the Czar of Muscovy.


Theo. And yet papa, what else can I call it? for though lord Aimworth is
extremely attentive, and obliging, I assure you he is by no means one of the
most ardent of lovers.


Sir Har. Ardent, ah! there it is; you girls never think there is any love,
without kissing and hugging; but you should consider child, my lord Aimworth is
a polite man; and has been abroad in France and Italy, where these things are
not the fashion; I remember when I was on my travels, among the madames, and
signoras, we never saluted more than the tip of the ear.


Theo. Really papa, you have a very strange opinion of my delicacy; I had no
such stuff in my thoughts.


Sir. Har. Well come, my poor Dossy, I see you are chagrin'd, but you know it
is not my fault; on the contrary I assure you, I had always a great regard for
young Mervin, and should have been very glad --


Theo. How then papa, could you join in forcing me to write him that strange
letter, never to see me more; or how indeed could I comply with your commands?
what must he think of me?


Sir Har. Ay, but hold Dossy, your mama convinced me that he was not so proper
a son-in-law for us as lord Aimworth.


Theo. Convinced you! ah my dear papa you were not convinced.


Sir Har. What don't I know when I am convinced?


Theo. Why no papa, because your goodnature and easiness of temper is such,
that you pay more respect to the judgment of mama, and less to your own, than
you ought to do.


Sir Har. Well, but Dossy, don't you see how your mama loves me; if my finger
does but ach, she is like a bewitched woman; and if I was to die, I don't
believe she would outlive the burying of me: nay she has told me as much
herself.


Theo. Her fondness indeed is very extraordinary.


Sir Har. Besides, could you give up the prospect of being a countess, and
mistress of this fine place?


Theo. Yes truly could I.

AIR.
With the man that I love, was I destined to dwell,
On a mountain, a moor, in a cot, in a cell;
Retreats the most barren, most desert would be
More pleasing than courts or a palace to me.
Let the vain and the venal, in wedlock aspire
To what folly esteems, and the vulgar admire;
I yield them the bliss, where their wishes are placed,
Insensible creatures! it is all they can taste.

SCENE VII.
SIR HARRY, THEODOSIA, LADY SYCAMORE. La. Syc. Sir Harry where are you?


Sir Har. Here my lamb.


La. Syc. I am just come from looking over his lordship's family jewels; I
protest they are prodigiously magnificent -- Well miss Sycamore, you are a
happy creature, to have diamonds, equipage, title, all the blessings of life
poured thus upon you at once.


Theo. Blessings Madam! do you think then that I am such a wretch as to place
my felicity in the possession of any such trumpery.


La. Syc. Upon my word miss, you have a very disdainful manner of expressing
yourself; I believe there are very few young women of fashion, who would think
any sacrifice they could make, too much for them -- did you ever hear the like
of her Sir Harry?


Sir Har. Why my dear, I have just been talking to her in the same strain, but
whatever she has got in her head she seems to think --


La. Syc. Oh I know very well what she has got in her head, it is Mr. Mervin,
her gentleman of Bucklersbury; fie miss, marry a cit, where is your pride, your
vanity, have you nothing of the person of distinction about you?


Sir Har. Well, but my lady, you know I am a piece of a cit myself, as I may
say, for my great grandfather was a dry salter.


Theo. And yet Madam, you condescended to marry my papa.


La. Syc. Well, if I did miss, I had but five thousand pounds to my portion,
and Sir Harry knows I was past eight and thirty, before I would listen to him.


Sir Har. Nay Dossy, that is true, your mama owned eight and thirty, before we
were married, but by the la my dear, you were a lovely angel; and by
candlelight nobody would have taken you for above five and twenty.


La. Syc. Sir Harry, you remember the last time I was at my lord duke's.


Sir Har. Yes my love, it was the very day your little bitch Minxey pupt.


La. Syc. Well, and what did the whole family say, my lord John, and my lord
Thomas, and my lady Duchess in particular? cousin says her grace to me -- for
she always calls me cousin.


Sir Har. And me too, her grace is exceedingly kind -- she always calls me
cousin.


La. Syc. In short they all said, that this match, if my prudence could bring
it about, was the most desirable in the universe; and the other absolutely
below our attention -- A fellow that will have an estate got by selling
mundungus and mollossus --


Theo. Well but Madam, be their quality ever so great, I cannot see what right
my lord John, and my lord Thomas, have to direct my inclinations; and I must
tell you there is a much nearer relation of mine, and one who has a better
right to rule me, that is my father, who has a great regard for Mr. Mervin, and
would consent to our union with all his heart.


La. Syc. Did you say so Sir Harry?


Sir Har. Who I love!


La. Syc. Then all my care and prudence are come to nothing.


Sir Har. Well, but stay my lady -- Dossy, you are always making mischief.


Theo. Ah! my dear sweet --


La. Syc. Do Miss, that is right, coax --


Theo. No Madam, I am not capable of any such meanness.


La. Syc. It Is very civil of you to contradict me, however.


Sir Har. Eh! what is that -- hands off Dossy, don't come near me.

AIR.
Why how now Miss pert,
Do you think to divert
My anger by fawning and stroking,
Would you make me a fool?
Your play thing, your tool,
Was ever young minx so provoking?
Get out of my sight,
'Twould be serving you right,
To lay a sound dose of the lash on;
Contradict your Mama,
I Have a mind by the la!
But I will not put myself in a passion.

SCENE VIII.
SIR HARRY, LADY SYCAMORE, LORD AIMWORTH, GILES. L. Aim. Come farmer, you may
come in, there are none here but friends; Sir Harry your servant.


Sir Har. My lord, I kiss your lordships hands -- I hope he did not overhear us
squabbling.


L. Aim. Well now master Giles, what is it you have got to say to me? if I can
do you any service, this company will give you leave to speak.


Giles. I thank your lordship, I has not got a great deal to say; I do come to
your lordship about a little business, if you will please to give me the hearing.


L. Aim. Certainly, only let me know what it is.


Giles. Why an please you my lord, being left alone, as I may say, feyther
dead, and all the business upon my own hands, I do think of settling and taking
a wife, and I come to ax your honor's consent.


L. Aim. My consent farmer! if that be necessary, you have it with all my heart
-- I hope you have taken care to make a prudent choice.


Giles. Why I do hope so my lord.


L. Aim. Well, and who is the happy fair one? does she live in my house?


Giles. No my lord, she does not live in your house, but she is a parson of your
acquaintance.


L. Aim. Of my acquaintance!


Giles. No offense I hope your honor.


L. Aim. None in the least: but how is she an acquaintance of mine?


Giles. Your lordship do know Miller Fairfield?


L. Aim. Well --


Giles. And Patty Fairfield, his daughter, my lord.


L. Aim. Ay, is it her you think of marrying?


Giles. Why if so be as your lordship has no objection; to be sure we will do
nothing without your consent and approbation.


L. Aim. Upon my word farmer, you have made an excellent choice -- It is a
god-daughter of my mother's Madam, who was bred up under her care, and I
protest I do not know a more amiable young woman -- but are you sure farmer,
that Patty herself is inclinable to this match?


Giles. O yes my lord, I am sartain of that.


L. Aim. Perhaps then she desired you to come and ask my consent?


Giles. Why as far as this here, my lord; to be sure, the miller did not care
to publish the banns, without making your lordship acquainted -- But I hope
your honor's not angry with I.


L. Aim. Angry farmer! why should you think so? -- what interest have I in it
to be angry?


Sir Har. And so honest farmer, you are going to be married to little Patty
Fairfield -- her father's a good warm fellow; I suppose you take care that she
brings something to make the pot boil.


La. Syc. What does that concern you Sir Harry? how often must I tell you of
meddling in other people's affairs.


Sir Har. My lord, a penny for your thoughts.


La. Syc. I beg your pardon, Sir Harry, upon my word, I did not think where I
was.


Giles. Well then your honor, I Will make bold to be taking my leave, I may say
you gave consent for Miss Patty and I to go on.


L. Aim. Undoubtedly farmer, if she approves of it; but are not you afraid that
her education has rendered her a little unsuitable for a wife for you?


La. Syc. Oh my lord, if the girl's handy.


Giles. Handy, why saving respect, there is nothing comes amiss to her; she is
cute at every varsal kind of thing.

AIR.
Odds my life, search England over,
An you match her in her station;
I Will be bound to fly the nation:
And be sure as well I love her.
Do but feel my heart a beating,
Still her pretty name repeating,
Here Is the work it is always at,
Pity, patty, pat, pit, pat.
When she makes the music tinkle,
What on earth can sweeter be?
Then her little eyes so twinkle,
It Is a feast to hear and see.

SCENE IX.
LORD AIMWORTH, SIR HARRY, LADY SYCAMORE. Sir Har. By dad this is a good merry
fellow, is not he love, with his pity patty -- And so my lord you have given
your consent that he shall marry your mother's old housekeeper. Ah, well, I can
see --


L. Aim. Nobody doubts Sir Harry, that you are very clear sighted.


Sir Har. Yes, yes, let me alone, I know what is what: I was a young fellow once
myself, and I should have been glad of a tenant, to take a pretty girl off my
hands now and then, as well as another.


L. Aim. I protest my dear friend, I don't understand you.


La. Syc. Nor nobody else -- Sir Harry you are going at some beastliness now.


Sir Har. Who I, my lady? not I, as I hope to live and breath; it is nothing to
us you know, what my lord does before he is married; when I was a bachelor, I
was a devil among the wenches, myself; and yet I vow to George my lord, since I
knew my lady Sycamore, and we shall be man and wife eighteen years, if we live
till next Candlemas day; I never had to do --


La Syc. Sir Harry, come out of the room I desire.


Sir Har. Why what is the matter, my lady, I did not say any harm?


La. Syc. I see what you are driving at, you want to make me faint.


Sir Har. I want to make you faint, my lady?


La. Syc. Yes you do -- and if you don't come out this instant I shall fall
down in the chamber -- I beg my lord you will not speak to him -- will you come
out, Sir Harry?


Sir Har. Nay but my lady!


La. Syc. No, I will have you out.


SCENE X.
LORD AIMWORTH. This worthy baronet, and his lady, are certainly a very
whimsical couple, however, their daughter is perfectly amiable in every
respect; and yet I am sorry I have brought her down here; for can I in honor
marry her, while my affections are engaged to another? To what does the pride
of condition and the censure of the world force me! Must I then renounce the
only person that can make me happy; because, because what? because she is a
miller's daughter. Vain pride and unjust censure: has she not all the graces
that education can give her sex, improved by a genius seldom found among the
highest? Has she not modesty, sweetness of temper, and beauty of person,
capable of adorning a rank the most exalted? But it is too late to think of
these things now; my hand is promised, my honor engaged; and if it was not so,
she has engaged herself, the farmer is a person to her mind, and I have
authorized their union by my approbation.

AIR.
The mad man thus, at times, we see,
With seeming reason blessed;
His looks, his words, his thoughts are free,
And speak a mind at rest.
But short the calms of ease and sense,
And ah, uncertain too;
While that idea lives from whence
At first his frenzy grew.

SCENE XI.
Changes to a prospect of the mill. Enter RALPH, with MERVIN, in a riding
dress, followed by FANNY. Fanny. Ah, pray your honor, try if you have not
something to spare for poor Fanny the gypsey --


Ralph. I tell you Fan, the gentleman has no change about him, why the plague
will you be so troublesome?


Fanny. Lord what is it to you, if his honor has a mind to give me a trifle? do
pray gentleman, put your hand in your pocket.


Mervin. I am almost distracted! ungrateful Theodosia! to change so suddenly;
and write me such a letter; however, I am resolved to have my dismission face
to face; this letter may be forced from her by her mother, who I know was never
cordially my friend: I could not get a sight of her in London, but here they
will be less on their guard; and see her I will, by one means or other.


Fanny. Then your honor will not extend your charity?

AIR.
I am young, and I am friendless,
And poor alas! withal;
Sure my sorrows will be endless,
In vain for help I call.
Have some pity in your nature.
To relieve a wretched creature,
Though the gift be never so small.
May you possessing, every blessing.
Still inherit Sir, all you merit Sir,
And never know what it is to want;
Sweet Heaven, your worship all happiness grant.

SCENE XII.
RALPH, MERVIN. Ral. Now I Will go and take that money from her, and I have a
good mind to lick her, so I have.


Mer. Pho, prithee stay where you are.


Ral. Nay, but I hate to see a toad so devilish greedy.


Mer. Well come, she has not got a great deal, and I have thought how she may
do me a favor in her turn.


Ral. Ay, but you may put that out of your head, for I can tell you she will not.


Mer. How so?


Ral. How so, why she is as cunning as the Devil.


Mer. Oh she is -- I fancy I understand you. Well, in that case friend Ralph --
Your name's Ralph, I think.


Ral. Yes Sir, at your service, for want of a better.


Mer. I say then friend Ralph, in that case, we will remit the favor you think
of, 'till the lady is in a more complying humor, and try if she cannot serve
me at present in some other capacity -- there are a good many gypsies
hereabout, are there not?


Ralph. Softly -- I have a whole gang of them here in our barn; I have kept
them about the place these three months, and all on account of she.


Mer. Really.


Ral. Yes -- but for your life don't say a word of it to any Christian -- I am
in love with her.


Mer. Indeed.


Ral. Feyther is as mad with me about it, as Old Scratch; and I gets the plague
and all of anger; but I don't mind that.


Mer. Well friend Ralph, if you are in love, no doubt you have some influence
over your mistress; don't you think now you could prevail upon her, and her
companions, to supply me with one of their habits, and let me go up with them
today to my lord Aimworth's.


Ral. Why do you want to go a mumming? we never do that here but in the
Christmas holidays.


Mer. No matter: manage this for me, and manage it with secrecy; and I promise
you shall not go unrewarded.


Ral. Oh! as for that sir, I don't look for any thing; I can easily get you a
bundle of their rags; but I don't know whether you will prevail on them to go up
to my lord's, because they are afraid of a big dog that is in the yard; but I Will
tell you what I can do, I can go up before you and have the dog fastened, for I
know his kennel.


Mer. That will do very well -- by means of this disguise I shall probably get
a sight of her; and I leave the rest to love and fortune.

AIR.
Why quits the merchant, blessed with ease,
The pleasures of his native seat;
To tempt the dangers of the seas,
And climes more perilous than these;
Midst freezing cold, or scorching heat?
He knows the hardships, knows the pain,
The length of way, but thinks it small;
The sweets of what he hopes to gain,
Undaunted, make him combat all.

SCENE XIII.
PATTY, RALPH, GILES, FANNY. Giles. So, his lordship was as willing as the
flowers in May -- and as I was coming along who should I meet but your father
-- and he bid me run in all haste and tell you -- for we were sure you would be
deadly glad.


Patty. I know not what business you had to go to my lord's at all farmer.


Giles Nay I only did as I was desired -- Master Fairfield bid me tell you
moreover, as how he would have you go up to my lord out of hand, and thank him.


Ral. So she ought, and take off those clothes, and put on what is more becoming
her station; you know my father spoke to you of that this morning too.


Patty. Brother, I shall obey my father.


Lie still my heart, oh! fatal stroke
That kills at once my hopes and me.

Giles. Miss Pat!

Patty. -- what?

Giles. -- Nay I only spoke,

Ralph. Take courage mon, she does but joke.
Come Suster, somewhat, kinder be?

Fanny. This is a thing the most oddest,
Some folks are so plaguily modest;

Ral. Fan. Were we in the case,
To be in their place,
We'd carry it off with a different face.

Giles. Thus I take her by the lilly hand,
So soft and white,

Ral. -- why now that is right:
And kiss her too, mon, never stand.

Pat. Giles. What words can explain
My pleasure -- my pain?
It presses, it rises,
My heart it surprises,
I cannot keep it down though I Would never so fain.

Fan. So here the play ends,
The lovers are friends.

Ral. Hush!

Fan. -- Tush!

Giles. -- Nah!

Patty. -- Psha!

All. What torment's exceeding, what joys are above,
The pains and the pleasures that wait upon love



END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A marble portico ornamented with statues, which opens from Lord AIMWORTH's
house; two chairs near the front. Enter Lord AIMWORTH reading. IN how
contemptible a light would the situation I am now in, show me to most of the
fine men of the present age? in love with a country girl, rivaled by a poor
fellow, one of my meanest tenants, and uneasy at it; if I had a mind to her, I
know they would tell me, I ought to have taken care to make myself easy long
ago, when I had her in my power. But I have the testimony of my own heart in my
favor; and I think was it to do again, I should act as I have done. Let Us see
what have we here? perhaps a book may compose my thoughts; [reads and throws
the book away] it is to no purpose, I cannot read, I cannot think, I cannot do any
thing.

AIR.
Ah! how vainly mortals treasure,
Hopes of happiness and pleasure,
Hard and doubtful to obtain;
By what standards false we measure:
Still pursuing,
Ways to ruin,
Seeking bliss, and finding pain.

SCENE II.
Lord AIMWORTH, PATTY. Patty. Now comes the trial; no, my sentence is already
pronounced, and I will meet my fate with prudence and resolution.


L. Aim. Who Is there?


Patty. My lord!


L. Aim. Patty Fairfield!


Patty. I humbly beg pardon my lord, for pressing so abruptly into your
presence; but I was told I might walk this way; and I am come by my father's
commands, to thank your lordship for all your favors.


L. Aim. Favors Patty! what favors? I have done you none; but why this
metamorphosis? I protest if you had not spoke, I should not have known you; I
never saw you wear such clothes as these in my mother's life time.


Patty. No my lord, it was her ladyship's pleasure I should wear better, and
therefore I obeyed; but it is now my duty to dress in a manner more suitable to
my station, and future prospects in life.


L. Aim. I am afraid Patty you are too humble -- come sit down -- nay I will
have it so -- what is it I have been told to day Patty, it seems you are going
to be married.


Patty. Yes my lord.


L. Aim. Well, and don't you think you could have made a better choice than
farmer Giles? I should imagine your person, your accomplishments, might have
entitled you to look higher.


Patty. Your lordship is pleased to over-rate my little merit; the education I
received in your family, does not entitle me to forget my origin; and the
farmer is my equal.


L. Aim. In what respect? the degrees of rank and fortune, my dear Patty, are
arbitrary distinctions, unworthy the regard of those who consider justly; the
true standard of equality is seated in the mind; those who think nobly are
noble.


Patty. The farmer my lord, is a very honest man.


L. Aim. So he may, I don't suppose he would break into a house, or commit a
robbery on the highway; what do you tell me of his honesty for?


Patty. I did not mean to offend your lordship.


L. Aim. Offend! I am not offended Patty, not at all offended -- but is there
any great merit in a man's being honest?


Patty. I don't say there is, my lord.


L. Aim. The farmer is an ill bred illiterate booby, and what happiness can you
propose to yourself in such a society. Then as to his person I am sure -- But
perhaps Patty you like him, and if so I am doing a wrong thing.


Patty. Upon my word, my lord --


L. Aim. Nay I see you do, he has had the good fortune to please you, and in
that case you are certainly in the right to follow your inclinations -- I must
tell you one thing Patty, however -- I hope you will not think it unfriendly of me
-- But I am determined farmer Giles shall not stay a moment on my estate, after
next quarter day.


Patty. I hope my lord, he has not incurred your displeasure --


L. Aim. That Is of no signification -- Could I find as many good qualities in
him as you do, perhaps -- but it is enough, he is a fellow I don't like; and as
you have a regard for him, I would have you advise him to provide himself.


Patty. My lord I am very unfortunate.


L. Aim. She loves him it is plain -- Come Patty, don't cry, I would not
willingly do any thing to make you uneasy -- Have you seen Miss Sycamore yet? I
suppose you know she and I are going to be married.


Patty. So I hear my lord; Heaven make you both happy.


L. Aim. Thank you Patty, I hope we shall be happy.


Patty. Upon my knees, upon my knees I pray it; may every earthly bliss attend
you; may your days prove an uninterrupted course of delightful tranquillity: and
your mutual friendship, confidence and love, end but with your lives.


L. Aim. Rise Patty, rise; say no more -- I suppose you will wait upon Miss
Sycamore before you go away -- at present I have a little business -- as I
said, Patty, don't afflict yourself, I have been somewhat hasty with regard to
the farmer, but since I see how deeply you are interested in his affairs, I
may, possibly, alter my designs with regard to him -- You know -- you know
Patty, your marriage with him is no concern of mine -- I only speak --

AIR.
My passion in vain I attempt to dissemble,
The endeavor to hide it, but makes it appear;
Enraptured I gaze, when I touch her I tremble,
And speak to and hear her, with fault'ring and fear.
By how many cruel ideas tormented?
My blood's in a ferment, it freezes, it burns;
This moment I wish, what the next is repented,
While love, rage and jealousy rack me by turns!

SCENE III.
PATTY, GILES. Giles. Miss Pat -- Odd rabit it, I thought his honor was here;
and I wish I may die if my heart did not jump into my mouth, -- come, come down
in all haste, there is such rig below, as you never knew in your born days.


Patty. Rig?


Giles. Ay and fun -- there is as good as forty of the tenants, men, and
maidens, have got upon the lawn before the castle, with pipers and garlands;
just for all the world as thof it was May day; and the quality's looking at
them out of the windows -- It Is as true as any thing; on account of my lord's
coming home with his new lady -- look here, I have brought a string of their
flowers along with me.


Patty. Well, and what then?


Giles. Why I was thinking, if so be as you would come down, as we might take a
dance together; little Sal, farmer Harrow's daughter of the Green, would fain
have had me for a partner, but I said as how I Would go for one I liked better, one
that I Would make a partner for life.


Patty. Did you say so?


Giles. Yes, and she was struck all of a heap -- she had not a word to throw to
a dog -- for Sal and I kept company once for a little bit.


Patty. Farmer, I am going to say something to you, and I desire you will
listen to it attentively -- it seems you think of our being married together.


Giles. Think, why I think of nothing else; it is all over the place mun, as how
you are to be my spouse, and you would not believe what game folks make of me.


Patty. Shall I talk to you like a friend, farmer -- you and I were never
designed for one another; and I am morally certain we should not be happy.


Giles. Oh! as for that matter, I never has no words with no body.


Patty. Shall I speak plainer to to you then -- I don't like you.


Giles. No!


Patty. On the contrary, you are disagreeable to me --


Giles. Am I?


Patty. Yes, of all things, I deal with you sincerely.


Giles. Why, I thought Miss Pat, the affair between you and I was all fixed and
settled.


Patty. Well, let this undeceive you -- Be assured we shall never be man and
wife. No offer shall persuade, no command, force me -- you know my mind, make
your advantage of it.

AIR.
Was I sure a life to lead,
Wretched as the vilest slave,
Every hardship would I brave:
Rudest toil, severest need;
'Ere yield my hand so cooly,
To the man who never truly,
Could my heart in keeping have.
Wealth with others success will insure you,
Where your wit and your person may please,
Take to them your love, I conjure you,
And in mercy set me at ease.

SCENE IV.
GILES. Here Is a turn, I don't know what to make of it, she is gone mad, that is
for sartin; wit and learning have crakt her brain -- poor soul, poor soul -- It
is often the case of those that have too much of them. -- Lord, Lord, how sorry
I be -- but hold, she says I baint to her mind -- may not all this be the effect
of modish coyness, to do like the gentlewomen, because she was bred among them?
and I have heard say, they will be upon their vixen tricks, 'till they go into
the very church with a man; Icod there is nothing more likelier, for it is the
cry of one and all, that she is the moral of a lady in every thing: and our
farmers daughters, for the matter of that, tho'f they have nothing to boast of,
but a scrap of red ribbon about their hats, will have as many turnings and
windings as a hare, before one can lay a fast hold of them. There can no harm
come, of speaking with master Fairfield, howsoever: odd rabbit it, how plaguey
tart she was -- I am half vexed with my myself now that I let her go off so.

AIR.
When a maid in way of marriage,
First is courted by a man,
Let 'un do the best he can,
She Is so shame-fac'd in her carriage,
It Is with pain the suit's began.
Tho'f mayhap she likes him mainly,
Still she shams it coy and cold;
Fearing to confess it plainly,
Lest the folks should think her bold.
But the parson comes in sight,
Gives the word to bill and coo;
It Is a different story quite,
And she quickly buckles too.

SCENE V.
Changes to a view of Lord AIMWORTH's house, and improvements; a seat under a
tree; and part of the garden wall, with a Chinese pavilion over it; several
country people appear dancing, others looking on; among whom are MERVIN,
disguised; RALPH, FANNY, and a number of gypsies. After the dancers go off,
THEODOSIA, and PATTY, enter through a gate supposed to have a connection with
the principal building. Theo. Well then my dear Patty, you will run away from
us; but why in such a hurry, I have a thousand things to say to you.


Pat. I shall do myself the honor to pay my duty to you some other time,
Madam, at present I really find myself a little indisposed.


Theo. Nay, I would by no means lay you under any restraint. But methinks the
entertainment we have just been taking part of, should have put you into better
spirits: I am not in an over-merry mood myself, yet I swear I could not look on
the diversion of those honest folks, without feeling a certain gaietie de coeur.


Pat. Why indeed Madam, it had one circumstance attending it, which is often
wanting to more polite amusements, that of seeming to give undissembled
satisfaction to those who were engaged in it.


Theo. Oh infinite, infinite! to see the cheerful healthy looking creatures,
toil with such a good will, to me there were more genuine charms, in their
awkward stumping and jumping about; their rude measures, and homespun finery;
than in all the dress, splendour, and studied graces, of a birth-night ballroom.


Pat. It Is a very uncommon declaration to be made by a fine lady, Madam; but
certainly, however the artful delicacies of high life may dazzle and surprise,
nature has particular attractions, even in a cottage, her most unadorned state;
which seldom fails to affect us, though we can scarce give a reason for it.


Theo. But you know, Patty, I was always a distracted admirer of the country;
no damsel in romance was ever fonder of groves and purling streams: had I been
born in the days of Arcadia, with my present propensity, instead of being a
fine lady, as you call me, I should certainly have kept a flock of sheep.


Patty. Well, madam, you have the sages, poets, and philosophers, of all ages,
to countenance your way of thinking.


Theo. And you, my little philosophical friend; don't you think me in the right
too?


Patty. Yes indeed, madam, perfectly.


AIR.
Trust me, would you taste true pleasure,
Without mixture, without measure,
No where shall you find the treasure
Sure as in the sylvan scene:
Blessed, who, no false glare requiring,
Nature's rural sweets admiring,
Can, from grosser joys retiring,
Seek the simple and serene.
SCENE VI.
THEODOSIA, MERVIN, FANNY. Theo. How unjust is fortune in the distribution of
her gifts! This girl certainly merits to shine in a higher sphere; and how many
that pass for fine ladies might fill the place she now occupies without the
least violence to their characters.


Mer. Yonder she is seated, and, to my wish, most fortunately alone. Accost her
as I desired.


Theo. Heigh! (Sighing) I could be very melancholy now; but that indeed is no
wonder in my present situation.


Fan. Heaven bless you, my sweet lady -- bless your honor's beautiful visage,
and send you a good husband and a great many of them.


Theo. A very comfortable wish upon my word; who are you, child?


Fan. A poor gipsey, an' please you, that goes about begging from charitable
gentlemen and ladies -- If you have ere a coal or bit of whiting in your
pocket, I Will write you the first letter of your sweetheart's name; how many
husbands you will have, and how many children, my lady; or, if you will let me
look at your line of life, I Will tell you whether it will be long or short,
happy or miserable.


Theo. Oh! as for that, I know it already -- my life will be miserable most
certainly; and, as you cannot tell me any good fortune, I Will hear none. Go
about your business.


Mer. Stay, madam, stay (Pretending to lift a paper from the ground) you have
dropped something. Fan, call the young gentlewoman back.


Fan. Lady, you have lost --


Theo. Pho, pho, I have lost nothing.


Mer. Yes, that paper, lady; you dropped it as you got up from the chair: we are
poor but honest. Fan, give it to her honor.


Theo. A letter with my address! (Takes the paper and reads) "Dear Theodosia!
Though the sight of me was so disagreeable to you, that you charged me never to
approach you more, I hope my handwriting can have nothing to frighten or
disgust you. I am not far off, and the person who delivers you this, can give
you intelligence." -- Come hither, child; Do you know any thing of the
gentleman that wrote this?


Fan. My lady --


Theo. Make haste, run this moment, bring me to him, bring him to me; say I
wait with impatience; tell him I will go, fly any where --


Mer. My life, my charmer!


Theo. Oh, Heavens! -- Mr. Mervin!


SCENE VII.
THEODOSIA, MERVIN, SIR HARRY, LADY SYCAMORE, FANNY, GYPSIES. La. Syc. Sir
Harry don't walk so fast, we are not running for a wager.


Sir Har. Hough, hough, hough.


La. Syc. Hey day, you have got a cough; I shall have you laid up upon my hands
presently.


Sir Har. No no, my lady, it is only the old affair.


La. Syc. Come here, and let me tie this handkerchief about your neck; you have
put yourself into a muck-sweat already (Ties a handkerchief about his neck)
Have you taken your Bardana this morning? I warrant you no now, though you have
been complaining of twitches two or three times; and you know the gouty season
is coming on. Why will you be so neglectful of your health, Sir Harry? I
protest I am forced to watch you like an infant.


Sir Har. My lovey takes care of me, and I am obliged to her.


La. Syc. Well, but you ought to mind me then, since you are satisfied I never
speak but for your good. I thought, Miss Sycamore, you were to have followed
your papa and me into the garden. -- How far did you go with that wench?


Theo. They are gypsies, madam, they say. Indeed I don't know what they are.


La. Syc. I wish, miss, you would learn to give a rational answer --


Sir Har. Eh! What Is that? Gypsies! Have we gypsies here? Vagrants, that
pretend to a knowledge of future events; diviners; fortune tellers?


Fan. Yes, your worship; we'll tell your fortune, or her ladyship's, for a crum
of bread, or a little broken victuals, what you throw to your dogs, an please
you.


Sir Har. Broken victuals, hussy! How do you think we should have broken
victuals? If we were at home, indeed, perhaps you might get some such thing
from the cook; but here we are only on a visit to a friend's house, and have
nothing to do with the kitchen at all.


La. Syc. And do you think, Sir Harry, it is necessary to give the creature an
account.


Sir Har. No, love, no; but what can you say to obstinate people? -- Get you
gone, bold face -- I once knew a merchant's wife in the City, my Lady, who had
her fortune told by some of those gypsies. They said she should die at such a
time; and I warrant, as sure as the day came, the poor gentlewoman actually
died with the conceit -- Come, Dossy, your mama and I are going to take a walk
-- My Lady, will you have hold of my arm?


La. Syc. No, Sir Harry, I choose to go by myself.


Mer. Now, love, assist me (Turning to the gypsies) Follow, and take all your
cues from me. -- Nay, but good lady and gentleman, you wont go without
remembering the poor gypsies.


Sir Har. Hey! here is all the gang after us.


Gip Pray, your noble honor.


La. Syc. Come back into the garden, we shall be covered with vermin.


Gip. Out of the bowels of your commisseration.


La. Syc. They press upon us more and more; yet that girl has no mind to leave
them; I shall sound away.


Sir Har. Don't be frightened, my lady; let me advance.

AIR.
You vile pack of vagabonds what do ye mean?
I Will maul you, rascallions,
Ye tatter demallions --
If one of them comes within reach of my cane.
Such cursed assurance,
It Is past all endurance.
Nay, nay, pray come away.
They Are liars and thieves,
And he that believes
Their foolish predictions
Will find them but fictions,
A bubble that always deceives.

SCENE VIII.
MERVIN, THEODOSIA, FANNY, GYPSIES. Fanny. Oh! mercy, dear, -- The gentleman is
so bold, it is well if he does not bring us into trouble. Who knows but this may
be a justice of peace; and see, he is following them into the garden.


1 st Gipsey. Well, it is all your seeking, Fan.


Fan. We shall have warrants to take us up, I Will be hanged else. We had better
run away, the servants will come out with sticks to lick us.


Mer. Cursed ill fortune -- (Here Mervin returns with gypsies) She Is gone, and,
perhaps, I shall not have another opportunity -- And you, ye blundering
blockheads, I will not give you a halfpenny -- Why did you not clap too the
garden-door, when I called to you, before the young lady got in? The key was on
the outside, which would have given me some time for an explanation.


2 d Gip. An please your honor I was dubus.


Mer. Dubus! plague choke ye -- However, it is some satisfaction that I have
been able to let her see me, and know where I am -- (Turning to the gypsies,
who go off) Go, get you gone, all of you, about your business.


Theo. Disappeared, fled! -- (Theodosia appears in the pavilion) Oh, how
unlucky this is! Could he not have patience to wait a moment.


Merv. I know not what to resolve on.


Theo. Hem!


Mer. I Will go back to the garden-door.


Theo. Mr. Mervin!


Mer. What do I see! It Is she, it is she herself! Oh, Theodosia! -- Shall I
climb the wall and come up to you?


Theo. No; speak softly, Sir Harry and my Lady sit below at the end of the
walk. How much am I obliged to you for taking this trouble.


Mer. When their happiness is at stake, what is it men will not attempt? Say
but you love me.


Theo. What proof would you have me give you? I know but of one: if you please,
I am willing to go off with you.


Mer. Are you? Would to Heaven I had brought a carriage!


Theo. How did you come? Have you not horses?


Mer. No, there is another misfortune; to avoid suspicion, there being but one
little public-house in the village, I dispatched my servant with them, about an
hour ago, to wait for me at a town twelve miles distant, whither I pretended to
go also; but alighting a mile off, I equipt myself, and came back as you see;
neither can we, nearer than this town, get a post-chaise.


Theo. You say you have made a confidant of the miller's son: return to your
place of rendezvous; my father has been asked this moment, by Lord Aimworth,
who is in the garden, to take a walk with him down to the mill: they will go
before dinner, and it shall be hard if I cannot contrive to be one of the
company.


Mer. And what then?


Theo. Why, in the mean time, you may devise some method to carry me from
hence; and I Will take care you shall have an opportunity of communicating it to
me.


Mer. Well, but dear Theodosia --


The. AIR.
Hist, hist! I hear my mother call*
Pr'ythee be gone,
We'll meet anon. --
Catch this, and this --
Blow me a kiss,
In pledge-promis'd truth, that is all.
Farewell! -- and yet a moment stay,
Something beside I have to say:
Well, it is forgot; --
No matter what.
Love grant us grace,
The mill's the place.
She calls again, I must away.

SCENE IX.
MERVIN, FANNY. Fan. Please your honor, you were so kind as to say, you would
remember my fellow-travellers for their trouble, and they think I have gotten
the money.


Mer. Oh, here! give them this (Gives her money) And for you, my dear little
pilot, you have brought me so cleverly through my business, that I must --


Fan. Oh, Lord! your honor -- (Mervin kisses her) Pray don't -- kiss me again.


Merv. Again, and again -- There Is a thought come into my head. Theodosia will
certainly have no objection to putting on a dress of the sister of mine. So,
and so only, we may escape to Night. This girl, for a little money, will
provide us with necessaries --


Fan. Dear, gracious! I warrant you now I am as red as my petticoat. Why would
you royster and towzel one so? -- If Ralph was to see you, he would be as jealous
as the vengeance.


Mer. Hang Ralph! Never mind him. There Is a guinea for thee.


Fan. What, a golden guinea?


Mer. Yes; and, if thou art a good girl, and do as I desire thee, thou shall
have twenty.


Fan. Ay, but not all gold.


Mer. As good as that is.


Fan. Shall I though, if I does as you bids me?


Merv. You shall.


Fan. Precious heart! He Is a sweet gentleman! Ecod I have a great mind --


Mer. What art thou thinking about?


Fan. Thinking, your honor? Ha, ha, ha!


Mer. Indeed, so merry.


Pan. I don't know what I am thinking about, not I -- Ha, ha, ha! -- Twenty
guineas!


Mer. I tell thee thou shall have them.


Fan. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!


Mer. By Heaven I am serious.


Fan. Ha, ha, ha* Why then I Will do whatever your honor pleases.


Mer. Stay here a little, to see that all keeps quiet. You Will find me presently
at the mill, where we'll talk farther.

AIR.
Yes, it is decreed, thou maid divine,
I must, I will, possess thee.
Oh, what delight within my arms to press thee!
To kiss and call thee mine!
Let me this only bliss enjoy,
That never can waste, that never can cloy,
All other pleasures I resign.
Why should we dally,
Stand shilli shally?
Let Fortune smile or frown;
Love will attend us,
Love will befriend us,
And all our wishes crown.

SCENE X.
FANNY; RALPH. Fan. What a dear kind soul he is -- here comes Ralph -- I can
tell him, unless he makes me his lawful wise, as he has often said he would,
the devil a word more shall he speak to me.


Ral. So Fan, where is the gentleman?


Fan. Why how should I know where he is, what do you ask me for?


Ral. There Is no harm in putting a civil question, be there? why you look as
cross and ill natured --


Fan. Well, mayhap I do -- and mayhap I may have wherewithal for it.


Ral. Why has the gentleman offered any thing uncivil? ecod I Would try a bout as
soon as look at him.


Fan. He offer -- no -- he is a gentleman every inch of him; but you are
sensible Ralph, you have been promising me a great while, this, and that, and
the other, and when all comes to all, I don't see but you are like the rest of
them.


Ral. Why what is it I have promised?


Fan. To marry me in the church, you have a hundred times.


Ralph. Well, and mayhap I will; if you will have patience.


Fan. Patience me no patience, you may do it now if you please.


Ral. Well, but suppose I don't please; I tell you Fan you're a fool, and want
to quarrel with your bread and butter; I have had anger enough from feyther
already, upon you're account, and you want me to come by more; as I said, if
you have patience, mayhap things may fall out, and mayhap not.


Fan. With all my heart then; and now I know your mind, you may go hang
yourself.


Ral. Ay, ay.


Fan. Yes, you may -- who cares for you?


Ral. Well, and who cares for you, an you go to that?


Fan. A menial feller -- go mind your mill and your drudgery, I don't think you
worthy to wipe my shoes, -- feller.


Ral. Nay but Fan, keep a civil tongue in your head, odds flesh! I would fain
know what fly bites all of a sudden now.


Fan. Marry come up, the best gentlemen's sons in the county have made me
proffers, and if one is a Miss, be a Miss to a gentleman I say, that will give
one fine clothes, and take one to see the show, and put money in one's pocket.


Ral. Whu, whu (whilstling, she hits him a slap in the face) what is that for?


Fan. What do you whistle for then! Do you think I am a dog?


Ral. Never from me Fan, if I have not a mind to give you with this switch in
my hand here, as good a lacing --


Fan. Touch me if you dare, touch me; and I Will swear my life against you.


Ral. A murrain! with her damned little fist, as hard as she could draw.


Fan. Well, its good enough for you; I Am not necesiated to take up with the
impurence of such a lowliv'd monkey as you are -- A gentleman's my friend, and
I can have twenty guineas in my hand, all as good gold as that is.


Ral. Belike from this Londoner, eh?


Fan. Yes from him -- so you may take your promise of marriage, I don't value
it that (spits) and if you speak to me, I Will slap your chops again.

AIR.
Lord Sir, you seem mighty uneasy,
But I the refusal can bear;
I warrant I shall not run crazy,
Nor die, in a fit of despair.
If so you suppose you're mistaken,
For Sir, for to let you to know;
I Am not such a maiden forsaken,
But I have two strings to my bow.

SCENE XI.
RALPH. Indeed! now I Will be judged by any soul living in the world, if ever
there was a viler piece of treachery than this here; there is no such a thing
as a true friend upon the face of the globe, and so I have said a hundred
times! a couple of base deceitful -- after all my love and kindness shown.
Well, I Will be revenged, see an I ben't -- Master Marvint, that is his name, an
he do not sham it; he has come here and disguised unself; whereof it is contrary
to law so to do; besides, I do partly know why he did it; and I Will fish out the
whole conjuration, and go up to the castle and tell every sylable; a shall not
carry a wench from me, were he twenty times the mon he is; and twenty times to
that again; and moreover than so, the first time I meet un, I Will knock un down,
tho'f'twas before my lord him self; and he may capias me for it afterward, an
he wull --

AIR.
I Am in such a passion, but let 'em take care on it,
Or else by the mackins, before they are aware on it,
They Will pay for their gamesomeness dear;
The first and the best, whomsomdever they be,
Shall find, if they offer to play upon me,
They take the wrong sow by the ear.
I have been a fool to this Londonshire shaver,
But now since I sees his ungrateful hehaver,
I Will with him turn over a new leaf;
And if I don't speedily serve 'em a trick,
Shall make both my lady and gentleman sick,
Why say that my name is not Ralph.

SCENE XII.
Changes to a room in the Mill; two chairs with a table, and a tankard of beer.
FAIRFIELD, GILES. Fairf. In short, farmer, I don't know what to say to thee. I
have spoken to her all I can; but I think children were born to pull the gray
hairs of their parents to the grave with sorrow.


Giles. Nay master Fairfield don't take on about it; belike Miss Pat has
another love, and if so, in Heaven's name be it: what is one man's meat as the
saying is is another man's poison. And thof, some might find me well enough to
their fancy, set in case I don't suit here is, why there is no harm done.


Fairf. Well but neighbor, I have put that to her; and the story is, she has
no inclination to marry any one; all she desires, is, to stay at home and take
care of me.


Giles. Master Fairfield -- here is toward your good health.


Fairf. Thank thee friend Giles -- and here is toward thine -- I promise thee
had things gone as we proposed, thou should have had one half of what I was
worth, to the uttermost farthing.


Giles. Why to be sure Master Fairfield, I am not the less obligated to your
good will; but as to that matter, had I married, it should not have been for
the lucre of gain; but if I do like a girl, do you see, I do like her; ay, and
I Will take her, saving respect, if she had not a second petticoat.


Fairf. Well said -- where love is, with a little industry, what have a young
couple to be afraid of? and by the lord Harry, for all that is past, I cannot
help thinking we shall bring our matters to bear yet -- Young women you know
friend Giles!


Giles. Why that is what I have been thinking with myself, master Fairfield.


Fairf. Come then, mend thy draught -- duce take me, if I let it drop so. But
in any case don't you go to make yourself uneasy.


Giles. Uneasy master Fairfield, what good would that do. -- For sarten, seeing
how things were, I should have been very glad they had gone accordingly; but if
they change, it is no fault of mine, you know.

AIR.
Zooks! why should I sit down and grieve?
No case so sad, there may not be had,
Some medicine to relieve.
Here Is what masters, all disasters:
With a cup of nut-brown beer,
Thus my drooping thoughts I cheer:
If one pretty damsel fail me,
From another I may find,
Return more kind;
What a murrain then should ail me?
All girls are not of a mind.
He Is a child that wimpers for a toy,
So here is to thee, honest boy.

SCENE XIII.
FAIRFIELD, Lord AIMWORTH. Fairf. O the goodness, his lordship's honor -- you
are come into a litter'd place, my noble sir -- the arm chair here -- will it
please your honor to repose you, on this till a better --


L. Aim. Thank you Miller, there is no occasion for either -- I only want to
speak a few words to you, and have company waiting for me without.


Fairf. Without -- will not their honors favor my poor hovel so far --


L. Aim. No Miller, let them stay where they are -- I find you are about
marrying your daughter -- I know the great regard my mother had for her, and am
satisfied that nothing but her sudden death, could have prevented her leaving
her a handsome provision.


Fairf. Dear my lord, your noble mother, you, and all your family, have heaped
favors on favors, on my poor child.


L. Aim. Whatever has been done for her she has fully merited --


Fairf. Why to be sure, my lord, she is a very good girl.


L. Aim. Poor old man -- but those are tears of satisfaction -- here master
Fairfield, to bring matters to a short conclusion, here is a bill of a thousand
pounds. -- Portion your daughter with what you think convenient of it.


Fairf A thousand pound my lord! pray excuse me; excuse me worthy sir, too much
has been done already, and we have no pretensions.


L. Aim. I insist upon your taking it -- Put it up and say no more.


Fairf. Well my lord, if it must be so; but indeed, indeed --


L. Aim. In this I only fulfill what I am satisfied would please my mother. As
to myself, I shall take upon me all the expenses of Patty's wedding, and have
already given orders about it.


Fair. Alas Sir, you are too good, too generous; but I fear we shall not be
able to profit of your kind intentions, unless you will condescend to speak a
little to Patty.


L. Aim. How speak!


Fair. Why my lord, I thought we had pretty well ordered all things concerning
this marriage, but all on a sudden, the girl has taken it into her head, not to
have the farmer, and declares she will never marry at all -- but I know my
lord, she will pay great respect to any thing you say; and if you will but lay your
commands on her to marry him, I am sure she will do it.


L. Aim. Who, I lay my commands on her?


Fair. Yes, pray my lord do; I Will send her into you.


L. Aim. Master Fairfield! (Fairfield goes out and returns) What can be the
meaning of this? refuse to marry the farmer! How, why? My heart is thrown in an
agitation, while every step I take serves but to lead me into new perplexities.


Fair. She Is coming, my lord, I said you were here; and I humbly beg you will
tell her, you insist upon the match going forward; tell her you insist upon it
my lord, and speak a little angrily to her.


SCENE XIV.
Lord AIMWORTH, PATTY. Pat. Yet another conflict! well, it is the last, and I
must go through it.


L. Aim. I came hither, Patty, in consequence of our conversation this morning,
to render your change of state as agreeable and happy as I could; but your
father tells me, you have fallen out with the farmer; has any thing happened
since I saw you last, to alter your good opinion of him?


Pat. No my lord, I am in the same opinion with regard to the farmer now, that
I always was.


L. Aim. I thought, Patty, you loved him, you told me?


Pat. My lord!


L. Aim. Well, no matter -- It seems I have been mistaken in that particular --
Possibly your affections are engaged elsewhere; let me but know the man that
can make you happy, and I swear --


Pat. Indeed, my lord, you take too much trouble upon my account.


L. Aim. Perhaps Patty, you love somebody so much beneath you, you are ashamed
to own it; but your esteem confers a value wheresoever it is placed -- I was
too harsh with you this morning; our inclinations are not in our own power;
they master the wisest of us.


Pat. Pray, pray my lord, talk not to me in this style; consider me as one
destined by birth and fortune to the meanest condition and offices; who has
unhappily been too apt to imbibe sentiments contrary to them; let me conquer a
heart where pride and vanity have usurped an improper rule, and learn to know
myself, of whom I have been too long ignorant.


L. Aim. Perhaps, Patty, you love some one so much above you, you are afraid to
own it. -- If so, be his rank what it will, he is to be envied; for the love of
a woman of virtue, beauty, and sentiment, does honor to a monarch -- What
means that downcast look, those tears, those blushes? Dare you not confide in
me -- Do you think Patty, you have a friend in the world would sympathize with
you more sincerely than I.


Pat. What shall I answer? No my lord, you have ever treated me with a
kindness, a generosity of which none but minds like yours are capable; you
have been my instructor, my adviser; my protector: but, my lord, you have been
too good; when our superiors forget the distance between us, we are sometimes
led to forget it too; had you been less condescending, perhaps I had been
happier.


L. Aim. And have I, Patty, have I made you unhappy; I, who would sacrifice my
own felicity to secure yours?


Pat. I beg my lord, you will suffer me to be gone; only believe me sensible of
all your favors, though unworthy of the smallest.


L. Aim. How unworthy! you merit every thing, my respect, my esteem, my
friendship, and my love! yes I repeat, I avow it; your beauty, your modesty,
your understanding, has made a conquest of my heart; but what a world do we
live in? that while I own this, while I own a passion for you, founded on the
justest, the noblest basis; I must at the same time confess, the fear of that
world, its taunts, its reproaches --


Pat. Ah Sir, think better of the creature you have raised, than to suppose I
ever entertained a hope tending to your dishonor: would that be a return for
the favors I have received? would that be a grateful reverence for the memory
of her -- pity and pardon the disturbance of a mind that fears to enquire too
minutely into its own sensations -- I am unfortunate my lord, but not criminal.


L. Aim. Patty, we are both unfortunate; for my own part, I know not what to
say to you, or what to propose to myself.


Pat. Then my lord, it is mine to act as I ought: yet while I am honored with a
place in your esteem, imagine me not insensible of so high a distinction, or
capable of lightly turning my thoughts toward another.


L. Aim. How cruel is my situation! I am here Patty, to command you to marry
the man who has given us so much uneasiness.


Pat. My lord, I am convinced it is for your credit and my safety, it should be
so; I hope I have not so ill profited by the lessons of your noble mother, but
I shall be able to do my duty wherever I am called to it; this will be my first
support, time and reflection will complete the work.

AIR.
Cease oh cease, to overwhelm me,
With excess of bounty rare,
What am I? what have I? tell me,
To deserve your meanest care?
Against our fate in vain's resistance,
Let me then no grief disclose;
But resigned at humble distance,
Offer vows for your repose.

SCENE XV.
Lord AIMWORTH, PATTY, Sir HARRY SYCAMORE, THEODOSIA, GILES. Sir Har. No
justice of peace, no bailiffs, no headborough! Why gypsies are as great a
nuisance in this country, as rats were in the island where Wittington went to.


L. Aim. What Is the matter, Sir Harry?


Sir Har. The matter my lord, while I was examining the construction of the
mill without, for I have some small notion of mechanics, Miss Sycamore had like
to have been run away with by a gypsey man.


Theo. Dear papa, how can you talk so? did not I tell you it was at my own
desire, the poor fellow went to show me the canal.


Sir Har. Hold your tongue, Miss Sycamore, I understand what I am saying. I
don't know any business you had to let him come near you at all: we have stayed
so long too, your Mama gave us but half an hour, and she will be frightened out
of her wits -- she will think some accident has happened to me.


L. Aim. I Will wait upon you when you please.


Sir Har. O but my lord, here is a poor fellow tells us a dismal story -- it
seems his mistress has conceived some disgust against him; pray has her father
spoke to you to interpose your authority in his behalf?


Giles. If his lordship's honor would be so kind, I would acknowledge the
favor as far as in me lay.


Sir Har. Hold your tongue, let me speak; did not the miller tell you he had
given you a thousand pounds portion (takes lord Aimworth aside) a word or two
in your lordship's ear.


Theo. Well, I do like this gypsey scheme prodigiously, if we can but put it
into execution as happily as we have contrived it (here Patty enters) so my
dear Patty, you see I am come to return your visit very soon; but this is only
a call en passant -- will you be at home after dinner?


Patty. Certainly Madam, whenever you condescend to honor me so far; but it is
what I cannot expect.


Theo. O fie, why not -- Well Patty, I will positively see you in the evening.


Pat. Then undoubtedly Madam, I shall take care not to be out of the way.


Giles. Your servant, Miss Patty.


Pat. Farmer, your servant.


Sir Har. Here you goodman delver, I have done your business for you; my lord
has spoke, and your fortune's made; a thousand pounds at present, and better
things to come; his lordship says he will be your friend.


Giles. I do hope then, Miss Pat. will make all up.


Sir Har. Miss Pat. make up, stand out of the way, I Will make it up.


The quarrels of lovers, adds me! they are a jest,
Come hither ye blockhead come hither:
So, now, let us leave them together.

L. Aim. Farewell then!

Patty. -- For ever!

Giles. -- I vow and protest,
'Twas kind of his honor,
To gain thus upon her,
We Are so much beholden, it cannot be expressed.

Theo. I feel something here,
'Twixt hoping and fear.
Haste, haste, friendly night,
To shelter our flight --

Ld. A. Patty. A thousand distractions are rending my breast.

Patty. Oh mercy,

Giles. -- oh dear!

Sir Har. Why Miss, will you mind when you're spoke to; or not?
Must I stand in waiting,
While you're here a prating?

Ld. A. Theo. May every felicity fall to your lot.

Giles. She curtsy's, look there,
What a shape, what an air!

All. How happy! how wretched! how tired am I!
Your lordship's obedient; your servant; good by.



END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
The Lawn before Lord AIMWORTH's house. Enter Lord AIMWORTH, Sir HARRY, Lady
SYCAMORE, and RALPH. L. Syc. A Wretch, a vile inconsiderate wretch, coming of
such a race as mine, and having an example like me before her.


L. Aim. I beg madam you will not disquiet yourself; you are told here, that a
gentleman lately arrived from London, has been about the place today; that he
has disguised himself like a gipsey, came hither, and had some conversation
with your daughter; you are even told, that there is a design formed for their
going off the other; but possibly there may be some mistake in all this.


Sir Har. Ay; but my lord the lad tells us the gentleman's name; we have seen
the gypsies and we know she has had a hankering --


L. Syc. Sir Harry my dear, why will you put in your word, when you hear others
speaking -- I protest my lord I Am in such confusion, I know not what to say, I
can hardly support myself.


L. Aim. This gentleman it seems is at a little inn at the bottom of the hill.


Sir. Har. I wish it was possible to have a file of musketeers my lord; I
could head them myself, being in the militia, and we would go and seize him
directly.


L. Aim. Softly my dear sir; let us proceed with a little less violence in this
matter, I beseech you. We should first see the young lady -- Where is Miss
Sycamore, madam?


L. Syc. Really my lord I don't know; I saw her go into the garden about a
quarter of an hour ago, from our chamber window.


Sir Har. Into the garden! perhaps she has got an inkling of our being informed
of this affair; and is gone to throw herself into the pond. Despair, my lord,
makes girls do terrible things. 'Twas but the Wednesday before we left London,
that I saw, taken out of Rosamond's pond in Saint James's Park, as likely a
young woman as ever you would desire to set your eyes on; in a new calamancoe
petticoat, and a pair of silver buckles in her shoes.


L. Aim. I hope there is no danger of any such fatal accident happening at
present: but will you oblige me, sir Harry?


Sir Har. Surely my lord --


L. Aim. Will you commit the whole direction of this affair to my prudence?


Sir Har. My dear, you hear what his lordship says.


L. Syc. Indeed my lord I am so much ashamed, I don't know what to answer; the
fault of my daughter --


L. Aim. Don't mention it, madam; the fault has been mine; who have been
innocently the occasion of a young lady's transgressing a point of duty and
decorum, which, otherwise, she would never have violated. But if you, and sir
Harry, will walk in and repose yourselves, I hope to settle every thing to the
general satisfaction --


L. Syc. Come in sir Harry?


L. Aim. I am sure my good friend, had I known that I was doing a violence to
Miss Sycamore's inclinations, in the happiness I proposed to myself --


Sir Har. My lord it is all a case. -- My grandfather by the mother's side, was
a very sensible man -- he was elected knight of the shire, in five successive
parliaments; and died high sheriff of his county -- a man of fine parts, fine
talents, and the curioest docker of horses in all England, but that he did only
now and then, for his amusement) And he used to say, my lord, that the female
sex were good for nothing but to bring forth children, and breed disturbance.


L. Aim. The ladies were very little obliged to your ancestor, sir Harry; but
for my part, I have a more favorable opinion --


Sir Har. You are in the wrong, my lord; with submission, you are really in the
wrong.

AIR.
To speak my mind, of womankind,
In one word it is this,
By nature they are designed,
To say and do amiss.
Be they maids, be they wives,
Alike they plague our lives;
Wanton, headstrong, cunning, vain,
Born to cheat, and give men pain.
Their study, day and night,
Is mischief, their delight;
And if we should prevent,
At one door their intent;
They quickly turn about,
And find another out.

SCENE II.
Lord AIMWORTH, FAIRFIELD, RALPH. Ral. Dear goodness, my lord, I doubts I have
done some wrong here; I hope your honor will forgive me; to be sartin if I had
known --


L. Aim. You have done nothing but what is very right, my lad; don't make
yourself uneasy. How now, master Fairfield, what brings you here?


Fairf. I am come my lord to thank you for your bounty, to me and my daughter,
this morning; and, most humbly to entreat your lordship, to receive it at our
hands again.


L. Aim. Ay -- why what is the matter?


Fairf. I don't know my lord; it seems your generosity to my poor girl, has
been noised about the neighborhood; and some evil minded people have put it
into the young man's head, that was to marry her, that you would never have
made her a present so much above her deserts, and expectations, if it had not
been upon some naughty account: now my lord, I am a poor man, it is true, and a
mean one; but I and my father, and my father's father, have lived tenants upon
your lordship's estate, where we have always been known for honest men; and it
shall never be said, that Fairfield, the miller, became rich in his old days,
by the wages of his child's shame.


L. Aim. What then, master Fairfield, do you believe --


Fairf. No my lord, no, Heaven forbid; but when I consider the sum, it is too
much for us; it is indeed my lord, and enough to make bad folks talk: besides,
my poor girl is greatly altered; she used to be the life of every place she
came into; but since her being at home, I have seen nothing from her, but
sadness and watery eyes.


L. Aim. The farmer then refuses to marry Patty, notwithstanding their late
reconciliation?


Fairf. Yes my lord, he does indeed; and has made a wicked noise, and used us
in a very base manner: I did not think farmer Giles would have been so ready to
believe such a thing of us.


L. Aim. Well master Fairfield, I will not press on you a donation, the
rejection of which does you so much credit; you may take my word, however, that
your fears upon this occasion are entirely groundless; but this is not enough,
as I have been the means of losing your daughter one husband, it is but just I
should get her another; and, since the farmer is so scrupulous, there is a
young man in the house here, whom I have some influence over, and I dare say,
he will be less squeamish.


Fairf. To be sure my lord, you have in all honest ways, a right to dispose of
me and mine, as you think proper.


L. Aim. Go then, immediately, and bring Patty hither; I shall not be easy till
I have given you entire satisfaction. But, stay and take a letter, which I am
stepping into my study to write; I Will order a chaise to be got ready, that you
may go back and forward with greater expedition.

AIR.
Let me fly -- hence tyrant fashion,
Teach to servile minds your law;
Curb in them each generous passion,
Every motion keep in awe.
Shall I in thy trammels going,
Quit the idol of my heart;
While it beats, all fervent, glowing;
With my life I Will sooner part.

SCENE III.
RALPH, FANNY. Fan. Ralph, Ralph!


Ral. What do you want with me, eh?


Fan. Lord, I never knowed such a man as you are, since I com'd into the world;
a body cannot speak to you, but you falls straightways into a passion; I
followed you up from the house, only you run so, there was no such a thing as
overtaking you, and I have been waiting there at the back door ever so long.


Ral. Well, and now you may go and wait at the fore door, if you like it; but I
forewarn you and your gang, not to keep lurking about our mill any longer, for
if you do, I Will send the constable after you, and have you every mother's skin
clapped in the county gaol; you are such a pack of thieves, one cannot hang so
much as a rag to dry for you; it was but the other day that a couple of them
came into our kitchen to beg a handful of dirty flour to make them cakes, and
before the wench could turn about, they had whipped off three brass
candlesticks and a potlid.


Fan. Well, sure it was not I.


Ral. Then you know that old rascal, that you call father; the last time I
catched him laying snares for the hares, I told him I Would inform the game-keeper,
and I Will expose all --


Fan. Ah dear Ralph, don't be angry with me.


Ral. Yes I will be angry with you -- what do you come nigh me for? -- you
shall not touch me -- there is the skirt of my coat, and if you do but lay a finger
on it, my lord's bailiff is here in the court, and I Will call him and give you
to him.


Fan. If you will forgive me, I go down on my knees.


Ral. I tell you I will not -- no, no, follow your gentleman, or go live upon your
old sare, crows and pole cats, and sheep that die of the rot; pick the dead
fowl off of dunghills, and squench your thirst at the next ditch, it is the
fittest liquor to wash down such dainties -- skulking about from barn to barn;
and lying upon wet straw, on commons, and in green-lanes -- go and be whipped
from parish to parish as you used to be.


Fan. How can you talk so unkind?


Ral. And see whether you will get what will keep you as I did; by telling of
fortunes, and coming with pillows under your apron, among the young farmers
wives, to make believe you are a breeding, "with the Lord Almighty bless you
sweet mistress, you cannot tell how soon it may be your own case." You know I
am acquainted with all your tricks -- and how you turn up the whites of your
eyes, pretending you were struck blind by thunder and lightning.


Fan. Pray don't be angry Ralph.


Ral. Yes but I will though; spread your cobwebs to catch flies, I am an old
wasp, and don't value them a button.

AIR.
When you meet a tender creature,
Neat in limb, and fair in feature,
Full of kindness and good nature;
Prove as kind again to she;
Happy mortal! to possess her,
In your bosom, warm, and press her,
Morning, noon, and night, caress her.
And be fond, as fond can be.
But if one you meet that is frow-ard,
Saucy, jilting, and untow-ard,
Should you act the whining coward,
It Is to mend her never the whit;
Nothing's tough enough to bind her,
Then agog, when once you find her,
Let her go, and never mind her;
Heart alive, you're fairly quit.

SCENE IV.
FANNY. I wish I had a draught of water -- I don't know what is come over me, I
have no more strength than a babe, a straw would fling me down -- he has a
heart as hard as any parish officer; I don't doubt now, but he would stand by
and see me whipped himself; and we shall all be whipped, and all through my means
-- The devil run away with the gentleman, and his twenty guineas too, for
leading me astray; if I had known Ralph would have taken it so, I would have
hanged myself before I would have said a word -- but I thought he had no more
gaul than a pidgeon.

AIR.
O! what a simpleton was I,
To make my bed at such a rate;
Now lay thee down, vain fool, and cry,
Thy true love seeks another mate.
No tears alack,
Will call him back.
No tender words his heart allure;
I could bite
My tongue, through spite, --
Some plague bewitched me that is for sure.

SCENE V.
Changes to a room in the miller's house. Enter GILES followed by PATTY and
THEODOSIA. Giles. AIR.
Women's tongues are like mill clappers,
And from thence they learn the knack,
Of for ever sounding clack, --
Why, what the plague's the matter with you? What do you scold at me for? I am
sure I did not say an uncivil word as I do know of; I Will be judged by the young
lady if I did.


Pat. It Is very well farmer, all I desire is, that you will leave the house;
you see my father is not at home at present; when he is, if you have any thing
to say, you know where to come.


Giles. Enough said, I don't want to stay in the house not I; and I don't much
care if I had never come into it.


Theo. For shame, farmer, down on your knees and beg Miss Fairfield's pardon,
for the outrage you have been guilty of.


Giles. Beg pardon Miss, for what? -- icod that is well enough; why I am my own
master, ben't I? If I have no mind to marry, there is no harm in that I hope;
it is only changing hands -- This morning she would not have me, and now I will not
have she.


Pat. Have you! Heavens and earth; do you think then it is the missing of you
that gives me concern? no; I would prefer a state of beggary a thousand times,
beyond any thing I could enjoy with you; and be assured, if ever I was
seemingly consenting to such a sacrifice, nothing should have compelled me to
it, but the cruelty of my situation.


Giles. O, as for that, I believes you, but you see the gudgeon would not bite;
as I told you a bit agone you know, we farmers never love to reap what we don't
sow.


Pat. You brutish fellow how dare you talk --


Giles. So now she is in her tantarums again, and all for no manner of yearthly
thing.


Pat. But be assured, my lord will punish you severely for daring to make free
with his name.


Giles. Who made free with it, did ever I mention my lord? it is a cursed lie.


Theo. Bless me! farmer?


Giles. Why it is Miss -- and I Will make her prove her words -- then what does
she mean by being punished? I am not afraid of nobody, nor beholding to nobody,
that I know of; while I pays my rent, my money I believe, is as good as
another's; egad if it goes there, I think there be those deserve to be punished
more nor I.


Pat. Was ever unfortunate creature pursued as I am, by distresses and
vexations.


Theo. My dear Patty -- See farmer, you have thrown her into tears -- pray be
comforted.


Patty. AIR.
Oh leave me in pity, the falsehood I scorn,
For slander, the bosom untainted defies;
But rudeness, and insult, are not to be borne,
Though offered by wretches we have sense to despise.
Of woman defenseless, how cruel the fate,
Pass ever so cautious, so blameless her way;
Ill nature, and envy, lurk always in wait,
And innocence falls to their fury a prey.

SCENE VI.
MERVIN, THEODOSIA. Theo. You are a pretty gentleman, are not you, to suffer a
lady to be at a rendezvous before you?


Mer. Difficulties my dear, and dangers -- None of the company had two suits of
apparel, so I was obliged to purchase a rag of one, and a tatter from another;
at the expense of ten times the sum they would fetch at the paper mill.


Theo. Well, where are they?


Mer. Here in this bundle -- and though I say it, a very decent habiliment, if
you have art enough to stick the parts together: I Have been watching till the
coast was clear, to bring them to you.


Theo. Let me see -- I Will slip into this closet and equip myself -- all here is
in such confusion there will no notice be taken.


Mer. Do so, I Will take care nobody shall interrupt you in the progress of your
metamorphosis (she goes in) and if you are not tedious, we may walk off without
being seen by any one.


Theo. Ha! ha! ha! what a concourse of atoms are here; though as I live, they are
a great deal better than I expected.


Mer. Well, pray make haste, and don't imagine yourself at your toilette now,
where mode prescribes two hours, for what reason would scarce allow three
minutes.


Theo. Have patience, the outward garment is on already, and I Will assure you a
very good stuff, only a little the worse for the mending.


Mer. Imagine it embroidery, and consider it is your wedding suit. -- come, how
far are you got?


Theo. Stay, you don't consider there is some contrivance necessary -- Here goes
the apron flounced and furbelow'd, with a witness; alas! alas! it has no
strings; what shall I do? come, no matter, a couple of pins will serve -- And
now the cap -- oh mercy! here is a hole in the crown of it large enough to
thrust my head through.


Mer. That you will hide with your straw hat, or if you should not -- What, not
ready yet?


Theo. Only one minute more -- Yes, now the work's accomplished.

AIR.
Who Will buy good luck, who will buy, who will buy?
The gypsey's favors -- here am I!
Through the village, through the town,
What charming sav'ry scraps we'll earn;
Clean straw shall be our beds of down,
And our withdrawing room a barn.
Young and old, and grave, and gay,
The miser, and the prodigal;
Cit, courtier, bumkin, come away,
I warrant we'll content you all.

SCENE VII.
MERVIN, THEODOSIA, FAIRFIELD, GILES. Mer. Plague, here is somebody coming.


Fairf. As to the past, farmer, it is past; I bear no malice for any thing thou
have said; perchance thou might think thou were in the right.


Giles. Why, master Fairfield, you do know I had a great regard for Miss Patty;
but when I come to consider all in all, I finds as how, it is not advisable to
change my condition yet a while.


Fairf. Friend Giles, thou art in the right; marriage is a serious point, and
cannot be considered too warily -- ha, who have we here! shall I never keep my
house clear of these vermin? -- look to the goods there, and give me a
horsewhip -- by the lord Harry, I Will make an example -- come here lady
Light-fingers, let me see what thou have stolen; for I am sure thou never
come in here with a design of going out empty handed.


Mer. Hold miller, hold!


Fairf. O gracious goodness, sure I know this face -- Miss -- young madam
Sycamore. -- Mercy heart, here is a disguise!


Theo. Discovered!


Mer. Miller, let me speak with you.


Theo. What ill fortune is this!


Giles. Ill fortune -- Mess! I think there be nothing but crosses, and
misfortunes of one kind or other.


Fairf. Money to me sir! not for the world; you want no friends but what you
have already -- Lack a day, lack a day -- see how luckily I came in: by what I
heard above at the castle, I believe you are the gentleman I was desired to
look for; and I Am charged to give you this, on the part of my lord Aimworth;
look sir, if the direction is not for you?


Mer. "To Mr. Mervin," -- it is.


Fairf. And my young lady; they are seeking for her, I warrant, high and low.
-- Bless you dear miss, go up to his lordship's, you will find friends there
enough, and every thing fixed as you would have it -- There is a chaise waiting
at the door to carry you -- I and my daughter will take another way.


SCENE VIII.
MERVIN, THEODOSIA, GILES. Mer. Pry'thee read this letter, and tell me what you
think of it?


Theo. Heavens, it is a letter from my lord Aimworth; we are betrayed.


Mer. By what means I know not.


Theo. I am so frighted and flurried, that I have scarce strength enough to
read it.

SIR,
It is with the greatest concern, I find, that I have been unhappily the
occasion of giving some uneasiness to you and Miss Sycamore; be assured, had I
been appriz'd of your prior pretensions, and the young lady's disposition in
your favor, I should have been the last person to interrupt your felicity. I
beg sir, you will do me the favor to come up to my house, where I have already
so far settled matters, as to be able to assure you, that every thing will go
entirely to your satisfaction.



Mer. Well!


Theo. Well!


Mer. What do you think of it?


Theo. Nay, what do you think of it?


Mer. Egad, I cannot very well tell -- however, on the whole, I believe it would
be wrong of us to proceed any further in our design of running away, even if
the thing was practicable.


Theo. I am entirely of your opinion; I swear this lord Aimworth is a charming
man. I fancy, it is lucky for you I had not been long enough acquainted with
him, to find out all his good qualities. -- But how the duce came he to hear?
--


Mer. No matter; after this there can be nothing to apprehend -- what say you,
shall we go up to the castle?


Theo. By all means; and in this very trim; to show what we were capable of
doing, if my father and mother had not come to reason -- but, perhaps, the
difficulties being removed, may lessen your penchant: You men, are such
unaccountable mortals. -- Do you love me well enough to marry me, without
making a frolic of it?


Mer. Do I love you!


Theo. Ay, and to what degree?


Mer. Why do you ask me?

AIR.
Who upon the oozy beech,
Can count the numerous sands that lie;
Or distinctly reckon each,
Transparent orb that studs the sky?
As their multitude betray,
And frustrate all attempts to tell;
So it is impossible to say,
How much I love, I love so well.

SCENE IX.
GILES. So, there goes a couple! ecod, I believe Old Nick has got among the
people in these parts. This is as queer a thing as ever I heard of. -- Master
Fairfield, and Miss Patty, it seems, are gone to the castle too; where, by what
I larns from Ralph in the mill, my lord has promised to get her a husband among
the servants: now set in case the wind sets in that corner, I have been
thinking with myself who the plague it can be; there are no unmarried men in
the family, that I do know of, excepting little Bob, the postilion, and master
Jonathan, the butler; and he is a matter of sixty or seventy years old. I Will be
shot if it bean't little Bob. -- Icod, I Will take the way to the castle, as well
as the rest; for I Would fain see how the nail do drive. It is well I had wit
enough to discern things, and a friend to advise with, or else she would have
fallen to my lot -- but I have got a surfeit of going a courting, and burn me,
if I will not live a bachelor; for, when all comes to all, I see nothing but ill
blood and quarrels, among folk, when they be married.

AIR.
Then hey for a frolicksome life!
I Will ramble where pleasures are rife;
Strike up with the free hearted lasses,
And never think more of a wife;
Plague on it, men are but asses,
To run after noise and strife.
Had we been together buckl'd,
'Twould have proved a fine affair;
Dogs would have barked at the cuckold,
And boys pointing cried -- Look there.

SCENE X.
Changes to a grand apartment in Lord AIMWORTH's house, opening to a view of
the garden. Enter Lord AIMWORTH, FAIRFIELD, PATTY, RALPH. L. Aim. Thus, master
Fairfield, I hope I have fully satisfied you, with regard to the falsity of the
imputation thrown upon your daughter and me; if there yet remains a doubt, you
are at liberty to speak it.


Fairf. My lord, I am very well content; pray do not give yourself the trouble
of saying any more.


Ralph. No my lord, you need not say any more to us, we are very well content.


Fairf. Hold your tongue, sirrah.


L. Aim. I am sorry Patty, you have had this mortification.


Pat. I am sorry, my lord, you have been troubled about it; but really it was
against my consent, my father would --


Fairf. Well, come children, we will not take up his honor's time any longer;
let us be going toward home. -- Heaven prosper your lordship; the prayers of
me, and my family shall always attend you.


L. Aim. Miller, come back. -- Patty, stay --


Fairf. Has your lordship any thing further to command us?


L. Aim. Why yes, master Fairfield, I have a word or two still to say to you.
-- In short, though you are satisfied in this affair, I am not; and you seem to
forget the promise I made you, that, since I had been the means of losing your
daughter one husband, I would find her another.


Fairf. Your honor is to do as you please.


L. Aim. What say you Patty, will you accept of a husband of my choosing?


Pat. My lord, I have no determination; you are the best judge how I ought to
act; whatever you command, I shall obey.


L. Aim. Then Patty, there is but one person I can offer you -- and I wish, for
your sake, he was more deserving -- take me --


Pat. Sir!


L. Aim. From this moment our interests are one as our hearts; and no earthly
power shall ever divide us.


Fairf. O the gracious! Patty! my lord! did I hear right? you, sir, you, marry
a child of mine!


L. Aim. Yes, my honest old man, in me you behold the husband designed for your
daughter; and I am happy, that by standing in the place of fortune, who has
alone been wanting to her, I shall be able to set her merit in a light, where
its luster will be rendered conspicuous.


Fairf. But good noble sir, pray consider; don't go to put upon a silly old
man; my daughter is unworthy -- Patty child, why don't you speak?


Pat. What can I say, father? what answer? to such unlooked for, such
unmerited, such unbounded generosity!


Ralph Down on your knees, and fall a crying.


Pat. Yet sir, as my father says, consider -- your noble friends, your
relations -- it must not, cannot be --


L. Aim. It must, and shall. Friends! relations! from henceforth I have none
that will not acknowledge you; and I am sure, when they become acquainted with
your perfections, those, whose suffrage I most esteem, will rather admire the
justice of my choice, than wonder at its singularity.

AIR.
L. Aim. My life, my joy, my blessing,
In thee each grace possessing,
All must my choice approve;

Patty. To you my all is owing,
O take a heart overflowing,
With gratitude and love.

L. Aim. Thus enfolding,

Patty. Thus beholding,

Both. One to my soul so dear;
Can there be pleasure greater,
Can there be bliss compleater,
It Is too much to bear.




SCENE XI.
Enter Sir HARRY, Lady SYCAMORE, THEODOSIA, MERVIN. Sir Har. Well, we have
followed your lordship's counsel, and made the best of a bad market -- So my
lord, please to know our son-in-law, that is to be.


L. Aim. You do me a great deal of honor, I wish you joy Sir with all my heart
-- And now Sir Harry, give me leave to introduce to you a new relation of mine
-- This Sir, is shortly to be my wife.


Sir Har. My lord!


L. Syc. Your lordship's wife!


L. Aim. Yes, Madam.


L. Syc. And why so my lord?


L. Aim. Why faith Ma'am, because I cannot live happy without her -- And I think
she has too many amiable, too many estimable qualities to meet with a worse
fate.


Sir Har. Well, but you are a peer of the realm, you will have all the fleerers
--


L. Aim. I know very well the ridicule that may be thrown on a lord's marrying
a miller's daughter; and I own with blushes, it has for some time had too great
weight with me; but we should marry to please ourselves, not other people: and
on mature consideration, I can see no reproach justly merited, by raising a
deserving woman to a station she is capable of adorning, let her birth be what
it will.


Sir Har. Why it is very true my lord: I once knew a gentleman that married his
cook maid; he was a relation of my own -- you remember fat Margery, my lady!
She was a very good sort of a woman, indeed she was, and made the best suet
dumplings that ever I tasted.


La. Syc. Will you never learn, Sir Harry, to guard your expressions -- Well,
but give me leave my lord to say a word to you -- there are other ill
consequences attending such an alliance.


L. Aim. One of them I suppose is, that I, a peer, should be obliged to call
this good old miller, father-in-law; but where is the shame in that? he is as
good as any lord, in being a man; and if we dare suppose a lord that is not an
honest man, he is, in my opinion, the more respectable character. Come master
Fairfield, give me your hand, from henceforth you have done with working; we
will pull down your mill, and build you a house in the place of it; and the
money I intended for the portion of your daughter, shall now be laid out in
purchasing a commission for your son.


Ralph. What, my lord, will you make me a captain?


L. Aim. Ay, a colonel, if you deserve it.


Ralph. Then I Will keep Fan.


SCENE XII.
Lord AIMWORTH, Sir HARRY, Lady SYCAMORE, PATTY, THEODOSIA, MERVIN, FAIRFIELD,
RALPH, GILES. Giles. Odds bobs, where am I running -- I beg pardon for my
audacity.


Ralph. Hip farmer, come back man, come back -- Sure my lord's going to marry
sister himself; feyther's to have a fine house, and I Am to be a captain.


L. Aim. Ho, master Giles, pray walk in; here is a lady who, I dare swear, will
be glad to see you, and give orders that you shall always be made welcome.


Ralph. Yes, farmer, you will always be welcome in the kitchen.


L. Aim. What have you nothing to say to your old acquaintance -- Come, pray
let the farmer salute you -- nay a kiss, I insist upon it.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha!


L. Aim. Fie, master Giles, don't look so sheepish; you and I were rivals, but
not less friends at present You have acted in this affair like an honest
Englishman, who scorned even the shadow of dishonor, and thou shall sit rent
free for a twelvemonth.


Sir Har. Come, shall not we all salute -- With your leave my lord, I Will --


La. Syc. Sir Harry!

AIR.
L. Aim. Yield who will, to forms a martyr,
While unawed by idle shame;
Pride for happiness, I barter,
Heedless of the millions blame.
Thus with love, my arms I quarter:
Women graced in nature's frame;
Every privilege by charter,
Have a right from man to claim.

Theo. Eased of doubts and fears presaging,
What new joys within me rise?
While Mama, her frowns aswaging,
Dares no longer tyrannize.
So long storms and tempests raging,
When the blustering fury dies;
Ah how lovely, how engaging,
Prospects fair, and cloudless skies.

Sir Har. Dad but this is wondrous pretty,
Singing each a roun-de-lay;
And I Will mingle in the ditty,
Though I scarce know what to say:
There Is a daughter brisk and witty,
Here Is a wife can wisely sway;
Trust me masters, 'twere a pity,
Not to let them have their way.

Patty. My example is a rare one,
But the cause may be devin'd;
Women want not merit -- dare one
Hope, discerning men to find;
O may each accomplished fair one,
Bright in person, sage in mind;
Viewing my good fortune, share one,
Full as splendid and as kind.

Giles. Laughed at, slighted, circumvented,
And exposed for folks to see it;
It Is as thof a man repented,
For his follies in a sheet.
But my wrongs go unresented,
Since the fates have thought them meet;
This good company contented,
All my wishes are complete.




END OF THE OPERA.
Of the Publishers of this Opera may be had, (Price One Shilling.) Illustrated
with an Elegant Frontispiece, and written by the same Author, THOMAS AND SALLY,
OR THE SAILOR's RETURN. THE THIRD EDITION. Performed with great applause, at
the Theater Royal in Covent Garden. Where may be had THE TENTH EDITION (Price 1
s. 6 d.) of LOVE IN A VILLAGE. A COMIC OPERA.


