THE FUNERAL OF ARABERT, MONK OF LA TRAPPE: BY MR. JERNINGHAM.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. ROBSON, BOOKSELLER, AT THE FEATHERS, NEW BOND STREET.

MDCCLXXI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
ARABERT, a young ecclesiastic, retired to the convent of La Trappe, in
obedience to a vow he had taken during a fit of illness: LEONORA, with whom he
had lived in the strictest intimacy, followed her lover, and by the means of a
disguise, obtained admission into the monastery, where a few days after she
assisted at her lover's funeral.

THE FUNERAL, etc.
FAIR LEONORA, by affliction led,
Sought the dread dome where sleep the hallowed dead:
The solemn edifice was wrapped around,
In midnight darkness, and in peace profound:
A solitary lamp, with languid light,
Served not to chase, but to disclose the night:
Served to disclose (of all her grief the source,)
The tomb that gaped for ARABERTUS' corse:
To this, she sent the deep, the frequent sigh,
And spoke -- the tear just gathering in her eye.
'Doom'd to receive all that my soul holds dear,
'Give him that rest his heart refused him here:
'Oh screen him from the pain the tender know,
'The train of sorrows that from passion flow;
'And to his envied newborn state adjoin,
'(Or all is vain) an ignorance of mine.'
As thus she mourned, an aged priest drew near,
(Whose pure life glided as the riv'let clear,)
The virtuous ANSELM. -- Though in cloisters bred,
Still bright-ey'd Wisdom to his cell he led:
From paths of sophistry he loved to stray,
To tread the walk where Nature led the way.
The prior's rank he long had held approved,
Esteemed, revered, and as a parent loved:
Unskilful in the jargon of the schools,
He knew humanity's diviner rules:
To others gentle, to himself severe,
On sorrow's wound he dropped the healing tear.
In all the negligence of grief he found,
The fair extended on the naked ground.
Touched at her woe the sacred father said,
'Well may thou droop if happiness be fled:
'Sure, if at holy ARABERT'S decease,
'Impetuous sorrows rush upon thy peace,
'Some much-loved friend in him you must deplore,
'Or, dearer still, a brother is no more:
'Yet, as through life our weary steps we bend,
'Let us not sink when beating storms descend:
'Still let Religion hold unrivaled sway,
'And Patience walk companion of our way.
'Ah, lose not sight of that delightful shore,
'Whose blissful bowers shall friends to friends restore:
'Tho' here misfortune comes to blast our will,
'The Heavens are just, and God a Father still.
'Blest be the voice, the rising mourner said,
'That bids Affliction raise her drooping head:
'That bids me hope (beyond even Death's domain,)
'These eyes shall banquet on my love again.
'Ah, start not ANSELM -- for to truth allied,
'Impiety now throws her mask aside:
'No holy monk by contemplation led,
'To these sequestered mansions of the dead;
'No youth devoted to Religion's power,
'Implores thy pity at this awful hour. --
'The guilty secret -- I Will at length unfold --
'In me -- (forgive) a woman you behold.
'Ah fly me not, let mercy now prevail,
'And deign to mark my sad disastrous tale.'
'Known to misfortune from my tender years,
'My parent's ashes drank my early tears:
'A barbarous uncle to each vice allied,
'The office of a parent ill supplied:
'Of my entire inheritance possessed,
'By lucre prompted, and by fortune blessed,
'He passed the ocean never to return,
'And left me weeping over my parents' urn:
'Then ARABERT the generous stranger came,
'To sooth my sorrows, and relieve my shame:
'Beneath his tender care, my woes decreased,
'More than Religion's, he was Pity's priest:
'To reach his bounty my affection strove,
'Till gratitude was heightened into love:
'Nor he at length refused the lover's part,
'The pity that adorned, betrayed his heart.
'How ardently he wished the nuptial rite,
'In holy wedlock, might our hands unite:
'But stern Religion at our vows exclaimed,
'And tore the bands that Love and Nature framed:
'For then devoted to her hallowed shrine,
'His country's laws forbad him to be mine.
'Tho' from my mind each flattering thought retired,
'And in my bosom, hope and peace expired;
'Yet on their ruins, love triumphant rose:
'Enough -- shame over the rest a mantle throws:
'At length Remorse effaced the guilty scene,
'And to his breast applied her dagger keen;
'Restrain'd in full career the erring youth,
'And led him back to Innocence and Truth:
' 'Twas then he fled from Pleasure's rosy bowers,
'To woo Religion in these gloomy towers:
'Yet are he fled, my bliss he fondly planned,
'And scattered riches with a lavish hand:
'Ah, what to me availed the golden store?
'The giver gone, the gift could charm no more.
'While in the gloom his tedious absence cast,
'My former life in fancy I repassed,
'Repentance gained admission to my breast,
'Nor did it enter an unwelcome guest:
'For never to Pleasure I dismissed the rein
'Free and unconscious of reflection's pain;
'If hapless LEONORA loved too well,
'Content, fair Virtue's friend, with Virtue fell:
'But not my stubborn soul could prayer subdue,
'Ev'n grafted on remorse my passion grew;
'Too fatal passion -- by its impulse led,
'In man's attire to this retreat I fled:
'Yet then, even then to bashful fear allied,
'Still over my love did modesty preside.
'In those sweet moments that precede the night,
'When peaceful Nature wears a softened light,
'I met the youth within the solemn grove,
'(His frequent walk) absorbed in heavenly love:
'I strove to speak, but words refused to flow,
'And, fixed, I stood a monument of woe:
'While God and he employ the trembling scene,
' 'Twere sacrilege, I thought, to rush between:
'Still from that hour my wishes I restrained,
'And in my breast the unwilling secret chained:
'Unknown to him, yet half-content I grew,
'So that his form might daily charm my view:
'Think how misguided by your guileless heart,
'You took for virtue, what in me was art,
'And highly honored with applauding strain,
'The zeal that joined Religion's sober strain,
'Unknowing that the call thou did approve,
'And all my virtue, all my zeal was love:
'But new Affiction, with relentless hand,
'O'erthrew the project that my heart had planned:
'Amid the horrors of the lonesome night,
'A ghastly spectre rushed upon my sight,
'And poured these accents on my trembling ear,'
Think not impiety shall triumph here:
Thy hopes are blasted -- Death's tremendous bell
Shall sound, ere many hours, thy lover's knell:
'I started from my couch, with fright impressed,
'And anxious doubts were busy in my breast:
'By love then prompted -- yet by love dismayed,
'The peopled choir I tremblingly surveyed;
'Still mid the innumerous monastic train,
'These eyes solicited his form in vain:
'Nor in the field or pensive grove retired,
'Could I discover whom my heart required:
'Then sure (I cried) at this unhappy hour
'Does anguish over his cell diffuse its power:
'Shall LEONORA not relieve his pain,
'And with these arms his drooping head fustain?
'Say, at the couch, when death is stalking round,
'Shall not the spouse of his fond heart be found!
'Ah no -- the affection that subdues me still,
'At that dread moment checked my ardent will,
'Lest rushing on his sight I should control
'The holy thoughts that hovered over his soul.
'This lowering morn disclosed the fatal truth:
'Oh early lost -- oh loved -- oh hapless youth --
'Fix'd to the column of the hallowed porch --
' 'Twas scarcely light -- some fury lent her torch --
'I read --
The pious ARABERT' s no more,
The peace the dead require, for him implore:
'Let peace, let joy, (I said) his spirit join,
'Nor joy, nor peace must ever encircle mine:
'Lamented youth! too tenderly allied,
'In vain you fled me, and in vain you died,
'Still to your image, which this breast inurns,
'My constant heart a lamp perpetual burns.
'But thou, to whom as friend he did impart
'Each latent wish, and foible of the heart;
'For well I know, where Sorrow drops her tear,
'Or Misery complains, thou still art near;
'Ah say, by love did my idea dressed,
'Come to his mind thus welcome, thus carest?
'Or on his soul come rushing undesir'd
'The fatal fair, by female arts inspired,
'Who dimmed the luster of his radiant name,
'And from his temples tore the flower of fame:
'Who through the labyrinth of Pleasure's bower
'Allur'd (for beauty such as mine had power)
'Ev'n to the dangerous fteep -- and cast him down
'From high repute to groveling disrenown:
'Wretch that I am, to my distressful state
'There wanted not the addition of his hate:
'For him I plunged my artless youth in shame,
'Unlock'd reserve, and sacrificed my fame:
'Still, still I fear (unable to confide,)
'Before my ARABERT, the lover died:
'This thought (to thee I Will own) suspends my grief,
'While cold indifference c mes to my relief:
'Say virtuous ANSELM, if this thought be vain,
'And give, Oh give me all my grief again.
To her replied the pity-breathing seer,
'Mark well my words, and lose thy idle fear:
'When on the couch of Death, the victim lay,
'Not in that moment was his friend away:
'As at his side I took my mournful stand,
'With feeble grasp he seized my offered hand,
'And thus began. -- "The fatal dart is sped,
"Soon, soon shall ARABERT increase the dead:
" It Is well -- for what can added life bestow,
"But days returning still with added woe:
"Say, have I not secluded from my sight,
"The lovely object of my past delight?
"Ah, had I too dethroned her from my mind,
"When here the holy brotherhood I joined,
"Remorse would not, encreafing my disease,
"Prey on my soul, and rob it of its ease:
"And yet I strove unequal to the part,
"Weak to perform the sacrifice of heart:
"And now, even now, too feeble to control,
"I feel her clinging to my parting soul:"
"He spoke -- (my sympathetic bosom bled,)
"And to the realms of Death his spirit fled.
The fair rejoined: 'Misled by foul distrust,
'To him, whose heart was mine, am I unjust?
'Ah, ARABERT, the unwilling fault forgive,
'Dead to th'alluring world, in thee I live:
'My thoughts, my deep regret, my sorrows own,
'No view, no object still but thee alone:
'At all the vengeance bursting from above,
'Alarm'd, I weep, I shudder, yet I love:'
As thus she spoke, the death-bell smote her ear,
While to the porch the funeral train drew near:
Ah, LEONORE in that tremendous hour,
Did thou not feel all Heaven's avenging power,
When moving through the isle, the choral band,
And vested priests, with torches in their hand,
Gave to thy view, unfortunately dear,
Thy lover sleeping on the untimely bier?
Collecting now at length her scattered force,
With trembling footsteps she approached the corse,
And while she checked the conflict in her breast,
The wide-encircling throng she thus addressed:
'Well may ye mark me with astonished eyes,
'Audacious hypocrite in man's disguise;
'Who urged by passion, dared with steps profane,
'Approach the hallowed dome of Virtue's train:
'Lead me, ah lead me to the dungeon's gloom,
'The rack prepare -- I yield me to your doom:
'Yet still should Pity in your breast abide,
'And Pity sure to Virtue is allied:
'To my distress benign attention lend,
'Your acts of rigor for a while suspend,
'Till over this bier ('it is Nature's kind relief,)
'I've poured my plaints, and paid the rites of grief:
'Ah, he was dearer to this bleeding heart,
'Far dearer than expression can impart.
'Thou who did place us in this vale of tears,
'Where sorrow blasts the plant that pleasure rears:
'If, as the tenets of our creed require,
'Thy wakened justice breathes immortal ire;
'If love, from whence even here misfortunes flow,
'Beyond the grave you curse with endless woe?
'Ah not over ARABERT thy vengeance spread!
'On me, on me t y darts of anger shed!
'For I allured him far from Virtue's way,
'And led his youthful innocence astray:
'Ah not in punishment our fate conjoin,
'He shared the rapture, but the guilt was mine.'
With trembling hand she now the veil withdrew, It Is usual to bury the monks of
La Trappe in their monastic 01 habit extended on a plank.

When lo the well-known features struck her view:
Absorpt in grief she cast a fond survey --
At length her thoughts in murmurs broke away:
'That eye -- which shed on mine voluptuous light,
'Alas how sunk in everlasting night?
'See from those lips the living color fled,
'Where Love resided, and where Pleasure fed!
'And where bright Eloquence had poured her store,
'Dumb Horror sits -- and Wisdom is no more:
'Yet ere the worm (since this is doomed its prey)
'Shall steal the lingering likeness quite away,
'On that cold lip sure LEONORE may dwell,
'And, free from guilt, imprint the long farewell:'
She added not -- but bending low her head,
Three times the mourner kissed the unconscious dead.
Now holy ANSELM urged her to restrain
Her boundless grief in reverence of the fane:
She answered, starting from the sable bier,
'Can I forget that ARABERT was dear!
'Can I, cold monitor, from hence remove,
'His worth unrivaled, and his lasting love!
'Can I forget, as destitute I lay,
'To sickness, grief, and penury a prey,
'How eagerly he flew at Pity's call,
'Put forth his hand and raised me from my fall!
'All unsolicited he gave me wealth,
'He gave me solace, and he gave me health;
'And, dearer than the bliss those gifts impart,
'He strained me to his breast, and gave his heart:
'And shall these hallowed walls and awful fane,
'Reproach the voice that pours the praiseful strain?
'Say at the friend's, the guardian's, lover's tomb,
'Can sorrow sleep, and gratitude be dumb?
'But I submit -- and bend thus meekly low,
'To kiss the avenging hand that dealt the blow:
'Resign'd I quit the losing path I trod,
'Fall'n is my idol -- and I worship God?'
She ceased -- the choir intones the funeral song,
Which holy echoes plaintively prolong:
And now the solemn organ, tuned to woe,
Poured the clear notes pathetically slow:
These rites performed -- along the extending fane,
She now attends the slow-proceeding train;
Who over the mournful cypress-shaded way,
To the expecting tomb, the dead convey:
See now the priests, the closing act prepare,
And to the darksome vault commit their care:
At this dread scene, too feelingly distressed,
She poured the last effusions of her breast
'Come dove-like peace, to watch this sacred shrine,
'And brood incessant, with a love like mine.
She paused -- then (over the yawning tomb reclined)
In all the tenderness of grief rejoined:
'Oh beauty's flower -- oh pleasure ever new --
'Oh friendship, love, and constancy adieu:
'Ye virtues that adorned the unhappy youth,
'Affection, pity, confidence, and truth,
'The generous thoughts that with the feeling dwell,
'And sympathy of heart -- farewell, farewell!
'Not all of ARABERT this tomb contains,
'All is not here while LEONORE remains:
'Methinks, solicitous my form to meet,
'The conscious ashes heave beneath my feet:
'Methinks a voice even animates the clay,
'And in low accents summons me away:
'Haste LEONORE -- thy other self rejoin,
'And let thy glowing ashes mix with mine:
'Ah, trust me ARABERT! to share thy doom,
'Prepar'd, resolved, I Will meet thee in the tomb:
'Forbear, Oh Heaven, in pity to these tears
'To curse my sorrow with a length of years.
'And when this drooping form shall press the bier,
'Say virtuous ANSELM, will thou not be near?
'The friendly requiem for my soul to crave,
'And lay these limbs in this lamented grave?
'Then when this tortured heart shall cease to burn,
'Our blended dust shall warm the faithful urn:
'Nor distant far is that releasing hour,
'For Nature now oppressed beyond her power,
'Resigns at length, my troubled soul to rest,
'And Grief's last anguish rushes through my breast.
Behold her now extended on the ground,
And see the sacred brethren kneeling round:
Them she addresses in a fault'ring tone,
'Say, cannot Death my daring crime atone?
'Ah, let compassion now your heart inspire,
'Amid your prayers, I unalarm'd expire.
'Thou who art even in this dread moment dear,
'Oh, shade of ARABERT, still hover near.
'I come. --
-- And now emerging from her woes,
('It Was Love's last effort) from the earth she rose;
And, strange to tell, with strong affection fraught,
She headlong plunged into the gloomy vault:
And there, what her impassioned wish required,
On the loved breast of ARABERT expired.
FINIS.

