FUN: A Parodi-tragi-comical SATIRE.

As it was to have been performed at the Castle-Tavern, Paternoster Row, ON
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 1752, BUT Suppressed, BY A Special ORDER from the
LORD MAYOR and COURT of ALDERMEN.

LONDON: Sold by F. STAMPER in Pope's-head Alley, Cornhill; and by all other
Booksellers.

MDCCLII.

[Price One Shilling.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Publication of this Piece would not have been so long delayed, but for the
Expectation of performing it, as at first intended; which however, by the same
indefatigable Opposition, was still frustrated.

PREFACE.
THE Father of the following little Offspring, being very well convinced of the
natural Weakness of this his puny Child, did never intend to trust it abroad
without the LEADING STRINGS of Action; had not the Fear of those, who, like
Cowards, are afraid of their own Shadows, assiduously opposed the
Representation; being terribly apprehensive that the Strength of a poor Baby
Monosyllable might affect the Magnanimity of a Drawcansir. -- Such is the Force
of Self-Conviction! -- But as this Infant is obliged to walk alone, by many who
are resolved on it is Appearance, it is Father most humbly desires the
good-natured Town will not tumble the little Creature into the Dirt; but that
they will help it forward over the Kennels of Detraction; and, in Compassion to
the Tenderness of it is Age, keep the barking Curs, the Critics, at a Distance.
-- And to excite them to this Benevolence, here follow the Memoirs of the cruel
and affecting Period of its Birth, etc.

This Piece of Fun, Son to the Father, and Grandson to the Grandfather of the
same Name, was conceived, in a Fit of Laughter, about the 8th of February, in
the Year 1752. -- His Mother advanced happily in her Pregnancy, and there were
great Hopes of a fine Offspring; but, unhappily, just before the Time of her
Delivery, Measures were taken, by a certain great Man, to make her miscarry;
excited, as some say, to this Piece of Barbarity, by an old Woman's Prophesy
which he keeps by him (cast in leaden Characters) in a Chest of Brass secured,
like the fortunate Tickets of a Lottery, by seven Locks: And of which Prophesy
the following is a Transcript:

When Fun
Has a Son
Then Drawcansir's Race is run.
However childish and ridiculous it may seem for a Man to be affected with such
idle Stuff as this, it is not unprecedented or extravagantly strange; since
Tradition tells us, that Saturn, Father of JUPITER, the Great Grandfather of
Cyrus, and many other august Personages, were equally moved, by such
Instigations, to much the same Absurdities.

Notwithstanding, however, all such malignant Measures were taken, the full
Time of Pregnancy advanced, and the Child was hourly expected; when a positive
Order came down, that Mrs. FUN, who then lay at the Castle-Tavern,
Paternoster Row, must not be brought to-bed within the Walls, lest the Child,
which was suspected to be a Bastard, should bring a Scandal on the Dignity and
Chastity of the City. Upon this, even while the Lady lay crying out, the Father
waited on the chief Personage of the Liberties, with Remonstrances, that the
Child was very honestly got, and that none but very creditable People were at
the Labor; complaining, at the same Time, that the same Privilege had been
permitted an old Woman of a very bad Character, one Mother Midnight, who had
often practiced her Profession there, though it was now denied others. -- 'Twas
all in vain: The Gentleman, though he behaved with a great deal of Politeness
and Good-manners, was so prepossessed against the whole Family of FUN, which
had been falsely represented to him as of no Character or Reputation, that he
not only forbid the Men Midwives doing their Duty, but sent others to see his
Orders duly executed. -- What could now be done? -- Mrs. FUN was, in the midst
of her Travail, removed; and, nobody daring to give her Assistance, her poor
Offspring almost perished in the Birth. But Nature had been liberal, the
Stamina were sound, and branched out for Life. It Is true, indeed, its Features
were so defaced, that the strong Likeness in them was almost lost; and a
Weakness, which will be lasting as it is Life, is the Consequence of the Usage
it then met with. -- If, after all, then, it should fail of answering those
Expectations the Town had of it, in Embrio; it will undoubtedly be thought,
there is Reason enough to excuse all the Imperfections and Failings it is
unhappily afflicted with; since these are so far from being its Faults, that
they are Misfortunes which must infallibly engage the Protection of every
candid, tenderhearted, christian Reader!

PROLOGUE.
AS dying Sinners hope to get to Heaven,
And beg and pray to have their Crimes forgiven,
So I come here, with humble Supplication,
In Hopes you will kindly save us from Damnation.
For you must know the whole of this Design,
The Plot, the Manner, Sentiment is mine.
It Is true, we must confess, our motley Piece
Is not confined by Laws from Rome or Greece:
For I disdain old Aristotle's Rules,
That tie down Scriblers, limit none but Fools.
I dare beyond the Goal of Critics run,
What Order should confine the Works of FUN,
Whose Self I am? -- And for your Information,
Hear my Birth, Parentage and Education:
My Sire was, thirty Years ago, in Vogue;
His Name was WIT, an arch, diverting Rogue;
My Mother's Name was HUMOR, low and poor,
Reduced for Want sometimes to play the Whore.
Who best repaid what she was pleased to grant,
Was RIBALDRY, her favorite Gallant.
Now, little Delicacy dwelt in either,
For, as I Am told, they all Three lay together.
Soon after I was born, their darling Son,
A Bastard Compound he! -- was christened FUN.
Laughter, a merry Jade, was chose my Nurse;
Whose Birth was mean, but Education worse;
Betimes she taught me to distort the Face,
And sneer at every Thing but want of Grace;
At twelve Years old she sent me first to School;
My Tutor, Ignorance, a Coxcomb and a Fool.
Little I learned it is true, but every Day
The Truant played, at length ran quite away.
Proud of my Freedom, rambling up and down,
Folly, a Jilt that ruins half the Town,
Spreading those Arms which every Fool admires,
Caught me to satisfy her loose Desires.
The Task, though hard, I followed with Delight;
Sometimes most wisely wrong, and sometimes blindly right;
Above all Order, or the vain Pretense
Of Learning, Genius, Taste or Common Sense.
Who then will censure what may here be done?
What WIT will criticize a PIECE OF FUN?
Persons of the DRAMA.
MEN.
Sir ALEXANDER DRAWCANSIR, Knight. Dr. MOUNTAIN. Sir NACKADIL TRUNNION, Knight. 'Squire
ANTONY. BULLYBOY. Lord RIOT. ORATOR, alias the BRAZEN HEAD.
WOMEN.
ROXANA TERMAGANT. PEG BRINDLE. Four Witches. Drawer, Ghost, THIEF, JUSTICE,
Mob and Attendants.
FUN.
SCENE I. Discovers Three Witches.
Enter HECATE. First Witch. HOW now Hecate? You seem pleased.

Hec. Have I not Reason? Drawcansir is ours:
He yields again to Dulness' magic Powers.
He was indeed a wayward Son,
Rejecting Opiate and Pun;
But now again he bears a Part,
In nodding Dulness' Art:
Therefore let us, with some most powerful Charm,
Timely prevent our future Harm;
That never from us he relapse again:
For in the Corner of his Brain,
There hangs a vap'rous drop of Wit, --
Then mar it ever it comes to Light,
And, by the Strength of vain Illusion,
Draw him on to his Confusion.
Make him spurn Wisdom, Wit and Sense,
Retailing Humor out for Pence,
For you all know that Vanity,
Is Authors' chiefest Enemy.
[Call without. Hark! I am called -- my Mistress Dullness see
Sits in a foggy Cloud, and waits for me.

1st Witch. What are we?

2d Witch. Witches Three.

3d Witch. Bound to what?

1st Witch. Boil the Pot.
Around, around to go;
Ingredients in to throw,
To form a Charm that ever shall remain;
Nor let Drawcansir rise to Wit again.

2d Witch. We'll do it.

3d Witch. We will.

1st Witch. Then let us raise it up -- Thrice to thine.

2d Witch. Thrice to mine.

3d Witch. And thrice again to make up Nine --
Peace the Cauldron's come

[Cauldron rises. 1st Witch. Let us then around it sing,
Like Elves and Fairies in a Ring.

2d Witch. Agreed.

3d Witch. Agreed.

1st Witch. (Sings) SONG.
Whenever Dullness annoys,
We all should rejoice in Chorus;
The Hour of the Time's before us
We all should rejoice, rejoice,
While around we go.
Let the Scriblers write like Asses,
Our Fire their Fire surpasses,
While our Charm complete does grow.
DA CAPO.
2d Witch. With all the Speed we may,
When Dullness calls, we post away.
Sometimes upon the Rope we dance;
Or Capers cut, first cut in France;
Sometimes unto the Salt-box play,
Or to the Jews-harp dance away,
To some old Saw or bardish Rhyme
With the Midwise and old Time.

1st Witch. Now like Italian Cats we show,
And, instead of Music, mew;
Where the carping Critics come,
And Blockheads keep their drowsy Hum:
Or, if with none of these we do it,
We dance to the Echoes of the Foot.

3d Witch. But it is Time the Charm begin,
Throw your poisonous Compounds in.

1st Witch. Pen of Critic pointed small,
Whittled sharp and dipped in Gall,
Full of swelt'ring Envy fraught,
Boil thou first in the charmed Pot.

All. Double, double, Toil and Trouble,
Fire burn and Cauldron bubble.

2d Witch. Wetted with my Spittle fasting,
Here is all the Sense of Pasquin.

3d Witch. Here what Puppets learned to squeak.

1st Witch. Here the Tongue that made them speak.

2d Witch. Here the Virtue of Pamela.

3d Witch. Here Clarissa.

1st Witch. Here Cornelia.

2d Witch. Virgin from Baudery unmasked.

3d Witch. Wedding Day -- The Banns unasked.

1st Witch. O -- stand aside, and let me come,
Here, here is the Body of Tom Thumb;
For a Charm of powerful Trouble,
In the Broth of Dullness bubble.

All. Around, around, around about,
Dullness come running in, all Wit keep out.

1st Witch. Here a Goose-quill.

2d Witch. Paper.

3d Witch. Ink.

1st Witch. Brains that never were known to think.

2d Witch. Poet's Mark wherewith Men brand 'em.

3d Witch. Shot in vain, thrown out at Random.

1st Witch. Valet.

2d Witch. Loveill.

3d Witch. And Creole.

All. Dead and damned without a Soul.

1st Witch. With Laughter that can never tickle,
Swell it up -- Oh! here is Pickle.

2d Witch. Here I Have got within my Budget,
A Rosciad and the Brains of Touchit.

1st Witch. Here a poor Birth-strangled Babe,
Ditch-deliver'd by a Drab;
Child of Poverty and Spleen,
Mother Midnight's Magazine.

3d Witch. To make it stronger it is prudent.

1st Witch. Here Is the Kapelion.

3d Witch. Here the Student.

2d Witch. Here! here our favorite Delight.

3d Witch. What is it?

2d Witch. A Journal Jacobite.

1st Witch. To add to these and make a poisonous Stench,
Here take 4 Ounces of a noseless Wench.

2d Witch. Add the Learning of a Blood,
Then the Charm is firm and good.

1st Witch. By the Noise I hear of Puns,
Sure Drawcansir this Way runs --
At the Gate enter strait.

Enter Drawcansir. Dr. How now? Ye stupid, dull and tire some Hags,
Ye Imps of Dullness, -- What is it you do?

All. A Deed without a Name.

Dr. I conjure ye, by that which you profess,
However you come to know it, -- answer me.
Though you untie Ignorance and Dullness too,
Though their muddy Waves confound and swallow up
All Taste and Common-Sense, though the Treasure
Of Wit and Genius tumble all together,
Even 'till Nonsense sicken; -- answer me.

1st Witch. Speak, Drawcansir.

2d Witch. Demand.

3d Witch. We'll answer.

Dr. Have you not raised within me towering Hopes
That I alone should mount the Throne of Wit,
That I alone should reign the Umpire there?
Have not you often flattered me, that I,
Above the carping Critics am exalted;
And as the Barking-dogs near Hoxton show,
I like the Moon am high as they are low;
And yet my Mind forebodes -- it cannot be true.
I am not safe, while yet the Town has Sense;
I am not safe, for that malicious Town,
As fast as I get up, still pulls me down.

3d Witch. Thou shal't be satisfied.
See thou that Apparition?

Dr. Ah! the Ghost of Vinegar! my Soul turns sow'r within me -- it is gone --
now I am an Hercules again. A Second! Trotplaid! ah! shake not thy goary Locks
at me, thou were a Jacobite -- A Third and like the former -- Filthy Hags --
why do you show me this? -- Another! I Will see no more.


1st Witch. It speaks.

Ghost. Drawcansir -- Drawcansir -- Drawcansir.

Dr. Oh were I deaf, I Would hear thee.

Gh. Be vain, be insolent, and take no Care,
Who writes, who rails, or who the Critics are:
Drawcansir never shall be vanquished, 'till
To fight against him, rise a mighty Hill;
'Till the fierce Lion leaves the Afric Shores,
And in a Coffee-house unregarded roars,
'Till Sexes change, and then thy Arm oppose.
Hark, hark what Noise? -- Yes, it is -- the Cock does crow,
My Time is spent -- your Servant -- I must go.

[Ghost exit. Dr. Sweet Boadments! good! fly Fear unto the Winds,
Drawcansir shall ever maintain his mighty Name;
For will the Lion ever grow so tame,
As not to frighten Critics from Bohea,
Can Sexes change, or Mountains fight with me;
I thank thee -- yet I Would know. [ Witches disappear:
Ha! vanished into Air -- what -- ho! without there.

Enter Servant. S. What is your Worship's Will?

Dr. Saw you the wierd Sisters.

S. No, my good Lord.

Dr. It is enough -- what Noise was that I heard?

S. Three Messengers just now arrived, laden
With heavy News -- the Powers of Grub-street all
Are up in Arms, threatening Destruction
Upon Drawcansir's Head.

Dr. Let them come on --
They come like Sacrifices in their Trim,
And to the blink-ey'd Maid of powerful Dullness,
All cold and lifeless will we offer them.
Bring me my Pen and Ink, my Sword and Shield,
My BACCO BOX, and onward to the Field.
[Exit.
SCENE II. A Coffee-House, Covent Garden.
Sir Nackadil Trunnion, Squire Antony. Sir N. Antony -- Antony -- sit down and
read the News papers -- Boy, what are you gaping at? -- Why the Lad's a Nizey I
think -- what do you stare at?


Ant. Father, Father, do but look at that fine Gentleman there, all over Silver
amost -- why he is as fine again as I am -- I warrant his Father must be a Lord.


Sir N. A Lord! Antony -- no -- no; may be not a Parliament Man.


Ant. No! why you told me Father, when you gi'n me a new Coat at your Election,
that I was as fine as any Parliament Man's Son in the Nation.


Sir N. Ay! ay! -- well, well he may be a Lord's Son then, for aught I know; --
or a Lord's Bastard may be -- who knows?


Ant. Ho! ho! who? So may I Father, I may be a Lord's Bastard too, for aught I
know -- neither you nor I know that, you know. Ha! ha! ha!


Sir N. What do you make of your Mother then, you Dog, ha!


[Breaks bis Head with his Cane. Ant. O Lord! O Lord! O Lord!


Enter Bullyboy. Bull. What Is the Matter, Gentlemen? What Is the Matter? -- Ha!
Sir Nackadil Trunnion! I am very glad to see you.


Sir N. I don't recollect, Sir, that --


Bull. What have you forgot your Nephew -- my Name is Bullyboy -- I am the
youngest Son of the Family of the Bloods.


Sir N. God so -- I beg your Pardon Kinsman -- I had indeed almost forgot you
-- you are grown almost out of Knowledge since you came down to Tumbledown-hall
-- about five years ago, you was not much higher than this. I think -- Humph --
quite a Man! though I heard as much from your Mother -- well I am very glad to
see you -- here Antony -- this, Sir, is my Son Antony -- come hold up your
Head, and let us have none of your Snuffling -- why how you stand sucking your
Orange, as if you were going to be hanged.


Bull. Sir, your humble Servant, I am very proud to see you.


Ant. Your Servant, Sir -- I don't care how proud you are, not I.

[Aside.
Sir N. Ay Sir, this Son Sir, I intend to make a great Man -- I have brought
him up to London with me for that Purpose. -- You heard I suppose, I was chosen
Member for our Borough, and that obliges me you know to attend the Parliament.


Bull. Undoubtedly, Sir.


Sir N. Now Sir, as hereafter, as things may happen and turn out, if so be, I
should come to be at the Head of Affairs; I shall want, you know, a good clever
Fellow, with a ready Wit, to write your -- what do ye call 'em, Pamphlets and
Newspapers on my Side, when I want to carry a Point you know. -- I am told
your great Men have them always in Pay. -- Now if I could bring my Son Antony
to this, I could trust him better than any body else you know, and he might
save me Money too.


Bull. Right, Sir,


Ant. I wont do it.


Sir N. You wont, Sirrah?


Ant. No, I wont.


Sir N. Not assist your Father, Sirrah! -- why wont you?


Ant. 'Cause I, wont.


Bull. Oh Sir! but it is your Duty.


Ant. What did he beat me for then?


Bull. You must have offended him, I suppose very grossly.


Ant. Not I -- I only said I might be a Lord's Bastard for what I knew. -- What
Harm was there in that you know, when he said the same of you just before?


Bull. Of me Sir!


Sir N. As I did not then know you, Nephew, you know --


Bull. O Lord Sir! I am not at all offended!


Ant. Well then, why should Father be offended?


Bull. Very true.


Ant. Well then -- Humph.


Bull. [Aside to Sir Nackadil.] I Will tell you Sir Nackadil -- my Cousin Antony
has the Seeds of ready Wit in his Nature, and only wants a little good
Instruction to fit him for the Task you intend him; -- if you will leave him to
me, I Will engage myself to give you a good Account of him: -- We have Academies
here in Town, where he may learn to be a Wit, a Writer, and a Politician in a
few Hours.


Sir N. Indeed! well, I am glad to hear that, and as you are so happily related
to him, I am satisfied you will use your utmost Endeavors for his Improvement.
-- Antony!


Ant. Well, what do you say?


Sir N. Come, be a good Boy, Sirrah, for the Future; I Will forgive you.


Ant. With all my Heart, forget and forgive I say; -- I never loved to bear
Malice in my Life.


Sir N. to Bull. Well Sir, I Will leave him entirely to your Experience, and shall
be glad if you will accompany him to my Lodgings; -- Antony will give you
Directions. -- Antony, I shall leave you to keep your Cousin Company.


[Exit. Sir N. Ant. Cousin! -- what are you my Cousin?


Bull. Ay -- my Heart.


Ant. Cod, I took you to be some young Lord, you are so woundy fine.


Bull. O Cousin Antony, if you stay in Town and keep Company with us Bloods, you
must leave off that Suit, and lose these lanky Locks of yours.


Ant. Bloods! Cousin, why what are they? Bloods! Bloods!


Bull. Why Sir, I have the Honor to be a Blood.


Ant. O Cod! I should like to be such another as you very well; -- why you look
amost as well again as I do -- though, tho'f I say it, I Am a clever Fellow in the
Main too.


Bull. Oh! a very clever Fellow, and will be much cleverer if you will be ruled by
me.


Ant. Gaush, I Will do any Thing you bid me.


Bull. Well then, you shall be a Blood: -- In the first Place then, you must
learn to hate that dry old Dog, that left us just now.


Ant. What Father! Oh Cod! I learned that a good while ago.


Bull. And then you must laugh at all he says to you.


Ant. O gaush! but he will break my Head for that though.


Bull. Pho! pho! you must not mind that, -- if he does, you must laugh at him
again.


Ant. So I will, now I think on it, or suppose I break his Head too: Ha! -- hang
me if I don't think I could beat him.


Bull. Bravo! that will do. -- And then you must be witty upon every body.


Ant. What, cut Jokes upon 'em, ha! -- oh! I am a Dab at that.


Bull. Ay Sir, but your Country Jokes are nothing, -- you must be witty the
right Way, or else you're Nobody; -- you must learn to bully, pull People by
the Nose, trip up their Heels, break their Heads, and so forth.


Ant. Ay, but then they must not be so big as I.


Bull. No, no, you must always take Care of that -- but you may hum any body
safely.


Ant. Hum -- ah! pray what is that?


Bull. Why; suppose now I was to meet your Father: -- I go up to him, and, with
a very serious Countenance, say, Lord Sir, I wonder you can seem so
unconcerned, -- do you know that your Son Antony is just now dropped down dead
in an Apoplectick Fit? -- Upon my Honor it is true. -- So, putting him into the
utmost Consternation, go away, and laugh at the old Dog.


Ant. Cod, this is good Fun enough, and then he would run home frighted out of his
Wits, and find it all a Joke: -- Ha! ha! gaush I like that. -- And will this
make me a Blood?


Bull. O Lord Sir, no! these are but half the Qualifications. You must learn
Humor --


Ant. O Sir, I am of a very good Humor already.


Bull. Oh! that you must break yourself of -- and learn to box, talk Baudy, roar
and look big.


Ant. Oh! I can roar and look big -- you shall see now.


Bull. O Lord Sir! that will never do -- This Sir, is the way.

[Swears loud and affectedly.
Ant. O Lord! O Lord!


Bull. And then to be truly humorous, you must steal Trinkets and Pocket-books
from the Ladies, which you are to keep for the Jest's sake; -- then Sir, you
are to bilk Taverns, -- tumble the Waiters down Stairs, -- break all the
Glasses in your Way, -- sally into the Street, -- take all the young Women you
meet for Whores, and kick the old ones into the Kennel, -- knock down the
Watch, -- lie all Night in Covent Garden Round-house, -- be carried before the
Justice, where you have nothing to do but to prove your Father a Gentleman, and
the old Dog his Worship will stand by you in abusing all the World. -- This, my
Boy, is true Humor. -- You must also be a Critic.


Ant. A Critic! ha! that is something harder still -- is'nt.


Bull. No Sir, nothing easier -- you can read, I suppose.


Ant. O yes, I can read.


Bull. Ay, well, but that is not very material, -- if you can do any thing more
than tell your Letters it will be sufficient.


Ant. My Letters! oh! I could tell my Letters at 4 Years old.


Bull. That Is more than some Critics can do at thirty.


Ant. And then I can write very well, and talk Latin: -- Quid agis? What are
you doing? -- Repeto mecum, I am repeating by myself. Quid repetis.


Bull. Faith, my Boy, you are a better Scholar than half the Critics at Sam's,
George's; or the Bedford. -- But this is not much to the Purpose, Sir, you may
criticize upon Authors very well, without ever reading, or even being able to
read, them at all.


Ant. Ah! like enough, -- criticize, -- ah.


Bull. Ay, that is no more than this, Sir, -- you must affect to have read every
thing. -- Then you must frequent all the Coffee-houses where Wit is pretended
to; and whenever a Performance is mentioned you must stand thus, and cry with
an Air of Disdain; -- Oh Sir, Stuff Sir, Damnation Stuff Sir, stupid Stuff by G
-- d, -- the Author's an Ass, damme.


Ant. Ah!


Bull. And then at the Appearance of a new Piece upon the Stage, you are to go,
because every body does -- Before the Curtain rises, you put the House in a
Riot, and afterward you must groan and cry Augh, off, no more, no more,
Damnation low! -- Oh, and then Sir, you must whip such a Machine as this out of
your Pocket, and --

[Whiststles with a Cat-call.
Ant. Ho! ho! ho! well, that is well enough, -- let me try. -- Damnation low! --
[Whistles.] Goles, I believe I shall soon learn, -- Well, and will this make me
a Blood like you, ha!


Bull. This is all the Instruction you will require, the rest will come easily
of itself.


Ant. Will it? -- Then I Will be a Blood, damme.


Bull. Well, you will remember what I have told you, and I Will see you again in the
Afternoon. -- Here Is an Acquaintance of mine coming, that I shall want to talk
with.


Ant. Well, well, I will not tell any body what you say.


Bull. No Sir, you must leave me.


Ant. But I Will keep this.


Bull. Ay, ay, take it with you to practice.


Ant. So I will. -- Damnation low.


[Goes out whistling with a Cat-call. Bull. Ha! ha! ha! high Humbug! ha! ha! ha!


Enter Waiter. W. Sir, a Porter has brought this for your Honor.


Bull. A Letter from Jack Riot?

[Breaks it open and reads: Damme Jack, we had high Hum last Night at Mother
Brindles, -- Bitch Peg, damnation saucy, -- knocked up a Dust and played Hell;
-- you will come to George's, -- a Mob of us going to see Blood Henley, and Poor
Nell, Justice to be bam'd, and the Doctor in fine Pickle, -- dam my Blood.

JACK RIOT.



Bull. Have among you, my Boys.

[Exit.
SCENE III. Doctor Mountain, reading a Paper.
The Covent Garden Journal! Death and Hell!
This, this will ruin my best labored Scheme.
Two Stars keep not their Course in one same Sphere,
Nor can one Town ever brook the double Reign
Of an Inspector and a Censor too.
I hate Drawcansir; for, on single Sheets
He wants to do my Office; and beside
His Works are read, while mine neglected die.
This like a poisonous Mineral gnaws my Inwards,
And nothing can or shall content my Soul,
'Till I am even'd with him -- let me see
To keep my Place, and yet plume up my Pride --
How? How? -- Oh! he has late achieved Amelia;
A Maid that parallels Description and wild Fame,
One that excels the Quirks of blazoning Pens:
Suppose I tell him she is upon the Town,
A common Prostitute despised by all,
She wants a Nose, and that is a smooth Dispose
To make her be suspected. -- Now Drawcansir
Is easily abused by Vanity,
And will as tenderly be led by the Nose
As Asses are -- 'twill do -- but see he comes.
Enter Drawcansir. Dr. It was a false Alarm -- Fast in their Tents
Sleep on the Powers of Grub-street, scarce awoke
By Poverty or Fear -- I Will therefore to my Love --
Excellent Wench! Perdition catch my Soul
But I do love her, and when I do not,
Chaos is come again -- Oh my Amelia!

Moun. Ah! did thou name Amelia!

Dr. Why? Wherefore should I hot, with Raptures name her?

Moun. Here kneel thou down and breathe a solemn Vow,
Never to own that deceitful Fair again:
For she has undone thee, Drawcansir; she has ruined thee.

Dr. Do thou join Ruin with Amelia's Name?
Does she not come replete with Wealth and Honor?

Moun. O no Drawcansir! she has robbed thy Name
Of that high Rank and Luster which it boasted;
Has levelled thee with Men of common Fame,
Has made thee a Picture for the Hand of Scorn
To point her slow and moving Finger at.
There Is not a Boy, or Porter in the Streets,
But casts the base Amelia in thy Teeth.
For she has been a Prostitute to all,
'Till even the Rubbish of the Town are sicken'd.

Dr. Ha! Villain! Miscreant! what is that you say?
Learn to restrain the License of your Speech;
For, mark me, Sir, I will not have her Name Profaned.

Moun. It is the Curse of Fools to be secure,
And that be thine -- Dream on, nor think upon
The Vengeance till thou feel'st it, for ever long
Thou will be damned.

Dr. -- Damned for Amelia!
Is she not fair as Painting can express,
Or Fancy form! eternal Excellence
Dwells in her Mind, and sits upon her Tongue.
Be damned for her!

Moun. Thou will be damned and hissed about the Town,
Branded a Fool, a Scribler, Idiot --

Dr. Ha!
Learn thus Obedience --
[Strikes him.
Moun. -- Ha! a Blow! thou'st used
Me well -- this to thy Heart --

Dr. -- And this to thine.

[They sight. Moun. By Heaven my Sword has lost its usual Point!

Dr. And so has mine -- suppose we make it up,
And bam the Town -- you own your Power subdued,
And both of us will flourish --

Moun. Ha! base-born Tike!
Would thou with venal Trash pollute my Fame?
Know I disdain thine Offer --

Dr. Then thus thou Villain will I be revenged.

Moun. And I --

[They go out fighting. SCENE IV. The Brazen Heap.
A Specimen of TRUE ORATORY.
Old Women the Pests of the Creation -- what constitutes them? Ignorance and a
College Education -- University itself an old Woman -- Want of Impudence want
of Sense -- no Man beside myself ever dared to say so -- Nonsense -- Puns --
Quibbles -- Conundrums -- Smart Sayings -- St. Paul's Churchyard and,
Grub-street, the same Place -- Puffs -- Horses, the Consumers of Oats, gone to
draw the Asses to Mother Midnight's Oratory -- long Ears best to taste the
Music of the Salt-box -- In my humble Opinion they are got on the wrong Side of
the Post there -- Mary Midnight not herself -- See the Old Woman's Dunciad --
what signifies her pretending to stand up for her own Existence? She don't
exist at all -- I can prove it. --

Roxana Termagant, an old Apple Woman, who is she? Who Is afraid? Not I -- I
don't screen myself under Petticoats -- none but Fools and Villains oppose
Justice. -- Who Is a Favorite at Court? -- I am -- they cannot persuade me to be
a Bishop for all that -- Subsidies subside -- Who Is King then? -- I shall write
my own Memoirs soon -- or set up a Dailypaper -- the Clare-market Journal --
who will smoke then? -- Protestants -- who? -- Pope a Pop -- who says so? -- No
honest Man -- I am an honest Man -- Nobody'l deny that -- whoever could prove
me a Rogue?

It is necessary Women should have masculine Epithets when Men creep into
Petticoats -- why should not a Woman be called a Rogue, Rascal, Scoundrel,
Villain -- no Proof to the contrary -- Sauce for Goose Sauce for a Gander -- I
say it -- prove it -- New Astronomy, no Astronomy; Gresham College an Old Woman
-- Man in the Moon set up there by Moses. Moses a much greater Man than Sir
Isaac Newton -- a Comet, what? -- Neither a Catherine Pear nor a Cheshire
Cheese.

Mother Midnight made Use of unfair Weapons -- Salt-boxes! why does a Salt-box
make her a better Man? Why I can get five Salt-boxes, and then I am five times
as good as she -- Solo on a Broom-stick -- did you ever hear a Dog sing --
Signor Canini from Bologna -- come forth -- now trust your Ears --

Here a Song by a Dog. There Is the masterly -- the grand Coup -- the every
Thing -- Music itself no more than Sound, Sound no more than Noise -- I myself
a good Musician -- perhaps a little harsh to old Women or so -- but come --
Signor Canini renew the Strain --

Dog sings again. -- Conviction! now who is Conqueror? Epaminondas a great Man
-- I much like him -- have been up long enough since I go down unconquered. --


SCENE V.
Justice Bobadil, Dr. Mountain, Riot, Sir Nackadil Trunnion, File, Mrs.
Brindle. Just. Well, Sir, and what Business do you Follow? Your Name is File
you say -- do you never attend the Playhouse Door, to see the Company safe out?


File. No Sir.


Just. I believe, Fellow, you don't strictly confine yourself to Truth -- did
you never see my Face before?


File. No Sir -- nor do I ever desire to see it again.

[Aside.
Just. What Is that you mutter about? -- Who has any Thing to lay to the Charge
of this Man?


Moun. I, Sir -- he assaulted and robbed me, as my Servants can witness.


Just. Your Servants! Man -- why, who are you, Fellow?


Moun. Sir.


Just. Sir, I say, Man -- Fellow -- who are you?


Moun. I am called Mountain, Sir.


Just. Mountain! alias Dunghill, ay -- ay I know you -- the vilest Fellow that
ever wore a Head. -- Well, and you have been robbed, you say, by this Fellow:
-- Very well, I have done with you, -- you may go down -- Man -- you are not to
go away -- do ye mind? -- You shall be bound to prosecute, and if you stir out
of the House I shall send a Warrant after you -- Ay, for all you look so, --
you're a Gentleman, and as such I use you. --


Moun. Insolent Rascal!

[Exit.
Just. To File -- stand you aside, Fellow -- I shall talk to you presently. --
[Exit File] Well, Mistress, who are you? What have you to say?


Mrs. Br. My Name is Brindle, if it please your Worship, -- this young
Gentleman here is a vile Fellow, and last Night broke into my Bedchamber and
ravished me, without giving me any thing for it; -- which your Worship knows is
a cruel Thing -- when I have kept House in the Parish and paid Taxes this two
Years -- under your Worship's Protection and Favor. -- But these young Fellows
think they may do any Thing with any body, because, as how, we are civil and
obliging to our Customers, and all that, if it please your Worship. -- So
therefore, I beg your Worship will make out a Mittimus and send him to Newgate,
and have him scragg'd; -- for indeed 'twas a Rape, if it please your Worship,
and he ought to be hanged as much as Penlez or Maclaine.


Just. It is very well, Madam, we are acquainted with you, and consequently
know you to be a creditable Woman -- you shall have Justice done you. -- Well,
Sir, what do you say to this?


Riot. Damme Sir! -- a Bitch of Bitches -- damn my Blood!


Just. That, Sir, is nothing at all to the Purpose.


Riot. I very seldom do talk to the Purpose, Sir -- does your Worship always do
that? That, Sir, is a damnation Failing of mine.


Just. Sir, I shall make you speak to the Purpose.


Riot. Will you by the Lord? Then you will make me do more than body else can.


Just. Sir, do you know that I am a Justice of Peace?


Riot. Not I Sir, but I judge so by your Stupidity and Insolence.


Just. Dare you affront a Magistrate, Sir, in his Office? Do you know, Sir,
that I shall send you to the Gatehouse?


Riot. Not I -- damn my Blood! if I know any such thing.


Just. Do you know, Sir, that it is in my Power to commit you to Newgate?


Riot. Nay -- nay, none of your Hum, my dear Barrister -- but dismiss me -- I
must go to the Bedford -- damme!


Just. This must be some young Fellow of Quality by his Impudence; I must take
Care how I act with him. -- I Will try him a little further however -- [ Aside]
Do you know, Sir, the Consequence of a Rape?


Riot. The Consequence of a Rape, old Boy! -- a Bastard, a Bastard, or two at
most -- but there is no Danger with Peg there; she will breed nothing but the
Consumption of Mercury.


Mrs. Br. Indeed, if it please your Worship, I am as honest a Woman, in my Way,
as ever broke Bread.


Riot. Only in a damned bad Way, Peg -- I Will tell you, Bobadil -- your Worship
would do well by putting her in a better, by sending her to Bridewell, damme!


Just. It must be so -- he is some Spawn of Quality -- Pray, Sir, may I have the
Honor to know who you are?


Riot. As you begin to grow a little civil and intelligible, I Will tell you, Sir
-- I have the Honor to be Son and Heir to Lord Riot.


Just. Lord Riot! let me see -- whereabouts does he lie? -- In or out -- Riot
-- Riot -- out -- ay; but then he is Brother to Bacon Hope that married Viscount
Dangle's Neice, who was Sister to Viscount Favor, that married the Earl of
Place's Daughter, who is Son to his Grace of Promise; and so it is possible I
may offend somewhere, -- [ Aside.] Though I have not the Honor to know you,
Sir, I shall nevertheless behave in this Affair according to Justice -- Do you
know, Mistress, the Consequence of bringing such a Charge as you were going,
against the noble Gentleman?


Mrs. Br. Indeed, if it please your Worship, he did --


Just. No -- Woman, he did not.


Mrs. Br. I Will take my Oath.


Just. Ha! Woman -- do you contradict me? How do you say it was?


Mrs. Br. -- Why -- if it please your Worship -- I goes up Stairs --


Just. How, Woman! I GOES up Stairs -- false English, Woman, false English, and
consequently what you say must be false -- your Mittimus shall be made out
immediately.


Riot. No -- no -- damn the Bitch, I have abused her, let her go about her
Business.


Just. If 'twill oblige your Lordship that she be dismissed -- or else it is
proper these People be made Examples for the Good of Community -- Woman, I
believe you are a sad Creature; but as I have a great deal of the Milk of Human
Kindness in my Nature; and am in Hopes you will amend, you may go. -- I am very
sorry I have given your Lordship so much Trouble; your Lordship is at Liberty
whenever your Lordship pleases.


Riot. Servile Dog! Ha! ha! ha!


Sir N. Hold, Sir, a Moment, perhaps I have not such a Veneration for your
Quality as his Worship; therefore I shall charge Mr. Constable with you for the
Insult you put on me last Night in your Way to the Round-house, and expect you
find Bail, before his Worship, to answer me in a proper Place -- I attended you
here this Morning for that very Purpose.


Riot. Why, faith, thou art a very comical old Fellow, damme -- Do you know now
I don't remember I ever saw your Face before?


Sir N. That may be, Sir -- I must assist your Memory then.


Riot. Why thou art an odd Bitch -- what shall I say to this Fellow, Bobadil?


Just. Oh! I Will deal with him for your Lordship presently -- pray, Sir, who are
you? What are you? Whence do ye come? As the Man can give no Account of
himself, I shall send him to the Gatehouse, my Lord.


Sir N. Me to the Gatehouse, Mr. Justice! do you know, Sir, that I am in the
Commission of the Peace, and of the Quorum! and that I am Representative in
Parliament?


Just. How!


Sir N. For the Borough of Muddletown.


Just. I had like to have gone too far here.


[Aside. Sir N. Send Sir Nackadil Trunnion to the Gatehouse, indeed!


Just. I beg Sir Nackadil Trunnion's Pardon in the most submissive Manner, but
I hope a Mistake, arising from the many Deceptions People of the poorer, and
consequently of the viler, Class put on us, will find an Excuse -- And I hope
also, the Error his Lordship might possibly, unknowingly, and I am confident
unwillingly, committed, is not of such a Nature in itself, as to make either of
you slight a Reconciliation. As nothing is more conducive to the Promotion of
Justice and the Good of Community, than the perfect Amity of People of Power
and Fortune, and which it is necessary they should preserve, in order that the
lower Part of Mankind should meet with the Punishment due to their Offenses --
if you will do me the Honor, with his Lordship, to step into the next Room, a
Moment, I will attempt to clear up this Affair, in which I am sure, as you are
Men of Fortune, there is not, on either Side, any thing contrary to the nicest
Points of Honor, Justice and Good-manners.


Sir N. As you are so perfectly obliging, Sir, and seem to come to a right
Understanding of Things, I will hear what you have to say to it.


Riot. A dry troublesome old Bitch, this! -- I believe I had better make it up
with him, damn my Blood! --


SCENE VI.
Enter Roxana Termagant. Raise all my Powers, the Powers of Grub-street raise,
Drawcansir trembles at the Name of me.
My Ranks in King Street shine -- but oh my Heart!
I Am sick of Love, and for my mortal Foe;
Drawcansir's Charms have pierced my tender Breast:
Oh wherefore then do I, in seeming Hate,
Rise up to Battle thus against his Power --
Oh! but to conquer and subdue his Arm,
That I may bend his stubborn Soul to Love.

Enter Mountain. Moun. Why sits the Child of Dullness pensive here?
When now her Host of Friends have taken the Alarm,
Are up and ready to revenge her Cause;
The roaring Lion threatens to devour,
Drawcansir's self and all his boasted Power.

Term. Ha! say thou Doctor? Does the Lion roar?
He is Queen Dulness' Friend -- but yet alas!
May I not hope Drawcansir is so too?
For oh! I blush to tell thee that I love The dear Drawcansir.

Moun. -- Ha! in Love with him!
[Aside. I thought that I alone possessed her Heart --
Have not I told her twice ten thousand Lies?
Boasted of Favors I had never received,
In vain to win her Love? What must be done?
O now I have it -- great Madam, if by me
You Will condescend to be advised, I Will make
This mighty Hero gladly own your Love.

Term. Will thou do that? Then shall thou be our
Friend -- all Grub-street shall be tributary made,
Each Day, to feed your Lion and yourself.

Moun. I Will do it -- I studied Physic in my Youth,
And can procure such charmed powerful Drugs
That shall command the Passions of the Soul,
And bind Drawcansir to your Charms for ever.

Term. I Have read indeed that Magic has such Powers --
Go, try and prosper -- yet, alas, I fear --
I Will to Ben Sedgley's -- you may find me there.

[Exit. Moun. And I to minister the Draught -- O Fool -- Fool --
Fool! -- I Will make him loath her Name --
But how? Oh! an Emissary I Will get,
That while he over his Journal daily sleeps,
Shall pour it lavishly into his Ear;
Which such strange Work shall in his Memory make,
That never more he shall for her awake.
[Exit.
SCENE VII.
Enter 'Squire Antony, whistling. Cod, here comes Father -- now I Will have some
Fun with him -- I Will hum him, damme.

[Begins crying. Enter Sir Nackadil Trunnion. Sir N. Well, Antony, what is the
matter, Boy? What do you cry for? What are you blubbering about?


Ant. O Lord! Father, O Lord! O Lord! our House at Tumbledown-hall is burned
down to the Ground, and every thing destroyed -- here has been Steward Poundage
to look for you, and tell you of it -- he is gone to see about for you.


Sir N. Tumbledown-hall burned to the Ground, and all the rich Furniture and
Plate gone to the Dogs! oh I am ruined! undone! I had rather have lost half my
Estate. Where, where is Mr. Poundage gone? What is there nothing saved at all?
-- Where did the Fire begin? What part of the House? -- Is your Mother safe? Oh
I shall run distracted.


Ant. Ho! ho! ha! a Hum -- Ha! ha! ha!


Sir N. What do you laugh at your Father's Misfortunes?


Ant. Why Father you're humm'd -- Ho!


Sir N. Humm'd! you Dog, what do you mean by that?


Ant. Ho! ho! why it is all a Joke -- Ho! ho! I don't know any thing about
Tumbledownball, not I.


Sir N. You don't -- and a'nt you a pretty Fellow to make Game of your Father,
ha! Sir.


[Breaks his Head. Ant. Ho! ho! ho! I don't mind that -- damme -- I must not
heed that -- there -- [Put's himself in a boxing Posture at a Distance, and
darts a strait Blow at his Father.] that is for you -- hang me if I don't think
I could beat you, at dry Boxing, -- if 'twas n't for that Cane.


Sir N. Amazing Impudence! you do, Sir! then there, and there, and there.
[Beats him.


Ant. OLord! OLord! OLord! no indeed I don't -- pray Father. [Falls on his
Knees.


Sir N. O! have I brought you to Reason young Gentleman, and pray who has been
tutoring you to this? -- Who set you on to abuse your Father, Sirrah, ah! come,
get up and tell me -- where have you been?


Ant. Cousin, you lest me with, told me I should hate you, and not mind what
you said to me, and then he said it was witty to hum any body.


Sir N. A mighty pretty Fellow, that! I shall go and acquaint my Brother
Bullyboy of this Behavior of his -- and you, I see Sir, have profited more by
his Instructions in half an Hour, than you have done by mine these eighteen
Years. -- I wanted you to turn over a new Leaf, and this is the Way you was
going to do it; but, Sirrah! I shall turn you back again to your old Chapter --
Well, and did you learn no more of these goodly Tricks of him? What more did he
tell you?


Ant. Yes, he said I must learn to bully and swear and look big and so, and
then I must learn to be a Critic, and to cry Stuff, Damnation low! and to
whistle thus -- and that would make me a great Man.


Sir N. Mighty pretty! a fine Fellow, that! -- I had entrusted my Son with a
fine Rascal -- he would give me a good Account of him -- a very good Account
indeed, and this was the Way you was to become a great Man -- Come along, Sir,
and if ever I see you conversing with that Cousin of yours again, I shall
wring your Nose off for you -- Come, Sir, I shall take another Course with you
-- I am now going to Gresham College -- Come along, Sir -- let me see if you
can learn nothing better there.

[Exeunt.
SCENE VIII. Drawcansir soulus -- reading at a Table.
Drawcansir rising. Strange that my Sword should want its usual Point.
How dull its Edge! sure some superior Power,
Like mighty Pallas, in the Shape of Rust,
Opposed my Arm -- by Heaven it shall not be --
Though Hills on Hills to oppose my Vengeance meet,
My Foes shall all lie sprawling at my Feet.
But let me pause --
Of what unequal Genius are we framed?
One Day the Mind, replete with Wit and Sense,
Dictates secure and fondly tells herself,
The Hour of Dullness will return no more:
The next, the Spirits palled and sick with Study,
Turn all to Nonsense, and the Town despise.
O my Amelia! what have thou returned
For all the Toil and Labor which I squandered,
Dullness, Aversion, Tediousness and Stuff?
Sour'd all mine Hopes and damped my towering Fame! --
Here I lest reading.
[Reads. It being reported that a HILL must be levelled, before the Bedford
Coffee-house could be taken, Orders were given accordingly; but this was
afterward found to be a Mistake, a second Express assuring us, that this HILL
was only a little paultry Dunghill and had long before been levelled with the
Dirt. [Falls fast asleep.
Enter an Apothecary. Drugs apt and Time agreeing,
Fast asleep, no Creature seeing,
Mixture of MIDNIGHT Weeds collected,
Works thrice damned and thrice neglected.
Journal in Drury Lane begun,
Poor Compound of Ribaldry and Pun.
Pierce the soft Recesses of thy Brain.
[Empties a Phial into his Ear. My Business done, I now go out again.

[Exit Apothecary. Drawcansir wakes. This Candle does want Snuffing -- Ha!
what is this?
[Ghost rises.
Gh. I am thy Genius -- and I come to say,
The Powers of Dullness fight with thee Today.

Dr. Well -- wherefore should I fear? Since Fate has said
I never shall be conquered 'till unfear'd
The Lion roar, a Mountain rear it is Head, And Sexes change.

Gh. Be not deceived -- this is already true.
In yon Piazza, hark, the Lion roars,
An Hill uplifts it is Head, and --
[Ghost sinks.
Dr. How is this?
Vanished! I would know more of this -- Ha!
Now I begin to fear and doubt the Word
Of that equivocating Ghost -- but, ha!
Whom have we here?

Enter Roxana Termagant and Mountain. Moun. Fear not, the Charm will work.

R. Ter. to Dr. O my loved Lord, my dear Drawcansir, hear me.

Dr. Ha! Woman, who art thou? Away -- be gone --

R. Ter. I am thy mortal Foe, and yet thy Friend.

Dr. Woman, away, I know thee now -- thou art
Roxana Termagant -- but wherefore here?
Why do thou come to brave me at mine Home?
At King Street end I Will meet thee by and by,
And thou or I in Wit shall lower lie.

R. Ter. to Moun. Did thou not say the Charm had pierced his Brain?

Moun. The Charm was naught -- there was left out a Grain
Of special Puns -- he cannot endure thee now.

R. Ter. Then shall he die -- shout Dullness, and fall on!

Dr. Hold -- hold -- in vain you draw your threatening Sword,
I bear a charmed Life, and cannot die
Till Sexes change, Hills rise, and Lions roar unfear'd.

R. Ter. Despair thy Charm, for know I was a Man.

Moun. I am a Mountain, and a Lion keep To roar at thee.

Dr. Accursed be the Tongues that tell me so;
For it has cowed my better Part of Man:
And be those juggling Witches never believed,
Those Imps of Vanity that swell our Pride,
Yet cheat us of our Hopes --
Yet, I will fight ye -- both at once fall on.

[They fight -- Drawcansir falls. Moun. Now let us away, the Battle will be ours,
We shall disperse full soon his friendly Powers.
To mighty Dullness be a Sacrifice,
The Queen for you and I reserves the Prize.

[Exeunt Mountain and Termagant. Dr. How are the Mighty fallen! -- I am down;
O now farewell -- farewell ungrateful Town.
Tobacco stops my Throat, my Race is run,
And now in Death I Am punished with a Pun.

[Exit dying. FINIS.

