THE LORD OF THE MANOR, A COMIC OPERA, AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL
DRURY LANE, WITH A PREFACE BY THE AUTHOR.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. EVANS IN THE STRAND. M.DCC.LXXXI.

PREFACE.
AMONG the many unpleasing circumstances attending the concealed writer of a
dramatic piece (and they are more than are apt at first to occur to him), it is
not one of the least considerable to a liberal mind, that other persons become
sufferers by his failings. Thus while the real Author, on one hand, has enjoyed
the compliment of having the Lord of the Manor ascribed to several men, for
whom it is great literary credit to be mistaken; so, on the other, he has had
the pain to see criticism extended from poetical to political principles, and
made a vehicle for party reflections upon persons who never saw a line of his
writing. Not only have the erroneous guesses shifted from man to man, they have
fallen also upon men in a body: different scenes have been given to different
pens; and sometimes these supposed writers have multiplied upon the
imagination, 'till they became almost as numerous as the personages of the
drama.

Perhaps an apology may be due to every man who has been charged with this
foundling; and the more especially as the parent himself means to continue
still unknown -- confessing ingenuously at the same time, that his temptations
to break from his concealment far over-balance his discouragements: for after
duly weighing every defect of fable, conduct, dialogue, etc. with which the
severest critic could tax him, what candidate for praise in poetry would not
bear the weight ten-fold, for the sole pride of avowing in his own name the
songs which by many respectable judges have been attributed to Mr. SHERIDAN?

It is unnecessary to trouble the reader with the motives upon which so
flattering a gratification is resisted. -- Some of them perhaps are mere
peculiarities of temper -- Suffice it to say, that they are such, upon the
whole, as induce this Author to request the few friends, who necessarily have
been entrusted with his secret, not to think themselves at liberty, from any
thing here said, to divulge it. For his own part he is desirous so far to
satisfy the public curiosity (if curiosity remains upon so trifling a subject)
as to declare that every word in the following Opera is the production of a
single person; and should a mistake still rest upon any individual, it is fit
that the burden should be made as light as possible, by removing some
prejudices which have been bevelled unjustly against the man, whatever may
become of others which may have been conceived against the piece.

Be it known, then, that these scenes were written last summer in the country
for mere amusement -- to relax a mind which had been engaged in more intense
application -- and the only view in bringing them upon the stage was a
continuation of amusement, encouraged and enhanced by the reflection, that, if
they were defective in many parts, they were harmless in all; that although
they might not correct the follies, they would not offend the morals of the
spectators.

It could not but be matter of surprise and some pain to a writer intent upon
these principles, to find himself accused of having introduced the character of
Captain Trepan, for the purpose of impeding the recruiting service of the army.
To be thought a bad Poet, is but a common misfortune, and it may be borne with
temper and in silence; but the imputation of being an ill-intentioned citizen
requires an answer, though in this case, it is trusted, a short one will
suffice.

The writer has ever conceived, that as to show the enormous vices of the time
in their utmost deformity ought to be the great end of dramatic satire; so, in
a lesser degree, to expose to ridicule any practice that savoured more of abuse
than absolute vice, had its use. They who think the fallacies and frauds of
recruiting dealers about this town necessary evils, which ought to be connived
at, as contributary to the military strength of the nation, are ignorant of
facts, or blind to consequences. So little is the writer of that opinion, that
he has thought it incumbent upon him to restore in print the passages which
from apprehension of sudden misconstructions, and from no other apprehension,
were omitted in the representation. An abler hand might have carried satire on
this subject infinitely further, not only with a consciousness of doing no
harm, but also a confidence of doing good. Let us suppose, for
illustration-sake, that his Majesty were pleased to command the First Part of
King Henry IV. and to order all the boxes to be kept for the new Commanders,
which the policy of the times (from the scarcity undoubtedly of veterans) has
placed at the head of corpse raising or to be raised; and one of the galleries
devoted exclusively to the Crimp Captains and their Subalterns -- might not
public benefit be united with entertainment by a just exhibition of old Jack
Falstaff's levies? and should it happen that any person present in such an
audience were conscious of " having misused the King's press damnably" -- or
from any other cause were " ashamed of his ragamuffins" -- surely he could not
but feel grateful for so gentle a hint! and we might see effected by wit and
mirth, a reformation, which under a harsh Sovereign might have been thought
deserving of direct and exemplary reprehension.

A more serious defense can hardly be requisite upon this subject, after
publication of the piece. At the Theater, where the attention naturally (and in
this instance most deservedly) has rested much upon the music, the public
sentiments sincerely meant to be inculcated may have escaped notice; but, in
the closet, the writer, without a shadow of fear, rests his justification from
the charge of ill will to the military service, upon passages too numerous to
be pointed out. He might almost say upon every character of the Drama -- but
particularly upon that of Trumore, where the two extremes of that passion which
fills, or ought to fill, every youthful breast, is employed to excite martial
ardour: in one instance, disappointment and despondency in love are made the
motives for enlisting as a private soldier; in the other, success in love, the
supreme happiness in human existence, is not admitted as an excuse for
relinquishing the military service during the exigencies of our country.

To disavow the aspersion I have mentioned, was the principal purpose of this
address to the candor of the reader; but having taken up the pen, I will
venture to offer to his further indulgence a few thoughts upon Opera, and
particularly that species of it attempted in the ensuing pages.

The Opera is a favorite entertainment in all the polite countries of Europe,
but in none, that I know of, held subject to the laws of regular Drama. There
is neither usage nor statute of criticism (if I may use that expression) to try
it by, unless we look for such in some musical code. Metastasio, though a very
respectable stage writer, has never been brought to the same bar with Corneille
or Racine, or any other professors of correct Tragedy. The vital principle and
very soul of Italian Opera is music; and provided it be well maintained in
composition and execution, every inconsistency, in fable, conduct, or
character, is not only always pardoned, but often applauded.

The French Opera (without entering into the disputed points concerning its
music, or denying the many beautiful passages which may be extracted from its
poetry) is if possible more absurd than the Italian in its departure from
probability. To the powers of sound is added all that decoration, machinery,
beauty, and grace, can supply to enchant the eye and the fancy; and so
forcible, it must be allowed, is their effect, that the judgment receives no
shock, when tyrants and lovers, heroes and peasants, Gods and devils, are
singing and dancing in amicable chorus all together.

The reader will go with me in applying every thing yet said to the serious or
great Opera. Another species, but no more of the legitimate family of Comedy
than the former is of Tragedy, has been introduced in all the countries I have
alluded to. In England both have been in use in our native language, but with
very different success. I have no hesitation in pronouncing an opinion, that
the adopting what is called recitative into a language, to which it is totally
incongruous, is the cause of failure in an English serious Opera much oftener
than the want of musical powers in the performers. In countries where the
inflection of voice in recitative upon the stage is little more than what the
ear is used to in common discourse, the dialogue of the drama is sustained and
strengthened by a great compass of tones; but in our northern climates, in
proportion as the ordinary expression comes nearer monotony, recitative, or
musical dialogue, will seem the more preposterous See Mr. Addison upon this
subject, Spectator No. 29, and others of his papers upon the Opera.
.

I will not contend (though I have my doubts) that it is impossible for genius
to invent, and for voice to deliver, a sort of recitative that the English
language will bear. But it must be widely different from the Italian. If any
specimens can yet be produced of it is having been effected, they will be found
to consist only of a few lines introductive of the air which is to follow, and
as such received by the ear just as symphony would be. Very few serious pieces,
except Artaxerxes, can be recollected upon our Theater where it has not
entirely failed, even when assisted by action: in Oratorios it is, with a few
exceptions, and those sustained by accompaniment, a soporific that even the
thunder of Handel's chorusses are hardly loud enough to overcome.

There may be enthusiasts in music who will treat the disrelish I have
described to want of ear. Let ear be understood merely as the organ by which
the mind is to receive more or less delight from sublime English verse, and I
should be happy to see the dispute brought to public issue -- the test should
be the performance of Alexander's Feast as now set to music throughout; and the
performance of that inimitable ode, with the songs alone preserved in music,
and the rest delivered by Mrs. Yates without accompaniment, or other melody,
than her emphatic elocution.

I trust that in contending against musical dialogue in English, I shall not be
understood to think that all music is inapplicable to the higher compositions
of our stage. On the contrary I am convinced that under judicious management
music is capable of giving them effect beyond what our best authors can attain
without it -- music can add energy to Shakspeare himself. Indignant as an
English audience would be to hear King Lear deliver himself in recitative, I
believe no person, who had a heart or taste, ever contemplated the mute groupe
of Cordelia with the aged parent asleep in her lap, and the physician watching
by, without an increase of sensibility from the soft music which Mr. Garrick
introduced into that scene. The same observation will hold good with respect to
the additional horror excited in Macbeth, and delight in the Tempest, from the
judicious use of both song and instruments. I cannot help quoting another
instance of the application of music which I have always thought a happy one.
At the close of the tragedy of the Gamester, when the distress is raised to
such a pitch that language fails under it, how forcibly is the impression left
upon the audience by music, accompanying the slow descent of the curtain over
the mournful picture! How preferable such a conclusion to the usual one of an
actor straddling over dead bodies to deliver a tame moral in tame rhyme to the
pit, in the same breath, and often in the same tone, in which he is to give out
the play. But surely no man can be so void of discernment as not to see clearly
the difference between recitative and music thus applied: the one diverts the
attention from sense to sound, breaks the propriety and very nerve of our
language, and by giving to the expression of the passions cadences of which we
never heard an example, nor can form a conception in real life, destroys that
delusion and charm of fancy which makes the situations before us our own, and
is the essence of dramatic representation: the other, upon the principle of the
chorus of the ancients, serves to excite and to combine attention and emotion,
and to improve and to continue upon the mind the impressions most worthy to be
retained.

I am aware that I have entered further into the grave Drama than my subject
required; but the digression will be found excusable, in as much as the same
doctrine applies to comic productions, and as it will serve to shorten the
trouble of the reader in what I have further to offer.

One branch of comic opera which meets with success on our stage is evidently a
graft from the Burletta of the Italians; and little as I may admire it in
general, I will venture to say, respectively to the writing, it is improved in
our soil. Midas, the Golden Pippin, and some others, considered as pieces of
parody and burlesque, are much better than any Italian Burletta I know. In
fact, there is in general in the Italian Drama of this name an insipidity,
mixed with a buffoonery too low to be called farcical, which would make the
representation insupportable in England, were the language understood, or
attended to in any other view than as the introduction and display of exquisite
music.

I cannot easily bring myself to allow the higher branch of our Comic Opera, to
be of foreign extraction. From the time the Beggar's Opera appeared, we find
pieces in prose, with songs interspersed, so approaching to regular Comedy in
plot, incident, and preservation of character, as to make them a distinct
species from any thing we find abroad -- and is it too much to add that the
sense, wit, and humor to be found in some of them are sterling English marks
by which we may claim the species as our own? The musical pieces at Paris, upon
the Theater called Les Italiens, sprung up from the decline of a sort of Drama
where half the personages were Italian, as was half the language. When
Harlequin and Argentine grew unfashionable, such other representations as
served best for an hour of mere dissipation succeeded, and the light and easy
music with which they were accompanied, made them very popular. But the pieces
are either parodies, or founded in general upon materials which would be
thought in England too flimzy for any thing but an after-piece. They are
composed with an amusing playfulness of imagination, which runs Love through all
its divisions, and usually contain abundance of very pretty vocal music with a
scarcity of incident and little variety of character. It is not intended to
degrade or depreciate this style of writing as applicable to a Paris audience:
it is only meant to state it more widely separate and distinct from the force
and spirit of regular comedy than our own. They who are unacquainted with the
Paris theater, are referred for judgment upon this subject to the Deserter,
Zemira and Azor, and other direct translations; and to Daphne and Amintor, and
Thomas and Sally, and other after-pieces, very good in their kind, but written
after the French manner. The Padlock is above this class in display of
characters; and the French have nothing upon their Musical Comic Stage to
compare, as resembling Comedy, with Love in a Village, or the Maid of the Mill,
or, to take still greater credit to our Theater, the Duenna.

The Lord of the Manor, although the leading incident of the story is
professedly taken from the Silvain of Marmontel, is an humble attempt at the
species of Opera which I have ventured to call English, and to describe as a
drama the next in gradation below regular Comedy, and which might perhaps be
carried a step above it. It will not therefore be thought want of attention to
the excellencies of Marmontel's piece, which as adapted to French manners I
believe no man of taste will dispute, but respect and preference to our stage,
that induced me to alter and enlarge the plan and conduct of the original, to
substitute characters, and to add scenes and circumstances entirely new.

I know not a feature of character preserved from Marmontel, except the
sensibility and artless innocence of the young women -- qualities, which, to be
truly represented, admit of little diversity by change of country.

I should be sorry if taking part, or even the whole of a story from a foreign
stage, when such story can be made applicable to our customs and characters,
and is entirely new worked up for that purpose, could be deemed plagiarism,
because it would be a confinement to the invention rather pedantick than useful.

But while I am taking credit for borrowing so little as one incident, there
may be those who think I had better have borrowed a great deal more. I can only
say that translation, or imitation, would have cost less pains, as it is easier
to spin Filer le Sentiment.
sentiment, than to delineate character, and to write twenty songs to please
the ear, than half as many lines of such Comedy as ought to satisfy the
judgment. I do not contend that a direct copy of Marmontel would not have been
a much better thing than my talents have been able to make; I only insist it
would no have been English drama. Continued uninterrupted scenes of tenderness
and sensibility (Comedy larmoyante) may please the very refined, but the bulk
of an English audience, including many of the best understanding, go to a comic
performance to laugh in some part of it at least. They claim a right to do so
upon precedents of our most valued plays -- and every author owes it to them,
so long as the merriest amongst them shows he is equally capable of relishing
and applauding what is elevated and affecting -- an observation I have always
seen hold good in an English gallery.

It might be assuming too much to quote any passages from the Lord of the
Manor, as a test that every part of the house can relish refined sentiment; but
were the fact ten times more apparent, I should still adhere to my former
opinion, and intermix mirth: the censure of a critic of fashion here and there
in the boxes, who reckon every thing low which is out of their own sphere,
would never persuade me to turn Moll Flagon out of my piece (easy as it would
be to conduct the story without her) while she excites so much pleasure in
general, as to prove the character can neither be false in nature, nor void of
humor.

And now a few words upon what I conceive would be the plan of writing, were
men of genius and taste to try a specimen of correct musical comedy.

In a representation which is to hold "a mirror up to nature," and which ought
to draw its chief applause from reason, vocal music should be confined to
express the feelings of the passions, but never to express the exercise of
them. Song, in any action in which reason tells us it would be unnatural to
sing, must be preposterous. To fight a duel, to cudgel a poltroon in cadence,
may be borne in a burletta, upon the same principle that in the serious opera
we see heroes fight lions and monsters, and sometimes utter their last
struggles for life in song, and die in strict time and tune: but these
liberties would be totally inadmissible in the kind of drama which I am
recommending. My idea might be further explained by a passage in the piece of
Marmontel before referred to. It appeared to one of the newspaper critics, that
I had been guilty of a great error in not introducing a scene in the Silvain,
wherein the Gardes Chasse of the Seigneur attack the sportsman with guns in
their hands, threatening to shoot him unless he surrenders his gun which he
persists in preserving. By the bye, this sort of authority is more natural in
France than I hope it would yet be thought to be in England: but that was not
my principal objection. This scene upon the French stage is all in song; and
even at Paris, where license of throwing action into song is so much more in
use than it is here, and where I have often seen it excellently performed, the
idea of five or six fellows with fusils presented at a gentleman's head, and
their fingers upon the triggers, threatening his life in bass notes, he
resisting in tenor, and a wife or daughter throwing herself between them in
treble, while the spectator is kept in suspense, from what in reality must be a
momentary event, till the composer has run his air through all its different
branches, and to a great length, always gave me disgust to a great degree.

Music, therefore, if employed to express action, must be confined to dumb
show. It is the very essence of pantomime; and we have lately seen upon the
opera stage how well a whole story may be told in dance; but in all these
instances music stands in the place of speech, and is itself the only organ to
express the sentiments of the actor.

To return to the application of vocal music upon the English theater: it must
not only be restrained from having part in the exercise or action of the
passions; care must be also taken, that it does not interrupt or delay events
for the issue of which the mind is become eager. It should always be the
accessory and not the principal subject of the drama; but at the same time
spring out of it in such a manner that the difference can hardly be discerned,
and that it should seem neither the one nor the other could be spared.

And notwithstanding all these restrictions, vocal music judiciously managed
would have many occasions to distinguish its own specific charms, at the same
time that it embellished, enriched, and elevated regular dramatic compositions.
In tragedy, I am convinced, the mind would peculiarly feel its powers. Not
touched but rapt, not wakened but inspired.
In the humbler, but not less instructive line of comedy, its office would be
to convey through the sweetest channel, and to establish by the most powerful
impressions upon the mind, maxim, admonition, sentiment, virtue.

Should any thing I have said strike a man of genius and taste with the
distinction I have endeavored to establish between comic opera and musical
comedy, viz. between "elaborate trifles" made secondary to music, and sense and
spirit inculcated and sustained by it, new subjects could not be wanting to
engage their trials; or if it occurred to men of that description to try an
experiment upon an old subject, and a poet could be found courageous enough to
engraft upon Shakspeare, as has been done upon Milton in Comus; perhaps no
subject could be found in the whole range of fancy better fitted for musical
comedy than the play of "As you like it." Indeed it seems by some songs thrown
into the original, that it was the idea of the great author himself. To
multiply the songs, excellent materials might be taken from the piece itself,
without injury to the eloquent and brilliant passages which are better adapted
to the energy of elocution and action. And where materials failed in the
original, what true votary of the Muse would not find animation, and assistance
in his inventive faculties, from the prospect of being admitted before the
public a companion to Shakspeare!

In the mean time the Lord of the Manor has been offered, not as an example,
but an excitement to improve that species of drama -- -- fungar vice cotis;
acutum
Reddere quae ferrum valet, exsors ipse secandi.
It would be affectation in me, as well as ingratitude to the public, to deny
the pleasure I have had in the very favorable reception of this piece. At the
same time I trust that I am duly sensible how much of the success is to be
attributed to the exertions of the performers, the merits of the Orchestra, and
the excellence of Mr. Jackson's composition. Among all the circumstances of
satisfaction, there is not one more pleasing to the reflection than that the
bringing this humble production upon the stage, has been the means of making me
acquainted with a man whose harmony I sincerely believe to be characteristic of
his mind, -- equal to any exertions, but peculiarly exquisite; when expressive
of the social, tender, quiet, and amiable qualities of the human heart.

Before I dismiss this theatrical subject, upon which I have hazarded many
opinions that for aught I know may be singly mine, I am free to confess, that
in calling upon men of genius to try the effect of my ideas, I have had my eye
particularly upon Mr. Sheridan. As an author, he is above my encomium; as a
friend, it is my pride to think we are exactly upon a level. From the
consideration of him in both those capacities, I feel myself more interested
than the rest of the world, in a performance he has some time given us reason
to expect. His Muse, though without participation of my cause, will naturally
and of necessity be the advocate of it, by verifying and exemplifying true
musical comedy; and such a sanction from the author whom all respect, will be
rendered doubly precious to myself by its proceeding also from the man I love.

THE AUTHOR.

The following elegant Editions are just published by T. EVANS, Bookseller,
near York-Buildings, in the Strand.
1. DESIDERATA CURIOSA, a collection of very curious Tracts on British History
and Antiquity. Published from original manuscripts, by Francis Peck, M.A.
Rector of Godeby, near Melton, Leicestershire, in 2 vols. Royal Quarto, with
plates; price r l. 11s. 6d. in boards. 2. Old Ballads Historical and Narrative,
with some of modern dates, published from rare copies, and illustrated with
notes. This work is a proper Supplement to Dr. Percy's Collection, 2 vols.
price 6s. sewed.

"The success of Dr. Percy's Collection has instigated Mr. Evans to furnish
that Supplement, which is at present under our consideration; and with pleasure
we recommend his work to our readers, as every way deserving their patronage
and attention. We sincerely wish all Editors, like the present, those
emoluments they have a right to expect, on account of their zeal to preserve
the early efforts of the British Muse, their taste and judgment in selection,
and their expense and elegance in publication." Critical Review.

See also the Monthly Review.

3. The Works of Richard Savage, Esquire. containing his Plays, Poems and
Miscellanies, with an account of his Life and Writings, by Samuel Johnson,
LL.D. 2. vols. price 7s. sewed. "We are much pleased with this elegant Edition
of the works of a man whose merit as a Poet, and whose misfortunes as a man,
have rendered him, in a peculiar manner, the object of public attention, an
attention that has been greatly heightened by those admirable memoirs of him by
Dr. Johnson, being indeed deservedly esteemed as one of the most excellent
pieces of Biography in the English language." Monthly Review.

4. Plays and Poems, written by Dr. Smollet, with his Life, Price 3s. sewed. 5.
The Poetical Works of Mr. William Collins, with his Life, and notes by Dr.
Langhorn, price 3s. bound. 6. A Supplement to Bishop Hurd's Edition of Cowley,
price 3s. sewed. 7. Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws, and his other Works complete,
4 vol. octavo, price 1l. 4s. bound.
This day is published, elegantly printed in two large volumes ^ octavo,
illustrated with maps, price, in boards, 10s. 6d. The History of the
Peloponnesian War, translated from the Greek of Thucydides, to which are
annexed three preliminary discourses. 1. On the Life of Thucydides. 2. On his
Qualifications. 3. A Survey of the History. By William Smith, A.M. Rector of
the parish of the Holy Trinity, in Chester, and Chaplain to the Earl of Derby.


DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
SIR JOHN CONTRAST, Mr. Parsons. CONTRAST, Mr. Palmer. TRUMORE, Mr. Vernon.
RASHLY, Mr. Bannister. RENTAL, Mr. Aickin. LE NIPPE, Mr. Dodd. CAPTAIN TREPAN,
Mr. Baddeley. SERGEANT CRIMP, Mr. R. Palmer. HUNTSMAN, Mr. Du Bellamy. CORPORAL
SNAP, Mr. Williams.
ANNETTE, Miss Prudom. SOPHIA, Miss Farren. PEGGY, Mrs. Wrighten. MOLL FLAGON,
Mr. Suett.
SOLDIERS, RECRUITS, COUNTRYMEN.
THE LORD OF THE MANOR.
ACT I. SCENE I.
At the close of the overture a peal of bells is heard at a distance, the
curtain continuing down. When the peal is nearly finished the curtain rises,
and discovers a magnificent entrance to a park, with a view of a Gothic castle
on an eminence at a distance. On the side scene, near the park-gate, the
outside of a small neat farmhouse with a bank of turf before the door, on which
Sophia and Annette are seated and at work -- Annette throws down her work, and
runs to meet Peggy, who enters immediately on the other side -- Sophia
continues her work pensively. PEGGY. KEEP it up, jolly ringers -- ding dong and
away with it again. A merry peal puts my spirits quite in a hey-day -- what say
you, my little foreigner?


ANNETTE. You know, Peggy, my spirits are generally in time and tune with
yours. I was out of my wits for your coming back to know what was going on --
Is all this for the wake?


PEGGY. Wake! An hundred wakes together would not make such a day as this is
like to be. Our new landlord, that has bought all this great estate of Castle
Manor, is arrived; and Rental the steward, who went up to London upon the
purchase, is with him, and is to be continued steward. He has been presenting
the tenants -- and they are still flocking up to the castle to get a sight of
Sir John, -- Sir John --


ANNETTE. What is his name?


PEGGY. I declare I had almost forgot it, though I have heard all about him --
Sir John Contrast -- Knight and Baronet -- and as rich as Mexico -- an ox is to
be roasted whole -- the whole country will be assembled -- such feasting --
dancing --


ANNETTE. Oh! how I long to see it! I hope papa will let us go -- do not you,
sister?


SOPHIA. No, indeed; my hopes are just the reverse; I hate nothing so much as a
crowd and noise. -- Enjoy the gaiety for which your temper is so well fitted,
Annette, but do not grudge me what is equally suited to mine -- retirement.


ANNETTE. I grudge it to you only, Sophy, because it nourishes pain.

Sings. If an amorous heart
Is distinguished by smart,
Let mine still insensible be;
Like the zephyr of spring,
Be it ever on wing,
Blythe, innocent, airy, and free.
Love, embitter'd with tears,
Suits but ill with my years,
When sweets bloom enmingled around;
Ere my homage I pay,
Be the godhead more gay,
And his altars with violets crowned.

PEGGY. Well said, my mademoiselle; though I hate the French in my heart, as a
true Englishwoman, I Will be friends with their sunshine as long as I live, for
making thy blood so lively in thy veins. Were it not for Annette and me, this
house would be worse than a nunnery.


SOPHIA. Heigh ho!


ANNETTE. Aye, that is the old tune. It Is so all night long -- sigh! sigh! pine,
pine! I can hardly get a wink of sleep.


PEGGY. And how is it ever to end? The two fathers are specially circumstanced
to make a family alliance. A curate with forty pounds a year has endowed his
son with two sure qualities to entail his poverty, Learning and Modesty; and
our gentleman (my master, God bless him!) is possessed of this mansion, a farm
of an hundred acres, a gun and a brace of spaniels -- I should have thought the
example so long before your eyes of living upon love might have made you --


SOPHIA. Charmed with it Peggy -- And so indeed I am -- It was the life of a
mother I can never forget. I do not pass an hour without reflecting on the
happiness she enjoyed and diffused -- "May such be my situation! it is my
favorite prospect."


PEGGY. "Aye, it is like your favorite moonshine, just of the same substance."
Helpless souls! you have not a single faculty to make the pot boil between you
-- I should like to see you at work in a dairy -- your little nice fingers may
serve to rear an unfledged linnet, but would make sad work at cramming poultry
for market --


SOPHIA. But you, my good Peggy, ought not to upbraid me; for you have helped
to spoil me by taking every care and labor off my hands -- the humility of our
fortunes ought to have put us more upon a level.


PEGGY. That Is a notion I cannot bear. I speak my mind familiarly to be sure,
because I mean no harm; but I never pretend to be more than a servant; and you
were born to be a lady -- I Am sure on it -- I see it as sure as the gypsies in
every turn of your countenance. -- Read Pamela Andrews, and the Fortunate
Country Maid.


SOPHIA. Have done Peggy, or you will make me seriously angry; this seems your
particular day of nonsense.


PEGGY. No nonsense, but a plain road to fortune. Our young landlord, Sir John
Contrast's son, is expected every hour; now get but your silly passion for
Trumore out of your head, and my life on it it will do -- I dreamt last night I
saw you with a bunch of nettles in your breast for a nosegay; and that is a sure
sign of a wedding -- Let us watch for him at the park-gate, and take your aim;
your eyes will carry further, and hit surer, than the best gun your father has.


ANNETTE. Peggy, how odd you are!


PEGGY. Yes, my whole life has been an oddity -- all made up of chequers and
chances -- you don't know half of it -- but Margery Hearts-ease is always
honest and gay; and has a joke and a song for the best and worst of times.

Sings. I once was a maiden as fresh as a rose,
And as fickle as April weather;
I lay down without care, and I waked from repose,
With a heart as light as a feather.
I worked with the girls, I played with the men,
I was always or romping or spinning;
And what if they pilfer'd a kiss now and then,
I hope 'twas not very great sinning.
I married a husband as young as myself,
And for every frolic as willing;
Together we laughed while we had any pelf,
And we laughed when we had not a shilling.
He Is gone to the wars -- Heaven send him a prize!
For his pains he is welcome to spend it;
My example, I know, is more merry than wise,
-- But, Lord help me, I never shall mend it!

ANNETTE. It would be a thousand pities you ever should.


PEGGY. But here comes your father, and Rental the steward; -- they seem in
deep discourse.


SOPHIA. Let us go in then; it might displease my father to interrupt them.

[Exit Sophia.
PEGGY. Go thy ways, poor girl! thou art more afraid of being interrupted in
discoursing with thy own simple heart.


ANNETTE. Peggy, when do you think my sighing-time will come?


PEGGY. Don't be too sure of yourself, miss; there is no age in which a woman
is so likely to be infected with folly, as just when she arrives at what they
call years of discretion.

[Exeunt.
Enter Rashly and Rental. RENTAL. But you are the only tenant upon the manor,
that has not congratulated our new lord upon taking possession of his purchase.


RASHLY (aside.) Strange disposition of events! That he of all mankind should
be a purchaser in this county! -- I must not see Sir John Contrast.


RENTAL. Why so? he is prepared -- in giving him an account of his tenants,
your name was not forgot.


RASHLY. And pray, my friend, how did you describe me?


RENTAL. As what I always found you -- an honest man. One can go no farther
than that word in praise of a character; therefore, to make him the better
acquainted with yours, I was forced to tell him the worst I knew of you.


RASHLY. Good Rental, what might that be?


RENTAL. I told him, you had the benevolence of a prince, with means little
better than a cottager; that consequently your family was often indebted to
your gun (at which you were the best hand in the country) for the only meat in
your kitchen.


RASHLY. But what said he to the gun?


RENTAL. He shook his head, and said, if you were a poacher, woe be to you when
his son arrived.


RASHLY. His son! --


RENTAL. Yes, his only son in fact. The eldest it seems was turned out of doors
twenty years ago, for a marriage against his consent. This is by a second wife,
and declared his heir. He gives him full rein to run his own course, so he does
not marry -- and by all accounts a fine rate he goes at.


RASHLY. And what is become of that elder?


RENTAL. Nobody knows. But the old servants who remember him are always
lamenting the change.


RASHLY. You know him well.


RENTAL. What do you mean?


RASHLY. A discovery that will surprise you -- I have lived with you, the many
years we have been acquainted -- an intimate -- a friend -- and an impostor.


RENTAL. An impostor!


RASHLY. Your new master, the purchaser of this estate is an obstinate father
-- I am a disinherited son -- put those circumstances together, and instead of
Rashly, call me --


RENTAL. Is it possible!


RASHLY. Call me Contrast.


RENTAL. Mr. Rashly, Sir John Contrast's son!


RASHLY. Even so -- for the sole offense of a marriage with the most amiable of
womankind, I received one of Sir John's rescripts as he calls the signification
of his pleasure, with a note of a thousand pounds, and a prohibition of his
presence for ever. I knew his temper too well to reply.


RENTAL. You must know him best -- I had conceived him of a disposition more
odd than harsh.


RASHLY. You are right; but this oddity has all the effects of harshness. Sir
John Contrast has ever thought decision to be the criterion of wisdom; and is
as much averse to retract an error as a right action. In short, in his
character, there is a continual variance between a good heart and a perverse
head; and he often appears angry with all mankind, when in fact he is only out
of humor with himself.


RENTAL. I always thought you must have been bred above the station I saw you
in, but I never guessed how much -- could you immediately submit to such a
change of situation?


RASHLY. No, I thought of different professions to support the rank of a
gentleman. I afterward placed my eldest daughter, then an infant, under the
care of a relation, and went abroad -- There my Annette was born, and for the
sake of economy for some years educated. In short, after various trials, I
found I wanted suppleness for some of my pursuits, and talents perhaps for
others; and my last resource was a cottage and love, in the most literal sense
of both.


RENTAL. But why did you change your name? -- the pride of Sir John Contrast
would never have suffered it to be said, that his son was in the capacity of a
poor farmer.


RASHLY. Our claims were upon the virtues, not the weaknesses of the heart; and
when they failed, obscurity was not only choice but prudence. Why give our
children the name and knowledge of a rank that might alienate their minds from
the humble life to which they were destined?


RENTAL. What a sacrifice! how strange this situation must have appeared to you
at first!


RASHLY. My Anna was equally fitted for a cottage or a court. Her person, her
accomplishments, her temper -- the universal charm of her society, made our new
life a constant source of delight --

-- "The desert smiled,
And Paradise was opened in the wild."
Sings. Encompassed in an angel's frame,
An angel's virtues lay;
Too soon did heaven assert the claim,
And call its own away.
My Anna's worth, my Anna's charms,
Must never more return!
What now shall fill these widowed arms?
Ah, me! my Anna's urn!

RENTAL. Not so, my good sir, you have two living images of her; and for their
sakes you must try to work upon this old obdurate -- Heaven has sent you
together for that purpose.


RASHLY. No my friend, he is inflexibility itself -- I mean to fly him -- it
must be your part to dispose of my farm and little property.


RENTAL. Your intention is too hasty -- I pretend to no skill in plotting, but
I think I see my way clearly in your case -- dear Sir, be advised by me --


LA NIPPE (without.) Hollo countryman, do you belong to the lodge?


RASHLY. Hey-day, what strange figure have we here?


RENTAL. As I live, the young heir's gentleman. I got acquainted with his
character when I was in London to solicit the stewardship, and it is as curious
as his master's.


RASHLY. What countryman is he?


RENTAL. True English by birth. He took his foreign name upon his travels to
save his master's reputation -- nothing so disgraceful nowadays, as to be
waited upon by your own countrymen -- pray be contented to --


Enter La Nippe (affectedly dressed as a foreign valet de chamber, with a
little cloak bag made of silk on his shoulder. LA NIPPE. Hollo! countrymen,
which is the nearest way -- What Mr. Rental! faith the sun was so much in my
eyes I did not know you.


RENTAL. Welcome to Castle Manor, Mr. Homestall -- I forget your French name.


LA NIPPE. La Nippe at your service; and when you see me thus equipped, I hope
you will forget my English one.


RENTAL. Pray how came you to be on foot?


LA NIPPE. A spring of the chaise broke at the bottom of the hill; the boy was
quite a bore in tying it up; so I took out my luggage and determined to walk
home.


RASHLY. The prettiest little package I ever saw.


RENTAL. What may it contain?


LA NIPPE. The current utensils of a fine gentleman -- as necessary to his
existence as current cash. It is a toilette a chasse, in English the macaroni's
knapsack -- It contains a fresh perfum^d fil^et for the hair, a pot of cold
cream for the face, and a callico under-waistcoat compressed between two
sachets a l'adorat de Narcisse; with a dressing of Marechalle powder, court
plaster, lip-salve, eau de luce --

[ Rashly smiling.
RENTAL (laughing.) To be sure that cargo does not exactly suit the family of
the Homestalls.


LA NIPPE. Non, non -- my master would not trust a black pin in my hands, if I
did not talk broken English -- I expect him here every minute.


RENTAL. What time was he to leave London?


LA NIPPE. The chaise was ordered at one this morning -- I must allow him an
hour for yawning, picking his teeth, and damning his journey -- that would
bring it to --


RASHLY. Upon my word, a pretty full allowance for such employments.


LA NIPPE. Nothing -- I have known Lord Dangle and his friend Billy Vapid in
suspense in St. James's Street, between a fruit-shop and a gambling-house,
thrice the time, and the chaise door open all the while.


RASHLY. Well said, Mr. La Nippe. I see you are a satyrist.


RENTAL. But what time of the morning had you brought him to?


LA NIPPE. Two o'clock -- oh, he dares not stay much longer -- for he is made
up for the journey. I doubt whether he could take himself to pieces; but, if he
could, I am sure he could never put himself together again without my
assistance -- his curls pinned, his ancles rolled, his --


RASHLY. His ancles rolled? pray what may you mean by that?


LA NIPPE. The preservation of a Ranelagh leg -- the true mode of keeping it
from one season to another -- What Is a Macaroni without a Ranelagh leg -- our's
has carried it hollow six seasons together.


RASHLY. We don't understand you.


LA NIPPE. Why sir, with six yards of flannel roller to sweat the small, and
prop the calf, and only an hour's attention every day (nothing for a gentleman
to spare), to sit with his heels in the air, and keep the blood back, I will
undertake to -- oh I Will leave nature in the lurch at her best works -- and
produce a leg with the muscle of a Hercules, and the ancle of the Apollo
Belvidere.


RASHLY. And is this a common practice?


LA NIPPE. Common! what do you think, but to hide the roller, makes the young
fellows so damned fond of boots at all hours? -- they cannot leave them off at
the playhouse nowadays -- but let me be gone.


RENTAL. Nay, nay, you have time to spare -- He must be many miles off; for it
is a hundred and twenty from London.


LA NIPPE. Lord help you! I see you have no notion how a genius travels.


RENTAL. He cannot fly, I suppose.


LA NIPPE. Yes, and in a whirlwind -- over orange-barrows and oyster-baskets at
every corner -- You may trace his whole journey by yelping dogs, broken-back'd
pigs, and dismembered geese.


RENTAL. Ha! ha! ha!


LA NIPPE. There Is no describing it in common words -- I Will give you a sample
in music.

Sings. Over the pavement when we rattle,
Trim the drivers, sharp the cattle,
How the people gape and wonder!
Whirling with our wheels in chorus,
Every earthly thing before us,
We come on like peals of thunder!
Cracking, smacking,
Backing, tacking,
Brats here bawling, Sir,
Dogs here sprawling, Sir,
Now they tumble, now they skip,
Zounds take care, Sir!
Safe to a hair, Sir!
Helter, skelter,
Swelter, swelter,
Dust and sun, Sir,
Help the fun, Sir,
Oh! the glories of the whip!

RENTAL. Glories! I am sure it has made you sweat to describe them; and I
hardly know if I have a whole bone in my body at hearing them.


LA NIPPE. Well, I Am glad it pleases you; but as sure as death my master will
get home before me -- (going.)


RENTAL. Never fear; you have time enough, I tell you -- He stops short at the
edge of the forest -- His game-keepers and pointers meet him there -- He shoots
home.


LA NIPPE. What the Devil signifies that? the sportsmen of fashion shoot as
fast as they travel [whistle without]. Zounds! there is his whistle -- If he
finds me loitering here, he will vent more oaths in a minute than have been heard
in this forest since its foundation.


RASHLY. Sir, you may step into Mr. Rashly's house till he is gone by.


LA NIPPE. I thank you, Sir.

[Exit.
RASHLY. My brother here? farewell, Rental -- (going.)


RENTAL. Stay Sir, it is impossible he can have a suspicion of you -- Let us
see whether he tallies with this impudent fellow's account -- sift him boldly
-- I have a thousand thoughts for you.


RASHLY. If he answers the description I have heard, I shall never keep my
temper.


RENTAL. Perhaps so much the better -- but he is alighting from his horse.


CONTRAST (without.) Searchum, take up the dogs, one might as well beat for
game in Hyde-Park.

[Enters, attended with game-keepers -- a gun in one hand, and a silk parasol
in the other. The manors are poached to desolation, the saddles are gridirons,
and the air is impregnated with scurf and freckle -- In another half hour I
shall be a Mulatto in grain, in spite of my parasol, by all that is sultry --
but come to business --

[Gives the gun to one of his attendants. Searchum, get warrants immediately
for seizing guns, nets, and snares, let every dog in the parish be collected
for hanging tomorrow morning -- give them a taste of Norfolk discipline --
"Nothing like executions to support government."


RASHLY. I hope, young gentleman, you will be better advised than to proceed so
rashly.


CONTRAST. And pray, friend, who may you be, that are so forward with your hope?


RASHLY. A tenant upon this estate these sixteen years, where I have been used
to see harmony between high and low established upon the best basis --
Protection, without pride, and respect without servility.


CONTRAST. Odd language for a farmer! -- but in plain English it implies
indulgence for arrears, and impunity for poaching. -- And you, Sir, what may be
your occupation?


RENTAL. I have been long, sir, steward at Castle Manor; your father's goodness
continues me so. I Am sorry, sir, you have had no sport -- but your game-keepers
are strangers -- if this gentleman had been with you, he knows every haunt of
the country.


CONTRAST. Oh I don't doubt it; and is this gentleman qualified to carry a gun?


RASHLY. I always thought so, sir.


CONTRAST. Where is your qualification?


RASHLY. In my birthright as a free man -- Nature gave the birds of the air in
common to us all; and I think it no crime to pursue them, when my heart tells
me I am ready, if called upon, to exercise the same gun against the enemies of
my king and country.


CONTRAST. A period again! if it were not for his dress I should take him for a
strolling orator escaped from Soho -- but to cut the dispute short -- You Mr.
Steward, and you Mr. Monitor of the forest, take notice that I require
unconditional submission in my supremacy of the game.


RENTAL. In what manner, sir?


CONTRAST. The county gaol shall teach transgressors -- thanks to my fellow
sportsmen in the senate, we have as good a system of game laws as can be found
in the most gentleman-like country upon the continent.


"RASHLY. "By gentleman-like I am afraid, young sir, you mean arbitrary -- It
is true we have such laws -- modern and unnatural excrescences, which have
grown and strengthened by insensible degrees, 'till they lie upon our
statute-book like a wen upon a fair proportioned body -- a deformity fed by
wholesome juices. -- I hope, sir, we shall have your assistance to remove the
evil."


"CONTRAST. "Just the contrary. Though our system be excellent for the
preservation of game, it still wants a little foreign enforcement -- In France,
the insignia of a Lord Paramont of the chase are gallowses with his arms upon
every hill in his estate -- they embellish a prospect better than the finest
clump Brown ever planted." You look at me with surprise, old reformer of the
groves.


RASHLY. I confess I do, sir! In days when I frequented the world, a high-bred
town spark and a sportsman were the greatest opposites in nature -- The bean
and the squire were always --


CONTRAST. Oh, I begin to take you -- your days -- the rusticated remains of a
ruined Temple Critic -- a smatterer of high life from the scenes of Cibber,
which remain upon his imagination, as they do upon the stage, forty years after
the real characters are lost -- Thy ideas of a gentleman are as obsolete, old
speculator, as the flaxen wig, and "stap my vitals."


RASHLY. May I presume, sir, to ask what is the character that has succeeded?


CONTRAST. Look at me -- (turning round.)


RASHLY. We were comparing, sir --


CONTRAST. Coxcombs -- never baulk the word -- the first thing in which we
differ from your days is, that we glory in our title, and I am the acknowledged
chief. -- In all walks of life, it is true ambition to be at the head of a
class.


RASHLY. And may I ask, sir, if the class over which you so eminently preside
is very numerous?


CONTRAST. No, faith; and we diminish every day; the cockade predominates --
the times have set nine tenths of our men of fashion upon being their own
soldiers -- I should as soon have thought of being my own gunsmith.


RASHLY. But is it possible you can have been idle at such times?


CONTRAST. Idle! -- I never killed more birds any seven days in my life than in
the precise week the French were off Plymouth.


RASHLY. Singular character!


CONTRAST. Right for once, old Tramontane -- singularity is the secret of
refined life. In the present day it connects the Nimrod and the man of taste --
thus we hunt our pointers at full speed; our foxes at midday; crown the evening
with French cookery, and wash down our fatigues with orgeat and icid lemonade.


Enter La Nippe running. Sir, sir, -- apart un instant, Monsieur -- such an
adventure! I have discovered such a girl 1 such a shape! such --


CONTRAST. Beat! did you ever know me think of a woman in the country?


LA NIPPE (aside.) No, nor much any where else.

[Takes him aside, and seems eagerly to press him.
Rental aside to Rashly. I think, I discover Monsieur la Nippe's business --
humor it, I beseech you, sir, and ask Contrast in.


RASHLY. Sir, will you accept any refreshment my poor house affords? -- I hope
you take nothing ill I have said.


CONTRAST. No, sir, I bear no malice, and I will drink your health in a bowl of
milk and water -- (aside). I Would not take the trouble of looking at his daughter,
if it was not for the hope of being revenged of this old crusty de tristibus.


LA NIPPE (aside.) I must get him into this intrigue, for my own sake with the
maid, if not for his with the mistress.

[Exeunt.
Enter Trumore. How surely and involuntarily my feet bring me to this spot!
Conscious scenes! Sophy! Do thou remember them with my constancy? -- Do
thou visit them with my sensibility?

Sings. Within this shade, beneath this bough,
We passed the tender mutual vow;
Recording loves were listening round,
And in soft echoes blessed the sound.
Come, Sympathy, with aspect fair,
And, soaring Hope, that treads on air,
Smile on our truth, our cause befriend,
And footh the passions that you blend!
Is it impossible to get a glance at her at a distance? If I could but do it
unperceived --


Enter Peggy. So, sir, do you think I did not spy you from the window, prowling
like a fox about a hen-roost? but set your heart at rest, the pullet you are in
search of will soon be upon a perch too high for your reach.


TRUMORE. What do you mean?


PEGGY. Do you see that castle there? -- there -- Sir John Contrast's great
seat -- mine are no castles in the air.


TRUMORE. Well, what of that?


PEGGY. Well then, if you had my second sight, you would see Sophy in a coach
and six white horses driving in at the great gate.


TRUMORE. What would you lead my thoughts to?


PEGGY. Patience! -- Reason! -- Sir John's son is paying his addresses within
-- Consult Sophy's interest, and your own too in the end, and resign her.


TRUMORE. Horror and distraction! you cannot be in earnest -- would Sophia
suffer even a look from a stranger without a repulse?


PEGGY. Time enough to repulse when strangers grow impertinent -- mean while,
why not be courted a little? there is curiosity in it, only to see how many ways
the creatures can find to please us.


TRUMORE. These are your thoughts -- but, Sophia.


PEGGY. Thinks like me, or she is not a woman. Look ye, I hate to be ill-natured
-- but don't fancy I Am your enemy, because I Am her friend; and depend upon it
we all love to be tempted -- some few to be sure for the pride of resisting,
and that may be Sophy's case -- but ten for one think the pleasure of yielding
worth the chance of repentance. I will not promise I am not one of the number.

Sings. All women are born to believe
In the sweets of the apple of Eve:
If it comes in my eye,
It Is in vain to deny;
I so much long to try,
I must bite though I die --
-- It Is done! -- and, oh, fie!
Lack, how silly was I!
Oh, the devilish apple of Eve!
[Exit.
TRUMORE (alone.) Tormenting woman, -- I cannot however but be alarmed, and
shall watch your steps closely, young gentleman; yes, my Sophia, I will hover
round thee like a watchful spirit -- invisible, but anxious to prove thy truth,
and if necessary, to defend it.

[Exit.
[Scene changes to the inside of the house, Contrast, La Nippe, Rashly, Sophy,
Annette.] LA NIPPE (apart to Contrast.) What do you think of her eyes?


CONTRAST. Passable for a village,


LA NIPPE. Her complexion! her skin! her delicacy!


CONTRAST. Oh perfectly delicate; she looks like the diet of her nursery,
extract of leveret and pheasant with egg.


RASHLY. Girls, you may retire when you please.

[As they are going off, enter Peggy with a guitar.
SOPHIA. Peggy, what are you doing?


PEGGY (aside.) "Gad, but he shall see a little more of her first." -- It Is
only the guitar, madam! -- It hung so loose upon the peg, I was afraid the
kitten would pull it off --

[Touches the string. Lord! it speaks of itself, I think -- just as if it
wanted --


CONTRAST (aside.) Music too -- a siren complete -- I am to be tempted by all
the enchantments of Calypso's Grotto -- a la bonheur, try your skill, my dear.


SOPHIA. Officious girl, carry it back directly.


CONTRAST. Oh, by no means, miss, pray favor us with a song.


RASHLY. Come, girls, don't be ashamed of an innocent and pleasing talent --
perhaps the warble of Nature may please Mr. Contrast, from its novelty.


SOPHIA. Indeed, Sir, I wish to be excused; upon my word, I am not able to sing
--


ANNETTE. Dear sister, sing the song my father made upon a butterfly -- I have
laughed at the insect ever since.


SOPHIA sings. Hence reveller of tinsel wing,
Insipid, senseless, trifling thing;
Light spendthrift of thy single day,
Pert insignificance, away!
How joyless to thy touch or taste
Seems all the spring's profuse repast;
Thy busy, restless, varied range
Can only pall the sense by change.

CONTRAST. Bravo, Miss; very well indeed --


PEGGY (as going off.) Gad, I don't know what to make of him; but all great men
are of the family of the Whimsicals.


CONTRAST. La Nippe, on to the castle; announce me to my father, and get things
to cool -- I am still hot enough to be page of the presence in the palace of
Lucifer.

[Horns without. What horns are those?


LA NIPPE, looking out. Your honor's master of the hounds, and your whole
hunting equipage are arrived.


CONTRAST. Have they the new liveries?


LA NIPPE. They have -- and for elegance they would shame the hunt at
Fontainebleau.


CONTRAST. Let them draw up before the door, I Will see them as I pass. --

[Exit La Nippe. One word at parting, friend Rashly. -- Your daughters are not
without attractions -- nor you void of a certain sort of oddity that may be
diverting; but your gun must be surrendered, and from a pheasant to a squirrel
-- chasse defendue -- no pardon for poaching -- and so good day, old Aesop in
the shades.

[Exit.
RENTAL. I must follow -- but I request you to take no steps till you see me
again -- give me but time to work in your favor! --


RASHLY. You are too sanguine -- but I consent, upon condition that I do not
see my father.


RENTAL. As yet it is no part of my plan that you should.

[Exeunt severally.
Scene changes to the outside of the house. Enter Contrast, La Nippe, and
Huntsmen. LA NIPPE. The huntsmen, Sir, have been practicing a new chorus song;
will you hear it?


CONTRAST. A hunting song quite breaks my ears, it is a continued yell of horn
and morn, wake the day and hark away -- but they may begin; I shall hear enough
as I walk off.


I.
When the orient beam first pierces the dawn,
And printless yet glistens the dew on the lawn,
We rise to the call of the horn and the bound,
And Nature herself seems to live in the sound.
Chorus.
Repeat it quick, Echo, the cry is begun,
The game is on foot, boys, we'll hunt down the sun.
II.
The Chase of old Britons was ever the care,
Their sinews it braced, 'twas the image of war.
Like theirs shall our vigor by exercise grow,
Till we turn our pursuit to our country's foe.
Chorus.
Repeat it, shrill Echo, the war is begun,
The foe is on foot, boys, we'll fight down the sun.
III.
With spirits thus fired, to sleep were a shame,
Night only approaches to alter the game.
Diana's bright crescent fair Venus shall grace,
And from a new goddess invite a new chase.
Chorus.
Be silent, fond Echo, the whisper's begun,
The game is on foot, boys, we want not the sun.

END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A Shrubbery. Enter Sophia and Annette, arm in arm. SOPHIA. I Confess, Annette,
you are a very forward scholar in affairs of the heart: but would you really
persuade me, that the women in France scorn to be in love?


ANNETTE. Just the contrary. Love, there, is the passion of all ages. One
learns to lisp it in the cradle; and they will trifle with it at the brink of
the grave; but it is always the cherup of life, not the moping malady, as it is
here.


SOPHIA. And according to the notions of that fantastical people, how is the
passion to be shown?


ANNETTE. Oh! in a woman, by any thing but confessing it.


SOPHIA. Surely, Annette, you must now be wrong: insincerity and artifice may,
for aught I know, be the vices of fine folks in courts and cities; but in the
rural scenes, where you as well as myself have been bred, I am persuaded the
tongue and the heart go together in all countries alike.


ANNETTE. So they may too: it would be wrong if the tongue told fibs of the
heart; but what occasion for telling all the truth? -- I wish you saw a girl in
Provence as she trips down the mountain with a basket of grapes upon her head,
and all her swains about her, with a glance at one, and a nod at another, and a
tap to a third -- 'till up rises the moon, and up strikes the tabor and pipe --
away go the baskets -- " Adieu panniers, Vendange est faite!" -- her heart
dances faster than her feet, and she makes ten lads happy instead of one, by
each thinking himself the favorite.


SOPHIA. But the real favorite is not to be in suspense for ever?


ANNETTE. No, no; she solves the mystery at last, but in a lively key.


("A short French song.") SOPHIA. I admire your vivacity, Annette; but I
dislike your maxims. For my part, I scorn even the shadow of deceit toward the
man I love, and would sooner die than give him pain.


ANNETTE. So would I too, dear sister -- but why not bestow pleasures with a
smile?


SOPHIA. Giddy girl -- you know not love.


ANNETTE. Oh! but you are mistaken -- I understand sentiment perfectly, and
could act it to admiration. I could gaze at the moon, prattle to the evening
breeze, and make a companion of a rose for hours together -- "only I don't like
to prick my fingers with it" -- a propos now; here is a charming bush in full
blow, and you shall hear me address it exactly in your character --

Sings to a rose. Rest, beauteous flower, and bloom anew,
To court my passing love;
Glow in his eyes with brighter hue,
And all thy form improve.
And while thy balmy odours steal
To meet his equal breath;
Let thy soft blush for mine reveal
The imprinted kiss beneath.

SOPHIA. Get you gone, you trifler -- you will make me angry.


ANNETTE. Well, I Will only stroll with you as far as yonder great tree, and
leave you to kiss the rest of the roses to the same tune.

[Exeunt.
Enter La Nippe, beckoning Contrast. LA NIPPE. Yonder she is -- and the young
one going away -- now is the time -- at her, Sir.


CONTRAST. It Is a damned vulgar business you're drawing me into, La Nippe -- I
could never show my face again if it were known I was guilty of the drudgery of
getting a woman for myself.


LA NIPPE. What do you mean, Sir, that you never make love?


CONTRAST. No, certainly, you blockhead -- modern epicures always buy it
ready-made.


LA NIPPE. "Aye, and in town it is fitted to all purchasers, like a shoe in
Cranburn-alley -- but here --


"CONTRAST. "Is the scene of novelty and experiment -- be it so for once -- it
is the sporting season -- I Will course this little puss myself." But hold, she
is turned, and coming this way.

[Exit La Nippe.
Enter Sophia. I did not recollect that these walks are no longer to be open
for the neighborhood -- How simple was that girl not to remind me! If I should
be seen, I may be thought impertinent -- and alone too --


CONTRAST. So, Miss Rashly, we meet as patly as if you had known my
inclinations.


SOPHIA (aside and confused). He too, of all others! -- I know it is an
intrusion, Sir, to be here -- I was retiring. [to him]


CONTRAST. It is the most lucky intrusion you ever made in your life.


SOPHIA (still confused). Permit me, Sir, to pass?


CONTRAST. Not till you hear your good fortune, my dear. You have attracted in
one moment what hundreds of your sex have twinkled their eyes whole years for
in vain -- my notice -- I will bring you into the world myself -- your
fortune's made.


SOPHIA (confused and angrily). Sir, this sort of conversation is new to me,
and I wish it to continue so.

[Still endeavoring to pass.
CONTRAST (examining her). Yes, she will do when she is well dressed -- one sees
by her blush how rouge will become her -- I shall soon teach her to smile -- La
belle gorge when adjusted in French stays --


SOPHIA (more angrily). Sir, though your language is incomprehensible, your
manners are offensive -- I insist upon passing.


CONTRAST. Oh fie child -- the first thing you do must be to correct that frown
and this coyness -- they have no more to do with thy figure than a red cloak or
blue stockings -- No, no, my girl, learn to look a man in the face, whatever he
says to you -- it is one of the first principles for high life; and high as the
very pinnacle of female ambition shall thine be -- thou shall drive four poneys
with a postilion no bigger than a marmoset.


SOPHIA. Insufferable!


CONTRAST. You shall make your first appearance in my box at the opera -- a
place of enchantment you can have no notion of -- Have you seen Contrast's
Sultana? shall be the cry -- "All the women in the town are Aethiops to her, or
blindness confound me" -- there is the language to fix a woman's reputation! --
there is the secret to make her adored -- beauty! -- it is not worth that,
[fillips his fingers. in comparison of fashion.


SOPHIA. Sir, I have tried while I could to treat you with some degree of
respect -- you put it out of my power -- resentment and contempt are the only
--


CONTRAST. Clarissa Harlow in her altitudes! -- what circulating library has
supplied you with language and action upon this occasion? or has your
antiquated father instructed you, as he has me, in the mode of his days? --
Things are reversed, my dear -- when we fellows of superior class show
ourselves, the women throw themselves at us; and happy is she we deign to catch
in our arms.

[Offers to take hold of her.
SOPHIA. (Enraged; and at last bursting into a passion of tears). Unheard Of
assurance! What do you see in me to encourage such insolence? Or is it the very
baseness of your nature, that insults a woman because she has no protector?

[Breaks from him -- at the instant,
Enter Trumore. Protection is not so distant as you imagined -- compose
yourself, my Sophia -- I have heard all -- leave to me to settle the difference
with this unworthy ruffian.


CONTRAST. Waylaid, by all that is desperate -- a rustic bully -- but I must
submit, for I conclude he has a forest mob within call.


TRUMORE. A mob to encounter thee! -- a mob of fleas -- of gnats -- of pismires
-- a wasp would be a sure assassin -- but to be serious, Sir -- though the
brutality of your behavior calls for chastisement, the meanness of it places
you beneath resentment.


CONTRAST. How he assumes! because I know as little of a quarter-staff, as he
of the weapons of a gentleman.


TRUMORE. It would indeed be profanation of English oak to put it into such
hands -- thou outside without a heart -- when the mind is nerveless, the figure
of a man may be cudgelled with a nettle.


SOPHIA. For heaven's sake, Trumore, be not violent, you make me tremble -- no
further quarrel.


TRUMORE. Another word, Sir, and no more -- could I suppose you a real sample
of our fashionable youth, I should think my country indeed degraded -- but it
cannot be -- away! -- and tell your few fellows, if even few exist, that there
is still spirit enough among common people to defend beauty and innocence; and
when such as you dare affronts like these, it is not rank nor estate, nor even
effeminacy, that shall save them.


CONTRAST. Very sententious truly -- quite Rashly's flourish. -- In Italy now I
could have this fellow put under ground for a sequin -- in this damned country,
we can do nothing but despise him. Boxing was once genteel; but till the
fashion returns, it would be as low to accept the challenge of a vulgar as to
refuse it to an equal.

[Exit.
TRUMORE. How is my Sophia? happy, happy moment that brought me to your rescue.


SOPHIA. If the thoughts you most wish I should entertain of my deliverer can
repay you, trace them by your own heart, Trumore; they will harmonize with its
tenderest emotions.


TRUMORE. Oh, the rapture of my Sophia's preference! thus let me pour forth my
gratitude.

[Kneeling, and kissing her hand.
Enter Rashly. So, inconsiderate pair, is it thus you keep your engagements
with me? Neither the duty of one, nor the word of honor of the other, I see,
is a sanction --


TRUMORE. Restrain your displeasure, Sir, till you hear what has happened -- no
breach of promise --


RASHLY. I have no leisure for excuses, nor for reproaches -- fortune more than
my resentment is against you. -- Sophy, my affairs will probably compel me to
seek another and a distant home. Prepare yourself to set out with me at an
hour's warning.


TRUMORE. What do I hear? Sir, part us not -- I Will be your slave to obtain her
presence -- let me but follow her -- let me but enjoy the hopes of at last
deserving her.


SOPHIA. What have you not already deserved? -- If we are to separate, here in
a father's presence I engage to you a faith that time and distance shall never
change.


TRUMORE. I accept in the same presence the sacred pledge, and will cherish the
remembrance of it with a truth, which, like the brilliant ore, proves its
purity by its trials.

Sings. Superior to this adverse hour
True Love, my Fair, shall rise;
The turn of chance, the stroke of power,
A faithful heart defies.
A parent may this frame control
By his severe decree;
But thought, the essence of the soul,
Shall never remove from thee.

RASHLY. Here then break off, and to time and distance leave the further test
of your sincerity: at present I can flatter you with no other remedy. --
Daughter, return to the house. -- Trumore, you must not follow.


TRUMORE. I submit; I have saved her from a ruffian -- I resign her to a father
-- and angels assist to guard her!


RASHLY. Come, Sophia -- the world is wide, and innocence an universal passport.


Trio. Thus when the wint'ry blasts are near,
The Stork collects her brood
Trains their weak pinions high in air
And points the longsome road.
At length the final flight they try,
Farewell the parent nest,
They seek from fate a milder sky
Attain it, and are blessed.
[Exeunt.
Enter Contrast and La Nippe meeting. CONTRAST (after a pause). Get posthorses
for the chaise directly.


LA NIPPE. To carry her off, Sir? -- quick work -- I thought how it would be
when you set yourself to it.


CONTRAST. I wish you had been among the other curs I ordered to be hanged
before you had put me upon the trace of her -- find me a quick conveyance from
this region of barbarism, or the spirit of the place shall be tried upon you --
it will be no "profanation of English oak to cudgel you."


LA NIPPE. In the name of wonder, what has happened?


CONTRAST. Happened! I have been nearly worried by a cursed confounded
two-legged mastiff. Where was you, Sir, not to be within call?


LA NIPPE. Just where I ought to be by the true rule of a valet de chambre's
office all the world over -- trying the same game with the maid, I supposed you
were trying with the mistress -- [ Contrast looks angry. but, all for your
honor's interest, to make her your friend --


CONTRAST. Rot her friendship -- I would not expose my nerves to a second
encounter with this new piece of Piety in pattens, to secure all the rustic
females from the Land's End to the Orknies.


LA NIPPE. You shall not need till she is brought to proper terms. Look ye,
sir, Peggy the maid is a fly wench, why not make her a convenient one? --
Commission me to pay her price, and she shall deliver this toy into your hands
-- that is love exactly in your own way, you know.


CONTRAST. I would not give five pounds for her, if it were not for vengeance.


LA NIPPE. Your vengeance need not stop there. The father you know, by his own
confession, is a poacher. I have enquired of Peggy if he has no enemies -- he
has but one it seems in the parish; but he is worth a hundred -- an attorney --
broken by Rashly's faculty in deciding differences -- this fellow shall saddle
him with as many actions for game in half an hour, as shall send him to jail,
perhaps for the rest of his days.


CONTRAST. Your plan is not unpromising, and you may try one of my rouleaus
upon it. -- If I could at the same time correct the dog of a lover, I believe I
should grow cool again, and put off my journey for the accomplishment.


LA NIPPE. It is not impossible -- what think you of a pressgang?


CONTRAST. Transcendent, if one could be found. The game laws and the press act
ought always to go hand in hand -- and, were they properly enforced, the
constitution might be more bearable to a man of fashion.


LA NIPPE. I Will about this business directly.


CONTRAST. Content: mean while, I Will give an airing to my inability upon the
lawn. -- Hark ye, La Nippe, before you go, I think the summary of our projects
is thus -- the father to jail; the lover to sea; my pointers, if you will, in
Rashly's chamber; and his daughter in exchange in mine.


LA NIPPE. Exactly, sir.

[Exeunt severally.
Inside of Rashly's house. Enter Rashly, and Sophia under his arm, as
continuing a conversation. "RASHLY. "Besides these peculiarities of my
circumstances, and many others which you are yet a stranger to, you must see an
unsurmountable reason for discontinuing an intercourse with Trumore -- the
absence of his father -- it would be indelicate in you, as well as
dishonorable in me, to proceed to a union unknown to him, and to which he may
have the greatest objections.


"SOPHIA. "Dear sir, there wanted no argument to convince me of your tenderness
-- I am entirely at your disposal -- if a tear drops when I obey you, it is an
involuntary tribute to my fortune, think it not repugnance to your will."


RASHLY. Be comforted, Sophia, with the reflection that I lament, and do not
blame your attachment; you know I agree, both upon experience and principle,
that the only basis for happiness in every station of life is disinterested
love.

Sings. I.
When first this humble roof I knew,
With various cares I strove;
My grain was scarce, my sheep were few,
My all of wealth was love.
II.
By mutual toil our board was dressed;
The stream our drink bestowed;
But, when her lips the brim had pressed,
The cup with Nectar flowed.
III.
Content and Peace the dwelling shared,
No other guest came nigh,
In them was given, though gold was spared,
What gold could never buy.
IV.
No value has a splendid lot
But as the means to prove,
That from the castle to the cot
The all of life was love.

Enter Annette hastily. ANNETTE. Sir, Mr. Rental is coming into the gate, and
with him a strange gentleman I never saw before -- an old man, and Rental is
pulling off his hat and bowing; I wonder who he is.


RASHLY (with emotion). Sir John Contrast! how my heart throbs at his approach!
(Aside) Girls, I have a reason to be concealed; you must not discover I was
within --

[Walks with his daughters to the top of the scene, as giving them direction,
and exit -- Sophia and Annette remain a little behind the last side-scene.
Scene changes to the inside of Rashly's house. Enter Sir John Contrast --
Rental following. SIR JOHN. I tell you, Rental, that last cottage shall come
down, there is not a male creature about it -- nothing but girls with black
eyes, and no industry -- but what sort of dwelling have we here?


RENTAL. The seat of innocence, once the seat of more happiness than at present.


SIR JOHN. The seat of innocence? -- aye, to be sure, and these I suppose are
the children of innocence that inhabit it --

[Perceiving Sophia and Annette who come timidly forward.
SOPHIA. What could my father mean by going away himself, and insisting we
should not decline an interview with Sir John Contrast and Rental? -- I have
seen enough of the family already.


ANNETTE. Is that he? Lord! sister, don't quake; he does not look so ungracious
--

[They approach timidly.
SIR JOHN (examining them). Zounds! are all my farms overrun thus with
evil-eyed wenches?


RENTAL. Suspend your opinion, I beseech you, sir, and speak to the young
women; the family is indeed worth your notice. --

(Aside) Now, Nature and Fortune, work your way.


SIR JOHN. Young women, how may you earn your livelihood?


SOPHIA and ANNETTE (embarrass'd). Sir!


SIR JOHN (to Rental). They are too innocent, I see, to answer a plain question.


RENTAL. You alarm them, sir; they are as timid as fawns. My young mistresses,
it is Sir John Contrast speaks to you; in your father's absence, he wants to
enquire of you into the circumstances of your family.


SIR JOHN. What is your father, young woman?


SOPHIA. The best of parents.


SIR JOHN. Not very rich, I imagine?


SOPHIA. He is content.


SIR JOHN. What business does he follow?


SOPHIA. He has a small farm of his own; he rents a larger upon this manor --
he cultivates both.


SIR JOHN. You two are not of much service to him, I Am afraid?


SOPHIA. Too little, sir, -- his indulgence sometimes prevents even our feeble
attempts -- Mr. Rental knows it is his fault -- but I believe his only one.


SIR JOHN. What then is your employment?


SOPHIA. I work at my needle for him; I read to him; I receive his instructions
-- I once received them from a mother -- I repeat to him her precepts -- they
often draw his tears; but he assures me they are pleasing.


ANNETTE. Yes, but I always stop them for all that -- the moment his eyes
moisten, I sing or chatter them dry.


SIR JOHN. This is past bearing, Rental -- the seat of innocence! -- it is the
seat of witchcraft.


RENTAL. Pure Nature, sir.


SIR JOHN. And what witchcraft's so powerful? -- have not you learnt that it is
a blessing when the sex takes to artifice and affectation? Were women to
continue in person and in heart, as Nature forms her favorites among them,
they would turn the heads of all mankind.


RENTAL. Permit me, sir, to say you are the first that were ever angry at
finding them undegenerated.


SIR JOHN. Have not I suffered by it? -- I lost a son by this sort of artless
Nature before -- my present Hopeful, it is true, is an exception; Nature would
stand a poor chance with him against a French heel, and a head as big as a
bushel.


RENTAL. I am glad, sir, you are easy upon that head.


SIR JOHN (to Annette). And so, my little gypsey (for I find you talk
gibberish), your prattle is always at your tongue's end?


ANNETTE. Not always -- I can hold my tongue to people I don't like. -- I talk
to divert my father -- and would do the same now -- if it could put you in a
humor to be his friend.


SOPHIA. Fie, Annette, you are very bold.


ANNETTE. Sister, I am sure the gentleman is not angry. I should not have
ventured to be so free, if he had not the very look, the sort of half-smiling
gravity of papa, when he is pleased with me in his heart -- and does not care
directly to own it.


SIR JOHN. Wheedling jade! -- but, may be, that is another proof of woman in
pure Nature.


ANNETTE. Indeed, sir, I mean no harm; and I am sure you have not thought I
did, for your frowns vanish like summer clouds, before one can well say they
are formed.

Sings. So the chill mist, or falling shower,
O'erspreads the vernal scene;
And in the vapor of the hour
We lose the sweet serene.
But soon the bright meridian ray
Dispels the transient gloom;
Restores the promise of the day,
And shows a world in bloom.

SIR JONH. This is past enduring. -- Rental, take notice -- the decree is past
irrevocably as fate -- no reply -- this house and all that belongs to it --
father, daughters, servants, to the very squirrels and linnets, shall --


RENTAL. Be laid low, Sir?


SIR JOHN. Be secured! protected! raised! -- It shall become the mansion of
plenty and joy; and these girls shall pay the landlord in song and sentiment.


RENTAL. I thank you in the name of their father. A man more worthy your favor
does not live -- and you only can save him from his enemies.


SIR JOHN. Who are they?


RENTAL. He has one in particular, honorable and benevolent in his nature, but
who vowed enmity to him in a fit of passion, and has obstinately adhered to it
ever since.


SIR JOHN. Does he so? gad, that is no fool though! no weathercock! -- and how did
he deserve this enmity? but that is no matter with a man of the decision and
wisdom you describe.


RENTAL. You Will best decide upon the provocation, when the effects of it are
laid before you as an impartial judge.


SIR JOHN. I hate impartiality, and set out this business upon a quite contrary
principle. -- Come forward, my little clients, give a kiss of partiality a
piece -- now I am feed your advocate for ever -- so come to the Castle in the
evening; bring your father with you; let this obstinate dog appear if he dare
-- my obstinacy is now bound to defeat his, right or wrong -- he shall give
way, and he may look for an excuse to himself in the eyes of my little charmers.


RENTAL. He is very positive.


SIR JOHN. He shall go to the stocks, if he is. -- What, not yield when the
interest of my darlings is in question? By all that is steady, I Will build a new
house of correction, and they shall keep the key.


RENTAL. But be upon your guard, Sir; he will be asserting his former
resolutions.


SIR JOHN. Tell not me of his assertions,
Mine are laws of Medes and Persians;
Vain against them all endeavor,
Right or wrong they bind for ever.

SOPHIA. Remember then a daughter's prayer,
Receive a parent to your care;

ANNETTE. Frown on his foe's obdurate plea,
But keep benignant smiles for me.

Enter Peggy. PEGGY. When I see my betters hearty,
How I long to be a party!
Pardon me if I intrude, Sir;
I Would be pleasant, but not rude, Sir.

SOPHIA. Peggy, have done.


ANNETTE. It is Sir John.


PEGGY. I Am sure he looks compliant.


SOPHIA and ANNETTE. From hence he goes,
To crush our foes.

SIR JOHN. As Jack did once the Giant.


SOPHIA. Remember your clients with troubles beset.


ANNETTE. Remember Sophia, remember Annette.


SIR JOHN. The cause of my clients I Will never forget,
The kiss of Sophia, the kiss of Annette.

END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Peggy and La Nippe (following and courting). PEGGY. IF you offer to be
impudent again, you shall have it on both ears instead of one. I tell you I Am a
married woman; is not that an answer?


LA NIPPE. Yes, of encouragement, my dear -- it seldom is an objection in the
world I have inhabited.


PEGGY. The world is at a fine pass by your account -- "But these are some of
your outlandish notions -- they would make fine cutting of throats among
English husbands.


LA NIPPE (laughing). "Cutting throats! Oh, my sweet Peg, how ignorant you are!
I wish your husband was at home with all my heart -- I Would show you how to follow
the example of our betters -- I would dine with you both every day, and he
should thank me for preserving the peace of his family.

[puts his arm round her.
PEGGY (pushing him). "Keep your distance, Mr. Assurance" -- If this be the new
style of matrimony, Heaven keep Sophia clear of it, I say.


LA NIPPE. Oh my dear, you need be in no pain about that. She is not in the
least danger.


PEGGY. Why, did not you tell me your master was mad in love for her, and would
make my fortune if I would help him?


LA NIPPE. Exactly! but what has that to do with marriage?


PEGGY (in surprise). What the deuce has it to do with else?


LA NIPPE. Pleasure and profit. He Will love her out of vanity if she makes a
figure as his mistress; he would hate her for fashion's sake if she was his wife.
Let us but get the couple well established in London -- who knows but you and I
may be exalted to be their toads.


PEGGY. Toads!


LA NIPPE. One takes any name for a fortune, and this is become a fashionable
one I assure you. In short you will be the companion of her pleasures; dressed
as well as herself; courted by every man who has a design upon her -- and make
a market of her every day. Oh, you will have quite the pull of me in employment.


PEGGY. Indeed!


LA NIPPE. Yes, I shall change damnably for the worse in quitting the life of a
valet for that of a companion. "Follower to what he calls a man of fashion!
zounds I Would rather be a bailiff's follower by half -- if it was not for what may
come after.


PEGGY. I have no longer any patience with the Rogue's impudence! (aside.)

"So having declared yourself a pimp -- you would make me a procuress, and Miss
Sophy a --


LE NIPPE (stopping her mouth). "Hold your tongue, you jade -- and don't give
gross names to characters so much in fashion." Come, don't be silly and angry
now -- I have dealt openly with you, knowing you to be a woman of sense and
spirit --

[Peggy seems angry. Don't be in a passion I tell you -- here my dear -- here is
a gentle receipt for anger -- here -- did you ever see this sort of thing
before?

[Takes a rouleau of guineas from his pocket.
PEGGY. What is it?


LA NIPPE (measuring the rouleau on his finger). A rouleau! fifty guineas wrapped
up in this small compass. One may know it by its make, it is from the first
club in town -- there it is, escaped from sharpers and creditors, to purchase
beauty and kindness.


PEGGY (aside). I could tear his eyes out -- is there no way to be even with
him?


LA NIPPE. Aye, take a minute my dear to consider -- I know but few of your sex
would require so much time.


PEGGY (to herself). No means of fitting the rogue! Gad I have a thought -- if
I am not too much in a passion to dissemble -- I am not much used to artifice
-- but they say it never fails a woman at a pinch.

(Looking kindly) Why to be sure, I was considering upon that little device --
let us feel, is it heavy?

[Taking the money.
LA NIPPE. Oh! of great weight.


PEGGY. Law not at all, I could carry a hundred of them -- but pray now tell me
fairly what am I to do for it?


LA NIPPE. Nothing but an office of goodnature -- you are to put your mistress
into my master's hands -- you women can do more with one another in this sort
of business in a day, then a lover (at least such a one as ours) will do in a
year.


PEGGY. Lord, how modest you are all at once -- speak out -- I am to seduce my
mistress for --


LA NIPPE. Fie, what names you are giving things again! -- you are to remove
foolish prejudices; to open a friend's eyes to their interest -- zounds child
it is an office for a statesman.


PEGGY. Oh, that is all --


LA NIPPE. Not quite all; you know there is a something that regards ourselves,
but that goes of course in negociations of this sort.


PEGGY. Oh, does it? -- and what do you call this pretty invention?


LA NIPPE. An abridgement of polite arithmetic -- a purse must be counted,
which is troublesome; a note requires reading, which to some persons may be
inconvenient -- but the rouleau conveys fifty guineas to your pocket without a
single chink, and takes up less room than a toothpick case.


PEGGY. This bewitches me, I think,


LA NIPPE. Yes, my dear, it is always reckoned bewitching.

Sings. The rouleau is formed with a magical twist,
To conquer caprice or displeasure:
If your object the offer of one should resist,
You have only to double the measure.
It finds to all places its way without eyes,
Without tongue it discourses most sweetly;
To beauty or conscience alike it applies,
And settles the business completely.

PEGGY. Well, who could have thought such a wonderful power,
In a compass so small could be hidden;
To sweeten at once the grapes that are sour,
And purchase even fruit that is forbidden:
A magic so pleasant must surely be right,
Without scruple I pocket the evil,
I Will show you the proper effect before night,
And leave you to account with the devil.

LA NIPPE. Excellent! now you are a girl exactly after my own heart -- where
shall we meet?


PEGGY. Why, you must know this is the day of our wake; and Sir John gives a
treat to all the tenants, so every body will be busy, and so about an hour
before sun set come to the hay rick by the poole of the farm yard.


LA NIPPE. Oh, you jade, I shall have no patience if you make me wait.


PEGGY. I Will come whenever I am sure the coast is clear -- but in the mean time
you shall find a harvest cag, with a sup of cordial to keep up your spirits; in
the country we never make a bargain with dry lips.


LA NIPPE (aside). What the devil, my dairy-maid drinks drams! -- she will be fit
to cry milk in the streets of London -- I need not have paid so high if I had
known that.


PEGGY. Be sure now to be punctual.


LA NIPPE. And you to be complying.


PEGGY. Oh, as for that you know -- "If your object your offer of one should
resist" etc.

[Exeunt separately, she singing, he nodding.
Scene -- Booths for a country wake -- a large one in the form of a tent --
recruits in different colored cockades at work in fitting it up. CAPTAIN
TREPAN. Come, stir my lads -- briskly, briskly -- up with the rest of the
advertisements -- we shall have the wake filled before we are ready.


Enter Rental. Hey day! what have we here? if you have any show to exhibit
friend, you ought to ask leave before you erect your booth.


TREPAN. Ah, sir, the Lord of the Manor is too good a subject to obstruct my
work. -- (To the workmen) Bring forward the great Butt there, place it in view
by the drum and colors.


RENTAL. By your dress you should belong to the army; pray, sir, what is your
real business?


TREPAN. I am a manufacturer of honor and glory -- vulgarly called a recruiting
dealer -- or more vulgarly still, a skin merchant. I come to a country wake as
to a good market -- a little patience, and you shall see my practice -- come
paste up more bills -- and the devices -- they are not half thick enough --
where is the lion rampant, with a grenadier's cap upon his head?


1st WORKMAN. Here, sir, here.


TREPAN. And the marine device?


2d WORKMAN. Here it is -- done to the life -- the prize boarded; the decks
running with arrack punch, and dammed up with gold dust.


TREPAN. Right lad, place that next the lion. I don't see the London Tailor
with his foot upon the neck of the French king.


3d WORKMAN. Here he is in all his glory.


TREPAN. Paste him up on the other flank of the lion -- so, so, pretty well --
what have you left for the corner?


4th WORKMAN. The East Indies, Captain, a nabob in triumph, throwing rough
diamonds to the young fifers to play at marbles.


TREPAN (to Rental). Very well, very well -- sir, how do you like my shop.


RENTAL. Faith, sir, the construction seems to be as curious as your employment
-- I think you called yourself a skin merchant.


TREPAN. Mine, sir, is a new trade, but a necessary and a happy one, for it
flourishes in proportion to the spirit of the nation -- and if our rulers will
but employ it properly -- Captain Trepan shall furnish them for next year with
twenty thousand new Alexanders at five pence a day.


RENTAL. Well, captain, as you have called yours a trade, will you oblige me
so much as to explain how it is carried on?


TREPAN. Oh, with pleasure, sir! suppose new regiments are to be raised -- I am
applied to -- Captain Trepan -- that is my name, sir -- How are skins now? --
how many may you want? -- five hundred -- Why, your honor, answers I, those
that are fit for all use, that bear fire, and wear well in all climates, cannot
be affoarded for less than ten pounds a piece -- we have an inferior sort that
we sell by the hundred -- I Will take half and half says my employer! -- your
place of delivery? -- Plymouth! -- agreed! -- and they are on shipboard in a
month.


RENTAL. But captain, sure this business is subject to frauds?


TREPAN. Yes, there are rogues in all trades -- but my word is known. I never
run the same recruit through more than three regiments in my life -- and that
only when we have been hard pressed for a review.


RENTAL. Very conscientious, upon my word.


TREPAN. Aye, and my conscience has made me -- I export more goods than all the
trade together. Let us but have a fair trial with our enemies in any part of
the world -- and then see if captain Trepan's skins don't figure -- but here,
sergeant Crimp, let the recruits fall in.


RENTAL (reading the bills). "Very fine language, Captain -- I see you are a
great writer as well as an orator.


TREPAN. "I could not do without the talents of both, Sir -- next to gold and
brandy, a glib tongue and a ready pen are the best implements in our trade --
novelty in every line, you see -- new clothes, new arms, new commanders, new --


RENTAL. "There I doubt a little, whether novelty is so proper -- would not old
commanders be more encouraging?


TREPAN. "No it is not thought so -- old commanders, like old wines, may be
good to stick to; but the new sparkles, and gets into the head, and presently
makes it fit to be run against the wall" -- see how my new Colonels stand over
the old ones with their names in capitals as tall as their spontoons.


RENTAL. Arranged with a great deal of fancy indeed.


TREPAN. Aye, and meaning too -- I can tell you -- but do only look at my
recruits -- do but look at them --

[ Crimp gives the word March. there is stuff for all work -- southern rangers,
and northern hunters -- low-landers and high-landers, and loyals and royals,
and chasseurs and dasheurs -- I suppose now you would like such a fellow, as
that.

[Pointing to a smart recruit.
RENTAL. It is a thousand pities he should be shot at.


TREPAN. Be in no apprehension, he will never die by powder.


RENTAL. What do you mean?


TREPAN. Lord help you, how you might be imposed upon -- he is my decoy-duck --
mere show goods for the shop window -- not an inch of wear and teat in the
whole piece. -- The dog inherited desertion from his family. His brother was
called Quicksilver Jack, he was hanged at last at Berlin, after having served
six different princes in the same pair of shoes.


Enter Trumore (hastily). Which is the commander of the party?


TREPAN. Your pleasure, Sir.


TRUMORE. A musket in a regiment upon foreign service.


TREPAN. And a handful of guineas to boot, my lad of mettle; this is something
like a recruit.


Rental to Trumore. What Is this -- Trumore enlisting -- can I believe my eyes?


TRUMORE. Yes, and your heart too -- which is always on the side of a
well-meant action.


RENTAL. What has driven you to such an act of desperation?


TRUMORE. Rashly quits the country -- I am convinced his repugnance to my union
with his daughter is the cause. He is provident -- I am undone -- he is besides
in immediate trouble -- perhaps going to jail upon informations for killing
game -- I must give him a proof of my respect and my friendship -- as well as
of my resignation.


RENTAL (aside). Generous youth -- but I Will let all things go on -- if they do
not unitedly work upon the old man's heart, it must be adamant. Captain, you will
see Sir John Contrast.


TREPAN. I shall attest my recruits before him, and this brave fellow at their
head.

[Exit Rental.
TRUMORE. I shall be ready, but there is a condition must first be complied
with.


TREPAN. Name it.


TRUMORE. Twenty guineas to make up a sum for an indispensible obligation -- I
scorn to take it as enlisting money -- you shall be repaid.


TREPAN. You shall have it -- any thing more?


TRUMORE. Absence for half an hour -- in that time depend upon it I Will meet you
at the Castle.

[Exit.
Re-enter Sergeant Crimp (to Trepan). Here Is a fine set of country fellows
getting round us, a march and a song might do well.


TREPAN. (Aside) You are right!

(Aloud) Come, my lads, we'll give you a taste of a soldier's life. Corporal
Snap -- give them the song our officers used to be so fond of -- it will please
their sweethearts as well as themselves -- strike up drums.


Corporal SNAP sings. Gallant comrades of the blade,
Pay your vows to beauty.
Mars's toils are best repaid,
In the arms of beauty.
With the myrtle mix the vine,
Round the laurel let them twine;
Then to glory, love, and wine
Pay alternate duty.
Chorus.
Gallant comrades, etc.

Scene changes. Enter Peggy, with an empty cag laughing. The rogue has drank it
every drop; poppy water and cherry brandy together work delightfully -- he will
sleep some hours in a charming ditch where I have had him conveyed -- pleasant
dreams to you, monsieur La Nippe. What would I give if I could requite your
master as well.


Enter Sergeant Crimp and Soldiers. CRIMP. My life on it the dog's off -- the
moment Trepan told me of his pelaver -- I suspected he was an old hand -- with
his voluntary service -- and his honor -- and his half hour.

[Seeing Peggy. Mistress, did you see a young fellow with a scarlet cockade in
his hat pass this way?


PEGGY. Not I, indeed, friend -- I was otherways employed.


CRIMP. Nay, don't be cross -- we are looking for a deserter -- he is described
as a likely young fellow -- come, if you can give me intelligence, you shall
have half the reward for apprehending him.


PEGGY. Here Is another bribe -- one may have them, I see, for betraying either
sex. And what would you do with him?


CRIMP. Oh, no harm, as it is the first fault. We should put him in the black
hole at present, just to give him the relish of bread and water; the party
marches at midnight; he will be handcuffed upon the road; but as soon as he gets
between decks in a transport -- he will be perfectly at liberty again.


PEGGY. Gad, whoever he is, if I could see him, I Would give him a hint of your
intended kindness.

[looking out. Hey! who is this coming -- the hero of the plot, young Contrast
(ruminates) it would be special vengeance -- a bold stroke its true -- but a
public justice to woman kind -- hang fear -- I Will do it -- hark ye -- Mr. what
do you call 'em -- did you ever see the man you are in search of?


CRIMP. No, but I think I should know him.


PEGGY (pointing). That Is your mark, I fancy.


CRIMP. Gad it must be so -- but I don't see his cockade.


PEGGY. I saw him pull it off, and throw it in the ditch as he came over yonder
style.


CRIMP. Ah! an old hand, as I suspected -- meet me at the Castle, where we
shall convict him -- you shall have the reward.


PEGGY. To be sure, money does every thing; but have some pity upon the young
man -- you will not treat him worse than what you told me.


CRIMP. No, no, get you gone, he will never know who did his business.


PEGGY (archly). But don't treat him hardly? --

[Exit.
Enter Contrast yawning -- Crimp comes behind and taps him upon the shoulder.
Well overtaken brother soldier.


CONTRAST. Friend, I conclude you are of this neighborhood, by the happy
familiarity that distinguishes it; but at present it is misapplied, you mistake
me for some other.


CRIMP. Mistake you -- no, no, your legs would discover you among a thousand --
I never saw a fellow better set upon his pins.


CONTRAST (looking at his legs). Not so much out there.


CRIMP. But where have you been loitering so long? is your knapsack packed?
have you taken leave of your sweetheart? -- she must not go with you, I can
tell you -- we are allowed but four women a company for embarkation, and the
officers have chosen them all already.


CONTRAST. Sure there is some strange quality in this air -- the people are not
only impudent -- but mad.


CRIMP. I shall find a way to bring you to your senses, sir; what did you pull
the cockade out of your hat for, you dog?


CONTRAST. What the devil can he mean?


CRIMP. Why, you rascal, you will not deny that you are enlisted to embark
immediately for the West Indies? have not you touched twenty guineas for the
legs you are so proud of? pretty dearly bought.


CONTRAST. Now it is plain how well you know me -- thy own gunpowder scorch me,
if I Would lie in a tent two nights to be Captain General of the united Potentates
of Europe.


CRIMP. The dog's insolence out-does the common -- but come, walk on quietly
before me. --

[Pushing him.
CONTRAST. Walk before you! --

[resisting.
CRIMP. Oh, oh! mutinous too --

[whistles.
Enter four or five SOLDIERS. 1st SOLDIER. Here we are, sergeant! what are your
orders?


CRIMP. Lay hold of that fellow -- he is a deserter -- a thief -- and the
sauciest dog in the army. -- Have you no handcuffs?


Enter Moll Flagon -- A soldier's coat over her petticoat, a gin bottle by her
side, and a short pipe in her mouth. MOLL. No occasion for 'em, master sergeant
-- don't be too hard upon the young man -- brandy be my poison but I like the
looks of him -- hear my heart -- take a whiff -- (offers her pipe) -- what, not
burn priming! come load then. --

[gives him a glass of brandy.
CONTRAST. It is plain these are a set of murderers -- no help! no relief!


MOLL. Relief, sirrah! you're no centry yet. Sergeant, give me charge of him --
Moll Flagon never failed when she answered for her man.


CRIMP. With all my heart, honest Moll! -- and see what you can make of him. --


MOLL. Never fear, I Will make a soldier and a husband of him -- here, first of
all -- let us see -- what a damned hat he has got -- here, change with him Jack.
--

[Puts a cap upon his head.
CONTRAST. Why, only hear me -- I Am a man of fashion --


MOLL. Ha! ha! ha! I Will fashion you presently --

[puts a knapsack upon him. There, now you look something like -- and now let us
see what cash you have about you.


CONTRAST. Very little -- but you shall have it every farthing if you will let me
go.


MOLL. Go, you jolly dog -- ay, that you shall, through the world; you and I
together -- I Will stick to you through life, my son of sulphur.

Sings. I.
Come my soul
Post the cole,
I must beg or borrow:
Fill the can,
You're my man;
It Is all the same tomorrow.
II.
Sing and quaff,
Dance and laugh;
A fig for care or sorrow,
Kiss and drink,
But never think;
It Is all the same tomorrow.

CONTRAST. Oh, I am a man of fashion.

[Exeunt, thrusting him off.
Enter Sophia and Annette, crossing the stage hastily -- Trumore after them.
TRUMORE. Stop, Sophia.


SOPHIA. Trumore, this is the only moment I could refuse listening to you. My
father is, for aught I know, going to jail.


TRUMORE. Comfort yourself on his part -- I promise you his safety. I would not
leave the county 'till I was certain of it. I now take leave of him -- of you
-- and all that makes life dear.


SOPHIA. Oh my fears! what means that ribband in your hat?


TRUMORE. The ensign of honor, when worn upon true principles. A passion for
our country is the only one that ought to have competition with virtuous love
-- when they unite in the heart, our actions are inspiration.

Sings. I.
From thine eyes imbibing fire,
I a conqueror mean to prove;
Or with brighter fame expire,
For my country and my love:
II.
But ambition's promise over,
One from thee I still shall crave;
Light the turf my head shall cover,
With thy pity on my grave.

SOPHIA. Trumore, this is too much for me -- heaven knows how little I am
formed for the relish of ambition -- these heroic notions, how often do they
lead to the misery of ourselves! -- of those we leave! -- I claim no merit in
my apprehensions -- alas, they are too selfish.


TRUMORE. I came to bid farewell in one short word; but the utterance fails me
-- Annette, speak for me; and when I am gone, comfort your sister.


ANNETTE. Indeed, Trumore, it will be out of my power -- my notes will now be
as melancholy as her own -- to sooth her, I must sympathize with her in the
alarms of absence and danger.

Sings. I.
The sleepless bird from eve to morn
Renews her plaintive strain;
Presses her bosom to the thorn,
And courts the inspiring pain.
II.
But, ah! how vain the skill of song,
To wake the vocal air;
With passion trembling on the tongue,
And in the heart despair!

Enter Rental. What is here! -- a concert of sorrow? Reserve your tears, my
young mistresses, if your smiles will not do the business better, to work upon
the old Baronet in the cause of your father -- he is going to be called before
him -- let a parent owe his happiness to you in the first place; and may it be
an omen for your lover being as fortunate in the next!


TRUMORE. Rashly appearing before the justice! I have an interest and a
business there before you -- I fly to execute it -- then, Fortune, grant me one
more look of her, and take me afterward to thy direction!

[Exit.
RENTAL. The moment is strangely critical to you all. Come on, young ladies, I
have a story for you will surprise and encourage you.


SOPHIA. We are guided by you -- but what can we hope from our silly tears,
opposed to the malice of my father's enemies?


RENTAL. Every thing -- you know not half the interest you possess in the judge.

[Exeunt.
Scene last. A large Gothic Hall. Sir John Contrast, followed by Trepan. SIR
JOHN. I have attested the men, in compliance with your beating order -- but no
more of your occupation -- I Am not for purchasing human flesh -- give me the
man (aye, and the woman too) that engages upon frank love and kindness, and so
to other business.


Enter Crimp, whispers Trepan. TREPAN. One word more, your worship. The
sergeant has just apprehended a deserter. I am sure your worship will be glad
to have him convicted -- he is the worst of swindlers.


SIR JOHN. How do you make him out a swindler?


TREPAN. He borrows for show the most valuable commodities in the nation,
courage and fidelity; and so raises money upon property of which he does not
possess an atom.


SIR JOHN. Does he so? -- then bring him in -- I Would rather see one thief of the
public punished, than an hundred private ones.


CRIMP. Here, Moll, produce your prisoners. --

[Lugs in Contrast.
SIR JOHN. What, in the name of sorcery, is this! my son in a soldier's
accoutrements! -- I should not have been more surprised, if he had been
metamorphosed into a fish.


CONTRAST. I was in a fair way to be food for one -- I should have been shark's
meet before I got half way to the West Indies.


SIR JOHN. Stark mad, by all that is fantastical! -- Can nobody tell me how he
was seized?


CONTRAST. Seized! why, by that ruffian, neck and heels; and for my
accoutrements, you must ask this harpy, who assisted at my toilette.


CRIMP. A perfect innocent mistake, as I hope to be pardoned, your worship -- I
was sent to seek a deserter -- with the best legs in England -- was it possible
not to be deceived? but, thanks to Fortune, here is a sure acquittal -- this
baggage put him into my hands as the very person.


Enter Peggy. PEGGY. Only a little retaliation, your worship -- a wolf was in
full chase of an innocent lamb, that, to be sure, I had foolishly helped to
expose to his paws -- a trap offered to my hand, and I must own I did set it,
and the wolf was caught, as you see. But, indeed, I was coming to your worship,
to prevent all further harm. I meant honestly, and a little merrily I confess
-- I cannot be one without the other for my life.


CONTRAST. Plague on you all! this mystery thickens, instead of clearing.


TREPAN. It is clear, however, my party is out of the scrape -- and as for the
fellow really enlisted --


Enter Trumore. He is here to fulfill all engagements.


TREPAN. Well said, my lad of truth; then my twenty guineas are alive again.


TRUMORE. You shall see them employed; I would have mortgaged ten lives rather
than have wanted them.

[To Sir John. Mr. Rashly is charged with informations for killing game to the
amount of forty pounds. By assistance of this gentleman I have made up the sum.
The law is cruel to him; to me it is kind; it enables me to show him the heart
he perhaps has doubted.

[Lays down the money. He is free -- and now, Sir, I am your man, and will
follow wherever the service of my country leads.

[To Trepan.
RENTAL (coming forward.) Brave generous fellow! I foresaw his intent, and
would not have baulked it for a kingdom.


SIR JOHN. Oh, Rental, I am glad you are come; you find me in a wilderness here.


RENTAL. A moment, Sir, and I Am sure you will not mistake your path.


PEGGY (opening the rouleau.) The twist is magical, indeed, I think, for I
cannot undo it -- oh, there it is at last --

[pours the money upon the table. Put up yours again, Mr. Trumore -- poor
fellow! you will want it in your new life.


CONTRAST. One of my rouleaus! I have been robbed, I see, as well as kidnapped.


SIR JOHN. Hussy! how came you by all that money?


PEGGY. Perfectly honestly -- I sold my mistress and myself for it -- it is not
necessary to deliver the goods, for his honor is provided with a mistress;
[Pointing to Moll. and my lover is about as well off. -- Come, Sir, never look
so cross after your money -- what fine gentleman would grudge to let an honest
man out of jail, when he can buy his daughter's modesty into the bargain?


SIR JOHN. Rental, do you see into this?


RENTAL. Clearly, Sir, and it must end with reconciling you to your son.


SIR JOHN. How! reconcile me to bribery and debauchery! -- never -- if the dog
could succeed with a girl by his face, or his tongue, or his legs, or any thing
that nature has given him, why there is a sort of fair play that might palliate
-- but there is an unmanliness in vice without passion -- death! insipidity is
converted into infamy -- but where is this Rashly and his girls?


Enter Rashly -- between his daughters -- they throw themselves at Sir John's
feet -- a long pause. SIR JOHN (in the greatest surprise). This Rashly! this
the father of these girls! and do not his features deceive me? -- who is it I
see?


RENTAL. The son I mean to reconcile -- who offended upon principles the most
opposite to those you just now condemned -- the children of his offense -- and
thanks only to the inheritance of his virtues, that they are not become the
punishment of his poverty.


CONTRAST. My elder brother come to light!


SIR JOHN. Rise till I am sure I am awake -- this is the confusion of a
delirium.


RENTAL (to Rashly). Why do not you speak, Sir?


RASHLY. What form of words will become me? to say I repent, would be an injury
to the dead and living. I have erred, but I have been happy -- one duty I can
plead; resignation to your will -- so may I thrive in the decision of this
anxious moment as I never taxed your justice.


SIR JOHN (after a pause). Rental, do you expect I shall ever retract?


RENTAL. No, Sir, for I was witness to the solemnity of your vow, that you
would protect the father of your little clients against all his enemies --
right or wrong, they should yield.


SIR JOHN. Yes, but I little thought how very stubborn an old fellow I should
have to deal with.


RENTAL. Come forward, clients.


SOPHIA. I am overcome with dread.


SIR JOHN. Come, I Will make short work of it as usual -- so hear all -- my
decree is made.


RENTAL. Now justice and nature!


SOPHIA. Memory and tenderness!


CONTRAST (aside.) Caprice and passion!


SIR JOHN. Decision and consistency! -- I discarded one son for a marriage -- I
have brought up a second -- not to marry -- but to attempt to debauch his own
niece -- I Will try what sort of vexation the other sex will produce -- so
listen, girls -- take possession of this castle -- it is yours -- nay, I only
keep my word -- you remember how I promised to treat the old obstinate your
father was afraid of. This is the house of self-correction, and I give you the
key.


SOPHIA and ANNETTE (kneeling). Gratitude -- love and joy --


SIR JOHN. Up, ye little charmers -- your looks have asked me blessing this
hour.


RENTAL. And now for Trumore to complete the happiness. Sir John permit me your
ear apart.

[takes him aside.
CONTRAST. So! the confusion of chances seems winding up to a miracle, and
quite in my favor -- the run of these last twelve hours exceeds all
calculation, strike me pennyless -- where is that dog La Nippe?


Enter La Nippe covered with mud. LA NIPPE. Here he is in a pleasant plight --


CONTRAST. Whence, in the devil's name, come thou?


LA NIPPE. From the bottom of a black ditch -- how I got there I know no more
than the man in the moon -- I waked and found myself half smothered in dirt,
lying like King Log in the fable, with a congress of frogs on my back.


PEGGY. My dear, I hope you are satisfied with your bargain, I did my best "to
settle your business completely."


LA NIPPE. Oh! thou witch of Endor.

[ Peg and La Nippe continue to act in dumb show.
SIR JOHN. Another plot upon me, Rental -- but does the young fellow say
nothing himself for his pretensions.


TRUMORE. I have none, Sir -- they aspired too high when directed to Sophy
Rashly; they must cease for ever when I think of Miss Contrast.


SIR JOHN. Now, for the blood of me, I cannot see that distinction. Can you,
Contrast?

[to Rashly.
RASHLY. So far from it, Sir, that I think the purity of his attachment to the
poor farmer's daughter, is the best recommendation to the fortune of the
heiress.


SIR JOHN. I confirm the decree -- it is exactly my old way -- I have not been
apt to retract an action, but no man more ready to correct it by doing the
reverse another time. I am now convinced mutual affection makes the only true
equality in marriage; and in my present humor (I don't know how long 'twill
last) I wish there was not a wedding in the nation formed upon any other
interest -- what say you, man of fashion?

[to young Contrast.
RASHLY. Dear Sir, don't treat my brother's foibles too severely. His zeal, to
be eminent, only wants a right turn.


SIR JOHN. Let him find that turn, and he knows I have where-withal to keep him
from the inconvenience of a younger brother, though he loses Castle Manor.


CONTRAST. I resign it, and all its appendages. And with all my faults, my
brother shall find I am neither envious nor mercenary.

[To La Nippe.] Horses for town instantly; there is my true sphere -- and if
ever I am caught in a rural intrigue again, may I be tied to an old ram, like
my pointers for sheep-biting, and but^ed into a consistence with the clay of
this damned forest.

[Exit, La Nippe following.
SIR JOHN. And now to return to my recruit -- I promised he should be attested
tonight -- and so he shall -- to his bride -- if afterward his country
demands his assistance -- get him a commission, Sophy, and pray for a short end
to the war -- a prayer in which every good subject in the nation will join you.


TRUMORE. Sir, you have given me a possession that makes all other treasures
poor. Witness love and truth, how much I despise the temptation of ambition,
when weighed against one hour of Sophia's society. But these are times when
service to the public is a tribute that justice and virtue indiscriminately
impose upon private happiness. And the man who refuses upon their call, a
sacrifice to the exigency of his country, ill deserves to be a sharer in her
prosperity.


RENTAL. Sir, the tenants from the wake, in eagerness of honest joy, press to
be admitted.


SIR JOHN. Throw open the doors.


RENTAL. I hope you will not see a countenance that does not express an
interest in the events of Castle Manor.


Scene draws to an enlargement of the hall. Enter Tenants, etc. FINALE. RASHLY.
Partners of my toils and pleasures,
To this happy spot repair;
See how justly Fortune measures,
Favors to the true and fair:
With chorusses gay,
Proclaim holiday
In praise of the Lord of the Manor;
And happy the song,
If it trains old and young
In the lessons of Castle Manor.

SOPHIA. When a mutual inclination
Once a glowing spark betrays;
Try with tender emulation
Which shall first excite the blaze:
I plighted my troth
To a generous youth,
I found him at Castle Manor.
To one only be kind,
And leave fashion behind,
It Is the lesson of Castle Manor.

TRUMORE. Gallants, learn from Trumore's story,
To associate in the breast
Truth and honor, love and glory,
And to fortune leave the rest.
My ambition was fame;
From beauty it came,
From beauty at Castle Manor.
It Is an honor to arms
To be led by its charms,
Like the soldier of Castle Manor.

PEGGY. Brisk and free, but true to duty,
Sure I Have played an honest part;
Would you purchase love and beauty,
Be the prize a faithful heart:
Should a knave full of gold
Think Peg 's to be sold,
Let him meet me at Castle Manor;
A bed in the mire
To cool bis desire,
Is the lesson of Castle Manor.

ANNETTE. Though I trip in my expression,
Critics, lend a patient ear --
If coquetting be transgression --
Sisterhood, be not severe.
To love while we live
And all faults to forgive,
Is the lesson of Castle Manor:
Be friends to our cause
And make your applause,
A new blessing at Castle Manor.

FINIS.

