A POEM, SACRED to the Glorious MEMORY Of our LATE Most Gracious SOVEREIGN LORD
King GEORGE. Inscribed to the RIGHT HONORABLE George Dodington, Esquire

By RICHARD SAVAGE, Son of the late Earl RIVERS.

DVBLIN: Printed by S. POWELL, for G. RISK, G. EWING and W. SMITH, Booksellers,
in Dame's -street, MDCCXXVII.

A POEM, etc.
LET gaudy Mirth, to the blithe Carrol-song,
In loose light-measur'd Numbers dance along;
Thou, Muse no flowery Fancies here display,
Nor warble with the cheerful Lark thy Lay.
In the dark Cypress Grove, or moss-grown Cell,
Where dreary Ravens haunt, would Sorrow dwell!
Where Ghosts, that shun the Day, come sweeping by,
Or fix in melancholy Frenzy's Eye;
Yet now she turns her Flight to Scenes of State,
Where Wealth and Grandeur weep the Frowns of Fate!
Wealth, Want, Rank, Power, here each alike partakes,
As the Shrub bends, the lofty Cedar shakes;
To her wide View is no Contraction known,
It Is Youth, it is Age, the Cottage and the Throne.
O Exclamation! lend thy sad Relief!
O Dodington! indulge the righteous Grief!
Distant, I Have long beheld, in Thee, transcend
The Poet, Patron, Patriot, and the Friend.
Thou, who must live in Truth's remotest Page,
Formed to delight, and dignify an Age;
Whose Words, whose Manners, and whose Mind declare,
Each Grace, each Moral, and each Muse are there;
Accept this Po'esy, void of venal Aim,
Made sacred by thy Royal Master's Name.
But why, O Muse! are songful-Hours thy Choice?
Lost is the Life, whose Glory lifts thy Voice!
GEORGE is no more! As at the doomful sound
Of the last Trump, all Nature feels the Wound!
Each private, each distinguished Virtue bleeds!
And what but Lamentation long succeeds?
Where will thou then for apt Allusions fly?
What Eloquence can throbbing Grief supply?
Late, golden Pleasures urged their shining Way,
With GEORGE they flourished, and with GEORGE decay!
Now dusky Woes, over varied Scenes extend,
Groans rise! Rocks echo! and chill Damps descend!
Grief strikes my View with ever-weeping Eyes,
At her wan Look, each lively Fancy dies.
In fear, in hope, dull rest, or rufling Storms,
Thus Woe besets us, tho in various Forms!
That dire Event of Youth's ungoverned Rage!
That dear-bought Knowledge to declining Age!
In Want, in Scorn, it haunts an humble State,
It Is Care, it is Envy, to perplex the Great!
A Kingdom's Curse, it in Dissension brings;
Or heavier falls, when falls the best of Kings!
Worth it exalts, when aiming to debase;
It Is Virtue's Triumph, or it is Guilt's Disgrace!
It humbles Life, yet dignifies our End;
Reflection's Torment, yet Reflection's Friend!
Then let the Muse her meaning Notes resume,
And pay due Sorrows to the hallowed Tomb.
Was there a Glory, yet to Greatness known,
That not in Brunswick's Soul superior shone?
Ill fare the Man, who, robbed in purple Pride,
To wounded Worth has no Relief applied!
Benevolence makes Power to Prudence dear,
When Pity weeps, what Pearl excells the Tear?
When not one Virtue glows to bless Mankind,
When Pride's cold Influence petrifies the Mind;
Let the Prince blaze with Jems! -- in Wisdom's View,
An Emblem of the Rock, where once they grew!
Yet Springs gush out, to prove even Rocks can flow
In Rills refreshful to the Vales below.
Why has he power, and why no heart to cheer,
Unseeing Eyes, and Ears that will not hear?
Swift, as his Bliss, shall his light Name decay,
Who, self-indulgent, sports his Hours away!
But, Oh! -- what Love, what Honor shall he claim,
Whose Joy is Bounty, and whose Gift is Fame?
He (truly Great!) his useful Power refines,
By him discovered Worth exalted shines;
Exalted Worth, the enlivening Act, repeats,
And draws new Virtues from obscure Retreats;
He, as the first, creative Influence, praised,
Smiles over the Beings, which his Bounty raised.
Such Dodington, thy Royal Master shined,
Such Thou, the Image of thy Monarch's Mind.
Nations were balanced by his guardian Skill,
Like the poised Planets by the all-powerful Will.
Mark the Swede succored! mark the aspiring CZAR!
Checked are his Hopes, and shunned the naval War.
By GEORGE the Austrian Eagle learns to tower,
While the proud Turk shakes conscious of her Power;
But when her Menace braves our envied Shore,
She trembles at the British Lyon's Roar;
Trembles, though aided by the Force of Spain,
And India's Wealth! -- against Brunswick, All how vain?
He bad thy Honor, Albion, foremost shine!
His was the Care, unmeasured Bliss was Thine!
Yet often against his Virtue Faction rose!
An Angel, if thy Monarch, would have Foes.
Come Charity, Firstborn of Virtue's Line!
Come meek-ey'd Mercy from the Seat divine!
Pure Temperance, Mistress of a tranquil Mind,
By whom each sensual Passion stands confined!
Fixed Fortitude, from whom fierce Peril flies!
By whom (O Soul of Action!) Empires rise!
Fair Justice, Author of a Godlike Reign!
Peace, Plenty, Liberty adorn thy Train!
Loved Prudence! Queen of Virtues! blissful Dame!
Parent, and Guide of each illustrious Aim!
From whose firm Step Confusion turns in Flight,
That shapeless Spawn of Anarchy and Night!
From whom kind Harmony deduced her Race,
Then Order, all in one united Grace!
And thou Religion! truest, heavenly Friend!
Whom these alone establish, These defend!
Assemble to the wailing Muse's call!
Weep over the clay-cold Breast, that held you All!
O Death, rouse all those Terrors to thy Aid,
Weak Fear, or wisest Valor would evade!
Whether foul Pestilence in dire Array,
Red War, or pale-ey'd Famine point your Way,
What can you more than Kingdoms overthrow?
What aimed you less, when Brunswick felt the Blow?
But mark! -- AUGUSTUS, still above thy Rage,
Steps forth to give a second GOLDEN AGE.
Ye great Plantagenets! distinguished Race!
One greater meets you on celestial Space.
And thou, Nassau the fairest noblest Name!
Even mid the Blessed, superior still thy Flame!
Behold an Equal now! -- How dear th'Embrace!
Oh, fly! -- present him at the Throne of Grace!
It Is done! -- He Is crowned with a resplendent Joy,
Which Care shall never dim, nor Time destroy.
See! -- from yon golden Cloud, amidst a Band
Of Angel-Pow'rs, once Patriots of the Land,
Soft-leaning over Britania's weeping Isle,
And shedding sweet, a fond, paternal Smile;
Pointing, the visionary Seraph cries,
Suspend thy Tears! -- Behold a Sovereign rise,
Thy Second GEORGE! whose Reign shall soon disclose
All that mine gave, and Heaven, in Grace bestows.
He said. -- Again, with Majesty refined,
Up-wing'd to Realms of Bliss, the Aetherial Mind.
FINIS.

