A PINDARIQUE ODE, Humbly Offered to the QUEEN, ON THE Victorious Progress of
Her MAJESTY's Arms, under the Conduct of the Duke of MARLBOROUGH.

To which is prefixed, A DISCOURSE on the PINDARIQUE ODE.

By Mr. CONGREVE.

-- Operosa parvus
Carmina fingo.
Hor. Ode 2. L. 4. Tuque dum procedis, Io triumph
Non semel dicemus, Io triumph
Civitas omnis; dabimusque Divis
Thura benignis.
Ibid. LONDON: Printed for Jacob Tonson, within Gray's Inn Gate next Gray's Inn
Lane. 1706.

A DISCOURSE ON THE PINDARIQUE ODE.
THE following Ode is an Attempt toward restoring the Regularity of the
Ancient Lyrick Poetry, which seems to be altogether forgotten or unknown by our
English Writers.

There is nothing more frequent among us, than a sort of Poems entitled
Pindarique Odes; pretending to be written in Imitation of the Manner and Style
of Pindar, and yet I do not know that there is to this Day extant in our
Language, one Ode contrived after his Model. What Idea can an English Reader
have of Pindar, (to whose Mouth, when a Child, the Bees Pausan. Boeotic.
brought their Honey, in Omen of the future Sweetness and Melody of his Songs)
when he shall see such rumbling and grating Papers of Verses, pretending to be
Copies of his Works?

The Character of these late Pindariques, is a Bundle of rambling incoherent
Thoughts, expressed in a like parcel of irregular Stanza's, which also consist
of such another Complication of disproportioned, uncertain and perplexed Verses
and Rhimes. And I appeal to any Reader, if this is not the Condition in which
these Titular Odes appear.

On the contrary, there is nothing more regular than the Odes of Pindar, both
as to the exact Observation of the Measures and Numbers of his Stanza's and
Verses, and the perpetual Coherence of his Thoughts. For though his Digressions
are frequent, and his Transitions sudden, yet is there ever some secret
Connection, which though not always appearing to the Eye, never fails to
communicate it self to the Understanding of the Reader.

The Liberty which he took in his Numbers, and which has been so misunderstood
and misapplied by his pretended Imitators, was only in varying the Stanza's in
different Odes; but in each particular Ode they are ever Correspondent one to
another in their Turns, and according to the Order of the Ode.

All the Odes of Pindar are Songs of Triumph, Victory or Success in the Grecian
Games: They were sung by a Chorus, and adapted to the Lyre, and sometimes to
the Lyre and Pind. Olym. 10.
Pipe; they consisted oftnest of Three Stanza's, the first was called the
Strophe, from the Version or circular Motion of the Singers in that Stanza from
the Right Hand to the Left. Or from the Left to the Right, for the Scholiasts
differ in that, as may be seen in Pind. Schol. Introduc. ad Olymp. And Alex. ab
Alexandro, L. 4. C. 17. speaking of the Ceremony of the Chorus, says, Cursum
auspicati a Laeva dextrorsum -- ^ox a dextra Laevorsum. But the Learned
Schmidius takes part with the first Opinion, as more consistent with the
Notions of the Ancients concerning the Motions of the Heavenly Spheres, and
agreeable to Homer there cited by him. See Eras. Schmid. Prolegom. in Olymp.
and de Carmin. Lyric.
The second Stanza was called the Antistrophe, from the Contraversion of the
Chorus; the Singers, in performing that, turning from the Left Hand to the
Right, contrary always to their Motion in the Strophe. The Third Stanza was
called the Epode, (it may be as being the After-song) which they sung in the
middle, neither turning to one Hand nor the other.

What the Origin was of these different Motions and Stations in singing their
Odes, is not our present business to enquire. Some have thought that by the
Contrariety of the Strophe and Antistrophe, they intended to represent the
Contrarotation of the Primum Mobile, in respect of the Secunda Mobilia; and
that by their standing still at the Epode, they meant to signify the Stability
of the Earth. Pind. Schol. and Schmid. ibid.
Others ascribe the Institution to Theseus, who thereby expressed the Windings
and Turnings of the Labyrinth in celebrating his Return from thence.

The Method observed in the Composition of these Odes, was therefore as
follows. The Poet having made choice of a certain Number of Verses to
constitute his Strophe or first Stanza, was obliged to observe the same in his
Antistrophe, or second Stanza; and which accordingly perpetually agreed
whenever repeated, both in number of Verses and quantity of Feet: He was then
again at liberty, to make a new choice for his third Stanza, or Epode; where,
accordingly, he diversified his Numbers as his Ear or Fancy led him; composing
that Stanza of more or fewer Verses than the former, and those Verses of
different Measures and Quantities, for the greater Variety of Harmony, and
Entertainment of the Ear.

But then this Epode being thus formed, he was strictly obliged to the same
Vid. Jul. Scal. Poetic. ad Fin. Cap. 97. l. 3.
Measure, as often as he should repeat it in the order of his Ode, so that every
Epode in the same Ode is eternally the same in Measure and Quantity, in respect
to it self; as is also every Strophe and Antistrophe, in respect to each other.

The Lyrick Poet Stesichorus (whom Longin. de Sub. c. 13.
Longinus reckons amongst the ablest Imitators of Homer, and of whom Quint.
Inst. l. 10. c. 1.
Quintilian says, that if he could have kept within bounds, he would have been
nearest of any Body, in Merit, to Homer) was, if not the Inventer of this Order
in the Ode, yet so strict an Observer of it in his Compositions, that the Three
Stanza's of Stesichorus became a common Proverb to express a thing universally
known, (...), de vehementer indocto and imperito dici solitum. Erasm. Adag.
ne tria quidem Stesichori nosti; so that when any one had a mind to reproach
another with excessive Ignorance, he could not do it more effectually than by
telling him, he did not so much as know the Three Stanza's of Stesichorus; that
is, did not know that an Ode ought to consist of a Strophe, an Antistrophe, and
an Epode. If this was such a mark of Ignorance among them, I am sure we have
been pretty long liable to the same Reproof; I mean, in respect of our
Imitations of the Odes of Pindar.

My Intention is not to make a long Preface to a short Ode, nor to enter upon a
Dissertation of Lyrick Poetry in general: But thus much I thought proper to
say, for the Information of those Readers whose Course of Study has not led 'em
into such Enquiries.

I hope I shall not be so misunderstood, as to have it thought that I pretend
to give an exact Copy of Pindar in this ensuing Ode; or that I look upon it as
a Pattern for his Imitators for the future: Far from such Thoughts, I have only
given an Instance of what is practicable, and am sensible that I am as distant
from the Force and Elevation of Pindar, as others have hitherto been from the
Harmony and Regularity of his Numbers.

Again, we having no Chorus to sing our Odes, the Titles, as well as Use of
Strophe, Antistrophe, and Epode, are Obsolete and Impertinent: And certainly
there may be very good English Odes, without the Distinction of Greek
Appellations to their Stanza's. That I have mentioned 'em here, and observed
the Order of 'em in the ensuing Ode, is therefore only the more intelligibly to
explain the extraordinary Regularity of the Composition of those Odes, which
have been represented to us hitherto, as the most confused Structures in Nature.

However, though there be no necessity that our Triumphal Odes should consist of
the Three afore-mentioned Stanza's; yet if the Reader can observe that the
great Variation of the Numbers in the Third Stanza (call it Epode, or what you
please) has a pleasing Effect in the Ode, and makes him return to the First and
Second Stanza's, with more Appetite, than he could do if always cloyed with the
same Quantities and Measures, I cannot see why some Use may not be made of
Pindar's Example, to the great Improvement of the English Ode. There is
certainly a Pleasure in beholding any Thing that has Art and Difficulty in the
Contrivance; especially, if it appears so carefully executed, that the
Difficulty does not show it self, 'till it is sought for; and that the seeming
Easiness of the Work, first sets us upon the Enquiry. Nothing can be called
Beautiful without Proportion. When Symmetry and Harmony are wanting, neither
the Eye nor the Ear can be pleased. Therefore certainly Poetry, which includes
Painting and Music, should not be destitute of 'em; and of all Poetry,
especially the Ode, whose End and Essence is Harmony.

Mr. Cowley, in his Preface to his Pindarique Odes, speaking of the Music of
Numbers, says, which sometimes (especially in Songs and Odes) almost without
any thing else makes an Excellent Poet.

Having mentioned Mr. Cowley, it may very well be expected, that something
should be said of him, at a time when the Imitation of Pindar is the Theme of
our Discourse. But there is that great Deference due to the Memory, great
Parts, and Learning of that Gentleman, that I think nothing should be objected
to the Latitude he has taken in his Pindarique Odes. The Beauty of his Verses,
are an Atonement for the Irregularity of his Stanza's; and though he did not
imitate Pindar in the Strictness of his Numbers, he has very often happily
copied him in the Force of his Figures, and Sublimity of his Style and
Sentiments.

Yet I must beg leave to add, that I believe those irregular Odes of Mr.
Cowley, may have been the principal, though innocent Occasion of so many deformed
Poems since, which instead of being true Pictures of Pindar, have (to use the
Italian Painters Term) been only Caricatura's of him, Resemblances that for the
most part have been either Horrid or Ridiculous.

For my own part I frankly own my Error, in having heretofore mis-call'd a few
irregular Stanza's a Pindarique Ode; and possibly, if others, who have been
under the same Mistake, would ingenuously confess the Truth, they might own,
that never having consulted Pindar himself, they took all his Irregularity upon
trust; and finding their Account in the great Ease with which they could
produce Odes, without being obliged either to Measure or Design, remained
satisfied; and it may be were not altogether unwilling to neglect being
undeceived.

Though there be little (if any thing) left of Orpheus but his Name, yet if
Boeotic. page 588.
Pausanias was well informed, we may be assured that Brevity was a Beauty which
he most industriously labored to preserve in his Hymns, notwithstanding, as
the same Author reports, that they were but few in Number.

The Shortness of the following Ode will, I hope, atone for the Length of the
Preface, and in some measure for the Defects which may be found in it. It
consists of the same Number of Stanza's with that beautiful Ode of Pindar,
which is the first of his Pythicks; and though I was unable to imitate him in any
other Beauty, I resolved to endeavor to Copy his Brevity, and take the
Advantage of a Remark he has made in the last Strophe of the same Ode, which
take in the Paraphrase of Sudorius.

Qui multa paucis stringere Commode
Novere, morsus hi facile invidos
Spernunt, and auris mensque pura
Omne supervacuum rejectat.
ODE.
I.
DAughter of Memory, Immortal Muse,
Calliope; what Poet will thou choose
Of ANNA's Name to Sing?
To whom will thou thy Fire impart,
Thy Lyre, thy Voice, and tuneful Art;
Whom raise Sublime on thy Aetherial Wing,
And Consecrate with Dews of thy Castalian Spring?
II.
Without thy Aid, the most aspiring Mind
Must flag beneath, to narrow Flights confined,
Striving to rise in vain:
Nor ever can hope with equal Lays
To celebrate bright Virtue's Praise.
Thy Aid obtained, even I, the humblest Swain,
May climb Pierian Heights, and quit the lowly Plain.
III.
High in the Starry Orb is hung,
And next Alcides Guardian Arm,
That Orpheus was said to be the Son of the Muse Calliope. The Poetical Fiction
of the Harp of Orpheus is this. Mercury, the same Day that he was born of Maja
in Cyllene, a Mountain of Arcadia, found a living Tortoise, which he carried
home with him to his Cradle, and immediately composed a Harp of the Shell. A
little after he stole the Oxen of Apollo; this caused some Difference between
the Deities, but the Matter being referred to Jupiter, he ordered Mercury to
return the Oxen to the right Owner; on this there followed not only a
Reconciliation but Friendship, and Apollo expressing an extreme Pleasure at the
Invention of the Harp, Mercury bestowed it on him as a Pledge of his future
Friendship. Of this Homer, in his Hymn to Mercury, speaks at large. Afterward
Apollo inventing another Instrument called the Cithera, gave the Lyra to
Orpheus. The Muses, after the Death of Orpheus, Translated his Harp into
Heaven, where it became a Constellation, and is placed between the Knee and
Left Arm of Engonasis or Hercules.
Harp to which thy Orpheus Sung,
Who Woods, and Rocks, and Winds could Charm.
That Harp which on Cyllenes shady Hill,
When first the Vocal Shell was found,
With more than Mortal Skill
Inventer Hermes taught to sound.
Hermes on bright Latona's Son,
By sweet Persuasion won,
The wondrous Work bestowed;
Latona's Son, to thine
Indulgent, gave the Gift Divine:
A God the Gift, a God the Invention showed.
I.
To that high-sounding Lyre I tune my Strains;
A lower Note his Lofty Song disdains
Who Sings of ANNA's Name.
The Lyre is struck! the Sounds I hear!
O Muse, propitious to my Prayer!
O well known Sounds! O Melody, the same
That kindled Mantuan Fire, and raised Maeonian Flame!
II.
Nor are these Sounds to British Bards unknown,
Or sparingly revealed to one alone:
Witness sweet Spencer's Lays
And witness that Immortal Song,
As Spencer sweet, as Milton strong,
Which humble Boyn over Tiber's Flood could raise,
And mighty William Sing, with well-proportion'd Praise.
III.
Rise, Fair Augusta, lift thy Head,
With Golden Towers thy Front adorn;
Come forth, as comes from Tithon's Bed
With cheerful Ray the ruddy Morn.
Thy lovely Form, and fresh reviving State,
In Crystal Flood of Thames survey;
Then bless thy better Fate,
Bless ANNA's most Auspicious Sway.
While distant Realms and neighboring Lands,
Armed Troops and hostile Bands
On every Side molest,
Thy happier Clime is Free,
Fair CAPITAL of Liberty!
And Plenty knows, and Days of Halcyon Rest.
I.
As Britain's Isle, when old vexed Ocean roars,
Unshaken sees against her Silver Shoars
His foaming Billows beat;
So Britain's QUEEN, amidst the Jars
And Tumults of a World in Wars,
Fixed on the Base of Her well-founded State,
Serene and safe looks down, nor feels the Shocks of Fate.
II.
But Greatest Souls, though blessed with sweet Repose,
Are soonest touched with Sense of others Woes.
Thus ANNA's mighty Mind,
To Mercy and soft Pity prone,
And moved with Sorrows not her own,
Has all her Peace and downy Rest resigned,
To wake for Common Good, and succor Human-kind.
III.
Fly, Tyranny, no more be known
Within Europa's blissful Bound;
Far as the unhabitable Zone
Fly every hospitable Ground.
To horrid Nova Zembla, a miserable Region in the Frigid Zone, where there is
neither Tree nor Herb, but perpetual Frost and Snow, and where, for one half of
the Year, it is continual Night.
Zembla's Frozen Realms repair;
There with the baleful Beldam, NIGHT,
Unpeopl'd Empire share,
And rob those Lands of Legal Right.
For now is come the promised Hour,
When Justice shall have Power;
Justice to Earth restored!
Again Astrea Reigns!
ANNA Her equal Scale maintains,
And MARLBRO wields Her sure deciding Sword.
I.
Now could thou soar, my Muse, to Sing the MAN
In Heights sublime, as when the Mantuan Swan
Her towering Pinions spread;
Thou should of MARLBRO Sing, whose Hand
Unerring from his QUEEN's Command,
Far as the Lucan in his Third Book, V. 202. gives it the indefinite Epithete
of Multifidi Istri. But Ovid, Trist. 2. Solus ad ingressus missus Septemplicis
Istri. And Sidonius Apollinaris gives it the same Epithete, on the like
Occasion with this Ode, when in his Panegyric to Majorianus Caesar, he tells
him, Illicet aggrederis, quod nullus tempore nostro
Augustus potuit, rigidum Septemplicis Istri
Agmen in arma rapis --
The Ancient Geographers differed very much in their Account of the Rise of
this River; so that on a double account the same Epithets may be appropriated
to it as are usual to the Nile.
Seven-mouth'd Ister's secret Head,
To save the Imperial State, Her hardy Britons led.
II.
Nor there thy Song should end; though all the Nine
Might well their Harps and Heavenly Voices join
To Sing that Glorious Day,
When Bold Bavaria fled the Field,
And Veteran Gauls unused to yield,
On Blenheim's Plain imploring Mercy lay;
And Spoils and Trophies won, perplexed the Victors way.
III.
But could thy Voice of Blenheim Sing,
And with Success that Song pursue;
What Art could Aid thy weary Wing
To keep the Victor still in view?
For as the Sun never stops his radiant Flight,
Nor Sets, but with impartial Ray
To all who want his Light
Alternately transfers the Day:
So in the Glorious Round of Fame,
Great MARLBRO, still the same,
Incessant runs his Course;
To Climes remote, and near,
His Conquering Arms by turns appear,
And Universal is his Aid and Force.
I.
Attempt not to proceed, unwary Muse,
For O! what Notes, what Numbers could thou choose,
Though in all Numbers skilled;
To Sing the Hero's matchless Deed,
Which Belgia need not only be strictly understood of the Seven Provinces,
called Belgium Foederatum, by the Distinction made in the Time of Phil. 2. but
may also be interpreted with respect to that which was anciently called
Belgium, comprehending the lower Germany, in regard of the great Consequences
attending such a Victory.
Belgia Saved, and Brabant Freed;
To Sing Ramillia's Day! to which must yield
Cannae, as inconsiderable a Village as Blenheim, 'till in like manner made
Memorable and Illustrious by the great and entire Victory which Hannibal
obtained there over the Romans.
Cannae's Illustrious Fight, and Famed Pharsalia, famous for the Overthrow of
Pompey by Julius Caesar; a wonderful Victory, but may justly be said to yield
to that of Ramillies: For the Design and End of the first was to enslave
Mankind, the manifest Aim and Event of the latter has been to set 'em at
Liberty.
Pharsalia's Field.
II.
In the short Course of a Diurnal Sun,
Behold the Work of many Ages done!
What Verse such Worth can Raise?
Luster and Life, the Poet's Art
To middle Virtue may impart;
But Deeds sublime, exalted high like These,
Transcend his utmost Flight; and mock his distant Praise.
III.
Still would the willing Muse aspire,
With Transport still her Strains prolong;
But Fear unstrings the trembling Lyre,
And Admiration stops her Song.
Go on, Great Chief, in ANNA's Cause proceed;
Nor sheath the Terrors of thy Sword,
'Till Europe thou have freed,
And Universal Peace restored.
This mighty Work when thou shall End,
Equal Rewards attend,
Of Value far above
Thy Trophies and thy Spoils;
Rewards even Worthy of thy Toils,
Thy QUEEN's just Favor, and thy COUNTRY's Love
FINIS.

